The Hope and Vision of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Michael A. Day 


Yo World Scientific 


The Hope and Vision of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


This page intentionally left blank 


The Hope and Vision of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Michael A. Day 


Lebanon Valley College, USA 


_& World Scientific 


NEW JERSEY + LONDON + SINGAPORE + BEIJING » SHANGHAI - HONG KONG ~- TAIPEI] + CHENNAI + TOKYO 


Published by 


World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 

5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224 

USA office: 27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601 
UK office: 57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Day, Michael (Michael A.) 
The hope and vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer / Michael Day. 
pages cm 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-98 14656733 (hardcover : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-98 14656740 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967. 2. Philosophy, Modern--20th century. 3. Nuclear 
nonproliferation--International cooperation. 4. Physicists--United States--Biography. I. Title. 
QC16.062D38 2015 
530.092--dce23 
[B] 
2015010840 


British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 


The image on the cover comes from Los Alamos National Laboratory 
(http://www. lanl.gov/misc/copyright.html). 


Copyright © 2016 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 


All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval 
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the publisher. 


For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright Clearance 
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy 
is not required from the publisher. 


Typeset by Stallion Press 
Email: enquiries@stallionpress.com 


Printed in Singapore 


To my wife Judy 


for her love, inspiration and encouragement 


This page intentionally left blank 


Contents 


Preface 
Acknowledgments 


1. Introduction 
Biographical Sketch 
Recent Scholarship and the “Oppenheimer Challenge’ 


2. Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 
Background 
A Vital Center for Oppenheimer’s Thought 
Philosophy and the Public Sphere 


y) 


3. MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest 
of America” 
Background 
The Conquest of America 
Oppenheimer—MacLeish Exchange 
Oppenheimer’s Reith Lectures 
MacLeish’s Suspicion of Science 


4. Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 
Background 
Oppenheimer’s Response to Rabi 
Focusing Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 
Rabi’s Philosophical Views and Outlook 
MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and Rabi 


ix 
Xv 


23 


4] 


65 


viii 


10. 


The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


International Control of Atomic Energy 
Acheson-Lilienthal Proposal 
Moral Ramifications 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 
Oppenheimer and Complementarity 
Bohr, Einstein, and Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration I 
Oppenheimer and Modernity 
Oppenheimer and Pragmatism 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 
Oppenheimer, Moral Dilemmas, and Moral Luck 
Oppenheimer and Narrative 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 
Realism, Liberal Internationalism, and Constructivism 
David Mitrany and International Functionalism 
Oppenheimer and Epistemic Communities 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 
Nuclear Disarmament 
Nuclear One Worldism 


Epilogue 
Endnotes 
Index 


89 


lll 


125 


143 


163 


189 


215 
229 
253 


Preface 


The development and military use of atomic weapons at the end of 
World War II not only destroyed two cities and their populations, but 
also created revolutionary changes and crises for scientific activity and 
the world at large. Due to these earth-shattering changes, scientists 
were called upon to address issues related to science and society as 
well as the significance of the atomic revolution for the international 
order and even humanity itself. 

The public clamored to hear from its leading atomic scientists, 
and the scientists were eager to respond. For the public, these scien- 
tists offered more than a glimpse at the secrets of the atom. They were 
seen as interpreters of science and its new relationships to society, and 
as offering hope for transcending the atomic crisis. Perhaps this role 
was no better exemplified than by the physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer 
(1904-1967). 

With the atomic attacks against Japan in August of 1945, 
Oppenheimer became a public symbol and interpreter of modern 
science, embodying both science and the atomic crisis. Lecturing 
throughout North America as well as South America, Europe, and 
Japan, Oppenheimer continued in this dual role until shortly before 
his death in 1967. His views and opinions were widely covered in the 
press and he made several appearances on radio (e.g., BBC Reith 
Lectures in 1953) and television (e.g., a one-hour program with 
Edward R. Murrow on CBS in 1955).? 


“For an in-depth discussion of the Murrow interview of Oppenheimer, see Mark 
Wolverton, A Life in Twilight: The Final Years of J. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: 
St Martin’s Press, 2008), Chapters 1 and 2. 


ix 


x The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Unfortunately, and in some ways understandably, Oppenheimer 
has now faded into insignificance and is seen primarily in symbolic 
roles — “Father of the Atomic Bomb,” the “Atomic Faust,” the guilt- 
ridden scientist who had “known sin,” and the most prominent victim 
of McCarthyism. Oppenheimer has become a subject for the TV 
docudrama and even the opera. However, the question remains 
whether he offers something of value beyond the symbolic. A signifi- 
cant feature of this book is the construction of an extended argument 
which answers this question with a definite yes. Though not easy to 
establish, such an answer is not unexpected for Oppenheimer was a 
person of remarkable talents and genius who was strategically placed 
as a scientist, government adviser, and public intellectual. 

But Oppenheimer is a subject surrounded by controversy and 
presents historians and biographers with numerous challenges. In this 
book, like others before me, I take up this “Oppenheimer challenge” 
and attempt to remove some of the mystery surrounding him. 
However, my overall approach is not easily categorized, so let me first 
say what I am vot doing. I am not doing history, or even intellectual 
history, or philosophy, or biography in the traditional sense. 

Instead, what I am doing in an overall sense might be called 
“philosophical biography,” and it moves in two dimensions. First, 
I recover and reconstruct what Oppenheimer said during the 1940s, 
50s, and 60s, which I identify as his hope and vision of 1957-59. 
With this in hand, Oppenheimer’s various views and outlook become 
more understandable and, I would contend, more noteworthy. 
Further, questions are explored concerning what might be of interest 
from a general philosophical perspective. 

Second, and just as important, I consider not only Oppenheimer’s 
thought but also his life using philosophical ideas developed by 
contemporary philosophers, in particular, ideas developed by the 
British philosopher Bernard Williams (1929-2003) and the American 
philosopher Richard Rorty (1931-2007). Interestingly, connections 
arise between these two complementary dimensions that serve to illu- 
minate and assess Oppenheimer and his thought. The key question, 
of course, is whether this overall approach is biographically, historically, 


Preface xi 


and philosophically grounded, and provides insight into Oppenheimer 
and his thought. I believe it does. 

Central to any discussion of Oppenheimer and his thought, 
of course, is the atomic or nuclear revolution, and the possibility 
of transcending the resulting crisis. In order to deepen and broaden 
the discussion of Oppenheimer’s vision as well as to further demon- 
strate its relevance for today, his thought is also analyzed using con- 
temporary international relations theory with special emphasis on 
nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament. This inquiry, which is 
taken up in the last chapters of this book, proves instructive as well as 
illuminating, and resonates well with recent calls for “a world without 
nuclear weapons,” such as the one made by US President Obama in 
Prague in 2009. This overall examination using contemporary inter- 
national relations reveals a realism underlying Oppenheimer’s 
thought that in many ways is prescient of the work being done today 
to control, and possibly transcend, the nuclear revolution. 

In Chapter 1, I present a biographical sketch of Oppenheimer, 
and then turn to a discussion of recent scholarship and the so-called 
“Oppenheimer challenge.” In Chapter 2, the development of 
Oppenheimer’s views on science and society commences with his 
hope and vision of 1957-59. This hope and vision serves as a “vital 
center” both temporally and conceptually in developing Oppenheimer’s 
thought. Chapters 3 and 4 focus on exchanges between Oppenheimer 
and the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Archibald MacLeish in 1949 and 
the Nobel Prize-winning physicist I. I. Rabi in 1962, respectively. 
These exchanges furnish means, both temporally and conceptually, 
for a fuller and richer account of Oppenheimer’s thought and its 
development. 

Along with some historical background concerning attempts at 
the international control of atomic energy (e.g., Acheson—Lilienthal 
proposal), later chapters then place Oppenheimer’s thought in a 
broad, and perhaps more revealing, philosophical light. In parti- 
cular, moral ramifications for Oppenheimer of the failure of inter- 
national control are explored. Connections are then made between 
Oppenheimer’s thought and American pragmatism as well as what 


xii The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


philosophers and other social theorists have called “modernity” and 
its various crises. After this, an examination of his thought as well as 
Oppenheimer himself is undertaken using philosophical ideas and 
themes from Williams and Rorty. Finally, Oppenheimer’s hope and 
vision as related to the nuclear revolution is placed within the context 
of contemporary international relations theory. 

Before turning to the biographical sketch of Oppenheimer, 
I would like to say something about the journey behind this book. In 
1997, with my training in physics and philosophy, I became interested 
in American Cold War physicists and their views on the nature of 
science and society. With Oppenheimer as “Father of the Atomic 
Bomb” and his papers nearby at the Library of Congress, I decided 
to focus my research on his views on the nature of science. I found 
the task fascinating, demanding, and at times frustrating. 

After making some progress, I was fortunate in 1999 to meet and 
spend time with David Hawkins, who was a friend of Oppenheimer. 
Hawkins was trained as a philosopher and knew Oppenheimer at 
Berkeley during the 1930s and 40s. Further, Hawkins was an admin- 
istrative assistant to Oppenheimer at Los Alamos and wrote the offi- 
cial technical history of the Los Alamos atomic bomb project. While 
discussing my work with Hawkins and, more important, listening to 
him, I began to realize that my approach to Oppenheimer and _ his 
thought had to be broadened. 

In addition, Hawkins introduced me to Priscilla McMillan, who 
was then researching and writing her biography of Oppenheimer that 
was published in 2005. With encouragement and insights from 
Hawkins and McMillan, I was able to bring this first task, namely 
Oppenheimer’s views on the nature of science, to completion. Clearly, 
I learned much about Oppenheimer from both Hawkins and 
McMillan. But more important, when I now look back, what I sensed 
in both of them was a definite sympathetic, though not uncritical, 
understanding of Oppenheimer based on reflection and firsthand 
experience or research. I must confess that my personal reactions to 
Oppenheimer at this time were for the most part ambivalent. 

My efforts then turned to the physicist I. I. Rabi, whose papers 
were also at the Library of Congress, and the focus was on his views 


Preface xiii 


on science and society. Rabi was a very close friend of Oppenheimer 
and a senior adviser to the atomic bomb project at Los Alamos. 
Again, I was fortunate. I met and interacted with the physicist and 
historian of science John Rigden, who knew Rabi and had written the 
definitive biography of Rabi. With Rigden’s insights and encourage- 
ment, I was able to complete my work on Rabi. 

With Oppenheimer’s and Rabi’s views along with some documen- 
tation of their interactions in hand, I noticed additional coherence 
and richness in Oppenheimer’s thought. Then, in 2007, I began 
working with Gary Grieve-Carlson, a friend and colleague who 
specializes in American poetry. Our focus was the poet Archibald 
MacLeish and Oppenheimer, who were friends and exchanged ideas 
on Cold War America. From these investigations, again more coher- 
ence over time as well as in content appeared in Oppenheimer’s 
thought and philosophical outlook. 

During these years, I also had the opportunity to meet and talk 
with several Oppenheimer scholars — in particular David Cassidy, 
Charles Thorpe, Kai Bird, and Martin Sherwin. These interactions and 
the scholarly works of these individuals have proved invaluable in pro- 
moting a fuller and richer understanding of Oppenheimer. Furthermore, 
over the last few years, I have come to realize that Oppenheimer’s 
thought and outlook touched on many of the themes and issues found 
in contemporary international relations theory — debates over real- 
ism/liberalism/constructivism, the role of epistemic communities, 
and issues concerning nuclear policy and nuclear disarmament. 

Finally, by making connections to standard philosophical thought, 
like American pragmatism, and, in particular, the moral thought of 
the philosopher Bernard Williams, I came to conclusion that a con- 
vincing case could be made for a sympathetic, though not uncritical, 
understanding of both Oppenheimer and his thought. In other 
words, Hawkins and McMillan were insightful and justified in their 
overall assessments and reactions to Oppenheimer. 

In this book, the reader will not only encounter Oppenheimer 
and his thought, but will also be taken on a journey with elements of 
history, science, philosophy, and international relations theory. Such 
is to be expected for Oppenheimer was a man of many dimensions as 


xiv The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


well as a person of remarkable talents and genius who was strategically 
placed. The general thesis of this book is that Oppenheimer’s thought 
is important, engaging, relevant, and more coherent than normally 
assumed, and hence his voice needs to be brought back into the pub- 
lic forum. Hopefully, this effort may contribute to a fuller, and per- 
haps more sympathetic, understanding of Robert Oppenheimer. 


Acknowledgments 


During the years of research and writing that underlie this book, 
I have accumulated a number of debts both professional and personal. 

First, I am indebted to the late David Hawkins of the University 
of Colorado. David was and remains a paragon of inspiration, and 
was instrumental early on in pointing me in the right direction and 
shaping my interpretation of Oppenheimer and his thought. Second, 
Priscilla McMillan, Oppenheimer scholar and friend, has played a 
formative role in my understanding of Oppenheimer. Her enthusiasm 
and encouragement along with her research and scholarly work have 
proved invaluable. 

John Rigden through his scholarly work, especially on the physi- 
cist I. I. Rabi, and his support over the years, has furnished me both 
understanding and opportunity. His commitment to a public under- 
standing of science, as illustrated through his long-term editorship of 
Physics in Perspective along with Roger Stuewer, serves as a model of 
social and academic responsibility. In addition, for conversations and 
their scholarly works on Oppenheimer, I am grateful to David Cassidy, 
Charles Thorpe, Martin Sherwin, Kai Bird, and Mary Palevsky. 

Several colleagues at Lebanon Valley College (LVC) have provided 
support over the years. Most important, Gary Grieve-Carlson and Jeffrey 
Robbins have read various versions of the manuscript and provided 
insightful comments and advice as well as inspiration and encourage- 
ment. Gary and Jeff represent the best of the teacher-scholar in con- 
junction with a dedication to the college, which at times has required 
both academic and philosophical courage. In addition, I am grateful to 
Stephen MacDonald, Christopher Dolan, John Norton, Michael Pittari, 


xvi The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Robert Carey, Rick Chamberlin and Stephen Williams as well as my 
physics colleagues Scott Walck and Barry Hurst for their comments, 
support, and encouragement. I must also call attention to my indebt- 
edness to my friend Robert Hardy of the University of Nebraska— 
Lincoln, who was my physics mentor, for his insight, encouragement, 
and guidance over the years. 

I am indebted to LVC for providing support through sabbaticals 
and faculty travel grants. Especially important has been the continual 
assistance I have received from the library staff at LVC. Most notable 
has been the assistance of Donna Miller, Becky Chanas, Julia Harvey, 
Maureen Bentz, Lori Nyce, Scott Conrad, Stacie Allison, Susan 
Aungst, Susan Krall, and the late Frank Mols. Also, I am grateful to 
Barbara West of the physics department, Todd Gamble of Information 
Technology Services, and summer interns Shane Jacobeen and Mary 
Terese Sweitzer for their assistance. 

I am deeply appreciative to World Scientific Publishing, and in 
particular its Chairman and Editor-in-Chief Phua Kok Khoo, for their 
commitment to making this book a reality. I thank Jessica Barrows, 
Commissioning Editor in New Jersey, and Elizabeth Lie, Production 
Editor in Singapore, for their support and much needed assistance 
during the publishing process and manuscript preparation. Also, 
I thank editor Low Lerh Feng for his assistance at the closing stages 
of the publishing process. 

A special thank you goes to my stepson, Ian Hansen, for his 
encouragement and assistance. Most important has been the support, 
encouragement, and understanding of my wonderful wife, Judy 
Pehrson. Her astute advice and assistance played a significant role in 
bringing this project to fruition. This book is dedicated to her. 

Parts of this book borrow from previous publications. Material in 
Chapters 2 and 6 appeared previously in “Oppenheimer on the 
Nature of Science,” Centaurus 43 (2001). Material in Chapter 3 
appeared previously in “MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and ‘The Conquest 
of America’” (coauthored with Gary Grieve-Carlson), Soundings: 
An Interdisciplinary Journal 93 (Fall/Winter 2010). Material in 
Chapter 4 appeared previously in “I. I. Rabi: The Two Cultures and 
the Universal Culture of Science,” Physics in Perspective 6 (2004), and 


Acknowledgments xvii 


in “Oppenheimer and Rabi: American Cold War Physicists as Public 
Intellectuals” in The Atomic Bomb and American Society: New 
Perspectives (Knoxville, TIN: University of Tennessee Press, 2009). 
Material in Chapter 7 appeared previously in a book review of Jay A. 
Labinger and Harry Collins (editors) The One Culture? A Conversation 
about Science in Physics in Perspective 4 (2002). 

Also, I thank Nancy Rabi Lichtenstein for permission to quote 
from the I. I. Rabi Papers at the Library of Congress. 

Finally, any errors or omissions as well as deficiencies in this book 
are my responsibility. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 1 


Introduction 


Biographical Sketch! 


Robert Oppenheimer, the son of Julius and Ella (Friedman) 
Oppenheimer, was born in New York City on April 22, 1904. His 
father emigrated from Germany to the United States in 1888 at the 
age of 17, and became a very successful textile importer. His mother, 
born in Baltimore, had studied art in Europe and was an accom- 
plished painter and teacher of art. Robert was raised in an atmosphere 
of culture and wealth — a spacious apartment on Riverside Drive 
overlooking the Hudson River with maids and a chauffer, a summer 
home on Long Island, family trips to Europe, and a 28-foot sloop for 
Robert about a year before his high school graduation. His younger 
brother Frank, who would also become a physicist, was born in 1912. 

The Oppenheimers were an emancipated Jewish family who 
belonged to the Ethical Culture Society founded by Felix Adler in 
1876. The Society was nonsectarian and emphasized moral dialogue 
and instruction with a commitment to charitable work and progres- 
sive social reform; that is, “Deed, not Creed.” Robert’s parents had 
been married by Adler and his father was a member of the board of 
trustees of the Society for a number of years. 

From 1911 to 1921, Robert attended the Society’s private school 
called the Ethical Culture School, located next to Central Park. 
Young Robert, delicate and physically awkward, excelled even relative 
to his gifted and motivated peers. Taken as distant and sometimes 
difficult by fellow students, he was precocious — an “adolescent 


1 


2 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


polymath.”? Years later, Helen Rabi, who had attended school with 
Robert, “recalled that by the seventh grade he was universally recog- 
nized as an intellectual phenomenon.”* In 1926, Helen married I. I. 
Rabi, who later became a close friend and colleague of Oppenheimer 
and won the 1944 Nobel Prize for Physics. 

Robert had developed a scientific bent early on. In particular, he 
always felt indebted to his chemistry-physics teacher Augustus Klock, 
with whom he helped set up laboratory equipment and went on occa- 
sional field trips collecting minerals, “for having set him on the road 
to science.”* But young Robert’s life was a very sheltered one. 
Looking back years later, Oppenheimer recalled that “My life as a 
child did not prepare me in any way for the fact that there are cruel 
and bitter things.”® 

Robert graduated from the Ethical Culture School in the spring 
of 1921. That summer on a family trip to Germany, Robert con- 
tracted a life-threatening case of trench dysentery. He had to post- 
pone his enrollment at Harvard University until the fall of 1922. In 
the summer of 1922, as part of his recuperation, he went on his first 
trip to the Southwest with Herbert Smith, his high school English 
teacher. Oppenheimer thoroughly enjoyed the adventure — fresh air, 
beautiful vistas, physical challenges — which afforded a positive and 
transformative experience for the frail and socially awkward adoles- 
cent. While horseback riding in the New Mexico wilderness, 
Oppenheimer and his companions would gaze upon the Los Alamos 
(Spanish for “The Poplars or Cottonwoods”) mesa where twenty 
years later he would direct the atomic bomb project. 

Oppenheimer entered Harvard in the fall of 1922 and graduated 
summa cum laude three years later in 1925 with a degree in chemis- 
try. He took a wide variety of courses from philosophy and French 
literature to graduate courses in physics. He even took a course with 
eminent mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead, 
working through Principia Mathematica written by Whitehead and 
Bertrand Russell. Though his degree was in chemistry, it was physics 
where he found his home. In fact, Percy Bridgman, who would win 
the 1946 Noble Prize for Physics, was a primary influence on 
Oppenheimer. Having taken courses from Bridgman as well as 


Introduction 3 


working in his laboratory, Oppenheimer had decided to pursue a 
doctorate in experimental physics. 

In September 1925, Oppenheimer set sail for England where he 
had been accepted at the Cavendish Laboratory at the University 
of Cambridge. This would be a disappointing and dark time for 
Oppenheimer, still in many ways an adolescent. He discovered that he 
did not have the interest or competence to become an experimental- 
ist. But by early 1926, things were looking up because Oppenheimer 
had found that his interests and abilities lay in theoretical physics. He 
“became friends with the influential Cambridge physicists Paul A. M. 
Dirac and Ralph H. Fowler. ... [who] were the theoreticians and 
helped to broaden Oppenheimer’s view of the field.”° He was reading 
Werner Heisenberg and learning the new developments in quantum 
mechanics, and would meet the great Danish physicist Niels Bohr, 
who visited Cambridge later that spring. Bohr surely impressed the 
young Oppenheimer, and would come to have a profound influence 
on both Oppenheimer and his thought. In May 1926, Oppenheimer 
submitted his first paper entitled “On the Quantum Theory of 
Vibration-Rotation Bands” for publication. 

That summer while visiting Cambridge, Max Born, who would 
win the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1954, invited Oppenheimer to 
pursue his doctorate at the University of G6éttingen in Germany, 
a major center for theoretical physics and quantum mechanics. Less 
than a year later in March 1927, and less than five years after he had 
first entered Harvard as an undergraduate, Oppenheimer received his 
doctorate from G6ttingen. By the summer of 1927, Oppenheimer 
published or completed the work for at least seven additional publica- 
tions including work on the quantum theory of continuous spectra 
and the quantum theory of molecules using what is now called Born— 
Oppenheimer approximation, which mathematically separates nuclear 
and electronic motions. 

He “spent the next two years, one in the U.S. and one in Europe, 
as a National Research Council (NRC) Fellow.”’ He interacted with 
the great physicists Paul Ehrenfest in Leiden and Wolfgang Pauli in 
Zurich. Oppenheimer and Rabi, also an NRC fellow, first met in 1928 
in Leipzig. While an NRC fellow, Oppenheimer completed an 


4 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


additional seven papers. One, submitted in March 1928, predicted 
the phenomenon of quantum tunneling by showing “that a weak 
electric field could dislodge electrons [electron emission] from the 
surface of a metal.”® Today, in the context of radioactive decay by 
alpha emission, the prediction of quantum tunneling is usually cred- 
ited to George Gamow and, independently to Edward Condon and 
Ronald Numbers. But as pointed out by physicist and historian John 
Rigden, this is incorrect since Oppenheimer’s paper predated their 
papers by several months.’ 

Oppenheimer returned to the United States in the summer of 
1929, and would not return to Europe for nearly two decades.'° 
Oppenheimer, only 25 years old, was in great demand especially in 
America — with a German doctorate, an international reputation, and 
at the forefront of the quantum revolution. With perhaps ten offers 
from American universities, he accepted a joint appointment at the 
University of California at Berkeley and the California Institute of 
Technology at Pasadena, typically spending the fall and winter at 
Berkeley and the spring at Caltech. 

In less than a decade, he would make Berkeley the major center 
for theoretical physics in the United States, and in the words of Hans 
Bethe who won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1967, “J. Robert 
Oppenheimer did more than any other man to make American theo- 
retical physics great.”'' During his California years, Oppenheimer did 
fundamental research in theoretical physics and worked in close col- 
laboration with experimental physicists, for example, Ernest Lawrence 
and his Radiation Laboratory. Of particular note is a 1930 paper by 
Oppenheimer that “practically predicted the positron [the antiparticle 
of the electron] three years before its discovery by Carl Anderson.”” 
In addition, Oppenheimer made significant contributions to the 
understanding of cosmic ray showers, meson theory, and nuclear reac- 
tions (e.g., Oppenheimer—Phillips process). 

Most fascinating, as discussed in detail by Ray Monk, Oppenheimer 
in the late 1930s published three papers on astrophysics, each with a 
different co-author (i.e., two of his students along with his younger 
colleague Robert Serber).'* These papers investigated neutron stars 
and gravitational collapse — what later became known as black holes. 


Introduction 5 


This series of papers was groundbreaking, but largely neglected for 
nearly thirty years. Physicist and biographer Jeremy Bernstein has 
called the third paper in this series “one of the great papers in 
twentieth-century physics.”'* According to Monk, “Many people 
think that, if he had lived a little longer, Oppenheimer would have 
received the Nobel Prize for these papers.”!° The Nobel Prize, of 
course, can only be given to a living person, and Oppenheimer died 
in 1967 at age 62. 

Beginning in 1936, Oppenheimer’s interests took on a new 
dimension. Before this, he had little interest in social issues and poli- 
tics. He did not read a newspaper, did not have a radio, and voted for 
first time in the 1936 presidential election. In large part because of his 
romance with Jean Tatlock as well as the world depression and the rise 
of Fascism in Europe, Oppenheimer became involved in left-wing 
social and political issues. For example, he donated funds to the 
Loyalist cause in the Spanish Civil War and was active in the East Bay 
Teacher’s Union. 

A daughter of a Berkeley English professor, a graduate of Vassar, 
and training to be psychiatrist, Tatlock was an “on again, off again” 
member of the communist party.” Oppenheimer’s brother Frank and 
his wife had also joined the communist party. In 1939, Tatlock and 
Oppenheimer finally broke up. In the summer of 1939 in Pasadena, 
Oppenheimer met Katherine “Kitty” Puening and they were married 
in November 1940. They would have two children — a son Peter and 
a daughter Katherine “Toni.” One of Kitty’s former husbands, Joe 
Dallet, had been a member of the communist party and had died 
fighting in Spain, and she had been a party member for about two 
years (1934-1936) during the first part of their marriage.'° 

Robert Oppenheimer was certainly a fellow-traveler during the 
1930s, but he steadfastly denied that he was ever a member of the 
communist party. In fact, in his March 1954 letter (which was read 


>For a wonderful and well-researched book on the three women whom Oppenheimer 
loved and who “gave shape to his life,” see Shirley Streshinsky and Patricia Klaus, An 
Atomic Love Story: The Extraordinary Women in Robert Oppenheimer’s Life (Nashville, 
TN: Turner Publishing, 2013). The three women are Jean Tatlock, Kitty Oppenheimer, 
and Ruth Tolman. 


6 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


into the record of his 1954 security hearing) replying to the official 
letter which informed him of the suspension of his security clearance, 
Oppenheimer stated and in effect testified that he “was never a mem- 
ber of the [communist] party, concealed or open.”'”? Oppenheimer 
scholars Kai Bird and Martin Sherwin agree with Oppenheimer while 
Gregg Herken holds that he was a secret member during the 1930s. 
In any case, all agree that Oppenheimer was not a spy and was loyal 
to the United States.‘ 

With the discovery of nuclear fission in December 1938 in 
Germany and the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 when 
Germany invaded Poland, the possibility of atomic weapons began to 
take center stage. With the shock of the Japanese attack on Pearl 
Harbor in December 1941 and the entry of the United States into the 
war, the race to build the atomic bomb was on. Oppenheimer had 
already been involved in research into nuclear fission by early 1941, 
and was officially appointed director of fast-neutron research as 
related to the atomic bomb in May 1942. Five months later in 
October, General Leslie Groves, who was in charge of the Manhattan 
(Atomic Bomb) Project, selected Oppenheimer to be the scientific 
director of the central laboratory dedicated to the development of an 
atomic bomb. In November while on an official trip, Oppenheimer 
showed Groves Los Alamos, and the general quickly decided that this 
would be the site for the secret laboratory to build the bomb. 

Appointing Oppenheimer as scientific director of Los Alamos 
was a bold and controversial move on Groves’ part. Oppenheimer 
was a theoretician with no administrative experience organizing 


‘For a discussion of Soviet spying and Oppenheimer, see Gregg Herken, 
“Target Enormoz: Soviet Nuclear Espionage on the West Coast of the United States, 
1942-1950,” Journal of Cold War Studies 11 (Summer 2009). In his article using 
evidence from the “Soviet State Security Committee (KGB) documents transcribed 


in Alexander Vassiliev’s notebooks,” 


Herken makes a convincing case that 
“Oppenheimer was never a spy” (p. 84) even though “the KGB had a growing 
interest — and, ultimately, a near obsession — with recruiting Oppenheimer.” 
(p. 78) Herken’s conclusion is reconfirmed in John Earl Haynes, Harvey Mehr, and 
Alexander Vassiliev, Spies: The Rise and Fall of the KGB in America (New Haven & 


London: Yale University Press, 2009), p. 58. 


Introduction 7 


experimental, let alone engineering, work. In addition, Oppenheimer 
lacked a Nobel Prize and had a questionable background from the 
perspective of military intelligence. However, Groves insisted on the 
appointment and, in the end, was proved right. In July 1945, the first 
atomic explosion was conducted in the deserts of New Mexico. Less 
than a month later, on August 6, an atomic bomb destroyed 
Hiroshima and three days later another leveled Nagasaki. The next 
day the Japanese offered to surrender and a few days later the war was 
over. In the view of historians as well as his wartime colleagues, Los 
Alamos owed much of its success to Oppenheimer’s inspiration and 
leadership as well as his scientific brilliance and understanding.'® 

With the end of war, Oppenheimer was heralded as “Father of 
the Atomic Bomb” and became an international as well as national 
figure, and was awarded the Medal of Merit by President Truman for 
his work at Los Alamos. In October 1945, he officially resigned as 
the director of Los Alamos, and returned to California in November 
to resume teaching. Though his personal research in physics effec- 
tively ended in 1942 with his work on the atomic bomb, Oppenheimer 
would continue to stay up with physics and would influence its 
development. In 1947, he became director of the Institute for 
Advanced Study in Princeton, and continued in this position until 
June 1966.'? Oppenheimer died of throat cancer eight months later 
on February 18, 1967. 

Immediately after the war, Oppenheimer became an influential 
voice in Washington and played a leading role in shaping atomic 
policy. In particular, he had a central role in formulating the Acheson— 
Lilienthal Report, which will take on a significant and illuminating 
role in our later exploration of Oppenheimer’s thought. This report 
provided the framework for the proposal by the United States pre- 
sented to the United Nations for the international control of atomic 
energy. In particular, it would abolish atomic weapons from national 
arsenals, and hence lead to nuclear disarmament and “a world free of 
nuclear weapons.” From 1947 to 1952, Oppenheimer also served as 
chairman of the powerful General Advisory Committee (GAC) to the 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). The GAC is noted for its opposi- 
tion to a crash program to develop the hydrogen (thermonuclear) 


8 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


bomb as an answer to the successful atomic test by the Soviet Union 
in August 1949, which broke the American atomic monopoly. 
Instinctively and somewhat precipitously, President Truman rejected 
the recommendation of the GAC, and the United States proceeded 
with its crash program and exploded its first thermonuclear device in 
1952. In addition, Oppenheimer served as a consultant on continen- 
tal defense, civil defense, and the use of tactical nuclear weapons.’° 
By 1952, Oppenheimer’s influence was waning. He resigned from 
the GAC in August 1952 and Rabi became its new chairman.*! In 
November, the Republicans won both the presidency and took con- 
trol of the Senate and House. In the fall of 1953, Oppenheimer gave 
the BBC Reith Lectures in England. Shortly after his return from 
Europe, Oppenheimer was informed on December 21 by AEC chair- 
man Louis Strauss, one of his archenemies, that his security clearance 
had been suspended. Oppenheimer requested a hearing before a per- 
sonnel security board. The ruling of this confidential hearing (though 
much of the transcript was publicly released shortly thereafter), which 
lasted more than three weeks during April and May of 1954, was a 2 
to 1 decision to uphold Oppenheimer’s suspension. The AEC com- 
missioners agreed with the board’s upholding of the suspension by a 
vote of 4 to 1. The loss of his security clearance in conjunction with 
the humiliation of the hearing was a jarring blow for Oppenheimer. 
Due to his powerful influence on policy decisions, and in part his 
own personality, Oppenheimer was a polarizing figure and had made 
powerful enemies in the government (e.g., Louis Strauss), the mili- 
tary (e.g., the Air Force), the scientific community (e.g., Edward 
Teller), and the press (e.g., the Luce publishing empire). For his 
enemies, Oppenheimer’s behavior was bewildering even suspicious, 
especially his opposition to the H-bomb. Given his left-wing past and 
unwise actions on his part (e.g., the “Chevalier incident”),’ he thus 


4Haakon Chevalier, a member of the American Communist Party, was a French pro- 
fessor at Berkeley and a close friend of Oppenheimer. In the winter of 1942-43 at 
Oppenheimer’s home in Berkeley, Chevalier “passed on a feeler as to whether 
Oppenheimer would provide information [about the atomic bomb project] to the 
Russians through a Soviet consular official in San Francisco. Oppenheimer immedi- 
ately refused, but he delayed several months before reporting the feeler to Army 


Introduction 9 


proved an inviting target for those who saw him as a danger to 
national security. For others, Oppenheimer became the most promi- 
nent victim of McCarthyism. 

In 1963, President Lyndon Johnson presented Oppenheimer the 
prestigious Enrico Fermi Award of the Atomic Energy Commission. 
Though perceived as making amends, this gesture was seen in large 
part as an attempt at rehabilitating Oppenheimer’s public reputation. 
There is a touch of irony here since Teller, one of Oppenheimer’s 
archenemies, received the Fermi Award the year before. Over his 
career both in and out of science, Oppenheimer received numerous 
awards and honors — including being elected a member of the 
National Academy of Sciences and Royal Danish Academy of Sciences, 
and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the 
American Physical Society. 

Oppenheimer’s loss of his security clearance marked the end of his 
work as a government adviser. Of course, Oppenheimer continued his 
work as director of the Institute for Advanced Study. Just as impor- 
tant, he persisted in being a spokesperson for science and more 
generally a public intellectual — speaking at innumerable events, 
celebrations, and conferences together with publishing articles and 
lectures. His opinions and views were widely covered in the public 
media. Combining eloquence with a lasting authority based on his 
leadership of the Manhattan Project, Oppenheimer endured as an 
interpreter of science and its new relationships to society. Most 
important, he still spoke as an interpreter of the atomic revolution and 
offered hope for transcending the atomic crisis. 

Biographers and commentators have highlighted and explored 
several biographical themes and interpretations for understanding 
Oppenheimer and his historical significance. One is certainly Oppen- 
heimer’s dedication to and love of science, especially physics. His active 
involvement and contributions to physics during its revolutionary 


intelligence and then lied about the circumstances in the hope of protecting Chevalier 
[and possibly others, as well as alerting Army intelligence].” (McMillan, Ruin of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 234), p. 192). The “Chevalier incident,” along with lying 
about it, played a crucial role in the AEC Board justifying its decision not to reinstate 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance and hence causing his political downfall. 


10 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


period in the first half of the 20th Century was instrumental in forming 
his personality, reputation, and philosophical thought about science. 
Biographer Ray Monk dedicates a significant part of his book to 
Oppenheimer’s scientific endeavors, and explores how Oppenheimer’s 
life “was shaped and driven by his desire to understand physics.””” 
As noted by many, Oppenheimer’s dedication to and success in 
bringing modern theoretical physics to America in the 1930s — 
making American physics a rival to European physics that would 
surpass it in the 1940s — is historically important. For physicist and 
biographer Abraham Pais, this was “the most important contribu- 
tion of his life.”?? 

Another theme for understanding Oppenheimer is his love for 
America and lifelong patriotism. George Kennan, diplomat and close 
friend of Oppenheimer — and defender of Oppenheimer at his security 
hearing — was the concluding speaker at the Oppenheimer memorial 
service in 1967. Kennan insisted the “truth is that the US Government 
never had a servant more devoted at heart than this one, in the sense 
of wishing to make a constructive contribution.” Furthermore, Kennan 
recalled that shortly after the 1954 security hearing, he “had asked 
Oppenheimer why he hadn’t left the country, noting that he would be 
welcomed in ‘a hundred academic centers’? around the globe.” 
Oppenheimer replied with tears in his eyes, “Damn it, I happen to love 
this country.”’* Kennan’s affirmation stands in stark contrast to 
Oppenheimer’s political enemies who accused him of being a closet 
communist attempting to undermine the national security of the 
United States. Like other biographers, Monk stresses “the importance 
of Oppenheimer’s deeply felt and lifelong patriotism.” For instance, 


In the 1930s he had set out to build an American school of theoretical 
physics that would enable the USA to replace Germany as the leading 
centre for research in that area; now [in 1942] he had a chance to lead 
a project that would not only demonstrate the superiority of American 
physics, but would also, in so doing, equip the US with a weapon that 
would enable it to win the war against Germany.” 


Other features were Oppenheimer’s brilliance and quickness 
of mind combined with his multifaceted, polymath personality. 


Introduction 11 


The result was an eloquent, charismatic teacher and leader remarkable 
as a synthesizer and summarizer. According to physicist Robert Serber, 
who was a younger colleague of Oppenheimer’s, 


Many facets of Oppenheimer’s character contributed to his great- 
ness as a teacher: his great capacity as a physicist, his wide intellectual 
interests, his astonishing quickness of mind, his great gift of expres- 
sion, his sensitive perception, his social presence, which made him 
the center of every gathering. His students emulated him as best 
they could. They copied his gestures, his mannerisms, his intona- 
tions. He truly influenced their lives.?¢ 


Biographer and sociologist Charles Thorpe analyses Oppenheimer 
as the charismatic leader at Los Alamos. Though his leadership was 
“a collective task and a collective accomplishment,”’” Thorpe 
contends that 


Oppenheimer was celebrated at Los Alamos for his ability to see the 
big picture: to synthesize the entire body of science involved in the 
project and, from this overall perspective, to bring order and 
cohesion to decision making and discourse. Famously, he could sum 
up opposing views in such a way that the argument would appear 
resolved — his “magical trick that brought respect” even from those 
who were “his superiors in terms of their scientific record.” Although 
not set apart by a Nobel Prize, he was seen to be able to “rise above” 
the scientific flock, due to this combination of moral and intellectual 
qualities. His authority derived from an ability to speak for and bring 
to bear a consensus that was seen to already exist in potential. His 
synthetic knowledge, together with his perceived moral qualities, 
allowed him to reconcile conflicting parties and made him the 
“natural” spokesman for an underlying, though not yet realized, 
consensus. It was this underlying collegial consensus, for which he 
was believed to speak, that was the root and source of his authority; 
hence the close association between Oppenheimer’s leadership and 
organizational forms ... that expressed that collegial order.”*® 


Oppenheimer as a flawed individual is another prominent bio- 
graphical theme. He was arrogant and sharp-tongued, and has been 


12 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


taken as insecure and fragmented. In the words of physicist and biog- 
rapher John Rigden, Oppenheimer lacked a “sense of self.” Moreover, 
as highlighted by others, Monk maintains that 


Oppenheimer cannot be understood without taking into account 
the importance of his deeply felt desire to overcome the sense of 
being an outsider that he inherited from his German Jewish back- 
ground and his desire to get inside the centre of American political 
and social life.” 


Given these faults along with a titanic ambition and a certain level 
of naiveté, Oppenheimer was susceptible to being manipulated espe- 
cially given certain vulnerabilities (e.g., the “Chevelier incident” and 
his communist affiliations). Certainly, Captain de Silva, who was in 
charge of security at Los Alamos, believed this. In a 1943 memo to 
his superior concerning Oppenheimer and possible involvement in 
Soviet espionage, de Silva concluded (as set forth by Monk) that 


“Oppenheimer is deeply concerned with gaining a worldwide repu- 
tation as a scientist, and a place in history” through his leadership of 
the Los Alamos laboratory. The army [de Silva] maintained, “is in 
the position of being able to allow him to do so or to destroy his 
name, reputation, and career, if it should choose to do so.” 
[De Silva] ended up suggesting that, if “strongly presented to him”, 
the fact that the army could destroy his reputation, “would possibly 
give him a different view of his position with respect to the Army, 
which has been, heretofore, one in which he has been dominant 
because of his supposed essentiality.”*° 


Concerning Oppenheimer’s scientific character, and as empha- 
sized by the physicist Freeman Dyson in his review of Monk’s biogra- 
phy, Oppenheimer has been viewed as lacking what Germans call 
Sitzfleisch (sitting flesh as on a chair) or perseverance in English.*! 
Dyson knew Oppenheimer as a friend and colleague at the Institute 
for Advanced Study. Murray Gell-Mann, who won the Nobel Prize 
for Physics in 1969 and was at the Institute for Advanced Study in 
1951, agrees with Dyson saying, 


Introduction 13 


As far as I know, he [Oppenheimer] never wrote a long paper or did 
a long calculation, anything of that kind. He didn’t have patience 
for that; his own work consisted of little apercus, but quite brilliant 
ones. But he inspired other people to do things, and his influence 
was fantastic.” 


To a degree, this explains why Oppenheimer, even given his brilliance, 
was never awarded the Nobel Prize, and what philosopher and histo- 
rian Robert Crease has called “Oppenheimer’s ambiguous scientific 
legacy,” 

Another biographical theme for understanding Oppenheimer is 
his commitment to internationalism and in particular scientific inter- 
nationalism. Central to this theme are his efforts for the international 
control of atomic energy together with the influence of Niels Bohr 
and the idea of an Open World. This theme plays a prominent role in 
the following chapters. 

Furthermore, the controversies and political battles that Oppenheimer 
engaged in have been the subject of historical interpretation as well as 
biographical analysis. Of particular note are the hydrogen bomb contro- 
versy and the resulting decision for a crash program to develop the 
H-bomb or Super, a bomb 1000 times more powerful than the atomic 
bomb dropped on Hiroshima. The GAC, under Oppenheimer’s chair- 
manship, opposed the crash program on moral as well as technical 
grounds saying in the majority annex to its report that the Super “might 
become a weapon of genocide.” In the minority annex, Rabi and fellow 
physicist Enrico Fermi even referred to the Super as “necessarily an evil 
thing considered in any light.”* Though their recommendation was 


‘This use of such strong moral condemnation to characterize the Super is found in 
the GAC Report concerning a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb. In 
October 1949 the General Advisory Committee (GAC) of the Atomic Energy 
Commission, chaired by Oppenheimer, announced (not to the public since this 
report was top secret) its opposition to a crash program to develop the super bomb. 
For the GAC such a program could not be technically justified at that time, and mor- 
ally such “a super bomb might become a weapon of genocide” and “is necessarily an 
evil thing considered in any light.” Others saw the crash program as a necessary 
response to the Soviet atomic bomb test in August 1949 that ended the US atomic 
monopoly. In January 1950 Truman announced his decision to develop the 


14 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


rejected, the GAC (with veterans of the Manhattan Project like 
Oppenheimer, Fermi, and Conant who had supported the military use 
of the atomic bomb during the war) “made it clear that nuclear weapons 
policies must no longer be decided in a moral vacuum.”** According to 
biographers Kai Bird and Martin Sherwin, 


In retrospect — and even at the time — it was clear that the 
H-bomb decision was a turning point in the Cold War’s spiraling 
arms race. Like Oppenheimer, Kennan was thoroughly “disgusted.” 
I. I. Rabi was outraged. “I never forgave Truman,” he said.* 


However, no member of the GAC resigned in protest. 

For any interpretative understanding of Oppenheimer, the 1954 
security hearing looms large. For science historian and biographer 
David Cassidy, Oppenheimer could have 


successfully stood up to the bullies. He still possessed the national 
and international stature to brush off these trumped-up charges and 
to refuse to accept the terms of such a proceeding. ... Public resig- 
nation in outrage at his treatment would have done more to defend 
science and his own reputation than his sinking to the level of his 
accusers in an inevitably degrading attempt to defend his personal 
views and private behavior.** 


But Cassidy reminds his reader that this was “out of character” for 
Oppenheimer and “would have required him suddenly to assume a 
wholly different role as a moral protest leader.” Moreover, he would 
voluntarily be 


giving up the power and prestige and participation in high councils 
that he had worked so hard to attain as the nation’s ultimate insider 


hydrogen bomb. In direct opposition to the GAC, the “Second Atomic Revolution” 
had begun with the development of the Super — a bomb that would be 1000 times 
more powerful than the atomic bomb that had destroyed Hiroshima. Note the strong 
moral condemnation by the GAC is with respect to the super bomb not the atomic 
bomb. The GAC took the super bomb (based on nuclear fusion) to be in a totally 
different destructive category than the atomic bomb (based on nuclear fission). For 
excerpts and discussion of the GAC report, see McMillan, Ruin of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer (ref. 234), pp. 36-40. 


Introduction 15 


scientist, the valued and esteemed leader of the nation’s established 
scientific elite. Even more than that, he had worked for years toward 
shaping the nation’s science-policy system along rational, even 
moral lines, into a managerial system directed toward achieving a 
moderate policy encompassing arms control and restraints on the 
ever expanding application of science to military weaponry.” 


In his letter of response to his accusers concerning the “alternative 
suggested [ quiet resignation ],” Oppenheimer wrote 


Under the circumstances this course of action would mean that 
I accept and concur in the view that I am not fit to serve this 
Government, that I have now served for some 12 years. This I can- 
not do. If I were thus unworthy I could hardly have served our 
country as I have tried ... or have spoken, as on more than one 
occasion I have found myself speaking, in the name of our science 
and our country.** 


Oppenheimer’s choosing not to resign and to fight here points to 
many things from personal ambition to defending American science 
conjoined with an open and moderate policy with respect to nuclear 
weaponry. 

Like Thorpe and others, Bird and Sherwin construe Oppenheimer’s 
defeat as having historic connotations. 


For a few years after World War II, scientists had been regarded as a 
new class of intellectuals, members of a public-policy priesthood 
who might legitimately offer expertise not only as scientists but as 
public philosophers. With Oppenheimer’s defrocking, scientists 
knew that in the future they could serve the state only as experts on 
narrow scientific issues. As the sociologist Daniel Bell later observed, 
Oppenheimer’s ordeal signified that the postwar “messianic role of 
the scientists” was now at an end. Scientists working within the 
system could not dissent from government policy, as Oppenheimer 
had done by writing his 1953 Foreign Affairs essay [strongly recom- 
mending government “candor” with regard to nuclear weapons], 
and still expect to serve on government advisory boards. The trial 
thus represented a watershed in the relations of the scientist to the 
government. The narrowest vision of how American scientists 
should serve their country had triumphed.” 


16 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 
Moreover, they interpret that 


Oppenheimer’s defeat was also a defeat for American liberalism. 
Liberals were not on trial during the Rosenberg atom spy case. 
... But like many Roosevelt New Dealers, Oppenheimer had once 
been a man of the broad Left, active in Popular Front causes, 
close to many communists and to the Party itself. Having evolved 
into a liberal disillusioned with the Soviet Union, he had used his 
iconic status to join the ranks of the liberal foreign policy estab- 
lishment, counting as personal friends men like Gen. George C. 
Marshall, Dean Acheson and McGeorge Bundy. Liberals had 
then embraced Oppenheimer as one of their own. His humilia- 
tion thus implicated liberalism, and liberal politicians understood 
that the rules of the game had changed. Now, even if the issue 
was not espionage, even if one’s loyalty was unquestioned, chal- 
lenging the wisdom of America’s reliance on a nuclear arsenal 
was dangerous. The Oppenheimer hearing thus represented a 
significant step in the narrowing of the public forum during the 
early Cold War.*° 


Ironically, as pointed out by Bird and Sherwin, the “publicity 
surrounding the trial and its verdict enhanced Oppenheimer’s fame 
both in America and abroad.” Not only was Oppenheimer the Father 
of the Atomic Bomb, but now he was also “a scientist martyred, like 
Galileo.”*! 

In concluding this biographical sketch, Oppenheimer’s associa- 
tion with the Congress for Cultural Freedom (CCF) is worth high- 
lighting. In November 1954, six months after his security hearing and 
political exile, it was officially announced that Oppenheimer was 
elected to the American Committee for Cultural Freedom which was 
affiliated with the CCF. Oppenheimer would become a significant 
figure in the CCF, and participate in a number of its events. Founded 
in 1950, the CCF was an international organization of artists, writers, 
and intellectuals that actively opposed “Communism and all other 
forms of totalitarianism” in the so-called war of ideas. With affiliates 
in Europe, North America, South America, and Asia, the CFF 
sponsored journals, newsletters, conferences, and seminars. 


Introduction 17 


Today, many historians give prominence to the view that the 
Cold War was an “Ideological Project” (a war of ideas). Remarkably, 
the CFF is symbolic of this interpretation. Amid disclosures of its CIA 
funding, the CCF was dissolved in 1967.47 Among its hundreds of 
members, there were numerous Americans — George Kennan (diplo- 
mat), Reinhold Niebuhr (public theologian), John Steinbeck (novel- 
ist), Sidney Hook (philosopher), Arthur Schlesinger Jr. (historian), 
Diana and Lionel Trilling (literary critics), Irving Kristol (journalist 
and future founder of neoconservatism), Norman Cousins (journalist 
and world peace advocate), and, of course, J. Robert Oppenheimer. 


Recent Scholarship and the “Oppenheimer Challenge” 


The centennial of Oppenheimer’s birth was in 2004 and was reflected 
in the publication of at least eight biographical books on Oppenheimer 
during the years 2004 to 2008. Of particular note is American 
Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer by 
Kai Bird and Martin Sherwin, which won the 2006 Pulitzer Prize in 
biography. In addition, a collection of essays based on presentations 
at the 2004 Oppenheimer Centennial held at the University of 
California—Berkeley was published as well as some scholarly articles on 
Oppenheimer and substantial reviews of the above books.** In 2012, 
the interest in Oppenheimer reached new heights with the publica- 
tion of an eight-hundred-page biography entitled Inside the Centre: 
The Life of J. Robert Oppenheimer by Ray Monk. 

However, Oppenheimer as a subject presents us with major 
challenges. As illustrated in the biographical sketch, he was many 
things — scientist, weaponeer, government adviser, public intellec- 
tual, and icon for his age. Moreover, Oppenheimer was strategically 
placed and became the focus of historic forces and controversies that 
shaped the Twentieth Century. Consequently, as noted by historian 
Barton Bernstein, “Oppenheimer is not the kind of subject ... for 
whom there will ever be a ‘definitive’ biography — too much of his 
life will remain subject to interpretive dispute.”** 

To illustrate differences in interpretation by Oppenheimer biogra- 
phers, Charles Thorpe in his book, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect 


18 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


(2006), which he characterizes as a “sociological biography,” con- 
trasts his position with that of Bird and Sherwin and of Priscilla 
McMillan in her The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer (2005). 
According to Thorpe, Bird and Sherwin take Oppenheimer as “an 
authentic voice of American scientific, intellectual, and political liber- 
alism” and McMillan takes him as “a defeated moderating voice in 
American foreign policy.” In contrast, Thorpe takes Oppenheimer as 
having failed “to develop a critical political perspective as his liberal- 
ism was shaped by the culture of the Cold War” and “in significant 
ways accommodated himself to and internalized the culture and 
mentality of the national-security state.”* 

Moreover, interpretations of Oppenheimer’s philosophical out- 
look differ. Silvan Schweber, in his book Ezustein and Oppenheimer: 
The Meaning of Genius (2008), emphasizes the influence of the Ethical 
Culture movement on Oppenheimer during his early years and places 
Oppenheimer, in part on the basis of his 1957 William James Lectures 
at Harvard and interactions with such philosophers as Morton White, 
in the tradition of American pragmatism. In contrast, using themes 
from the sociologist Max Weber (1864-1920), Thorpe emphasizes 
the role of such things as vocational ethics in Oppenheimer’s thought. 

On a more personal level, Oppenheimer presents a challenge. As 
Oppenheimer’s close friend Rabi once remarked “God knows I’m not 
the simplest person, but compared to Oppenheimer, I’m very, very 
enigmatic,” 
and “fragmented.” For some, Oppenheimer was “a person who, 
throughout his entire life, tried on different masks ... without ever 
establishing a coherent identity or gaining a sense of who he was.”*” 
Oppenheimer could also promote “a love-hate relation.” Abraham 
Pais, a close colleague of Oppenheimer’s at the Institute for Advanced 
Study, knew “of largely just love or hate responses among many who 


” 


1 : 1 usiv' 
simple.”4° Oppenheimer has been taken as “elusive, 


knew” Oppenheimer, analogous to “the ways people react to 
New York City.”*8 

Finally, Oppenheimer’s thought and philosophical outlook pre- 
sent another challenge. For one, Oppenheimer like many other intel- 
lectuals never wrote a book that is a systematic exposition of his views. 
For example, his book Science and the Common Understanding is his 


Introduction 19 


BBC Reith Lectures given in 1953, and his book The Open Mind is a 
collection of eight lectures delivered between 1946 and 1954. 
Additionally, the majority of sources for Oppenheimer’s thought con- 
sists of lectures and talks, both published and unpublished. Since they 
were tailored for different live audiences, these works are repetitive, 
make little or no reference to previous works, and in many cases lack 
detail and depth. Such an approach for presenting one’s views was by 
no means unique to Oppenheimer and is found among other scien- 
tists and intellectuals; for example, Bohr and Rabi took this approach.” 

Oppenheimer’s lecturing style also presents challenges. He typi- 
cally lectured using abbreviated notes; and his poetic, oracular style 
could leave audiences more mesmerized than informed. Interestingly, 
Thorpe notes that Oppenheimer attempted to tutor David Lilienthal, 
a friend and government official, in the art of such lecturing by prais- 
ing one of Lilienthal’s speeches as “very sound and deep and with just 
the right lightness of touch in pointing to the great human and ethical 
substrata that determine our way of life without handling them in 
such an explicit way that the touch destroys.”°° 

In spite of this, the corpus of Oppenheimer’s works is extensive 
and provides for a discussion and criticism of his views as well as con- 
siderations of influence and development over time. Furthermore, it 
not only contains individual lectures and talks, but also contains sev- 
eral lecture series which assist in adding detail and depth to his views. 
Three lecture series have been published, and at least four others have 
been transcribed.*! Also, Oppenheimer did revise and edit to varying 
degrees the lectures and talks that he published as well as wrote arti- 
cles directly for publication. In addition, Oppenheimer’s interactions 
with other intellectuals — scholars, scientists, and artists — can be 
documented and assist in exploring and elaborating Oppenheimer’s 
thought and philosophical outlook.” In particular, Oppenheimer’s 
interactions with the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Archibald MacLeish 
as well as his close friend and Nobel Prizing-winning physicist 
I. I. Rabi will be the subjects for Chapters 3 and 4, respectively. 

To conclude this chapter, let us return to biographical themes that 
assist in interpreting and understanding Oppenheimer. As explored 
and highlighted earlier, there are Oppenheimer’s dedication and 


20 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


commitment to science, especially physics; his love of and loyalty to 
America; and his commitment to internationalism. There is also the 
theme of his brilliance and polymath characteristics in conjunction 
with a fragmented personality and significant human failings. 

There are other biographical themes as well, and certainly one of 
them is centered on responsibility. In his 1954 security hearing, 
Oppenheimer was questioned why he felt it was his “function as 
a scientist to express views on military strategy and _ tactics.” 
Oppenheimer replied “I felt, perhaps quite strongly, that having 
played an active part in promoting a revolution in warfare, I needed 
to be as responsible as I could with regard to what came of this revo- 
lution.”*? Even though responsibility for the atomic revolution is in 
large measure a collective responsibility, Oppenheimer’s taking 
responsibility at the individual level is fitting given the significant 
role he played in this revolution. Indeed, in some ways, it was neces- 
sitated. In addition to the part he played, Oppenheimer had knowl- 
edge and abilities along with political and symbolic capital to step 
forward and take responsibility and help shape “what came of this 
revolution.” This responsibility clearly exhibited at least two dimen- 
sions. The principal dimension was to help shape government policy, 
both domestic and foreign, with regard to nuclear weapons and 
energy. This is illustrated by his leading role in the 1946 Acheson— 
Lilienthal proposal for the international control of atomic energy, his 
chairmanship of the General Advisory Committee to the AEC and 
its 1949 opposition to the H-bomb, his recommendations for flexi- 
ble response and civil defense in nuclear strategy, and his refusal to 
resign and hence confront oppositional forces in his 1954 security 
hearing. 

Another dimension of his individual responsibility was to assist 
and facilitate the general public as well as elites in confronting and 
understanding the atomic revolution. This dimension is certainly 
illustrated by his public presentations — in number, subject matter, 
and audience. In addition, given the urgency and public nature of this 
responsibility, it is understandable, in part, why he might not attempt 
a scholarly, systematic exposition of his views and even recommend 
the need for a certain “lightness of touch.” 


Introduction 21 


In December 1966, less than two months before Oppenheimer 
died, Thomas Morgan of Look Magazine published a conversational 
piece entitled “With Oppenheimer.” In this conversation, surely sens- 
ing his own mortality and legacy, Oppenheimer remarked 


The use of the word “responsibility” ... is almost a secular device for 
using a religious notion without attaching it to a transcendent 
being. ... Now, I don’t know how to describe my life without using 
some word like “responsibility” to characterize it, a word that has to 
do with choice and action and the tension in which choices can be 
resolved.** 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 2 


Oppenheimer’s Hope 
and Vision 1957-1959 


Background 


In April and May of 1957, Robert Oppenheimer delivered the 
William James Lectures at his alma mater, Harvard University, where 
he graduated in 1925. Oppenheimer had been invited by both the phi- 
losophy and psychology departments, and joined a prestigious rank 
of previous lecturers. The great American philosopher John Dewey 
(1859-1952) had delivered the first James Lectures in 1931 and was 
followed by such luminaries as Bertrand Russell (1872-1970) and 
B. F. Skinner (1904-1990). 

Later that spring, Oppenheimer participated in a five-day Fulbright 
conference on higher education which was sponsored by Columbia 
University and hosted at Sarah Lawrence College. The conference 
organizers planned for “over 70 participants including 45 visiting 
scholars and 25 American scholars” and arranged an afternoon visit to 
the United Nations.** Touching on many of the ideas presented in his 
James Lectures, Oppenheimer delivered an evening address that was 
later published in 1959 as “Science and the Human Community.” 

Oppenheimer concluded this address with an idea, really a hope 
and vision, not found in his James Lectures.’ He spoke of “the 


"A word of caution is needed here. The theme of the James Lectures, which consisted 
of eight lectures, was “The Hope of Order.” The fifth lecture, “An Unfamiliar 
Order,” was not recorded and hence there is no transcript/manuscript for this 


23 


24 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


sovereign, unlimited, all-powerful nation-state” as “a pretty deadly and 
impossible form for the organization of mankind.” With a reference 
to “a rather muted shout” by Niels Bohr and an indirect reference to 
the Acheson—Lilienthal proposal of 1946 for the international control 
of atomic energy, in which Oppenheimer played such an important 
part, he said “The creation of vital, strong, international communities 
[1.e., an international communitarian pluralism] must precede the 
creation of international organs of comparable strength and vitality. 
And this, in turn, is probably what must precede the formal regulation 
of the sovereign national will.”°° 

In June, Oppenheimer delivered another address, “Nuclear 
Power and International Relations,” at the Princeton University 
Conference on NATO; and in October, another talk, “The Environs 
of Atomic Power,” at the Twelfth American Assembly conference 
associated with Columbia University. The Princeton NATO confer- 
ence with over 60 participants from Europe and North America 
included ambassadors and members of parliament from such coun- 
tries as Canada, France, England, Greece, and Italy and three mem- 
bers of the United States Congress as well as retired military 
personnel, journalists, academics, and some labor and _ business 
leaders.*” The American Assembly conference, also with over 60 par- 
ticipants, included scientists, business and labor leaders, newspaper 
editors, and academics.*® 

As in his address at the Fulbright conference, Oppenheimer con- 
cluded these two presentations with the same hope and vision based 
on an international, communitarian pluralism. Months later, in April 
of 1958, Oppenheimer “spoke to a group of editors and journalists 
from all over the world who had gathered in Washington for a meet- 
ing of the International Press Institute.” Again, this address, “The 
Tree of Knowledge,” concluded with the same expressed hope and 
vision and was placed before the public by being published in the 
October issue of Harper’s Magazine.*? 


lecture. So it is possible that this hope and vision (i.e., specialized communities 
needed to bring about the regulation of the sovereign national will) occurred in the 
fifth lecture. 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 25 


In these presentations and publications, Oppenheimer posited 
that the nature of defense problems, economic development, and 
communications with its technology would pull us together and help 
tame “a fierce nationalism.” But to break the “grip” of nationalism 
and survive these unprecedented times, Oppenheimer pointed to the 
need for “the creation of vital, strong, international communities.” 
These would be “fraternal communities ... embarked on specialized 
work” and would include “communities of the mind.” For him, “If 
the nations provide the warp of our life, these communities provide a 
kind of woof.” 


A Vital Center for Oppenheimer’s Thought 


I contend that by exploring and elaborating on this hope and vision 
given at the end of these four presentations (three of which were 
published) provides an insightful way — really a “vital center” both 
temporally and conceptually — for stepping into Oppenheimer’s life 
and thought.’ Its roots lie in his earlier works and activities (e.g., the 
attempt at the international control of atomic energy which serves as 
the focus of Chapter 5), and it is supported and reflected in his later 
works as well as his interactions with other public intellectuals like 
Archibald MacLeish and I. I. Rabi (the subjects of Chapters 3 and 4, 
respectively). 

Moreover, this hope and vision displays some of the constants 
and invariants that shaped Oppenheimer’s life and thought (e.g., a 
communal view of science). Oppenheimer’s references to Bohr are of 
particular note. As documented by several scholars, the influence of 
Bohr on Oppenheimer was significant; and to fully appreciate this, 
we will be led (in Chapter 6) to the role of Bohrian complementarity 
in Oppenheimer’s thought. Most important, with this hope and 
vision in hand, we will then (in later chapters) consider Oppenheimer 
and his thought in a more philosophical light as well as from the 
perspective of contemporary international relations theory. 


8 Many of the ideas in Oppenheimer’s hope and vision are also repeated in a magazine 
article by Thomas B. Morgan, “A Visit with J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Look Magazine 
(April 1, 1958). 


26 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


These four works of 1957-59, where he sets forth this vision, inter- 
estingly break into two pairs. The two talks and resulting publications, 
“Science and the Human Community” and “The Tree of Knowledge,” 
were addressed to educators and members of the press, respectively, 
and mainly deal with cognitive and cultural issues. The other two talks, 
“Nuclear Power and International Relations” and “The Environs of 
Atomic Power,” were addressed more to government officials, former 
military personnel, and business leaders, and dealt mainly with nuclear 
power and defense issues related to nuclear weapons. 

We begin with the two works that focus on the cognitive and 
cultural. These two addresses “talk about the nature and structure of 
our knowledge [science] today and how it has altered and compli- 
cated the problems of” education and the press.°' The ideas and 
themes in these works essentially all occur in Oppenheimer’s James 
Lectures as well as his earlier works. However, some important ideas 
are missing in these two addresses — for instance, Oppenheimer’s 
distinction between thematic and propositional discourse, and com- 
plementarity in atomic physics and its extension to other areas of 
human experience. 

In his James Lectures, Oppenheimer spoke of “our cognitive pre- 
dicament” and the resulting cultural crisis, and this continues as the 
dominant theme in both “Science and the Human Community” and 
“The Tree of Knowledge.” This cognitive predicament or crisis 
results from many factors — for example, knowledge doubling every 
ten years. The most significant factor, though, is that knowledge 
(science) in the modern world is necessarily based on specialization 
which results in fragmentation and difficulties of communication. 
Since science is the primary force shaping the modern world, such 
specialization threatens both public discourse and cultural coherence, 
and hence alters and complicates problems in such areas as education 
and journalism. 

To see this more clearly, let us consider Oppenheimer’s views on 
science and specialization. First, Oppenheimer takes a broad concep- 
tion of science with it encompassing history as well as such fields as 
physics. In fact, science includes “anything that can be talked of in an 
objective way so that people ... can understand it, know what the 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 27 


scientist has done, reproduce it, and find out if it is true or not.” For 
Oppenheimer, objectivity is based on unambiguous communication, 
not ontology. Though science arises from and is continuous with 
common sense as well as cumulative in its development, Oppenheimer 
took a pluralistic, non-hierarchical view of science. There is no funda- 
mental or foundational discipline or specialization in the sciences. 
Instead, the unity of the sciences is much more indeterminate and 
based on the absence of contradiction and the fructification of various 
specializations (e.g., from logical implication to suggestive analogy). 
Science is like a “network” with no simple unifying and reductive 
principles. In his 1953 BBC Reith Lectures, Oppenheimer developed 
the metaphor of the House of Science, which is open to all but so vast 
that no one can know more than one or perhaps a few of its rooms. 
New rooms are added and walls removed, but the House of Science 
has “no central chamber.”® 

Even though the structure of scientific knowledge and how it is 
produced (specialization) can threaten public discourse and cultural 
coherence, science significantly enriches society both materially and 
spiritually. Material fruits are technological and result from the knowl- 
edge and power generated by science. Except for atomic energy, 
Oppenheimer spends little time addressing the material fruits of sci- 
ence since the spiritual fruits are his major concern. To begin, science 
is a collective effort — a democratic meritocracy which serves as a 
model or prototype for social organization providing cultural and 
personal enrichment. The findings and spirit of science directly affect 
the philosophical forces and ideas that shape culture as well as 
promote optimism, rationality, and critical debate within a framework 
of empirical inquiry. Two of Oppenheimer’s favorite examples of 
the influence of science on culture are Newtonian physics and the 
Enlightenment, and Darwinian evolution and the naturalization of 
man. Another key example is Bohrian complementarity in atomic 
physics and its relevance for modern society. This plays a major role 
in Oppenheimer’s thought and will be discussed later in Chapter 6. 

Science enriches its participants by developing such virtues as 
humility, cooperation, and self-reliance. It promotes a healthy skep- 
ticism; and since science is an open-ended and perhaps never capable 


28 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


of completion, one comes “to have a great caution in all assertions of 
totality, of finality or absoluteness.”°** More important for us, 
Oppenheimer took science as “a way of life” — a form of craftsman- 
ship — with the “true responsibility of a scientist [being] ... to the 
integrity and vigor of his science.”® For Oppenheimer, science is best 
construed as a mode of action or doing. 

Though it enriches its participants, science is not merely an indi- 
vidualistic enterprise. Science is a “collective effort in which there is a 
clear and well-defined community whose canons of taste and order 
simplify the life of the practitioner.” The community of science dis- 
plays “a total lack of authoritarianism” because it has refined “tech- 
niques for the prompt discovery of error” that all members of the 
community acknowledge and respect. Further, science “is a field in 
which the technique of experiment has given an almost perfect har- 
mony to the balance between thought and action.”® This communal 
view of science as well as science as craft permeate Oppenheimer’s 
work, and help mitigate what has been called “the antinomy between 
the individual and the community.” 

Since, to a large extent, knowledge in the modern world is based 
on specialization, the “traditions of science are specialized traditions,” 
and this is what gives such “enormous thrust and power to the scien- 
tific experience.”®” Most important, as Oppenheimer said in his talk 
“Science and the Human Community” as well as his James Lectures, 
knowledge is not so much a property of individuals, but rather a prop- 
erty of specialized communities — “The receptacle of all the knowl- 
edge we have, the agencies to whom this knowledge is entrusted and 
who create it, are not individual men. They are communities of men. 
They are the specialized professions, often increasingly specialized” — 
and this results in a kind of “cognitive syndicalism.”°* Furthermore, 
“the cultural values of the life of science almost all lie in the intimate 
view [i.e., in specialization]: it is here that the hard lessons, the real 
choices, the great discoveries, the great disappointments, the new 
techniques are vivid and clear and detailed, and not in the general 
encyclopedia-like description of what the progress of science is all 
about.” However, specialization is “one of the things which also 
makes the great problem of teaching and explaining the sciences.” 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 29 


Therefore specialization, though necessary for epistemic honesty 
and meaning, threatens both public discourse and communal under- 
standing. In many ways, this is not so much a problem of making 
information available; it is more a problem of the non-specialist’s 
lack of semantic understanding or even imagination which is acquired 
through specialization and action. 

So what did Oppenheimer recommend we do, given the inevita- 
bility that specialization will lead to cognitive and cultural fragmenta- 
tion, and the resulting temptation to present oversimplified summaries 
of the specialist’s knowledge and understanding? In the end, for the 
individual, his recommendation took the form of a “dual duty” of 
both specialization (“a duty of faithfulness and firmness” to one’s 
specialty) and engagement with the broader community (“a duty 
of great openness to others”).”? In “The Tree of Knowledge,” 
Oppenheimer wrote 


all of us in our years of learning, and many if not most of us 
throughout our lives, need some true apprenticeship, some hard and 
concentrated work, in the specialized traditions. This will make us 
better able to understand one another but, most important of all, it 
will clarify for us the extent to which we do not understand one 
another. It will not be easy. It means a major change in the way we 
look at the world and in our educational practices. It means that an 
understanding of the scope, depth, and nature of our ignorance 
should be among the primary purposes of education. But to me, it 
seems necessary for the coherence of our culture, and for the very 
future of any free civilization.”! 


Two points are important here. First, Oppenheimer did not 
restrict apprenticeships to the sciences since he took “specialized tra- 
ditions” to include such fields as law and architecture. Second, and 
most important, this is a call for second-order knowledge or under- 
standing — that is, knowledge or understanding about knowledge 
that is obtained through specialization. Such second-order knowledge 
is required not only for coherence within the scientific community, 
but also for cultural coherence due to the richness and pluralism of 
the cognitive world. 


30 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Engagement among persons from various specialized traditions 
requires openness and creates bonds between specialized communi- 
ties. Such engagement can take diverse forms, but a favorite for 
Oppenheimer is the telling of “stories.” A central part of Oppenhei- 
mer’s 1953 BBC Reith Lectures was the origin of the quantum the- 
ory of atomic systems in the early part of the twentieth century, with 
an emphasis on Bohr’s idea of complementarity. When he turned to 
his detailed discussion of atomic physics, Oppenheimer prepared his 
audience by saying, 


We must talk of our subject not as a community of specialized sci- 
entists but as men concerned with understanding, through analogy, 
description, and an act of confidence and trust, what other people 
have done and thought and found. So men listen to accounts of 
soldiers returning from a campaign of unparalleled hardship and 
heroism, or of explorers from the high Himalayas, or of tales of deep 
illness, or of a mystic’s communion with his God. Such stories tell 
little of what the teller has to tell. They are the threads which bind 
us in community and make us more than separate men.” 


In particular, genuine cognitive and cultural bonding by such 
engagement requires epistemic second-order understanding obtained 
through some hard and concentrated work in a specialized tradition — 
that is, a true apprenticeship. Oppenheimer appears to have held that 
this second-order knowledge or understanding cannot be directly 
communicated since it is a tacit understanding obtained through 
specialization, that is, action and experience within a community. 

As suggested above, though our cognitive predicament is formi- 
dable, part of the solution lies in higher education. In his talk “Science 
and the Human Community” at the Fulbright conference on higher 
education, Oppenheimer recommended that undergraduates should 
“Try to learn something very well indeed. And do not just learn what 
it is in general terms. Learn it as a practitioner; learn how to do it.” 
Further, he expressed his skepticism of “the general-education 
approach” and took survey courses as serving “a necessary purpose 
only because without them one cannot navigate” in the intellectual 


world.”? 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 31 


In earlier works, Oppenheimer had expressed this same educa- 
tional outlook with respect to science education. For instance, 
Oppenheimer was critical of teaching science to undergraduates using 
historical methods or case studies, in particular, the views of James 
Conant (president of Harvard University and a director in the 
Manhattan Project). For Oppenheimer, science teaching “is best 
when it is more like an apprenticeship” since an element of action is 
inseparable from understanding. One must participate in science if 
one is to truly benefit from science. Perhaps an analogy between sci- 
ence and athletics is helpful. What one learns or obtains by being an 
athlete (e.g., physical strength, self-confidence) cannot be learned or 
obtained by being a spectator or even studying the history of athletics. 
One learns or obtains these things by doing athletics (science) or 
ideally by becoming an athlete (a scientist). 

In his talk “The Tree of Knowledge” at the meeting of 
International Press Institute, Oppenheimer extended his recommen- 
dations to the press since they are part of the solution of “our cogni- 
tive predicament” as well. Oppenheimer described the press as 
“a group of men who have a singularly critical destiny in these rather 
peculiar times. ... to keep the channels of truth and communication 
open and to keep men in some sense united in common knowledge 
and common humanity.”” In his talk, Oppenheimer spoke of some of 
the “traps” that the press faces when covering science (e.g., the use of 
very large numbers as well as technical terms like “relativity” sound- 
ing like ordinary words). 

However, he reminded them that even though it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to communicate the fundamentals of sciences far removed 
from common experience, say atomic physics or the theory of 
relativity, the press has successfully communicated practical applica- 
tions of these sciences such as atomic power generation and the use 
of vaccines to prevent diseases. Further, sciences like the psychological 
sciences are not so far removed from common experience, and many 
of their fundamental findings can be understood by the public. 
Moreover, by presenting a “faithful image” of the cognitive chal- 
lenges we confront, such as the threat of specialization to cultural 
coherence and the need for “some true apprenticeship,” the public 


32 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


press could do a great deal to alleviate our situation. Also, Oppenheimer 
held that part of the solution to our cognitive predicament “lies with 
just learning to live with it.””> At the end of this talk, Oppenheimer 
briefly discussed the topic of nuclear disarmament. 

Oppenheimer’s two 1957 talks, “Nuclear Power and International 
Relations” at the Princeton NATO conference and “The Environs of 
Atomic Power” at the meeting of the American Assembly, were very 
different from the two talks discussed above since they did not con- 
cern themselves with “our cognitive predicament” and the resulting 
cultural crisis. Excluding nuclear power generation, their main con- 
cern was “a very grim one” — nuclear weapons and defense policy. 
Oppenheimer said that those who “know our stockpiles are terrified 
by them [and] everybody is terrified by estimates and assessments 
of Soviet capabilities. Total nuclear war has begun to take on that 
desperate, perhaps genocidal, perhaps suicidal, quality which was 
anticipated from the beginning.””® 

In these talks, Oppenheimer discussed four strategic endeavors 
given the current nuclear world — disarmament, defense, deterrence, 
and limitation. All are interrelated, “in part conflicting, and in part 
complementary.””” In his Princeton NATO talk, Oppenheimer 
expressed skepticism about disarmament given the current world situ- 
ation and problems inherent to nuclear disarmament (e.g., rapid, 
ongoing changes in nuclear technology). To prevent all-out nuclear 
war at this time, Oppenheimer saw the need for civilian defense as 
well as the defense of retaliatory forces necessary for a credible deter- 
rence. However, our overall strategy today must be based on limita- 
tion. For Oppenheimer, “We need to be able to fight limited war, 
conventionally if we can, limited nuclear war if we must; and we need 
to be prepared for these things ahead of time... .””8 

These realistic talks about “a very grim” subject validate Thorpe’s 
interpretation that Oppenheimer “in significant ways ... internalized 
the culture and mentality of the national-security state.” However, 
there are elements here that validate McMillan’s interpretation of 
Oppenheimer as a “moderating voice.” In the question-and-answer 
session following his Princeton NATO talk, Oppenheimer offered 
support for NATO adopting a retaliation-in-kind policy and alluded 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 — 33 


to support for a no-first-use policy with regard to nuclear weapons.” 
In his American Assembly talk, Oppenheimer said that to limit the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons the most important step that the 
United States can probably take “is to share our responsibility for 
their use with our allies abroad, and to make such weapons as effec- 
tively available as full partnership in the alliance might require.”*° 
More important, Oppenheimer did not dismiss nuclear disarmament 
for “there is a very great anxiety, surely on both sides, which lends 
some weight to discussions of disarmament.”®! For him, disarma- 
ment “is desirable, but only in connection with vast changes in the 
world, some of which have to do with international cooperative 
development, others ... with the maintenance of international order, 
and some ... with the establishment of some minimal elements of 
transnational power.”*? 

As in his other two works, Oppenheimer concluded these two 
talks with the same hope and vision centered on intimate specialized, 
international communities — “the people who know how to build 
dams ... , the people who know something about subatomic physics, 
the people who know about malaria.” These epistemic communities 
involve “knowledge of” and “knowledge how” and are not limited 
to pure scientific communities. Having previously mentioned inter- 
national efforts like CERN (European Organization for Nuclear 
Research) and EURATOM (European Atomic Energy Commission), 
Oppenheimer also spoke of the future of industrial atomic power, and 
even “a destiny and a duty of NATO,” saying that these will play their 
parts “in creating those communities, those true elements of federa- 
tion, and that pattern of new order which will some day have to 
encompass this earth, if we are to live with the great new powers we 
have acquired.”** The conclusions of these four talks demonstrated 
Oppenheimer’s continuing faith in international communitarian 
pluralism supported by scientific internationalism. 

At this point, it might be helpful to summarize and attempt to put 
things in perspective. The hope and vision with which Oppenheimer 
ended his four talks of 1957-59 are concerned with breaking the 
“grip” of nationalism, fostering international institutions and endeav- 
ors, and preventing such disasters as nuclear war. However, as seen in 


34 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


the above discussion, this vision is embedded in a broader, more 
detailed, vision. Later in Chapter 4, it will be argued that Oppenheimer 
accepted this overall hope and vision of 1957-59 as the fruition of 
his intellectual and philosophical efforts to understand contemporary 
science and society as well as providing means and recommendations 
for confronting and possibly transcending the nuclear revolution. 

In addition, Oppenheimer’s overall vision, like the more focused 
one, is secular and naturalistic. This should not be taken to imply that 
he was hostile to religious traditions. In fact, he made use of them in 
his public presentations and probably in his own self-understanding. 
Consider the following from Oppenheimer at the opening session of 
the 1960 conference “Progress in Freedom,” which was held in 
Berlin and sponsored by the Congress for Cultural Freedom. 


If I cannot be comforted by Vishnu’s argument to Arjuna, it is 
because I am too much a Jew, much too much a Christian, much 
too much a European, far too much an American. For I believe in 
the meaningfulness of human history, and of our role in it, and 
above all of our responsibility to it.** 


This revealing statement combines the ecumenical, secular, and 
progressive. The argument of the Hindu god Vishnu mentioned here 
(in which Oppenheimer “cannot be comforted”) comes from the 
Bhagavad Gita, and contends that Prince Arjuna should engage in 
fratricidal combat since it is “a simple and necessary duty, whose per- 
formance would preserve the way of Arjuna’s salvation, and whose 
evils were of not deep meaning, either for him or for those whom he 
might kill.”* 

Oppenheimer’s vision is also humanistic, pluralistic, and centered 
on the cognitive and the communal. Its major emphasis is coherence, 
especially cultural coherence. Moreover, Oppenheimer’s vision is par- 
tial and open-ended, and at least on a first reading, not “grand” like 
Marxism or Manifest Destiny, or even Market Fundamentalism. 
However, his vision is grounded by its emphasis on science, which for 
him is the force shaping the modern world. Further, science-as-craft 
is a way of life founded in community which offers enrichment at the 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 35 


personal level and internationalism at the collective level. His vision 
also provides advice and direction at various points. For instance, 
individuals have a dual duty centered on specialization and open- 
ness, educators need a curriculum based on practice and mastery of 
a discipline, and the press has obligations for promoting a viable 
public sector. 

Central to Oppenheimer’s vision are “the fraternal communities 
of men embarked on specialized work.” The ideal here is the scien- 
tific community, like the community of subatomic physicists, but 
Oppenheimer quickly extended them to include other communities — 
for example, communities based on technological goals like the extir- 
pation of malaria. He even extended them to include communities 
like the legal community. These specialized, epistemic communities 
are grounded by practice and tradition, and are robust since they are 
not defined simply by conventional agreement. They are defined by 
human need and commitment with success dependent on under- 
standing the natural world and its limitations. Given that many are 
international, such communities are “true elements of federation” and 
are legitimate and natural objects of loyalty and commitment. They 
lead us in the right direction and provide tools for that new pattern of 
international order necessary to break the “grip” of nationalism and 
for us to survive in “this unprecedented period in the history of man.” 

In 1945, as will be stressed in the Chapter 5, Oppenheimer saw 
the atomic bomb as a “great peril” and a “great hope.” Likewise in his 
overall vision set forth in the 1950s, Oppenheimer saw specialization 
as a “great peril” and, when properly understood, a “great hope.” 


Philosophy and the Public Sphere 


Oppenheimer’s vision, though strongly rooted in science, is not a sci- 
entific vision let alone a form of scientism. To see this most clearly, it 
is helpful to focus on his views of professional philosophers and the 
public sector. Remember, in his 1958 talk “The Tree of Knowledge,” 
Oppenheimer addressed the press giving them advice and encourage- 
ment for their crucial contribution of keeping the channels of truth 
open and maintaining a viable public sector. In contrast, in a 1959 


36 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


talk, Oppenheimer rebuked professional philosophers for removing 
philosophy from the public sector. 

Oppenheimer’s critique of professional philosophy carried special 
weight here. He was certainly aware of current philosophical thought, 
and had at least some limited philosophical interactions with profes- 
sional philosophers. But most important, Oppenheimer was an 
Overseer of Harvard College and a member of the Visiting Committee 
for its philosophy department (as well as its physics and chemistry 
departments). He was elected Overseer in 1949, and his first appoint- 
ment included being chairman of the Visiting Committee to the 
Philosophy Department, a position he held until 1955. This brought 
him in direct contact with senior members of the philosophy depart- 
ment concerning issues ranging from faculty appointments to the role 
of philosophy in general education.*® 

Oppenheimer’s talk, “In the Keeping of Unreason,” was delivered 
at a seminar in September 1959 and later published in the Bulletin of 
Atomic Scientists. This week-long seminar, which was held in a hotel 
on the banks of the Rhine a few miles from Basel, Switzerland, was 
sponsored by the Congress for Cultural Freedom and entitled 
“Industrial Society and the Western Political Dialogue.” Some twenty 
intellectuals from ten countries participated including Raymond Aron 
(1905-1983), Michael Polanyi (1891-1976), and Bertrand de Jouvenel 
(1903-1987) as well as specialists in philosophy, economics, and law.*” 
Interestingly, Oppenheimer’s 1957 Princeton NATO talk “Nuclear 
Power and International Relations” was apparently a background 
paper for the Basel seminar. 

In his talk, Oppenheimer touched on several ideas from his ear- 
lier works — the difficulty of communicating the insights of science, 
the sciences as “a plural and multiple reflection of reality,” and spe- 
cialization as providing a deep sense of knowledge and ignorance 
(i.e., second-order knowledge). His focus, though, was the health — 
really the lack of health — of our “common discourse” or public sec- 
tor. In his introductory remarks, he said his concern was not simply 
with the hope of a revival of political philosophy, but with the hope of 
a revival of all philosophy.** 

For Oppenheimer, the “image of the public sector has suffered” 
due to its enormous size as well as the rapid change of the circumstances 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 37 


of our lives and the growth of mass culture, especially in the United 
States, where “production for consumption’s sake has reached a kind 
of completeness.” In addition, our common discourse has suffered 
from “an alienation between the world of science and the world of 
public discourse.” This has not only “impoverished” public discourse 
but has “intimidated” it as well, and has denied it “an element of 
legitimacy and has given it a kind of arbitrary, unrooted, unfounded 
quality.” 

In advancing these ideas, Oppenheimer made the distinction 
between propositional and thematic discourse, which he first intro- 
duced (on my reading of his works) in his James Lectures. 
Propositional discourse is concerned with assertions “verifiable by the 
characteristic methods of science.” Thematic discourse is “not best 
construed, though it can occasionally be construed, as assertions of 
fact about the natural order or the human order. It is best construed 
as assertions of experience, of dedication, of commitment” as well as 
concerned with the relatedness and priority of things. Moreover, 
thematic discourse “is the typical [and for the most part, proper | 
function of the public sector of our lives, which is where law arises, 
morality, and the highest forms of art.” 

Now, especially when not properly understood, science can intim- 
idate the public sector by calling into question the legitimacy of the- 
matic discourse. For example, an aggressive scientism (like logical 
positivism) might hold that only propositional discourse, as demon- 
strated by the success of science, is meaningful. Hence, thematic dis- 
course would be “nothing but arbitrary decision” or the expression of 
emotive attitudes. Even given that thematic discourse is not “verifia- 
ble by the characteristic methods of science,” Oppenheimer rejected 
such a view since in thematic discourse things can be analyzed, clari- 
fied, and explored as well as “subject to some logical surgery” and put 
into order. 

The public sector and thematic discourse are also vulnerable since 
philosophy, once the “queen” of common discourse, has lost its way. 
Modern professional philosophy has overemphasized “the role of 
certitude” and hung “around its neck that dread, dead bird, ‘How 
can you be sure?’” This has not only “stunted philosophy” but has in 
large part removed it from the public sector. 


38 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


This absence of a public philosophical discourse not only 
impoverishes individuals and communities, but it is also dangerous. 
Oppenheimer revealed that he was profoundly anguished “over the 
fact that no ethical discourse of any nobility or weight has been 
addressed to the problem of the atomic weapons.” And he raised the 
question “What are we to think of such a civilization, which has not 
been able to talk about the prospect of killing almost everybody, 
except in prudential and game-theoretic terms?” He dismissed people 
like Bertrand Russell who advocated World Government and a simple 
move to disarmament saying “these people want heaven and earth” 
and say “if we behave in a nice way, we will never get into any trou- 
ble.” For Oppenheimer, this is “not ethics” because “They are not in 
any way talking about deep ethical dilemmas, because they deny that 
there are such dilemmas.” 

Oppenheimer then took his audience back to 1945 (presumably, 
the decision to use the atomic bomb against Japan and early discus- 
sions related to the Acheson—Lilienthal proposal for the international 
control of atomic energy) and 1949 (presumably, the debate over the 
American response to the Soviet Union acquiring the atomic bomb, 
and in particular the hydrogen bomb controversy), lamenting that 
“there have been crucial moments in which the existence of a public 
philosophical discourse, not aimed at the kind of proof which the 
mathematicians give, not aimed at the kind of verifiability which the 
biologists have, but aimed at the understanding of the meaning, of 
the intent, and of the commitment of men and at their reconciliation 
and analysis, could have made a great difference in the moral climate 
and the human scope of our times.” 

Oppenheimer’s concern for the viability of the public sector or 
public sphere, to use a term made famous by the social philosopher 
Jiirgen Habermas, is central to his overall vision. His call here is not 
merely to put in place mechanisms for “intellectual exchange present 
in the notion of a ‘marketplace of ideas,’” but it is a call also for 
embodied processes for “forming otherwise private people into a 
public” capable of communication and cultural coherence.’? What 
makes a view or opinion public “is not merely the accident of its 
popularity but also its accessibility and ability to withstand public 


Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 1957-1959 39 


scrutiny.”°? Oppenheimer’s call appealed to the crucial roles of 
educators, journalists, and professional philosophers as well as the 
dual duty (specialization and openness) of the individual. 

For Oppenheimer, as for Habermas, the public sphere and the 
possibilities for cultural coherence have a history. The worlds of 
the ancient Greek polis and of eighteenth-century Enlightenment 
Europe are very different from the modern world of mass media and, 
most importantly, of atomic weapons. With the symbolic potential 
of postwar attempts for the international control of atomic energy 
(e.g., Acheson—Lilienthal proposal) and such means as specialized 
communities for breaking the “grip” ofthe nation state, Oppenheimer’s 
hope and vision addressed not only cultural coherence but addressed 
the nuclear revolution itself. 

In the next two chapters, our exploration of Oppenheimer and his 
thought continues by turning to the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet 
Archibald MacLeish and Nobel Prize-winning physicist I. I. Rabi. 
The focus is the interactions between Oppenheimer and these two 
men with whom he was intellectually engaged. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 3 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, 
and “The Conquest of America” 


Background 


When Archibald MacLeish’s essay “The Conquest of America” 
appeared in the August 1949 Atlantic Monthly, it provoked consider- 
able comment in American newspapers, and even a response in Pravda. 
When this Pulitzer Prize-winning poet chose his provocative title, he 
could not have known that the Soviets would test their first atomic 
bomb in the same month that his essay appeared. But this ominous 
event, which broke America’s atomic monopoly and gave rise to the 
hydrogen bomb controversy, provided his essay a deeper resonance. 
He received complimentary letters from people such as McGeorge 
Bundy, at that time a Harvard professor and member of the Council 
on Foreign Relations (“I think your piece in the August Atlantic is 
magnificent ...”); Harold Ickes, Secretary of the Interior from 1933 to 
1946 (“You have done excellently a job that needed to be done ...”); 
and Robert Hutchins, chancellor of the University of Chicago (“Your 
article in the Atlantic is wonderful.”).?! MacLeish also received a 
glowing letter from Adlai Stevenson, at that time governor of Illinois 
and the future Democratic Party nominee for president in 1952 and 
1956 (“Thanks — for the fifth copy of your much discussed piece. All 
my friends have sent it to me, but I had not expected one from the 
author himself — and with what an inscription! ... From all I hear it 
has attracted more attention than anything you have written for some 


4] 


42 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


time ... .”). MacLeish’s inscription was “Adlai my boy: I salute you! 
I revere you! Goddam but I love you. Archie.” Stevenson recipro- 
cated by closing his letter with “My love to you both [Archie and his 
wife Ada].”°? 

Most important, MacLeish received praise from Oppenheimer as 
well: “I had seen it [the essay] with delight and read it more than 
once not only with gratitude but with attention.”? But Oppenheimer 
also presented MacLeish with a challenge when he responded to its 
intellectual core — namely, MacLeish’s “Revolution of the Individual.” 

The focus of this chapter is Oppenheimer’s 1949 response and 
challenge to MacLeish. In the next chapter, the focus moves to 
Oppenheimer’s 1962 response and challenge to his close friend 
I. I. Rabi and his views on education. These two responses and chal- 
lenges flank what was designated in the previous chapter as 
Oppenheimer’s hope and vision of 1957-59, and thus provide points 
of reference for addressing questions of development and content of 
his philosophical outlook. Just as significant, MacLeish’s and Rabi’s 
views serve as insightful means for comparing and contrasting 
Oppenheimer’s outlook with those with whom he was intellectually 
engaged. 

MacLeish was born in 1892 in Illinois. His father was a success- 
ful dry goods merchant and his mother was a college professor and 
educational leader who developed a deep sense of social responsibil- 
ity in her children. From 1911 to 1915, MacLeish attended Yale 
University where “he majored in English, wrote poetry, and was 
heavily involved in campus literary, social, and athletic activities.”°* 

MacLeish married in June 1916, but was confronted with a dif- 
ficult decision less than a year later when the United States declared 
war on the Central Powers (e.g., Germany). He decided to join the 
American Army in June 1917 and served, along with other duties, as 
an artillery officer in France. MacLeish was shocked by the death of 
his younger brother Kenneth, who was a pilot shot down and killed 
shortly before the end of the war. Like many writers of his generation, 
MacLeish was embittered and came to see World War I as “an enor- 
mous fraud and fabrication; ... nothing but a commercial war.”?* 
After the war, MacLeish graduated at the top of his class from 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 43 


Harvard Law School and quickly went on to teach and become a 
successful lawyer. 

However, in September 1923, he and his wife headed for Paris 
and would not return to the United States until 1928. MacLeish hav- 
ing published his first volume of poetry during the war now hoped 
“to become an accomplished poet” and his wife Ada “a professional 
singer.” During this time, “they joined the expatriate literary com- 
munity, meeting writers such as E. E. Cummings, John Dos Passos, 
Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald, James Joyce, and Ernest Hemingway.””° 

MacLeish flourished and became, to say the least, “an accom- 
plished poet” as well as an accomplished playwright. He won his first 
Pulitzer Prize for poetry in 1933 and another in 1953, and yet 
another for drama in 1959. He was Boylston Professor of Rhetoric 
and Oratory at Harvard University from 1949 until his retirement in 
1962. Elected in 1946 to the American Academy of Arts and Letters, 
he served as its president from 1953 to 1956. MacLeish was honored 
with the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1977 and the National 
Medal for Literature in 1978. He died in Boston in 1982. 

Most twentieth-century American poetry that concerns itself with 
political subjects assumes an adversarial stance toward the political 
center by challenging its authority, values, and decisions. MacLeish 
stands out as one of the few major poets consistently interested in 
articulating and shaping the values of that center along with 
defending its legitimacy. Moreover, he was the only major poet 
who belonged to the center. He worked for Henry Luce’s Fortune 
magazine and became its most prolific writer during the 1930s. He 
admired and became a vigorous supporter of Franklin Roosevelt, and 
even wrote speeches for the president. In government, he served as 
Librarian of Congress (1939-44), Assistant Director of the Office of 
War Information (1942-43), Assistant Secretary of State (1944-45), 
and Chairman of the American Delegation to the UN Conference in 
London that founded UNESCO in 1945. 

Like Oppenheimer, MacLeish became a target for political attack. 
The FBI maintained a thick file on MacLeish, and he was labeled a 
“fellow traveler” and “pink” by voices on the Right and even an 
“unconscious fascist” by voices on the Left. Fortunately, he never 


44 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


faced the brutal attacks and public humiliation that Oppenheimer suf- 
fered. Nevertheless, as his “Conquest of America” demonstrates, 
MacLeish did not hesitate to confront the anti-communist hysteria of 
his time as well as Joseph McCarthy and his minions. 

In all likelihood, MacLeish and Oppenheimer came to know each 
other in the 1940s, though it is difficult to trace the precise origins 
of their friendship. The MacLeish and Oppenheimer Papers at the 
Library of Congress include several letters that the two exchanged. 
The earliest run from September 2 to October 15, 1948, and con- 
cern MacLeish’s attempt to enlist Oppenheimer as a signatory to a 
petition opposing the decision of the Board of Superintendents of 
the New York City Schools to remove The Nation from public school 
libraries.*” In an intriguing letter from February 1949, Oppenheimer 
wrote to MacLeish that he and his wife Kitty “were touched and 
pleased” by some poems MacLeish had sent them and noted that 
Kitty “felt rightly the need” for MacLeish’s bitter poem “Brave New 
World,” which she had read on the evening of President Truman’s 
inaugural. Oppenheimer concluded, “Do come and see us when 
you can. Professor Bohr is not here [at the Institute for Advanced 
Study] this semester; and you need not fear long midnight walks 
through the snow.”*® This language suggests a close social relation- 
ship, as well as interesting conversations among MacLeish, 
Oppenheimer, and Bohr. 

Later letters include a 1954 letter with MacLeish’s condemnation 
of the recent AEC hearing of Oppenheimer and the revocation of his 
security clearance: “I can’t wholly restrain the push of my own feel- 
ings and certainly not the push of Ada’s. Like so many others we 
suffered personally through the whole ordeal as though something 
intimately valuable to us was being hurt — as indeed it was — and 
we came out at the end feeling, as every decent human being must 
feel, that a terrible wrong had been perpetrated but that a very great 
spirit has been revealed also ...”°? Other letters consist of MacLeish’s 
inviting Oppenheimer to participate in an Eliot House seminar at 
Harvard as well as Ada’s letter to Kitty in November 1954, indicating 
an enduring friendship between the two couples. One final brief 
letter from MacLeish to Oppenheimer dated September 2, 1965 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 45 


indicates that their friendship lasted until then, and probably until 
Oppenheimer’s death in 1967. The most important letter for us, 
dated September 27, 1949, is Oppenheimer’s response to MacLeish’s 
essay “The Conquest of America.” 


The Conquest of America’ 


In their Pulitzer Prize-winning American Prometheus, Kai Bird and 
Martin Sherwin devote slightly less than one page to MacLeish’s 
“Conquest” and Oppenheimer’s reply. They highlight some of the 
central ideas found in it as well as Oppenheimer’s response, and char- 
acterize “Conquest” as “an astonishing bitter essay.” Yet it is also a 
window into the evolution and content of the thought of both 
MacLeish and Oppenheimer. 

At the time MacLeish wrote “The Conquest of America,” he was 
worried that the 1940s were turning out like the 1920s. Like many 
writers and intellectuals of his generation, MacLeish was disillusioned 
by World War I and its aftermath. As early as 1942, MacLeish was 
arguing that victory against the Germans and Japanese must not 
result in the “misery, the economic dislocation, the inane prosperity 
followed by the meaningless hunger of the victory we won before 
[in World War I].”!° Similarly, in 1943, MacLeish wrote that after 
our victory in World War I, “we left the future to the laws of econom- 
ics to construct. And we ... recall a future that should have been peace 
and freedom and became the radio, the automobile, and the depres- 
sion of 1929. ... you do not fight a war for the privilege of ... becom- 
ing the world’s most numerous consumers and thereafter the world’s 
most numerous unemployed.”!°? 

So there was a real danger that victory in World War II might 
come to mean no more than victory in World War I had meant. 
Nonetheless, for MacLeish as well as Oppenheimer, there was, at least 
initially after World War IJ, an enormous opportunity to re-make the 
world with America taking the lead, an opportunity embodied most 
palpably in the United Nations and UNESCO and the prospects for 
international cooperation which they entailed. Although MacLeish 
never went as far as One-Worlders like Einstein and Russell in calling 


46 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


for the establishment of an actual world government, he imagined a 
very strong, proactive UN and was deeply disappointed when Cold 
War rivalries vitiated that possibility — hence, the bitterness in his 
1949 essay. More pointedly, “Conquest” presents an alarming diag- 
nosis of America based on betrayal and failure resulting in historic 
danger. Thankfully, the essay ends with an affirmation and a prognosis 
of hope since “the cock has not crowed for the second time.” 

To capture the reader’s attention, MacLeish begins his essay by 
speculating about what might be written by somebody, most likely a 
historian, in the 1980s about “the conquest of the United States by the 
Russians.” The conquest would not be a military conquest, but a con- 
quest of ideas and spirit. The hypothetical diagnosis would commence 
with an indictment — in the late 1940s, America, the most powerful 
nation the world has ever known, surprisingly defined itself negatively 
not positively. It defined itself by what it was against, not by what it was 
for. The American people lost their way and “wandered into the Russian 
looking-glass, primarily because [they] were unable to think.” American 
foreign policy became “a mirror image of Russian foreign policy: what- 
ever the Russians did, [they] did in reverse.” In America, “no proposal 
could be enacted, from a peace plan at one end to a military budget at 
the other, unless it could be demonstrated that the Russians wouldn’t 
like it.” Moreover, “Even religious dogma was Russian dogma turned 
about: the first duty of a good Christian in the United States in these 
years was not to love his enemies but to hate the Communists.” 

Regrettably, the Americans did not “understand the nature of the 
crisis in which [they] were caught or the character of the role [they] 
were called upon to play.” They took Communism as “a great new 
revolutionary force” and “the way to resolve the crisis, therefore, was 
to resist and contain and presumable strangle the Communist revolu- 
tion.” But for MacLeish this was “a delusive belief” since the rise of 
Communism did not precipitate the crisis. It was simply a conse- 
quence of a deep and fundamental crisis in civilization and culture, 
and even the condition of man. They were blind since “the true revo- 
lutionary force” which began in the eighteenth century was then 
centered in America not Russia. By chaining itself to “the purposes 
and policies of a rival state,” the “realization of the historic American 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 47 


purpose” was “subordinated to the defeat of the Russian purpose,” 
and the life of the American Republic and hence the true revolution- 
ary force was betrayed. 

For MacLeish, the so-called conflict between the right and the left 
was a false conflict. The real conflict and choice was between different 
worlds, namely, “all forms of authoritarianism,” on the one hand, and 
“the dream of a whole and responsible human freedom” on the other. 
This conflict pits the forces of “world reaction, which preaches sub- 
mission to authority, whether of a state or a man or a party or a 
church,” against the forces of “world revolution,” specifically the 
Jeffersonian “revolution of the individual.” Authoritarian societies of 
both right and left permitted the individual to live only “through the 
life of the society as a whole,” while the revolution of the individual 
promised to “create a society in which each can live as himself.” 

As warrant for his argument, MacLeish offered a model of human 
history in striking contrast to the Marxist model. In MacLeish’s 
model, the “world” of authoritarianism, in which individuals are 
strictly defined by and find fulfillment only in the social order, peaks in 
the European Middle Ages. The Renaissance marks the first stirrings of 
a flowering of freedom that finds its first significant expression at the 
end of the eighteenth century, most powerfully in the ideas of the 
American Revolution. The “world” of authoritarianism is “dying” but 
“not altogether dead,” while Jefferson’s “new world” of individual 
freedom is “conceived but not yet born,” and in the mid-twentieth 
century we find ourselves in “the interval between the two.” 
Communism seeks to turn back “the current of human evolution to 
that decaying city of hierarchical and disciplined order,” and is thus a 
reactionary rather than a revolutionary force in world history. The true 
evolutionary — or revolutionary — force is Jeffersonian individualism 
and democracy. 

In his essay, MacLeish conceded that over the course of American 
history, Jeffersonian individualism and democracy have at times been 
“corrupted by hypocrisy and cynicism and selfishness.” Moreover, 


Its articles of faith have been made the catechism of a faithless mate- 
rialism. Its central concept of the dignity of the individual, grown 


48 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


cancerous on occasion, has swollen to the morbid and malignant 
figure of irresponsible and grasping power — the “rugged individual” 
whom some still think of as American.! 


In spite of all this, the force of revolution so eloquently declared 
by Jefferson remains the living spirit of the American Republic: 
“Without it, the United States is so much land, so many people, such 
an accumulation of wealth. With it the United States is a stage upon 
the journey of mankind.” 

MacLeish was convinced that the United States had no choice 
but to arm itself and resist “Russian threats of force and Russian 
conspiracies.” The trouble arose when this resistance “became an 
end and object in itself.” By ceding its intellectual and moral inde- 
pendence to an authoritarian state, America had issued “a declara- 
tion of political bankruptcy such as few great nations in the course of 
history have ever confessed to.” Though a policy of resistance was 
necessary, this resistance should have been only a means for moving 
ahead with the “American purpose” and providing “a positive and 
believable alternative to the grim choice the authoritarians [held] 
before mankind.” 

This failure may well turn out to be “the costliest blunder” in 
American history. From an American perspective, “the severest indict- 
ment of this generation of men and women will be the charge that we 
falsified the American image and thus undermined the spiritual integ- 
rity of the nation.” But, for MacLeish, 


there will be other accusations from other quarters and some of 
them will be even harsher than our own. There will be the judgment 
of the men of conscience and concern and honest mind in every 
country who, when all the arguments are in, write down the ver- 
dicts. And what they will say of us will certainly be this: that we had 
it in our power at a critical moment in history, when the whole 
future of humanity hung in balance, to present a true and hopeful 
alternative to the iron choice with which the world was faced and 
that we did not do it; that we did not do it even though the true 
alternative was the course to which our whole past and our entire 
tradition had committed us; that instead of doing it we built a wall 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 49 


against one half the evil [communists and authoritarians of the left] 
but not against the other [fascists and authoritarians of the right], 
and made the wall still higher by tearing down for its construction 


some of the dearest of our own beliefs.!* 


In the final section of his essay, MacLeish reminds his reader that 
even though the American people have failed to act at this “moment 
of decision” and assert their “moral purpose,” they “have not yet 
denied that purpose — the cock has not crowed for the second time.” 
They have lost “momentum” and “initiative,” but they “have not yet 
rejected [their] role as a revolutionary people moving with the great 
revolutionary current of history.” Time is short; and “only by moral 
action, only by moral action at the highest level — only affirmative 
recommitment to the revolution of the individual” can America 
regain its “vital and creative impulse” and present to the world “a true 
and hopeful alternative.” 

Although MacLeish’s “Conquest” was aimed at the specific con- 
ditions of the United States in 1949, many of the ideas and themes of 
this essay retained their validity in the coming decades. These lines 
from his 1960 “National Purpose,” for example, could easily have 
come from “Conquest”: “To engage, as we have over the past fifteen 
years, in programs having as their end and aim not an action to fur- 
ther a purpose of our own but counter action to frustrate a purpose of 
the Russians is to invite just such a state of mind [a loss of national 
purpose]. A nation cannot be sure even of its own identity when it 
lives its history in a mirror.”! 

Somewhat amazingly, in March 1980, the editors of The Atlantic 
re-printed “The Conquest of America” in its entirety as the lead arti- 
cle, along with a foreword by Robert Manning citing a New York 
Times headline on “containing” Moscow after the Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan. Manning quoted MacLeish as conceding that he had 
been wrong in the original “Conquest” when he predicted that his 
hypothetical historian in the 1980s would be unable to understand 
why the world’s most powerful nation in 1949 had “contracted its 
national will to the dry negation of the [Soviet] will.” As things 
turned out, said MacLeish, the 1980s were just like the 1940s.'°° 


50 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer—MacLeish Exchange 


MacLeish sent Oppenheimer a copy of “Conquest” along with a 
“warm note” apparently inviting him for his thoughts on the essay. In 
a letter dated September 27, 1949, Oppenheimer responded: “Long 
before that in California I had seen it with delight and read it more 
than once not only with gratitude but with attention. I am very, very 
glad that you wrote it and put it out.”'°? Oppenheimer praised the 
first sections of “Conquest” where “the present state of affairs is 
portrayed against the anguish of the implication of how things ought 
to be.” Oppenheimer remarked “This is masterful; you will not need 
to be told how it speaks my thought.” 

However, Oppenheimer wrote that he had “one worry which 
even the rereading has left.” The trouble arose in the last section 
with MacLeish’s insistence that “the revolution of the individual” as 
articulated by Jefferson is the “affirmation” needed for solving the 
Republic’s ills and presenting the world with a hopeful alternative. 
Specifically, Oppenheimer was worried when MacLeish said “What 
was needed was a redeclaration of the revolution of the individual in 
terms which would have realistic meaning in this time.” 

Rather than overemphasizing “the emancipation of the individual 
from society,” wrote Oppenheimer, MacLeish ought to acknowledge 
“with an awareness that the past one hundred and fifty years have 
rendered progressively more acute, the basic dependence of man on 
his fellows.” Further, any account must reflect “the profound part 
that culture and society play in the very definition of human values, 
human salvation and liberation.” Because “man is both an end and an 
instrument,” wrote Oppenheimer, the “affirmation” that MacLeish 
called for in “Conquest” which certainly has to do with freedom must 
be “something far subtler than the emancipation of the individual 
from society.” The affirmation that we need “in the present situation” 
ought to be “as surprising in its concreteness and its breadth as was 
Jefferson’s, which bears to our familiar protestations of belief in the 
individual something like that of Jefferson to Condourcet.”* 


Jefferson met and corresponded with Condorcet on several occasions, particularly 
between 1784 and 1789, when Jefferson was American Minister in Paris. At that time 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 51 


Oppenheimer conceded that he could not articulate such an affir- 
mation himself, but wrote that “because I think that there will be real 
novelty and real creation in what we have now to say and think and 
do, that I take a more tolerant attitude towards the confusions and 
fumblings of the last years.” Oppenheimer reminded MacLeish of 
“the night you spent with Bohr” and wrote, “I think that Bohr’s 
point is much too narrow to comprise anything like the whole of 
what we need to understand and to resolve. But in a narrow range 
it does have that new insight into the relations of the individual and 
society without which we can give an effective answer neither to the 
Communists nor to the antiquarians nor to our own confusions.” 
Oppenheimer closed his letter by re-emphasizing his delight and 
gratitude to MacLeish for having written “Conquest” and_ his 
“conviction that it will help.” 

MacLeish replied in a letter dated October 6, 1949, stating, “It 
was extraordinarily kind of you to write me at such length. The point 
you raise is, of course, the central point of the whole business. I want 
to think about it and to write to you later.”!°° There is no record 
(according to my research) of a later letter to Oppenheimer on this 
topic. Also, what Oppenheimer means by “Bohr’s point” is uncertain, 
though one would expect that it involves Bohr’s notion of “comple- 
mentarity” as illustrated in atomic physics (the subject of Chapter 6) 
and its application to the tension between the individual and society. 

This private exchange between Oppenheimer and MacLeish on 
America and its Cold War foreign policy is noteworthy on several 
levels. For one, it illuminates not only the intellectual landscape of 
that period, but even touches on contemporary discussions of the 
meaning of liberal democracy. Both men were members of the 
American political elite, highly placed in the formulation and articula- 
tion of US foreign and domestic policy, as well as public intellectuals 
who presented their ideas to a much broader audience. Moreover, in 
the last years, historians have turned their attention to the Cold War 
as an “ideological project.” For example, in his 1996 “On Moral 
Equivalency and Cold War History,” John Lewis Gaddis argues for 


Condorcet was among the intellectual leaders of the French Enlightenment, and he 
shared Jefferson’s faith in the perfectibility of human nature. 


52 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


the significance of “ideas, ideologies, and moral frameworks,” and 
claims, “We have gone too far looking at the Cold War within a mate- 
rialist framework devoid of moral content.”!” Oppenheimer and 
MacLeish bear this out. In addition, one can now point to the influ- 
ence of the neo-conservatives in the George W. Bush administration 
and the so-called “War on Terrorism” as a painful reminder of the 
continuing importance of ideas and ideology. 

More to the case at hand, this exchange demonstrates strong 
agreements between Oppenheimer and MacLeish — about opportu- 
nities lost and squandered after World War II, historic dangers con- 
fronting America and the world, American Exceptionalism, and the 
need for an American affirmation. Furthermore, this exchange has 
disturbing undercurrents by portraying a haunting image — though 
difficult to imagine a communist America, “it is easy to imagine what 
a fascist American would be like.”"!° 

Oppenheimer’s critique and worry suggest several criticisms. 
For instance, MacLeish’s revolutionary individualism immediately 
brings to mind the dangers of mass democracy as stressed by such 
intellectuals as author, journalist, and leading opinion-maker Walter 
Lippmann. In various circumstances and at different times, the 
American electorate like any electorate has proved to be fearful, 
unimaginative, materialistic, and intolerant as well as susceptible to 
propaganda and emotional stereotyping. A fatal weakness of democ- 
racy could be that “the people have acquired power which they are 
incapable of exercising.”!! 

Moreover, MacLeish is obliged to expand on what he means by 
his “redeclaration of the revolution of the individual in terms which 
would have realistic meaning in this time.” In “Conquest,” MacLeish 
does say some things. One is a call for an energized New Deal — 
“liberate individuals from the degrading fear of unemployment or old 
age or sickness.” And most important, with recent technological 
advances, “Even the greatest of the industrial obstacles to individual 
freedom — the mechanization of the machine-worker — could be 
removed if the freedom of the individual became the first business of 
society.” By ending the age of the machine-worker, those who work 
would regain “a measure of their former manhood, their former 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 53 


mastery.” For MacLeish though, “The real obstacle is the obstacle of 
will, not method.” Like always, freedom is “a hard choice,” but today 
it takes a very different form — “For to choose individual freedom 
now is to choose, not a common struggle against the masters of an 
ordered world, but a lonely journey, each man for himself, across the 
ruin and the rubble which that world has left.” 

Nevertheless, MacLeish needed to say more about his affirmation 
especially, as Oppenheimer insisted, about “the basic dependence of 
man on his fellows” or, in other words, about the individual and com- 
munity. However, Oppenheimer’s “worry” was not simply about an 
omission in MacLeish’s “Conquest” but was a deep reflection of 
Oppenheimer’s communitarian inclinations and views which become 
more apparent in his hope and vision of 1957-59. When MacLeish 
spoke of the need for the “revolution of the individual” which today 
is “a lonely journey,” Oppenheimer had reason to worry. 

At the time of his 1949 letter to MacLeish, Oppenheimer clearly 
recognized that community would have an essential role in any ade- 
quate affirmation or vision. During the war and early postwar period, 
communitarian themes appeared in his discussions and writings about 
the international control of atomic energy. For instance, in his 1945 
Los Alamos speech, Oppenheimer spoke of the “common [universal | 
problem” of atomic weapons as requiring “a complete sense of com- 
munity responsibility” for its solution.'!” 

More specifically, as will be highlighted in Chapter 5, 
Oppenheimer played a leading role in Acheson—Lilienthal Report 
that served as the basis for the US proposal to the United Nations 
for the international control of atomic energy. Proposing the 
“renunciation of national sovereignty” in the field of atomic energy, 
this report concluded saying “in the long term there can be no inter- 
national control and no international cooperation which does not 
presuppose an international community of knowledge.”!!? In addi- 
tion, it was understood that science, with its international fraternity 
of scientists, served as a worthy prototype for such “an international 
community of knowledge.” Therefore, efforts to constrain and pos- 
sibly transcend the atomic crisis emphasized community rather than 
the individual. 


54 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer’s worry about MacLeish’s essay was also rooted in 
his early views on science and society. Central to Oppenheimer’s early 
and continuing diagnosis and vision concerning science and society is 
the theme of community. His 1947 MIT lecture, “Physics in the 
Contemporary World,” is perhaps best known for the remark that in 
developing the atomic bomb, “the physicists have known sin.” Most 
important for us in this lecture, Oppenheimer addressed the subject 
of community when he spoke of “some of the features of the profes- 
sional life of the scientist, which make it one of the great phenomena 
of the contemporary world.” For him, science is “a way of life” — a 
form of craftsmanship — with “The true responsibility of a scientist 
[being] to the integrity and vigor of his science.” Oppenheimer 
described science as a mode of action or doing that enriches its par- 
ticipants, but science is not an individualistic enterprise. Science is a 
“collective effort in which there is a clear and well-defined community 
whose canons of taste and order simplify the life of the practitioner.”!* 
In another essay, “The Age of Science,” published a year after 
“Conquest,” Oppenheimer described the institution of science as 
creating a great “harmony between the flourishing of the community 
and the liberation of the individual man.”!"* 

This communal view of science permeates Oppenheimer’s early as 
well as latter works. MacLeish’s “revolution of the individual” stood 
in sharp contrast to Oppenheimer’s developing vision which empha- 
sized the potential of community rather than the individual. Even 
more so, any adequate affirmation would have to contend with the 
tensions between the individual and community or, put more starkly, 
“the antinomy between the individual and the community.” 


Oppenheimer’s Reith Lectures 


In his 1949 letter, Oppenheimer told MacLeish that a simple 
“redeclaration” of Jefferson’s “revolution of the individual” was inad- 
equate because it failed to acknowledge the fundamental truth “that 
man is both an end and an instrument” and “the basic dependence of 
man on his fellows.” Oppenheimer called for an “affirmation” that 
would be “far subtler than the emancipation of the individual from 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 55 


society,” but conceded, “None of this is to explain that I know what 
it is that should be our affirmation.” Oppenheimer did offer sug- 
gestions and hints pointing to such an affirmation. He reminded 
MacLeish of “the night you spent with Bohr” and continued that “in 
a narrow range it [Bohr’s point] does have that new insight into the 
relations of the individual and society without which we can give an 
effective answer ... . 

With such suggestions and hints in mind, an intriguing place to 
look is Oppenheimer’s BBC Reith Lectures entitled “Science and the 
Common Understanding,” which he delivered in 1953 and later pub- 
lished in 1954. In these lectures, he discussed science as a cultural 
resource and developed Bohr’s ideas on complementarity in atomic 


” 


physics (e.g., wave versus particle descriptions of atomic systems) and 
their possible extension to other domains. Further, Oppenheimer 
referred to both Jefferson and Condorcet, like he did in his letter to 
MacLeish, and used phrasing (e.g., “We are at once instrument and 
end ... .”"'°) quite similar to that of the letter. His sixth and final 
lecture, “The Sciences and Man’s Community,” appears directly 
related to what Oppenheimer took as a central part of any acceptable 
“affirmation.” Consider the following. 


If we err today — and I think we do — it is in expecting too much 
of knowledge from the individual and too much of synthesis from 
community. ... The individual event, the act, goes beyond the gen- 
eral law. ... And we as men are not only the ingredients of our com- 
munities; we are their intersection, making a harmony which does 
not exist between the communities except as we, the individual men, 
may create it and reveal it. ... We are men because we are part of, 
but not because only part of, communities; and the attempt to 
understand man’s brotherhood in terms only of the individual man 
is as little likely to describe our world as is the attempt to describe 
general laws as the summary of their instances. These are indeed two 
complementary views, neither reducible to the other, no more 
reducible than is the electron as wave to the electron as particle.!!” 


From this, one can propose that an acceptable affirmation for 
Oppenheimer at this time would be two-fold. First, what Oppenheimer 


56 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


referred to in his Reith Lectures as “the antinomy between the indi- 
vidual and the community” should be expected since such oppositions 
are found in other areas and, in particular, atomic physics. Further, as 
complementarity in atomic physics illustrates, sometimes oppositions 
can be transcended — not through theoretical re-description but 
through something like choice or action. Therefore, it is an overreac- 
tion and hence a mistake to attempt a universal description of man 
either as a fully emancipated individual or as merely a part of a fully 
cohesive, single community. However, this antinomy between the 
individual and the community can be mitigated and perhaps tran- 
scended, for man reaches his potential only in a diversity of open 
communities connected with the past and committed to action in the 
present. Coherence between communities requires a unity of men 
brought about by action and dialogue. 

Similarities between Oppenheimer’s Reith Lecture and his hope 
and vision of 1957-59 as set forth in such later works as “Science 
and the Human Community” and the James Lectures are evident. 
Nevertheless, there are differences. In the Reith Lectures, there is no 
reference to the need for strong international communities to break 
the “grip” of nationalism. Further, in the later works, there is greater 
emphasis that knowledge is more of a property of specialized com- 
munities (i.e., a kind of “cognitive syndicalism”) rather than of 
individuals. 

A plausible interpretation here is that in 1949 Oppenheimer had 
a definite grasp of what an acceptable affirmation or vision would 
be like, but was still trying to formulate it in his own mind. This 
was reflected in his general works on science and society as well 
as exchanges and interactions with others like MacLeish. For 
Oppenheimer, fundamental problems cluster around “the antinomy 
between the individual and the community,” and with the Reith 
Lectures he believes that he has made definite progress. 

This interpretation is supported by an exchange of letters 
between MacLeish and Oppenheimer. In a letter dated June 21, 
1953, MacLeish sent Oppenheimer a poem on the subject of 
science which he had been “working off and on in lighter moments.” 
The poem was “a kind of bastard sonnet with two octets (like a cow 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 57 


with eight tits) but only one sextet (to catch the milk).” MacLeish’s 
sonnet presents a caricature of science as reductive and limited, like a 
“simple saint” incapable of asking “Why?” since “Her devotion is to 
tell by rote her rosary of perfect answers.”!"8 

MacLeish wrote again on November 14, asking, “Don’t you 
ever acknowledge poems dedicated to you?”'!? By happenstance, 
Oppenheimer had arrived in London that November, and his Reith 
Lectures were broadcast during November and December. 
Oppenheimer finally replied in a note dated July 15, 1954: “Your 
eight titted sonnet is still in my desk drawer; and when I had your 
note of November, I had the thought, if not the heart to answer ‘( )’. 
At this late day that no longer seems so heartless, in part perhaps 
because I did get the reasons of [on] record in the BBC lectures.”!”° 

Interestingly, Lloyd Garrison who was Oppenheimer’s lawyer 
during the 1954 security hearing introduced the Reith Lectures as an 
exhibit. The purpose was to show that Oppenheimer’s “views on the 
freedom of the mind and the human spirit” were inconsistent with 
communism and “could not be tolerated for one moment behind the 
Iron Curtain.”!”! In fact, Garrison quoted and placed into the record 
a long excerpt from the sixth and final lecture. In this excerpt, 
Oppenheimer speaks of open access to knowledge as a fundamental 
mark of freedom as well as resolving “difference by converse, and, 
where converse does not unite, to let tolerance compose diversity.” 
The excerpt continues 


This would appear to be a freedom barely compatible with modern 
political tyranny. The multitude of communities, the free association 
for converse or for common purpose, are acts of creation. It is not 
merely that without them the individual is the poorer; without them 
a part of human life, not more nor less fundamental than the indi- 
vidual, is foreclosed. It is a cruel and humorless sort of pun that 
so powerful a present form of modern tyranny should call itself by 
the very name of a belief in community, by a word “communism” 
which in other times evoked memories of villages and village inns 
and of artisans concerting their skills, and of men of learning con- 
tent with anonymity. But perhaps only a malignant end can follow 
the systematic belief that all communities are one community; that 


58 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


all truth is one truth; that all experience is compatible with all other; 
that total knowledge is possible; that all that is potential can exist as 
actual.!? 


Furthermore, in the hearing Oppenheimer stated that principal 
point of the lectures 
science left room for an integrated human community” and that 


“was to indicate in what ways contemporary 


specialized knowledge does not necessarily lead to fragmentation in 
society.!?? With this use of the Reith Lectures in the security hearing, 
Oppenheimer’s vision that he presented to the public is shown to 
have connections, at least in general ways, with his views on national 
security and atomic policy. 

Irrespective of the securing hearing, Oppenheimer is clearly 
taking his Reith Lectures as getting his “reasons [on] record” and can 
be seen as responsive to MacLeish and his “revolution of the indi- 
vidual.” In spite of this, the public responses to Oppenheimer’s Reith 
Lectures, both as delivered and published, were mixed and must have 
been disappointing to Oppenheimer. For example, though praised by 
one reviewer for “consummate clarity” and “beauty of expression that 
is very nearly poetic,” the review in the Economist spoke of the recep- 
tion to the lectures as “generally one of bewilderment and disappoint- 
ment; apparently something different was expected from the man 
who had engineered the mightiest scientific experiment in history.”!?* 
One reason for such reactions is that complementarity has a central 
role in the Reith Lectures which requires Oppenheimer to spend a 
large, perhaps inordinate, amount of time developing atomic physics 
as a prerequisite to his discussion of complementarity and its exten- 
sions. Further, complementarity can be a topic filled with confusion, 
and to some can appear trivial or obvious. 

In 1989, Oppenheimer’s Reith Lectures were republished in 
Atom and Void: Essays on Science and Community. In its preface, the 
physicist Freeman Dyson, friend and colleague of Oppenheimer at 
the Institute for Advanced Study, offers his take on the public recep- 
tion to Oppenheimer’s lectures. According to Dyson, “millions of 
listeners were baffled and disappointed.” After Einstein, Oppenheimer 
was “the second most famous living scientist.” He was “a prime 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 59 


mover, first in the building of atomic bombs, second in the effort 
to establish international control on nuclear energy, and third in the 
political struggles that raged around the building of hydrogen 
bombs.” These English listeners “expected hot news” and “dra- 
matic statements about the great events and great issues of the day.” 
Instead, Oppenheimer presented “a scholarly and impersonal discus- 
sion of the history of science” as well as “a rarified and philosophical 
view of the mysteries of quantum mechanics,” and “a picture of the 
human predicament.” Dyson continues, “Barely a word about the 
bomb. No answers to any urgent political questions of the 1950s. No 
glimpse of the inner world of action and power in which Oppenheimer 
had been living for the previous ten years. No wonder the listeners 
were scornful.” But, 


Now, thirty-five years later, we can see that Oppenheimer chose 
his subject-matter wisely. He knew that any discussion of current 
events that attempted to be up-to-date would soon be out-of- 
date. He had no wish to give lectures that would cause a political 
sensation today and be obsolete tomorrow. He wanted to speak to 
the ages, to say something of permanent value. As a result, these 
lectures have stood well the test of time. They are as pertinent to 
our situation in 1989 as they were in 1953. The English listeners’ 
loss is our gain.!?5 


Dyson is clearly impressed by Oppenheimer’s lectures. In any 
event, they definitely address enduring themes — the nature of 
science and the human predicament, and specifically “the antinomy 
between the individual and the community” — and were placed into 
the government record of Oppenheimer’s 1954 security hearing. 


MacLeish’s Suspicion of Science 


In October 1949, when MacLeish replied to Oppenheimer’s letter 
critiquing “The Conquest of America,” he said “The point you 
raise is, of course, the central point of the whole business. I want to 
think about it and to write to you later.” Not only is there no letter 


60 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


on record to Oppenheimer on this subject, but MacLeish simply 
does not engage “the central point of the whole business” in his 
later works whereas Oppenheimer does as illustrated by his Reith 
Lectures.’ 

Part of the reason might simply be that MacLeish has little to say 
here. On the other hand, his reticence may well be founded on his 
suspicions of science itself — a human endeavor and institution taken 
by some as the paradigm case of a progressive community of free 
individuals. For MacLeish, science is a kind of totalizing system — 
like Marxism — that claims privileged access to the truth, and thus 
threatens the premise of the “revolution of the individual” that each 
individual is entitled to determine the truth for himself. MacLeish’s 
thinking on this issue predated his friendship with Oppenheimer by 
several years. In 1929, for instance, he argued that “the world cen- 
tered about man was destroyed by the impulses which produced the 
world explicable by science. Men lost themselves. They ceased to 
know what they were, what they were for.” MacLeish urged “The 
restoration of man to his position of dignity and responsibility at the 
center of the world — not at the center of one of the arbitrary worlds 
of science ... .”!?° In 1944, he made the same point: “we have lost 
our sense of the place of man in the universe.”!?7 

And in his 1968 “Master or Man,” where he speaks of his late 
winter evening at Princeton that he spent with Bohr, MacLeish 
expanded on his claims, arguing that a “world autonomous in its eco- 
nomic laws, as the Marxists hoped, or autonomous in its scientific surge, 
its technological compulsions, as some in the West began to fear,” 


'This is not to say that MacLeish never mentions the tension between the individual 
and community. For example, in his 1955 “The Alternative,” which is a highly critical 
review of Walter Lippmann’s The Public Philosophy, MacLeish writes “What motivates 
Mr. Lippmann is the conviction that the idea of full individual freedom and the idea 
of effective community are irreconcilable ideas and that there is therefore an ineluc- 
table choice between them: that in that choice community must be preferred. He is 
unwilling or unable to believe that no such painful choice may be necessary: that full 
individual freedom may conceivably lead to a community of its own, effective in 
a new and different way.” (MacLeish, A Continuing Journey (ref. 105), p. 155). 
MacLeish has an interesting thesis here but he does not develop it. 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 61 
undermined the idea that man can create whatever world he imagines.!?8 
He went on to elaborate, 


Prior to Hiroshima, it had still been possible — increasingly difficult 
but still possible — to believe that science was by nature a human 
tool obedient to human wishes and that the world science and its 
technology could create would therefore be a human world, reflect- 
ing our human needs, our human purposes. After Hiroshima it was 
obvious that the loyalty of science was not to humanity but to 
truth — its own truth — and that the law of science was not the 
law of the good — what humanity thinks of as good, meaning 


moral, decent, humane — but the law of the possible.!”? 


MacLeish concluded that the American Proposition — that men 
can, and by right ought to, govern themselves — “faltered with our 
failure to control the greatest and most immediate of human dangers. 
We began to see science as a kind of absolute beyond our reach, beyond 
our understanding even; known, if it was known at all, through proxies 
who, like priests in other centuries, could not tell us what they knew.”?*° 
For MacLeish, science is clearly not a case, let alone the paradigm case, 
of a progressive community of free individuals. 

There is an element of irony here perhaps unbeknownst to 
MacLeish. Near the end of the war with Japan, there were senior offi- 
cials (e.g., Secretary of War Henry Stimson and Acting Secretary of 
State Joseph Grew who had been the ambassador to Japan) in the US 
government and military who supported clarifying and possibly rein- 
terpreting the unconditional surrender terms for Japan. In particular, 
retention of the Emperor was recommended to help shorten the war 
and perhaps avoid a costly invasion of the Japanese homeland as well 
as assist with the postwar occupation of Japan. 

In 1945, while assistant secretary of state for public and cultural 
affairs, MacLeish along with Dean Acheson, then assistant secretary 
of state for congressional relations, opposed such significant changes 
in the policy of unconditional surrender. They warned of “a strong 
public and congressional reaction against any proposal for retaining 
the Emperor.”!*! Today, several historians like Gar Alperovitz and 
Martin Sherwin contend that if the United States had made it clear 


62 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


that the institution of the Emperor would be retained, Japan might 
have surrendered before a costly invasion and, in all likelihood, before 
the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Unaware of the atomic bomb 
project, MacLeish had unwittingly made a small but not insignificant 
contribution to the atomic attacks. 

Of course, MacLeish’s (and Acheson’s) “bureaucratic responsi- 
bilities for public and congressional relations are enough to account 
for their opposition to any public pledge to spare the throne [of the 
Emperor ].”!*? But a suspicion remains — MacLeish’s worry that vic- 
tory in World War II might come to mean no more than victory in 
World War I. With the end of the war, America would take the leading 
role in remaking the world and there must be a peace “which alone 
will justify this war.”!*? 

In a July 1945 memo to Secretary of State James Byrnes who 
strongly opposed retention of the Emperor, MacLeish, who had little 
or no expertise in Japanese affairs, warned “what has made Japan dan- 
gerous in the past and will make her dangerous in the future if we 
permit it, is, in large part, the Japanese cult of the emperor worship 
which gives the ruling groups in Japan ... their control over the 
Japanese people.”'** Surely, MacLeish’s deep-seated faith in Jeffersonian 
individualism and democracy as exemplified in his “revolution of the 
individual” — a revolution against “all forms of authoritarianism,” both 
the left and the right (monarchy, aristocracy, fascism) — reinforced, 
and possibly shaped, his opposition to retaining the Emperor. 

In drawing this chapter to a close, keep in mind that as public 
intellectuals in 20th Century America, MacLeish and Oppenheimer 
serve to illuminate the Cold War as an “ideological project.” Both 
held that we must define ourselves by what we are for, not against. 
MacLeish turned to the past and used Jeffersonian individualism and 
democracy as a springboard to the future. In the crisis of atomic 
energy with its great peril and great hope, Oppenheimer turned to the 
communal nature of science and the image of scientific 
internationalism. 

However, MacLeish never really addressed “the central point of the 
whole business” — “the basic dependence of man on his fellows” as 
epitomized by “the antinomy between the individual and the 
community” — whereas Oppenheimer not only addressed it but 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of America” 63 


embraced it as illustrated by his Reith Lectures and his later hope and 
vision. An underlying reason for this difference surely lies in the defin- 
ing experiences of their lives — as artist and as scientist. MacLeish’s life 
as a poet is a life that exemplifies the individual not the community — 
hence his “revolution of the individual.” Oppenheimer’s life as a physi- 
cist is a life that exemplifies both the individual and the community; 
and this is a key, perhaps the key, to his thought. As he said in his 1950 
article “The Age of Science,” the human institution of science “makes 
for so great a harmony between the flourishing of community and the 
liberation of the individual man.” 

Oppenheimer’s themes concerning the individual and community 
extend well beyond science and its applications. During the first of his 
William James Lectures, delivered at Harvard University in 1957, 
Oppenheimer spoke briefly of “one of the great roles of the arts” — 
namely, that art “alters and extends what people can see, what they 
can perceive, and above all alters and extends what people can see 
with a certain community, as a whole group of people and not indi- 
vidually.”!%° MacLeish, then a professor at Harvard, was likely in 
attendance; but in any case, he would almost certainly have agreed. 

In his essay “The Conquest of America,” MacLeish called for 
“a redeclaration of the revolution of the individual” and emphasized 
the importance and necessity of images, saying that “The soul of a 
people is the image it cherishes of itself ... .”1%° On December 24, 
1968, nearly two years after Oppenheimer had died, the Apollo 8 
astronauts orbiting the moon became the first humans to see and 
photograph Earth in the vast void of space. On Christmas day on the 
front page of the New York Times, MacLeish proposed that this pho- 
tograph has given us a new image. 


Formed as it was in the minds of heroic voyagers who were also 
men, it may remake our image of mankind. No longer that prepos- 
terous figure at the center, no longer that degraded and degrading 
victim off at the margins of reality and blind with blood, man may 
at last become himself. 

To see the earth as it truly is, small and blue and beautiful in 
that eternal silence where it floats, is to see ourselves as riders on 
the earth together, brothers on that bright loveliness in the eternal 


cold — brothers who know now they are truly brothers.!%” 


64 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


This global communitarian image is startling, and in some ways 
frightening, calling for collective reassurance and action. Oppenheimer 
would certainly be “very, very glad” that MacLeish had “put it out” 
and would express his “conviction that it will help.” However, 
Oppenheimer would temper his gratitude by reminding MacLeish 
that when it comes down to it, community is pluralistic not global, 
and in large part based on specialization. 

In the next chapter, we move forward to 1962, and an exchange 
between the Nobel Prize-winning physicist I. I. Rabi and Oppenheimer 
who were close friends. Its subject matter begins with science and 
education in the so-called age of specialization. 


Chapter 4 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the 
Universal Culture of Science 


Background 


On a Sunday in June 1962, I. I. Rabi was the guest on the NBC 
television show, The Open Mind. Eric Goldman moderated the program, 
which was on “Science and American Society.” First produced in 1959 
and featuring prominent figures as guests, Tie Open Mind presented 
the American public with in-depth interviews and discussions of con- 
temporary issues. The show ran until 1967, winning Emmy awards in 
1962 and 1967. 

Goldman introduced Rabi as a winner of the Nobel Prize for 
Physics and as someone who had “held virtually all the key posts bear- 
ing on science and national policy in this country.” His guest was 
“one of the most active and most deeply respected of that emerging 
type in American life, the scientist-statesman,” someone who had 
“acquired, among scientists and non-scientists alike, an extraordinary 
reputation for a warm and humane approach to human affairs and for 
a mellow wisdom that moves easily across specific disciplines.” !** Two 
decades later, in 1984, Rabi could still command a television audience 
when he appeared as “A Man of the Century” on A Walk Through the 
20th Century with Bill Moyers. 

The interview and discussion on The Open Mind showed Rabi at 
his best. The topics ranged from American education to the public 
understanding of science, from science and values to the division 


65 


66 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


between “The Two Cultures” of the sciences and humanities, and 
from arms control to the possibility of nuclear war. Rabi was no stran- 
ger to The Open Mind. In 1960, C. P. Snow, Reinhold Niebuhr,) and 
Rabi had been the guests on The Open Mind discussing “The Impact 
of Science on Western Civilization.” 

Rabi also was no stranger to Goldman. In fact, they were close 
friends. Rabi had just spent the 1961-62 academic year at Princeton 
University as the Schreve Fellow in History and as a Visiting Senior 
Fellow of the Council of Humanities. Goldman, a professor of 
history at Princeton, was instrumental in getting Rabi to come to 
Princeton. In addition to lecturing in Goldman’s class on “Modern 
America,” Rabi conducted two faculty seminars on issues of science 
and culture. These seminars met approximately fortnightly at Rabi’s 
house and involved Princeton faculty members from a variety of 
departments. !%° 

The seminars, which included a discussion on the decision to 
build the hydrogen bomb, focused on the so-called cultural gulf 
between scientists and humanists as well as possible initiatives in edu- 
cation to promote the public understanding of science. The seminars 
were successful on several levels. As Charles Gillispie, historian of 
science at Princeton, wrote to Rabi, “I think it [a report] speaks for 
itself, and you will see that it owes almost everything to the discus- 
sions at your house during the course of the year.”'*? This report 
was submitted to the president of Princeton from the Committee on 
the Study of Science in Society. It recommended programmatic and 
curricular initiatives “concerned with the public understanding of 
science, of science itself, and of the public responsibilities of the 
scientific community.” !4! 

These faculty seminars also benefitted from the participation of 
Oppenheimer, then director of the Institute for Advanced Study at 


iSir Charles Percy Snow (1905-1980) was a British novelist, physicist, and govern- 
ment administrator who introduced the now famous “Two Cultures” (i.e., scientists 
vs. humanists with physical scientists at one pole and literary intellectuals at the other 
pole). Reinhold Niebuhr (1892-1971) was a Protestant theologian and regarded by 
many as the foremost public theologian of 20th-century America. 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 67 


Princeton. Rabi and Oppenheimer were personal friends who had first 
met in 1928 in Leipzig as young American physicists who had gone to 
Europe to learn the new revolutionary physics of quantum mechanics. 

After a biographical sketch of Rabi, this chapter turns to a January 
1962 letter that Oppenheimer wrote at the request of Rabi about the 
subject of these seminars. This letter serves as a steppingstone into the 
thought of these two physicists. 

Born in 1898 in the small Austro-Hungarian town of Rymanow 
(now in Poland), Rabi was brought to the United States by his 
Orthodox Jewish parents in 1899.'** The family had limited financial 
means and settled in the Lower East Side of New York City; later, they 
moved to the borough of Brooklyn. 

Rabi attended public schools in New York City. In 1916, with 
the assistance of scholarships, he entered Cornell University and 
graduated with a bachelor’s degree in chemistry in 1919. Then, 
after a four-year hiatus, Rabi entered the physics department at 
Columbia University in 1923 and completed his PhD requirements in 
1926. His dissertation research involved a simple and accurate method 
that he had developed for measuring the magnetic susceptibility of 
crystals. 

In 1926, Rabi and Helen Newark were married. One year later, 
Rabi began a two-year postdoctoral sojourn in Europe interacting and 
studying with such physicists as Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, 
Wolfgang Pauli, and Otto Stern. Rabi also came into contact with 
several young American physicists including Oppenheimer and 
Edward Condon, and the future American physicists Hans Bethe 
and Edward Teller. Rabi’s most significant work was his successful 
and innovative experiments with molecular beams in Stern’s labora- 
tory in Hamburg. 

In 1929, Rabi returned with his wife to the United States and 
began his career as a lecturer in physics at Columbia University. In 
1968, he retired from Columbia as University Professor, the first 
Columbia professor to be so designated. During the 1930s, with 
the assistance of his co-workers and students, Rabi developed meth- 
ods for measuring the magnetic properties of atomic nuclei. This 
work culminated in Rabi’s development of the molecular-beam 


68 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


magnetic-resonance method and his being awarded the 1944 Nobel 
Prize for Physics. 

With war raging in Europe and Asia, Rabi joined the Radiation 
Laboratory at MIT in November 1940. Serving as head of the 
research division and as associate director of the laboratory, Rabi 
guided the development of radar systems for the war. He also was a 
senior adviser to Oppenheimer on the atomic bomb project and 
witnessed the first atomic bomb test at Alamogordo, New Mexico, in 
July 1945. 

After the war, Rabi returned to Columbia where he rebuilt the 
physics department, which had been depleted during the war, hiring 
several future Nobel Prize winners. But with his success as a leading 
wartime physicist and his recent Nobel Prize, Rabi was positioned to 
move into the public arena — an arena shaped by the birth of the 
nuclear age and the Cold War. And so he did, entering public life as both 
government adviser and institution builder. For example, he served on 
the powerful General Advisory Committee (GAC) to the Atomic 
Energy Commission from 1947 to 1956, succeeding Oppenheimer as 
its chairman in 1952. Remember, Rabi and Oppenheimer along with 
the other members of the GAC are noted for their opposition to the 
crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb. Rabi also was involved 
in the Atoms for Peace program during the Eisenhower administra- 
tion and played the key role in organizing the first International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva in 1955. 
As an institution builder, Rabi was instrumental in the establishment 
of Brookhaven National Laboratory in 1947 and CERN in 1952. 

Most important, Rabi became a spokesperson for science or, in 
other words, he became a public intellectual speaking on behalf of 
science as a cultural and moral force. He continued in this capacity 
until his death in January 1988. Later in this chapter, Rabi’s vision of 
the nature of science and society that he presented to the public is 
discussed and contrasted with Oppenheimer’s — providing a richer 
and more meaningful understanding of the views of these two physi- 
cists — but first, let us take a detailed look at Oppenheimer’s 1962 
letter to Rabi concerning the faculty seminars. 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 69 


Oppenheimer’s Response to Rabi 


Oppenheimer began his letter by saying, 


You asked me to put down a few words on the subject of the 
seminars that you have been holding. 

As you know, I came to these seminars late. I understand that 
their object is to devise practical steps which would help to assimilate 
the sciences, with their great diversity of subject, style and purpose, 
and with their rapid growth and growing importance, to the general 
culture of our times, to make them more nearly an integral part of 
it. More specifically, I understand the question as relating to what 
could be done in undergraduate instruction at Princeton, and still 
more specifically through the teaching of history, as in the large 
course on American institutions. 

I should, I think, never have supposed that there was very much 
that could be done in this context, nor that it would be very easy to 
do. Some of the reasons, to me compelling, for this are set forth at 
too great length in the accompanying text of a talk that I gave in 
Tokyo. The seminars that I have attended have not changed my 
mind.'48 


Oppenheimer then “with a very modest hope” made “a very lim- 
ited proposal.” The proposal aims at providing material, in particular 
stories (e.g., Bohr’s account of his discussions with Einstein), which 
“could be used in undergraduate courses to make an awareness of 
scientific life a more natural part of elementary education.” It is inter- 
esting that Oppenheimer framed his proposal in the context of the 
following observation. 


Our seminars have seemed to me most revealing in those moments 
where one or another of us was telling a story, either of the develop- 
ment of a scientific discovery or of a human predicament that the 
sciences had thrown up, or of our own troubles in understanding or 
communicating with one another. In order to tell stories which 
reveal the intellectual, the heroic, the comic, and the human aspects 


of the sciences, there must be sources.!*4 


70 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In this letter, Oppenheimer referred Rabi to his Tokyo talk for 
some of the reasons underlying his skepticism. This lecture, entitled 
“Science and Culture,” was delivered in 1960 and is essentially identi- 
cal to lectures that he delivered and published in numerous places 
(including Mexico City, Colorado, Brazil, Geneva, and California) 
from 1960 to 1965.!*° The lecture is very compact and can be taken 
as a synopsis of many of Oppenheimer’s views on science and society. 

With respect to education in this lecture, Oppenheimer set forth 
his views that the “traditions of science are specialized traditions” 
and this is what gives “the enormous thrust and power to the scien- 
tific experience.” Furthermore, “the cultural values of the life of 
science almost all lie in the intimate view [specialization] ... and not 
in the general encyclopedia-like description of what the progress of 
science is all about.” However, specialization is “one of the things 
which also makes the great problem of teaching and explaining the 
sciences.” 

What Oppenheimer was saying here was not new. In earlier 
works, like his “The Tree of Knowledge” published in Harper’s 
Magazine in 1958, Oppenheimer held that due to cognitive pluralism 
and the need for tacit understanding and cultural coherence “all of us 
in our years of learning ... need some true apprenticeship, some hard 
and concentrated work, in the specialized traditions.” Even in 1947, 
he was critical of teaching science to undergraduates using historical 
methods or case studies, in particular, James Conant’s views on teach- 
ing science. For Oppenheimer, science teaching “is at its best when it 
is most like an apprenticeship”!*° since an element of action is insepa- 
rable from understanding. One must participate in science if one is to 
truly benefit from science. 

Further, in his “Science and the Human Community” published 
in Issues in University Education and based on his 1957 talk at the 
Fulbright Conference on Higher Education, Oppenheimer advised 
that we should try to learn something like “a practitioner” and “do 
not just learn what it is in general terms,” and then “learn something 
else as well that is quite different.”'*” He went on to express his skepti- 
cism about the so-called “general-education approach” since this “is 
essentially a description...of what has gone on in broad areas of 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 71 


science.” Furthermore, survey courses and general accounts “serve a 
necessary purpose only because without them one cannot navigate.” 

Likewise, consider Oppenheimer’s “very limited proposal” 
described in his letter — providing material, in particular stories, 
which “could be used in undergraduate courses to make an awareness 
of scientific life a more natural part of elementary education.” Such 
materials and stories help by revealing “the intellectual, the heroic, the 
comic, and the human aspects of the sciences.” This proposal brings 
to mind his 1953 Reith Lectures. Recall that in his third lecture, when 
he turned to his detailed discussion of atomic physics and comple- 
mentarity, Oppenheimer prepared his audience by saying, 


We must talk of our subject not as a community of specialized 
scientists but as men concerned with understanding, through analogy, 
description, and an act of confidence and trust, what other people 
have done and thought and found. So men listen to accounts of sol- 
diers returning from a campaign of unparalleled hardship and hero- 
ism, or of explorers from the high Himalayas, or of tales of deep 
illness, or of a mystic’s communion with his God. Such stories tell 
little of what the teller has to tell. They are the threads which bind us 
in community and make us more than separate men.'48 


Remember, genuine cognitive and cultural bonding by such engage- 
ment requires epistemic second-order understanding obtained through 
some hard and concentrated work in a specialized tradition — that is, 
a true apprenticeship. Consequently, in his 1962 letter, Oppenheimer 
was proposing, at least in part, the development of curricula materials 
and initiatives for such engagements in undergraduate education 
along with emphasis on specialization and survey courses to help one 
“navigate” the intellectual landscape. Hence, Oppenheimer’s critique 
and proposal in his letter are understandable, even predictable, given 
his works that predate his Tokyo lecture. 


Focusing Oppenheimer’s Hope and Vision 


Oppenheimer’s Tokyo lecture “Science and Culture” — containing 
topics like the rapidity of scientific change, Bohr and complementarity, 


72 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


propositional versus thematic discourse, and the dual duty of speciali- 
zation and openness — is essentially just a summation of many of the 
views and recommendations that comprise what has been character- 
ized as Oppenheimer’s hope and vision of 1957-59. To help substan- 
tiate this idea, consider the following. In May 1962, Oppenheimer 
received a letter from John Fischer, an editor at Harper’s Magazine, 
inquiring about publishing what was essentially Oppenheimer’s 
Tokyo lecture.!*? He wrote that his wife by “sheer chance” happened 
to hear a radio broadcast of Oppenheimer’s “Reflections on Science 
and Culture” that was “originally delivered at the summer lecture 
series of the University of Colorado in 1961.” Fischer remarked that 
his wife — who “thinks everything you write is wonderful” — “told 
me that the talk ought to make a first-rate magazine article,” hence 
the inquiry for it to appear in Harper’s. 

Oppenheimer responded by sending a text of the talk but cau- 
tioned that there are “reasons why you may not wish to publish the 
paper” since “it is quite long, and probably even rather difficult.”!*° 
However, he would welcome editing the paper and possibly an abbre- 
viated version might be of interest to Harper’s. On June 20, Fischer 
replied, 


For nearly two weeks we have been trying hard to figure out some 
way to edit and abbreviate the enclosed text, as you suggested in 
your letter of June 4. ’m unhappy to have to report that we failed. 
The main trouble was not the difficulty of the language, as you 
feared; on the contrary, you write with unusual lucidity. The real 
problem, which emerged as we worked on the text, is that a number 
of your main points have already have been made in previous articles 
in Harper’s — notably in your own piece which we published about 
three years ago. Consequently, we concluded — with considerable 
reluctance — that an article based on this text would not sound 
entirely fresh to many of our readers, particularly those who have 
followed your own work with considerable attention.'*! 


The article that Fischer refers to as “published about three years 


” 


ago” is surely Oppenheimer’s “The Tree of Knowledge” that 
appeared in the October 1958 issue of Harper’s. Remember, “The 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 73 


Tree of Knowledge” was one of the central works used in Chapter 2 
when setting forth Oppenheimer’s hope and vision of 1957-59. 

Notice two things here concerning Oppenheimer: (1) his Tokyo 
lecture (a summation of much of his hope and vision 1957-59) which 
he recommended to Rabi was delivered several times with slight 
modifications from 1960 to 1965, and (2) responses like his 1962 
letter to Rabi on education can be explained using works before 
1960. With this in mind, a reasonable interpretation which is clarifying 
and functional is that Oppenheimer basically accepted what I have 
called his hope and vision of 1957-59 as the fruition of his intellectual 
and philosophical efforts to understand contemporary science and 
society — a vision providing both insights and recommendations 
which was reached ten years after MacLeish’s “The Conquest of 
America.” 

This is not to say that Oppenheimer did not introduce and discuss 
new ideas after 1960. For instance, there are a few new ideas on when 
a scientific discovery would have a large effect on the beliefs of the 
culture at large. More significant, in his 1965 lecture “Physics and 
Man’s Understanding,” delivered during the Bicentennial Celebration 
of the Smithsonian Institution, he raised a new concern — nuclear 
proliferation. At the time of his lecture, there were five nuclear weap- 
ons states (America, Russia, Britain, France, and China) with the 
danger of other states like India and Israel joining the nuclear club. 
In his lecture, Oppenheimer stated that in June 1945, before the first 
atomic bomb, he and three other physicists (Compton, Fermi, and 
Lawrence) wrote in response to questions from Secretary of War 
Stimson concerning the end of the war and the future of world peace: 
“To accomplish these ends ..., we recommend that before the weap- 
ons are used not only Britain, but also Russia, France and China be 
advised that we would welcome suggestions as to how we can coop- 
erate in making this development [atomic energy] contribute to 
improved international relations.” Oppenheimer continued his lec- 
ture saying that “would have been a moment to begin to worry about 
what is now called ‘nuclear proliferation.’”!* 

Nevertheless, given our situation today (1965), he advised “I think 
that we will not be very successful in discouraging other powers from 


74 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


this course unless we show, by our own example and conviction, that 
we regard nuclear armaments as a transitory, dangerous, and degrad- 
ing phase of the world’s history, [and] that before other nations 
could have competing armament, there is a good chance that arma- 
ment will have become archaic.”'*? He ended his Smithsonian lec- 
ture returning to ideas found in his hope and vision of 1957-59: the 
universality of science and its ethos, the importance of Niels Bohr 
and his thought, and the potential of international communities and 
collaboration.‘ 

No single article or even lecture series can fully convey 
Oppenheimer’s hope and vision. However, with qualifications as 
given above, Oppenheimer’s four talks /articles dating from 1957 to 
1959 (discussed in Chapter 2) — in conjunction with his 1959 talk 
“In the Keeping of Unreason” and his 1957 James Lectures — 
provide the core and nuance of his hope and vision. In particular, his 
1960 Tokyo lecture even with its abundance of ideas still needs to be 
supplemented. For instance, in this lecture, there is less emphasis, 
than found in his earlier works, on knowledge being a property of 
specialized communities (e.g., a kind of “cognitive syndicalism”) 
rather than individuals. Also, there is no explicit reference to the need 
for creating strong international communities “embarked on special- 
ized work” to break the “grip” of the nation state though this is 
certainly a natural implication of the lecture. 

Another feature in the development of Oppenheimer’s hope and 
vision is the effect of the loss of his security clearance and exile from 
government service in 1954. First, it must be emphasized that 
Oppenheimer began setting forth his ideas on science and society and 
the significance of the atomic revolution at the end of the war in 1945, 
not as a result of his 1954 exile. However, certain aspects, or at least 
their public expression, of his later hope and vision appear to be linked 


*In his latter works, there is a limited number of works on scientific history and biog- 
raphy (e.g., on Rutherford, Einstein, and Bohr) with the most extensive on Bohr. 
Oppenheimer began to lecture on Bohr within a year after Bohr’s death in 1962. For 
example, Oppenheimer’s Pegram Lectures given in 1963 consist of three lectures 
entitled “Niels Bohr and His Times.” The three themes of the lectures are “all parts 
of Bohr’s life — Physics, Philosophy, and Politics.” 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 75 


to his exile. During 1957 to 1959, Oppenheimer spoke of breaking 
the “grip” of the nation state which as sovereign and all-powerful was 
“a pretty deadly and impossible form for the organization of man- 
kind.” Such stark public expressions are not found in Oppenheimer’s 
earlier works. Though he may well have believed them before 1954, 
clearly such public expressions would have undermined his role in 
shaping government policy especially with respect to national security. 
The loss of his security clearance and exile from government certainly 
provided him the freedom to speak his mind along with additional 
illuminations of the inner workings of the nation state. 

In addition, remember Oppenheimer’s 1959 rebuke of profes- 
sional philosophers for removing philosophy from the public sector 
and his lamenting that “there have been crucial moments in which the 
existence of a public philosophical discourse ... could have made a 
great difference in the moral climate and the human scope of our 
times.” Interestingly, Oppenheimer mentioned 1945 and 1949. The 
1945 reference is clearly the decision to use the atomic bomb and 
early attempts at international control. The 1949 reference is the 
hydrogen bomb controversy and the attempt of the General Advisory 
Committee, of which Oppenheimer was chairman, to provide certain 
moral dimensions to its opposition to a crash program. In fact, in the 
December 1953 letter to Oppenheimer from the Kenneth Nichols, 
General Manager of the AEC, informing Oppenheimer of the suspen- 
sion of his security clearance, one of the so-called charges was that “in 
the autumn of 1949, and subsequently, you strongly opposed the 
development of the hydrogen bomb; (1) on moral grounds, (2) by 
claiming that it was not feasible, (3) by claiming that there were insuf- 
ficient facilities and scientific personnel to carry on the development, 
and (4) that it was not politically desirable.”!** 

Bringing morality, especially from advisers, into the inner sanctums 
of government and the formation of national security policy can lead 
to allegations of naiveté and suspicions of disloyalty. Undoubtedly, 
Oppenheimer’s 1959 rebuke of professional philosophers is an urgent 
plea for moral assistance in matters of state — reflecting his 1949 
opposition to the hydrogen bomb and his 1954 exile. His exile from 
government again provided him the freedom to speak his mind. 


76 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In the autumn of 1966 at the Institute for Advanced Study, 
Thomas Morgan of Look Magazine spent part of a day in conversation 
with Oppenheimer. Morgan’s piece entitled “With Oppenheimer” 
appeared in the December 27 issue of Look less than two months 
before the physicist died at age 62. Oppenheimer — “very frail” and 
hair “hardly more than a white mist” — was “fighting a long illness 
with stoic grace.” 

The conversation ranged from Los Alamos and the atomic bomb 
to the hydrogen bomb controversy and the withdrawal of his security 
clearance — “probably the most wasteful exercise of the McCarthy 
era.” Concerning science and society, the conversation ranged from 
“the explosion and fragmentation of knowledge” to specialized tra- 
ditions and the impoverishment of the public sector as well as the 
“follies and dangers of nationalism.” Oppenheimer also raised the 
concern over nuclear proliferation like he did in his Smithsonian 
lecture. However, there were hopeful remarks and insights along 
with fascinating and personal observations about responsibility as 
mentioned in Chapter 1. Oppenheimer mentioned the recent 
Limited Test Ban Treaty regarding nuclear weapons as “a tenta- 
tive,” but a “very precious declaration that reason might still 
prevail.” 

The conversation ended with Oppenheimer saying, 


It is a bad time ... I think peace should be far more prominent in 
our thoughts, talk and deeds as it tended to be toward the end of 
the last war. ... The war in Vietnam has stymied our relations, but 
the habit of talking to the Russians has not been lost. The attitudes 
of the bitterest cold-war days have not returned, despite trouble. 
Altogether, this teaches that peace must be approached through 
cooperation and non-national ways of doing things that gradually 
take the power and the burden from the nation-state.'*° 


Throughout this conversation Oppenheimer’s touched on many 
features of his hope and vision, and his final statement here is surely 
an echo from the past encompassing his 1957 call for strong interna- 
tional communities “embarked on specialized work” to break the 
“grip” of the nation state. 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 77 


Rabi’s Philosophical Views and Outlook 


In his biography of Rabi, John Rigden devotes an entire chapter to 
Oppenheimer and Rabi.'*° Rigden begins by noting some of the 
“uncanny parallels” in their lives — both Jewish, both New Yorkers, 
both influential science advisers. But Rigden mainly focuses on the 
“deep differences” that separate the lives of these two men. 
Oppenheimer grew up on Riverside Drive with maids and a chauffer 
whereas Rabi grew up in the ghetto on the Lower East Side. Rabi 
embraced his Jewishness, Oppenheimer did not. Rabi won the Nobel 
Prize, Oppenheimer did not. For Rigden, the most profound differ- 
ence that distinguishes these two men is the “sense of self” or “iden- 
tity.” Rabi had it, Oppenheimer did not. As will be seen, though 
their views on science and society have similarities, there are “deep 
differences,” between their views as well. 

Though Rabi certainly appreciated Oppenheimer’s letter con- 
cerning education with its “very limited proposal” for curricular 
materials and initiatives, he would not have been persuaded by 
Oppenheimer’s skepticism regarding science and education. In fact, 
Rabi was an educational optimist and eventually adopted what could 
be called “Science as the Center of Education.” To understand this, 
we turn to Rabi’s more philosophical views and outlook which will 
also furnish the groundwork needed for comparing and contrasting 
his views with Oppenheimer’s. 

Rabi began speaking and writing on science and society in 1950 
with his talk, “Science as a Way of Life,” which was published in 1951 
in The Atlantic Monthly as “Faith in Science.” He delivered this talk 
at an opening ceremony at Columbia University while Dwight 
Eisenhower was president of the university, and continued speaking 
on science and society until his death in 1988. Like Oppenheimer and 
many other intellectuals and scientists, Rabi never wrote a book 
whose purpose was a systematic exposition of his views. Instead, he 
used lectures, talks, and related publications as his primary means of 
presentation. Rabi’s book, Science: The Center of Culture, published 
in 1970 is simply a collection of works. Though a valuable resource, 
it is not an exposition of his views and even omits many of Rabi’s 


78 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


major ideas on science and society. However, its title serves as a key 
to understanding his views. For Rabi, the power and universality of 
science place it in a unique position. Science can serve both materially 
and spiritually as the force to unify culture. This centering of science 
is held to be a radical continuance and extension of the scientific tradi- 
tion founded in the 1600s and 1700s by such “whole men” as 
Benjamin Franklin (Rabi’s ideal) and the members of the Royal 
Society. With this unified and universal culture of science, modern 
society can alleviate, and perhaps solve, its most pressing problems 
(e.g., poverty and war) and is provided with the vision of a scientific 
utopia. Rabi’s mature and boldest positions were set forth in the 
1960s, advocating science as the center of education and science as 
the replacement for religion. 

Education and its importance occur as themes throughout Rabi’s 
writings. In essence, Rabi’s overall recommendation is to transform 
society by transforming education. The resulting society is to be uni- 
fied as well as rationalistic and humanistic in its institutions, policies, 
and outlooks. In his early works of the 1950s, Rabi presented his 
views on education in terms of the quest for wisdom and the prob- 
lematic separation between the sciences and humanities. His initial 
solution was to fuse or blend the sciences and humanities — two liv- 
ing traditions that would be united on roughly equal footings. 
However, by the middle 1960s, Rabi deemphasized the humanities 
and placed science at the center of education. Just as the sun domi- 
nates the solar system, so science should dominate contemporary 
education. 

Rabi was concerned mainly with higher education in America. 
Though much of Rabi’s analysis and criticisms of contemporary edu- 
cation were not unique, his proposed solution — science as the center 
of education — and its supporting philosophy may be unique and 
taken as a limiting case in the educational debates of the 1950s and 
1960s.' In an analogous way, the Great Books Program of Robert 


'For an excellent account of American science education during this period, see John 
L. Rudolph, Scientists in the Classroom: The Cold War Reconstruction of American 
Science Education (New York: Palgrave, 2002). 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 79 


Hutchins and Mortimer Adler may be taken as a limiting case placed 
in opposition to Rabi’s views on education. Beyond this, the Great 
Books Program is the kind of curriculum, according to Adler, “that 
makes Professor Rabi so very unhappy.”'*? Not surprisingly, Rabi 
knew and interacted with both Hutchins and Adler. 

Rabi’s vision of science as the center of education is founded, in 
large part, on two educational principles. First, he advocated a 
Minimalist Principle in educational requirements and hence a con- 
traction of general education requirements at most colleges and uni- 
versities. This would allow students more freedom and encourage 
more student initiative in their education. Second, Rabi advocated a 
Teaching-To-Our-Times Principle whose objective “should be to 
develop people who can live in their age, understand the problems of 
their age and enjoy the great things that are happening.”!** 

In order to satisfy these principles, science must be placed at the 
center of education, because “science has become the modern stage 
of human endeavor”’*’ and is the force that shapes our age. Moreover, 
science taught in a humanistic way can fulfill many of the goals tradi- 
tionally satisfied by courses in the humanities. To Rabi, humanities 
teach to the past and are in some ways obsolete. In addition, with 
science at the center, the student is presented with a progressive and 
enlightened endeavor connected to individual empowerment. Most 
important, the student is provided with an understanding of science 
which is vital since without it “mankind is in real danger of destroying 
ieselt, 729° 

At times, Rabi moved beyond generalities and provided specifics 
concerning a general education program for American students that 
places science at the center of education and satisfies his two educa- 
tional principles. In his 1967 Dean’s Day talk, “What Every Young 
Man Should Know,” at Columbia University, Rabi proposed to 
eliminate requirements in several areas of the humanities and social 
sciences (e.g., history, literature, economics).'*! He stressed five sub- 
jects for inclusion in his program: law, social anthropology in the 
United States, practical reasoning, English communication, and 
science taught in a humanistic way. For Rabi, the sciences are taught 
too much as skills removed from the broader aspects of life and 


80 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


culture. The teaching of science must be humanized and taught more 
like natural philosophy — including biographies of scientists, histori- 
cal and philosophical settings, and social and technological implica- 
tions of science. Rabi did not specify how many semesters of such 
humanized science courses would be required in his general educa- 
tion program, but he clearly intended more than one and perhaps as 
many as eight. Rabi taught a course at Columbia that embraced his 
point of view at least twice, in 1966 and in 1967, with the title, 
“Cultural and Philosophical Implications of Twentieth Century 
Physics.” 

Beyond satisfying general education requirements, Rabi recom- 
mended that a student should specialize or major in a traditional 
discipline like business, history, or chemistry. Specialization is 
necessary for the development of epistemic self-confidence and 
humanization — a subject can be learned both “deeply and liberally” 
with specialization serving as a center for humanization. Though the 
basic sciences do not exhaust the disciplines worthy of specialization, 
Rabi certainly gave them a privileged position. Physics would be 
unique in this recommendation since, for Rabi, science is hierarchical 
with physics having a special role. According to Rabi, “Physics, which 
is the most highly developed science, is at the apex (or base) of this 
hierarchy and the other sciences model themselves more or less 
closely on the methods of physics.”'° 

In sum, Rabi’s overall recommendation is to transform society by 
transforming education with science at its center. His reasons were 
not based solely on pedagogical concerns, or even the historical force 
and epistemic success of science. For Rabi, science has a moral, even 
a religious, interpretation, and is capable of providing meaning both 
individually and collectively. 

In the 1960s, at the same time that Rabi was advocating science 
as the center of education, he began to address issues related to 
science and religion. Overall, he held that science and religion are in 
conflict, and science (properly understood) is the necessary and legiti- 
mate replacement for religion in modern society. The conflict is 
“more in the nature of a civil war between two parties with the same 
ultimate aims of comprehension and of submission to a higher order 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 81 


of knowledge and of insight.”!°* For Rabi, science and religion are 
not complementary ways of approaching the universe and the human 
condition, and attempts to synthesize them result “in a devaluation of 
both aspects of a powerful urge of the human spirit.”!* 

Though Rabi was certainly not alone here in his views, he can 
certainly be contrasted with other atomic scientists like Edward 
Condon and Arthur Compton who were theists in the Christian tradi- 
tion holding that science and religion are not in conflict. For Condon, 
“there is no essential lack of harmony between Science and Religion” 
and each “without the other is incomplete and inadequate.”!® For 
Compton, science is an ally with religion through which God’s 
“human creatures became His partners, sharing with Him the great 
task of making life what they wanted it to be” with “more and more 
of the responsibility” being “shifted to man’s shoulders.” Fittingly, 
for Compton, who was one of the principal scientific leaders in the 
Manhattan Project, “Atomic power is ours, and who can deny that it 
was God’s will that we should have it?”!°° 

Though science and religion are in conflict for Rabi, it must be 
realized that he was not hostile to religion. He was brought up an 
Orthodox Jew and throughout his life identified himself as Jewish. 
For Rabi, religion and science come into conflict by adopting different 
approaches in seeking answers to such questions as man’s origin and 
his spiritual nature. Supported by authority and external organization, 
religion is “aristocratic and hierarchical” and claims “more than it 
knows and, therefore, must always retreat and qualify as science 
advances.”!°” Science, whose appeal is to nature, is “democratic and 
leveling” and “purifies religion” as it advances. 

For Rabi, even though science has undercut the traditional base 
of religious values, it has done so “without touching” them. For 
example, although Darwinian evolution and the naturalization of 
man removed the possibility of a supernatural justification of the sanc- 
tity of human life, this value can be maintained and grounded in a 
proper scientific understanding of man and his place in nature. 
Something like this had to be the case for Rabi. If science and reason 
have only skeptical and critical functions that undermine religion and 
morality, science would eliminate the possibility of personal guidance 


82 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


and social solidarity. Not surprisingly, science has positive functions 
for Rabi — offering both personal and collective meaning, and even 
the possibility of a new faith. 


In a certain deep sense, science opens the road to a new faith, which 
differs from other faiths in the sense that it can be openly and 
humanly shared without the intervention of outside authority, 
a faith that comes out of man’s basic nature in his relations to the 
greater whole of the universe.!°8 


Science provides personal meaning on several dimensions. Science 
is a way of life in which the individual is active — a life promoting 
personal virtues and insights. Though science is a craft, it is much 
more for Rabi. Science takes the scientist out of himself not simply 
because its subject matter is external but also because it is a communal 
effort. The scientist becomes a member of an enlightened and pro- 
gressive community. Moreover, this effort offers the individual the 
possibility of rare moments and visions filled with awe, humility, and 
ecstasy — the scientific discovery or epiphany. 

But science offers more than personal and communal meaning to 
its practitioners. Rabi held that science is universal in the strong sense 
that it is capable of providing meaning to all members of society. With 
proper planning and organization, science with its practical applica- 
tions can fulfill the material needs of humankind. But more impor- 
tant, from the Rabian perspective, the aspiration to understand is 
shared by all humankind, and science has been immensely successful 
in this epistemic quest. For example, through our scientific under- 
standing of the universe, we are released from superstition and find 
that we are “at home” in the universe. The universe is not to be feared 
since life, and in particular human life, follows from the properties of 
matter. But humankind is not just “at home” in the universe — it is 
unique and central. In a 1964 Eternal Light radio interview spon- 
sored by the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and broadcast 
on NBC, Rabi emphasized this point. 


I consider science as the great adventure of the human race. It is the 
thing which to my mind makes man different from other species. ... 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 83 


the human being is the only one with a conscious attempt to under- 
stand the world — how it’s made, how he is made, what are the 
basic laws. In a certain sense — through humanity, matter — the 
universe — becomes conscious of itself.!° 


Rabi’s idea that through humanity matter “becomes conscious of 
itself” appears in several of his works and is characterized as a “philo- 
sophical paradox” or “philosophical enigma.” One assumes that this 
mystery from the Rabian perspective is beyond understanding, much 
like the mystery of the Trinity in Christianity. 

Most important, this uniqueness of humanity serves as the Rabian 
goal for establishing collective meaning (and a “guarantee of the sanc- 
tity of human life”). 


This vision of humanity, a part of the nature of mankind, learning 
to understand nature, being the vehicle so to speak of nature, 
matter becoming conscious of itself is to me one of the greatest 
profundity yet. For the present I see or seek no higher goal for the 


human race.!”° 


In sum, science is not simply the dominant force in modern 
society. For Rabi, science offers a universal culture not of stasis but of 
quest, in which the Brotherhood of Man can be achieved both materi- 
ally and spiritually. 

Though there are similarities between the outlooks of Oppenheimer 
and Rabi (e.g., science serving a model for social organization and 
providing cultural and personal enrichment), Oppenheimer would 
not agree with many of Rabi’s views such as his hierarchical view of 
science with physics at its apex and his view that the humanities are 
obsolete and teach to the past. Furthermore, Oppenheimer holds that 
the cognitive world is richer than can be conceived by any particular 
person, discipline, or even culture. No single approach can be com- 
pletely exhaustive. Given this along with his pluralism, Oppenheimer 
could not have accepted Rabi’s position of science as the center of 
education, let alone science as the center of culture. In addition, 
Oppenheimer would take it as misguided to speak of science as the 
replacement for religion. 


84 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Rabi spoke of a universal culture based on science whereas 
Oppenheimer did not. For Rabi, the ideal is unified culture brought 
about by acommon quest (1.e., scientific understanding of nature and 
man). For Oppenheimer, the ideal is pluralistic community connected 
by dialogue and conversation (i.e., “man knowing man”). Rabi 
emphasized unity whereas Oppenheimer emphasized coherence. 

In April 1967 at the meeting of the American Physical Society, the 
Oppenheimer Memorial Session was held. Rabi was to speak but was 
prevented because of other commitments. However, he wrote the 
introduction to the 1969 publication of the talks given at the session. 
In his introduction, Rabi covered “those aspects of Oppenheimer’s 
life that he would have discussed at the meeting.” Near the end of this 
introduction, Rabi raised the question “why men of Oppenheimer’s 
gifts do not discover everything worth discovering.” Concerning this, 
Rabi remarked, 


In pondering this subject it seems to me that in some respects 
Oppenheimer was over-educated in those fields which lie outside 
the scientific tradition, such as his interest in religion, in the Hindu 
religion in particular, which resulted in a feeling for the mystery of 
the universe that surrounded him almost like a fog. ... He was insuf- 
ficiently confident of the power of the intellectual tools he already 
possessed and did not drive his thought to the very end because he 
felt instinctively that new ideas and new methods were necessary to 
go further than he and his students had already gone. Some may call 
it a lack of faith, but in my opinion it was more a turning away from 
the hard, crude methods of theoretical physics into a mystical realm 
of broad intuition. ... In Oppenheimer the element of earthiness 
was feeble.!7! 


Many have taken Rabi’s remarks as especially insightful concern- 
ing the personality of his close friend and colleague. But they also 
speak of Rabi as well. As Rigden has noted there are “deep differ- 
ences” that separate the lives of these two men. And it must be said 
that there are “deep differences” separating their thought as well. 

With regard to Rabi and Oppenheimer, one might be reminded 
of the 1953 essay, “The Hedgehog and the Fox,” written by the 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 85 


British philosopher and historian of ideas Isaiah Berlin (whom both 
Oppenheimer and Rabi had met and interacted with). The essay 
begins with an interpretive discussion of a line taken from the Greek 
poet Archilochus — “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog 
knows one big thing.” Concerning this line, Berlin writes, 


But, taken figuratively, the words can be made to yield a sense in 
which they mark one of the deepest differences which divide writers 
and thinkers, and, it may be, human beings in general. For there 
exists a great chasm between those, on one side, who relate every- 
thing to a single central vision, one system, less or more coherent or 
articulate, in terms of which they understand, think and feel — a 
single, universal, organising principle in terms of which alone all that 
they are and say has significance — and, on the other side, those 
who pursue many ends, often unrelated and even contradictory, 
connected, if at all, only in some de facto way, for some psychological 
or physiological cause, related to no moral or aesthetic principle. 
These last lead lives, perform acts and entertain ideas that are 
centrifugal rather than centripetal; their thought is scattered or 
diffused, moving on many levels, seizing upon the essence of a 
variety of experiences and objects for what they are in themselves, 
without, consciously or unconsciously, seeking to fit them into, or 
exclude them from, any one unchanging, all-embracing, sometimes 
self-contradictory and incomplete, at times fanatical, unitary inner 
vision. The first kind of intellectual and artistic personality belongs 
to the hedgehogs, the second to the foxes ... .”!7 


With cautions of over-simplification, Berlin categorizes such 
figures as Plato, Dante, and Hegel as hedgehogs, and such figures as 
Aristotle, Shakespeare, and Goethe as foxes. Again, with cautions of 
over-simplification, Rabi is a hedgehog and Oppenheimer is a fox. 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and Rabi 


MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and Rabi serve as examples of public intel- 
lectuals in 20th Century America while providing a micro-study in the 
social networking of intellectuals. They moved in the Habermasian 


86 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


“public sphere” and the public spaces opened up by the Cold War and 
the crisis of atomic weapons. With the Cold War as an “ideological 
project,” they demonstrate the importance not only of social and 
cultural capital but also of “symbolic capital” — MacLeish as Pulitzer 
Prize-Winning Poet, Oppenheimer as Father of the Atomic Bomb, 
and Rabi as Nobel Prize-Winning Physicist. Their audiences included 
government officials and business elites, scientists and artists, doctors 
and teachers, as well as the general public. 

Moreover, as public intellectuals who were not outsiders but 
belonged to and shaped the political center, these individuals invite 
and challenge reflections on Antonio Gramsci’s distinction between 
the “traditional” and “organic intellectual,” Michel Foucault’s 20th 
Century transition from the “universal intellectual” to the “specific 
intellectual,” Edward Said’s characterization of the intellectual as 
“outsider” and “lookout,” and Pierre Bourdieu’s thesis of the intel- 
lectual as “an unstable synthesis” and his call for “an International of 
Intellectuals.”!7* 

In his 1993 Reith Lectures, Said declared that “The central fact 
for me is ... that the intellectual is an individual endowed with a 
faculty for representing, embodying, articulating a message, a view, an 
attitude, philosophy, or opinion to, as well as for, a public.”!”* In the 
light of Jeffrey Goldfarb’s thesis of intellectuals as “central democratic 
actors” and his caution that “Truth telling, by itself, without the 
framing of the modern political narratives, can be confusing” for both 
the individual and the deliberating public,!”* the intellectual challenge 
becomes the struggle to find a vision or “affirmation” that rings true 
and can be communicated to the public. Oppenheimer as well as 
MacLeish and Rabi took up this challenge by turning to the crucibles 
of their own lives and experiences — in the sciences, arts, academia, 
and government — without the aid of the philosophers and their 
seminars. What this says about Oppenheimer (and perhaps MacLeish 
and Rabi) as well as academic philosophy in 20th Century America is 
interesting to contemplate. Remember, Oppenheimer was a Harvard 
overseer, beginning his chairmanship of the Visiting Committee to 
the (Harvard) Philosophy Department in 1949, the year of “The 
Conquest of America.” 


Rabi, Oppenheimer, and the Universal Culture of Science 87 


MacLeish took up this challenge with a strong, even radical, indi- 
vidualism and his call for “the revolution of the individual.” Rabi took 
up this challenge with a strong, even radical, unification and his call 
for moving science to the center of culture. Both visions are polariz- 
ing and, in many ways, limiting and closed. Oppenheimer’s stance was 
more exploratory and cautious emphasizing both the individual and 
the collective with a call for coherence. His vision is not polarizing 
and, in many ways, ongoing and open. Most important, Oppenheimer’s 
hope and vision was not simply an academic or intellectual exercise 
that concerned itself with issues like cultural coherence and educa- 
tion, for his vision addressed the atomic revolution itself. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 5 


International Control of Atomic Energy 


Personal and historical roots of Oppenheimer’s hope and vision 
reside in the development and military use of atomic weapons in 
World War II as well as postwar attempts, and their failure, to 
obtain international control of atomic weapons. With the revolution- 
ary changes and crises that these weapons brought to the world at 
large, atomic scientists and especially Oppenheimer stepped forward 
to mobilize the American people and their government. For the pub- 
lic, they offered more than a glimpse at the secrets of the atom. By 
focusing on the significance of the atomic revolution for the interna- 
tional order, they were seen as interpreters of science and its new 
relationships to society, and as offering hope for transcending the 
atomic crisis. Of particular importance for Oppenheimer was the 
Acheson-Lilienthal proposal. 


Acheson-Lilienthal Proposal 


Oppenheimer and his fellow atomic scientists began considering and 
even formalizing their ideas on the political and international implica- 
tions of atomic weapons before the end of the war. Of particular rel- 
evance is the influence of Niels Bohr on Oppenheimer. They first met 
in 1925 at Cambridge when Rutherford introduced Oppenheimer to 
Bohr. Bohr had won the 1922 Nobel for Physics and surely must have 
impressed the young Oppenheimer. During the war, Bohr was at Los 
Alamos for several extended visits being more “a scientific father 


89 


90 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


confessor to the younger men” than a technical advisor.'”° In 1964, 
Oppenheimer wrote in The New York Review of Books, “Bohr at Los 
Alamos was marvelous. ... He made the enterprise seem hopeful, 
when many were not free of misgiving. ... His own high hope that 
the outcome would be good, that the objectivity, the cooperation of 
the sciences would play a helpful part, we all wanted to believe.”!”” 
Oppenheimer recalled that when Bohr first arrived at Los Alamos in 
December 1943, “his first serious question was, ‘Is it really big 
enough?’”!”8 In other words, is this atomic weapon the “great peril” 
that might bring about the end of war? 

In his speech at Los Alamos in November 1945, Oppenheimer 
referred to Bohr, and this speech is an excellent place to begin an 
examination of Oppenheimer’s early views on the international control 
of atomic energy. With some five hundred people packing the largest 
movie theater on “The Hill,” Oppenheimer described the develop- 
ment of atomic weapons as both “a great peril” and “a great hope.”'” 
The peril arises not simply from the destructive power of atomic weap- 
ons, but also from such things as the quantitative advantage they give 
to “aggression compared to defense.” The hope arises from the ben- 
eficial uses that atomic energy promises humankind (e.g., atomic 
power generation, medical diagnosis and treatment) in conjunction 
with the fact that the “common [universal] problem” of atomic weap- 
ons requires “a complete sense of community responsibility” for its 
solution. In particular, Oppenheimer spoke of atomic energy as 


a new field, in which just the novelty and the special characteristics 
of the technical operations should enable one to establish a com- 
munity of interest which might almost be regarded as a pilot plant 
for a new type of international collaboration. I speak of it as a pilot 
plant because it is quite clear that the control of atomic weapons 
cannot be in itself the unique end of such operation. The only 
unique end can be a world that is united, and a world in which war 
will not occur.!8° 


Therefore, “if one solves the problems presented by the atomic 
bomb, one will have made a pilot plant for solution of the problem of 
ending war.”!®! 


International Control of Atomic Energy 91 


Oppenheimer took his views to the broader public with articles 
in such publications as The Saturday Review, The New York Times 
Magazine, and the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists as well as lectures 
at such forums as the American Philosophical Society. However, 
Oppenheimer’s views on the international control of atomic energy 
reached well beyond lectures and articles, and even testimony before 
Congressional committees. In January 1946, he was appointed to 
the five-member Board of Consultants to the special committee that 
was charged with drawing up a concrete proposal for the interna- 
tional control of atomic weapons.'** This proposal would serve as the 
foundation for the US proposal to the United Nations. President 
Truman had appointed the committee with Under Secretary of State 
Dean Acheson as its chair; David Lilienthal chaired the Board of 
Consultants. Although the result was made public on March 28, 1946, 
as the Acheson-Lilienthal Report, it was in large part Oppenheimer’s 
report. As Acheson later wrote in his memoirs, “All the participants, 
I think, agree that the most stimulating and creative mind among us 
was Robert Oppenheimer’s.”!*? 

The heart of the report was the recommendation to establish an 
international atomic development authority under the control of the 
United Nations. Atomic weapons would be prohibited from national 
arsenals, and all “dangerous activities” would be conducted by the 
Atomic Development Authority. For example, all uranium mines 
and atomic reactors capable of providing fissionable materials for 
making atomic bombs would be owned and operated by the 
Authority. In addition, the Authority would conduct research on the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy and make the results publicly 
available. Hence, the Authority undercut the “great peril” and 
promoted the “great hope” of atomic energy. 

The authors of the Acheson—Lilienthal Report proposed “that in 
the field of atomic energy there be set up a world government” with 
“renunciation of national sovereignty” in the field of atomic 
energy,'** and said that they were “sustained by the hope” that this 
“may contain seeds which will in time grow into that cooperation 
between nations which may bring an end to all war.” They concluded 
their report saying “in the long term there can be no international 


92 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


control and no international cooperation which does not presuppose 
an international community of knowledge.”!*° As many believed, 
science with its international fraternity of scientists served as a 
worthy prototype for such “an international community of 
knowledge.” 

On March 30, just two days after the Acheson—Lilienthal Report 
was made public, Oppenheimer wrote the following in a letter to 
Bohr. 


Even in our gloomy moments we did not succeed quite in thinking 
how difficult it would get to be. This report that I am sending you 
is months later than it should be, and is not all it should be; but I 
think it may still be of interest to you. For what is good in it, it 
should be dedicated to you.'*° 


On April 17, Bohr wrote Oppenheimer concerning the Acheson— 
Lilienthal report. 


I have just received a copy of the report on international control of 
atomic energy published by the State Department, and it is very 
much on my mind to give expression to you for the deep pleasure it 
was to me to read this report. In every word of it I find just the spirit 
which I think offers the best hopes for the development in which we 
all put our whole faith. I was also deeply impressed by the amount 
of thought and work which lies behind the preparation of the 
report, and from page to page I recognized your broad views and 


refined power of expression.'*” 


However, by early 1947 Oppenheimer, like many others, had lost 
hope in the international control of atomic energy for the foreseeable 
future. The UN negotiations certainly had critics on both the political 
right and left. On the right, “The Hearst press labeled the proposal 
an ‘imbecilic,’ ‘New Deal’ scheme to give away the national advan- 
tage. ... ‘... a scheme for surrendering to FOREIGN MASTERS 
the AMERICAN SECRET of the atomic bomb.’”!§* On the left, 
Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace criticized the plan for its step- 
by-step procedure that was requiring the Soviet Union to show “her 


International Control of Atomic Energy 93 


cards” (e.g., its uranium deposits) while the United States retained 
the option of whether “to continue to play the game.”!*? 

But the real reason for Oppenheimer’s pessimism was that nego- 
tiations at the United Nations were stalled and probably deadlocked. 
The Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union was 
beginning on several fronts. Winston Churchill delivered his provoca- 
tive Iron Curtain speech in 1946 while visiting Fulton, Missouri. In 
March 1947, Truman in a momentous speech before a joint session 
of Congress called for US aid for Greece against a communist-led 
insurgency as well as aid for Turkey. This speech launched what would 
be called the “Truman Doctrine” for containing the Soviet Union 
and stopping the spread of communism. The following year, the 
Soviet Union sponsored a coup that brought down the democratic 
government of Czechoslovakia and would later blockade Berlin. 

In March 1947, Oppenheimer was requested to come to Washington 
to assist the United States delegation at the UN in drafting a speech for 
the UN ambassador related to the negotiations on the control of atomic 
energy. In the course of this visit, Oppenheimer spent a considerable 
amount of time with Fredrick Osborn, the newly-appointed US dele- 
gate to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission. During this 
time, Oppenheimer “displayed the intensity of his belief that continued 
negotiations in the UN were not only futile but potentially danger- 
ous.”!° Also, when Oppenheimer first arrived, he had stopped by the 
State Department and Acheson had shown him a draft of Truman’s 
upcoming speech. Acheson wanted him to know that “we were entering 
an adversary relationship with the Soviet [Union], and whatever we did 
in the atomic talk [at the UN] we should bear that in mind.”!”! 

In the January 1948 issue of Foreign Affairs, Oppenheimer pub- 
lished an article entitled “International Control of Atomic Energy.”!*? 
With success of the UN negotiations in the short term “rather 
unlikely,” Oppenheimer addressed the questions of “why in a matter 
so overwhelmingly important to our interest we have not been suc- 
cessful” and “what lessons this has for our future conduct.” This 
article, in conjunction with two talks he gave during this time, help 
bring to light Oppenheimer’s thinking at this time as well as connec- 
tions between the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative and his later hope and 


94 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


vision. One talk entitled “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary 
Problem” was a restricted talk given in September 1947 at the 
National War College in Washington, DC. This talk was later pub- 
lished in 1955 in Oppenheimer’s book The Open Mind. The other 
talk entitled “Some Aspects of the Problem of Atomic Energy” was 
delivered in January 1948 at the annual meeting of the New York 
State Bar Association. 

In these works, Oppenheimer touched on the hopeful aspects of 
atomic energy — the need for an international response to the crisis 
of atomic weapons, the hope for large-scale atomic power genera- 
tion, and the “freedom of maneuver” which the novelty of atomic 
energy provided. Certainly, there were sacrifices and renunciations 
that the international control of atomic energy demanded from the 
United States and Western Europe. But most important, Oppenheimer 
stated that 


the sacrifices, the renunciation, required of Russia are of another 
order of magnitude. That is because the proposed pattern of control 
[openness and cooperation] stands in a very gross conflict to the 
present patterns of state power in Russia. The ideological underpin- 
ning of that power, namely the belief in the inevitability of conflict 
between Russia and the capitalist world, would be repudiated by a 
co-operation as intense or as intimate as is required by our proposals 
for the control of atomic energy.!%? 


Though non-cooperation of the Soviet Union was certainly 
“a most essential part of a true answer” for the lack of success, there 
was, according to Oppenheimer, much more to be said and lessons to 
be learned. There were problems inherent in atomic energy itself like 
its most beneficial aspect (atomic power generation) being long-term 
but its threat being immediate. There were mistakes on the part of the 
United States. By developing atomic weapons in secret during the 
war, we “cast a doubt upon our willingness to cooperate in the future 
with allies [e.g., Soviet Union] with whom we had not in this field 
been willing to cooperate during the war.” By going to the United 
Nations, “where matters of the highest policy could only be touched 
upon with difficulty and clumsily,” instead of working directly with 


International Control of Atomic Energy 95 


heads of state appears “to have prejudiced the chances of any genu- 
ine meeting of minds.” Further, for Oppenheimer, there had been a 
“schizophrenic separation of our dealings in this field [atomic energy] 
from our dealings in all others.”!** 

In the end, Oppenheimer held that the thinking and policy of the 
Soviet Union in conjunction with the actual course of events neces- 
sarily gave “little support to the view that by prompter, clearer and 
more magnanimous action we might have achieved our purposes.” 
He did caution his audience that had there been a greater reality for 
the internationalization of atomic energy, “we ourselves ... would 
have found many difficulties in reconciling particular national secu- 
rity, custom and advantage with an over-all international plan for 
insuring the security of the world’s peoples.”!°° 

So what was to be done? In his talk at the National War College 
in September 1947, Oppenheimer reiterated that he was confident 
that “the arguments that were given in the Acheson—Lilienthal report 
are correct arguments” and that “Some day we will want to come 
back to this.”!°° In his January 1948 talk, Oppenheimer told the 
New York State Bar Association that such arguments “are in some 
ways eternal arguments. They will be as strong five years from now as 
they were two years ago. They will be strong twenty years from now.” 
In other words, Oppenheimer’s narrative involving the international 
control of atomic energy had become a long-term narrative. What was 
imperative was that in the pursuit of its short-term goals, the United 
States did not “do anything that would shut the door [on the future 
prospect for the international control of atomic energy].”!°” 

Though “a profound change in the whole orientation of Soviet 
policy” was absolutely necessary, there must also be, according to 
Oppenheimer, “a corresponding reorientation of our own.”!%8 
There must be balance between short-term security and long-term 
security. We must remember that proposals like the internationali- 
zation of atomic energy “presuppose a very large measure of peace- 
ful intention, of co-operation, of confidence and candor before they 
can get started.” In particular, in atomic policy we must include 
“the achievement of international control as one of the things to 
keep in mind” — even when rearming.!” 


96 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In December 1948, Oppenheimer delivered another talk where 
he addressed the issues surrounding atomic energy. This talk entitled 
“The Open Mind” was delivered “before a joint session of the 
Rochester Association for the United Nations and the Rochester 
Foreign Policy Association,” and later published in his 1955 book by 
the same title.2°° With an audience of some thirty-five hundred in 
attendance, as well as a radio audience, Oppenheimer spoke of the 
need for “style.”?°! Illustrating this with an historical example of 
Lincoln during the Civil War, Oppenheimer said “it is style which 
makes it possible to act effectively, but not absolutely.” In the case of 
foreign policy, style “enables us to find a harmony between the pur- 
suit of ends essential to us, and the regard for the views, the sensibili- 
ties, the aspirations of those to whom the problem may appear in 
another light.”?°? What Oppenheimer was saying here, for example, is 
that in pursuing our short-term goals, we must try to demonstrate, or 
at least hint at, our long-term objectives, especially to our enemies. 
A salient example of lacking style is the Bikini atomic tests (which 
Oppenheimer opposed and did not attend?®*) by the United States in 
the summer of 1946 while it was negotiating for the international 
control of atomic energy. 

In this talk as in his article in Foreign Affairs, Oppenheimer used 
the metaphor of planting seed in new soil “and then waiting for it to 
grow, and then harvesting it.” Likewise, we need to enlist “time and 
nature in the conduct of our international affairs: in the quest for 
peace and a freer world. This is not meant mystically, for the nature 
which we must enlist is that of man; and if there is hope in it, that lies 
not least in man’s reason.”*°* The UN negotiations on atomic energy 
would officially continue, really linger on, until September of 1949.70 
The Soviet Union conducted its first atomic test and ended the 
American atomic monopoly that August, the month that MacLeish’s 
“The Conquest of America” appeared. 

It is perhaps today too easy to speak of the Acheson—Lilienthal 
initiative as utopian. Even Oppenheimer said that the internationali- 
zation of atomic energy “would have altered the face of the world.”?” 
But in many ways it was not unrealistic and reflected its time. With 
the victory of the Allies over the Fascists, the world would be remade 


International Control of Atomic Energy 97 


and this might be an ideal time to break the “grip” of nationalism. 
Early postwar, international efforts like the formation of the United 
Nations as well as the World Bank and the International Monetary 
Fund succeeded. Further, atomic energy offered “freedom of maneu- 
ver” since it “lay in a field international by tradition and untouched 
by preexisting national patterns of control” and its novelty guaran- 
teed no entrenched economic interests.”°”” Plus, atomic scientists 
were strategically placed due to the crucial roles they played in the 
development of atomic weapons and their roles as government 
advisers. Atomic scientists, committed to scientific internationalism, 
knew the facts and had “symbolic capital” with their governments and 
the public. And there was always the “great peril” and the “great 
hope” of atomic energy which many believed required an international 
solution. 

Further, there were even hopeful signs and progress at the United 
Nations. In December 1945, the Soviet Union accepted an American 
proposal and joined the United States along with other countries like 
the United Kingdom in proposing that the UN establish the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC). The UNAEC was 
officially put in place in January 1946 and would take up the interna- 
tional control of atomic energy.”°* In September and October of 
1946, there was even some limited optimism. The Scientific and 
Technical Committee had unanimously reported — with regard to a 
diluted version of the Acheson—Lilienthal report — that it did not 
find “any basis in the available scientific facts for supposing that effec- 
tive control is not technologically feasible.”*°? But even this limited 
optimism quickly vanished. At the end of October in front of the 
United Nations General Assembly, Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav 
Molotov, charged that the American plan “proceeds from the desire 
to secure for the United States ... the monopolistic possession of the 
atomic bomb” and demanded that it eliminate its atomic weapons as 
part of “a general reduction of all armaments.”?’° 

There are correspondences and connections between this early ini- 
tiative for the internationalization of atomic energy and Oppenheimer’s 
later overall hope and vision. Both have themes of crisis that can 
only be solved internationally, and both seek to break the “grip” of 


98 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


nationalism. There are communitarian themes with science and its 
ideal communities as well as the appeal to scientific internationalism. 
There are crucial roles for the specialized work of international com- 
munities working for the benefit of the people of the world. In the 
concluding paragraph of his 1957 Fulbright talk “Science and the 
Human Community” where Oppenheimer spoke of his hope and 
vision, he even referred to Bohr and the post-war international efforts 
of the United States (e.g., the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative). 


That is, indeed, what so many physicists throughout the world have 
been shouting for the last twelve years or so. It has usually been a 
rather muted shout, as in the case of Niels Bohr, but it has been a 
very deep and heartfelt shout. This hope is what animated some of 
the first efforts in the United States after the war to suggest ways of 
coping with the new problems of atomic energy.”"! 


Oppenheimer said that the internationalization of atomic energy 
“would have altered the face of the world.” That was certainly true in 
1946 but not necessarily true of the future. The postwar failure of the 
international control of atomic energy demonstrated the need for a 
long-term view, and perhaps a broader and more detailed view. Many 
of Oppenheimer’s later works like his Reith Lectures (1953) and 
James Lectures (1957) can be interpreted, in part, as providing the 
foundation for such a view. He focused on and developed such ideas 
as the need for specialization, that knowledge is more a property 
of the community not the individual, the necessity of our dual 
duty (specialization and openness), and a viable public sphere with 
philosophy taking its proper place. With this robust foundation in 
conjunction with communities embarked on specialized work (essen- 
tially his hope and vision of 1957-59), we might break the “grip” of 
nationalism and move forward to cultural coherence and a world 
without war and, in particular, a world free of nuclear weapons. 

Though the Acheson-Lilienthal initiative failed, it remained sym- 
bolic in several ways. Oppenheimer held that it “should not be too 
lightly dismissed as a remarkable achievement in the democratic for- 
mulation of public policy.” The United States had “developed, and in 


International Control of Atomic Energy 99 


large part committed itself to, a policy of genuine internationalization 
of atomic energy, ... fortified this policy with concrete, if sketchy, 
proposals as to how the internationalization was to be accomplished,” 
and placed them before the governments of the world. Throughout 
the negotiations, “the basic idea of security through international 
cooperative development [had] proven its extraordinary and pro- 
found vitality.””!* Further, on a personal front, the Acheson-Lilienthal 
report illustrated the potential of how insiders — especially scientific 
advisers — in the national government could move the United States 
towards internationalism and away from extreme nationalistic reac- 
tions. For Oppenheimer, it might also have confirmed a proper role 
of experts, namely, to define and illuminate possibilities for public 
officials as well as the general public, and thereby contribute to a 
culture of critical discourse and deliberation. 

As noted earlier, Oppenheimer published an article entitled 
“International Control of Atomic Energy” in the January 1948 issue 
of Foreign Affairs. With success at the UN in the short term “rather 
unlikely,” Oppenheimer concluded his article by writing, 


It is necessarily denied to us in these days to see at what time, to 
what immediate ends, in what context, and in what manner of 
world, we may return again to the great issues touched on by the 
international control of atomic energy. Yet even in the history of 
recent failure, we may recognize elements that bear more generally 
on the health of our civilization. We may discern the essential har- 
mony, in a world where science has extended and deepened our 
understanding of the common sources of power for evil and power 
for good, of restraining the one and of fostering the other. This is 
seed we take with us, traveling to a land we cannot see, to plant in 
new soil?! 


Surely, part of this seed is the Acheson—Lilienthal proposal. But 
even given that its ideas and arguments were “correct” and “in some 
ways eternal,” the proposal failed at the United Nations. This failure 
not only had international ramifications but had moral ramifications 
as well. 


100 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Moral Ramifications 


Though the Acheson-Lilienthal proposal can be viewed as a noble, 
and perhaps not unrealistic, attempt by the United States to eliminate 
atomic weapons and promote the benefits of atomic energy, it was 
certainly not viewed that way by the Soviet Union. On June 14, 1946 
at the United Nations, Barnard Baruch had formally announced the 
American plan for the international control of atomic energy. But less 
than three weeks later, on July 1 at Bikini in the Pacific, the United 
States conducted its first atomic test since the end of the war. With 
the United States negotiating and testing, the Russians quickly 
responded. “Pravda charged that the United States aimed not at 
restricting but at perfecting the atomic weapon” and was engaged in 
atomic blackmail.*!* The Acheson—Lilienthal initiative was a masquer- 
ade that really aimed at maintaining the American atomic monopoly. 

The Soviets were not alone in placing the Americans in a trouble- 
some moral light. In 1948, the British physicist P. M. S. Blackett, who 
won the Nobel Prize for Physics that same year, published his book 
Fear, War, and the Bomb. He claimed that given the evidence, “the 
dropping of the atomic bombs [on Japan] was not so much the last 
military act of the second World War, as the first major operation of 
the cold diplomatic war with Russia now in progress.”?!* He argued 
that this interpretation made sense of the facts. For instance, the 
atomic bombs were rushed into use with the first one being dropped 
on Hiroshima on August 6 just two days before the deadline for the 
Soviet Union to enter the war against Japan. Blackett’s reasoning 
coincided well with the interpretation that the United States was con- 
ducting atomic diplomacy and the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative was 
really a masquerade. 

Blackett’s claim stood in sharp contrast to the American interpre- 
tation of the use of the atomic bomb. The official view was that the 
atomic bombs were used to end the war as quickly as possible and save 
lives, and in particular to avoid an invasion of the Japanese mainland. 
In December 1946, Karl Compton published an article entitled “If 
the Atomic Bomb Had Not Been Used” in The Atlantic Monthly. 
Compton, who was trained as a physicist, was president of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and served on several wartime 


International Control of Atomic Energy 101 


projects. In particular, he was member of the Interim Committee 
which was formed in May 1945 by Secretary of War Henry Stimson. 
This committee made recommendations concerning postwar organiza- 
tion as well as the military use of the atomic bombs against Japan. In 
his article, Compton wrote that he believed “with complete convic- 
tion, that the use of the atomic bomb saved hundreds of thousands — 
perhaps several millions — of lives, both American and Japanese; that 
without its use the war would have continued for many month.”?!° 

Two months later in February 1947, the former Secretary of War 
Henry Stimson published his influential article entitled “The 
Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb” in Harper’s Magazine. Stimson 
wrote that the decision to use the atomic bomb was a considered, 
deliberate decision made within a broad framework, and he was 
informed that “operations [in the invasion of Japan] might be 
expected to cost over a million casualties, to American forces alone. 

. [and it was expected that] enemy casualties would be much larger 
than our own.”?!? He emphasized that “the atomic bomb was more 
than a weapon of terrible destruction; it was a_ psychological 
weapon.”?!8 It had shocked the Japanese government; and all the 
evidence seen by him indicated that “the controlling factor in the 
final Japanese decision to accept our terms of surrender terms was the 
atomic bomb.”?!° In essence, the official American justification for 
the atomic attacks was utilitarian — they were the lesser of two evils. 
By way of contrast, Blackett’s interpretation held that the reasoning 
behind the attacks was not primarily a moral utilitarian calculation, 
but simply power politics between the United States and the Soviet 
Union writ large. 

By focusing on Oppenheimer, there arise other elements in the 
moral debates surrounding the atomic attacks. Oppenheimer was sig- 
nificantly involved in the discussions and decision on how the atomic 
bombs would be used. As a member of the Scientific Panel to the 
Interim Committee, Oppenheimer attended its May 31, 1945, meet- 
ing where the committee recommended the combat use of the atomic 
bomb. At this meeting, Oppenheimer stated that “it might be wise for 
the United States to offer to the world free interchange of information 
with particular emphasis on the development of peace-time uses 


102 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


[of atomic energy]. The basic goal of all endeavors in the field should 
be the enlargement of human welfare. If we were to offer to exchange 
information before the bomb was actually used, our moral posi- 
tion would be greatly strengthened.”*?° Concerning the Russians, 
Oppenheimer “suggested that we might open up this subject [con- 
trols and collaboration concerning atomic energy] with them in a 
tentative fashion and in the most general terms without giving them 
any details of our productive effort.” And “we might say that a great 
national effort had been put into this project and express a hope for 
cooperation with them in this field.” According to the minutes of the 
meeting, Oppenheimer “felt strongly that we should not prejudge the 
Russian attitude in this matter.”??? 

In addition, concerning whether the United States should con- 
duct a technical demonstration of the atomic bomb to induce the 
Japanese to surrender, the Scientific Panel — consisting of Arthur 
Compton, Ernest Lawrence, Enrico Fermi, and Oppenheimer as its 
chairman — concluded in its June 16 report to the Interim Committee 
that they could “propose no technical demonstration likely to bring 
an end to the war” and they saw “no acceptable alternative to direct 
military use.” However, they recommended that “before the weap- 
ons are used not only Britain, but also Russia, France, and China be 
advised that we have made considerable progress in our work on 
atomic weapons, that these may be ready to use during the present 
war, and that we would welcome suggestions as to how we can cooper- 
ate in making this development contribute to improved international 
relations.”?? 

On August 17, three days after the Japanese accepted the surren- 
der terms of the Allies, Oppenheimer wrote on behalf of the Scientific 
Panel to Henry Stimson. The letter urgently recommended that “all 
steps be taken, all necessary international arrangements be made” to 
“making future wars impossible.” In support of this recommenda- 
tion, the panel had noted that future atomic weapons would be 
“quantitatively and qualitatively far more effective than now availa- 
ble,” that the panel was “unable to devise or propose effective military 
countermeasures for atomic weapons,” and even if the United States 
could maintain a “hegemony in the field of atomic weapons” 
this could not protect it “from the most terrible destruction.””* 


International Control of Atomic Energy 103 


Nevertheless, at Los Alamos during the war, Oppenheimer had 
intervened to stifle moral and political opposition by some of the 
scientists to the rapid development and military use of the atomic 
bomb. He must have thought that such concerns might needlessly 
complicate things and divert the lab from its goal — a weapon for 
combat use. For example, Oppenheimer blocked the circulation at 
Los Alamos of a petition from the physicist Leo Szilard that was 
opposed “on moral grounds to the use of these [atomic] bombs in 
the present phase of the war.”?** In addition, when Robert Wilson, a 
young physicist with a Quaker heritage, called a meeting at Los 
Alamos to discuss “The Impact of the Gadget [Atomic Bomb] on 
Civilization,” Oppenheimer warned him not to do it. Wilson per- 
sisted, so Oppenheimer then attended the meeting and “skillfully 
channeled the internationalist idealism of this group of young scien- 
tists into the task of building the bomb and used the meeting to 
reinforce their dedication to the work.””** Beyond his charisma and 
his authority as scientific director of Los Alamos, Charles Thorpe 
stresses that “The primary argument that Oppenheimer had in his 
arsenal, one to trump all opposition, was that only combat use of the 
weapon would demonstrate to the world its destructiveness, and that 
this destructiveness itself might mean the end of all war.”??° 

In all likelihood, this “primary argument” played a significant role 
in Oppenheimer’s thought at this time. David Hawkins, who was a 
friend of Oppenheimer as well as a special administrative assistant to 
Oppenheimer during the war, essentially confirms this along with an 
insightful analysis. In a 1996 interview conducted by Mary Palevsky, 
Hawkins said, 


He [Oppenheimer] was obsessed with an understanding that this 
development [of the bomb] was in his view inevitable and that it was 
a change, to use his phrase, “a change in the nature of the world.” 
Typically he saw that, and probably at the same time believed, and 
often correctly, that other people wouldn’t see it. ... 

And he wanted to act in such a way that the world would 
understand this as deeply and as soon as possible. That, I think you 
could say, is a rationalization with which he cloaked the Faustian 
bargain. But I think it was quite genuine. I’m pretty sure from 
conversations with him that Oppenheimer really had the belief 


104 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


which would be, from an unfriendly critic, a rationalization of his 
position: that the bomb had to be used, because if it were not used 
in World War II it would be used in World War III. The world had 
to know about it and its full destructive character and not simply as 
a demonstration of an explosion, but as a weapon. Well, obviously 
that could be, and in some measures certainly was, a rationalization 
of his position. But it has to be examined as an argument in its 
own right. 

And I was well persuaded of it at the time, but in retrospect 
I suspect that the passage of events is much too complicated to 
make that kind of argument stick. Again, it’s the lesser evil argu- 
ment. The first lesser evil argument was the one about beating 
Germany to the production. The second one was, if we don’t do this 
now something even worse will happen. But I think he was firmly 
convinced of that. 

And remember that the Faustian compact, at least in Goethe’s 
version, brought destruction but also the possibility of a new era: a 
fifty-year war that remained “cold,” a nuclear pacifism creeping into 
high places.??” 


What’s more, in October 1945, Oppenheimer endorsed this argu- 
ment before a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Military 
Affairs. In response to questions and remarks by Senator William 
Fulbright, Oppenheimer testified, 


May I be very honest. Most scientists, because they are scientists 
were certainly not happy with the absolute national sovereignty 
which prevailed 10 years ago. They were not happy with the war. 
When we had the possibility of making atomic weapons, cer- 
tainly for many of us a great argument was that it might be necessary 
or helpful in shortening the war; but there were many times when 
we thought we would never get it done in time for that; many times 
when we thought that the war was so completely won without it 
that we might as well stop. None of us did want to stop, and the 
reason was that we thought that since atomic weapons could be real- 
ized, they must be realized for the world to see because they were 
the best argument that science could make ... for a more reasonable 


and a new idea of the relations between nations.?”° 


International Control of Atomic Energy 105 
Senator Fulbright responded, 


In other words, that is one of the justifications for its use. It took 
the shock, we will say, of Hiroshima to bring the world to a con- 
sciousness of what another war might mean, and it therefore gives 
the reason for seeing that there is no more war. I think in that sense 
it does justify its use, regardless of how regrettable it may have been 
in that particular instance.” 


Oppenheimer responded in return, “That is in my opinion” and 
then added “I know that my colleagues share these views.”?*° Using 
the words of Thorpe, Oppenheimer’s “primary argument” — which 
trumped all opposition — placed “the atomic bomb into a narrative 
of progress, the weapon’s global destructiveness providing a vehicle 
for the achievement of universal human ideals.” The bomb became 
“a medium for transcendence, a realization of modernist dreams of 
breaching the constraints of history and tradition.”?#! 

Oppenheimer apparently was attracted to similar reasoning even 
after the use of the atomic bomb. In his 1954 security hearing when 
the subject was the hydrogen bomb controversy, Oppenheimer 
stated that it was his judgment that “when you see something that 
is technically sweet, you go ahead and do it and you argue about 
what to do about it only after you have had your technical success.” 
He then remarked this is “the way it was with the atomic bomb.” 
This corresponds to his above testimony that “since atomic weap- 
ons could be realized, they must be realized” to help move the 
world forward to a more reasonable international order. Since the 
technical feasibility of the H-bomb was highly uncertain in 1949, 
Oppenheimer’s imperative of “technical sweetness” did not apply 
to the H-bomb at this time. Hence, this imperative is compatible 
with the GAC invoking moral concerns in its opposition to a crash 
program; in particular, with the recommendation of the majority 
report: “In determining not to proceed to develop the super bomb, 
we see a unique opportunity of providing by example some limita- 
tions on the totality of war and thus of eliminating the fear and 
arousing the hope of mankind.”**? 


106 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


However, once the technical sweetness of a thermonuclear device 
was established (say in 1951), moral concerns over a crash program 
would recede but could reappear in a new guise due to an altered 
technological environment. In 1952, this actually occurred when the 
State Department Panel of Consultants on Disarmament was chaired 
by Oppenheimer.*** The panel recommended a moratorium on 
testing the H-bomb. This would provide an opportunity to approach 
the Soviets so that the world would not cross the thermonuclear 
threshold to a bomb a thousand times more powerful than the 
Hiroshima bomb. This was technologically and geopolitically rea- 
sonable since any thermonuclear device would have to be tested to 
be a reliable military weapon and any such test could easily be 
detected. Unfortunately, the panel’s recommendation was rejected by 
Truman and the test was conducted in the Pacific on November 1 just 
three days before the presidential election. An election, the Republicans 
were expected to and did win, and hence denying the new administra- 
tion “a unique opportunity of providing by example some limitations 
on the totality of war and thus of eliminating the fear and arousing 
the hope of mankind.” 

Near the end of his testimony on the second day of his 1954 
security hearing, Oppenheimer made a most revealing statement. 


I don’t want to conceal from you, and I said it in public speeches so 
it would not make much sense to conceal from you the dual nature 
of the hopes which we entertained about the development of bigger 
and bigger weapons, first the atomic bomb, and then its amplified 
version, and then these new things [H-bombs]. 

On the one hand, as we said at the time, and I now firmly believe, 
this stuff is going to put an end to major total wars. I don’t know 
whether it will do so in our lifetime. On the other hand, the notion 
that this will have to come about by the employment of these weap- 
ons on a massive scale against civilizations and cities has always 
bothered me. I suppose that bother is part of the freight I took into 
the General Advisory Committee, and into the meetings that 
discussed the hydrogen bomb.?** 


So in 1954, Oppenheimer still foresees nuclear weapons as mov- 
ing us towards a world without war. The problem of course is how we 


International Control of Atomic Energy 107 


get there. Clearly, nuclear weapons with their frightening technologi- 
cal momentum must be brought into the moral realm but there is an 
intrinsic tension given the current geopolitical configuration of nation 
states. His later hope and vision offers means which are not totally 
insignificant for moving us forward — bring philosophy and its moral 
discourse back into the public sector and use international specialized 
communities to break the “grip” of the nation state. 

Let us return to use of the atomic bomb in 1945. Oppenheimer’s 
“primary argument” was not unique to him. In December 1945, 
James Conant, president of Harvard University and member of the 
Interim Committee, presented this argument in a letter as part of his 
reply to Reverend Bradford Young of Manchester, New Hampshire. 
Young had attended a presentation by Conant on the atomic bomb- 
ings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. With pictures showing the destruc- 
tion of these two cities, Young was shocked and sent Conant a letter 
saying that he “felt that all of us there were war criminals.” Near the 
end of his letter, Young said “If you have a conscience about that 
crime, you concealed it wonderfully well.”*° 

In response to what Conant took as “a very emotional letter” that 
denounced him for his part in the atomic bomb program, Conant 
ended his letter to Young saying, 


I was in favor of using the atomic bomb as it was used ... for two 
reasons: first, because it was a valuable supplement to the strategic 
bombing then in progress and which I hoped would end the war 
without an invasion; and second, because I felt certain that unless this 
bomb was demonstrated in combat there was very little chance of 
arousing public opinion to a point where they would take sufficiently 
drastic action to control it in the future. Nothing has happened since 
August 6 to change my views.??” 


Young wrote back to Conant a few days later thanking him for his 
patient letter to his own “somewhat excited letter.” He ended his 
short letter to Conant saying, 


The decision to destroy two cities as the best way to arouse public 
opinion to control the A-bomb in the future must be based on so 
many uncertainties that only God could make it. What bothered me 


108 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


was to see you preparing and participating in such a Godlike decision 
with apparently no sense of presumption, no fear and trembling, no 
feeling of tragic involvement in a horrible deed.?* 


Much the same might be said of other government officials and 
atomic scientists including Oppenheimer.” 

Given this “primary argument” and the resulting “Godlike deci- 
sion,” the moral significance of the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative is 
painfully transparent. If the initiative succeeded, the argument and 
the resulting “Godlike decision” might be vindicated. If the initiative 
failed, the argument and the resulting “Godlike decision” are in large 
measure condemned. What is one to make of Oppenheimer and 
Conant invoking this “primary argument?” A host of responses are 
summoned — from high stakes morality in a minefield of ethical 
dilemmas, to moral blindness induced by technological enthusiasm, 
and to moral rationalization of an inevitable evil in which one has 
played a central role. 

Though often portrayed as suffering from profound guilt about 
his involvement with the atomic bomb, Oppenheimer never publicly 
professed regret, in fact, just the opposite. In August 1965, the twen- 
tieth anniversary of Hiroshima, in The New York Times Magazine, 
Oppenheimer said “I never regretted, and do not regret now, having 
done my part of the job.”?%° 


™In a 1996 interview by Mary Palevsky, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist Hans 
Bethe, who was director of the Theoretical Division at Los Alamos during WWI, 
presents a version of the “primary argument” given by Oppenheimer and Conant. 
Here Bethe says that even though the use of atomic bombs in WWII saved a lot of 
lives, they can no longer be used for saving lives due to the great destruction that 
would result from nuclear war, for example, between the United States and Russia. 
For Bethe, this realization that the use of nuclear weapons “cannot and must not be 
repeated was very much facilitated by Hiroshima. If we hadn’t had these two atomic 
bombings, people would not have realized what a terrible thing this is.” Bethe 
continues, “And so, in a way, the victims of Hiroshima died so that other people 
could live. It is unhappy, but that is the way it is. And there was no way of preventing 
the atomic bomb from being invented, both by the United States and by Russia.” 
(Quoted in Mary Palevsky, Atomic Fragments (ref. 227), pp. 70-71). 


International Control of Atomic Energy 109 


However, moral ramifications of this “primary argument” in con- 
junction with the failure of the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative are 
reflected in Oppenheimer’s works and his later hope and vision. 
Remember that in his 1957 talk “In the Keeping of Unreason” at the 
Basel seminar, Oppenheimer dismissed Bertrand Russell for not 
engaging the “deep ethical dilemmas” and lamented, with references 
to 1945 (decision to use atomic bomb and early attempts at interna- 
tional control) and 1949 (hydrogen bomb controversy), that “there 
have been crucial moments in which the existence of a public philo- 
sophical discourse ... could have made a great difference in the moral 
climate and the human scope of our times.” His 1947 lecture “Physics 
in the Contemporary World,” delivered at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, is perhaps best known for the remark that with respect 
to the atomic bomb “the physicists have known sin.” In August 1965, 
in a CBS television interview, Oppenheimer elaborated upon this 
remark and pointed to the shadow cast by the “primary argument.” 


Long ago I said once that in a crude sense which no vulgarity and 
no humor could quite erase, the physicist had known sin, and I 
didn’t mean by that the deaths that were caused as a result of our 
work. I meant that we had known the sin of pride. We had turned 
to [affect] ... the course of man’s history. We had the pride of think- 
ing we knew what was good for man, and I do think it had left a 
mark on many of those who were responsibly engaged.” 


Finally, in 1964 in The New York Review of Books, Oppenheimer 
recalled that when Bohr arrived at Los Alamos in 1943, “his first seri- 
ous question was ‘Is it really big enough?’” Taking the combat use of 
the atomic bomb as a realistic possibility, this question brings to life 
the haunting possibility of a “Godlike decision” based solely on utili- 
tarian, historic argumentation. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 6 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 


Oppenheimer and Complementarity 


In 1955 in honor of Niels Bohr at the celebration of his 70th birthday, 
Oppenheimer wrote a paragraph speaking of Bohr’s scientific discov- 
eries, his “philosophical courage,” and his “heroic part in furthering 
international cooperation in science, and in defining and upholding 
the ideal of an open world.”**! Bohr was the most formative influence 
on Oppenheimer’s thought. For example, Oppenheimer’s persistent 
recommendation for the United States to approach the Allies, espe- 
cially Russia, before the atomic attacks was in all likelihood due to Bohr. 
During 1944, Bohr had met separately with Roosevelt and Churchill 
concerning the atomic bomb and the postwar world, and the possibility 
of a terrifying arms race. In these meetings, Bohr advised approaching 
the Russians.?*? 

Bohr’s effect on Oppenheimer involved more than political and 
intellectual influences. For example, David Hawkins, who was friend 
and an administrative assistant to Oppenheimer during the war, 
observed Bohr and Oppenheimer together on several occasions at Los 
Alamos. Hawkins had received his PhD in philosophy at Berkeley in 
1940 and knew Oppenheimer before the war. In 1947, Hawkins pub- 
lished Manhattan District History — Project Y, The Los Alamos 
Project, the official technical history of the project. According to 
Hawkins, “Oppenheimer not only admired Bohr, but revered him as 
well, and Bohr could have been the only person whom Oppenheimer 
felt so strongly.””** Such strong affections for Bohr were not unique 


111 


112 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


to Oppenheimer. Consider Abraham Pais, physicist and friend of Bohr. 
In his biography of Bohr, Pais forthrightly says, “I loved Bohr.”?** 

In 1955, when Oppenheimer wrote of Bohr’s “philosophical 
courage,” he was surely in part referring to Bohr’s formulation 
and commitment to the notion of “complementarity.” As with Bohr, 
complementarity plays a significant role in Oppenheimer’s thought 
and overall vision. 

The early part of the 20th Century was the birth of two great 
revolutions in modern physics — relativity and quantum mechanics. 
Relativity was, in large part, the creation of Einstein; quantum 
mechanics was the creation of a scientific community. From 1900 to 
1930, quantum mechanics was developed with fundamental contri- 
butions from such physicists as Planck, Einstein, Heisenberg, and 
Schrédinger. But Bohr, who also made fundamental contributions 
to quantum mechanics, was its guiding and interpretative parent. 
Quantum mechanics presented physicists with problems of empirical 
and ontological meaning along with a rejection of Newtonian deter- 
minism. In 1927, Bohr set forth his notion of complementarity as a 
response to this crisis. For many, including Oppenheimer, Bohr’s 
use of complementarity provided the means for successfully inter- 
preting quantum mechanics. Consider the following formulation of 
complementarity set forth in 1950 by Oppenheimer in Scientific 
American. 


The discoveries in physics ... revealed the inapplicability of causal, 
Newtonian physics to problems of individual atomic systems; they 
uncovered the universal duality between corpuscular and undula- 
tory descriptions of atomic systems. Codified in the powerful 
formalism of the quantum mechanics, they were in the first 
instance given an acceptable epistemological formulation in Bohr’s 
principle of complementarity. The basic finding was that in the 
atomic world it is not possible to describe the atomic system under 
investigation, in abstraction from the apparatus used for the investi- 
gation, by a single, unique, objective model. Rather a variety of 
models, each corresponding to a possible experimental arrangement 
and all required for a complete description of possible physical expe- 
rience, stand in a complementary relation to one another, in that the 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 113 


actual realization of any one model excludes the realization of 
others, yet each is a necessary part of the complete description of 
experience in the atomic world.” 


Furthermore, Oppenheimer like Bohr took complementarity as a 
significant epistemological discovery in physics that reaches well 
beyond quantum mechanics and even physics itself. Throughout 
Oppenheimer’s works, complementarity with its potential for cultural 
enrichment is a dominant theme. In fact, many of his works can be 
taken as demonstrating his commitment to a public understanding of 
complementarity. In the same 1950 article, Oppenheimer said, 


It is of course not yet fully clear how characteristically or how 
frequently we shall meet instances of quite close analogy to the com- 
plementarity of atomic physics in other fields, above all in the study 
of biological, psychological and cultural problems. Yet it is clear, as 
has repeatedly been stressed by Bohr himself, that the discovery of 
complementarity has provided us with a far wider and more sophis- 
ticated framework for the synthesis of varieties of scientific experi- 
ence. It has refined and extended the pluralism natural to science, 
and added new elements of subtlety to the idea of dialectic. Indeed, 
it seems to offer a far richer and more adequate general point of view 
for the comprehension of human experience than the misleadingly 
rigid and unitary philosophies that flowed so naturally from the 


experiences of Newtonian mechanics.” 


In many of Oppenheimer’s single lectures and talks from 1945 
to 1966, complementarity is at least mentioned if not discussed. In 
most of his lecture series, both published and unpublished, comple- 
mentarity plays a dominant if not a defining role — for example, the 
Messenger (1946), Reith (1953), James (1957), Trust (1960), 
Whidden (1962), and Pegram (1963) Lectures. In these lecture 
series, Oppenheimer attempted to show how complementarity of 
atomic physics provides insights and understanding into such dichot- 
omies as free will versus determinism, acting versus introspection, 
causal versus functional explanation, love versus justice, individual 
versus community, and cultural versus intercultural understanding. 


114 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Some additional comments on complementarity might be helpful 
at this point. Complementarity consists of two features — mutual 
exclusion and joint completion.”*” For atomic systems, it is held that 
both space-time descriptions and momentum-energy descriptions are 
necessary for handling all experimental situations, but only one can 
be applied or assigned in any one experimental situation. The wave- 
particle duality of atomic systems, say electrons, is also taken as a case 
of complementarity. Most important, it is held that the two descrip- 
tions cannot be combined in a fundamental, unifying description. 
An analogy may be of assistance here. Imagine a person with two 
distinct personalities, but no underlying personality of which the 
two are manifestations. Since only one personality can be exhibited 
at a time, this would be a case of complementarity since to fully 
account for the person’s behavior, one must use two complementary 
descriptions (personalities). 

Other cases of complementarity may be found in perception and 
cognition. “To take one of Bohr’s examples, the emotional experience 
of a piece of music excludes conscious analysis of it, whereas analysis 
of the music excludes emotional experience. Yet, both approaches are 
necessary for our understanding of what music is.”?*8 

Complementarity plays an essential role in Oppenheimer’s plural- 
ism, and hence his overall hope and vision. Remember that he took a 
nonhierarchical, pluralistic view of science — for example, there is no 
fundamental or foundational science. Interestingly, Oppenheimer 
appears to allow for a global pluralism with respect to science as 
whole. In his 1960 lecture “Science and Culture” delivered in Tokyo, 
Oppenheimer raised the question: “Would another civilization based 
on life on another planet very similar to ours in its ability to sustain 
life have the same physics [as we have ]?” Oppenheimer answered — 
“One has no idea whether they would have the same physics or not. 
One only knows that they would not find insoluble contradictions; 
they might be talking about quite different questions.”?* 

Oppenheimer’s response here as well as his pluralism is based in 
large part on a theme that begins to appear in his works in 1957, 
namely, that the knower is active and with all knowledge there is loss. 
Consider the following from Oppenheimer’s 1960 Tokyo lecture. 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 115 


In every investigation, in every extension of knowledge, we are 
involved in an action; in every action we are involved in a choice; 
and in every choice we are involved in a kind of loss, the loss of that 
we did not choose to do. We find this in the simplest situations. 
We find this in perception .... in speech .... Meaning is always 
attained at the cost of leaving things out. One finds it, of course, as 
a recurring theme of literature, in action. One finds it in the idea of 
complementarity, in its sharpest form, where it is formally recog- 
nized that the attempt to make one sort of observation on an atomic 
system forecloses others. ... 

In practical terms, this means, of course, that our knowledge is 
finite and never all-encompassing. There is always much that we 
miss. ... 

I say this not at all in a mystical way, but factually, and with 
modesty.?°° 


So for Oppenheimer, the cognitive world is richer than can be con- 
ceived by any particular person, discipline, or even culture. No single 
approach, not even science, can be completely exhaustive. 

The general notion — the knower as active and with all knowl- 
edge there is loss — is a natural extension of complementarity of 
atomic physics since the scientist is active in choosing the experimen- 
tal situation and there is loss due to mutual exclusion. Moreover, such 
ideas also reflect Oppenheimer’s interactions with psychologists. 
A case in point is Jerome Bruner, who was at the Institute for 
Advanced Study from 1951 to 1952. Brunner received his PhD in 
psychology from Harvard in 1941. For decades, he played a major 
role in the development of cognitive psychology, and co-founded the 
Center for Cognitive Studies at Harvard in 1961. His 1956 book 
with George Austin and Jacqueline Goodnow, A Study of Thinking, is 
considered a founding study in cognitive psychology. 

In 1958, Oppenheimer published a ten-page review of A Study 
of Thinking.*?' But it is more than a review. It is clear that 
Oppenheimer is taking this study as supporting his views on science; 
for example, objectivity as unambiguous communication, the 
knower as active and with all knowledge there is loss, and the exist- 
ence of analogies of complementarity in psychological phenomena. 


116 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In his 1983 intellectual autobiography, Bruner remarks that 
Oppenheimer’s review was “the most thoughtful in the lot,” and says 
that Oppenheimer caught the theme that he “cared most about” 
when Oppenheimer wrote that it will now be “natural for psycholo- 
gists to turn their attention to man as a rational being, and not only 
to the problems of his appetites, his folly, and his will.” Bruner also 
notes that he was a member ofa small psychology committee that met 
with Oppenheimer “a few times a year at his office in Princeton to 
‘keep him in the picture’ about developments in psychology with the 
possibility that the Institute [for Advanced Study] might make some 
appointments.”?*? 

While complementarity is found throughout Oppenheimer’s 
works, there is discussion in some of his later works of why the 
topic has been so difficult to communicate to the public and of 
Oppenheimer’s resulting frustrations. For example, the responses to 
his 1953 BBC Reith Lectures, both as delivered and published, were 
mixed and must have been disappointing for Oppenheimer. As men- 
tioned in Chapter 3, one book reviewer said they were “written with 
consummate clarity of thought, and with a beauty of expression that 
is very nearly poetic.” However, other reviewers were not so kind. 
One wrote that the reception of his lectures “was generally one of 
bewilderment and disappointment”; another said “many of the exam- 
ples [of complementarity] he gives are trivial or obscure, and none is 
developed at any great length.” In 1963 at a small informal confer- 
ence at Mt. Kisco in New York (sponsored in part by the Congress for 
Cultural Freedom and chaired by Oppenheimer), Oppenheimer even 
lamented “I spent the Reith Lectures trying to explain it [comple- 
mentarity], but for my pains was told that I was impossibly obscure 
about an obvious subject; but it is not obvious; most people do not 
know what it is all about.”?°* 

So, according to Oppenheimer, why the difficulty in communi- 
cating complementarity to the public? Also, why do certain scientific 
discoveries and not others have significant effects on the beliefs of a 
culture? Beyond being intelligible, he mentioned that the discovery 
must be “relevant to some movement of the human spirit character- 
istic of the day.” More important, the discovery should correct 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 117 
“some common view which was, in fact, demonstrably in error.”?>4 
For instance, the errors corrected by the Scientific Revolution 
(e.g., the geocentric view of the universe) and Darwinian evolution 
(e.g., the creation of man) were errors common to the culture, but 
the errors corrected by quantum mechanics and complementarity 
were physicists’ errors and hence did not resonate with the culture 
at large. 

Oppenheimer’s account here is reasonable but not the whole story. 
He is certainly correct that the development of quantum mechanics 
with its indeterminism and complementarity corrected physicists’ 
errors and not errors in the common culture. Also, in his lecture 
series, he was aware that a large, perhaps inordinate, amount of time 
was being spent discussing atomic physics as a prerequisite to his dis- 
cussion of complementarity. Further, complementarity in atomic phys- 
ics can be a topic filled with confusions even for physicists, so it is not 
surprising that he had difficulties. 

Perhaps more troubling, Oppenheimer was not clear on what he 
took the philosophical significance of complementarity in atomic 
physics to be. His views certainly developed over time, and a reason- 
able interpretation can be presented based on things he said in vari- 
ous works and his overall view of science and culture. Remember 
Oppenheimer took a pluralistic view of knowledge and culture, and 
held that action and knowledge are always partial. These views could 
be taken as exemplified by various dichotomies like free will versus 
determinism and love versus justice which appear to exhibit mutual 
exclusion and joint completion. However, such philosophical views 
are controversial and by no means obvious. This partiality and plural- 
ism could simply be a reflection of an inadequate understanding of 
human experience and the world, or be based simply on confusion 
resulting from a naive conceptualization of the world. Further, this 
partiality and pluralism might vanish once an adequate, unitary under- 
standing is achieved. In other words, the partiality and pluralism sup- 
posedly found in experience is not ontologically and epistemologically 
grounded. 

Given the profound instrumental success of quantum mechanics, 
the significance of complementarity in atomic physics now becomes 


118 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


apparent. For Oppenheimer, complementarity is integral to the 
interpretation of quantum theory, a theory that is experimentally 
robust, not conceptually confused, and will probably not be reduced 
or replaced by a unitary theory that would eliminate the essence of 
complementary, namely, mutual exclusion and joint completion. 
Given this, Oppenheimer has an “ideal type” for complementarity 
embedded within a scientific framework, that is, he has “the rather 
sharply defined, nonambiguous, straightforward complementarity ... 
found in the heart of the atom.”*°> Since there are analogous cases 
in human experience of complementarity (i.e., mutual exclusion and 
joint completion), one has reason to believe that these cases are not 
based on conceptual confusion or an inadequate understanding of the 
world, and are reflections of reality. In a 1959 talk at Dartmouth 
College, Oppenheimer gave an argument in support of this conclusion. 
He said, 


Yet one has ... a relevant parable here, because if it is true that in so 
simple a thing as physics knowledge is inherently incomplete, that 
different situations exclude each other, and yet that a rounded 
description of nature, even of physics, would be sacrificed if one kept 
only one out of the multiplicity, then it seems reasonable to think 
that very similar things will be a general feature of a human experi- 
ence, in which the very first elements of perception and cognition 
involve choice and involve loss.?*° 

Also, one can now see why some of Oppenheimer’s examples of 
complementarity were taken as “trivial.” This is because they are 
already found in ordinary life and in many ways understood. What can 
be “obscure” are the cases found in atomic physics given the formi- 
dable background required to understand them. As Oppenheimer 
said, “life is full of that [complementary situations], of course. We all 
know it in the relations between our acts and our introspection, our 
thinking about our acts. Hamlet has said it better than Planck’s con- 
stant [found in atomic physics].”?°” In addition, it was probably not 
clear to many in his audiences that the philosophical significance of 
complementarity in atomic physics was to provide an ontological and 
epistemology grounding based on analogy for complementarity in 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 119 


other domains of human experience, and hence a pluralistic vision of 
human experience and society.” 

Quantum mechanics with its indeterminism and complementarity 
plays an integral part of Oppenheimer’s pluralistic vision. First, it elimi- 
nates the “Laplacian nightmare” — “of knowing everything about the 
world right now ... and therefore knowing all about its future”?** — 
and provides “a much better analogue to the human predicament than 
could possibly have been built on Newtonian physics.”?*? Further, as 
Oppenheimer said, it “brings an open and human element into the 
nature of science, very largely absent from the picture of the great 
machine ... that was the Newtonian legacy ... until so very recently. It 
seems to me to make for a more plural and more tolerant notion of the 
role of science in human life.”?° In other words and most important, 
Oppenheimer used complementarity as a means to humanize science. 

Another consequence of this is to remove the “intimidating effect” 
of science on other parts of human life that are best addressed by the- 
matic discourse with its rational aspects, though not verifiable by sci- 
entific approaches. Complementarity offered Oppenheimer a way of 
reconciling and bringing order to opposing points of view without 
blending or compromising them. In the end, for Oppenheimer, the 
ideal is a pluralistic community connected by dialogue and conversa- 
tion (i.e., “man knowing man”) reinforced by an understanding of the 
nature of science and its significance for cultural coherence and inter- 
national progress. Oppenheimer’s vision of science is humanistic and 
progressive, and is a rejoinder to attitudes like MacLeish’s suspicion 
of science. 


"Literature on Bohr and complementarity is vast. Some writers, including 
Oppenheimer, take complementarity as a profound insight or discovery. Others take 
it as confused or at best trivial. In positive terms, complementarity could be taken as 
a much needed liberation of concepts and a way of reconciling opposing viewpoints. 
Negatively, it could be taken as simply a form of conceptual complacency or defeat- 
ism. For many of Bohr’s works on complementarity with background and commen- 
tary, see David Favrholdt (editor), Complementarity Beyond Physics (1928-1962) 
Vol. 10 in Niels Bohr Collected Works (Amsterdam: Elsevier, Holland, 1999). Also, 
see Henry J. Folse, The Philosophy of Niels Bohr: The Framework of Complementarity 
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985). 


120 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Bohr, Einstein, and Oppenheimer 


In concluding this chapter, more needs to be said about Bohr and 
Oppenheimer. First, they were personally close and had significant 
intellectual exchanges over several years concerning international 
issues and philosophical issues such as the epistemological significance 
of complementarity. Oppenheimer’s intellectual debts to Bohr include 
views on atomic energy and the need for an Open World as well as 
complementarity and its cultural significance. More particularly, 
Oppenheimer like Bohr puts strong emphasis on language with objec- 
tivity being found in unambiguous communication, and not ontol- 
ogy. In part, this must be coming from Oppenheimer’s interactions 
with Bohr.° 

Bohr began setting forth his notion of complementarity in 1927 
in response to a crisis in the physics community caused by quantum 
mechanics. Oppenheimer began speaking of Bohr and the significance 
of complementarity in 1945 in response to a crisis in the international 
community caused by atomic weapons. Oppenheimer held that the 


°Bohr and Oppenheimer have other things in common. Bohr never wrote a book on 
his views on the nature of science and issues like complementarity. Like Oppenheimer, 
his books are essentially just collections of edited lectures and talks. Also, like 
Oppenheimer, Bohr is critical of academic philosophers. Consider the following from 
an interview with Bohr the day before he died: “I felt ... that philosophers were very 
odd people who really were lost, because they have not the instinct that it is impor- 
tant to learn something and that we must be prepared really to learn something of 
very great importance. ... There are all kinds of people, but I think it would be rea- 
sonable to say that no man who is called a philosopher really understands what one 
means by the complementary description. ... First of all I would say — and that is the 
difficulty — that it is hopeless to have any kind on understanding between scientists 
and philosophers directly.” (Interview of Niels Bohr by Thomas S. Kuhn, Leon 
Rosenfeld, Aage Bohr, and Erik Rudinger on Nov. 17, 1962, Niels Bohr Library & 
Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD USA, www.aip.org/ 
history /ohilist/LINK). However, there are things in Bohr’s views that are not found 
in Oppenheimer’s. For example, Oppenheimer does not address (at least I have not 
found anything in his writings) the necessity of classical concepts for describing 
experience, a central tenet in Bohr’s outlook. Also, Oppenheimer cautions that the 
extension of complementarity may be somewhat more limited than Bohr hoped. 
(Oppenheimer, Pegram Lecture 1 (ref 264), p. 5). 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 121 


quantum revolution with Bohr as its central protagonist and the 
resulting discoveries of indeterminacy, acausality, and complementa- 
rity was “an object lesson in the conservation and the transcendence 
of concepts.”?° Further, the quantum revolution from 1900 to 1930 
occurred in the span of a single generation and hence some people 
(e.g., Bohr, and Oppenheimer in part) could see a whole proto- 
type of the adaptation of human conception to experience.* For 
Oppenheimer, such adaptations almost always occur over longer peri- 
ods of time (e.g., centuries or even a millennium) and hence are more 
difficult to perceive and understand. 

Oppenheimer took Bohr’s views on complementarity and placed 
them within a more historical, cultural, and communitarian view of 
science and its relation to society — but a society confronted with 
international, cultural, and cognitive crises. Most important, 
Oppenheimer’s commitment to complementarity throughout his 
works, especially in the face of such disappointments as his 1953 
Reith Lectures, was not simply sustained by his belief in its impor- 
tance but was also sustained by his interactions with and personal 
loyalty to Bohr. Moreover, Oppenheimer may well have viewed him- 
self as a voice speaking on behalf of Bohr since, in Oppenheimer’s 
own words, Bohr is “a very hard man to hear and not entirely easy to 
follow.”?% 

Not surprising, with the death of Bohr in November 1962, 
Oppenheimer began lecturing on Bohr. For example, Oppenheimer’s 
Pegram Lectures given in August 1963 at Los Alamos consist of three 
lectures entitled “Niels Bohr and His Times.” The three themes of the 
lectures are “all parts of Bohr’s Life — Physics, Philosophy, and 
Politics.””°* Oppenheimer speaks glowingly of Bohr as “a very resolute 
and clear and indefatigable thinker and a scientist with lovely imagina- 
tion,” and having had “one of the richest and most beautiful lives, in his 
family, with his children, with his wife that anyone could wish for.”?° 

Being aware of Bohr’s influence greatly assists in interpreting many 
of Oppenheimer’s works, in particular, a talk he gave on Einstein. In 
contrast to his lectures on Bohr, Oppenheimer gave a brief, but con- 
troversial lecture on Einstein in December 1965. This talk was given in 
Paris ata UNESCO conference commemorating the tenth anniversary 


122 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


of Einstein’s death and the fiftieth of his discovery of general relativity. 
Such notables as Julian Huxley and Werner Heisenberg also spoke. 
Oppenheimer’s lecture was published in March 1966 in The New York 
Review of Books and entitled “On Albert Einstein.” 

Before an audience of about one thousand, Oppenheimer spoke 
of Einstein and began by saying “it might be useful ... to start to 
dispel the clouds of myth and to see the great mountain peak that 
these clouds hide.” Of course, he spoke in praise of Einstein but he 
also spoke in a manner that was critical. Consider the following four 
excerpts from his lecture.” 


In the last years of Einstein’s life, the last twenty-five, his tradition in 
a certain sense failed him. They were the years he spent at Princeton 
and this, though a source of sorrow, should not be concealed. 


And there was an element of the lone worker in him, in sharp contrast 
to the teams we see today, and in sharp contrast to the highly 
cooperative way in which some other parts of science have developed. 


He had a deep distrust of power; he did not have that convenient 
and natural converse with statesmen and men of power that was 
quite appropriate to Rutherford and to Bohr, perhaps the two 
physicists of this century who most nearly rivaled him in eminence. 


He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without 
worldliness. I think that in England people would have said that he 
did not have much “background,” and in America that he lacked 
“education.” 


The New York Times on December 14, 1965, characterized 
Oppenheimer’s talk as “warm but not uncritical.” Several people were 
very disturbed by the talk.’ For instance, Otto Nathan (friend of 


PFor others besides Otto Nathan who were disturbed by Oppenheimer’s talk, see 
Leopold Infeld, Why I Left Canada — Reflections on Science and Culture (Montreal: 
McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1978), pp. 173-180. Also, Abraham Pais sent 
Oppenheimer a letter (December 20, 1965) saying that he saw an account of 
Oppenheimer’s talk in The New York Times and it made him “highly uncomfortable.” 
(Box 285, JRO Papers (ref. 55)). 


Complementarity in Atomic Physics 123 


Einstein and lawyer in charge of Einstein’s estate) attended the lecture 
and wrote Oppenheimer saying that he “was seriously disturbed by 
some of the remarks you made about Albert Einstein.”*°” Oppenheimer 
even wrote that “a number of colleagues have suggested that I had 
been out of my mind.”?°8 

What should be made of this lecture? In part, Oppenheimer must 
have seen himself as trying to give balance to the historical record by 
challenging the “Einstein myth” and helping to put Bohr in proper 
historical perspective. But there could be more here than that. 
Remember, Oppenheimer took a communitarian view of science with 
its offerings of spiritual fruits (e.g., complementarity) to the culture 
at large. Not only did Einstein oppose the complementarity interpre- 
tation of quantum physics, it is Bohr who exemplifies “community” 
not Einstein. In fact, if anything, Einstein exemplifies the individual- 
istic nature of the scientific endeavor. As Pais says, “Einstein was not 
a lonely figure. ... Nevertheless it was his deepest need to think 
separately, to be by himself. Bohr, on the other hand, craved togeth- 
erness, in life and in thought. Bohr created a major school; Einstein 
did not.”?° 

In his Einstein lecture, Oppenheimer was not out of his mind. He 
was in character demonstrating his personal loyalty and historical con- 
nection to Niels Bohr, and his commitment to complementarity and 
a communitarian view of science. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 7 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical 
Exploration I 


At this point, a natural move is to step back and consider Oppenheimer 
and his thought — and thus his hope and vision of 1957-59 — ina 
broad, and perhaps more revealing, philosophical light. In this chapter, 
Oppenheimer’s thought is first placed within the general framework 
which philosophers and other social theorists have called modernity 
and its various crises. Then, his thought and philosophical outlook are 
considered from the perspective of American pragmatism in conjunc- 
tion with particular philosophical issues and themes developed by the 
American philosopher Richard Rorty. The philosophical exploration 
continues in the next chapter where the focus shifts more from 
Oppenheimer’s thought to Oppenheimer himself. 


Oppenheimer and Modernity 


Though used in various and sometimes confusing ways, the term 
“modernity” is concerned with the formation and emergence of modern 
society and is often taken to denote the generalized societal state that 
has emerged during the last four or five hundred years. Whether moder- 
nity ended in the 20th Century and post-modernity has arrived is a 
question of debate among historians, sociologists, and philosophers.* 


‘The literature on modernity is extensive. Works that I have found particularly helpful 
and have used in setting forth this discussion of modernity include: Stuart Hall, 


125 


126 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


The origins of modernity are found in Europe and North America, 
and its rise has been associated with various revolutions such as the 
Protestant Reformation, the Scientific Revolution, and political revolu- 
tions like the American Revolution of 1776 and the French Revolution 
of 1789. Modernity is typically characterized by the rise of urbanization, 
industrialization, mass democracy, capitalism, and secularism as well as 
a complex of institutional forms and structures such as the nation state, 
market economy, and rationalized bureaucracies along with increased 
specialization. Though its origins are in the West, modernity spread to 
almost the entire world by the middle of the 20th Century. 

Modernity is also characterized by a cluster of philosophical 
assumptions and attitudes. The belief in material and social progress 
through reason is essential to modernity. In addition, authority is to 
be grounded in reason and not in tradition or religion. As expected, 
science as established by such figures as Galileo and Newton plays a 
central role in modernity offering both mastery and understanding of 
the natural world, and possibly the social world as well. Most impor- 
tant, the autonomous individual is the philosophical focal point of 
modernity. As illustrated by Descartes’ meditations and his methodi- 
cal doubt, the individual is the epistemic anchor for belief. In the 
Hobbesian and Lockean social contracts, the individual is the starting 
point for constructing and justifying the state. Moreover, meaning 
and morality moved away from sources like Plato’s cosmic order and 
the Christian God, and were placed in the human realm, and for many 
reside in the realm of the autonomous individual. Modernity makes 
strong distinctions between reason and emotion, fact and value, and 
private and public. In sum, modernity emphasizes individual autonomy 
and mastery through reason. 


David Held, Don Hubert, and Kenneth Thompson (editors), Modernity: An 
Introduction to Modern Societies (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1996); Charles Taylor, 
The Ethics of Authenticity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992); 
Stephen Toulmin, Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (ref. 273); Anthony 
Giddens and Christopher Pierson, Conversations with Anthony Giddens: Making Sense 
of Modernity (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998); and Peter Wagner, 
A Sociology of Modernity: Liberty and Discipline (London: Routledge, 1994). 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration I 127 


Given the significant gains and progress of modern society, moder- 
nity has many defenders. But modernity has its dark sides as well. 
Large-scale human exploitation and victimization have resulted from 
aggressive industrialization and colonization. There have been losses 
which critics of modernity have found not only unacceptable but dan- 
gerous, oppressive, and inhuman. Numerous ills like consumerism 
and nationalism are associated with modernity as well as various 
crises — economic crises, the governability crisis of mass democracy, 
the ecological crisis, and the crisis of industrial warfare which now 
threatens nuclear warfare and global destruction. 

In addition, individuals are engulfed by a crisis of meaning and val- 
ues that has several dimensions. Life is fragmented into separate spheres 
yet disciplined by the apparatus of the nation state and other institu- 
tions. Moreover, modernity is “disenchanted.” According to historian 
Michael Saler, “This view, in its broadest terms, maintains that won- 
ders and marvels have been demystified by science, spirituality has been 
supplanted by secularism, spontaneity has been replaced by bureaucra- 
tization, and the imagination has been subordinated to instrumental 
reason.”*”° Most alarming, people are alienated and the resources of 
the autonomous individual are not sufficient to establish meaning and 
value. Whereas defenders of modernity hold it as liberating and 
empowering, critics hold it as alienating and disciplining. 

Given this overview of modernity, consider Oppenheimer and his 
thought. Interestingly, many historians hold that “the period after 
1945” is “the peak of modernity’s development” which is just when 
Oppenheimer was developing and setting forth his hope and vision.?”' 
Oppenheimer was obviously addressing some of the crises of moder- 
nity, and in particular, the crisis of nuclear weapons and the threat of 
global destruction. In addition, he spoke to other crises and ills of 
modernity by developing a humanistic view of science, emphasizing 
community over modernity’s autonomous individual, and calling for 
breaking the “grip” of the nation state. 

As shown earlier, Oppenheimer’s humanistic view of science has 
many dimensions. In contrast to Rabi, he rejected scientism which has 
been associated with modernity by taking a pluralist, non-hierarchical 
view of science. Science is like a “network” with no simple unifying 


128 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


and reductive principles, and he cautioned against “all assertions of 
totality, of finality, or absoluteness.” Oppenheimer softened moder- 
nity’s fact-value distinction by emphasizing the need and legitimacy 
of thematic discourse which has been intimidated by an aggressive 
scientism. His exposition of quantum mechanics with its indetermin- 
ism and complementarity stands in stark contrast to the “Laplacian 
nightmare” — the world as a deterministic machine of particles 
whose future is fixed. Moreover, Oppenheimer presented the practice 
of science as embedded in community with meaning and value. 

In contrast to MacLeish, Oppenheimer rejected the centrality of 
the autonomous individual in modernity’s thought. Such a position 
simply reinforces the fragmentation and alienation in modern society, 
and could mislead us into taking a philosophical view based on social 
and moral atomism. While maintaining the importance of the indi- 
vidual, Oppenheimer advocated a pluralistic communitarianism with 
an emphasis on specialized communities. Internationally, many of 
these communities provide means for undermining state sovereignty 
from below. Furthermore, such communities offer personal and social 
meaning along with second-order knowledge or understanding nec- 
essary for cultural coherence. Moreover, knowledge (really first-order 
knowledge) is more a property of specialized communities, not indi- 
viduals, which results in a kind of “cognitive syndicalism.” 

In the end, Oppenheimer advocated a dual duty — faithfulness 
through specialization and cultural coherence through openness and 
dialogue. For him, an understanding of the modern condition requires 
us to take the individual as “both an end and an instrument.” In other 
words, one must avoid philosophical theories that attempt to reduce 
the community to the individual (i.e., social atomism) or reduce the 
individual to the community (i.e., strong communitarianism). For 
Oppenheimer, “the antinomy between the individual and the commu- 
nity” is analogous to complementarity in atomic physics. 

Though cognizant of the ambiguous nature of modernity and 
critical of many of its assumptions and ramifications, Oppenheimer 
was unmistakably modern in maintaining the centrality of science for 
modern society. Scientific communities are his ideal type of special- 
ized communities, having potentials for internationalism that could 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical ExplorationI 129 


assist in taming the nation state. Also, Oppenheimer took science as 
an epistemic democratic meritocracy which serves as a worthy pro- 
totype for social organization, providing both cultural and personal 
enrichment. 

Given Thomas Kuhn’s 1962 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
and the “Science Wars” of the 1990s which tended to pit natural sci- 
entists against sociologists of science, it is perhaps too easy today to 
dismiss Oppenheimer and his “enchanted” view ofscience. Interestingly, 
in the last few years, the sociologist of science Harry Collins, who is 
a veteran of the “Science Wars,”" has advocated the need for what he 


"The Science Wars began in the early 1990s as an academic debate and reached the 
public arena with the Sokal Hoax in 1996. Physicist Alan Sokal submitted a fabricated 
article entitled ““Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneutics 
of Quantum Gravity” to the cultural studies journal Social Text. The article was pub- 
lished; and shortly thereafter, Sokal revealed that the article was a hoax, saying that it 
experimentally demonstrated the lack of intellectual standards, obscurantism, and 
subjectivist thinking of many “progressive” or “‘leftist’? academic humanists and 
social scientists. Further, at least for Sokal, the hoax exposed the editors’ acceptance 
that “‘the search for truth in science must be subordinated to a political agenda.” For 
many, the Sokal Hoax was the high (low) point of the Science Wars. 

The Science Wars are typically portrayed as a clash between two cultures — the 
natural scientists versus the postmodern humanists and social scientists in Science and 
Technology Studies. This conflict is analogous to the bitter clash between C. P. 
Snow’s “Two Cultures”’ (natural scientists vs. literary intellectuals) and is sometimes 
taken as an outgrowth of Thomas Kuhn’s 1962 book, The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions. Polarizing dichotomies center around such philosophical issues as objec- 
tivity /subjectivity, realism /constructionism, universalism/multiculturalism and such 
normative issues as proscience /antiscience, power and control/unmasking and lib- 
eration, and Enlightenment faith/Postmodern awareness. Perhaps the most promi- 
nent philosophical differences separating these sociologists and natural scientists 
involve epistemological and metaphysical issues concerning the “social construction 
of scientific knowledge.” The sociologists emphasize the social whereas scientists 
appeal to the reality and objectivity of scientific facts and entities over social con- 
structs. Another issue dividing these warring camps is the progressive nature of sci- 
ence especially in an epistemic sense. Not surprisingly, the sociologists tend to be 
skeptical of what, if anything, is going on here. Whereas the natural scientists tend to 
take it as given that science is epistemologically progressive. For an excellent and 
stimulating conversation about science as well as the Science Wars and an attempt 
at a Scientific Peace Process, see Jay A. Labinger (chemist) and Harry Collins 


130 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


calls the “Third Wave of Science Studies” — a call with definite 
resemblances to Oppenheimer’s views on science.?”* 

According to Collins, the first wave “drawing on the success of 
physicists during the Second World War” took an “enchanted view” 
of science. It emphasized science as “the ultimate form of knowl- 
edge” and the individual scientist as epistemologically privileged, and 
claimed a synergy between political democracy and the normative 
structure of the scientific community. Wave two, “a child of the 
broader cultural revolution of the 1960s,” focused more on the social 
construction of scientific knowledge and took a more skeptical view 
of science and its public persona. For Collins, “The recent dominance 
of this second wave has unfortunately led some from science studies 
and the broader humanities movement known as post-modernism to 
conclude that science is just a form of faith or politics. ... [and] have 
become overly cynical about science.” 

The third wave of science studies would “redirect the focus from 
truth to expertise.” For Collins as well as Oppenheimer, focusing on 
expertise and specialization rather than truth portrays the scientist as 
craftsman, not epistemic priest. This protects “science against the 
danger of claiming more than it could deliver” and promotes policy 
deliberations involving scientists and the public. Further, it warns us 
about scientists who move beyond their expertise. Like the second 
wave, Collins takes science “as a form-of-life rather than a logically 
coherent set of procedures.” Most important, science as a form-of- 
life is constituted through “a distinctive set of values” or “formative 
intentions.” This set includes (1) free criticism of ideas, (2) basing 
knowledge claims on evidence, (3) integrity and honesty in gathering 
evidence and reporting results, (4) clarity and unambiguous presenta- 
tion, (5) taking all claims as fallible, (6) separating science from poli- 
tics, and (7) universalism which holds that claims are evaluated 
independent of such things as race and gender. 

What Collins means here by “formative intentions” is not neces- 
sarily the intentions or values in the everyday life of the scientist but 


(sociologist), The One Culture: A Conversation about Science (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2001). 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical ExplorationI 131 


the essential characteristics that constitute the scientific life. For exam- 
ple, these would be values and intentions that could be openly 
expressed and not subject to criticism by scientists and observers of 
science, and would be promoted by the members of scientific com- 
munity. Hence, if one appeals to political conformity instead of 
empirical evidence for a “scientific” claim, one is no longer doing 
science and is subject to criticism. Collins, like Oppenheimer, clearly 
holds that science is a form-of-life instantiated by individuals but 
maintained through community. 

Collins holds that “the third wave is needed to put science back 
in its proper place.” Most significantly, he proposes that we 
“choose, or ‘elect,’ to put the values that underpin scientific think- 
ing back in the center of our world” — in particular, universalism, 
free criticism of ideas, recognition of the value of expertise, and the 
proper separation of science from politics. Collins refers to his posi- 
tion as “elective modernism” to contrast it with “post-modernism.” 
In all likelihood, Oppenheimer would welcome Collins’ Third 
Wave; but he would place more emphasis on the importance of 
expertise or specialization for second-order knowledge which is 
vital for cultural coherence, and would highlight the essential role 
of the specialized communities of science in breaking the “grip” of 
the nation state. 

In his influential 1990 book, Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of 
Modernity, historian and philosopher of science Stephen Toulmin 
takes our task to be “to reform, and even reclaim, our inherited 
modernity, by humanizing it.” Central to this task is to “move beyond 
the absolute nation-state.”?”? Like Oppenheimer’s, Toulmin’s vision 
is not to build something larger and more powerful than the nation- 
state, “let alone a ‘world state’ having absolute, worldwide sover- 
eignty.” His vision “is to fight the inequalities that were entrenched 
during the ascendancy of the nation-state, and to limit the absolute 
sovereignty of even the best-run nation-states.”?”* For Toulmin, sub- 
national and transnational organizations like Amnesty International 
will play vital roles in providing adaptive ways for moving us beyond 
the absolute nation state and closer to a world of justice and a world 
without war. Though such organizations do not have the power of 


132 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


force like the nation state, they have the power of influence and can 
restrict and bind the actions of states. 

Toulmin portrays his vision in a section entitled “From Leviathan 
to Lilliput.” Lilliputian organizations like Amnesty International can- 
not force the Leviathan state to do anything. But like Gulliver, “wak- 
ing from an unthinking sleep,” the Leviathan state will find itself 
“tethered by innumerable tiny bonds” of Lilliputian organizations.” 
Toulmin does not explore the potential of specialized communities 
devoted to the production and use of knowledge as ways of limiting 
the nation state. With Toulmin’s picture in mind, Oppenheimer 
might point out that such specialized communities could be among 
the strongest, and perhaps the most numerous, of the bonds tethering 
the Leviathan state. 

Oppenheimer’s hope and vision arose during “the peak of moder- 
nity’s development.” Though it is not a solution to the crises of 
modernity, his vision is certainly part of any solution especially with 
respect to transcending the nuclear crisis. By humanizing science and 
emphasizing the power of community, he pointed us in the right 
direction and suggested means for moving forward. 


Oppenheimer and Pragmatism — Richard Rorty 


In his book Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius, 
Silvan Schweber makes a case that Oppenheimer was profoundly 
influenced by the views of the American pragmatists, and much of his 
thought can be taken as “a form of neo-pragmatism.” Pragmatism is 
a philosophical movement or tradition that originated and was devel- 
oped in the United States during the last third of the nineteenth 
century and the first part of the twentieth century by three American 
philosophers — Charles Peirce, William James, and John Dewey. It 
became “the most influential philosophy in America in the first quar- 
ter of the twentieth century” and “has been the most distinctive and 
the major contribution of America to the world of philosophy.”?”° 
With its emphasis on the social and the centrality of practice, pragma- 
tism rejected much of the traditional academic philosophy of its time 
(e.g., absolute idealism, neo-Kantianism, British empiricism) and 
maintains that truth resides in instrumental success. 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical ExplorationI 133 


Schweber’s line of reasoning for the influence of pragmatism on 
Oppenheimer has several dimensions. For one, he holds that as an 
undergraduate at Harvard it was “likely that Oppenheimer had 
audited courses that had made him read some of the writings of 
William James, Charles Peirce, and John Dewey.” Further, one of the 
lecturers for the freshman course in the history of philosophy which 
Oppenheimer took was Ralph Barton Perry, who was a student and 
later a colleague of James. Perry edited the papers of James and 
received a Pulitzer Prize in 1936 for his book The Thought 
and Character of William James.?’” 

Second, Schweber maintains that as a Harvard Overseer and espe- 
cially as a member of the Visiting Committee for the department of 
philosophy, Oppenheimer “acquired a critical overview of contempo- 
rary philosophical inquiries and practices” and interacted with such 
philosophers as Morton White and Willard Quine as well as Perry, 
who was also a member of the Visiting Committee.?”* Schweber con- 
tends that these experiences and interactions “led Oppenheimer to 
carefully restudy Peirce, James, and Dewey” with the result that 
“Many of his public lectures in the late 1950s and early 1960s echo 
the views that Peirce, James, and Dewey had expounded.”?” 

Schweber focuses especially on White who is a philosopher and 
historian of ideas. White received his PhD in philosophy from 
Columbia in 1942 with his dissertation The Origins of Dewey's 
Instrumentalism, and was a member of the Harvard philosophy 
department from 1948 to 1970. White had some interactions with 
Dewey but never knew him very well, and characterizes himself as a 
“selective admirer of Dewey.”°° 

Interactions between White and Oppenheimer began as early as 
the fall of 1953 when White provided Oppenheimer some written 
remarks and suggestions for his upcoming Reith Lectures.?*! At that 
time 1953-54, White was a visiting member at the Institute for 
Advanced Study. He would again be a visiting member during 
1962-63 while Oppenheimer was still director, and become a perma- 
nent member and professor at the Institute in 1970. When 
Oppenheimer gave his William James Lectures at Harvard in 1957, 
White was chairperson of the philosophy department. According to 
Schweber, Oppenheimer’s interaction with White, “primarily through 


134 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


the reading of his books and essays on pragmatism,” deepened 
Oppenheimer’s philosophical outlook.?*? White’s book Toward 
Reunion in Philosophy (1956), a good deal of which was written while 
he was at the Institute during 1953-54, as well as his books Social 
Thought in America (1947) and The Age of Analysis (1955) provide 
in-depth, lucid presentations of the American pragmatists. 

Third, Schweber looks closely at Oppenheimer’s William James 
Lectures delivered in 1957, which he takes as “one of the clearest 
expositions of what he [Oppenheimer] had hoped he might accom- 
plish as a public intellectual.”?** In these lectures, Oppenheimer said 
he had read James and quoted him several times as well as mentioned 
Pierce. Though there is no explicit reference to Dewey, Schweber 
holds that “it was the views of Dewey that underlay Oppenheimer’s 
presentation.”*4 

Many of Oppenheimer’s ideas and themes fall within the prag- 
matic tradition — rejection of absolutism and acceptance of anti- 
foundationalism and fallibilism, “emphasis on the performative 
aspect of knowledge”, and openness to the richness of experience 
and the world. In his first lecture, Oppenheimer said that he admired 
“James because he fought against limitation and preconception; 
against the applicability of ideas from which specifics could be 
deduced; against certitude, against doctrine, against system.”?*° 
Furthermore, Oppenheimer took the pragmatic position that science 
is a self-corrective, communal inquiry and serves as a worthy model for 
democratic society. In addition, philosophy is to be broadly conceived, 
related to practice, and cautious of its own specialization. 

The actual influence of pragmatism on Oppenheimer is difficult to 
ascertain in detail and some cautionary remarks are in order. As 
Schweber notes, reactions to Oppenheimer’s James Lectures were 
mixed. According to White, “Students and nonphilosophers on the 
faculty, like I. A. Richards, loved them and applauded wildly, whereas 
the philosophers were on the whole disapproving.”?*° In a letter to the 
philosopher and historian of ideas Isaiah Berlin, White wrote that the 
Oxford legal philosopher H. L. A. Hart, then a visiting professor at 
Harvard, was “outraged” by Oppenheimer’s first lecture, but fortu- 
nately Billy James, the son of William James, “loved” both it as well as 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical ExplorationI 135 


Oppenheimer.”*” Further, like his Messenger Lectures (Cornell, 1946) 
and Trust Lectures (Queen’s University in Canada, 1960), 
Oppenheimer’s James Lectures were never published though 
Oppenheimer in all likelihood had “high hopes” for them.?** In addi- 
tion, though Schweber argues that White and his writings influenced 
Oppenheimer’s thought, White said in a 1999 interview (by the author) 
that he remembered quite distinctly interacting with Oppenheimer but 
never “having a serious philosophical exchange with him.”°? 

As Schweber stresses, Oppenheimer’s thought and faith arose 
from several sources with components ranging from “his Ethical 
Culture upbringing with its emphasis on human welfare and noblesse 
oblige” to Hindu thought and the G7ta‘ with its emphasis on duty as 
well as from Bohrian complementarity and American pragmatism.?”° 
Though the formative influence of Bohr and his notion of comple- 
mentarity on Oppenheimer’s thought is apparent, the formative influ- 
ence of pragmatism is less so. However, even if not overly formative, 
pragmatism was at least sustaining and supportive of his thought. 

To illustrate this, consider Peirce’s influential 1878 paper “How 
to Make Our Ideas Clear” published in Popular Science Monthly. In 
his paper, Peirce sets forth for the first time his pragmatic theory of 
meaning of a concept saying — “Consider what effects, that might 
conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our 
conception to have. Then, our conception of these effects is the 
whole of our conception of the object.”’?! He then illustrates this by 
relating such physical concepts as “hard” and “force” in Newtonian 
mechanics over to sensible or observable effects. What is important 
here is that the meaning of an idea or concept is not what it pictures 
or mirrors in so-called reality but is to be taken as a conjunction of 
practical or observable, and hence testable, conditionals, such as, if x 
is done then y results. Among Peirce’s goals is to eliminate metaphysi- 
cal disputes as well as vagueness and ambiguity. 

The similarity here to Oppenheimer’s taking objectivity as 
unambiguous communication is apparent. In his first James Lecture, 


‘For an in-depth discussion of the influence of Hindu thought, in particular the Gita, 
on Oppenheimer, see James A. Hijiya, “The Gita of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 144 (June 2000), pp. 123-167. 


136 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer even speaks of objectivity as measuring the degree to 
which communication lacks ambiguity, which is “the application of 
the pragmatic method, even the more ruthless applications of logical 
positivism, which do work in eliminating ambiguity and establishing 
this kind of objectivity ....”?°? Further, there are definite similarities 
between Peirce’s pragmatic meaning and Percy Bridgman’s opera- 
tionalism of physical concepts that he set forth in his book The Logic 
of Modern Physics. Oppenheimer published a review of his former 
teacher’s book in 1928 though he did not mention Peirce.??* 

Another illustration is the pragmatist account of experience, for 
instance, sense perception. Experience is taken as an ongoing inter- 
action of the person or organism and the environment with knowl- 
edge arising due to the activity of the organism with its interests and 
selective attention.*** This account rejects the “spectator theory of 
knowledge” with the organism being passive and like a “blank tab- 
let.” Consequently, the classical dualism of Descartes consisting of 
the mind with its ideas and the external world with its objects is 
avoided. 

Moreover, the Cartesian quest for certainty along with its ques- 
tioning of even the existence of the external world simply does not 
arise. In addition, the empiricist’s goal of knowledge resting on a 
“sense datum” foundation is shown to be an illusion. For many prag- 
matists, such attempts are not only misguided but have been debilitat- 
ing for Western philosophy. Connections with Oppenheimer’s views 
of the knower as active and with all knowledge there is loss, which are 
topics in his James Lecture, are obvious. Further, his remarks at the 
1959 Basel seminar that modern professional philosophy has overem- 
phasized “the role of certitude,” which has not only “stunted philoso- 
phy” but has in large part removed it from the public sector, come to 
mind as well. 

There are clearly other ways in which pragmatism is supportive 
and sustaining of Oppenheimer’s thought. Like Oppenheimer, most 
pragmatists have a deep appreciation of science and place strong 
emphasis on pluralism, the communal and social nature of knowl- 
edge, learning as doing, and philosophy having a crucial public role. 
Further, both place importance on the claim that philosophical 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration I 137 


questions and views should “arise out of the perplexities that confront 
us in the course of experience [and inquiry].”?°> For Oppenheimer, 
Bohr’s atomic struggles and his resulting views on complementarity 
would be a case in point.t However, there is a strong, cautionary 
remark here. Pragmatists are suspicious of sharp dualisms (e.g., mind- 
world, fact-value, freedom-determinism) and seek to eliminate or 
overcome them. On the other hand, Oppenheimer, like Bohr with the 
notion of complementarity, takes dualisms as reflective of experience 
and possibly of the world as well. 

In the first part of the 20th Century, pragmatism was the most 
influential philosophy in America, but by the 1940s it “had lost much 
of its momentum and prestige.”°° When Oppenheimer gave his 1957 
James Lectures, analytic philosophy had come to dominate English- 
speaking, academic philosophy. Among its founders were Frege, 
Russell, Moore, and Wittgenstein, and its emphasis was on linguistic 
analysis with a high regard for logic, clarity, and rigor in argumenta- 
tion. Pragmatism had fallen out of favor and was taken as “vague and 
hazy.” Moreover, “the age of grand synoptic philosophizing” had 
drawn to a close and “the age of piecemeal problem-solving and hard- 
edged argument” was underway. However, within the internal devel- 
opments of analytic philosophy itself, certain pragmatic elements 
began to appear especially in the works of such eminent philosophers 
as W. V. O. Quine and Hilary Putnam, to name only a few. By the 
early 1980s, pragmatism was experiencing a revival especially due to 
the high-profile, controversial efforts of the American philosopher 
Richard Rorty, who claimed Dewey as his “philosophical hero.” 

Rorty, like Oppenheimer, was born in New York City. His par- 
ents, James and Winifred, were college-educated and socially and 
politically active intellectuals, though not academics. Though they 
had “gravitated in a Communist orbit early in their lives” and “later 


‘Bohr certainly read some of the works of William James. Henry J. Folse makes a case 
in his book, The Philosophy of Niels Bohr: The Framework of Complementarity 
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985) pp. 49-51, that Bohr might have become 
“acquainted with James’ philosophical psychology as early as 1904” and this could 
have had some influence on Bohr’s development of the notion of complementarity 
in 1927. 


138 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


joined the ranks of the Trotskyist [anti-Stalinist] New York left,” 
they became “vigorously anti-Communist” by the 1950s.7”” Like 
Oppenheimer, James Rorty became a member of the Congress for 
Cultural Freedom. Though critical of American society and “without 
abandoning their commitment to social justice”, Rorty’s parents 
“came to appreciate the freedoms and democratic potentials of 
American society” and instilled in their son that “leftism and patriot- 
ism went hand in hand.”°§ Moreover, with Dewey nearby at 
Columbia University and the philosopher Sidney Hook, who was a 
family friend and called “Dewey’s Bulldog,” pragmatism was part of 
the Rorty household. 

In 1946, at the young age of fifteen, Rorty enrolled in so-called 
Hutchins College at the University of Chicago with its emphasis on 
the great books of the Western tradition, a curriculum that made 
I. I. Rabi “so very unhappy.” Rorty continued at Chicago getting a 
Master’s degree in philosophy in 1952 with a thesis on Whitehead’s 
metaphysics. After this, he went to Yale and completed his doctorate 
in 1956 with a dissertation entitled “The Concept of Potentiality” 
that “reviewed and assessed the adequacy of employment of this and 
related concepts in three philosophical systems: that of Aristotle; the 
seventeenth-century rationalists Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz; and 
the logical empiricists.”’*’ It is important to note that Rorty had sig- 
nificant interest and training in the history of ideas as well as the his- 
tory of philosophy; and at this time “offered himself up as a translator” 
between analytic approaches, which brushed aside the history of 
philosophy, and nonanalytic approaches which did not.#” 

After two years in the army and three years teaching at Wellesley 
College, Rorty accepted a position in the philosophy department at 
Princeton in 1961 and would remain there for over twenty years. 
Unlike Chicago and Yale, Princeton was a bastion of analytic philoso- 
phy, and during “the 1960s and early 1970s Rorty earned a reputa- 
tion as a smart analytic philosopher who was also well versed in the 
history of philosophy.”*”! In 1982, Rorty left Princeton to become 
Kenan Professor of Humanities at the University of Virginia. In 1998, 
he left Virginia and became Professor of Comparative Literature at 
Stanford University, a position he held until 2005 when he became 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical ExplorationI 139 


Professor Emeritus of Comparative Literature and Philosophy. During 
his life, Rorty received numerous honors and awards. For example, 
during the 1980s he was awarded a MacArthur “genius grant” with a 
stipend of nearly $250,000.°° 

Rorty’s break with analytic philosophy came with his book 
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature published in 1979, the same year 
he was president of the prestigious Eastern Division of the American 
Philosophical Association. Later, with his 1982 publication Consequ- 
ences of Pragmatism, “Rorty fully identified his intellectual project 
with pragmatism.”*°* Rorty’s attack charged that the representational 
view of knowledge — that the mind is like a mirror — had generated 
fundamental mistakes in Western philosophy. It had lead to such false 
dualisms as mind/body and objective /subjective and the ill-founded 
pursuit of certainty by seeking a foundation for knowledge. This epis- 
temological project running from Plato through Descartes to its lin- 
guistic reincarnation in analytic philosophy is not only bankrupt but 
has placed philosophy outside the public sphere. With its current 
ideology of specialization, this misguided philosophy presents itself as 
a master discipline — the “guardian of rationality” — that judges the 
claims of other disciplines. According to Rorty, instead of representa- 
tion, our quest should be pragmatically oriented seeking intersubjec- 
tive agreement and social solidarity. 

As developed by the sociologist Neil Gross in his book Richard 
Rorty: The Making of an American Philosopher, the standard interpreta- 
tions that “Rorty started out as a hard-nosed analytic philosopher and 
only later came to doubt the value of the analytic program” are mis- 
taken.*** Though internal developments in analytic philosophy were 
important for Rorty’s break, it must be remembered that Rorty’s early 
training at Chicago and Yale engendered in him a much broader con- 
ception of philosophy than found in most analytic philosophers. Many 
of his colleagues were “narrowly focused” and struck him as “arro- 
gant.” To a significant degree, his break with analytic philosophy was 
his intellectual return to his parents’ activism which had been nurtured 
and developed in the environment of American pragmatism. 

Not surprising, Rorty’s break received heavy criticism in the 
philosophical community with charges ranging from relativism to 


140 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


philosophical showmanship. Some philosophers sympathetic with or 
working in the pragmatic tradition accused him of distorting the clas- 
sical pragmatists and expressed serious reservations about his interpre- 
tation of pragmatism. Though he had some support inside philosophy, 
most of his support came from scholars in other disciplines, especially 
the humanities. In the public sector, he was widely discussed and was 
denounced by members of both the far left and the far right. In 2003, 
the BBC ran a documentary “provocatively titled Richard Rorty: The 
Man Who Killed Truth.” *°* 

As expected, due to pragmatic ideas and themes in Oppenheimer’s 
thought, there are definite similarities between his thought and Rorty’s 
such as a strong anti-foundationalism and pluralism. Both moved to 
soften the distinction between science and nonscience, and took sci- 
ence as a suggestive model for other areas of culture. In his 1987 
article “Science as Solidarity,” Rorty sounding much like Oppenheimer 
writes, 


there is plenty of reason to praise the institutions they [scientists] 
have developed and within which they work, and to use these as 
models for the rest of culture. For these institutions give concrete- 
ness and detail to the idea of “unforced agreement.” Reference to such 
institutions fleshes out the idea of “a free and open encounter” — the 


sort of encounter in which truth cannot fail to win.*° 


Both Oppenheimer and Rorty rejected the centrality of epistemology 
and the quest for certainty and insisted on a more public role for phi- 
losophy. They emphasized the communal and social, and took conver- 
sation as essential for deepening and widening “cultural coherence” 
and “solidarity.” 

Not surprising, there are differences, in fact deep differences, 
between their views. Science is given a prominent, almost defining, 
role in Oppenheimer’s thought whereas Rorty takes a deflationary 
view of science. Concerning the individual and society, Rorty makes 
“a firm distinction between the private and the public” treating “the 
demands of self-creation and of human solidarity as equally valid, yet 
forever incommensurable.”*” For Oppenheimer, though this may be 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical ExplorationI 141 


analogous to instances of complementarity in atomic physics, he held 
that there are definite mechanisms for alleviating and perhaps even 
transcending the dichotomy of the individual and society — such as 
specialization embedded in community, and dialogue among specialized 
communities themselves as well as the public at large. 

Nonetheless, both Oppenheimer and Rorty took themselves as 
patriotic Americans on the political left. Though only too aware of the 
failings of the United States, they took “pride in being citizens of a 
self-invented, self-reforming, enduring constitutional democracy.”*°% 
Each offered a vision of social hope and advocated reform, not revo- 
lution, in which America would have a prominent role. However, 
neither were symbols for the American Left. Oppenheimer was too 
much of an insider and a member of the political center, and had 
made the atomic bomb. In his 1994 op-ed “The Unpatriotic 
Academy” in The New York Times, Rorty even chastised many of his 
colleagues for becoming “increasingly isolated and ineffective” and 
stressing that “An unpatriotic left has never achieved anything.”*” 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 8 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical 
Exploration II 


Using philosophical ideas and themes developed by the British 
philosopher Bernard Williams as well as the American philosopher 
Richard Rorty, the exploration continues and moves deeper into the 
realm of philosophical biography. In this chapter, the philosophical 
exploration now considers not only Oppenheimer’s thought and 
philosophical outlook, but Oppenheimer himself. 


Oppenheimer, Moral Dilemmas, 
and Moral Luck — Bernard Williams 


At the 1959 Basel Seminar sponsored by the Congress for Cultural 
Freedom, Oppenheimer criticized people like the eminent philoso- 
pher Bertrand Russell, who had advocated World Government and an 
idealistic move to disarmament, for not engaging the “deep ethical 
dilemmas” because they denied their existence. Oppenheimer reminded 
his audience that “there have been crucial moments [e.g., 1945 and 
1949] in which the existence of a public philosophical discourse ... 
could have made a great difference in the moral climate and the 
human scope of our times.” Interestingly, during the last fifty years or 
so, philosophers have redeemed themselves, at least in part, since they 
have certainly engaged the subject of moral dilemmas. Central to this 
effort is the work of Bernard Williams, who is considered by many as 


143 


144 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


“the most brilliant and most important British moral philosopher of 
his time.”#!° 

According to common sense, a person is in a moral dilemma when 
a person is in a morally difficult situation and does not know what to 
do. For the sake of clarity and exposition, philosophers have some- 
thing more specific in mind. For example, a working philosophical 
definition of a moral dilemma could be defined as follows: a person 
or agent is in a moral dilemma when an agent is in “a situation where 
[the] agent has a strong moral obligation or requirement to adopt 
each of two alternatives, and neither is [morally] overridden, but the 
agent cannot adopt both alternatives.”*!! A well-known example for 
illustrating this is the student of Jean-Paul Sartre whose brother had 
been killed by the Germans during the Fall of France in 1940. The 
dilemma was whether the young man should join the Free French in 
England to fight the Nazis or remain in Paris and care for his grieving 
mother.*!? 

The central issue among philosophers is whether, appearances 
aside, there are genuine moral dilemmas. Philosophers in the utilitar- 
ian (e.g., John Stuart Mill) and duty-based (e.g., Immanuel Kant) 
traditions have generally argued against moral dilemmas.*!? Their 
emphasis has been the rational coherence of ethics through founda- 
tional principles. For example, utilitarianism maximizes utility and 
Kantianism universalizes duty. In contrast, philosophers who defend 
moral pluralism (e.g., Isaiah Berlin) commonly argue for genuine moral 
dilemmas." “Moral pluralism is the view that moral values, norms, ide- 
als, duties and virtues are irreducibly diverse,” and hence allows for the 
possibility of irreducible moral conflict.*!* However, moral pluralism 
does not deny moral theory, only that such a theory cannot be for- 
mulated in a hierarchical way with one value taking precedence over 
all others. 

With Oppenheimer’s pluralist, non-hierarchical view of science, it is 
not unreasonable to assume that he would endorse a pluralist, non- 
hierarchical view of morality (i.e., moral pluralism), and hence 


“For an insightful overview and interpretation of Berlin’s thought centered on “value- 
pluralism” with connections to moral dilemmas, see John Gray, Isaiah Berlin — An 
Interpretation of His Thought (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013). 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 145 


recognize the possibility of genuine moral dilemmas. Remember he 
chastised Russell for denying the existence of “deep ethical dilemmas.” 

But there is more here. In his discussions of extensions of com- 
plementarity of atomic physics to other domains of human experi- 
ence, Oppenheimer mentioned love versus justice. Assuming moral 
dilemmas exist, love-justice is a domain in which to expect moral 
dilemmas. Love deals with the personal (e.g., the family); justice deals 
with the impersonal (e.g., the state). Sophocles’ Antigone might be a 
case in point. Just as important, moral dilemmas exhibit the structure 
found in complementarity — mutual exclusion (one alternative or the 
other, but not both), joint completion (only two alternatives), and 
loss through choice (a moral obligation not fulfilled). At the small 
informal conference in 1963 at Mt. Kisco mentioned earlier, 
Oppenheimer interestingly attributes to Bohr a generalization involv- 
ing some of these ideas, saying that before his discovery of comple- 
mentarity in atomic physics, 


He [Bohr] was disturbed by the fact that really to love, and really to 
be just, are not in the end compatible, and that societies are judged 
by us very largely by the measure in which these two important but 
complementary ideals are reconciled, complementary in the sense 
that the full pursuit of one destroys the other, and complementary 
in the sense that without both something is very much lost from 


human life.#!5 


In 1965, less than two years before Oppenheimer died, the phi- 
losopher Bernard Williams published his influential essay “Ethical 
Consistency” where he argues for genuine moral dilemmas from the 
phenomenology of moral experience, not from the framework of 
rationalistic ethics. Holding that philosophical accounts of morality 
must be sensitive to psychological reality, he defended that “moral 
conflicts are neither systematically avoidable, nor all soluble without 
[moral] remainder.”*!° By moral remainder, he means such things as 
guilt, shame and, in this particular essay, regret. 

Williams takes moral conflicts (dilemmas) as analogous to con- 
flicts of desire, not conflicts of belief. In conflicts of belief, once 
one of the beliefs is taken as true the epistemic force of the other 


146 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


disappears, and this belief is eliminated or silenced. However, in 
conflicts of desire, once one of the desires is satisfied the other desire 
still remains and has emotive force. For Williams, moral dilemmas are 
like conflicts of desire in that acting on one of the moral oughts does 
not eliminate or silence the other ought. This remainder is typically 
expressed by regret for what has not been done. 

It is important to realize that for Williams having regret does not 
imply that the agent believes that he acted wrongly or he would act 
differently if he had it to do over. Though moral remainders, like 
standard cases of feeling guilty, imply the agent believes that he acted 
wrongly, others clearly do not. For example, survivor guilt does not 
imply that one believes that he acted wrongly or even that he acted. 
Furthermore, experiencing regret is not a bad thing and has its mor- 
ally redeeming aspects. Regret can show that the agent understands 
the depth of the moral conflict, has not silenced the other voice or 
ought, and in some ways suffers as well. The essence of Williams’ 
argument is that philosophical accounts of morality must take into 
account both reason and the moral emotions. His essay is taken as 
a founding text in the philosophical area of moral psychology and a 
caution against all attempts which seek unity and harmony in moral- 
ity through systematic, objective reason. 

As scientific director of Los Alamos, Oppenheimer most probably 
believed that he faced profound moral conflicts. Whether he also 
believed at the time, or came to believe, that he faced genuine moral 
dilemmas is difficult, perhaps impossible, to answer. His talk at the Basel 
seminar suggests that he did. His attraction to complementarity and 
his sustained effort for its public understanding are also suggestive. 

In very general terms, any scientific director of Los Alamos would 
have faced the dilemma of something like an obligation-ought versus 
a prohibition-ought. As director, one would have strong obligations 
to the United States, members of the Manhattan Project, and 
American soldiers and their families to support the combat use of the 
atomic bomb. But such an atomic attack would mostly likely be 
against civilians, given the US strategic bombing campaigns of Japan 
and Germany. Hence, there would be a strong moral requirement 
against the combat use of the atomic bomb due to the prohibition not 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 147 


to deliberately target and attack civilians even in wartime. In addition, 
utilitarian arguments could be given for both alternatives. 

As director, Oppenheimer might not have taken this as a genuine 
moral dilemma since he may have believed that the prohibition-ought 
was overridden.” For example, due to the decisions and actions of 
others, Japanese civilians were already in harm’s way, independent of 
the atomic bomb, since they were being targeted and attacked in the 
conventional bombing campaign. Further, there is always the 
“Godlike decision” that it would take “Hiroshima to bring the world 
to a consciousness of what another war might mean.” 

Oppenheimer never publically professed regret about his involve- 
ment in the Manhattan Project. As noted in a previous chapter, in 
1965, he even publically said, “I never regretted, and do not regret 
now, having done my part of the job.” This is possibly because he 
took “regret” as implying that one believes one has acted wrongly. 
In any case, in the eyes of his biographers as well as his friends, 
Oppenheimer had and suffered from moral remainders.” 


*Such eminent philosophers and political theorists as John Rawls and Michael Walzer 
hold that the prohibition against targeting and attacking civilians can be overridden 
given “supreme emergency.” They use the case of the years 1940 and 1941 when 
Britain was essentially alone and “a Nazi victory in Europe was frighteningly close.” 
For them, the British decision to bomb German cities and hence target and attack 
the civilian population, though regrettable, was morally justified. However, they hold 
that “supreme emergency” did not hold for Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and hence 
these were great moral wrongs. By way of contrast, philosopher Charles Landesman 
argues that “supreme emergency” did hold for Hiroshima and Nagasaki and hence 
were morally justified. See John Rawls, “Fifty Years after Hiroshima,” Dissent 
(Summer 1995); Michael Walzer, “Emergency Ethics” (1988) in Axguing about War 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004); and Charles Landesman, “Rawls on 
Hiroshima,” The Philosophical Forum (Spring 2003). 

Further, one might say that the situation surrounding the decision of whether to 
use atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki simply overwhelms morality. Williams 
says that there can be “extreme cases of moral conflict, tragic cases” where “the 
notion of ‘acting for the best’? may very well lose its content.” (Williams, “Ethical 
Consistency” (ref. 316), p. 123). Clearly, for Rawls, Walzer, and Landesman, this was 
not the case for Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 

“Oppenheimer and guilt is a subject discussed by Oppenheimer biographers and 
scholars; and Oppenheimer may have not only regretted involvement with the atomic 


148 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In 1976, moving along a related moral path, Williams in conjunc- 
tion with the American philosopher Thomas Nagel, introduced the 
notion of moral luck.*!” As Williams later remarked, he expected it 
would suggest an oxymoron. One can be lucky at cards, business, and 
even academics, but morality appears to be an arena free of luck. The 
idea behind moral luck is that one’s moral status and responsibilities 
are to a large extent based on factors beyond one’s control, that is, 
matters of luck.*!® Philosophers have distinguished and discussed vari- 
ous candidates for moral luck. Of particular interest for us are what 
philosophers have called resultant moral luck and circumstantial 
moral luck. 

An example of resultant luck would be two “equally” negligent 
drivers (e.g., texting on their cell phones) where one hits a child who 
just happens to walk into the street and the other gets home without 
any accident since no children were in the street. The unlucky driver 
will be judged harshly and have considerable responsibilities to the 
child and its family, face a possible prison term, and feel terrible and 
have difficulty living with himself. Though subject to criticism for 
what might have happened, the lucky driver is free from most of this. 
Another example given by Nagel is the case of someone who 
“launches a violent revolution against an authoritarian regime.”*!? If 
the revolution succeeds, the leader could very well be a moral hero. 
If not, the leader could be an object of scorn and bear significant guilt 
and responsibilities for what the people suffered. 

An example involving circumstantial luck would be the case of 
young Germans during the Nazi regime. By simply being in Germany, 
these young people faced the frightful moral test of whether to col- 
laborate with the Nazis. Many failed, but others were lucky since 


bomb but may have had guilt feelings as well. In his Oppenheimer: The Tragic 
Intellect, Charles Thorpe insightfully writes “Oppenheimer seemed to be in a pendu- 
lum swing of guilt ... ... [Jeffries] Wyman [an old friend] thought that 
Oppenheimer in his later years ‘was almost reveling in his feeling of guilt about the 
bomb.’ But at the same time, ‘it was obviously a great achievement and a very impor- 
tant thing in his life ... and there was a kind of play back and forth between these two 
attitudes.’” (Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect (ref. 27), p. 285). 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 149 


they had left Germany, say to be with relatives in the United States, 
and never faced such a test.*”° 

Not surprising, since Williams and Nagel first introduced this 
notion, philosophers have debated the issues that arise concerning 
moral luck. Many argue that upon reflection moral luck is seen to 
be illusory while others argue that it is genuine and reflects some- 
thing important, perhaps paradoxical, in moral thought. 

From the perspective of moral luck, can anything be said about 
Oppenheimer and his involvement in the atomic bomb project? 
Perhaps he was similar to the unlucky young Germans by being put 
to the moral test by circumstantial luck. Oppenheimer as well as other 
senior officials of the Manhattan Project like Conant certainly faced 
moral trials. Granted there are differences; for example, Oppenheimer 
freely joined the Manhattan Project and could have avoided participa- 
tion whereas the young Germans were simply in Germany when the 
Nazis came to power. However, in certain ways, Oppenheimer was 
morally pressured, perhaps even morally compelled, to join the pro- 
ject given his expertise in atomic physics and the threat of a Nazi 
atomic bomb. Indeed in February 1943, Oppenheimer wrote Rabi 
who was unwilling to join the Manhattan Project that “I do not think 
that the Nazis allow us the option of carrying out that development 
[the atomic bomb].”*! Clearly, Oppenheimer did not intentionally 
seek out his moral ordeals, so perhaps he was morally unlucky through 
no fault of his own. 

In what ways and to what degrees Oppenheimer failed or 
succeeded are questions worth exploring — biographically, histori- 
cally, and ethically — and are matters of debate.* However, even if 


*For a philosophical discussion, see Richard Mason, Oppenheimer’s Choice (ref. 321). 
However, Mason only focuses on Oppenheimer’s choice to become scientific director 
of Los Alamos in 1942, and does not consider in any detail decisions and choices that 
happened later such as Oppenheimer and the decision to use the atomic bomb and 
the H-bomb controversy of 1949. His approach is insightful and helpful with use of 
philosophers such as Plato, Augustine, Descartes, Spinoza, and Nietzsche. Mason 
takes “Oppenheimer’s Choice” as providing the opportunity not only of “thinking 
about Oppenheimer” but also of providing the opportunity of “thinking about 
thinking about Oppenheimer” (that is, reflection on moral philosophy). 


150 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


everything that Oppenheimer did was justified and he did the best he 
could, he still might have been morally unlucky here. Doing, partici- 
pating in, and contributing to certain actions (e.g., killing in wartime) 
that violate deep-seated moral principles tend to damage one’s moral 
sensitivity and destroy one’s innocence even when justified.*” 

Does the idea of resultant moral luck apply to the atomic bomb 
project? Though most discussions of moral luck focus on individu- 
als, some of the ideas surrounding moral luck carry over to groups 
and their projects. The historical significance of the Manhattan 
Project was the technological invention and then the production 
and use of atomic weapons. How this project and to a certain extent 
Oppenheimer (since he is symbolic of the project) are viewed is to 
a considerable extent based on the resulting atomic threat and its 
ramifications. Clearly these could not be foreseen and are in some 
sense “beyond the control of the project.” If the threat has a signifi- 
cant part in ending all major wars, the project could be viewed 
favorably — in particular, if the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative had 
succeeded.” If the threat leads to atomic warfare, the project would 
certainly be condemned. 

Oppenheimer’s last day as director of Los Alamos was in October 
1945. At an outdoor ceremony, with “virtually the entire population 
of the mesa assembled,” Oppenheimer accepted on behalf of the 
laboratory a Certificate of Appreciation from General Groves sent by 
the Secretary of War Henry Stimson. In a short speech, he said 


It is our hope that in years to come we may look at this scroll, and 
all that it signifies, with pride. 

Today that pride must be tempered with a profound concern. If 
atomic bombs are to be added as new weapons to the arsenals of a 


YOne could contend that the decision to use the atomic bomb, and perhaps even 
building it, with the goal of ending all war is simply too risky, or beyond morality, or 
even “Godlike,” to be spoken of as morally justified even if it results in ending all war. 
This seems to be part of Reverend Young’s criticism of James Conant. However, 
other reasons might morally justify such a decision with the possibility of ending all 
war being morally supportive of (but not justifying) the decision. 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 151 


warring world, or to the arsenals of nations preparing for war, then 
the time will come when mankind will curse the names of Los 
Alamos and of Hiroshima.*?% 


Later in November at Los Alamos, Oppenheimer spoke of atomic 
weapons as “not only a great peril, but a great hope” — like the pas- 
sage above, these words capture the historical contingency (i.e., the 
moral luck) of the legacy of the Manhattan Project. 

Much of Williams’ article “Moral Luck” is concerned with an 
agent’s reflective, retrospective assessment of his own decisions and 
actions. Williams’ development centers around a story of a man, 
whom he calls “Gauguin,” who abandons his family “in order to live 
a life in which, as he supposes, he can pursue his art.” His pursuit to 
become a “creative artist” is realistic but cannot be foreseen, and the 
claims of his family have a hold on him. Williams contends that “in 
such a situation the only thing that will justify his choice [to himself] 
will be success itself” and hence Gauguin’s justification is in “some 
ways a matter of luck.”*** 

In addition, if Gauguin fails to become a creative artist, it matters 
considerably for his retrospective assessment on how he fails. If he 
“sustains some injury on the way to Tahiti which prevents his ever 
painting again,” he suffers from extrinsic luck and “his decision ... 
was for nothing.” But this does not show that “he was wrong and 
unjustified.” However, if he fails because of lack of talent or an inabil- 
ity for sustained effort, then the failure is intrinsic. His project is 
proved worthless and he is left “with the most basic regrets.” So 
“Some luck, in a decision of Gauguin’s kind, is extrinsic to his project, 
some intrinsic; both are necessary for success, and hence for actual 
justification, but only the latter relates to unjustification.”*?* 

Moreover, it needs to be emphasized that for Williams, even if 
Gauguin succeeds and can justify himself, this does not bring “it 
about that those who suffer from his decision will have no justified 
ground of reproach.”*° There has been a “moral cost.” However, 
Gauguin’s “moral luck ... does not lie in acquiring moral justifica- 
tion,” though he might have it, rather it lies in the relation of his life 
to morality. Since claims beyond the artistic have a hold on Gauguin, 


152 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


he will have regrets. Consequently, if he fails, there will be no “per- 
spective within which something else could have been laid against 
them.” To a “moral spectator” that can make a difference, for 
Gauguin runs “a risk within morality” and his life is “recognizably 
part of moral life.””*?7 

As is apparent, such a decision and its project are “very risky” and 
“substantial in a special way.” This is because 


With an intrinsic failure, the project which generated the decision is 
revealed as an empty thing, incapable of grounding the agent’s life. 
With extrinsic failure, it is not so revealed, and while he must 
acknowledge that it has failed, nevertheless it has not been discred- 
ited, and may, perhaps in the form of some new aspiration, contrib- 
ute to making sense of what is left. In his retrospective thought, and 
its allocation of basic regret, he cannot in the fullest sense identify 
with his decision, and so does not find himself justified; but he is not 
totally alienated from it either, cannot just see it as a disastrous error, 
and so does not find himself unjustified.*8 


Oppenheimer and his involvement with the Manhattan Project 
and attempts for the international control of atomic energy bear simi- 
larities to Williams’ Gauguin and his artistic quest. Oppenheimer not 
only symbolized the Manhattan Project, he was a central figure in the 
project and identified with it — he had recruited scientists, directed 
its central laboratory, and participated in major decisions. Further, his 
influence, fame, and reputation were based on its technical success. 
He likewise identified with attempts at the international control of 
atomic energy, especially the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative, so inti- 
mately tied to the legacy of the Manhattan Project. If the 


“It should be noted that Williams holds that morality of today suffers from “a genuine 
pathology” by presenting itself as “supreme” and “ubiquitous” as well as free from 
moral luck. Williams’ account of Gauguin illustrates that though morality shapes 
Gauguin, it does not determine him. For Williams, this “limitation of the moral is 
itself something morally important.” (Williams, “Moral Luck” (ref. 317), pp. 52-53). 
Williams’ positive account which he calls “ethics” not “morality” is in the tradition 
of Aristotelian ethics with its emphasis on the virtues. 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 153 


Acheson-Lilienthal initiative or something similar had succeeded, the 
legacy of the Manhattan Project could perhaps be progressively 
grounded, and might serve to ground Oppenheimer’s retrospective 
assessment of himself. However, such initiatives failed and with them 
so had Oppenheimer. In deep and personal ways, Oppenheimer was 
morally unlucky. 

In many respects, Oppenheimer took the failure of the interna- 
tional control of atomic energy as extrinsic to the project. In 1947 
and 1948, he spoke of the arguments given in the Acheson—Lilienthal 
Report as “correct arguments” and “in some ways eternal argu- 
ments.” He spoke of extrinsic causes for the failure like costly delays 
and the mistakes on the part of the United States and, most impor- 
tant, the non-cooperation of the Soviet Union arising from its ideol- 
ogy and monopoly of state power. In other ways, the failure appeared 
intrinsic to atomic energy itself since its most beneficial aspect (atomic 
power generation) was long term but its threat immediate. 

Though the early attempts at the international control of atomic 
energy failed, Oppenheimer could take them as not being discredited 
and “perhaps in the form of some new aspiration, contribute to mak- 
ing sense of what is left.” In 1957, Oppenheimer said “the sovereign, 
unlimited, all-powerful nation-state is a pretty deadly and impossible 
form for the organization of mankind.” Taking this as the most 
controlling extrinsic factor for the failure of such attempts as the 
Acheson-Lilienthal initiative, Oppenheimer’s hope and vision pre- 
sented in the 1950s would “contribute to making sense of what is 
left” with its goal of breaking the “grip” of the nation state and mov- 
ing us toward a world without war and free of nuclear weapons. Such 
a move would naturally embrace substantial initiatives like the 
Acheson-Lilienthal plan. In addition, Oppenheimer called for com- 
munities embarked on specialized work to help pacify and redirect the 
nation state. 

In important ways, the next two chapters on Oppenheimer and 
international relations assist in underwriting the above interpretation. 
First, it will be argued that the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons 
cannot be dismissed as simply utopian. This can be more easily seen 
today given the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold 


154 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


War in conjunction with detailed and mature works like Abolishing 
Nuclear Weapons by John Perkovich and James Acton. Moreover, 
such a move can even be placed within a broad theoretical framework 
as illustrated by Daniel Deudney’s nuclear one-worldism with its 
strong resemblances to the Acheson—Lilienthal plan. Most important, 
it will be shown that the successful Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, 
with its pillars of peaceful use of nuclear energy and disarmament, has 
a structural likeness to the Acheson—Lilienthal plan. These results sup- 
port Oppenheimer’s contention that the ideas and arguments of the 
Acheson-Lilienthal proposal are “correct” and in some sense “eter- 
nal,” and hence its failure at the UN was not an “intrinsic failure.” 
Finally, it will be established that Oppenheimer’s vision and his call 
for specialized communities to undermine the nation state falls within 
a liberal-constructivist tradition in international relations, and is 
strengthened by David Mitrany’s international functionalism as well 
as contemporary studies of epistemic communities. 


Oppenheimer and Narrative — Richard Rorty 


Other dimensions of Oppenheimer and his thought can be explored 
by considering Rorty’s book Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity, 
which was published in 1989 and has been translated into at least 22 
languages.*”° Of particular interest is Rorty’s chapter on the novelist 
George Orwell. 

Essential to Rorty’s book and many of his other works is the 
importance of conversation in society and hence vocabularies. For 
him, knowledge is a matter of conversation and social practice and not 
an attempt to represent or mirror nature. Vocabularies play a promi- 
nent role by determining what can be communicated, and suggesting 
and limiting what can be believed — in other words, they form and 
limit conceptual perception and perhaps even perception itself. 

For Rorty, the primary aim of intellectuals, and especially philoso- 
phers, should be “to edify — to help their readers, or society as a 
whole, break free from outworn vocabularies and attitudes, rather 
than to provide ‘grounding’ for the intuitions and customs of the 
present.”*°° Furthermore, “Interesting philosophy is rarely an 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration IT 155 


examination of the pros and cons of a thesis.” It usually occurs as a 
contest between vocabularies — especially between an “entrenched 
vocabulary which has become a nuisance and a half-formed new 
vocabulary which vaguely promises great things.”**! Producers of new 
vocabularies range from Aristotle to Nietzsche to Dewey as well as 
Galileo to Darwin to Freud. 

Speaking pragmatically, vocabularies are tools and there is no ideal 
or all-inclusive vocabulary. The task of philosophy is to invent new 
vocabularies and explore possibilities, not to ascertain the language 
of the world. As is apparent here, Rorty’s ideas resonate with 
Oppenheimer’s views that the aim of philosophy should be thematic, 
not propositional, discourse as well as his pluralism. Remember that 
Oppenheimer’s pluralism holds that the cognitive world is richer than 
can be conceived by any particular person, discipline, or even culture, 
and that no single approach (or vocabulary), not even science, can be 
completely exhaustive. 

The chief aim of Rorty’s book is “to show that the vocabulary of 
Enlightenment rationalism [centered on universal reason, truth, and 
moral obligation], although it was essential to the beginnings of lib- 
eral democracy, has become an impediment to the preservation and 
progress of democratic societies.” Rorty then introduces his own 
candidate vocabulary as “a redescription of liberalism” with the hope 
that “culture as a whole can be ‘poeticized’ rather than ... ‘rationalized’ 
or ‘scientized.’” 

For the political structure of society, Rorty advocates constitu- 
tional democracy but makes a strong distinction between the private 
and the public. The private is concerned with individual self-creation 
and the public is concerned with human solidarity, and for Rorty these 
two cannot be unified in theory. In large part, this is because for Rorty, 
the self does not have an essence or intrinsic nature. Therefore, treat- 
ing the demands of self-creation and of human solidarity as equally 
valid yet incommensurable, we should aim for a society which lets “its 
citizens be as privatistic, ‘irrationalist,’ and aestheticist as they please so 
long as they do it on their own time — causing no harm to others and 
using no resources needed by those less advantaged.” Moreover, this 
incommensurability is reflected in the fact that the “vocabulary of 


156 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


self-creation is necessarily private, unshared, unsuited to argument” 
whereas the “vocabulary of justice is necessarily public and shared, a 
medium for argumentative exchange.” 

Rorty’s ideal citizen is the “liberal ironist.” This person would hold 
that what unites humans is not some essence or even a common private 
vocabulary, but just the shared “susceptibility to pain and in particular 
to that special sort of pain ... humiliation.” The ideal citizen is “lib- 
eral” by holding “that cruelty is the worst thing we do” and that suf- 
fering should be diminished and that humiliation of human beings by 
other human beings should cease. However, this citizen is an “ironist” 
by facing “up to the contingency [both historical and philosophical] of 
his or her own most central beliefs and desires” and hence one’s own 
“final vocabulary” — that is, the “set of words” which one employs 
“to justify their actions, their beliefs, and their lives.” Further, the ideal 
final vocabulary would “split into a large private and a small public 
sector, sectors which have no particular relation to one another.” 

Rorty discusses the work of intellectuals and artists mainly in 
terms of books. Given a strict public-private distinction, he suggests 
that “we distinguish books which help us become autonomous from 
books which help us become less cruel.” With respect to becoming 
less cruel, he further distinguishes “books which help us see the 
effects of social practices and institutions on others” and “those which 
help us see the effects of our private idiosyncrasies on others.” With 
the aim of eliminating cruelty, Rorty gives the key role to works of 
literature, especially the novel, and not to works in theology, science, 
or philosophy. Novels serve to sensitize us to the pain and humiliation 
of others, and hence play crucial roles in social reform, moral educa- 
tion, and reform in our private relations. Novels are safer and more 
revealing by dealing with the human situation through individual lives 
rather than principles of abstract theory. 

Rorty devotes an entire chapter to Orwell by focusing on two of 
his novels — Animal Farm published in 1945 (the year of the 
atomic attacks) and Nineteen Eighty-Four published in 1949 (the 
year of MacLeish’s “The Conquest of America”). For Rorty, 
“Orwell was successful because he wrote exactly the right books at 
exactly the right time.” These books did two jobs in alerting us to 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 157 


the dangers confronting the world after World War II — “redescrib- 
ing” the Soviet Union and “inventing” the character O’Brien. 

The redescription of the Soviet Union not only alerted us to the 
cruelty and suffering behind the Iron Curtain, but “broke the 
power of ... ‘Bolshevik propaganda’ over the minds of liberal intel- 
lectuals in England and America.” O’Brien is the antagonist in 
Nineteen Eighty-Four who ends up torturing and reeducating 
Winston, the novel’s protagonist. According to Rorty, Orwell’s 
creation of the character O’Brien is not so much to alert us to a 
contemporary danger like the Soviet Union, but a warning of a real 
possibility of totalitarianism in the future — the complete subordi- 
nation of the individual through psychological manipulation plus 
physical and technological control. Such a totalitarianism is not 
ordained by human or societal nature, but a contingency of a future 
that is “up for grabs.” For Rorty, Orwell’s critique of the 
“Communist oligarchs” and totalitarianism along with his “earlier 
warnings against the greedy and stupid conservatives” remain as 
useful as anything we possess even today. 

Furthermore, Rorty emphasizes that for Orwell the twentieth 
century is the period when “human equality became technically pos- 
sible.” With this in mind as well as Orwell’s post-war critique, Rorty 
presents his fellow liberals with a challenge reminding them that they 
are “still at the drawing board.” 


I do not think that we liberals can now imagine a future of “human 
dignity, freedom and peace.” That is, we cannot tell ourselves a story 
about how to get from the actual present to such a future. We can 
picture various socioeconomic setups which would be preferable to 
the present one. But we have no clear sense of how to get from the 
actual world to these theoretically possible worlds, and thus no clear 
idea of what to work for. ... We liberals have no plausible large- 
scale scenario for changing that world so as to realize the “technical 
possibility of human equality.”*? 


For Rorty, such a narrative of social hope concerned with means for 
moving forward has become harder to tell in a convincing way since 
the end of World War II. 


158 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Though Rorty holds that liberals cannot as yet tell such a story, he 
surely believes that he has an outline for such a story. First, the means 
to realize the “technical possibility of human equality” are not to be 
found in something which stands beyond contingency, history, and 
institutions such as religious appeals or even theories advocated by 
Enlightenment rationalism or Marxism. Further, Rorty must take his 
vocabulary of self-creation and human solidarity as a step forward. Not 
surprising, progress will be made by greater human solidarity which is 
created by extending the “we,” that is, extending our “ability to see 
more and more traditional differences ... as unimportant when com- 
pared with similarities with respect to pain and humiliation.” Using 
such devices as novels and ethnographies, modern intellectuals’ princi- 
pal contributions to moral progress are given by “detailed descriptions 
of particular varieties of pain and humiliation.” By way of caution, 
Rorty reminds us that appeals for solidarity are strongest when the “we” 
denotes “something smaller and more local than the human race.” 

Although developed and presented around the time of the publi- 
cation of Orwell’s two novels, Oppenheimer’s hope and vision can be 
taken, not only as a dimension of his responsibility to see “what came 
of this [atomic] revolution,” but also as providing a response to 
Rorty’s later challenge of 1989 that liberals are “still at the drawing 
board.” In many ways, Oppenheimer can be seen as offering a narra- 
tive as well as a new vocabulary centered on community, complemen- 
tarity, and Bohr’s vision of an Open World. 

In the years immediately after the war, the international control of 
atomic energy was taken as a means for moving the world towards 
internationalism and a world without war. As argued in this book, with 
the failure of such efforts as the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative and the 
start of the Cold War, Oppenheimer began setting forth a less grand, 
and more long-term, narrative. Essential to this narrative are interna- 
tional communities of people embarked on specialized work which 
serve as important means to lead us forward and break the “grip” of 
nationalism, and possibly transcend the nuclear revolution. Furthermore, 
with a personal dual duty of “faithfulness and firmness” to one’s spe- 
cialty and “great openness to others” along with philosophy as a vital 
contributor to the thematic discourse of the public sphere, the crises of 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 159 


modernity are moderated and solidarity deepened and extended. 
Interestingly, specialized communities have a two-dimensional role in 
Oppenheimer’s thought. Specialized communities furnish means for 
mitigating “the antinomy between the individual and the community” 
with a call for cultural coherence as well as means for mitigating the 
atomic crisis with a call for a world without war. 

It is instructive to compare Rorty and Oppenheimer on the pri- 
vate and the public (i.e., the individual and society). Rorty holds for 
a strict separation while Oppenheimer allows for a merging and inter- 
mingling of the private and the public. For Oppenheimer, this separa- 
tion is mitigated since people reach their potential only in a diversity 
of open communities connected with the past and committed to 
action in the present. Coherence within and between communities 
requires a unity or solidarity of men brought about by action and 
dialogue. 

In particular, Oppenheimer holds that specialized communities, 
especially in sciences, offer ways of bridging and combining the public 
and private. Remember that for Oppenheimer one obtains personal 
enrichment and develops such virtues as epistemic honesty and coop- 
eration through specialization within community. Also, knowledge is 
not so much a property of individuals but rather a property of special- 
ized communities — a kind of “cognitive syndicalism.” Finally, these 
communities of people embarked on specialized work have a progres- 
sive public function by furnishing means for overcoming nationalism 
and making room for solidarity. 

Though Oppenheimer moves away from Rorty’s strong private- 
public split, he does not reach the theoretical limits found in Marxism 
and Christianity. As Rorty notes, Marxism with its historical material- 
ism and proletarian revolution “has been the envy of all later intel- 
lectual movements because it seemed, for a moment, to show how 
to synthesize self-creation and social responsibility,” that is, to theo- 
retically and historically unify the private and the public.*? In an 
analogous way, Christians unify the private-public split by seeking 
private perfection by living for others. 

Nonetheless, Oppenheimer’s bonds between the private and the 
public, as exemplified by his specialized communities, are taken as 


160 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


strong and serve to bridge the private-public split. Such communities 
provide advocates and receptive audiences embedded in practice, 
provide robust and concrete means connected to utilitarian needs 
and internationalism, and move us forward towards human equality 
and a world without war. Further, Oppenheimer might contend that 
Rorty’s position is dangerously close to simply taking modernity’s 
autonomous individuals and placing them in a theoretical vacuum, 
and raising the specter of a debilitating relativism. Thus, Oppenheimer 
avoids the radical individualism of MacLeish and the scientism of 
Rabi and his universal culture of science. 

Beyond literature and its vital role for extending our sense of soli- 
darity, Rorty says little in Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity about 
other means for extending and deepening human solidarity. Similarly, 
Oppenheimer says little about the nature of thematic discourse which 
he takes as vital for cultural coherence and solidarity. A major criticism 
of the visions of both Rorty and Oppenheimer is that their “social 
glue” is simply not thick enough. However, by borrowing from each 
other — Rorty emphasizing something like Oppenheimer’s pluralist 
communitarianism and Oppenheimer emphasizing Rorty’s literary 
means for solidarity as a vital part of thematic discourse — both can 
thicken the social glue. 

In his account of Orwell’s novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, Rorty has 
an intriguing but unsettling discussion of the reeducation and torture 
of Winston, the novel’s protagonist, by O’Brien. Concerning torture, 
Rorty writes 


But people can, their torturers hope, experience the ultimate humil- 
iation of saying to themselves, in retrospect, “Now that I have 
believed or desired this, I can never be what I hoped to be, what I 
thought I was. The story I have been telling myself about myself — 
my picture of myself as honest, or loyal, or devout — no longer 
makes sense. I no longer have a self to make sense of. There is no 
world in which I can picture myself as living, because there is no 
vocabulary in which I can tell a coherent story about myself.” ... If 
one can discover that key sentence and that key thing, then, as 
O’Brien says, one can tear a mind apart and put it together in new 


shapes of one’s own choosing.**4 


Oppenheimer — Philosophical Exploration II 161 


For Winston, it came with his betrayal of Julia, his lover and com- 
panion in rebellion against Big Brother. Taken to Room 101 where 
one’s worst fear resides, Winston broke and said “Do it to Julia!” 
With that sentence, with that action, he would never be able to recon- 
stitute himself (never be able to develop a final vocabulary to rede- 
scribe himself) and could no longer justify himself to himself. In 
psychological terms, the narrative unity of his life ended and could 
not be put back together again.* 

With the above ideas from Rorty in mind, I would like to con- 
clude this philosophical exploration by proposing a possible portrayal 
of Oppenheimer. Shortly after the war, even with the atomic threat, a 
case could be made that Oppenheimer had a “plausible large-scale 
scenario” for realizing the “technical possibility of human equality” 
based on redescribing our public world — Bohr’s Open World begin- 
ning with the international control of atomic energy. But once this 
redescription failed, the liberal imagination was unable to redescribe 
the public sphere by constructing a plausible scenario or narrative 
leading us forward to a future of “human dignity, freedom and peace.” 

At the same time, there was certainly another attempt at rede- 
scription but now in the private sphere. Given his significant involve- 
ment in the development of the atomic bomb and the decisions for 
its use (e.g., the “Godlike decision”), Oppenheimer was confronted 
with a crisis calling for personal redescription. However, once the 
redescription in the public sphere failed, Oppenheimer could not 
develop a final vocabulary to redescribe himself. In other words, he 
could not justify himself to himself, and in some ways he became 
self-tortured. 


Psychology has much to say here; in particular, narrative psychology is an area of 
psychological research and used in therapy. The literature in this area is extensive. For 
a recent book, consider Dan P. McAdams, Ruthellen Josselson, and Amia Lieblich 
(editors), Identity and Story: Creating Self in Narrative (Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association, 2006). Philosophers also have much to say here as well. 
For recent articles consider Galen Strawson, “Against Narrativity,” Ratio XVII 
(2004), pp. 428-452 and Anthony Rudd, “In Defence of Narrative,” European 
Journal of Philosophy 17 (2009). 


162 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Historically, from Rorty’s perspective, Oppenheimer is among the 
few individuals whose redescription in the private sphere depended so 
crucially on a redescription in the public sphere where the individual 
was a major actor in shaping the public sphere. In other words, 
Oppenheimer was historically placed in a game of big stakes and he 
was morally unlucky both personally and publically. A twist of fate 
here is that Rorty’s private-public split is intimately joined, almost 
unified, in Oppenheimer’s attempts at redescription. 

This portrayal of Oppenheimer like others (e.g., Freeman Dyson’s 
characterization of Oppenheimer as an Atomic Faust***) surely paints 
things as more focused and momentous than they were. Things evolved 
and developed over time. Most important, Oppenheimer’s hope and 
vision of 1957-59 should be seen as a continuing response by 
Oppenheimer to fulfill responsibilities that arose from his “having 
played an active part in promoting a revolution in warfare.” Indeed, 
this hope and vision of the 1950s could be interpreted as an attempt 
to redescribe the public sphere and “contribute to making sense of 
what is left.” 

Nevertheless, the intimate union between his attempted, public 
and private redescriptions shortly after the war in all likelihood 
remained with him, and at times materialized in his public expres- 
sions. In 1947, there was his unsettling admonition that “physicists 
have known sin.” In 1959 at Basel, Oppenheimer lamented that 
“In 1945 [decision to use atomic bomb and early attempts at inter- 
national control], in 1949 [hydrogen bomb controversy], and per- 
haps now, there have been crucial moments in which the existence of 
a public philosophical discourse ... could have made a great difference 
in the moral climate and human scope of our times.” 


Chapter 9 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 


The discipline of contemporary international relations provides both 
theoretical and empirical resources for examining and illuminating 
Oppenheimer’s thought and philosophical outlook. Such resources 
also serve to further clarify and even evaluate his thought. In this 
chapter, the emphasis is general and theoretical. In the next chapter, 
the focus narrows to the nuclear revolution with special emphasis on 
nuclear proliferation and disarmament. 

As emphasized in this chapter, the three dominant theoretical 
approaches to international relations — realism, liberal internation- 
alism, and constructivism — assist in categorizing and probing 
Oppenheimer’s thought. Connections are then drawn between 
Oppenheimer’s vision and the functional approach developed by 
David Mitrany, who was a colleague of Oppenheimer’s at the Institute 
for Advanced Study. In addition, Oppenheimer’s communal view of 
science and his emphasis on cognitive communities embarked on special- 
ized work are shown to have clear affinities to the concept of “epistemic 
community” as advanced by international relations theorists such as 
Peter Haas in the 1990s. 

Most important, the overall exploration in these two chapters 
furnishes coherence and grounding to Oppenheimer’s thought by 
placing it within the traditions of international relations theory, and 
hence reveals that he again offers something of value that reaches 
beyond the symbolic. Moreover, central to Oppenheimer’s overall 
vision is transcending the nuclear revolution by opening up the 


163 


164 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


possibility for nuclear disarmament and moving towards a world with- 
out war. The degree to which such an aspiration can be placed into a 
narrative structure using international relations theory is critical to 
how one views Oppenheimer and his thought and, in all likelihood, 
how Oppenheimer viewed himself. 


Realism, Liberal Internationalism, and Constructivism 


Realism with its emphasis on competition and power between nation 
states was the most influential approach to international relations 
when Oppenheimer set forth his hope and vision in the late 1950s. 
Realist thought became dominant shortly after World War II and still 
remains so, though not to such a strong degree. Liberal internation- 
alism with its emphasis on democracy as well as international law and 
cooperation between states arose in large measure as a response to the 
catastrophe of World War I and was the dominant school of interna- 
tional relations up to World War II. For realists, idealism (e.g., League 
of Nations), which is natural to liberal internationalism, had ironically 
led in part to the outbreak of World War II. Interestingly, constructiv- 
ism with its emphasis on ideas and social construction in international 
relations became a significant approach after the unanticipated and 
peaceful end of the Cold War. 

Each of these 20th Century theoretical perspectives traces its 
origins back in history. Realism reaches back to such philosophers 
as Thomas Hobbes and his anarchic state of nature and even to 
Thucydides of ancient Greece, liberal internationalism to Immanuel 
Kant and Enlightenment optimism, and constructivism to Friedrich 
Hegel and German Idealism. Each perspective attempts to be descrip- 
tive, and hopefully explanatory, as well as prescriptive and hence nor- 
mative. Nevertheless, given the complexity and the multi-causality of 
international relations, many theorists are wary of wholeheartedly 
taking just one approach, and recommend using the insights and 
resources of all three. That is, they recommend a methodological 
pluralism. Moreover, even given that realism is more systematic and 
simplifying in its assumptions than the other two approaches, one 
needs to realize that not even all realists are of one voice. 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 165 


Realism. In realistic thought, states which are the key actors of 
international relations are self-interested and power-seeking. Hence, 
the overriding concerns of a state are and should be its national 
security and survival. International law and morality are in general 
ineffective, and serve as screens for “power politics” between states. 
For many, realism paints a grim, egoistic, and hence pessimistic pic- 
ture of international relations. Classical mid-20th Century realists like 
Hans Morgenthau and the American theologian Reinhold Niebuhr 
tended to take the ruthless nature of international relations as arising 
from the failings of human nature — humans are selfish and aggressive. 

In 1979, Kenneth Waltz revitalized the realistic tradition with the 
publication of his book Theory of International Politics, putting in 
place what is now called structural realism or neorealism. He offered 
a more “scientific” approach (along the lines of microeconomics and 
game theory which analyses competition/cooperation between firms 
and players) to international relations by characterizing and investi- 
gating the structure of the international system and its systemic 
imperatives. Moreover, he simply dismissed, and hence avoided, the 
reductive and ontologically suspect move of grounding the nature of 
the international relations on the failings of human nature.**° 

For Waltz, the central ordering principle of the international sys- 
tem is anarchy, not in the sense of chaos, but in the sense that among 
states there is no central authority or enforcer. Given that states are 
self-interested and fundamental interests do conflict, power politics 
results and the international system becomes a “self-help” system. In 
understanding international relations, the focus is on the distribution 
of power and hence the capabilities among states whose primary con- 
cern is national security. As a case in point, states may appear to join 
together and cooperate for altruist reasons, but on closer inspection 
their cooperation might be seen as simply a balance of power against 
a stronger state. 

Further, neorealism downplays domestic politics as well as the 
restraining force of morality and international law on the behavior of 
states. Most important, it significantly downplays non-state actors like 
international institutions. For Waltz, “realists believe that interna- 
tional institutions are shaped and limited by states that found and 


166 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


sustain them and have little independent effect.... [resulting in] the 
subordination of international institutions to national purposes.”*°” 

The international arena, which is epitomized by struggle and 
competition as well as permeated by insecurity and uncertainty, is 
certainly dangerous for the neorealist. Nevertheless, international 
relations are understandable. Above all, the danger does not arise 
from the failings of human nature or some “original sin.” Rather, “It 
is the basic situation [namely, international anarchy] that is danger- 
ous” and human beings are obliged to work within it.*** States are 
instructed to be watchful and constantly aware of the realities of self- 
interest and power. In particular, realism counsels against utopian 
thinking that can lead to such reckless undertakings as moral crusad- 
ing and other unnecessary interventions. 

Liberal Internationalism. Though realism was the dominant 
approach to international relations when Oppenheimer set forth his 
hope and vision in the 1950s, liberal internationalism was still promi- 
nent and has now moved to center stage, especially since the end of 
the Cold War. For liberalism, realistic thought is narrowing and too 
simplifying in its assumptions. It is fixated on the state as the key actor 
in international affairs and too security-focused. Moreover, conflict 
and hence power politics are taken as the essence of international 
affairs. In many ways, realism regards states like billiard balls with no 
internal structure or dynamics and capable only of collision. 

Liberal internationalism is less systematic than realism and more 
wide-ranging in its concepts and assumptions. Thus, liberal interna- 
tionalism could well be conceived as a cluster of interrelated and 
reinforcing ideas, principles, and themes. As John Ikenberry, in his 
2009 article “Liberal Internationalism 3.0: America and the Dilemmas 
of Liberal World Order,” writes 


At its most basic, liberal internationalism offers a vision of an open, 
rule-based system in which states trade and cooperate to achieve 
mutual gains. Liberals assume that peoples and governments have 
deep common interests in the establishment of a cooperative world 
order organized around principles of restraint, reciprocity, and 
sovereign equality. There is an optimist assumption lurking in liberal 
internationalism that states can overcome constraints and cooperate 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 167 


to solve security dilemmas, pursue collective action, and create an 
open, stable system. ... Across the decades, liberal internationalists 
have shared the view that trade and exchange have a modernizing 
and civilizing effect on states, undercutting illiberal tendencies and 
strengthening the fabric of international community. Liberal inter- 
nationalists also share the view that democracies are — in contrast 
to autocratic and authoritarian states — particularly able and willing 
to operate within an open ruled-based international system and to 
cooperate for mutual gain.**° 


Whereas realism has a singular view of the interdependence between 
states grounded in competition and national security, liberalism with 
emphasis on cooperation as well as competition has a more pluralistic 
and complex view of interdependence ranging from commercial and 
cultural ties to international organizations and international law. 
While realism downplays domestic politics, liberal internationalism 
puts a strong emphasis on domestic politics and the virtues of demo- 
cratic states, and hence on the spread of democracy. Not surprising, 
realists tend to view the United States as just another self-interested 
state which happens to be a very successful great power whereas liber- 
als tend to view as the United States as exceptional in its promotion 
of liberalism and international order. 

Liberal internationalism emphasizes mutual gains through a net- 
work of cooperation among states based on such means as open mar- 
kets and collective security. Such a network undercuts the competitive 
and security-focused character of the international system, and offers 
the opportunity for a prosperous and peaceful world. Central to this 
network are international and supranational institutions and organi- 
zations (e.g., United Nations, World Bank, European Union, Nuclear 
Nonproliferation regime, multinational corporations). Such mecha- 
nisms not only coordinate activities and bring to light new possibilities, 
but serve to constrain and even limit the sovereignty of states. Whereas 
realists downplay international institutions, liberals stress their poten- 
tial as well as their real power. Furthermore, liberal internationalists 
not only see nation states, but they see a common humanity which 
further confines the state conceptually and morally as well as legally 
(e.g., international treaties on human rights). 


168 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Given its optimistic assumptions and belief in progress, liberal 
internationalism is both a theoretical perspective and, according to its 
proponents, a project as well. However, with the recent international 
and perhaps domestic “decline” of the United States along with its 
assumed centrality to the international liberal order, some argue that 
today this project is threatened and may soon end.**° 

Realists view other states as necessarily foes since their reality is 
one of competition and the necessary conflict of interests. Liberal 
internationalists view other states as potentially friends since their 
hope is one of cooperation and the potential harmony of interests. 
Realists emphasize conflict, anarchy, and relative gain whereas liberals 
emphasize cooperation, progress, and mutual gain. Realists downplay 
the power of morality and international institutions whereas liberals 
do not. 

Constructivism. Though realism and liberal internationalism have 
significant differences, they are similar in their underlying ontological 
and epistemological assumptions. First, they take a structural/system- 
levels approach to international relations with an emphasis on reason — 
rational self-interest for realism, enlightened but morally constrained 
self-interest for liberalism. Just as important, they take the identities 
and interests of their key actors — states for realism, states and other 
actors like international organizations for liberalism — to be relatively 
stable if not fixed over time. 

Constructivism takes a more sociological approach holding that 
the identities and interests of these collective entities (e.g., states) 
are not fixed, and hence in need of explanation. Further, identity 
changes become a fundamental dynamic of the international system 
and hence are vital in explaining international relations. In large 
measure, identities are socially constructed through mechanisms that 
range from the progressive (e.g., open political debate) to the illib- 
eral (e.g., mass propaganda), but ideas are key to constructivism. 
Consequently, “Constructivists contend that their theory is deeper 
than realism and liberalism because it explains the origins of the forces 
that drive those competing theories.” **! Also, the essence for the con- 
structivist is process rather than behavior of fixed, rational agents in a 
fixed structure. 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 169 


At this point, it is helpful to turn to a discussion of constructivism 
by the international relations theorist Andrew Phillips.**? To begin, he 
frames part of his discussion in what he calls the “rationalistic-con- 
structivist divide.” Given similarities between realism and liberalism 
and such analytic approaches as rational-actor theory from microeco- 
nomics, this divide is characteristic of the divide between realism/ 
liberalism and constructivism. From an ontological perspective, ration- 
alists and constructivists differ on three points according to Phillips. 

“First, constructivists are philosophical idealists rather than mate- 
rialists,” where the assumption is that realists and liberals emphasize 
material structures and causes in exclusion to, or at least over, idea- 
tional structures and causes. The idealism here is not ethical but onto- 
logical in the sense that ideas, and hence meaning and norms, are 
essential for explaining and understanding international relations. In 
particular, ideas are not simply reflections of the material realm. 

“Second, constructivists posit a mutually constitutive relationship 
between agents and structures.” The identities of agents are “gov- 
erned by the normative and ideological structures that they inhabit” 
but these structures are in turn “sustained by patterns of social prac- 
tice that are produced and reproduced through the actions of these 
agents.” For instance, “The international system is therefore seen by 
constructivists as being a constitutive rather than merely a strategic 
domain” for states. “This position contrasts with rationalists’ belief 
that agents [states] are analytically separable from the environments 
they inhabit, and that the study of international politics consists of the 
study of agents’ instrumental pursuit of presocial interests that remain 
constant over the course of social interaction.” 

Third, “rationalists and constructivists diverge in their concep- 
tions of the dominant logics governing agents’ actions. Behavior 
through constructivist eyes is seen as essentially norm-driven, with 
states seeking to ensure a correspondence between their own conduct 
and internalized prescriptions for legitimate behavior that states have 
derived from their identities .... Far from being of purely ornamental 
value, norms exercise a profound influence on state behavior ....” In 
contrast, rationalists believe that “agents” behavior is governed not by 
a logic of appropriateness but merely by a logic of consequences. 


170 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


States through this optic are conceived as rational egoists pursuing 
interests formed exogenously to social interaction in a rationally 
instrumental manner ... .” 

Given such ontological disagreements between rationalists and con- 
structivists, it is unsurprising that there are epistemological and meth- 
odological differences. For instance, as pointed out by Phillips, given 
that social construction surely results in fundamental diversity, con- 
structivist approaches appear to “preclude the possibility of developing 
all but the most elementary transhistorically or transculturally valid 
claims about international politics ... . This contrasts with rationalists’ 
conviction that there exists sufficient commonality in state behaviors 
across different cultural and historical contexts as to warrant the devel- 
opment of law-like generalizations about international politics, and 
their concomitant belief in the possibility of developing robust predic- 
tive claims about global politics on the basis of these generalizations.” 

With regard to normative guidance, it must be appreciated that 
realism and liberal internationalism are more systematic than construc- 
tivism by having definitive views regarding the state and the interna- 
tional system. Further, realism and liberalism in contrast to constructivism 
are each “explicitly anchored within a broader philosophical tradition” 
and hence tend to be grounded on distinctive prescriptive and norma- 
tive claims."® Hence, the moral guidance that constructivism can offer 
is less definitive and clear than realism and liberalism. 

Nonetheless, constructivism has something profound to offer the 
moral realm. As highlighted by Phillips, given that the identities and 
interests of agents are not fixed and can be transformed (say “by the 
force of logical argument”), constructivism leads one “to infer far 
greater possibilities for expanding the moral boundaries of political 
community than may be discerned in either realism or all but the 


*»For the case in point, “realism draws its insights from a Hobbesian conception of 
the state of nature and is imbued with a pessimism regarding the prospects for human 
progress that has its foundations in theology as much as the social sciences.” Whereas 
“liberals subscribe to a Lockean conception of the state of nature and are conversely 
informed by an optimism about humanity’s capacity to effect transformative social 
” 


change that is anchored firmly within the tradition of the Enlightenment .... 
(Phillips, “Constructivism” (ref. 342), p. 69). 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 171 


most radical streams of liberalism.” Furthermore, as pointed out by 
international relations theorist Jack Snyder, since “constructivists 
believe that ideas and values helped shape the modern state system, 
they expect intellectual constructs to be decisive in transforming it — 
for good or ill.”*4% 

By way of summary and illustration, consider the remarkable fact 
that since the first atomic attacks in 1945, which some conclude were 
highly instrumental in bringing about a quick surrender of Japan, 
nuclear weapons have never been used again in combat for over seven 
decades. According to some scholars, this non-use of nuclear weapons 
“remains the single most important phenomenon of the nuclear 
age.”**4 How would realism, liberal internationalism, and constructivism 
account for this? 

Realists would appeal to such material factors as the overwhelming 
destructive power of these weapons and to the logic of nuclear deter- 
rence. Though acknowledging elements in the realist explanation, 
liberal internationalists would appeal to international organizations 
like the United Nations and the success of such international instru- 
ments as the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as well as commercial 
ties and the spread of democracy. Though sympathetic to these two 
accounts, constructivists would give prominent roles to changes in the 
identity of states/agents and their interests as well as the power of 
norms directly related to these weapons — for example, the norm of 
nuclear weapon non-use as developed by the constructivist theorist 
Nina Tannenwald in her 2007 book The Nuclear Taboo. 

With the above development of international relations theory in 
hand, it proves illuminating to reexamine Oppenheimer’s hope and 
vision of the 1950s as well as his philosophical outlook. Realist, lib- 
eral, and constructivist components and themes are noticeably present 
in Oppenheimer’s thought. Realism is seen by his support for robust 
deterrence and his call for a limited war fighting capacity with nuclear 
options. However, his realism is tempered and conditional, and reflects 
the dangers and limits of the international system in the 1950s. 

Most predominant and enduring to his thought is liberal interna- 
tionalism. Oppenheimer’s fundamental role and continuing support 
for the international control of atomic energy is illustrative here. The 


172 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Acheson-Lilienthal proposal with the “great hope” and “great peril” 
of atomic energy offered what he took to be “a pilot plant for a new 
type of international cooperation.” Even with the rejection of the 
international control of atomic energy, Oppenheimer held that the 
arguments in the Acheson—Lilienthal Report are “correct arguments” 
and that “Some day we will want to come back to this.” The 
Acheson-Lilienthal initiative is symbolic of the possibilities of interna- 
tional cooperation and collective security. 

Oppenheimer’s latter vision of 1957-59 was multi-faceted, long- 
term, and more down-to-earth. He stressed the need for a viable 
public sector and the need for moving philosophy back into the pub- 
lic sphere through thematic discourse. Most important, breaking the 
“grip” of the nation state was central to his vision. From the perspec- 
tive of liberal internationalism, this could conceivably be achieved 
through international organizations and institutions (like NATO and 
EURATOM), and especially communities “embarked on specialized 
work.” For Oppenheimer, “These communities of the mind are the 
human counterpart and the basis of the international institutions that 
the future must hold in store and on them rests ... the hope that we 
will survive this unprecedented period in the history of man.”*4° 

There are major constructivist elements and themes in 
Oppenheimer’s vision. For one, he advocated a pluralist international 
communitarianism, and community is the heart of the social con- 
struction of identity and interests. Further, for Oppenheimer knowl- 
edge is communal with these specialized communities being “true 
elements of federation” and legitimate and natural objects of loyalty 
and commitment, that is, these international communities construct 
identities and interests. Given that their knowledge and specialized 
work are essential for the functioning of society and the international 
system, these communities work to “undermine state sovereignty from 
below”*** by transforming the identities of states and their interests. 

Drawing these points together, Oppenheimer, though aware and 
open to realist insights, is first and foremost a liberal internationalist 
with strong constructivist elements. Compelled by the nuclear revolu- 
tion in which he played an integral part, he advocated an Open World 
based on international cooperation with a corresponding faith in the 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 173 


power of international organizations, institutions, and specialized 
communities. Further, like many liberals, Oppenheimer expressed 
utopian themes and can be viewed as advocating a project, or at least 
a vision, leading us to a liberal world order and a world without war. 
Unlike realism, Oppenheimer’s philosophical outlook is optimistic, 
progressive, and founded on community. Though Oppenheimer may 
be a tragic figure, his philosophical vision is not tragic. 

Finally, in his influential 1992 article, “Anarchy Is What States 
Make of It: The Social Construction of Power Politics,” the promi- 
nent constructivist theorist Alexander Wendt“ argues for “the propo- 
nents of strong liberalism and the constructivists ... [to] join forces 
in contributing to a process-oriented international theory” since 
“Each group has characteristic weaknesses that are complemented 
by the other’s strengths.”**” Strong liberals claim that “international 
institutions can transform state identities and interests,” but for 
Wendt, constructivism can provide the sociological underpinnings 
and understanding for these transformations.** 

For the world of today, Wendt holds that “The significance of 
states relative to multinational corporations, new social movements, 
transnationals, and intergovernmental organizations is clearly declin- 
ing ....” But he sides with realists holding that “in the medium run 
sovereign states will remain the dominant political actors in the inter- 
national system.”**? In other words, the identities and interests of 
states are basically fixed and will remain so for some time. Given this, 
a vision of how to move to a strong liberal order must be construc- 
tivist in nature and long-term in narrative. The similarities here to 
Oppenheimer’s overall vision are unmistakable. 

In the next section, the focus on Oppenheimer and international 
relations sharpens and provides more detail as well as additional sup- 
port. The international functionalism of David Mitrany, a colleague 
of Oppenheimer’s, is examined and seen to have affinities with 
Oppenheimer’s vision. 


‘Wendt is a “modern constructivist” as distinguished from a “postmodern construc- 
tivist.” (Phillips, “Constructivism” (ref. 342), p. 64). Also, note that postmodern 
constructivists are concerned with human emancipation. 


174 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


David Mitrany and International Functionalism 


Though others made significant contributions, Mitrany can reasona- 
bly be taken as the originator of the functional approach in interna- 
tional relations theory.“4 He developed his ideas on functionalism 
during the 1930s and 1940s, and continued to expound and develop 
them until his death in 1975. In 1943 during the war, Mitrany pub- 
lished his well-received pamphlet, A Working Peace System, which has 
now become a classic essay. According to Chris Brown, a professor of 
international relations, “Functionalism is certainly the most impor- 
tant approach to international institutions to have emerged in the 
twentieth century ....”*°° Moreover, Mitrany’s work “continues to 
provide inspiration for those who hope to moderate the effects of 
state sovereignty in the interests of improving global welfare.”**! 

Functionalism. In 1975, shortly before his death, the London 
School of Economics published a collection of Mitrany’s works along 
with a personal memoir and retrospective/prospective reflections. 
Paul Taylor of LSE and a former student of Mitrany’s contributed the 
scholarly introduction to this volume from which the following 
excerpt is taken. 


The major principles of functionalism are that man can be weaned 
away from his loyalty to the nation state by the experience of fruitful 
international co-operation; that international organization arranged 
according to the requirements of the task could increase welfare 
rewards to individuals beyond the level obtainable within the state; 
that the rewards would be greater if the organization worked, where 
necessary, across national frontiers, which very frequently cut into 
the organization’s ideal working area. Individuals and groups could 
begin to learn the benefits of co-operation and would be increas- 
ingly involved in an international co-operative ethos, creating inter- 
dependencies, pushing for further integration, undermining the 
most important bases of the nation state. From small beginnings, in 
Professor Mitrany’s view, the functional approach could eventually 


44Ror historical background and interpretation on Mitrany and functionalism, 
see David Long, “International Functionalism and the Politics of Forgetting,” 
International Journal XLVIII (Spring 1993). 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 175 


enmesh national governments in a dense network of interlocking 
co-operative ventures. Furthermore, one important pillar of their 
authority — the loyalties of citizens — would have been weakened 
in the development at the popular level of a social-psychological 
community which stressed superordinate ‘co-operative’ goals, but 
which nevertheless posed no apparent threat to the existing cultural 
attachments of groups and individuals.... Functionalism holds that 
violence has its roots in the social and economic circumstances of 
people, and that if we give them a “moderate sufficiency of what 
they want and ought to have they will keep the peace.” Accordingly, 
functionalism points to the potential contribution of the specialized 
agencies of the United Nations to the improvement of conditions 
which otherwise encourage violence. It has less to say about the 
‘fire-brigade’ function of the United Nations — the specific actions 
needed when the fight has started.*°? 


Note that functionalism is not so much a theory of international 
organizations but really an approach to peace based on what Mirtrany 
describes as “form follows function.” 

For Mitrany, “form follows function” directs us to concentrate on 
what unites us, not on what divides us if we are to move toward inter- 
national solutions and coordinated action. At this time and for the 
foreseeable future, this will be located in functional approaches not 
in political-constitutional approaches (like the League of Nations). 
The political-constitutional tends to be too undefined, overly legal- 
istic, and motivated mostly by what divides us and hence focused on 
policing not solving. At best, political-constitutional devices lead to 
half-measures. 

First and foremost, we should focus on specific transnational 
issues and problems that are directly related to welfare (such as disease 
control, fighting drug trafficking, coordinating transportations like 
civil aviation, establishing communication systems like postage). Such 
undertakings in large measure separate the technical from the politi- 
cal, and hence separate what currently unites us from what currently 
divides us. Moreover, in A Working Peace System, Mitrany maintains 
that this separability-thesis is complemented by “a cardinal virtue of 
the functional method — what one might call the virtue of technical 


176 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


self-determination. The functional dimensions ... determine themselves. 
In a like manner the function determines its appropriate organs. 
It also reveals through practice the nature of the action required 
under the given conditions, in that way the powers needed by the 
respective authority.”*°* Additionally, “The functional approach ... by 
linking authority to a specific activity” breaks “away from the tradi- 
tional link between authority and a definite territory” so characteristic 
on the modern state.*** Predictably, technical experts and specialized 
international agencies have vital roles in Mitrany’s functionalism. The 
functional approach is flexible, pragmatic, and above all experimental; 
and most of all, it is “a plea for the creation” here and now, not later, 
of “the elements of an active international society.” *** 

With successful functional cooperation there should be “spillover” 
effects promoting wider and more substantial cooperation in the 
original domain as well as cooperation in other areas. For Mitrany, 
“Each of us is in effect a bundle of varied functional loyalties ... .”%°° 
Hence, as state powers, especially related to welfare, shift from the 
state to functional agencies and organizations, national loyalties fade 
and most likely transfer to “international society.” This “transfera- 
biltiy thesis” will be most clearly exemplified by the technical experts 
and personnel of the specialized agencies due to “a professional pride 
and a vested interest in good performance.” Such “a detached interna- 
tional civil service” would be “the best insurance against any possible 
abuse,” and its functional service “is more likely than anything else to 
breed a new conscience in all those concerned with such international 
activities.” 357 

Given that sovereignty is “a bundle of powers,” state sovereignty 
diminishes as the functional order expands. Functionalism is not a 
frontal assault on sovereignty since it looks “to undermine state 
sovereignty from below.”** In the words of Mirtany, “Sovereignty 
cannot in fact be transferred effectively through a formula [say a con- 
stitution], only through a function.”**° In constructivist terms, state 
identities and interests like those of individuals are transformed and 
new possibilities emerge. Transition from an international system 
based on power politics to an international society based on func- 
tional order becomes conceivable. For Mitrany, “we must put our 
faith not in a protected peace but in a working peace.”*°° In the end, 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 177 


the functional approach suggests a path to a new global order of peace 
and prosperity. 

Though insightful and even inspiring, Mitrany’s ideas have been 
criticized. For one, his “separability thesis” that the technical can be 
separated from the political is certainly limited, perhaps naive. For 
instance, consider the establishment of international communications 
in authoritarian states. Also, Mitrany appears overly optimistic about 
“spillover” effects. Can successful functional cooperation, in say disease 
control, spearhead significant cooperation in the control of strategic 
weapons? 

Moreover, what really is Mitrany’s final vision for the world? He 
is just not clear and specific here, and even appears contradictory at 
times. Certainly, his vision does not entail a centralized world govern- 
ment. Perhaps, he is contemplating a political world-federation of 
diminished states. He does at times say that the “the ultimate goal was 
federation” and he might even take the functional approach as “the 
development of federation by instalments.”**! But it must be realized 
that Mitrary was a harsh and continuing critic of federation. In con- 
trast to a federal system, Mitrany speaks of an international society 
based on functional order. According to international relations theo- 
rists Lucian Ashworth and David Long, “Mitrany’s vision of a func- 
tionally organized world was one with many overlapping, non-congruent 
international functional organizations” combined with “a web of 
overlapping, pluralistic associations of groups and individuals.”*® But, 
as they point out, such a pluralistic vision is confronted with an 
immense problem of coordination. 

Mitrany’s “transferability thesis” is also questionable. The loyalties 
of citizens to a state are not simply tied to their welfare or instrumental 
needs being fulfilled by the state. Loyalty is grounded in the emotional 
or spiritual realm as well. Loyalty is based on a shared history and 
future, generational connections, and a common culture together with 
national pride and attachment to a given territory. Can national loyalty 
really be transferred to a functional or instrumental order? 

More troubling, is that national loyalty could be first and fore- 
most linked to the physical protection of the citizenry and hence with 
national security and military power. Mirtany says of security that “It 
is in fact a separate function like the others, not something that stands 


178 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


in stern isolation, overriding all the others.”*°? Realists would certainly 
object here pointing out that security and defense are prerequisites for 
functional undertakings. 

In the 1966 re-publication of Mitrany’s A Working Peace System, 
Hans Morgenthau, who was perhaps the most prominent realist dur- 
ing the Cold War, wrote the introduction. For Morgenthau, “Modern 
technology [e.g., nuclear weapons] has rendered the nation state 
obsolete as a principle of political organization; for the nation state is 
no longer able to perform what is the elementary function of any 
political organization: to protect the lives of its members and their 
way of life.”°°t Somewhat ironically for realistic critics of Mitrany, 
Morgenthau concludes his introduction saying, 


The only rational reply to the challenge which nationalism presents 
to the peace and order of the world is the voluntary cooperation of 
a number of nations with common interests for the purpose of creat- 
ing supra-national institutions after the model of specialized agen- 
cies of the United Nations and of the European Communities. 
These institutions would gradually take over the functions which the 
nation state has traditionally preformed but is no longer able to 
perform today. If nation states acted in accord with the rational 
requirements of the age, they would strive, as it were, to make them- 
selves superfluous. This is the “functional approach” Professor 
Mitrany advocates. ... It would be rash indeed to try to predict 
who will win the contest between the old and the new, between 
nationalism and functionalism. But it is no exaggeration to assert 
that the outcome of this contest will decide the fate of the world. 
For nationalism as a principle of political organization is not only 
obsolete; but in the nuclear age it is also self-destructive. Thus the 
future of the civilized world is intimately tied to the future of the 
functional approach to international organization.*® 


By way of synopsis, international relations theorist Cornelia Navari 
in a 1995 article speaks to the “Mitranian Legacy.” 


Mitrany’s idea, and his chief legacy, was the conceptualization and 
systematic exposition of a new form of international political organi- 
zation. Instead of the spiritual union whose parts were fused by a 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 179 


common purpose, as many thought of the League [of Nations], or 
the constitutional federation whose parts are fused by a legal struc- 
ture, he articulated the model of an organization proceeding by 
sector or segment whose parts were fused by the carrying out a task. 
He also gave to this new form its now recognized name, the func- 
tional type of international organization, and he promoted it in 


those terms.*°° 


Oppenheimer and Mitrany. The outlooks and ideas of Oppenheimer 
and Mitrany are similar and reinforcing. Oppenheimer and Mitrany 
are both in the liberal internationalist tradition offering pluralistic 
visions with strong emphasis on international cooperation and inter- 
national organizations. Plus, neither advocated a centralized world 
state. 

Central to their outlooks is that the nation state is obsolete, and 
its “grip” must be broken if we are to move forward to peace and 
prosperity. However, at this time, this cannot be achieved by simple, 
sweeping means due to the lack of international understanding and 
trust. Taking a long-term perspective, this must be addressed using 
concrete, practical steps focused on the technical. This is Mitrany’s 
functional approach and Oppenheimer’s international “fraternal com- 
munities ... embarked on specialized work.” Both give crucial roles to 
experts and specialized agencies. 

By way of contrast, Oppenheimer’s outlook and ideas are above 
all communal and cognitive whereas Mitrany’s are functional and 
administrative. Though science has a role for Mitrany, it is crucial for 
Oppenheimer. Science is not simply a technical and instrumental 
resource; it is also a key cultural resource for Oppenheimer. Moreover, 
with the ethos of science being universal, international cooperation is 
intrinsic to the scientific endeavor not just instrumental as found in 
the functional endeavors of Mitrany. 

The international control of atomic energy plays a fundamental 
role in Oppenheimer’s thought, and is symbolic and illustrative of the 
possibilities of international cooperation. In his 1966 forward and 
introduction to the re-publication of A Working Peace System, Mitrany 
stresses that when the atomic bomb was placed on the ballistic missile, 
we all became “one indivisible community, with inescapably one and 


180 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


the same fate — either to live or to vanish together.”*°” Henceforth, 
the functional approach becomes an overriding and immediate 
necessity. 

More interestingly, he writes that “There can be no real transfer 
of sovereignty until defense is entrusted to a common authority ... .” 
which “has now found a first international expression in the Security 
Council, and still more in the American proposals for the interna- 
tional control of atomic energy.”*°* There appears to be an unspoken 
implication here. Namely, atomic energy is so strongly connected to 
military power and defense as well as civilian welfare (e.g., nuclear 
power and nuclear medicine) that the “cardinal virtue of the func- 
tional method ... the virtue of technical self-determination” could 
allow us to move beyond the nation state even given the realist’s point 
that security and defense are prerequisites for functional undertak- 
ings. As Oppenheimer said in 1945, the development of atomic weap- 
ons is both “a great peril” and “a great hope.” For him, atomic 
energy is “a new field, in which just the novelty and the special char- 
acteristics of the technical operations should enable one to establish a 
community of interest which might almost be regarded as a pilot 
plant for a new type on international collaboration” leading to 
“a world that is united, and a world in which war will not occur.” 

In the end, both Mitrany and Oppenheimer seek to undermine 
state sovereignty from below by means of international efforts which 
emphasize the technical. Mitrany’s case for moving beyond the nation 
state could be strengthened by combining his instrumental, func- 
tional approach with Scientific Internationalism. Further, he should 
have highlighted science as a culture resource and made a stronger call 
for the international control of atomic energy. Though Oppenheimer’s 
vision clearly included the functional approaches and specialized agen- 
cies of Mitrary, he should have juxtaposed his own thought and vision 
with Mitrany’s functionalism. This would have promoted more 
understanding and connected his ideas to the work of others. 

It should be noted that Mitrany was a professor in the School of 
Social Sciences at the Institute for Advanced Study when Oppenheimer 
was its director. In what ways and to what degrees, Mitrany and 
Oppenheimer influenced each other is difficult to say. It is clear 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 181 


though that they did have political discussions; and their outlooks and 
ideas exhibit definite similarities and are certainly reinforcing.“ 


«*Mitrany was appointed a professor in the School of Social Sciences at the Institute 
for Advanced Study in 1933, and Oppenheimer became its director in 1947. It is 
perhaps impossible to determine when they first met, but there are two letters in the 
Mitrany Papers at the London School of Economics which are helpful (LSE’s Library 
collections, MITRANY/64). The first is a three-page, single-spaced note to 
Oppenheimer dated May 10, 1949. In this note, Mitrary addresses the reasons he did 
not return to the institute when the war was over. He reviews the background and 
some of the challenges and frustrations (e.g., bad working relations and insufficient 
financial support) of his appointment at the institute as well as his affiliation with the 
multinational corporation Unilever. More than a third of the note is devoted to 
reviewing his scholarly activities (e.g., publications and study groups) during the past 
few years. Of particular interest is the following. 


The booklet on “A Working Peace System” has, for something of its kind, 
had a remarkable circulation. What people think of these essays is not for me 
to say, but I can say that none of them is merely critical or descriptive — but 
each tries to break new ground. And whatever one may think of it, my 
approach has started a school of thought, and my writings are quoted as such 
in books of readings published since the war (as in that of Prof. Ebenstein, 
of Princeton, or the recent work of Prof. Morgenthau, of Chicago). 


Given this, it is reasonable to assume that by 1949 Oppenheimer was aware of 
Mitrany’s work and his “school of thought.” 

The second letter is from England and dated January 16, 1958. Mitrany reminds 
Oppenheimer of their recent discussions in Princeton about the current state of 
political theory and expresses his concern that “we are passing through something 
completely new in regard to political organisation.” He writes, “in the totalitarian 
countries, like Russia, there is no ‘politics’ left. The structure and essential principles 
for the political system ... are regarded there as changeable at will; and the give and 
take of the political process becomes simply a matter of dictation and management 
by small ruling groups.” Mitrany remarks that he has “an unhappy idea that the trend 
is the same” in the West though to a lesser degree, and likens his ideas to the views 
of Reinhold Niebuhr. Moreover, “the Welfare State, with its new devotion to eco- 
nomic and social security,” could possibly be as “equally ruthless,” as imperially 
motivated states in the past, to other countries, not by invasion, but by suddenly 
cutting off imports or exports. 

In addition, Mitrany sent Oppenheimer a copy of a current review that he had 
written of the book Sovereignty — An Inquiry Into the Public Good by the French 
political thinker Bertrand de Jouvenel. The review was included since “it states in a 


182 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In the next section, the focus on Oppenheimer and international 
relations sharpens again. The contemporary notion of “epistemic 
community” is considered and the role of such communities in inter- 
national relations is explored. 


Oppenheimer and Epistemic Communities 


With resemblances found in the work of previous scholars like Ludwig 
Fleck and his “thought collective” along with Thomas Kuhn and his 
scientific “paradigm,” the technical notion of “epistemic community” 
was “first elaborated in the early 1990s” and has served as the core of 
a research program in international relations supported by empirical 
findings.*° As a case in point, in 1992, the journal International 
Organization had a special issue entitled “Knowledge, Power, and 
International Policy Coordination” dedicated to the subject of epis- 
temic communities. Edited by the international relations theorist 


summary way some of the things we were discussing about the state of political 
theory.” Oppenheimer knew Jourvenel who was also a member of the Congress for 
Cultural Freedom. In fact, he was one of some twenty intellectuals that participated 
in the 1959 Basel seminar where Oppenheimer delivered his talk “In the Keeping 
of Unreason.” 

In his 1975 “The Making of the Functional Theory: A Memoir,” Mitrany writes 
negatively of Oppenheimer saying: “The other expectation Dr Flexner [founder of 
the Institute for Advanced Study] cherished was that within such a small and easy 
community scientists and humanists would tend to bridge the gap of specialization 
and cross-fertilise each other. That soon proved a vain project. There were individual 
contacts and friendships, significantly rather among the older generation; but the 
physicists, a younger group, were absorbed in their own exciting new universe, and 
even at mealtime used a language that put the rest of us out of bounds. The division 
became worse when Dr Robert Oppenheimer took over as director, having come 
from managing the atomic energy project at Los Alamos. He not only encouraged 
the expansion of his own school beyond what originally was intended ... but tended 
to use the place as a base for his own activities, more public than scientific; and he 
also upset the quiet discretion of the Institute’s inner life by encouraging a publicity 
of which he himself seemed to be in need.” (Mitrany, Functional Theory of Politics 
(ref. 352), pp. 29-30). 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 183 


Peter Haas, it consists of eight research articles in conjunction with an 
introduction and conclusion.” 

Early in his introduction, Haas provides the following characteri- 
zation of “epistemic community.” 


An epistemic community is a network of professionals with recog- 
nized expertise and competence in a particular domain and an 
authoritative claim to policy-relevant knowledge within that domain 
or issue-area. Although an epistemic community may consist of 
professionals from a variety of disciplines and backgrounds, they 
have (1) a shared set of normative and principled beliefs, which 
provide a value-based rationale for the social action of community 
members; (2) shared causal beliefs, which are derived from their 
analysis of practices leading or contributing to a central set of 
problems in their domain and which then serve as the basis for 
elucidating the multiple linkages between possible policy actions 
and desired outcomes; (3) shared notions of validity — that is, inter- 
subjective, internally defined criteria for weighing and validating 
knowledge in the domain of their expertise; and (4) a common 
policy enterprise — that is, a set of common practices associated 
with a set of problems to which their professional competence is 
directed, presumably out of the conviction that human welfare will 
be enhanced as a consequence.*”° 


Though epistemic communities are in many instances scientific 
communities or networks, they are not restricted to such communi- 
ties let alone to natural scientists. For example, there can be a human 
rights epistemic community consisting in part of lawyers and political 


"The literature on epistemic communities is extensive. For a recent overview and 
assessment of epistemic communities, see M. K. Davis Cross, “Rethinking Epistemic 
Communities Twenty Years Later,” Review of International Studies (2013), 
pp. 137-160. For detailed accounts of the emergence and role of epistemic commu- 
nities in Argentine-Brazilian cooperative nuclear agreements which led to their 
signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as well as the denuclearization of 
Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine after the break-up of the Soviet Union, see Sara 
Z. Kutchesfahani, Politics and the Bomb: The Role of Experts in the Creation of 
Cooperative Nuclear Non-Proliferation Agreements (New York: Routledge, 2014). 


184 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


scientists. Also, epistemic communities are not professions or disci- 
plines let alone interest groups like environmentalists. In fact, many 
epistemic communities cut across professions and disciplines. By way 
of illustration, three cases considered in Haas’s edited volume are the 
arms control epistemic community during the Cold War, the cetology 
epistemic community and whaling management during the Twentieth 
Century, and the Keynesian-economics epistemic community and its 
role in shaping post-World War II policies. 

The world of today and the last century is characterized by high 
levels of complexity and uncertainty as well as rapid technological 
change. With the dramatic rise of science and rationalization, much of 
the recent past “can be described in terms of the transfer of wider and 
wider areas of public policy from politics to expertise.”*”! Epistemic 
communities serve as principal agents in this environment by “articu- 
lating the cause-and-effect relationships of complex problems, help- 
ing states identify their interests, framing the issues for collective 
debate, proposing specific policies, and identifying salient points for 
negotiation.” This “control over knowledge and information is an 
important dimension of power and that the diffusion of new ideas and 
information can lead to new patterns of behavior and prove to be an 
important determinant” in such areas as policy innovation and inter- 
national policy coordination.*” 

The power and prestige of epistemic communities rest on their 
claim to validated and relevant knowledge, and are enhanced by the 
solidarity of the communities. Epistemic communities are especially 
called upon during times of crisis or technological shock (e.g., 
Sputnik) where decision makers are placed in unfamiliar techno- 
logical situations calling for action. The power and influence of 
epistemic communities are amplified by their transnational reach 
and by their being embedded in advisory and regulatory agencies at 
the national and international levels. Furthermore, epistemic com- 
munities have lasting effects through the institutions and organiza- 
tions which they played a role in promoting and founding. Most 
important, the impacts of epistemic communities are not limited to 
such things as simply supplying information and causal understand- 
ing. Epistemic communities share “normative and principled beliefs” 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 185 


which shape their guidance and counsel along with their actions. For 
example, they have a commitment to procedural rationality and typi- 
cally a commitment to human welfare and collective betterment. 
Consequently, epistemic communities shape the identities of states 
and the values of decision makers, and extend the horizons of pos- 
sibility and imagination. 

For some, the prominence of epistemic communities is troubling. 
As they point out, “the increasing influence of specialized groups 
such as epistemic communities may have serious negative implications 
for such deep-seated political values as democracy and _ participa- 
tion.”*”8 Nonetheless, “whether they constitute a neutral agent or a 
politically biased group of experts,” defenders of epistemic communi- 
ties “argue that, normatively, epistemic communities ultimately pro- 
vide more impartial advice than other modes of policy advice.” 
Further, and more important, “they are worth studying because they 
represent a causal pathway by which ideas come to inform political 
practices.” 374 

Peter Haas along with Emanuel Adler end their edited volume on 
epistemic communities with the following, which can be viewed as a 
tentative hope and vision. 


In the absence or aftermath of a hegemonically created world order, 
an alternative order based on shared cause-and-effect understand- 
ings, practices, and expectations may be possible. While epistemic 
communities can help constitute such an order, whether or not 
that order will be a better international order depends largely on 
the extent to which it is also based on shared values, rather than 
individual state interests, and on moral vision. Among the necessary 
conditions for minimal progressive change in international rela- 
tions are the redefinition of values and reconciliation of national 
interests with human interests in general, such as security, welfare, 
and human rights. To the extent that epistemic communities make 
some of the world problems more amenable to human reason and 
intervention, they can curb some of the international system’s anar- 
chic tendencies, temper some of the excesses of a purely state-centric 
order, and perhaps even help bring about a better international 
order.*”° 


186 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


In short, epistemic communities are important actors in international 
relations and potentially form a substantial force for progressive 
change; and investigating them is indispensable for understanding the 
role of reason and ideas in international relations. 

With the above in mind, one sees definite parallels and resonances 
between these recent investigations of epistemic communities and 
Oppenheimer’s views. Like proponents of epistemic communities, 
Oppenheimer places strong emphasis on complexity and rapid tech- 
nological change, and the resulting need for specialized knowledge 
and understanding. Likewise, Oppenheimer makes a strong connec- 
tion between specialized communities and knowledge. He portrays 
this as a kind of “cognitive syndicalism” that is also value-laden (e.g., 
openness, epistemic honesty, concern for collective betterment). His 
call for “the fraternal communities of men embarked on specialized 
work” sounds identical to a call for epistemic communities. Like Adler 
and Haas above, Oppenheimer held that these communities are a 
force for progressive change and needed to break the “grip” of the 
nation state. 

Oppenheimer’s views on epistemic-like communities are not as 
well-developed and empirically grounded as discussions of such com- 
munities today. This is not surprising since he spoke in the 1950s and 
not in the 1990s when the technical notion of “epistemic commu- 
nity” was first elaborated. Nonetheless, from firsthand experience, 
Oppenheimer was certainly cognizant of the power and influence of 
specialized communities and experts on national and international 
policy. His experiences as an adviser for atomic weapons during the 
war and his chairmanship of the General Advisory Committee to the 
Atomic Energy Commission were surely formative of his ideas. 
Furthermore, the Acheson—Lilienthal proposal in which he played 
an instrumental role did become the basis for the American pro- 
posal for the international control of atomic energy, and could be 
regarded as the creation of an epistemic-like community. This com- 
munity and its proposal were successful at the national level but not 
at the international level. Nonetheless, the Acheson—Lilienthal pro- 
posal (along with the American call for international control) has “left 
a legacy” that has not been “overlooked” and in altered forms has its 


Oppenheimer and International Relations 187 


proponents even today.*”° Also, the unsuccessful opposition in 1949 
of Oppenheimer along with the General Advisory Committee to the 
development of the hydrogen bomb is revealing of both the power 
and limits of epistemic communities. 

As we draw this chapter to a close, remember that though 
Oppenheimer was aware and open to realist insights, he was a liberal 
internationalist with strong constructivist elements. Like many liber- 
als, Oppenheimer expressed utopian themes and can be viewed as 
advocating a project, or at least a vision, leading us to a liberal world 
order and possibly a world without war. Further, with his strong 
emphasis on the technical and communities embarked on specialized 
work, his views have definite similarities with the views of advocates 
of epistemic communities as well as Mitrany and his international 
functionalism. Like them, Oppenheimer sought to “undermine state 
sovereignty from below,” by transforming the identities and interests 
of states as well as individuals. 

In the next chapter, the examination of Oppenheimer and inter- 
national relations theory continues by turning to the nuclear revo- 
lution and unparalleled ramifications it continues to have on the 
international system. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Chapter 10 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 


In 1946, the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative called for a world without 
nuclear weapons, and Oppenheimer’s later hope and vision of the 
1950s held out the prospect for such a world. However, with the 
failure of the international control of atomic energy in the late 1940s 
and the deepening of the Cold War together with the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, such a world was perceived as utopian and its 
advocates were dismissed as naive idealists. 

Remarkably, during the last few years, the abolition of nuclear 
weapons is once again being taken seriously. On January 4, 2007, 
four hard-headed US statesmen — George Schultz (former secretary 
of defense), William Perry (former secretary of defense), Henry 
Kissinger (former secretary of state), and Sam Nunn (former chair- 
man of the Senate Armed Services Committee) — published their 
challenging op-ed “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons” in the Wall 
Street Journal.® Added to this in April 2009, US President Obama in 
his now famous Prague Speech stated “clearly and with conviction 
America’s commitment to seek the peace and security of a world 
without nuclear weapons.”*7”7" Later that October, the Nobel 


ssFor an in-depth and fascinating account on these four men along with physicist 
Sidney Drell, see The Partnership: Five Cold Warriors and their Quest to Ban the Bomb 
by Philip Taubman (New York: HarperCollins, 2012). 

4h See Des Browne, Shatabhisha Shetty, and Andrew Somerville, “The Importance of 
Political Leadership in Achieving a World Free of Nuclear Weapons,” International 
Relations 24 (2010). 


189 


190 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Committee announced that Obama would receive the Nobel Peace 
Prize saying they “attached special importance to Obama’s vision of 
and work for a world without nuclear weapons.”*”8 These calls for the 
abolition of nuclear weapons recommended concrete steps: drastic 
cuts in nuclear arsenals, strengthening the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty, ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty by the 
United States, and better control of the nuclear fuel cycle. 

Why these recent calls for abolition of nuclear weapons? For 
one, the end of the Cold War had opened new possibilities on the 
nuclear front. Moreover, there was the fear of an outbreak of further 
nuclear proliferation — a nuclear tipping point — and the frightening 
likelihood of nuclear terrorism if nothing is done. 

In this chapter, the appreciation and significance of Oppenheimer’s 
hope and vision are developed along three avenues. First, the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty is examined. Then on the basis of the path- 
breaking book Abolishing Nuclear Weapons by John Perkovich and 
James Acton, the possibility of nuclear disarmament is explored. Third, 
the theoretically bold Nuclear One Worldism of Daniel Deudney is 
presented. With the convergence of these avenues, Oppenheimer’s 
overall vision of constraining and possibly transcending the nuclear 
revolution exhibits an awareness and significance that was not fully 
appreciated during his time, and indicates something of value beyond 
the symbolic that has direct relevance for the world of today. For 
instance, the connection between Perkovich’s and Acton’s work and 
Oppenheimer is straightforward since the prospect of nuclear disar- 
mament is central to the Acheson—Lilienthal proposal as well as 
Oppenheimer’s later hope and vision. Moreover, the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty and parts of its regime like the Inter- 
national Atomic Energy Agency have striking similarities to the 
Acheson-Lilienthal initiative which was pivotal in Oppenheimer’s 
thinking. Further, Deudney’s Nuclear One Worldism is in some ways 
“the great grandson” of the Acheson—Lilienthal plan. 


Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 


The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) is the primary institution 
of today’s international nuclear order. The treaty was “opened for 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 191 


signature in 1968, [one year after Oppenheimer’s death] and entered 
into force in 1970 after ratification by three depositary governments 
(UK, US and USSR) and 40 other countries.”*”? Today 190 states- 
parties have signed the NPT. Only four states have not signed — 
India, Israel, Pakistan, and South Sudan. North Korea signed but has 
withdrawn from the NPT. These states except for South Sudan, which 
became independent in 2011 and in all likelihood will sign the treaty, 
possess nuclear weapons though Israel has not declared itself in 
possession of such weapons. The original duration of the NPT was 
25 years with review conferences every five years. At the 1995 review 
conference, the treaty was extended indefinitely. The NPT is the most 
universal treaty on arms control and nuclear disarmament.**° According 
to William Walker, it is “the grand political and normative settlement 
of the nuclear age.”**! 

The NPT is constructed on three pillars — nonproliferation of 
nuclear weapons, peaceful use of nuclear energy, and disarmament.**” 
Central to its structure is the division of states into nuclear weapons 
states (NWS) and non-nuclear weapons states (NNWS). This division 
between the signatory states results in an asymmetry in treaty rights 
and obligations between the NWS and NNWS. For the purposes of 
the treaty, there are only five NWS — United States, Soviet Union 
(now Russia), United Kingdom, France, and China. According to the 
treaty, “a nuclear-weapon State is one which has manufactured and 
exploded a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device prior to 
1 January 1967.” Consequently India, Israel, Pakistan, and North 
Korea cannot join the NPT as a NWS. India conducted its first 
(peaceful) nuclear explosion in 1974 followed by further nuclear 
explosions in May 1998. About two weeks later, Pakistan conducted 
two nuclear explosions. North Korea conducted its first nuclear 
explosion in 2006 followed by two others in 2009 and 2013. In all 
probability, Israel has not conducted a nuclear explosion. 

Proliferation of nuclear weapons is held to “seriously enhance 
the danger of nuclear war.” Accordingly, with respect to the 


‘Some international relations experts, who might be labeled as “proliferation optimists,” 
do not agree with this statement. For the classic debate, see Scott D. Sagan and Kenneth 
N. Waltz, The Spread of Nuclear Weapons: A Debate (New York: Norton & Co., 1995). 


192 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


nonproliferation pillar, Article I of the NPT requires each NWS “not 
to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other 
nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive 
devices directly, or indirectly” as well as “not in any way to assist, 
encourage, or induce” any NNWS “to manufacture or otherwise 
acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.” Article I 
of the treaty requires each NNWS “not to receive the transfer ... of 
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or of control over 
such weapons or explosive devices directly, or indirectly” as well as 
“not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other 
nuclear explosive devices.” Furthermore, according to Article I, 
each NNWS accepts “safeguards, as set forth in an agreement ... 
with the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA] ... , for the 
exclusive purpose of verification of the fulfillment of its obligations 
assumed under this Treaty with a view to preventing diversion of 
nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear 
explosive devices.” 

With respect to the peaceful-use pillar, Article IV asserts that 
“Nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inaliena- 
ble right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, produc- 
tion and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without 
discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty.” 
Furthermore, all parties to the treaty shall cooperate “to the further 
development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful pur- 
poses, especially in the territories of non-nuclear-weapon States ..., 
with due consideration for the needs of the developing area of the 
world.” In addition, Article V guarantees that the “potential benefits 
from any peaceful applications of nuclear explosions” [e.g., mining, 
making canals] will be made available to any NNWS at a cost “as low 
as possible and exclude any charge for research and development.” 


The title of Waltz’s opening piece is “More May Be Better” and Sagan’s is 
“More Will Be Worse.” On realist grounds, Waltz argues that “the gradual spread of 
nuclear weapons is better than either no spread or rapid spread” because of such 
things as stability through nuclear deterrence especially for states having small nuclear 
forces (p. 42). 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 193 


With respect to the disarmament pillar, Article VI of the treaty 
states that “Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue 
negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to the cessa- 
tion of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarma- 
ment, and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under 
strict and effective international control.” The remaining articles of 
the treaty cover the amendment process of the treaty, the process for 
states to withdraw from the treaty, the five-year review conferences, 
and the guarantee that the treaty does not in any way hinder the 
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones by regional treaties. 

The NPT is essentially a “grand bargain” between the NNWS and 
the NWS. For the sake of a secure world, the NNWS would not 
obtain nuclear weapons and the NWS would eliminate their nuclear 
weapons. Not surprising, NWS typically emphasize the importance 
of nuclear nonproliferation whereas the NNWS typically emphasize 
nuclear disarmament. 

In fact, this was displayed in the negotiating history of the NPT. 
In the 1960s, the two nuclear superpowers, US and USSR, found 
mutual strategic interest in advancing nuclear nonproliferation not 
only in general but also in particular. The USSR was frightened about 
(West) Germany, its archenemy in two world wars, obtaining nuclear 
weapons. Added to this, the US was worried about nuclear prolifera- 
tion amongst the non-aligned states of the Cold War. Most unset- 
tling, India could go nuclear given that China had just become a 
nuclear weapons state in 1964. This could cause nuclear instability in 
southern Asia and possibly bring about a nuclear arms race in Asia.**4 

The US and USSR formulated a treaty draft with only the non- 
proliferation pillar — hence the name of the treaty. The NNWS 
rejected this and demanded both substantial and procedural amend- 
ments. Namely, the substantial amendments were “the unimpeded 
right to develop all aspects of peaceful nuclear use and to receive 
related cooperation,” a nuclear disarmament obligation for the NWS, 
and “the recognition of nuclear weapon-free zones.” Procedural 
amendments covered review conferences, a limited 25-year duration 
of the treaty unless extended by a conference, and “the right of parties 
to withdraw from the NPT.”%*4 


194 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


The asymmetry between NWS and NNWS and the resulting ten- 
sion are inherent in the NPT, and potentially destructive of the treaty 
itself) On the other hand, this tension is in many ways a creative ten- 
sion. Given the treaty, the NWS obviously have obtained a negotiated 
means for opposing and prohibiting nuclear proliferation of other 
states. But more creatively, even with their lack of a nuclear-weapons 
threat, the NNWS have a means for moving the NWS toward arms 
control and nuclear disarmament using diplomatic pressures within a 
negotiated treaty in conjunction with the threat of withdrawal from 
the treaty. Further, “The disarmament obligation opened the (long- 
term) perspective that inequality [asymmetry between NWS and 
NNWS] would end at some point in the future, not by every state 
procuring nuclear weapons, but by the present possessors eliminating 
them?" 

There are also creative tensions between the pillars and articles of 
the treaty itself. For example, Article III with the “inalienable right” 
to peaceful use allows for a NNWS to develop uranium enrichment 
facilities. Of the fourteen states that currently enrich uranium, six are 
NNWS (namely, Argentina, Brazil, Germany, Iran, Japan, and the 
Netherlands).*8° For nuclear power reactors today, enrichment levels 
typically range from 3% to 5%. But enrichment technology (gas cen- 
trifuges today and possibly laser enrichment tomorrow) to reach these 
low levels can be used to increase levels to say 80% or 90% which are 
sufficient to then “easily” construct a nuclear weapon. Hence, enrich- 
ment involves a dangerous dual-use technology. Furthermore, given 
that enrichment is the most difficult part in making nuclear weapons 
based on uranium, like the atomic bomb used in the Hiroshima 
attack, there is the real possibility that a NNWS can virtually become 
a nuclear weapons state under the guise of peaceful use. And then 
if desired, it can quickly move (say in weeks or months) to possess 
nuclear weapons. 


iFor an up-to-date and illuminating discussion of the NPT and its associated regime, 
see Ethics & International Affairs 27 (Fall 2013). In this issue, there is a special 
“Roundtable: Nonproliferation in the 21st Century” consisting of four articles as 
well as a feature article on the Nonproliferation Complex. 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 195 


To counter this, there are of course safeguard inspections by the 
IAEA. But they may prove insufficient if the NNWS is determined to 
possess nuclear weapons, which could be the case with Iran without 
successful negotiations. Of course, this calls for stronger and more 
intrusive safeguards. But more creatively, this may necessitate that 
enrichment facilities under the national control of NNWS move to 
multinational or even international control. This puts pressures and 
possible constraints on NNWS. However, if a NWS like the US is not 
making sufficient progress on nuclear disarmament from the perspec- 
tive of the NNWS, the NNWS can simply reject or drag their feet with 
respect to multinational /international control of enrichment facilities 
and even with respect to stronger and more intrusive safeguards. To 
a large degree this is the situation today. Hence, the peaceful use pillar 
together with the nonproliferation pillar can creatively push on the 
disarmament pillar to move forward. 

In addition, the peaceful use pillar can support the nonprolifera- 
tion pillar by encouraging the development of civilian nuclear power 
in NNWS. By developing nuclear power, civilian bureaucracies are 
established with “increased incentives to maintain strong ties to the 
global nuclear power industry, to international capital and technology 
markets, and to global regulatory agencies — and hence may be more 
likely to cooperate with the nuclear nonproliferation regime,” and even 
to oppose military and political moves toward nuclear weapons.**” 

Though the NPT is primary to the international nuclear order, 
understanding what is called the nuclear nonproliferation regime in 
international relations involves more than understanding the NPT. 
The nuclear nonproliferation regime is “an interlocking network of 
multilateral and bilateral agreements, structures, and relationships, 
all supported by the NPT.” Among its important components is the 


«Mohamed ElBaradei, former Director General of the IAEA and winner of the Nobel 
Peace Prize for 2005 along with the IAEA, strongly recommends multinational con- 
trol of the nuclear fuel cycle. See his “Towards a Safer World,” in The Economist 
(October 16, 2003) and an interview of him by Giovanni Verlini, “An Extraordinary 
Experience,” IAEA Bulletin 51, (September 2009). For recommendations related 
to the international control of the nuclear fuel cycle, see Scott Sagan, “Good Faith” 
(ref. 409) and “Shared Responsibilities” (ref. 389). 


196 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


IAEA which was founded in 1957 and whose duties include con- 
ducting “audits and inspections (known collectively as ‘safeguards’ ) 
to verify compliance with the NPT.”%°* The IAEA is not an enforce- 
ment agency and reports NPT violations to the National Security 
Council and General Assembly of the UN for appropriate action (e.g., 
sanctions) — “as it did in 2004 with respect to Libya and in 2006 
with respect to Iran.”**° The IAEA also works to foster the develop- 
ment of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear safety.” 
Added to this are “the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), 
adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1996” and “supplier control 
mechanisms (two informal, voluntary coalitions, the Zangger Coalition 
and the Nuclear Suppliers Group) that control the export of equip- 
ment and the materials potentially useful in a nuclear weapons pro- 
gram.”*°° Also, there are nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZ) where 
countries in a specified region “commit themselves not to manufac- 
ture, acquire, test, or possess nuclear weapons. Five such zones exist 
today, with four spanning the entire Southern Hemisphere.”?)™™ 
Finally, numerous research and educational institutions support 
the nuclear nonproliferation regime. For instance, the James Martin 
Center for Nonproliferation Studies, which was established in 1989, 
is “the largest nongovernmental organization in the United States 


"For an in-depth and insightful account of the IAEA, see Robert L. Brown, Nuclear 
Authority: The IAEA and the Absolute Weapon (Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press, 2015). Though the IAEA was once dismissed as ineffectual, Brown 
develops a strong case that the IAEA “has in the past twenty years emerged as a 
powerful international organization” and “has acquired a surprising amount of power 
over states” in such areas as nuclear security. In large part, this is based on the IAEA 
providing “politically neutral expertise that produces beneficial policy outcomes.” 
The connections here to Oppenheimer’s hope and vision are apparent — nuclear 
energy /weapons as a universal problem which should enable the establishment of an 
international “community of interest” centered on the technical, the “renunciation 
of national sovereignty” in the field of nuclear energy, the solution of the problems 
presented by nuclear weapons serving as a “pilot plant” for other international 
organizations, and specialized (epistemic) communities as progressive forces. 

™™The zones are Latin America (1967 Treaty of Tlatelolco), the South Pacific (1985 
Treaty of Rarotonga), Southeast Asia (1995 Treaty of Bangkok), Africa (1996 Treaty 
of Pelindaba) and Central Asia (2006 Treaty of Semipalatinsk). 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 197 


devoted exclusively to research and training on nonproliferation stud- 
ies.”*°? With supporting offices in Washington and Vienna, its head- 
quarters is located in Monterey, California; and it publishes the 
highly-regarded journal The Nonproliferation Review. 

Unfortunately, the NPT along with the nonproliferation regime 
have suffered major failures and setbacks. For instance, India, 
Pakistan, and Israel did not join the NPT and now possess nuclear 
weapons. In addition, North Korea withdrew from the NPT and con- 
ducted nuclear tests. Perhaps more disturbing was “the realization 
after the Gulf War in 1991 that Iraq [a party to the NPT] had been 
developing a nuclear weapons program that was not detected by the 
IAEA.”**? Equally disturbing was the exposure of A. Q. Khan’s 
illicit supply network in 2004 which included export of enrichment 
technology and nuclear weapon designs. This clandestine network 
involved operations in such countries as Pakistan, Iran, Libya, 
North Korea, Malaysia, South Africa, and even Switzerland.” 

Moreover, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty has not entered 
into force due to lack of support from key countries. Of particular 
disappointment was the failure of the US Senate to ratify the treaty in 
1999, resulting in dismay around the world, even though the US had 
signed the treaty and it was “strongly promoted abroad by the 
Clinton administration.”*** Lastly, even though there have been 
significant reductions in the nuclear arsenals of the US and Russia, 
there remain the continuing disappointment of too little progress and 
the suspicion that the commitments of the US and Russia to disarm 
are not genuine. 

However, the nuclear nonproliferation regime and the NPT have 
had their successes and highpoints. There was the collapse of the 
Soviet Union (a NWS in the NPT) into a number of successor states. 
Only one of these successor states (i.e., Russia) became a NWS in the 
NPT and the other states, some of which possessed nuclear weapons 
on their territories but gave them up, joined the NPT as NNWS. 


™ For an in-depth account of A. Q. Khan and his supply network, see David Albright, 
Peddling Peril: How the Secret Nuclear Trade Arms America’s Enemies (New York: 
Free Press, 2010). 


198 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Further, there was the 1995 review conference that extended indefi- 
nitely the NPT. This was by no means an assured outcome. The indefi- 
nite extension was opposed by many countries, in particular, several 
Arab countries led by Egypt. Interestingly, compromise was reached 
to indefinitely extend the treaty by placing on the NPT agenda the 
proposal for a NWEFZ in the Middle East. 

Plus, the CTBT has had its successes. Over 180 states have signed 
the treaty and over 160 states have ratified it. Also, even though it has 
not entered into force, the spirit of the CTBT with a moratorium on 
nuclear testing has nearly been universal over the last two decades. 
Since the beginning of the nuclear testing in 1945, there have been 
over 2000 nuclear tests. However, during the last decade, only North 
Korea has conducted nuclear tests (three small tests). Russia ceased 
testing in 1990, the United Kingdom in 1991, and the United States 
in 1992. France and China both ceased testing in 1996, and India and 
Pakistan ceased in 1998. 

Equally important, even though not in force, the CTBT has a 
formal organization called the Preparatory Commission for the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) 
which “was set up in 1996 with its headquarters in Vienna, Austria.”*?° 
Most notable, the main tasks of the CTBTO are the promotion of the 
treaty and “building up the verification regime” so that it is opera- 
tional when the treaty enters into force. The verification regime “is 
designed to detect any nuclear explosion conducted on Earth — 
underground, underwater or in the atmosphere” and consists of three 
key components — the International Monitoring System (IMS), 
on-site inspections, and the International Data Center (IDC). When 
complete, the IMS will consist of over 300 monitoring stations oper- 
ating in 89 countries, and currently around 85% are already up and 
running. Though on-site inspections can only occur once the CTBT 
enters in force, there was a large on-site inspection exercise carried 
out in Kazakhstan in 2008. Finally, the IDC gathers data from the 
monitoring stations, processes it, and distributes it to member states. 
For instance, when North Korea conducted its three tests, member 
states “received information about the location, magnitude, time and 
depth of the tests within two hours — and before the actual test had 
been announced by North Korea.” 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 199 


In 1963, President Kennedy predicted that “there might be as 
many as ‘fifteen, twenty, or twenty-five nuclear weapons powers’ in 
the 1970s.”°°° In 1970, when the NPT entered into force, there were 
five nuclear weapons powers, and today there are only nine. This is 
somewhat surprising given “the large number of nuclear weapons- 
capable states [like Canada, Japan, Sweden, and Brazil], now gener- 
ally estimated to be around 50.”*°” So perhaps, the greatest success 
of the NPT and its associated regime is simply its contribution to 
reducing, slowing, and nearly halting nuclear proliferation. 

With the above discussion of the NPT in mind, one realizes that the 
NPT and parts of its regime like the IAEA have definite similarities to the 
Acheson-Lilienthal proposal which played a vital role in Oppenheimer’s 
thought. Both emphasize the peaceful use and development of nuclear 
energy while using international safeguards for preventing dangerous 
activities and uses that could lead to nuclear weapons. Furthermore, the 
goal of each is a world free of nuclear weapons. 

However, differences between them remain. For example, the 
Acheson-Lilienthal proposal places uranium enrichment under inter- 
national control whereas the NPT allows these activities to be under 
national control. In reply to such differences, the NPT should not be 
regarded “as a static instrument of disciplinary confinement” but 
rather as “a dynamic instrument of cooperative engagement and inno- 
vation in arms control and disarmament.”*”8 Indeed, the NPT and its 
associated regime could well be evolving towards an Acheson-— 
Lilienthal-like regime, especially given recent calls for the multina- 
tional/international control of uranium enrichment facilities. 

Moving to a world free of nuclear weapons is predominant for 
both the NPT and the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative. Consequently, 
nuclear disarmament and hence its possibility are central to any 
assessment or even discussion of the NPT and Oppenheimer’s hope 
and vision. 


Nuclear Disarmament — George Perkovich and James Acton 


The subject of nuclear disarmament is vast, complicated, and in some 
respects overwhelming. Given such challenges along with suspicions 
of idealistic thinking, discussions of nuclear disarmament have been 


200 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


dismissed at best as forums for political maneuvering and moral pos- 
turing, and at worst as forums of confusion leading to perilous actions. 

In contrast, during the last few years, nuclear disarmament has 
been a subject for serious and thought-provoking discussions by 
international relations scholars and nuclear policy experts. Most 
important is the work of George Perkovich and James Acton. In 
2008, they published their path-breaking paper Abolishing Nuclear 
Weapons. The following year, the edited book Abolishing Nuclear 
Weapons: A Debate was published which consisted of their original 
paper plus seventeen response papers and concluded with their fol- 
low-up response “What’s Next?”. 

Both Perkovich and Acton are with the Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. Perkovich is vice president for studies at Carnegie 
and Acton is co-director of the Nuclear Policy Program at Carnegie. 
Both are experts with hands-on experience in nuclear policy with 
Perkovich trained in US foreign policy and Acton trained in physics. 
The authors of the response papers are also experts on nuclear issues 
coming from ten countries. Though not uncritical, the response 
papers are generally highly favorable toward the original paper by 
Perkovich and Acton taking it as “seminal,” “a conceptual break- 
through,” and “the most comprehensive and well-thought-out paper 
on nuclear abolition I have read” as well as a paper where “the study 
of nuclear disarmament reaches a new maturity.” 

The discussion in this section focuses on Abolishing Nuclear 
Weapons: A Debate. After some general remarks about the book and 
its major findings and recommendations, three problematic areas for 
nuclear disarmament are highlighted — deterrence at low numbers, 
the nuclear fuel cycle, and virtual arsenals and nuclear hedging. 

To begin, the book by Perkovich and Acton is highly informative, 
balanced, manageable in length and presentation, politically and tech- 
nically grounded, and persuasive in much of its argumentation. The 
authors present strong reasons based on security, legality, and moral- 
ity for abolishing nuclear weapons along with key recommendations 
for moving ahead. However, the heart of the work is whether nuclear 
disarmament is actually a realistic possibility given the world of today. 
The upshot of their book is that nuclear disarmament is a realistic 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 201 


possibility and “a good organizing principle for interstate relations,” 
and hence should be taken as a working and regulative agenda for the 
international order.*”” 

One consensus of the two authors and responders that emerges is 
that “world government need not be invoked in considerations of 
abolishing nuclear weapons.” More specifically, “Nuclear abolition is 
not an alternative to international politics and power balancing. 
Rather, it can be a realistic organizing principle of states seeking to 
balance and order their relations in ways that remove the singular 
threats of nuclear mass destruction.”*°° To make progress, though, 
there must be cordial relations among major powers, and in some 
ways, a “concert” among the great powers. Also, the United States 
and Russia will have to take the lead given their large nuclear stock- 
piles (currently approximately 8,000 warheads each with previous 
highs of 32,000 and 45,000 respectively).*°' 

In addition, other states (e.g., China with approximately 250 
warheads) must assist especially when the arsenals of the US and 
Russia are lowered to around 500 or 1000 warheads. Further, there 
must be “joint, simultaneous steps on nuclear disarmament and non- 
proliferation” and hence the cooperation and participation of most 
states will be required.* Absent this, nuclear-weapon states will not 
go to a very low number of weapons since without significant pro- 
gress in ensuring nuclear nonproliferation there arises the real danger 
of the emergence of new nuclear powers. Equally, non-nuclear weap- 
ons states will not cooperate without progress on disarmament. 
Finally, given a world free of nuclear weapons, another theme 
emerges, namely, that “verification is important but ultimately not as 
vital as political-security dynamics and enforcement.”*°% 

At this point, it might be helpful to highlight some problematic 
issues for nuclear disarmament according to Perkovich and Acton. 
First, there is the question of the having a credible nuclear deterrence 
during the disarmament process when nuclear arsenals of US and 
Russia reach low numbers like 500 or 1000 warheads. Given such low 
numbers for the US and Russia, there is the added worry that a 
smaller nuclear power like China might attempt to sprint to parity 
with the US and Russia by quickly building up its nuclear arsenal. 


202 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Crucial for Russia is the survivability of its nuclear force against a 
pre-emptive first strike by the US. It has been argued that a small 
Russian nuclear force is especially vulnerable due to the large US 
advantage with respect to long-range conventional munitions that can 
attack nuclear weapons as well as the future possibility of an effective 
US missile defense. These in conjunction with even a low number of 
US nuclear weapons might undermine Russian deterrence at low 
numbers. Hence, crisis instability looms during disarmament since 
Russia could be tempted to strike first given its vulnerability. However, 
for Perkovich and Acton, such vulnerability is probably overblown 
and Russia can certainly develop countermeasures. For example, 
“Russia currently has about 170 road-mobile ICBMs [intercontinen- 
tal ballistic missiles] that could hit the United States and it is build- 
ing more.”* Such missiles are highly survivable. Furthermore, the 
effectiveness of missile defense is highly questionable. 

The survivability of a small US nuclear force against a first strike 
is not a significant concern due in large part to its highly survivable 
submarine-launched ICBMs. However, a small US nuclear force 
might undermine the extended nuclear deterrence provided to US 
allies. With the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the USSR, 
“extended deterrence today is a mission particular to the United 
States.”*°° Undermining extended deterrence is problematic since 
Japan, for example, might conclude that the US with a small nuclear 
arsenal would not protect it in a nuclear crisis — for instance with 
China. Hence, Japan would seek nuclear weapons during the disarma- 
ment process and ironically undermine the transition to a world free 
of nuclear weapons.°° 


°°In his 2011 book Deterrence During Disarmament (ref. 401), Acton takes up in 
detail another argument that deep reductions in the US nuclear arsenal could under- 
mine extended deterrence. During the Cold War, some held that for the extended 
deterrence to be credible, “the US had to significantly limit the damage it would 
suffer in a nuclear war on behalf of an ally.” Hence, “Large arsenals with significant 
counter-force capabilities were advocated as a way of achieving this.” (p. 41). Acton 
argues against this on several fronts. For one, in the most plausible cases, the US 
could not sufficiently limit damage even with a large nuclear arsenal. Second, by 
appealing to the history of the Berlin Crisis of 1958-62, Acton argues that the 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 203 


Perkovich and Acton hold that “While these concerns cannot be 
dismissed out of hand, the risk that counties that now enjoy an 
extended deterrent would be left vulnerable on the way to abolition 
must not be exaggerated.” For one, the US would certainly involve 
its allies “in deliberations on the step-by-step processes that could 
reduce global nuclear arsenals from current levels to zero.” Further, 
there is “conventional-force balancing” and “regional confidence- 
building” that can address such concerns. In fact, “the prospect of 
Japanese and/or South Korean nuclear armament may in fact be 
motivating Chinese cooperation on reducing such insecurities.”*°° 

Several problematic issues also surround verification mechanisms 
with regard to dangerous dual-use technologies, especially when the 
end state of nuclear disarmament (a world free of nuclear weapons) is 
attained or even approached. As discussed earlier, enrichment technolo- 
gies of uranium for peaceful use in nuclear power reactors would be 
such a case. As pointed out by Perkovich and Acton, what many take as 
weak safeguards with respect to enrichment is “tolerated today in large 
part because major powers (and others) retain nuclear weapons that are 
felt to deter both proliferation and nuclear aggression from states cheat- 
ing on their non-proliferation obligations.”*°” Given the end state of 
nuclear disarmament or its approach, stronger and more intrusive 
inspections and control would be required than we have today. 

For the sake of adequate verification, Perkovich and Acton con- 
sider what they call a “radical approach,” namely multinational or 
international control/ownership of enrichment facilities. They recog- 
nize that “Moving beyond nationally owned fuel-cycle facilities 
[especially enrichment facilities] could be a key step towards disar- 
mament, and it is a concept that states should discuss seriously ....” 
They correctly point out that such a transition would be “hugely 
complicated and politically challenging.” Moreover, they caution that 


success of the US in defending its German ally was more a matter of resolve and even 
“willingness to absorb high costs” rather than a supposedly large arsenal that could 
limit damage to the US and its allies (p. 51). In the end, Acton holds that “large 
arsenals contribute little to the effectiveness of deterrence, even extended deter- 
rence.” (p. 93). 


204 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


“There is no precedent for a key facet of a major modern industry 
being collectively owned by a number of multinational firms, let alone 
being owned in its entirety by a single international organization.” 
However, given the difficulties of verification and the prerequisite of 
nuclear equity between states, they suggest that “the most acceptable 
alternative would be to move towards a standard whereby only multina- 
tional facilities were allowed everywhere, notwithstanding the difficul- 
ties involved.” On a hopeful note, they mention that there are today 
two such “multinational enrichment organizations — the Urenco 
consortium and Eurodif.”*°8 

In his response to Perkovich and Acton, Scott Sagan takes their 
work as “important because it breaks more new intellectual ground, 
and digs deeper into the subject [of nuclear disarmament], than any 
previous study.” However, he believes their work is “flawed.” For 
Sagan, “by focusing almost exclusively on the disarmament end- 
game,” they have taken attention away from the NPT of today. 
Returning to Article VI of the NPT, Sagan reiterates that all member 
states, not just the NWS, are “committed ‘to pursue negotiations in 
good faith on effective measures relating ... to nuclear disarmament.’” 
In particular, Perkovich and Acton fail to place their “important 
analysis of international control over the nuclear fuel-cycle” in the 
context of the NPT and the NNWS obligation to negotiate in good 
faith concerning disarmament.*” With this in hand and the not 
unreasonable assumption that the international control of the fuel- 
cycle is a prerequisite for nuclear disarmament, Sagan, who is “a true 
believer in the NPT,”*!° calls on the NNWS to fulfill one of their 
shared responsibilities with the NWS. Namely, begin negotiations 
about the international control of the fuel-cycle and hence enrich- 
ment facilities. 

Sagan’s analysis is important since it is “a reconceptualization of 
this issue.”*!? Many NNWS will not enter such negotiations since they 
“fear that any effort to create multinational fuel-cycle facilities ... or 
international facilities ... could cut against their ‘inalienable right’ as 
specified in Article IV” concerning the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy.*!” For Sagan, this “inalienable right” has all ways been a “con- 
ditional right” due to the requirements of all NPT member states to 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 205 


be in conformity with Articles I and I. His analysis is novel by 
making the “inalienable right” to peaceful use similarly conditioned 
by Article VI on disarmament. Perkovich and Acton take Sagan’s 
suggestions and ideas as “innovative and formidable” and deserving 
of “further international analysis and discussion.”*!% 

In fact, Sagan published much of the above analysis along with 
other ideas in his article “Shared Responsibilities for Nuclear 
Disarmament” in the Fall 2009 issue of Daedalus. This is relevant 
here since Sagan has been criticized for focusing on the responsibili- 
ties of NNWS over the responsibilities of NWS. In his Daedalus arti- 
cle, Sagan makes the creative suggestion that even though the NWS 
are currently exempted from IAEA safeguards, perhaps a NWS like 
the US should “pick one or more model [enrichment] facilities to 
place under advanced safeguards, to demonstrate future intentions 
and help create best practices.” By placing such facilities under the 
international controls of the IAEA, even though not necessary today 
since a NWS can legally enrich uranium even to weapons-grade levels, 
the NWS “would signal equitable treatment and a long-term commit- 
ment to disarmament.”** This is highly symbolic since in a world free 
of nuclear weapons, a former NWS will not be exempted from safe- 
guards and could be required to relinquish national control of enrich- 
ment facilities to international control and even ownership. What 
Sagan is recommending here is what Oppenheimer called “style” in 
his 1948 talk entitled “The Open Mind.” In other words, in pursuing 
our short-term goals (like nuclear non-proliferation), we must try to 
demonstrate, or at least hint at, our long-term objectives (nuclear 
disarmament), especially to other countries like the NNWS. 

Enforcement of nuclear prohibition in a world free of nuclear 
weapons presents numerous problematic issues as well as formidable 
challenges. As pointed out by Perkovich and Acton, the chief chal- 
lenge for enforcement in a nuclear-weapons-free world is preventing 
and, if necessary, responding to a nuclear “break-out” — namely, a 
state covertly acquiring nuclear weapons which threatens and endan- 
gers the status quo. Developing enforcement mechanisms is difficult 
for many reasons. For example, in preventing break-out through veri- 
fication, one will be presented with ambiguous evidence concerning 


206 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


compliance that gives rise to various interpretations and disagree- 
ments. Additionally, threat perception of a “break-out” would have a 
“wide spectrum.” For Israel, a “nuclear break-out” by an Arab state 
“could pose an existential threat” whereas for China because of its 
size and conventional forces it would not.*!® Furthermore, what inter- 
national body would decide non-compliance and determine the means 
of enforcement for non-compliance, let alone for an actual nuclear 
break-out? Something like the UN Security Council with the veto 
power of its five permanent members or some other body without 
members having veto power? 

Even given this enforcement maze, Perkovich and Acton manage 
to make insightful and constructive recommendations and sugges- 
tions. For one, to reach consensus, there should not be “robust 
automatic-enforcement measures against non-compliant actors” and 
accommodations need to be made for “case-by-case decision-making 
processes.”*!° Also, “to avoid complications associated with Security 
Council membership, veto rights and so on, leaders of a nuclear- 
weapons-prohibition effort might propose that the prohibiting treaty 
or convention establish a separate body to authorize enforcement 
action.”*!” Further, to encourage states to join the prohibiting treaty, 
there should be a withdrawal option though it would have “very 
stringent conditions attached.”*!® 

Though the challenges of enforcement are numerous and may 
appear overwhelming, there are some strong reasons for optimism. For 
one, in a nuclear-weapons-free world, “the major powers ... would 
take violations more seriously because small-scale cheating would 
pose an even greater risk to their security than is the case now.”*!? 
Intriguingly and with some hope, Perkovich and Acton close their 
chapter on enforcement as follows. 


Any well-informed analyst can cite dozens of obstacles and 
complications standing in the way of the establishment of means to 
authorise and implement enforcement that would make states now 
reliant on nuclear deterrence feel able to relinquish their weapons. 
Yet it is also possible to take a broader view. Speaking to a confer- 
ence on nuclear disarmament in Oslo in February 2008, former US 
Secretary of State George Schultz offered an important rejoinder to 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 207 


pessimism on this issue. Few in the early 1980s, he observed, imag- 
ined the political changes that would in a few years result in the 
peaceful end of the Cold War. Similarly, today, we underestimate the 
potential for developments that would profoundly change the pros- 
pects for abolishing nuclear weapons. If, Schultz suggested, a few 
leaders of nuclear-armed states stepped forward with conviction and 
determination to seek the prohibition of nuclear weapons, many 
obstacles that seem immovable today might become movable.*”° 


In their next chapter, Perkovich and Acton give some additional 
mechanisms for enforcement and hence optimism. Of particular 
interest are the notions of nuclear hedging and virtual arsenals. 
Nuclear hedging by a state is simply the “retention of a capacity to 
reverse the renunciation of nuclear weapons” (e.g., maintaining tech- 
nical personnel as well as some limited nuclear-weapons technology). 
Such hedging “might be seen as an important element of an enforce- 
ment regime, at least for a transitional period.”**! The ability of some 
states to quickly reconstitute nuclear weapons would serve “to deter 
or retaliate against break-out.” This is essentially the idea of “virtual” 
nuclear arsenals or “weaponless deterrence” put forward in 1984 by 
US journalist and nuclear analyst Jonathan Schell. Though controver- 
sial, virtual nuclear arsenals “might make the nuclear-armed states 
more willing to pursue disarmament in the first place” and could be 
viewed “as simply another step on the road to ‘genuine’ abolition.”*” 
Simply put, even in a world free of nuclear weapons, there is still 
nuclear deterrence. 

Abolishing Nuclear Weapons is a path-breaking book in which 
“the study of nuclear disarmament reaches a new maturity.” Its most 
relevant feature for us is its overall conclusion — nuclear disarmament 
is a realistic possibility and “a good organizing principle for interstate 
relations,” and hence should be taken as a working and regulative 
agenda for the international order. The connection to Oppenheimer 
is straightforward since the prospect of nuclear disarmament is central 
to the Acheson-—Lilienthal proposal for the international control of 
atomic energy as well as his later hope and vision. As will be seen in 
the next section, it has a central role in the work of Daniel Deudney 
as well. 


208 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Nuclear One Worldism — Daniel Deudney 


In 2007, Daniel Deudney published his well-received book Bounding 
Power — Republican Security Theory from the Polis to the Global 
Village. Reviewers praised it as “rich,” “truly brilliant,” “creative and 
original” as well as “destined to be a classic work” in international 
relations theory. His book was a co-winner of the 2008 Robert Jervis 
and Paul Schroeder Best Book Award (International History and 
Politics Section) given by the American Political Science Association. 
Deudney, a political scientist and an international relations theorist at 
Johns Hopkins University, has also served as a consultant and adviser 
in the US Senate and as a senior researcher for the Worldwatch 
Institute in Washington, DC. 

For our discussion, the essential notion is what Deudney calls 
“nuclear one worldism” which is the main subject of the penultimate 
chapter of Bounding Power. Nuclear one worldism is not new for 
Deudney. In fact, it took center stage in his 1995 article “Nuclear 
Weapons and the Waning of the Real-State” published in Daedalus. 
Indeed, Bounding Power can be seen as placing nuclear one worldism 
in broader historical and theoretical contexts, and consequently 
bolstering its credentials and its importance as an extrapolation from 
the past. 

Nuclear one worldism is a response to the nuclear revolution that 
occurred in the 1940s. At the risk of simplification, given that nuclear 
weapons are globally destructive, a realist interstate anarchy is intoler- 
able and a global solution is called for, namely some form of nuclear 
one worldism. What is unique and intriguing is that Deudney devel- 
ops and evaluates nuclear one worldism in the Western tradition of 
republicanism and, most important, in what he calls “republican 
security theory.” Republicanism is characterized by a number of key 
norms — political freedom and liberty, popular sovereignty and par- 
ticipation, and limited government with checks and balances. The 
principal objective of republicanism, which Deudney christens as 
“negarchy,” is to avoid the extremes of anarchy and hierarchy. In 
other words, negarchy holds that republics are “the simultaneous 
negations of both anarchy and hierarchy.”*” 


Pp) 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 209 


Deudney considers various “schools of thought on the implica- 
tions of nuclear weapons for world order.”** Classical nuclear one 
worldism — whose golden age, according to Deudney, was during the 
1940s, 50s, and even the early 60s — argues for a centralized world 
state with such institutions as “a worldwide centralized military appa- 
ratus capable of coercing all other actors.”*”° However, republicanism 
would reject a centralized world government by appealing to such 
norms as political liberty and limited government, and holding that 
extreme interstate anarchy produced by the nuclear revolution has 
simply been replaced by an extreme global hierarchy. 

Another school of thought is nuclear strategism, which “holds 
that the advent of nuclear weapons marks no decisive break in world 
politics and observes the behavior of states to be largely the same 
before and after their arrival.” This position, which views such initia- 
tives as “interstate arms control as useless and possibly harmful,” 
would be rejected in republican thought since it simply does not 
address the extreme interstate anarchy produced by the nuclear 
revolution.*”° 

A third school is imstitutional deterrence statism, which empha- 
sizes nuclear deterrence along with institutional supports for enhanc- 
ing deterrence such as arms control. Deudney also rejects this 
dominant and influential view by pointing out that though it addresses 
the extreme anarchy of the nuclear revolution, it is really “a reformist 
response to a revolutionary situation.” The reasons here are at least 
two-fold. For one, deterrence statism assumes that states have “suffi- 
cient organizational and technological capacities to sustain stable 
deterrence.” So the danger is not only possession of nuclear weapons 
by states, but also the danger of “the possession of nuclear weapons 
by imperfect states.”*?” Second, with the shadow of 9/11, there is 
now the dreadful conception of nuclear terrorism by small groups of 
non-state actors which undermines the doctrine of state deterrence. 

Deudney advocates a school of thought which he labels federal- 
republican nuclear one worldism. According to this school, there is not 
a centralized world state, but there is republican global governance. 
In particular, as expressed in his 1995 article, “the state system is 
augmented (rather than replaced) by a nuclear containment system: 


210 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


nuclear capability is separated from state control and paralyzed.” 
Moreover, Deudney holds that “This image of adjustment is implicit 
in the architecture of the Baruch Plan [and I would contend “its more 
enlightened predecessor, the Acheson—Lilienthal Plan”*?8] ....”4?° 

Deudney expresses similar positions in Bounding Power, and his 
book should be regarded as providing some of the much-needed 
“theoretical critical mass” — especially for the previously mentioned 
idea of nuclear containment which he calls strategic neutralization. 
For him, this idea or notion “animates the first and in many ways still 
most significant proposal for nonhierarchical world nuclear govern- 
ance, the Baruch Plan [and hence the Acheson—Lilienthal Plan].”*°° 
In his book, Deudney discusses the workings of the Baruch (Acheson— 
Lilienthal) Plan in some detail. 

It is instructive to highlight two additional ideas that he attributes 
to federal-republican nuclear one worldism — recessed deterrence 
and unconquerability. Recessed deterrence is just Deudney’s name for 
what was called weaponless deterrence or virtual arsenals in the previ- 
ous section on nuclear disarmament. Functioning at a different level, 
“Unconquerability is the notion that it has become very difficult to 
conquer, occupy, and govern territories occupied by hostile popula- 
tions” due to the worldwide diffusion of weapons which is symbol- 
ized for Duedney by the Soviet Kalashnakov assault rifle.**! Such has 
been the experience of the two nuclear weapons giants — the United 
States in Vietnam and the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. 

Given ideas like these that constitute federal-republican nuclear 
one worldism, the republican objective of avoiding the extremes of 
anarchy and hierarchy is achievable. Extreme interstate anarchy is 
countered by strategic neutralization through the international con- 
trol of atomic energy along with recessed deterrence. Extreme global 
hierarchy is countered by a system of states with all having at least 
unconquerability and some even with recessed deterrence. 

Even though the end or telos of Bounding Power emerges as 
nuclear one worldism, Deudney has more sweeping ambitions. By 
recovering the lost tradition of republicanism, he undertakes to recon- 
struct our theoretical past and show that realism and liberalism (and 
hence liberal internationalism) are huge “fragmentary successors” of 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 211 


republicanism. Central to this reconstruction is republican security 
theory and the master variable of “violence interdependence.” Now 
given the intense, large scale violence interdependence brought 
about by the nuclear age, even continental republics like the United 
States are no longer viable.?? Consequently, a move to some form of 
federal-republican nuclear one worldism is necessitated. 

What’s more, from the tradition of republican security theory, 
Deudney presents a most intriguing reversal. 


Viewing the evolution of this tradition as it has grappled with 
variations and changes in the spatial scope of different degrees of 
violence interdependence reveals a rich heritage of having repeatedly 
done what we are again being compelled to do. If the most basic 
insight of this tradition, the core of the anarchy-interdependence 
problematique, is that situations of intense violence interdepend- 
ence combined with anarchy are intrinsically incompatible with 
security-from-violence and that government is needed for security in 
such contexts, then the establishment of world government, of 
government scaled to the spatial scope of contemporary intense 
violence interdependence, is not in this most important sense novel. 
Rather it simply stipulates that we again must do what we have done 
so many times before.*%? 


In short, given the nuclear revolution, a determined effort to 
achieve nuclear one worldism is not utopian but “simply the continu- 
ation of a long familiar pattern.”*** Indeed, federal-republican nuclear 


pp As summarized by Charles Kupchan in his review of Bounding Power, “Deudney probes 
the intellectual roots of republican security theory” and “reclaims the importance of 
material concerns by developing the notion of violence interdependence — a basic 
measure of the ability of actors [e.g., states] to do physical harm to each other. 
Geography, topography, transportation and weapons technology, and state size are 
among the most important variables determining violence interdependence. As vio- 
lence interdependence has increased, republican polities have had to increase their 
size to remain viable — from democratic city-state, to constitutional nation-state, to 
federal republic. Spatial and technological demands have driven institutional innova- 
tions — such as the compound republic — that made possible continental federations 
of the size and scope of the United States.” (ref. 437, p. 859). 


212 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


one worldism would complete the nuclear revolution much like the 
republican continental state completed the industrial revolution. 
What would be radically novel, and hence utopian, would be to 
remain in the extreme interstate anarchy produced by nuclear revolu- 
tion without devastating results. Somewhat incredibly, Deudney’s 
analysis reverses the presumption of utopianism from world govern- 
ment to such dominant and currently influential positions like institu- 
tional deterrence statism. 

Moreover, given that realism and liberalism are fragments of 
republicanism, Deudney takes his reconstruction of our theoretical past 
as demonstrating that “the current hegemony of Realism [in interna- 
tional relations theory], particularly regarding security, is unwar- 
ranted.” Consequently, the appeal of realism is diminished “while 
expanding, deepening, and recentering international Liberalism.”*** 
For instance, so-called liberal appeals for certain international organi- 
zations, and for world government in particular, can be “advanced as 
necessary to meet basic security (and other) needs, rather than as 
desirable in order to improve or ameliorate the human condition.”*%* 
In fact, Deudney says republican security theory is in some sense a 
“first Liberalism” by being “primarily focused on the security-from- 
violence problem.” Further, some of the most powerful ideas in 
liberal internationalism like “democratic peace, commercial peace, 
and international unions, are the legacies of Enlightenment republi- 
can security theory.”*%° 

Though Deudney’s Bounding Power has been highly praised, it has 
been criticized. The penultimate chapter can appear as “a somewhat 
esoteric reflection on ‘nuclear one worldism.’”**” Even John Ikenberry, 
a friend and colleague of Deudney, cautions that “This book is not for 
the theoretical faint of heart.”*** Irrespective of such criticisms and his 
“imaginative phrase making,” Deudney offers a powerful, and in many 
ways convincing, analysis of contemporary international relations 
theory that addresses the present nuclear crisis. 

Most significant, Oppenheimer’s and Deudney’s assessments and 
outlooks are mutually reinforcing on several dimensions. First, both 
recognize the revolutionary significance of the nuclear revolution and 
its destructive technology for the nation state and the international 


Oppenheimer and the Nuclear Revolution 213 


system. However, they do not call for a centralized world state. 
Oppenheimer calls for the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative for the inter- 
national control of atomic energy within a state system where states 
relinquish their sovereignty in the nuclear field. This is just Deudney’s 
idea of nuclear containment that he calls strategic neutralization and 
relates to the (Acheson—Lilienthal) Baruch Plan. In fact, in conclud- 
ing a talk at the New America Foundation in July 2007, Deudney 
refers to his ideas on nuclear containment as “the great grandson of 
the [Acheson-Lilienthal] Baruch Plan.” Interestingly, Oppenheimer 
is absent from Deudney’s account. 

Formative and central to Oppenheimer’s hope and vision is the 
Acheson-Lilienthal proposal advocating the international control of 
atomic energy and its move toward a world free of nuclear weapons. 
Even with its failure, Oppenheimer told audiences in the 1940s that 
the ideas and arguments in this proposal are “correct” and “in some 
ways eternal,” and that “Some day we will want to come back to this.” 
As we see today, these ideas and arguments are in many ways instanti- 
ated in the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty with its three pillars — 
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, peaceful use of nuclear energy, 
and disarmament — and guide its evolving structure. Furthermore, 
the Acheson-Lilienthal initiative is reflected in Deudney’s Nuclear 
One Worldism. Most important, the work of Perkovich and Acton on 
nuclear disarmament, along with Deudney’s theoretical studies, help 
to quell objections of utopianism to Oppenheimer’s hope and vision 
by providing a realistic possibility that is historically and theoretically 
grounded. 

In his reply to Abolishing Nuclear Weapons, Harald Miiller criti- 
cizes Perkovich and Acton for not putting enough emphasis on a 
“macro-argument” based on the “path-dependency” of the process of 
nuclear disarmament. Miiller observes that 


The actors in a disarmament process will change the conditions of 
the basis on which they act as they go along. The last steps will 
occur — if and when the path up to then has been successfully 
walked — in a vastly different environment from the one in which 
the journey started. Neglecting this social dynamic in the 


214 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


disarmament process leads, on the one hand, to overconfidence in 
predicting or prescribing specifics of the end stage from today’s 
vantage point. On the other hand, it tends to define obstacles for 
this last phase, which, by the time it arrives, might have gone 


away.*°? 


As noted in Chapter 5, Oppenheimer published an article entitled 
“International Control of Atomic Energy” in the January 1948 issue 
of Foreign Affairs. With success at the UN in the short term “rather 
unlikely,” he addressed questions of “why in a matter so overwhelm- 
ingly important to our interest we have not been successful” and 
“what lessons this has for our future conduct.” In a vein similar to 
Miiller and with a lyrical touch, Oppenheimer concluded his article 
by writing, 


It is necessarily denied to us in these days to see at what time, to 
what immediate ends, in what context, and in what manner of 
world, we may return again to the great issues touched on by the 
international control of atomic energy. Yet even in the history of 
recent failure, we may recognize elements that bear more generally 
on the health of our civilization. We may discern the essential har- 
mony, in a world where science has extended and deepened our 
understanding of the common sources of power for evil and power 
for good, of restraining the one and of fostering the other. This is 
seed we take with us, traveling to a land we cannot see, to plant in 
new soil.*#° 


Surely, part of this seed is the Acheson—Lilienthal proposal 
along with the potential of international communities “embarked on 
specialized work” to break the “grip” of the nation state. 


Epilogue 


During the period from 1957 to 1959, at the height of modernity 
and the depths of the Cold War, Oppenheimer put forward a hope 
and vision. Central to Oppenheimer’s vision is the humanization of 
science and breaking the “grip” of the nation state. He emphasized 
scientific internationalism, the communal nature of science, and 
science as a cultural resource supporting democracy and offering 
philosophical insight through such ideas as complementarity. 
Specialized communities, with scientific communities as exemplary, 
provide means for “tethering” the Leviathan state, and moving us 
forward to a world of justice and a world without war and nuclear 
weapons. In addition, specialization offers personal meaning as well as 
shelter from mass culture, and generates a bulwark against a dangerous 
relativism. He worked to prevent social atomism by calling for cul- 
tural coherence through dialogue — a kind of conversationalism — 
and our dual duty of great openness and faithfulness grounded in 
specialization and community. He recognized “the antinomy between 
the individual and the community” and attempted to mitigate it. All 
the while, he avoided both a radical individualism like MacLeish’s and 
a universal scientism like Rabi’s. 

Pluralism was central to Oppenheimer’s views on science and 
society; and in many ways, Oppenheimer defended what might be 
called a pluralistic version of “Communicative Realism.” Such a view 
would be based on specialized discourses of communities committed 
to unambiguous communication, and most important, committed to 


215 


216 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


epistemic understanding of various parts or aspects of the natural and 
social worlds, and hence to empirical constraint. A meta-discovery 
resulting from these communal endeavors is that the world is plural- 
istic and incapable of a universal discourse. In other words, the 
domain of knowledge is a kind of “cognitive syndicalism.” However, 
specialized discourses are objective and capable of meaningful coher- 
ence through thematic discourse combined with second-order knowl- 
edge and understanding grounded in specialization. 

Oppenheimer’s overall hope and vision arose from his involve- 
ment with atomic weapons and attempts at international control, and 
in all likelihood, personal crises as well. Other sources included the 
Ethical Culture movement, Hindu thought, and, most important, 
Bohr and his call for an Open World. In a philosophical light, 
Oppenheimer’s vision can be seen as a response to modernity and its 
various crises, and having connections with American pragmatism. In 
an international light, it can be seen as a response to the nuclear revo- 
lution, and having connections to liberal internationalism as well as 
functionalist and constructivist thought. 

An overall goal of this book — in part, a venture into “philo- 
sophical biography” — was to sympathetically trace and develop the 
ideas on science and society as well as the nuclear revolution that 
Oppenheimer presented to the public and his fellow elites. This explo- 
ration helps remove some of the mystery surrounding Oppenheimer 
by illustrating constants or invariants in his life and thought (e.g., 
liberal internationalism, Acheson—Lilienthal initiative, scientific inter- 
nationalism, communal view of science, science as a cultural resource, 
Bohr and complementarity). Most important, a biographical theme 
focused on responsibility is enriched by elaborating the hope and 
vision that Oppenheimer presented to the public — a vision for 
understanding and confronting the nuclear revolution in which he 
“played an active part.” 

In addition, scholars and biographers have spoken of 
Oppenheimer as providing hope and vision. For instance, Silvan 
Schweber holds that Oppenheimer believed that “he could formu- 
late a new philosophical vision appropriate and relevant for the new 
times.”**! David Hecht in his 2008 article “The Atomic Hero” 


Epilogue 217 


remarks that Oppenheimer’s supporters “lauded him for providing 
a particular kind of hope.”**? Also, Priscilla McMillan claims that 
“among the scientists who created the bomb there were heroes” who 
“tried desperately, each in his way, to control the outcome,” and that 
“Oppenheimer was the American who could see the furthest” 
and “was the most articulate.”*4* By investigating Oppenheimer’s 
thought and drawing strong connections to contemporary philoso- 
phy and international relations theory, this book has attempted to 
bring additional depth and insight to such scholarly claims as well 
as Oppenheimer himself. 

For the most part, Oppenheimer is remembered for how he lived, 
and perhaps also for what he suffered, and not for what he said. He 
is engulfed by atomic celebrity and represented by such simplifying 
quotes as “Now I have become death, the destroyer of worlds.” 
However, Oppenheimer was strategically placed, and he had some- 
thing to say about the modern world and its possibilities that has 
relevance even today. 

Oppenheimer’s efforts in presenting his ideas and vision were 
sustained and wide ranging. Yet, like many other intellectuals and 
scientists, he never wrote a book that is a systematic exposition of his 
views. Though a philosophical thinker, Oppenheimer was not part of 
the continuing philosophical community since he functioned as a 
public intellectual speaking to audiences of his time. In some ways, 
this book has been an exercise in philosophical recovery and recon- 
struction that attempts to place Oppenheimer’s thought back into 
the public forum. It is also a general argument that the views of natu- 
ral scientists need to be taken seriously as scholarly resources for pro- 
moting a viable public sphere and connecting us with our past as 
well as assisting us in more meaningful philosophical and political 
investigations. 

I have attempted to illustrate this in various ways — placing 
Oppenheimer’s thought into the general discussion of modernity, 
relating his thought to liberal internationalism/constructivism and 
Mitrany’s international functionalism, showing mutual support 
between Oppenheimer’s analysis of the nuclear revolution and 
Deudney’s nuclear one worldism, furthering Schweber’s discussion of 


218 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer and American pragmatism, showing connections 
between Oppenheimer’s thought and Stephen Toulmin’s 1990 dis- 
cussion of modernity and the “tethering” of the Leviathan state, and 
making contact between Oppenheimer’s views on science and Harry 
Collins’ call in 2002 for “The Third Wave of Science Studies.” 

Furthermore, connections between Oppenheimer’s thought and 
the ideas of Richard Rorty and Bernard Williams have proved enlight- 
ening. Most interesting, ideas from Williams (e.g., moral dilemmas 
and moral luck) and Rorty (e.g., destruction of the narrative unity of 
one’s life) have served as useful conceptual tools in discussing and 
bringing understanding to the challenges and dilemmas that 
Oppenheimer faced in his life, and again in removing some of the 
mystery surrounding him. Additionally, these interpretations reflect 
back on Williams and Rorty and serve to highlight the vitality and 
relevance of their philosophical views. 

It is interesting to note omissions where significant, historical 
connections could be made. In January 2003, at a forum entitled 
“National Pride, National Shame” at Stanford University, Rorty 
called for the United States to make a “gesture toward the future” 
and “issue a call for diminishing the sovereignty of individual nation- 
states, including our own.” In particular, nations would turn over part 
of their national sovereignty to an international organization, and 
all nuclear powers would eliminate their nuclear weapons.*** Many 
believe that a nuclear attack/war is perhaps the greatest threat to 
liberal democracy and its extension, and could give rise to the 
Orwellian state. Rorty reminded his audience of the “Baruch- 
Lilienthal” plan for the international control of atomic energy, say- 
ing that many in 1945 viewed such a plan as “an obvious necessity.” 
However, this is not so today in the era of the American Empire 
and the national security state. Rorty told his audience that the 
United States could receive glory and be viewed with pride if it was 
the first great empire to work for something greater than its own 
security and work for the security of the world. Rorty mentioned 
Roosevelt, Truman, and Einstein but not Oppenheimer. Given that 
Oppenheimer played a central role in the development of the 
atomic bomb and was “the most stimulating and creative mind” 


Epilogue 219 


among the proponents for the international control of atomic 
energy, Rorty’s omission is telling and reflective of Oppenheimer’s 
absence from the public sphere. 

Oppenheimer and his thought are difficult to categorize using 
simple labels. Though he was a polarizing figure politically and perhaps 
personally during his lifetime, his thought and vision are not polariz- 
ing. Oppenheimer was not a movement intellectual (e.g., peace move- 
ment, environmental movement) or a revolutionary. Being slightly 
left of center, he was never a symbol for the political left or right. 

Further, Oppenheimer was an insider and part of the political 
establishment (like MacLeish and Rabi) and not an outsider (like 
Einstein and Linus Pauling). Consequently, if one takes the tradition 
of the intellectual as being the “outsider,” then Oppenheimer appears 
not to be an intellectual, let alone a public intellectual. For instance, 
Irving Howe, founder and long-time editor of Dissent, might well 
defend such a position. In 1954, the year of Oppenheimer’s security 
hearing and political exile, Howe published an article, entitled “This 
Age of Conformity,” in Partisan Review. Howe claimed that “the 
truly powerless people are those intellectuals — the new realists — 
who attach themselves to the seats of power, where they surrender 
their freedom of expression without gaining any significance as 
political figures.” Consequently, “whenever they become absorbed 
into the accredited institutions of society they not only lose their 
traditional rebelliousness but to one extent or another they cease to 
function as intellectuals.”**° A rejoinder here, as pointed out by the 
philosopher of science Noretta Koertge, is that though being an 
insider runs risks of corruption and losing one’s “rebelliousness,” the 
“same insider perspective also enables them [scientists] to serve as 
sentinels for society at large.”**° 


«Interestingly, in the January 31, 2003 issue of the Chronicle of Higher Education, 
there is “the text of the speech given by Richard Rorty” at this forum. The published 
text is structurally the same and the content is essentially same as Rorty’s actual 
speech, but the wording is somewhat different. For example, in the published text, 
Oppenheimer is referred to along with Einstein when Rorty concludes the published 
text but not in the actual speech. This omission and then inclusion may be reflective 
of the historical and scholarly ambiguity surrounding Oppenheimer. 


220 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


More to the point, one could respond to Howe by appealing to 
the views of the historian Richard Hofstadter, who wrote in his book, 
Anti-Intellectualism in American Life (winner of the 1964 Pulitzer 
Prize for Non-Fiction), that: 


The intellectual who has relinquished all thought of association with 
power understands well — almost too well — that his state of power- 
lessness is conducive to certain illuminations. What he is prone to 
forget is that an access to power and an involvement with its prob- 
lems may provide other illuminations. The critic of power tries to 
influence the world by affecting public opinion; the associate of 
power tries directly to make the exercise of power more amenable to 
the thought of the intellectual community. These functions are not 
of necessity mutually exclusive or hostile. ... The characteristic intel- 
lectual failure of the critic of power is a lack of understanding of the 
limitations under which power is exercised. His characteristic moral 
failure lies in an excessive concern with his own purity; but purity of 
a sort is easily had where responsibilities are not assumed.**” 


So for Hofstadter, Oppenheimer’s insider status would not disqualify 
him as an intellectual, let alone a public intellectual. 

Even more, like the “critic of power,” Oppenheimer tried “to 
influence the world by affecting public opinion;” and as an “associate 
of power,” he tried “directly to make the exercise of power more 
amenable to the thought of the intellectual community.” Oppenheimer 
surely believed that these two functions were not merely “mutually 
exclusive” but really two dimensions of his responsibility. Remember, 
in his 1966 conversation with Thomas Morgan of Look Magazine 
shortly before his death, Oppenheimer said that responsibility “is 
almost a secular device for using a religious notion without attaching 
it to a transcendent being.” And he did not know “how to describe 
[his] life without using some word like ‘responsibility’ to characterize 
it, a word that has to do with choice and action and the tension in 
which choices can be resolved,” and noted that meaningful responsi- 
bility presupposes power. However, Hofstadter’s analysis entails a 
warning: even though “access to power and an involvement with its 
problems may provide other illuminations,” there is the danger of 
losing one’s moral purity. 


Epilogue 221 


Oppenheimer’s views and vision have definite ties to the thought 
of many contemporary scholars as already illustrated by Stephen 
Toulmin and Harry Collins as well as international relations experts 
like Scott Sagan and Daniel Deudney. Further, Oppenheimer’s com- 
munal views have connections with scholars who have successfully 
moved into the popular media of today. One might think of the 
political scientist Robert Putnam and his best-selling book Bowling 
Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community published 
in 2000. One might also think of the political philosopher Michael 
Sandel and his outstanding Reith Lectures A New Citizenship deliv- 
ered in 2009. Sandel’s “communitarian self” resonates well with 
Oppenheimer’s ideas on the individual and society. Also, there is his 
2012 awarding-winning book (along with his internet presentations) 
What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets? And, of course, 
there is Sandel’s free, online course Justice: What’s the Right Thing to 
Do? which has reached thousands, perhaps millions, of people around 
the world. Both Putnam and Sandel are at Harvard University, and 
Oppenheimer, as a former overseer, would surely commend them for 
their contributions to the public sphere. Remember, in 1959 and 
prescient of Rorty’s break with analytic philosophy twenty years later, 
Oppenheimer criticized the professionalization of philosophy with its 
overemphasis on certainty and epistemology, and called for it to 
return to the public sphere of thematic discourse. 

In numerous ways, the world of today has moved beyond 
Oppenheimer and the 1950s. The Soviet Union has collapsed and the 
Cold War has ended peacefully, and globalization is now the historic 
force. Technologically, spacecraft have taken us to the moon and 
probed the surface of Mars while the world is now connected through 
the Internet. Scientifically, the human genome has been mapped 
and the so-called “God Particle” has been detected. Politically, the 
United States has elected a black president and women serve on its 
Supreme Court. 

Academic philosophy of today is much richer than in the 1950s 
when Oppenheimer was an Overseer at Harvard. Analytic philosophy, 
though still dominant in the English-speaking universities, has evolved 
and lost much of its rigidity and is more receptive to other traditions 
like pragmatism and continental philosophy. Most important, analytic 


222 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


philosophy has shifted its emphasis from a metaethics of analyzing 
ethical discourse to actually doing normative ethics. Emblematic of 
this move to normative ethics is the work of John Rawls (1921-2002), 
considered the most important political philosopher of the 20th 
Century, and his defining text, A Theory of Justice, published in 1971. 
Further, philosophers like Bernard Williams have revitalized Aristotelian 
ethics by focusing on what is now called virtue ethics and communi- 
tarian ethics. At another level, philosophical ethics has focused on 
significant domains of human activity and experience as illustrated by 
fields such as medical ethics, environmental and climate ethics, and 
even nuclear ethics." Such major shifts in academic philosophy have 
provided us new understanding and insights, and are advancing 
philosophy to fulfill its proper role of fostering a viable public sphere. 

With regard to the nuclear revolution, we have also moved consid- 
erably beyond the 1950s. For over 70 years, the international nuclear 
order has demonstrated a series of successes — no combat use of 
nuclear weapons, only nine states have nuclear weapons, no nuclear 
disaster with the break-up of the Soviet Union, no nuclear test explo- 
sions by the majors powers for over 15 years, and significant reductions 
in the nuclear arsenals of the United States and Russia. 

Unlike the 1950s, nuclear disarmament is no longer simply 
dismissed as utopian. A president of the United States has called for 
and helped us move forward to a world without nuclear weapons. 
Most important, as stated by the nuclear expert Harald Miiller, “The 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, with the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT) at its core, can be called one of the most amazing international 
institutions.”**8 With the NPT and its three pillars (nuclear nonpro- 
liferation, peaceful use of nuclear energy, and nuclear disarmament) in 
place for over 40 years, calls for a world free of nuclear weapons can 
point to an international institution with a successful history that is 
serving as a framework to move forward to nuclear disarmament and 
possibly to a world without war. 


"For an excellent source on climate ethics, see Stephen Gardiner, Simon Caney, Dale 
Jamieson, and Henry Shue (editors), Climate Ethics: Essential Readings, (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2010). 


Epilogue 223 


In addition, there is now, and continues to be, significant scholarly 
work in international relations related to nuclear disarmament as illus- 
trated by extensive studies in nuclear proliferation/nonproliferation 
as well as in-depth work on the possibilities of nuclear disarmament as 
illustrated by the work of John Perkovich and James Acton. Besides 
general initiatives like reducing regional rivalries and pursuing 
confidence-building, we know of definite measures that can be taken 
now to bring us closer to nuclear disarmament, for example, bring- 
ing into force the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, working toward 
a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty, and a No First Use (of nuclear 
weapons) Pledge by the United States.* 

In 1959 at Basel, Oppenheimer had lamented that “there have 
been crucial moments in which the existence of a public philosophi- 
cal discourse ... could have made a great difference in the moral 
climate and human scope of our times.” In many ways, Oppenheimer’s 
concern is now being addressed. For example, in the interdiscipli- 
nary field of nuclear ethics, philosopher Thomas Doyle in his 2010 
article “Reviving Nuclear Ethics: A Renewed Research Agenda for 
the Twenty-First Century” has proposed a research agenda for three 
areas: “the possible decay of the Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) 
regime, the threat that nuclear weapons pose to democratic institu- 
tions, and the relationship between ethics and domestic political 
dimensions of nuclearization.”*? 

At another level, William Walker, who is a professor of interna- 
tional relations at the University of St. Andrews, has moved morality 
into the arena of the international nuclear order and nuclear policy. 
In his 2007 article, “Nuclear Enlightenment and Counter- 
Enlightenment,” he holds that “the exceptional nature of nuclear 
weapons calls for an exceptional kind of cooperative politics” and this 
requires the international nuclear order to fully incorporate “the NPT 
or an NPT-like vessel of central principles, norms, and rules.” Key to 


‘For an interesting discussion of things to be done in the short term for achieving a 
world free of nuclear weapons, see the final chapter in Richard Falk and David 
Krieger, The Path to Zero: Dialogues on Nuclear Dangers, (Boulder, CO: Paradigm 
Publishers, 2012). 


224 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


this, of course, are the nuclear disarmament norm and its principle 
that “nuclear weapons are intrinsically illegitimate [a ‘radical evil’ due 
to their destructive power], and that any legitimacy or legality afforded 
to them has to be contingent and temporary.”*°° 

In his 2012 book, A Perpetual Menace: Nuclear Weapons and 
International Order, Walker continues and deepens the positions and 
views taken in his 2007 article.* Walker mentions that his title 
A Perpetual Menace is taken from a July 1944 memorandum of Bohr 
to President Roosevelt warning him about the prospects of an atomic 
bomb for the international order, and in many ways Walker can be 
taken as “echoing Bohr [and Oppenheimer as well].”*°! Walker again 
emphasizes that the legality for a small group of states to possess 
nuclear weapons according to the NPT is simply a historical contingency, 
and that this legality is not legitimacy. Consequently, “For both moral 
and political reasons, therefore, the bracketing of legality and legiti- 
macy within the NPT requires that the legal possessors [of nuclear 
weapons] commit themselves to the reversal of their acquisition — 
to the elimination of their nuclear weapons and nuclear weapons 
status.”*5? 

Walker notes that his moral stance here is in many ways Kantian — 
appealing to justice and fairness within a social and political structure 
as well as taking the nuclear disarmament norm as a “regulative prin- 
ciple” guiding action and not as “an ideal serving a utopian aim.” In 
the concluding section of his book, he invokes the moral emotions in 
support of a normative international order. 


Scholars and practitioners often write and act as if questions of 
morality have no place in international politics. They are certainly 
mistaken in the field of nuclear weapons. For reasons discussed at 
various points in this book, the moral implications of the possession 


“Walker holds that something along the lines of the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative is 
needed in the international nuclear order, but this could be “elusive.” For instance, 
he writes: “A founding document of the nuclear age, the Acheson—Lilienthal Report, 
bore the title ‘A Proposal for the International Control of Atomic Energy’. That 
control and the order that is implied seem as essential but elusive today as in 1946.” 
(Walker, Perpetual Menace (ref. 379), p. 193). 


Epilogue 225 


and use of these instruments of annihilation are profound and have 
affected behavior throughout the nuclear age. Without underesti- 
mating the role played by nuclear deterrence, the absence of nuclear 
war since 1945 has its roots in the moral repugnance evoked by 
images of the wholesale destruction of people, cities, societies and 
living environments, and in recognition of the despair and shame 
that would follow it. Moral repugnance has been one of human- 
kind’s main protections against nuclear disaster. It has animated 
the searches for order and restraint that have been such features of 
nuclear history.*°? 


Another way we have moved beyond the 1950s is that 
Oppenheimer’s voice is essentially absent from the public sphere. 
A hope underlying this book has been to foster a sympathetic, though 
not uncritical, understanding of Oppenheimer and assist in bringing 
his voice back into the public sphere. Oppenheimer can serve as a 
historic voice, and not just as a symbolic figure, of someone strategi- 
cally placed in the nuclear revolution to help us move forward to a 
more humane world. This voice would call for breaking the “grip” of 
the nation state with the means of specialized communities, speak of 
the communitarian nature of science as well as science as a cultural 
resource, and encourage us to our dual duty of great openness and 
faithfulness grounded in specialization. 

Oppenheimer’s voice would also raise the specter of nuclear pro- 
liferation and reiterate as it did in 1965 that to be successful we must 
“show, by our own example and conviction, that we regard nuclear 
armaments as a transitory, dangerous, and degrading phase of the 
world’s history.” Most important, this voice would echo the necessity 
of abolishing nuclear weapons along the lines of the Acheson— 
Lilienthal plan. This plan was in large part Oppenheimer’s plan, and 
he spoke eloquently for it in 1946 and continually held that its argu- 
ments are “correct arguments” and that “Some day we will want to 
come back to this.” In significant ways, we ave come back. For one, 
the Acheson—Lilienthal plan and its arguments are in many ways 
instantiated in the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty with its three 
pillars — nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, peaceful use of nuclear 
energy, and nuclear disarmament — and guide its evolving structure. 


226 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


This remarkable rise of the nuclear nonproliferation regime, along 
with recent calls for a world without nuclear weapons, correspond- 
ingly affect the retrospective assessment of Oppenheimer and the 
postwar attempts for the international control of atomic energy. They 
demonstrate that the failure of the Acheson—Lilienthal initiative was 
not intrinsic to project but extrinsic. Though it failed in the late 
1940s, the Acheson—Lilienthal plan was not discredited and could 
“perhaps in the form of some new aspiration, contribute to making 
sense of what is left.” Oppenheimer’s hope and vision of 1957-59 can 
be taken as such an attempt. In a significant way, this book has argued 
that this later hope and vision, really an aspiration for a world of cul- 
tural coherence and a world without war, is philosophically grounded 
and can be successfully placed into a narrative structure using interna- 
tional relations theory that has relevance today. This is critical to how 
we view Oppenheimer and his thought, and possibly how Oppenheimer 
hoped to view himself. 

Not unexpectedly, the world has moved beyond 1950s in terms 
of new crises and global challenges." Like the atomic crisis of 1945, 
the environmental crisis of today with the prospect of global warm- 
ing will require a universalistic approach that reaches beyond the 
Leviathan state. However, the challenges surrounding global warm- 
ing are enormous and measures for addressing them are so limited at 
this time, that for many, things appear hopeless.” By comparison, the 


“For a discussion of the new crises and global challenges of the 21st Century, see 
especially pp. 350-353 in G. John Ikenberry, Liberal Leviathan: The Origins, Crisis, 
and Transformation of the American World Order (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 2011). Inkenberry’s book is a masterful and systematic account in the tradition 
of liberal internationalism written for international relations theorists, scholars, 
policymakers, and the general public. 

The literature on global warming and its challenges is extensive. I have found the 
Stephen M. Gardiner, A Perfect Moral Storm: The Ethical Tragedy of Climate Change 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011) to be very helpful. Also, for an in-depth 
account of how certain scientists (in particular, the solid-state physicist Fredrick Seitz 
who did war-related research during WWII and was president of the National 
Academy of Sciences from 1962 to 1969) have “joined forces with think tanks and 
private corporations to challenge scientific evidence on a host of contemporary issues” 
(p. 6) and “deliberately misrepresent the work of their own colleagues” (p. 8), see 


Epilogue 227 


challenges facing the nuclear problem, though substantial, appear 
more manageable than those facing global warming. Moving ahead 
on nuclear disarmament today would assist in confronting and solving 
global warming by showing success in an area that also requires a 
global solution. Additionally, there is the promising coincidence that 
nuclear power does not contribute greenhouse gases and hence its 
widespread use could be a significant factor in confronting global 
warming.“” Remember that in November 1945 at Los Alamos, 
Oppenheimer spoke of atomic energy as “a new field, in which just 
the novelty and the special characteristics of the technical operations 
should enable one to establish a community of interest which might 
almost be regarded as a pilot plant for a new type of international 
collaboration.” Therefore, if we solve the nuclear problem, we should 
have a “pilot plant” for solving other global problems as well. 
Finally, many historians today take the Cold War as an “Ideological 
Project” (i.e., a war of ideas) which is symbolized in the West by the 
Congress for Cultural Freedom and its CIA funding. Oppenheimer 
was a member of the CCF; and some of his ideas can be portrayed as 
part of this project, but his hope and vision were certainly more. They 
were a response not only to the nuclear revolution but to modernity 
itself. His views of science as a model of responsible belief embedded 
in community and cooperation, along with his liberal international- 
ism, are needed in this time of competition and fragmentation. His 
ideas are more than suggestive since they point us in the right direc- 
tion and provide means for moving forward and beyond the Leviathan 
state. In some ways, as physicists might say, his hope and vision pro- 
vides a “first-order solution” for modernity and its various crises, 
especially the nuclear crisis and the resulting call for a world free of 


Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of 
Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming (New 
York: Bloomsbury Press, 2010). 

“For an up-to-date case for the need of nuclear power to confront global warming, 
see Michael H. Fox, Why We Need Nuclear Power — The Environmental Case 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014). Fox characterizes himself as a “pro-nuclear 
environmentalist” and argues for halting “global warming by replacing most fossil fuel 
electrical generation with nuclear power, supplemented with wind power.” (p. 281). 


228 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


nuclear weapons. In the words of Rorty’s challenge, Oppenheimer’s 
ideas and outlook can assist us in constructing a plausible large scale 
narrative of progress. 

Oppenheimer’s hope and vision of 1957-59 arose from his “hav- 
ing played an active part” in bringing about the nuclear revolution 
and his taking responsibility for “what came of this revolution.” In 
August 1965, twenty years after Hiroshima, in an interview for the 
CBS Evening News with Walter Cronkite, Oppenheimer responded 
to the query that “from all that you have said, it seems when you 
contemplate the future, it is more with hope than with pessimism.” 
Oppenheimer replied with words of hope and vision, 


I’ve tried to talk about the hopeful things .... There are a hundred 
reasons for seeing no hope at all. And I take it for granted that 
everybody can think of them without being reminded. It’s harder to 
think of them on the other side, and I have tried to say that however 
frail and however tentative, however limited, they do exist and they 
look to me like a bridge head to a liveable future.*** 


Endnotes 


14. 
15. 


This biographical sketch relies to a large extent on the biographies of 
Oppenheimer given in (ref. 43). 

Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, American Prometheus: The Triumph 
and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: Knopf, 2005), 
p. 23. 

Jeremy Bernstein, Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma (Chicago: 
Ivan R. Dee, 2004), pp. 10-11. 

Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), p. 23. 

Quoted in David C. Cassidy, J. Robert Oppenheimer and the American 
Century (New York: Pi Press, 2005), p. 28. 

John S. Rigden, “J. Robert Oppenheimer: Before the War,” Scientific 
American 273 (July 1995), p. 78. 

Tbid., p. 78. 

Tbid., p. 79. 

Tbid., p. 79. 

Cassidy, Oppenheimer and the American Century (ref. 5), pp. 129-130. 
Quoted in Silvan S. Schweber Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning 
of Genius (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008), p. 151. 
Rudolf Peierls, “Oppenheimer, J. Robert” in Charles C. Gillispie 
(editor-in-chief) Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1974), p. 214. 

Ray Monk, Inside the Centre: The Life of J. Robert Oppenheimer 
(London: Jonathan Cape, 2012), p. 245. 

Bernstein, Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma (ref. 3), p. 48. 
Monk, Inside the Centre (ref. 13), p. 245. 


229 


230 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


16. 


17. 
18. 
19. 


20. 
21. 


22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 


27. 


28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 


32. 
33. 


34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 


In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of Hearing before 
Personnel Security Board and Texts of Principal Documents and Letters 
(Cambridge: MIT Press Paperback Edition, April 1971), pp. 572-575. 
Text reproduced from original editions published in 1954 by 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. 

Tbid., p. 11. 

Peierls, “Oppenheimer” (ref. 12), p. 215. 

Abraham Pais (with Supplemental Material by Robert P. Crease), 
J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Life (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2006), p. 302. 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 20. 

Richard T. Sylves, The Nuclear Oracles: A Political History of the General 
Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission 1947-1977 
(Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 1987), p. 55. 

Monk, Inside the Centre (ref. 13), p. xi. 

Pais (and Crease), J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Life (ref. 19), pp. xx—xxi. 
Tbid., p. 306. 

Monk, Inside the Centre (ref. 13) p. 336. 

Quoted in Pais (and Crease), J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Life (ref. 19), 
p. 23. 

Charles Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2006), p. 127. 

Ibid., p. 125. 

Monk, Inside the Centre (ref. 13), p. xii. 

Tbid., p. 374. 

Freeman Dyson, “Oppenheimer: The Shape of Genius,” The New York 
Review of Books (August 15, 2013). 

Quoted in Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), p. 375. 
Robert P. Crease, “Oppenheimer and the Sense of the Tragic” in Cathryn 
Carson and David A. Hollinger (editors), Reappraising Oppenheimer: 
Centennial Studies and Reflections (Berkeley: Office for History of 
Science and Technology, University of California-Berkeley, 2005), p. 321. 
Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), p. 422. 

Ibid., p. 429. 

Cassidy, Oppenheimer and the American Century (ref. 5), p. 311. 
Tbid., pp. 311-312. 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 22. 

Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), p. 549. Used by 
permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday 


40. 
41. 
42. 


43. 


Endnotes 231 


Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All 
rights reserved. Copyright © Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, 2005. 
Tbid., p. 550. 

Tbid., p. 547. 

Michael A. Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science,” Centaurus 
43 (2001), p. 74, 109 (Note 3). 

The eight biographical books from 2004 to 2008 are Jeremy 
Bernstein, Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma (Chicago: Ivan 
R. Dee, 2004); David C. Cassidy, J. Robert Oppenheimer and the 
American Century (New York: Pi Press, 2005); Kai Bird and Martin 
J. Sherwin, American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: Knopf, 2005); Priscilla J. McMillan, 
The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer and the Birth of the Modern Arms 
Race (New York: Viking, 2005); Charles Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The 
Tragic Intellect (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006); 
Abraham Pais (with Supplemental Material by Robert P. Crease), 
J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Life (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2006); Silvan S. Schweber Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of 
Genius (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008); and Mark 
Wolverton, A Life in the Twilight: The Final Years of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2008). Also, in 2012 
there is the biography Ray Monk, Inside the Centre: The Life of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer (London: Jonathan Cape, 2012). 

Cathryn Carson and David A. Hollinger (editors), Reappraising 
Oppenheimer: Centennial Studies and Reflections (Berkeley: Office for 
History of Science and Technology, University of California-Berkeley, 
2005) is the collection of essays from the 2004 Oppenheimer 
Centennial Conference at Berkeley. Cynthia C. Kelly (editor), 
Oppenheimer and the Manhattan Project (Singapore: World Scientific 
Publishing, 2006) is the collection of essays from the 2004 Symposium 
on Oppenheimer at Los Alamos sponsored by the Atomic Heritage 
Foundation. Two recent articles on Oppenheimer are David 
K. Hecht, “The Atomic Hero: Robert Oppenheimer and the Making 
of Scientific Icons in the Early Cold War,” Technology and Culture 49 
(October 2008), pp. 943-966 and Michael A. Day, “Oppenheimer 
and Rabi: American Cold War Physicists as Public Intellectuals” in The 
Atomic Bomb and American Society: New Perspectives (Knoxville, TN: 
University of Tennessee Press, 2009), pp. 307-328. The journal 
Metascience (2008) devoted a 37-page review symposium to Thorpe’s 


232 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


44, 


45. 
46. 
47. 


48. 
49. 


50. 


51. 
52. 


53. 


54. 


55. 


56. 


57. 


58. 


59. 


book with contributions from Sheila Jasanoff, Michael Gordin, 
Andrew Jewett, and a response by Thorpe. 

Barton J. Bernstein, “The Puzzles of Interpreting J. Robert 
Oppenheimer, His Politics, and the Issues of His Possible Communist 
Party Membership” in Carson and Hollinger, Reappraising 
Oppenheimer (ref. 33), p. 106. 

Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect (ref. 27), pp. xiv—xv. 
Quoted in Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), p. 77. 
Jessica Wang, “Two Lives in Contrast: Blackett, Oppenheimer and the 
Nuclear Age,” Isis 97 (2006), p. 147. 

Pais (and Crease), J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Life (ref. 19), p. xx. 
Michael A. Day, “I. I. Rabi: The Two Cultures and the Universal 
Culture of Science,” Physics in Perspective 6 (2004), pp. 428-476. 
Quoted in Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect (ref. 27), p. 254. 
Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), p. 77. 

For example, see Michael A. Day, “Oppenheimer and Rabi: American 
Cold War Physicists as Public Intellectuals” in The Atomic Bomb and 
American Society: New Perspectives (Knoxville, TN: University of 
Tennessee Press, 2009), pp. 307-328 and Gary Grieve-Carlson and 
Michael A. Day, “MacLeish, Oppenheimer, and “The Conquest of 
America,” Soundings: An Interdisciplinary Journal 93 (Fall/Winter 
2010), pp. 281-311. 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 959. 

Quoted in Thomas B. Morgan, “With Oppenheimer,” Look Magazine 
(Dec. 27, 1966), p. 67. 

“Tentative Program of the Fulbright Conference on Higher Education” 
(June 12-16, 1957), Box 257, J. Robert Oppenheimer Papers 
(henceforth JRO Papers), Library of Congress, Washington, DC. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Science and the Human Community” in 
Charles Frankel (editor), Issues in University Education: Essays by Ten 
American Scholars (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1959), p. 62. 
Program for “Princeton University Conference on NATO” (June 
19-29, 1957), Box 274, JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

For information on the American Assembly Conference as well as 
Robert Oppenheimer’s, “The Environs of Atomic Power,” see Atoms 
for Power: United States Policy in Atomic Energy Development (New York: 
The American Assembly — Columbia University, 1957). 

Robert Oppenheimer, “The Tree of Knowledge,” Harper’s Magazine 
(October 1958), pp. 55-60. 


60. 


61. 
62. 
63. 


64. 


65. 
66. 
67. 


68. 
69. 
70. 


71. 
72. 
73. 


74, 
75. 
76. 
77. 


78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 


82. 
83. 


84. 


85. 


Endnotes 233 


Oppenheimer, “The Environs of Atomic Power” (ref. 58), pp. 33-34 
and “The Tree of Knowledge” (ref. 59), p. 60. 

Oppenheimer, “The Tree of Knowledge” (ref. 59), p. 55. 

Tbid., p. 55. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1954), pp. 92-95. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World” 
(1947) in J. Robert Oppenheimer, The Open Mind (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1955), p. 94. 

Tbid., p. 91. 

Tbid., pp. 93-94. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Science and Culture,” International House 
of Japan Bulletin (October 1960), p. 7. 

Oppenheimer, “Science and the Human Community” (ref. 56), p. 55. 
Oppenheimer, “Science and Culture” (ref. 67), pp. 6-7. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, William James Lecture 8 — “The Hope of 
Order” (1957, unpublished manuscript), Box 259, JRO Papers (ref. 55), 
pp. 25-26. 


Oppenheimer, “The Tree of Knowledge” (ref. 59), p. 59. 
Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding (ref. 63), p. 39. 
Oppenheimer, “Science and the Human Community” (ref. 56), 
pp. 60-61. 

Oppenheimer, “The Tree of Knowledge” (ref. 59), p. 55. 

Tbid., p. 59. 

Oppenheimer, “The Environs of Atomic Power” (ref. 58), p. 31. 
Robert Oppenheimer, “Nuclear Power and International Relations” 
(June 25, 1957, unpublished manuscript), Princeton University 
Conference on NATO, Box 274, JRO Papers (ref. 55), p. 7. 

Tbid., p. 11. 

Ibid., p. 17. 

Oppenheimer, “The Environs of Atomic Power” (ref. 58), p. 32. 
Oppenheimer, “Nuclear Power and International Relations” (ref. 77), 


p. 8. 

Tbid., p. 9. 

Oppenheimer, “The Environs of Atomic Power” (ref. 58), p. 34 and 
“Nuclear Power and International Relations” (ref. 77), p. 12. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “A Time of Sorrow and Renewal,” Encounter 
XVI (February 1961), p. 71. 

Tbid., p. 71. 


234 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


86. 


87. 


88. 


89. 


90. 


91. 


92. 


93. 


94. 


95. 


96. 
97. 


98. 


99. 


100. 


Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), p. 92. Also, 
see Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer (ref. 11), pp. 216-221. 
“Basle Seminar Studies Impact on Modern Industrial Society,” News — 
Congress for Cultural Freedom (November—December, 1959), p. 1. 
The quoting in this paragraph and the next five paragraphs is from 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, “In the Keeping of Unreason,” Bulletin of 
Atomic Scientists 16 (January 1960), pp. 18-22. 

Thomas F. Murphy III, “Public Sphere” in Maryanne Cline Horowitz 
(editor), New Dictionary of the History of Ideas (New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 2005), Vol. 5, p. 1964. 

Tbid., p. 1964. 

These letters are found in Box 35, Archibald MacLeish Papers (hence- 
forth AM Papers), Library of Congress, Washington, DC. 

Letter Stevenson to MacLeish (August 13, 1949), Box 21, AM Papers 
(ref. 91). 

Letter Oppenheimer to MacLeish (September 27, 1949), Box 49, 
JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

David Barber, “MacLeish, Archibald” in John A. Garraty and Mark 
C. Carnes (general editors), American National Biography Vol. 14 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), p. 269. 

Bernard A. Drabeck and Helen E. Ellis (editors), Archibald MacLeish: 
Reflections (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 1986), 
p. 232. 

Barber, “MacLeish, Archibald” (ref. 94), p. 270. 

See Box 17, AM Papers (ref. 91). The signatories of the petition include 
Henry Steele Commager, W. E. B. DuBois, Martha Graham, Robert 
Hutchins, Thomas Mann, Lewis Mumford, Edward R. Murrow, 
Eleanor Roosevelt, and Mark Van Doren, among many others. 

Letter Oppenheimer to MacLeish (February 14, 1949), Box 49, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55). 

Letter MacLeish to Oppenheimer (July 7, 1954), Box 49, JRO Papers 
(ref. 55). 

Archibald MacLeish, “The Conquest of America,” The Atlantic 
Monthly (August 1949), pp. 17-22. “Conquest” was reprinted in 
Archibald MacLeish, Freedom Is the Right to Choose (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1951). Note: All quoting in this section is taken from 
“Conquest” except for the quotes in the first two paragraphs and the 
first quote in the last paragraph of this section. These quotes are 
referenced by endnotes or directly attributed in the text. 


101. 


102. 


113. 


114. 


115. 


116. 


Endnotes 235 


Archibald MacLeish, “The Image of Victory” (1942) in Archibald 
MacLeish, A Time to Act (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1943), 
pp. 182-183. 

Archibald MacLeish, “The Unimagined America” (1943) in MacLeish, 
Freedom Is the Right to Choose (ref. 100), p. 18. Note: MacLeish deliv- 
ered a speech titled “The Unimagined America” on March 22, 1943, 
at the University of California-Berkeley which appeared in the June 
1943 issue of The Atlantic Monthly. In addition, Congressman Martin 
J. Kennedy (NY) entered the text of the speech into the Congressional 
Record (July 6, 1943). 

MacLeish, “Conquest” (ref. 100), p. 19. 

Tbid., pp. 20-21. 

Archibald MacLeish, “National Purpose” (1960) in Archibald MacLeish, 
A Continuing Journey (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1968), pp. 85-86. 
See reprint of “The Conquest of America” in The Atlantic Monthly 
(March 1980), pp. 35-42. 

Letter Oppenheimer to MacLeish (September 27, 1949), (ref. 93). 
Letter MacLeish to Oppenheimer (October 6, 1949), Box 49, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55). 

John Lewis Gaddis, “On Moral Equivalency and Cold War History,” 
Ethics & International Affairs 10 (1996), p. 147. 


. Archibald MacLeish, “Freedom to End Freedom” (1939) in Archibald 


MacLeish, A Time to Speak (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1941), p. 132. 
Lippmann quoted by MacLeish, “The Alternative” (1955) in A 
Continuing Journey (ref. 105), p. 153. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Speech to the Association of Los Alamos 
Scientists” (1945) in Alice Kimball Smith and Charles Weiner (edi- 
tors), Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and Recollections (Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 319. 

Board of Consultants (Chester I. Barnard, J. R. Oppenheimer, 
Charles A. Thomas, Harry A. Winne, David E. Lilienthal), A Report 
on the International Control of Atomic Energy (Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 61. 

Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World” (ref. 64), 
pp. 91-94. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, “The Age of Science 1900-1950,” Scientific 
American (September 1950), p. 23. 

Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding (ref. 63), 
p. 109. 


236 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


117. 
118. 


119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 


125. 


126. 


127. 


128. 


129. 


130. 
131. 


132. 
133. 


134. 


135. 


Ibid., pp. 103-104. 
Letter MacLeish to Oppenheimer (June 21, 1953), Box 49, JRO Papers 
(ref. 55). The last quote comes from the following two lines in the poem. 


Why should she? Her devotion is to tell 
By rote her rosary of perfect answers: 


Letter MacLeish to Oppenheimer (November 14, 1953), Box 49, 
JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

Letter Oppenheimer to MacLeish (July 15, 1954), Box 49, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55). 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 97. 

Tbid., p. 98. 

Tbid., p. 97. 

Quoted in Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), 
p. 89. 

Freeman J. Dyson, “Preface” in J. Robert Oppenheimer, Atom and 
Void: Essays on Science and Community (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1989), pp. vii-viii. 

Archibald MacLeish, “An Anonymous Generation” (1929) in 
MacLeish, A Time to Speak (ref. 110), pp. 152-53, 154. 

Archibald MacLeish, “The Belief in Man” (1944) in MacLeish, 
Freedom Is the Right to Choose (ref. 100) p. 149. 

Archibald MacLeish, “Master or Man” (1968) in Archibald MacLeish, 
Riders on the Earth (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1978), p. 31. 

Tbid., p. 32. 

Tbid., pp. 33-34. 

Quoted in Leon V. Sigal, Fighting to a Finish: The Politics of War 
Termination in the United States and Japan, 1945 (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1988), pp. 112-113. 

Ibid., p. 154. 

MacLeish quoted in Michael D. Pearlman, “Unconditional Surrender, 
Demobilization, and the Atomic Bomb” (1996), Combat Studies 
Institute, US Army Command and General Staff College, Fort 
Leavenworth, Kansas. See Footnote 34. 

Quoted in Akira Iriye, Power and Culture: The Japanese-American War, 
1941-1945 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), p. 255. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, William James Lecture 1 — “A Pluralistic 
Multiverse” (1957, unpublished manuscript), Box 259, JRO Papers 
(ref. 55), p. 20. 


136. 
137. 


138. 


139. 


140. 
141. 


142. 


143. 


144. 
145. 
146. 
147. 


148. 
149. 


150. 


151. 


152. 


153. 
154. 
155. 
156. 


Endnotes 237 


MacLeish, “Conquest” (ref. 100), p. 20. 

Archibald MacLeish, “A Reflection: Riders on Earth Together, 
Brothers in Eternal Cold,” New York Times (December 25, 1968). 
Transcript of NBC Television Show, “The Open Mind: Science and 
American Society” (June 17, 1962), Box 71, Folder 3, 1. I. Rabi 
Papers (henceforth IIR Papers), Library of Congress, Washington, 
DC, pp. 2-3. 

For materials on Rabi’s 1961-1962 visit to Princeton University, see 
Box 48, JR Papers (ref. 138). 

Letter Gillispie to Rabi (June 18, 1962), Box 48, ITR Papers (ref. 138). 
Committee Report to President Goheen (May 31, 1962), Box 48, 
IIR Papers (ref. 138). 

Much of my discussion here is based on John S. Rigden, Radi: 
Scientist and Citizen (New York: Basic Books, 1987; reprinted with a 
new preface, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000). See also 
John S. Rigden, “Isidor Isaac Rabi: Walking the Path of God,” Physics 
World 12 (November 1999), pp. 27-31. 

Letter Oppenheimer to Rabi (January 15, 1962), Box 48, ITR Papers 
(ref. 138). 

Ibid. 

Oppenheimer, “Science and Culture” (ref. 67), pp. 2-10, 21. 
Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World” (ref. 64), p. 97. 
Oppenheimer, “Science and the Human Community” (ref. 56), 
pp. 60-61. 

Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding (ref. 63), p. 39. 
Letter Fischer to Oppenheimer (May 22, 1962), Box 270, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55). 

Letter Oppenheimer to Fischer (June 4, 1962), Box 270, JRO Papers 
(ref. 55). 

Letter Fischer to Oppenheimer (June 20, 1962), Box 270, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55). 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Physics and Man’s Understanding” (1965) 
in J. Robert Oppenheimer, Uncommon Sense (Boston: Birkhauser, 
1984, editors — N. Metropolis, Gian-Carlo Rota, and David Sharp), 
p. 188. 

Ibid, p. 188. 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 6. 

Quoted in Morgan, “With Oppenheimer” (ref. 54), p. 67. 

Rigden, Radi: Scientist and Citizen. (ref. 142). 


238 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


157. 


158. 


159. 
160. 


161. 


162. 


163. 


164. 


165. 


166. 


167. 


168. 


169. 


170. 


171. 


172. 


173. 


Mortimer Adler, “A Panel Discussion: New Patterns in Education,” 
Graduate Faculties Newsletter (Columbia University), February 1961, 
p. 6. Copy in Box 67, ITR Papers (ref. 138). 

I. I. Rabi, “A Matter of Opinion,” Scientific Research 2 (September 
1967), p. 63. 

Tbid., p. 62. 

I. I. Rabi, “Science for Nonscientist,” Think (January-February 1968), 
p. 23. 

I. I. Rabi, “What Every Young Man Should Know” (1967), Box 70, 
IIR Papers (ref. 138). 

I. I. Rabi, “Freedom and Science” (1957), speech at Kenyon College, 
Box 66, IJR Papers (ref. 138), p. 3. 

I. I. Rabi, “Science and the Satisfaction of Human Aspirations,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 50 (December 1963), 
p. 1221. 

Tbid., p. 1221. 

E. U. Condon, “The Harmony of Science and Religion in Today’s 
Troubled World,” Social Questions Bulletin 39 (May 1949), p. 80. 
Arthur Compton, “The Moral Meaning of the Atomic Bomb” in 
William Scarlett (editor), Christianity Takes a Stand (New York: 
Penguin, 1946), pp. 70-71. 

Rabi, “Science and the Satisfaction of Human Aspirations” (ref. 163), 
p. 1221. 

I. I. Rabi, “Danz Lecture 1: Science and Humanity” (1967), Box 65, 
IIR Papers (ref. 138), pp. 3-4. 

I. I. Rabi, Eternal Light Radio Interview (1964), Box 70, IZR Papers 
(ref. 138), p. 9. 

I. I. Rabi, Address on Occasion of Receiving Niels Bohr International 
Gold Metal (1967), Box 67, IIR Papers (ref. 138), p. 27. 

I. I. Rabi, Robert Serber, Victor F. Weisskopf, Abraham Pais, and 
Glenn T. Seaborg, Oppenheimer (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
1969), pp. 7-8. 

Isaiah Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox (1953), 2nd edition edited by 
Henry Hardy, (Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 
2013), pp. 1-2. Reproduced with permission of Curtis Brown Group 
Ltd, London on behalf of The Beneficiaries of the Estate of Isaiah 
Berlin. Copyright © Isaiah Berlin, 1953. 

See Michel Foucault, “The political function of the intellectual,” 
Radical Philosophy 17 (1977), pp. 12-14; Edward W. Said, “The 


174. 


175. 


176. 


177. 


178. 
179. 


180. 
181. 
182. 


183. 
184. 


185. 


186. 


187. 


188. 
189. 
190. 


Endnotes 239 


Public Role of Writers and Intellectuals” in Helen Small (editor), 
The Public Intellectual (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2002), 
pp. 19-39; Pierre Bourdieu, “The Corporatism of the Universal: 
The Role of Intellectuals in the Modern World,” Telos 81 (1989), 
pp. 99-110. 

Edward W. Said, Representations of the Intellectual (New York: 
Random House, 1994), p. 11. 

Jeffrey C. Goldfarb, Civility and Subversion: The Intellectual in 
Democratic Society (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 
p. 1, 216. 

Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson, Jr., Volume I: A History 
of the United States Atomic Energy Commission — The New World 
1939/1946 (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 
1962), p. 310. 

Robert Oppenheimer, “Niels Bohr and Atomic Weapons,” The New 
York Review of Books (December 17, 1964), p. 7. 

Tbid., p. 6. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Speech to the Association of Los Alamos 
Scientists” (ref. 112), p. 315. 

Ibid., pp. 319-320. 

Ibid., pp. 323-324. 

See Hewlett and Anderson, The New World (ref. 176), pp. 533-534. 
Also, see Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), pp. 339-342. 
Quoted in Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), p. 340. 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Atom Bomb as a Great Force for 
Peace,” The New York Times Magazine (June 9, 1946), p. 60. 

Board of Consultants, A Report on the International Control of Atomic 
Energy (ref. 113) p. 31, 61. Also quoted in Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The 
Tragic Intellect (ref. 27), pp. 178-179. 

Letter Oppenheimer to Bohr (March 30, 1946), Archives for the 
History of Quantum Physics, Bohr Scientific Correspondence-31, 
1946-1962. 

Letter Bohr to Oppenheimer (April 17, 1946), Box 21, JRO Papers 
(ref. 55). 

Hewlett and Anderson, The New World (ref. 176), p. 582. 

Tbid., p. 598. 

James G. Hershberg, ““The Jig Was Up’: J. Robert Oppenheimer and 
the International Control of Atomic Energy 1947-49” in Carson and 
Hollinger, Reappraising Oppenheimer (ref. 33), p. 153. 


240 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


191. 
192. 


193. 


194. 


195. 
196. 


197. 


198. 


199. 


200. 
201. 


202. 


203. 
204. 
205. 
206. 


207. 


208. 
209. 
210. 
211. 
212. 


213. 
214. 
215. 


Quoted (Oppenheimer in 1954 security hearing) in [bid., p. 154. 
For interesting background on Oppenheimer’s article published in 
Foreign Affairs, see Ibid., pp. 167-175. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Energy asa Contemporary Problem” 
(1947) in Oppenheimer, The Open Mind (ref. 64), p. 26. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “International Control of Atomic Energy,” 
Foreign Affairs 26 (January 1948), p. 239, 246, 248. 

Tbid., p. 248, 250. 

Oppenheimer, “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem” 
(ref. 193), pp. 28-29. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Some Aspects of the Problem of Atomic 
Energy” (1948, unpublished transcript), Box 267, JRO Papers (ref. 55), 
p. 10. 

Oppenheimer, “International Control of Atomic Energy” (ref. 194), 
p. 252. 

Oppenheimer, “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem” 
(ref. 193), p. 25, 28. 

Oppenheimer, The Open Mind (ref. 64), p. 44. 

Letter Sol M. Linowitz to Oppenheimer (December 13, 1948), Box 
280, JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Open Mind” (1948) in Oppenheimer, 
The Open Mind (ref. 64), p. 54. 

Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus (ref. 2), pp. 349-350. 
Oppenheimer, “The Open Mind” (ref. 202), p. 46. 

Hershberg, “The Jig Was Up” (ref. 190), p. 181. 

Oppenheimer, “Some Aspects of the Problem of Atomic Energy” 
(ref. 197), p. 8. 

Oppenheimer, “International Control of Atomic Energy” (ref. 194), 
p. 246. 

Hewlett and Anderson, The New World (ref. 176), p. 476, 532. 
Quoted in Ivid., pp. 593-594. Also, see pp. 606-607. 

Ibid., p. 608. 

Oppenheimer, “Science and the Human Community” (ref. 56), p. 62. 
Oppenheimer, “International Control of Atomic Energy” (ref. 194), 
p. 247, 250. 

Tbid., p. 252. 

Hewlett and Anderson, The New World (ref. 176), p. 581. 

P.M. S. Blackett, Fear, War, and the Bomb: Military and Political 
Consequences of Atomic Energy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1948/1949), 
p. 139. 


216. 


217. 


218. 
219. 
220. 


221; 
222. 
223% 
224, 


225. 
226. 
227. 


228. 


229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 


235. 
236. 


Endnotes 241 


Karl T. Compton, “If the Atomic Bomb Had Not Been Used,” The 
Atlantic Monthly (December 1946), p. 54. 

Henry L. Stimson, “The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb” 
reprinted in Kai Bird and Lawrence Lifschultz (editors), Hiroshima’s 
Shadow (Stony Creek, CT: Pamphleteer’s Press, 1998), p. 204. 

Ibid., p. 209. 

Ibid., pp. 208-209. 

Michael B. Stoff, Jonathan F. Fanton, and R. Hal Williams (editors), 
The Manhattan Project: A Documentary Introduction to the Atomic 
Age (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991), p. 112. 

Ibid., p. 114. 

Ibid., p. 150. 

Ibid., pp. 254-255. 

Ibid., p. 172. Also, see Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect 
(ref. 27), p. 156. 

Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect (ref. 27), p. 155. 

Tbid., p. 155. 

Quoted in Mary Palevsky, Atomic Fragments: A Daughter’s Questions 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), pp. 103-104. 
Reproduced with permission of University of California Press Books. 
All rights reserved. Copyright © Mary Palevsky, 2000. 

Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee of Military Affairs 
(October 17, 1945), United States Senate (Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office, 1945), pp. 313-314. 

Tbid., p. 314. 

Tbid., p. 314. 

Thorpe, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect (ref. 27), p. 180. 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 81 

Ibid. p. 80. 

See Priscilla J. McMillan, The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer 
and the Birth of the Modern Arms Race (New York: Viking, 2005), 
pp. 138-142. 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 16), p. 87. 

Letter Young to Conant (December 4, 1945) in James G. Hershberg, 
“A Footnote on Hiroshima and Atomic Morality: Conant, Niebuhr, 
and an ‘Emotional’ Clergyman, 1945-46,” December 2002 Newsletter 
(currently, titled Passport), Society for Historians of American 
Foreign Relations, online at http://www.shafr.org/. Also, see James G. 
Hershberg, “A Footnote on Hiroshima and Atomic Morality: Conant, 
Niebuhr, and an ‘Emotional’ Clergyman, 1945-46” in Cynthia C. 


242 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


237. 


238. 
239. 


240. 


241. 


242. 


243. 


244. 


245. 


246. 


247. 


248. 


249. 


250. 


251. 


252. 


253. 


254. 


Kelly (editor), Remembering the Manhattan Project (Singapore: World 
Scientific Publishing, 2004), pp. 47-52. 

Letter Conant to Young (December 7, 1945) in Hershberg, “A Footnote 
on Hiroshima” (ref. 236). 

Letter Young to Conant (December 13, 1945) in Ibid. 

Quoted in William L. Laurence, “Would You Make the Bomb 
Again?,” The New York Times Magazine (August 1, 1965), p. 8. 
Quoted in “Martin Agronsky: Dr. Oppenheimer Interview,” Excerpt 
from the CBS Evening News with Walter Cronkite (August 5, 1965), 
Box 285, JRO Papers (ref. 55). Note: The ellipsis indicates the omit- 
ted phrase “effect in what proved to be a majority way.” 

Paragraph for Bohr’s 70" Birthday (sent 9/30/55 to Niels Blaedel 
and Jens Soltoft-Jensen), Box 245, JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

Martin J. Sherwin, A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the 
Grand Alliance (New York: Knopf, 1975), pp. 105-114. 

Quoted in Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), 
p. 97. 

Abraham Pais, Niels Bohr’s Times: In Physics, Philosophy, and Polity 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), p. 5. 

Oppenheimer, “The Age of Science” (ref. 115), p. 22. Reproduced 
with permission. Copyright © (1950) Scientific American, Inc. All 
rights reserved. 

Tbid., p. 22. 

Carsten Held, “The Meaning of Complementarity,” Studies in History 
ana Philosophy of Science 25 (1994), p. 871. 

David. Favrholdt (editor), Complementarity Beyond Physics (1928-1962) 
Vol. 10 in Finn Aaserud (general editor), Niels Bohr Collected Works 
(Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999), p. XLVI. 

Oppenheimer, “Science and Culture” (ref. 67), p. 9. 

Ibid., p.9. 

Robert Oppenheimer, “A Study of Thinking,” The Sewanee Review 66 
(1958), pp. 481-490. 

Jerome Bruner, In Search of Mind: Essays in Autobiography (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1983), pp. 110-111, 120-121. 

Quotes in Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), 
pp. 89-91. 

Oppenheimer, “Physics and Man’s Understanding” (ref. 152), 
p. 185. 


255. 


256. 


257. 


258. 


259. 
260. 


261. 


262. 


263. 


264. 


265. 


266. 
267. 
268. 
269. 
270. 


271. 


272: 


Endnotes 243 


J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Electron Theory: Description and Analogy,” 
Physics Today (July 1957), p. 20. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Freedom and Necessity in the Sciences” 
(April 14, 1959, unpublished manuscript), Dartmouth College, Box 
256, JRO Papers (ref. 55), p. 12. 

Oppenheimer, “Electron Theory” (ref. 255), p. 20. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for Physicists 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1964), p. 53. 

Tbid., p. 44. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Reflections on Science and Culture”, 
University of Alberta, 1961, p. 14. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, William James Lecture 3 — “Sites of Order” 
(1957, unpublished manuscript), Box 259, JRO Papers (ref. 55), p. 18. 
This and the next sentence are paraphrases of Oppenheimer during a 
conversation with Niels Bohr that was recorded in Copenhagen on 
June 6, 1958. Sound Center Library of Congress, Washington, DC, 
RWD 4782 Al. 

This is taken from a transcript of an interview on the Manhattan 
Project done by the BBC and broadcast in 1965, Box 243, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55). 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, Pegram Lecture 1 — “The Nuclear Atom” 
(1963, unpublished manuscript), Box 247, JRO Papers (ref. 55), p. 2. 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, Pegram Lecture 2 — “Complementarity” 
(1963, unpublished manuscript), Box 247, JRO Papers (ref. 55), 
pp. 29-30. 

Excerpts and previous quote from Robert Oppenheimer, “On Albert 
Einstein,” New York Review of Books VI (March 17, 1966), pp. 4-5. 
Letter from Nathan to Oppenheimer (January 14, 1966), Box 285, 
JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

Note in Box 285, JRO Papers (ref. 55). 

Pais, Niels Bohr’s Times (ref. 244), p. 227. 

Michael Saler, “Modernity and Enchantment: A Historiographic 
Review,” American Historical Review 111 (June 2006), p. 692. 

Don Hubert and Kenneth Thompson, “Introduction” in Stuart Hall, 
David Held, Don Hubert, and Kenneth Thompson (editors), 
Modernity: An Introduction to Modern Societies (Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell, 1996), p. 231. 

Harry M. Collins and Robert Evans, “The Third Wave of Science 
Studies: Studies of Expertise and Experience,” Social Studies of Science 


244 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


273. 


274. 
275. 
276. 


277. 
278. 
279. 
280. 


281. 
282. 
283. 
284. 
285. 
286. 
287. 
288. 
289. 
290. 
291. 


292. 


293. 


294. 


32 (2002), pp. 235-296. Phrases quoted below are from Harry Collins, 
“We Cannot Live by Skepticism Alone,” Nature 458 (March 5, 2009) 
and Harry Collins, “Elective Modernism” (Draft/Working Paper) at 
the website http://www.cf.ac.uk/socsi/expertise. For an in-depth 
philosophical source on experts as well as an article by Collins, see 
Evan Selinger and Robert P. Crease, The Philosophy of Expertise 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2006). 

Stephen Toulmin, Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (New 
York: The Free Press — Macmillan, 1990), pp. 180-181. 

Ibid., pp. 192-193. 

Ibid., p. 198. 

H. S. Thayer, “Pragmatism” in Donald M. Borchert (editor-in-chief), 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2nd edition) (Farmington Hills, MI: 
MacMillan Reference USA, 2006), p. 741. 

Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer (ref. 11), pp. 213-214. 

Tbid., p. 219. 

Tbid., p. 221. 

Morton White, A Philosopher's Story (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 1999), p. 78. 

Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), pp. 92-93. 
Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer (ref. 11), p. 200. 

Tbid., p. 199. 

Tbid., p. 227. 

Quoted in I[bid., p. 230. 

White, Philosopher’s Story (ref. 280), p. 139. 

Tbid., p. 235. 

Schweber, Eznstein and Oppenheimer (ref. 11), p. 225. 

Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science” (ref. 42), p. 93. 
Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer (ref. 11), pp. 191-192. 

Charles S. Peirce, “How to Make Our Ideas Clear” (1878) in Edward 
C. Moore (editor), Charles S. Peirce: The Essential Writings (Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 1998), p. 146. 

Oppenheimer, William James Lecture 1 — “A Pluralistic Multiverse” 
(ref. 135), pp. 23-24. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, Book Review: The Logic of Modern Physics by 
P. W. Bridgeman, Physical Review 31 (January 1928), pp. 145-146. 
Charlene H. Seigfried, “Pragmatism” in Robert Audi (general editor), 
The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1995), p. 638. 


295. 


296. 


297. 


298. 
299. 
300. 
301. 
302. 
303. 
304. 
305. 
306. 


307. 


308. 


309. 


310. 


311. 


312. 


313. 


314. 


Endnotes 245 


John E. Smith, “Introduction” in Sandra R. Rosenthal, Carl R. Hausman, 
and Douglas R. Anderson, Classical American Pragmatism: Its 
Contemporary Vitality (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois 
Press, 1999), p. 5. 

The quotes (except the last) and several ideas in this paragraph are from 
Douglas McDermid, “Pragmatism” in The Internet Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, ISSN 2161-0002, http://www.iep.utm.edu/, (August 1, 
2010). 

Neil Gross, Richard Rorty: The Making of an American Philosopher 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), p. 337. 

Tbid., p. 323. 

Tbid., p. 142. 

Tbid., p. 149. 

Tbid,, p. 17. 

Tbid., p. 232. 

Tbid., p. 21. 

Tbid., p. 308. 

Tbid., p. 25. 

Richard Rorty, “Science as Solidarity” (1987) in Richard Rorty, 
Objectivity, Relativism and Truth: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 39. 

Richard Rorty, Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 83, xv. 

Richard Rorty, “The Unpatriotic Academy” (1994) in Richard Rorty, 
Philosophy and Social Hope (New York: Penguin Books, 1999), p. 252. 
Tbid., p. 254. 

“Professor Sir Bernard Williams,” The Times, Online Obituary (June 14, 
2003), http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/obituaries/ 
article1141892.ece. 

Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, “Moral Dilemma” in Audi, Cambridge 
Dictionary of Philosophy (ret. 294), p. 508. 

Tbid., p. 508. 

Cristopher W. Gowans, “Introduction: The Debate on Moral 
Dilemmas” in Christopher W. Gowans (editor), Moral Dilemmas 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987), pp. 4-5. 

Daniel M. Weinstock, “Moral Pluralism” in Edward Craig (general 
editor), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (London: Routledge, 
1998), Vol. 6, p. 529. 


246 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


315. 


316. 


317. 


318. 
319. 
320. 


321. 


322. 


J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Talk at Seven Springs Farm” (June 1963, 
unpublished manuscript), Mount Kisco, New York, Box 282, JRO 
Papers (ref. 55), p. 3. 

Bernard Williams, “Ethical Consistency” (1965) in Gowans, Moral 
Dilemmas (ref. 313), p. 129. Also, see Claudia F. Card, “Rectification 
and Remainders” in Craig, Routledge Encyclopedia (ref. 314), Vol. 8, 
pp. 135-141 for an account of moral remainders such as regret. 

For a collection of articles on moral luck as well as papers by Williams 
and Nagel, see Daniel Statman (editor), Moral Luck (Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press, 1993). 

Daniel Statman, “Moral Luck” in Craig, Routledge Encyclopedia, 
Vol. 6 (ref. 314), pp. 520-522. 

Thomas Nagel, “Moral Luck” in Statman, Moral Luck (ref. 317), 
p. 63. 

Statman, “Moral Luck” (ref. 318), p. 520. 

Quoted in Richard Mason, Oppenheimer’s Choice: Reflections from 
Moral Philosophy (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 
2006), pp. 23-24. 

Daniel Statman, “Introduction” in Statman, Moral Luck (ref. 317), 
p. 31. 

Quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and 
Recollections (ref. 112), pp. 310-311. 

Bernard Williams, “Moral Luck” in Statman, Moral Luck (ref. 317), 
pp. 37-40. 

Ibid., pp. 40-41, 50. 

Tbid., p. 38. 

Tbid., p. 53. 

Ibid., pp. 50-51. 

Gross, Richard Rorty (ref. 297), p. 25. 

Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton: 
Princeton Univesity Press, 1979), p. 12. 

Rorty, Contingency (ref. 307), p. 9. Note: All quoting in the next 
seven paragraphs is taken from Contingency. 

Tbid., pp. 181-182. 

Ibid., p. 120. 

Tbid., p. 179. 

For Dyson’s characterization of Oppenheimer, see Jon Else, The 
Day After Trinity: J. Robert Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb 
(documentary film, 1980). 


336. 


337. 


338. 


339. 


340. 


341. 


342. 


343. 
344. 


345. 
346. 
347. 


348. 
349. 
350. 
351. 


Endnotes 247 


W. Julian Korab-Karpowicz, “Political Realism in International 
Relations” in Edward N. Zalta (editor), The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy (Summer 2013 Edition), URL = <http://plato.stanford. 
edu/archives/sum2013/entries/realism-intl-relations/>. Note: See 
Section 3.1 “Kenneth Waltz’s International System.” 

Kenneth N. Waltz, “Structural Realism after the Cold War,” 
International Security 25 (Summer 2000), p. 18. 

Chris Brown, Understanding International Relations (New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 1997), p. 98. 

John Ikenberry, “Liberal Internationalism 3.0: America and the 
Dilemmas of Liberal World Order,” Perspectives on Politics 7 (March 
2009), p. 72. 

For examples, see Christopher Layne, “The Waning of U.S. 
Hegemony — Myth or Reality?,” International Security 34 (Summer 
2009), pp. 147-172 and Stephen Chaudoin, Helen V. Milner, and 
Dustin H. Tingley, “The Center Still Holds: Liberal Internationalism 
Survives,” International Security 35 (Summer 2010), pp. 75-94. 
Jack Snyder, “One World, Rival Theories,” Foreign Policy 145 
(November/December 2004), p. 60. 

Andrew Phillips, “Constructivism” in Martin Griffiths (editor), 
International Relations Theory for the Twenty-First Century (London 
and New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 60-74. Note: All quoting in 
this paragraph and the next four paragraphs are from Phillips’s article 
except for one quote as noted. 

Snyder, “One World, Rival Theories” (ref. 341), p. 61. 

Nina Tannenwald, “The Nuclear Taboo: The United States and the 
Normative Basis of Nuclear Non-Use,” International Organization 
53 (Summer, 1999), p. 433. 

Oppenheimer, “The Tree of Knowledge” (ref. 59), p. 60. 

Brown, Understanding International Relations (ref. 338), p. 134. 
Alexander Wendt, “Anarchy Is What States Make of It: The Social 
Construction of Power Polices,” International Organization 46 
(Spring, 1992), p. 425. 

Tbid., p. 394. 

Tbid., p. 424. 

Brown, Understanding International Relations (ref. 338), p. 129. 
Martin Griffiths, Fifty Key Thinkers in International Relations 
(London and New York: Routledge, 1999), p. 191. 


248 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


352. 


353. 


354. 
355. 
356. 
357. 
358. 
359. 
360. 
361. 


362. 


363. 
364. 


365. 
366. 


367. 
368. 
369. 


370. 
371. 
372. 
373. 
374. 


Paul Taylor, “Introduction” in David Mitrany, The Functional Theory 
of Politics (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1975), pp. x-xi. Quoted with 
consent of the author. 

David Mitrany, A Working Peace System (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 
1966), pp. 72-73. 

Tbid., p. 27. 

Tbid., p. 98. 

Mitrany, Functional Theory of Politics (ref. 352), p. 265. 

Mitrany, Working Peace System (ref. 353), pp. 78-79. 

Brown, Understanding International Relations (ref. 338), p. 134. 
Mitrany, Working Peace System (ref. 353), p. 31. 

Tbid., p. 92. 

David Mitrany, “The Functional Approach to World Organization,” 
International Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs) 24 
July 1948), p. 360. 

Lucian Ashworth and David Long, “David Mitrany, the Functional 
Approach and International Conflict Management,” published by the 
Program in International Security at the Norman Paterson School of 
International Affairs (Carleton University, Ottawa), pp. 8-9. 
Mitrany, Working Peace System (ref. 353), p. 76. 

Hans Morgenthau, “Introduction” in Mitrany, Working Peace System 
(ref. 353), p. 9. 

Ibid., pp. 10-11. 

Cornelia Navari, “David Mitrany and International Functionalism” in 
David Long and Peter Wilson (editors), Thinkers of the Twenty Years’ 
Crisis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), pp. 236-237. 
Mitrany, Working Peace System (ref. 353), p. 13. 

Tbid., pp. 30-31. 

Peter M. Haas, “Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International 
Policy Coordination,” International Organization 46 (Winter 1992), 
Special Issue — Knowledge, Power, and International Policy 
Coordination (edited by Peter Haas), p. 3; Peter M. Haas, “Epistemic 
Community” in Martin Griffiths, Encyclopedia of International Relations 
and Global Politics (London and New York: Routledge, 2005), p. 230. 
Haas, “Introduction” (ref. 369), p. 3. 

Ibid., p. 8. Harvey Brooks as quoted by Haas. 

Tbid., pp. 2-3. 

Tbid., p. 24. 

Haas, “Epistemic Community” (ref. 369), p. 230. 


375. 


376. 


377. 


378. 


379. 


380. 


381. 


382. 


383. 


384. 


385. 
386. 
387. 


388. 


389. 


390. 


Endnotes 249 


Emanuel Adler and Peter M. Haas, “Conclusion: Epistemic 
Communities, World Order, and the Creation of a Reflective Research 
Program,” International Organization 46 (ref. 369), pp. 389-390. 
Emanuel Adler, “The Emergence of Cooperation: National Epistemic 
Communities and the International Evolution of the Idea of Nuclear 
Arms Control”, International Organization 46 (ref. 369), p. 122. 
Barack Obama, “Remarks by President Barack Obama” in Prague, 
Czech Republic (April 5, 2009), Whitehouse Press Office, online at http:// 
www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office /Remarks-By-President-Barack- 
Obama-In-Prague-As-Delivered/. 

“The Nobel Peace Prize for 2009” (Press Release, October 9, 2009), 
Oslo, Norway, online at http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/ 
peace/laureates/2009 /press.html. 

William Walker, A Perpetual Menace: Nuclear Weapons and 
International Order (London and New York: Routledge, 2012), p. 81. 
Harald Miiller, “A Nuclear Nonproliferation Test: Obama’s Nuclear 
Policy and the 2010 NPT Review Conference,” Nonproliferation 
Review 18 (March 2011), p. 220. 

William Walker, “Nuclear Enlightenment and Counter-Enlightenment,” 
International Affairs 83 (2007), p. 452. 

All quoting in this paragraph and the next three paragraphs are from 
the text of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. 

Dane E. Swango, The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty: Constrainer, 
Screener, or Enabler?, PhD dissertation (University of California- 
Los Angeles, 2009). 

Harald Miiller, “The NPT Review Process and Strengthening the 
Treaty: Disarmament,” EU Non-Proliferation Consortium, Non- 
Proliferation Papers No. 10 (February 2012), p. 2. 

Tbid., p. 2. 

Pierce S. Corden and David Hafemeister, “Nuclear Proliferation and 
Testing: A Tale of Two Treaties,” Physics Today 67 (April 2014), p. 44. 
Scott D. Sagan, “The Causes of Nuclear Weapons Proliferation,” 
Annual Review of Political Science 14 (2011), pp. 240-241. 

Maria R. Rublee, “Taking Stock of the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Regime: Using Social Psychology to Understand Regime Effectiveness,” 
International Studies Review 10 (2008), p. 425. 

Scott D. Sagan, “Shared Responsibilities for Nuclear Disarmament,” 
Daedalus 138 (Fall 2009), p. 160. 

Rublee, “Taking Stock” (ref. 388), p. 425. 


250 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


391. 


392. 


393. 


394. 
395. 


396. 
397. 


398. 
399. 


400. 
401. 


402. 
403. 
404. 
405. 
406. 


407. 
408. 
409. 


410. 


“Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZ) At a Glance” (Updated: 
September 2012) at Arms Control Association website, http://www. 
armscontrol.org/factsheets /nwfz. 

James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies website at http:// 
www.nonproliferation.org/. 

Marianne Hanson, “Nuclear Proliferation” in Griffiths, Encyclopedia 
(ref. 369), p. 607. 

Walker, Perpetual Menace (ref. 379), p. 139. 

The quoting and information in this paragraph and the previous para- 
graph are from the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive 
Test-Ban Organization website at http://www.ctbto.org/. 

Sagan, “Causes of Nuclear Weapons Proliferation” (ref. 387), p. 228. 
Jacques E. C. Hymans, “Nuclear Proliferation and Non-Proliferation” 
in Robert A. Denemark (editor), The International Studies Encyclopedia 
Vol. VIII (Oxford: Wiley—Blackwell, 2010), p. 5447. 

Walker, “Nuclear Enlightenment” (ref. 381), p. 439. 

George Perkovich and James M. Acton, “What’s Next” in George 
Perkovich and James M. Acton (editors), Abolishing Nuclear Weapons: 
A Debate (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2009), 
p. 315. 

Tbid., p. 310. 

James M. Acton, Deterrence During Disarmament: Deep Nuclear 
Reductions and International Security (Oxford: Routledge, 2011), 
p. 101. 

Perkovich and Acton, “What’s Next” (ref. 399), p. 311. 

Tbid., p. 323. 

Acton, Deterrence During Disarmament (ref. 401), p. 44. 

Tbid., p. 39. 

George Perkovich and James M. Acton, “Abolishing Nuclear 
Weapons” in Perkovich and Acton, Abolishing Nuclear Weapons: A 
Debate (ref. 399), p. 37. 

Perkovich and Acton, “Abolishing Nuclear Weapons” (ref. 406), p. 18. 
Ibid., pp. 91-92. 

Scott D. Sagan, “Good Faith and Nuclear Disarmament Negotiations” 
in Perkovich and Acton, Abolishing Nuclear Weapons: A Debate 
(ref. 399), pp. 203-204. 

Achilles Zaluar, “Shared Responsibilities, Shared Rights” in Scott Sagan 
and Responders, Shared Responsibilities for Nuclear Disarmament: A 
Global Debate (American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2010), p. 42. 


411. 
412. 
413. 
414. 
415. 


416. 
417. 
418. 
419. 
420. 
421. 
422. 
423. 


424. 
425. 
426. 
427. 
428. 
429. 


430. 
431. 
432. 
433. 
434. 
435. 
436. 
437. 


438. 


439. 


440. 


Endnotes 251 


Sagan, “Good Faith” (ref. 409), p. 204. 

Ibid., pp. 208-209. 

Perkovich and Acton, “What’s Next” (ref. 399), p. 325. 

Sagan, “Shared Responsibilities” (ref. 389), p. 160. 

Perkovich and Acton, “Abolishing Nuclear Weapons” (ref. 406), 
pp. 100-102. 

Ibid., pp. 108-109. 

Ibid., pp. 107-108. 

Tbid., p. 112. 

Sagan, “Shared Responsibilities” (ref. 389), p. 166. 

Perkovich and Acton, “Abolishing Nuclear Weapons” (ref. 406), p. 113. 
Ibid., p. 117. 

Ibid., pp. 120-122. 

Daniel H. Deudney, Bounding Power: Republican Security Theory from 
the Polis to the Global Village (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
2007), p. 269. 

Tbid., p. 245. 

Tbid., p. 251. 

Tbid., p. 246. 

Tbid., pp. 253-254. 

Perkovich and Acton, “Abolishing Nuclear Weapons” (ref. 406), p. 83. 
Daniel Deudney, “Nuclear Weapons and the Waning of the Real- 
State,” Daedalus 124 (Spring 1995), p. 220. 

Deudney, Bounding Power (ref. 423), p. 257 (also see p. 248). 

Ibid., p. 255. 

Ibid., p. 275. 

Ibid., p. 275. 

Ibid., p. 267. 

Ibid., p. 274. 

Ibid., p. 269. 

Charles A. Kupchan, Book Review: Bounding Power by Daniel 
H. Deudney, Perspectives on Politics 5 (December 2007), p. 860. 

G. John Ikenberry, Book Review: Bounding Power by Daniel 
H. Deudney, Foreign Affairs 86 (March/April 2007), p. 162. 
Harald Miiller, “The Importance of Framework Conditions” in 
Perkovich and Acton, Abolishing Nuclear Weapons: A Debate (ref. 399), 
p. 171. 

Oppenheimer, “International Control of Atomic Energy” (ref. 194), 
p. 252. 


252 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


441. 
442. 


443. 
444. 


445. 


446. 


447. 


448. 


449. 


450. 


451. 


452. 


453. 
454. 


Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer (ref. 11), p. 201. 

David K. Hecht, “The Atomic Hero: Robert Oppenheimer and the 
Making of Scientific Icons in the Early Cold War,” Technology and 
Culture 49 (October 2008), p. 966. 

McMillan, Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer (ref. 234), p. 265. 
“National Pride, National Shame” (January 13, 2003), Aurora Forum 
at Stanford University. Audio recording of Rorty’s opening remarks 
and responses to questions are online at http://auroraforum.stanford. 
edu /event/national-pride-national-shame/. 

Irving Howe, “This Age of Conformity,” Partisan Review 21 
(January-February, 1954), p. 13. 

Noretta Koertge, “A Bouquet of Scientific Values” in Noretta Koertge 
(editor), Scientific Values and Civic Virtues (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2005), p. 21. 

Richard Hofstadter, Anti-Intellectualism in American Life (New 
York: Random House, 1963), p. 429. 

Harld Miiller, “Between Power and Justice: Current Problems and 
Perspectives of the NPT Regime,” Strategic Analysis 34 (2010), 
p. 189. 

Thomas E. Doyle I, “Reviving Nuclear Ethics: A Renewed Research 
Agenda for the Twenty-First Century,” Ethics International Affairs 
24 (2010), p. 288. 

Walker, “Nuclear Enlightenment” (ref. 381), p. 433, 451, 453. 
Michael Krepon, “Building a Nuclear Order” (Book Review: A Perpetual 
Menace by William Walker), Arms Control Today 42 (March 2012). 
Walker, Perpetual Menace (ref. 379), p. 179. 

Tbid., p. 193. 

Quoted in “Martin Agronsky: Dr. Oppenheimer Interview (part two),” 
Excerpt from the CBS Evening News with Walter Cronkite (August 6, 
1965), Box 285, JRO Papers (ref. 55). 


Index 


academic philosophy, 86, 132, 137, 
221-2 
Acheson, Dean, 16, 61-2, 91, 93 
Acheson- Lilienthal Report 
(Proposal), xi, 7, 20, 24, 38-9, 
53, 89, 154, 172, 186, 189, 
199, 210, 214, 216, 224-6 
description of, 91-2 
moral significance of, 108, 150, 
152-3 
Oppenheimer “most stimulating 
and creative mind” behind, 91 
Oppenheimer-Bohr exchange on, 
92 
Oppenheimer’s assessment of 
failure of and what should be 
done, 94-6 
Oppenheimer’s hope and vision 
and, 97-9, 109, 158, 190, 
207, 213 
responses to, 92-3, 97, 100 
see also Deudney, Daniel; Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty 
Acton, James, 154, 190, 199-207, 
213, 223 


Adler, Emmanuel, 185-6 

Adler, Felix, 1 

Adler, Mortimer, 79 

Albright, David, 197 

Alperovitz, Gar, 61 

American Exceptionalism, 52 

American Philosophical Society, 91 

American Physical Society, 9, 84 

American Political Science 
Association, 208 

American Revolution, 47, 126 

analytic philosophy, 137-9, 221 

Anderson, Carl, 4 

Aron, Raymond, 36 

Ashworth, Lucian, 177 

Atomic Development Authority, 91 

Atoms for Peace Program, 68 

Austin, George, 115 


Baruch, Barnard, 100 
Baruch plan, 210, 213, 218 
Berlin, Isaiah, 85, 134, 144 
Bernstein, Barton, 17 
Bernstein, Jeremy, 5 

Bethe, Hans, 4, 67, 108 


254 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Bhagavad Gita, 34, 135 
Bird, Kai, «iti, 6, 14-8, 45 
Blackett, P. M. S., 100-1 
Bohr, Niels, 24-5, 44, 51,55, 
60, 67, 69, 71, 92, 98, 109, 
1114, 119-23, 135, 145, 224 
Churchill, meeting with, 111 
and James, William, 137 
at Los Alamos during WW II, 
89-90 
“Open World,” vision and call 
for, 13, 111, 120, 158, 161, 
172, 216 
Oppenheimer first met, 3, 89 
Oppenheimer’s admiration and 
intellectual debt to, 3, 13, 25, 
27, 30, 89, 111-2, 120-3 
Oppenheimer’s and Bohr’s views, 
similarities and differences, 
120-1 
Oppenheimer’s lectures on, 74, 
121 
philosophers, critical of, 120 
Roosevelt, meeting with, 111 
see also Acheson- Lilienthal 
Report; complementarity; 
MacLeish, Archibald 
Born, Max, 3 
Bourdieu, Pierre, 86 
Bridgman, Percy, 2, 136 
Brookhaven National Laboratory, 
68 
Brown, Chris, 174 
Brown, Robert, 196 
Browne, Des, 189 
Bruner, Jerome, 115-6 
Bundy, McGeorge, 16, 41 
Bush, George W., 52 
Byrnes, James, 62 


California Institute of Technology, 
4 
Caney, Simon, 222 
Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 200 
Cassidy, David, x7iz, 14 
Cavendish Laboratory, 3 
Center for Cognitive Studies at 
Harvard, 115 
Chevalier (incident), Haakon, 8-9 
China, 73, 102, 191, 193, 198, 
201-2, 206 
Churchill, Winston, 93, 111 
Collins, Harry, 129-31, 218, 
221 
Colorado, University of, 72 
Columbia University, 23-4, 67-8, 
77, 79-80, 133, 138 
Communism/Communist Party/ 
communist, 5-6, 8, 10, 12, 16, 
46-7, 49, 51-2, 57, 93, 137, 
157 
complementarity, 25-7, 30, 
51, 55-6, 58, 71, 111, 120-1, 
123, 128, 135, 137, 141, 158, 
215-6 
difficulty in communicating 
to the public, 116-9 
discovery of mutual exclusion 
and joint completion, 113-4 
extensions to other domains, 
113-4 
formulation (in atomic physics) 
of, 112-3 
and humanizing science, 119 
moral dilemmas, analogous to, 
145-6 
Oppenheimer’s thought, integral 
role in, 114-6 


Comprehensive Nuclear-Test- 
Ban-Treaty Organization 
(CTBTO), 198 

Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty 
(CTBT), 190, 196-8, 223 

Compton, Arthur, 73, 81, 102 

Compton, Karl, 100-1 

Conant, James, 14, 31, 70, 107-8, 
149-50 

Condon, Edward, 4, 67, 81 

Condorcet, Nicolas de, 50-1, 
55 

Congress for Cultural Freedom 
(CCE), 16-7, 34, 36, 116, 
138, 143, 182, 227 

constructivism, «722, 163-4, 
168-71, 173, 217 

Conway, Erik, 227 

Cousins, Norman, 17 

Crease, Robert, 13 

Cronkite, Walter, 228 

Cross, M. K. Davis, 183 

Cummings, E. E., 43 


Dallet, Joe, 5 
Dartmouth College, 118 
Darwin, Charles, 155 
Darwinian evolution, 27, 81, 117 
Descartes, René, 126, 136, 138-9, 
149 
Deudney, Daniel, 154, 190, 207, 
217, 221 
centralized world government, 
rejection of, 209 
nuclear one worldism 
(federal-republican), advocates, 
209-10 
Oppenheimer’s views and 
nuclear one worldism (“great 


Index 255 


grandson” of the Acheson- 
Lilienthal plan) mutually 
reinforcing, 210, 213 
realism and international 
liberalism fragments 
of republicanism, 210-1 
state nuclear deterrence, 
rejection of, 209 
state nuclear deterrence utopian 
not nuclear one worldism, 211-2 
Dewey, John, 23, 132-4, 137-8, 
155 
Dirac, Paul, 3 
Dos Passos, John, 43 
Doyle, Thomas, 223 
Drell, Sidney, 189 
Dyson, Freeman, 12, 58-9, 162 


Ehrenfest, Paul, 3 
Einstein, Albert, 45, 58, 69, 74, 
112, 120, 218-9 
Oppenheimer’s controversial 
lecture “On Albert Einstein,” 
121-3 
ElBaradei, Mohamed, 195 
epistemic community, x77, 33, 35, 
154, 163, 182, 194 
Haas’s characterization of, 183 
Oppenheimer’s specialized, 
cognitive communities, 
parallels to, 186 
power and progressive force of, 
184-7 
Eternal Light (radio show), 82 
Ethical Culture Society/School/ 
movement, 1-2, 18, 135, 216 
European Atomic Energy 
Commission (EURATOM), 
33, 172 


256 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


European Organization for Nuclear 
Research (CERN), 33, 68 


Falk, Richard, 223 

fascism /fascist, 5, 43, 49, 52, 62, 
96 

Favrholdt, David, 119 

Fermi, Enrico, 9, 13-4, 73, 102 

Fischer, John (Harper’s Magazine), 
72 

Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty, 
223 

Fitzgerald, Scott, 43 

Fitzgerald, Zelda, 43 

Fleck, Ludwig, 182 

Flexner, Abraham, 182 

Folse, Henry, 119, 137 

Foucault, Michel, 86 

Fowler, Ralph, 3 

Fox, Michael, 227 

Franklin, Benjamin, 78 

Frege, Gottlob, 137 

French Revolution, 126 

Fulbright, William, 104-5 

functionalism (international), 154, 
173-6, 178, 180, 187, 217 


Gaddis, John Lewis, 51 

Galileo Galilei, 16, 126, 155 

Gamow, George, 4 

Gardiner, Stephen, 222, 226 

Garrison, Lloyd, 57 

Gell-Mann, Murray, 12 

General Advisory Committee 
(GAC) to the Atomic Energy 
Commission, 7-8, 13-4, 20, 
68, 75, 105-6, 186-7 

German idealism, 164 

Giddens, Anthony, 126 


Gillispie, Charles, 66 
Goldfarb, Jeffery, 86 
Goldman, Eric, 65-6 
Goodnow, Jacqueline, 115 
Gottingen, University of, 3 
Gramsci, Antonio, 86 
Gray, John, 144 
Great Books Program (Hutchins 
and Adler), 78-9 
Grew, Joseph, 61 
Grieve-Carlson, Gary, xiii 
Gross, Neil, 139 
Groves, Leslie, 6-7, 150 


Haas, Peter, 163, 183-6 

Habermas, Jiirgen, 38-9 

Hall, Stuart, 125 

Hart, H. L. A., 134 

Harvard Law School, 43 

Harvard University, 2-3, 18, 23, 
31, 36, 41, 43-4, 63, 96, 107, 
133-4, 221 

Hawkins, David, xi—xiii, 103, 111 

Haynes, John, 6 

Hecht, David, 216 

Hegel, Friedrich, 85, 164 

Heisenberg, Werner, 3, 67, 112, 122 

Held, David, 126 

Hemingway, Ernest, 43 

Herken, Gregg, 6 

Hijiya, James, 135 

Hiroshima (atomic attack), 7, 13-4, 
61-2, 106, 151, 194, 228 

Blackett simply power politics 
between US and USSR, 101 
“Godlike decision,” Rev. Young 

rejects moral justification and 
chastises Conant for “Godlike 
decision,” 107-8 


moral dilemma for Oppenheimer, 
146-7 
morally condemned: Rawls, 147; 
Walzer, 147; Young, 107-8 
morally justified: Bethe, 108; 
Compton, 100-1; Conant, 
107-8; Fulbright, 104-5; 
Landesman, 147; Stimson, 101 
Oppenheimer on regret and 
“physicists have known sin,” 
108-9 
Oppenheimer’s opposition to 
demonstration of atomic bomb 
to induce Japanese surrender, 
102, 104 
Oppenheimer’s “primary 
argument” for moral 
justification of, 103-5 
Hofstadter, Richard, 220 
Hook, Sidney, 17, 138 
Howe, Irving, 219-20 
Hubert, Don, 126 
Hutchins College, 138 
Hutchins, Robert, 41, 78-9 
Huxley, Julian, 122 
hydrogen bomb controversy, 7-8, 
13-4, 20, 38, 41, 59, 66, 68, 
75-6, 105-6, 109, 149, 162, 
187 


Ickes, Harold, 41 

Ikenberry, John, 166, 212, 
226 

Infeld, Leopold, 122 

Institute for Advanced Study, 7, 9, 
12, 18, 44, 58, 66, 76, 115-6, 
133-4, 163, 180-2 

Interim Committee, 101-2, 107 

International Atomic Energy 


Index 257 


Agency (IAEA), 190, 192, 
195-7, 199, 205 
International Conference on 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy (Geneva, 1955), 68 
international control of atomic 
energy, see Oppenheimer, 
J. Robert; Acheson-Lilienthal 
Report 
international relations theory, xz77, 
163-73 
constructivism, 168-71, 217 
liberal internationalism, 166-8, 
216-7, 226-7 
Oppenheimer as a liberal 
internationalist with strong 
constructivist elements, 172 
realism, 165-6 


James, Billy, 134 
James Martin Center for 
Nonproliferation Studies, 196 
James (William) Lectures, 18, 23, 
26, 28, 37, 56, 63, 74, 98, 
113, 133-7 
James, William, 132-4, 137 
Jamieson, Dale, 222 
Jefferson, Thomas, 48, 50-1, 55 
Jewish Theological Seminary 
of America, 82 
Johnson, Lyndon, 9 
Josselson, Ruthellen, 161 
Jouvenel, Bertrand de, 36, 181 
Joyce, James, 43 


Kant, Immanuel, 144, 164 
Kennan, George, 10, 14, 17 
Kennedy, John, 199 

Khan, A. Q., 197 


258 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Kissinger, Henry, 189 

Kehr, Harvey, 6 

Klock, Augustus, 2 

Koertge, Noretta, 219 
Krieger, David, 223 

Kristol, Irving, 17 

Kuhn, Thomas, 120, 129, 182 
Kupchan, Charles, 211 
Kutchesfahani, Sara, 183 


Labinger, Jay, 129 

Landesman, Charles, 147 

Lawrence, Ernest, 4, 73, 102 

Leibniz, Gottfried, 138 

liberal internationalism, 163-4, 
166-8, 170-2, 210, 212, 
216-7, 226-7 

Lieblich, Amia, 161 

Lilienthal, David, 19, 91 

Limited Test Ban Treaty, 76 

Lincoln, Abraham, 96 

Lippmann, Walter, 52, 60 

London School of Economics, 174, 
181 

Long, David, 174, 177 

Los Alamos, xit-xi11, 2, 6-7, 11-2, 
53, 76, 89-90, 103, 108-9, 111, 
121, 146, 149-51, 182, 227 

Luce, Henry, 8, 43 


MacLeish, Ada, 42-4 
MacLeish, Archibald, x7, xii, 19, 
25, 39, 41, 55, 58-9, 63-4, 
73, 85-7, 96, 119, 128, 156, 
160, 215, 219 
Atlantic article “The Conquest 
of America” and “Revolution 
of the Individual,” 45-9 
biographical sketch, 42-4 


Bohr, discussions with, 44, 51, 
55, 60 
complimentary letters on 
“Conquest,” 41-2 
Japanese Emperor, opposition to 
retaining, 61-2 
Oppenheimer, letter exchanges 
with, 44-5, 50-1, 56-7 
Oppenheimer’s response to 
“Conquest,” 50-1 
Oppenheimer’s and MacLeish’s 
views, comparison of, 50-4 
suspicion of science, 60-1 
Manhattan (atomic bomb) Project, 
6, 9, 14, 31, 81, 146-7, 
149-53 
Manning, Robert, 49 
Marshall, George, 16 
Marxism/Marxist 34, 47, 60, 
158-9 
Mason, Richard, 149 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), 54, 68, 
100, 109 
McAdams, Dan, 161 
McCarthy, Joseph, 44, 76 
McMillan, Priscilla, xiz—xiii, 9, 14, 
18, 32, 217 
Mill, John Stuart, 144 
Mitrany, David, 154, 163, 173, 
187, 217 
A Working Peace System, 174 
characterization of Mitrary’s 
international functionalism by 
Taylor, 174-5 
form follows function, 175 
on international control of 
atomic energy and weapons, 
179-80 


legacy of, 178-9 
Morgenthau on Mitrany, atomic 
weapons, functionalism, and 
nation state as obsolete, 178 
nation state as obsolete and 
undermining sovereignty from 
below, 176, 179-80 
Oppenheimer, exchanges 
with and personal views on, 
181-2 
Oppenheimer’s and Mitrany’s 
views similar and reinforcing, 
179-81 
separability and transferability 
theses, 175-8 
modernity, x72, 159-60, 215-8, 
227 
Collins, Oppenheimer, “Third 
Wave of Science Studies,” and 
“elective modernism,” 129-31 
Oppenheimer’s vision and, 127-9 
overview of, 125-7 
Toulmin, Oppenheimer, and 
the “Hidden Agenda of 
Modernity,” 131-2 
Molotov, Vyacheslav, 97 
Monk, Ray, 4-5, 10, 12, 17 
Moore, G. E., 137 
moral dilemmas (Bernard 
Williams), 143, 218 
characterization of, 144 
and complementarity, 145-6 
Oppenheimer and Hiroshima, 
146-7 
and regret, 145-6 
moral luck (Bernard Williams), 
143, 162, 218 
characterization of, 148 
circumstantial moral luck, 148-9 


Index 259 


and Manhattan Project, 150-1 
resultant moral luck, 148 
Oppenheimer and agent’s 
retrospective assessment, 
151-4 
moral pluralism, 144 
Morgan, Thomas (Look Magazine), 
21, 25, 76, 220 
Morgenthau, Hans, 165, 178, 181 
Moyers, Bill, 65 
Miiller, Harald, 213-4, 222 


Nagasaki, 7, 107, 147 

Nagel, Thomas, 148-9 

Nathan, Otto, 122 

National Academy of Sciences, 9, 
226 

National War College, 94-5 

Navari, Cornelia, 178 

New America Foundation, 213 

Newton, Isaac, 126 

Newtonian physics/mechanics, 27, 
112-3, 119,135 

Nichols, Kenneth, 75 

Niebuhr, Reinhold, 17, 66, 165, 
181 

Nietzsche, Friedrich, 149, 155 

no-first-use (of nuclear weapons) 
pledge, 223 

North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 24, 32-3, 172 

nuclear disarmament, 47, xiiz, 154, 
163, 191, 193-5, 199, 214, 
222-5, 227 

Abolishing Nuclear Weapons by 

Perkovitz and Acton for details 
of disarmament process and 
stability of a world free of 
nuclear weapons, 199-214 


260 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer and, 7, 32-3, 
38, 106, 143, 164, 190, 207, 
213-4 

“regulative principle” not “an 
ideal serving a utopian aim” 
Walker, 224 

State Department Panel of 
Consultants on Disarmament, 
106 

“World Free of Nuclear 
Weapons” Schultz, Perry, 
Kissinger, and Nunn, 189 


“world without nuclear weapons” 


Obama, 189-90 
see also Deudney, Daniel; Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 
(NPT), 171, 183, 190, 204, 
213, 222-5 
creative tensions in, 194-5 
failures and setbacks of, 197 
history and overview of, 
190-4 
nuclear nonproliferation regime, 
195-7 
nuclear-weapon-free zones 
(NWEZ), 193, 196, 198 
similarities between NPT and 
its regime and the Acheson- 
Lilienthal proposal, 154, 199 
successes and highlights of, 
197-8 
Nuclear Suppliers Group, 196 
Numbers, Ronald, 4 
Nunn, Sam, 189 


Obama, Barack, x7, 189-90 
The Open Mind (TV show), 65-6 
Oppenheimer, Frank, 1, 5 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert 


atomic energy as “a pilot plant” 
for international cooperation, 
90, 172, 180, 196, 227 

atomic energy, international 
control of, x7, 7, 13, 20, 24-5, 
38-9, 53, 59, 75, 89-100, 
109, 152-3, 158, 161-2, 
171-2, 179-80, 186, 189, 
207, 213-4, 216, 218-9, 226 

atomic energy/bomb as “great 
peril” and “great hope,” 35-6, 
62, 90-1, 97, 151, 172, 180 

biographical sketch, 1-9 

biographical themes and 
interpretations of, 9-16, 19-21 

communist party member, denial 
of, 5-6 

Congress for Cultural Freedom, 
16-7, 34, 36, 116, 138, 143, 
182 

dual duty (specialization and 
openness), 29, 35, 39, 72, 99, 
128, 158, 215, 225 

education, views on, 26, 
29-31, 42, 69-71, 77, 83, 87 

Harvard overseer (philosophy, 
physics, chemistry), 36, 86, 
133, 221 

hope and vision (focusing of), 
71-4 

hope and vision (initial summary 
of), 33-5 

ideal as a pluralistic community 
connected by dialogue and 
conversation, 84, 119, 215 

individual and community, 
antinomy between, 28, 54, 56, 
59, 62, 128, 141, 159, 215 


knowledge there is loss, 
knowledge always partial, 
114-5, 117-8, 136 

knowledge /understanding 
(second-order) for cultural 
coherence, 29-30, 36, 71, 128, 
131, 216 

loss of security clearance and exile 
from government, effects of, 
8-9, 15-6, 74-5 

nation state as “obsolete,” 23-5, 
75, 153, 179 

nuclear proliferation and evil of 
nuclear weapons, views on, 33, 
73-4, 76, 205, 225 

propositional vs. thematic 
discourse, 26, 37, 72, 119, 
128, 155, 158, 160, 172, 216, 
221 

psychologists, interactions with, 
115-6 

public intellectual, x, 9, 17 
25, 51, 62, 85-7, 134, 217, 
219-20 

public sphere and rebuke of 
professional philosophers, views 
on, 35-9, 75, 221-3 

responsibility and the nuclear 
revolution, 20-1, 34, 53, 109, 
158, 162, 216, 220, 228 

scholarship (recent) on and the 
“Oppenheimer challenge,” 
x-x1, 17-19 

science and knowledge, 
communal nature of, 28, 56, 
74, 98, 128, 159, 186, 216 

science enriching participants and 
culture, 27-8, 34-5, 54, 63, 
83, 113, 129, 159 


Index 261 


science, nonhierarchical pluralist 
view of, 27, 83, 114, 127, 144 

specialization, views on, 26-31, 
64, 70-1, 130, 159, 215 

specialized, international 
communities and the regulation 
of sovereign national will 
(breaking the “grip” of nation 
state), 24-5, 33, 35, 39, 74, 
76, 98, 107, 128-9, 131-2, 
153-4, 158-9, 172, 186-7, 
214-5, 225 

vital center of his thought, 25-35 

voice (Oppenheimer’s) needs to 
return to the public forum, xz, 
217, 225-6 

see also Acheson- Lilienthal 
Report; Bohr, Niels; 
complementarity; Deudney, 
Daniel; Einstein, Albert; 
epistemic community; 
Hiroshima; international 
relations theory; MacLeish, 
Archibald; Mitrany, David; 
modernity; moral dilemmas; 
moral luck; nuclear 
disarmament; pragmatism; 
Rabi, I. I.; Reith Lectures; 
Rorty, Richard; Soviet Union 


Oppenheimer, Katherine, 5, 44 
Oreskes, Naomi, 227 

Orwell, George, 154, 156-8, 160 
Osborn, Fredrick, 93 


Pais, Abraham, 10, 18, 112, 122-3 
Palevsky, Mary, 103, 108 

Pauli, Wolfgang, 3, 67 

Perkovich, John, 154, 190, 


199-207, 213, 223 


262 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Perry, Ralph Barton, 133 
Perry, William, 189 
Phillips, Andrew, 169-70, 173 
Pierce, Charles, 132-3, 135-6 
Pierson, Christopher, 126 
Planck, Max, 112 
Plato, 85, 126, 139, 149 
Polanyi, Michael, 36 
pragmatism: x7, xia, 18, 125, 216, 
218, 221 
general comments on, 132, 137 
Oppenheimer’s thought, 
supported and sustained by, 
135-7 
Rorty and pragmatism, 137-40 
Rorty’s and Oppenheimer’s 
outlooks, similarities, 140-1 
Schweber and influence of 
pragmatism on Oppenheimer, 
132-5 
Pravda, 41, 100 
Princeton University, 24, 66, 69, 
138, 181 
Protestant Reformation, 126 
Putnam, Hilary, 137 
Putnam, Robert, 221 


Quantum mechanics/theory, 3, 30, 

59, 67, 112-3, 117-20, 123, 128 
Quantum revolution, 4, 121 
Quine, Willard, 133, 137 


Rabi, Helen, 2, 67 
Rabi, Isidor Isaac, xi—xiiz, 2-3, 
8, 19, 25, 39, 42, 64-6, 73, 
86-7, 127, 138, 149, 160, 
215, 219 
biographical sketch, 67-8 
education, views on, 78-80 


H-bomb controversy, 13—4 
Oppenheimer, APS Memorial 
Session remarks on, 84 
Oppenheimer, 1962 exchange 
with, 66-7, 69-71 
Oppenheimer’s personality, view 
on, 18 
Oppenheimer’s and Rabi’s views, 
comparison of, 83-5 
philosophical outlook, 77-84 
religion, views on, 80-3 
Rawls, John, 147, 222 
realism, x727, 129, 163-71, 173, 
210, 212 
Reith Lectures (Oppenheimer) 
“Science and the Common 
Understanding,” ix, 8, 19, 27, 
30, 54-8, 60, 63, 71, 86, 98, 
113, 121, 133, 221 
Dyson on, 58-9 
responses to, 58, 116 
and security hearing, 57-8 
Relativity, Theory of, 31, 112, 122 
Richards, I. A., 134 
Rigden, John, xiii, 4, 12, 77, 84 
Roosevelt, Franklin, 16, 43, 111, 
218, 224 
Rorty, James, 137-8 
Rorty, Richard: x, x77, 125, 143, 
218, 221, 228 
biographical sketch and 
pragmatism, 137-40 
challenge to liberals for a 
narrative of social hope, 157 
Contingency, Irony, and 
Solidarity, 154 
conversation, private and public 
vocabularies, “liberal ironist,” 
154-6 


Oppenheimer, portrayal using 
Rortian ideas, 160-2 
Oppenheimer’s and Rorty’s views 
on social hope and private vs. 
public (individual and society), 
comparison of, 158-60 
Orwell’s Animal Farm 
and Nineteen Eighty-Four, 
156-7 
Rorty’s telling omission of 
Oppenheimer in his talk 
“National Pride, National 
Shame,” 218-9 
see also pragmatism 
Rorty, Winifred, 137 
Royal Danish Academy of Sciences, 
9 
Rudd, Anthony, 161 
Rudolph, John, 78 
Russell, Bertrand, 2, 23, 38, 45, 
109, 137, 143, 145 
Rutherford, Ernest, 74, 89, 122 


Sagan, Scott, 191-2, 195, 204-5, 
221 

Said, Edward, 86 

Saler, Michael, 127 

Sandel, Michael, 221 

Sarah Lawrence College, 23 

Sartre, Jean-Paul, 144 

Schell, Jonathan, 207 

Schlesinger Jr., Arthur, 17 

Schrédinger, Erwin, 112 

Schultz, George, 189, 206-7 

Schweber, Silvan, 18, 132-5, 
216-7 

Science Wars, 129 

scientific internationalism, 13, 33, 
62, 97-8, 180, 215-6 


Index 263 


Scientific Revolution, 117, 126 
Seitz, Frederick, 226 
Serber, Robert, 4, 11 
Sherwin, Martin, xz, 6, 14-8, 
45, 61 
Shetty, Shatabhisha, 189 
Shue, Henry, 222 
Silva, Peer de, 12 
Skinner, B. F., 23 
Smith, Herbert, 23 
Smithsonian Institution, 73-4, 
76 
Snow, Charles Percy, 66, 129 
Snyder, Jack, 171 
Sokal Hoax (Alan Sokal), 129 
Somerville, Andrew, 189 
Soviet Union (Russia), 16, 32, 49, 
92-3, 97, 100-1, 106, 108, 
153, 181, 183, 191, 193, 
197-8, 201-2, 210, 
221-2 
first atomic explosion by, 8, 13, 
41, 96 
MacLeish’s views of, 46-9 
Oppenheimer’s views of, 32, 73, 
76, 94-5, 102, 111, 153 
Orwell’s views of, 156-7 
Soviet spying and Oppenheimer, 
6,8 
Spinoza, Baruch, 138, 149 
Stanford University, 138, 218 
Steinbeck, John, 17 
Stern, Otto, 67 
Stevenson, Adlai, 41-2 
Stimson, Henry, 61, 73, 101-2, 
150 
Strauss, Louis, 8 
Strawson, Galen, 161 
Szilard, Leo, 103 


264 The Hope and Vision of J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Tannenwald, Nina, 171 

Tatlock, Jean, 5 

Taubman, Philip, 189 

Taylor, Charles, 126 

Taylor, Paul, 174 

Teller, Edward, 8-9, 67 

Thompson, Kenneth, 126 

Thorpe, Charles, xii, 11, 15, 17-9, 
32, 103, 105, 148 

Thucydides, 164 

Tolman, Ruth, 5 

Toulmin, Stephen, 126, 131-2, 
218, 221 

Trilling, Diana, 17 

Trilling, Lionel, 17 

Truman, Harry, 7-8, 13-4, 44, 91, 
93, 106, 218 

Two Cultures (C. P. Snow), 66, 129 


United Nations (UN), 7, 23, 45-6, 
53, 91-4, 96-97, 99-100, 129, 
154, 167, 171, 175, 178, 196, 
206 

United Nations Atomic Energy 
Commission (UNAEC), 93, 97 


Vassiliev, Alexander, 6 
Verlini, Giovanni, 195 
Virginia, University of, 138 


Wagner, Peter, 126 
A Walk Through the 20" Century 
(TV show), 65 
Walker, William, 191, 223-4 
Wallace, Henry, 92 
Waltz, Kenneth, 165, 191-2 
Walzer, Michael, 147 
Weber, Max, 18 
Wellesley College, 138 
Wendt, Alexander, 173 
White, Morton, 18, 133-5 
Whitehead, Alfred, 2, 138 
Williams, Bernard, x, xii—xii1, 
143-144, 218, 222 
see also moral dilemmas; moral 
luck 
Wilson, Robert, 103 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 137 
Wolverton, Mark, ix 


Yale University, 42, 138-9 
Young, Bradford, 107, 150 


Zangger Coalition, 196 


