THE RUIN 

OF diet ay 
OPPENHEIMER 
AND THE BIRTH 


OF THE MODERN 


ARMS RACE 


mR ISCILLA J, 
MCMILLAN 


The Ruin of 
J. Robert 
Oppenheimer 


Priscilla J. McMillan is an associate of the Davis Center for Russian 
and Eurasian Studies at Harvard University. She is the author of 
Krushchev and the Arts and the classic Marina and Lee. Her articles 
have appeared, among other places, in The New York Times, The 
Boston Globe, the Los Angeles Times, Harper’s Magazine, Scientific 
American, and the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, where she is a 
member of the editorial board. She lives in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 


Johns Hopkins Nuclear History and Contemporary Affairs Martin J. 
Sherwin, Series Editor 


Priscilla J. McMillan 


The Ruin of 


J. Robert 


Oppenheimer 
and the Birth 
of the Modern Arms 
Race 


Foreword by Martin J. Sherwin 


Johns Hopkins University Press | Baltimore 


© 2005, 2018 Priscilla Johnson McMillan 
All rights reserved. Published 2018 
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper 
2468975 31 


First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin, a member of Penguin Group 
(USA) Inc. 2005. Published in Penguin Books 2006. 


Johns Hopkins University Press 
2715 North Charles Street 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363 
www.press.jhu.edu 


Library of Congress Control Number: 2017953274 
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library. 


ISBN 13: 978-1-4214-2567-2 
ISBN 10: 1-4214-2567-X 


Designed by Francesca Belanger 
Photograph credits appear on page 374. 


Special discounts are available for bulk purchases of this book. For more information, please contact 
Special Sales at 410-516-6936 or specialsales@press.jhu. edu. 


Johns Hopkins University Press uses environmentally friendly book materials, including 
recycled text paper that is composed of at least 30 percent post-consumer waste, whenever 
possible. 


For Sam and Ethel Ballen 


CONTENTS 


Foreword, by Martin J. Sherwin 


Preface 
Introduction 


PART ONE: 1945-1949 


CHAPTER ONE: David Lilienthal’s Vacation 
CHAPTER Two: The Maneuvering Begins 
CHAPTER THREE: The Halloween Meeting 
CHAPTER Four: The Secret Debate 


CHAPTER FIVE: Lost Opportunities 


PART Two: 1950 


CHAPTER SIx: Fuchs’s Betrayal 
CHAPTER SEVEN: Fission versus Fusion 
CHAPTER EIGHT: Teller 


CHAPTER NINE: Ulam 


PART THREE: 1951-1952 


CHAPTER TEN: Teller’s Choice 
CHAPTER ELEVEN: The Second Lab 


CHAPTER TWELVE: A New Era 


PART FOUR: 1952-1954 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN: Sailing Close to the Wind 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN: Strauss Returns 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN: Two Wild Horses 

CHAPTER SIXTEEN: The Blank Wall 

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: Hoover 

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: The Hearing Begins 

CHAPTER NINETEEN: Smyth 

CHAPTER TWENTY: Borden 

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE: Caesar’s Wife 

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO: Do We Really Need Scientists? 
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE: Oppenheimer 

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR: We Made It—and We Gave It Away 


Postlude 


Photographs 
Acknowledgments 
Notes 

Selected Bibliography 


Index 


FOREWORD 


DuRING THE WINTER and spring of 1954, J. Robert Oppenheimer, the 
wartime director of the Los Alamos atomic bomb laboratory and 
postwar advisor to the U.S. government, appeared before an Atomic 
Energy Commission (AEC) security panel. The panel’s responsibility 
was to determine whether he was a security risk. 

The panel had been convened by Lewis Strauss, chairman of the 
AEC. During the past several years, Strauss and Oppenheimer had 
significant disagreements about the role that nuclear weapons 
should play in American foreign and military policy. Strauss 
believed that these weapons were essential for the defense of the 
United States. He believed that the security of our country 
depended on building more, and more powerful, nuclear weapons. 

Oppenheimer believed that a policy of “more and bigger” 
nuclear weapons would inevitably diminish our security. He was 
convinced that it would motivate the Soviet Union to follow suit, 
escalate the nuclear arms race, and create a far more dangerous 
international environment. 

This was a reasonable debate. It was the type of dialogue that 
sustains our democratic culture, a point that Oppenheimer argued 
in print. Strauss believed that Oppenheimer’s call for a public 
discussion of nuclear weapons policy was an act of sabotage 
committed by an_ influential, untrustworthy, and _ possibly 
treasonous scientist. 

In the hysterical atmosphere of the McCarthy period, Strauss’s 
hostility to Oppenheimer easily morphed into a conviction that 
Oppenheimer’s views were inspired by communist sympathies. His 
left-wing associations during the 1930s gave Strauss the 
opportunity, as chairman of the AEC, to initiate the hearing In the 
Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer. As Priscilla McMillan brilliantly 


demonstrates, this move against Oppenheimer was supported by a 
collection of conspirators convened by Strauss. They included J. 
Edgar Hoover, director of the FBI; William L. Borden, the former 
director of the staff of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy; the 
physicist Edward Teller; and others who wished to see an expanded 
nuclear weapons program. 

The charges against Oppenheimer were convoluted, inconsistent, 
and ultimately unsupportable in any unbiased forum. Roger Robb 
(the AEC’s prosecuting lawyer) and Strauss came to recognize this 
only after the hearing was underway. As a result, desperate to 
“win,” both Robb and Strauss engaged in a shocking series of illegal 
violations of due process, all of them contrary to the AEC’s security 
hearing rules. An FBI tap of Oppenheimer’s lawyer’s phone 
arranged by Strauss, and the transmission of their confidential 
conversations to prosecutor Robb, is only one egregious example. 

There is no question whether Oppenheimer’s hearing was 
corrupted by the government’s illegal actions; the following pages 
make that clear. Nor is there a serious question whether those 
violations influenced the 2 to 1 decision that removed 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance. As the dissenting member of the 
hearing panel wrote, the judgment against Oppenheimer was, and 
will forever remain, “a black mark on the escutcheon of our 
country.” 


Martin J. Sherwin 


PREFACE 


Moke THAN SIXTY years ago, a special panel, convened in secret by the 
U.S. government and known as the Gray Board, voted 2-1 to revoke 
the security clearance of J. Robert Oppenheimer, the country’s most 
famous scientist and a leader of the Manhattan Project that had 
produced the atomic bomb in time to help end World War II. 
Upholding the board’s verdict, an even higher tribunal, the U.S. 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), ruled by a 4—1 vote that, due to 
his “defects of character,” Oppenheimer could not be trusted with 
the nation’s secrets. 

Why does this board’s hearing still matter? Why was a man who 
knew all the nation’s nuclear secrets, and had even discovered some 
of them, denounced as unworthy? At the time, Oppenheimer had 
earned the country’s gratitude and had never been accused of 
betraying a single secret. Yet as this book reveals, Oppenheimer’s 
foes used deceit and treachery to humiliate and banish him from 
public service. And his legacy as a public servant willing to raise his 
voice in dissent is even more significant and inspiring now than it 
was then. 

This is a story about ambitious men and their rivalries, fueled by 
fear and paranoia during the US-Soviet Cold War. It is the story of 
the brilliant and charismatic Oppenheimer and two determined 
foes. One was the devious and thin-skinned Lewis Strauss, President 
Dwight D. Eisenhower’s chief adviser on atomic energy, and the 
other was the virulently anti-Soviet Hungarian physicist Edward 
Teller. Together they avenged themselves on Oppenheimer for 
slights both men came to resent obsessively. But this is also a much 
larger story about the way the American government could be 
manipulated by anti-communist frenzy and political intrigue, set off 
by an unexpected challenge from its wartime ally, the USSR. 


Shocked to learn that the Soviet Union had run a successful spy 
operation inside our government all through the war, Americans 
were stunned anew in 1949 when they learned that Soviet scientists 
had tested a nuclear device of their own just four years after 
Hiroshima and had broken the A-bomb monopoly we had expected 
to rely on. 

President Harry S. Truman’s response to the Soviet nuclear 
advances, reached in utmost secrecy with close advisers, was to 
build the next big weapon—the hydrogen bomb—that would be a 
hundred or a thousand times as destructive as the atomic bomb. 
Truman’s decision was unanimously opposed by his General 
Advisory Committee on atomic energy, with eloquent dissenting 
opinions by committee chairman Robert Oppenheimer and his 
fellow scientific members. They dissented because at that time no 
one knew how to build the hydrogen bomb although scientists had 
been working on it without success since the war. Besides, the 
scientists agreed, the H-bomb appeared far too destructive to use 
except, they warned, as “a weapon of genocide.” 

The Oppenheimer security hearing is a story about the 
arguments for and against building the H-bomb. After a major 
scientific breakthrough in 1951 and thermonuclear tests in the 
Pacific, the United States by the spring of 1954 was about to add 
the hydrogen bomb to its arsenal. Why, then, at the very moment of 
its success, did the AEC decide to hold an inquisition into the 
making of the hydrogen bomb? And why, when nearly all the 
scientists who had worked on the Manhattan Project opposed 
taking the next step, was only Oppenheimer singled out for 
persecution? Oppenheimer’s is a story about how easily and how 
brutally the government can crush an individual, even someone 
enjoying universal public gratitude and respect. It is the story of 
how Robert Oppenheimer became the victim of a government 
proceeding so unfair and one-sided that to this day it remains a 
shameful and cautionary memory. 

In the decade after World War II, differences developed among 
the highest government officials over the role nuclear weapons 
ought to play in our foreign policy. One group, heavily represented 
in Congress and the armed services, wanted as large an arsenal of 
nuclear and thermonuclear bombs as possible for use against the 
Soviet Union. The other group included scientists and diplomats 
who hoped that diplomacy and the eventual erosion of Stalin’s rule 
might one day soften our relations with the USSR. The first group 
was led by Lewis Strauss, a New York investment banker who was 


well connected in Washington, and by the physicist Edward Teller, 
who ever since the Manhattan Project had been obsessed by finding 
the secret to the hydrogen bomb. The second group was led by 
Robert Oppenheimer, hero to the country and adviser to countless 
government committees, who during the H-bomb debate in 1949- 
1950 spoke for nearly the entire scientific community. 

Shortly before the 1952 presidential election, the outgoing 
secretary of state, Dean Acheson, set up a panel to summarize for 
the new administration the state of the nuclear weapons program 
and its role in American foreign policy. The panel concluded that 
the country had become frozen in its relationship with the USSR 
and blamed the extreme secrecy surrounding the atomic energy 
program. The public, which stood to be wiped out in the event of 
thermonuclear war, had been told nothing: how many nuclear 
weapons the United States had, the phenomenal pace at which both 
the U.S. and the Soviets were accumulating “unprecedented 
destructive power,” and the fact that staying ahead of the Russians 
was no guarantee of security. The panel urged the U.S. government 
to replace secrecy with greater openness, or what it called 
“candor,” toward the American people. Yet the report, which was 
thoughtful and farsighted, was itself a secret. Only a handful of 
officials would see it. Frustrated and disappointed, Robert 
Oppenheimer gave a speech to the Foreign Policy Association in 
New York that winter of 1953 noting that nearly everything about 
the nuclear arms race was classified: “I must reveal its nature 
without revealing anything.” What he did reveal was that in the 
near future, “we may anticipate a state of affairs in which the two 
Great Powers will each be in a position to put an end to the 
civilization and life of the other, although not without risking its 
own. We may be likened to two scorpions in a bottle, each capable 
of killing the other, but only at the risk of its own life.” 

Those words made a deep impression, as did an article by 
Oppenheimer in Foreign Affairs magazine that summer repeating his 
call for “candor.” This message was deeply offensive to Lewis 
Strauss, a secrecy zealot, who had just been appointed chairman of 
the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission. Strauss decided that this was 
his chance to eliminate J. Robert Oppenheimer’s influence forever. 
Strauss despised Oppenheimer’s open attitude toward the Soviet 
Union and proceeded to work closely with J. Edgar Hoover, head of 
the FBI, and Charles Murphy, an Air Force lieutenant colonel and 
writer for Fortune magazine, to destroy the man he had hated, and 
envied, for so long. The result was the hearing In the Matter of J. 


Robert Oppenheimer. 

Politics as well as personal intrigue played a role in 
Oppenheimer’s undoing. President Eisenhower and his advisers 
feared that fellow Republican Joseph McCarthy, a senator from 
Wisconsin who was staging fiery anti-communist hearings, might 
focus on the U.S. atomic energy program. So, in a sense, 
Eisenhower and Strauss were attacking Oppenheimer before 
McCarthy could. And while in the spring of 1954 McCarthy was 
staging televised hearings about communist infiltration in the U.S. 
Army, the Gray Board began its own inquest in deepest secrecy. 
Behind doors manned by armed guards, the U.S. Atomic Energy 
Commission was the prosecutor, accusing J. Robert Oppenheimer of 
being a security risk. One charge was that he had obstructed 
development of the hydrogen bomb; another was that he had lied 
to security officials in 1942 and 1946 about a friend’s suggestion 
that he share information with the Russians about the bomb 
program. Behind the charges at the height of the McCarthy red 
scare was the fact that as a young and Bohemian professor at the 
University of California at Berkeley during the 1930s, Oppenheimer 
himself had been very far to the left, and his brother, wife, and 
many close friends had been members of the Communist Party. 

Lewis Strauss stage-managed the hearing, choosing the 
prosecuting attorney, the three jurors (the “Gray Board”), and the 
procedures, which included closeting the jurors with the prosecutor 
and Oppenheimer’s FBI file for a full week before the hearing so 
that they would be steeped in negative information. Strauss ordered 
his staff to withdraw selected documents from the AEC files so that 
they would be unavailable to the defense. When Oppenheimer’s 
lawyers requested security clearances, Strauss refused, which 
deprived the defense of information available to the prosecution. 
Most damaging of all, Strauss had the FBI wiretap Oppenheimer’s 
home, his office, and all conversations with his attorneys, meaning 
that throughout the hearing, the prosecution knew ahead of time 
just what the defense was planning. 

Predictably, the rigged hearing ended by recommending the 
removal of Oppenheimer’s clearance, a vote sustained 4 to 1 by the 
full AEC. The verdict came as a tremendous shock to the public and 
was to mark a permanent change in the relationship between the 
government and the scientific community. Scientists split over 
Teller’s role, with most ostracizing him. And from then on, 
scientists experienced new limits within which questions about 
nuclear policy would be tolerated. The government needed the 


scientists’ brains for its weapons programs, but it would not tolerate 
any one of them challenging the morality of a new weapon on the 
grounds that it could wipe out civilization. 

Oppenheimer’s gross mistreatment rankled scientists and the 
public. Nowhere were these feelings stronger than in Los Alamos, 
the town Oppenheimer made famous. In 1971 a group concerned 
with his reputation endowed an annual lecture in his honor. After 
the centenary of Oppenheimer’s birth in 2004, members of the J. 
Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Committee advanced their efforts to 
clear his name. Lawyers from a well-known Washington law firm 
undertook to have the 1954 verdict reversed, but the effort ceased 
when a partner, whose father had been chairman of the hearing 
board, insisted that it be dropped. Members of another firm, Arnold 
and Porter, worked on the case on a pro bono basis for two and a 
half years, but they concluded that there was no chance a legal 
challenge could nullify the verdict. Still, the memorial committee’s 
chairwoman spent thirteen years leading her group to support 
resolutions urging New Mexico’s senators to persuade successive 
heads of the Energy Department to nullify the verdict 
administratively. 

Two writers, Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, authors of 
American Prometheus, their Pulitzer Prize-winning biography of 
Oppenheimer, supported the effort by providing new evidence that 
the U.S. government had acted illegally to obtain the verdict it 
wanted. And Senator Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico helped by 
providing a tightly argued brief from one of the lawyers in his 
office. In September 2016, four senators—Patrick Leahy of 
Vermont, Edward Markey of Massachusetts, Martin Heinrich of 
New Mexico, and Jeff Merkley of Oregon—wrote President Barack 
Obama, asking him to issue an executive order nullifying the 
Oppenheimer verdict on the grounds that, “in addition to righting 
this particular wrong, this step would also signal support for other 
government employees who risk their careers and livelihoods to 
warn of safety, security or other concerns.” 

Despite these many appeals, the Energy Department refused to 
vacate the Oppenheimer verdict. Instead, without apparent irony, it 
reiterated the Gray Board’s conclusion that “we find no evidence of 
disloyalty,” adding that details released by the National Security 
Agency since 1954 only serve to “strengthen the conclusion that 
Oppenheimer was never disloyal.” The best the energy secretary 
could do, to honor Oppenheimer somehow, was to rename one of 
its scholarships the Oppenheimer Science and Energy Leadership 


Program. This book looks at the people and events that led to the 
ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 
There are stories like it today. 


The Ruin of 
J. Robert 
Oppenheimer 


Introduction 


ON THE MorNING Of April 12, 1954, readers of the New York Times 
woke to startling news. The security clearance of the nation’s best- 
known nuclear scientist, J. Robert Oppenheimer, had been 
suspended in the face of charges that he was a security risk. 

The Times’s scoop created a sensation, for Oppenheimer was a 
national hero. He had been the leader of the Manhattan Project 
during World War II, and his name, more than that of any other 
American, was coupled with the building of the atomic bomb and 
the war’s victorious end at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. After the war, 
as the government’s number one adviser on atomic weapons, he 
had been privy to all its decisions about these weapons. If 
Oppenheimer was a security risk, did the United States have a 
single important secret left? 

It was almost unthinkable that this man’s loyalty should be in 
question. Except that as U.S. disagreement with the Soviet Union 
hardened into a state of permanent tension, the certainties that had 
sustained the American people during the war and the early years 
thereafter ebbed away, and so did some of the nation’s confidence. 
After the defections of two people who had spied for the USSR (a 
Soviet code clerk in Canada named Igor Gouzenko in 1946 and a 
woman named Elizabeth Bentley from the U.S. Communist Party in 
1948), Americans learned that key parts of the government—State, 
Treasury, and possibly even the White House—had been penetrated 
by Soviet agents. Then, in 1948, a rumpled-looking former writer 
for Time magazine named Whittaker Chambers rose in a crowded 
congressional committee room and, in an unforgettable televised 
confrontation, accused the irreproachable Alger Hiss, president of 
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, of having handed 
U.S. government secrets to Russia years before, while he had been a 
State Department official. The confidence of Americans was shaken 
again in the late summer of 1949, when the Soviet Union tested its 


first atomic bomb, an event the CIA had not expected for at least 
two more years. Its atomic monopoly broken, the country learned 
in early 1950 that Hiss had been convicted on charges of perjury 
and that a serious-looking, bespectacled ex—Manhattan Project 
scientist named Klaus Fuchs had confessed in England to having 
passed atomic secrets to Russia. 

After only four short years, the United States found itself shorn 
of its monopoly on the weapon that had given it a feeling of 
omnipotence, and learned that the key to its unrivaled ascendancy 
—the secrets of the atomic bomb—had been stolen. It was not long 
before ambitious politicians started to capitalize on the nation’s 
new sense of vulnerability, and no accident that the most strident of 
those who tried to do so was a hard-drinking senator from the 
heartland of traditional isolationism. Within days of the Hiss 
conviction and the Fuchs confession, Joseph McCarthy stood up in 
Wheeling, West Virginia, and brandished a piece of paper 
purportedly containing the names of 205 “known” Communists 
who he claimed were working for the Department of State. 

As McCarthy spoke, a debate that had been waged in secret 
about a possible next step in the arms race reached its decisive 
point, as President Harry Truman ordered the nation’s scientists to 
find out whether a new weapon, the so-called hydrogen bomb, 
could be built in response to the Soviet success. Such a bomb 
would, if feasible, have a thousand times the explosive power of the 
atomic bomb. And, in subsequent directives, Truman made clear 
that the effort to build a hydrogen bomb was to be an all-out affair, 
and that everything about the program was to be held in utmost 
secrecy. 

Robert Oppenheimer had been at the center of the debate over 
whether to try to build the hydrogen bomb. As chairman of the 
Atomic Energy Commission’s General Advisory Committee, the 
group which, more than any other, made the government’s 
decisions about atomic weapons, Oppenheimer had chaired the 
October 1949 meeting at which the GAC had voted 8 to o (a ninth 
GAC member was out of the country) against a crash program to 
develop the hydrogen bomb. Oppenheimer’s committee had cited 
both technical and moral arguments. It had before it only one 
design for the weapon, and despite several years of research, it was 
not clear that it could ever be made to work. To launch a new stage 
of the arms race by committing the nation to build a weapon that 
had so far been proof against every effort at invention seemed to 
the committee members supremely irresponsible. Nor did they 


think it would be ethical. The new weapon, should it ever prove 
feasible, could be designed to carry unlimited destructive power. It 
would be a weapon not of warfare but, quite possibly, of genocide. 
As an answer to Russia’s newfound possession of the atomic bomb 
it was, all too literally, overkill. 

Oppenheimer agreed with the committee, but, contrary to 
accusations that were brought against him later, he had not led the 
GAC to its conclusions. He came to his view only in the last few 
days before the meeting, partly under the influence of Harvard 
president James B. Conant, a committee member for whom he had 
almost filial respect, and in the course of the meeting itself, as the 
consensus took shape. His feelings were less vehement than 
Conant’s and he did not write the majority opinion, as he very often 
did. Nevertheless, the four-month behind-the-scenes debate over 
the hydrogen bomb earned him bitter foes. One was Lewis Strauss, 
a highly partisan Republican banker and businessman who was one 
of five AEC commissioners. Another was Edward Teller, the 
Hungarian-born scientist whom Oppenheimer had known well 
during the Manhattan Project years, and whom he had disappointed 
in 1943 by declining to make him head of Los Alamos’s Theoretical 
Division. A brilliant administrator, Oppenheimer had kept Teller on 
the reservation throughout the war by allowing him to form a small 
group of his own. But Teller, already obsessed by the idea of the 
hydrogen bomb, nursed his resentments and concluded that 
Oppenheimer was motivated not by honest conviction but by 
ambition, not wanting his success, the atomic bomb, to be trumped 
by a bigger weapon. 

The enmities Oppenheimer incurred during the H-bomb debate 
of 1949-50 became deeper afterward, for as part of his H-bomb 
decision, Truman also decreed that the very fact of the debate, plus 
everything that had been said in the course of it, was to remain 
supersecret. No one who had taken part was permitted even to 
describe the proceedings to anyone who did not have a “Q” 
clearance, a clearance to see top secret nuclear data. As a result 
Oppenheimer and the rest of the General Advisory Committee were 
not permitted to explain why they had reached their conclusions. 
Yet the GAC had urged that the American people be kept more fully 
informed about atomic matters, and its members were almost as 
disheartened by Truman’s secrecy order as by the H-bomb decision 
itself. A few days after Truman’s announcement Oppenheimer 
spoke on Mrs. Roosevelt’s special television program against the 
excessive secrecy, but he was the last Q-cleared insider to do so. 


From then on, it was only the scientists who no longer had any 
official portfolio who spoke out publicly against the dangers of the 
thermonuclear bomb, men such as Hans Bethe of Cornell, Victor 
Weisskopf of MIT, retired AEC commissioner Robert Bacher, and 
Ralph Lapp, an expert on the effects of radiation. Oppenheimer was 
aware of their efforts and no doubt approved, but he had to 
maintain public silence. Much later, however, his early opposition 
to the crash program was metamorphosed into the charge that 
because his opposition had become known, it had discouraged 
other scientists and slowed down the program—all to the benefit of 
the Russians. 

Following Truman’s silencing decision, Oppenheimer took other 
stands that earned him enemies in high places. First, like Conant 
and most of the government’s other scientific advisers, he opposed 
a pet project of the Air Force, the building of a nuclear-powered 
aircraft. Second, like Gordon Dean, chairman of the AEC, and 
nearly all his own colleagues on the General Advisory Committee, 
he defended the ongoing work of Los Alamos and opposed pressure 
from Teller and the Air Force to build a second nuclear weapons 
laboratory to compete with it, the laboratory that exists today in 
Livermore, California. After his and the GAC’s defeat on this issue, 
Oppenheimer was forced off the GAC. Finally, he helped write the 
“Vista” report, a study commissioned by the Air Force in 1951, 
which urged that tactical nuclear weapons be made available to 
defend Western Europe against Soviet land armies if necessary. 
Instead of relying on a small number of thermonuclear bombs with 
which the Air Force could pulverize targets in the far-off USSR, 
“Vista” recommended that a large number of smaller bombs be 
spread among the services so that, if need be, war could be fought 
on the ground in Europe. The Air Force, a young and cocksure 
branch of the armed services, took umbrage at the notion of sharing 
the powerful new weapons with the other services and assumed 
once again that Oppenheimer was the villain. 

A brilliant, charismatic man with the gift of seeing further into 
the future of nuclear weapons than anyone else, either then or 
later, Oppenheimer also had glaring vulnerabilities, chief among 
them the possibility that he had been a member of the Communist 
Party. Certainly, several of those closest to him had been: Jean 
Tatlock, a woman he cared about deeply, and Frank and Jackie 
Oppenheimer, Robert’s brother and _ sister-in-law. Katherine 
Puening, whom Robert married in 1940, had belonged to the Party, 
as had one of her former husbands, Joe Dallet, who died a hero in 


the Spanish civil war. Communists and Communist sympathizers 
were numerous in Depressionera Berkeley, and some were physics 
students of Oppenheimer’s who joined the Party believing him to be 
a member and who paid dearly for it afterward. Robert 
Oppenheimer himself made monthly contributions to the Party up 
to 1942 and, by his own admission, “belonged to nearly every 
fellow-traveling organization on the West Coast.” But he denied 
that he had ever joined the Party, and the testimony of a number of 
close witnesses of his political activity bears him out. 

Jean Tatlock was the daughter of a highly regarded professor of 
English literature at the University of California at Berkeley. By all 
accounts she was a beautiful woman, generous and warmhearted, 
in training to be a doctor. She and Robert Oppenheimer met in the 
spring of 1936 and by the fall of that year he began to court her. 
With the courtship, a change was observed in Oppenheimer. His 
lectures became simpler and more accessible. And he was happier, 
he said later, because he now felt more a part of his time and 
country. Much of this he owed to Jean, an on-again, off-again 
member of the Communist Party who introduced him to her activist 
friends in Berkeley. 

At least twice, Oppenheimer was to say, he and Jean were “close 
enough to marriage to think of ourselves as engaged.” He was 
anxious to marry her, but Jean, one friend said, “out of troubles of 
her own,” refused to marry him. Robert and Jean broke up in the 
fall of 1939, after he had met Kitty Harrison, and a year later he 
and Kitty were married.1 

In early 1943, before he left for Los Alamos, he had a telephone 
call from Jean that he failed to answer. Through a mutual friend he 
soon had a message that she was in distress and needed to see him. 
So in June of that year he found an excuse to go to San Francisco, 
where he saw Jean. The FBI followed him during every moment of 
the visit, and on one of the two evenings he spent with Jean, FBI 
agents in a car outside her apartment building observed that he 
spent the night. The night he spent with Jean Tatlock in 1943 was 
brought up at his hearing eleven years later, always as part of the 
charge that he was an adulterer who disregarded demands of 
security by spending the night with a known Communist. “Was that 
good security?” someone asked at the hearing. “No,” he admitted. 

Kitty Oppenheimer knew about the meeting in advance. Knew of 
it, didn’t like it, and accepted it. But when Robert got into trouble 
over it at the hearing, his relatives were amused. “There were dark 
secrets in his life on Shasta Road,” said his cousin, Hilde Stern 


Hein, years afterward. (Shasta Road was where he had lived as a 
bachelor.) “And one of them was that Jean was lesbian.” The 
“secret” was evidently true, but we can only speculate about the 
role played by Jean’s lesbianism in her feelings toward Robert and 
her decision not to marry him.2 

Whether Oppenheimer joined the Communist Party in Berkeley 
during the late 1930s was a question scrutinized intently by the FBI 
and Army security. The issue has been revived from time to time, 
most recently when historian Gregg Herken unearthed the diary of 
Haakon Chevalier’s first wife. She wrote that Haakon, a lecturer in 
Romance languages at the university, and Robert had belonged to a 
closed unit of the Party that met every other week or so during the 
academic year at the house of one or the other of them. In a letter 
to another historian in 1973, Chevalier, who had been a Party 
member and insisted that Robert had been as well, gave the names 
of four deceased friends who, he claimed, had belonged to their 
unit.3 

Oppenheimer steadfastly denied that he had ever belonged to 
the Communist Party, and the U.S. government, despite its efforts, 
never proved that he had. But he conceded that he had been an 
active fellow traveler and had, through the Party, contributed to 
Spanish war relief and other causes favored by the Communists. At 
his home in Truro, Massachusetts, in 1985, Steve Nelson, head of 
the Party in San Francisco during the early 1940s, told the author, 
“Absolutely I would have known if he was in the Party, and I have 
no reason to deny it now that he is dead.” If Oppenheimer had 
belonged to the Party, added the eighty-four-year-old Nelson, “I’d 
have been the one to collect his dues.” Instead, the Party assigned 
Isaac “Doc” Folkoff, an older man who knew how to discuss 
“philosophical questions,” to collect Robert’s donations to the war 
in Spain.4 

Nelson said that he first met Oppenheimer in 1939 at a fund- 
raiser in Berkeley. After they had made their speeches, 
Oppenheimer went up to Nelson to shake his hand. “I am going to 
marry a friend of yours,” he said. The friend was Kitty, who had 
been married to Joe Dallet, a comrade of Nelson’s in the Spanish 
war. In 1936 or so, Nelson, Dallet, and Kitty had spent a week 
together in Paris when the men were on their way to Spain; eight 
months later, it fell to Nelson to break the news to Kitty that Dallet 
had been killed. Later, Kitty lived briefly in New York City with 
Nelson and his wife, Margaret. “My association with Spain and with 
his wife’s former husband made a bond that’s a little hard to 


explain,” Nelson said of his relationship with Oppenheimer. “I 
admired him. I respected him. He was an outstanding figure whom 
people, especially his students, looked on with awe. He was a figure 
with a glow. Why on earth should he have cared about the anti- 
Fascist cause?” Nelson thought it had something to do with 
Oppenheimer’s exposure to anti-Semitism during his student years 
in Germany. But the question of asking him to join the Communist 
Party did not arise, Nelson claimed, in any discussion he took part 
in. “He’s a good person, fine. He made contributions to the Party, 
fine. There are people who want to squeeze every drop out of a 
lemon. I didn’t put the question to Robert. Our relationship was 
sensitive. I didn’t want to be told no.” 

The Oppenheimers and Nelsons saw each other three or four 
times “on a personal basis,” Nelson said, and other times at parties 
and fund-raisers. But in early 1943 Robert told Nelson he’d have to 
say good-bye. “I already suspected that it might be something 
special, maybe connected with the war effort, so I said nothing but 
good-bye and good luck.” Robert left for Los Alamos, and they 
never saw each other again.s 

Nelson’s picture of Oppenheimer as close to the Party but not of 
it is echoed by Philip Farley, later a State Department adviser on 
arms control. As a graduate student in English at Berkeley, Farley 
saw Oppenheimer licking envelopes nights at the teachers’ union, 
and remembered him as someone, unlike lowly graduate students 
such as himself, whom the Communists backed for office—Oppie 
was elected recording secretary—because he was a non-Party 
member who was a hero to others.« 

Philip Morrison, a devoted student of Oppenheimer’s, and David 
Hawkins, the Party’s education director in the Bay Area, carefully 
distinguished their roles inside the Party from Oppenheimer’s 
outside it. Morrison remembers lecturing on Marx, Engels, and 
Lenin at an old Loew’s Theater in San Francisco as one of his 
assigned tasks, and he and Hawkins raised funds from individual 
donors as well. Oppenheimer donated funds but was never asked to 
solicit them. Years afterward, Hawkins observed that Oppenheimer 
was content to leave “a certain calculated ambiguity” about his 
relationship with the Party. Possibly it was a manifestation of his 
overall style of leaving things unsaid, a style which lent him an air 
of mystery but led others to wonder about his motives.7 

Today, nearly seventy years later, does it matter whether 
Oppenheimer, along with other liberals who felt that the New Deal 
was not far enough left, actually belonged to the Communist Party? 


The Gray board, the government panel that in 1954 ruled on 
whether he should have a top-level security clearance, dismissed 
the possibility of his spying and called him “unusually discreet” 
with secrets of the atomic project. The question, then, is one of 
truthfulness. If Oppenheimer, despite his many denials, did in fact 
join the Party, even briefly, then he was carrying a terrible burden 
—both of membership and of dishonesty—during the hearings and 
throughout his postwar years as a government adviser. 

Oppenheimer was not one to submit to the demands of Party 
discipline. And whether membership in what, in the parlance of the 
day, was called a “professional section” amounted to Party 
membership, as the Chevaliers claimed, may be a matter of 
definition. Given Oppenheimer’s character and the years of scrutiny 
he weathered, it seems fair to assume that for a time he was, as he 
admitted, close to the Party, but that he did not belong to it. 

Still, how could a man with so radical a record have been 
cleared for the Manhattan Project? The answer is that the country 
needed him. General Leslie R. Groves, director of the project for the 
Army, knew of his past connections but decided early on that 
Oppenheimer was the man to lead the effort and cleared him 
despite the objections of subordinates. Throughout the war 
Oppenheimer was subjected to closer surveillance than anybody 
else at Los Alamos: whenever he went outside the gates, he was 
driven in a government car by an Army security agent who listened 
in on his conversations. When Jean Tatlock in deep depression 
appealed to him and he went to her in Berkeley in 1943, FBI agents 
parked outside her apartment recorded the fact that he had spent 
the night. 

After the war the surveillance continued. In the J. Edgar Hoover 
Building on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington there are 
thousands of pages of transcripts of Oppenheimer’s telephone 
conversations with his wife, Kitty, and others from 1946 on, all 
recorded by the FBI. And throughout this time he was advising the 
government on its policies about atomic weapons and, inevitably, 
its foreign policies as well. Oppenheimer knew he was being 
watched. Countless times, when he and Kitty were on a picnic or 
were stranded beside an airstrip somewhere, they and their two 
children would scour the ground for the four-leaf clovers they knew 
they would be needing someday. Although he expected lightning to 
strike, Oppenheimer did not trim his advice to the government. In 
the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, which he and his associate I. I. Rabi 
drafted at the end of 1945, he proposed international control of all 


fissionable materials although he was aware that this could—as it 
did—give rise to the charge that he wanted to give away the 
“secret” to the Russians. He opposed the H-bomb crash program 
although his position could—as it did—lead to the official charge 
that he had failed to advocate “the strongest offensive military 
posture for the United States.” Beneath the debates, in minutes and 
letters that were classified for decades but are at long last available 
today, it is clear that he unfailingly took positions that he believed 
would optimize the nation’s military posture. 

Oppenheimer had other vulnerabilities besides his left-wing past. 
Ordinarily solicitous, even courtly, toward others, he also had a 
cruel streak. Sometimes, for no discernible reason, he would lash 
out at a student, a colleague, even a powerful official, with an 
acerbity bound to humiliate. This earned him enemies with power 
to retaliate and, just as much as his left-wing past or positions he 
had taken on major issues, paved the way to his downfall. 

And there were questions about his character. While 
Oppenheimer did not trim his political advice in an effort to protect 
himself, in at least five instances he informed the government that 
he suspected a former student of being, or having once been, a 
Party member. And, spectacularly, by his own admission he had 
lied to Army security officials in 1943 in describing a feeler as to 
whether he might be willing to reveal atomic secrets to Russia—the 
so-called Chevalier affair. 

Given these attributes, his enormous personal magnetism, his 
contempt for anyone he regarded as stupid or pompous or 
hypocritical, the fact that he was known to have lied on occasion, 
plus a delphic way of expressing himself that could make his 
pronouncements seem puzzling or double-edged, Oppenheimer was 
bound to become a point of anxiety to an administration which 
wanted to protect itself against charges that it was sheltering 
Communist spies. Thus, when a one-time congressional aide wrote 
a letter to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover charging that Oppenheimer 
was “more probably than not” a spy for the Soviet Union, President 
Eisenhower quickly ordered that the scientist’s clearances be 
suspended pending a hearing to determine whether he represented 
a danger to the nation’s security. 

Behind the scenes, the president was pursuing two related 
purposes. One was to break McCarthy’s power; the other, to keep 
McCarthy as far as possible from the atomic energy program. As it 
happened, these purposes came together during the heartbreakingly 
beautiful Washington spring of 1954. After he had assaulted one 


government agency after another for alleged security lapses, 
McCarthy’s unfriendly gaze had at last fallen upon Eisenhower’s 
favorite institution, the U.S. Army. The commanding officer at Fort 
Monmouth, New Jersey, had inadvertently countenanced the 
promotion of a dentist named Irving Peress, who was charged by 
McCarthy with having been a Communist Party member. For this, 
McCarthy decided, the Army would have to pay. And so for the first 
ten days of May the secretary of the Army, Robert Stevens, 
occupied the witness stand in televised hearings before Congress 
that riveted the nation’s attention. Each day after testifying, 
Stevens, whose career as a textile manufacturer had in no way 
prepared him for his ordeal, was driven back to the Pentagon to go 
over the testimony he had just given and be coached for his 
appearance the next day. 

For three weeks that April and May, about the same time 
Stevens was suffering under the klieg lights on Capitol Hill, 
Oppenheimer was undergoing a comparable ordeal far out of public 
sight, in a dilapidated government building close by the 
Washington Monument. After he had testified each day and listened 
to the testimony of others, Oppenheimer, too, was driven across 
town, to the house of an attorney in Georgetown, to review the 
day’s events and prepare for the next day’s torment. 

The ordeals the two men were undergoing were by no means 
symmetrical, for the Army secretary enjoyed the president’s 
enthusiastic behind-the-scenes support, while the scientist endured 
just the opposite. The government placed obstacle after obstacle in 
the way of Oppenheimer’s lawyers. They were denied access to 
documents they needed, witnesses for the defense were subjected to 
entrapment, and when his attorneys conferred with their client or 
with one another in person or by telephone, their conversations 
were recorded by the FBI and transmitted to the prosecution. 

This wiretapping was illegal and would have caused a scandal 
had it been known at the time (it became public knowledge only 
after passage of the Freedom of Information Act more than twenty 
years later). In addition, nearly all the charges against 
Oppenheimer were wildly out of date. One accusation was that the 
scientist had continued to oppose the H-bomb program after it had 
become official policy and that his opposition had slowed down the 
program. Only a few days before the hearing began, however, the 
Atomic Energy Commission detonated a hydrogen bomb in the 
Pacific so powerful that it caused a diplomatic incident with Japan 
and gave rise to fears that thermonuclear explosions could no 


longer be controlled. Not only was the program successful, it was 
embarrassingly successful, and it had plainly outpaced that of the 
Russians. 

Another of the accusations was that Oppenheimer had advocated 
the dispersal of small atomic weapons in Europe so that the West 
could fight a defensive war there as an alternative to mass bombing 
of civilians in the USSR. Testimony on this issue took up about a 
quarter of the transcript, yet by the time of the hearing in the 
spring of 1954, the measures Oppenheimer had advocated in 1951 
were already the official policy of the administration that was 
conducting the prosecution. If Oppenheimer had committed heresy, 
it was the heresy of being right a year or two too soon. 

During the hearing, Oppenheimer was not accused of ever 
having given away a government secret, nor did either of the panels 
that judged him find that he had done so. To the contrary, the court 
of first instance, the Gray board (so named after its chairman, 
former secretary of the Army Gordon Gray), concluded that the 
defendant had shown “extraordinary discretion in keeping to 
himself secrets,” adding that had it been allowed to apply “mature 
common sense judgment” instead of the government’s tangled 
security regulations, it would have cleared him. Nevertheless, citing 
his opposition to the H-bomb crash program, it recommended by a 
vote of 2 to 1 that his clearance be withdrawn. Next, the five AEC 
commissioners, to whom Oppenheimer appealed the verdict, 
upheld the Gray board’s decision by a vote of 4 to 1, this time on 
the entirely new ground that the scientist did not take the 
requirements of the security system seriously enough and that he 
had “defects of character” that made him a security risk. 

By the conclusion of the parallel proceedings that spring, the 
public hearing on Capitol Hill and the secret one in the run-down 
building just off the Mall, Eisenhower’s purposes had been 
achieved. In the course of the Army-McCarthy hearings the 
demagogic senator from Wisconsin overreached himself, and a few 
months later his colleagues voted to censure him, thereby ending 
his power. And, dominating the headlines as they did, the hearings 
over the Army drowned out the Oppenheimer hearing and stifled 
debate over the momentous questions that had led to it. As Stephen 
Ambrose, one of Eisenhower’s biographers, pointed out, such was 
the furor over McCarthy that the president and Lewis Strauss got 
rid of Robert Oppenheimer without any public discussion of 
whether he had been right: whether it had been a breach of 
morality to build the H-bomb. The McCarthy hearings also 


distracted the public from fears stirred by the “Bravo” test in the 
Pacific that spring—the second U.S. thermonuclear test and one so 
enormous that it almost seemed out of control—and obscured the 
fact that thanks to Presidents Truman and Eisenhower, the United 
States was now embroiled in an all-out H-bomb race with the 
Russians. 

But for the president, and the country, the hearing held in secret 
had its costs. Eisenhower respected Oppenheimer, shared his moral 
qualms about nuclear weapons, and knew that he was not disloyal. 
By allowing his officials to deceive him about Oppenheimer’s 
alleged foot-dragging over the H-bomb and about methods used 
during the hearing, Eisenhower countenanced a travesty of justice 
that rankles in the American conscience to this day. Early in the 
year 2000, at a fiftieth-anniversary observance at the National 
Archives of McCarthy’s West Virginia speech, no one—not a single 
member of Eisenhower’s family or administration—took issue with 
the verdict of the historians in attendance that the Oppenheimer 
hearing was the single worst blot on Eisenhower’s record in 
domestic affairs. 


In writing this book, it was not my intention to write a parable for 
our time. But the story I tell is an old one, the story of what 
happens when some institution—a church, say, or a government— 
decides to rid itself of someone who has become anathema to it, or 
when it wants to change course without saying so openly. 

Stories like this one do not take place in the open. Secrecy is at 
their heart, and so is the exclusive claim to orthodoxy. The people 
must be protected, whether from the taint of alien ideology or from 
the threat of military attack. The result is always the same. The 
fever passes, and most people never find out what was really at 
stake. 

In the case of Robert Oppenheimer, the deviations from what we 
consider basic rules of our democracy were so egregious that even 
today, half a century later, the story still stirs our consciences and 
makes us wonder what it was all about. It was about many things. 
One of them was our government’s decision to move to a new and 
deadlier level of the nuclear arms race without telling the American 
people. Not only was the hearing an extraordinary display of 
ingratitude toward a man to whom the nation owed much, but it 
resulted in the removal from public life of the one individual who 
might have helped restrain our catastrophic rush to overarmament. 

This book is a look at the people and events that led to the 


destruction of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 
There are stories like it today. 


PART ONE 


1945-1949 


CHAPTER ONE 


David Lilienthal’s Vacation 


FROM THE KITCHEN Of his rented house on Martha’s Vineyard, David 
Lilienthal watched on the early morning of September 19, 1949, as 
bluebirds flew in and out of a hole in the old knotted apple tree 
outside. A downy woodpecker was whacking away at the tree, 
along with a large flicker, a kingbird, and a pair of gray crested 
waxwings. The whirring sounds the birds made and the distant 
lapping noises of Nantucket Sound, these were nursing Helen and 
David Lilienthal back to life after a devastating spring and summer. 
It had begun, if their current troubles could be said to have had 
so neat a beginning, back in May, when Republican senator Bourke 
Hickenlooper had demanded Lilienthal’s resignation as chairman of 
the Atomic Energy Commission. Each day, said Hickenlooper, a 
member of the joint congressional committee on atomic energy, he 
had found new_- evidence of _ Lilienthal’s “incredible 
mismanagement.” For three months the hearings had dragged on, 
with Lilienthal on the witness stand day after sweltering summer 
day, with cameramen at his feet and glaring klieg lights in his eyes. 
Three months, and then Hickenlooper’s Republican colleague 
Arthur Vandenberg had called David Lilienthal in and told him, 
almost casually, that the charges against him were being dropped. 
Through it all, through banner newspaper headlines and nightly 
verbal attacks by the virulently right-wing radio commentator 
Fulton Lewis Jr., David and Helen Lilienthal had had over them the 
shadow of former secretary of defense James Forrestal, who had 
jumped to his death from a window of Bethesda Naval Hospital on 
May 22, the very day the attack on Lilienthal’s “mismanagement” 
had begun. Reminded in this abrupt and shocking way of what the 
pressures of public life could do to a man, Lilienthal felt grateful 
once again that he was able to count on the encouragement of his 


wife, Helen, and the staunch support of the president of the United 
States.1 

On the Vineyard he had slept away some of his exhaustion. “I’m 
not a new man and never will be,” Lilienthal wrote in his journal, 
“but I’m no longer acutely weary.” It was time to think about the 
future. His term on the commission would be ending the following 
June. Nineteen years on government salaries, first as a founding 
director of the Tennessee Valley Authority and then as the first 
chairman of the AEC, had left him without much in the way of 
savings. He had just turned fifty, and with parents who needed help 
and a son and daughter who hoped to go to graduate school, he 
figured he had ten years left in which to put something by for his 
retirement. His three years at the AEC had been deeply 
disappointing to him in that the harnessing of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes was still a long way down the road, and he knew 
the agency would never become what he had hoped—another TVA. 
On the other hand, in what the AEC had determined, to his regret, 
to be its main task, the commission had met its responsibility: the 
country had enough atomic weapons to ensure its safety for the 
foreseeable future.2 

The AEC had been created in 1946, with five commissioners 
appointed by the president and answerable to both the White 
House and the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the House and 
Senate (JCAE). In addition to Lilienthal, the original commissioners 
were Robert Bacher, a nuclear physicist from Cornell who had 
worked on the Manhattan Project; Lewis Strauss and Sumner Pike, 
small-town boys who had been successful on Wall Street; and 
William Waymack, former editor of the Des Moines Register and 
Tribune and deputy chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago. Because it had been created to manage atomic energy 
development for military as well as civilian purposes, the 
commission had had to take a tougher line on almost everything 
than Lilienthal would have liked. And of the five commissioners, 
the toughest had been Lewis Strauss, a strongly partisan Republican 
investment banker from New York. A dozen times, finding himself 
in a minority of one, Strauss had gone over the heads of the others 
to the White House, the newspapers, and even to highly placed 
friends such as Defense Secretary Forrestal. Strauss’s habit of 
“shooting at one’s brothers,” as Lilienthal called it, had shattered 
the spirit of collegiality so important to Lilienthal’s way of running 
things. He realized that he would no longer be able to lead in the 
way that suited him, by reconciling differences. He knew, 


moreover, that if he were to accept reappointment, there would 
probably be another ugly fight, like the one he had had with 
Democratic senator Kenneth McKellar of Tennessee on_ his 
confirmation in 1947 and the one he had just been through. “If we 
have another one,” Helen told him, referring to the Hickenlooper 
hearings as they sat drinking coffee on the front stoop a day or two 
before, “Il resign.” Not that David Lilienthal looked with much 
enthusiasm on the prospect of a return to private life. For all that it 
cost him, the cameras and the headlines and the constant pressure 
to make decisions too portentous for any one man, he was in his 
metier as a public servant. The mere making of money held little 
appeal for him. 

Driving home from dinner with friends in a heavy ground fog 
that evening of September 19, Lilienthal thought he recognized the 
man who, with his thumb up in a hitchhiker’s gesture, was peering 
into the headlights. “It’s Jim McCormack,” he said quietly, as if he 
found this man every night squinting beside a goat field in dense 
fog. Had he parachuted in, or what? 

Back at the house, the flame from the kerosene lantern made the 
rickety summer furniture wobble and dance as if in a Charles 
Addams drawing. Lilienthal gazed out the window at the Big Dipper 
as the visitor he called “General Jim” half apologized and half 
joked about being the messenger bearing bad news. 

“Are you troubled?” Helen Lilienthal asked as they went to bed. 
“Oh, some, one of those things,” her husband told her. He said he 
had to leave at seven the next morning, and would “probably be 
back by night.” He did not believe it, of course, and at dawn he 
pumped enough water in the well to keep her supplied for two 
days. Before departing, he said good-bye to the birds, the slender, 
tufted things he had so enjoyed watching the day before. They were 
in a poplar tree now. Off they flew in a cloud, into the sunrise, 
swinging from side to side. 

General Jim (Brigadier General James McCormack, director of 
the Division of Military Applications, AEC) filled Lilienthal in 
during the flight. On September 3, a weather reconnaissance plane 
on patrol from Japan to Alaska had picked up signs of radioactivity 
just east of the Kamchatka Peninsula, and more signs had been 
picked up during the next few days. No one in official Washington 
had expected the Russians to test an atomic device so soon— 
Secretary of State Dean Acheson had said it might occur as early as 
1951 and General Leslie Groves, head of the Manhattan Project, 
had said it would take twenty years—and the news was bound to 


cause shock. William Webster, the defense secretary’s deputy for 
atomic energy, had gone to see Lilienthal’s deputy, AEC general 
manager Carroll Wilson, and suggested that a scientific panel be 
appointed to examine the evidence. Vannevar Bush, civilian 
director of the Manhattan Project during the war, was appointed 
chairman, with three Los Alamos veterans, Robert Oppenheimer, 
former commissioner Robert Bacher, and Admiral William S. 
Parsons, as members. 

That all of this had occurred while the chairman of the Atomic 
Energy Commission was allowed to rusticate in ignorance for nearly 
three weeks on Martha’s Vineyard says worlds about the secrecy 
that suffused the enterprise, since no one had dared inform him by 
telephone or telegraph. But on Monday, September 19, at Air Force 
detection headquarters on G Street, the members of the Bush panel, 
General Hoyt Vandenberg and other high-ranking Air Force officers, 
a dozen scientists from various laboratories, and a small British 
mission gathered to question the scientists who had analyzed 
radioactive samples from the suspected test. Even here, however, 
secrecy imposed its restrictions: Oppenheimer’s task of explaining 
what the Russians had done was the more difficult because he was 
not permitted to reveal how the panel had arrived at its 
conclusions. The assembled scientists and officers nonetheless 
accepted the panel’s assessment that what it had seen was 
“consistent with the view that the origin of the fission products was 
the explosion of an atomic bomb” on August 29. The members of 
the Bush panel and the three commissioners on hand that afternoon 
hoped the news would be announced by the president before it 
leaked and before the Russians announced it. They decided to 
dispatch General McCormack to Martha’s Vineyard to bring 
Lilienthal back so that he could persuade the president to announce 
the Soviet success without delay. 

When he arrived at his office on the morning of September 20, 
Lilienthal hoped to be told that the explosion had turned out to be 
something else. But Oppenheimer, looking “frantic,” and a “deeply 
worried” Bacher assured him that the event they had feared since 
1946 was upon them. Both of them urged that the news be made 
public right away. 

Harry Truman was at his desk, reading the Congressional Record, 
when Lilienthal entered the Oval Office just before four in the 
afternoon. As the president joked about partisan goings-on in the 
Senate the day before, his mood seemed as serene as the garden 
outside, with the golden September sunlight streaming through it. 


As for this detection report—he raised the subject—he had known it 
would happen someday. Those captured German scientists had 
probably helped the Russians pull it off. But maybe it wasn’t the 
real thing. Oh, yes, it was, Lilienthal assured him. The evidence had 
been persuasive even to the doubters. “Really?” asked the 
president. Still, he said, he was not going to announce it right 
away. The Russians had finally sent a real negotiator to the UN and 
the British were about to announce devaluation of the pound, and 
he wanted to let things simmer down. Another reason for silence 
was that announcing the test would reveal our detection 
capabilities to the Russians. 

Lilienthal urged him to reconsider. Far from alarming the 
country, Truman’s announcing—before it leaked—that the Russians 
had acquired the bomb would show that he was taking it in stride 
and that no one else need be upset either. And it would show that 
this was a president who leveled with the American people. Harry 
Truman heard his visitor out and accompanied him to the door, 
apparently still determined to take his time. 

Back at commission headquarters, Lilienthal found his fellow 
commissioners upset by the delay. Oppenheimer was particularly 
unhappy, seeing it as one more case of the government’s behaving 
as if there were some big secret when there was none, and missing 
the chance to bring the facts about atomic energy a little more into 
the open. Lilienthal agreed but, knowledgeable about the ways of 
government, pointed out that the decision was up to the president. 

Go on back to the Vineyard, Lilienthal’s secretary, Martha Jane 
Brown, urged him late that afternoon. Lilienthal stopped by the 
apartment of his friend and fellow commissioner Sumner Pike for 
whiskey and some talk before boarding the B-25. By 10:30 that 
night he was back with Helen by the fireplace on Martha’s 
Vineyard, with the wind blowing outside, the limbs of dead apple 
trees dancing eerily in the firelight. The “Wuthering Heights touch 
again,” he wrote in his journal before they went to bed. 

A couple of days later Lilienthal was summoned to a neighbor’s 
telephone on the Vineyard to take a call from acting AEC chairman 
Pike. The president had announced the Russian bomb that morning 
after all, and in the text Pike read aloud to him, Lilienthal 
recognized arguments he had made to President Truman three days 
before. The choice of words showed that the president still 
questioned whether the Russians really had done it—he termed it 
“an atomic explosion,” not a full-fledged bomb test—but Lilienthal 
was pleased that his trip to Washington had had some effect.s 


The General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy 
Commission happened to be meeting that day. The nine-man GAC 
was the tail that wagged the AEC dog, being composed of the 
country’s wisest and most experienced nuclear scientists and 
engineers. Appointed by the president for fixed terms, the GAC 
members enjoyed an authority in nuclear affairs that no one in the 
Pentagon, White House, or AEC could match. The commission 
therefore looked to the GAC and its chairman, Robert 
Oppenheimer, for guidance on technical issues and much more. 

Oppenheimer described the evidence that what the Russians had 
set off was really an atomic test. The first reaction of Glenn 
Seaborg, chemistry professor at the University of California and the 
committee’s youngest member, was that the U.S. government’s 
stringent secrecy policies had failed. Isidor Isaac Rabi, professor of 
physics at Columbia University, thought the Soviet bomb made war 
more likely. He wanted the government to take action, but he did 
not say what. Oppenheimer thought it too early to suggest changes 
in the weapons program, since it was the country’s response, and 
not the Russian bomb, now called Joe One, that might make 
changes necessary. He agreed with Seaborg that if the committee 
were to make any response, it should be an expression of hope for a 
secrecy policy that made sense. When news came that the president 
had just announced the test—ahead of the inevitable leak or an 
announcement from Moscow—everyone was relieved. 

Later that day Oppenheimer had a call from a former colleague, 
Edward Teller, in town for a meeting at the Pentagon. Teller 
wanted to know what he should do now that the Russians had 
tested a bomb. “Keep your shirt on,” Oppenheimer told him.« 


CHAPTER TWO 


The Maneuvering Begins 


No sooner HAD the Russian test been announced than intensive 
lobbying got under way, with the Joint Committee on Atomic 
Energy, chaired by the high-powered and ambitious senator Brien 
McMahon of Connecticut, taking the lead. At the end of September 
the JCAE’s executive director, a twenty-nine-year-old veteran of 
World War II in Europe named William Borden, told the committee 
that development of a weapon a thousand times more powerful 
than the A-bomb, something so far unattainable called the 
hydrogen bomb, was the answer to the Soviet success. A few days 
after the president’s announcement, McMahon asked General James 
McCormack how much the new bomb, providing it could be built at 
all, would “magnify the destructiveness” of the atomic bomb. 
McCormack replied in secret session that “if all the theory turned 
out,” the bomb would be “infinite. You can have it any size up to 
the sun.... A million tons or more of ... TNT.”1 

Across the ocean, a headline caught the eye of a wealthy 
American as he passed a newsstand in Florence, Italy. The 
American knew only a few words of Italian, but he grabbed the 
paper and puzzled out Truman’s announcement. Then he sat up 
until three in the morning writing a letter to an old friend back in 
New York. The next day he carried the letter to the U.S. consul 
general and asked him to send it via diplomatic pouch. 

The American who had spotted the president’s announcement 
was a Wall Street investor named William Golden, and the friend to 
whom he sent his letter was AEC commissioner Lewis Strauss. The 
two men had been in the Navy together during World War II and 
remained friends afterward as they pursued lucrative careers in 
finance. After Strauss joined the commission, Golden signed on as 
his dollar-a-year assistant; in September 1949, he was vacationing 


with his wife in Europe. Years afterward Alice Strauss remembered 
her husband’s receiving a secret message in New York that the 
Russians had exploded what appeared to be an atomic bomb. 
Dismayed and alarmed, he boarded the first flight to Washington 
and left her to catch up as best she could.2 

As soon as he received Golden’s letter Strauss penned a 
memorandum, which he read to the other commissioners on 
October 5. With our monopoly gone, he said, it was not enough for 
the United States to maintain an “arithmetical” lead in atomic 
weapons. Borrowing an expression from Golden, he said it was time 
for a “quantum jump.” The only way to stay ahead was to make a 
commitment comparable “in talent and money ... to that which 
produced the first atomic bomb.” The GAC should be consulted not 
about whether, but about “how we can proceed with expedition.” 

A determined man who left nothing to chance, Strauss next paid 
a call on Sidney Souers, another friend from naval intelligence 
during the war. Souers was a banker in St. Louis, Missouri, 
Truman’s home state. Surprisingly, however, he and the president 
did not know each other, and it had been at Strauss’s request that 
Souers had come to Washington to serve on an AEC security panel. 
Discreet and self-effacing, Souers soon won the president’s trust and 
became executive secretary of the National Security Council (NSC). 
He was Strauss’s man, and Strauss decided to use him as his conduit 
to the president. In doing so, Souers said later, Strauss had come “to 
the right place.”4 

Strauss asked his old acquaintance whether something called the 
hydrogen bomb had reached the president’s attention, and if so, if 
Truman had made up his mind to build it. 

Souers responded that as far as he knew, the president had never 
heard of such a bomb. “Can we build one?” he asked. 

Strauss said yes. 

“Then why in the world don’t we build it?” Souers wanted to 
know. 

Strauss replied that the president had not been told about the 
weapon because AEC chairman David Lilienthal was opposed to 
building it. 

“See that it gets to the President,” Souers said. 

“I don’t think I can since I’m almost alone in the Commission,” 
said Strauss, adding that the GAC, too, was almost unanimously 
opposed to building the new bomb. 

“That doesn’t matter,” said Souers. “You were appointed by the 
President. You bring it up, let your colleagues refute what you ... 


recommend, and then the President can do what he thinks best.” 

“Check with the President, anyway,” Strauss requested. “If you’ll 
just tell me to go ahead, I'll accept that from you.” 

“Tll tell you right now,” Souers said. “I know he would want it 
done.”s 

The next day Souers asked the president whether he had heard 
of something called the hydrogen bomb. “No,” said the president, 
“but you tell Strauss to go to it and fast.” Souers called Strauss and 
said nothing about talking to the president, merely that he had 
thought about the matter overnight, and told him to go ahead. 


The memo Strauss read aloud at the commission on October 5 had 
its effect. Within days David Lilienthal asked Oppenheimer to call a 
meeting of the GAC to advise on “as broad a basis as possible” 
whether the atomic energy program “constitutes doing everything 
that it is reasonably possible for us to do for the common defense 
and security.” Oppenheimer arranged a meeting for the final 
weekend of October, the earliest date at which two of his members, 
James Conant and Enrico Fermi, could be there.« 

Meanwhile, a handful of scientists in Berkeley were horrified by 
the Soviet success. One was a tall, ruddy, intensely creative 
physicist named Luis Alvarez, and another was the chemist Wendell 
Latimer. They lost no time going to see Ernest Lawrence, director of 
the University of California’s Radiation Laboratory, inventor of its 
cyclotron, and a scientist of enormous influence in political circles, 
who had had much to do with getting the Manhattan Project 
started back in 1942. Alvarez and Latimer found Lawrence worried 
that the Russians might already be working on the H-bomb and 
might succeed in building it first. The only thing to do, the three 
men agreed, was to get there before the Russians did. On their way 
to Washington for a scheduled visit, Lawrence and Alvarez decided 
to make a stop at Los Alamos to check with Edward Teller. On 
Friday, October 7, they spent a full day there talking to Teller, the 
Russian-born astrophysicist George Gamow, the Polish-born 
mathematician Stanislaw Ulam, and John Manley, the lab’s 
associate director. Teller assured Lawrence and Alvarez, who had 
not done any research on the weapon, that the Super—Teller’s 
proposed thermonuclear, or hydrogen, bomb—was feasible and, 
with an effort comparable to that of the Manhattan Project, could 
be built in about two years. Alvarez reported in his diary that the 
men they talked to at Los Alamos thought the Super would have a 
“good chance,” provided there was plenty of an element called 


tritium—a big if—and provided the calculating machines at 
Princeton and Los Alamos could be geared up to perform the 
millions of mathematical calculations the project would require. 
Teller accompanied the visitors to their hotel in Albuquerque and 
stayed up half the night with them discussing how to obtain the 
needed supply of excess neutrons. Lawrence, in what the Hungarian 
took to be an exhortation to go on the stump campaigning for the 
H-bomb, showed Teller how to wash his shirts and hang them out 
to dry.7 

At lunch three days later in Washington, Lawrence and Alvarez 
told Brien McMahon and California congressman Carl Hinshaw, a 
member of McMahon’s committee, that current research on the 
Super was inadequate and that the “booster” test scheduled for 
1951 was merely a “mincing step.” According to Borden, they 
expressed “keen and even grave concern that Russia is giving top 
priority to development of the thermonuclear super-bomb. They 
pointed out that the Russian expert, Kapitsa, is one of the world’s 
foremost authorities on the problems involved in light elements ... 
and even went so far as to say that they fear Russia may be ahead 
of us.... They declared that for the first time in their experience 
they are actually fearful of America’s losing a war unless immediate 
steps are taken on our own super-bomb project.” Finally, they said 
that a Super could be developed in one and a half to two years if an 
all-out effort was mounted.s 

Alvarez paid a visit to AEC headquarters in Washington, where 
he got the impression that Lilienthal felt “lukewarm” about the 
Super; Lilienthal wrote with disgust in his journal that Alvarez and 
Lawrence had come to see him, “drooling” over the H-bomb. We 
keep saying we have no other course, Lilienthal observed, when the 
real difficulty is that “we are not bright enough to see any other 
course.”9 

Lawrence and Alvarez were not the only ones who believed the 
Super was the answer. After the Soviet test, Teller went to Major 
General Roscoe Charles Wilson, deputy chief of the Air Force 
Special Weapons Group, to urge that Air Force higher-ups be 
briefed about the hydrogen bomb. Air Force chief of staff Hoyt 
Vandenberg appeared before the JCAE the day after he was briefed 
to plead for the weapon on the grounds that the United States had 
to beat Russia to the punch. General Omar N. Bradley, chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, did not put it nearly so bluntly, but right 
after the session at which the two men testified McMahon wrote to 
Lilienthal that should the USSR achieve a thermonuclear bomb 


ahead of the United States, “the fatal consequences are obvious.... 
American efforts along this line should be as bold and urgent as our 
original atomic enterprise.” He wanted to know whether the AEC 
was considering an all-out, Manhattan Project—-type of effort. 10 

As busy as things were in Washington, Fuld Hall in Princeton 
was even busier. Fuld Hall was home of the Institute for Advanced 
Study, to which Robert Oppenheimer, scientific director of the 
atomic bomb project at Los Alamos during the war, had come as 
director in 1947. Of all Oppenheimer’s responsibilities as adviser to 
the government, none meant as much to him as his chairmanship of 
the GAC, and during October 1949, nearly everyone in the country 
concerned in a high-level way with atomic energy came to 
Princeton to seek his counsel. The first was his close friend I. I. 
Rabi, and the next was another close friend, Admiral William 
“Deak” Parsons, the ranking military officer at Los Alamos during 
the war and a highly intelligent Navy official, with whom 
Oppenheimer discussed everything. Then came the two top men at 
Los Alamos, Norris Bradbury, Oppenheimer’s successor as director 
of the lab, and John Manley. Both men wanted a thorough review 
of what the laboratory was doing in light of the Russians’ success. 
Since the Soviet test, they told Oppenheimer, scientists at the lab 
had been advocating everything from business as usual to an all-out 
program to develop the H-bomb. After the visit by the Los Alamos 
men, two representatives of the military side of things came, James 
McCormack and Robert LeBaron, of the Pentagon’s Military Liaison 
Committee, and after them the physicists Hans Bethe and Edward 
Teller. 

Back in 1942, Oppenheimer, aided mostly by Manley but by 
Teller and others as well, had scoured the country in search of 
talent for the Manhattan Project. The time was late, most scientists 
were already working on the war effort, and recruiting first-class 
men for a project too secret to be described had been a tough sell. 
But Oppenheimer had worked miracles of persuasion, and Los 
Alamos soon was staffed by young Americans trained during the 
1930s at Berkeley, Caltech, the University of Chicago, Purdue, the 
University of Illinois, and East Coast universities, and by Europeans 
(Bethe and Teller among them) who had fled Hitler’s anti-Semitism 
and might not have received U.S. citizenship in time to be cleared 
for other projects. Now Teller, perhaps in unconscious emulation of 
Oppenheimer’s wartime effort, had embarked on a recruiting drive 
of his own. His first stop was Ithaca, New York, where his close 
friend Hans Bethe was professor of physics at Cornell. 


Bethe later said that at this time he had been in “very great” 
internal conflict as to whether he should take part in an all-out 
effort to build a hydrogen bomb. He had attended the meeting at Le 
Conte Hall in Berkeley in the early summer of 1942, the first to 
consider basic thermonuclear reactions, and had taken a leading 
part in theoretical research during his many stints as consultant to 
Los Alamos since the war. Always, at the back of his mind, was the 
hope that he, or if not he then someone else, would succeed in 
proving the thermonuclear bomb impossible. Now Teller, anxious 
to persuade Bethe to head the theoretical effort, told him about 
some new ideas that might make at least one phase of the program 
more feasible technically than it had seemed before. Hearing about 
Teller’s ideas in his living room, Bethe was impressed, but he still 
felt that building such a large bomb, and escalating the weapons 
race, would be a “terrible undertaking.” He and his wife, Rose, 
discussed what he ought to do. “I was deeply troubled,” he has said, 
and “Rose was very much against it.”11 

The two friends therefore converged on Oppenheimer’s office in 
Fuld Hall to ask his opinion. Oppenheimer later remembered 
Bethe’s saying, “I cannot see what we can do but build this, and I 
don’t see that it can eventuate in anything but utter catastrophe. I 
cannot refuse ... but if I go, it will be with a very heavy heart.” 
According to Bethe, he and Teller found Oppenheimer “equally 
undecided and equally troubled about what should be done. I did 
not get from him the advice I was hoping to get” as to whether to 
join Teller in trying to build the bomb. When Teller presented his 
case, Oppenheimer did not argue for or against the bomb, but 
confined himself to the observation that one GAC member, James 
Conant, was very much against it. He pointed to a letter on his desk 
which he said he had just received from Conant and read part of it 
aloud. All Teller could remember later was that Conant had said 
that a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb would be 
approved only “over my dead body.” As for Oppenheimer, Teller 
remembered only his saying that if there were to be such a 
program, then the country should be told openly, without the 
hermetic secrecy that had shrouded the Manhattan Project. Bethe 
disagreed, and said that the fact that work was under way, and the 
outcome, should be kept secret. Memorably, Oppenheimer called 
the contest that would take place between the United States and 
Soviet Russia to build the bomb “a race between a piece of glass 
and a piece of onyx, [one] totally transparent and [the other] 
totally obscure.” 12 


Prior to the visit, Teller had predicted that after seeing 
Oppenheimer, Bethe would decline to work on the bomb. But as 
they left Oppenheimer’s office, Teller later recalled, Bethe told him, 
“You see, you can be quite satisfied. I am still coming.” 13 

But during the weekend Bethe strolled around the Princeton 
campus with Victor Weisskopf, a theoretical physicist from Vienna 
with whom he had worked closely at Los Alamos. Weisskopf spoke 
in vivid terms about the costs of a thermonuclear war. He said that 
the world that survived would be “not worth preserving,” a world 
in which “we would lose the things we were fighting for.” Bethe 
later called the conversation “very long” and “very difficult ... for 
both of us.” Later that weekend, as Bethe, Weisskopf, and another 
close friend, the Czech-born physicist George Placzek, drove to La 
Guardia Airport, they went over it again, with both Weisskopf and 
Placzek urging Bethe in the strongest terms not to work on the 
bomb. All three speculated about the position Oppenheimer and the 
GAC were likely to take. After talking a full hour with 
Oppenheimer, Bethe said, he still did not know his opinion. So 
intense was the conversation that Weisskopf forgot his coat. He left 
it in Placzek’s car and took Placzek’s instead of his own, while 
Bethe missed his flight to Oak Ridge, Tennessee. 14 

A day or so later, Bethe called Teller to say that he had decided 
against working on the bomb. Then and later, Teller assumed it was 
Oppenheimer who had dissuaded him. 

But Bethe was right—Oppenheimer had not made up his mind. 
Of all his colleagues on the GAC, Conant was the one Oppenheimer 
was closest to. Earlier that month he had stayed with the Conants 
during a meeting of the Harvard Board of Overseers in Cambridge. 
Of the visit he wrote to a colleague that he and Conant had had “a 
long and difficult discussion having, alas, nothing to do with 
Harvard.” During their talk the two men apparently discussed 
whether the GAC should ask for a meeting with President Truman 
at the end of its late-October session. And on Friday, October 21, 
before he saw Bethe and Teller, Oppenheimer had penned his reply 
to Conant.1s 

“Dear Uncle Jim,” he wrote, addressing Conant by his Los 
Alamos nickname. “We are exploring the possibilities for our talk 
with the President on October 30.” 

Oppenheimer continued: 


On the technical side, ... the super is not very different from 
what it was when we first spoke of it more than seven years ago 


—a weapon of unknown design, cost, deliverability and military 
value. But a very great change has taken place in the climate of 
opinion. On the one hand, two experienced promoters have been 
at work, i.e., Ernest Lawrence and Edward Teller. The project 
has long been dear to Teller’s heart; and Ernest has convinced 
himself that we must learn from Operation Joe that the Russians 
will soon do the super, and that we had better beat them to it.... 

What concerns me is really not the technical problem. I am 
not sure the miserable thing will work, nor that it can be gotten 
to a target except by ox cart. It seems likely to me even further 
to worsen the unbalance of our present war plans. What does 
worry me is that this thing appears to have caught the 
imagination, both of the congressional and of military people, as 
the answer to the problem posed by the Russian advance. It 
would be folly to oppose the exploration of this weapon. We 
have always known it had to be done; and it does have to be 
done, though it appears to be singularly proof against any form 
of experimental approach. But that we become committed to it 
as the way to save the country and the peace appears to me full 
of dangers. 

We will be faced with all this at our meeting; and anything 
that we do or do not say to the President, will have to take it 
into consideration. I shall feel far more secure if you have had an 
opportunity to think about it. 

I still remember my visit with gratitude and affection. 


Oppenheimer had already answered Conant when Bethe and 
Teller visited him on October 21, but it was Conant’s letter to him, 
and not his reply, that he chose to read aloud. Bethe speculated 
long afterward that Oppenheimer might already have made up his 
mind, but, believing that as chairman of the GAC he ought to 
maintain neutrality, he had let Conant’s letter speak for him. But 
the fact is that Oppenheimer still was uncertain. He testified at his 
1954 security hearing that he had not yet made up his mind at the 
time he received Conant’s letter, and in a 1957 interview he 
pointed out that the position he ultimately took was different from 
the one he had taken in his letter to Conant. It was Conant’s 
arguments later, at the GAC meeting, that persuaded him. 16 

These were the discussions that were taking place as the GAC 
met to discuss the most important question that had ever come 
before it. The American people knew nothing except that Russia 
had tested the atomic bomb. 


CHAPTER THREE 


The Halloween Meeting 


EacH TIME the General Advisory Committee met, the secretary, John 
Manley, flew to Washington a day or two early to prepare. Manley 
was a slight, able experimentalist who had helped Oppenheimer set 
up the Los Alamos laboratory early in the war and had stayed on 
afterward. As associate director of the laboratory and a trusted 
colleague of GAC chairman Oppenheimer, Manley was in a perfect 
position to shape the committee’s agenda. This he did informally, 
drifting from desk to desk at AEC headquarters prior to each 
meeting, greeting everyone who felt like talking to him, typists to 
division heads, and asking what was on their minds. In this way he 
not only took the commission’s pulse, he helped keep the advisory 
committee so well informed that it earned the reputation of running 
the commission. In late October 1949, Manley had more than the 
usual quantity of papers to prepare and distribute ahead of time. 

He was setting out documents on the afternoon of Friday, 
October 28, when Robert Oppenheimer appeared in the conference 
room overlooking Constitution Avenue. Oppenheimer had with him 
someone Manley had not seen before, a slender, tall, rather dapper- 
looking man from the Department of State who turned out to be 
George Kennan, special adviser to Secretary of State Acheson. After 
Oppenheimer, other members of the GAC appeared: I. I. Rabi; Cyril 
Smith and Enrico Fermi from the University of Chicago; Oliver 
Buckley, head of Bell Labs in New Jersey; Hartley Rowe of the 
United Fruit Company; and Lee DuBridge, president of Caltech, who 
had been director of the radar project at MIT during the war. Two 
members did not appear that day: James Conant, who arrived from 
Boston the next morning, and Glenn Seaborg, the University of 
California chemist who was in Stockholm, being looked over by the 
Nobel Prize committee. 


Kennan spoke informally to the committee that afternoon about 
conditions in the USSR, with a view to whether Stalin would want 
to embark on a new stage of the arms race so soon after the 
devastation of World War II. With its industry still in ruins, Kennan 
thought, the Soviet Union might be willing to enter an agreement 
to restrain nuclear weapons development, provided the United 
States did so as well. Kennan also believed that it would not take a 
huge stockpile of atomic weapons to deter the Russians from 
aggressive acts—a few bombs would suffice. Speaking after Kennan, 
Hans Bethe described the technical difficulties of igniting the Super 
weapon and suggested that the odds of building it were not good.1 

On the morning of Saturday, October 29, the committee met, 
first with the five commissioners and other officials from the AEC, 
and then with Pentagon officers led by General Bradley and Air 
Force chief of staff General Lauris Norstad. Oppenheimer was 
seated at one end of the long rectangular table, with Manley behind 
him, taking notes. Manley was as impressed by General Bradley’s 
homespun manner and obvious decency as he had been the 
previous day by Kennan’s impassioned fluency and his knowledge 
of the Russians. But he noticed to his surprise that the generals 
seemed to be hearing about the hydrogen bomb for the first time. 
The meeting therefore devolved not into a discussion of whether 
the generals wanted a new, more powerful bomb, but of how, since 
the armies of Europe and the United States had been demobilized 
since the end of the war, Western Europe could be defended in the 
event of a Soviet attack. Manley got the impression that the two 
generals had not given much thought to other important questions. 
Would the United States, for example, respond to a Soviet attack on 
Europe by dropping an atomic bomb on Moscow? Norstad and 
Bradley did not even answer the question as to whether the armed 
services wanted more A-bombs. As for a hydrogen bomb, Bradley 
said nothing about its military usefulness, only that it might be of 
“psychological” value.2 

The physicist Luis Alvarez was not a member of the GAC, but his 
enthusiasm for the H-bomb had prompted him to come all the way 
from Berkeley on his own. He stationed himself inside the entrance 
to the AEC to watch the generals and scientists come and go. 
Spotting him there at the lunch break, Oppenheimer invited 
Alvarez and Robert Serber, a former student now teaching at 
Berkeley, who had spoken before the committee on technical issues 
the day before, to join him at a restaurant nearby. Oppenheimer 
echoed Kennan’s view that if the United States refrained from 


trying to build the Super, the Russians might do likewise. While he 
told his luncheon companions that negative views about the H- 
bomb had been expressed at the meeting on moral grounds, 
Oppenheimer did not say anything about the fact that in the course 
of discussion those views were coming to be his own. But Alvarez 
picked up on the tenor of Oppenheimer’s remarks. Concluding, 
mistakenly, that he was leading the opposition and would carry the 
day, Alvarez gave up and flew back to California, convinced that 
“the program was dead.”3 

Like Oppenheimer, most GAC members had arrived with their 
minds not fully made up. A consensus was therefore reached only 
gradually, after lengthy soul-searching, in the course of which most 
of them changed their views. At one end of the spectrum, adamant 
in opposition to any effort to build an H-bomb, was James Conant 
who, as civilian director of the Manhattan Project in Washington 
during the war and Truman’s original choice to be chairman of the 
AEC, was the senior person in the room.4 An austere-looking New 
Englander whom Lilienthal described in his journal as “looking 
almost translucent, so grey,” Conant said that mere discussion of 
the issue made him feel as if he were “seeing the same film, and a 
punk one, for the second time.” Another member, Hartley Rowe, 
agreed—“we already built one Frankenstein.” Lilienthal had the 
impression that Rabi was “completely on [the] other side.” And 
Fermi gave a technical summary in which he concluded that the 
chances of building a deliverable thermonuclear weapon (as the H- 
bomb was called) were only “a little better than even.”s 

The meeting produced three documents. The main report, by 
Oppenheimer and Manley, was signed by all eight members who 
were present. “We all hope that by one means or another the 
development of these weapons can be avoided. We are all reluctant 
to see the United States taking the initiative.... We are all agreed 
that it would be wrong at the present moment to commit ourselves 
to an all-out effort.” Explaining that if the first problem, that of 
initiating an explosion, proved soluble, then deuterium, a gaseous 
isotope of hydrogen, could be added to the weapon to the point 
where “there is no limit to the explosive power of the bomb except 
that imposed by requirements of delivery.” And if it could be 
delivered by ship and did not have to be dropped from the air, 
then, said the committee, “the weapon is from a technical point of 
view without limitations with regard to the damage it can inflict.... 
Its use therefore carries much further than the atomic bomb itself 
the policy of exterminating civilian populations.” The committee 


recommended that, in deciding against development, the 
government make clear to the public the fact that the bomb would 
have no civilian uses and that it could be built to have unlimited 
destructive power. 

The committee had before it only one H-bomb model, a concept 
invented by Edward Teller called the “Classical Super.” While it had 
not so far proven mathematically feasible, the committee did not 
rule out the possibility that this or some other model might be 
achievable: “We believe that an imaginative and concerted attack 
on the problem has a better than even chance of producing the 
weapon within five years.” 

The report addressed itself also to Lilienthal’s original question: 
was the AEC doing everything that could be done for the nation’s 
defense? The answer, again, was no. The report urged a major 
effort to expand the supply of fissionable material and to adapt 
aircraft and weaponry to the use of smaller atomic weapons for 
limited, or tactical, purposes. 

As against its unanimity on these issues, the committee admitted 
that it was divided as to the nature of its commitment not to 
develop the hydrogen weapon. “The majority feels that this should 
be an unqualified commitment. Others feel that it should be made 
conditional on the response of the Soviet government to a proposal 
to renounce such development.” To the main report two appendices 
were added, a majority annex written by Conant and DuBridge and 
signed by six members, and a minority annex by Rabi and Fermi. 

The majority annex read as follows: 


We have been asked by the Commission whether or not they 
should immediately initiate an “all-out” effort to develop a 
weapon whose energy release is 100 to 1000 times greater and 
whose destructive power in terms of area of damage is 20 to 100 
times greater than those of the present atomic bomb. We 
recommend strongly against such action. 

We base our recommendation on our belief that the extreme 
dangers to mankind inherent in the proposal wholly outweigh 
any military advantage.... Let it be clearly realized that this is a 
super weapon; it is in a wholly different category from an atomic 
bomb. The reason for developing such super bombs would be to 
have the capacity to devastate a vast area with a single bomb. Its 
use would involve a decision to slaughter a vast number of 
civilians. We are alarmed as to the possible global effects of the 
radioactivity generated by the explosion of a few super bombs of 
conceivable magnitude. If super bombs will work at all, there is 


no inherent limit in the destructive power that may be attained 
with them. Therefore, a super bomb might become a weapon of 
genocide. 

We believe a super bomb should never be produced [italics 
added]. Mankind would be far better off not to have a 
demonstration of the feasibility of such a weapon until the 
present climate of world opinion changes. 

It is by no means certain that the weapon can be developed at 
all and by no means certain that the Russians will produce one 
within a decade.... Should they use the weapon against us, 
reprisals by our large stock of atomic bombs would be 
comparably effective to the use of a super. 

In determining not to proceed to develop the super bomb, we 
see a unique opportunity of providing by example some 
limitations on the totality of war and thus of limiting the fear 
and arousing the hopes of mankind. 


James B. Conant 
Hartley Rowe 

Cyril Stanley Smith 
L. A. DuBridge 
Oliver E. Buckley 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


The minority statement by Fermi and Rabi makes the moral case 
even more strongly: 


Necessarily such a weapon goes far beyond any military 
objective and enters the range of very great natural catastrophes. 
By its very nature it cannot be confined to a military objective 
but becomes a weapon which in practical effect is almost one of 
genocide. 

It is clear that the use of such a weapon cannot be justified on 
any ethical ground which gives a human being a certain 
individuality and dignity even if he happens to be a resident of 
an enemy country. It is evident to us that this would be the view 
of people in other countries. Its use would put the United States 
in a bad moral position relative to the peoples of the world. 

Any postwar situation resulting from such a weapon would 
leave unresolvable enmities for generations. A desirable peace 
cannot come from such an inhuman application of force. The 
postwar problems would dwarf the problems which confront us 
at present.... 

The fact that no limit exists to the destructiveness of this 


weapon makes its very existence and the knowledge of its 
construction a danger to humanity as a whole. It is necessarily an 
evil thing considered in any light [italics added]. 

For these reasons we believe it important for the President of 
the United States to tell the American public and the world that 
we think it wrong on fundamental ethical principles to initiate a 
program of development of such a weapon. At the same time it 
would be appropriate to invite the nations of the world to join us 
in a solemn pledge not to proceed.... If such a pledge were 
accepted even without control machinery, it appears highly 
probable that an advanced stage of development leading to a test 
could be detected by available physical means. Furthermore we 
have in our possession, in our stockpile of atomic bombs, the 
means for adequate “military” retaliation for the production or 
use of a Super.c 


Despite their strong moral language, Fermi and Rabi were 
proposing a practical solution. Development of the hydrogen bomb 
would require testing, a fact that made possible a system of control. 
Since any test large enough to produce debris in the atmosphere 
could be detected by our aircraft, American scientists would be 
alerted to any Soviet thermonuclear test. Having continued its 
research into thermonuclear processes, the United States could then 
go ahead with a test program of its own. Fermi and Rabi were 
proposing a thermonuclear test ban that was self-enforcing and 
would not require an intrusive system of inspection. 

As they said their good-byes on Sunday, the committee members 
felt they had accomplished something. One of them described the 
spirit of the meeting as “astonishingly harmonious,” and 
Oppenheimer called it “a meeting of sensibilities.” No one had 
dominated; no one had even tried to win any of the others to his 
point of view. A consensus had evolved, and the question had 
become “how much we were going to say and how strongly we 
were going to say it.”7 

John Manley was pleased by the outcome. The GAC, he felt, had 
reversed the momentum created by Teller and Lawrence and 
pointed the way to ending the arms race. Cyril Smith, a British-born 
specialist in metals physics, felt the same way. On the flight back to 
Chicago, he and Fermi, barred from discussing sensitive matters 
where others could overhear them, passed the time playing 
mathematical games. It occurred to Smith while they were playing 
that the proposals they had just fashioned might be the beginning 
of a revolution in man’s relationship to the weapons he had 


created. Back in Washington, however, David Lilienthal was less 
hopeful. He had “terrible and deeply important things” on his mind, 
among them the differences in kind between the ordinary atomic 
bomb and the Super. The Super would have no civilian by-products, 
and its existence was certain to increase the risk of war. It was not 
enough to forgo development, as the GAC had suggested: before 
making decisions about the future of nuclear weaponry, Americans 
would have to rethink where “national security” really lay. It was 
not something that could be left to insiders; it would have to be 
entrusted to citizens outside the government.s 

But how to do this, given the pervasive secrecy? Not a word 
about the GAC meeting had appeared in the newspapers. The 
members had agreed not to give their views in public until the AEC 
gave them the go-ahead, and the go-ahead never came. Apart from 
a handful of officials at the very top of government, no one knew 
the meeting had taken place, much less its reasoning or 
conclusions. And the tiny group that did hear of it greeted the GAC 
verdict with puzzlement verging on disbelief. The Russians had 
broken our monopoly on the A-bomb. They had proven themselves 
possessors of scientific talent and industrial resources beyond 
anything we had supposed. The way to protect ourselves—the only 
way—was to build a bigger and better weapon. Against this, as this 
group of officials saw it, the GAC was proposing unilateral 
disarmament. 

Unlike the scientists who had built the atomic bomb, top U.S. 
officials had no experience with nuclear weapons. They did not 
understand that the thermonuclear bomb as conceived at that time 
was too large to serve as a military weapon and would destroy 
civilian populations. And in spite of the use of the word “genocide” 
in both the majority and minority annexes, these officials did not 
understand that a weapon that could be built to carry unlimited 
destructive power could wipe out much of life on earth. 

Nor did they comprehend that in attempting to build an H-bomb 
—how, in our society, could such a fact be kept secret?—we would 
be inviting the Russians to compete with us in building a weapon to 
which we were more vulnerable than they. We were surrounded by 
oceans, with two heavily populated coasts against which large 
weapons could be launched by ship—warship, barge, or submarine 
—whereas if we wanted to deliver a bomb on Moscow, we would 
have to do it from the air and would be limited to the much smaller 
size and weight that an airplane could carry. 

Finally, there was the problem that the scientists who wrote the 


GAC’s recommendations, and the officials who knew of them, did 
not speak the same language. Physicists had tried for seven years to 
figure out how the H-bomb could be built, and had failed. When 
Oppenheimer stated, as he did in the main report, that “an 
imaginative and concerted attack ... has a better than even chance” 
of producing a weapon within five years, he was saying that the 
technical outlook was not promising. Senators, statesmen, and 
generals looked at things differently. The lesson they had drawn 
from recent experience with radar and the atomic bomb was that if 
the government threw enough money at a scientific problem, the 
laws of nature would succumb. They overlooked the fact that those 
who were warning against the Super were virtually the only 
influential men in the country who knew at first hand what nuclear 
weapons could do. 


When the war ended in 1945, no one had known what to do with 
the laboratory that produced the atomic bomb. Los Alamos had 
languished, more or less, until passage of the McMahon Act in 1946 
placed the atomic energy enterprise in the hands of a new civilian 
agency, the AEC. During that period one man held the lab together, 
Norris Bradbury, the lean, intense, and capable Navy commander 
who had succeeded Robert Oppenheimer as director. On October 8, 
1945, the day he took over, Bradbury promised the scientists, in an 
effort to keep them at Los Alamos, that investigation of the Super’s 
feasibility was a major reason for the lab to continue. “Another 
Trinity,” he declared, alluding to the A-bomb test at Alamogordo in 
July 1945, “might even be FUN.” But before the Super could be 
built, a smaller, more powerful A-bomb had to be designed to serve 
as the trigger. The emphasis had to remain on fission. 

After the Halloween meeting it fell to John Manley, who helped 
write the GAC’s conclusions and passionately agreed with them, to 
inform the division heads at Los Alamos that the advisory 
committee was unanimously opposed to an all-out program to 
develop the Super. Chairman Brien McMahon of the JCAE, an avid 
proponent of more and bigger bombs, was due for a visit November 
16 to assess the lab’s willingness and capability to build them. 
Despite the super-secrecy surrounding the Halloween meeting, it 
had been decided that the scientists who would be briefing 
McMahon on the status of H-bomb research ought to be aware of 
the GAC’s conclusions. Carroll Wilson had therefore taken the 
unusual step of having the documents flown to Los Alamos by 
courier, and Robert Oppenheimer had given Manley permission to 


explain why the GAC had come to the conclusions it had.» 

The scientists’ reactions to the GAC’s opinion were mixed. The 
first man Manley talked to, Jerry Kellogg, leader of the 
Experimental Division, was fearful that the decision would mean 
suspension of the work his division was doing. Carson Mark, head 
of the Theoretical Division, was “on the fence,” while Darol 
Froman, like Manley an associate director of the lab, was all in 
favor of the Super. He did not think the prospective new bomb was 
so very different from the A-bomb, or that the public would recoil 
when it learned of its enormous power. Only Alvin Graves, head of 
the Test Division, agreed with the GAC. 

Manley knew that an on-again, off-again member of the lab, 
Edward Teller, had been obsessed for years by the idea of a 
thermonuclear bomb and had been waiting for some event that 
would precipitate an all-out effort to build it. He was also aware 
that the Hungarian hoped the Soviet A-bomb would be that event. 
When Manley explained the GAC’s thinking—that it made no sense 
to counter the Russians by building a new, even deadlier weapon 
without first trying to end the arms race—he saw that Teller was 
not listening. Teller did not say much, however, except to comment 
that if the great brains on the GAC were so sure that agreement 
with the Russians was possible, why hadn’t they suggested some 
means of going about it? Manley did not know the lengths to which 
Teller, who was not a member of the GAC and not in possession of 
a “Q” clearance, had gone to learn its recommendations. When 
Fermi and Cyril Smith had arrived home after the Halloween 
meeting, Teller had met their airplane in Chicago to try to pry the 
news out of Fermi. When Fermi did not tell him, he had flown to 
Washington to see McMahon. McMahon did not tell him outright, 
either, but let drop that the GAC opinion made him “feel sick.” 
Teller had the information he wanted, and Manley’s briefing in Los 
Alamos ten days later told him nothing he did not already know. 

In planning the agenda for the senator’s visit, Manley had 
decided not to permit the visit to turn into a policy debate. He 
instructed the scientists to resist discussion of larger questions or 
even of whether the Super bomb would be militarily useful. But 
prior to McMahon’s arrival Teller and Froman telephoned Manley 
repeatedly to urge that the lab formally approve the so-called crash 
program. Manley responded that the lab had never before taken a 
stand on national policy and would have no business doing so now. 
It was the laboratory’s job to make weapons, not to decide whether 
they ought to be made. Teller could talk policy with McMahon 


outside the formal sessions if he felt like it. 

But from the moment of his arrival on the morning of Tuesday, 
November 16, it was obvious that McMahon was thinking only 
about policy. The Russians, he said, had a long record as an evil 
people who failed to keep their promises, force was the only 
language they understood, and the United States must remain as 
strong as possible. He considered the GAC position suicidal. During 
lunch at Fuller Lodge, the big log building that was the lab’s social 
center, the senator and members of his party spoke so loudly that 
Manley was worried about security, the lab members at tables 
around them not being cleared to overhear conversations of such 
sensitivity. McMahon compared the United States and Russia to two 
neighbors, of whom one possessed a machine gun and the other 
was building one. What sense would it make for the neighbor with 
the gun to throw his weapon away? Robert LeBaron, deputy to the 
secretary of defense for atomic energy, conceded that the armed 
forces had not thought much about how the Super might be used or 
whether it would actually be more effective than the A-bomb, but 
he said that “the existence of a weapon always brought forth new 
ideas about how it could be used.” Walking back to the Tech 
Building after lunch, LeBaron added that the Super would be ideal 
for a United Nations peacekeeping force. Manley was so appalled 
by the idea of using a weapon a thousand times more powerful than 
the one that had leveled Hiroshima to carry out UN peacekeeping 
missions that he remembered the remark for the rest of his life.io 

During the formal sessions, when the lab members described 
their thermonuclear research so far, Manley found Teller’s 
presentation more balanced than he had expected. Teller conceded 
that no one knew whether a thermonuclear reaction could be made 
to burn and added that even if the tests scheduled for 1951 in the 
Pacific were successful, they would not in themselves prove that the 
Super bomb could be built. In private conversation with McMahon, 
however, outside the hearing of Manley and the other physicists, 
Teller painted a different picture. He told McMahon that a program 
to build the Super had a better than even, perhaps a much better 
than even, chance of success, this in spite of the fact that Teller 
himself had been working on it for seven years with inconclusive 
results. 

Years afterward, it seemed to Manley that McMahon’s visit 
marked the beginning of a change in his own feelings toward 
Edward Teller. He had known Teller during the mid-1940s as a 
colleague who refused to work on the lab’s project to end the war, 


the atomic bomb, focusing instead on a hypothetical hydrogen 
bomb. Now Manley wrote in his diary that prior to the visit by 
McMahon, “despite many tribulations of which Teller was the 
cause, I had mistakenly dismissed him as forgivably eccentric, but 
most imaginative in compensation; almost wholly impractical but 
possessed of a keen mind; unaccustomed to _ disciplined, 
concentrated creativity ... but still a valued colleague. Now I began 
to see a distorted human being, petty, perhaps nearly paranoid in 
his hatred of the Russians, and jealous in personal relations.” 11 

These characteristics may have been at work in Teller’s 
misreading of the laboratory’s mood on learning that the GAC, with 
which it had agreed until now on nearly everything, opposed a 
stepped-up program to build the hydrogen bomb. He wrote to a 
close friend, the renowned mathematician John von Neumann, that 
because of the committee’s opinion, “the really fine and unanimous 
enthusiasm which was building up at Los Alamos is now checked, 
at least temporarily.” 12 

Von Neumann had a letter from another close friend at Los 
Alamos, the dashing, dark-haired Polish mathematician Stanislaw 
Ulam. In a letter to von Neumann at the Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton, Ulam wrote that “everybody here is against the 
proposals of the GAC,” and predicted accurately that the GAC’s 
verdict would “merely mean a loss of time and not any final ... 
negative.” Ulam, who had lost nearly all his family in the 
Holocaust, was in no hurry to produce a weapon a thousand times 
more powerful than that which had wasted Hiroshima. But he was 
offended by the idea of intentionally sidestepping a possible 
discovery. To his French-born wife, Francoise, he wondered aloud 
whether Newton and Archimedes would have made their great 
discoveries if they had had to worry constantly about the 
consequences. 13 

Norris Bradbury and Carson Mark, who along with Ulam were to 
play critical roles in bringing into being the real H-bomb—not 
Teller’s Super, which the lab had been working on without success 
—felt very much as Ulam did. Protesting that “one cannot tell 
scientists not to think,” Bradbury said, “I’ll be damned if I'll let 
those people tell me what not to do.” And Mark, a Canadian 
mathematician who had learned physics on the job, later thought it 
was astonishing that the GAC had taken the possibility of an H- 
bomb seriously enough to make a recommendation, since there was 
no prospect at the time of building one. Nothing had changed 
except the fact that the Russians had tested an A-bomb. Mark hoped 


to be able to prove that a thermonuclear bomb was inconsistent 
with the laws of nature and could not be built. But he said later 
that he wished the GAC had phrased its recommendations in the 
words Oppenheimer had used in his October letter to Conant: “It 
would be folly to oppose the exploration of this weapon. We have 
always known it had to be done.... But that we become committed 
to it as the way to save the country and the peace appears to me 
full of dangers.” 14 


CHAPTER FOUR 


The Secret Debate 


SINCE ITS BEGINNING IN 1947, the Atomic Energy Commission had dealt 
with major questions, but never one so portentous as whether to 
advise that the nation embark on an all-out effort to build a 
thermonuclear bomb. At a meeting of the GAC in early December 
1949, Robert Oppenheimer gave members a chance to reconsider 
their earlier recommendations. Not only did everyone stand by his 
original opinion, but several went further and went on record with 
deeply thought-out statements of their own. No one felt more 
strongly than Lee DuBridge, who pointed out that the Super was 
not suited to the annihilation of military targets and would be 
solely a weapon of terror. DuBridge, like Fermi, noted that with its 
two long coasts, the United States was more vulnerable than the 
USSR to attack from the sea and, like Manley, said that in 
embarking on a Super program, the United States would be doing 
Russia’s research for it: the Russians inevitably would learn what 
we were up to. Everyone agreed that the Super was needed for 
neither deterrence nor retaliation, since the U.S. atomic stockpile 
would be sufficient to deal the Soviet Union a devastating blow 
even if that country had the Super and we did not.1 

The five commissioners met several times to consider the 
advisory committee’s recommendations, arriving at a 3-2 split; 
David Lilienthal, Sumner Pike, and Henry DeWolf Smyth were in 
agreement with the GAC and opposed to Super development “at 
this time,” while the other two, Lewis Strauss and Gordon Dean, 
favored a secret effort to reach agreement with the Russians and “if 
this fails, then proceed with the development.” All agreed that the 
public should be informed. Smyth later shifted to a position closer 
to that of Strauss and Dean. 

It fell to Lilienthal to inform the president that his colleagues 


had failed to reach agreement. Since Lilienthal was known for the 
gift of bringing men of opposing views together and was anxious to 
present the president with an unambiguous recommendation, his 
friends later wondered why he had not tried harder to obtain a 
consensus. Did he consider building the hydrogen bomb an issue of 
morality too fundamental to be compromised? Or was he simply 
tired, worn out by years in the job and by the humiliation of the 
Hickenlooper hearings the summer before? 

Whatever the cause of his ineffectiveness this time, Lilienthal 
had no second thoughts about his decision to resign and went to the 
president to inform him. His spirits fell as he entered the Oval 
Office: what would it be like never to walk through that door 
again? When Harry Truman glanced up from his reading, Lilienthal 
noted the tired look in his eyes. But the president’s grin reassured 
the AEC chairman—maybe the conversation would not be so 
painful after all. “I hate like the dickens to see you go,” Truman 
said, adding that he, too, had a tough decision to make. Lilienthal 
observed that McMahon and his friends in Congress seemed to 
think that blowing up the world was our only recourse now that the 
Russians had the A-bomb. He was afraid they would try to blitz the 
president into a quick decision. “I don’t blitz easily.” Truman 
smiled.2 

But those who were trying to blitz him were among the heaviest 
hitters in Washington, ambitious, determined men who were 
accustomed to getting their own way. And they had access to the 
Oval Office: McMahon as chair of the powerful congressional 
committee on atomic energy and a man who aspired to the 
presidency, Lewis Strauss as a friend of National Security Adviser 
Sidney Souers, and Defense Secretary Louis Johnson as a 
swashbuckling donor to the Democratic Party with presidential 
aspirations of his own. Strauss and McMahon had joined forces 
early in the fall and had been bombarding the president with 
strongly worded letters in which they demanded an all-out effort to 
build the hydrogen bomb. “Brien,” the president had said to 
McMahon, “it’s not an easy thing to order development of a weapon 
that will kill ten million people.” But he added that he had read 
McMahon’s letter several times, and this persuaded the senator that 
Truman would side with him in the end. “He has just got enough of 
Missouri common sense,” McMahon told his committee. “I can go 
ahead on that.” 

When Lilienthal told the secretary of state that he had decided to 
resign, Dean Acheson was sympathetic. “I don’t understand how 


you have stood it as long as you have, living with this grim thing 
all the time.” And after Lilienthal informed him that the theoretical 
outlook had improved to the point where physicists considered the 
chances of building the Super about even, Acheson seemed sorry to 
hear it. He was “somber enough when I began,” Lilienthal wrote in 
his journal, “and after a few questions he was graver still. ‘What a 
depressing world it is,’ said Dean, looking quite gray.”4 

Dean and Alice Acheson frequently spent the weekend on their 
farm outside Washington. As he put his garden to bed on mellow 
afternoons that fall, the secretary thought about the horrifying 
weapon that might soon be a reality. After interminable hours 
testifying on Capitol Hill, Acheson had concluded that 
congressional opinion was a fairly accurate reflection of opinion in 
the country. Knowing that foreign as well as domestic policy is the 
art of the possible, he did not see how the president could survive a 
decision not to try to make the new bomb, and he said as much to 
Oppenheimer. But he was appalled by the prospect of the nation’s 
impaling itself on a deadly new phase of the arms race, and he cast 
about for other options. In a meeting with his Policy Planning Staff 
he floated the idea of a one-and-a-half- to two-year moratorium on 
H-bomb development, accompanied by an effort to reach 
agreement with the Russians on a range of issues that included 
arms control. Only if this effort failed would the United States try to 
build the bomb. He and Lilienthal were close for a time to 
recommending that H-bomb possibilities be investigated, any 
decision to produce the weapon be deferred, and a far-reaching 
review of foreign and domestic policies begun forthwith. 

But a poorly timed leak by a member of the Joint Committee on 
Atomic Energy ratcheted up pressure on the president to make a 
quick decision. While scolding scientists for allegedly leaking secret 
information, Senator Edwin Johnson of Colorado announced on 
television that the president was trying to decide whether to try to 
build a weapon a thousand times more powerful than the atomic 
bomb. The administration collectively held its breath, hoping no 
one would notice Johnson’s statement. And for nearly three weeks 
no one did, until the Washington Post on November 18 reported it in 
a front-page story. Harry Truman hit the ceiling. He called in his 
attorney general and JCAE chairman McMahon and ordered them 
to stop the leaks. He banned government employees, even scientific 
advisers, from speaking about the Super except inside a tiny circle. 
And he named a committee comprising the state and defense 
secretaries and the chairman of the AEC to advise him on whether 


to go ahead with a crash program. Truman’s order cut off 
discussion inside the government and meant that, with Lilienthal 
and Defense Secretary Johnson at odds with each other on the issue 
at hand and loath even to be in the same room together, Acheson’s 
opinion would be decisive. 

Although by Christmas Acheson had concluded that it would 
probably be necessary to launch enough of a program to determine 
whether the bomb could be built, he continued to seek alternatives. 
He consulted the head of his Policy Planning Staff, George Kennan. 
Kennan, known within the department—although not to the 
general public—for helping conceive the Truman Doctrine and the 
Marshall Plan and as author of the policy of “containing” Russia, 
pointed out that U.S. policy was based on a willingness to make 
“first use” of nuclear weapons. Kennan, who had discussed the 
matter with Oppenheimer, recommended that until the policy of 
first use had been reconsidered—Kennan hoped it would be 
abandoned—the United States should refrain from any decision 
about the hydrogen bomb. Acheson was put off by what an aide 
called Kennan’s “evangelical zeal” and admonished him, “If that is 
your view of the matter, I suggest you put on a monk’s robe, put a 
tin cup in your hand, and go to the street corner and announce that 
the end of the world is nigh.” Still, he sought Conant’s opinion, and 
had a long talk with the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
General Omar Bradley, in an effort to find out what—apart from a 
psychological edge over the Russians—the Pentagon wanted the H- 
bomb for.s 

While Acheson sought answers, proponents of the Super 
continued to proselytize. Strauss called Sidney Souers at the White 
House and warned darkly that “it may be later than we think.” In 
early January, McMahon wrote the president twice on one day 
alone, accusing the AEC of leaks and again demanding a quick 
decision. And Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson gave the 
president a secret Pentagon report urging that determination of the 
bomb’s feasibility be a matter of the highest priority. These and 
other developments caused Truman to worry that unless he acted 
quickly, Congress might usurp a decision he considered part of his 
prerogative as president. 

At a press conference on January 19, he was asked for the first 
time about the Super. 


Q: Mr. President, are you considering direct negotiations with 
Russia on the hydrogen bomb? 


A: No. 


A week later, asked about the Super again, he replied that he 
would have nothing to say until he had made his decision. The 
secrecy-minded president thereby casually declassified the fact that 
there was a decision to be made and increased the pressure on 
himself to make it quickly. Lilienthal called the admission “a major 
event” and a final setback in the effort to keep the decision from 
being railroaded through.. 

Acheson had had a strenuous year. Early in 1949 he had become 
secretary of state, succeeding the revered General George Catlett 
Marshall. When China fell to the armies of Mao Tse-tung and was 
declared a people’s republic in October, Marshall, Truman’s former 
ambassador to China, was, together with the Truman 
administration, accused of having “lost” China to the Communists. 
In addition to its defeat in Asia, the administration was plagued by 
espionage scandals at home. Alger Hiss, a former State Department 
official who was suspected of having passed secrets to the Soviet 
Union, went on trial for perjury for a second time in November. 
The case was a particular embarrassment for the secretary of state 
because he knew Alger Hiss and was known to be close to Hiss’s 
brother, Donald, Acheson’s former law partner and trusted assistant 
at the department. 

Acheson had kept a comparatively open mind about the 
prospective new bomb longer than anyone else in the higher 
reaches of government. But on January 26 an event occurred that 
taxed even his capacity to stand above the fray. A reporter asked 
him to comment on the case of Alger Hiss, who had been sentenced 
that day to serve five to ten years in a federal penitentiary 
following his conviction for perjury. Conscious of “the yelping 
pack” at his heels and his own vulnerability to “the fall of some 
fool’s question at a press conference,” Acheson referred the 
questioner to a passage from Saint Matthew on the virtue of 
compassion, and uttered eleven words that were to haunt him for 
the rest of his life: “I do not intend to turn my back on Alger Hiss.”7 

He drove to the White House that afternoon and offered his 
resignation. Truman declined it. 

Lilienthal went to see Acheson the next day, and found the 
secretary looking unruffled. The weather was unseasonably warm, 
Acheson was at work with his window open, and the two men 
discussed the upcoming decision about the bomb as though neither 
of them had another thing on his mind. 


Lilienthal then changed the subject, and congratulated the 
secretary of state on his statement about Hiss: “I am looking at a 
man.” 

“After a while you get tired of the curs yiping, 
replied.s 

The secretary of state sat up late on Sunday and Monday nights 
replying to the “flood of letters” he had received after his comment 
on the Hiss case. To the watchful eye of his assistant, Gordon 
Arneson, “the Dean” looked weary Tuesday morning as he opened 
the final meeting of the special committee that was to advise the 
president on the Super. There were eleven men in the room: 
Acheson, with Arneson and State Department legal counsel Adrian 
Fisher; Defense Secretary Johnson and three aides; Lilienthal with 
Commissioner Smyth; and Souers with his deputy, James Lay. 
Acheson led off by reading a draft recommendation that the 
president direct the AEC to determine whether a thermonuclear 
weapon was technically feasible, while deferring a decision to 
produce the weapon pending reconsideration by State and Defense 
of overall U.S. plans and objectives. Johnson objected to the 
proviso that a decision to produce be deferred, and even though 
they realized that the defense secretary was trying to accelerate 
building of the bomb, Lilienthal and Acheson yielded. And when 
Pentagon press secretary Steven Early suggested that the president 
not make a special announcement but merely issue a press release, 
Johnson weighed in again. The thing to do was “play it down, make 
it just one of those things.” 

Lilienthal wanted to present his objections. The atmosphere 
resulting from a decision to go ahead, he said, would in all 
likelihood render a new approach to the atomic arms race 
impossible. It would confirm us on our present path and conceal 
from us the weakness of our position—our reliance on the atomic 
bomb for the defense of Europe. We were assuming that there 
would be no war with Russia for a few years at least. Instead of 
building a new bomb, why not spend a few months on “an intensive 
... re-examination of the worsening of our position as a result of our 
preoccupation with nuclear weapons?” 10 

Acheson agreed with most of what Lilienthal had said. But 
without an alternative—and in his view Lilienthal had not 
suggested one—the pressures for a decision had reached such a 
point that he did not feel he could recommend delay. To Acheson’s 
surprise, Lilienthal agreed to join in and make _ their 
recommendation to the president unanimous, provided he be given 


0 


Acheson 


a chance to express his objections to the president in person. 

Truman was seated at his desk in the Oval Office when Johnson, 
Acheson, and Lilienthal appeared. Slightly surprised to see the three 
of them when he had expected only the secretary of defense, he 
greeted them with a “quick, owlish look.” Acheson told him that 
Lilienthal had something he wanted to say. Turning to Lilienthal, 
Truman said he hoped we would never have to use these new 
weapons, but in view of the way the Russians were behaving, we 
had no choice but to go ahead. Lilienthal objected that he did not 
agree with the course the country was about to take. It would 
magnify our reliance on nuclear weapons and mislead the nation 
into thinking there was no other way. The president broke in to say 
that if Senator Johnson of Colorado hadn’t made his televised 
remarks, calmer deliberation might have been possible. Now, 
however, so much excitement had built up that he had no 
alternative.11 

At 12:45 the visitors left the Oval Office. They had been there all 
of seven minutes. 

As his special committee had suggested, the president refrained 
from calling a press conference. The White House merely issued a 
press release: “I have directed the Atomic Energy Commission to 
continue its work on all forms of atomic weapons, including the so- 
called hydrogen or super bomb.” That afternoon, acting on another 
Lilienthal caveat, Truman ordered State and Defense to reexamine 
national objectives “and the effect of these objectives on our 
strategic plans in light of the probable fission bomb capability and 
possible thermonuclear bomb capability of the Soviet Union.” 12 

That afternoon David Lilienthal learned from McMahon that his 
committee had been on the point of demanding publicly that the 
president go ahead, the very act of preemption the president had 
anticipated. 

Lilienthal later wrote that speaking up in the Oval Office had 
been one of the hardest acts of his life, “saying No to a 
steamroller.” He knew that Acheson was at least as unhappy as he 
was about the course they were suggesting and that his own 
insistence on speaking out distressed the secretary, lest his doing so 
without putting forward an alternative merely confuse the 
president, who had already made up his mind. If Lilienthal had had 
anything but “the most unbounded admiration” for Acheson, “the 
deepest loyalty and fealty for the President,” and compassion for 
the load each man had to carry, he would not have found his 
dissent so painful.1s 


“Now to be a good sport,” he thought as he broke the news to 
the GAC. The mood was “like a funeral party,” and became bleaker 
still when Lilienthal added that the president had issued a second 
order forbidding GAC members to speak out. Not only had the 
president overruled his scientific advisers; he had bound them to 
secrecy at a moment when they had urged that the public be more 
fully informed. Conant and Oppenheimer asked whether they ought 
to resign. Lilienthal asked them to remain.14 

Later there was an evening gathering, the fifty-fourth birthday 
party Lewis Strauss gave for himself at the Wardman Park. For the 
GAC members it was like the second funeral they had been to that 
day. While Strauss celebrated, a dejected Robert Oppenheimer sat 
with his back to the other guests, the inevitable cigarette dangling 
from his fingertips. When Strauss approached to introduce his son 
and his son’s new wife, Oppenheimer did not bother to turn 
around. As the Strausses remembered it, he merely extended a hand 
over his shoulder.1s 

Before going to bed that night, Lilienthal wrote in his journal: 
“This is a night of heartache.... We have to leave many things to 
God; this one He will have to get us out of.” 16 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Lost Opportunities 


THE PRESIDENT HAD Now committed the country to building a weapon 
no one knew how to make, or even whether it could be made. 
Against the advice of nearly all his scientific advisers, he had placed 
his weaponeers in a position where they had to produce—or make 
his government look catastrophically inept. And he had handed the 
Russians information that ought to remain secret. If they had not 
already embarked on a program to build the hydrogen bomb, they 
would do so now. And if they had begun, they would step up the 
pace. 

We know now, as we did not know then, that the Russians were 
working on the H-bomb and that their physicists were just as 
capable as ours. After Truman’s announcement of January 31, 
1950, Stalin ordered them to move faster, and the Soviet scientists 
succeeded brilliantly. For the second time, Hiroshima having been 
the first, the United States had set the pace of the arms race. 

Air Force officials wanted the Super because its radius of 
destruction—ten times that of the atomic bomb—would 
“compensate for bombing error.” It is appalling today to read secret 
congressional testimony of January 1950, in which officials of the 
Pentagon explained that instead of ten or twelve A-bombs, a single 
hydrogen bomb would more efficiently do the job of wiping out a 
division of troops massed for a river crossing or a beachhead 
landing. These men understood neither the H-bomb nor the A- 
bomb. Air Force officials and congressional assistants such as 
William Borden, who drafted McMahon’s emotionally charged 
letters to the president, had access to all the secrets. But what the 
H-bomb was—what it would do and what the effects would be—of 
this they had no understanding. The damage inflicted by the 
weapon could not be limited to the battlefield. A single bomb could 


probably “take out” any capital city in the world and, because of 
the pulse it emitted, wreak havoc on the communications of the 
country that received it. Industry, agriculture, communications, all 
would be so severely crippled that the conquering nation would be 
unable to put civilization together again. Those who understood 
this were the physicists, mathematicians, and engineers who had 
built the atomic bomb. The GAC was composed of such men, and 
they were horrified by the idea of a new weapon a thousand times 
more destructive than the one they had brought into being. But as 
far as the politicians were concerned, the new bomb would be 
bigger, therefore better, than the old, and it would be political 
suicide not to build it. They brushed aside any thought that it might 
also be a weapon of genocide. 

There were other respects in which scientists and political 
people were at cross-purposes. The model the GAC had been 
looking at was the Classical Super, which Teller and others had 
been working on without success for more than three years. The 
weapon U.S. scientists ultimately developed was not the model the 
GAC had before it in 1949 but a new weapon, built on different 
principles. Thus when Oppenheimer wrote in his covering report 
that the GAC’s recommendations “stem in large part from the 
technical nature of the Super,” he was referring to a fact difficult 
for nonscientists to understand: while it had been impossible to 
prove the feasibility of Teller’s Super, it might likewise be 
impossible to prove decisively that it was not feasible. The situation 
was an open-ended one in which the odds of the bomb’s being 
possible did not look good enough for the nation to commit itself 
publicly to building it.1 

Readers of the GAC report in Washington did not understand 
this. Instead, they looked at its moral language—“weapon of 
genocide,” “necessarily an evil thing in any light”’—and were put 
off by the fact that advisers picked for their scientific expertise had 
ventured into moral territory. Unaware that David Lilienthal had 
asked the GAC to advise on “as broad a basis as possible,” the few 
who had seen the report believed that the GAC had bent its 
technical advice to fit its ethical predilections. The fact that it had 
dealt with the moral issue obscured its technical advice and tended 
to discredit its recommendations. 

Why didn’t the GAC press its case? Manley said later that it 
“leaned over backwards” not to lobby, adding that the members 
were not accustomed to fighting for their views, since their advice 
had almost always been taken. That, I. I. Rabi was to say later, left 


the lobbying to the other side. And lobby the other side did. While 
Oppenheimer, Rabi, and the rest felt inhibited from lobbying 
members of the legislative branch while the issue was being 
considered by the president, men like Strauss and Johnson were not 
troubled by such scruples. The same was true of the president’s 
secrecy directives: the scientists observed the prohibition against 
going public, while the political men, aided by tips from a collusive 
FBI, felt free to leak to the press. It was not until five years later, 
when the transcript of the Oppenheimer hearing was published, 
that Americans learned that of the president’s fourteen atomic 
energy advisers, ten had opposed an accelerated H-bomb program 
and one had abstained, and it had been the two nonscientists who 
had been most eager to go ahead. 

Robert Oppenheimer had a history of thinking long thoughts 
about atomic weapons. In the course of six wartime visits to Los 
Alamos by the great Danish physicist Niels Bohr, he had become 
imbued with Bohr’s belief in international control. Both men were 
convinced that once the war was over, the “secret” of atomic 
weapons should be shared with other nations and that the capacity 
to make atomic weapons should be controlled not by a single 
nation but by a consortium. Oppenheimer never wavered from his 
and Bohr’s vision of international control. 

As soon as the war was over, he chaired a panel to make 
recommendations on the future of the atomic bomb to a group 
consisting of Secretary of State Acheson, General Leslie R. Groves, 
James B. Conant, Vannevar Bush, and John J. McCloy, former 
assistant secretary of war. After four days’ intense deliberation at 
the historic meeting place of Dumbarton Oaks in Washington, D.C., 
the group proposed that an Atomic Development Authority be 
created to control everything about atomic energy, from the mining 
of thorium and uranium to production. No nation would be allowed 
to make atomic bombs, and the United States would effectively give 
up its monopoly. The proposal, called the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 
was Oppenheimer’s inspiration and was drafted by him and Rabi 
during Christmas week, 1945, in Rabi’s apartment overlooking the 
Hudson River. The plan, which Acheson described as “brilliant and 
profound,” was introduced at the United Nations in amended form 
by the American financier Bernard Baruch, and promptly rejected 
by the Russians. Meanwhile Oppenheimer, as adviser to Baruch’s 
delegation, got a chastening look at Stalin-era intransigence. 

When the H-bomb issue arose in 1949, he remembered that 
experience. He was convinced that development of the H-bomb 


would make things worse, and likewise convinced that any system 
of inspection rigorous enough to pass the U.S. Senate would be 
turned down by the Russians in a way that might close the door to 
future negotiations. “It seems to me,” Oppenheimer wrote to 
Kennan, “that the time for plans, proposals and systems offered 
unilaterally by our government is past, if it ever existed; and if we 
ever again come up with a set of proposals, it should be on the 
basis of some prior agreement.”2 

He continued to believe in international control, but he did not 
know how to get there. With the rest of the GAC majority, 
Oppenheimer considered it neither the obligation nor the 
prerogative of their committee to say what the president ought to 
do, but only to advise as to what he ought not to do. Fermi and 
Rabi, on the other hand, considered it incumbent on them to 
suggest a positive as well as a negative course of action, and 
proposed an attempt at a self-enforcing agreement with the 
Russians not to develop the bomb. Uncertainty as to which was 
truly the better course evidently stayed Oppenheimer’s hand and 
kept him from fighting for the majority view. On this issue, as on a 
good many others, he was the possessor of a divided mind and 
extraordinarily divided emotions. 

Why did Harry Truman come to the decision he did? The 
Truman of 1950 was no longer the accidental president who had, 
almost jauntily, it seemed, ordered the bombing of Hiroshima in the 
summer of 1945. Five years later, he was more confident and more 
humane; he understood a great deal that had been obscure to him 
before. In the late 1940s he told a group of military and civilian 
advisers, “I don’t think we ought to use this thing [the atomic 
bomb] unless we absolutely have to. It is a terrible thing to order 
the use of something that is so terribly destructive.... You have got 
to understand that this isn’t a military weapon.” 

The American people, too, seem to have understood. A Gallup 
poll in early 1950 showed support, by 73 to 18 percent, for the 
president’s decision, but also showed that half of those who 
responded wanted to try to reach agreement with the Russians 
before proceeding to build the hydrogen bomb. With the public, 
although not with the Super’s more vociferous advocates in 
Congress and the Pentagon, the president had more leeway than he 
supposed.4 

Had he been willing to brave the political fallout, Truman could 
have omitted any public announcement and left the scientists to 
continue secretly to investigate the bomb’s feasibility. Meanwhile 


he could quietly have felt out Soviet willingness to make a deal. As 
long as Stalin was still alive, negotiations would not have been 
successful. Once Stalin was gone, however, and he died in 1953, a 
legacy of trying to find a solution would have been there—and 
might have made a difference. Khrushchev and Eisenhower might 
by the mid- to late 1950s have reached agreement to end the fateful 
competition.s 

The outcome was a disaster for everyone. It marked a lost 
opportunity for the president to level with the American people on 
a life-or-death decision from which they would be the first to suffer 
and about which they showed heartening signs of common sense. 
And it failed to buy security for the United States. Believing that we 
had a greater supply of atomic weapons than we did, the Russians 
reversed their earlier demobilization and built their ground forces 
from a low of three million back up to five million men. To counter 
the resulting superiority of Soviet troop strength in Europe, the 
president ordered full steam ahead with the H-bomb. So it was to 
go with decision after decision for forty years, and with each 
upward ratchet of the arms race, each side became less secure. The 
decision to produce the H-bomb enshrined secrecy and made the 
cold war a way of life for both countries. 


PART TWO 


1950 


CHAPTER SIX 


Fuchs’s Betrayal 


“THE ROOF FELL IN TODAY,” David Lilienthal wrote in his journal on 
February 2. He called what had happened “a world catastrophe, 
and a sad day for the human race.” A German-born member of the 
Manhattan Project had confessed in London to passing atomic 
secrets to the Russians. His name was Emil Julius Klaus Fuchs, and 
he had been a member of the British mission to Los Alamos during 
the war.1 

The president was told on February 1, 1950, the day following 
his H-bomb announcement. To official Washington, as to the rest of 
the country, the news was as shattering as Joe One, the Russian 
atomic test, had been less than six months before. Physicists who 
had worked with Fuchs were appalled. Not only might his betrayal 
explain why the Russians had tested an atomic device sooner than 
expected, but it might also explain another fact—known to 
Oppenheimer and one or two others who had studied the debris 
from Joe One—that the Soviet device appeared to have similarities 
to the bomb we had dropped on Nagasaki. What else might Fuchs 
have passed on? The tiny circle of men who knew about these 
things quickly learned that Fuchs had attended a conference at Los 
Alamos on thermonuclear reactions in the spring of 1946 before 
going home to Britain. Had he passed H-bomb tips to Moscow? 
American physicists did not think so. We were on the wrong track 
with the H-bomb, and we had been in 1946: anything Fuchs might 
have transmitted could only have misled the Russians. Robert 
Oppenheimer expressed the belief of knowledgeable physicists 
when he said that if the Russians had made progress on the basis of 
what Fuchs could have told them, “they were marvelous indeed.” 
Still, what Fuchs knew was important enough: that with the war 
barely over, the Americans already were at work on the H-bomb.2 


One American physicist was convinced that Fuchs had given the 
Russians a head start with the hydrogen bomb. That physicist was 
Edward Teller. Teller had known Fuchs a long time, as a student in 
Fuchs’s native Germany in 1928, and in Los Alamos during the war, 
when Fuchs, a bachelor, was sought after by the Tellers and other 
couples to babysit their children. Not only had Teller and Fuchs 
both been present at the 1946 Super conference, they had seen each 
other every year since, at the Tellers’ home and elsewhere. Only a 
few months before, in September 1949, while Oppenheimer and 
Vannevar Bush in Washington were poring over fallout data from 
Joe One, Teller and Fuchs had made a train trip together in 
England. News of Fuchs’s treachery must have been a fearful blow 
to Teller. Already he had been warning that the Russians were 
probably ahead with the H-bomb. Now he proclaimed it insistently. 

Fuchs’s betrayal had other shattering consequences, among them 
the growth of doubt in some quarters about Robert Oppenheimer. 
As early as October 1949, when the H-bomb debate was getting 
under way, Lewis Strauss received a tip from the FBI that Fuchs was 
under suspicion. Immediately, he began making inquiries of 
General Leslie R. Groves, director of the Manhattan Project, about 
Robert Oppenheimer, who was known to have had a left-wing past, 
and his brother Frank, a former member of the Communist Party. 
Strauss spent an hour with FBI director J. Edgar Hoover, apparently 
exchanging concerns about the Oppenheimers, and when, during 
the Halloween meeting in October, Robert Oppenheimer told him 
that he did not think the Russians would refuse to negotiate about 
the Super, Strauss’s suspicions grew. From then on, he wondered 
about Oppenheimer’s opposition to the H-bomb. Was Oppenheimer 
simply naive? Or was he, like Fuchs, trying to help the Russians? 
Informed that Fuchs had confessed to espionage, Strauss, in a 
response that spoke volumes, told Hoover that the news would 
strengthen the president’s hand on the H-bomb decision and “make 
a good many men who are in the same profession as Fuchs very 
careful of what they say publicly.”s 

Hoover shared some of Strauss’s reservations, for he informed 
Strauss of Fuchs’s confession on the same day he told the president, 
thereby enabling Strauss to upstage the chairman, David Lilienthal: 
at the AEC’s meeting on February 2, it was Strauss, not Lilienthal, 
who broke the news to the commissioners. 

If Fuchs’s espionage seemed to official Washington and much of 
the public to strengthen the case for secrecy, in the eyes of many 
Manhattan Project veterans it did the opposite. It meant, as Glenn 


Seaborg pointed out after learning about Joe One, that Groves’s 
policy of compartmentalized research had failed. Most scientists 
believed that there were no atomic “secrets.” The basic principles 
were widely known, and once it appeared that the bomb could be 
made, then the way was clear for others to build it. Some of the 
country’s most distinguished physicists were convinced that had the 
American people been told the facts about nuclear weapons and the 
scientists’ true opinions, they would not have supported the 
decision to proceed with the H-bomb. Prohibited from disclosing 
classified information, these physicists struggled to find a way to 
keep the public better informed. The way they found was to 
criticize the secrecy that had surrounded Truman’s decision. 

A day or two after the announcement of Fuchs’s confession, a 
dozen physicists signed an appeal in the Wall Street Journal, 
describing use of the H-bomb as “a betrayal of all standards of 
morality and of Christian civilization itself,” and calling for a 
pledge by the U.S. government not to be the first to use it. And a 
few days after that, three famed theoreticians spoke their minds on 
Mrs. Franklin Roosevelt’s weekly television program. Characterizing 
the arms race as “inexorable,” Albert Einstein called “each step ... 
the inevitable consequence of the one before. And, at the end ... 
lies general annihilation.” Hans Bethe emphasized the H-bomb’s 
genocidal nature. The only reason for developing it, he said, lay in 
the danger that the Russians might build it first and use it to 
blackmail the United States. By announcing that we would never be 
first to use it, we could reduce the odds that they would use it to 
forestall a strike by us. And Oppenheimer emphasized the “grave 
danger for us in that these decisions have been taken on the basis of 
facts held secret.” The danger, he said, lay in the fact that “wisdom 
itself cannot flourish, nor even truth be determined, without the 
give and take of debate or criticism. The relevant facts could be of 
little help to an enemy; yet they are indispensable for an 
understanding of questions of policy.”4 

Oppenheimer spoke from experience: as chairman of the GAC 
and member of several other governmental advisory groups, he had 
been frustrated during the H-bomb discussions by being muzzled. 
Just the day before Truman’s H-bomb decision, he had testified to 
the joint congressional committee—in tightest secrecy, of course— 
that it had been painful for him and others in the know to stand by 
“in rigid silence” while uninformed individuals had been free to say 
whatever they pleased, in some cases misleading the public, and in 
others violating security. Oppenheimer pointed to public use of the 


word “tritium”—a key H-bomb component—as a security violation. 
He added that it would be impossible to “undertake anything as 
interesting as this [building the bomb] and keep it quiet in this 
country.”5 

Oppenheimer and Bethe evidently had a conversation after their 
appearance on the program. Being a consultant at Los Alamos but 
not a government official, Bethe had greater freedom than 
Oppenheimer to speak out as long as he did not divulge technical 
secrets. Two days after their conversation Bethe wrote to his 
colleague Victor Weisskopf at MIT, “I had a long talk with Oppie, 
who agreed very much with what we had done and were doing. He 
emphasized the necessity of keeping the issue alive and I very much 
agree with him. Can you help?” Bethe’s letter marked the beginning 
of an effort by physicists outside the official framework to keep 
fundamental facts about the H-bomb before the public while 
observing the president’s security strictures. 

In keeping with what he and Oppenheimer had agreed, Bethe 
and three colleagues that spring of 1950 published a series of 
articles in the journal Scientific American and in the Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists in which they deplored the “authoritarian” manner 
in which the H-bomb decision had been made, and tried to inform 
the public of the principles underlying the technology. The first 
article, by Louis Ridenour, dean of the graduate college at the 
University of Illinois, called Truman’s decision a “Pyrrhic reply” to 
the news of Joe One and noted that we were more vulnerable to the 
hydrogen bomb than the Russians. He praised the emphasis of Los 
Alamos since the war on making more efficient fission weapons 
instead of trying to build a hydrogen bomb, deplored the 
“bankruptcy” of a secrecy policy that excluded the public from life- 
and-death decisions, and added that the nation needed better 
means of delivering bombs more than it needed new, more 
destructive weapons.7 

In another of the series former AEC commissioner Robert Bacher 
complained that the public was being given an exaggerated idea of 
the H-bomb’s effectiveness and being denied facts that would 
enable it to choose between developing weapons, on one hand, and 
atomic power for peaceful purposes, on the other; and he warned 
against the belief that secrecy contributes to security: “We are 
dangerously close to abandoning those principles of free speech and 
open discussion that have made our country great,” he said. And 
Ralph Lapp, former head of the nuclear physics branch of the Office 
of Naval Research, emphasized that development of the H-bomb 


would require a far-reaching program of civil defense and that the 
nation had not been informed. Since an H-bomb could level an 
entire metropolitan area, we would have to build a new type of 
city, a strip city strung along a straight line hundreds of miles long. 
Such a restructuring of American society could not be carried out 
without public assent, yet the issue had not even been raised. In the 
meantime Congress was making a political football of the atom.s 

Of all the Scientific American articles, however, it was Hans 
Bethe’s contribution on the moral issue that attracted the most 
attention. After describing the terrifying heat, blast, and radiation 
effects, Bethe asked, “Can we, who have always insisted on 
morality and human decency, introduce this weapon of total 
annihilation into the world?” Use of thermonuclear weapons would 
usher in a new dark age, with nothing left that we think of as 
civilization. If the Nazi experience taught anything, said Bethe, it 
was that physical destruction brings moral destruction, and in the 
struggle merely to survive, it is every man against the other. How 
could we, whose quarrel with the Soviet Union was largely about 
means, take the lead in introducing a type of warfare that was 
bound to bring mass slaughter? “Shall we convince the Russians of 
the value of the individual by killing millions of them?” Our failure 
to eliminate or control atomic weapons was no reason to introduce 
a weapon a thousand times worse.9 

Even if the Russians were to develop the hydrogen bomb first 
and use it on us, Bethe said, our reserve of atomic bombs, 
distributed among various launching sites, would enable us to even 
the score. “In fact, because of the greater number available, A- 
bombs may well be more effective in destroying legitimate military 
targets.... H-bombs, after all, would be useful only against the 
largest targets, of which there are very few in the USSR.” The only 
reason to develop the bomb would be to deter the Russians from 
deploying it against us, to prevent its use rather than to use it 
ourselves. Should we go ahead, therefore, we ought to proclaim our 
reason to the world and pledge that we would never be the first to 
use a thermonuclear weapon and would use it only if someone else 
had already used it in an attack on us or one of our allies. 

The straightforward simplicity of Bethe’s argument would have 
attracted attention in any event, but the circumstances in which his 
article appeared were sensational. On reading an advance copy, 
which had been delivered to the AEC, Commissioner Smyth spotted 
technical data which, he thought, should remain secret. The AEC 
immediately ordered Gerard Piel, publisher of the magazine, to stop 


publication and informed him that it was prepared to get a court 
order. Piel obeyed the AEC of his own volition and had the typeset 
plates, plus about three thousand copies of the magazine, 
destroyed. Bethe then produced a second version, which with 
customary prudence he had written in advance and stored in his 
safe, and the journal appeared, only a few days late, with this 
version in it. Bethe took the fuss with customary calm: the 
published version, he felt, was just as good for his purposes as the 
original. Practical as ever, he was concerned about the cost to 
Scientific American, but consoled himself by thinking that the 
notoriety had been “good advertising” for Mr. Piel.10 


Bethe went further than any of the other Manhattan Project 
physicists to act on his disapproval of the presidential ukase. In 
mid-February 1950 he wrote Norris Bradbury one of the more 
remarkable letters in the annals of American dissent. 


You have probably heard about my feelings concerning the 
hydrogen bomb.... The announcement of the President has not 
changed my feelings.... I still believe that it is morally wrong 
and unwise for our national security to develop this weapon. In 
most respects I agree with the opinions of the General Advisory 
Committee although I have not seen their report itself. So much 
has been said about the reasons on both sides that I do not need 
to go into them here. The main point is that I cannot in good 
conscience work on this weapon. 

For this reason, if and when I come to Los Alamos in the 
future I will completely refrain from any discussions related to 
the super-bomb. I have not completely decided whether this 
should include work on the booster. This will depend essentially 
on the question of how many problems the super and the booster 
have in common. Therefore on my visits I would primarily 
concern myself with the problems of the implosion, with 
problems of neutron diffusion and of efficiency, in other words 
with classical Los Alamos problems.... 

Because of these very much reduced plans I think it would not 
be worthwhile to renegotiate my consultant’s contract... 

In case of war I would obviously reconsider my position. 11 


The letter was remarkable, among other reasons, for the 
willingness to sacrifice that it implied. Bethe was one of the 
constellation of scientific geniuses who had sought refuge from 
Hitler’s anti-Semitism during the 1930s, and his work on the fusion 


of light elements in the sun was the first to point to the possibility 
of a weapon based on thermonuclear reactions. He was at the time 
a faculty member at Cornell, which had become his home in 
America. Later, as director of one of the Manhattan Project’s two 
Theoretical Divisions, he had come to think of Los Alamos, too, as 
home, and had returned there as a consultant every summer but 
one since the war. He loved gazing out at the high mesas, loved 
hiking in the mountains, and considered his colleagues there not 
only his cherished friends but his extended family. The prospect of 
not working with them again was painful to him. 

His letter to Bradbury was unique: no one was under as much 
pressure as Bethe to join the program, and no one was to resist as 
forthrightly. Others who agreed with him that the weapon was 
immoral, that possessing it would not contribute to defense, or that 
their university research was more promising for the country than 
weapons work, remained silent rather than refusing outright. Bethe 
alone spelled out his reasons. 

Meanwhile his colleague Teller had already started recruiting for 
the Super program. In the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists that spring 
he wrote a summons titled “Back to the Laboratories,” in which he 
preached that it is not the scientist’s job to decide whether the 
hydrogen bomb should be built. The scientist, Teller said, is not 
responsible for the laws of nature: it is his job to find out how they 
work. The scientific community had been “out on a honeymoon 
with mesons. The holiday is over. Hydrogen bombs will not 
produce themselves.... If we want to live on the technological 
capital of the last war, we shall come out second best.” 12 

Early in March 1950, Teller arranged to have dinner in 
Washington with Brien McMahon’s assistant William Borden. He 
informed Borden that Oppenheimer had delayed the H-bomb 
program and had tried to have the Los Alamos laboratory closed 
after the war. “Give it back to the Indians,” he quoted 
Oppenheimer, apparently unaware that this was the title of a 
popular song that Oppie must have heard somewhere. Realizing 
that he could not have the lab disbanded, Oppenheimer, Teller said, 
had tried to change it from a weapons facility into a center for basic 
research. While postwar director Norris Bradbury was an 
improvement over Oppenheimer, he added, Bradbury, too, left a lot 
to be desired. Under him the lab had, “miraculously,” survived, but 
it was weak and ineffective and composed of mediocrities. It was 
Bradbury’s fault, since he “is loyal to them and ... refuses to 
supplant the mediocre with better men.” Teller warned that the 


Fuchs case confirmed our worst fears: thanks to him, the Russians 
had known our most promising approach to the H-bomb since 1946 
and as a result might have developed a hydrogen device 
concurrently with their atomic bomb. Now, with Bethe, Fermi, and 
Oppenheimer discouraging the younger men by refusing to join the 
program, our situation was “desperate.” Teller hoped the president 
would bring his personal pressure to bear on reluctant scientists. 13 

Teller’s testimony, given secretly to the congressional committee 
the next day, was even more alarming than what he had told 
Borden over dinner, but this time he did not mention Bradbury or 
Oppenheimer by name or suggest that the president be asked to 
intervene. He warned that the country was in even greater peril 
than during the war, since the Germans had not, after all, been 
working on the atomic bomb. The Russians, on the other hand, 
might already be ahead of us with the H-bomb. He told the 
committee that H-bomb work had barely progressed since the war: 
the best scientists had returned to basic research and many were 
hesitant to join because they had a bad conscience over Hiroshima. 
Physicists, he added, are as susceptible to the herd instinct as those 
of lesser intellect: they would refuse to work on the weapon if their 
leaders refused. Los Alamos needed to double the size of its 
theoretical staff and improve it by “much more than a factor of two 
in talent.” Yet a manpower draft or other direct pressure might not 
be helpful, since a scientist has to put his heart in it if he is to 
invent something new and original. If the scientists continued to 
hold back, however, we might have to turn to the British and 
Canadians and that could be dangerous. Klaus Fuchs had, after all, 
been part of the British wartime mission. Was there, Teller asked, 
some form of suasion the committee might be willing to bring to 
bear? He offered a list of scientists who could be helpful. 14 

Smyth, who had come to the hearing expressly to add nuance to 
Teller’s remarks, intervened, suggesting that an appeal by the White 
House to the president of a university might be the best way to 
secure the services of a scientist reluctant to take time from his 
academic career to return to the lab. Smyth added that a scientist 
who did not want to work on the bomb could nevertheless 
contribute by training younger men to work on it, and pointed out 
that secrecy damaged recruitment, since it fostered the assumption 
that there was nothing left to do on the H-bomb but the 
engineering. If secrecy were eased somewhat, and scientists were 
told the truth, that there was still a vast amount of work to be 
done, it would send a signal that we had not gotten very far.15 


In warning of a scientific boycott, Teller as usual had jumped the 
gun. Other shortages were more critical at that moment than highly 
skilled manpower; one of them was the potential shortage of 
tritium. No one knew how much tritium, an isotope of hydrogen, 
would be required for a bomb test, but it could be considerable, 
and the reactor facility in Hanford, Washington, the only one in the 
country that produced it, already was fully committed to plutonium 
production. In the tense atmosphere after Fuchs’s confession, after 
an alarming Pentagon report in February that the Russians might 
already be working on the H-bomb, and after a formal request from 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff that work on the bomb receive priority 
status, President Truman issued the directive that put real teeth in 
his original order. On March 10 he secretly ordered the AEC to 
prepare production of the materials the weapon would require, 
especially tritium. 16 

Another bottleneck was the lack of computers to do the millions 
of computations that would be required. Just after the war a 
handful of scientists and their wives had performed mathematical 
calculations on the early IBM punch-card machines. But by 1948 it 
was clear that further work on either of the H-bomb designs under 
consideration—both Teller’s Super and a simpler, layered device 
called the Alarm Clock, designed by Teller in 1946—would have to 
wait until faster machines had become available, a delay to which 
Teller himself agreed. Since 1948, members of the “T,” or 
Theoretical, Division, had done hand calculations on aspects of the 
Super problem and had planned the calculations that needed to be 
done as soon as computers became available. What the lab needed 
most was not, as Teller thought, a famous theoretician like 
Oppenheimer, Fermi, Bethe, or Harvard’s Julian Schwinger to 
replace Bradbury, but a way to cope with the staggering 
mathematical demands imposed by the H-bomb project.17 

The lab eventually built a computer of its own. Even that effort, 
however, was slowed by something more mundane—a housing 
shortage that hampered the growth of personnel. Los Alamos in the 
spring of 1950, then, was dealing with a number of shortages, each 
of them related to the others and each, in time, overcome.is 

During the period of uncertainty after the war, the man who had 
held the lab together was Norris Bradbury, selected by Groves and 
Oppenheimer to succeed Oppenheimer only a few weeks after the 
Japanese surrender. Bradbury was a naval commander and a 
specialist in ordnance; his first task had been to stanch the 
hemorrhaging of personnel, which had fallen from about 3,500 in 


the summer of 1945 to just over 1,200 six months later, and build a 
stockpile of fifteen or so atomic bombs that could be assembled 
rapidly. The lab did fission research that had been passed over 
during the war, especially research into design of the smaller, more 
efficient fission weapons that were now the country’s first line of 
defense. Sophisticated atomic weapons were important for another 
reason as well: should the Super ever become a reality, the 
hydrogen fuel would be triggered by an atomic bomb. It was 
therefore of great importance to learn more about how fission 
worked and how fission and fusion interacted during an explosion. 
Bradbury was not enthusiastic about the Super, but he was 
convinced that “some day, someone must know the answer” to the 
question whether it could be built. “The use of nuclear energy,” he 
had told the laboratory on the day he took over in 1945, “may be 
so catastrophic ... that we should know every extent of its 
pathology.... One studies cancer—one does not expect or want to 
contract it—but the whole impact of cancer ... is such that we must 
know its unhappy extent. So it is with nuclear energy ... we must 
know how terrible it is.”19 

When Truman made his decision to proceed with the hydrogen 
bomb, the lab under Bradbury had already held two major series of 
tests in the Pacific, Operation Crossroads in 1946, which studied 
the effects of the atomic bomb on naval vessels, and Operation 
Sandstone in 1948, which tested design principles for the next 
generation of atomic warheads. And, contrary to Teller’s 
accusations that it was not working on the Super, the lab was 
preparing a series for the following year, 1951, which would 
include a critical test of thermonuclear principles. To prepare the 
series—an enormous theoretical, engineering, and _ logistical 
challenge—Bradbury in late 1949 or early 1950 set up what he 
called the “Family Committee” to evaluate a whole family of 
thermonuclear ideas—with nicknames like “Daddy,” “Sonny,” 
“Uncle,” and “Little Edward”—generated by Teller, and decide 
which should be included in the next year’s series. Teller had come 
up with so many ideas, some good, some not so good, that it had 
placed a strain on the laboratory. Aiming to harness his formidable 
energies without allowing them to tear the lab apart, Bradbury 
passed over Teller and named a tough-minded assistant, Darol 
Froman, who had managed the Sandstone tests, to be head of the 
new committee. 

Bradbury’s choice was preceded by some volatile history. During 
the war, when Bethe twice asked Teller to undertake critical 


assignments, Teller accepted responsibility but both times failed to 
follow through. After the second failure he and his group, at his 
request, had been relieved of work on the A-bomb, and a British 
team was brought in to do the work (the team that included Fuchs). 
It was generally felt that Teller failed to perform because he was 
bored by the fission bomb, a problem he considered solved, and 
because he was already far more interested in the H-bomb. 
Meanwhile the wartime director, Robert Oppenheimer, was under 
tremendous pressure to get the A-bomb built. To assuage Teller’s 
resentment at not being named head of the Theoretical Division, 
Oppenheimer set aside an hour in his hectic schedule each week to 
meet with the Hungarian and listen while he poured out his 
suggestions. Oppenheimer also permitted Teller to form a special 
group of a dozen physicists and mathematicians to work on 
thermonuclear ideas. Years afterward members of the wartime lab 
still remembered with resentment Teller’s having sat out what one 
of them called “the main event,” building the atomic bomb, during 
the last critical year, when all hands were desperately needed. And 
right after the war, when Bradbury was struggling to hold the lab 
together, Teller had presented an ultimatum: Bradbury must 
promise to conduct a dozen fission tests a year, or mount a vastly 
stepped-up thermonuclear effort, or he would leave. The laboratory 
being in no condition to undertake either, Bradbury refused, and 
Teller returned to teaching and research at the University of 
Chicago. 

But he did not sever his ties to Los Alamos. He had returned 
every summer to consult on special problems and was back at the 
lab on a year’s leave even before the Soviet test of August 1949. 
With the Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam and the prodigious 
Russian astrophysicist George Gamow, he was working on the 
problem of ignition: how to ignite a cylinder of deuterium (an 
isotope of hydrogen), using a fission bomb near one end of the 
cylinder as the trigger. It was a daunting problem, since the 
deuterium would not ignite until it reached a temperature so high 
that the cylinder would blow apart in the fraction of a millisecond 
before the explosion could spread through it. With the addition of 
tritium, a third isotope of hydrogen, to the deuterium fuel, the 
temperature of ignition could be lowered sufficiently for the 
deuterium-tritium mixture to burn. But the amount of tritium this 
would require had to be established with some accuracy, since 
tritium, produced in the reactors at Hanford, Washington, was 
scarce and expensive. Producing it would mean a sacrifice of 


plutonium needed for the A-bomb. 20 

Teller had made several different estimates of the amount of 
tritium that would be required. At the time of the 1946 conference 
it was assumed that the Super could be ignited with fewer than four 
hundred grams of tritium, which was not considered prohibitive, 
but an estimate by Teller in September 1947 was about twice as 
large. In December 1949, even before Truman’s H-bomb 
announcement, two parallel sets of calculations were begun in an 
attempt once again to determine the tritium requirement. One set 
entailed preparation of a machine calculation to go on a computer 
called the ENIAC, in Aberdeen, Maryland. Preparing the calculation 
took six months and was carried out by two husband-and-wife 
teams, John and Klari von Neumann in Princeton, and Foster and 
Cerda Evans with John Calkin in Los Alamos. The calculation went 
on the ENIAC in June 1950 and continued into the summer. 21 

Since the results would not be known for some time, Stanislaw 
Ulam and a collaborator, Cornelius Everett, undertook a second set 
by hand. It was expected that their work, a simplified version of the 
ENIAC calculation, would provide less detailed results than the 
ENIAC but would do so faster. The two mathematicians worked 
four to six hours a day, applying slide rules, pencil, and paper to a 
set of highly simplified calculations and filling page after page with 
stepwise computations. Everett, a self-effacing workaholic whom 
Ulam had known before the war at the University of Wisconsin, 
performed such a large number of calculations that his slide rule 
wore out, leading him to joke that the least the government could 
do was buy him a new one. They began their work in early winter 
and by the end of February 1950 concluded that it would take far 
more tritium to ignite the Super than any of Teller’s estimates, 
ranging from three hundred to six hundred grams, had foreseen. 22 

Ulam and Everett then began a new calculation, one that 
assumed that several hundred additional grams of tritium had been 
added to the model. Francoise Ulam and two other wives were put 
to work grinding out arithmetical problems on desk calculators. But 
even assuming the extra tritium, this model, too, would not ignite. 
Thus the results of the second set of Ulam-Everett calculations, 
completed by early summer 1950, were even gloomier than the 
first, indicating that the amount of tritium required would be 
several times larger than previous estimates. They seemed to 
indicate that Teller’s Super was not feasible. 23 

In April 1950, before the second set of results was known, Ulam 
flew east to consult the great mathematician John von Neumann, 


who, like Teller, hoped that the H-bomb in some form would be 
possible. A day or so after Ulam arrived in Princeton, Enrico Fermi, 
too, appeared in the busy von Neumann household, and on the 
afternoon and evening of April 21 the three friends spent hours 
discussing the implications of the first Ulam-Everett calculations. 
The next day they were joined by Oppenheimer, who lived near the 
von Neumanns in Princeton. When Ulam caught Fermi and von 
Neumann, the world’s most accomplished mathematicians, in a 
minor arithmetical error, Oppenheimer winked at Ulam in 
amusement. Comparing Oppie’s and von Neumann’s attitudes 
toward the bomb, Ulam noticed that Oppie “liked having the 
difficulties confirmed, whereas von Neumann was still searching for 
ways to rescue the whole thing.” Von Neumann “never lost heart,” 
even after he realized that the amount of tritium required would be 
so great as to make the Super prohibitively expensive. 24 

Immediately after his return to Los Alamos, Ulam wrote to von 
Neumann that Teller had been “pale with fury” when he learned of 
their conclusions. Teller also wrote to von Neumann, expressing the 
dark thought that Ulam had biased his calculations deliberately. To 
this von Neumann replied that he was “sorry to see that the strain 
which your work puts upon you is exceedingly great.” Francoise 
Ulam in Los Alamos was a witness to the unhappiness her 
husband’s results caused Teller. She had enjoyed her job up to now, 
punching out numbers on the desk calculators. She liked working in 
the T Division, where her husband was, and liked joining in the 
midmorning coffee hour, where the lab’s luminaries and its rank 
and file exchanged gossip and planned the next Sunday’s hike in 
the Jemez or Sangre de Cristo Mountains. But now, down the 
corridor, Francoise heard Teller berating Stan and shouting that his 
figures were wrong. The angry scenes went on for weeks, until it 
seemed to Francoise that no one stood up to Teller but Stan. But 
what Teller denied when it came from Ulam he could accept, at 
least for while, from his esteemed friend von Neumann. On June 
13, after more than six weeks, Ulam wrote in his diary, “Victorious 
end of fights with Edward.” 25 

Members of the old wartime team had by now arrived for the 
summer. On hand to consult on fission reactions, Bethe, despite his 
letter to Bradbury a few months earlier renouncing work on the 
Super, looked over the Ulam-Everett hand calculations and 
concluded that ignition would probably require a kilogram of 
tritium, almost twice Teller’s most recent estimate. Eagle-eyed as 
always, Ulam noticed that Bethe began to show up more frequently, 


apparently in hopes of proving once and for all that the Super 
would not work.26 

Another visitor was Fermi, with whom Ulam set up a calculation 
to explore the second, equally crucial, half of the Super problem, 
the problem of burning. On the dubious assumption that the 
deuterium could be made to ignite, would the burning “propagate” 
through the column of deuterium? Programmers from the lab’s 
computing group worked with desk calculators, while Fermi used 
logarithms and a slide rule and his usual stunning simplifications. 
By late summer he and Ulam embellished this routine and made 
their final set of computations a race between them. Assisted by a 
collaborator named Miriam Plank, Fermi worked on a Marchand 
calculator. The many hours he spent alone with the fetching 
Miriam, reviewing her calculations on the Marchand and laying out 
new ones for her to do, caused smiles of amusement among 
members of the T Division. 

Ulam, on his side of the competition, relied on Monte Carlo, a 
method of calculation that was largely his invention and that was 
based on random numbers. Working once again with Everett, he 
addressed the problem by throwing dice. The race between Fermi 
and Ulam ended in a draw, with the two sets of calculations 
producing the same answers at about the same time. Like the three 
sets of Ulam-Fermi calculations that had preceded them, this one 
also showed that the explosion would fizzle. 27 

Teller’s capitulation was short-lived. Carson Mark heard him 
roaring in disbelief as one set of calculations came in. But Ulam and 
Fermi were confident of their results. Ulam’s confidence went 
beyond the issue of accuracy. He was convinced that the work he 
had done with Fermi was even more important than the earlier 
calculations with Everett because it turned out to be basic to an 
understanding of thermonuclear explosions. And it was important 
in a way that mattered hugely for successful development of the H- 
bomb. For years the lab had been working on the wrong model, 
Teller’s Super. But before a new approach could be considered 
seriously, the old one had to be discredited. Ulam and Everett had 
shown that the Super could not work, but neither of them had 
Fermi’s prestige. His adherence to their conclusions was decisive. 
Los Alamos was now convinced that the Super conceived by 
Edward Teller would neither ignite nor burn.2s 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


Fission versus Fusion 


THE THEORISTS WHO gathered in Los Alamos that summer of 1950 were 
a stellar group. In addition to Bethe, who had come to work on 
fission, and Teller and Fermi, who were working on different 
aspects of the thermonuclear problem, another legendary physicist, 
John Wheeler, arrived from Paris to answer what he regarded as a 
patriotic summons to join the H-bomb project. 

Wheeler, whose groundbreaking paper on fission with Niels Bohr 
before the war had identified U-235 as the isotope of uranium that 
could be made to fission, had been in Europe during the 1949-50 
academic year for a Guggenheim-sponsored period of thinking, 
writing, and renewed collaboration with Bohr. With his wife and 
three young children, he had settled into a cozy pension on the Left 
Bank when, one evening in late 1949, he received a transatlantic 
telephone call. Wheeler took the call on the wall phone in the 
dining room, where a score of French guests laid down their knives 
and forks to listen. It was AEC commissioner Henry Smyth. Would 
Wheeler cut short his fellowship year and come home to work on 
an all-out project? The Russians, Smyth said obliquely, were almost 
surely working on the same thing. Wheeler had already heard from 
Teller and had a notion what Smyth was referring to. Other cryptic 
telephone calls followed from across the Atlantic. 

Still hesitating two months later, Wheeler mentioned his 
dilemma over breakfast in Copenhagen with Niels Bohr. “Do you 
for a moment imagine,” he heard the Danish physicist say, “that 
Europe would be free of Soviet control today were it not for the 
atomic bomb?” Wheeler, an ardent patriot, decided to go home.1 

He brought two of his most promising Princeton graduate 
students, Ken Ford and John Toll, to Los Alamos, where the three of 
them recalculated existing bomb design ideas, altering the 


parameters to see if they could somehow produce a thermonuclear 
explosion. They thought of new designs, too, the further out the 
better, and ran them through the calculators. And they revived an 
early inspiration of Teller’s, the Alarm Clock, to see how large an 
explosion they could get. Wheeler and his men worked in an office 
next to the coffee room, and members of the T Division dropped by 
daily to join in the brainstorming. Besides Teller and his assistant, 
Frederic de Hoffmann, who had come from France to help out, 
there were Conrad Longmire, Marshall Rosenbluth, and Emil 
Konopinski, all of whom were to make significant contributions. 
And, importantly, the patient and respected division chief, Carson 
Mark, would come by to ask quiet questions that had a way of 
ferreting out weak spots. During the morning coffee hour all of 
them pooled their latest ideas, especially the ones they had tried 
out on calculators the day before. Teller would drop in, “a dark- 
haired, bushy-browed prophet,” as Wheeler described him, to urge 
that they chuck it all and try some new approach. Ulam, 
meanwhile, would float down the corridor from office to office and 
announce before leaving in midafternoon, “I don’t know how you 
physicists do it. I can’t work more than six hours a day.” Then he 
would go home to do pure mathematics late into the night.2 

Wheeler, too, worked evenings in the log house where he and 
his family were living. It was the best house on Bathtub Row, 
having served as the arts and crafts building for the boys’ school 
before the war, and it had a small Indian ruin in back. The three 
small Wheelers loved playing with six-year-old Claire Ulam next 
door, and observed that, when it came to stacked-up dishes in the 
sink and round-the-clock hospitality, the housekeeping style of 
Claire’s mother, Francoise, was more relaxed than that of their 
mother. Janette Wheeler, for her part, found Los Alamos a company 
town, hard to break into. When, after a year or so, the Wheelers 
departed for the more civilized life of Princeton, the Los Alamites 
detected Janette’s hand. “She thought we were all savages,” one of 
them said.3 

While Wheeler had come to explore thermonuclear possibilities, 
fission exploration, too, had attracted a gifted recruit in twenty- 
five-year-old Theodore Taylor. A few months earlier, in the fall of 
1949, Carson Mark had had a call from Robert Serber, Manhattan 
Project veteran and professor of physics at Berkeley. He had an 
outstanding graduate student who had gone to pieces during his 
preliminary oral exams and flunked not once, but twice. The 
student was exceptionally creative, and Serber could not bear to see 


him lost to physics. He asked Mark to try him out. Taylor, who 
possessed an uncanny ability to visualize the way a collection of 
metal and wire and high explosives would react together, used 
graph paper and a hand calculator to eliminate material from the 
designs tested at Trinity, Bikini, and Sandstone and made them 
lighter and more efficient. Then he rearranged what was inside the 
implosion systems so as to get more energy for compression of the 
U-235 or plutonium core. Soon it was clear that Taylor was a 
prodigy, capable of designing A-bombs in a whole range of sizes 
and yields. After his failure at Berkeley, Taylor’s confidence had 
been at rock bottom; his freewheeling status at Los Alamos suited 
him perfectly. The big men were trying to figure out how to build 
the Super, no one cared much about fission, and he was left in 
peace. So little had been done to improve the early fission designs 
that he felt his job was like skimming cream off the top of a milk 
bottle. He was getting results—while everyone else at the lab was 
at a dead end, trying to make deuterium ignite and burn.4 

Any number of factors, a millionth of a second in timing or the 
smallest deviation from perfect symmetry, could make such a 
difference that Taylor decided that multiple small-yield explosions, 
each testing a different aspect, were needed to perfect the design of 
his new, more efficient A-bombs. He couldn’t go to the Pacific to 
test merely part of a bomb, and so the AEC built two sites in 
Nevada, the first in the continental United States, to try out Taylor’s 
ideas. The confidence that the young theorist had lost at Berkeley 
rebounded. He was given increasing freedom and that precious 
thing, open access to the computer. Caro Taylor noticed that Hans 
Bethe would drop by in hiking boots to confer with her husband, 
that Fermi would seek him out for hikes in the mountains above 
Los Alamos, and that at the rare dinner party they attended, some 
famous physicist or mathematician would huddle with him off in a 
corner. 

Taylor’s work was partly a hedge in case the thermonuclear 
bomb proved impossible: indeed, two years later his design, the 
Super Oralloy Bomb, was tested triumphantly at the Pacific proving 
grounds on Eniwetok. The successful test of a fission weapon of this 
magnitude—at half a megaton, it produced a much bigger 
explosion than earlier atomic bombs and half that of the putative 
hydrogen bomb—was to raise the question whether the megaton 
weapon, the thermonuclear bomb, would be needed after all. 

The constellation of geniuses at Los Alamos that summer focused 
on a series of tests scheduled to take place in the Pacific the 


following spring. The series, code-named “Greenhouse,” was to test 
four devices, two of which would have thermonuclear components. 
One of these was the Booster, an atomic bomb in which a small 
amount of deuterium would be added to the fissionable material in 
order to increase the yield. At their Halloween meeting 
Oppenheimer and the GAC had endorsed work on this weapon 
because it appeared to be a promising way to use fusion to produce 
an enormously enhanced atomic bomb. Carson Mark and the T 
Division were especially committed to this test because of the 
information it might provide about the way the fission and fusion 
elements interacted. 

The other test, code-named “George,” was the one in which 
Teller was particularly interested because it was more nearly a true 
thermonuclear experiment than the Booster test. It was not a bomb 
test but an experiment to learn how a capsule of thermonuclear 
fuel, a mixture of deuterium and tritium (D-T), would behave if 
ignited by a fission explosion outside it. Instead of placing the D-T 
combination at the center of the explosion, as in the Booster, 
energy from the explosion would be channeled down a pipe, or 
tube, to a vial of D-T gas weighing only a fraction of an ounce. 
After years of trying to think of ways to ignite a D-T mixture and 
make it burn, Teller wanted to know what would happen once it 
did burn: how the temperature and density would change, all the 
“diagnostics” of burning. This required that the thermonuclear 
mixture be at a distance from the fission trigger and studied 
separately. Teller hoped the test would prove that the Super on 
which he and the lab had lavished years of research was possible, at 
least in principle. But a portentous fact, to which neither he nor 
anyone else gave much thought at the time, was that the 
component of the fission explosion that would move out of the core 
first and down the tube toward the thermonuclear fuel would be X- 
radiation. 

After a summer of intense theoretical exploration, the lab had 
continued to make headway with fission weapons. Not only was 
there no progress on the Super, however, but the ENIAC 
calculations and the hand calculations by Ulam with Everett and 
Fermi all had provided evidence that the Super could not be built. 
In August, Teller and Wheeler produced a paper in which they 
conceded that it was still too early to say whether a thermonuclear 
weapon was feasible or economically practical. Instead of blaming 
possible failure on statistical evidence, however, they blamed it on 
a shortage of the “right men,” or senior theoretical physicists. The 


number of these, they said, was shrinking when it ought to be 
growing. Unwilling to give up, they expressed hope that the big 
new computers scheduled for completion in 1951 and 1952 might 
disprove the pessimistic calculations so far. 

About this time Bradbury wrote a paper agreeing that the 
chances of success now looked poorer than before. Unlike Teller 
and Wheeler, however, Bradbury did not blame a shortage of 
talent. Thermonuclear success, he predicted, “may depend upon 
entirely new and as yet unforeseen approaches.” s 

At a meeting in Washington in September 1950, the GAC 
welcomed the laboratory’s success in fission research, noting that it 
was now possible to make a large number of small bombs from a 
given amount of fissionable material and also to develop atomic 
weapons with ten times the destructive power of any previous 
design, improvements that promised effectively to double the size 
of the U.S. stockpile. The committee contrasted the “uncertainties” 
of thermonuclear development with the “great promise” of fission 
weapons and suggested that the laboratory concentrate on fission. 
The GAC made another comment that was to cause trouble later on 
for Chairman Oppenheimer. Taking aim at Teller’s special project, 
the GAC expressed “misgivings as to the value and relevance” of the 
effort expended on the forthcoming George shot. Because of the 
demands preparation for the test was placing on computer time and 
on the T Division, the committee concluded that “there is in fact 
interference between the thermonuclear program and the fission 
weapon program.” 


That summer an event occurred that dwarfed even the explorations 
at Los Alamos. On June 26, 1950, in an attack that Americans 
believed to have been instigated by Joseph Stalin, the troops of 
Communist North Korea poured over the border to the south and 
invaded the Republic of South Korea. With U.S. strategic interests 
at stake, President Truman asked the United Nations to intervene. 
The fighting, waged by forces of the United States and the United 
Nations, lasted three years and was regarded as a kind of surrogate 
war between the United States and the USSR.7 

The war in Korea changed everything. With Mao Tse-tung in 
power in China, the outbreak of hostilities meant that the United 
States was engaged against Communism in Asia as well as in 
Europe. It led to a buildup of U.S. armed forces, a change from 
peace to a semiwar footing, and growing suspicion of everything 
remotely red at home. 


Remote as they were geographically, the men on the mesa in 
New Mexico were very much affected. There was talk of postponing 
or canceling the Greenhouse tests scheduled for the spring of 1951 
in the Pacific lest they interfere with Navy supply lines to Korea. 
Hans Bethe reconsidered his renunciation of H-bomb work and 
agreed to join the project. And at the higher reaches of the U.S. 
government, consideration was given to using the atomic bomb in 
Korea. This possibility enhanced the priority of fission research: 
Korea had no targets large enough for the hydrogen bomb, but 
plenty of targets for small, or “tactical,” atomic weapons should 
Truman decide to go nuclear. 

The Korean War also brought into relief a difference of emphasis 
in Washington between those who believed the main threat from 
Stalin lay in Europe and those who worried most about Asia. Those 
who thought the greatest danger from Communism lay in Asia 
wanted to give priority to better and cheaper atomic bombs, while 
those who worried most about Europe tended to favor the bigger 
bomb. The nightmare of those most concerned with Europe was 
that with the Americans tied down in Korea, Stalin, who had 
already overrun Eastern Europe, would unleash his vast land armies 
on Western Europe. To prevent this, they wanted priority 
development of a “strategic,” or hydrogen, weapon with which to 
bomb Soviet urban areas should Stalin make a move toward the 
West. Brien McMahon’s energetic assistant, William Borden, 
belonged to the Europe-first school of thought. Borden wrote a 
memo that summer pointing out that in addition to its larger cities, 
the USSR had many smaller, spread-out urban areas with factories 
and military bases on the outskirts. “One H-bomb would eliminate 
the entire complex,” he wrote, while “A-bombs would be relatively 
ineffective.” Borden also doubted the ability of U.S. bomber crews 
to deliver A-bombs on heavily defended pinpoint targets, especially 
at night or in bad weather. “Such targets,” he concluded, “might 
succumb to the H-bomb alone.” Such was the strength of Borden’s 
feelings that he opposed use of the A-bomb in Korea not out of 
pacifist sentiment but because “each weapon used in Korea will 
leave one less to be used ... against Russia.” 

Ted Taylor was exposed to this attitude that fall of 1950 when 
he and several other New Mexico weaponeers were informed in a 
Pentagon briefing that Soviet land armies were capable of 
occupying all of Western Europe in less than six weeks. Taylor, an 
innocent whose experience up to then had been pretty much 
limited to what went on in the core of a fissioning bomb, was too 


startled to question whether what they were being told was true 
—“we were only kids from Los Alamos.” 

Taylor spent several weeks in the Pentagon that autumn poring 
over enormous photographs of Moscow, Baku, and other targets in 
the Soviet Union, trying to figure out whether he could design an 
A-bomb big enough to wipe out an entire metropolitan area. “I 
spent a lot of time drawing circles with ground zero on the Kremlin 
and the distance corresponding to various calories per square 
centimeter and pounds per square inch pressure.” Pentagon officials 
were disappointed that none of his circles included the whole of 
Moscow. If the contents of one big bomb were divided into several 
smaller bombs, Taylor told them, they could destroy more of the 
city. “What could you do with a kiloton?” he asked rhetorically 
later on. “The answer was a great deal, depending on what you 
could package it in.”9 

Smaller bombs were a specialty of his: thanks to Taylor, a dozen 
small implosion designs eventually became part of the US. 
stockpile, to say nothing of the design for a tiny atomic bomb ten 
inches in diameter that one man could lift off the ground. But the 
Navy and Air Force were not interested in Taylor’s boutique bombs. 
Frightened by the conviction that they were years behind the 
Russians and uncertain that the Super could be built, they wanted a 
one-megaton fission bomb, an atomic bomb in the hydrogen-bomb 
range. They hoped that the twenty-five-year-old prodigy from Los 
Alamos could give them the miracle they sought. 

With war simmering in the Far East and Taylor at work on clever 
fission designs, Oppenheimer summoned the GAC to Los Alamos in 
late October for its twenty-third meeting. Here and there the 
cottonwoods were still yellow in the river valleys, but on the Hill 
the aspens were bare. The skepticism of the Halloween meeting just 
one year before had been amply borne out. Oppenheimer reminded 
those gathered on the mesa that the earlier meeting had been asked 
to judge a specific Super design and concluded that it showed too 
little promise to justify an all-out program. Calculations by Fermi 
and Ulam since then made it appear even less likely than before 
that the second stage of the explosion, the “propagation,” would 
occur.10 

The situation was equally grave, indeed it now looked nearly 
hopeless, with regard to the first, or “ignition,” stage. Instead of the 
one hundred, four hundred, or six hundred grams of tritium that 
Teller had variously predicted, Ulam and Everett and the ENIAC 
calculations had shown that “a lower limit” of three to five 


kilograms would be required. Not only had Teller’s estimates been 
wrong—they had been wrong by an order of magnitude. 11 

Did Teller feel chastened by his egregious miscalculations? Not 
in the least. He was present at the meeting, along with other 
members of the lab, and when Carson Mark outlined the ENIAC and 
Fermi-Ulam results of the summer just past, Teller charged that the 
assumptions on which they were based had been heavily 
oversimplified and that their conclusions were wrong. Fermi 
disagreed, suggesting that more detailed calculations would 
probably make the picture even bleaker. And when Chicago 
chemist Willard Libby, a new member of the committee, agreed 
with Teller that the Fermi-Ulam results had been given too much 
weight, Oppenheimer, Rabi, and DuBridge responded that any 
change would be in the direction of making success appear even 
more unlikely.i2 

Teller returned to the manpower issue, charging that Los Alamos 
did not have enough qualified personnel to do both the required 
theoretical work and detailed calculations—“there are just not 
enough of us.” With more than a touch of condescension, he said 
the lab would be able to cope if the Super’s feasibility was 
disproven, but should the George test the following spring show 
that the Super looked promising, “then for that we are not strong 
enough.” By “we,” he meant the lab and his colleagues there. 
Bradbury spoke up for the lab and responded that what Los Alamos 
needed was not larger numbers but “individuals of special abilities 
and judgment,” especially theoreticians. He had opposed pressure 
to expand more rapidly, he said, lest the place become too 
cumbersome. Oppenheimer suggested that if the lab were to change 
emphasis in any way it should be in the direction of obtaining 
higher yields from smaller amounts of fissionable material. 

With the war in Korea making the Pacific proving grounds less 
secure, the question arose of whether to go ahead with any of the 
Greenhouse tests and especially whether George, the test of 
ignition, or first-stage, possibilities would be useful when, in light 
of the work by Ulam, Everett, and Fermi, there was no apparent 
solution to the second, or propagation, stage. 

Oppenheimer wrote a summary letter to AEC chairman Gordon 
Dean after the meeting, in which he conceded that the test might 
yield “relevant” information about burning and radiation flow. “We 
wish to make it clear, however, that the test, whether successful or 
not, is neither a proof firing of a possible thermonuclear weapon 
nor a test of feasibility.... The test is not addressed to resolving the 


paramount uncertainties which are decisive in evaluating the 
feasibility of the Super.” Since George was the test to which Teller 
attached special importance and on which he had lavished his 
efforts, he and others later criticized Oppenheimer for his words 
and accused him of hoping for a failure. To the contrary, 
Oppenheimer, the GAC, and the lab thought that the test would 
succeed. But they considered it irrelevant to the question of 
whether the Super would work and believed that it “made no 
technical sense.” 13 

Summing up the past year as the meeting ended, Bradbury 
concluded that the thermonuclear program had gotten nowhere. It 
was of utmost urgency that the lab “do first those things promising 
the greatest possible gain in minimum time.” That meant working 
on atomic weapons. Bradbury had almost given up on the Super. 
“Practical success, if it can be attained at all without new and 
presently unforeseen conceptions, must be regarded as 
distant.” 14 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


Teller 


SOON AFTER JOINING the lab, Ted Taylor found himself grounded by 
weather at the Phoenix airport. The only person who looked 
familiar to him was Edward Teller, and in the course of an eight- 
hour stopover, the two got to talking. Teller, who had a special 
liking for young people, asked Taylor what he was working on. 
Taylor described an idea he had for exploring reactions in the 
center of the current stockpile bomb by going to low-yield testing. 
Teller was enthusiastic. 

The moment they got back to Los Alamos, Teller called a 
meeting and asked Taylor to lay out his idea. Carson Mark was 
there, and Emil Konopinski and even Enrico Fermi. Everyone said 
yes, that looked like a good thing to do. 

That, Taylor said afterward, was Edward Teller at his best. And 
his best was very, very good. In originality, enthusiasm, quickness 
to grasp a new concept—in all of these, no one was better. Even 
colleagues who detested him enjoyed going to Teller’s office to 
chew over a new idea. His math could be unreliable and he was not 
the person you’d ask to work a problem through patiently, with 
equations, but he had humor and charm and he could be 
immensely generous. He could also lean over backward to be fair. 
In 1948 he was probably the first American scientist to seek out 
Werner Heisenberg, Carl Friedrich von Weiszacker, and other 
physicists who had chosen to stay in Germany during the war. He 
listened to them, sought to understand the ambiguities of their 
position under the Nazis, and did his best to bring them back into 
the world scientific community. “It is wrong,” he wrote to a close 
friend, “to act as if the only thing in the world would be politics.” 1 

Teller was also astonishingly self-absorbed. Whatever his mood 
of the moment, that mood simply filled his universe. At such times 


he would extrapolate outward from his own dark mood and see the 
whole world in shades of black. By late fall 1950, he had sunk into 
one of those moods. Gone were the high hopes with which he had 
arrived from Chicago the year before. He blamed the lab and 
looked down on his colleagues there. Bradbury and the others who 
had stayed on after the war were what he called “the second team.” 
His thoughts ran constantly to the first team—Fermi and Bethe and 
Oppenheimer—who had refused to return and work on his bomb as 
they had worked on Oppie’s bomb during the war. If work on the 
Super was at a dead end, they were to blame. 

Many an evening that fall and early winter, Teller trudged 
through the snow to the house of Kay and Carson Mark, three doors 
away from his own. There he sat in a big chair, chin in hand, 
staring at the floor, “wrapped in a black cloud you could almost 
touch,” Kay Mark remembered. Her husband was likewise aware of 
that cloud of despair. Putting it in his usual mild way, Carson Mark 
saw that Teller was “troubled,” that he was “angry and resentful.” 
While Kay was putting the younger children to bed, Carson puffed 
quietly on his pipe and kept his thoughts to himself. He was 
reflecting that thanks largely to the man in front of him, “we had 
spent years working on the wrong thing. The thing Edward had 
peddled to Truman did not exist.”2 

There were other reasons, too, for Teller’s apocalyptic frame of 
mind. He had received word that his father, Max Teller, had died in 
Budapest, leaving his mother and sister exposed to the Stalinist 
cruelties of Hungary’s Rakosi regime. And he was tormented by 
indecision about his future. He had tentatively accepted a job offer 
from UCLA, only to learn that the regents had fired thirty-two 
professors who refused to take a loyalty oath. Teller’s solidarity 
with the professors and unwillingness to take the oath himself had 
led to a bitter scene in Ernest Lawrence’s office. Not since Nazi 
times, he said, had he heard a “little fascist speech” like the 
scolding Lawrence gave him that day. Teller actually wanted to 
return to the University of Chicago, but his wife, Mici, hated the 
place. He was toying with an offer from New York University, not 
because he meant to take it, but in hopes of persuading Mici that he 
had done his utmost to save her from the midwestern weather. All 
this and more Teller confided to Maria Goeppert Mayer, a brilliant 
former student living in Chicago, on whom he relied for counsel 
and support.s 

And there was Korea. “The third world war has started,” he 
wrote Mayer, “and I do not know whether I care to survive it.” Not 


since Pearl Harbor had the nation faced such disaster. After a 
successful landing at Inchon in September 1950, General Douglas 
MacArthur had sent his forces up the Korean Peninsula, risking 
intervention by China. Sure enough, on November 25, a quarter of 
a million Chinese troops burst from their hiding places just south of 
the Yalu River and crushed the United Nations forces. President 
Truman created an uproar by leaving the impression at a press 
conference that the decision whether to use atomic weapons might 
be left to General MacArthur. 4 

Teller, as usual, spent much of the winter in travel mode. In 
December he flew in a tiny airplane from Los Alamos to Norman, 
Oklahoma, where he delivered a speech at the university and, even 
though AEC commissioner Sumner Pike was in the audience, 
criticized both the commission and the U.S. policy of restraint in 
Korea. He also traveled to Washington, where he informed Louis 
Ridenour, now chief scientist of the Air Force, that the AEC was 
dragging its feet on the H-bomb. Teller wanted to leave Los Alamos, 
where, he said, the research facilities were inadequate. He wanted 
the Air Force to set up a facility so that he could work on the 
problem at the University of Chicago instead. And he made a 
convert of Lieutenant General Elwood R. “Pete” Quesada, a 
renowned World War II pilot assigned to command the task force 
that would carry out the Greenhouse tests. Listening to Teller, 
Quesada realized that his service, the Air Force, stood to gain more 
than the other services if the H-bomb was built. It followed that he 
should render all the help he could. Teller warned, however, that 
the project had powerful opponents, the ringleader being Robert 
Oppenheimer. Failure of the tests would enable those opponents to 
argue that the effort was futile. 

Teller’s conviction that Oppenheimer was trying to subvert the 
project received reinforcement when a panel chaired by 
Oppenheimer made its report in December 1950. The panel, one of 
many on which Oppenheimer served in addition to the GAC, had 
been specially created by the Defense Department to advise on the 
long-range uses of atomic weapons. It met at a moment when hopes 
for the Super were at their nadir and many in Washington feared 
that China’s intervention in Korea might be the prelude to a Soviet 
invasion of Europe. Since recent successes at Los Alamos had all 
been in fission research, the panel—like the GAC at its Halloween 
meeting of 1949 and its Los Alamos meeting of October 1950— 
agreed that priority should be given to work on the fission bomb. 
Only if it was understood and accepted that work on a 


thermonuclear bomb was long-range in nature, five years or more, 
could the resources of Los Alamos be freed for concentration on 
fission weapons. Teller disagreed, and bitterly reproached Luis 
Alvarez, a member of the panel, for having signed a report that, he 
told Alvarez, was “being used against our program. It is slowing it 
down and it could easily kill it.”s 

Oppenheimer had written the report, but all twelve members of 
the panel, which included three generals and an admiral, were in 
agreement. The GAC, meeting on January 6, was likewise 
unanimous (with Walter Whitman, director of the 1948 Lexington 
Study of aircraft nuclear propulsion, and Oppenheimer, who 
belonged to both groups, recusing themselves). But as Teller saw it, 
the culprit was Oppenheimer: he had a golden tongue, and the 
others must have succumbed to his spell. Teller did not view it as a 
matter of honest error or difference of opinion. Oppenheimer 
wanted to kill his, Teller’s, program; therefore he must have a 
hidden motive.« 


Teller and Bill Borden had been cultivating each other for a year. 
They wrote flattering letters back and forth, decried what they 
thought were shortcomings in the H-bomb program, and arranged 
to see each other over dinner when Teller was in Washington. 

In March 1950, only a month after Truman’s H-bomb decision, 
Teller had warned the committee that the country might be in even 
greater danger than during World War II. By the war’s end we had 
known that the Germans did not, as we had feared, have an A- 
bomb program. Now, however, with the Russians, we had no such 
assurance: indeed, thanks to Fuchs, they might well be ahead. 
Between the war’s end and the 1949 Russian test, Teller claimed, 
work on a U.S. hydrogen bomb had not gone forward “at any 
appreciable rate.” Although he was hesitant to suggest that his 
colleagues actually be drafted to work on the H-bomb, the number 
of theoretical physicists on the project must be promptly increased 
by “more than a factor of two in number and much more than a 
factor of two in talent.”7 

Teller complained that most of the scientific community was 
reluctant. Many scientists, he said, were still suffering a bad 
conscience over the destruction wreaked by the A-bomb and 
questioning the morality of H-bomb work. “If some of the best 
among them” showed by their actions that they were doubtful 
about thermonuclear work, the others would also hesitate. 

In his formal testimony before the committee, Teller had not 


named names. But at dinner with Borden the evening before, he 
had not hesitated to do so, blaming the scientists’ reluctance on 
Oppenheimer and, to a lesser extent, on Bethe and Fermi also. He 
had charged that for two years after the war Oppenheimer had 
tried to have the lab disbanded—“give it back to the Indians”—or 
make it a center of basic research.s 

On the strength of what Teller said that night, Borden prevailed 
on Senator McMahon to call the last-minute session next day in 
which Teller told the committee that for four years after the war no 
“appreciable” work had been done on the H-bomb. 

Teller was well aware that the man he had chosen to confide in 
saw things very much as he did. Bill Borden had no training in 
nuclear physics, but this in no way inhibited his certainties. He 
shared Teller’s belief that the Russians were out to do in the United 
States and that it was a matter of survival to stay ahead. He 
expected war in Europe at any moment and believed that the H- 
bomb could be decisive in subduing the vast territory of the USSR. 
The usually reticent Fermi implicitly criticized Borden’s advice to 
the senator when he told a member of the JCAE staff that during 
the critical period in 1949 and 1950 when McMahon had been 
pushing President Truman to start a crash program, he and the 
JCAE had been “misinformed” about the real prospects and 
problems of the Super. Fermi warned that the committee ought to 
“think twice” before entering scientific controversies in the future, 
since it lacked the necessary technical competence. Coming from 
Fermi, who was renowned for his impartiality and cool judgment, 
this was devastating criticism. The conversation ended with what 
the staff member in his report described as “admonitory remarks 
about Dr. Teller. Dr. Fermi says he has the greatest respect for Dr. 
Teller’s scientific ability and also values him as a personal friend,” 
but that, having “very little comprehension of the scientific and 
engineering problems that lie between the germ of a brilliant idea 
and the achieving of a perfected weapon,” Teller had a tendency to 
exaggerate the prospects for success.9 

As for Borden, out of childish bravado and lack of genuine 
understanding, he made light of what the A-bomb could do. After 
witnessing his first atomic test, he had written a memo dismissing 
the impression it had made on him. He and colleagues on the 
committee staff who felt as he did made a point of calling atomic 
bombs mere “ordinaries” compared with the hydrogen bomb. He 
prodded Senator McMahon relentlessly to seek expansion of the 
program. Borden was an intelligent man who cared about duty and 


honor. But he was a zealot, and he had the ear of a powerful 
senator who wanted to be president, and as a result, he wielded an 
authority that far outweighed his judgment. 

So zealous was Borden in pursuing his ends—larger, more 
powerful nuclear weapons—that he occasionally committed glaring 
breaches of protocol and even security. For example, after an 
appearance by Hans Bethe before the committee in May of 1950, 
Borden outlined Bethe’s secret testimony in a letter to Teller that, if 
not technically a breach of security, was at the very least out of 
channels, as Borden himself acknowledged: “This information is, of 
course, just for your personal use.... I would appreciate your not 
circulating it.”10 

Borden’s lapses of judgment were compounded by Teller’s 
inclination to question the motives of anyone who stood in his way. 
Meeting with a committee staff member in Los Alamos during the 
spring of 1950, Teller had made what was almost—but not quite— 
his first suggestion to a government official that Oppenheimer 
might be a security risk. After entering the caveat that he “did not 
get along” with Oppenheimer, in part because he held him 
responsible for dropping the H-bomb program at the end of the 
war, Teller said it was “common knowledge that Oppenheimer was 
far to the left.” Oppenheimer, he said, was “unusually close” to his 
brother Frank, and Frank Oppenheimer would not have joined the 
Communist Party if Robert had not approved. Teller believed that 
Robert Oppenheimer had used his influence to bring his brother to 
Los Alamos during the war, and he thought that this, too, was 
grounds for suspicion. (Frank Oppenheimer was, in fact, a first-rate 
experimentalist whose work checking test results at the Trinity site 
received high praise from everyone there.) Concluding his report, 
the JCAE staff member said that Teller had been “careful to explain 
that he himself did not have any idea that the subject was disloyal 
or intended to injure the best interests of the country.... However 
... Teller did say that were Oppenheimer found, by any chance, to 
be disloyal ‘in the sense of transmitting information,’ he could, of 
course, do much more damage to the program than any other single 
individual in the country.”11 

Borden lost no time reacting to Teller’s remarks. He drafted a 
memo for Senator McMahon warning that the program was in the 
hands of highly placed individuals who had “bitterly” opposed the 
H-bomb decision and whose emotions might be leading them to 
consider the effort futile. These individuals included AEC general 
manager Carroll Wilson, all nine members of the GAC including 


Oppenheimer, and two of the commissioners, Sumner Pike and 
Henry D. Smyth. Borden urged that special attention be given to 
filling the position of general manager and vacancies on the GAC 
and the commission as they arose. Accordingly, when the terms of 
three GAC members expired that summer, they were replaced by 
men who were expected to show more enthusiasm for the H-bomb 
project than those who were departing. By far the most notable 
departure was that of Fermi, quite possibly the world’s greatest 
living physicist: his departure was pushed by a new AEC 
commissioner, Thomas Murray, in hopes of creating a precedent 
that might lead in time to the departure of Oppenheimer. 2 

The extent to which Borden shared Teller’s suspicions—and, 
indeed, brought his own special twist to them—can be seen from a 
memorandum he wrote to his boss toward the end of the year: 


I spent most of last week reading several dozen personnel 
security files... 

A number of the “calculated risk” clearances of distinguished 
scientists having irreplaceable abilities ... left me with a feeling 
of apprehension.... Usually, too, the subject had intimate access 
under the Manhattan District—and if he is kept out of the 
program, our progress very definitely suffers. 

It is indeed the unhappy truth that a number of our greatest 
experts have long lacked—and perhaps occasionally still lack—a 
sense of moral outrage at the characteristics and ambitions of the 
Soviet government. This lack, combined with almost fantastic 
naivete and gullibility, has caused so many of the top scientists 
to join front groups, associate with Communists, etc., that any 
real espionage agents among them cannot be identified by 
reference to such activities. 

I conclude that we may well have another Fuchs still in the 
project today and that all calculations should take into account 
this strong possibility.13 


CHAPTER NINE 


Ulam 


AS HE PLAYED on the rug in his parents’ house in the Polish city of 
Lvov, the little boy kept staring at the intricate Oriental pattern. 
Aware that his father was smiling at him, the boy thought, “He 
thinks I am childish, but these are curious patterns. I know 
something my father does not know.” 

All his life, Stan Ulam was looking for patterns. All his life, too, 
he had the air of the detached observer. He was not yet forty-two 
years old when the year 1951 began, an onlooker as Edward Teller 
and Hans Bethe argued about thermonuclear reactions. “Amusing 
fights: Hans-Edward,” Ulam wrote in his diary on January 18. And 
a few days later, “big fight fairly amusing.” What the fight was 
about, whether and how it contributed to the pattern taking shape 
in Ulam’s head, is not known. But on January 25 he wrote in the 
diary, “Discussion with Edward on two bombs.”2 

Ulam had been thinking for some time about a “bomb in a box.” 
And in December 1950 he came upon the idea of using shock waves 
from an exploding fission bomb inside a “box,” or container, to 
compress the material in a second fission device inside the same 
“box” to such high density that it would burn. Now it occurred to 
him that these ideas might be combined in such a way as to solve 
the problem of making a package of thermonuclear fuel burn. Ulam 
described the concept, that of using an exploding fission device 
inside a container to create so much pressure on the thermonuclear 
material as to maintain the burn, was called “supercompression,” 
and it was, in fact, extreme compression compared with anything 
that had been contemplated before. 

Francoise Ulam later remembered coming home at noon on 
January 23, 1951, to find her husband staring out the window with 
a strange expression on his face. Over lunch, he told her he had had 


an idea that might make the Super possible. If his idea worked, he 
said, it would change the world. Appalled, since she had hoped the 
bomb would prove infeasible, Francoise asked what his next step 
would be. He supposed that he would have to tell Edward. 
Remembering Teller’s fury the previous summer after he learned of 
Stan’s results with Everett and Fermi, she asked whether he ought 
to try his idea on someone else first, “either Carson or Norris.” 4 

Ulam appeared in Carson Mark’s office that afternoon and, 
sketching something on the blackboard, said, “In Nevada we have 
to be doing something more interesting, like this. If we did it that 
way, it might produce such and such reactions, which would be 
interesting to measure.” Such was Ulam’s style. He seldom spelled 
out an idea, being so absorbed in it himself that he assumed his 
interlocutor was following his line of thought. Mark, frantically 
busy with preparations for the Greenhouse tests and for a series of 
smaller fission shots in Nevada, did not realize that Ulam’s idea 
pertained to the thermonuclear problem. “It seemed like an 
unnecessary addition to things that were scarcely manageable as 
they were,” he said long afterward. 

Ulam next showed up in Bradbury’s office. This time he had no 
need to explain: Bradbury immediately saw what he was driving at. 
Both men realized that the next person Ulam had to see was Teller. 
Bradbury, who was given to minimizing his own role, refused to 
take credit in later years for so quickly grasping the relevance of 
Ulam’s idea: he took credit only for imparting a hint or two as to 
how Ulam might present his idea without making Teller as angry as 
he had been the summer before.« 

The next morning Teller and Ulam had their discussion “on two 
bombs.” Teller resisted at first, but before long he, too, became 
enthusiastic. Later in the day he burst into the T Division office, 
where several of his colleagues were working. “Ulam has had an 
idea,” he announced, “but he hasn’t got it quite right.” And he set 
the men—Max Goldstein, Arnold Kramish, and Frederic de 
Hoffmann—to work on calculations to see whether the new concept 
might be applied to the George test in the spring. Teller went home 
to his piano while the others worked through the night.7 

Ulam met with Teller several times in late January and early 
February 1951, half an hour or so each time. He drew a sketch, and 
then Teller added an idea. Ulam’s idea was to compress the 
thermonuclear fuel by mechanical shock from an exploding fission 
device, while Teller’s was to use radiation from the exploding 
device instead, in order to achieve the extreme compression 


required. The two men wrote a joint paper in which each described 
the scheme he had thought of: they had come up with parallel ways 
of obtaining a thermonuclear burn without using the prohibitive 
quantities of tritium required by all the other schemes so far. The 
concept was called “radiation implosion.” 

The concept seemed simple—but only after someone had 
discovered it. And the title of LAMS-1225, the paper completed by 
the two men in late February and dated March 9, 1951—“On 
Heterocatalytic Detonations: I. Hydrodynamic Lenses and Radiation 
Mirrors—I”—hints at its extraordinary ingenuity. Hot X-rays from 
the exploding fission bomb would move in all directions inside the 
casing that contained the two bombs. The plastic material that 
filled the casing would then be ionized and exert a strong material 
pressure that would compress the secondary sufficiently to ignite 
the thermonuclear fuel. All of this had to occur in a millionth of a 
second, lest the device explode before the second bomb could 
ignite. In the half century since it was written, only a handful of 
people have read the paper, and those who have report that much 
of it consists of brilliant ideas of Ulam’s about “staging,” or 
arranging the components in such a way as to maximize the 
explosion. Although six other nations—Britain, France, China, the 
USSR, and probably Pakistan and India—later developed the 
hydrogen bomb, the Ulam-Teller paper, which lays out the key 
concepts of staging (Ulam’s), compression (Ulam’s), and radiation 
(Teller’s), is classified to this day with no hope of declassification 
anytime soon, lest some would-be proliferator, whether a terrorist 
or a nation, learn something from it that would enable him to 
devise a workable bomb.» 

Teller assigned his protégé, Frederic de Hoffmann, to do the 
mathematical work on a second idea he had had that was an 
ingenious complement to the first: the addition of a second fission 
element, which came to be called the “spark plug,” positioned like 
a rod inside the thermonuclear fuel, to compress the thermonuclear 
component by an explosion inside as well as from the outside. The 
resulting paper, LA-1230, to which, knowing his mentor’s 
emotional identification with the achievement, de Hoffmann signed 
only Teller’s name, and not his own, is dated April 4, 1951, and 
likewise remains classified. 10 

Teller from the start tried to make Ulam an unperson. Not only 
did he assign de Hoffmann to write the April 4 paper; he refused to 
sign a patent application bearing Ulam’s signature because it named 
the two of them as coinventors. Because of Teller’s refusal to sign 


Ulam’s application and failure to file an application of his own, the 
Teller-Ulam, or, as some might call it, the Ulam-Teller, concept, 
which became the basis of hydrogen bomb design, has never been 
patented. Teller simply took the credit.11 

Four years later, following a conversation with Fermi on his 
deathbed, Teller published an article, “The Work of Many People,” 
in which he described the contributions various scientists had 
made. He mentioned the calculations Ulam had done with Everett 
showing that the old concept would not work, but omitted Ulam’s 
role in the breakthrough. He did it again in his book Legacy of 
Hiroshima, published in 1962, this time attributing the 
breakthrough to himself and de Hoffmann. Afterward, in books, 
articles, and interviews, he did his utmost to excise Ulam from the 
history books, insisting that since Ulam had not been eager for the 
bomb to be invented and was skeptical that it would work even 
after their conversations of January and February 1951, he should 
not receive any credit. “Ulam invented nothing!” he exclaimed on 
many occasions.12 

For a time Teller’s claim to sole authorship was virtually 
uncontested, partly because of government secrecy. Because the 
ideas he had contributed were considered especially sensitive, 
Ulam’s name was for years censored out of the official literature. In 
the published transcript of the Oppenheimer hearing of 1954, for 
example, Ulam’s name appears only once, with four asterisks in 
place of his name the other times it was mentioned in testimony; 
and when Bradbury, in a press conference later that year, singled 
out Ulam’s contribution, Robert McKinney, publisher of the Santa 
Fe New Mexican and a man well versed in matters atomic, had to 
ask who Ulam was and how the name was spelled. Ulam declined 
to press his claim, considering assertiveness of that sort beneath 
him, and despite Bradbury’s effort, the role of the Polish 
mathematician was for years unknown to the public, while Teller, 
with his reputation as “Father of the H-bomb,” enjoyed tremendous 
standing with congressmen and Pentagon officials, who did not 
know the real story.i3 

This distortion of the record, for which both Teller and the 
system of secrecy were to blame, later became a matter of anger 
and embarrassment to members of the laboratory who knew how 
the breakthrough had occurred. Most were critical, even 
contemptuous, of Teller, not only for claiming credit that was not 
properly his, but also for the very serious action of using his public 
reputation to acquire his own lab at Livermore and to promote 


visionary schemes—the “Clean Bomb” of the 1950s, Projects 
“Gabriel” and “Ploughshare” in the 1960s, “Palisades of Fire” in the 
1970s, and “Star Wars” in the 1980s—which they considered ill- 
judged and based on false scientific claims.14 Carson Mark, in 
particular, felt remorse over having missed what Ulam tried to tell 
him that fateful afternoon of January 24, 1951. Mark believed that 
had he caught Ulam’s drift and put the T Division to work on the 
new concept right away, Teller’s contribution, the idea of radiation, 
would have occurred to the lab’s theoreticians as a matter of 
course. In that event the T Division and Stan Ulam would have 
been known as mother and father, respectively, of the H-bomb. 
Teller would still have received credit for the single-mindedness he 
had brought to the quest, but he would not have had the enormous 
political clout that he acquired and that, in the opinion of Mark and 
most members of the lab, he misused.1s 

Teller’s churlishness had a history, unknown until Francoise 
Ulam unearthed it in the lab’s personnel files during the late 1980s. 
It was the questionnaire Teller filled out after Ulam had worked for 
about a year in Teller’s subgroup, doing research on the Super. 


War Department 
Project Y 


EMPLOYEE RATING OF SCIENTIFIC ACHIEVEMENT 


Stamislafvetilaloyee 
DSunsetisfaetoagent work 
Onestantitialgability 

Asitsoaenttiiag member of lab research 
Pasatnefityory 


Comments: Mr. Ulam is a brilliant mathematician but does 
not have the proper background for the work we are doing and 
does not seem able to adjust himself to our work. Occasionally 
he has helped in our research and on the whole the group has 
profited by his presence. 

He is an independent thinker and might conceivably turn up 
most important results. I think if he could work on pure research 
in mathematics he would be much more happily placed than in 
our project. 


E. Teller February 13, 194516 


Teller recognized Ulam’s independence—and wanted no more to 
do with him.17 


Something similar also happened in early 1950 when Ulam, 
Teller, and Gamow were looking into theoretical problems of the 
Super. Finding the other two uncomfortably irreverent and 
independent-minded, Teller seized a moment when they were both 
out of town to disband their three-man group. 

Having shown by his calculations with Everett and Fermi during 
the spring and summer of 1950 that Teller’s design would not work, 
Ulam in 1951 came up with the solution. Poker player that he was, 
he was pleased to have trumped Teller, to have trumped him twice, 
in fact, first by showing that Teller’s design would not work, and 
then by coming up with a workable concept himself. And he had 
done it, as he did everything, with a beguiling air of nonchalance 
and not a trace of Teller’s obsessiveness, which to him was 
unseemly and perhaps a little obscene. Ulam was annoyed by 
Teller’s insistence on placing his stamp on the invention: as far as 
he was concerned, his scheme, that of achieving compression by 
means of mechanical shock, was enough by itself to do the job. As 
Ulam put it later, Teller had added a “complication.” Belittling it, 
he said in his book that Teller “had found a parallel version, an 
alternative to what I had said, perhaps more convenient and 
generalized.” is 

But Teller’s idea was crucial. Why did the idea of radiation occur 
first to him and not to Ulam? Carson Mark believed that Teller’s 
concentration on George was the explanation. “Edward had just 
finished a year of work on the George shot,” of which radiation was 
a feature. George was Teller’s test: not only had he worked on it, he 
had promoted it to the point of trying to have “Item,” another shot 
in the series, canceled. Ulam, Mark added, “did not have that 
immediate, close-in exposure to the radiation picture.” Mark did 
not consider it surprising that Teller came up with the idea, since 
“once you try to achieve fantastic compression by means of an 
atomic bomb, you’d have to face the fact that radiation was there. 
You'd have had to think of it. Edward was in a better position to be 
aware that radiation could be decisive. He was thinking about 
radiation in a way that Ulam was not.” Mark believed that anyone 
in T Division who had worked on George would have called 
attention, as Teller did, to radiation as a way of producing extreme 
compression.19 

Another physicist, who attended the 1946 Super conference but 
was no longer working on weapons in 1951, agreed. “Once you 
think of implosion,” he said, “you think of radiation. After the idea 
of compression occurred, a day’s discussion would have produced 


the idea of achieving compression by means of radiation.” This 
scientist, Philip Morrison, did not find Teller’s idea surprising. 
Rather, what surprised him was the importance given by the new 
concept to “radiation mirrors.” 20 

Legends surround Ulam, among them the legend that he was 
lazy. No one ever saw Ulam working; nor did anyone ever see him 
when he was not, almost visibly, engaged in thinking. Some 
mornings he did his thinking at home, and Bradbury would drop by 
at eleven or so to ask when he was coming to “work” at the two- 
story wooden Tech Building. There was joking at the lab that 
“Everett did Ulam’s best work,” and in later years one or two of the 
division chiefs were “ferociously critical” of Ulam for failing to 
complete his projects. But Mark, with Bradbury’s support, insisted 
on keeping him because his presence was so stimulating to the 
younger scientists. Mark conceded that Ulam did not exactly 
“work” on things. Instead, he sowed ideas as if he were “a landed 
seigneur back in Poland strolling around his estates, waving a hand 
and ordering his minions to plant a walnut seed here, a sapling 
there, and leaving others to tend the young trees.” 21 

Ulam was to the manor born. Stan’s father, Jozef, was a lawyer; 
his uncle, Szymon, was a banker; and his mother, Anna Auerbach, 
was from a wealthy industrial family. Genius ran in the family, 
some of the finest buildings in Lvov being the work of an earlier 
Ulam, an architect. For a few years, beginning when Stanislaw was 
five, the family took refuge in Vienna, since Russian troops had 
occupied Lvov, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. While 
still in his teens, Ulam was accepted by the coterie of 
mathematicians who made up the well-known Lvov school, who 
quickly noticed his altogether exceptional originality. Huddled in 
the coffeehouses and tiny inns of Lvov, these mathematicians spent 
hours drinking coffee and scribbling formulas on white marble 
tabletops. Recalling one seventeen-hour session at the Scottish Café 
in which the silence was broken only by occasional bouts of 
laughter or a pause for drinks and a bite to eat, Ulam later said that 
long hours of silent concentration were a requirement of creative 
mathematical work. But thinking very hard about the same 
problem for hours on end could produce severe fatigue, even 
breakdown. Ulam, who was as fascinated by the workings of the 
brain as by mathematics, wrote that he never experienced a real 
breakdown, but on two or three occasions he had felt “strange 
inside” and had to stop. 

In 1932, at the age of twenty-three, he was invited to work in 


the Soviet Union, but because of his capitalist origins considered it 
the better part of wisdom to decline. Two years later, von Neumann 
invited him to the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, and in 
the fall of 1936 he began a three-year appointment as a junior 
fellow at Harvard, returning each summer to Poland. Finally, in the 
summer of 1939, with war impending in Europe and at his uncle’s 
insistence, he left Poland for the United States, accompanied by his 
seventeen-year-old brother, Adam. 

Neither Adam nor Stan ever recovered from the loss of the life 
they had known in Europe. Although both were to make 
distinguished careers in the United States (Adam as a historian), 
neither felt at home in what they experienced as a puritanical 
Anglo-Saxon culture. Nor did they know the full dimensions of their 
loss until after the war. Only then did they learn that the Nazis had 
shot their sister, Stefania, and her infant daughter; that her 
husband, too, had disappeared; and that the uncles and aunts who 
had stayed in Lvov were sent to concentration camps and died 
there. The Russians permitted their father, Jozef, to remain in his 
apartment, where he offered shelter to a seventeen-year-old student 
who was wanted by the authorities. During the fall and winter of 
1939-1940 the two of them burned Jozef’s law books for warmth 
and had conversations in which the older man spoke with pride 
about the two sons he had sent to America. Before the war ended, 
no one knows exactly when, Jozef died of heartbreak and ill health. 
The Russians, meanwhile, confiscated the family properties. 22 

Immediately after the war Stan, who was teaching at the 
University of Southern California, was stricken by mysterious 
headaches. Upon operating, the doctors found inflammation of the 
brain and not, as they had feared, a tumor. Their intervention 
relieved the intracranial pressure, and the patient recovered. But 
for Stan the observer of mental processes, the threat of losing his 
memory and capacity for logical thought had been terrifying, and 
he never completely recovered from the fear. After he died in 1984, 
his friend Gian-Carlo Rota wrote that Ulam’s mental capacity had 
been affected by the illness, but Francoise and Adam Ulam, and two 
mathematicians who worked with Stan before and afterward, Mark 
Kac and David Hawkins, insisted that they had seen no change. 
When they discussed the cause of Stan’s illness, colleagues 
speculated that he might have been trying unconsciously not to 
solve the problem of the H-bomb. But Francoise, whose mother also 
had died in the Holocaust, disagreed with the speculation. If Stan’s 
illness had a psychological component, and she was by no means 


persuaded that it did, she thought it was caused by the realization 
that all of his family were gone, the old life in Europe gone 
forever.23 

When Stan was invited to return to Los Alamos after his illness, 
he gladly accepted, and the unlikeliest part of his unlikely odyssey 
began. There on the dusty mesa, he managed to re-create some of 
the warmth and conviviality of his beloved Scottish Café: he and a 
colleague even opened a coffeehouse. What he missed in America 
was a culture in which mathematics was done orally and at leisure, 
in conversation upon conversation, as it had been in Warsaw and 
Lvov. Paradoxically, he found this culture at the lab. Being at the 
very frontier of science with some of the most brilliant minds in the 
world excited his imagination. It reminded him of Lvov. And Los 
Alamos, a kind of factory for most of the people who worked there, 
allowed him to work as he pleased. 24 

One friend said that Ulam had “not an ounce of modesty in 
him.” Indeed, he was heard to boast, “I am the most imaginative 
man in the world.” Aware that his greatest gift was his originality, 
he was at pains to conserve it. When he read a book, his eye would 
race down the page, plucking out the nuggets, and then he would 
toss the thing away, “in order not to be influenced.” In conversation 
it was the same, with friends occasionally complaining that he gave 
short shrift to their ideas. When I. I. Rabi, for whom he had great 
respect, twice came to see him—in 1949, during the H-bomb 
debate, and 1954, at the time of the Oppenheimer hearings—to ask 
him to join the behind-the-scenes political scrimmaging, Ulam, to 
Rabi’s annoyance, remained aloof. Similarly, although he disdained 
Teller’s lust for the H-bomb, he refused to waste himself on anger. 
Indeed, some of Ulam’s personal style, the air of amateurish ease, 
the laziness, appears to have been a cover to protect the “ability to 
see around corners,” which, along with uncanny luck, was the Ulam 
signature in mathematics.25 

Surprisingly for one so original, he required the stimulation of 
other minds. He was never alone if he could help it, entertained 
people by the hour with jokes and stories, and did nearly all his 
work in collaboration with others, even though, as his colleague 
Mark Kac put it, he was the giver 99.99 percent of the time. Ulam’s 
work with Cornelius Everett appears to have been the exception. 
The two of them had written a major paper and three or four lesser 
ones together before they sat down to calculate tritium 
requirements for the Super. Everett, who combined extraordinary 
technical prowess with an unusual willingness to work on someone 


else’s ideas, would listen as Ulam tossed out ideas, then check them 
with brilliant computations of his own. But somewhere along the 
way Everett, who was as reclusive and self-effacing as Ulam was 
outgoing, came to feel shortchanged; after his death his widow, 
Dolly, said that he was “disillusioned and brokenhearted” over his 
collaboration with Ulam. According to her and other members of 
her family, Everett felt that Ulam had shoved him aside and 
usurped the credit, as Teller was to do with Ulam. 26 

The collaboration with von Neumann was another matter. The 
two never wrote a paper together, yet they were so close that to 
understand the work of either, Francoise thought, one had to 
understand their relationship. The friendship went back to prewar 
Europe: in 1937, at Ulam’s invitation, von Neumann went to Lvov, 
where he met Ulam’s parents and visited the Scottish Café. Ulam, in 
turn, visited von Neumann in Budapest the following summer, met 
his family, and accompanied him to a mountain resort where he 
met two of his friend’s elderly professors. And there was the matter 
of background. Von Neumann did not feel at ease with people 
whose social origins differed much from his own: he and Ulam were 
both well-to-do central European Jews of the third or fourth 
generation. Both were cultivated, with backgrounds in the Latin 
and Greek classics, and a wry humor was seemingly native to them 
both. Although something in the air stimulated them to do great 
work in America, both suffered from culture shock here, and from 
absence of the conversational art. And they had a common 
sensibility. Although he was six years younger and nowhere nearly 
as accomplished a craftsman, Ulam sensed von Neumann’s deep- 
seated doubt about his own ability and knew how to tease him out 
of it. Especially in the early days, it was the older man who sought 
out the younger one, and by some accounts Ulam was the only 
close friend von Neumann ever had.27 

On the basis of Ulam’s work on random processes, the two 
friends, with input from Nicholas Metropolis, Stanley Frankel, 
Enrico Fermi, and others, invented Monte Carlo, a method of 
extending the use of computers to statistical sampling. Monte Carlo, 
so named because an uncle of Ulam’s had borrowed money from 
others in the family to fuel his frequent visits to the gaming tables, 
became invaluable in estimating neutron multiplication rates and 
predicting the explosive behavior of fission weapons. An 
indispensable tool in computer science to this day, Monte Carlo 
exemplifies the ways in which computer development and 
invention of the hydrogen bomb were inextricably linked. 2s 


Thinking of how Ulam broke the logjam in 1951, one has to ask 
whether Truman’s H-bomb order made a difference. Did it speed up 
the pace of Ulam’s thinking? Ulam himself was dismissive. He said 
that “the number of people working on something does not increase 
in proportion the yield” and hinted that the visiting dignitaries and 
influx of talent brought by Wheeler had merely been a distraction. 
But Francoise Ulam at first believed that without the forcing-house 
atmosphere produced by the president’s decision, Stan might in 
1950-1951 have devoted his best thinking to some other problem. 
Carson Mark had a different view, with which Francoise later came 
to agree. He concluded that Ulam “resonated” neither with 
Truman’s order nor with Teller’s enthusiasm, but with von 
Neumann’s desire—on political as well as scientific grounds—to 
find a solution. Ulam did not share von Neumann’s right-wing 
political ideas, but he did share his intense interest in fusion 
reactions. It was to von Neumann, and to the intellectual challenge 
of the thermonuclear problem, that Ulam responded. Ironically, 
when the younger man came up with a solution, von Neumann, the 
greatest mathematician of the century, felt a pang of regret that he 
had, once again, been trumped in originality. 29 

Ulam’s enormous contribution did not at first bring him much 
recognition. Members of the lab were too busy with the tests of 
spring 1951, and then with preparing the first test of the Ulam- 
Teller, or Teller-Ulam, concept, to worry about questions of credit. 
Besides, everything Los Alamos did was a group effort: no one felt 
any need to sort out the question of who contributed what idea, or 
in what sequence, until later, when Teller’s claims made it an issue. 
Ulam, meanwhile, disappointed by what he took to be the lab’s 
indifference, departed for Harvard, where he spent the 1951-1952 
academic year. He took no part in preparations for the “Mike” shot 
of autumn 1952, the first test of his ideas. 

A gentle man, he was wounded more than he ever admitted by 
Teller’s brutal rejection. While privately he despised Teller, he 
refrained from joining the Teller-bashing at dinner parties in Los 
Alamos and Santa Fe. They had needed each other once: “If either 
of those guys had had to work alone,” Bradbury said, “each would 
have accomplished about one quarter of what he did.” But after 
that brief moment in 1951 they never spoke to each other or 
communicated in a meaningful way again.30 


PART THREE 


1951-1952 


CHAPTER TEN 


Teller’s Choice 


Lewis STRAUSS AND EDWARD TELLER first met in a synagogue in New 
York City. The year was 1948; the occasion, a speech by Teller 
advocating world government. After the speech an elderly woman 
came up to him and introduced her son. The serious-looking, 
bespectacled man at her elbow turned out to be AEC commissioner 
Lewis Lichtenstein Strauss. Despite the differences in their religious 
practices—Strauss, an Orthodox Jew who prayed twice a day, was 
distressed by the fact that Teller was nonpracticing—the two 
became friends, and the friendship was cemented a year later 
during the debate over the hydrogen bomb. From then until 
Strauss’s death many years later, Teller and Strauss were allies who 
frequently acted in concert. 

In February 1951, only days after Teller and Ulam had their 
talks in Los Alamos hammering out the concept of radiation 
implosion, Teller appeared on the East Coast for one of his 
démarches with Strauss. Strauss was no longer a commissioner, he 
was working in New York for the Rockefellers, and he knew 
nothing about the Ulam-Teller breakthrough. But he held a couple 
of part-time appointments that gave him leverage in Washington. 
As he saw it, the president had issued his order more than a year 
earlier and there was still no hydrogen bomb. Someone must be to 
blame. That someone, he decided, was Robert Oppenheimer. There 
were rumors that Oppenheimer had been a Communist, and two 
former Party members had lately surfaced and testified that they 
had attended a Party meeting eight years before at Oppie’s house in 
California. Whatever his intentions, Oppenheimer was helping the 
Soviet Union.1 

And so on February 9, 1951, Strauss went to see Gordon Dean, 
David Lilienthal’s successor as chairman of the AEC. Clutching 


several pages of notes, he treated Dean to a scathing critique of Los 
Alamos: the lab was dragging its heels and Oppenheimer was 
“sabotaging” the project. When he described Oppenheimer as “a 
general who did not want to fight,” Dean disagreed that the 
program was in the hands of people who did not believe in it. 
Suggesting remedies nonetheless, he noticed one in particular that 
Strauss did not object to—creation of an entirely new laboratory. 
Before the visitor left, Dean asked to keep his talking points. To his 
surprise, Strauss strode to the fireplace and tossed them, with a 
dramatic gesture, into the fire. Dean thought this a little bizarre, 
and was mystified further when he was told later that the notes had 
been intended for Truman. Dean was miffed both by Strauss’s 
intention of going over his head to the president and by his failure 
to mention it. A straight shooter himself, Dean viewed it as his job 
to protect a president besieged by a thousand headaches. Had he 
read the notes, which bore the Tellerian title “The Russians May Be 
Ahead of Us,” he would have seen what he probably suspected 
anyway, that Strauss’s informants had been Teller and his acolyte 
Freddie de Hoffmann. 

The other member of the two-man team was also in the AEC 
building that day. Teller had come at Strauss’s suggestion to see 
AEC commissioner Thomas Murray, who was also dissatisfied with 
thermonuclear progress. Meeting Murray for the first time, Teller 
attacked the panel report on long-range objectives that Strauss had 
criticized to Dean. Singling out the author, Oppenheimer, Teller 
charged that the report was “designed to discourage” enthusiasm 
and had effectively put the project “on ice.” He added that Los 
Alamos had lost competent men and seemed unable to attract new 
ones. Time and again, Teller said, Bradbury had yanked him and 
others off the H-bomb project and assigned them to other work. If 
the program remained at Los Alamos, Bradbury should be fired and 
a new division created to focus on thermonuclear problems. But 
there was a better way: take the project away from Los Alamos and 
set up an entirely new laboratory.3 

While he was in the AEC building, Teller also stopped by to see 
General Manager Marion Boyer and told him, too, that the program 
should be moved away from Los Alamos. Then he took a taxi to the 
Capitol, where he insinuated to William Borden that the tritium 
estimates by Ulam, Everett, and Fermi were wrong. He warned that 
the design for the upcoming George shot, the first test of 
thermonuclear principles, had been deliberately made highly 
experimental and might not succeed. Borden realized that Teller 


was embarrassed by his erroneous tritium estimates. Fearful that 
George, too, might be a failure, Teller was accusing Oppenheimer 
and the GAC of pushing for a premature test in hopes of a failure 
that would kill the whole program. 

Gordon Dean had been AEC chairman for about a year. At the 
time of his appointment, he was known in atomic energy circles 
mainly as Senator McMahon’s onetime law partner, and his 
selection had been viewed as a presidential sop to the nuclear 
enthusiasts in Congress. Dean’s appointment prompted such 
foreboding in Carroll Wilson, David Lilienthal’s loyal deputy and 
the man entrusted with day-to-day management of the commission, 
that he had taken the unusual step of resigning publicly in protest. 
Wilson need not have worried, for Dean proved to be an 
experienced administrator and a first-rate judge of character. A 
Californian by birth, he had joined the Duke University law faculty 
at twenty-five, argued his first case before the Supreme Court at 
twenty-eight, served in the Justice Department’s antitrust division 
under the legendary Thurman Arnold, and been special assistant to 
two of FDR’s attorneys general, Homer Cummings and Robert H. 
Jackson. When Jackson was appointed chief U.S. prosecutor at 
Nuremberg, he took Dean along as an adviser.s 

The joint descent by Teller and Strauss on the AEC, plus Teller’s 
call on Borden and his visits to the Pentagon, planted the thought 
in high places that the program was lagging and a new lab might be 
the answer. Meanwhile, the men at Los Alamos were enjoying a 
breather after completing work on the Greenhouse series, and 
Norris Bradbury circulated a plan to reorganize the place. Bradbury 
was responding to a demand by Teller for a special division at Los 
Alamos, with himself as leader, to work solely on _ the 
thermonuclear bomb. Teller was convinced that success could come 
only from men who were giving it their undivided attention, a 
premise that made no sense to the rest of the lab. Since a small and 
efficient fission “primary” was the key to making the fusion 
“secondary” burn, and success of the weapon depended on the 
interaction between the two, most people were working on both.« 
Placing Teller in charge made no sense to most of them either, since 
Teller’s idea for organizing things was to insist each day that the 
laboratory drop what it had been doing the day before and turn to 
his newest brainstorm. So while Teller—without leveling with 
Bradbury—was politicking in Washington for a laboratory of his 
own, Bradbury in Los Alamos was ceding as much as he could, 
short of creating a separate thermonuclear division run by Teller.7 


In Washington again, Teller this time presented his case directly 
to the chairman of the AEC. It was a dark moment for Gordon 
Dean, who had been wrestling with a dilemma: how much of the 
evidence in its possession could the government use in its 
prosecution of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg without risking the loss 
of atomic secrets.s Dean had no sooner dealt with that issue than he 
learned that the Russians might be on the point of entering the war 
in Korea, an action that could trigger World War III. The news, a 
false alarm received by Pentagon Intelligence, marked the moment 
when the United States came closer than at any other juncture to 
using nuclear weapons in Korea. The Joint Chiefs asked the AEC to 
transfer part of its stockpile to the Air Force for possible use in the 
Far East, and this in turn raised the delicate issue of civilian 
control. And another delicate question loomed over the White 
House: how to handle General Douglas MacArthur, who had 
recently—without authorization—proposed a series of actions in 
the Pacific likely to expand the war. A few days after the Dean- 
Teller meeting, the president, at fearful political cost, fired his most 
famous general for in-subordination.9 

At the meeting on April 4, Teller noticed that Dean’s attention 
seemed to wander. But the chairman’s air of distraction did not 
restrain the scientist from giving a long and one-sided recitation on 
thermonuclear ideas, criticizing Bradbury’s proposal for a separate 
thermonuclear division and discussing how and why he would hand 
in his resignation. Teller asked for a new laboratory devoted 
entirely to the thermonuclear effort and staffed by fifty senior 
scientists, eighty-two junior scientists, and 228 assistants. Aware of 
Teller’s awesome political support, Dean prevailed on him to 
postpone any decision to quit Los Alamos. 10 

After leaving the chairman’s office, Teller discovered that his 
zipper was broken. He thereupon attributed Dean’s apparent 
inattention to his open fly rather than, as was in fact the case, to 
Dean’s worry that atomic war was about to break out.11 

Soon afterward Dean received a long memo from Teller, again 
asking for a new laboratory and hinting that without it he might 
leave the project. This was not to be the last time Teller would 
threaten to quit.12 

A few weeks later Teller and Dean met again, this time on 
remote Eniwetok Atoll. What brought the AEC chairman all the way 
to the Pacific was the long-awaited George shot, on which Los 
Alamos had been working for two years. Detonated on May 9, local 
time, George produced by far the largest nuclear explosion ever: it 


vaporized the two-hundred-foot test tower and 283 tons of 
diagnostic equipment. Dean heard Teller boast that Eniwetok would 
not be large enough for the next test.i3 

But size was not the main thing.14 George, in which radiation 
from exploding a large atomic bomb was channeled to a container 
of thermonuclear fuel outside it, demonstrated that with sufficient 
heat and pressure, tritium and deuterium could be fused.is The 
result had been expected, so beyond that was the question of the 
test’s usefulness, since Ulam and Fermi had already shown the 
second part of the Super—the propagation—to be infeasible. Not 
only that, but during preparations for the George shot, and partly as 
a result of them, the Ulam-Teller idea had come along and rendered 
moot the problems to be addressed by the test. Theoreticians at Los 
Alamos were delighted all the same by the outcome, which, Carson 
Mark said afterward, confirmed “that the methods we were using to 
calculate the elements of the process were ... accurate” and “could 
be relied on wherever similar processes might be involved.” Mark 
realized that calculations for the next big test, that of the Ulam- 
Teller idea, would be more elaborate than any the men of the T 
Division had done so far. He was encouraged to know that they had 
been going about it the right way.16 

Almost no one at Eniwetok had heard about the Ulam-Teller 
concept, but a Lawrence protégé from California named Herbert 
York learned of it on a warm tropical evening spent alone with 
Teller. The two men were in a corroded old aluminum building, 
and York later remembered that, using a blackboard as his prop, 
Teller sketched the new idea. “I instantly recognized that this was 
it.”17 


York was one of only a handful who had heard about the Ulam- 
Teller idea, and Gordon Dean decided in the spring of 1951 that it 
was time to inform those closest to the project of the recent 
developments. The new concept, known as “radiation implosion,” 
required theoretical investigation, as did results of George and the 
other Greenhouse tests. In addition, Teller’s 1946 Super—the 
concept so difficult to disprove—was still on the table. With an 
enormous workload ahead, Dean wanted to establish priorities. He 
called a meeting for mid-June at the Institute for Advanced Study, 
with Robert Oppenheimer as host. 

All of the commissioners came, and five GAC members and, from 
Los Alamos, Norris Bradbury, Associate Director Darol Froman, and 
Carson Mark. Several consultants—Bethe, Teller, Wheeler, von 


Neumann, and the theoretical physicist Lothar Nordheim—were 
invited because of their close familiarity with the project. The 
gathering turned out to be the turning point in the development of 
the hydrogen bomb.1:s 

At the meeting, which assumed the importance of the new Ulam- 
Teller concept, Carson Mark led off with an analysis of the Pacific 
test results, and Wheeler reported on ways in which findings from 
those tests, particularly Item and George, might be applied in a test 
of the radiation-implosion idea. Norris Bradbury discussed the 
allocation of lab time between fission and fusion; Bethe, who had 
been in Los Alamos checking calculations, described the new 
concept as hopeful; and Oppenheimer pronounced it “technically 
sweet.” Oppenheimer’s words expressed the sense of the gathering, 
which welcomed the breakthrough as the right course to follow.19 

Teller apparently did not understand. Bradbury had intentionally 
left him and the other consultants off the Los Alamos delegation so 
that they could express themselves independently of the laboratory. 
Foreseeing trouble, Bradbury had sent a memo to Oppenheimer in 
which he warned that emotions were a bigger roadblock than either 
the physics or the engineering, and he even arranged to accompany 
Oppie on the train ride to Princeton to discuss how to deal with 
both the science and the personalities. 20 

But his omission of Teller from the lab’s delegation provoked the 
very outburst he had been hoping to avoid: from the outset, the 
Hungarian treated the gathering as a “battle” for acceptance of his 
ideas. He listened to the speakers with growing impatience. 
“Finally, I could contain myself no longer. I insisted on being heard. 
... It was decided that I should be allowed to speak.”2i Outside the 
meeting, Bethe and Teller were overheard in some sharp exchanges, 
and when Gordon Dean privately asked Bethe whether there was 
any way to alleviate the ill feeling between Teller and the rest of 
the lab, Bethe sadly shook his head. 22 

During the half century since, Oppenheimer has been accused of 
inconsistency, at the very least, in welcoming the new ideas as 
“technically sweet,” and many people felt that he had betrayed the 
principles enunciated by him and the GAC majority in 1949 when 
they opposed the crash program partly on moral grounds. No 
sooner did the bomb look feasible, critics say, than Oppenheimer 
tossed morality out the window. If so, Oppenheimer was not alone. 
Fermi was at Princeton, too, and although in 1949 he, with Rabi, 
had called the H-bomb “necessarily an evil thing in any light,” 
neither Fermi nor Rabi expressed doubts now. The difference was 


that with the Ulam-Teller inspiration, the weapon was now within 
reach. In 1949, when it looked impossible, Fermi and Rabi hoped, 
while there was time, to agree with the Russians not to go ahead. 
But by 1951 it was too late. As soon as they learned of the new 
concept, Bethe, Fermi, and Oppenheimer, along with everyone else, 
realized that the bomb was possible. And if it was possible for the 
United States, it was possible for the Russians, too. Oppenheimer’s 
remark announced that the landscape was irrevocably altered. 


After the Princeton meeting, Bradbury asked Teller to take charge 
of all theoretical work on the H-bomb. Aware that many of the men 
he relied on would quit if he were to put Teller in overall charge, 
he did not offer the one thing Teller really wanted: directorship of 
the entire program. Bradbury did his best to “soften the blow,” but 
each of them found the conversation so painful that neither ever 
again mentioned it in the other’s presence. Teller for the time being 
stayed on, but not without a new warning to Gordon Dean, via 
Freddie de Hoffmann, that he might quit—and not just the lab, but 
the entire H-bomb program.23 

Meanwhile the work went on, with Carson Mark and his 
Theoretical Division analyzing results from the Pacific tests. Twice 
in the summer of 1951 the unhappy Teller flew to Washington to 
complain to higher-ups: once over dinner with William Borden at 
his club, then at a meeting with Gordon Dean. Both men begged 
him to remain. 

A few weeks later, twenty-three-year-old Richard Garwin, a 
protégé of Fermi’s from Chicago, happened to attend a Los Alamos 
meeting where the schedule for Mike, the first and crucial test of 
the Ulam-Teller concept, was being discussed. Teller wanted the 
shot scheduled for July 1, 1952, while Bradbury and Marshall 
Holloway, leader of the Theoretical Megaton Group, said that it 
could not practicably be held before fall. Teller was furious. “You 
guys don’t have your heart in it,” he scolded, and he threatened to 
leave the lab. Garwin, who was friendly with Teller and had, at his 
request, done the essential early blueprint for Mike, was 
flabbergasted. He thought these “guys” had their hearts wholly in 
it, and he found their dedication impressive. 24 

About this time, late September of 1951, Bradbury made a 
crucial decision: he put Holloway in charge of preparations for 
Mike. This, Teller’s friend de Hoffmann pointed out, was “like 
waving a red flag before a bull.” Around the lab it was said that 
more than anyone else, “Holloway really had Teller’s number.” The 


two men had had so many passages at arms during the preparations 
for the George test that Holloway, hard-shelled, even impervious, 
though he was, refused any longer to deal with Teller directly. 
Holloway would describe the calculations he needed to Carson 
Mark, who would go to de Hoffmann, who would then put the 
matter, with utmost delicacy, to Teller.25 

Informing the AEC of his decision to elevate Holloway, Bradbury 
told Dean that the lab could live with Teller if he “is willing to 
settle down and work with the rest of us,” but “after the experience 
of the past year I am not persuaded that this is likely.” Bradbury 
concluded that “equally rapid and certainly more stable and 
unemotional progress” would be made if Teller contributed from 
outside, “rather than as a continually dissatisfied and rebellious 
member of the laboratory.” 26 

For his part Teller considered Holloway cantankerous and 
unreasonable and altogether an insulting choice. Besides, Teller had 
all along wanted someone “big” to head the program—Bethe, 
Fermi, or Oppenheimer. Fermi and Bethe had turned it down. Now 
Oppenheimer, sensing that Teller was emotionally off balance, told 
Dean that much as he doubted he could “make the omelet rise 
twice,” he had not closed the door on returning to Los Alamos. He 
telephoned Bradbury and felt him out, but sensed no eagerness on 
the director’s part to have him back. “Oppie couldn’t come here and 
act in a limited way,” Carson Mark explained years afterward. 27 

The question of Teller’s future inevitably came to a head as the 
AEC commissioners finally faced the decision of whether to build a 
second Los Alamos. Teller had been pushing this behind the scenes, 
telling anyone who would listen that the lab had grown stodgy, 
unimaginative, and unequal to the task of producing an H-bomb 
anytime soon. He had a supporter in former commissioner Strauss 
and another in Commissioner Murray. And in a speech before the 
U.S. Senate, Brien McMahon, chairman of the joint congressional 
committee, piled on the pressure by urging that all three services be 
equipped with nuclear weapons—“an atomic army, an atomic navy 
and an atomic air force.” 2s 

Teller’s next step was to announce one more time that he was 
leaving Los Alamos, with the caveat that he would keep track of 
developments from his post at the University of Chicago and 
perhaps visit the lab briefly from time to time. Over lunch with 
Borden and another staff member from the joint committee, he 
made it very clear that “his primary interest ... was the second 
laboratory.” His departure, he pointed out, would undercut one of 


the chief arguments against it, since “he had already left and to that 
extent the new laboratory would not be cutting into the manpower” 
available to the old one.29 

Gordon Dean had been staving off the pressure. First, there was 
the problem of personnel: a new lab would divide the small cadre 
of available physicists. Second was the morale factor. A new lab 
would constitute a staggering no-confidence vote in the men who 
were doing the work and showing every sign of success. Dean was 
impressed by Teller’s cleverness and political clout, but knew that 
the last thing he was, was an administrator. Nor could Dean 
overlook the monumental self-absorption of the man who had come 
to him in April 1951, at a moment when Dean had thought the 
world was on the brink of World War III, to hand in his resignation, 
and had been threatening to quit ever since. 

Dean and the three other commissioners who were trying to hold 
the line received an assist from the GAC in October when it 
opposed a new lab on grounds that virtually everyone qualified was 
at Los Alamos already, except for Teller, and that “a solution to the 
major thermonuclear problem” appeared likely within a year. But 
Oppenheimer had misgivings of his own. He considered the lab’s 
leaders—Bradbury, Froman, Holloway, and Mark—capable but 
cautious and risk averse. For this or some other reason, following a 
visit from Teller, who again expressed doubt about the laboratory’s 
competence, Oppenheimer invited the Hungarian to appear before 
the GAC. There, in December, Teller blasted the lab’s senior staff 
for lacking imagination and failing to attract the best scientists. He 
did this just as the Russians announced their second and third 
atomic tests: these signs of progress fed anxiety in Washington that, 
thanks to Klaus Fuchs, they might already be ahead. Pointing to 
these new indicators of Soviet progress, Teller charged that even 
the laboratory’s success at Greenhouse was proof of earlier failure 
to develop its potential.3o 

Despite Teller’s imprecations, the GAC for the second time 
formally opposed a new lab, fearing it would damage Los Alamos 
and “create general havoc.” Hoping, however, to reengage Teller 
and deal with its own sense that the lab had become too 
conservative, the committee suggested creating an advanced 
division to work on long-range, even far-out, ideas, with a leader 
who would be persona grata to both Bradbury and Teller. Bethe’s 
name was floated, since he got along well with both men. 
Oppenheimer urged that the suggestion be carried out quickly, 
since, as he put it, “the present ambiguous situation cannot be held 


ambiguous very long.”31 

Bradbury was under fearful pressure. Again and again he flew 
east to appear before the Washington brass. Aware, as he put it, of 
“rather thinly veiled criticism,” he nonetheless reminded skeptics 
that every weapon development currently under way had “arisen 
out of the suggestion and, in many cases, the urging, of this 
laboratory,” and warned that siphoning off manpower and 
resources would only slow things down.32 

Under tremendous pressure themselves, the lab’s theoreticians, 
explosives experts, cryogenists, and metallurgists were working all- 
out to prepare two series of tests: one, a preliminary fission series in 
Nevada in the spring; the other, a first test of the radiation- 
implosion concept in the Pacific the following fall. While lab 
members noticed occasionally that the director was out of town, 
Bradbury took pains to keep them from any inkling of the ordeal he 
was undergoing back east. Mark, who worked with him as closely 
as anyone, had no idea of this pressure on Bradbury until he read a 
partially declassified version of Gordon Dean’s diary when it was 
published thirty-six years later. “He never let himself sag in my 
presence. He kept it to himself and shielded me and the rest of us 
from the miserable time he was having.”33 

Why, in the midst of the enormous outlay of effort on the 
project, did Bradbury and the rest of the laboratory try so hard to 
hold on to the fractious Teller? Much of the reason lay in the man’s 
tantalizing originality. His insight and curiosity were relentless, and 
he promoted his ideas with evangelical fervor. Moreover, he had 
been right just often enough so that each time he had an 
inspiration, the others strove to divine whether this might be the 
long-awaited stroke of genius. “It would be impossible to run a 
laboratory if you had no Dr. Tellers,” said Max Roy, an associate 
director of the lab, “and equally impossible if you had all Dr. 
Tellers.” Carson Mark put it generously: “He discussed nearly every 
physical detail of almost every problem.... He called attention to 
possibilities. He resolved difficulties, elucidated complicated 
phenomena. His speculations induced speculations in others.” But 
Jacob Wechsler, an engineer who had to coax designs into reality, 
thought otherwise. “You can’t take a massive program and keep 
changing it,” he said. “Such a brilliant, destructive man! It got so 
that each time he came back to visit, we were terrorized. We almost 
hated to see him show up.”34 

No one had any idea about the true extent of Teller’s disloyalty. 
Marshall Rosenbluth, a talented young physicist whose 


contributions were critical, had heard that there was tension, but 
commented that “it didn’t make much difference” at the working 
level. Some lab members were amused by the Hungarian; others 
thought his ideas gained disproportionate attention just because he 
was “obnoxious.” None knew how egregiously he had maligned 
them, and the lab, behind their backs. Teller’s faith and enthusiasm 
were compelling—so they mostly put up with him.ss 

It was Bradbury’s ironic lot, in order to save the program and 
build the H-bomb at the earliest possible moment, that he had to 
deny Edward Teller. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


The Second Lab 


THomas Murray of New York was a well-known inventor and 
entrepreneur. A Democrat and a devout Roman Catholic layman, he 
had been appointed by President Truman to the Atomic Energy 
Commission after David Lilienthal’s resignation in 1950. Murray 
held two hundred patents, had founded his own company, acted as 
receiver of the IRT subway system in New York during World War 
II, and had successfully arbitrated major labor disputes. But he was 
new to the atomic energy program. 

From the moment Edward Teller appeared in his office in 
February 1951, Murray had been a convert to the idea of a second 
laboratory. Each time the matter came up at commission meetings, 
he had spoken strongly in favor. And each time the commissioners 
voted against the idea, he had written a withering dissent. Murray 
used Teller’s criterion, the number of topflight scientists at Los 
Alamos engaged solely in thermonuclear work. Persuaded by Teller 
that a new facility was needed, Murray strove energetically to bring 
it about. Being a solo operator, accustomed to ignoring channels, he 
felt no compunction about going straight to the White House. Twice 
in October 1951 he _ expressed dissatisfaction with the 
thermonuclear effort directly to President Truman, then pressed the 
case for a new lab with Truman’s national security adviser, Sidney 
Souers, as well.i 

In December 1951, a few days after the GAC rejected the 
proposal for a new laboratory for the second time, Murray placed a 
call to Ernest Lawrence, Nobel laureate and inventor of the 
cyclotron, in Berkeley. He outlined the thermonuclear situation as 
he saw it and said that all of his fellow commissioners and 
Oppenheimer’s GAC were claiming that there were too few 
qualified physicists to staff a second facility. Lawrence scoffed and 


suggested that he and Teller become the core of a new enterprise. 
Murray urged Lawrence to become director, saying that Lawrence’s 
prestige would be needed if the opposition from Oppenheimer and 
those who thought as he did was to be overcome. 2 

At a party in Berkeley on New Year’s Day, 1952, Lawrence asked 
a promising postdoctoral student, Herbert York, to stop by his 
office. York was one of a handful of men at Berkeley who had 
worked on the thermonuclear program, having performed 
diagnostic tests on the George shot the year before, and Lawrence 
wondered whether he had an opinion about the need for a second 
lab. The thirty-year-old York, whose experience until then had been 
mostly confined to experimental physics, told Lawrence that he had 
not given it much thought. And so, with the boss’s blessing, he set 
off on a fact-finding tour. After listening to the views of Teller in 
Chicago, Wheeler in Princeton, and officials of the Air Force in 
Washington, he reported back that a new laboratory would be a 
good idea, the very conclusion Lawrence had hoped he would come 
to. 

Lawrence instructed York to draw up preliminary plans. This 
York did, flying back and forth between Berkeley and Chicago all 
winter in an effort to reconcile the vastly different visions of 
Lawrence and Teller. Each time, he found himself editing his 
account so that neither man would be totally alienated by the 
other’s concept. Teller wanted a lab focused on a single objective 
and staffed by world-famous scientists, like Los Alamos during the 
war, while Lawrence wanted something smaller, less ambitious, and 
in fact more open-ended. A product of the plains of South Dakota, 
Lawrence was the kind of leader who had little use for rank or 
organizational charts. He believed in selecting talented young men 
and giving them their head. Since York shared his predilections, the 
emerging plans bore the Lawrence stamp.3 

During the winter of 1952, Teller paid a visit to Berkeley. 
Lawrence escorted him to the nearby townlet of Livermore amid 
orchards and vineyards to show him the Materials Testing 
Accelerator, a pet project of his. Suggesting this as a possible site 
for the new laboratory, Lawrence inquired whether Teller might be 
willing to join. Yes, Teller replied, but only if the lab worked solely 
on thermonuclear weapons. 

Back east, however, with the AEC and the GAC firm in their 
opposition, the drive for a new facility had stalled. In February 
1952, the GAC again declared itself opposed, again praised Los 
Alamos, and pointed out that fission and fusion processes within 


the H-bomb were so closely intertwined that separation between 
them was impossible. The committee concluded for the third time 
that creating a new facility would hurt Los Alamos, while 
producing “no compensating advantages for many years.” 

Over at the joint congressional committee, even Borden and 
committee counsel John Walker appeared resigned to the thought 
that it would take an impressive new advance by the Russians to 
rekindle enthusiasm here. One of them, however, offered a 
suggestion not too far removed from what eventually happened. 
Why shouldn’t an eminent scientist, someone in private life, 
organize a small group of theoretical physicists to work on the H- 
bomb, then approach the AEC to seek funds for a new facility? 

Teller, meanwhile, was his usual mercurial self. After his 
February visit to Lawrence he had a conversation with Murray, who 
advised him to lie low. Afterward Teller thanked him “for your 
good advice.... I have now a much clearer picture of the situation 
and consequently a much better feeling about the way I must 
continue to act. I shall be, as you advise me, very patient and I 
believe, like you do, that things will work out as we hope and as 
they must.” Teller’s optimism, as usual, was short-lived: a few days 
later he confided to Borden that he had given up hope.« 

Yet events continued to unfold. In March, Murray flew to 
California, where he and Lawrence agreed on the need for a change 
of leadership. Lawrence told Teller he hoped that Oppenheimer 
would not be reappointed to the GAC when his term expired the 
next summer, that Arthur Compton of the University of Chicago 
would take his place as chairman, and that Luis Alvarez, leader of 
the Materials Testing Accelerator, would be appointed a member. 
Murray was a friend of fellow industrialist Henry Ford: it occurred 
to him and Lawrence that either the Ford Foundation or the RAND 
Corporation, a recently created Air Force think tank, might be 
persuaded to offer subsidies so that the top advisory jobs would be 
more appealing to those who agreed with them.7 

Finally, to finesse a prediction attributed to Gordon Dean—that 
Bradbury would quit in protest if a new lab were to be set up— 
Murray flew home by way of New Mexico, where he was assured 
by Bradbury himself that he would never resign over such an issue.s 

Meanwhile Senator McMahon, his enthusiasm for a second lab 
undiminished, requested a formal report from the Defense 
Department, an action that proved to be the turning point. Defense 
Secretary Robert Lovett’s first response was to praise Los Alamos 
and declare that it would be a mistake to move the thermonuclear 


program. But two weeks later Lovett did an abrupt about-face, 
urging immediate consideration of a new laboratory and a vastly 
expanded thermonuclear effort. 

Why did Robert Lovett, one of the most self-assured men ever to 
serve in Washington, suddenly have second thoughts? David Tressel 
Griggs, chief scientist of the Air Force, was the key. He had known 
Lovett very well during World War II, when Lovett was assistant 
secretary of war for air. Teller told a member of the joint 
congressional committee staff that a briefing he had given for 
Lovett and the three service secretaries on March 19—a briefing 
arranged by Griggs—had been for the express purpose of turning 
Lovett around, and apparently it did. Possessor of one of the early 
U.S. pilot’s licenses, Lovett had flown countless bombing missions 
with the British over Germany during World War I and was a 
devotee of airpower and Air Force prerogatives alike. His reversal 
on the second laboratory came about not because of any change in 
his beliefs about air warfare but because of the intense campaign 
waged by Teller, Lawrence, and Murray to win him over. Griggs 
had also introduced Teller to General James H. “Jimmy” Doolittle, 
the Air Force hero who had led the famous incendiary raids over 
Tokyo during World War II. Quickly won over by Teller, Doolittle 
spoke to Air Force Secretary Thomas Finletter, who was hearing 
similar advice from his assistant, William A. M. Burden, another 
convert to Teller’s views.9 

Out of the blue, Teller in Chicago now received a summons from 
Finletter. As Teller later described it, the secretary, an austere, self- 
contained lawyer from New York, listened “in icy silence” as Teller 
described the shortcomings of Los Alamos and the likelihood that 
Fuchs had speeded up the Soviet program, and sketched a future 
with a variety of thermonuclear weapons, not just a single big 
bomb. A few days later, Finletter flew to Los Alamos. There he 
found—or thought he found—the same halfhearted attitude Teller 
had told him to expect. Finletter was no sooner back in Washington 
than Teller received another summons, this time from Lovett.1o0 

As Teller waited in the outer office of the unflappable secretary 
of defense, his mood was shaken when Robert LeBaron, chairman 
of the Pentagon’s Military Liaison Committee, said to him, 
“Edward, I’ve done everything I can, but it’s a lost cause.” In 
Lovett’s inner sanctum, however, Teller’s powers of persuasion did 
not fail him: “before I left the Secretary’s office I knew that I had 
won.” 11 

Finletter played the decisive role: he sanctioned the clandestine, 


out-of-channels meetings between David Griggs and staff members 
of the joint congressional committee, and he encouraged Griggs to 
set up half a dozen briefings by Teller and his RAND associates 
which added immeasurably to the pressure, especially from the Air 
Force. At these sessions for officials of State, Defense, and the Joint 
Chiefs, the RAND scientists displayed charts illustrating thermal, 
gamma, and shock effects from thermonuclear bombs at various 
megatonnages, dropped from various altitudes. Teller followed up 
by emphasizing the Russians’ competence, the risk that Fuchs had 
put them ahead, and the appalling danger should the Soviet Union 
build the thermonuclear first. Finally, he pleaded for new talent 
and a new laboratory to supplement the current desultory effort. To 
these briefings was added the threat that if the AEC refused to 
establish a new laboratory, the Air Force might do so on its own. 12 

Gordon Dean was ordinarily a virtuoso at rising above pique. But 
he was infuriated by Teller’s latest end run. Privately, he fumed 
that Lovett “knows virtually nothing about the atomic program.” 
And, in as restrained a manner as he could summon, he complained 
to Secretary of State Dean Acheson and to Lovett’s deputy, William 
Foster, both colleagues on the atomic energy subcommittee of the 
NSC, that he had endured Teller’s complaints for two years now 
and that “while representing the finest in scientific brains, Teller 
did not always have a good feel for ... administrative headaches.” 
To the president’s incoming national security adviser, James Lay, 
Dean attributed Lovett’s change of heart to “one man’s [Teller’s] 
kicking up a fuss with people ... who don’t know the background.” 
It would be “the worst thing in the world ... to disrupt the morale 
of the lab when they are breaking their necks” to prepare the first 
test of a true thermonuclear device.13 

But Dean recognized handwriting on the wall when he saw it 
and reluctantly agreed to meet with Ernest Lawrence. First, 
however, the GAC in late April praised the existing program as 
“sound, constructive, and very likely indeed to lead to success,” and 
made one last effort to deflect the pressure. Noting that scientists 
from Berkeley had worked on instrumentation at Greenhouse, and 
that York was interested in testing componentry, the committee 
suggested by way of compromise that the Berkeley group be invited 
to help with the testing program and even with broader problems— 
so long as it did not drain manpower from Los Alamos. 
Characterizing the situation as “an unhappy one in which a fairly 
technical decision is being forced by high-pressure methods,” 
Oppenheimer observed that the new enterprise would “have to go 


fast, or it will not go at all,” his way of saying that Los Alamos was 
on the verge of a breakthrough that would prove a new lab 
unnecessary. 14 

Soon afterward, the AEC echoed the GAC’s praise for Los Alamos 
and repeated its opposition to a new laboratory. The commissioners 
agreed with the GAC’s recommendation and invited the Berkeley 
scientists to join in “securing diagnostic information on the 
behavior of thermonuclear devices.” Once established in this work, 
they added, the California group would be “encouraged to submit 
... proposals of areas of further thermonuclear research.” 15 

Ernest Lawrence was content. Experienced entrepreneur that he 
was, he knew that the goals of the new operation needed no 
spelling out. In Washington, second lab supporters were likewise 
satisfied. What mattered to them was not the AEC’s rhetorical 
opposition but the reality that it was pulling Berkeley into the 
program. With Lawrence in the picture, the rest would follow. But 
Teller disagreed, demanding a clear mandate. He distrusted the 
AEC and doubted that it would ever sanction a new lab devoted 
wholly to thermonuclear weapons, he was suspicious of Lawrence’s 
priorities, and he considered Herbert York too inexperienced to run 
the place. Besides, Teller wanted to stay in Chicago, where the Air 
Force had, he believed, promised him a laboratory of his own. By 
early summer 1952, his allies—Murray, David Griggs, and Robert 
LeBaron of the Defense Department, and Walker and Borden of the 
joint congressional committee—were all trying to persuade him to 
go to Berkeley, while he was inclined to refuse. 16 

Teller was on hand, however, at Berkeley’s Claremont Hotel in 
mid-July for a celebration of the new laboratory. Unexpectedly, 
after a considerable amount of alcohol had been imbibed by all, 
Teller announced that he would not be joining after all. Lawrence 
was unfazed, having already intimated to York that they might be 
better off without him. But Captain John T. Hayward of the AEC’s 
Division of Military Applications intervened: some of those at the 
celebration spotted Gordon Dean racing downstairs to dictate a 
“warm and cordial” letter committing the AEC to the new facility’s 
going ahead on a broad front. Teller, whose wife and children had 
already arrived in California, agreed to remain.17 


The new laboratory, set in Livermore, opened officially on 
September 2, 1952, and was at first called Project Whitney, after 
the highest mountain on the West Coast. Although Lawrence 
continued to insist that it was not, and never would be, the second 


laboratory, within a few years it became just that, moving from 
diagnostics to full-scale design and development. In the beginning, 
Lawrence was the nominal director, with York the acting director 
and Teller the presiding genius. The lab grew quickly, and it did, as 
proponents had prophesied, draw new talent into the program. To 
Teller’s initial chagrin, those who came were not the world-class 
physicists he had dreamed of but young, newly minted Ph.D.’s. 
Nearly all had been students of Lawrence’s. Charles Critchfield, a 
former student of Teller’s, refused to join. Like many others, he was 
fond of the man but did not want to work for him—“If he’s not in 
charge, he’s not happy.” Another refusenik was Francis Low, a 
thirty-year-old postdoc at the Institute for Advanced Study. 
Oppenheimer summoned Low and young Murray Gell-Mann to his 
office in Princeton. He sat by without comment while Teller made 
his pitch, asking the younger men to work with him. Low drove 
Teller to the railway station afterward, but he did not join the 
project.is 

Besides increasing the number of physicists in the program, 
especially experimentalists, the new laboratory greatly expanded 
the number and variety of new weapons in the U.S. arsenal. That is, 
after early failures—its first two tests, of uranium devices designed 
by Teller, were embarrassing fizzles. But by 1956, the Livermore 
lab was finally on its way. Ironically, the Air Force, which had done 
so much to bring the new lab into being, continued to order its 
weapons from Los Alamos, while the Army and Navy, which had 
not pushed for the lab, patronized Livermore. Livermore made a 
specialty of building miniaturized warheads and is perhaps best 
known for designing the warhead for the Navy’s Polaris missile. 

The Air Force’s continuing patronage of Los Alamos illustrates 
what had happened. Top brass at the Air Force, including Secretary 
Finletter, believed what Griggs and Teller told them, while officers 
at the working level, who dealt day to day with Los Alamos, trusted 
Bradbury. Bradbury did not overpromise, he did not stimulate 
military requirements for weapons he was not ready to produce, 
and he stayed well within his cost estimates. But the higher-ups 
mistook his workaday manner and his too-evident lack of 
enthusiasm when they arrived on time-consuming inspection trips 
for absence of charisma and lack of commitment to the program. 

Herbert York in later years said that Teller’s politicking failed 
—“It was Lawrence who rescued the enterprise.” To have him, even 
nominally, at the helm was a gold-plated guarantee. And Lawrence 
wanted the lab that came into being at Livermore. The Materials 


Testing Accelerator, the huge device he had been building there 
and in which he had invested his prestige, had become an 
embarrassment, and he was anxious to save face. The new lab 
solved his problem. It likewise provided a graceful way out for the 
AEC, with Gordon Dean and his supporters now able to claim that it 
was not a new facility being created but an existing one converted 
to new uses. 

The country now had two enormously costly laboratories 
competing with each other to produce ever more streamlined 
designs. Together, Livermore and Los Alamos created the vast 
arsenal of superfluous nuclear weaponry that curses us today. 19 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


A New Era 


THE MEN AND WOMEN Of Los Alamos took creation of the new lab hard. 
It was an ill-deserved slap in the face, and at a moment when they 
were working all-out to prepare the first trial of the Ulam-Teller 
concept. The test, christened Mike in honor of the expected 
megaton yield, was scheduled to take place in the fall of 1952 on 
Elugelab, an island at the northern end of the Pacific atoll of 
Eniwetok. 

The work to be done was awe-inspiring, in scale and complexity 
something like the logistics for one of the great Pacific landings in 
World War II. Sections of the test device, plus experimental and 
support material, were being fabricated in shops all over the United 
States; for reasons of secrecy, no subcontractor was told the 
complete story about how the parts he made were to be used. A 
major sea- and airborne task force would be required, with the 
components—hundreds of tons of them—hauled to Oakland, 
California, for shipment, and other parts flown directly to Eniwetok 
in airplanes far less capable than those used today. Making sure 
that the parts arrived in the right place at exactly the right moment 
entailed almost unimaginably close coordination. 

To make the test, and analysis of the results, as simple as 
possible, liquid deuterium had been selected as the hydrogen fuel. 
This decision caused cryogenic problems never dealt with before: 
for these, the engineer Jacob Wechsler was in charge. Every month, 
sometimes more frequently, Wechsler traveled by train from New 
Mexico to Boulder, Colorado, where the National Bureau of 
Standards had built a hydrogen liquefaction plant; to Buffalo, New 
York, where American Car and Foundry was casting and welding 
the heavy steel casing and the cab under which the device would be 
assembled; and then to the Boston area, where the A. D. Little 


Cambridge Corporation was producing enormous dewars in which 
liquid deuterium and other liquefied gases would be stored at 
Eniwetok. Transporting the dewars from the East Coast to Oakland, 
and from there to the Pacific, was itself a vast undertaking, and one 
that, again, required the most precise coordination. Ultimately, to 
achieve, by the explosion itself, the highest temperatures ever 
attained on earth, the hydrogen fuel had to be cooled to minus 423 
degrees Fahrenheit, one of the lowest temperatures ever generated, 
and maintained there in the scorching heat of the Pacific. 
Calculations for Mike had begun in June of 1951 and entailed 
millions of computations, so many that at one point, in 1952, they 
required the full-time use of four large calculators, the Princeton 
and Los Alamos MANIACs designed by John von Neumann, and 
two others: the UNIVAC in Philadelphia and the SEAC in 
Washington, D.C. The questions that were fed into these calculators 
originated mostly at Los Alamos, where design and engineering 
were directed by the Theoretical Megaton Group (also called the 
Panda Committee) under Carson Mark and Marshall Holloway.2 
Years afterward, as Wechsler recalled the preparations for Mike, 
he gave credit first to Holloway, for managing the extraordinarily 
complicated logistical details, and second to Mark, for his 
willingness to compromise on design problems to help minimize the 
chances of failure. Wechsler described sitting in Mark’s office trying 
to think of ways to channel radiation from the fission primary down 
the cylindrical container so that it would bombard the back of the 
fusion secondary. And he remembered Mark’s saying, “Look, if we 
firm up the plan and do this, can we then hold this other thing 
open?” Mark considered Holloway a steady manager and someone 
he could rely on. For example, if the theoreticians lagged a little in 
delivering computations, he knew Holloway would find a margin of 
a week or two. “I was always sure he had a little something up his 
sleeve.”s 
Teller at one stage predicted that Mike would fail: because of a 
physical law called Taylor instability, radiation from the primary 
would be absorbed in the casing. But Hans Bethe, a genius at 
understanding the physical interaction between radiation and shell, 
asserted, confidently, that there would be no Taylor instability.4 
The lab could not afford failure, or even delay. Each time a 
potential glitch threatened, the question was not Can the device be 
made perfect? but Can it be made to work at all? The result was 
what weaponeers call overdesign. One example was the outer 
casing, manufactured in Buffalo and shipped from Oakland aboard 


the USS Curtiss, disassembled, for reasons of secrecy, in heavy steel 
rings. To keep the device from blowing apart prematurely, the 
casing had welded steel walls a foot thick, which accounted for 
much of Mike’s eighty-two-ton weight. Later, with the experience of 
Mike behind them, the engineers were able to design walls that 
were much thinner, a key to making bombs that could be carried by 
aircraft. But for Mike, most choices were on the conservative side. 
The result was a device that was not—and not meant to be—a 
deliverable weapon. Nicknamed “the Sausage” because of its shape, 
Mike has been described as “essentially a large thermos bottle,” 
standing just over twenty feet high and not quite seven feet in 
diameter, with diagnostic tubes protruding at either end. Design 
changes were made until the moment of final assembly, with 
Carson Mark on hand to interpret theoretical questions into 
language the experimentalists could understand.5 

Even the primary, one of the least problematic parts of the 
design owing to the lab’s work on fission, required last-minute 
changes: to reduce the risk of predetonation, a new core, with 
altered quantities of plutonium and enriched uranium, was flown to 
Eniwetok and installed only a day or two before the test. 


While the lab was going at it full steam, four well-known scientists 
questioned whether the test should take place at all. In the billiard 
room of Washington’s august Cosmos Club in the spring of 1952, 
Robert Oppenheimer, I. I. Rabi, and Charles Lauritsen, the president 
of Caltech, found themselves comparing notes about the danger 
that Mike would end—for all time—any hope of agreement with 
the Russians not to develop hydrogen weapons. Once we held a 
test, the USSR was sure to follow. And since any hydrogen 
explosion would throw up debris, secrecy was out of the question: 
either nation would know when the other set off a thermonuclear 
device. Once again, the men discussed an alternative: prepare a 
test, and then tell the Russians that we would not go ahead unless 
they did so, an idea similar to the Fermi-Rabi proposal of 1949. 
They telephoned their wartime colleague, Vannevar Bush, the 
crusty, independent-minded president of the Carnegie Institution of 
Washington, and asked him to join them. On Bush’s arrival, they 
found that he was thinking along the same lines. 

The Mike test was scheduled for November 1, three days before 
the election of a new president, and the four scientists considered it 
unconscionable for either candidate, Republican Dwight 
Eisenhower or Democrat Adlai Stevenson, to be confronted upon 


his election by a fait accompli of such fateful import, and with 
consequences for which he would be responsible. With engineers 
and other specialists building test components all over the country 
and servicemen helping in the Pacific, word could easily leak out 
and become an issue in the closing days of the campaign. Moreover, 
they were certain that a test would be invaluable to the Russians as 
they studied our fallout, and would help them on their way to an H- 
bomb of their own.7 

Vannevar Bush, wartime director of the Office of Scientific 
Research and Development and a member of the Acheson-Lilienthal 
working group in 1945, was so concerned that Mike would end any 
hope of ever reaching an agreement with the Russians that after 
meeting with his colleagues at the Cosmos Club he immediately 
went to Secretary of State Acheson to urge that the test be 
postponed. Acheson turned a deaf ear.s 

Hans Bethe, too, was drawn into discussions of postponement. In 
the early summer of 1952, he was in Los Alamos when 
Oppenheimer asked him to seek Bradbury’s views about the 
consequences of a delay. Bradbury answered that a delay of ten 
days or so would do no harm. After that, however, bad weather 
might force postponement until spring. Bradbury suggested that the 
candidates be told of the pending test ahead of time so that the new 
president would be prepared for what faced him on taking office.» 

Bethe was in a painful position. Here was someone who had, in 
his words, been “terribly shocked” by Truman’s decision to proceed 
with the H-bomb, who had at first refused to work on 
thermonuclear weapons, who had joined the effort with great 
reluctance and had been cheered by every indication that the bomb 
might not work. Yet here he was at Los Alamos in mid-1952, doing 
the final calculations for Mike. About this time Gordon Dean, beset 
by Air Force warnings that the Russians were probably ahead, 
asked Bethe to compare H-bomb progress by the two countries in 
light of Fuchs’s spying. Bethe responded in a long and thoughtful 
memo expressing doubt that Fuchs had been of much help to the 
Russians, since the ideas he was in a position to give had turned out 
to be invalid. He said that thermonuclear development in this 
country had been “about as rapid as was technically feasible” once 
the Ulam-Teller ideas appeared, and he pleaded for the utmost 
secrecy. “If we now publicly intensify our efforts, we shall force the 
Russians even more into developing this weapon which we have 
every reason to dread.” 10 

Then, late that summer, Bethe wrote a second letter to Dean, 


pointing out that a successful test three days before the election 
could become a last-minute campaign issue. He urged that Mike be 
postponed until the day after the election or, better yet, until mid- 
November, when the “smoke of [campaign] battle” would have 
cleared. As Bradbury had done earlier, Bethe urged that Eisenhower 
and Stevenson be briefed. He suggested that if Dean did not wish to 
do the briefing, someone like Oppenheimer could do it.11 

Oppenheimer, too, entered the discussion of test postponement 
once again. He had been appointed chair of a panel tasked by the 
secretary of state to survey relations with the Soviet Union one last 
time for the outgoing Truman administration and consider whether 
there was any way to break the impasse over arms control. The new 
group, called the Disarmament Panel, wanted to try for an 
agreement with the Russians not to engage in thermonuclear 
testing, and in early September, some of its members paid a call on 
Acheson. They, like Bethe and Bush before them, suggested that the 
test be postponed so that the new president would have a chance to 
think about thermonuclear weapons in a much larger context, that 
of the U.S.-Soviet relationship overall. Once a hydrogen device had 
been tested, a threshold would have been crossed, and it would be 
too late.12 

Bethe, members of the Disarmament Panel, and Rabi, who had 
known Eisenhower well when he was president of Columbia 
University, probably hoped that a postponement until mid- 
November would lead to a longer delay so that the new president 
would have time to test Soviet willingness to negotiate. 

Displeased at seeing Oppenheimer as part of the discussion, 
Gordon Dean told a colleague that he was “a little concerned at 
Oppenheimer’s recently undue interest in postponement. I can see 
the plays from where I am sitting and I am not happy.” Dean’s 
position and that of the president on the timing of the test were 
delicate enough without meddling by a scientist whose left-wing 
past, amid the increasingly clamorous musings of Senator 
McCarthy, made him a point of vulnerability for the atomic energy 
program. Truman and Dean were Democratic loyalists who hoped 
for a victory by Stevenson. Years afterward, Deborah Gore Dean 
said that her father had wanted the Mike test held on schedule in 
hopes that a successful shot might swing the election to the 
Democrats, and the president probably felt the same way. In 
addition, he surely wanted to leave a successful test as his 
administration’s legacy. But if he was tempted to go ahead prior to 
the election on political grounds, he gave no hint, putting out word 


instead that he would have no objection if operational difficulties 
should cause postponement. By mid-October it was clear, however, 
that no such difficulties existed, and Dean instructed AEC 
commissioner Eugene Zuckert, who was on his way to the Pacific, 
to find out whether a brief postponement would cause problems. 
Zuckert’s answer was yes: commanders on the ground feared a 
hydrogen leak if the test was delayed.1is 

And so Mike went off as scheduled at 7:15 a.m. on November 1 
(October 31 in the United States). Almost immediately an enormous 
white fireball appeared in the sky like a half-risen sun, and as it 
rose higher, the ocean around it turned red. Elugelab, the island on 
which the shot was set off, likewise turned a brilliant red, and after 
burning six hours, it disappeared. A mushroom cloud one hundred 
miles across rose to fill the horizon, spreading eighty million tons of 
radioactive earth, gases, and water into the air and atmosphere. At 
10.4 megatons, it was the largest man-made explosion ever, forty- 
six times the size of the George shot eighteen months earlier, and a 
thousand times the size of the bomb that had destroyed Hiroshima. 
A sailor who witnessed the shot remarked: “You would swear that 
the whole world was on fire.”14 

With the success of Mike, the world moved into a new era just as 
surely as it had on that fateful day in August 1945. Proportionally, 
a weapon producing an explosive force of a single megaton 
represented as large an increase in destructive power as the atomic 
bomb had over a conventional high-explosive weapon. Moreover, 
with much of Mike’s yield, more than three-quarters, coming from 
the layer of U-238 that surrounded the fusionable fuel, it was clear 
that depending on the amount of uranium used, a thermonuclear 
device could be built to have unlimited destructive power. As 
Herbert York said afterward, “fission bombs, destructive as they 
might be, were thought of as being limited in power. Now, it 
seemed, we had learned how to brush even these limits aside and to 
build bombs whose power was boundless.” 15 

Edward Teller, who had for so long sought a weapon of 
unlimited destructive power, did not witness the test. Having 
predicted that Mike would fail, he chose to sit out the event close 
by a seismograph in Berkeley; when the lines on the graph 
registered a large explosion, he sent a triumphal telegram to Los 
Alamos: “It’s a boy.” Later he told a friend there, Fred Hoyt, that 
had he known Los Alamos was capable of pulling it off, he would 
not have insisted on a second laboratory. 

Vannevar Bush viewed Mike as a lost opportunity. Gone was the 


possibility of an agreement with Russia never to cross that 
threshold. “I still think we made a grave error in conducting that 
test at that time and not attempting to make that simple agreement 
with Russia. I think history will show that was a turning point ... 
that those who pushed that thing through ... without making that 
attempt have a great deal to answer for.” 16 


PART FOUR 


1952-1954 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


Sailing Close to the Wind 


THROUGHOUT THAT SUMMER and fall, the ad hoc panel appointed by 
Acheson and chaired by Robert Oppenheimer had been meeting to 
consider the largest questions of atomic policy. Besides 
Oppenheimer, the panel was composed of four other distinguished 
Americans: Vannevar Bush; John Dickey, president of Dartmouth 
College; Joseph Johnson, president of the Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace; and Allen Dulles, deputy director of the CIA. It 
was a sign of the increasingly security-conscious times that the 
panel had to begin its work late because a question had arisen 
about clearing one of the distinguished members. As for Robert 
Oppenheimer, who had chaired innumerable government groups 
and was the natural leader of this one, he was sailing close to the 
wind—closer, perhaps, than he knew. 

His enemies found an opening in the fact that his term on the 
GAC, along with the terms of two other members who had opposed 
the crash program, would expire in the summer. Commissioner 
Murray, an archconservative who maintained a channel of his own 
to J. Edgar Hoover, started the ball rolling in early 1952 by 
complaining to Hoover that Oppenheimer had delayed the weapons 
program. Soon afterward, in California, Murray discussed with 
Ernest Lawrence the names of possible replacements for Oppie as 
chairman of the GAC. Next, the California scientist Kenneth Pitzer 
brought matters into the open by delivering a speech in which he 
charged that there had been “serious and unnecessary delays” in 
the H-bomb program and urged that the influence of “scientific 
kibbitzers” be reduced. Pitzer’s were not the accusations of an 
obscure West Coast chemistry professor: as AEC research director, 
he had spent two years watching the Washington goings-on at close 
range. After his speech in California, when the FBI came to him, 


Pitzer said that in contrast to an earlier time he now had doubts, 
not just about Oppenheimer’s judgment, but about his loyalty as 
well. He suggested that Teller might have something to add.1 

Teller now made charges that carried special weight. Contacted 
by the FBI in New Mexico, where he was working on Mike, Teller 
for the nth time accused Oppenheimer of discouraging others from 
working on the H-bomb. Oppenheimer, he said, was motivated not 
by subversive tendencies but by “personal vanity”: he did not want 
his bomb, the A-bomb, trumped by another, more powerful, 
weapon. According to the FBI report, Teller added that he would do 
“most anything to see subject separated from General Advisory 
Committee because of his poor advice.” A couple of weeks later 
Teller—taking the initiative this time—sought a second FBI 
interview in hopes of making sure that the earlier one remained 
secret. To his previous comments, Teller added that as a young 
man, Oppenheimer had suffered “physical and mental attacks 
which may have permanently affected him.” He warned that he 
“had never had the slightest reason to believe that Oppenheimer is 
in any way disloyal,” but that he did not want it known that he had 
raised the loyalty question lest he be asked about Frank 
Oppenheimer and his Party membership. Having raised questions 
about both Robert Oppenheimer’s loyalty and his emotional 
stability, Teller concluded with what was by now a trademark 
threat: if fellow scientists were to learn what he had said, the 
embarrassment would be such that he would have to “sever his 
connections” with the program. Keep my comments secret, he 
warned the FBI, or I’ll quit working on the H-bomb.2 

Teller’s complaints were not new. He had made them before, to 
officials at various levels; but the circumstances this time were 
different. Senator McCarthy was now a power, and Teller was 
talking, not to a lowly congressional staff assistant as he had in 
1950, but to agents of the FBI.3 

Not surprisingly, with members of the scientific community 
being questioned by the FBI, rumors about Oppie floated to the 
surface that spring during the American Physical Society’s annual 
meeting in Washington. At a Cosmos Club gathering in May 1952, 
James Fisk, the AEC’s former director of research, picked up 
“almost vitriolic talk against Dr. Oppenheimer—implying that he 
was unpatriotic.” Gordon Dean told Fisk that he, too, had “seen 
signs of this,” and termed Pitzer’s actions, in _ particular, 
“despicable.”4 

But Pitzer did not quit. He wrote a personal letter to the 


president asking that Oppenheimer be “eased out.” (In an interview 
with the author years later, Pitzer denied that he had written to the 
president.)s Others, too, weighed in. Wendell Latimer, another 
Berkeley chemist, and Harold Urey, a nuclear chemist and Nobel 
Prize winner at the University of Chicago, also wrote to Truman. 
Berkeley physicist Luis Alvarez made a special trip east to lobby Air 
Force Secretary Finletter against reappointing Oppenheimer, and 
former commissioner Lewis Strauss, now a financial consultant in 
New York, raised the issue with Souers and the president in 
person.6 

In addition to Strauss, Alvarez, and the chemists—none of whom 
had participated in the H-bomb program or knew it at first hand— 
others got into the act. Murray tried to enlist his fellow 
commissioners, and Finletter arranged to have the matter voted on 
by the special subcommittee of the National Security Council. 
Gordon Dean of this group voted to reappoint Oppenheimer, along 
with Conant and DuBridge, the other GAC members whose terms 
were expiring, while Lovett and the State Department 
representative who stood in for Acheson voted against.7 

Just then, in the early summer of 1952, Gordon Dean learned 
something that could at any moment erupt into disaster for the 
atomic energy program: the Justice Department was about to indict 
a physicist named Joseph Weinberg for perjury. The potential for 
disaster lay in the fact that Weinberg, a onetime Communist Party 
member, had been a student and a friend of Oppenheimer’s. The 
FBI had been tailing him for years and, in 1943, had recorded a 
conversation between him and the Party organizer of Alameda 
County, California, which seemed to implicate Weinberg in 
espionage. The Justice Department now charged Weinberg with 
lying when he had denied to the government under oath that he 
had attended a Party meeting at Oppie’s house in Berkeley in July 
1941, at which the scientist had allegedly been present. The 
government had only one witness, a man named Paul Crouch, a 
former Communist Party organizer in California who was now a 
paid informer for the FBI. The charges had been simmering for a 
while, Oppenheimer having told a California investigating 
committee in 1950 that he had been in New Mexico in July of 1941 
and had never attended such a meeting, much less hosted it at his 
house. For Gordon Dean, the disastrous potential lay in the fact that 
neither he nor Jay MclInerny, the assistant attorney general charged 
with bringing the case, was convinced that Oppie had told the 
truth. They feared that should he be called to testify, he would lie 


under oath and subsequently be indicted for perjury. Dean was 
worried about the likelihood that such a sequence of events would 
make the AEC a sitting duck for McCarthy or some other red- 
hunting committee chairman in Congress. Dean was therefore 
anxious to get the count naming Oppenheimer dropped from the 
Weinberg indictment—and maneuver Oppie off the GAC before the 
press got wind of the case. Oppenheimer’s attorney, Joseph Volpe, 
made it “crystal clear” (Volpe’s words) to Oppie that Dean wanted 
him off the GAC. Meanwhile, ill with the brain tumor that would 
soon kill him, JCAE chairman Brien McMahon met with McInerny’s 
and Oppenheimer’s lawyers and brokered a deal. Oppenheimer 
decided not to make a fight of it, and Gordon Dean wrote him a 
letter of thanks—“I fully appreciate the reasons behind your 
unwillingness”—that hinted at the behind-the-scenes negotiations.s 

Had Oppie chosen to fight for his place on the GAC he would not 
have succeeded, since National Security Adviser Sidney Souers 
advised the president against reappointing him. Souers said 
afterward that in making his decision he had discounted the 
“loyalty talk” against Oppenheimer but considered it time for “new 
blood” who “believed in the policy of the President.” Despite 
Souers’s denial, the FBI interviews with Teller, Pitzer, and Libby 
and the letters to the White House from Pitzer, Urey, and Latimer 
accomplished their goal: they persuaded Souers that Oppenheimer 
had been opposing the program and should be replaced.» 

Oppenheimer enjoyed being chairman of the GAC. Volpe, 
Oppie’s friend as well as his attorney, called him “Mr. Atom, the 
giant of the business. He loved being sought out for his advice and 
to some extent it went to his head.” Now, facing the possibility that 
he might have to testify in a felony trial, Oppie was distressed by 
the likelihood that he would forfeit his enormous stature with the 
public, the government, and the scientific community. Kitty 
Oppenheimer, Volpe remembered, “took it more calmly than he 
did, and was extremely supportive.” Gordon Dean, too, treated 
Oppenheimer with kid gloves. “Mr. Atom” had on occasion been a 
headache for Dean, personifying, as he did, traits that made the 
scientists difficult for a government official to deal with: they had 
been thrown into the public spotlight unprepared, they did not 
know the political game, and they enjoyed their newly acquired 
renown all too much. Dean felt a measure of personal attachment 
for Oppenheimer, however, and a respect that had risen during the 
second-lab affair, and did his utmost to balance fairness to the man 
with the best interests of the atomic energy program. 1o 


The Weinberg case was like a high explosive that could blow up 
at any moment. Dean now made a highly unusual request: he asked 
the president to intervene with the Justice Department to keep 
Oppenheimer’s name out of it. Should the prosecution call Oppie as 
a witness, Dean warned, “it will mean that Dr. Oppenheimer must 
take the stand and contradict the testimony of Crouch, the only 
government witness. It will be Oppenheimer’s word against 
Crouch’s.... Such a conflict in the atmosphere of a criminal court, 
involving two such colorful figures, will attract great attention.... 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s good name will be greatly impaired and much 
of his value to the country destroyed.” Such was the risk that the 
president overcame his reluctance to intercede and wrote to Dean, 
with a copy to Attorney General Tom Clark, “I am very much 
interested in the Weinberg-Oppenheimer connection. I feel as you 
do that Dr. Oppenheimer is an honest man. In this day of character 
assassination and unjustified smear tactics, it seems that good men 
are made to suffer unnecessarily.” The president’s words were 
brave, but the White House in reality was wary of embarrassment, 
so much so that Truman did not send his ritual letter of thanks to 
the outgoing members of the GAC until the eve of his departure 
from office.11 

Fortunately for Dean and the AEC, the outcome was 
anticlimactic: the trial did not take place until March 1953, safely 
past the new president’s inauguration; the incident involving 
Oppenheimer was somehow, miraculously, never mentioned; and 
the jury—to everyone’s astonishment—found Weinberg innocent.12 

The Weinberg affair, nonetheless, showed the difficulty of 
conducting rational policy with political dynamite in the air. At a 
meeting of the special subcommittee of the National Security 
Council in October, for example, Acheson suggested that the United 
States might use the upcoming Mike test as an opportunity to try a 
new arms control approach to the USSR, and Paul Nitze, chief of 
the State Department’s Policy Planning Staff, raised the possibility 
of a test moratorium. At this, Secretary of Defense Robert Lovett 
nearly leaped out of his chair. Such ideas, he said, must be put out 
of mind and any documents that so much as mentioned them 
destroyed. The reason? Proposals such as these might be traced to 
“fellows like Dr. Oppenheimer, whose motivations in these matters 
were suspect.” It turned out that Lovett had been talking with 
Gordon Dean about Oppenheimer and was fearful of “adverse 
developments,” by which he meant the still ticking Weinberg 
case. 13 


At this very time, Oppenheimer and his colleagues on the 
Disarmament Panel were putting the final touches on their 
thoughtful and farsighted report, in which they said that nuclear 
weapons were not merely a military problem but were “intimately 
connected with the largest questions of national policy.” The United 
States, they said, had allowed itself to become frozen in a posture 
of “rigidity and totality of commitment which seem to us very 
dangerous,” and they warned of catastrophe unless our policies 
became more flexible. The panel singled out for special criticism 
the excessive secrecy whereby the public had not been told even 
minimal facts about the size of the nation’s stockpile, about the 
phenomenal pace at which both sides were accumulating 
“unprecedented destructive power,” or about the fact that beyond a 
certain number of weapons it was futile to try to meet the Soviet 
threat simply by “keeping ahead of the Russians.” Finally, the panel 
urged the nation’s leaders to deal more openly with the American 
people and reach a collective understanding with the “other major 
free nations” whereby the responsibility for nuclear weapons would 
be shared. Despite its pessimism—the panel could see no path to 
arms control as long as Joseph Stalin was alive—the report closed 
on a note of prophecy. It exhorted the U.S. government to keep 
channels open and listen carefully for the slightest change in 
attitude once the Soviet dictator passed from the scene. Two 
months later, the seemingly immortal Stalin lay dead.14 


It was a measure of Robert Oppenheimer’s fatalism, arrogance, and, 
possibly, despair that he and the panel of which he was chairman 
had ventured far beyond their mandate, into the deepest waters of 
foreign and domestic policy. 

He could not have been oblivious of the storm clouds gathering 
in the summer of 1952. He had been maneuvered off the GAC, and 
the GAC itself had suffered major defeats with rejection of its H- 
bomb and second-lab positions. At lunch at the Cosmos Club in May 
1952, he, Conant, and Lee DuBridge had discussed the “dark 
words” in circulation about him, as well as reports that the three of 
them had sabotaged the H-bomb program. He had heard about a 
rancorous luncheon in Georgetown that spring at which David 
Griggs, chief Air Force scientist, had argued about the H-bomb with 
two of Oppie’s closest colleagues. In response to Griggs’s charge 
that the GAC had obstructed the effort, one of them, Rabi, arranged 
for Griggs to meet with Oppenheimer in Princeton so that he could 
read minutes of the various GAC meetings at which the H-bomb 


project had been discussed. Griggs was disappointed, however, 
when Oppie showed him, not the minutes he had hoped to see, but 
the Halloween meeting annexes in which the GAC members spelled 
out their reasons for opposing a crash program. This effort at 
rapprochement led to disaster when Oppie’s failure to make 
“minutes” available only deepened Griggs’s suspicions. It is not 
clear from existing accounts, however, which minutes Griggs had 
expected to see, those of the Halloween meeting—because of their 
sensitivity, Manley’s minutes had been destroyed—or those of 
subsequent meetings, which, in Rabi’s view, would have proven to 
him that the GAC had spared no effort to comply with the 
president’s order.1is 

The meeting at Princeton veered toward acrimony, moreover, 
when Griggs asked whether Oppenheimer was spreading a story 
that Thomas Finletter had said that if only the United States had a 
couple of hundred hydrogen bombs, “it could rule the world.” 
Oppenheimer bluntly replied that he believed the story and did not 
deny relaying it to others. Then Oppenheimer asked whether Griggs 
considered him pro-Soviet, or merely confused. Griggs said he 
wished he knew. Next, Oppenheimer asked whether Griggs had 
raised questions about his loyalty with Finletter and General Hoyt 
Vandenberg. Griggs admitted that he had. Their meeting ended 
with Oppenheimer’s telling Griggs he was paranoid. 16 

What Oppie did not know was that a full year before, in May 
1951, Finletter had canceled his Air Force clearance in the wake of 
a conversation with California physicist Luis Alvarez and after 
reading portions of Oppenheimer’s FBI file. Not only were Air Force 
Secretary Thomas Finletter and Air Force Chief of Staff Hoyt 
Vandenberg convinced that Oppenheimer was a security risk, but 
he had infuriated the Air Force by participating in a study with 
Caltech scientists about ways to adapt atomic weapons to ground 
warfare. The study, Project Vista, had been commissioned by the 
Army and the Air Force as a result of their experience in Korea, 
where the A-bomb would have been useless against troops on the 
ground. The study was addressed to fears that the Russians, with 
their vast superiority in manpower, could roll over Western Europe 
and annex its industrial power. Should the Russians make such a 
move, the Western allies would have no way to counter them 
except by bombing Soviet cities and civilians. Was there a way to 
adapt nuclear weapons, by making them small and precisely 
targeted, so as to deter the Russian land armies and ward off an 
invasion of Western Europe? 17 


After working on the study during the spring and early summer 
of 1951, the chairman—Lee DuBridge—and the rest of the Vista 
group had invited Oppenheimer to Pasadena. With his genius at 
synthesizing the ideas of others, Oppenheimer redrafted the 
committee’s work and helped write what was to become the 
controversial chapter 5 of the report, dealing with the question of 
tactical weapons. Although Oppenheimer was a latecomer to the 
project and his views were shared by all the other scientists who 
were working on it, he inevitably became the lightning rod. To the 
Air Force, Vista’s recommendation that the Strategic Air Command 
relinquish its monopoly of fissionable material and share with the 
other services could only mean abolition of its strategic air arm. 
Similarly, the Air Force objected to the proposal that instead of the 
SAC’s being assigned to carry out major bombing strikes inside the 
Soviet heartland, a new tactical air force be created that could drop 
small nuclear bombs on enemy airfields and supply lines in Europe. 
To the “big bomb” advocates in the Air Force, these proposals 
spelled heresy. And to powerful individuals already suspicious of 
Oppenheimer, chapter 5 of Vista smacked of treason.is 

Oppenheimer did not help his cause when Finletter, at the 
suggestion of two assistants, invited him to lunch in his private 
dining room at the Pentagon. He arrived late, rebuffed the 
secretary’s efforts to be gracious, and became, in the words of one 
of those present, “rude beyond belief.” He questioned the morality 
of the big-bomb strategy. Finletter replied that it would be more 
immoral to forgo our most effective weapon before conditions were 
ripe for disarmament. Their meeting ended in _ disaster. 
Oppenheimer was said to have exuded contempt for everyone in 
the room and, the moment the meal ended, rose, turned on his 
heels, and walked out.19 

The Pentagon luncheon did nothing to quell the secretary’s 
suspicions, and, learning that a group of Vista scientists, including 
Oppenheimer, were on their way to Europe to present their ideas to 
NATO commander Dwight D. Eisenhower, Finletter tried but failed 
to scuttle the visit. Next, he summoned General Lauris Norstad, the 
ranking Air Force officer at NATO near Paris, back to Washington 
for a briefing. The scientists—DuBridge, Oppenheimer, Charles 
Lauritsen, and Walt Whitman, now chairman of the Pentagon’s 
Research and Development Board—first called on Eisenhower, who, 
according to Lauritsen, was “fascinated” by the idea of using 
tactical airpower to defend Europe, favored publication of chapter 
5, and said he wished he had written it himself. Next they met with 


Norstad. Fresh from his briefing at the Pentagon, Norstad at first 
gave an impassioned defense of the strategic concept. When the 
scientists saw him a second time, however, they found him calmer, 
and after Oppenheimer had hastily redrafted one or two provisions, 
Norstad pronounced himself satisfied. 20 

The Air Force in Washington was another story. Having first 
tried to water down the report, Finletter now moved to suppress it 
entirely. All copies were recalled and chapter 5 disappeared from 
view until its partial declassification in 1980, nearly thirty years 
later. Even today, it is not available in its entirety. While chapter 5 
was never allowed to become part of the dialogue, the suggestions 
put forward there soon became policy. In early 1952, even before 
the complete Vista report was issued, the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
authorized General Eisenhower to start planning for the use of 
tactical nuclear weapons in Europe, and two years later NATO 
made a formal commitment to use them for defense. Progress in the 
aim and design of nuclear weapons, along with the imperatives of 
strategy, vindicated chapter 5 long before the Air Force could bring 
itself to accept it.21 

Meanwhile, on a personal level, chapter 5 seemed once again to 
bear out Finletter’s suspicions. If in the spring of 1951 he had 
judged Oppenheimer a security risk, by autumn, with the Vista 
affair at its height, he had concluded that the scientist might be 
something more sinister. One of Finletter’s subordinates, Garrison 
Norton, came to share these suspicions, confiding to a congressional 
staff member that he “was awake nights worrying” about the 
physicist. 22 

Air Force officials were not alone. Bill Borden, executive director 
of the joint congressional committee and Brien McMahon’s trusted 
right hand, had first doubted Oppenheimer’s loyalty back in early 
1950, following the GAC’s verdict against the crash program and 
Fuchs’s arrest for espionage. Since then Teller had fueled Borden’s 
doubts by telling him repeatedly that the thermonuclear program 
was lagging, and Oppenheimer was to blame. All this time Borden 
had been engaged in a dialogue with himself over whether 
Oppenheimer took the positions he did because he was (a) an agent 
of the Soviet Union or (b) simply wrongheaded. In the space of just 
a few days in the spring of 1952 Borden took several contradictory 
actions. He drafted a letter for McMahon to send to the president 
warning that the scientist might have been in touch with the Soviet 
spy network even before the opening of Los Alamos, and an 
alternative suggesting that “sincere and patriotic” as Oppie’s 


motives might be, his influence was nonetheless harmful. And he 
wrote a memo to himself summarizing the FBI’s most up-to-date 
file. “The whole trend and connotation of this summary is to the 
effect that Dr. Oppenheimer is not that which might be most 
feared.”23 

With Borden engaged in debate with himself, he and McMahon 
decided to hire Frank Cotter, a former FBI agent with a year’s 
experience at Los Alamos. On the morning Cotter reported for work 
in June 1952, Borden handed him the transcript of the FBI’s 
interview with Fuchs in England, told him it hinted that there had 
been a second spy in the Manhattan Project, and instructed him to 
find out whether it was Oppenheimer. 

The thirty-year-old Cotter, whose fair hair, blue eyes, and open 
countenance belied his extensive experience as a street agent, had 
grown up in the Bronx and attended New York University, where— 
he later pointed out—every tenth professor had been a Marxist. The 
idea that someone might be a real, live Communist didn’t faze him. 
But as he read the AEC files on Oppenheimer, Cotter was appalled 
by the fact that Oppenheimer had kept on making monthly 
payments to the Party even after the Hitler-Stalin pact of 1939. 
Cotter knew that many Communists, especially Jewish members, 
had abandoned the Party after that, and he thought it remarkable 
that Oppenheimer should have kept up his payments. Then he 
noticed that nearly everyone close to the scientist—his brother, 
wife, sister-in-law, former students, friends—had been Party 
members. And he noticed that San Francisco police records of the 
death, thought to be suicide, of Oppie’s onetime fiancée, Jean 
Tatlock, were missing from the file. She, too, had belonged to the 
Party. Was there cause for suspicion in this apparent disappearance 
of records? 24 

On sweltering evenings that summer of 1952, Cotter sat in the 
joint congressional committee offices on the Hill and talked over his 
findings with Bill Borden, who, to his surprise, now seemed to take 
Oppie’s side. “No, no,” Borden would say at Cotter’s newest 
discovery. “That doesn’t make him a spy.” Cotter looked up an 
acquaintance, Maurice “Gook” Taylor, a field agent whose 
judgment he respected, and every week or two they met for a beer 
after work. Taylor, who dealt with coded messages coming in to the 
FBI via Soviet cable traffic, was unequivocal. There was, he said, 
“no way” someone as big as Oppenheimer could be engaged in 
espionage without its coming through the signals system. And after 
four months working on the case and finding nothing, Cotter was 


persuaded. Not only Taylor, but Don Walters and Charlie Lyons, 
agents whose job it was to tail Oppenheimer when he was in town, 
assured Cotter that the scientist was beyond suspicion. 2s 

Cotter reported these assurances to Borden and _ other 
congressional staffers who had taken part in their discussions. He 
was therefore very much surprised in the fall of 1952, after what 
must have been fifty or sixty hours of conversation, to find that he 
and Borden had switched sides. Cotter’s suspicions had been 
allayed. Borden’s had flared up again. 

Although McMahon chose not to send either of Borden’s draft 
letters in May warning the president about Oppenheimer, he had 
sent Truman a third missive, also drafted by Borden and 
apocalyptic in tone, which demanded production of H-bombs by 
the hundreds, and had attached a forty-page history of the nuclear 
weapons program compiled by the joint committee staff. Realizing 
that a new administration would soon take office and that he might 
no longer enjoy his accustomed influence, Borden now churned out 
more of these papers, or “Chronologies,” critical of Oppenheimer 
and the AEC. By the fall of 1952, John Walker, committee counsel 
and a Yale Law School friend of Borden’s, was putting final touches 
on an H-bomb chronology that Borden hoped to have on the new 
president’s desk as soon as he was inaugurated. Lewis Strauss, like 
Borden a fervent believer that the bomb had been dangerously 
delayed, contributed material from his copious files, and Teller 
invited committee staffers to spend two weeks with him in 
California so that he, too, might contribute.2« Since the document 
was filled with theoretical material, Walker and Borden sought a 
consultant. In view of the report’s criticisms of the GAC, 
Oppenheimer, and the AEC for allegedly obstructing the H-bomb 
program, they dared not turn to a scientist from Los Alamos or the 
AEC. Instead they chose John Wheeler, who had sided with them in 
the H-bomb and second-lab controversies and was currently 
director of a project in Princeton that was doing sensitive 
computations on the H-bomb. One of the world’s great physicists 
and philosophers, Wheeler was notoriously absentminded, and 
somewhere on the train ride between Princeton and Washington on 
January 6, 1953, he managed to misplace the six highly classified 
pages that Borden had sent to him by registered mail. Those pages 
have never been recovered. 

No document could have been of greater help to a would-be 
enemy: it revealed the basic concepts of staging, compression, and 
radiation implosion; the existence of the spark plug; and the length 


of time it had taken the United States to progress from discovery of 
radiation implosion to its first test of the concept. The pages also 
mentioned names for secret devices and codes and summarized a 
highly classified debate between Bethe and Teller about the 
American H-bomb program. A panel comprising Bethe, Bradbury, 
Teller, and von Neumann quickly concluded that, together with 
information gleaned from the Mike test of November 1, the 
document lost on that train ride could be the basis for a full-scale 
Soviet thermonuclear program.27 

By the time news of Wheeler’s gaffe had filtered through the 
bureaucracy, Dwight Eisenhower was in the Oval Office. Appalled 
by the episode, and convinced that it had been an “inside job” 
perpetrated by Soviet intelligence, Ike treated the five AEC 
commissioners to a display of temper the likes of which they had 
never before experienced. Painstakingly, Gordon Dean laid the facts 
before the president. The AEC was in no way responsible for what 
had happened. It had not originated the document and had, indeed, 
never seen it. Wheeler, Dean explained, was far from being an 
agent of the worldwide Communist conspiracy. He was a 
distinguished theoretician and much too valuable for the program 
to lose. 

Borden, too, was called to account, and by the committee that 
employed him. In breathtaking defiance of logic and common 
sense, he tried to place responsibility on the AEC, against whom his 
démarche had in fact been directed. He even blamed the 
commission for his and Walker’s decision to send the document, 
classified top secret, by registered mail rather than by armed 
courier. Borden’s presumptuousness, his conviction of his own 
rightness, his certainty that he was duty-bound to act as he thought 
best without even consulting the senators he worked for—all of 
these foreshadowed the still larger event in which his failed 
judgment was to lead not to a stand-alone breach of security, 
serious as it was, but to a national calamity. 2s 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


Strauss Returns 


DwicuT EISENHOWER RAN for president in 1952 to keep the Republican 
Party from being captured by its isolationists, led by Senator Robert 
A. Taft of Ohio. Eisenhower had done as much as anyone to save 
Europe from Hitler, he felt committed to the nations he had helped 
liberate, and he did not want the United States to retreat from its 
new responsibilities abroad. Even though he had been commander 
of NATO, however, he was not up-to-date on nuclear weapons. He 
was astonished when—nearly three weeks after the fact—Gordon 
Dean told him about Mike, the test in the Pacific held days before 
his election. Ike was subdued when he learned about Mike’s 
enormous explosive power and the fact that the island on which it 
was detonated had disappeared, giving way to a vast underwater 
crater. Hearing about the world’s first thermonuclear test, he 
worried that mankind would prove unequal to the challenge of 
managing such awesome power and would stumble into the 
destruction of all life on earth. And he expressed hope that news of 
the breakthrough could be kept secret. 

Against this inclination toward secrecy, the new president had a 
countervailing inclination toward openness. Shortly after his 
inauguration in January 1953, he met with Oppenheimer and other 
members of the Disarmament Panel and was impressed by what 
they told him, and especially by their recommendation that his new 
government share more information with the American people 
about how nuclear weapons were growing exponentially in power. 
Indeed, he was so impressed that he devoted one of the first 
meetings of his National Security Council to the panel’s suggestions, 
especially its plea for greater openness. Almost immediately 
thereafter, however, Ike made an appointment that was to doom 
the panel’s proposals; he named Lewis Strauss to a new post, that of 


White House adviser on atomic energy. The president knew that 
Strauss was a successful banker and an early Taft supporter who 
had made amends by helping the Eisenhower campaign in New 
York. What he did not know was that Strauss was entering his new 
job with an agenda of his own.1 

That agenda was, in part, to reduce the public stature of Robert 
Oppenheimer. Within days of acceding to his new office, Strauss 
made his first move. He had lunch with a man whose role in the 
events that lay ahead was to be truly extraordinary. Charles J. V. 
Murphy was a writer for Fortune and Life magazines and had for 
years been a close friend of the publisher, Henry R. Luce. But in 
addition to writing on defense and intelligence issues for Luce’s 
influential publications, Murphy wore another hat, that of 
lieutenant colonel in the Air Force Reserve. Somehow enjoying 
special status, he had the run of the Pentagon and served as 
speechwriter and part-time adviser to outgoing secretary Finletter 
and his undersecretary, Roswell Gilpatric, Air Force Chief of Staff 
Hoyt Vandenberg, General Jimmy Doolittle, and others. Even 
before his luncheon with Strauss on March 12, Murphy had been 
thinking about a story for Fortune on the hydrogen bomb program, 
in which, he agreed with the Air Force chieftains, there had been 
“literally criminal negligence.”2 Pursuing his story, he had flown to 
Independence, Missouri, to call on the newly retired president. To 
Murphy’s amazement, Harry Truman refused to speak to him about 
his decision to accelerate development of the H-bomb. Undeterred, 
Murphy flew on to Pasadena to interview Vista scientists Lee 
DuBridge, Willy Fowler, and Charles Lauritsen. Then he flew to 
Boston to see MIT physicist Al Hill. All the while he kept working 
his Air Force sources. 

A spellbinding Irishman from Massachusetts, Murphy had 
accompanied Admiral Richard E. Byrd to the Antarctic and spent 
two years there, and had ghostwritten Byrd’s bestselling books on 
his Antarctic expeditions. During Murphy’s years as a Luce reporter 
he had acquired champagne tastes—first-class restaurants, the 
finest private schools for his four children, and a house in 
Georgetown, in the nation’s capital. To sustain these tastes, he 
juggled ghostwriting tasks along with his magazine assignments, 
and on a given day that spring of 1953, the afternoon might find 
him in New York City discussing a writing project over tea at the 
Waldorf with the Duke of Windsor, while in the evening he might 
be in Georgetown discussing air strategy with influential columnist 
Joseph Alsop or downing martinis with some hero of covert action 


at the CIA. Editors at Time could count on a Murphy story to be 
sweeping and portentous, yet the author of those stories had an odd 
way of taking a backseat. Though always strapped for cash, Murphy 
might quixotically refuse payment for a ghostwriting stint, and 
invariably he made the heroes of his articles larger, nobler 
characters than they were in real life. Such were his enthusiasms 
that one didn’t lightly enlist him in a cause lest one find oneself 
mounted on a charger that might slip its harness. Only one man 
could keep Charlie Murphy in harness, and that was Henry R. 
Luce.4 Still, Lewis Strauss tried, and his meeting with Murphy over 
lunch marked the confluence of two conspiracies to end 
Oppenheimer’s influence, one masterminded by Strauss, the other 
by officials in the Air Force. 

The highest of these officials, Thomas Finletter and Roswell 
Gilpatric, spent hours with Murphy that spring as they said their 
good-byes in Washington and moved back to their old law firms in 
New York. Finletter, whose conversations with Murphy covered the 
entire range of strategic issues confronting the Air Force, was 
tightlipped and contained, not given to expressing what were said 
to be powerful currents of emotion underneath.s Thus it fell to 
Gilpatric, over drinks, dinners, and late-night conversations at his 
apartment, to provide the details. Questioned years afterward as to 
why he had given so much of his time to the project, Gilpatric 
explained that before his stint in the Air Force, as an attorney for 
Henry R. Luce, he had vetted Murphy’s articles for Life, and that he 
had known the writer socially for years. The interviews dealt with 
dissension inside the Air Force over what type of aircraft should 
carry the H-bomb, why Finletter had supported the second lab, and 
Finletter’s suspicion that the so-called delay in building the H-bomb 
was somehow tied to Oppenheimer’s support of Vista. “As this 
conviction took hold,” Gilpatric explained, the secretary “fought for 
giving Teller a free hand.”« 

Three years before his death in 1996, Gilpatric expanded on the 
personal aspect. He explained that while Finletter had relied on his 
assistants, William Burden and Garrison Norton, to handle the 
scientists, there was one scientist whom he made a point of seeing 
personally. That was Edward Teller. Gilpatric’s office was next to 
the Air Force secretary’s, he was aware that Teller was “in the 
building all the time,” and he knew that Finletter frequently had 
Teller to lunch. Describing the secretary as “completely sold” on 
Teller, Gilpatric added that, “carried along by the force of his 
personality,” Finletter had championed Teller with the other 


services. To Gilpatric it had seemed that his boss was “under a 
spell,” and he did not understand how Finletter, who appeared 
“unemotional and moved solely by cold logic,” could make an 
exception for this one man. He also noticed that much as Finletter 
resented Oppenheimer’s meddling in Air Force policy, he made no 
objection when Teller did the same thing.7 

This complaint, that Oppie was meddling where he did not 
belong, became the theme of Murphy’s article, “The Hidden 
Struggle for the H-Bomb: The Story of Dr. Oppenheimer’s Persistent 
Campaign to Reverse U.S. Military Strategy,” which was published 
anonymously in the May 1953 issue of Fortune magazine. A 
hysterical, overwritten account of an alleged life-and-death struggle 
over Air Force policy, “it contained so many errors,” one scientist 
said, “that it wasn’t even wrong.” It scolded Oppenheimer and the 
GAC for allegedly obstructing the H-bomb program, blocking Teller 
at every turn, and campaigning to give up the Air Force advantage 
in big bombs in favor of smaller, defensive weapons. It accused the 
GAC scientists of hubris in “trying to settle such grave national 
issues alone, inasmuch as they do not bear responsibility for the 
successful execution of war plans.” The article’s admonitory tone, 
and the fact that it was unsigned, lent it an ominous, somehow 
official, air, and made it the shot across the bow of Oppenheimer 
and the other “liberal” scientists that much of the scientific 
community had been expecting. 

Teller, whom Murphy had not interviewed for the story, was one 
of its heroes, and another was Strauss, who can be seen from the 
notes of Murphy’s interviews to have been the source of many of its 
fallacies. In explaining the GAC scientists’ alleged opposition to the 
H-bomb, for example, Strauss told Murphy that they had mistakenly 
assumed that the Russians would be unable to produce an atomic 
bomb for decades, if ever (most scientists actually expected that it 
would be about five years after Hiroshima); that it was he who 
insisted on convening the GAC after the AEC met in the fall of 1949 
(it was Lilienthal, the chairman, who convened the GAC before the 
AEC met); that Strauss was the only AEC commissioner who 
favored a crash program (Gordon Dean favored it also); and that, 
among GAC members, “only Fermi forthrightly supported Strauss” 
(Fermi, with Rabi, forthrightly dissented).s 

These and other falsehoods added up to what Joseph Alsop, a 
sometime friend and sometime foe of Murphy’s, called a “rich 
compost of hints, inaccuracies and special pleadings.” But even 
these paled before the article’s most astonishing invention, a cabal 


called ZORC, supposedly made up of scientists who were accused of 
promoting a futuristic system to defend North America at the 
expense of the Strategic Air Command. ZORC, Murphy claimed, got 
its initials from its members, Jerrold Zacharias, Robert 
Oppenheimer, I. I. Rabi, and Charles Lauritsen, who were said to be 
guilty of believing that defense was more moral than offense. 
Outside the Air Force, where the imaginary ZORC had been the 
subject of rumors for some time, no one, and certainly not the 
scientists for whom it was supposed to be named, had ever heard of 
it. Murphy’s source was a shadowy retired lieutenant colonel by the 
name of Thaddeus F. “Teddy” Walkowicz.1o 

ZORC—later to assume crucial importance in the Oppenheimer 
security trial—was not Walkowicz’s only fabrication. He told 
Murphy that the Greenhouse George shot in May 1951 had been 
“an experiment to determine whether you could use a fusion bomb 
as a match to light a fission weapon,” when the opposite was true.11 
Walkowicz, whose misinterpretation of secret intelligence data had 
led to a false alarm in 1951 that the Russians had beaten the United 
States to a working thermonuclear device, was the source with 
whom Murphy, sometimes accompanied by Jimmy Doolittle, had 
met more frequently than anyone else while preparing his story. 12 

Who was this character who emerged from the Pentagon from 
time to time to spread dire and misleading reports? Tall, handsome, 
and in his forties, Walkowicz, like Murphy, was a mesmerizing 
storyteller whose presence could electrify a room. But he was a 
much darker character than Murphy, a heavy drinker and a “black 
Catholic” whose father had arrived in 1908 on a cattle boat from 
Poland. A member of the Murphy family described the friendship 
between the two men as “a dark chapter,” while Walkowicz left so 
much human wreckage behind that it is difficult to find an 
acquaintance or family member who will speak of him at all. 
Brilliant in technical matters, Walkowicz had degrees in 
aeronautical engineering from Caltech and MIT, had been executive 
officer of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Air Force, and in the 
spring of 1953 was a financial adviser to the Rockefeller brothers. 
Someone who knew him well described him as “hateful,” and for all 
his success—by the 1980s he was a board member of NASA, 
Eastern Airlines, and the Civil Aeronautics Board—he remained 
angry and sometimes violent toward those who were close to him. 
Rabidly anti-Communist, he was so convinced that war between the 
United States and the Soviet Union was about to break out that 
throughout his years at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, he kept a fallout 


detector on his desk. 

After cutting his first draft from 6,600 to 3,400 words, Murphy 
cleared the article with Strauss, who pronounced it “accurate” as 
far as his role was concerned. Murphy sent the final draft to 
Finletter and Gilpatric, went over “last points” with Walkowicz, and 
twice visited Finletter at his apartment to check last-minute 
changes. “He had few more corrections to make and was 
enthusiastic,” Murphy commented, adding that a final check with 
Gilpatric produced the same result. 13 

The article created a sensation, especially the ZORC accusation 
with its dark suggestion that four of the government’s top advisers 
had formed a conspiracy to weaken the United States. And, as it 
happened, at the very moment of its appearance in May 1953, two 
longtime friends of Oppenheimer’s were summoned before the 
Senate Internal Security Subcommittee and its chairman, Senator 
William Jenner of Indiana. One was Philip Morrison, professor of 
physics at Cornell who had been Oppenheimer’s student, and the 
other was David Hawkins, a philosopher of science who had been 
Oppenheimer’s administrative assistant at Los Alamos. Back in the 
1930s, in Berkeley, the two men had been Communist Party 
activists and devoted supporters of Loyalist Spain. Appearing before 
a session of the Jenner committee in Boston, each took the 
“diminished Fifth,” meaning that he agreed to answer questions 
about himself, but not about anyone else.14 In closed session on the 
morning of May 7, Morrison was asked—and refused to answer—a 
series of questions about Oppenheimer. During the lunch break 
Morrison explained to his attorney that he was not the committee’s 
real target. It was Oppenheimer. The attorney, Arthur Sutherland of 
the Harvard Law School, did not believe it. “But he’s an overseer of 
Harvard,” Sutherland objected, by which he meant that someone so 
respected could not possibly be under suspicion. But when, in open 
session that afternoon, lawyers for the committee omitted the 
questions about Oppie that they had asked in secret session earlier 
in the day, Sutherland, in Morrison’s words, “nearly fainted,” and 
accepted what Morrison, Hawkins, Rabi, and other friends of 
Oppenheimer’s had known for years: that eminent as Oppie was, he 
was not too eminent to be the object of a political vendetta. 
Someone in Washington, however, judging the moment not yet 
ripe, apparently telephoned the committee’s lawyers during the 
lunch break and ordered them to drop the questions about 
Oppenheimer. The famed scientist was still above public attack. 1s 

And what of Oppenheimer? How did he react to the article in 


Fortune and to news that two of his old and close friends, both 
former members of the Communist Party, had been called before a 
congressional committee and asked questions designed to 
incriminate him? Oppenheimer had had plenty of warnings. He had 
lost his place on the GAC and, over cocktails at his house in 
Princeton in late 1952, had heard from colleagues the rumors that 
he was about to come under attack by the Air Force.1i6 
Oppenheimer had long known that his left-wing past made him 
vulnerable, and with Senator McCarthy ascendant, the danger now 
was even greater than before. Over the years, Joe Volpe had seen 
the scientist trying to ingratiate himself with such powerful 
senators as Hickenlooper and McMahon, seen him flatter them and 
treat them like high priests of atomic energy, only to make fun of 
them later behind their backs. “He was a genius in some respects 
and a child in others,” Volpe commented. There were individuals, 
especially those he regarded as stupid, with whom Oppenheimer 
could not hold himself back. With them he was capable of 
unleashing a fusillade of feline, almost involuntary, cruelty which 
witnesses never forgot and the victims—some of them, anyway— 
never forgave. Volpe saw Oppie make mincemeat of Pitzer at a 
meeting of the GAC, watched him ridicule Strauss at the Halloween 
meeting of 1949, and even saw him make withering remarks to 
Commissioner Henry D. Smyth, with whom Oppenheimer was 
mostly in agreement but whom he did not regard as a first-rate 
physicist. 

Was he aware of the effect his sharp tongue had on others? “Yes 
and no,” Volpe thought. “Oppie was his own worst enemy. If he did 
not like someone, he was not content just to win the argument. His 
propensity for destroying an adversary led to his downfall.” Volpe, 
a vigorous, direct, and wise counselor, called him on it repeatedly 
and told him to cool it. Oppenheimer would thank him, but 
somehow that didn’t stop him next time.17 

The decisive occasion with Lewis Strauss was a congressional 
committee hearing in May 1949 which had been called to discuss 
the shipment of iron isotopes abroad, a step Strauss bitterly 
opposed because he feared that the isotopes might be put to 
military use. Strauss was seated in the hearing room with his fellow 
AEC commissioners, Oppenheimer with Volpe at the witness table. 
“No one,” Oppie started out, “can force me to say that you cannot 
use these isotopes for atomic energy. You can use a shovel for 
atomic energy. In fact, you do. You can use a bottle of beer for 
atomic energy. In fact, you do.... My own rating of the importance 


of isotopes in this broad sense is that they are far less important 
than electronic devices but far more important than, let us say, 
vitamins, somewhere in between.” As laughter punctuated these 
remarks, Volpe stole a look at Strauss. His eyes had become narrow 
slits; the muscles in his jaws were working; his face had reddened 
and taken on a menacing look. 

Afterward Oppenheimer turned to Volpe like a triumphant 
schoolboy. “Well, Joe, how did I do?” 

“Too well, Robert, much too well.” 

“Somewhere along the way,” Volpe said later, “he had learned to 
go for the jugular.” is 

What made this particular put-down different from the others 
was the fact that it happened in public. Strauss did not enjoy being 
mocked in closed meetings before Fermi and Rabi and Conant, of 
whose intellectual stature he was in awe, but he truly hated having 
the same thing happen within camera range, hated reading about it 
the next day in the Washington Post.19 

The one response Oppenheimer did not evoke was indifference. 
According to Volpe, there were those who disliked him, those who 
disliked him a lot, and those who disliked him to the point of 
enmity. But those who liked him, loved him. Louis and Eleanor 
Hempelmann were among those who loved him _ without 
reservation. Dr. Hempelmann was a broad-shouldered, handsome 
man with deep-set eyes who had been trained in the unusual—for 
the times—subject of radiology at Washington University in St. 
Louis and the Brigham Hospital in Boston. He and Oppenheimer 
first met during the 1930s in Berkeley, where he was working with 
John Lawrence, brother of Ernest, on radiation treatment for 
cancer. They saw each other again in Chicago in 1942, when 
Oppenheimer asked Hempelmann to come to Los Alamos. The two 
couples became close friends, and Eleanor Hempelmann, a member 
of the Pulitzer family of Maine and St. Louis, became close to Kitty. 
The Hempelmanns were still at Los Alamos when Kitty and Robert 
returned to New Mexico for a visit in 1946. Dining with the 
Oppenheimers at the La Fonda Hotel in Santa Fe, the Hempelmanns 
noticed that Robert turned to the walls from time to time and made 
announcements for the benefit of the microphones he assumed were 
implanted there. Here, they reflected, was Robert Oppenheimer, 
hero to the entire nation, still under surveillance, as he had been 
throughout the war. Another time they were visiting the 
Oppenheimers at their ranch in the Pecos Mountains and the two 
couples spent hours on hands and knees, scouring the earth for 


four-leaf clovers. But when Louis Hempelmann came upon a rare 
five-leaf clover, Kitty was upset: the five-leaf clover was thought to 
bring bad luck, rather than the good luck she and Robert knew they 
would be needing.20 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


Two Wild Horses 


THE DIsARMAMENT PANEL, led by Oppenheimer, had summed up the 
Truman administration’s accomplishments in arms control and 
made further suggestions for the incoming Republican 
administration. Paradoxically, although the panel had 
recommended far greater openness in nuclear matters, the report 
itself was held in tightest secrecy. In hopes of getting its suggestions 
before movers and shakers of the Eastern Establishment, 
Oppenheimer in February 1953 presented an unclassified version in 
a speech before the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. He 
had been encouraged by the new president’s favorable response to 
the panel’s suggestion of greater candor. In Paris a year or so 
before, Oppenheimer had heard Eisenhower—then NATO 
commander in Europe—complain about excessive secrecy. 
Therefore he was not surprised that of all the panel’s suggestions, it 
was the candor proposal that the new president responded to first. 
If the government were to share more weapons information with 
the public, Oppenheimer believed, other priorities—the need for 
better defensive measures at home, more exchange of information 
with our allies, reconsideration of the mindless buildup of 
redundant weapons—would sooner or later fall into place. As he 
told an interviewer, “the only way to bring this candor into being is 
through the President. He is the only person who has the right to 
do it, the only person who has the authority to transcend the racket 
of noise, mostly consisting of lies, that has been built up around 
this subject. Only the President can make this known. All I can do is 
make it easier for the President to do it.”1 

On May 28, 1953, Oppenheimer visited the Oval Office and 
handed the president a draft of an article he had written for Foreign 
Affairs, the influential journal of the Council on Foreign Relations, 


based on his speech the winter before. Eisenhower gave the article 
to his national security adviser, Robert Cutler, and it was published 
with Cutler’s approval in July. Oppenheimer had written that 
because of secrecy, he had to tell about the arms race “without 
communicating anything. I must reveal its nature without revealing 
anything.” He pointed out that merely staying ahead of the 
Russians did nothing for our security because “our twenty- 
thousandth bomb will not in any deep strategic sense offset their 
two thousandth.” To be ready if an opportunity to negotiate with 
the Russians should present itself, the leaders of the two sides 
needed to get past the rigidity imposed by the “terrifyingly rapid 
accumulation of nuclear weapons.” He compared the situation of 
Russia and the United States to that of “two scorpions in a bottle, 
each capable of killing the other, but only at the risk of his own 
life.” 2 

Lewis Strauss, apostle of secrecy, did not stand idly by while 
Oppie was scoring points with the president. Before the scientist’s 
visit to the Oval Office at the end of May, Strauss warned the 
president that he had misgivings about Oppenheimer’s security 
record. And when the president invited Strauss to add the AEC 
chairmanship to his portfolio as White House adviser, Strauss is 
said to have told the president, before accepting, that he “could not 
do the job” if Oppenheimer had anything to do with the nuclear 
weapons program. Meanwhile, intent on keeping the threads in his 
own hands, Strauss helped head off a threatened investigation of 
Oppenheimer by Senator McCarthy, warning Senate majority leader 
Robert Taft that “some of the so-called evidence will not stand up. 
The McCarthy committee is not the place for such an investigation 
and the present is not the time.” 

On June 30 Gordon Dean completed his three-year term as AEC 
chairman. For months after Strauss’s appointment as White House 
atomic energy adviser, the two men had been working in tandem. 
Dean disliked and distrusted Strauss but had chosen to finish out 
his term partly because the new president asked him to, and partly 
because he had been appalled by the incoming administration’s 
ignorance about nuclear weapons. Oppenheimer, who no longer 
held an advisory position and—as the unsigned Fortune article had 
made clear—was facing brisk headwinds from the Air Force, now 
asked Dean to extend his AEC consultancy. From that perch, he 
would still have access to classified information and still be able to 
influence policy. Dean agreed. Oppenheimer’s Q clearance was 
good for another year, until June 30, 1954.4 


Now that he would be wearing both hats, that of White House 
atomic energy adviser and chairman of the AEC, Strauss was again 
in touch with Charlie Murphy, this time about a second article for 
Fortune. The new article reported that Oppie’s advocacy of greater 
openness had placed him “once more squarely in conflict” with 
Strauss, “a man of rare sagacity, enlightenment and courage.” 
Before the draft went to press, however, Strauss asked Murphy to 
“omit the references to me, even though they are very flattering.... 
For the next month or two, until I am firmly in the saddle, I would 
like to remain very much in the background.” Accordingly, the 
piece appeared without the praise of Strauss, but with a small 
photograph of him and a caption saying that he wanted to “keep a 
tight lid” on atomic secrets. The article was mainly an attack on 
Oppenheimer, accusing him of a cardinal sin, that of advocating 
publication of—holy of holies—the number of weapons in our 
atomic stockpile. It also criticized the president—because he 
favored relaxation of nuclear secrecy. Murphy met with Strauss four 
times while he was preparing the article, which appeared, not 
anonymously like the one in May, but under Murphy’s byline, in 
the August issue of Fortune.s 

Murphy rarely pulled his punches. If a man is a traitor, then, to 
his way of thinking, get rid of him! Strauss’s desire to stay in the 
background disappointed Murphy, who decided that the new 
chairman was a trimmer. But Murphy knew only part of the story. 
Strauss had another steed in his stable, and that was the obsessive 
Bill Borden. At the end of April 1953, badly compromised by his 
handling of the Wheeler affair and a Democrat who stood to lose 
his job with the new Republican Congress, Borden carried a 
mysterious “paper” to Strauss and spoke with him briefly. The 
content of his “paper” is not known but was probably a compilation 
of Borden’s suspicions about Oppenheimer. The May issue of 
Fortune, containing Murphy’s anonymous attack on the scientist, 
was about to appear on the newsstands. Strauss telephoned several 
opponents of Oppenheimer at this time, probably to warn them that 
a public attack was imminent, and he may have used Borden’s 
paper as backup.« 

Borden spent May struggling with the question that had nagged 
at him for so long. He asked to see Oppenheimer’s AEC security file 
one more time, and a day or so before he left Washington, he 
handed his successor at the joint committee a fifteen-page 
document. The document’s 189 questions about Oppenheimer’s 
record were mainly a brief against the FBI for sloppy investigatory 


procedures. But Borden also appended a separate, handwritten 
document in which he painstakingly weighed the scientist’s actions: 
had Oppenheimer been acting “under a directive from his own 
conscience or a directive from the Soviet Union?” Borden 
considered either explanation consistent with the evidence, but 
concluded that “Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence upon atomic policy 
has been more harmful to the United States than even would have 
been the betrayal of all the military-atomic information in his 
possession from 1940 to the present.”7 

Borden then repaired for the summer to his family’s place in 
Chaumont, New York, near Lake Ontario, where he spent six weeks 
alone, without his wife and sons, ruminating over the unfinished 
business he had left behind. He spoke to Lewis Strauss by telephone 
during the summer, and in the fall he moved his family to 
Pittsburgh. But before starting on his new job, at the Westinghouse 
Electric Corporation, Borden felt that he would not have done his 
duty until he had reached a verdict on Oppenheimer. This he did, 
and in November he sent his verdict to the FBI. 

The verdict was that “more probably than not,” Oppenheimer 
had for years been acting as an espionage agent of the Soviet 
Union. Borden sent the letter to J. Edgar Hoover, rather than the 
head of the AEC or some other government agency, because he 
thought that the FBI had grown lax and he hoped it would reopen 
its investigation of Oppenheimer.s 

What sort of man was William Borden and what led him to his 
conclusion? Did Strauss know about his letter in advance? Had 
Strauss put him up to it? One August afternoon two years earlier, 
Borden and Strauss had had a lengthy conversation about 
Oppenheimer. Since then, they had remained in contact. It seems 
likely that during the early fall of 1951, the two men had agreed on 
some kind of joint action with regard to Oppenheimer, but, faced 
by a long absence from Washington and an apparent cooling in 
Strauss’s regard, Borden had gone off on his own and taken a step 
the older man did not anticipate. But Borden’s colleagues in the 
schoolboyish, rather Yale atmosphere at the joint congressional 
committee disagreed with this reading of Borden’s actions. They did 
not think that Strauss was implicated in what Borden had done. It 
was not Borden’s nature to conspire, they insisted, “and besides, he 
didn’t like Strauss.” He had even nicknamed Strauss “Luigi” because 
he considered him Machiavellian. And he still blamed Strauss for 
inspiring the 1949 Hickenlooper hearings, for which Borden had 
had to write the final, embarrassing report saying that there was 


nothing to the charges of “terrible mismanagement” by Lilienthal.» 

Borden was a child of Washington. He was born there in 1920 
and attended the select St. Albans School and then Yale. On his 
graduation in 1942 he enlisted in the Army and became a bomber 
pilot over Europe. One night near the end of the war, flying his 
B-24 home after a mission to Holland, he saw a German V-2 rocket 
whizzing past him on its way to London. From then on Borden was 
haunted by the horror that could be wrought by marrying rocket 
technology to that of the atomic bomb. At twenty-six, he wrote a 
book called There Will Be No Time, arguing for world federation. 
After graduating from Yale Law School, he was singled out by Brien 
McMahon, father of the Atomic Energy Act and a neighbor of his 
parents, to work for the JCAE. 

Borden was from a protected, orderly world. The mother who 
left her imprint on him was known for her upright character; his 
father was a Washington surgeon famous for having barred from his 
operating room an intern who had arrived only five seconds late to 
assist him. There was military tradition in the family, and an uncle 
Liscum (Borden’s middle name) who had won the Congressional 
Medal of Honor. Lacking much experience of everyday life, young 
Liscum, or “Lic,” as he was known to his friends, believed things 
happen in a tidy, logical way. Upon becoming staff director of the 
joint congressional committee, he had been shaken to discover how 
few atomic weapons the U.S. stockpile contained—he was not told 
the precise numbers but was able to make a rough guess—and right 
away set to work to expand it. His writing had a kind of hysteria to 
it: he wrote lines for Senator McMahon like “total power in the 
hands of total evil equals total destruction” that illustrate the 
absolute cast of his thought. If x or y was obvious to him, he 
wondered, why wasn’t it obvious to a genius like Oppenheimer? 
From there it wasn’t far to the question, How can someone as clever 
as Robert Oppenheimer take the positions he does if he is not an 
agent? Extrapolating from his own character, Borden knew that he 
could not have taken those stands unless he had been an agent.1o0 

Borden was a liberal Democrat. He had a strain of idealism and 
was an active board member of the Experiment in International 
Living, which sought to improve international understanding by 
sponsoring exchanges between European and American students. 
He loathed Joe McCarthy and agreed with Oppenheimer’s proposal 
for greater candor. Far from being obsessed by security, he had 
been known to look the other way when something was not as it 
ought to have been in the dossier of a loyal congressional 


committee staff member. He was decent and courteous and might 
enjoy three or four scotches during an evening’s conversation, but 
he would not countenance an obscenity or a dirty joke. Everyone 
who knew him uses the word “integrity,” as in “he had more 
integrity than anyone I ever met.” He was an exceptionally 
conscientious man, driven by what he saw as his duty. But he was 
an intense workaholic, and one colleague said, “I think that 
destroys judgment.” Those who worked with Borden liked and 
respected him. Said one, “The most negative thing I thought was 
that he might have flown a few too many missions during the 
war.”11 

Why did this man who ordinarily showed little interest in 
people, and no interest whatever in sizing them up, focus on 
Oppenheimer—and reach the conclusion he did? Frank Cotter 
thought it was Teller, who saw Borden every time he came to 
Washington. They were not close personally—Borden was not close 
to anyone—but their views on policy were very close indeed. “An 
impressionable man like Bill, hearing someone of Teller’s stature 
tell him that Oppenheimer was sabotaging the program, and always 
with the innuendo that he was a Communist, that would have done 
it.”12 

When Borden’s colleagues at the joint committee read his letter 
to the FBI that fall, they were horrified. John Walker, J. K. “Ken” 
Mansfield, Frank Cotter, Corbin Allardice—none of them agreed 
with him about Oppenheimer. They thought his isolation that 
summer had contributed to his taking such a drastic step and that 
talking things over with them every day, as he had done at the 
committee, would have tempered his judgment. They noticed that 
he missed Senator McMahon, missed the give-and-take, missed 
writing overheated letters for the boss that the boss sometimes did 
not send. McMahon’s death in the summer of 1952, they believed, 
left him feeling that it was up to him to carry the burden of 
national security alone and removed a restraint from his actions. 
They thought it was tragic, that it was bound to destroy both Oppie 
and Borden, and that Borden would carry the weight of it with him 
to his grave. And they were certain that he and Strauss had not 
been in collusion. 

But it was not so simple. Although not nearly as devious as 
Strauss, Borden, too, could be manipulative, his handling of the 
JCAE’s thermonuclear history of January 1, 1953, the so-called 
Walker-Borden report, being a case in point. Borden had told Carl 
Durham, the inexperienced interim chairman of the joint 


congressional committee, that the report was a “compilation,” not 
the one-sided attack on Oppenheimer and the AEC that it actually 
was. He had tried to withhold it from the AEC, he had delayed 
several hours before informing the FBI that Wheeler had lost an 
extract, and he had given misleading answers to members of the 
JCAE at their hearing on the episode. He had even used threats 
against Gordon Dean in an effort to force the AEC to assume 
responsibility. Similarly, Borden’s correspondence shows him trying 
to manipulate Teller, and his exchanges with Strauss are so 
conspiratorial in tone as to suggest shared purposes that they did 
not care to put in writing.13 

Borden had all along funneled information to Strauss, who in 
turn assumed that he could count on the younger man when the 
time was right. But what Strauss seems to have had in mind was 
some action that would tarnish Oppenheimer’s public image and 
reduce his influence, not a dramatic move that might force the 
president to act.14 

Lewis Strauss had two wild horses in his stable, and one of them 
threw off his harness. Only, it wasn’t the spirited Charlie Murphy 
who got out of hand, but quiet, intense Bill Borden. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


The Blank Wall 


On SATURDAY EVENING, November 7, 1953, Bill Borden, anxious to rid 
himself of the burden that was weighing on him, drove to the main 
post office in downtown Pittsburgh and mailed a copy of his three- 
and-a-half-page letter to Lou Nichols, an FBI acquaintance, to be 
passed along to J. Edgar Hoover. He sent the letter, which 
contained highly sensitive material, by ordinary mail and with a 
covering note in cramped handwriting, and with errors that might 
suggest that the author had had two or three drinks, or was under 
severe stress.1 

Borden’s letter stated that Oppenheimer, as member or chairman 
of more than thirty-five advisory groups, had shaped more 
government policies and been in a position to compromise more 
secrets than any other individual in the country. It gave twenty-one 
reasons why it was Borden’s “exhaustively considered opinion, 
based on years of study, that more probably than not J. Robert 
Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union.” 

When Hoover received Borden’s letter, he treated it like a 
grenade that might go off at any moment. He had been living with 
the Oppenheimer problem for years, saw nothing new in the letter, 
and was only too aware of Oppenheimer’s formidable standing in 
the scientific community. Six months earlier, Hoover had headed 
off Joe McCarthy when the rambunctious senator—primed by 
Murphy’s anonymous blast in Fortune—had come to see him about 
investigating Oppenheimer. Hoover also agreed with Strauss that 
there should be no public move against Oppie without the most 
careful preparation. The thing Hoover cared most about was not the 
arrogant physicist but protecting the FBI’s sources. His FBI had kept 
Oppenheimer under surveillance for years. Ever since 1946 the 
bureau had, intermittently, opened Oppenheimer’s mail, tapped his 


telephones, and followed his movements, and it was of utmost 
importance to Hoover that these methods—most of which were 
illegal—not be compromised. Mindful of the adage that if you strike 
at a king, you must kill him, he was convinced that the destruction 
of this particular king could not be accomplished without the use of 
every bit of ammunition in the FBI’s arsenal. The best way to 
handle Borden’s charges, Hoover believed, was for the Defense 
Department—to which, along with the White House and the Justice 
Department, he had sent Borden’s letter—to abolish the only 
official board on which Oppenheimer was currently serving and 
thereby, in effect, cancel his clearance without the hazards of a 
public hearing. And there were other considerations. For one, 
Hoover seems to have been wary of Strauss, lest the AEC chairman 
in his zeal give away FBI methods, particularly its use of wiretaps. 
And there was the uncomfortable fact, which Hoover had until now 
forgotten, that back in 1947, with a single caveat, he had signed off 
on Oppenheimer’s Q clearance. 

Responding to a hurry-up call from the White House on the 
afternoon of December 2, Lewis Strauss found the president, his 
adviser Robert Cutler, and one or two others in an anxious huddle 
in the Oval Office. Borden’s bombshell had landed in a highly 
charged situation: Attorney General Herbert Brownell had accused 
former president Truman just a few weeks earlier of having 
knowingly protected a Communist spy in the Treasury, and 
McCarthy had followed up with an attack on Truman that was seen 
in the White House as an attack on the new president as well. 
Resisting the pleas of some in his entourage that he take on 
McCarthy openly, Eisenhower had that very morning told an aide 
that he would “not get in the gutter” with the Wisconsin senator. 
But he could not afford to open himself to the charge that he, like 
Truman, had knowingly protected a security risk. Strauss helped Ike 
reach his decision that afternoon, and the next morning Eisenhower 
told his national security advisers that he had decided to lower a 
“blank wall” between Oppenheimer and the nation’s secrets. How it 
was to be done was left to them to decide. 

Robert Oppenheimer was in Europe, delivering the BBC’s 
prestigious Reith Lectures, and was scheduled to return in mid- 
December. It was decided that he must be kept in the dark lest— 
nightmare of Hoover and Strauss—he slip off to Russia as the 
suspected Soviet spies Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean had done 
three years before. But defense installations and AEC laboratories 
were notified right away that Oppie’s clearance had been 


suspended. At the Pentagon, Rear Admiral William S. “Deak” 
Parsons, head of ordnance at Los Alamos during the war and the 
closest of friends with Robert and Kitty Oppenheimer, heard about 
the “blank wall” order on December 4 and made up his mind to 
protest to the secretary of the Navy. But he was stricken with chest 
pains in the night and died at Bethesda Naval Hospital the next 
day. In the minds of Martha Parsons and their daughters there was 
never any doubt that Deak’s heart attack had been precipitated by 
the news about their friend.4 

For the next couple of weeks Hoover, Strauss, AEC general 
manager Ken Nichols, Commissioners Murray and Smyth, Assistant 
Secretary of Defense Donald Quarles, Attorney General Brownell, 
and National Security Adviser Robert Cutler all tried to devise a 
way to rescind Oppie’s clearance without provoking a public 
outcry. Murray wanted to cancel Oppenheimer’s AEC consultancy, 
while Smyth favored a secret hearing that he hoped would clear the 
scientist. Nichols wanted to hand the whole thing over to 
McCarthy, and Quarles was so concerned about feeling in the 
scientific community that he wanted to do nothing about the 
charges and let the government go on living with the risk. Cutler, a 
Harvard overseer along with Oppenheimer, preferred to inform the 
scientist in secret that his clearance was being revoked and ask him, 
for the nation’s sake, not to make a fight of it. Everyone understood 
that if challenged in public, Oppenheimer would have to defend 
himself. Finally it was decided that on Oppie’s return from Europe, 
Strauss would present him with a letter of charges and leave it to 
him whether to give up his clearance quietly or insist on a hearing.s 

Lewis Strauss later falsified the events of those days in an effort 
to minimize his own role—and for many years he got away with it.6 
In his book Men and Decisions, published in 1963, Strauss claimed 
that the president summoned him “in the chill of late afternoon” on 
Thursday, December 3, to help him decide what to do. After 
meeting with his national security advisers, Strauss said, the 
president informed them that he was lowering a “blank wall” 
between Oppenheimer and all classified information. But from 
Strauss’s own daybooks and from notes by his assistant Bryan 
LaPlante, it is clear that Strauss first saw the president “in the chill 
of late afternoon” on December 2, a day earlier than he wrote in his 
book, and for the second time at a National Security Council 
meeting the next morning, at the close of which Eisenhower 
announced his “blank wall” directive. Why, nine years after the 
event, did Strauss choose to make it appear that he had seen the 


president only once, and only after Eisenhower had already decided 
to lower the “blank wall”? Because it was he who suggested the 
“blank wall,” and he did so on December 2.7 

There is more. On December 1, Strauss spent an hour and a half 
with Edward Teller. Two days later, returning from his second visit 
to the White House, Strauss found Teller awaiting him again, this 
time for a luncheon appointment. Teller returned to California later 
in the day. That evening Strauss sent him a telegram: “Take no 
action on personal matter we discussed. Nichols will call you.” And 
the next day Ken Nichols telephoned to inform Teller of changes in 
his “previous instructions by Mr. Strauss on Thursday, December 3, 
1953.” In an interview many years later, Teller could not recall 
what the “personal matter” was.s 

In later years Teller described the AEC chairman as extremely 
upset on his return from the White House that day. “I just had a 
terrible piece of news,” he quoted Strauss as saying. “The President 
insists that we open the case” of Oppenheimer’s clearance. Strauss, 
Teller added, did not want this known, because he hoped to settle it 
without a public hearing. He cited Strauss’s secretary, Virginia 
Walker, as saying that Strauss was “horrified and deeply disturbed” 
by the president’s order. Was Strauss actually “appalled,” as John 
MacKenzie, his personal assistant, described him, or was he secretly 
gratified to be going head-to-head with his nemesis at last? 
Someone who knew him very well, and from a position of equality, 
was William Golden, the self-made financier who had from time to 
time helped Strauss at the AEC as an unpaid, highly respected 
adviser. Golden thought that Strauss and Oppenheimer were in 
some ways alike. Each of them was courtly in manner, each had the 
capacity to mask his feelings, and each was, above everything, 
“inscrutable.” Golden believed that Strauss, out of deep 
partisanship as a Republican and deep animosity toward 
Oppenheimer, had been capable of urging the “blank wall” on 
Eisenhower, and then coming back to his office and feigning 
dismay. Victor Mitchell, who worked for Strauss for three years, 
and his wife, Donna, who also knew the chairman well, agreed.» 

So inscrutable was Strauss that it is still impossible to say 
whether he was horrified when he read Borden’s letter or whether 
Frank Cotter was closer to the truth when he said that “Borden 
accidentally and without design gave Lewis Strauss the thing he 
wanted most in life.” 10 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


Hoover 


Haro_D GREEN, a thirty-two-year-old lawyer in the AEC’s Security 
Division, was not surprised that someone had pulled the trigger. He 
had expected something like this ever since he had learned from 
Bryan LaPlante, one of Strauss’s closest aides, that Strauss had 
made an unsolicited promise to Hoover that he would purge four 
officials at the AEC, including Oppenheimer, whom he knew to be 
anathema to the FBI chief. Neither Green nor others in his division 
considered Oppenheimer a security risk despite his appalling 
dossier. They simply hoped to muddle through until expiration of 
his clearance without another close call such as they, and Gordon 
Dean, had experienced with the Weinberg case.1 

A Chicago native and graduate of the University of Chicago Law 
School, Green had had extensive experience evaluating security 
files during his three years at the AEC. He was nonetheless 
surprised when William Mitchell, general counsel of the AEC, called 
him in on the afternoon of Friday, December 11, and showed him a 
copy of Borden’s letter. Mitchell pointed to an enormous stack of 
papers—the AEC’s investigative files on Oppenheimer—and told 
Green to draft a statement of charges for the commissioners to 
consider on Monday morning. He instructed Green not to include 
Oppenheimer’s opposition to the H-bomb: the commissioners did 
not want the scientist placed on trial for his opinions. 2 

If Green had been surprised by Mitchell’s telling him to draft the 
charges, he was still more surprised by the behavior of Ken Nichols 
that weekend at AEC headquarters. Nichols, who was to be the 
signatory to the charges, called Green again and again that 
weekend and summoned him twice to his office. He told Green how 
difficult Oppenheimer had been to work with during the war, when 
he was General Groves’s deputy. He described Oppenheimer’s 


arrogance and indifference to security, and recounted the bad 
advice he had given the government. His attitude toward Oppie was 
anything but dispassionate. “Be sure you get that in,” he would say. 
“T’ve got the son of a bitch now. I don’t want him wriggling off the 
hook.” Green thought it peculiar that a man who would probably 
be a judge in the case should be doing double duty behind the 
scenes as prosecutor.3 

Green finished early on Sunday and decided to try his hand at 
adding charges about the H-bomb, doing it in such a way as to test 
Oppenheimer’s truthfulness, rather than the validity of his advice. 
To the counts he had already written, Green added seven more, 
based on Teller’s interviews with the FBI in May 1952. When 
Mitchell came in later on Sunday, he approved. “Let’s try it on 
Nichols tomorrow.” 4 

On Monday, Green got another surprise: a call from one of 
Hoover’s closest assistants inviting him to call on the FBI if he 
needed help. Green was astonished, since in the hundreds of 
security cases he had handled, the FBI had until then met his 
requests for assistance with hostility and had helped out grudgingly 
if at all.s 

Strauss, meanwhile, had outraged three of his fellow 
commissioners. In a hurry to accompany the president to a 
conference in Bermuda on December 4, he had told the two who 
happened to be in town about Borden’s letter—but had said nothing 
about the president’s “blank wall” directive. Nor had he told his 
supposedly coequal colleagues that he had for months been meeting 
with C. D. Jackson, the president’s assistant for psychological 
warfare, to draw up a plan for international atomic cooperation. 
Under the plan, which Strauss had embraced in hopes of subverting 
Oppenheimer’s call for candor, the United States and the USSR 
would contribute a pool of fissionable material to the United 
Nations to be devoted to peaceful purposes. The first Strauss’s 
colleagues knew of the proposal, which had been christened “Atoms 
for Peace,” was on December 8, when the president, on his way 
home from Bermuda, unveiled it at the UN General Assembly to 
enthusiastic applause. At dinner that night Gerard Smith, assistant 
to Commissioner Murray, heard Harry Smyth describe the plan as 
“a thoroughly dishonest proposal” and express anxiety over the 
danger that it would spread nuclear know-how to nations that did 
not have it. It was to avert such contingencies that the commission 
had traditionally had a scientist member. While Smyth, the current 
scientific member, worried that Atoms for Peace would put tightly 


guarded secrets at risk, the security-obsessed Strauss, whether 
ignorant of reactor physics or simply elated at having his plan 
adopted and Oppenheimer’s proposal foiled, appeared serenely 
unconcerned with the danger.« 

Smyth and Zuckert were so unhappy with the chairman’s 
decisions and his abuse of commission prerogatives that by the time 
Strauss called his colleagues together on December 10, they were 
thinking seriously about resigning. Once again Strauss failed to 
level with them, neglecting to inform them that he had spoken with 
the president about the Oppenheimer matter and had himself had a 
role in the “blank wall” order. Now it was too late: Hoover had 
already sent Borden’s letter and a sixty-nine-page summary of 
Oppenheimer’s FBI file to several government agencies, the 
president’s “blank wall” directive had been circulated, and the 
Defense Department had notified its installations at home and 
abroad that Oppenheimer’s clearance had been suspended. The only 
thing left for the commissioners to decide was how—not whether— 
to implement the president’s order.7 

Commissioners Murray, Smyth, and Zuckert remained unhappy, 
and with good reason. The H-bomb charges drafted by Green were 
neither discussed at a meeting of the commissioners nor formally 
approved by them. Twice, Harry Smyth objected to inclusion of the 
H-bomb count in the letter that General Manager Nichols was to 
present to Oppenheimer, and he gave up only after being told— 
falsely—that his colleagues were going along. Informed of AEC 
decisions only after they had been taken, misinformed and even 
lied to, the restive commissioners found at every step that their 
options—above all, the option of keeping the matter quiet—had 
been foreclosed. 

In the middle of December the president summoned Hoover, 
Brownell, Strauss, and two other high officials. They decided that 
Strauss would tell Oppenheimer that his security status had been 
challenged and that the president had suggested that the AEC 
investigate the charges. The scientist would be given a choice 
between resigning and asking for a hearing. If he chose the latter, 
his case would be heard by an ad hoc AEC committee with 
provision for review.9 

That meeting was a turning point for Hoover. Returning to the 
bureau that day, he informed his underlings that “this is a most 
important and urgent project” on which they were to give the AEC 
“the fullest cooperation,” provided only that the bureau’s 
confidential techniques—especially its bugging and wiretapping 


practices—be protected. For years, Hoover had been watching, 
gathering evidence, and waiting for his opening. Now at last he 
committed the FBI to an all-out effort to banish Oppenheimer from 
the councils of government. His decision was, in part, the 
culmination of a protracted courtship between him and Strauss. For 
years, in and out of public office, Strauss had volunteered 
information to the FBI; the bureau, on the other hand, had, at his 
request, checked the security status of faculty appointees to the 
Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton and the Brookings 
Institution in Washington, of which he was a trustee. FBI agents 
had greeted him at Orly Airport when he went to France and met 
his mother-in-law at Idlewild (now John F. Kennedy International) 
Airport when she returned from abroad. He had promised the FBI 
chief that he would get rid of Oppenheimer, and Hoover at last was 
persuaded that the effort was likely to succeed.1io0 

Ex-FBI man Frank Cotter explained the director’s change of 
heart. From Gook Taylor, Cotter’s friend who monitored the Soviet 
intelligence cables, and from others, Hoover knew perfectly well 
that Oppenheimer was not an espionage agent. His reason for 
hating him could even have been mere conviction that 
Oppenheimer was an adulterer. But “Hoover was a master 
politician. Eisenhower was going a certain way, so he did, too.”11 


Kitty and Robert Oppenheimer spent their final evening in Europe 
with Haakon and Carol Chevalier at the Chevaliers’ apartment in 
the Montmartre section of Paris. Haakon, a professor of Romance 
languages, and Robert had been the closest of friends in Berkeley 
before the war, sharing a love of French poetry and French culture 
generally. Chevalier, a Communist Party member, and 
Oppenheimer, who during the late 1930s had probably occupied a 
niche just outside the Party, had also shared a great deal politically 
in their sympathy for Republican Spain and for the Soviet 
experiment in Russia. As the evening of December 7, 1953, drew to 
a close, it struck Chevalier that his old friend seemed apprehensive, 
as if he felt that trouble might await him in America.12 

A couple of weeks later, Oppenheimer was facing Lewis Strauss 
in Strauss’s office, the one man stocky, balding, with heavy 
spectacles shielding a partially blind right eye, the other man 
angular, rumpled, with large, almost transparent blue eyes. Strauss 
had gotten where he was on his own, from itinerant shoe salesman 
in Virginia, to protégé of Herbert Hoover in European war relief in 
1919, to fabulously successful investment banker who married the 


boss’s daughter. Strauss was controlling and conniving: a man who 
would walk into a social gathering, pick his moment, and dominate 
the room by telling stories. What one man had by effort, the other 
had by birthright, as son of a German Jewish immigrant who had 
made a fortune selling suit linings and real estate and left his sons 
an inheritance of Cézannes and Van Goghs. A natural of such 
magnetism that he could hold a roomful in his hand just by being 
there. Agnostic bohemian versus dutiful elder of an Orthodox 
Jewish congregation. One might almost have taken it for an even 
match.i3 

The two men sat there, and one of them told the other that he 
was in trouble. A former government official had raised questions 
about Oppenheimer’s right to a security clearance, Strauss 
explained, and the president had ordered an inquiry. Oppenheimer 
looked over the letter of charges and asked whether anyone with 
such a record had ever been cleared in a formal hearing. The two 
discussed the possibility of Oppenheimer’s resigning his contract, 
thereby obviating the need for a hearing. Strauss tried not to make 
a recommendation, but it was clear to the other man that this was 
the course Strauss wanted him to take. Oppenheimer asked for a 
few days to think it over: Strauss pressed for an answer right away. 
He would be at home after eight that evening, and Oppenheimer 
could reach him there. The scientist was not even allowed to take 
the letter of charges with him. He could have a copy only if and 
when he decided to go through with a hearing. 14 

As he was leaving, Oppenheimer said that he was going to see 
his friend and attorney, Herbert Marks, and Strauss loaned him his 
official Cadillac. But the scientist changed his mind and at the last 
minute went instead to the office of Joe Volpe, where they were 
joined by Marks. Unknown to the three of them, the FBI had 
anticipated Oppenheimer’s moves and placed a tap in the offices of 
both Volpe and Marks, with the result that Oppie’s very first 
conversation with his attorneys was recorded. The three men later 
proceeded to Marks’s house in Georgetown, where Anne Marks 
cooked steaks and the four of them reviewed Robert’s options. is 

The next day Oppenheimer sent Strauss his answer. 


Yesterday, when you asked to see me, you told me for the first 
time that my clearance by the Atomic Energy Commission was 
about to be suspended. You put to me as a possibly desirable 
alternative that I request termination of my contract as a 
consultant.... I have thought most earnestly of the alternative 
suggested. Under the circumstances this course of action would 


mean that I accept and concur in the view that I am not fit to 
serve this government that I have now served for some twelve 
years. This I cannot do. If I were thus unworthy I could hardly 
have served our country as I have tried, or been the Director of 
our Institute in Princeton, or have spoken, as on more than one 
occasion I have found myself speaking, in the name of our 
science and our country. 


About this time Hoover, at Strauss’s request, asked the attorney 
general for permission to “install a technical surveillance” on 
Oppenheimer’s telephone at home or at “any address to which he 
may later move.” Authorization arrived the next day. Although 
Attorney General Brownell told the author many years later that he 
had not been “directly involved” in the Oppenheimer affair, this 
decision was one of many he signed off on. 16 

Oppenheimer saw Strauss a second time to accept the letter of 
charges. It was Strauss’s impression that the scientist preferred to 
“terminate his contract quietly,” but that his attorneys, seeing “a 
big fee in it for themselves,” had advised otherwise. (In fact, they 
represented him free of charge.)17 

Among the humiliations visited upon the Oppenheimers was a 
visit to their house on Christmas Eve. Their caller was Roy Snapp of 
the AEC, who presented them with a letter ordering Robert to hand 
over any official documents remaining in his possession. 
Oppenheimer and Snapp had had many dealings when Oppie was 
riding high, and the occasion can only have been excruciating for 
them both. Eleanor Hempelmann, on hand with her husband for the 
holiday, later described Oppenheimer’s “consummately polite, even 
courtly” behavior toward the visitor. “He put on a wonderful 
performance.”1s 

Oppenheimer suffered a disappointment after he visited the 
leading law firm in Washington to ask the highly regarded attorney 
John Lord O’Brian to represent him. O’Brian was anxious to do so 
but, after consulting his colleagues, felt obliged to decline. The 
firm’s founding partner, Edward Burling, had an affectionate 
relationship with a younger member, Donald Hiss, who, like his 
brother, Alger, was the subject of espionage rumors. Because of its 
refusal to fire Donald Hiss, the firm had lost four or five major 
clients, and in the atmosphere of the day, the partners did not want 
O’Brian to take the case. O’Brian’s stature, talent, and devotion 
were such that his inability to handle the case came as a severe 
blow to Oppenheimer.19 

About this time FBI special agent Kenneth Commons in Newark 


telephoned Washington headquarters to report that the “technical 
surveillance” reflected the scientist’s search for an attorney. 
Because of the danger that the wiretaps might disclose an attorney- 
client relationship, the agent wondered whether to continue. He 
was told to do so.20 

From now on, the FBI’s wiretap reports were the AEC’s main 
source of information about Oppenheimer’s search for an attorney, 
his attorneys’ conversations with him and one another, and other 
defense preparations. To obscure the fact that the information had 
been obtained illegally, most of the reports were written in the 
form of letters from Hoover to Strauss that started out “according to 
a reliable confidential informant,” code for wiretapped information. 
In addition to reports obtained from telephone taps, others were 
derived from physical surveillance. On receipt of one report, Strauss 
wrote to Hoover: “This is to acknowledge and thank you for your 
letter of February 1, 1954, concerned with the reported discussion 
between Dr. Oppenheimer, his counsel, and other individuals.” But 
Strauss tired of penning acknowledgments, and a few days later 
wrote a letter with the notation “Strauss asked if it were necessary 
for him to acknowledge each letter from bureau. He was advised 
not necessary since letters were delivered personally to him.” The 
person who carried the FBI reports to Strauss was Hoover’s liaison 
to the AEC, Charles W. Bates.21 

Hoover had chosen his go-between with care. At the age of 
thirty-four, Bates, a good-looking, gregarious man with slicked-back 
dark hair, dark skin, and, sometimes, dark glasses, had become part 
of Strauss’s inner circle. “An able but shadowy figure,” as Harold 
Green described him, Bates did not so much enter a room as burst 
in, as if he were leading an FBI raid. He spent nearly all his time at 
the AEC and had entrée to everyone in the building. Not only did 
he deliver the FBI’s wiretap reports, but he carried verbal messages 
between Hoover and Strauss. Bates had been around politics for a 
long time. Raised in a tiny town in north Texas where his mother 
worked at the polls and his aunt was secretary to Collin County 
congressman Sam Rayburn, Charlie Bates and his twin brother 
remembered visiting Rayburn’s house as children and being given 
lemonade and watermelon. They looked to Rayburn as a father and 
even carved the wooden gavel with which he called the U.S. House 
of Representatives to order when he was first elected Speaker in 
1940.22 

Impressed by Bates and the Rayburn connection, J. Edgar 
Hoover elevated the young man to the rank of supervisor when he 


was only twenty-seven. Bates now looked on Hoover, too, as a 
second father, and came up with pretexts to drop in at his office 
now and then. It got so that Hoover would address Bates by name 
when they saw each other in the elevator and sound off about 
whatever was on his mind: “Hoover,” Bates said, “always had 
something he wanted to talk to you about.” Bates got along with 
Strauss, too, but not to the point where he viewed him as another 
father. Strauss called the younger man “Charlie,” while Bates called 
him “Admiral” and sometimes “Lewis.” Eventually Strauss relied on 
Bates and sometimes turned to him for advice. Hoover relied on 
Bates too—to help him gauge Strauss’s frame of mind. For, as the 
weeks went by, the Admiral was less and less a cool customer who 
wanted to rid himself of his quarry gracefully, more and more an 
implacable foe who wanted to destroy him as ruthlessly as possible. 
Hoover wanted to make sure that matters did not slip out of hand.23 


Oppenheimer spent the first three weeks of 1954 seeking an 
attorney. His friend Herb Marks thought he should be represented 
by someone whose stature was comparable to his own, yet it was 
asking a good deal to expect a prominent attorney to accept any 
case, let alone this one, on such short notice. O’Brian had advised 
Oppenheimer to settle for no one but Simon Rifkind, senior partner 
in the New York firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and 
Garrison, but for reasons of health and at his wife’s insistence, 
Rifkind turned him down. At that point Rifkind’s partner, Lloyd 
Garrison, volunteered, and Oppenheimer accepted with relief. He 
and Garrison were on friendly, respectful terms already, since 
Garrison was a trustee of the Institute for Advanced Study. A great- 
grandson of famed abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, Lloyd K. 
Garrison was intensely public-spirited, a national leader in civil 
rights, civil liberties, and labor arbitration. He cleared his calendar 
and took the case on a pro bono basis, his only payment the firm’s 
out-of-pocket expenses. Assisting him would be Marks; Samuel 
Silverman, a litigator in Garrison’s firm; and Allan Ecker, an 
associate in the firm who had written a 1948 cover story on 
Oppenheimer for Time. Eighty-year-old John W. Davis, Democratic 
candidate for president three decades earlier, was to serve as senior 
counselor. 

The AEC, too, was seeking a lawyer. Strauss had no one in his 
general counsel’s office whom he trusted—all of them being 
holdovers from Democratic days—so he asked the Justice 
Department to lend him an attorney. When Brownell refused, 


Strauss asked the FBI to suggest a former agent. Hoover likewise 
refused. Finally, on the recommendation of Deputy Attorney 
General William P. Rogers, Strauss hired Roger Robb, a Washington 
attorney who represented McCarthyite radio commentator Fulton 
Lewis Jr. and who, as a district prosecutor, had acquired a 
reputation as a fierce cross-examiner. Hoover approved, 
commenting that Robb had been “cooperative and honorable” with 
the bureau and agreeing to expedite his security clearance. 24 

That Strauss, certain to be a judge in the event of an appeal to 
the commissioners, should select the prosecuting attorney was 
remarkable enough. Equally remarkable, he also chose the 
chairman of the Personnel Security Board, in effect, foreman of the 
jury that would hear the case. His choice, seconded by President 
Eisenhower, was Gordon Gray, a Democrat, former secretary of the 
Army, and president of the University of North Carolina. (As it 
happened, Gray, Brownell, and Robb had all attended Yale Law 
School at the same time.) It was felt that the board should also 
include a captain of industry, and it fell to AEC general counsel 
William Mitchell to make the choice: Thomas Morgan, a North 
Carolina native who had risen from a hands-on job repairing 
gyrocompasses to the presidency of the Sperry Gyroscope 
Corporation. 

The third member was to be a scientist. Lee Hancock, a onetime 
FBI man employed by the AEC, happened to be on hand when C. 
Arthur Rolander, an AEC employee who was assisting General 
Manager Nichols with the prosecution, appeared at the AEC 
Security Division for help in finding someone to fill the third slot. 
Rolander was seeking a scientist who had served on other Personnel 
Security Boards and had “the right attitude toward security.” 
Members of the division checked the transcripts of board hearings 
all over the country, looking for individuals who had taken a tough 
line, and they chose a retired chemistry professor at Loyola 
University with a record of exceptional severity. His name was 
Ward Evans. Hancock considered the process a “cold, calculating 
exhibition of trying to stack the deck.” 25 

During the weeks and months that followed, Hancock received 
an education in what a politically motivated prosecution could be. 
Carpooling from Virginia to work each day, Hancock found himself 
coaching the neophyte Rolander on AEC rules and procedures. 
During the commute, and at lunches with Strauss’s assistant Bryan 
La-Plante, Bates, and others, Hancock became aware of the 
pervasive “get Oppie” atmosphere on the AEC team. He constantly 


heard remarks like “Strauss wants to win” and “if we deliver, our 
futures will be taken care of.” And on days when Robb joined them 
for lunch, it was “the Republican Party needs this.” Bates described 
the pressure in a report to Hoover: “Strauss felt the importance of 
the Oppenheimer case could not be stressed too much. He felt that 
if the case is lost the atomic energy program ... will fall into the 
hands of left-wingers. If this occurs, it will mean another Pearl 
Harbor as far as atomic energy is concerned. Strauss feels that the 
scientists will then take over the entire program. Strauss stated that 
if Oppenheimer is cleared, then anyone can be cleared regardless of 
the information against them.” 26 

The charges fell into two categories. The first twenty-three had 
to do with Oppenheimer’s alleged Communist and _ left-wing 
associations in California between 1938 and 1946: organizations he 
had sponsored; publications he had subscribed to; the Communist 
Party memberships of his brother, wife, sister-in-law, and former 
fiancée; funds he had donated to the Party for Spanish war relief; 
fund-raisers he had attended; claims by Party organizers that he 
was a covert member; and, by far the most important, the Chevalier 
affair. In that contretemps, Oppenheimer’s close friend Haakon 
Chevalier in late 1942 or early 1943 passed on a feeler as to 
whether Oppenheimer would provide information to the Russians 
through a Soviet consular official in San Francisco. Oppenheimer 
immediately refused, but he delayed several months before 
reporting the feeler to Army intelligence and then lied about the 
circumstances in the hope of protecting Chevalier. The AEC’s 
charges also included Kitty and Robert’s continuing friendship with 
the Chevaliers after the war, until 1947. Appalling as these charges 
appeared to anyone reading them for the first time, General Leslie 
R. Groves and his top security man, John Lansdale, had known 
about nearly all of them when they cleared Oppenheimer for the 
Manhattan Project in 1943, and the AEC had reviewed the charges, 
updated to include the Chevalier affair, in 1947 and cleared 
Oppenheimer without a dissenting vote. Among those who had 
agreed to the clearance were Strauss and J. Edgar Hoover, with 
Hoover stipulating that he had no _ reservations about 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty but only about the Chevalier matter, which 
he considered a matter of bad judgment, and not disloyalty. 

The final charges had to do with the hydrogen bomb. 
Oppenheimer was accused of having altered his estimates over the 
years as to the bomb’s feasibility, of having opposed its 
development for moral and political reasons, and of having 


continued to oppose the bomb and declining to cooperate fully even 
after Truman’s order to go ahead. He was also accused of having 
tried to turn the top scientists at Los Alamos against the project by 
instructing John Manley to disseminate the GAC reports there in 
November 1949, and of having persuaded colleagues not to work 
on the bomb; and he was told that the opposition, “of which you 
are the most experienced, most powerful and most effective 
member, has definitely slowed down its development.” 27 

Ironically, while Oppenheimer was preparing to defend himself 
against charges that he had delayed the hydrogen bomb, Strauss 
was on Bikini Atoll, witnessing the largest test the United States 
had ever detonated. It was called Bravo, and it exploded with a 
force of fifteen megatons, three times as large as expected and more 
than seven hundred times as powerful as the Hiroshima bomb. 
Bravo’s size prompted rumors that it had gotten out of control, and 
even the president said publicly that “something must have 
happened that we have never experienced before.” And it was not 
just a matter of size. Eighty-two nautical miles to the east of Bikini, 
twenty-three Japanese sailors on a ship called the Lucky Dragon 
sickened from fallout, and one of them died. Once again, America 
had inflicted nuclear damage on Japan. Seeking to distract the U.S. 
public from its fear of fallout, Strauss told a press conference on his 
return from the Pacific that the H-bomb “can be made as large as 
you wish ... large enough to take out a city.” A city as big as New 
York? someone asked. “The metropolitan area, yes,” Strauss replied, 
adding measurably to the panic. A photograph taken as they left the 
press conference showed Eisenhower scowling. “I wouldn’t have 
answered that one that way, Lewis,” the president chided. “Other 
than that, I thought you handled it well.” 2s 

Bravo was the first in a series of tests in the spring of 1954, the 
Castle series, that ushered in a new, more advanced phase of 
thermonuclear development. But U.S. officials continued to worry: 
six months earlier, the USSR had tested “Joe Four” (after Stalin), 
the first Soviet device that involved thermonuclear reactions. In Los 
Alamos, poring over debris that had been gathered by aircraft, Hans 
Bethe, Enrico Fermi, and Carson Mark concluded that while the 
Soviet Union was on the track, it had not yet discovered radiation 
implosion. Joe Four consisted of alternating layers of uranium and 
lithium deuteride, like our Alarm Clock. It was a single-stage and 
not a multistage device, like ours, and it used high explosives, not 
radiation, to achieve compression. Without radiation compression, 
the Russians would be unable to explode a megaton weapon. 29 


Ever since Joe One five years before, the United States had 
known that it had underestimated the talent of Soviet physicists 
and the capacity of the Soviet industrial machine. Americans had 
lost their complacency and tried incessantly to assess their lead—if 
indeed they still had one—over the USSR. Yet it seemed strange, at 
the very moment of reassurance, when the United States had just 
set off a device so enormous as to engender first and foremost the 
fear that it might get out of control, to be trying a man for having 
delayed development of the hydrogen bomb. The hydrogen bomb, 
or at least a thermonuclear device that could be weaponized with 
comparative ease, was already a fact. And we knew that the 
Russians did not yet have it. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


The Hearing Begins 


ONE MORNING IN JANUARY, a Scottish-born reporter for a famous 
newspaper was looking for a seat on an airplane out of Washington. 
He found one next to a rumpled-looking blue-eyed man who did 
not seem happy to see him. Well aware of the man’s identity, the 
reporter engaged Robert Oppenheimer in chitchat about 
Eisenhower’s first year in office. Although he steered away from 
topics he thought might be troublesome, the man noticed that his 
companion nonetheless seemed nervous and under strain.1 

That was all James Reston needed. On his return to the capital, 
he started asking around. What he found was dynamite, and before 
long Lloyd Garrison confirmed Reston’s scoop: the government had 
confronted the scientist with charges, suspended his clearance, and 
scheduled a hearing. Garrison asked Reston, Washington bureau 
chief of the New York Times, not to publish until Oppenheimer had 
had time to complete his response, so that charges and rebuttal 
could appear simultaneously. The Times’s publisher, Arthur Hays 
Sulzberger, agreed, and for six weeks the paper held the story amid 
worries that Senator Joseph McCarthy or a Times competitor might 
break the news at any moment. Finally, only days before the 
Oppenheimer hearing was to begin, McCarthy charged on 
nationwide TV that Communist sympathizers in the government 
had caused a “deliberate eighteen-month delay” in the hydrogen 
bomb, a figure he had apparently lifted from Charles Murphy’s 
anonymous article in Fortune the year before. Eisenhower replied 
that he knew of no such delay. 

Anxious to trump McCarthy, Lewis Strauss and presidential press 
secretary James Hagerty concocted a strategy to trigger publication, 
and on April 13, the second day of the hearing, Reston’s story 
appeared on page 1 of the New York Times. Gordon Gray, chairman 


of the hearing board, was outraged. Garrison had promised that he 
would try to restrain publication, and Gray thought Garrison had 
double-crossed him. Since no one at the AEC or the White House 
informed him that it was they who had double-crossed him, Gray 
scolded Garrison as the hearing opened and in the weeks that 
followed reprimanded him repeatedly for having—so Gray thought 
—broken his promise. The duplicity of this maneuver, whereby 
high officials of the AEC and the White House deceived their own 
handpicked chairman, was typical of what was to happen in the 
weeks ahead.2 

Oppenheimer’s friend Joseph Volpe later said the proceeding 
was “like a hearing on your wife after you’ve been married twenty 
years.” In his dozen years of government service Oppenheimer had 
been through four high-level reviews, among them the 1947 review 
in which Hoover and Strauss had agreed to clearance.3; This new 
proceeding was unlike any of the others in that it resembled a 
criminal trial, with the burden of proof on one side only: the 
defense. It was held in a dilapidated government building with only 
lawyers, witnesses, and a handful of officials present. The location 
was not announced, reporters were not permitted—indeed, they 
were not formally told that it was happening—and each witness 
was informed as he took the stand that the proceeding was 
“confidential,” meaning that he was not supposed to speak about it 
with anyone outside the hearing room and that government 
representatives would not do so either. On completion of the 
proceeding, the Gray board was to vote on whether Oppenheimer’s 
clearance should be restored, and it was understood that, either 
way, the verdict would be appealed. The defense decided at the 
outset that, should it lose, it would not appeal within the federal 
court system. Instead, the five commissioners would act as the court 
of final appeal. In an improvised, and egregious, intermediate step, 
once the Gray board rendered its decision, AEC general manager 
Kenneth Nichols, who had signed the original letter of charges, sent 
the commissioners his recommendations. The government made up 
rules as it went along, and the defense was not consulted about 
what the rules should be. Lloyd Garrison objected again and again 
that he did not know what type of proceeding it was—was it a trial, 
with the normal protections of the courtroom?—but in the fear- 
laden climate of the day, his objections were overruled, and 
Chairman Gray even reprimanded him for making them. 

The whole affair was after the fact: Oppenheimer’s contract as 
an AEC consultant was to expire on June 30, and Strauss was free 


at any time before that to cancel the contract, which would 
automatically have precipitated revocation of his Q clearance. 
Instead, paradoxically, members of the Gray board and the AEC 
commissioners had to rush the writing of their opinions in order to 
get a verdict in before the contract was to lapse. With common 
sense turned on its head, it is impossible to escape the conclusion 
that Strauss’s determination to win at any cost was colored by an 
implacable desire for revenge. 

The week before the hearing began, Gray, Morgan, and Evans 
were closeted with three thousand pages of documents—Borden’s 
letter, the denunciations by Pitzer, Teller, and Latimer, other items 
from Oppenheimer’s FBI file—compiled by the prosecution. Roger 
Robb, the outside prosecutor hired for the case, and his chief 
assistant, C. Arthur Rolander, were on hand to interpret, and with 
the board members taking meals together every day, Robb very 
often ate with them. Not only was the defense prevented from 
seeing the documents the board members were reading: it was not 
told what the documents were or what they contained. Silverman 
called the board’s prehearing immersion in files that the defense 
was not allowed to see “unheard of,” while Green later said that the 
board members emerged “brainwashed,” coming to _ the 
presentation of testimony steeped in the prosecution’s case and on 
friendly terms with the prosecutor himself. But when Garrison 
asked to meet with the board, he was brusquely refused. There was 
no discovery process and no rules of evidence. The defense, 
mistakenly assuming that the proceeding might bear some 
resemblance to a normal trial, furnished the prosecution with the 
names of its witnesses ahead of time, but when Garrison asked for a 
list of prosecution witnesses, Robb refused and was upheld by 
Gordon Gray. Meanwhile, knowing in advance who the defense 
witnesses were to be, Robb repeatedly embarrassed them with 
disclosures from their FBI files. 

The biggest handicap of all for the defense was its lack of 
security clearance. Many of the documents entered in testimony 
had been confiscated from Oppenheimer’s files and some had even 
been written by Oppenheimer himself, but now they were classified 
and no one on the defense team was permitted to see them. Prior to 
the hearing, the AEC had offered to expedite a clearance for 
Garrison but refused to extend the offer to Silverman and Marks, 
and Garrison withdrew his request. (The truth, which the 
prosecution did not want to tell Garrison, was that they anticipated 
difficulty clearing Marks, a liberal who had been a close adviser to 


Acheson in the State Department.) As opening day approached, 
however, Garrison, anxious that Oppenheimer not be left 
unrepresented in the hearing room, renewed his request for 
clearance. Strauss refused outright, instructing Nichols to “make it 
perfectly clear to Garrison that we offered to do this last January 
and ... we won’t give any special consideration to this and should 
not give him emergency clearance.” (Robb, of course, had been 
cleared in just a few days.) Several times Robb declassified a 
document on the spot, while questioning a witness, but refused to 
let the defense attorneys see it on grounds that they were not 
cleared. Barred by classification rules even from _ seeing 
Oppenheimer’s FBI file, the defense lawyers were unaware both of 
derogatory items they should try to answer and positive items that 
might help their client. It was like trying to defend someone while 
blindfolded and with one arm tied behind one’s back.4 

Most ironic of all, the hearing was a massive breach of security. 
Roger Robb would ask bluntly about the core of the hydrogen 
device, while the witness—Oppenheimer, Bethe, or Rabi—would do 
his best to answer without giving anything classified away. All of 
the defense witnesses were more careful about secrecy than the 
government prosecutor, and Rabi was especially outspoken. He 
insisted that James Beckerley, the government’s classification 
officer, be present at every moment while he was on the stand. He 
was afraid, he said, that the hearing would make it easier for the 
Russians to get the H-bomb by enabling them to put “bits and 
pieces together” and by “the attrition of the security of technical 
information.” Beckerley remarked afterward, “If Oppenheimer or 
his witnesses had given anything away, they’d have been had up for 
it, but they knew better than the prosecution what ought not to be 
said.” Their efforts did not wholly succeed. Scientists all over the 
world pored over the transcript after it was published, and the 
official British historian Lorna Arnold wrote that the transcript of 
the Oppenheimer hearing helped British weaponeers invent an H- 
bomb of their own.s 

Since the defense attorneys were denied access to material they 
needed, Oppenheimer and Marks served instead as their historical 
memory, and Silverman, chief litigator for the defense, was 
astonished at how much they remembered. Oppenheimer also 
served as Silverman’s tutor in physics. Silverman called these 
sessions “fantastic,” but added that because of security Oppie 
censored what he told him even when a fuller explanation might 
have made his case more persuasive. “Oppenheimer was very 


careful even with us, his counsel. If a thing was classified, he didn’t 
tell us.” It was one of innumerable respects in which the 
government assumed Oppenheimer’s loyalty and discretion even as 
it challenged them.« 

A final crippling circumstance, which Garrison and Oppenheimer 
suspected but may have underrated, was that every detail of their 
strategy was known to the prosecution in advance because of the 
wiretapping, euphemistically called “electronic surveillance,” of the 
Oppenheimers’ conversations with their attorneys and the 
attorneys’ conversations with one another. Robb had detailed 
information about Oppenheimer’s state of mind, his search for an 
attorney, the presence of former secretary of state Acheson at 
dinner at the Oppenheimers’ in Princeton just prior to the hearing, 
Kitty Oppenheimer’s approach to General Groves at a New York 
cocktail party in an effort to find out what he was going to say on 
the witness stand, and Robert’s conversations with potential 
witnesses, to say nothing of evidence the defense attorneys planned 
to introduce. 

Charles Bates, Hoover’s liaison to the AEC, carried the 
wiretapped reports, plus letters and memoranda from the FBI files 
—sometimes as much as a briefcaseful—from the FBI to Strauss, 
and from Strauss to Robb or his assistant Art Rolander. Bates, who 
strongly favored the prosecution, read all the messages stamped 
“via Liaison,” since it was his job to advise Strauss or the FBI 
recipient about the matter at hand and deliver an oral reply. He 
would run errands and schmooze at the AEC, then return to the FBI 
in late afternoon. During the first six months of 1954, before, 
during, and after the hearing, he carried at least 273 wiretapped 
reports to Strauss or Robb, as well as oral messages back and forth 
between the two men, including Strauss’s suggestions as to the 
questions Robb should ask witnesses.7 

Over twenty years later, on December 1, 1976, Judge Roger 
Robb of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of 
Columbia wrote a letter to Samuel B. Ballen, a businessman in 
Santa Fe, New Mexico, about his role in the Oppenheimer case. “I 
had no knowledge of any bugging. Neither did I have any 
information about any conversation between Oppenheimer and his 
lawyer, and the suggestion that I used such information in ‘strategy 
planning’ is preposterous. I trust you will not persist in circulating 
false and libelous statements about my professional conduct.” Robb 
sent a copy of his letter to Gordon Gray, and published a similar 
letter in Life magazine. As an attorney, Robb had represented 


clients as diverse as Earl Browder, chairman of the U.S. Communist 
Party, and Barry Goldwater, Republican candidate for president in 
1964, and there was no way he did not know the source of the FBI 
documents he used in prosecuting Oppenheimer. Asked in the 
mid-1970s whether he would be interested in an appointment to 
the U.S. Supreme Court, Robb indicated that he would not, perhaps 
in part because he feared that his use of illegally obtained evidence 
in the Oppenheimer case would come to light.s 


The hearing opened on Monday morning, April 12, in T-3, a 
rundown temporary building off Constitution Avenue within sight 
of the White House. Room 2022, where the hearing took place, was 
a long, rectangular office that had been converted into a makeshift 
courtroom. When he was not on the stand, Oppenheimer sat on an 
old leather couch just behind it. Roger Robb’s desire to throw the 
defendant off balance was manifest even in the old courtroom trick 
of placing the couch at such an angle that Oppenheimer had to 
squint into the sun throughout the proceedings.» 

Oppenheimer started off with panache. Under Lloyd Garrison’s 
gentle probing he described his years of service to the government, 
beginning with Los Alamos, his efforts after the war to get an 
atomic energy bill passed by Congress, and his work on the 
Acheson-Lilienthal plan. He described the reasoning behind the 
GAC’s advice against a crash program to build the H-bomb and 
denied that he had ever attempted to dissuade anyone from 
working on it. 

But the wind went out of his sails under cross-examination when 
Robb grilled him about the Chevalier affair. The facts were that one 
evening in late 1942 or early 1943, when Oppenheimer was already 
involved in the secret project, his close friend Haakon Chevalier, on 
a visit to the Oppenheimers, passed along a feeler from George 
Eltenton, a Communist Party member with whom they were both 
acquainted. Eltenton, a British-born engineer who had lived in the 
USSR, had asked Chevalier to inform Oppenheimer that he knew of 
a way to transmit information to our then ally, the USSR, through 
the Soviet consulate in San Francisco. Oppenheimer, shaking a 
pitcher of martinis in the kitchen, immediately responded, “But that 
would be treason,” or words very like those. The two men dropped 
the subject, and Oppenheimer tried to forget the conversation. Six 
or seven months later, on a visit to Berkeley from Los Alamos, 
hearing that Army security was worried about espionage at the 
Berkeley laboratory, he dropped by the Army security office on 


campus and told Lieutenant Lyall Johnson, the officer on duty, that 
George Eltenton, an employee of the Shell Development Company 
in the Bay Area, might bear watching. 

Johnson’s superior, Boris Pash, head of Army counterintelligence 
on the West Coast, was stunned. He ordered Johnson to place a 
wire in the office and, when Oppenheimer appeared the next day, 
pressed him for the name of the intermediary who had passed on 
Eltenton’s approach. Anxious to protect Chevalier, Oppenheimer 
equivocated. All he had meant to convey, he said, was that it would 
be a good idea to keep an eye on Eltenton. 

Oppenheimer returned to New Mexico, and Army security went 
into overdrive. General Groves and his deputy for security, John 
Lansdale, tried without result to pry more out of Oppenheimer. 
Finally, about a year after the initial approach, Oppenheimer 
yielded and gave Groves the name of Haakon Chevalier. 

Oppenheimer testified about these events on the third day of the 
hearing. Under questioning by Robb, he admitted that in Pash’s 
office in 1943 he had, in his words, “invented a cock and bull 
story”: 


Q: Did you tell Pash that X had approached three persons on the 
project? 

A: I am not clear whether I said there were 3 X’s or whether X 
approached three people. 

Q: Didn’t you say that X had approached three people? 

A: Probably. 

Q: Why did you do that, Doctor? 

A: Because I was an idiot. 

Q: Is that your only explanation, Doctor? 

A: I was reluctant to mention Chevalier. 

Q: Yes. 

A: No doubt somewhat reluctant to mention myself.io 


Robb next read from the transcript of the 1943 interview to 
show that Oppenheimer had said more than he had reported in 
earlier testimony. Much of what he had said in 1943 had been false, 
and Oppenheimer, unnerved at hearing his own words read back to 
him, commented: “This whole thing was a pure fabrication except 
for the one name Eltenton.”11 

Robb concluded, “Isn’t it a fair statement ... that you told not 
one lie to Col. Pash, but a whole fabrication and tissue of lies?” 
Oppenheimer lamely answered, “Right.” 12 

When he went home that night, Robb said to his wife, “I’ve just 


seen a man destroy himself.” 13 

But if Oppenheimer destroyed himself, Robb had supplied the 
script. He had prepared with the utmost care, then handed a piece 
of rope to the man on the gallows. 

The defense attorneys were dismayed. Robb’s bullying, his 
innuendos, his heavy-handed insistence on yes-or-no answers, all 
these, along with Gray’s supine failure to rein him in, soon made 
them realize that they were in an uphill battle. “There was a 
general feeling of depression,” Silverman said later.14 

On Easter Sunday, April 18, Joe Volpe was asked to the house of 
Randolph Paul, Garrison’s law partner, in Georgetown. The 
Oppenheimers were staying there, and Robert, miserable over the 
way things were going, wanted Volpe’s advice. After Garrison and 
Marks described what had gone on in the hearing room so far, 
Volpe told them that if things continued this way, they should pack 
their bags and walk out. Randolph Paul agreed. 1s 

Volpe had been counsel to the AEC in the early days and helped 
draw up its security regulations. He and Herb Marks had designed 
the AEC security board hearings to be nonadversarial, to bring out 
the favorable as well as unfavorable sides of an individual’s record 
and weigh the “whole man,” in part because the AEC could not 
otherwise attract the highly qualified personnel it was looking for. 
It was clear to Volpe that the proceedings in room 2022 were a 
long way from long-standing AEC procedures, which were known 
to be the fairest and most effective in government. 

Events a day or so later proved the point. On Monday the 
nineteenth, preparing to testify, David Lilienthal visited the AEC 
building to review documents about Oppenheimer’s 1947 clearance 
and the GAC’s Halloween meeting. He was assigned a desk and files 
that purportedly contained the documents he was seeking. Once he 
was on the stand, however, it became apparent that the documents 
he was being questioned about had been purposely lifted from the 
files to make it appear that he had forgotten critical facts and that 
his testimony should be discounted. Garrison protested that Robb’s 
trick made “a lapse of memory seem like a deliberate falsification,” 
adding that the hearing as a whole was more like a criminal 
prosecution than an inquiry to find the truth. Robb accused 
Garrison of challenging his professional integrity and went on 
questioning Lilienthal unabashed. All without a peep from Gordon 
Gray. 

Lilienthal’s entrapment was just the sort of outrage Volpe had 
had in mind when he had advised the defense lawyers to walk out. 


But Silverman explained years afterward that they had not taken 
the idea seriously. “In those days you didn’t protest. We just 
accepted that this was the way things were. And who would we 
have appealed to?” 16 

Had he known what was happening behind the scenes, the 
pessimism of the forty-six-year-old Silverman might have turned to 
anger. The tiny basement office in building T-3 that had been 
assigned to the defense to work in at night was wired. Oppenheimer 
and Garrison correctly assumed that they could talk privately in the 
evenings only at the Pauls’ house, but the more innocent Silverman 
thought they were “paranoid” and remained unaware of the 
tapping until passage of the Freedom of Information Act more than 
twenty years later gave it away. 

In his testimony, Oppenheimer conceded almost every charge 
having to do with his life in Berkeley prior to World War II. A 
product of the Cambridge-Gottingen-Berkeley Ivory Tower, he had 
known almost nothing about events in the world outside physics, 
learning of the 1929 stock market crash, for example, only some 
time after it occurred. But after falling in love in 1936 with Jean 
Tatlock, a Communist Party member, he, too, became close to the 
Party and was eventually, in his own words, a “fellow traveler.” He 
sympathized with the effort to create an egalitarian society in 
Soviet Russia, but what he cared most about was the rise of fascism 
in Europe and the cause of Republican Spain. Like other leftists of 
that era, he hoped for a defeat of fascism in Spain that would deter 
Hitler from unleashing war on the rest of Europe. People joked that 
the easiest way to find Oppenheimer was to attend a fund-raiser for 
victims of the Spanish civil war. What the ultrarespectable Gordon 
Gray and his colleagues made of Oppenheimer’s life on the 
bohemian left in Berkeley during the 1930s has to be guessed at, 
since it did not remotely resemble their own experience, and like 
most Americans, they were not touched personally by the Spanish 
war. The Chevalier affair was the most damning, not because it was 
about espionage or treason—it was not—but because it was about 
lying. Oppenheimer in 1943 had lied to protect a friend. 
Throughout the hearing, the question that hung over room 2022 
was, would he do it again? Would he put loyalty to a friend ahead 
of loyalty to his country? The question was the more pointed 
because Oppenheimer admitted that he had seen Chevalier from 
time to time after the war, and revealed—a startling fact that 
became known to the prosecution only when Oppenheimer 
mentioned it in his testimony—that he had seen Chevalier on two 


separate occasions in Paris in December 1953, only four months 
before the hearing. 

One after the other, witnesses for the defense argued not only 
that Oppenheimer would place loyalty to the country above loyalty 
to a friend but that he had already done so. They emphasized that 
he, like the rest of them, had changed and grown when it came to 
accepting the need for security. John von Neumann, the world’s 
greatest mathematician, who occupied the office next to 
Oppenheimer’s in Princeton, emphasized the strange new world of 
espionage and counterespionage into which they had all been 
thrust. “We were little children,” he said. “We suddenly were 
dealing with something with which one could blow up the world.... 
We had to make ... our code of conduct as we went along.” Even if 
Oppenheimer’s 1943 version of the Chevalier approach had been 
true, von Neumann said, “it would just give me a piece of 
information on how long it took Dr. Oppenheimer to get adjusted to 
this Buck Rogers universe, but no more.” Later he “learned how to 
handle it, and handled it very well.” Robb asked a final question. 
“Doctor,” he said to von Neumann, “you have never had any 
training as a psychiatrist, have you?” Von Neumann was only one 
of several distinguished witnesses who attested to Oppenheimer’s 
loyalty, only to be faced by insulting innuendo. 17 

Emphasizing that events of the early 1940s, such as the 
Chevalier affair, had to be weighed in terms of the period in which 
they occurred, Gordon Dean conceded that had he first met 
Oppenheimer in Berkeley in 1939 or 1940, he might not have 
cleared him. But, “I feel quite differently having watched him 
closely and ... evaluated quite carefully his service to his country.” 
Here, said Dean, was “one of the few men who can demonstrate his 
loyalty to his country by his performance.” Lee DuBridge, who had 
spent five years with Oppenheimer on the GAC, agreed: “There is 
no one who has exhibited his loyalty to this country more 
spectacularly.” is 

George Kennan, the expert on Russia whose last official post had 
been that of ambassador to the USSR, defended Oppenheimer 
against any implication that he had bent his policy advice in the 
Soviet Union’s favor. Pointing out that the gifted individual is less 
likely than others to have led a wholly conventional life, Kennan 
said that Oppenheimer had one of the great minds of his 
generation. “A mind like that is not without its implications,” he 
added. “You might just as well have asked Leonardo da Vinci to 
distort an anatomical drawing as ... ask Robert Oppenheimer to 


speak responsibly to the sort of questions we were talking about 
and speak dishonestly.”19 

While all twenty-eight defense witnesses—most of them far more 
distinguished in American life than any prosecution witness— 
praised Oppenheimer’s contributions, Vannevar Bush, director of 
the wartime Office of Scientific Research and Development and the 
most venerable of them all, treated the board with defiance. It 
ought to have rejected Nichols’s letter of charges and sent it back 
for redrafting, he said, to eliminate any suggestion that 
Oppenheimer was being tried for advice he had given the 
government. The board’s failure to do so, scolded the austere New 
Englander, had resulted in “a very bad mess” in the government’s 
relations with the scientists. The National Academy of Sciences and 
the American Physical Society would be holding their annual 
meetings in Washington the following week, and he hoped “they 
would do nothing foolish,” such as decide to boycott government 
programs. The scientific community was alarmed that a colleague 
who had “rendered great service to his country, service beyond 
almost any other man, is now being pilloried and put through an 
ordeal because he had the temerity to express his honest opinions. 
... When a man is pilloried for doing that, this country is in a severe 
state.”20 

But the witness who may have gone furthest of all was Rabi, a 
close friend of Oppenheimer’s since 1929 and his successor as 
chairman of the GAC. Rabi conceded that Oppenheimer’s failure to 
report the Chevalier feeler accurately “was a great mistake in 
judgment” but, as von Neumann had, pointed out that Oppie need 
not have reported it at all. “I read no sinister implication in it.” 
Asked about his attempts to persuade Strauss to call off the hearing, 
Rabi replied that he had told Strauss from the outset that the 
suspension of Oppenheimer’s clearance was “a very unfortunate 
thing and should not have been done. In other words, there he was; 
he is a consultant, and if you don’t want to consult the guy, you 
don’t consult him, period.... It didn’t seem to me the sort of thing 
that called for this kind of proceeding at all against a man who had 
accomplished what Dr. Oppenheimer has accomplished. There is a 
real positive record ... we have an A-bomb and a whole series of it, 
and what more do you want—mermaids? This is just a tremendous 
achievement. If the end of that road is this kind of hearing, which 
can’t help but be humiliating, I thought it was a pretty bad show. I 
still think so.”21 

Behind the scenes, Rabi had made six attempts to have the 


hearing called off, only to be foiled each time by Strauss. Once, 
before the proceeding began, he telephoned the White House to 
request an appointment with the president. Spotting Strauss in the 
outer office, the president’s secretary asked who Rabi was. Strauss 
intercepted the call and then obtained a commitment from the 
president to refer any call from Rabi—who had seen a good deal of 
Eisenhower during his brief time as president of Columbia 
University—back to Strauss. Another time, a few days after the start 
of the hearing, Rabi asked the AEC chairman to request a formal 
presidential directive to call it off. This time, worried about 
criticism that was beginning to appear in the press and wary of a 
scientific boycott, Strauss asked Robb to curtail his questioning of 
prosecution witnesses. 22 

Rabi let Strauss know later on that he would be appearing as a 
defense witness and would testify that Oppie was not a security 
risk. Strauss tried to warn him off and cautioned that Rabi might 
find himself trapped on the stand if he had not seen Oppenheimer’s 
FBI file. Strauss got an okay from J. Edgar Hoover to let Rabi see 
the file, but found himself outmaneuvered when Rabi mentioned 
offhandedly on the witness stand that Strauss had already shown it 
to him. Thrown into disarray by the revelation that Strauss had 
shown the witness the highly classified dossier, Robb asked for an 
immediate recess. 23 

Finally Rabi informed Strauss that the GAC had passed a 
resolution declaring it the intention of all nine members to appear 
as witnesses for the defense, and Strauss answered that he refused 
to be blackmailed. 24 

Neither man wanted to alienate the other, since both were 
keenly interested in the Atoms for Peace conference, which was to 
take place in Geneva the following year. Strauss needed Rabi, a 
Nobel Prize winner known all over Europe, for the conference, 
while Rabi wanted the world to get something besides weapons out 
of the atom. Rabi later explained, “My way of keeping straight with 
Strauss was to tell him at every point what I was doing and what I 
thought. I never hid what I thought. Had I taken part in the defense 
—gone over to Oppenheimer or his damn-fool lawyers—the 
outcome might have been different, but I wouldn’t have had my 
Geneva conference.” Rabi was angry at Oppie and thought he had 
brought the whole thing on himself. Had he been part of the 
defense team, he said, he would have urged him to tell his accusers, 
““who the Hell are you to try me, who saved your country for you?’” 
Disgusted by Oppie’s caving in under Robb’s savage cross- 


examination, Rabi said of his friend, “He was such a great actor, so 
he played the role of victim. That is what they wanted of him, and 
he did it.”25 

Still, Rabi regretted all his life that he hadn’t done more. As a 
member of the GAC, he held a presidential appointment and was 
entitled to approach the president directly, and afterward—perhaps 
not remembering that he had been intercepted on precisely such a 
mission by Strauss—he blamed himself for failing to tell 
Eisenhower in person that he should call the whole thing off. He 
did go up to the president at a White House reception one night 
intending to speak to him, but before he could open his mouth, Otis 
Chandler, publisher of the Los Angeles Times and backer of the 
Republican Party, broke in with some comment to Ike about 
Oppie’s romance with Jean Tatlock. Rabi could not summon the 
heart to talk to the president that night. 

It was as though Rabi, as steady as anyone could be, was 
standing like a rock beside Oppie and trying to impart to him the 
staunchness he needed. He loved Oppenheimer for the power of his 
mind and his superb education, so much better, he felt, than his 
own. He relished being with him, discussing history, philosophy, 
literature, and psychology with him—and knew precisely what he 
lacked. Oppenheimer’s brain, Rabi thought, was too much for his 
frail body and his emotional capacity. He could be “sublime” when 
things were going his way, but he was not a street fighter. “Kitty 
was better in that way. She supplied the backbone.” 26 

Groves at Los Alamos, Rabi thought, had understood what 
Robert lacked and supplied the “backbone” himself. And if he was 
too busy or was off somewhere, Groves brought in others to supply 
it. During the early days, in 1943, some of the Europeans thought 
that they were greater scientists than Oppie and that one of them 
should be leading the project. At moments when Oppie seemed to 
doubt himself, Groves would encourage Rabi or Bacher to fly in 
from the Radiation Lab at MIT to buck him up. Now, in the spring 
of 1954, Kitty Oppenheimer, herself the possessor of a keen fighting 
spirit, was doing her best to shore Robert up. And Rabi, as loyal in 
his way as Kitty was in hers, tried, quite simply, to make a gift to 
Robert of the staunchness, the stiffness of spine, that he himself had 
and that his brilliant, mysterious friend lacked. 

The cost to Kitty was beyond reckoning. On weekends during the 
hearing, the two of them went back to Princeton. Robert caught up 
with institute affairs, and they spent time with their children, Toni, 
aged ten, and Peter, fourteen, who especially needed comforting. 


One spring evening Harold Cherniss, an art historian at the 
institute, and his wife, Ruth, a childhood schoolmate of Robert’s, 
were with the Oppenheimers. After dinner, Robert walked them to 
their car. As the three of them were saying good-bye, they heard a 
prolonged wail coming from the house, like the baying of a 
wounded animal. 27 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 


Smyth 


THE OppENHEIMERS WOuld have been surprised had they known what 
was going on in the household of another couple—whom they 
knew, but were not close to—who were just as upset as they were, 
and on their account. AEC commissioner Henry Smyth was Oppie’s 
senior by six years and had received his Ph.D. from Princeton in 
1921, before quantum mechanics arrived in the United States. 
Oppenheimer respected Smyth but did not consider him a first-class 
physicist and had, on more than one occasion, let him know it. But 
Smyth, who had a lively sense of justice and an overriding desire 
for the wellbeing of the atomic energy program, was not one to 
hold Oppie’s attitude against him. So acute was his feeling, and that 
of his wife, that what was happening to Oppie was unjust, 
outrageous, and bad for the country, that the redoubtable Mary 
deConingh Smyth kept a detailed record of their actions throughout 
this period and left it behind for history. 

A little over six feet tall, with an angular face and wavy gray 
hair parted on one side, clad always in subdued grays and browns, 
Henry DeWolf Smyth was the picture of austere rectitude. A 
commissioner for five years, he had been disappointed when 
Eisenhower passed him over for AEC chairman in the spring of 
1953 and selected Strauss instead. By the autumn of that year he 
was thinking seriously of returning to his professorship at 
Princeton, not because he had been passed over but because he 
deeply distrusted the new chairman. Once he realized that the 
hearing was to take place, however, he put his personal plans on 
hold. He knew Strauss too well not to fear a collision between 
scientists and the administration that could endanger the weapons 
program.1 

After New Year’s, 1954, he and Mary stayed up nights discussing 


the resignation and worrying what would happen to Oppie if no 
one was left at the AEC to stand up to Strauss. Mary wrote in her 
diary on January 11, “We decide what is right for H to do about 
RO.” And an evening or two later, “H so tired from worry over RO. 
We talk late.” They shared hard truths about themselves, too: 
walking in Rock Creek Park one Sunday, husband and wife 
discussed their “real incompatibility,” and Mary wrote later that 
she was “sunk.” They had their lighter moments, too. Klari and 
Johnny von Neumann stayed with them the week Johnny testified 
—he had not wanted to appear, and rumor had it that Klari 
threatened him with divorce if he did not testify in Oppie’s favor— 
and another time Rabi came for dinner and stayed overnight: “Rabi 
here for dinner. Wonderful ping-pong.”2 

The week of April 26, the last full week of the hearing, scientists 
converged on Washington from all over the country for their annual 
meetings. Despite the warning to each witness that the hearing was 
to be treated as “confidential,” news had spread throughout the 
physics community as to what kind of proceeding it was. Hans 
Bethe, president of the American Physical Society, invited 
Oppenheimer to sit on the dais during dinner at one of the big 
Washington hotels. When Bethe introduced the worn and tired- 
looking physicist he received a standing ovation. 

All of the government witnesses testified that final week: the 
prosecution had arranged it that way so that hostile testimony 
would be fresh in the minds of the board members when they made 
their decision. During that frantic week, Strauss managed to 
squeeze time for four prosecution witnesses into his schedule. On 
Monday he saw Wendell Latimer and Kenneth Pitzer, the professors 
of chemistry at Berkeley who had informed against Oppie to the FBI 
two years earlier and were to testify against him that week. And 
late Tuesday he had a visit from Edward Teller, who was scheduled 
to testify on Wednesday.3 

After seeing Strauss, Teller stopped by the office of Roger Robb, 
who had interviewed him six weeks earlier in California. On that 
occasion Teller had told Robb about an episode in 1942 or so when 
Oppenheimer had sought his advice as to whether he should accept 
leadership of the Manhattan Project in view of left-wing friendships 
he had had during the 1930s, and Teller had urged him to go 
ahead. Robb now told Teller that since their meeting in California, 
Oppenheimer had testified to an involvement with the Communist 
Party far more extensive than the one he had described to Teller. 
Robb showed Teller the passage in Oppenheimer’s testimony in 


which the scientist admitted that he had given Pash in 1943 a false 
story about Chevalier, and Teller professed to be shocked. 
“Oppenheimer lied to me,” he said, adding that his father had 
taught him as a boy that a half-truth was as bad as a lie. 

When Teller returned to his hotel that evening, three of his 
oldest friends begged him not to testify for the prosecution. Thirty- 
two years later John Wheeler still remembered Teller’s pacing back 
and forth in his room at the Wardman Park Hotel, worrying about 
the flaws in Oppie’s character, while Hans and Rose Bethe also 
sorrowfully recalled pleading with Teller that night. Teller and 
Bethe had met in 1928, as students of Arnold Sommerfeld in 
Munich. When Bethe arrived in the United States in 1935 as a 
refugee from Hitler, he had gone straight to the Tellers’ home in 
Washington, D.C., and a year or so later the Tellers had chaperoned 
Bethe and Rose Ewald, then in their courtship, on an automobile 
trip across the United States. Bethe had already implored Teller to 
testify for Oppenheimer, and Rose, too, now begged him not to turn 
against their old friend. This time Teller did not mention the “issue 
of character” of which he had spoken to Wheeler, nor did he 
question Oppie’s loyalty. Instead he deplored his opposition to the 
H-bomb and complained that he had slowed down another 
program, the nuclear reactor effort, as well. As the old friends said 
good night, the Bethes knew they had failed. 

Teller did not mention his session with the prosecutor that day 
to either Wheeler or the Bethes. But in later years he insisted that 
his afternoon meeting with Robb—which he remembered, 
inaccurately, as having taken place early Wednesday morning, April 
28, when he was on his way into the hearing room—changed his 
mind. Until that moment, he claimed, he had intended to limit his 
testimony to his belief that Oppie had slowed the H-bomb program 
and given bad advice. But on reading Oppie’s admission that he had 
lied, he had decided to say more. 

Robb proceeded with surgical delicacy the next day. Asked 
whether he thought that Oppenheimer was disloyal, Teller 
answered that he had always considered him a loyal citizen. 
Describing his old colleague as “intellectually most alert” and “very 
complicated,” Teller volunteered that “it would be presumptuous 
and wrong on my part if I would try in any way to analyze his 
motives.” Robb moved in for the kill: “Do you or do you not believe 
that Dr. Oppenheimer is a security risk?” 

“In a great number of cases,” Teller answered, “I have seen Dr. 
Oppenheimer act in a way which for me was exceedingly hard to 


understand. I thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues 
and his actions frankly appeared to me confused and complicated. 
To this extent I feel that I would like to see the vital interests of the 
country in hands which I understand better and therefore trust 
more. In this very limited sense I would like to express a feeling 
that I would feel personally more secure if public matters would rest 
in other hands” (italics added).s 

With these words, the deed was done. In California only a few 
days before, Teller had told an AEC official that he was sorry the 
case was being “brought on security grounds because such charges 
were not tenable.” But in their session Tuesday night, Robb 
evidently persuaded Teller to utter the word “secure.” And the 
moment he did so, Robb switched abruptly to a different line of 
questioning. He aimed at all costs to avoid giving Teller a chance to 
take back the words he had spoken.« 

Teller then said under oath that Oppenheimer was “just a most 
wonderful and excellent director” of Los Alamos during the war. 
But if scientists had gone to work on the H-bomb immediately after 
World War II—a course he said Oppenheimer had discouraged—the 
United States could have had the weapon four years earlier than it 
had, indeed possibly as early as 1947. And he added that 
Oppenheimer’s influence and that of the GAC had been “a brake 
rather than encouragement” to the thermonuclear program, “more 
frequently a hindrance than a help.” 

Toward the end of Teller’s testimony Gordon Gray asked 
whether he thought the common security would be endangered if 
Oppenheimer were allowed to keep his clearance. If it was a 
question of intent, the answer would be no, Teller replied. 
Oppenheimer would not “knowingly and willingly” do anything to 
endanger the nation. But “if it is a question of wisdom and 
judgment, as demonstrated by actions since 1945, then I would say 
that it would be wiser not to grant clearance.”7 

As he left the stand, Teller turned to Oppenheimer, who was 
seated behind him on the sofa, and put out his hand. Stunned, 
Oppenheimer took it. “I’m sorry,” Teller said. “After what you’ve 
just said, I don’t know what you mean,” Oppenheimer replied. 
Teller turned and limped from the room.s 


Strauss and Robb were disappointed by the failure of another 
witness to make it to Washington that week. That witness was 
Ernest Lawrence, the only leader whose stature in the scientific 
community came close to that of Oppenheimer. A few weeks 


earlier, talking with Robb, Lawrence had bitterly criticized 
Oppenheimer: his hypnotic influence, his opposition to the H-bomb 
and the second lab, and his participation in Project Vista. Strauss, 
who for nearly twenty years had helped Lawrence acquire 
expensive equipment for his laboratory, had told Lawrence that it 
was his duty to testify, and Lawrence had reluctantly consented. 
Reluctantly because Lawrence and Oppenheimer went back even 
further than Lawrence and Strauss, and had been the closest of 
friends and collaborators during the 1930s. So close were they that 
Lawrence had named his younger son Robert after him. Lawrence, 
as leader, had very much at heart the “unity” part of the words 
“scientific community.” He was a man of unusually deep loyalties, 
and the idea of reading Oppie out of that community pained him. 
But he felt betrayed. It wasn’t just Oppie’s left-wing opinions— 
Lawrence thought he had outgrown them—but the fact that prior to 
his recommending Oppenheimer’s younger brother Frank for a 
teaching job at the University of Minnesota, Robert had assured 
him that Frank had never belonged to the Communist Party, 
knowing full well that he had. 

Because of his bitterness, because he _ believed that 
Oppenheimer’s advice had been mistaken and maybe dangerous, 
and also perhaps out of irritation that Oppenheimer seemed to 
enjoy his fame all too much, Lawrence had given Strauss his word 
that, on the way home from a meeting on reactors in Tennessee, he 
would stop in Washington to testify. Lawrence had allowed himself 
to be persuaded that the proceeding was Oppenheimer’s fault: 
Strauss had given him a chance to renounce his clearance quietly; it 
was Oppie who had insisted on a hearing. 

The woods outside Topoca Lodge in the Great Smoky Mountains 
were breathtakingly beautiful that last weekend of April 1954 as 
the country’s best-known specialists on nuclear reactors met under 
the auspices of the AEC. They had gathered to discuss technical 
problems, but the immolation of Oppenheimer dominated their 
meeting. Lawrence was surprised by the unanimous sympathy for 
his old friend. When he said that Oppenheimer himself was to 
blame, they told him that, to the contrary, Oppie had had no choice 
but to ask for the hearing once he was charged as a security risk. 
When Lawrence argued that fame had gone to Oppie’s head and he 
had strayed from science into moral preachment, they asked 
whether being a scientific adviser to the government meant that a 
man must renounce his beliefs. Was it his duty to approve a course 
of action that offended his moral code? And was it a crime to be 


wrong, assuming that Oppenheimer had been wrong in opposing 
the hydrogen bomb? Lawrence heard the words “martyrdom” and 
“persecution” applied to the goings-on in Washington, and approval 
of Oppie’s stance on the H-bomb. And when one of the conferees 
pointed out that the hostile testimony so far had all come from 
Berkeley, Lawrence found himself defending his lab from the 
charge that it was waging a vendetta. But the arguments that 
weighed most with him had to do with the scientific community— 
the damage a split would cause, not just to science, but to the 
weapons program and the country.9 

The discussions exacted a toll, and Lawrence suffered an attack 
of the ulcerative colitis that was eventually to kill him. Before he 
flew home—to California and not Washington—he summoned three 
other conferees to his bathroom and showed them the blood he had 
lost, so they would not think that he had lost his nerve. 10 

Luis Alvarez in Berkeley was surprised to receive a call from 
Lawrence, before he left Tennessee, telling him not to testify. 
Lawrence added that the four of them, Lawrence, Alvarez, Ken 
Pitzer, and Wendell Latimer, were viewed as a Berkeley cabal bent 
on destroying Oppenheimer, and that he was afraid the lab would 
suffer reprisals if he and Alvarez took the stand. Alvarez canceled 
his flight to Washington. 

That evening he had another call, this one from Lewis Strauss. 
Maybe Lawrence had caved in because of illness, Strauss scolded, 
but what was Alvarez’s excuse? Lawrence had ordered him not to 
go, Alvarez objected, and it was Lawrence he worked for. Strauss 
told Alvarez that it was his duty to appear; Alvarez responded that 
he had already done his duty to the country—during the war, at Los 
Alamos. Strauss became more and more exercised, and finally 
warned that if Alvarez failed to show up the next day, he would be 
unable to look at himself in the mirror for the rest of his life. 

Alvarez reconsidered. He poured himself a drink and booked a 
seat on a midnight flight to Washington. On the drive to the 
airport, he reflected that it was the first time he had ever disobeyed 
Ernest Lawrence.11 


CHAPTER TWENTY 


Borden 


On Wepnespay EVENING Allan Ecker, a junior member of the defense 
team, was in the AEC building reading declassified transcripts of 
the day’s testimony when he heard the crackling sounds of an 
ancient recording machine through the thin wall between him and 
the office next door. As he left the building that night, Ecker saw 
Roger Robb leaving with two men Ecker later recognized on the 
witness stand: Luis Alvarez, just in from California, and Boris Pash.1 

When his turn came the next day Alvarez, like his Berkeley 
colleagues Latimer and Pitzer, testified that Oppenheimer had 
persuaded others, especially younger men, not to work on the H- 
bomb. But all three of them hedged a little. Pitzer said, “I am not 
myself a physicist,” and Latimer, “my impressions would be based 
very largely on what Dr. Teller has told me.” Alvarez put it this 
way: “This I have been told by Edward Teller. That is my only 
source of information on this point.” Along with Teller, all of them 
emphasized Oppenheimer’s persuasiveness—“one of the most 
persuasive men that has ever lived,” Alvarez said—to back up the 
prosecution’s claim that Oppenheimer had discouraged fellow 
scientists from working on the project. And when Robb asked 
whether Oppenheimer was still essential to the weapons program, 
Pitzer, Teller, and Latimer answered emphatically that he was not. 
Interestingly, Strauss had seen the three other men, and probably 
coached them on this very point, before they gave their testimony, 
but saw Alvarez, who was not asked that question, only for a brief 
moment Friday morning, after he had testified. Strauss apparently 
did not coach Alvarez but presumably thanked him for coming all 
the way from California: Lawrence’s change of heart had, in a 
sense, left Teller out to dry, left him the only Berkeley physicist to 
take on Oppenheimer, Latimer and Pitzer being chemists. And, 


having seen Teller twice that week, on Tuesday, before he testified, 
and on Thursday, afterward, Strauss knew how shaky his star 
witness felt. Alvarez had no more firsthand knowledge of the 
thermonuclear program than Pitzer or Latimer, but at least he was a 
physicist and could be counted on because of his long-standing, and 
well-known, animosity toward Oppenheimer.2 

Unlike the other four, a fifth prosecution witness, Major General 
Roscoe Charles Wilson, had no personal animus against the 
defendant and appeared only reluctantly, on orders of the Air Force 
chief of staff. Wilson had known Oppenheimer since 1944, when as 
Air Force liaison officer to General Groves he had helped pick 
Alamogordo as the site of the first atomic bomb test. He testified 
that despite his admiration for Oppenheimer, he had warned the 
director of Air Force intelligence in early 1951 about a “pattern of 
activity” on the scientist’s part that he thought could “jeopardize 
the national defense.” The “pattern” included Oppenheimer’s 
advocacy of internationalizing atomic energy (the Acheson- 
Lilienthal plan) at a time when this country still had a monopoly, 
his opposition to two of three devices favored by the Air Force for 
detecting a possible test by the Soviet Union, and his opposition, on 
technical grounds, to development of a nuclear-powered airplane. 
In the fall of 1949, immediately after Joe One, Wilson had been 
briefed by Teller, who sent him to top Air Force officials to alert 
them to the fact that something called the hydrogen bomb might be 
the answer to the Soviet A-bomb. The intervention by Teller and 
Wilson led Air Force chief of staff Hoyt Vandenberg to testify in 
favor of the H-bomb in Congress, on October 14, 1949, only the day 
after he had learned that the bomb might someday be a possibility. 

Calling himself “a big bomb man,” Wilson described his 
testimony as “one of the great sorrows of my life.” Years afterward 
he explained that Oppenheimer had been “remarkably kind to me, 
and really a great mind, an incredible mind.... I liked 
Oppenheimer,” he said, “we were friends. I have been to his house 
many times.... As I sat there I could see tears running down the 
guy’s face.... This really has been on my conscience.”4 (Joe Volpe 
later denied that Oppenheimer wept at any time during the 
hearing.) 

If Lawrence’s defection left Teller out on a limb, Thomas 
Finletter’s decision not to testify left the Air Force’s other witness, 
David Tressel Griggs, very much on the spot as well. Ivan Getting, a 
former Air Force scientist and close friend of Griggs’s, stopped by 
Griggs’s house in Los Angeles one day in 1954 and found his friend 


talking on the telephone to someone back east. That someone was 
their old boss, the former secretary of the Air Force, breaking the 
news to Griggs that he was not going to appear. Getting noticed 
that Griggs looked “ashen” and “let down.”s 

Griggs nonetheless appeared during the final week to support 
the prosecution’s case that Oppenheimer had engaged not in a 
single act but a pattern of actions designed to weaken the Air Force 
and its offensive arm, the Strategic Air Command. Griggs described 
the 1951 Vista meetings at Caltech and a meeting outside Boston in 
September 1952 on air defense of the United States. During the 
Boston meeting, Griggs testified, he had seen Professor Jerrold 
Zacharias of MIT go to the blackboard and write the letter Z at the 
top, followed by the letters O, R, and C, in capitals eighteen inches 
high, diagonally to the bottom of the board. The initials were those 
of Zacharias himself, and of Oppenheimer, Rabi, and Charles 
Lauritsen, who, Griggs alleged, had conspired to weaken SAC, if not 
abolish it altogether. The charge that there was a cabal called ZORC 
had created a sensation when, as mentioned earlier, it appeared in 
Charles Murphy’s Fortune article of May 1953, and was raised again 
at the hearing to suggest a conspiracy. Although Zacharias denied 
writing the fateful letters on the blackboard and MIT physicist Al 
Hill, who was also present at the Boston meeting, testified that the 
episode never took place, the ZORC story had staying power: Ivan 
Getting believed it and in 1989 sent the author a letter from a 
scientist who had allegedly been present, offering to swear under 
oath that he had seen Zacharias write the initials on the 
blackboard. However, after the hearing two prominent scientists 
who had attended the Boston meeting, Emmanuel Piore and Carl 
Overhage, told the FBI that they had never witnessed such a scene 
nor heard of ZORC prior to Murphy’s story in Fortune. Griggs 
himself was unsure: three weeks after testifying at the hearing he 
told the FBI, according to bureau records, that “doubts have arisen 
in his mind as to whether his recollection was true.... He said that 
he is somewhat confused concerning this matter and stated also 
that he has a poor memory.” 

Guyford Stever, an aeronautics specialist who became science 
adviser to President Gerald Ford, in later years recalled seeing 
Zacharias at the blackboard, writing down names of those who had 
taken responsibility for drafting parts of a paper or report. “It was a 
simple technique, and not a consequential thing,” Stever said, 
adding that after Zacharias had written down the four names, or 
initials, he exclaimed, “Look at that, ZORCH.”7 


From FBI interviews of May and June 1954, it appears that the 
ZORC story sprang from the brain, and almost certainly the 
imagination, of Air Force Colonel Teddy Walkowicz, the author of 
much other misinformation. This, for example, from an FBI report 
in June: “On June 12, Mr. Charles J. V. Murphy was interviewed.... 
He stated that he had no direct or first-hand knowledge relative to 
the origin of ... the term ZORC. It is Murphy’s recollection that 
Teddy Walcowicz [sic], former Air Force officer, was Murphy’s 
main and possibly only source of information.” 

Griggs’s story, with its accusation that Oppenheimer had been 
leader of a conspiracy, was unsupported by any other witness at the 
hearing. But it was allowed to stand. Unlike so much else that had 
found its way into the FBI files, Griggs’s refutation in May was not 
leaked to the press, nor was Murphy’s of June 12. The bureau had 
both when the commissioners sat down to consider their verdict in 
late June. There is no evidence that they were informed.s 


On Friday, April 30, Boris Pash, whom Allan Ecker had seen 
emerging from Robb’s office on Wednesday evening, testified about 
the meeting in Lyall Johnson’s office in the summer of 1943, when 
Oppenheimer described the feeler from Soviet intelligence that had 
been relayed to him by Haakon Chevalier. The recording made by 
Pash, the Army’s counterintelligence chief at the Presidio of San 
Francisco at the time, had already been played to the Gray board, 
and Pash now testified to his belief that Oppenheimer was a 
security risk, that he was merely pretending to have changed his 
allegiances, and that he had been in 1943 and probably remained a 
member of the Communist Party. (Pash was the sole prosecution 
witness whose testimony was not based in part on information 
supplied by Teller.) 

Dramatic as the statements of Griggs and Pash had been, the 
appearance of the week’s final witness was the most stunning event 
of all. On Friday afternoon the blond, slight, thirty-four-year-old 
William Borden entered the hearing room and raised his right hand 
while his November 7 letter to Hoover was handed to lawyers for 
the defense. Until this moment, they had not known about the 
letter. Now, seeing it for the first time, they were appalled, both 
because the board members had had it in front of them the entire 
time, and because of its conclusion: Borden’s “exhaustively 
considered opinion ... that more probably than not J. Robert 
Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union.” The letter even said 
that Oppenheimer could have been acting on Soviet orders as far 


back as the time when he chose atomic weapons as his specialty in 
the early 1940s, and that in addition to performing espionage, he 
had probably also “acted under a Soviet directive in influencing 
United States military, atomic energy, Intelligence and diplomatic 
policy.” Lloyd Garrison was quick to point out that in introducing 
accusations that were not part of the AEC’s original letter of 
charges and that had not arisen at the hearing, “we now have a 
new case,” and even Gray dissociated himself and his fellow board 
members from Borden’s claim that Oppenheimer might have 
volunteered information to the Russians. The board had no 
evidence before it to show that Oppenheimer was an espionage 
agent, Gray said, to Borden’s chagrin and the outrage of his friends, 
one of whom later protested that “Gray kicked Borden in the 
teeth.” 

By the time Borden had read his letter aloud, it was 4:30 p.m., 
early enough in the afternoon for the defense to start cross- 
examination before adjournment for the weekend. But defense 
attorneys were at odds among themselves as to whether they even 
wanted to cross-examine, and a recess was called. Silverman did 
not want to give Borden a chance to make Robb’s case for him or to 
spread innuendo on the record. Herb Marks, on the other hand, 
wanted to question Borden on every single assertion. By Sunday 
night, however, Marks had come around to Silverman’s view, and 
the defense decided not to cross-examine. Even after Borden’s 
surprise appearance, Silverman later admitted, it was several days 
before he began to suspect that this was the letter that had 
triggered the hearing.1o 

On Thursday, May 6, the hearing ended with a three-hour 
extemporaneous summation by Garrison, who stated that the 
hearing should not have been brought at all in view of 
Oppenheimer’s overall record and the fact that there had been no 
new security information against him since his clearance in 1947. 
The charges, Garrison said, fell in two categories: Oppenheimer’s 
opposition to the H-bomb, in which he had been joined by nearly 
all the top scientists, and the Chevalier affair. The latter, he 
concluded, “must be judged in perspective. It happened in a wholly 
different atmosphere from that of today. Russia was our so-called 
gallant ally. The whole atmosphere toward Russia, toward persons 
who were sympathetic with Russia, everything was different from 
what obtains today. I think you must beware of judging by today’s 
standards things that happened in a different time and era.” With 
that, after three and a half weeks, and nineteen days of testimony, 


the board adjourned. The members departed for their homes, 
Morgan and Gray for North Carolina, Evans for Chicago.11 

When they reconvened on May 17, Gray and Morgan found, to 
their surprise, that Evans, whom they had believed to be firmly in 
the prosecution’s camp, had changed his mind. Aware of Gray’s 
concern that, in light of the 1947 clearance, the hearing might 
violate rules against double jeopardy, and that he might vote in 
Oppenheimer’s favor, Strauss and Robb decided to act. Shortly after 
noon on May 20, they had Charles Bates telephone the FBI with a 
request that Hoover meet with the board members. They “feel that 
the board may be trying to find a way out to clear Oppenheimer,” 
and wanted to “come over and talk to the director before the board 
does.” A series of follow-up calls ensued. At 12:20 p.m., Robb called 
the FBI, said that it would be “a tragedy if the decision of the board 
goes the wrong way,” and declared it “a matter of extreme 
urgency” that Hoover meet with the board. Ten minutes later 
Strauss placed a telephone call to Alan Belmont, Hoover’s top 
counterintelligence official, and said he had just come from the 
White House, implying that he had spoken to the president. Things 
were “touch and go,” Strauss said, and “a slight tip of the balance 
could cause the board to commit a serious error.” Therefore Robb 
and the board members would gladly go to Hoover’s out-of-town 
location, wherever he might be, in order to meet with him. Hoover, 
of course, refused. “I think it would be highly improper for me to 
discuss Oppenheimer case now with anyone connected with AEC or 
the board—JEH.”12 

Fully as remarkable as the request itself were the reactions years 
afterward of two participants in the approach to Hoover. In 1978, 
when BBC producer Peter Goodchild showed Robb, by then a 
federal district judge in Washington, D.C., a recently declassified 
FBI memo outlining the events of May 20, 1954, Robb responded, 
“Damned if I remember this.” He subsequently dictated a statement: 
“T specifically and categorically deny that I ever encouraged a 
meeting between the board and the director for the purpose of 
having the director influence the board [and] have no knowledge 
whatsoever of any conversation between Admiral Strauss and Mr. 
Belmont. I never heard of any such conversation, had nothing to do 
with it if it occurred, and any implication to the contrary is 
unwarranted.” 13 

Yet Robb failed to sue to prevent Goodchild’s TV program from 
being shown in the United States. Appointed by the chief justice of 
the United States about this time to a panel on ethics, he 


subsequently named special prosecutors to investigate alleged 
wrongdoing by President Carter’s chief of staff Hamilton Jordan, 
and two Reagan cabinet officers, including Attorney General Edwin 
Meese. 

Before making his 1978 statement to Goodchild, Robb 
telephoned Gordon Gray; Art Rolander, his assistant at the hearing; 
and Charles Bates, who had carried the May 20 messages between 
Robb and Strauss on one hand, and high officials of the FBI on the 
other. Five years afterward, in an interview with the author, Bates 
strenuously defended Robb against any suggestion that he had 
wanted to influence the hearing board. “Roger is too honorable a 
man. It would have been suicide,” he said. In an interview two 
weeks later, however, confronted again by Robb’s statement to 
Goodchild and the May 20 FBI memo, Bates defended the memo’s 
accuracy and grew angry at Robb. He had not had the memo in 
front of him when Robb called him in 1978, and had not known 
that it was declassified. “If he had shown me that memo, I’d have 
stood by it, absolutely” (the emphasis is Bates’s). Pointing to a 
remark Robb had made to Goodchild, he added, “Here, he admits 
he took the first step. If I had him up on the witness stand, he’d be 
in a lot of trouble.” Bates concluded by saying that he resented the 
Freedom of Information Act’s placing him in the situation he had 
just been in. He had handled many high-profile cases for the FBI— 
Patty Hearst, the Chicago Seven, the Black Panthers—and had 
managed to request a transfer out of Washington just in time to 
avoid Watergate, but he had been sued repeatedly because of FOIA, 
he said, and did not like having to defend actions he had taken 
thirty years earlier in a different context and atmosphere. 14 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 


Caesar’s Wife 


Gorpon Gray was born at the top and had never had a failure in his 
life. In North Carolina as he was growing up his father was 
president of the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. After graduating 
from the Yale Law School, Gray had spent two years practicing 
corporate law in New York City. He enlisted in the Army during 
World War II, rose to the rank of captain, and in 1949 was 
appointed secretary of the Army by President Truman. When 
Eisenhower asked him to serve on the board that was to hear the 
Oppenheimer case, he was president of the University of North 
Carolina and might have seen the security board as a step on the 
way back to public life in Washington. 

Besides being virtually above criticism, Gray, a forty-four-year- 
old widower and father of four young boys, had a reputation for 
fair-mindedness. Despite this, and despite his own feeling that he 
had leaned over backward to protect Oppenheimer, Gray’s rulings 
were tilted harshly against the defense, so harshly that a reader of 
the transcript might get the impression that he had had no training 
in the law and very little notion what due process was. With 
Oppenheimer’s clearance due to expire on June 30, Gray’s effort to 
speed up the proceeding led him at least twice to turn down 
requests from an exhausted Lloyd Garrison for a half hour’s delay in 
the start of testimony the next day. But the notes he made in North 
Carolina during the board’s ten-day recess in May show that Gray 
made an effort to be fair as he weighed the imperatives of security 
against Oppenheimer’s contributions. He was impressed by the 
prominence of the defense witnesses and the solidarity of the 
scientific community in defense of Oppenheimer, and he attached 
special weight to the suggestion of George Kennan in his testimony 
that men of unusual brilliance should be held to a different 


standard than those of more modest capacities. 1 

On their return to Washington he and the board devoted ten 
days to their deliberations. Finally, by a vote of two, Gray and 
Morgan, against one, Evans, they decided that Oppenheimer’s 
clearance ought not to be reinstated. The majority opinion, written 
by Gray and released on May 27, found nearly all of the charges 
having to do with the scientist’s left-wing associations in Berkeley 
before the war to be “substantially true.” Despite “poor judgment” 
in continuing some of those associations to the present day, 
however, the board found “no evidence of disloyalty. Indeed, we 
have before us much responsible and positive evidence of the 
loyalty and love of country of the individual concerned.” Its 
decision against clearance was based on the twenty-fourth, or H- 
bomb, count. It found Oppenheimer inconsistent in changing his 
views between 1945 and 1949 as to whether the H-bomb was 
feasible, and inconsistent—or, worse, untruthful—in testifying that 
what he opposed in 1949 was only the “crash program,” when he 
had in fact signed the GAC recommendation that the “super bomb 
should never be produced.” While it found that Oppenheimer had 
done nothing actively to obstruct the H-bomb project, the board 
declared that his failure to make his support known among the 
scientists had had a negative effect on recruitment, since his 
“enthusiastic support” would have led others to join the program. 
The board believed that the opposition of many scientists, of whom 
Oppenheimer was the “most experienced, most powerful and most 
effective,” had slowed development of the H-bomb. Although it 
considered Oppenheimer “a loyal citizen” with “a high degree of 
discretion reflecting an unusual ability to keep to himself vital 
secrets,” it nonetheless ruled that clearance would not be “clearly 
consistent with the security interests of the United States.” He was 
“susceptible to influence,” his conduct and associations showed 
“serious disregard for the requirements of the security system,” his 
conduct over the H-bomb had been “disturbing,” and he had been 
“less than candid in several instances in his testimony.” 

While tortured reasoning and a tone of regret pervaded the 
opinion, one caveat stood out. Astonishingly, the board said that it 
might have reached a different conclusion had it been “allowed to 
exercise mature practical judgment without the _ rigid 
circumscription of regulations and criteria established for us.” The 
regulations to which it was referring were provisions of Executive 
Order 10450 of the Eisenhower administration stipulating that 
clearance should be withheld from anyone against whom there was 


reliable derogatory information. This was called the “Caesar’s wife” 
principle, it being a truism in Roman days that Caesar’s wife must 
be above reproach. Against this was the “whole man” standard, 
prevalent at AEC security hearings during the Truman years, which 
required that favorable information should be balanced against 
unfavorable information. 

It might have been supposed that the Eisenhower, or Caesar’s 
wife, rule, being the more recent, should prevail, except for a June 
8, 1953, ruling by the Justice Department that the AEC’s existing 
security program exceeded requirements of the new order and that 
the Eisenhower rule was inapplicable. The hearing had, then, been 
conducted under an ad hoc combination of both regulations—with 
the harsher ruling prevailing in every instance. Harold Green, who 
had crafted the letter of charges, felt strongly at the time and 
afterward that among its many failings, the entire proceeding had 
been conducted under the wrong rules.2 

The only member to dissent from the majority opinion was Ward 
Evans, the chemistry professor from Chicago who had been 
specially selected to be “a hanging judge.” Of Oppenheimer, Evans 
wrote in his opinion that “to damn him now and ruin his career and 
his service, I cannot do it.” He concluded, “I personally think that 
our failure to clear Dr. Oppenheimer will be a black mark on the 
escutcheon of our country.” 

And how did Gordon Gray feel about his role in a case that in his 
closely knit circle divided family members from one another and 
tempted even close friends of his to shun him? Harold Green said 
later that Gray never understood the nature of the proceeding he 
had been party to. But the columnist Roscoe Drummond wrote at 
the time that Gray was profoundly upset, and the widow of his 
closest friend, Frank Wisner, agreed, saying that she thought the 
case “bothered him the rest of his life.” Some members of the Gray 
family disagree. Gray’s second wife, Nancy, said Gray had “moved 
on” by the time she met him six months after the hearing, and his 
son Boyden, with whom he had many conversations over the years, 
said that his father told him he “never lost any sleep” over the case. 
But the oldest son, Gordon junior, who spent hours with his father 
at Walter Reed Hospital in the two weeks before he died, believed 
that Gray went to his grave “with very serious doubts.” Again and 
again the father told his son how much he had admired 
Oppenheimer, how sorry for him he had been during the hearing, 
how he had worried that Oppie might break down, and how he had 
tried to get the hearing called off. “My father had very few 


failures,” said the younger Gray. “He had an unblemished record, 
and this was the one blot on it.” 

After publication of the opinion at the end of May, newspaper 
editorials in many parts of the country approved. But opinion in the 
New York Times, the New York Herald Tribune, and other influential 
dailies ran strongly against the Gray board, and Strauss quickly 
regretted Gray’s pledge to the witnesses that their testimony would 
remain secret. If people could read in Oppenheimer’s own words his 
admission that he had lied about the Chevalier affair and had spent 
a night in 1943 with a woman who might be a Communist Party 
member, Strauss thought, then opinion among the East Coast elite 
would turn against him. 

And so it happened one evening in the first half of June that Lee 
Hancock of the AEC Security Division was again kept waiting while 
Art Rolander made a flurry of phone calls. As they drove home 
along the Shirley Highway, Rolander explained what had kept him. 
He had been telephoning the witnesses to let them know that their 
testimony was being released to the newspapers. Hancock was 
stunned. “How could you?” he asked, thinking of Gray’s promise to 
the forty witnesses that their testimony would be treated as 
confidential and that the AEC would not initiate any public release. 
Rolander told Hancock that Robb had learned from a telephone tap 
that Oppie’s lawyers thought his testimony showed their client in a 
negative light. Hancock was stunned once again. He knew, of 
course, that for years Oppenheimer’s mail had been opened and his 
telephones tapped and that he was often under physical 
surveillance. But Hancock never got over the shock of learning that 
the telephones of the defense attorneys had been wiretapped 
throughout the hearing.4 

As for the witnesses, some were asked for permission to have 
their testimony released and agreed. I. I. Rabi later said that he was 
not asked but was simply told that his testimony was about to 
appear; Norman Ramsey asked to have his remarks about the wife 
of a colleague excised and was embarrassed to have his request 
ignored and his words published as he had spoken them; those who 
saw George Kennan that day believe that he was not contacted, 
since he was giving the commencement address at his daughter’s 
college; and Jerrold Zacharias flatly refused permission. 

Strauss briefly had a pretext for releasing the testimony when 
Commissioner Eugene Zuckert left a notebook containing a 
hundred-page analysis of the evidence in a railway car near New 
Haven. The notebook was soon recovered, but Strauss was able to 


use the loss to wangle a 4-1 vote in favor of releasing the 
transcript, with only Harry Smyth dissenting. Gray, whose promise 
to the witnesses was being broken, not only went along but urged 
that the transcript be published. This he was persuaded to do after 
Strauss and Charles Murphy, another friend, warned him— 
untruthfully—that Lloyd Garrison was negotiating with a public 
relations firm in hopes of manipulating public opinion in 
Oppenheimer’s favor. “There appears to be no respect for truth in 
either client or counsel,” Strauss said to Gray.s 

As relieved as they were by the Gray board’s decision, Murphy 
and Frank Wisner, members of an influential coterie of journalists 
and highly placed officials who lived in Georgetown, regarded 
Gordon Gray’s opinion as a disaster. First, it pronounced 
Oppenheimer “loyal” and “discreet,” which they believed to be 
untrue. And second, by blaming him for his failure to show 
enthusiasm for the H-bomb, it implied that Oppie was being 
punished for advice he had given the government. One evening 
Gray’s friend Wisner, head of covert action at the CIA, invited 
Murphy to his house after dinner to discuss the unfortunate 
opinion. A day or so later Murphy discussed it again with Wisner 
and Strauss. “The Oppenheimer ruling haunts every conversation,” 
Murphy wrote, adding that Gray was “hurt and disturbed” by 
newspaper “distortion” of his opinion. But following release of the 
transcript in mid-June, a strategy was worked out during a dinner 
at the Carlton Hotel given by James Shepley of Time magazine, 
where the guests were Gray, Strauss, Murphy, Wisner, and General 
Wilton D. “Jerry” Persons, political adviser to the president. In 
accordance with the new strategy Gray flew the next day to New 
York, where Murphy introduced him to Henry R. Luce and Ogden 
Reid Jr. The New York Herald Tribune, the newspaper belonging to 
Reid’s family, published the influential Walter Lippmann, whose 
columns were extremely critical of the way the case had been 
handled, and Joseph and Stewart Alsop, the most outspokenly pro- 
Oppenheimer and anti-Strauss reporters in the country. “The 
purpose of the meeting,” Murphy wrote in his diary, “was to 
impress upon Reid that his newspaper had not reported the 
Oppenheimer findings objectively.”« 

With Wisner and Murphy at work on public relations, the AEC’s 
Ken Nichols was engaged in damage control of his own. Charged 
with evaluating the Gray board’s findings and forwarding his 
recommendations to the commissioners for a final decision, he 
faced the difficulty that six of the eight prosecution witnesses and 


three-quarters of the testimony had dealt with Oppenheimer’s 
opinions on policy. With drafting help from Roger Robb, he now 
shifted the ground away from Oppenheimer’s views and based his 
recommendation—that he be judged a security risk—solely on 
Oppenheimer’s early Communist associations, his falsehoods in the 
Chevalier affair, and the fact that he was no longer indispensable to 
the atomic energy program. This shift in the prosecution’s charges, 
together with the fact that the defense was not allowed an appeal 
from them, has been called the “gravest procedural defect” in the 
entire case.7 


As Harry Smyth had foreseen, publication of the transcript and the 
Gray board’s verdict did nothing to lighten the pressures under 
which the commission was working. Inside the AEC, the appetite 
for vindication was so strong that one employee compared the 
atmosphere to that of “a lynching.” With the burden now on Strauss 
to come up with a persuasive and, if possible, unanimous verdict by 
the commissioners, the chairman was gratified to receive a 
telephone call on June 21 from a friend in New York. The friend 
was William E. Robinson, vice president of the New York Herald 
Tribune, sometime public relations man, and later president of 
Coca-Cola. Robinson, a “large, beefy Irishman who was probably 
Eisenhower’s closest friend,” urged Strauss to seek help in drafting 
his verdict and suggested Charles J. V. Murphy, author of the 
anonymous attack on Oppenheimer in Fortune the year before.s 

Two days later Murphy and Strauss dined together, and the next 
day Murphy reread the Gray report with a view to correcting the 
impression that Oppenheimer was being punished for his opinions. 
When Strauss sent a rough draft of his proposed opinion to Murphy 
at the Time Inc. office on Connecticut Avenue, Murphy immediately 
found it “too short and inconclusive.” To avoid the Gray board’s 
errors, he advised that the AEC opinion should steer clear of 
Oppenheimer’s views on policy and concentrate on “his falsehoods 
and his continued association with Communists,” an allusion to the 
Oppenheimers’ luncheon and dinner with Chevalier in Paris only 
six months before. In the course of a two-hour drafting session at 
Strauss’s office on Friday, June 25, Murphy had the impression that 
Strauss was “wavering between optimism and apprehension” over 
the outcome of the vote. The two men spent all day Saturday 
working together, and before Strauss departed for a black-tie dinner 
honoring Winston Churchill at the White House, Murphy suggested 
that he bring Roger Robb along the next morning. Robb, Strauss, 


and Murphy had a four-hour breakfast on Sunday in Strauss’s suite 
at the Shoreham Hotel and thoroughly revised the draft of the day 
before. “It was the first time Strauss seemed sure of his position,” 
Murphy observed. That night Murphy made further changes, which 
he showed to Strauss over breakfast Monday morning. Strauss left 
for the AEC in what Murphy judged to be “a confident frame of 
mind.”9 

Meanwhile, at Harry Smyth’s house on Woodland Drive, on a 
steep hill just behind the Shoreham, work was going forward on the 
dissent. Smyth knew that he would be in a minority, but he hoped 
to be joined by Zuckert or Murray in a 3-2 vote. But when he 
arrived home on Tuesday evening, June 22, Mary Smyth saw that 
he was in low spirits. He had learned that the vote would be 4 to 1, 
with his the only dissent. The other commissioners had given him 
some notion of the arguments they would be making, however, and 
he decided to address those with an opinion that was “shorter, 
stronger, and less philosophic” than the one he had originally had 
in mind. For the rest of the week he and Mary, together with Philip 
Farley and Clark Vogel, AEC employees whose help he had 
requested, stayed up into the wee hours each night working on 
successive drafts. On Saturday, Smyth wrote what his wife called a 
“good, short opinion,” adding at the top of her diary, “H looks close 
to exhaustion.” 10 

The other members of the drafting team were exhausted, too, 
and when AEC chief counsel William Mitchell delivered a first 
version of the majority opinion to the house at noon on Sunday, 
June 27, they did not read it right away. But late that afternoon, 
Smyth looked at it and saw that it was not what the other 
commissioners had told him to expect. With Oppie’s clearance due 
to expire on Wednesday, he did not have much time in which to 
produce a wholly new opinion. 

The same thing was repeated on Monday, when Roy Snapp of 
the AEC appeared at 3000 Woodland Drive about 7:00 p.m. with 
the majority opinion. Having no inkling about the sessions at the 
Shoreham and no idea that Murphy and Robb had worked on the 
decision too, Smyth was greatly surprised by the final version. The 
wording, the emphasis, and, above all, the tone of the new opinion 
differed so much from the draft he had seen on Sunday night—the 
Strauss-Murphy version of Friday and Saturday—that he knew he 
would have to start all over again. As they began work that night 
he worried whether his loyal secretaries, Mary Sweeney and Evelyn 
McQuown, would lose their AEC jobs and pensions, and he was 


concerned about Farley, who had been matter-of-factly informed by 
Nichols that helping Smyth with his opinion would do his AEC 
career no good. And he was aware of a car parked in the cul-de-sac 
down the street. He assumed it was the FBI, keeping track of their 
comings and goings.11 

The decision had been hammered out by the majority 
commissioners during an all-day session on Monday and was signed 
by Strauss, Commissioner Joseph Campbell, and Zuckert. Strauss 
had agreed to a slight weakening of the version he had approved 
that morning with Murphy, probably to placate Eugene Zuckert, but 
it was still a stunning personal attack on Oppenheimer. Specifying 
at the outset that Oppenheimer’s position on the H-bomb had 
nothing to do with its decision, the board stated that Oppenheimer 
was no longer entitled to the government’s trust because of 
“fundamental defects in his character.” The proof was that “his 
associations with persons known to him to be Communists have 
extended far beyond the tolerable limits of prudence and self- 
restraint” to be expected from one holding high positions of trust. 
“These associations have lasted too long to be justified as merely 
the intermittent and accidental revival of earlier friendships.” The 
opinion listed six associations about which he had allegedly lied, 
with emphasis on the Chevalier affair, concerning which he had 
either lied to Boris Pash in 1943 or to the Gray board in 1954. It 
added that the associations themselves, and not just his lying about 
them, were “part of the pattern of his disregard for the obligations 
of security.” 12 

In addition to signing the majority statement, Zuckert and 
Campbell each wrote a separate concurring opinion that pointedly 
excluded Oppenheimer’s advice to the government as a factor. 
Thomas Murray, meanwhile, also voted to revoke Oppenheimer’s 
clearance, but such was his resentment of the way Strauss had 
handled the case that he refused to sign the majority statement. 
Instead he produced a separate decision pronouncing Oppenheimer 
disloyal because he lacked loyalty to the security system as such. “It 
will not do to plead that Dr. Oppenheimer revealed no secrets to 
Communists and fellow travelers,” Murray said. It was the 
associations themselves that offended. That Oppie should have 
maintained them at all was an act of disloyalty. To allow him to 
place himself above the security regulations was “to invite the 
destruction of the whole security system.”13 

Strauss had violated a promise to Smyth that he would have a 
full twenty-four hours in which to write his dissent, and the six of 


them on Woodland Drive once again worked all night, revising a 
passage here, putting in a stronger word there, and trying to make 
the dissent responsive, point by point, to the majority opinion. 
Smyth at one point looked up and said, “You know, I’m doing all 
this for a fellow I’ve never liked very much. Of course,” he added, 
“lm not doing it for him.” He and his helpers felt that what they 
were doing, they were doing for history, a mission larger than the 
cause of justice to any one individual. And they hoped their dissent 
might serve as a basis for reopening the case someday. 14 

Smyth brought up the fact, about which the majority statement 
maintained a stunning silence, that Oppenheimer had not been 
charged with, or found guilty of, ever having divulged a single 
secret. In this, Smyth wrote, lay proof of his future trustworthiness. 
“The past fifteen years of his life have been investigated and 
reinvestigated. For much of the last eleven years he has been under 
actual surveillance. This professional review ... has been 
supplemented by enthusiastic amateur help from powerful personal 
enemies. Few men could survive such a period of investigation and 
interrogation without having many of their actions misinterpreted.” 
Smyth refuted the charges having to do with Oppenheimer’s 
personal associations and called the Chevalier affair the only 
“inexcusable” episode in the story (a word he later wished he had 
weakened). He denied that Oppenheimer had impeded the H-bomb, 
adding, “The history of his contributions stands untarnished.” 
Finally, he dismissed the alleged “fundamental defects in his 
character,” describing Oppenheimer instead as “an _ able, 
imaginative human being with normal weaknesses and failings.” He 
said that the board should have exercised “overall commonsense 
judgment.” It was the conclusions of the majority, he said, that 
were “so extreme as to endanger the security system.” 15 

About four o’clock in the morning Smyth took the unfinished 
draft to his study and worked alone. Two hours later he emerged 
with the final opinion. The weary secretaries typed it up, Mary 
Smyth made breakfast, and Farley took the dissent to the 
commission, where he stood watch over the mimeograph machine 
to be sure that no one changed it. On the following day, June 30, 
Mary Smyth wrote in her diary: “We buy newspapers and wonder 
what we have done.” 16 

As for the other commissioners, Murray was a devout Roman 
Catholic whose faith frequently impelled him in directions where 
other men did not go. For years he had maintained a special 
channel to his fellow Catholic J. Edgar Hoover, and in accordance 


with what the FBI chieftain had said to him, Murray did not think 
Oppenheimer was a Communist. But he felt that the issue of 
Oppie’s observance of security regulations “outweighed any 
question of equity to an individual.” Murray’s fellow commissioners 
viewed him as a wild card. They had no idea how he was going to 
vote, but since he was not much of a writer, they assumed that 
someone else had written his opinion for him. They thought the 
author was either his son, Daniel Bradley Murray, who was then in 
training for the priesthood, or the worldly and highly regarded 
Jesuit theologian John Courtney Murray, spiritual counselor not 
only of Tom Murray but of Clare and Henry Luce (he was known as 
the “Luces’ Richelieu”). Queried about his father’s opinion years 
afterward at the boys’ school outside Baltimore where he was 
teaching, Father Daniel Bradley Murray said that he did not know 
how his father had voted in the Oppenheimer case but added, 
however, that he had consulted John Courtney Murray about 
“everything.” His father would “put together all the problems he 
had at a particular time and consult him about them all at once.” 
While a search of John Courtney Murray’s papers has turned up no 
early drafts or other evidence that he was the true author of 
Thomas Murray’s opinion, it remains a good guess that he was.17 

Strauss did not leave the votes of the other two commissioners to 
chance. One, Joseph Campbell, was his creature. Campbell had 
been chief financial officer of Columbia University when, in the 
early 1950s, Strauss, in behalf of the Rockefeller family, negotiated 
a new lease of the land under Radio City with the university. 
Strauss, whose acquaintance with Eisenhower dated from this 
period, had had Campbell appointed to the commission and, after 
the hearing, had him shunted to the post of comptroller general of 
the United States so that he could make a new appointment to the 
AEC. 18 

Eugene Zuckert’s vote was a different matter. Like Gordon Gray, 
Zuckert was a Democrat and a Yale Law graduate, and his friends 
were mostly New Dealers. He had been assistant secretary of the 
Air Force and was later to be secretary, but at this moment his term 
as commissioner was expiring and he had no new job in sight. He 
remembered years later that in December 1953, when the case was 
getting under way, Strauss had sent his car for him, had him 
brought to the commission, and offered him a job as head of a 
foundation Strauss had created in his mother’s memory. It was such 
a “barefaced” attempt to bribe Zuckert into leaving that “I was 
completely shocked.” What governed his opinion, Zuckert said, was 


concern about Oppenheimer’s judgment. “I’ve lain awake at night. 
This man had national security responsibilities of the absolutely 
highest order. It was a question of what his judgment would be in 
the ultimate case and you had no way of predicting when that case 
might be presented to him. I just didn’t go along with his judgment, 
particularly on security matters. The scientists tend to have 
contempt for security anyhow. He had a very condescending 
attitude toward security.” Gray wondered whether Oppie was 
unstable, while Zuckert wondered about his judgment. It seemed to 
Zuckert afterward that, intellectually, he and Gray were “on the 
same plane.” 19 

But Zuckert’s written opinion seems forced, as if every word had 
to be wrung out of him. After the hearing, and after his departure 
as a commissioner, Strauss kept him on as a consultant and did 
other minor favors for him but apparently did not offer Zuckert the 
one thing that might have tempted him, a new term as 
commissioner. Harold Green, who admired Zuckert as “a man of 
massive integrity,” found him, two or three days before the vote, 
intending to vote in Oppenheimer’s favor. Something made him 
reconsider, presumably something more compelling than the last- 
minute changes in the majority statement that he managed to 
obtain from Strauss. Phil Farley, an outstandingly objective AEC 
employee, considered Zuckert an ambitious man of limited ability 
who was worried that he did not have a job awaiting him after his 
term expired. “He didn’t think Oppie was a security risk, he was 
afraid his own career would be at risk” if he voted the wrong way. 
Avoiding the enmity of Lewis Strauss, Farley thought, was probably 
sufficient. 20 

Zuckert’s later years reeked of regret, and he told friends many 
times that it had wounded him to reach the conclusion he did. 
“Here was this brilliant, accomplished man. It hurt to be objective.” 
And he would quote Supreme Court justice Abe Fortas, whom he 
had known since Yale Law School days. Fortas had told him that 
“there are times when you have to rise above principle,” meaning 
that he should have voted to clear Oppenheimer because Oppie was 
exceptional. Joe Volpe, who was close to Zuckert, was convinced 
that he regretted his vote as long as he lived. Asked about it a 
decade before he died, Zuckert nodded. “It was the saddest thing I 
ever took part in. It cost me a lot of friendships and I had to be on 
the same side as people I did not respect.” 21 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 


Do We Really Need Scientists? 


ON THE AFTERNOON of June 29, the day the AEC announced the verdict 
in Washington, Strauss telephoned James Hagerty at the White 
House with news of the 4-1 vote. The president, who had just 
concluded a four-day visit with British prime minister Winston 
Churchill, called back to congratulate him on the “fine job” he had 
done and said he hoped Strauss’s handling of the case “would be 
such a contrast to McCarthy’s tactics that the American people 
would immediately see the difference.” 1 

Throughout the Oppenheimer affair Strauss had consulted 
regularly with presidential press secretary James Hagerty, and on 
critical days he had met with Hagerty or the president first thing in 
the morning. He met at least a dozen other times with the president 
alone or his assistants Sherman Adams or Robert Cutler, and on 
some if not all of those occasions the hearing was a subject of 
discussion. In addition, the president’s personal assistant, the 
normally acidulous Ann Whitman, made an exception for Strauss, 
whom she called “the sweetest man I ever did see,” and gave him 
access to the Oval Office whenever he wanted a word with the 
president. Strauss had told Eisenhower, untruthfully, that the 
Oppenheimers had stayed with the Chevaliers for several days the 
previous winter, instead of having had two meals together, and this 
misinformation is said to have weighed heavily with Eisenhower. 
Strauss had told the president about the trouble he was having with 
the Democratic members of the commission, all three of whom, 
Murray, Zuckert, and Smyth, had, during the hearing, testified in 
Congress against his effort to codify his de facto role as ruler of the 
commission. The president was “concerned” by what Strauss told 
him about growing Democratic resistance to him inside the AEC 
and was “more determined than ever” to appoint someone who 


could work with Strauss when Zuckert’s appointment expired at the 
end of June.2 

In addition to Hagerty and the president himself, Attorney 
General Herbert Brownell had had a role in the case. Three years 
before his death he wrote the author, “I wasn’t directly involved in 
the Oppenheimer affair, but I do recall that President Eisenhower 
took an active interest in the progress of the Gray board hearings 
and asked me to review their findings from the standpoint of 
procedural due process.” The record shows, however, that Brownell 
had taken part in all the major decisions: the president consulted 
him before deciding to lower the “blank wall”; he gave the FBI 
permission to wiretap Oppenheimer’s attorneys; and the day before 
the hearing began he spent three hours at Strauss’s farm discussing, 
among other things, whether Oppenheimer might be subject to 
criminal charges. 

On the afternoon of June 29, when the commissioners’ decision 
was announced, Strauss paused to honor and to thank. He called on 
J. Edgar Hoover at the FBI, and had dinner with the other Hoover, 
the former president who had made his career and on whom he still 
looked as a father. A day or two later he paid an afternoon visit to 
the president and celebrated over dinner with Charles Murphy and 
Frank Wisner. In many respects it was Murphy whose contribution 
was the most spectacular of all. Not only had he written the 1953 
Fortune articles opening the attack on Oppenheimer, but he had 
been the first to realize that the Gray opinion was a disaster for the 
government, since it gave the impression that Oppenheimer was 
being punished for his opinions. He had taken charge immediately 
and masterminded the campaign to turn public opinion around. 
And he was principal author of the savage majority opinion. Which 
of them it was, Strauss, Robb, or Murphy, who coined the phrase 
“substantial defects in his character” is anybody’s guess. One 
individual who knew Murphy well considered him the likeliest 
candidate, although any of the three could have done it.4 

Recompense was in Strauss’s mind, but Murphy refused 
payment, viewing what he had done as a public service. So Strauss 
did the next best thing—he shared his incomparable contacts. After 
the Fortune articles the year before he had, unsolicited, given 
Murphy an introduction to young King Baudouin of Belgium, who 
had come to his throne in difficult circumstances and was said to be 
looking for public relations help. Now that the Oppenheimer case 
was over, Strauss sent a car for Murphy in Georgetown one evening 
in August 1954 and had him delivered to his country home in 


Culpeper, Virginia. There, he told Murphy over a magnificent 
dinner that his friend Helen Rogers Reid was looking for someone 
to buy her newspaper, the New York Herald Tribune. Would Murphy 
like to be the editor?s 

Of the two wild men Strauss had enlisted to help diminish 
Oppenheimer, one, Charlie Murphy, had stayed in harness and 
come through with flying colors. But what of the AEC chairman’s 
other charger, Bill Borden? Borden was now working for 
Westinghouse in Pittsburgh, but he had not forgotten his glory days 
at the congressional committee. For him it was not enough that his 
letter to Hoover had prompted the president to take action against 
Oppenheimer: the scientist’s destruction was merely act 1 of a two- 
part scenario which he and Strauss probably concocted together in 
the late summer or early fall of 1951. Act 2 was to make Teller the 
new Oppenheimer. And so in January 1954, Clay Blair, the twenty- 
nine-year-old Pentagon correspondent of Time magazine, received a 
letter postmarked Pittsburgh. The author of the letter congratulated 
Blair on his newly published book about Hyman Rickover, father of 
the nuclear-powered submarine. He added that the story of Edward 
Teller and the hydrogen bomb was equally impressive and 
expressed surprise that Time had not yet found room for Teller on 
its cover. The author’s name was not familiar: William L. Borden.« 

A week or so later Blair found himself in a mansion overlooking 
Rock Creek Park in Washington. Down from Pittsburgh for the 
weekend, Borden had invited Blair to his mother’s house to tell him 
about Teller’s battle to build the hydrogen bomb over the 
opposition of Robert Oppenheimer. And he had a story to tell! 
Blair’s usual beat was the Navy and he did not know much about 
Teller and Oppenheimer, but what he was hearing reminded him of 
the story he had just written: Teller fought Oppie and the GAC to 
build the hydrogen bomb, Rickover was said to have fought the 
same opponents to build his nuclear sub, and Blair wondered what 
Oppenheimer had been up to, opposing these projects to strengthen 
the United States. Borden hinted at an answer: was Oppie, with his 
left-wing past, trying to help the Soviet Union? Borden did not 
mention Oppenheimer’s being in trouble with the government or 
say anything about a prospective hearing. He struck Blair as 
disinterested, idealistic, anything but a huckster with something to 
sell. 

Blair raced back to his office at Time on Connecticut Avenue and 
informed his bureau chief, James Shepley, that this guy Teller was 
a hell of a story. Shepley wanted to meet Borden, and Blair 


introduced them over lunch. He did not see Borden again.7 

A week or two later, Shepley and Blair found themselves at the 
Tellers’ house in California. Mici Teller cooked a “fabulous” dinner, 
Edward played Beethoven on the piano, and they had a “wild” 
evening lasting six or seven hours. Early in the evening, as Teller 
and Shepley discussed philosophers, Blair realized that Teller, like 
Rickover, had an “awesome” mind. One bibulous evening led to 
another as Teller dispatched them to San Diego to see Freddie de 
Hoffmann, Los Alamos to see Ulam, and Livermore to see Lawrence 
and York. Everyone they talked to seemed enthusiastic about Teller 
and the H-bomb.s 

The fifteen-thousand-word “take,” or raw file, that Blair wrote 
after his return created a sensation at Time. Although it was not yet 
in print (being raw material for the planned cover story), everyone 
in the New York office was reading it. Even Turner Catledge, top 
editor at the New York Times, got a glimpse of it and said that this 
young fellow Blair ought to get the Pulitzer. Given Blair’s story and 
the flap it caused, it was natural for an outgoing, fabulously well 
connected Fortune writer with a desk in Time’s Washington bureau 
to take Blair under his wing. Charles J. V. Murphy was, as usual, 
commuting between Washington and New York, working on a 
dozen projects at once, but he had lost none of his enthusiasm for 
the Air Force. He introduced Blair to what Blair later called the Air 
Force “cabal.” The most flamboyant member of the cabal was 
Teddy Walkowicz, like Murphy a commuter to New York, where he 
advised Laurence Rockefeller on aviation investments. Walkowicz’s 
franchise at the Pentagon appeared to be the care and feeding of 
the in-house Hungarians: Theodore von Karmann of the rocket 
program, Edward Teller, and Johnny von Neumann. Blair later 
remembered nonstop discussions of weapons systems in a tiny room 
in the science area of the Pentagon. At the blackboard a bald, 
emaciated professor would be jotting down statistics about the 
number of Russians who could be wiped out by a single atomic 
bomb, all the while sipping from a glass of milk for his ulcers. He 
was W. Barton Leach, wise man of the cabal and professor of 
property law on leave from the Harvard Law School. Another 
member was Colonel Bob Orr, a frequent source of Murphy’s stories 
on science and strategy. The cabal was anti-Army, anti-Navy, anti- 
Russian, and out to “kill Oppenheimer” if they could. Blair later 
remembered the cabalists as “fanatics,” very, very different from 
the low-key, intellectual-appearing Borden.» 

That spring, Time’s Teller cover was shelved at Teller’s request. 


He had learned that his mother and sister were alive and still in 
Hungary. He was worried about them, and the U.S. government 
was worried about him and the pressure he would be under from 
both the Russians and the Hungarians should their attention be 
drawn to his role in building the H-bomb. Blair started to interview 
Strauss with the idea of converting his Teller take into a book. And, 
always the prodigal friend, Charlie Murphy took Blair and Shepley 
to lunch with his book publisher, Ken Rawson (publisher also of the 
Duke and Duchess of Windsor) in New York, and a contract was 
signed for The Hydrogen Bomb. 

By the time Blair learned about the Oppenheimer hearing, he 
said later, his book was three-quarters written. Fortunately his 
coauthor, James Shepley, a great reporter but one who lacked 
fluency and did little if any writing on the book, knew Gordon 
Gray. One day in June, Shepley called him into his office and, 
pointing to a stack of papers, explained that these were galleys of 
the Oppenheimer hearing. Blair’s surprise turned to incredulity 
when Shepley told him that the transcript had been leaked to him 
by Gordon Gray.a 

By now it was almost mid-June, and the book was due at the 
publisher’s. For three or four days Shepley and Blair stayed up 
around the clock, feverishly extracting anecdotes from the 
testimony and back-feeding them into their manuscript. No sooner 
had they finished than Shepley had a summons from Lewis Strauss. 
The two reporters arrived at the AEC in early evening and, Blair 
recalled, found a fire going in Strauss’s office. Strauss had been up 
all night reading their manuscript and greeted them with an 
astonishing offer: if they would agree to withhold publication, he 
would place twenty-five thousand dollars of his own funds in a 
safe-deposit box and it would be theirs upon his death. If the book 
was published now, he explained, the scientific community, which 
was already overwhelmingly in favor of Oppenheimer, would turn 
irrevocably against Teller. And that would undermine what he was 
trying to do: turn Teller into the new Oppenheimer. 10 

Blair and Shepley explained to Strauss that with everyone 
leaking to everyone else and most of the leakers convinced that 
Oppenheimer was a spy, there was no way to put twenty-five 
thousand dollars in a safe and make the story go away. 

The authors met their deadline, and throughout the summer 
their book was at the publisher’s in New York, ticking like a time 
bomb. 


Most of the public was shocked by the verdict. As for the physicists, 
nearly all of whom had agreed with Oppie about the H-bomb, they 
began to wonder when they might be hauled before some tribunal 
and have their reputations ruined for opinions they had expressed 
years before, under wholly different circumstances. Vannevar Bush 
spoke for virtually the entire community when he wrote in the New 
York Times in June that the partnership between government and 
the scientists that had grown up during the war was being 
destroyed by a security system gone wild. Bush pointed out that 
service to the government was not a privilege, as Lewis Strauss 
liked to say, but a duty, sometimes a disagreeable duty, which 
scientists would perform wholeheartedly only if they had 
confidence in the government. They had shown solidarity in 
defense of Oppenheimer because they believed he was being 
persecuted for expressing opinions that were not official policy of 
the moment. Scientists would not boycott government projects, 
Bush said, but they would work with a heavy heart—and at a 
moment when the country needed the utmost they could offer. He 
urged scientists to remain united and said that ordinary citizens, 
too, should ask whether they were being led into the “fallacies of 
totalitarianism.” 11 

It was August before most of the scientists at the weapons labs 
had time to wade through the 992-page transcript. At Los Alamos, 
493 scientists signed a statement of protest, and at the Argonne 
National Lab in Illinois, another 214. In a letter to the Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists Carson Mark, self-described “midwife” of the 
hydrogen bomb, compared the Oppenheimer hearing to the “Salem 
witchcraft delusion,” and Vannevar Bush declared that nuclear 
research was nearly at a_ standstill because of Strauss’s 
“sumshoeing” against the scientists. In an effort to stanch the 
damage, Strauss flew to Los Alamos to award the lab a presidential 
citation. But “Operation Butter-up,” as the Los Alamites called it, 
fooled no one, and the scientists angrily told Strauss that the 
hearing had created a “very grave morale problem.” To this day it 
is said that after Strauss snapped some photographs, Ralph Carlisle 
Smith, the lab’s patent officer, confiscated the film on grounds that 
the picture taking had been a breach of security. A month or so 
later Harry Smyth was sent to New Mexico to pour oil on the 
troubled waters.12 

Edward Teller visited Los Alamos that summer and had an 
experience he did not forget. After giving an interview to Robert 
Coughlan of Life magazine, Teller joined a picnic on the terrace 


outside Fuller Lodge. He went up to Bob Christy, an old friend who 
had shared his house in Chicago, and offered his hand. Christy 
looked at him coldly, refused his hand, and turned away. “I realized 
that my life as I had known it was over,” Teller wrote later. 13 

Those who had been at the lab during the war could not help 
remembering Teller’s wartime record: he had sat out “the main 
event,” as Carson Mark called the effort to build the A-bomb, and 
chosen instead to work on the hypothetical hydrogen bomb just 
when all hands were needed to work on a bomb that would end the 
war. And those who had been present later, during work on the 
thermonuclear bomb, remembered him as a contentious colleague 
whose lobbying led to the establishment of a new laboratory at the 
very moment when Los Alamos was going all-out to test Mike. Now, 
as they read his testimony, they were appalled. He was Brutus. He 
had sunk his knife into Oppenheimer and betrayed every one of 
them. 

Imagine their feelings when a book called The Hydrogen Bomb: 
The Men, the Menace, the Mechanism appeared that fall, accusing 
Oppenheimer, Bradbury, and the lab of what amounted to treason. 
The authors, James Shepley and Clay Blair, had written that Los 
Alamos during World War II had been “loaded with Communists 
and former Communists” hired by Oppenheimer. After Joe One, the 
lab, still “soft on Communism,” had opposed the hydrogen bomb, 
and Oppenheimer’s stooge, Bradbury, had dragged his feet. Even 
after Truman’s decision, the authors claimed, Bradbury had refused 
to put his best men at Teller’s disposal, and the lab had remained 
“indifferent, more often hostile,” to the H-bomb. Most of the key 
wartime scientists had not only refused to participate in the 
program but had lobbied against it while, following their elders’ 
lead, younger scientists had “stayed away in droves.” Shepley and 
Blair charged that most of the lab members who attended the 
Greenhouse test in 1951 had been hoping for a failure. And they 
dealt with the Ulam-Teller breakthrough merely by saying that 
something Ulam suggested had “turned on a small light in Teller’s 
storehouse of ideas” and that the laboratory continued to resist 
Teller’s new approach. Oppenheimer, they said, opposed the new 
concept but at the June 1951 conference at Princeton had had no 
choice but to give in. Finally Teller realized that he was outflanked 
and that the nation would be in danger if he did not leave Los 
Alamos. Not until Livermore opened its doors was Los Alamos 
finally goaded into building the H-bomb. 

The truth was that in 1954, when the book was written, 


Livermore had been in existence for two years and had so far had 
nothing but failures. It had held two tests, both designed by Teller, 
and they had been inglorious fizzles. Because of secrecy, Bradbury 
was not allowed to correct the record. All he could say was that Los 
Alamos had “developed every successful thermonuclear weapon 
that exists today in the free world.” 14 

Gordon Dean, chairman of the AEC during the period in 
question, wrote that the book was “vicious” and that Shepley and 
Blair were like a pair of “plumbers going to work on a delicate 
Swiss watch.” Along with everyone else in a responsible position, 
he worried about the harm their hatchet job might do to the 
weapons program. But he and Bradbury could respond only up to a 
point: the H-bomb, as Dean had said, was like a delicate Swiss 
watch whose workings could not be described because the name of 
each component was secret, as was the interaction between them. 
Only two people were in a position to discredit the Shepley-Blair 
book. The president wasn’t going to do it because he had been 
deceived by Strauss and did not know the truth. And Strauss 
declined pleas from two of the parties who had been libeled, 
Bradbury and Dean, that he repudiate the volume. Likewise, he 
turned down an appeal from the ten Los Alamos division leaders on 
the specious ground that if he spoke out, it would boost sales. 
Strauss’s refusal to repudiate the book was an act of unbelievable 
disloyalty, since he was head of the AEC, Los Alamos was his lab, 
and the scientists were his scientists. And it was painfully clear that 
many of the book’s so-called facts could have come only from 
him.is 

Bradbury was so outraged that on September 24 he gave an 
extraordinary press conference at Los Alamos, only the second such 
appearance he had ever made. Despite the stifling secrecy 
regulations, he managed to answer the book’s most egregious 
calumnies. And, in his desire to set the record straight, he did 
something no one would be allowed to do even today: he held aloft 
what he called the “Ulam-Teller” paper of March 9, 1951, to let 
reporters know that Teller had not invented the H-bomb alone. 
There had been another author, and his contribution was such that 
perhaps the usual alphabetical order should be reversed to “Ulam- 
Teller.” No one in the room had heard of Stanislaw Ulam, not even 
the best-informed among them, Robert McKinney, publisher of the 
Santa Fe New Mexican, and Bradbury had to spell out the name 
Ulam. 

That fall Joseph and Stewart Alsop published a column asking, 


“Do we really need scientists, or can we just make do with Lewis 
Strauss?” The Alsops said that, coming on the heels of the hearing, 
the Shepley-Blair volume had “turned what was formerly a brush 
fire into a perfect conflagration of fury.” That the book was the 
second part of a two-part plan to destroy Oppenheimer and make 
Teller the leader of the scientific community, and that both parts of 
the plan had been set in motion by William Borden, was known to 
no one except, perhaps, Lewis Strauss. One observer got the drift, 
however. Writing in the Reporter magazine, Elie Abel said that the 
book “set out to topple a particular god from his pedestal and to 
raise a new one in his place. The protagonists remain larger-than- 
life figures, casting portentous shadows on a darkened stage.” 16 

Did Teller know that he was to be the beneficiary of 
Oppenheimer’s downfall? Probably. But he would have given his 
testimony without that. For years he had been saying that 
Oppenheimer did not have good judgment. He had made secret 
statements against Oppie to the FBI since 1949 and to Borden and 
the JCAE since 1950, and had criticized him in devastating terms to 
the FBI on two occasions in 1952. Teller had not expected his 
testimony to be made public, and fear of becoming a pariah among 
scientists led him, within days of the commission’s decision, to draft 
a press statement seeking to correct the impression that he might 
consider someone a security risk because of his opinions. He sent 
his proposed statement to Strauss, who in turn sent it to Roger 
Robb. Robb got back to Teller with an edited text but advised that 
silence was best. Teller followed Robb’s advice and dropped the 
idea.17 

Teller wrote Strauss a letter of thanks. “It is not possible for me 
to tell you in any short or simple way how grateful I am to you for 
many things you have done. The list would be too long and the most 
important item I cannot mention” (italics added). The unmentionable 
item had to do with Teller’s relatives. Strauss had already spoken to 
Allen Dulles, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, about 
getting Teller’s mother, sister, and nephew out of Hungary. Now, 
after receiving Teller’s thanks, he sent Dulles a reminder.1s 

But Teller still wanted to retract. About the time the Shepley- 
Blair volume appeared, an article lionizing him appeared in Life 
magazine by another writer for the Luce publications, Robert 
Coughlan. It was clear that Coughlan had not only drawn on 
Shepley and Blair’s material in the Time files but had had help from 
Teller himself. All this deepened the animosity of the other 
scientists and made Teller afraid that he would be unable to set foot 


in Los Alamos again. He therefore drafted an article outlining a 
history of the hydrogen bomb in which he shared the credit. 

Once again he consulted Strauss, who advised against 
publishing. Meanwhile he had a letter from Laura Fermi telling him 
that her husband, Enrico, was dying of stomach cancer. Teller flew 
to Chicago to see Fermi, bringing along a copy of his draft. Anxious 
to mend the split among the scientists, Fermi asked to see it. He 
read for half an hour or so, then looked up and inquired, “What 
reason would you have not to publish this?” Teller explained that 
after all the criticism, he no longer knew what to do. “Enrico 
advised me strongly and insistently to publish it.” 19 

The article, “The Work of Many People,” appeared in Science 
magazine in February 1955. After recounting the early theoretical 
discoveries of George Gamow, Bethe, and Fermi, Teller described 
H-bomb work at Los Alamos, naming many of those who had 
contributed and singling out his protégé, Freddie de Hoffmann, for 
special praise. He credited Ulam and Everett with showing that 
early calculations on the H-bomb had been in error and eliminating 
the flawed model the lab had been working on, but added only that 
the impasse had been broken by two hopeful indicators, “one an 
imaginative suggestion by Ulam, the other a fine calculation by de 
Hoffmann.” He was modest about his own contribution, giving 
himself credit mostly for his steadfast belief that the bomb could 
and should be made. “I find myself in a position of being given 
certainly too much credit and perhaps too much blame for what has 
happened.” He concluded that the H-bomb ought to unite, not 
divide, those who had contributed to it and warned, “Disunity of 
the scientists is one of the greatest dangers for our country.” 20 

This was the most credit Teller would ever extend to Ulam. He 
gave many versions of the H-bomb story in the years ahead, and 
Ulam’s role shrank with each version. One reason for this, he said, 
was that Ulam had not really believed the bomb would work, since 
he had cast doubt on it in a letter to von Neumann in 1951 
(“Edward is enthusiastic, possibly a sign that it will not work”), and 
that if he did not believe in his own invention, then he did not 
deserve credit. 

But Teller’s outcast status bothered him and he wanted to make 
amends. In 1961, when he was writing a book called The Legacy of 
Hiroshima, Teller asked Lewis Strauss for advice about his chapter 
on the Oppenheimer case. Strauss warned that he would be seen as 
a “repentant witness” and advised him not to publish the chapter. 
Strauss also passed it along to Charles Murphy, who met with Teller 


three times in an effort to dissuade him and even brought Gordon 
Gray along. Murphy advised: “Believe me, Edward, I know how 
hard all this is for you. The world is also hard. It is replete with 
ambushes. I suggest that you walk warily and keep a sharp look in 
all directions.” 21 

The Legacy of Hiroshima appeared the following year without a 
chapter on the Oppenheimer affair. 

In the decade between 1944 and 1954, Teller had settled old 
scores. With the AEC hearing, he avenged himself on Oppenheimer 
for refusing to make him head of the Theoretical Physics Division of 
the Manhattan Project in 1944 and, very likely, for a number of 
perceived slights since then. With Livermore, he took revenge on 
Bradbury for refusing the conditions he had put on staying at Los 
Alamos in 1946 and refusing to place him in overall charge of the 
H-bomb program in 1951: if he couldn’t be master of the first 
laboratory, he would have a laboratory of his own. The third case, 
that of Ulam, was the most complicated: Ulam had trumped Teller 
twice, once when he proved that the Super conceived by Teller was 
unworkable, and again when he himself conceived two of the three 
ideas that made the radiation-implosion bomb possible. To get even 
with Ulam for undermining his proudest claim, that of being father 
of the H-bomb, Teller avenged himself by trying to erase his rival 
from the history books and make him a nonperson. 

Looking at all this, the Freudian observer might say that during 
the decade between 1944 and 1954 Teller symbolically destroyed 
each of the three men who had dealt him a severe narcissistic blow. 
The layperson might conclude, more simply, that he sought to 
destroy the three men who had stood in his way. 


aThe author doubts that Gray leaked the transcript and believes the leak 
was the work of one of Strauss’s minions. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 


Oppenheimer 


Kitty AND Rosert returned to Princeton, where he continued to run 
the Institute for Advanced Study and she gardened in the 
greenhouse they had built at Olden Manor. Ten-year-old Toni and 
fourteen-year-old Peter came home from the Hempelmanns’ in 
Rochester, New York, where they had stayed in May, and that 
summer the four of them went sailing off St. John’s, in the Virgin 
Islands. Meanwhile, Lewis Strauss tried to build a majority on the 
institute’s board of trustees for firing Robert. 

Robert did not tell his closest friends in the physics community, 
Rabi, Bethe, Victor Weisskopf, and Abraham Pais, about this new 
humiliation, and when the trustees voted on October 1 to retain 
him, it was with McGeorge Bundy, who had helped draft the 
Oppenheimer panel report two years before, Mary Bundy, and 
newspaper columnist Joe Alsop that Kitty and Robert celebrated at 
the Alsops’ family home in Avon, Connecticut. Physicist friends of 
Robert’s who still had Q clearances and had stayed on as advisers to 
the government found themselves in an excruciating position. 
Virtually everything they had discussed with him during the past 
dozen years, all the questions about weapons policy, were off limits 
now. Old friends from Pasadena like Bacher and Lauritsen made a 
point of visiting when they were in the East, and Bethe and 
Weisskopf when they were anywhere near Princeton, but as Rabi’s 
daughter Nancy Lichtenstein said later, it was as though they had 
been cut off in midconversation with Robert. 

The autumn after the hearing Schatzi Davis, wife of lab member 
Bob Davis and neighbor of the Oppenheimers’ at Los Alamos, went 
to see them and found everything changed. Instead of dust in the 
air and Navajo rugs on the floor and the smell of one of Kitty’s pot 
roasts on the stove, instead of Robert’s coming home from work 


filled with life and eager to see his family, she found the two of 
them spent and rather formal and sad. Even the food and the 
serving of it were different—a coddled egg, a butler, a canned half 
peach without liqueur—and, seeing how it all had changed, Schatzi 
could not hold back tears. Desperate to change the mood, Robert 
took her to inspect their new refrigerator, then went off alone to his 
study. 

Robert was more of a presence at the institute than he had been 
when he was commuting to Washington, and his friends Harold 
Cherniss and Freeman Dyson thought he was a better director. As 
he had done before at Berkeley and Los Alamos, he had built the 
institute into one of the world’s great centers of physics, and while 
he no longer did much original work in physics himself, he stayed 
abreast through institute luminaries such as T. D. Lee and Dyson 
and Abraham Pais, and went right on making his famously 
downputting remarks at seminars. At home and abroad, he lectured 
on larger questions of science and human values and took up with a 
group of cold war intellectuals clustered around the Congress for 
Cultural Freedom of Paris and New York, a group later found to 
have been secretly funded by the CIA. One of his most valued 
friends in the congress and at the institute was George Kennan, 
whose appointment as a permanent faculty member Oppenheimer 
secured in 1955 over the fierce opposition of the institute’s 
fractious mathematicians. 

Dyson, who frequently came upon Kitty up to the elbows in 
earth in her greenhouse, and Cherniss, a great listener who saw a 
good deal of Robert, thought the Oppenheimers recovered 
surprisingly well. But nearly everyone else thought they were 
devastated. This was especially obvious with Kitty, who had been 
Robert’s chief support and on occasion could still put up a valiant 
front. But even during Los Alamos days, Kitty used to drink more 
than was good for her, and now her drinking grew worse. Alcohol, 
together with medicine she took for her pancreatitis, made her 
already sharp tongue even sharper. The atmosphere around her 
could be withering, and the children suffered. Peter, to whom by all 
accounts she was not a loving parent, said years later, “My father’s 
tragedy was not that he lost his clearance, but my mother’s slow 
descent into the hell of alcoholism.” Then he added, “Cut that word 
‘slow.””1 

Early in their marriage Kitty had made Robert break with old 
acquaintances, and now her biases about people and her not 
infrequent cruelty drove even loyal friends away. If a woman who 


at some time or other had meant something to Robert came to see 
them, Kitty would withdraw to her bedroom and make her 
displeasure unmistakably plain. Ruth Tolman, widow of Oppie’s 
mentor Richard Tolman, was one of these; Anne Marks, wife and 
then widow of Herb Marks, was another; and so was Robert’s 
favorite cousin, Babette, who after Hiroshima had sent him a 
postcard of congratulations: “We always knew you’d set the world 
on fire.” 

Peter Oppenheimer, now in his sixties, says that his father coped 
well. But George Kennan observed that Kitty was a grave liability in 
Robert’s relationships with others. “He was accused of being 
arrogant, but she made him more arrogant than he was and would 
egg him on to be intolerant of this or that person. If he hadn’t been 
a pretty strong person and had a touching devotion and a 
willingness to put up with almost anything, he’d have been 
destroyed by her as the children were. I think she was a great 
burden to him.” Even those who agreed with Kennan—and nearly 
everybody did—conceded that the Oppenheimers were, in the 
words of one witness, “welded” to each other, that they were 
deeply and mutually loyal, and that, along with the destructiveness, 
they gave each other unqualified support. 

Verna Hobson, Oppenheimer’s secretary, a person of great 
distinction, saw Robert up close. She had worked for him for nearly 
a year when, around Christmas of 1953, she saw that he was in 
trouble. After she had made what she calls, without specifying, “a 
gesture of trust,” he invited her into his office, told her about his 
earlier life as a fellow traveler, and asked her to be his principal 
secretary. When, soon afterward, seeing the toll the hearing was 
taking on him, she urged him to fight tooth and nail, his response 
made her realize that, as he saw it, the hearing was the unavoidable 
outcome, not of any single misstep, such as his humiliation of 
Strauss at the isotopes hearing, but of his entire life and the way he 
had lived it. It was this sense that the government had pronounced 
judgment on him, not for what he had done, but for what he was, 
that kept him from walking out as Volpe suggested. He had to fight 
his way, and Mrs. Hobson believed it was this that led him to 
choose the gentlemanly Lloyd Garrison as his attorney. She had no 
sense that he ever felt, as Kitty and many of his friends did, that 
Garrison failed him. 

But from feeling that the hearing was inevitable, how far was it 
to feeling that his prosecutors were right and that he was guilty of 
something, even if not of the specific offenses with which he was 


charged? For a man who, for all the vaunted “arrogance,” had lived 
most of his life in a state of existential uncertainty, what was it like 
to be pronounced unworthy because of “substantial defects in his 
character”? Was it not crushing confirmation of what, beneath the 
mystique, he had believed all along? 

Verna Hobson later said that Oppenheimer’s growth during his 
last ten years or so was the most exciting thing she had ever 
witnessed. By this she meant primarily that he grew in his capacity 
for relationships and in his understanding of others. His time as a 
Harvard undergraduate had been “perfect,” he told her, except that 
he had had no talent for friendship then. Mrs. Hobson, like Joe 
Volpe, pointed to something else. After the hearing, Oppenheimer 
never said a word in public to disparage the AEC—much though 
there was to disparage. Nor was he critical of the government. Once 
again, just as at his trial, the government counted on his loyalty 
even as it tried to destroy him. 

In smaller ways, Oppenheimer still fell short of the perfection he 
required of himself. He was a “totally demanding” boss, expecting 
Mrs. Hobson, when she first worked for him, to take dictation in 
English, French, and German and in mathematical formulas. He 
preempted the private lives of those who worked for him. And 
when the White House announced in April 1963 that President 
Kennedy would present him with the Fermi Prize that fall, Robert 
“could hardly bear it” and wanted to decline. “But of course you 
have to accept,” she told him. “I know,” he said. But he hated the 
whole thing—because Teller had won the year before, and because 
the award to him was so clearly a political gesture. 

When the time came, within days of the Kennedy assassination, 
for President Johnson to present the award in a White House 
ceremony, Oppenheimer performed graciously and did not blanch 
even when Teller maneuvered himself within camera range in order 
to be photographed shaking his hand. It was a “bittersweet” 
occasion, Anne Marks said, and Kitty Oppenheimer saluted it in her 
own way. She went to New York and, for ten thousand dollars, 
bought a mink coat, a slender, saronglike wrap in which she was 
resplendent. When someone asked Robert what he was going to do 
with the prize money, he said, “I’ve already spent it.”4 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 


We Made It—and We Gave It Away 


THE BririsH TESTED their first hydrogen weapon in 1957, and the three 
thermonuclear powers, the United States, Britain, and the USSR, 
conducted larger and larger tests in the Pacific. The public began to 
worry about radioactive fallout, and when the Democratic 
candidate, Adlai Stevenson, proposed a self-enforcing ban on large- 
scale nuclear tests during the presidential election campaign of that 
year, he did so, ironically, on the advice of Thomas Finletter and 
Thomas Murray, two of the most avid proponents of the H-bomb— 
and opponents of Robert Oppenheimer—only a short while before. 
In 1957 On the Beach, a novel about nuclear war by Australian 
writer Neville Shute, was an overnight bestseller, and popular 
response to appeals by Bertrand Russell and Prime Minister 
Jawaharlal Nehru of India for a test ban showed that men and 
women the world over were alarmed by the dangers of nuclear 
testing in the atmosphere. In 1958 Nikita Khrushchev, now more or 
less firmly in the saddle as leader of the Soviet Union, and the 
safely reelected Dwight Eisenhower embarked on test-ban talks in 
Geneva and began a test moratorium that lasted three years. 

Lewis Strauss tried to apply the brakes. In 1957 he brought three 
test ban opponents from Livermore, Edward Teller, Ernest 
Lawrence, and Mark Mills, into the Oval Office, where they 
promised Eisenhower that a “clean,” or fallout-free, bomb could be 
developed with a mere seven more years of atmospheric testing. 
Doubts next arose about whether small tests underground could be 
distinguished from seismic events, such as earthquakes, and these 
doubts—doubts about Soviet cheating—were fanned by Teller and 
others for decades. When Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed in 1963, 
after the Cuban missile crisis, to ban nuclear testing in the 
atmosphere, and a limited test ban treaty was initialed in Moscow, 


Teller testified against it in the U.S. Senate. To him belongs a large 
share of responsibility for the fact that a comprehensive test ban 
treaty, banning tests underground as well as in the atmosphere, was 
never ratified. With his heavy eyebrows, his Hungarian accent, and 
his only partly deserved reputation as father of the H-bomb, Teller 
was a mesmerizing advocate of his pie-in-the-sky schemes. Just as 
he persuaded President Eisenhower for a brief time in 1957 that a 
“clean” bomb was possible, so, twenty-five years later, he 
persuaded President Reagan that the perfect defensive shield known 
casually as “Star Wars” could be achieved. 

Strauss’s influence persisted, too. At first he adopted 
Eisenhower’s Atoms for Peace idea as a way to preempt 
Oppenheimer’s Operation Candor, but he and the president 
sincerely hoped by way of the Geneva conferences of 1955 and 
1958 to promote the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
What neither Strauss nor Eisenhower understood was that the 
facilities required to produce electricity by way of nuclear fission 
could also be used to make nuclear weapons. The Russians, of 
course, did understand, and Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav 
Molotov wasted no time asking Secretary of State John Foster 
Dulles what on earth the Americans thought they were doing, 
proposing to spread weapons-grade nuclear material all over the 
world. It is the ironic legacy of the secrecy-obsessed Strauss that he 
was promoter of a program that has contributed to the spread of 
nuclear knowledge—and nuclear weapons—throughout the world.1 

Percival King, an experimental physicist who specialized in 
reactors, observed the consequences of Strauss’s ignorance at close 
range. Before the Geneva conference of 1958, Strauss, as AEC 
chairman, offered generous funding to three laboratories for 
peaceful fusion research. No one, not even Teller, thought that 
peaceful hydrogen power lay around the corner, and one of the 
scientists to whom funds were offered declined it for himself and 
his lab. But Strauss refused to be coached in physics. He counted on 
a breakthrough and believed that peaceful thermonuclear power 
would develop rapidly enough so that by 1956 or 1957 he would be 
the big man. King thought there was an element of competition 
here. Teller was father of the H-bomb; Strauss would be the father 
of peaceful hydrogen power. He was certain that if he threw 
enough money at the problem, scientists would solve it. They, on 
the other hand, felt that they ought to be in on decisions such as 
this one—political decisions—so as to help the government avoid 
wasting valuable resources on projects that defied the laws of 


nature. 

The scientists came into their own again, and Strauss’s influence 
receded, after the Russians launched Sputnik, the world’s first 
artificial satellite, in October 1957. The president took it calmly, 
but from his intelligence he knew that the Russians had already 
launched an intercontinental missile—the first in the world—and 
that they were developing increasingly powerful thermonuclear 
warheads. The fact that the boosters that had lofted Sputnik into 
space would soon be able to deliver the hydrogen bomb meant that 
a new era was at hand—and the president knew it. Later that 
autumn he convened a large group of scientists. At the meeting, I. I. 
Rabi asked for the floor and suggested that the president bring 
scientists directly into the White House to advise him on the 
technological problems raised by the Soviet success. Rabi was 
known for his genius at coming up with the right solution at the 
right moment, and he had the backing of the scientific community. 
The president accepted his proposal, and an advisory panel that had 
previously been attached to the State Department was upgraded, 
brought into the White House, and christened the President’s 
Scientific Advisory Committee (PSAC). James Killian, president of 
MIT, became its chairman. From then on, President Eisenhower 
began to get the kind of informed scientific judgment he should 
have been receiving all along, and would have but for his misplaced 
faith in Lewis Strauss. It was ironic that scientists should have 
regained some of their old clout under the very president who had 
overseen the demolition of Oppenheimer, and typical of the 
scientists of that era that they served him in spite of what had 
happened. 

And there were other ironies. During the debate over whether to 
build the H-bomb, there had been almost no discussion of how the 
bomb was to be delivered. The Air Force drove the debate, and the 
Strategic Air Command begged the question by demanding more 
and bigger airplanes for itself. The Russians were wiser. They saw 
that aircraft wouldn’t do, and that an H-bomb without an 
intercontinental missile to deliver it made little sense. So they 
started intensive work on rocketry well ahead of the United States. 
In means of delivery, if not in small, sophisticated warheads, they 
had outstripped us. With all its lobbying for bigger bombs and 
bigger bombers, and its labeling as “traitors” those, like 
Oppenheimer, who stood in its way, the Air Force had not helped 
our military posture but had held us back. The generals had failed 
to see that the future lay not with bombers but with missiles. 


Scientists on the PSAC and on a pair of other high-powered 
committees went to work and in time made up for what one called 
“seven lost years” in developing long-range missiles. 2 

Strauss, who for four years had controlled the access of scientists 
to the president, was furious, and sabotaged the PSAC whenever he 
could. Killian, not one to magnify personal differences, nonetheless 
noticed that Strauss could be a charming host, welcoming him and 
Mrs. Killian to his apartment at the Shoreham and his farm in 
Virginia, but that at work he battled the head of the PSAC at every 
turn and did his utmost to block Killian’s access to the president. 

Eisenhower was delighted with his new scientific advisers. 
People in Washington, he complained, had axes to grind, but 
scientists were trained to be objective. He soon began to call on the 
PSAC for advice in matters outside science. But he never realized 
how badly Lewis Strauss had served him. When Strauss left the AEC 
in 1959, the president nominated him to be secretary of commerce, 
a job Strauss coveted because it had been held by his mentor, 
Herbert Hoover. After long and contentious hearings, however, the 
nomination was rejected by the Senate, only the eighth time in 
American history that a cabinet nominee had been turned down. 
One of the reasons the senators gave was “defects of character,” the 
very words the AEC had used when it took away Oppenheimer’s 
clearance. The president, having no understanding of the 
resentments stirred by the Oppenheimer case, was enraged. And in 
another ironic twist, Strauss, who could be so callous in inflicting 
harm on others, almost literally wept on the president’s shoulder. In 
later years Lewis and Alice Strauss visited the Eisenhowers at 
Gettysburg, and for the rest of their lives the two men corresponded 
about their hobby of cattle breeding. 

At least in the short run, the two sets of hearings during the 
spring of 1954 served the president’s purposes. The Army-McCarthy 
hearings led to the Senate resolution in December of that year 
censuring the demagogue from Wisconsin and ended by breaking 
McCarthy’s power. And, dominating the headlines as they did, they 
drowned out the Oppenheimer hearing and helped stifle debate 
over the momentous issues that had led to it. As Eisenhower’s 
biographer Stephen Ambrose pointed out, the uproar over 
McCarthy enabled the president and Strauss to get rid of 
Oppenheimer with no public discussion of whether it had been a 
breach of policy or morality to build the H-bomb. Similarly, the 
McCarthy hearings diverted public attention from the fears aroused 
by the Bravo test and obscured the fact that thanks to both Truman 


and Eisenhower, the United States was now engaged in an all-out 
hydrogen bomb race with the Russians. 

Mike, the November 1952 test of the Ulam-Teller principles that 
Bush, Bethe, and Oppenheimer had hoped at the very least to 
postpone, was the watershed marking the world’s entry into the 
thermonuclear age. By the time of the next American test, Bravo in 
March 1954, the Russians had developed instruments that showed 
that the Americans had indeed made a breakthrough. Under 
tremendous pressure to keep up, Andrey Sakharov and Yakov 
Zeldovich in Moscow also made a breakthrough and, about the time 
of the Oppenheimer hearing, came up with their own version of the 
Ulam-Teller concept. A year and a half later, in Central Asia, the 
Russians tested their first radiation-implosion bomb. 

Once again—Hiroshima in 1945 being the first time, Truman’s 
H-bomb announcement of 1950 the second, and Mike in 1952 the 
third—the United States had led the way in the competition to 
build weapons of mass destruction. 


At the end of World War II, scientists were heroes. It was scientists 
who had made possible an end to the fighting in time to save the 
hundreds of thousands of American lives that, but for the atomic 
bomb, would have ebbed away on the shores of Japan. It did not 
occur to anyone that these same scientists would now turn their 
talents to the political arena. 

It did occur to those who had worked on the bomb, the young 
Los Alamos physicist Charles Critchfield for one. On August 16, 
1945, days after the Japanese surrender, Critchfield wrote a memo 
saying that, with the coming of peace, the responsibility for the 
effects of science on human beings would shift from politicians to 
the scientists themselves. It had to happen, he said, because 
scientists would be the first to understand the effects of their 
discoveries on humanity. 

Only a few weeks later physicists, chemists, and metallurgists 
poured out of the laboratories that had produced the bomb— 
Chicago’s Met Lab, Oak Ridge in Tennessee, Los Alamos in New 
Mexico—to protest the May-Johnson bill, legislation drawn up by 
the War Department that would have kept atomic energy under 
military control. Scientific statesmen who, under pressure of war, 
had found a way to cooperate with the Army—Oppenheimer, 
Arthur Compton, James Conant, and Vannevar Bush—favored May- 
Johnson and believed that the military men they had dealt with, 
men like General George C. Marshall and former secretary of war 


Henry L. Stimson, could be trusted with management of the atom. 
But other, mostly junior, scientists who had worked on the bomb 
wanted no part of the military, with its secrecy and the obedience 
to orders from above that were stifling to the spirit of invention. On 
the basis of their experience with General Groves, they wanted to 
keep work on atomic weapons free of the Army’s system of 
command and open to the adventurous, questioning spirit that had 
made their great achievement possible. 

The passion with which these men pleaded their case and the 
awe in which atomic scientists now were held by Congress and the 
public proved surprisingly persuasive, and May-Johnson was 
quietly shelved. In its place Congress passed the McMahon Act, 
which physicists and mathematicians had helped to draft and which 
provided for civilian control. There was no reason why the 
scientists’ cleverness should have extended to writing laws and 
lobbying Congress. But those who had contributed to the stunning 
white flash over the desert at Alamogordo in July 1945 were aware 
that they had handed man a strange new power, the power to alter 
nature, and, as Critchfield wrote, they felt that it was up to them to 
exercise responsibility. 

They created their own organization, the Federation of Atomic 
Scientists (now the Federation of American Scientists), and a 
journal of their own, and they taught academic courses, gave public 
lectures, and wrote articles in the press. But the vehicle through 
which they exercised their responsibility most effectively during the 
early years after the war was the General Advisory Committee of 
the Atomic Energy Commission, the civilian agency created by the 
McMahon Act. The nine members of the GAC, as it was called, were 
nearly all senior scientists who had played leading roles in the 
Manhattan Project. They were brilliant men with no ax to grind 
except passion to save the world from atomic war, and, 
surprisingly, they were very nearly the only people in government 
with any real understanding of atomic weapons. Because of the 
members’ disinterestedness and ability, the GAC from 1947 to 
1952, the Oppenheimer years, acquired remarkable authority inside 
the government. And much of that authority it owed to 
Oppenheimer himself, with his mastery of atomic physics, his 
brilliance at synthesizing the opinions of others, and _ his 
breathtaking command of language. 

The Oppenheimer GAC suffered two major defeats: President 
Truman’s decision in 1950 to go full steam ahead with the H-bomb, 
and the Defense Department’s decision two years later to build a 


second nuclear weapons laboratory. But it was the Oppenheimer 
hearing that put an end to the unique partnership between 
scientists and the government. By taking away the clearance of the 
man who had replaced Albert Einstein as the public face of 
scientific genius, the government told the scientists: We want your 
work, but we don’t want you. We want the fruit of your research, 
but we have no use for the deeper wisdom you acquired as you 
were exploring the laws of nature. The hearing marked the end of 
the scientists’ putting themselves and their imaginations on the line 
to help government with the long-range problems they had created. 

Nearly three decades later, in a speech at Los Alamos in 1983, 
Rabi took the scientific community to task for allowing its political 
power to slip away. In a speech entitled “How Well We Meant,” 
Rabi said that he and others had known when they saw the fireball 
at Alamogordo that they were witnessing the end of one world and 
the beginning of another. “We now had a power that put humanity 
on a new plane. And, having given this great power to our country, 
we were in a position to start on a new road.” At first, he said, the 
generals seemed to agree with the scientists, but then they returned 
to their old ways. The men who created the bomb, on the other 
hand, had no way of escaping their responsibility. “It’s gotten out of 
our hands and how to recover that?” Rabi asked. “We meant well 
and we sort of abdicated. We gave it away. We gave away the 
power to people who didn’t understand it.” In conclusion he 
lamented what happens when scientists “hand over the products of 
their knowledge to people who don’t have it, to people who don’t 
have the fundamental feeling and appreciation, who don’t have a 
feeling for the glory of the human spirit, who don’t respect science 
as such.” 

The question at issue was secrecy. Without the suffocating 
effects of secrecy, none of the events of the 1945-1955 decade 
would have happened in the way they did and some would not 
have happened at all. During the Manhattan Project, Oppenheimer 
had navigated superbly the impasse between the scientists’ desire to 
share their research and the Army’s insistence on secrecy. But after 
the war, because he advocated the Acheson-Lilienthal plan and 
opposed the H-bomb, Oppenheimer was accused by some of 
wanting to “give away the secret,” as if there were some single, 
magic secret to the atomic bomb. Lewis Strauss warned before the 
hearing began that if the case were lost, the atomic energy program 
would “fall into the hands of left-wingers.” The government, he 
added, would have “another Pearl Harbor” on its hands and 


scientists would take over the program. Three decades later Charles 
Bates, the FBI’s point man during the hearing, complained to the 
author that “scientists observe no restrictions. They exchange 
information about everything. They said that any information a 
scientist develops, he should be free to pass on to anyone 
anywhere. I got so sick of hearing that, because scientists are no 
different from the rest of us.”3 

“That was Oppenheimer’s idea,” Bates added, “but it was not his 
government’s idea, and it was the government that was paying the 
bills. Without the government’s resources, the bomb could not have 
been developed. Without the government’s money, labs, and 
support of all kinds, the scientists could not have made these 
discoveries, yet they had little patience for government restrictions 
and felt that scientific information ought to be exchanged in 
complete freedom.” Bates overstated the views of Oppenheimer and 
the other scientists, and the dilemma of which he spoke is now 
more complex than it was in Oppenheimer’s time. A scientific 
discovery in our time is likely to be not the work of a solitary 
researcher or a small team working with improvised equipment, but 
the product of a big team in an expensive lab operating with 
government funds. In such conditions the scientist is less and less 
likely to speak out against government policies. Today, for 
example, there is scarcely a physicist who thinks the Strategic 
Defense Initiative or its successor, National Missile Defense, can be 
made to work in anything like the way the Defense Department 
claims. Some disbelievers, however, accept government funds for 
the project in hopes of making an ancillary contribution to science, 
and cover their doubts with silence. The public has been lied to as a 
result, and billions of dollars have been wasted on an illusion. 

The Oppenheimer hearing claims our attention not only because 
it was unjust but because it undermined respect for independent 
scientific thinking at a time when such thinking was desperately 
needed. Had there been no Oppenheimer affair, the government 
would almost surely have tried to find some other way to chasten 
scientists and let them know who was boss. “The more we grew,” 
Rabi said, “the more we, the committee [the GAC], the scientists, 
grew in influence, the greater the worry that they were losing 
power.” He concluded, “Science can be misused. And it’s natural to 
misuse it, natural for politicians, people in power. It gives them a 
great deal of power, personal power and national power. You give 
politicians and people in government more power than they have 
the imagination and spiritual equipment to have.”4 


Among the scientists who created the bomb there were heroes, 
men who understood what they had done and tried desperately, 
each in his way, to control the outcome. Hans Bethe was one; Philip 
Morrison was another; Norris Bradbury, Jerrold Zacharias, Carson 
Mark, Victor Weisskopf, and Andrey Sakharov tried, and there were 
others. Of them all, Robert Oppenheimer was the American who 
could see the furthest, was the most articulate, had the tragic sense. 
If anyone could have moderated man’s rush to extermination, or at 
least articulated the danger with such eloquence that we would all 
have been forced to consider, it was Robert Oppenheimer. 


Postlude 


WHEN | wrote to him in the fall of 1985, Henry DeWolf Smyth did 
not want to see me. “Why exhume the case now?” he wrote. “It will 
only reopen old wounds.” He was still reluctant when I arrived at 
the big old wooden house in Princeton. “Oppenheimer is dead,” he 
said to me at the door. “His wife and daughter are dead. Strauss is 
dead. All the others are dead.”1 

But as we entered the airy paneled library, he reproached me for 
another reason. “Why didn’t you come to me first? After all, I wrote 
the only dissent.” Apart from his fair skin, everything about Harry 
Smyth was gray. His suit was dark gray, his hair was gray, the air 
around him seemed gray—and charged with loneliness. There were 
books all over the floor, so many of them that I had trouble picking 
my way to a chair. Dr. Smyth explained that he was giving them 
away in order to make room for more. This gentleman is not going 
to acquire more books, I said to myself. He is getting rid of them for 
another reason. I thought this because each time a new name 
entered the conversation he would ask, “Have you been to see him 
—or is he dead, too?” 

Dr. Smyth was eighty-seven years old when I saw him in 
December 1985. He had been an obscure professor of physics at 
Princeton forty years earlier when, after the dropping of the atomic 
bomb, the U.S. government published Atomic Energy for Military 
Purposes, the official story of the building of the bomb. The book 
was christened the Smyth Report, and the author became famous 
overnight as governments and scientists the world over vied with 
one another to obtain copies. With the report, Smyth’s notable 
public career began. He served for five years (1949-1954) as a 
member of the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington, and in 
1961 President Kennedy named him U.S. ambassador to the 
International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, a job he performed 
with distinction for nearly a decade. 


While he felt that the job in Vienna mattered more than 
anything else he had done, Dr. Smyth seemed aware, with some 
regret, that history would remember him best for his dissent in the 
Oppenheimer case. Talking about the case upset him, and as he was 
describing the tense night of June 28, 1954, when he wrote his 
opinion, he called in his secretary, Grace Anderson, and instructed 
her to take down his words. He pointed to a leather-bound copy of 
the hearing transcript and told me to open it to page 1063. He had 
marked the page with the letter I had written asking to meet with 
him. Near the top of the page, there was a word he wanted to 
change. In an early version of his opinion, he explained, he had 
called Oppenheimer’s conduct in the Chevalier affair 
“unforgivable,” but Lewis Strauss had remonstrated with him: “You 
said it was unforgivable, but then you forgave it.” So in the final 
version, Smyth used the weaker “inexcusable.” Now, three decades 
later, he wanted to soften his appraisal a little more. He wished the 
sentence to read “The Chevalier incident involved temporary 
concealment of an espionage attempt and admitted lying, and is 
unfortunate” (italics added). 

Did you realize how strongly Strauss felt about getting rid of 
Oppenheimer? I asked. “Yes,” Smyth replied, and then he told me 
an astonishing story. When he informed Strauss, the winter before 
the hearing, that he planned to resign in the fall, Strauss, without a 
moment’s pause, started offering him inducements to leave right 
away, so that he would be unable to vote on Oppenheimer’s 
clearance. “Twice between January and June he offered me bribes.” 
First he offered Smyth “a fancy job somewhere” that, Smyth found 
out later, had not been his to offer. Then he made an offer that was 
almost past belief—Oppie’s job. “He said he assumed that 
Oppenheimer would not want to continue as director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study after the ordeal he was going through 
and therefore he, as chairman of the institute’s board of trustees, 
was searching for a new director. He described the qualifications he 
was looking for, and they were nearly identical to qualities I would 
like to think I possessed. He didn’t go quite so far as to say that he 
wanted someone with degrees from both Princeton and Cambridge 
University, but he came close. They were qualifications no one else 
could have possessed.” Smyth, who had engaged in a running battle 
with Strauss over procedures in the Oppenheimer case and other 
crucial issues, told me how he felt in Strauss’s presence. “When I 
went to see him in his office, I was glad to get out. I didn’t want my 
back to him. I’d have made a perfect target.” 


When I asked whether Strauss had retaliated against him for his 
dissent, Smyth said no; he had seen no sign, for example, of 
Strauss’s trying to have him removed from his tenured job at 
Princeton. “Mrs. Smyth had money,” he told me, “so there was 
nothing he could do.” But he had been in no doubt that Strauss 
would have taken revenge if he could have. “After the case was 
over, Lewis suggested that I resign, but I refused. I said it would be 
bad for the country and bad for the scientific community to show 
that the commissioners were so badly split. I told him I would 
resign at the end of summer, and I did.” 

During the hearing Smyth carried out all his day-to-day duties at 
the commission. He had even flown to the Pacific for the Bravo test. 
Throughout that time—the hearing, the Gray board’s deliberations, 
the month of June just before the final decision—Strauss had 
insisted on his right, as chairman, to act as the commission’s sole 
spokesman. He himself saw two or three newspapermen a day but 
treated any other commissioner who talked to the press like a 
pariah. Along with two other commissioners, Smyth openly 
disagreed with this policy. Then he and his spirited wife, Mary, 
devised a way of seeing to it that the chairman’s was not the only 
view to come before the public. On Friday, May 14, 1954, Mary 
Smyth wrote in her diary, “JR here for talk with M,” JR being 
James Reston of the New York Times, and the next day she wrote, 
“Al Friendly here to talk with M.” Al Friendly was a reporter for the 
Washington Post. She was pleased with the result and on Sunday 
wrote, “Reston article just what I wanted.” The next week she 
wrote, “M. to see Alsop suddenly,” and a couple of evenings later, 
“Stewart Alsop asks to talk here with us two hours.” In this fashion 
husband and wife saw to it that the public got a fuller picture than 
it would have otherwise.2 

Smyth’s independence and his belief, as he wrote in his opinion, 
that the security “system itself is nothing to worship,” were 
exemplified by his handling of Mary’s papers after she died. Mary 
Smyth’s diary included a day-by-day account of the Oppenheimer 
case and Strauss’s efforts to doctor the record. After she died in 
1980, Harry Smyth, correct and proper though he was in every 
way, shipped her diary and other papers not to the AEC’s successor 
agency, the Department of Energy, where they might be moldering 
to this day under a “classified” stamp, but to the American 
Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. There, in her bold, penciled 
handwriting, any visitor can read “Items of Possible Interest in 
Oppenheimer File,” “M’s Summary on Strauss Data,” and dozens of 


other legal-sized pages documenting Strauss’s deceptions from the 
moment he became chairman of the AEC. 

Smyth told me why he had not especially warmed to 
Oppenheimer. “He was arrogant, and I think that is a dangerous 
trait when it comes to security. But what an incredible, magnificent 
job he did at Los Alamos! He was just about the last person I’d have 
picked for it.” Wondering why Oppenheimer did not walk out of 
the hearing, as Volpe urged him to do, Smyth had concluded that 
Oppie was disarmed by the sheer brutality of the attack. He had 
expected something, but nothing this savage. Had the hearing 
changed him? “Oh, yes,” came the reply. “It killed him.” 

Smyth did not remember that Oppenheimer had expressed much 
gratitude to him afterward. “He may have said, ‘Thank you.” But 
the record is a generous one on both sides. Days after the verdict, 
on July 5, 1954, Oppenheimer wrote: 


Dear Harry: 

For the past weeks you and Mary have been in my thoughts 
more than anyone else; and, since the 29th, I have thought often 
of the skill, fortitude and high courage of your action.... It has 
needed no telling for me to know how great a toll this effort will 
have taken of you. I wish for you both some quiet and some 
restoration, and that peace in an act of courage and honor that 
you have won for all of us and for all time. 

With admiration and affection, 

Roberts 


When Oppenheimer died in February 1967, just short of his 
sixty-third birthday, Smyth, who had just flown across the Atlantic 
to bury his mother, made a second flight back from Vienna within a 
day or two to deliver a eulogy at Oppenheimer’s memorial service 
in Princeton. 

Kitty died of a mysterious infection in Panama in 1972 while 
sailing to Japan with her friend and Robert’s, Bob Serber. Toni 
committed suicide in 1977 after the failure of her second marriage. 
Peter Oppenheimer lives today in a place he loves, Santa Fe, forty 
miles from Los Alamos, and knows everything there is to know 
about the Manhattan Project. Like his father and his own three 
children, Peter has spent much of his life worrying about the legacy 
of atomic weapons that Robert Oppenheimer left behind. 


, / \s 


Robert Oppenheimer at a party in Fuller Lodge, Los Alamos. Photograph probably taken 
August 1945. 


David Lilienthal. Photograph taken May 1938. 


Niels Bohr visited Los Alamos six times during the war. His views shaped Oppenheimer’s 
approach to postwar use of atomic knowledge. 


MG Lone 


At a skiing excursion at Los Alamos, New Mexico, are (left to right, standing) Enrico Fermi, 
Hans Bethe, Hans Staub, Victor Weisskopf,; (sitting) Mrs. Staub, Elfriede Segre. Photograph 
taken 1943. 


Enrico Fermi’s colleagues called him “the pope” because of his total knowledge of both 
theoretical and experimental physics. 


Charles J. V. Murphy at Cap d’Antibes in 1949, at work on A King’s Story, the memoir of 
the Duke of Windsor. 


Edward Teller (left) consulted Fermi while they were colleagues at the University of 
Chicago after the war. Photograph taken 1951. 


John Manley (left) helped Oppenheimer organize the lab. He became secretary of the 
General Advisory Committee. Photograph probably taken August 1945. 


Maria Goeppert Mayer with her teacher Edward Teller (left); her husband, Joseph Mayer; 
and James Franck, conscience of the physics community, Chicago, 1930s. 


Carson Mark (left) and Hans Bethe in Ithaca, New York, during the early 1960s. They 
worked together on the hydrogen bomb and remained close friends and collaborators 
afterward. 


NAMU Romunixk BIKINI: 
= — \WAOMOEN 


YUROCHI 


ik 


ASHINITON: AEC Chairman Lewis L. Strauss points te "warning area" in the Marshall 


Wap12<3/33 Wh : 
siands Atomic Prov: 3 Grounds during a press conference at White House today. Strauss said 
#28 country can now bu 


id a Hebomb powerful enough te wipe out New York city, U.P. TELEPHOIO 


Lewis Strauss points to the area where the Bravo test took place. At this press conference, 
on March 30, 1954, he said that the hydrogen bomb could be made big enough to “take 
out” a city as big as New York. 


A brilliant student of Oppenheimer’s at Berkeley, Robert Serber wrote what became The 
Los Alamos Primer, which was required reading for every newcomer to Los Alamos during 
the war. He remained close to the Oppenheimer family afterward. 


Vannevar Bush, head of the Office of Scientific Research and Development during the war, 
warned the commissioners in June 1954, while they were still debating, that the 
Oppenheimer hearing might forever impair trust between scientists and the government. 


Cornelius Everett at the University of Wisconsin, where he met Stanislaw Ulam in the 
early 1940s. 


Stanislaw Ulam and Francois Aron. 


Army general James M. Gavin, an Oppenheimer ally and a strong supporter of tactical, or 
“battlefield,” nuclear weapons, speaks with an adversary, Edward Teller. 


The Atomic Energy Commission’s director of research from 1948 to 1951, Kenneth Pitzer 
wrote to President Truman in 1952, opposing reappointment of Oppenheimer to the 
General Advisory Committee. 


Henry Smyth considered his work at the International Atomic Energy Agency the most 
important achievement of his life, but it was his dissent in the Oppenheimer case that 
earned him a place in history. 


tia he tte, a4 
I. I. Rabi (left) with Enrico Fermi at Westhampton Beach, New York, in 1953. Rabi was 


Oppenheimer’s closest friend and counselor and an eloquent defender who tried to stop 
his hearing. 


(" 
ul 
Pp e 
After President Truman’s order to develop the hydrogen bomb, Victor Weisskopf used the 


stature he had acquired at Los Alamos to insist that questions of weapons development be 
kept before the public. 


lle 


After learning that he was to receive the Fermi Prize, on April 5, 1963, Oppenheimer 
called his friend and neighbor Ulli Steltzer and invited her to take his photograph. 


Oppenheimer in 1946 with his trademark cigarette. 


230 eats 


Portrait of Robert Oppenheimer in front of a blackboard, 1960. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


Tus Book is the work of many hands and minds besides my own, 
first and foremost, Samuel B. Ballen and the J. Robert Oppenheimer 
Memorial Committee of Los Alamos and Santa Fe. Thanks to them I 
met, early on, pioneers of the atomic and hydrogen bomb projects 
whose views have informed my own: George Bell, Hans and Rose 
Bethe, Norris Bradbury, Charles Critchfield, Robert Raymond Davis, 
Percival L. D. P. King, Jim and Betty Lilienthal, M. Stanley 
Livingston, John and Kay Manley, Carson and Kay Mark, Louis 
Rosen, Max Roy, Raemer Schreiber, Richard Slansky, Robert Thorn, 
Robert Walker, and Jacob Wechsler. Through them I also met 
Harold P. Green; Lee Hancock; Frank, Judith, and Peter 
Oppenheimer; Cyril and Alice Smith; Victor Weisskopf; Jane and 
Robert Wilson; and Jerrold Zacharias. 

I owe a particular debt to an old and dear friend, Nancy 
Lichtenstein, to her husband, Immanuel, and to her parents, Helen 
and I. I. Rabi. Others who knew the Oppenheimers well and whom 
I wish to thank especially include Ruth and Harold Cherniss, 
Priscilla Greene Duffield, “Shotsy” Durgin, Eleanor and Louis 
Hempelmann, George Kennan, Anne Marks, Honora Fergusson 
Neumann, Abraham Pais, Joseph Volpe, and Stephen White. 

Sad to say, many of these individuals, some of them dear to me, 
are gone now, but I thank them from the bottom of my heart. The 
challenge to anyone writing about the events in this book is that for 
decades key materials were classified, and many remain classified 
still. The veil lifted a little in the late 1970s, after passage of the 
Freedom of Information Act, when portions of Robert 
Oppenheimer’s FBI file were released. As far as I know, the first 
person to use these documents in the FBI reading room was 
Caroline Davidson, in the course of her research for BBC producer 


Peter Goodchild, and I wish to thank her for sharing her notes with 
me after her work was done. Next to be reviewed for 
declassification were papers of the Joint Congressional Committee 
on Atomic Energy, which were bottled up entirely until 1987 and 
have now been released in part. 

Finally, beginning in 1993, Energy Secretary Hazel O’Leary took 
a fresh look at her department’s secrecy policies, and some of the 
AEC’s documents on the H-bomb program, the Second Lab affair, 
and the Oppenheimer hearing were declassified. As these materials 
became available, the work of historians of nuclear weapons 
became intensely collegial and many of us shared our discoveries 
with one another. I owe a particular debt to Gregg Herken for his 
generosity, as well as to R. Standish Norris, Richard Rhodes, and 
Silvan Schweber, and to the late Stanley Goldberg and Chuck 
Hansen. I am indebted also to Steven Aftergood, Brian Balogh, 
Barton Bernstein, William Burr, James David, James Hershberg, 
Robert Seidel, Richard Sylves, Samuel J. Walker, and Jonathan M. 
Weisgall. And I owe special thanks to several individuals who 
shared their deep knowledge of Russian and Soviet physics with 
me: Gennady Gorelik, Loren Graham, David Holloway, Ed Kline, 
and Mark Kuchment. 

I gained special appreciation for the devoted work of archivists 
and librarians, and I wish to thank Hedy Dunn of the Los Alamos 
Historical Society; Marjorie Ciarlante, William Davis, and Rodney 
Ross of the National Archives; Arthur Freed, Roger Meade, Mollie 
Rodriguez, and Linda Sandoval of the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory; Ronald Grele and John Verso of the Columbia Oral 
History Research Office; Lori Hefner of the Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory; Joseph Anderson, Jean Hrichus, and Spencer Weart of 
the American Institute of Physics; David Haight of the Dwight D. 
Eisenhower Presidential Library; Dale Mayer of the Herbert Hoover 
Presidential Library; Dennis Bilger of the Harry S. Truman 
Presidential Library; Charles Greifenstein of the American 
Philosophical Society; and Susan Gardos Bleich of the Davis Center 
Library at Harvard University. 

I thank the Davis Center and, above all, Marshall Goldman for 
unfailing encouragement and support, and the John D. and 
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation for its research and writing 
grant in 1988-1989. I also wish to thank Ruth Adams, Kurt 
Campbell, and James Cracraft. 

For enhancing the audiotape of the 1982 interview of Lee 
Hancock at Albuquerque Airport by Jack Holl of the Department of 


Energy, I thank Robert Berkovitz and Haila Darcy of Bolt, Beranek, 
and Newman. 

For advice about wiretapping law during the 1950s, I thank 
John Pound, Susan Rosenfeld, Herman Schwartz, and Katherine 
Triantafillou, and for help in interpreting key FBI documents, I 
thank Paul Farrell and Guy Goodwin. 

For making themselves available so that I could better 
understand Edward Teller’s contributions, I wish to thank Greg 
Canavan, George Chapline, and Harris Mayer, as well as Bill Beyer 
for arranging our meeting. 

For state-of-the-art dissertations that were not published at the 
time this book was written, I thank Anne Fitzpatrick and Sybil 
Francis. For making invaluable material available, I wish to thank 
Captain Jack Crawford and Edythe Murphy Holbrook. 

For additional material, I thank Theodore Conant, Dolores 
Everett, Ivan Getting, Gwen Groves, Elaine Kistiakowsky, J. K. 
Mansfield, Phillip S. Meilinger, and Ed Regis. For their 
understanding of key individuals, I am indebted to William Golden, 
Gordon Gray Jr., Joan Harrington, and Donna Mitchell. 

For their comments on all or part of my manuscript, I thank 
Hugh De Witt, Max Holland, William Lanouette, David E. Lilienthal 
Jr., Cecily D. McMillan, and Herbert York. And for the title of this 
book, I thank Andrew Szanton. 

For support and assistance of all kinds, I thank Daniel P. Asnes, 
Drew Colfax, Michael Day, Allan Ecker, Joseph Finder, Lester 
Grinspoon, Richard and Priscilla Hunt, Coit Johnson, Steve Kaiser, 
Roman Laba, Cecily McMillan, Thomas McMillan, Thomas Mallon, 
David Metcalf, Thomas Powers, Jay Topkis, Charles Weiner, and 
Eunice Winslow. 

For their talent, experience, and sheer staying power, I thank my 
editors, Wendy Wolf and M. S. Wyeth Jr. For advice in writing the 
preface to this edition, I thank William Lanouette. And for 
friendship and assistance beyond price, I thank the late David 
Hawkins, the late Carson and Kay Mark, Emily Morrison, Philip 
Morrison, and Francoise Ulam. 


NOTES 


Abbreviations 


AEC—Atomic Energy Commission 

AlIP—American Institute of Physics 

APS—American Philosophical Society 

AS—Atomic Shield: A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, 
vol. 2, 1947-1952, by Richard G. Hewlett and Francis Duncan 

BAS—Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 

CIlC—Coordination and Information Center, U.S. Department of Energy, Las 
Vegas, Nevada 

CJVM—Charles J. V. Murphy papers, property of Edythe M. Holbrook 

COHP—Columbia University Oral History Project 

DDEPL—Dwight David Eisenhower Presidential Library 

DEL—The Journals of David E. Lilienthal: The Atomic Energy Years, 1945-1950 

DOE—Department of Energy, successor to the Atomic Energy Commission, 
College Park, Maryland 

FRUS—Foreign Relations of the United States, publication of the U.S. 
Department of State 

GAC—General Advisory Committee, Atomic Energy Commission 

HHPL—Herbert Hoover Presidential Library 

HSTPL—Harry S. Truman Presidential Library 

IMJRO—United States Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer: Transcript of Hearing Before Personnel Security Board and Texts 
of Principal Documents and Letters (published by MIT Press, 1971) 

JCAE—Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy 

JFKPL—John F. Kennedy Presidential Library 

JRO—J. Robert Oppenheimer 

JRO/FBI—J. Robert Oppenheimer file no. 100-17828, FBI Reading Room, 
Washington, DC 

LANL—Los Alamos National Laboratory 

LASL—Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory 

LBL—Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory 

LC—Library of Congress 

LLS—Lewis Strauss papers, Herbert Hoover Presidential Library 


NARA—National Archives and Records Administration 

NYHT—New York Herald-Tribune 

NYT—New York Times 

OP—Oppenheimer Papers at the Library of Congress 

RG 128—Record Group 128, papers of the Joint Congressional Committee on 
Atomic Energy, located at the National Archives and Records 
Administration, Washington, DC 

RG 326—Record Group 326, papers of the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission, located at the National Archives and Records Administration, 
College Park, Maryland 

TEM—Thomas E. Murray papers, in the possession of the Murray family 

UC—University of California 

UCSD—University of California, San Diego 


Introduction 


1. Emily Morrison, interviews with author, February 2 and February 15, 
1985; IMJRO, p. 8. 

2. Hilde Stern Hein, interview with author, March 7, 1987. 

3. www.BrotherhoodoftheBomb.com, Web site of Gregg Herken’s 
Brotherhood of the Bomb: Herken’s notes of Barbara Chevalier’s diary; 
Chevalier to unknown researcher, April 25, 1973. 

4. Steve Nelson, interview with author, August 28, 1985. 

5. Steve Nelson, interview with author, August 28, 1985. 

6. Philip Farley, interview with author, February 2, 1987. 

7. David Hawkins, interviews with author, January 30, 1985, and January 
1, 1997. 


CHAPTER ONE: David Lilienthal’s Vacation 


1. DEL, pp. 566-573. 

2. When Lilienthal informed Truman on April 3, 1947, that the United 
States had components for only seven complete atomic bombs, the president 
was visibly upset. By the end of 1949, the United States had 235 stockpiled 
warheads (Natural Resources Defense Council Table of U.S. Nuclear Warheads 
1945-75, www.nrdc.org/nuclear/nudb/datab9.asp). Lilienthal earned $8,000 
to $10,000 per year as director of TVA and $17,500 as chairman of the AEC. 

3. A CIA memorandum of September 20, 1949, predicted, “The earliest 
possible date by which the USSR might be expected to produce an atomic 
bomb is mid-1950 and the most probable date is mid-1953.” Intelligence 
Memorandum 225, “Estimate of Status of Atomic Warfare in the USSR” 
(National Intelligence estimate from CIA records, Record Group 263, NARA, 
College Park, MD). 

4. Robert Oppenheimer, interview with Warner Schilling, 1957, OP, box 
65, and AS, p. 366. Oppenheimer told Schilling that the British had opposed 
announcement of the test, while Truman felt that the U.S. public should be 
told. 

5. For the president’s announcement, see Harry Truman’s Memoirs, vol. 2, 
pp. 307-308. 


6. The GAC has been criticized for going beyond the offer of technical 
advice at its October 29-30 meeting, but in a letter of October 22, 1949, the 
GAC was asked a second time, this time by Acting Chairman Sumner Pike, to 
provide policy advice. AEC’s 1954 “Thermonuclear Weapons Program 
Chronology,” compiled at the request of H. D. Smyth in 1954 for use by the 
commissioners in the Oppenheimer case, and declassified in 1982, pp. 22(c) 
and 22(d), RG 326, NARA. 


CHAPTER Two: The Maneuvering Begins 


1. AEC “Thermonuclear Weapons Program Chronology,” p. 21, RG 326, 
NARA. 

2. Interview with Alice Strauss, November 28, 1990. 

3. AEC “Thermonuclear Weapons Program Chronology,” 1954, p. 22, RG 
326, NARA. 

4. Strauss to Souers, May 13, 1947, and September 2, 1947; Souers to 
Strauss, September 25, 1947 (LLS); Souers oral history interview, December 
16, 1954, part 1, HSTPL. 

5. Timing of this conversation is important: if all of it took place on 
October 5, 1949, as the Souers oral history interview of December 16, 1954, 
suggests, then Strauss was misrepresenting the facts, since Lilienthal, the AEC, 
and the GAC had not yet taken formal positions. The dialogue recounted in 
the oral history could, however, be a composite of several conversations 
between Souers and Strauss that fall. 

6. IMJRO, p. 714. 

7. From “Take One” of an unpublished March 7, 1954, dispatch from Clay 
Blair and James Shepley to Larry Laybourne of Time magazine for a planned 
cover issue on Teller, Blair Papers, Archive of Contemporary History, 
University of Wyoming, Laramie; Alvarez Diary, October 5-7, 1949, RG 326, 
NARA; AS, pp. 376-377. 

8. The Russian physicist Pyotr Kapitsa was under house arrest from 1946 
to 1954 and did not work on the hydrogen bomb. It is illustrative of the state 
of Western knowledge of the Soviet bomb program that during the war the 
United States and Britain assumed that Kapitsa was head of the project, if 
there was one; the actual scientific director was Igor Kurchatov; Borden 
memorandum to files, October 10, 1949, RG 128, doc. no. LXVI, and Walker- 
Borden Chronology, p. 27, RG 128, NARA. “Take Two” of the unpublished 
Shepley-Blair Time cover file of March 7, 1954, reports on the luncheon: 
“Slowly a fire was ignited inside McMahon. By lunch’s end, he was an 
enthusiastic convert.... Lawrence went back to California to whip up 
enthusiasm in the university laboratories. Meantime Teller and De Hoffmann, 
getting word of Lawrence’s partial success in Washington, began to try to 
whip up support at Los Alamos.” 

9. Alvarez Diary, p. 29, RG 326, NARA; DEL, p. 577. 

10. According to Phillip S. Meilinger, Hoyt S. Vandenberg: The Life of a 
General, Vandenberg’s testimony was occasioned by Teller’s visit to Major 
General Roscoe Wilson. See also Walker-Borden Chronology, p. 29, RG 128, 
NARA. 

11. IMJRO, p. 328; author interview with Hans and Rose Bethe, December 


3, 1986. 

12. Hans Bethe, interview with Charles Weiner, part 3, May 1972, p. 24, 
AIP. 

13. IMJRO, p. 328. 

14. Hans Bethe, interview with Charles Weiner, part 3, May 1972, p. 25, 
AIP; IMJRO, p. 329; Victor Weisskopf, interview with author, February 25, 
1985. 

15. According to James Hershberg in James B. Conant: Harvard to 
Hiroshima and the Making of the Nuclear Age, p. 471, Oppenheimer was in 
Cambridge on October 9-10. On Wednesday, October 12, he spent a full day 
discussing the H-bomb dilemma with his close friend I. I. Rabi (Rabi to 
Bacher, October 18, 1949, Rabi Papers, LC), and on Saturday, October 15, he 
discussed it with another close friend, Admiral William S. Parsons. From 
Oppenheimer appointment books for September and October 1949; Warner 
Schilling interview notes, p. 19, OP, box 65. 

16. IMJRO, p. 231; Warner Schilling’s notes of June 12, 1957, pp. 6-7 (OP, 
box 65), quote Oppenheimer as saying that he changed his mind during the 
GAC meeting as a “result of Conant’s intervention” and that it had been a 
“mistake to go along.” Oppenheimer added that his confidential secretary was 
surprised when she saw the GAC report, and pointed out that it was not the 
position he had taken earlier. “She also correctly predicted that it would get 
me in a lot of trouble.” 


CHAPTER THREE: The Halloween Meeting 


1. Oppenheimer interview with Warner Schilling, June 12, 1957, OP, box 
65, and letter of Cyril S. Smith to Richard Hewlett, April 27, 1967. In later 
years Manley, Oppenheimer, and Smith said they had been strongly 
influenced by Kennan’s remarks; Manley and Smith added that they were also 
impressed by Bethe’s description of the technical difficulties. 

2. Manley’s handwritten notes on seventeenth GAC meeting, LANL; 
Oppenheimer interview with Schilling, p. 10; DEL, p. 581. 

3. IMJRO, p. 247; Alvarez, The Adventures of a Physicist, p. 172. 

4. According to Theodore Conant, when Truman asked his father in 1946 
to become the first chairman of the AEC, Conant declined because members 
of the Harvard board of overseers had warned him against serving with Lewis 
Strauss. Strauss, they said, was deceitful and overly ambitious, and with him 
as a commissioner, Conant would constantly have to be watching his back. 
(Conversation with the author, February 6, 1994.) Since Truman had already 
promised McMahon that he would appoint Strauss, the offer to Conant was 
moot. Truman left it to the GAC to name its chairman, and according to an 
FBI wiretap of a conversation between Robert and Kitty Oppenheimer, 
Oppenheimer assumed that either he or Conant would be elected. Meanwhile 
I. I. Rabi wrote to Lee DuBridge that Oppenheimer ought to be chairman 
because he “knows the entire field” and “is not burdened with any other 
important outside activity and would be able to give it the care and attention 
which it requires. The delicate question is whether Conant wants it for 
himself.” DuBridge obligingly wrote to Conant that if he did not want the job, 
then “Robert might fit the bill,” and at the GAC’s first meeting, on January 3, 


1947, Conant nominated Oppenheimer, who was elected without dissent. (See 
also James Hershberg’s James B. Conant: Harvard to Hiroshima, pp. 307-309 
and 837.) 

5. DEL, p. 581; Oppenheimer interview with Schilling; Richard T. Sylves, 
The Nuclear Oracles, pp. 145-146. 

6. Oppenheimer to Lilienthal with attachments, October 30, 1949, RG 326, 
NARA. 

7. Oppenheimer interview with Schilling. 

8. DEL, p. 582, and AEC 222/6, minutes of 310th AEC meeting, October 5, 
1949, RG 326, NARA. 

9. The Gray board concluded in 1954 that Oppenheimer had slowed the H- 
bomb program, and cited Manley’s carrying the GAC recommendations to Los 
Alamos in November 1949 as evidence, despite an affidavit from Manley to 
the board that fully explained the circumstances. 

10. Manley’s diary entries for October 30-November 15, 1949, LANL. 

11. Unpublished MS by John Manley, shown to the author by Manley in 
August 1986. 

12. Teller to von Neumann, November 9, 1949, NARA. 

13. Ulam to von Neumann, November 15, 1949, NARA; Francoise Ulam, 
interview with author, November 1991. 

14. Bradbury to Chet Holifield, October 15, 1969; Carson Mark, interviews 
with author, April 2, 1986, and October 18, 1987. 


CHAPTER FouR: The Secret Debate 


1. Glenn Seaborg, who had missed the Halloween meeting, was present at 
the December meeting but chose not to take a position. Nonetheless, in his 
autobiography, Adventures in the Atomic Age: From Watts to Washington (New 
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2000), he blamed Oppenheimer for allegedly 
suppressing the letter he had written to Oppenheimer, taking an equivocal, 
but mildly positive, position on the H-bomb, prior to the Halloween meeting. 

2. DEL, p. 594. 

3. JCAE meeting of January 9, 1950, appendix IV, doc. no. CXXV, RG 128, 
NARA. 

4. DEL, pp. 583-584. 

5. Arneson, “The H-Bomb Decision.” 

6. DEL, p. 622. 

7. Acheson, Present at the Creation, p. 360; James Chace, “Sharing the 
Bomb,” Foreign Affairs, pp. 226-228. 

8. DEL, p. 620. 

9. Lilienthal’s “Memo to File,” January 31, 1950, in AEC’s “Thermonuclear 
Weapons Program Chronology,” p. 110, RG 326, NARA. 

10. AEC’s “Thermonuclear Weapons Program Chronology,” pp. 111-116. 

11. Arneson, “The H-Bomb Decision”; Acheson, Present at the Creation, pp. 
348-349; DEL, pp. 632-633. 

12. Acheson, Present at the Creation, p. 349. The study ordered by Truman 
became NSC-68. 

13. DEL, p. 633. 

14. Ibid. At his security hearing in 1954, Oppenheimer testified that 


Acheson sent word to him and Conant “for heck’s sake not to resign or make 
any public statements to upset the applecart but accept this decision ... and 
not make any kind of conflict about it” (IMJRO, p. 86). 

15. Pfau, No Sacrifice Too Great, p. 123. 

16. DEL, pp. 633-634. 


CHAPTER FIVE: Lost Opportunities 


1. In his October 21, 1949, letter to Conant, Oppenheimer called Teller’s 
Super “singularly proof against any form of experiment.” 

2. JRO to George Kennan, November 17, 1949, FRUS, 1949, vol. 1, pp. 
222-223. 

3. Ferrell, Harry S. Truman: A Life, p. 344. 

4. Bernstein and Galison, “In Any Light,” p. 306. 

5. York, The Advisors, pp. 94-106. 


CHAPTER SIx: Fuchs’s Betrayal 


1. DEL, p. 634. 

2. FRUS, 1950, vol. 1, p. 173. 

3. Hoover to Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, February 2, 1950, JRO/FBI; Pfau, 
No Sacrifice Too Great, pp. 113-119. 

4. BAS, March 1950, p. 75. 

5. JCAE transcript, January 30, 1950, “Development of Atomic Super 
Weapons,” app. IV, box 4, doc. no. 1447, RG 128, NARA. 

6. Bethe to Weisskopf, February 14, 1950, Bethe Papers. 

7. Scientific American 182, no. 3 (March 1950), pp. 11-15. 

8. Ibid., no. 5 (May 1950), pp. 11-15. 

9. Ibid., no. 4 (April 1950), pp. 18-23. Bethe’s biographer, Silvan 
Schweber, points out that Bethe was free to publish his article only because 
he had allowed his Los Alamos consultancy to lapse. 

10. Hans and Rose Bethe, interview with author, December 3, 1986; Bethe 
with Charles Weiner, session 3, May 8-9, 1972, pp. 28-29, AIP; Hansen, 
Swords of Armageddon, vol. 3, p. 113, says there were only four deletions of 
which one contained disinformation and the other three, information that had 
appeared earlier in Scientific American. 

11. Bethe to Bradbury, February 14, 1950, RG 326, NARA. 

12. BAS, March 1950, pp. 71-72. 

13. Borden memo, “Teller Says,” March 2, 1950, RG 128, NARA. 

14. JCAE meeting of March 3, 1950, on “H-bomb Personnel,” RG 128, 
NARA. 

15. AS, p. 416. 

16. Truman followed up with his June 8 approval of construction of two 
new heavy-water reactors at Savannah River to produce tritium, and on July 
7 asked Congress for $260 million to build them. I. I. Rabi commented, “I 
regard Savannah River as the way he answered the Russian success.” Quoted 
in Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, pp. 192-193, and J. Carson Mark, “A 
Short Account of Los Alamos Theoretical Work on Thermonuclear Weapons, 
1946-1950.” 


17. AS, p. 439. 

18. Anne Fitzpatrick, “Igniting the Light Elements” (unpublished doctoral 
dissertation), p. 132. 

19. Bradbury to Coordinating Council, October 1, 1945, LANL. 

20. Fitzpatrick, “Igniting the Light Elements,” pp. 111-112, says that 
theoretical work on the Super had begun to interfere with work on the fission 
bomb by spring 1944 “because Teller increasingly devoted more time to this 
than to the implosion problems he and his group were supposed to work on. 
... Teller ... declined to take charge of the group that would perform very 
detailed calculations of an implosion weapon to devote more time to the 
fusion weapon.” In an interview with Silvan Schweber on July 21, 1990, 
Teller said that the strain between him and Bethe during the war arose, not 
from Bethe’s being placed above him as Theoretical Division leader, but from 
“Hans’ not asking, but telling, me what to do.” He added that Bethe 
considered his reaction “a violation of discipline.” 

21. To produce one gram of tritium, “one would have to forgo production 
of 80 grams of plutonium” (Carson Mark to Garrett Birkhoff, February 13, 
1990). Fermi in 1948 estimated that in terms of plutonium sacrificed, the 
United States could afford to produce ten grams a year. Fitzpatrick, “Igniting 
the Light Elements,” p. 192. 

22. Carson Mark to Garrett Birkhoff, February 13, 1990; Fitzpatrick, 
“Igniting the Light Elements,” pp. 147-148. The Ulam-Everett paper, 
LA-1076, “Ignition of a Large Mass of Deuterium by a Burning D-T Mixture: 
Problem I,” March 7, 1950, remains Secret-RD at LANL. Mark remembered 
Ulam as “smacking his lips” when he brought Mark the negative calculations. 
Carson Mark, interview with author, June 12, 1990. 

23. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, p. 215; Carson Mark to Garrett 
Birkhoff, February 13, 1990; Fitzpatrick, “Igniting the Light Elements,” pp. 
147-148, citing the second Ulam-Everett report, LAMS-1124, June 16, 1950, 
which is still secret. Testifying in a patent case years later, Ulam declined to 
say that the ENIAC results had been wrong. Rather, he said, his hand 
calculations with Everett showed the earlier calculations to have been 
“incomplete” (U.S. District Court of Minnesota, Fourth Division, Honeywell, 
Inc., v. Sperry Rand and Illinois Scientific Developments, Inc., transcript of 
proceedings, vol. 47, pp. 7367-7368). 

24. AS, p. 440; Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, p. 217. 

25. Ulam to von Neumann, April 27, 1950, NARA; Teller to von Neumann, 
May 10, 1950, NARA; von Neumann to Teller, May 18, 1950, NARA; 
Francoise Ulam, memorandum of September 25, 1988, “Edward and Mici,” 
AIP; Francoise Ulam memoir, From Paris to Santa Fe, AIP; Peter Galison, Image 
and Logic, p. 724. 

26. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, p. 216. 

27. Fitzpatrick, “Igniting the Light Elements,” p. 149, citing the Fermi- 
Ulam paper, LA-1158, “Considerations on Thermonuclear Reactions in 
Cylinders,” September 26, 1950, Secret-RD; Carson Mark to author, October 
17, 1991; Wheeler with Ford, Geons, Black Holes, and Quantum Foam, p. 209. 

28. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, pp. 218-219; S. M. Ulam, 
“Thermonuclear Devices”; George Bell, interview with author, March 8, 2000. 


CHAPTER SEVEN: Fission versus Fusion 


1. Wheeler with Ford, Geons, Black Holes, and Quantum Foam, p. 189. 

2. Ibid., pp. 20, 206-207. 

3. Carson Mark, interview with author, October 9, 1991. 

4. John McPhee, The Curve of Binding Energy, pp. 58-60; Wheeler with 
Ford, Geons, Black Holes, and Quantum Foam, p. 205; Nuclear History Program 
oral history interview with Theodore Taylor, April 12, 1989, University of 
Maryland. 

5. Bradbury to McCormack, August 29, 1950, cited in Hansen, Swords of 
Armageddon, vol. 3, pp. 141-142. 

6. Oppenheimer to Dean, September 13, 1950, AEC Secretariat Files, RG 
326, NARA. 

7. With the opening of archives in the former Soviet bloc, Western 
historians have concluded that the impetus came from North Korean dictator 
Kim Il Sung, who, after several attempts, persuaded a reluctant Joseph Stalin 
to permit the invasion. 

8. Borden to Sterling Cole, July 24, 1950, app. III, box 62, doc. no. 
CLXXXVIII, RG 128, NARA; Borden to McMahon, November 28, 1950, app. 
III, box 62, doc. no. 1785, RG 128, NARA. In 1949 Borden had been denied a 
top secret Defense Department document because it contained stockpile data. 
When he suggested that every bomb be saved for use on Russia, he may have 
believed the stockpile to be smaller than it was. According to the Natural 
Resources Defense Council Table of U.S. Nuclear Warheads 1945-75, by late 
1950 it contained 369 strategic warheads (www.nrdc.org/nuclear/nudb/ 
datab9.asp). 

9. Taylor oral history interview; Taylor, “Circles of Destruction,” BAS 
(January-February 1996). 

10. Hans Bethe wrote, “The technical skepticism of the GAC ... had turned 
out to be far more justified than the GAC itself had dreamed” (“Comments on 
the History of the H-Bomb,” written in 1954 as a reply to Shepley and Blair 
and classified until its publication in Los Alamos Science [fall 1982]); JRO to 
Dean, November 1, 1950, AEC Secretariat Files, RG 326, NARA. In November 
1950, Oppenheimer asked Ulam whether the calculations he had done with 
Everett showed conclusively that the Super was impossible. In accordance 
with the principle of indeterminacy, Ulam replied that the calculations were 
not final. 

11. The Teller-Wheeler report of August 1, 1959, said the amount of 
uncompressed T required to ignite uncompressed D was “of the order of a 
kilogram or more but not of the order of tens of kilograms” (Fitzpatrick, 
“Igniting the Light Elements,” pp. 222-223, citing the report itself, 
LAMD-443, secret-RD). The seriousness of the mistake, and of the finding that 
ignition would require three to five kilograms of tritium, and not a hundred 
or a few hundred grams as Teller claimed, may be seen from the fact that two 
years later, in the summer of 1952, the U.S. tritium supply still was measured 
in grams, not kilograms. On the far-off day when the nation’s laboratories 
might be able to produce a kilogram a year, it would take three to five years 
to produce enough tritium for a single Super bomb (Hansen, Swords of 
Armageddon, vol. 3, p. 149). As Gordon Dean told a secret session of the JCAE 


in November, production of one Super would mean sacrificing enough 
plutonium for between 100 and 150 atomic bombs. Walker-Borden 
Chronology, entry for November 30, 1950, RG 128, NARA. 

12. GAC 23, October 30-—November 1, 1950, AEC Secretariat Files, RG 326, 
NARA, p. 17. 

13. Oppenheimer to Dean, November 1, 1950, AEC Secretariat Files, RG 
326, NARA. 

14. Fitzpatrick, “Igniting the Light Elements,” p. 276, citing Draft 
Memorandum to the chairman of the AEC, “Notes on the AEC-MLC, LASL 
Conference on Tuesday, November 14, 1950,” November 17, 1950 (Secret- 
RD); and p. 221, citing Bradbury to Tyler, November 17, 1950, “LASL 
Technical Program of Calendar Year 1951 and Fiscal Year 1952” (Secret-RD), 
box 4944, Los Alamos folder 7, RG 326, NARA. 


CHAPTER EIGHT: Teller 


1. Teller to Maria Goeppert Mayer, letters of October 9 and October 
undated, 1948. Mandeville Department of Special Collections, UCSD. 

2. Kathleen Mark, interview with author, October 4, 1999; Carson Mark, 
interview with author, October 18, 1987. 

3. Five undated letters from Edward Teller to Maria Goeppert Mayer, 
August-November 1950. 

4. Undated letter of Edward Teller to Maria Goeppert Mayer from Norman, 
Oklahoma, probably written after November 25, 1950. 

5. Luis Alvarez testimony, IMJRO, p. 789. 

6. The other members were former AEC commissioner Robert F. Bacher, 
Luis Alvarez, Charles C. Lauritsen, Mervin J. Kelly, Walter G. Whitman, Major 
General Kenneth D. Nichols, Rear Admiral William S. Parsons, Major General 
Roscoe C. Wilson, and Brigadier General James McCormack Jr. 

7. JCAE meeting on “H-Bomb Personnel,” March 3, 1950, RG 128, NARA. 

8. Borden to file, March 2, 1950. “Give It Back to the Indians” was a hit 
song from a 1939 Rodgers and Hart musical and was still popular in 1946, 
when Oppenheimer allegedly made this remark. With his talent for the 
vernacular, Oppenheimer might well have taken the expression from the 
song. 

9. Borden memorandum to Sterling Cole, “The Hydrogen Bomb in Relation 
to the Atomic Bomb,” July 24, 1950, app. III, box 62, doc. no. CLXXXVIII, RG 
128, NARA; “Conversation with Dr. Enrico Fermi on September 4, 1951,” 
memo of J. K. Mansfield, October 2, 1951, RG 128, NARA. 

10. Borden to Teller, May 3, 1950, RG 128, NARA. 

11. The first such suggestion appears in Oppenheimer’s FBI file for July 5, 
1949; Bergman to Borden, May 7, 1950, app. III, box 41, doc. no. 1531, 
classified general subject file, RG 128, NARA. 

12. Borden memo to McMahon, May 11, 1950, app. II, box 50, doc. no. 
1516, RG 128, NARA; those whose terms were expiring were Fermi, Hartley 
Rowe, and Glenn Seaborg. 

13. Borden memo to McMahon, November 24, 1950, RG 128, NARA. 


CHAPTER NINE: Ulam 


1. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, p. 10. 

2. Galison, Image and Logic, pp. 724-725. 

3. Carson Mark to Garrett Birkhoff, February 13, 1990. George Bell, 
interview with author, March 8, 2000, and Bengt Carlson, interview with 
author, Nov. 11, 2005. George Bell noted that the “compression” being talked 
about here was extreme compression, much greater than that produced by 
ordinary high explosives. 

4. Francoise Ulam, From Paris to Santa Fe, AIP. 

5. Carson Mark, interviews with author, August 19, 1986; September 11- 
12 and November 3, 1989; private memo by Francoise Ulam, August 20, 
1988, “How My Conversation with Carson Came About.” Mark was working 
on the Ranger series in Nevada, as well as the Greenhouse tests. Greenhouse 
included two fission tests, “Dog,” detonated at Eniwetok on April 8 at 82 
kilotons, and “Easy,” April 21 at 47 kilotons. The others were “George,” May 
9 at 225 kilotons, which included a new type of fission device, and “Item,” 
June 2 at 45.5 kilotons. He later called Item, a boosted device with both 
fission and fusion components, “particularly dear to my heart.” Teller had not 
been enthusiastic about Item and at one point sought to have it canceled. 
Today, every U.S. nuclear weapon is boosted. 

6. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, p. 220; Francoise Ulam to the 
author, September 18, 1989. 

7. Stanislaw Ulam to Glenn Seaborg, March 16, 1962, LANL; Arnold 
Kramish to Samuel B. Ballen, April 4, 2000. 

8. Richard Rhodes is almost certainly correct in saying in Dark Sun, p. 467, 
that Ulam’s “‘following days’ comprised most of a month,” since the diary 
indicates that Ulam wrote his part of the paper in mid-February and wrote to 
von Neumann informing him of his new ideas only on February 23. Ulam’s 
diary on February 15 contains this entry: “Wrote Lenses (jointly with Teller). 
Heterocatalytic Detonation: Radiation Lenses and Hydrogenous Lenses” 
(Galison, Image and Logic, p. 725). 

9. George Bell, interview with author, March 8, 2000; Hugh DeWitt, 
interview with author, March 1, 1992; e-mails from Hugh DeWitt, July 28, 
August 8 and 21, 2000; Hugh DeWitt, telephone interview with author, 
August 21, 2000; Hans Bethe, who came to the lab in June 1951 to do 
calculations for the new scheme, relied on what he was told at that time, and 
did not read the Ulam-Teller paper until August 11, 1989. After reading the 
paper, he said that his May 28, 1952, letter to Gordon Dean had been 
“wrong” and that Ulam deserved more credit than he had given him in that 
letter and in his essay “Comments on the History of the H-Bomb,” published 
in 1982 (Bethe to Samuel B. Ballen, September 28, 1988). Bengt Carlson, a 
mathematician to whom Ulam described his “two bombs in a box” idea on 
Dec. 23, 1950, suspects that Teller deliberately delayed publication of his 
March 9, 1951, paper with Ulam, with the result that Bethe was not shown it 
on his arrival that srping and saw only his April 4, 1951, paper with de 
Hoffman. Carlson believes that this omission subsequently led to Bethe’s 
mistakenly attributing major credit for the radiation implosion concept to 
Teller instead of Ulam. Bengt Carlson, interviews with author, Sept. 6, 2005, 


and Nov. 11, 2005. 

10. Bethe, “Comments on the History of the H-Bomb,” p. 48; Rhodes, Dark 
Sun, pp. 471-472. 

11. Norris Bradbury, interview with Arthur Norberg, February 11, 1976. 
Opinions differ to this day as to whether Teller or Ulam deserves chief credit. 
The lab designation is “Teller-Ulam,” for alphabetical reasons, but because 
Ulam contributed two of the three critical ideas, I have called it “Ulam- 
Teller,” as Bradbury did at his September 24, 1954, press conference. 

12. Science, February 25, 1955, pp. 267-275; Teller with Brown, The 
Legacy of Hiroshima, pp. 48-50; Ulam’s offending remark appeared in a letter 
of February 23, 1951, to von Neumann, in which he said that “Edward is full 
of enthusiasm about these possibilities, this is perhaps an indication that they 
will not work.” Someone has attributed to Ulam a comment after the George 
test of May 1951, that its “failure” showed that radiation implosion would not 
work. But most of Ulam’s colleagues doubt that he said this, since it was 
known within a few days after George that the tritium-deuterium package had 
emitted neutrons and that the experiment had been successful. Teller told 
Stanley Goldberg, Gregg Herken, Richard Rhodes, and the author on June 7, 
1993, that Ulam deserved no credit because of his skepticism. But Ulam’s 
remark to Francoise over lunch in January, and his February 23 letter to von 
Neumann, make clear that he knew that radiation implosion would work. 

13. Bradbury press conference, September 24, 1954 (LANL). 

14. Carson Mark, who served on the Committee of Senior Reviewers, did 
not think the system was intentionally manipulated to elevate Teller’s stature, 
and Hugh DeWitt, a onetime whistleblower at the Lawrence Livermore 
Laboratory, agrees. In a charitable moment, Mark suggested that Teller’s 
followers were more responsible than Teller himself for Teller’s inflated 
reputation, and that the sobriquet “Father of the H-bomb” was to some extent 
forced on him. 

15. Carson Mark, interview with author, November 3, 1987; Francoise 
Ulam, private memorandum of August 20, 1988. 

16. Francoise Ulam, From Paris to Santa Fe, AIP. 

17. Francoise Ulam and David Hawkins, telephone interviews with author, 
August 19, 2000. Francoise Ulam said that her husband stood up to Teller, as 
younger members of their wartime TN group did not. During this period Ulam 
did mathematics on his own with Oppenheimer’s assistant, David Hawkins, 
who happened to work in an adjoining office. The two of them produced a 
paper on branching processes. 

18. U.S. District Court, District of Minnesota, Fourth Division, Honeywell 
Inc. v. Sperry Rand Corp. and Illinois Scientific Developments Inc., 4-67 Civil 
1138, transcript of proceedings, vol. 47, p. 7408; Stanislaw Ulam, Adventures 
of a Mathematician, p. 220. 

19. Carson Mark, interview with author, September 26, 1989; Carson 
Mark, telephone interview with author, February 15, 1990; George Bell, in an 
interview with the author on March 8, 2000, agreed with Bethe that the 
Teller-Ulam concept was surprising, and with Mark that the T Division would 
have thought of radiation implosion if Teller hadn’t thought of it first. 

20. Philip Morrison, conversations with author, July 25, 1990, and August 
18, 2000. 


21. Kathleen Mark, interview with author, October 4, 1999; Leon Heller, 
interview with author, October 9, 1999; Carson Mark, interview with author, 
June 14, 1993. The mathematician Paul Stein, who also worked closely with 
Ulam, said, “Stan’s mind was always brimming with ideas, most of them 
good. It was the collaborator’s job to fill in the details.” Quoted by Carson 
Mark in notes for speech given on publication of Los Alamos Science, no. 15, 
1987. 

22. Francoise Ulam, From Paris to Santa Fe, chapter 6, AIP; Anna Auerbach 
Ulam, mother of Adam and Stan, died of cancer in 1938. After the war the 
student, George Volsky, wrote to Adam Ulam, describing his father’s fate. 

23. Francoise Ulam, conversation with author, 1993. 

24. Francoise Ulam, “Fragments of Taped Conversation with M. Kac and D. 
Mauldin,” June 8, 1984, and undated biographical profile by Francoise Ulam, 
AIP. 

25. Samuel B. Ballen, conversation with author, November 9, 1987; 
Francoise Ulam, conversation with author, October 7, 1987; Gian-Carlo Rota, 
“Wheel of Fortune,” unpublished draft of March 28, 1986; comment by 
Seymour Papert, July 1997; Rota, “The Lost Cafe,” Contention, 2, no. 2 
(Winter 1993). 

26. Francoise Ulam, “Fragments of Taped Conversation with M. Kac and D. 
Mauldin”; Rota, “Wheel of Fortune,” March 28, 1986; Dolores Everett and 
Mollie Rodriguez, interviews with author, October 17 and 19, 1991; ina 
telephone interview on July 23, 2000, William Everett said that within the 
family, he heard that “Dad did all the work and Ulam got all the credit.” 
Francoise Ulam responded that her husband did not conceal Everett’s role, as 
Teller concealed Ulam’s. To the contrary, he frequently spoke of Everett’s 
contribution and lamented not having more opportunities to talk with him. 
Still another collaborator of Ulam’s confirmed the fact of Everett’s bitterness 
and said that he, too, felt used by Ulam. “Ulam had great ideas, and expected 
his underlings to work them out” (William Beyer, conversation with author, 
February 14, 2001). 

27. Francoise Ulam, interview with author, April 6, 1986; Stanislaw Ulam, 
Adventures of a Mathematician, pp. 76, 79-80, 107-111; Rota, “The Lost Cafe,” 
pp. 48-49. 

28. According to David Hawkins, Ulam during the war was able to solve 
linear equations much faster than other scientists because he was already, in 
his head, doing statistical sampling. In 1947, playing solitaire with his head 
still bandaged from his encephalitis operation, he thought of the Monte Carlo 
method and the uses to which it might be put. On his return to Los Alamos he 
firmed it up in his mind in letters to von Neumann and Robert Richtmyer, 
then head of the T Division. 

29. Transcript of H-bomb symposium sponsored by Sloan Foundation at 
Princeton, NJ, 1982, part 1, p. 13, and part 2, p. 14; Francoise Ulam, 
interview with author, November 22, 1987; Carson Mark, interview with 
author, September 12, 1989; Stanislaw Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, 
p. 80, refers to Kurt Godel’s discovery of undecidability; Heims, John von 
Neumann and Norbert Weiner, pp. 143-144. 

30. Francoise Ulam, interview with author, November 22, 1987; Francoise 
Ulam memoranda February 1, 1987, and December 8, 1988, AIP. 


CHAPTER TEN: Teller’s Choice 


1. Pfau, No Sacrifice Too Great, pp. 131-132. 

2. Dean, “Memorandum of Conversation with Lewis Strauss,” note of 
February 12, 1951, in Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, pp. 117-118; 
Pfau, No Sacrifice Too Great, pp. 132-133; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, p. 
241. 

3. Diary of Thomas E. Murray, vol. 2, part 2, pp. 8-9, TEM. The quotations 
are Murray’s. 

4. Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, p. 117; Borden to file, 
“Conversation with Dr. Edward Teller,” February 9, 1951, JCAE doc. no. 
CCLXXXIII, RG 128, NARA. 

5. “The Reminiscences of Gordon Dean,” COHP, 1959. 

6. Carson Mark later explained: “There was one outfit that handled 
calculations. Was it to work only on the thermonuclear? The same thing was 
true of the chemists. And they were working well as it was.... In addition to 
the computing, there was the Experimental Physics Division. It had machines, 
a Cockroft-Walton, a Van de Graaff, and so on. The work of the machines 
could be directed toward either fission or fusion. There was no sense saying 
that a given machine will work only on one and not the other.” Carson Mark, 
interview with author, October 18, 1991. Darol Froman made another 
objection: “What do we do with people who insist on having ideas ... in both 
fields, e.g., Ulam?” He termed the duplication of effort involved in creation of 
a separate division “time-consuming, wasteful, costly, geographically 
inappropriate ... absurd” and added, “I believe we have, entering this 
reorganizational picture from both sides, a lack of faith either in the 
motivation of others or in their ability to carry out their parts”; Froman, 
memos of March 20 and March 22, 1951, LANL. In a memo of March 28, 
Froman offered to mediate between Teller and the rest of the lab, adding that 
in case of a standoff, Bradbury would make the decision. Teller would not 
accept Bradbury’s having the final say. Bradbury’s March 6 proposal was 
ultimately sidetracked, in Carson Mark’s words, “because there was no way 
you could have a sensible way of working and please Teller.” Carson Mark, 
interview with author, October 18, 1991. 

7. A month after his February 9 visit to AEC general manager Marion 
Boyer, Teller told Bradbury: “You know that I am not pressing at present for 
any reorganization or change because that might disturb the harmony of the 
laboratory at a time when united effort is badly needed.” Teller to Bradbury, 
March 7, 1951, LANL. 

8. Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, pp. 106-107, 120-126. Dean was 
unaware that the government’s case against the Rosenbergs was mostly based 
on the decrypted Soviet wartime cable traffic known as “Venona.” The secret 
that the United States had decoded a portion of the Soviet intelligence cables 
was so tightly held that it has been claimed, probably erroneously, that even 
President Truman did not know of it. Existence of the decryptions was 
acknowledged by the U.S. government, and texts were published, only in 
1995 and 1996. 

9. Dean met with Truman on April 6, 1951, to discuss the JCS request, and 
the transfer was authorized, a decision that marked the end of exclusive 


civilian control over the atomic stockpile as mandated by the Atomic Energy 
Act. Anders, “The Atomic Bomb and the Korean War: Gordon Dean and the 
Issue of Civilian Control,” Military Affairs, January 1988; Hamby, Man of the 
People, pp. 555-556. 

10. AS, p. 541. 

11. Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, pp. 106-107, 131-134; Teller 
with Brown, The Legacy of Hiroshima, p. 51. 

12. Teller to Dean, April 20, 1951, from “ET” Files, LANL; Anders, ed., 
Forging the Atomic Shield, p. 108. 

13. Hansen, Swords of Armageddon, vol. 3, p. 251; Anders, ed., Forging the 
Atomic Shield, pp. 143-145. 

14. Actually, the hydrogen fuel did not account for much of George’s 
power, nor had it been expected to: of the total yield of 225 kilotons, an 
estimated 160 to 200 were produced by the fission trigger and the rest by the 
fusion component, prompting a young theoretician who worked on it, Robert 
Jastrow, to compare the test with “using a blast furnace to light a match.” 
Jastrow, “Why Strategic Superiority Matters,” Commentary, March 1983, p. 
27. 

15. Less than an ounce in weight, the tritium-deuterium mixture accounted 
for an estimated yield of 25 kilotons. Race for the Superbomb, shown on the 
PBS television series The American Experience, January 1999. 

16. Carson Mark, interviews with author, September 26, 1989, and 
October 17, 1991; Mark to Hansen, September 18, 1989; IMJRO, p. 952; AS, 
p. 541. 

17. York, Making Weapons, Talking Peace, pp. 57-58. 

18. Total cost of the conference, said to have been the turning point in the 
H-bomb program, was $166.07 (including lunch for twenty-five on June 16 at 
$56, for twenty-seven on June 17 at $68, beer at $11.19, plus labor and 
equipment). The expense was borne by the Institute for Advanced Study after 
the AEC refused to pay (Smyth Professional Correspondence Series One, box 
5, see Katherine Russell to Evelyn McQuown in “Boyer 1950-1953” file). 

19. AS, pp. 542-545; Bradbury to Froman and Mark, June 6, 1951, LANL; 
Bradbury to Oppenheimer, June 1, 1951, LANL; Bradbury to Froman and 
Mark, June 6, 1951, LANL; Bethe, “Comments on the History of the H-Bomb,” 
p. 48; “Partial Statement Made by Hans Bethe at Princeton Meeting,” June 
16-17, 1951, LANL; Bradbury to Tyler, July 13, 1951, LANL; Bethe to Joseph 
and Stewart Alsop, October 1, 1954, Joseph Alsop Papers, LC. 

20. Bradbury to Oppenheimer, June 1, 1951, LANL. Oppenheimer later 
ascribed differences that emerged at the conference to the fact that the 
leading personalities represented “polar psychological types.” Mansfield to 
file, October 3, 1951, doc. no. C 7404, RG 128, NARA. 

21. Teller with Brown, The Legacy of Hiroshima, pp. 52-53. In his memo to 
Froman and Mark of June 6, Bradbury explained that their role as consultants 
to GAC would enable Teller, Wheeler, and Lothar Nordheim “to speak as 
freely as they wish ... without any laboratory strings or restraints attached.” 
The memo had been sent to Teller beforehand. 

22. Nicholas Metropolis, interview with Silvan Schweber, August 20, 1990; 
AS, p. 545. Wheeler and Bethe both knew in advance that the Ulam-Teller 
ideas were to be discussed; both postponed visits to Europe in order to be 


present. 

23. Norris Bradbury, interview with author, August 27, 1986; Anders, ed., 
Forging the Atomic Shield, p. 156. 

24. Richard Garwin, interview with author, February 9, 2000. 

25. Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, p. 164; Carson Mark, interviews 
with author, September 26, 1989, and June 12, 1990. 

26. Bradbury to Dean teletype, September 26, 1951, LANL. Robert Serber 
and one or two others later speculated that Bradbury provoked Teller into 
leaving because he suspected that Teller had deliberately falsified his tritium 
estimates for the Super. 

27. Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, p. 164; Carson Mark, interview 
with author, June 12, 1990. 

28. JCAE, Walker-Borden Chronology, entry for September 18, 1951, RG 
128, NARA. Pressure for a major expansion was heightened by the 
announcement during the autumn of 1951 of the Soviet Union’s second and 
third atomic tests. 

29. John S. Walker memo, “Lunch Meeting with Dr. Teller,” October 3, 
1951, RG 128, NARA. 

30. Mansfield to file, “Conversation with Dr. Oppenheimer,” October 3, 
1951, RG 128, NARA; Teller to GAC, December 13, 1951, AEC Secretariat 
Files, RG 326, NARA. 

31. Kenneth Pitzer was also mentioned for the job, and Bradbury was said, 
additionally, to have considered Fred Seitz. 

32. Bradbury to Fields, October 11, 1951, LANL Folder 635, “Laboratory 
Program 1951-1957.” 

33. Carson Mark, interview with Silvan Schweber, July 19, 1990. Mark 
added that if Bradbury “let down his hair” with anyone, it would have been 
with his associate director, Darol Froman. 

34. Raemer Schreiber, interview with author, November 19, 1987; J. K. 
Mansfield memo for record, August 29, 1951, RG 128, NARA; J. Carson Mark, 
“A Short Account of Los Alamos Theoretical Work,” LASL, 1974; Jacob 
Wechsler, interview with author, July 25, 2001. 

35. Silvan Schweber with Marshall Rosenbluth, July 18, 1990; Max Roy, 
interview with author, October 11, 1991. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN: The Second Lab 


1. Murray, Thermonuclear Chronology, vol. 2, part 1, p. 10; part 2, pp. 27, 
31-32, TEM. 

2. Murray, Thermonuclear Chronology, vol. 2, part 2, pp. 44-45, TEM. 

3. York, Making Weapons, Talking Peace, pp. 62-67. 

4. Ibid.; Teller and Brown, The Legacy of Hiroshima, p. 60. 

5. Oppenheimer to Dean, February 17, 1952, AEC Secretariat Files, box 
1275, RG 326, NARA. 

6. Teller to Murray, February 7, 1952, enclosed in Murray Diary, vol. 2, 
part 2, TEM; Teller to Borden, February 18, 1952, TN box 59, doc. 2646, RG 
128, NARA. 

7. A key here was Rowan Gaither, president of RAND and assistant to Paul 
Hoffman, president of the Ford Foundation (Murray Diary, vol. 2, part 2, p. 


59, TEM). In a letter to Murray on March 17, Lawrence said he had 
mentioned Murray’s idea to Gaither, and perhaps RAND could “accomplish 
the desired objectives.” 

8. Murray Diary, vol. 2, part 1, p. 15, and part 2, pp. 57-58, TEM. 
Bradbury added that nothing would provoke him into a protest resignation 
except Pentagon takeover of key civilian jobs in atomic energy, and even that 
might not be sufficient. 

9. Ivan Getting, interview with author, October 6, 1989; Walker to Borden, 
April 3, 1952, RG 128, NARA; AS, p. 583; in a draft memo of March 15, 1952, 
Griggs warned Finletter that the Russians might already possess the radiation- 
implosion idea thanks to Fuchs. Finletter’s assistant, William A. M. Burden, a 
New York investment banker, later said he had “recommended to Finletter, on 
Teller’s advice, that we set up a separate laboratory ... to work solely on the 
hydrogen bomb” (COHP interview with William A. M. Burden, p. 72). About 
the second-lab proposal and details of the thermonuclear work, two 
congressional aides said of the Air Force at this time: “They have bought 
Teller hook, line and sinker” (Walker and Borden to McMahon, April 4, 1952, 
CD XCIX, RG 128, NARA; Dwayne A. Day, Lightning Rod [my thanks to Stan 
Norris for this document]). 

10. At Los Alamos, Bradbury refused to allow one of Finletter’s party, 
Sidney Plesset, to attend the briefing, and the briefer, Carson Mark, no doubt 
disgusted by still another inspection visit by Washington bigwigs, gave an 
exceptionally lackluster performance. 

11. Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, p. 289; Teller with Shoolery, 
Memoirs, pp. 336-338. 

12. The briefings took place between March 6 and April 15, 1952, Walker- 
Borden Chronology, January 1, 1953, p. 76, RG 128, NARA; Walker to file, 
“Thermonuclear Background Information—Air Force,” December 1952, CD 
DLXXXVII, TN box 59, app. 3, RG 128, NARA; Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic 
Shield, pp. 206-207; Gordon Dean memorandum, April 1, 1952, AEC 
Secretariat Files, box 4930, RG 326, NARA; Murray Diary, vol. 2, part 2, p. 
68. The Air Force threat was effective despite the fact that its establishment of 
a nuclear weapons laboratory would have been a violation of the Atomic 
Energy Act. 

13. Borden and Walker memorandum to McMahon, May 7, 1952, p. 6, doc. 
DXXIX, RG 128, NARA; Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, pp. 209-212. 

14. Minutes of thirtieth GAC meeting, AEC Secretariat Files, box 1272, RG 
326, NARA; Oppenheimer to Dean, April 30, 1952, AEC Secretariat Files, box 
1275, RG 326, NARA; Norris Bradbury, interview with author, August 27, 
1986. 

15. Walker-Borden Chronology, entry for June 10, 1952, June 16, 1952, 
draft, doc. 3257, RG 128, NARA. 

16. Murray Diary, vol. 2, part 1, pp. 18-19, and vol. 2, part 2, pp. 73-74, 
plus attachment to p. 74, TEM; Walker to file, “Thermonuclear Program,” 
June 19, 1952, doc. no. 2890, RG 128, NARA; Borden and Walker to file, 
“Second Laboratory—Dr. Teller,” June 19, 1952, doc. no. 2899, RG 128, 
NARA; Teller to Murray, June 20, 1952; Dean to Bethe, June 23, 1952, RG 
326, NARA; LeBaron to Borden, June 30, 1952, doc. no. DXXXVII, RG 128, 
NARA; Walker and Hamilton, “Denver Meeting,” July 1, 1952, RG 128, 


NARA. 

17. York, Making Weapons, Talking Peace, pp. 67-68; Blumberg and Owens, 
Energy and Conflict, p. 291; Childs, An American Genius, pp. 444-445; Walker 
to file, “Project Whitney,” November 10, 1952, TN box 60, doc. no. DCVII, RG 
128, NARA. 

18. Edward L. Heller to file, “Project Whitney,” October 7, 1952, doc. no. 
8055, RG 128, NARA; Charles Critchfield, interview with author, October 28, 
1987; Francis Low, interview with author, March 4, 1999. Gell-Mann was 
already committed to going to Chicago. By September 1952, Lawrence had 
recruited 123 scientists and technicians. The Materials Testing Accelerator 
was originally set up to produce uranium-235, but plentiful sources had 
subsequently been discovered in Colorado and elsewhere in the United States. 

19. This chapter also owes much to Sybil Francis, “Warhead Politics”; and 
Sybil Francis, “Between Science and Politics”; and Sybil Francis, Lecture at 
the Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, 
February 18, 1999; Barton Bernstein, “The Struggle for the Second 
Laboratory”; Herbert York, interview with Chuck Hansen, September 29, 
1993; Robert Seidel, “Ernest Lawrence”; and Robert Seidel, interviews with 
author, June 8, 1993, and May 11 and May 30, 2001. 


CHAPTER TWELVE: A New Era 


1. Hansen, Swords of Armageddon, vol. 4, pp. 40-59; Jacob Wechsler, 
interviews with author, July 25 and October 10, 2001; Rhodes, Dark Sun, pp. 
482-512. 

2. Hansen, Swords of Armageddon, vol. 3, p. 280. 

3. Jacob Wechsler, interview with author, October 10, 2001; Carson Mark, 
interview with author, September 26, 1989. 

4. Rhodes, Dark Sun, p. 487; George Bell, interview with author, March 8, 
2000. 

5. George Bell, interview with author, October 7, 1999; Jacob Wechsler, 
interviews with author, July 25 and October 10, 2001. 

6. Hansen, Swords of Armageddon, vol. 4, p. 67; Rhodes, Dark Sun, p. 503. 

7. Bernstein, “Crossing the Rubicon”; Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, 
pp. 194-195; IMJRO, p. 248. 

8. According to a memo of John Ferguson, deputy director of the Policy 
Planning Staff, dated September 2, 1952, Bush gave Acheson a paper, but the 
text has not been found, FRUS, 1952-1954, vol. 2, part 2, pp. 992-993; 
Zachary, Endless Frontier, p. 363. 

9. Bradbury to Oppenheimer, June 11, 1952. 

10. Bethe oral history interview with Charles Weiner, session 3, May 1972, 
p. 27, AIP; Bethe to Dean, May 23, 1952, CD 471.6, RG 330, NARA; Dean in 
his reply agreed about the danger of intensifying the effort “in public.” Dean 
to Bethe, June 23, 1952, Dean’s unclassified reader file, RG 326, NARA. At 
this point, Bethe himself fell victim to secrecy: on August 14, 1952, Teller 
wrote a reply to Bethe’s memorandum for Air Force Secretary Finletter and 
enclosed carbon copies for Bethe and Dean. In response to a July 25, 1990, 
query from the author as to whether he had written a classified response, 
Bethe wrote, “I did not know about Teller’s memorandum until today, so I did 


not write a rejoinder.” 

11. Bethe to Dean, September 9, 1952, RG 326, NARA. 

12. “Timing of the Thermonuclear Test,” FRUS, 1952-1954, vol. 2, part 2, 
pp. 994-1008; an unsigned memorandum with the penciled notation 
“9/5/52” is apparently the substance of the panel’s remarks to Acheson. At 
his security hearing, Oppenheimer testified that the panel had made its points 
orally, not in a written memorandum. The panel’s proposal rested on an 
argument that a test by either side could not escape detection by the other, a 
premise that was undercut by Luis Alvarez’s incorrectly informing Finletter 
that the hydrogen bomb could be developed without testing. 

13. AS, pp. 591-592; Anders, ed., Forging the Atomic Shield, pp. 218-230; 
Deborah Gore Dean, interview with author, June 11, 2001; Eugene Zuckert, 
interview with author, November 28, 1990. Deborah Dean must have been 
reporting what her mother told her, since she was not yet born in 1952. 

14. Hansen, Swords of Armageddon, vol. 4, pp. 70-77; Rhodes, Dark Sun, p. 
509. 

15. York, Making Weapons, Talking Peace, p. 69. 

16. IMJRO, p. 562. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN: Sailing Close to the Wind 


1. Ladd to Hoover, January 23, 1952, JRO/FBI; Hoover to Souers, March 
26, 1952, JRO/FBI; Hoover to Souers, April 16, 1952, JRO/FBI. Pitzer asked 
to have his identity kept secret, and the FBI complied. 

2. Washington Field Office 100-12253, enclosing FBI summaries of May 14 
and May 27, 1952, and letter of Teller to Department of Justice, June 19, 
1977. 

3. FBI, Summary of May 1, 1954, “to Director FBI re JRO.” The document 
quotes Teller as telling a JCAE staff member in 1950 that Robert 
Oppenheimer was “far to the left,” that Frank would not have joined the Party 
without his brother’s approval, and that if Robert were found to have given 
information to the Russians, “he could, of course, do more damage than any 
other single individual.” Teller had also answered FBI questions about 
Oppenheimer, Robert Serber, and Philip Morrison on July 5, 1949. NLH, 
904/32:14, FBI, April 18, 1952. 

4. Gordon Dean memorandum, May 19, 1952, RG 326, NARA. 

5. Kenneth Pitzer, interview with author, March 2, 1992. Pitzer’s animosity 
apparently had an additional source: Joseph Volpe was present at a GAC 
meeting at which Oppenheimer subjected Pitzer, the AEC’s director of 
research, to withering treatment. Volpe to author, December 4, 2000. 

6. Pitzer to Truman, April 4, 1952; Latimer to Truman, May 29, 1952; and 
Urey to Truman, June 2, 1952, all at HSTPL; Kenneth Pitzer, interview with 
author, March 2, 1992; Walker to file, October 3, 1952, TN box 41, doc. no. 
3049, RG 128; Borden to McMahon, May 28, 1952, TN box 41, doc. no. 3831, 
RG 128; Walker to file, May 28, 1952, TN box 41, doc. no. DXIII, RG 128, all 
at NARA. 

7. Keay to Belmont, April 28, 1952, JRO/FBI; Borden to McMahon, May 
28, 1952, TN box 41, doc. no. 3831, RG 128, NARA; Walker to file, May 28, 
1952, doc. no. DXIII, RG 128, NARA. 


8. Nichols to Tolson, May 29, 1952, JRO/FBI; Dean diary entries for May 
16, 17, 19-23, and June 5, 11-13, 27, 1952; Dean to file, May 19, 1952; Dean 
to Oppenheimer, June 14, 1952, all in Dean papers, RG 326, NARA. Dean and 
McInerny had collaborated in framing the charges against Julius and Ethel 
Rosenberg in 1951 and evidently trusted each other. McMahon’s staff had 
been relaying Griggs’s reports that the Air Force believed there had been 
“literally criminal negligence” in the H-bomb program (Walker and Borden to 
McMahon, April 4, 1952, JCAE doc. no. CDXCIX, RG 128, NARA). Griggs’s 
queries as to what they were “doing to get Oppenheimer off the GAC” 
(Walker to Borden, “Thermonuclear Program,” April 7, 1952, JCAE doc. no. 
CDXCIV, RG 128, NARA) and Teller’s comment, ““Three men, one soul.’ He 
felt very strongly that it would be an extreme mistake to reappoint Dr. 
Oppenheimer” (John S. Walker, memo to file, “Conversation with Dr. Edward 
Teller,” April 17, 1952, RG 128, NARA). Dean to Oppenheimer, June 14, 
1952. In an interview on February 21, 1984, Harold Green told the author 
that the Justice Department had informed the AEC that it was prepared to 
indict Oppenheimer and bring him to trial. 

9. William Hillman and David M. Noyes oral history with Sidney W. 
Souers, December 16, 1954, HSTPL. 

10. Joseph Volpe, interviews with author, November 19 and 21, 1985; 
Deborah Gore Dean, interview with author, June 11, 2001; and Roger Anders, 
interview with author, July 19, 1989; Dean diary entries for May 16 and June 
5, 1952, Dean papers, RG 326, NARA; Joseph Volpe to author, December 4, 
2000. 

11. Dean to Truman, August 25, 1952, and Truman to Dean, August 26, 
1952, doc. no. 7693, President’s Secretary’s Files, HSTPL. The charge 
mentioning Oppenheimer was temporarily dropped at Dean’s request in May 
1952. The Justice Department had other reasons for its reluctance to put 
Oppenheimer on the stand: it would have had to reveal that it was using a 
paid FBI informer and possibly also that its best evidence against Weinberg 
was based on wiretaps. 

12. McCarthy got wind of what had happened and held an executive 
session on September 15, 1953, at which Crouch described Truman’s 
intervention in the Weinberg case. The transcript was released on May 5, 
2003, by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. 

13. Lovett had other informants besides Dean. According to Philip Stern, 
Lovett told his assistant, James Perkins, that Oppenheimer’s security file was 
“a nightmare” and that “the quicker we get Oppenheimer out of the country, 
the better off we’ll be.” Perkins added that Lovett had mentioned the names 
of people who had expressed doubt to him about Oppenheimer: one of them 
was Lewis Strauss. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 195-196. 

14. Acheson had asked McGeorge Bundy, then dean of Harvard, to act as 
recording secretary, and the report was written by Bundy with Oppenheimer’s 
participation. A slightly edited version appears as “Early Thoughts on 
Controlling the Nuclear Arms Race” (ed. McGeorge Bundy), International 
Security 7, no. 2 (Fall 1982). 

15. IMJRO, pp. 751-752; Walker to file, October 3, 1952, p. 3, CD 3049, 
TN box 59, app. 3, RG 128, NARA; Walker to file, December 1952, 
“Thermonuclear Background Information—Air Force,” TN box 59, app. 3, CD 


DLXXXVII, pp. 4-5, RG 128, NARA; Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 
187-188. 

16. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 188-189. The accusation was 
that Oppenheimer had implied that the leaders of the Pentagon were 
madmen. 

17. Borden to file, November 16, 1951, RG 128, NARA; Elliot, “Project 
Vista,” pp. 163-183; Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 180-181. 

18. Walker to file, “Thermonuclear Program,” May 28, 1952, doc. no. 
DXIII, RG 128, NARA. 

19. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 189-190. Finletter’s assistants, 
William A. M. Burden and Garrison Norton, attended the lunch, while the 
exchange between Finletter and Oppenheimer was described to Charles J. V. 
Murphy in interviews with Gilpatric and Finletter on April 1 and April 11, 
1953, respectively. CJVM. 

20. Charles J. V. Murphy interviews with Charles Lauritsen and Lee 
DuBridge, March 18, 1953. CJVM. 

21. A fairly complete account by Hanson W. Baldwin did appear in the 
New York Times on June 5, 1952: “Experts Urge Tactical Air Might; Score 
Stress on Big Atomic Bomber”; Elliot, “Project Vista.” 

22. Ina memo, “Project Vista,” November 15, 1951, addressed to William 
A. M. Burden, Garrison Norton said Finletter’s word was “subversive.” RG 340 
(records of the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force), NARA, College Park, 
MD. My thanks to Gregg Herken for this document. Walker to file, July 2, 
1952, doc. no. 2925, RG 128, NARA. According to his Columbia oral history, 
Burden did not share Finletter’s suspicions. Norton confined himself in a 1990 
interview with the author to extolling Oppenheimer’s intellect. 

23. McMahon did not send either draft and told Borden that he preferred 
to take the matter up with the president in person, TN box 41, app. 3, doc. 
no. DCXXXVII, RG 128, NARA. He failed to do so, however, and because of 
illness or for some other reason canceled a long-standing appointment with 
the president. Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, p. 250, and Borden to file, 
May 30, 1952, RG 128, NARA. 

24. Francis P. Cotter, interviews with author, November 21, 1989, and 
May 2, 1990. 

25. The coded messages Taylor dealt with were almost certainly the 
“Venona” cables, existence of which was a tightly held U.S. government secret 
until the mid-1990s. Walters and Lyons were instructed to conduct physical 
surveillance of Oppenheimer from the moment his train arrived in Union 
Station from Princeton. In later years, Walters assured Joseph Volpe that 
Oppenheimer was not merely discreet but “very, very discreet.” Taylor, whom 
Volpe saw also in later years, at their golf club, said that “no matter what you 
think of Oppenheimer, he wasn’t a spy.” Joseph Volpe, interview with author, 
November 21, 1985. 

26. Walker and Mansfield to file, August 25, 1952, RG 128, NARA; Walker 
memo for file, January 13, 1953, doc. no. 3344, RG 128, NARA. The latter 
document contains part of what Teller told committee staffers. 

27. Memo of March 2, 1953, for the commissioners from Bethe, Bradbury, 
Teller, and von Neumann, doc. no. DCXV, RG 326, NARA. Hansen, Swords of 
Armageddon, vol. 4, pp. 99-102. 


28. Transcript of JCAE executive session, February 18, 1953, doc. no. 
3281, RG 128, NARA. My thanks to Gregg Herken for this document. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN: Strauss Returns 


1. Strauss to Hickenlooper, September 19, 1952; Hickenlooper to 
Eisenhower, September 26, 1952; Ralph Cake to Hickenlooper, October 10, 
1952. Hickenlooper papers, HHPL. Strauss’s sponsor was Herbert Hoover. 

2. Walker and Borden to McMahon, April 4, 1952, doc. no. CDXCIX, RG 
128, NARA. The memo continues, “It seems further that the Air Force feels 
that the removal of Dr. Oppenheimer [from the GAC] is an urgent and 
immediate necessity.” 

3. Murphy’s work diaries for February 12, March 18, and April 8, 1953, 
and his interviews with Charles Lauritsen and Lee DuBridge, March 18, 1953. 
CJVM. 

4. John Holbrook, interview with author, November 8, 1993. 

5. Notes of Murphy’s interview with Finletter, April 11, 1953; Murphy’s 
work diaries for December 15, 1952, and January 15 and 23, February 6, and 
April 9, 14, and 16, 1953, reflect meetings with Finletter. CJVM. 

6. Notes of Murphy’s interview with Gilpatric, April 1, 1953; other dates 
when Murphy discussed the story with Gilpatric include January 23, March 
31, April 14 and 16, 1953. CJVM. 

7. Roswell Gilpatric, interview with author, November 30, 1993; notes of 
Murphy interview with Gilpatric, April 1, 1953; other dates when Murphy 
discussed story with Gilpatric include January 23, March 31, April 14 and 16, 
1953. CJVM. 

8. Murphy’s interview with Lewis L. Strauss, March 12, 1953. CJVM. 

9. Joseph Alsop to Murphy, October 18, 1954. Joseph Alsop Papers, LC. 

10. Undated notes of Murphy’s interviews with Walkowicz and Doolittle, 
Murphy Papers. “It is Murphy’s recollection that Teddy Walkowicz ... was 
Murphy’s main and perhaps only source of information relative to ZORC.” 
Hoover to Waters, June 18, 1954, FBI report 100-17828-1760, FBI/ JRO. See 
also Hoover to Waters, June 3, 1954, FBI report 100-17828-1739, FBI/JRO; 
and FBI field report of June 21, 1954, by SA Joe R. Craig, FBI/JRO. 

11. Notes of Murphy interview with Walkowicz, undated, CJVM. A correct 
way of putting it would be to say that it was an experiment to determine 
whether you can use a fission bomb as a match to light a small amount of 
thermonuclear material. 

12. Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, pp. 265-267; work diaries 
for March 24 and 31, 1953. CJVM. 

13. Work diaries for April 14 and 16, 1953. CJVM. 

14. On December 20, 1950, Hawkins, appearing before HUAC, took the 
“diminished Fifth.” Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, p. 249. Hawkins’s lawyer, 
Joseph Fanelli, was recommended to him by Oppenheimer. 

15. Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, p. 157; Philip Morrison, interview with 
author, March 4, 2003. Morrison’s interpretation was that because of 
Oppenheimer’s stature, if he were to be attacked, it would have had to be 
done by the committee that was most in the public eye, the McCarthy 
committee, rather than the Jenner committee. 


16. Killian, Sputnik, Scientists, and Eisenhower, p. 67. Killian says that he, 
Rabi, and others discussed reports that the Air Force was about to remove 
Oppenheimer’s access to classified material, a step it had already taken in 
May 1951. Gregg Herken has written that it was Oppenheimer’s Q clearance, 
for access to classified nuclear data, and not his Air Force clearance, that was 
in question. Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, p. 257. 

17. Joseph Volpe, interviews with author, November 19 and 21, 1985; July 
7 and 8, 1989; May 12, 1994. 

18. Joseph Volpe, interviews with author, November 19 and 21, 1985; July 
7 and 8, 1989; May 12, 1994; Stern and Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 129- 
130. 

19. Joseph Volpe, interviews with author, November 19 and 21, 1985; July 
7 and 8, 1989; May 12, 1994; Volpe to author, June 28, 2001. Contents of the 
“Isotopes” folder in Strauss’s papers in the Hoover presidential library in West 
Branch, Iowa, bear out the importance of this episode to Strauss. 

20. Louis and Eleanor Hempelmann, interviews with author, December 7 
and 10, 1987. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN: Two Wild Horses 


1. Gertrude Samuels, “A Plea for ‘Candor’ About the Atom.” 

2. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Weapons and American Policy.” 

3. Belmont to Ladd, June 5, 1953, sec. 14, JRO/FBI; Bernstein, “The 
Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” p. 1433. 

4. Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, pp. 52-55; Deborah Gore 
Dean, interview with author, June 11, 2001. 

5. Strauss appointment diary, 1953/1: June 1, 23, and July 10, 23, LLS; 
Joanne Callahan to Strauss, July 16, Strauss memo to John Mackenzie, July 
15, July 13 draft article, Murphy to Strauss, July 21, with final proof, all 
1953, Murphy folder, LLS. The editor of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
Eugene Rabinowich, later criticized a series of articles by Murphy, starting 
with the anonymous piece of May 1953, for violating security: Rabinowich, 
“Fortune’s Own Operation Candor,” BAS, December 1953. 

6. John Holbrook, interview with author, November 8, 1993; Hewlett and 
Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, p. 47. Strauss saw Captain Hyman Rickover, 
Trevor Gardner of the Air Force, Willard Libby of the GAC, Kenneth Pitzer, 
and Luis Alvarez. Strauss tried to reach Ernest Lawrence and Leslie R. Groves, 
and was called by Robert Bacher and Kenneth D. Nichols. Some of them were 
in Washington for a meeting of the National Academy of Sciences, and their 
conversations with Strauss may have had nothing to do with the impending 
attack on Oppenheimer. 

7. “Questions Raised in My Mind by JRO file—WLB,” May 29, 1953, TN 
box 41, doc. no. DCXXXVIII, RG 128, NARA; “Comment and 
Recommendations,” June 1, 1953, TN box 41, doc. no. DCXXXIX, RG 128, 
NARA. 

8. William L. Borden, interview with Jack M. Holl, February 11, 1975. 

9. Borden to file, August 13, 1951, app. III, JCAE doc. no. 3464, RG 128, 
NARA. I have dated the possible Strauss-Borden conspiracy to the late 
summer or early fall of 1951, when Borden drafted a letter for McMahon to 


Walter Bedell Smith of the State Department, inquiring about Teller’s 
relatives. McMahon to Smith, September 28, 1951, RG 128, NARA. As for 
Strauss’s possibly “cooling” toward Borden, Borden had asked Strauss for a 
job in the AEC before leaving the congressional committee. Strauss did not 
oblige: instead it was Hyman Rickover and Representative Chet Holifield of 
California who found him his job at Westinghouse. Strauss’s failure to find 
room for Borden at the AEC may have had to do with the pending 
Oppenheimer affair but could also have been related to Democratic- 
Republican differences over the issue of public versus private power. 

10. J. Kenneth Mansfield, interviews with author, May 29, May 31, and 
June 1, 1986; according to the BAS, November—December 2002, p. 103, the 
number of warheads, not assembled weapons, was 32 in 1947, 110 in 1948, 
and 236 in 1949. 

11. Karl Haar, interview with author, July 11, 1990; J. K. Mansfield, 
interview with author, May 31, 1986; Courts Oulahan, interview with author, 
July 13, 1990; Frank Cotter, interviews with author, November 21, 1989, and 
May 2, 1990. 

12. Frank Cotter, interview with author, November 21, 1989. 

13. JCAE executive transcript, February 18, 1953, CD 3281, RG 128, 
NARA, courtesy of Gregg Herken; Harold Green, interview with author, 
February 21, 1984. The author was told on excellent authority that a folder of 
correspondence between Borden and Strauss had been removed from Strauss’s 
papers. This source believed that the two men worked together up to a point, 
but that Strauss did not have advance knowledge of Borden’s letter. 

14. Frank Cotter, interview with author, May 2, 1990. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN: The Blank Wall 


1. Although most historians have said that the letter was sent by registered 
mail, the FBI ascertained that it came by regular mail. Nichols to Tolson, 
January 12, 1954, JRO/FBI; Hoover to Brownell, January 19, 1954, JRO/FBI. 

2. Hoover to Tolson and Ladd, November 25, 1953, JRO/FBI; Hoover to 
Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, December 3, 1953, FBI doc. no. 17828-418. 
Although Hoover had discouraged McCarthy from holding hearings on 
Oppenheimer earlier in 1953, McCarthy did hold an executive session on 
September 15 at which Paul Crouch described Truman’s role in squelching 
the Weinberg prosecution. 

3. Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Note for Diary,” December 2, 1953, typed by 
Ann Whitman, Gordon Gray Papers, DDEPL. 

4, Martha Burroughs’s telephone conversations with author in 1985; 
Clarissa Parsons Fuller, interview with author, September 17, 1986; Peggy 
Parsons Bowditch, interview with author, July 22, 1992; Stern with Green, 
Oppenheimer Case, p. 222. 

5. Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” pp. 
1383-1447. 

6. Strauss got away with his deception until publication in 1989 of Atoms 
for Peace and War, the AEC’s official history, by Hewlett and Holl. 

7. Lewis H. Strauss, interview with author, July 6, 1989. Among those who 
believe that it was Strauss who urged Eisenhower to lower a “blank wall” is 


Strauss’s son, Lewis H. Strauss, who points out that “blank wall” is the sort of 
expression his father would have coined. Further evidence exists in 
handwritten notes exchanged between Strauss and C. D. Jackson at an NSC 
meeting of December 18, 1953, in which Strauss wrote that “the P. himself 
had been consulted and had (ordered) or (concurred).” LLS, C. D. Jackson 
folder, HHPL. A memo by AEC security officer Bryan LaPlante, titled “J. R. 
Oppenheimer” and dated December 3, 1953, describes a meeting with 
Strauss, Nichols, and AEC general counsel William Mitchell at 3:30 p.m. that 
day, at which Strauss displayed a copy of the presidential order, Secretariat 
Files, RG 326, NARA. Thus it is clear that the president did not first consider 
his decision “in the chill of late afternoon” on that day, as Strauss later wrote. 
By 1963, when Strauss published his book, the term “blank wall” had 
acquired the ring of opprobrium, as typifying the folly of the proceeding. He 
would logically have wanted to dissociate himself from it and deny his own 
role. 

8. Strauss to Teller, December 3, 1953, LLS, “J. Robert Oppenheimer” 
folder, HHPL; Bryan LaPlante diary memo, December 3, 1953, Secretariat 
Files, RG 326, NARA; Teller interview of June 4, 1993, with Stanley 
Goldberg, Gregg Herken, Priscilla McMillan, and Richard Rhodes. During the 
same interview, Teller said that he had discussed the Oppenheimer situation 
with JCAE chairman Sterling Cole on December 2. In fact, according to Cole’s 
1978 oral history interview at Cornell, they discussed Atoms for Peace. This 
means that Strauss discussed the Atoms for Peace proposal with Teller before 
he told his fellow commissioners about it. 

9. Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, p. 332; Teller interview of 
June 4, 1993, with Goldberg, Herken, McMillan, and Rhodes; William S. 
Golden, interview with author, January 3, 1990; Victor and Donna Mitchell, 
interview with author, November 13, 1990. 

10. John MacKenzie, interview with author, February 13, 1985; Frank 
Cotter, interview with author, November 21, 1988. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: Hoover 


1. Ladd to Hoover, March 27, 1953, sec. 14, JRO/FBI; Belmont to Ladd, 
April 13, 1953, sec. 14, JRO/FBI; Hoover to Tolson and Ladd, June 24, 1953, 
sec. 14, JRO/FBI; Belmont to Ladd, December 2, 1953, sec. 14, JRO/FBI; 
Green, “The Oppenheimer Case”; Lee Hancock, interviews with author, 
August 22, September 22, and December 13, 1983, and January 16, 1985; 
Hancock to Harold Green, January 22, 1966, in author’s possession. The 
individuals Strauss had offered to purge were Carroll Wilson, former general 
manager of the AEC; Carroll Tyler, the AEC’s former director of Santa Fe 
operations; Oppenheimer; and Francis Hammack of the AEC’s Security 
Division. Strauss made the promise in March 1953, after he was appointed 
special White House adviser; Hoover’s memo of June 24, 1953, can be read as 
signifying that Strauss knew the purge of Hammack was a precondition of 
Hoover’s help in getting rid of Oppenheimer. In an interview on March 7, 
1984, Harold Green told the author that he had learned of Strauss’s promise 
to Hoover directly from AEC security officer Bryan LaPlante and indirectly, 
via Lee Hancock, from Francis Hammack, Charles Bates, and C. A. Rolander. 


2. Mitchell did not tell Green that he had given up an attempt to do the job 
himself after two commissioners criticized his inclusion of charges about the 
H-bomb. Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, pp. 75-76; Stern with 
Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 223-225. 

3. Harold Green, interview with author, May 14, 1984; Stern with Green, 
Oppenheimer Case, pp. 225-226; Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, 
p. 76. 

4. Harold Green to John Manley, January 24, 1984, Manley Papers, LANL. 

5. Green, “The Oppenheimer Case”; Harold Green, interview with author, 
May 14, 1984. Green believed that the FBI official who called him was 
William C. Sullivan, later head of domestic counterintelligence in the FBI. 

6. Gerard Smith writes that Smyth “had a clearer idea of the dangers of the 
plan and its implications for nuclear proliferation than the rest of us” (Gerard 
Smith, Disarming Diplomat, p. 29). See also Mary Smyth diary entry for 
December 8, 1953, Smyth Papers, APS. 

7. Mary Smyth’s “Summary on Strauss Data,” p. 2; Henry D. Smyth to 
Strauss, “Dr. X. Case,” February 23, 1954; Henry D. Smyth to the Chairman 
and Commissioners, May 20, 1954; Henry D. Smyth to Cole, May 20 and June 
22, 1954; Henry D. Smyth to [A. L.] Christman, August 15, 1967, all in Smyth 
Papers, APS; Strauss to file, December 10, 1953; Strauss memo for Smyth, 
December 17, 1953; Strauss memo for Snapp, December 22, 1953; Strauss 
memo, undated, all LLS; Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, pp. 71- 
72. Smyth did not learn until April 1954 that Strauss had met with the 
president on December 3, 1953, or that he had ordered the AEC general 
manager in July 1953 to discourage consultation with Oppenheimer. 

8. Minutes of 957th AEC meeting (NARA), courtesy of Gregg Herken; 
Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered”; Mary 
Smyth diary entries for December 20-26, 1953, and February 3, 1954, Smyth 
Papers, APS. Smyth made his objections on December 18 and December 21, 
and was told by AEC general counsel William Mitchell that his colleagues had 
agreed to inclusion of the H-bomb count. He later realized that this was not 
the case: Zuckert had not agreed to it and there was a question as to whether 
Murray had agreed. Smyth, draft memo to Strauss, “Dr. X. Case,” February 2, 
1954; Smyth to Strauss, “Dr. X Case,” April 5, 1954; Smyth to Chairman and 
Commissioners, May 20, 1954, Smyth Papers, APS. 

9. Hoover to Tolson, Ladd, Belmont, Clavin, and Nichols, December 15, 
1953, JRO/FBI. The other officials in attendance were Arthur Flemming, head 
of the Office of Defense Mobilization, and Robert Cutler, national security 
adviser to the president. 

10. Hoover to Tolson, Ladd, Belmont, Clavin, and Nichols, December 15, 
1953, JRO/FBI; File number 77-47503-2, Lewis L. Strauss, FBI. 

11. Frank Cotter, interview with author, May 2, 1990. 

12. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 211-213 and 229-232. 

13. Anne W. Marks, interview with author, August 2, 1986; Alice H. 
Strauss, interview with author, November 28, 1990. 

14. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 229-231; Hewlett and Holl, 
Atoms for Peace and War, pp. 78-80; Belmont to Ladd, December 21, 1953, 
JRO/FBI; Strauss to file, April 15, 1954, LLS. 

15. Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, pp. 79-80; Stern with 


Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 231-232. Herbert Marks’s widow, Anne, 
remembers the day differently: she recalls picking up Oppenheimer by car at 
the AEC building, his coming out white as a sheet and telling her what had 
happened, and her driving him home to the Markses’ house, where they were 
joined by Volpe and Marks (Anne Wilson Marks, interview with author, 
August 2, 1986). But the recorded conversation in Volpe’s office appears to 
confirm the version given here. Volpe and his partner discovered that their 
offices were tapped when something came up the next day in the Dixon-Yates 
matter that showed advance knowledge by the AEC. Harold Green reports 
having seen wiretapped reports for that day from Marks’s and Volpe’s offices 
(author interview of May 14, 1984). Knowing that Oppenheimer would go to 
either Marks or Volpe, the FBI had placed wiretaps in both offices. 

16. Hoover to Brownell, December 21, 1953, JRO/FBI; Hoover to SAC 
Newark, December 28, 1953, JRO/FBI; Brownell to the author, September 9, 
1993. 

17. Belmont to Ladd, December 23, 1953, JRO/FBI. Oppenheimer’s 
attorneys represented him free of charge throughout the hearings, and he had 
to pay only their out-of-pocket expenses, which, in the case of Garrison’s firm, 
amounted to about twenty-five thousand dollars. 

18. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 235-236; Louis and Eleanor 
Hempelmann, interview with author, December 7, 1987. Mrs. Hempelmann’s 
observation could have occurred either on Snapp’s first visit, on Christmas 
Eve, or on his second visit, on New Year’s Eve, when he actually retrieved the 
documents. 

19. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 240-241; Anne Wilson Marks, 
interview with author, August 2, 1986; Charles Horsky, interview with 
author, December 19, 1986; “Re: Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” January 14, 
1954, an FBI field office report, quotes a “reliable confidential informant” to 
the effect that O’Brian told Herbert Marks that he wanted to take the case but 
could not do so “because of the disapproval of his partners.” Covington and 
Burling was Acheson’s law firm as well. 

20. Belmont to Ladd, January 5, 1954, JRO/FBI. 

21. Strauss to Hoover, February 1, 1954, LLS; Strauss to Bates, February 8, 
1954, JRO/FBI. Of the 110 reports on Oppenheimer sent by the FBI between 
December 22 and April 12, more than 50 were disguised as personal letters 
from Hoover to Strauss. Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, p. 85. 

22. Charles W. Bates, interview with author, October 12, 1983; Joan 
Harrington, interview with author, November 26, 1990. 

23. Charles W. Bates, interview with author, October 12, 1983; Harold 
Green, interview with author, May 14, 1984; Green, “The Oppenheimer 
Case”; Belmont to Ladd, February 2, 1954, p. 2, JRO/FBI. 

24. Hoover to Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, February 1, 1954, JRO/FBI. 

25. Lee Hancock, interview with author, August 22, 1983; Lee Hancock to 
Harold Green, January 22, 1966 (courtesy of Lee Hancock). 

26. Hancock to Green, January 22, 1966; Belmont to Ladd, January 26, 
1954, JRO/FBI. 

27. IMJRO, pp. 3-7; Joseph Volpe, interview with author, November 19, 
1985. 

28. Pfau, No Sacrifice Too Great, pp. 163-167; Rhodes, Dark Sun, pp. 541- 


543. 
29. Rhodes, Dark Sun, pp. 524-526. Joe Four’s yield was four hundred 
kilotons. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: The Hearing Begins 


1. Reston, Deadline, p. 221. 

2. Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, pp. 89-91; a story by Joseph 
and Stewart Alsop, also sympathetic to Oppenheimer, appeared the same day 
on page one of the Times’s competitor, the New York Herald-Tribune; notes of 
James C. Hagerty, April 8-11, 1954, Hagerty Papers, DDEPL. The strategy 
was developed at meetings attended by Sherman Adams, Hagerty, Murray 
Snyder, and Wilton Persons for the White House, and Commissioners Strauss 
and Campbell of the AEC. 

3. Oppenheimer had been cleared informally by Gordon Dean in 1950, and 
by Walter Whitman, chairman of the Research and Development Board of 
DoD, in July 1953, under the Eisenhower executive order. 

4. Samuel J. Silverman, interview with author, October 5, 1989. 

5. James G. Beckerley, interview with author, June 6, 1987; Arnold with 
Pyne, Britain and the H-Bomb, p. 92. At a meeting of commissioners the 
following summer, Smyth put his finger on the problem when he said he had 
been worried about “rate and scale and direction of thinking information, and 
specifically ... the question of the change in the thermonuclear program and 
the time it occurred.” Minutes of 1,017th AEC meeting, July 23, 1954, NARA. 
My thanks to Gregg Herken for this document. 

6. Samuel J. Silverman, interview with author, October 5, 1989. 

7. Charles W. Bates, interviews with author, October 5, 12, and 17, 1983, 
FBI file dated December 14, 1959, titled “J. Robert Oppenheimer.” This file 
lists 428 documents, mostly wiretapped conversations, transmitted by the FBI 
to the Atomic Energy Commission between 1947 and 1958. General 
Correspondence series, JRO file/RG 128, NARA. My thanks to Gregg Herken 
for this document. Strauss memo to Robb, February 23, 1954, suggesting 
questions for Bradbury, Rabi, and Groves, LLS AEC, JRO file. 

8. Roger Robb to Samuel B. Ballen, December 1, 1976; Irene Rice Robb, 
interview with author, November 11, 1988; Harold Tyler, interview with 
author, October 24, 1989; Patrick Raher, interview with author, November 
11, 1991; Judge Oliver Gasch, interview with author, November 13, 1991; 
Mrs. Ruth Luff, interview with author, January 4, 1992; Judge Paul Friedman, 
interview with author, May 31, 1986. 

9. Manchester, The Glory and the Dream, pp. 697-698. 

10. IMJRO, p. 137. 

11. IMJRO, p. 146. What neither Oppenheimer, Chevalier, nor Army 
security seems to have known then or later was that Eltenton was a physicist, 
not an engineer, and that he worked from 1934 to 1937 in Leningrad under 
Yuli Khariton, an important figure in Soviet nuclear research and later 
director of the Soviet H-bomb program. He was also close to Shalnikov, 
another prominent Soviet nuclear physicist. 

12. IMJRO, p. 149. 

13. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, p. 280. 


14. Samuel J. Silverman, interview with author, October 5, 1989. 

15. Joseph Volpe, interviews with author, November 19, 1985, and July 7, 
1989; Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, pp. 305-309; Goodchild, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds, p. 244. 

16. Samuel J. Silverman, interviews with author, October 5, 1989, and 
July 2, 1998. 

17. IMJRO, pp. 649-650, 656. 

18. IMJRO, pp. 306, 322, and 517. 

19. IMJRO, pp. 356-357, 365. 

20. IMJRO, pp. 566-567. 

21. IMJRO, p. 468. 

22. “Dates and times of appointments Dr. Rabi had with Mr. Strauss at AEC 
building during month of April, 1954,” and Strauss to “Joe” [Campbell], 
undated, but probably April 16, 1954, in Rabi folder, LLS. Belmont to 
Boardman, April 17, 1954, JRO/FBI; Strauss to Robb, April 16, 1954, in 
Oppenheimer folder, LLS. See also James Reston, “Oppenheimer Case Stirs 
Resentment Among Scientists,” New York Times, April 15, 1954; Walter 
Lippmann, “The Oppenheimer Case,” New York Herald-Tribune, April 15, 
1954; and Drew Pearson, “Admiral Strauss Sorry He Started Fuss, 
Oppenheimer Made Him Look Foolish,” New Mexican, April 20, 1954. 

23. Belmont to Ladd, January 7 and 15, 1954, JRO/FBI. 

24. Strauss to file, January 22, 1954, LLS; Belmont to Ladd, January 26, 
1954, JRO/FBI. 

25. I. I. Rabi, interviews with author, July 22, 1985, and January 31, 
1986. 

26. In an interview of December 11, 1985, George Kennan used almost the 
same words: “Oppenheimer had a brain that was outsize and too much for his 
physical and emotional frame.” 

27. Ruth and Harold Cherniss, interviews with author, December 13, 1985. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN: Smyth 


1. “M’s Summary on Strauss Data,” from Mary Smyth’s diary, Smyth 
Papers, APS. Smyth learned on May 8, 1953, that he would not be appointed 
chairman, and on May 9 he heard, via radio, of the Fortune attack on 
Oppenheimer. 

2. Mary Smyth diary entry of May 25, 1954, Smyth Papers, APS. 

3. Times of visits and calls are from Strauss’s appointment calendar and 
telephone log, April 26-30, 1954, LLS. 

4. Roger Robb, memo for file, July 24, 1967, LLS; John Wheeler, interview 
with author, November 14, 1985; Hans and Rose Bethe, interview with 
author, December 3, 1986; Hans Bethe, interview with Charles Weiner, part 
3, April 1972, AIP. 

5. Teller’s testimony appears on pp. 709-727 of IMJRO, this remark on p. 
710. 

6. Memo of Charter Heslep to Lewis L. Strauss, May 3, 1954. Years 
afterward, defense attorney Silverman said he had no doubt that Teller’s 
testimony had been the result of a deal, with Robb asking, “Will you say 
that?” and Teller saying, “so far and no farther,” and Robb knowing exactly 


how far Teller was willing to go. Samuel Silverman, interview with author, 
October 5, 1989. 

7. IMJRO, p. 726. 

8. Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, p. 340. 

9. Herbert Childs, An American Genius, pp. 466-473; Molly B. Lawrence, 
interview with author, February 24, 1992. Mrs. Lawrence said that her 
husband was “horribly torn,” did not know what he was going to say, and felt 
relief when he did not have to testify. She attributed his feeling of betrayal to 
an incident over Frank, to passages in Oppenheimer’s testimony in which he 
admitted lying about the Chevalier episode, and to having heard from a 
neighbor at Balboa Island that Oppenheimer had allegedly had a long love 
affair with Ruth Tolman, wife of his colleague Richard Tolman. 

10. Childs, An American Genius, p. 473. The men he summoned to his room 
were Leland J. Haworth, Thomas H. Johnson, and Clarence E. Larson. Mrs. 
Lawrence vouched for Childs’s accuracy and added that her husband was not 
pretending to be sicker than he was. 

11. Alvarez, The Adventures of a Physicist, p. 180. Lawrence’s defection 
deprived the Berkeley contingent of its heaviest heavyweight: Oppenheimer’s 
old, old friend and one with whom he had worked closely in the 1930s. 


CHAPTER TWENTY: Borden 


1. Allan B. Ecker, interview with author, June 18, 1989. Ecker concluded 
that Robb had been playing a recording of the August 26, 1943, conversation 
between Oppenheimer, Pash, and Lyall Johnson. In his questioning of Pash on 
April 30, Robb asked: “Have you recently refreshed your recollection about 
this interview by looking over a copy of that transcript?” Pash said: “I have.” 
IMJRO, p. 814. 

2. Alvarez, IMJRO, pp. 770-805; Latimer, IMJRO, pp. 656-667; Pitzer, 
IMJRO, pp. 697-709. 

3. For Wilson’s testimony, see IMJRO, pp. 679-697; for the information 
about Vandenberg, see Meilinger, Hoyt S. Vandenberg, p. 155. 

4. Interview of Lieutenant General Roscoe C. Wilson by Lieutenant Colonel 
Dennis A. Smith, December 1-2, 1983, Air Force Oral History Program. 

5. Getting to author, March 2, 1990. 

6. “To Whom It May Concern” letter of Dr. Allen F. Donovan, dated 
November 19, 1989, and sent to the author by Ivan Getting; FBI Report 
100-17828-1739, “Hoover to Waters via Liaison,” June 3, 1954, reports the 
denials by Piore and Overhage, as well as the remarks by Griggs cited here. 

7. Guyford Stever, telephone interview with author, April 27, 1990. 

8. FBI Report 100-17828-1760, “Hoover to Waters via Liaison,” and 
marked “attention Rolander,” reads in part: “On June 12, Mr. Charles J. V. 
Murphy was interviewed.... [H]e stated that he had no direct or firsthand 
knowledge relative to the origin of the term ZORC. It is Murphy’s recollection 
that Teddy Walcowicz [sic], former Air Force officer, was Murphy’s main and 
possibly only source of information relative to ZORC.” 

9. IMJRO, pp. 834 and 839; Courts Oulahan, interview with author, July 
13, 1990. 

10. Samuel J. Silverman, interviews with author, October 5, 1989, and 


July 2, 1998. 
11. IMJRO, pp. 971-990; Stern with Green, Oppenheimer Case, p. 367. 
12. Hennrich to Belmont, May 20, 1954, JRO/FBI. 
13. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer, pp. 260-261. 
14. Charles W. Bates, interviews with author, October 5 and 17, 1983. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE: Caesar’s Wife 


1. President Eisenhower told Philip Stern on July 19, 1967, that he 
“Delieves he talked with Mr. Gray, and asked him to serve in that capacity” 
(Stern to Schulz, July 21, 1967, Stern Papers, JFKPL. 

2. Green, “The Oppenheimer Case.” 

3. Harold P. Green, interview with author, May 14, 1984; Polly Wisner 
Fritchey, interview with author, June 16, 1989; Mrs. Gordon Gray, interview 
with author, June 14, 1989; Boyden Gray, interview with author, May 3, 
1991; Gordon Gray Jr., interview with author, April 4, 1989; and Joan 
Harrington, interview with author, November 26, 1990. Gray did try to end 
the hearing, but the person to whom he appealed was not, as he later told 
Boyden, Lloyd Garrison, but Roger Robb. Gray also gave his family the 
impression that he and Morgan had gone into the case expecting to clear 
Oppenheimer, but his notes at the time indicate that he, Morgan, and Evans 
all were inclined against clearance from the start and that the inclination 
grew stronger during their immersion in the prosecution’s documents before 
the hearing. Notes dictated by Gray to Ardith Johnson, May 7-14, Gray 
Papers, DDEPL. 

4. Lee Hancock, interview with author, September 22, 1983; Lee Hancock 
to Harold Green, January 22, 1966, author’s files. Some witnesses were told 
that their testimony was being released and others were asked for permission. 
One, Jerrold Zacharias, told the author that he refused permission. His 
testimony was published nevertheless. 

5. James Hagerty diary entry for June 15, 1954, Hagerty Papers, DDEPL; 
Strauss to Gray, June 11, 1954, Gray Papers, DDEPL. According to a memo by 
Strauss, Garrison may have talked to a public relations adviser about 
representing the defense in March, but there is no evidence that he did so 
later. Strauss to file, May 18, 1954, LLS. 

6. Murphy’s work diaries, June 8, 10, 14, 17, 18, 19, 1954, CJVM. Reid 
immediately called a high-ranking FBI official, Louis B. Nichols, for advice on 
how to handle Gray. Nichols to Tolson, June 18, 1954, FBI. 

7. Kalven, “The Case of J. Robert Oppenheimer Before the Atomic Energy 
Commission.” 

8. Ambrose, Eisenhower, the President, pp. 476-477. 

9. Murphy’s work diaries, CJVM. 

10. Mary Smyth diary, June 20-July 10, 1954; “From M’s Diary: M’s 
Summary on Strauss Data 1954”; and “Answers to Questions from Philip 
Stern,” August 7, 1967. All in Smyth Papers, APS. 

11. H. D. Smyth, interview with author, December 10, 1985; “Answers to 
Questions from Philip Stern,” August 7, 1967, Smyth Papers, APS. Farley did 
not consider Nichols’s warning a threat. Moreover, he was planning to leave 
the AEC to become assistant to Gerard Smith, chief atomic energy adviser to 


the Department of State. Philip Farley, telephone interview with author, 
February 2, 1987. 

12. IMJRO, pp. 1049-1052. 

13. IMJRO, pp. 1058-1061. 

14. Henry DeWolf Smyth, interview with author, December 10, 1985; 
Philip Farley, telephone interview with author, February 2, 1987. 

15. IMJRO, pp. 1061-1065. 

16. Mary Smyth diary entry for June 30, 1954, Smyth Papers, APS; 
“Answers to Questions from Philip Stern,” August 7, 1967, Smyth Papers, 
APS; H. D. Smyth, interview with author, December 10, 1985. 

17. Father Daniel Bradley Murray, interview with author, November 12, 
1990. John Courtney Murray’s papers at the Georgetown University library 
document his close friendships with Thomas Murray, Henry R. Luce, and 
Clare Boothe Luce, whom he catechized upon her conversion to Catholicism. 

18. Lewis H. Strauss, interview with author, July 6, 1989. 

19. Eugene Zuckert, interview with author, November 28, 1990. 

20. Harold Green, interview with author, November 13, 1991; Philip 
Farley, telephone interview with author, October 20, 1983. 

21. Eugene Zuckert, interview with author, November 28, 1990. 


CHAPTER TWENTy-TWo: Do We Really Need Scientists? 


1. Hagerty diary entry, June 29, 1954, DDEPL. 

2. Hagerty diary entry, May 29, 1954 (Strauss was considering Kenneth 
Pitzer as Zuckert’s replacement). Between April 9 and June 30, Hagerty’s 
diary records contacts with Strauss in person or by telephone on at least 
fifteen days, including one day when they spoke about the Oppenheimer case 
four or five times; Strauss’s diary records at least four solo visits with the 
president and numerous other occasions when the two men saw each other in 
the presence of others. 

3. Brownell to author, September 9, 1993. 

4. Jerry Hannifin, telephone conversation with author, July 19, 2003. The 
author’s guess is Robb. 

5. Murphy work diaries, October 5, 1953, and August 18, 1954, CJVM. 

6. Clay Blair, interview with author, February 22, 1993; Borden to 
Allardice, March 22, 1954, NND 902010, TN box 58, RG 128, NARA. Before 
leaving the JCAE on June 1, Borden, who wished to remain in Washington, 
asked Strauss whether he had a place for him at the AEC. But Strauss 
apparently did not want Borden in Washington, and it was Rickover and 
Representative Chet Holifield of California who found him his job at 
Westinghouse. 

7. Clay Blair, interviews with author, February 22, 1993, and March 20, 
1994. The author’s conjecture that Borden and Strauss made such a plan in 
the autumn of 1951 is based on the August 13, 1951, conversation between 
the two men and on Borden’s letter in late September 1951, to Walter Bedell 
Smith of the State Department, seeking help in getting Teller’s relatives out of 
Hungary. 

8. Clay Blair, interview with author, February 22, 1993. 

9. Clay Blair, interviews with author, February 22, 1993, and March 20, 


1994. Leach was also consulted about air strategy in Europe by James B. 
Conant while he was president of Harvard. 

10. In an interview with the author on February 22, 1993, Blair described 
accompanying Shepley to Strauss’s office, while Shepley, on the NBC 
television program Comment, on September 26, 1954, said Strauss had 
summoned him but made no mention of Blair’s presence (from an 
unpublished article on the Shepley-Blair book by Chuck Hansen). Blair told 
the author that there had been a fire burning in Strauss’s office at the time of 
his visit with Shepley. Since the meeting took place in mid-June, one wonders 
whether Blair’s memory may have slipped and whether the fire might have 
been lit earlier, during one of his interviews with Strauss for the book. 

11. Vannevar Bush, “If We Alienate Our Scientists.” 

12. Carson Mark letter of June 29, 1954, BAS, September 1954; excerpt 
from Drew Pearson broadcast, October 23, 1954, Teeple folder, LLS; minutes 
of forty-first GAC meeting, p. 54, box 4932, RG 326, NARA. Three members 
of Strauss’s staff at the AEC were thought to be “gumshoeing”: two of them, 
McKay Donkin and Bryan LaPlante, together with Strauss’s secretary, Virginia 
Walker, reported on Smyth’s activities throughout the summer of 1954. 

13. Teller with Shoolery, Memoirs, p. 401. 

14. Bradbury actually answered the charges from the condensed version in 
U.S. News & World Report, September 21, 1954, prior to the book’s 
publication on September 28. Livermore’s first successful large-scale fusion 
test took place only in 1956, and its first design, the W-27, did not go into 
production until 1958, six years after the lab was founded. 

15. Gordon Dean press release of September 28, 1954, with review 
attached, from David Lilienthal Papers, Princeton University Library; Dean to 
Strauss, September 10, 1954, LLS; Froman et al. to Strauss, September 28, 
1954, RG 326, LANL; Strauss to Froman, October 12, 1954, RG 326, LANL. 
Strauss reviewed at least two drafts of the Shepley-Blair book: first in early 
June, prior to his attempt to purchase the manuscript, and second in early 
July. Chuck Hansen’s unpublished article on the book cites a letter from 
Strauss to Pearl Carroll of Time Inc., dated July 10, 1954, with questions and 
suggested changes, in Strauss’s handwriting. Strauss saw Shepley at least six 
times during May and June of 1954, most of these meetings lasting more than 
an hour and at least three of them with no one else present. During those 
visits Strauss may also have helped with Time’s June 14, 1954, cover story on 
Oppenheimer. In addition to Blair’s several hours with Borden in January 
1954, Shepley and Blair had been coached by Murphy, had had personal 
access to his sources, and had read the notes for his stories in Fortune. 

16. Joseph and Stewart Alsop, “Do We Need Scientists?” New York Herald- 
Tribune, October 1, 1954; Elie Abel, “The Attack on Oppenheimer Continues,” 
Reporter, October 21, 1954. 

17. All in LLS, Teller folder, HHPL: Teller to Strauss, July 2, 1954; Strauss 
to Teller, July 6, 1954; Robb to Teller, July 8, 1954, with enclosure; Teller to 
Robb, July 30, 1954. 

18. Teller to Strauss, July 2, 1954; Strauss to Dulles, July 27, 1954. In LLS, 
Teller folder, HHPL. After his meeting with Blair in February, Borden wrote to 
his successor at the JCAE and asked him to follow up a 1951 inquiry he 
himself had made about the relatives. Borden to Allardice, March 22, 1954, 


NND902010, RG 128, NARA; McMahon to [W. Bedell] Smith, September 28, 
1951, doc. no. CDVII, RG 128, NARA. 

19. Teller with Shoolery, Memoirs, p. 405. In his autobiography, the 
Italian-born physicist Emilio Segré wrote that Fermi considered Teller’s 
testimony at the Oppenheimer hearing “unethical.” Segré, A Mind Always in 
Motion. 

20. Teller, “The Work of Many People,” Science, February 25, 1955. 

21. Murphy to Teller, May 17, 1961, LLS, Murphy folder, HHPL. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE: Oppenheimer 


1. Peter Oppenheimer, interview with author, November 16, 1987. 

2. George Kennan, interview with author, December 11, 1985. 

3. Verna Hobson, interview with author, September 20, 1986. 

4. Anne Marks, interview with author, November 11, 1986. (The prize 
money was fifty thousand dollars.) 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FouR: We Made It—and We Gave It Away 


1. Gerard Smith, Disarming Diplomat, p. 37; Leonard Weiss, “Atoms for 
Peace,” BAS, November—December 2003. 

2. James Killian, interview with Stephen White, 1969, pp. 225-228, COHP. 
The author is indebted to David Holloway for the insight that the Air Force 
held us back. 

3. Charles Bates, interview with author, October 12, 1983. 

4. I. I. Rabi, interview with Chauncey Olinger, 1983, box 3, pp. 759-760 
and 827-828, COHP. 


Postlude 


1. H. D. Smyth, interview with author, December 10, 1985. 
2. Mary Smyth Papers, APS. 
3. JRO to Smyth, July 5, 1954, Smyth folder, JRO Papers, LC. 


SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Books 


Acheson, Dean. Morning and Noon. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965. 

___. Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department. New York: 
Norton, 1969. 

___. Sketches From Life. New York: Harper & Bros., 1959. 

Albright, Joseph, and Marcia Kunstel. Bombshell: The Secret Story of America’s 
Unknown Atomic Spy Conspiracy. New York: Times Books, 1997. 

Alperovitz, Gar. The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb and the Architecture of an 
American Myth. New York: Knopf, 1995. 

Alsop, Joseph W., with Adam Platt. I’ve Seen the Best of It. New York: Norton, 
1992. 

Altshuler, B. L., B. M. Bolotovsky, I. M. Dremin, V. Y. Fainberg, and L. V. 
Keldysh, eds. Andrei Sakharov: Facets of a Life. Gif-sur-Yvette, France: 
Editions Frontiéres, 1991. 

Alvarez, Luis W. The Adventures of a Physicist. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 

Ambrose, Stephen E. Eisenhower, the President. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1984. 

Anders, Roger M., ed. Forging the Atomic Shield: Excerpts from the Office Diary 
of Gordon E. Dean. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987. 

Andrew, Christopher, and Vasili Mitrokhin. The Sword and the Shield: The 
Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB. New York: Basic Books, 
1999. 

Arnold, Lorna, with Katherine Pyne. Britain and the H-Bomb. Houndmills, UK: 
Palgrave, 2001. 

Badash, Lawrence. Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons: From 
Fission to the Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1939-1963. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: 
Humanities Press International, 1995. 

Badash, Lawrence, Joseph O. Hirschfelder, and Herbert P. Broida, eds. 
Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 1943-1945. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: 
Reidel, 1980. 

Benson, Robert Louis, and Michael Warner, eds. VENONA: Soviet Espionage 
and the American Response, 1939-1957. Washington, DC: Central 
Intelligence Agency, 1996. 


Bernstein, Jeremy. Hans Bethe: Prophet of Energy. New York: Dutton, 1981. 

___. The Life It Brings: One Physicist’s Beginnings. New York: Ticknor and 
Fields, 1987. 

____. Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma. Chicago: Ivan Dee, 2004. 

Bix, Herbert P. Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan. New York: Harper- 
Collins, 2000. 

Blackett, P. M. S. Fear, War, and the Bomb. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1948. 

Blumberg, Stanley, and Gwinn Owens. Energy and Conflict: The Life and Times 
of Edward Teller. New York: Putnam, 1976. 

Blumberg, Stanley, and Louis Panos. Edward Teller: Giant of the Golden Age of 
Physics. New York: Scribner’s, 1990. 

Borden, William L. There Will Be No Time: The Revolution in Strategy. New 
York: Macmillan, 1946. 

Bowen, Lee, and Robert D. Little. A History of the Air Force Atomic Energy 
Program, 1943-1953. 5 vols. Washington, DC: Air University Historical 
Liaison Office, Bolling Air Force Base. 

Bowie, Robert R., and Richard H. Immerman. Waging Peace. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1998. 

Boyer, Paul. By the Bomb’s Early Light. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 1994. 

Bradley, Omar N., and Clay Blair Jr. A General’s Life. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1983. 

Broad, William. Star Warriors. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1985. 

___. Teller’s War: The Top Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception. New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1992. 

Brower, Kenneth. The Starship and the Canoe. New York: Harper & Row, 1983. 

Brown, Andrew. The Neutron and the Bomb: A Biography of Sir James Chadwick. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. 

Brown, John Mason. Through These Men. New York: Harper, 1956. 

Brownell, Herbert, with John P. Burke. Advising Ike. Lawrence: University 
Press of Kansas, 1993. 

Bundy, McGeorge. Danger and Survival: Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty 
Years. New York: Random House, 1988. 

Bush, Vannevar. Modern Arms and Free Men. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1949. 

___. Pieces of the Action. New York: Morrow, 1970. 

Butow, Robert J. C. Japan’s Decision to Surrender. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 1954. 

Byrnes, James F. All in One Lifetime. New York: Harper & Row, 1958. 

___. Speaking Frankly. New York: Harper & Bros., 1947. 

Cassidy, David C. Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg. New 
York: Freeman, 1991. 

Chevalier, Haakon. The Man Who Would Be God. New York: Putnam, 1959. 

____. Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship. New York: Braziller, 1965. 

Childs, Herbert. An American Genius: The Life of Ernest Orlando Lawrence, 
Father of the Cyclotron. New York: Dutton, 1968. 

Christman, Al. Target Hiroshima: Deak Parsons and the Creation of the Atomic 
Bomb. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1998. 

Cohen, Sam. Shame: Confessions of the Father of the Neutron Bomb. Xlibris, 


2000. 

Compton, Arthur. Atomic Quest. New York: Oxford University Press, 1956. 

Conant, Jennet. Tuxedo Park. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2002. 

Craig, William. The Fall of Japan. New York: Dial, 1967. 

Curtis, Charles P., Jr. The Oppenheimer Case: The Trial of a Security System. 
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1955. 

Davis, Hope Hale. Great Day Coming. South Royalton, VT: Steerforth, 1994. 

Davis, Nuell Pharr. Lawrence and Oppenheimer. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1968. 

Day, Dwayne A. Lightning Rod: A History of the Air Force Chief Scientist’s Office. 
Washington, DC: Chief Scientist’s Office, U.S. Air Force, 2000. 

Divine, Robert. Blowing on the Wind: The Nuclear Test Ban Debate, 1954-1960. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1978. 

Donovan, Robert J. The Presidency of Harry S. Truman, 1945-1948: Conflict 
and Crisis. New York: Norton, 1977. 

___. The Presidency of Harry S. Truman, 1949-1953: The Tumultuous Years. 
New York: Norton, 1982. 

Dorwart, Jeffery M. Eberstadt and Forrestal. College Station: Texas A & M 
Press, 1991. 

Drell, Sidney D., and Sergei P. Kapitsa. Sakharov Remembered. Woodbury, NY: 
American Institute of Physics, 1991. 

Dyson, Freeman. Disturbing the Universe. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. 

____. Weapons and Hope. New York: Harper & Row, 1984. 

Eltenton, Dorothea. Laughter in Leningrad: An English Family in Russia, 1933- 
1938. Privately published, 1998. 

Evangelista, Matthew. Innovation and the Arms Race. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1988. 

___. Unarmed Forces. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1999. 

Feis, Herbert. Between War and Peace. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1960. 

____. Japan Subdued: The Atomic Bomb and the End of the War in the Pacific. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1961. 

Fermi, Laura. Atoms in the Family. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1954. 

____. Illustrious Immigrants. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968. 

Ferrell, Robert H. The Diary of James C. Hagerty: Eisenhower in Mid-Course, 
1954-1955. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983. 

, ed. Harry S. Truman: A Life. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 
1994. 

Fitzgerald, Frances. Way Out There in the Blue. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2000. 

Ford, Daniel. The Cult of the Atom. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1982. 

Frayn, Michael. Copenhagen. New York: Random House, 1998. 

Furman, Necah Stewart. Sandia National Laboratories: The Postwar Decade. 
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1989. 

Gaddis, John Lewis. The Long Peace. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987. 

___. Strategies of Containment. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982. 

___. The United States and the End of the Cold War. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1992. 

___. We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History. Oxford: Oxford University 


Press, 1997. 

Gaddis, John Lewis, Philip Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan Rosenberg, 
eds. Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999. 

Galison, Peter. Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1997. 

Galison, Peter, and David J. Stump, eds. The Disunity of Science: Boundaries, 
Contexts, and Power. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1996. 

Gamow, George. My World Line. New York: Viking, 1970. 

___. Thirty Years That Shook Physics. New York: Dover Publications, 1996. 

Garthoff, Raymond L. Détente and Confrontation. Washington, DC: Brookings, 
1985. 

___. The Great Transition. Washington, DC: Brookings, 1994. 

___.A Journey Through the Cold War. Washington, DC: Brookings, 2001. 

Gerhart, Eugene C. America’s Advocate: Robert H. Jackson. Indianapolis, IN: 
Bobbs-Merrill, 1958. 

Getting, Ivan. All in a Lifetime: Science in the Defense of Democracy. New York: 
Vantage Press, 1989. 

Gilpin, Robert. American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1962. 

Ginsberg, Vitaly. On Physics and Astrophysics. Moscow: Bureau Quantum, 
1995. 

Golden, William T., ed. Science and Technology Advice to the President, 
Congress, and Judiciary. New York: Pergamon Books, 1988. 

Goldfischer, David. The Best Defense. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1993. 

Goldstein, Jack S. A Different Sort of Time: The Life of Jerrold R. Zacharias. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992. 

Goodchild, Peter. Edward Teller: The Real Dr. Strangelove. London: Weidenfeld 
& Nicolson, 2004. 

___.J. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1981. 

Gorelik, Gennady. Andrei Sakharov: Science and Freedom. Moscow: RkhD, 
2000. 

Goudsmit, Samuel A. Alsos. New York: Henry Schuman, 1947. 

Gowing, Margaret. Britain and Atomic Energy, 1939-1945. Vol. 1. London: 
Macmillan, 1964. 

___. Britain and Atomic Energy, 1945-1952. Vol. 2. London: Macmillan, 1974. 

Greenstein, Fred I. The Hidden-Hand Presidency. New York: Basic Books, 1982. 

Groves, Leslie R. Now It Can Be Told. New York: Harper & Row, 1962. 

Gusterson, Hugh. Nuclear Rites. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 

Hamby, Alonzo L. Man of the People: A Life of Harry S. Truman. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1995. 

Hansen, Chuck. The Swords of Armageddon: U.S. Nuclear Weapons Development 
Since 1945. CD-ROM. 8 vols. Chukelea Publications, 1995. 

___. U.S. Nuclear Weapons: The Secret History. New York: Orion Books, 1988. 

Hawkins, David. Project Y: The Los Alamos Story. Part 1, Toward Trinity. 
Woodbury, NY: American Institute of Physics, Tomash, 1983. 

Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr. Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in 


America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999. 

Heilbron, J. L., and Robert Seidel. Lawrence and His Laboratory: A History of 
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1989. 

Heims, Steve J. John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1980. 

Heisenberg, Elisabeth. Inner Exile: Recollection of a Life with Werner Heisenberg. 
Boston: Birkhauser, 1984. 

Heisenberg, Werner. Physics and Beyond. New York: Harper & Row, 1972. 

Herken, Gregg. Brotherhood of the Bomb. New York: Holt, 2002. 

___. Cardinal Choices: Presidential Science Advising from the Atomic Bomb to 
SDI. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992. 

___. Counsels of War. New York: Knopf, 1985. 

___. The Winning Weapon: The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War. New York: 
Knopf, 1980. 

Hershberg, James. James B. Conant: Harvard to Hiroshima and the Making of 
the Nuclear Age. New York: Knopf, 1993. 

Hewlett, Richard G., and Oscar E. Anderson Jr. The New World: A History of 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission. Vol. 1, 1939-1946. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1972. 

Hewlett, Richard G., and Francis Duncan. Atomic Shield: A History of the 
United States Atomic Energy Commission. Vol. 2, 1947-1952. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1972. 

Hewlett, Richard G., and Jack M. Holl. Atoms for Peace and War: Eisenhower 
and the Atomic Energy Commission, 1953-1961. Vol. 3. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1989. 

Hoddeson, Lillian, Paul W. Henriksen, Roger A. Meade, and Catherine 
Westfall. Critical Assembly. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 

Holloway, David. The Soviet Union and the Arms Race. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1983. 

___. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994. 

Holton, Gerald. The Advancement of Science, and Its Burdens. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1986. 

Holton, Gerald, and Robert S. Morison, eds. Limits of Scientific Inquiry. New 
York: Norton, 1978. 

Hoopes, Townsend, and Douglas Brinkley. Driven Patriot: The Life and Times of 
James Forrestal. New York: Knopf, 1992. 

Hughes, Emmet John. The Ordeal of Power. New York: Atheneum, 1963. 

Immerman, Richard H. John Foster Dulles: Piety, Pragmatism and Power in U.S. 
Foreign Policy. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1999. 

Iriye, Akira. Power and Culture: The Japanese-American War, 1941-1945. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981. 

Irving, David. The German Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1967. 

Jackson, Robert H. That Man: An Insider’s Portrait of Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
Edited by John Q. Barrett. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 

Jenkins, Edith. Against a Field Sinister: Memoirs and Stories. San Francisco: City 
Lights Books, 1991. 

Jones, Vincent C. U.S. Army in World War II, Special Studies, Manhattan: The 


Army and the Atomic Bomb. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office, 1985. 

Jungk, Robert. Brighter Than a Thousand Suns. New York: Harcourt Brace, 
1958. 

Kac, Mark. Enigmas of Chance. New York: Harper & Row, 1985. 

Kamen, Martin. Radiant Science, Dark Politics: A Memoir of the Nuclear Age. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986. 

Kaplan, Fred. The Wizards of Armageddon. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983. 

Kennan, George F. The Cloud of Danger. Boston: Little, Brown, 1977. 

___. Memoirs. Vol. 1, 1925-1950. Boston: Little, Brown, 1967. 

. Memoirs. Vol. 2, 1950-1963. Boston: Little, Brown, 1972. 

____. The Nuclear Delusion. New York: Pantheon, 1976. 

____. Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin. Boston: Little, Brown, 1960. 

Kevles, Daniel. The Physicists: The History of a Scientific Community in Modern 
America. New York: Vintage, 1979. 

Khariton, Yuli B., and Yury N. Smirnov. Myths and Reality of the Soviet Atomic 
Project. Arzamas 16: Russian Federal Nuclear Center, 1994. 

Killian, James R. The Education of a College President. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1985. 

___. Sputnik, Scientists, and Eisenhower. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977. 

Kipphardt, Heinar. In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer. Trans. by Ruth 
Speirs. New York: Hill and Wang, 1985. 

Kistiakowsky, George. A Scientist at the White House. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1976. 

Klehr, Harvey, John Earl Haynes, and Fridrikh I. Firsow. The Secret World of 
American Communism. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1995. 

Krock, Arthur. Memoirs. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1968. 

Kuhns, Woodrow J., ed. Assessing the Soviet Threat: The Early Cold War Years. 
Washington, DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence, CIA, 1997. 

Kunetka, James. City of Fire. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 
1979. 

____. Oppenheimer: The Years of Risk. Englewood, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1969. 

Lamont, Lansing. Day of Trinity. New York: Atheneum, 1965. 

Lamphere, Robert, and Tom Shachtman. The FBI-KGB War: A Special Agent’s 
Story. New York: Random House, 1986. 

Lanouette, William, with Bela Szilard. Genius in the Shadows: A Biography of 
Leo Szilard, the Man Behind the Bomb. New York: Scribner’s, 1992. 

Lansdale, John, Jr. John Lansdale, Jr., Military Service Record. Privately 
printed, 1987. 

Lapp, Ralph E. My Life with Radiation: The Truth About Hiroshima. Madison, 
WI: Cogito Books, 1985. 

____. The Weapons Culture. New York: Norton, 1968. 

Leffler, Melvyn P. A Preponderance of Power. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1992. 

Libby, Leona M. The Uranium People. New York: Scribner’s, 1979. 

Lichtenstein, Alice. The Genius of the World. Cambridge, MA: Zoland Books, 
2000. 

Lilienthal, David E. The Journals of David E. Lilienthal. Vol. 2, The Atomic 
Energy Years, 1945-1950. New York: Harper & Row, 1964. 


___. The Journals of David E. Lilienthal. Vol. 4, The Road to Change, 1955- 
1959. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 

___. The Journals of David E. Lilienthal. Vol. 5, The Harvest Years, 1959-1963. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1971. 

MacEachin, Douglas J. The Final Months of the War with Japan. Washington, 
DC: Central Intelligence Agency, Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1998. 

Macrae, Norman. John von Neumann: The Scientific Genius Who Pioneered the 
Modern Computer, Game Theory, Nuclear Deterrence, and Much More. New 
York: Pantheon, 1992. 

Major, John. The Oppenheimer Hearing. New York: Stein and Day, 1971. 

Malkov, Viktor. The Manhattan Project: Intelligence and Diplomacy. Moscow: 
Nauka Publishing House, 1995. 

Manchester, William. The Glory and the Dream: A Narrative History of America, 
1932-1972. New York: Bantam, 1984. 

Mark, Hans, and Lowell Wood. Energy in Physics, War and Peace: A Festschrift 
Celebrating Edward Teller’s 80th Birthday. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988. 

McMahon, Thomas. Principles of American Nuclear Chemistry. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1970. 

McPhee, John. The Curve of Binding Energy: A Journey into the Awesome and 
Alarming World of Theodore B. Taylor. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 
1973. 

Meilinger, Phillip S. Hoyt S. Vandenberg: The Life of a General. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1989. 

Merry, Robert W. Taking on the World. New York: Viking, 1996. 

Michelmore, Peter. The Swift Years: The Robert Oppenheimer Story. New York: 
Dodd, Mead, 1969. 

Millis, Walter, ed. The Forrestal Diaries. New York: Putnam, 1952. 

Morland, Howard. The Secret That Exploded. New York: Random House, 1979. 

Morrison, Philip. Nothing Is Too Wonderful to Be True. Woodbury, NY: 
American Institute of Physics, 1995. 

Morse, Philip. In at the Beginnings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977. 

Moss, Norman. Klaus Fuchs. New York: St. Martin’s, 1987. 

___. Men Who Play God. New York: Harper & Row, 1968. 

Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. Secrecy. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1998. 

Murray, Thomas E. Nuclear Policy for War and Peace. Cleveland: World 
Publishing, 1960. 

___. The Predicament of Our Age. New York: Privately printed, 1955. 

Nelson, Steve, James R. Barrett, and Rob Ruck. Steve Nelson, American Radical. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1981. 

Newhouse, John. War and Peace in the Nuclear Age. New York: Knopf, 1989. 

Nichols, K. D. The Road to Trinity: A Personal Account of How America’s Nuclear 
Policies Were Made. New York: Morrow, 1987. 

Nolan, Janne E. Guardians of the Arsenal. New York: Basic Books, 1989. 

Norris, R. Standish. Racing for the Bomb. South Royalton, VT: Steerforth, 2002. 

Nuclear Weapons Databook. Vol. 1, U.S. Nuclear Forces and Capabilities. Thomas 
B. Cochran, William B. Arkin, and Milton M. Hoenig. Cambridge, MA: 
Ballinger, 1984. 


Nuclear Weapons Databook. Vol. 2, U.S. Nuclear Warhead Production. Thomas 
B. Cochran, William B. Arkin, Robert S. Norris, and Milton M. Hoenig. 
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1987. 

Nuclear Weapons Databook. Vol. 3, U.S. Nuclear Warhead Facility Profiles. 
Thomas B. Cochran, William B. Arkin, Robert S. Norris, and Milton M. 
Hoenig. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1987. 

Nuclear Weapons Databook. Vol. 4, Soviet Nuclear Weapons. Thomas B. 
Cochran, William B. Arkin, Robert S. Norris, and Jeffrey I. Sands. New 
York: Harper & Row, 1989. 

Nuclear Weapons Databook. Vol. 5, British, French, and Chinese Nuclear 
Weapons. Robert S. Norris, Andrew S. Burrows, and Richard W. Fieldhouse. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994. 

Nuclear Weapons Databook, Working Paper. U.S.-USSR/Russian Strategic 
Offensive Nuclear Forces, 1945-1996. Robert S. Norris and Thomas B. 
Cochran. Washington, DC: Natural Resources Defense Council, 1997. 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert. Atom and Void: Essays on Science and Community. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989. 

___. The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for Physicists. London: Oxford University 
Press, 1964. 

___. The Open Mind. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1955. 

___. Science and the Common Understanding. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1953. 

____. Uncommon Sense. Boston: Birkhauser, 1984. 

Oshinsky, David M. A Conspiracy So Immense. New York: Free Press, 1983. 

Pais, Abraham. Einstein Lived Here. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 

___. Niels Bohr’s Times. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991. 

___. “Subtle Is the Lord.” New York: Oxford University Press, 1982. 

___.A Tale of Two Continents: A Physicist’s Life in a Turbulent World. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997. 

Palevsky, Mary. Atomic Fragments. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2000. 

Pape, Robert A. Bombing to Win. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996. 

Peat, F. David. Infinite Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997. 

Peierls, Rudolph. Bird of Passage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1985. 

Pfau, Richard. No Sacrifice Too Great: The Life of Lewis L. Strauss. 
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1984. 

Polenberg, Richard, ed. In the Matter of Robert J. Oppenheimer: The Security 
Clearance Hearing. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002. 

Powers, Thomas. Heisenberg’s War: The Secret History of the German Bomb. 
New York: Knopf, 1993. 

Rabi, I. I., Robert Serber, Victor F. Weisskopf, Abraham Pais, and Glenn T. 
Seaborg. Oppenheimer. New York: Scribner’s, 1969. 

Regis, Ed. Who Got Einstein’s Office? Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987. 

Reston, James. Deadline. New York: Random House, 1991. 

Rhodes, Richard. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1995. 

___. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1986. 


Rigden, John S. Rabi. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 

Rogow, Arnold A. James Forrestal. New York: Macmillan, 1963. 

Romerstein, Herbert, and Eric Breindel. The Venona Secrets: Exposing Soviet 
Espionage and America’s Traitors. Washington, DC: Regnery, 2000. 

Rosenthal, Debra. At the Heart of the Bomb. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1990. 

Rossi, Bruno. Moments in the Life of a Scientist. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990. 

Rota, Gian-Carlo. Indiscrete Thoughts. Boston: Birkhauser, 1997. 

Rouze, Michel. Robert Oppenheimer: The Man and His Theories. Greenwich, CT: 
Fawcett, 1965. 

Rovere, Richard H. Senator Joe McCarthy. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1959. 

Rowny, Edward L. It Takes One to Tango. Washington, DC: Brassey’s, 1992. 

Royal, Denise. The Story of J. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: St. Martin’s, 
1969. 

Sakharov, Andrei. Memoirs. New York: Knopf, 1990. 

Schecter, Jerrold L., and Leona P. Schecter. Sacred Secrets: How Soviet 
Intelligence Operations Changed American History. Washington, DC: 
Brassey’s, 2002. 

Schrecker, Ellen W. No Ivory Tower: McCarthyism and the Universities. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1986. 

Schwartz, Stephen I. Atomic Audit. Washington, DC: Brookings, 1998. 

Schweber, Silvan. In the Shadow of the Bomb: Bethe, Oppenheimer, and the 
Moral Responsibility of the Scientist. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2000. 

____. QED and the Men Who Made It. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1994. 

Seaborg, Glenn. Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Test Ban. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1981. 

Seaborg, Glenn T., with Eric Seaborg. Adventures in the Atomic Age: From Watts 
to Washington. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2001. 

Segré, Emilio. Enrico Fermi: Physicist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1970. 

___.A Mind Always in Motion. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993. 

Seidel, Robert W. Los Alamos and the Development of the Atomic Bomb. Los 
Alamos, NM: Otowi Crossing Press, 1995. 

Serber, Robert. The Los Alamos Primer: The First Lectures on How to Build an 
Atomic Bomb. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992. 

Serber, Robert, with Robert P. Crease. Peace and War. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1998. 

Shepley, James, and Clay Blair Jr. The Hydrogen Bomb: The Men, the Menace, 
the Mechanism. New York: David McKay, 1954. 

Sherwin, Martin. A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance. 
New York: Knopf, 1975. 

Smith, Alice Kimball. A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’ Movement in America, 
1945-47. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971. 

Smith, Alice Kimball, and Charles Weiner, eds. Robert Oppenheimer, Letters and 
Recollections. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980. 

Smith, Gerard C. Disarming Diplomat. Lanham, MD: Madison Books, 1996. 


Smyth, Henry DeWolf. Atomic Energy for Military Purposes: The Official Report 
on the Development of the Atomic Bomb Under the Auspices of the United 
States Government, 1940-1945. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1989. 

Stein, Jonathan B. From H-Bomb to Star Wars. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath, 
1984. 

Stern, Philip M., with Harold P. Green. The Oppenheimer Case: Security on 
Trial. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 

Straight, Michael. After Long Silence. New York: Norton, 1983. 

Strauss, Lewis L. Men and Decisions. New York: Macmillan, 1962. 

Swanberg, W. A. Luce and His Empire. New York: Scribner’s, 1972. 

Sudoplatov, Pavel, and Anatoli Sudoplatov, with Jerrold L. Schecter and 
Leona P. Schecter. Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness—A 
Soviet Spymaster. Boston: Little, Brown, 1994. 

Sylves, Richard T. The Nuclear Oracles: A Political History of the General 
Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, 1947-1977. Ames: 
Iowa State University Press, 1987. 

Szasz, Ferenc Morton. The Day the Sun Rose Twice. Albuquerque: University of 
New Mexico Press, 1984. 

Talbott, Strobe. The Master of the Game: Paul Nitze and the Nuclear Peace. New 
York: Knopf, 1988. 

Teller, Edward. Better a Shield Than a Sword: Perspectives on Defense and 
Technology. New York: Free Press, 1987. 

___. Energy from Heaven and Earth. San Francisco: Freeman, 1979. 

___. The Pursuit of Simplicity. Malibu, CA: Pepperdine University Press, 1981. 

Teller, Edward, and Albert Latter. Our Nuclear Future: Facts, Dangers, and 
Opportunities. New York: Criterion Books, 1958. 

Teller, Edward, with Allen Brown. The Legacy of Hiroshima. New York: 
Doubleday, 1962. 

Teller, Edward, with Judith Shoolery. Memoirs: A Twentieth-Century Journey in 
Science and Politics. New York: Perseus Press, 2001. 

Thackara, James. America’s Children. Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, 2001. 

Thorne, Kip S. Black Holes and Time Warps. New York: Norton, 1994. 

Toulmin, Stephen. Foresight and Understanding. New York: Harper & Row, 
1961. 

Trachtenberg, Marc. A Constructed Peace. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1999. 

___. History and Strategy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991. 

Truman, Harry S. Memoirs. Vol. 1, Year of Decisions. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1955. 

___. Memoirs. Vol. 2, Years of Trial and Hope. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1956. 

Udall, Stewart. The Myths of August. New York: Pantheon, 1994. 

Ulam, S. M. Adventures of a Mathematician. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1991. 

United States Atomic Energy Commission. In the Matter of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer: Transcript of Hearing Before Personnel Security Board and Texts 
of Principal Documents and Letters. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971. 

Van DeMark, Brian. Pandora’s Keepers. Boston: Little, Brown, 2003. 


Van der Post, Laurens. The Night of the New Moon. London: Hogarth Press, 
1970. 

von Hippel, Frank. Citizen Scientist. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991. 

Walker, Samuel J. Prompt and Utter Destruction. Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1997. 

Weart, Spencer, and Gertrude W. Szilard, eds. Leo Szilard: His Version of the 
Facts. Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978. 

Weinstein, Allen. Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case. New York: Random House, 
1997. 

Weinstein, Allen, and Alexander Vassiliev. The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage 
in America—The Stalin Era. New York: Random House, 1999. 

Weisgall, Jonathan M. Operation Crossroads: The Atomic Tests at Bikini Atoll. 
Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1994. 

Wheeler, John Archibald, with Kenneth Ford. Geons, Black Holes, and 
Quantum Foam: A Life in Physics. New York: Norton, 1998. 

Wicker, Tom. Dwight D. Eisenhower. New York: Times Books, 2002. 

Wiesner, Jerome B. Where Science and Politics Meet. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1961. 

Wigner, Eugene. The Recollections of Eugene Wigner. As told to Andrew 
Szanton. New York: Plenum Press, 1992. 

Williams, Robert C. Klaus Fuchs, Atom Spy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1987. 

Williams, Robert C., and Philip L. Cantelon, eds. The American Atom: A 
Documentary History of Nuclear Policies from the Discovery of Fission to the 
Present, 1939-1984. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984. 

Wittner, Lawrence S. One World or None. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1993. 

Wyden, Peter. Day One: Before Hiroshima and After. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1984. 

York, Herbert F. The Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller, and the Superbomb. San 
Francisco: Freeman, 1976. 

___. Arms and the Physicist. Woodbury, NY: American Institute of Physics, 
1995. 

____. Making Weapons, Talking Peace: A Physicist’s Odyssey from Hiroshima to 
Geneva. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 

___. Race to Oblivion: A Participant’s View of the Arms Race. New York: Simon 
& Schuster, 1970. 

Zachary, G. Pascal. Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the American 
Century. New York: Free Press, 1997. 

Ziegler, Charles A., and David Jacobson. Spying Without Spies: Origins of 
America’s Secret Nuclear Surveillance System. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1995. 


Articles 


Alsop, Joseph, and Stewart Alsop. “We Accuse!” Harper’s, October 1954, 24- 
25. 

Arneson, R. Gordon. “The H-Bomb Decision.” Foreign Service Journal 46 (May 
1969): 27-29; (June 1969): 24. 

Baker, Richard Allen. “A Slap at the ‘Hidden-Hand Presidency’: The Senate 


and the Lewis Strauss Affair.” Congress and the Presidency 14, no. 1 (Spring 
1987): 1-16. 

Bernstein, Barton J. “The Atomic Bombings Reconsidered.” Foreign Affairs, 
January-February 1995, 137-152. 

___. “Crossing the Rubicon.” International Security 14, no. 2 (Fall 1989): 132- 
160. 

___. “Eclipsed by Hiroshima and Nagasaki: Early Thinking About Tactical 
Nuclear Weapons.” International Security, Spring 1991, 149-173. 

___. “Four Physicists and the Bomb.” Historical Studies in the Physical and 
Biological Sciences 18, part two (1988): 231-261. 

___. “The H-Bomb Decisions: Were They Inevitable?” In National Security and 
International Stability, ed. B. Brodie, M. D. Intriligator, and R. Kolkowicz. 
Boston: Oelgeschlager, Gunn, 1983, 327-356. 

___. “Oppenheimer and the Radioactive Poison Plan.” Technology Review, 
May/June 1985, 14-17. 

___. “The Oppenheimer Conspiracy.” Discover, March 1985, 22-32. 

___. “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered.” Stanford Law 
Review 42 (July 1990): 1383-1484. 

___. “Truman and the H-Bomb.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 1984, 
12-18. 

Bernstein, Barton J., and Peter Galison. “In Any Light: Scientists and the 
Decision to Build the Superbomb, 1952-1954.” Historical Studies in the 
Physical and Biological Sciences 19, part 2 (1989): 328. 

Bethe, Hans A. “Biographical Memoirs of the Fellows of the Royal Society” 14 
(1968): 391-416. 

___. “Comments on the History of the H-Bomb,” Los Alamos Science, Fall 
1982, 43-53. 

___. “Rewriting the History of the H-Bomb.” Science, November 19, 1982, 
769-772. 

Bix, Herbert P. “Japan’s Delayed Surrender: A Reinterpretation.” Diplomatic 
History 19, no. 2 (Spring 1995): 197-225. 

Bliven, Naomi. “Ike.” New Yorker, July 1, 1985, 95-97. 

Brands, H. W. “The Age of Vulnerability: Eisenhower and the National 
Insecurity State.” American Historical Review, Fall 1989, 963-989. 

Broad, William J. “Soviets Shown to Have Lagged on H-Bomb in 50’s.” New 
York Times, October 7, 1990. 

Bundy, McGeorge. “The Missed Chance to Stop the H-Bomb.” New York 
Review of Books 29, no. 8 (May 13, 1982): 19. 

Burr, William, and Hector L. Montford. “The Making of the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty, 1958-1963.” www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/nsa/NC/nuchis/html. 
Posting for August 8, 2003. 

Bush, Vannevar. “If We Alienate Our Scientists.” New York Times Magazine, 
June 13, 1954, 9. 

Chace, James. “Sharing the Atom Bomb.” Foreign Affairs, January-February 
1996. 

Coughlin, Robert. “Dr. Edward Teller’s Magnificent Obsession.” Life, 
September 1954, 60. 

___. “The Tangled Drama and Private Hells of Two Famous Scientists.” Life, 
December 13, 1963, 87. 


Day, Michael A. “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science.” Centaurus 43 
(2001): 73-112. 

“The Decade of Innovation: Los Alamos, Livermore, and National Security 
Decision-Making in the 1950s.” Workshop at Pleasanton, California, 
February 19-21, 1992, published by the Center for Security and 
Technology Studies. 

De Santillana, Georgio. “Galileo and J. Robert Oppenheimer.” Reporter, 
December 26, 1957, 10-18. 

DeWitt, Hugh E. “Labs Drive the Arms Race.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
November 1984. 

DeWitt, Hugh E., and Gerald E. Marsh. “Stockpile Reliability and Nuclear 
Testing.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, April 1984. 

Dingman, Roger. “Atomic Diplomacy During the Korean War.” International 
Security 13, no. 3 (Winter 1988/1989): 50-91. 

Elliot, David C. “Project Vista and Nuclear Weapons in Europe.” International 
Security 2, no. 1 (Summer 1986): 163-183. 

Feld, Bernard. “The Oppenheimer Case.” American Scientist, July 1970. 

Gaddis, John Lewis. “The Tragedy of Cold War History.” Foreign Affairs, 
January-February 1994, 142-154. 

Garthoff, Raymond L. “Assessing the Adversary: Estimates by the Eisenhower 
Administration of Soviet Intentions and Capabilities.” Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 1991. 

Goncharov, German A. “Thermonuclear Milestones.” Physics Today, November 
1996, 44-61. 

Goodman, Michael S. “The Grandfather of the Atomic Bomb? Anglo-American 
Intelligence and Klaus Fuchs.” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 32, 
part 1: 1-22. 

Gorelik, Gennady. “The Metamorphosis of Andrei Sakharov.” Scientific 
American, March 1999. 

Green, Harold P. “The Oppenheimer Case: A Study in the Abuse of Law.” 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, September 1977: 12. 

___. “Q-Clearance: The Development of a Personnel Security Program.” 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, May 1964. 

Hammond, Thomas T. “Did the United States Use Atomic Diplomacy Against 
Russia in 1945?” In From the Cold War to Détente, ed. Peter J. Potichnyi 
and Jane P. Shapiro. Boulder, CO: Praeger, 1976. 

Hersey, John. “Hiroshima.” New Yorker, August 31, 1946. 

Hershberg, James G. “Where the Buck Stopped: Harry Truman and the Cold 
War.” Diplomatic History 27, no. 5 (November 2003): 735-739. 

Hoddeson, Lillian, Adrienne Kolb, and Roger Meade. “Extending the Master’s 
Vision: Bradbury at Los Alamos and Lederman at Fermilab.” Los Alamos 
Technical Release, Los Alamos National Laboratory, 1999. 

Holloway, David. “New Light on Early Soviet Bomb Secrets.” Physics Today, 
November 1996, 26-27. 

___. “Soviet Scientists Speak Out.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, May 1996, 
18-19. 

Holton, Gerald. “The Migration of Physicists to the United States.” Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists, April 1984, 18-24. 

___. “Success Sanctifies the Means: Heisenberg, Oppenheimer, and the 


Transition to Modern Physics.” Transformation and Tradition in the Sciences, 
1984, 155-173. 

___. “Young Man Oppenheimer.” Partisan Review, July 1981, 380-388. 

Holtzman, Franklyn D. “Politics and Guesswork: CIA and DIA Estimates of 
Soviet Military Spending.” International Security 14, no. 2 (Fall 1989): 101- 
113. 

Jastrow, Robert. “Why Strategic Superiority Matters.” Commentary, March 
1983. 

Joravsky, David. “Sin and the Scientist.” New York Review of Books, July 17, 
1980, 7-10. 

Kalven, Harry, Jr. “The Case of J. Robert Oppenheimer Before the Atomic 
Energy Commission.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, September 1954, 
259-269. 

Kempton, Murray. “The Ambivalence of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” Esquire, 
December 1983, 236-248. 

Khariton, Yuli. “USSR Nuclear Weapons: Did They Come from America or 
Were They Built Independently?” Izvestia, December 8, 1992. 

Khariton, Yuli, and Yuri Smirnov. “The Khariton Version.” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, May 1993, 20-31. 

Lapp, Ralph E. “Atomic Candor.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, October 
1954. 

Leffler, Melvyn P. “The American Conception of National Security and the 
Beginnings of the Cold War, 1945-48.” American Historical Review 89, no. 
2 (April 1984): 346-400. 

Leskov, Sergei. “Dividing the Glory of the Fathers.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, May 1993, 37-39. 

Mayers, David. “Containment and the Primacy of Diplomacy: George 
Kennan’s Views, 1947-1948.” International Security 11, no. 1 (Summer 
1986): 124-162. 

Miles, Rufus E., Jr. “Hiroshima: The Strange Myth of Half a Million American 
Lives Saved.” International Security 10, no. 2 (Fall 1985): 121-140. 

Morland, Howard. “Errata.” Progressive, December 1979. 

Murray, Thomas E. “Morality and the H-Bomb.” National Catholic Weekly 
Review, December 1, 1956. 

Norris, Robert S., and William M. Arkin. “Russian/Soviet Weapons Secrets 
Revealed.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, April 1993, 48. 

Norton-Taylor, Duncan. “The Controversial Mr. Strauss.” Fortune, January 
1955. 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert. “The Atomic Bomb as a Great Force for Peace.” New 
York Times Magazine, June 9, 1946. 

___. “Atomic Weapons and American Policy.” Foreign Affairs 31:4, July 1953, 
526-535. 

___. “International Control of Atomic Energy.” Foreign Affairs, January 1948. 

Pape, Robert A. “Why Japan Surrendered.” International Security 18:2 (Fall 
1993): 154-201. 

Rabinowich, Eugene. “Fortune’s Own Operation Candor.” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, December 1953. 

Rhodes, Richard. “I Am Become Death: The Agony of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer.” American Heritage, October 1977, 72. 


Rigden, John S. “J. Robert Oppenheimer Before the War.” Scientific American, 
July 1995, 76-81. 

Ritus, V. I. “If Not Me, Then Who?” Priroda, August 1990. 

Rosenberg, David Alan. “American Atomic Strategy and the Hydrogen Bomb 
Decision.” Journal of American History 66 (June 1979): 62-87. 

___. “The Origins of Overkill: Nuclear Weapons and American Strategy, 
1945-1960.” International Security 7, no. 4 (Spring 1983): 3-71. 

___. “A Smoking Radiating Ruin at the End of Two Hours: Documents on 
American Plans for Nuclear War with the Soviet Union, 1954-1955.” 
International Security 6, no. 3 (Winter 1981-82): 3-38. 

___. “U.S. Nuclear Stockpile, 1945 to 1950.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
May 1982, 25-30. 

___. “U.S. Nuclear Strategy: Theory vs. Practice.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, March 1987, 20-26. 

Rota, Gian-Carlo. “The Lost Cafe.” Contention 2, no. 2 (Winter 1993): 41-61. 

Sagdeev, Roald. “Russian Scientists Save American Secrets.” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, May 1993, 32-36. 

Samuels, Gertrude. “A Plea for ‘Candor’ About the Atom.” New York Times 
Magazine, June 21, 1953. 

Schilling, Warner. “The H-Bomb Decision: How to Decide Without Actually 
Choosing.” Political Science Quarterly, March 1961, 24-46. 

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. “The Oppenheimer Case.” Atlantic Monthly, 
October 1954. 

Seidel, Robert W. “A Home for Big Science: AEC’s Lab System.” Historical 
Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 16, part 1 (1986): 135-175. 

___. “The DOE Weapons Laboratories.” Los Alamos National Laboratory, July 
26, 1992. 

Smith, Alice Kimball. “Scientists and Public Issues.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, December 1982, 38-45. 

Smith-Norris, Martha. “The Eisenhower Administration and the Nuclear Test 
Ban Talks, 1958-1960.” Diplomatic History 27, no. 4 (September 2003): 
503-541. 

Stimson, Henry L. “The Decision to Use the Bomb.” Harper’s, February 1947. 

Suri, Jeremy. “The Surprise Attack Conference of 1958.” Diplomatic History 
21, no. 3 (Summer 1997): 417-451. 

Teller, Edward. “The Work of Many People.” Science, February 25, 1955. 

Trachtenberg, Marc. “Truman, Eisenhower, and the Uses of Atomic 
Superiority.” International Security 13, no. 3 (Winter 1988-89): 4-49. 

Trilling, Diana. “The Oppenheimer Case: A Reading of the Testimony.” 
Partisan Review, November—December 1954, 105-142. 

Ulam, S. M. “Thermonuclear Devices.” In Perspectives in Modern Physics: Essays 
in Honor of Hans A. Bethe, ed. R. E. Marshak. New York: John Wiley and 
Sons, 1966. 

Ulam, S., H. W. Kuhn, and Claude E. Shannon. “John von Neumann, 1903-— 
1957.” Perspectives in American History no. 2 (1968): 235-269. 

Unna, Warren. “Dissension in the AEC.” Atlantic Monthly, May 1957. 
Wampler, Robert A. “NATO Strategic Planning and Nuclear Weapons, 1950- 
1957.” Occasional Paper no. 6, Nuclear History Program, University of 

Maryland. 


Weiss, Leonard. “Atoms for Peace.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, November- 
December 2003, 34-44. 

Ziegler, Charles, and David Jacobson. “Intelligence Assessments of Soviet 
Atomic Capability, 1945-1949: Myths, Monopolies, and Maskirovka.” 
Intelligence and National Security 12, no. 4 (1997). 


Unpublished Materials 


___. “The Struggle for the Second Laboratory, 1951-54.” Paper prepared for 
American Historical Association, 1999. 

Bethe, Hans A. Letter to Messrs. Joseph and Stewart Alsop, October 1, 1954, 
Joseph Alsop Papers, LC. 

___. “Memorandum on the History of Thermonuclear Program.” May 28, 
1952. Assembled by Chuck Hansen transcription of May 12, 1990. 

Borden, William Liscum. “Springtime of the Nuclear Debate.” Copy of 
manuscript, given to author by J. K. Mansfield. 

Fitzpatrick, Anne. “Igniting the Light Elements: The Los Alamos 
Thermonuclear Weapons Project, 1942-1952.” Ph.D. diss., Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute, 1998. 

Francis, Sybil. “Between Science and Politics: Edward Teller and the Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory.” Paper prepared for “The Martians: 
Hungarian Emigré Scientists,” a workshop held at Eotvos University, 
Budapest, 1997. 

___. “Race Horses vs. Work Horses: Competition Between the Nuclear 
Weapons Labs in the 1950’s.” Paper prepared for workshop on the 
weapons laboratories at Pleasanton, CA, February 19-21, 1992. 

___. “Warhead Politics: Livermore and the Competitive System of Nuclear 
Weapon Design.” Ph.D. diss., MIT, 1995. 

Getting, Ivan A., and John M. Christie. “David Tressel Griggs.” Paper given to 
author by Ivan Getting. 

Holloway, David. “The Hydrogen Bomb.” From a manuscript dated April 
2002. 

Hughes, Emmet J. Memorial speech for John Courtney Murray, January 16, 
1969, Georgetown University Special Collections. 

“In Memoriam: A Celebration of Thanksgiving for the Life of I. I. Rabi.” 
Privately published. 

Kuchment, Mark. “The Rosenberg Case and the Sarant-Barr Story.” Paper. 

Mark, Carson. “A Short Account of Los Alamos Theoretical Work on 
Thermonuclear Weapons, 1946-1950.” Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
1974. LA-5647-MS, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 

Messer, Robert L. “America’s ‘Sacred Trust’: Truman and the Bomb, 1945- 
1949.” Paper prepared for American Historical Association meeting, 
December 30, 1987. 

Murphy, Charles J. V. Correspondence and papers, property of Edythe M. 
Holbrook. 

Murray, Thomas E. Diary and notes, in the possession of the Murray family. 

Operation Epsilon: The Farm Hall Transcripts, August 8-22, 1945. RG 77, 
NARA. 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert. “Atomic Weapons and American Policy.” Speech and 


discussion at Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, February 17, 
1953. 

___. Speech at meeting of the Association of Los Alamos Scientists, November 
2, 1945, LANL. 

___. Speech at Seven Springs Farm, NY, June 1963, JRO, LC. 

___. Speech on Niels Bohr at Los Alamos, 1967, LANL. 

Schilling, Warner. “Interview with Robert Oppenheimer.” June 12, 1957. J. 
Robert Oppenheimer Papers, Library of Congress. 

Seidel, Robert W. “Ernest Lawrence and the Founding of a Second Nuclear 
Weapons Laboratory at Livermore,” paper presented at the Institute on 
Global Conflict and Cooperation Colloquium, University of California at 
Irvine, May 17, 1984. 

Sherwin, Martin. “Policing Science in Cold War America: The U.S. 
Government and the Conspiracy to Destroy J. Robert Oppenheimer.” 
Speech at Symposium on Science and Technology with a Human Face, 
MIT, 1992. 

Smith, Cyril. Letters to Ralph Lapp, June 23, 1965; Margaret Gowing, July 16, 
1965; Richard G. Hewlett, April 27, 1967. Gift of the author. 

___. “Los Alamos Reminiscences.” August 17, 1964. Gift of the author. 

Stern, Beatrice M. “A History of the Institute for Advanced Study, 1930- 
1950.” 2 vols. 1964, Institute for Advanced Study. Gift of Ed Regis. 

Ulam, Francoise. “Stanislaw Ulam, 1909-1984: A Biographical Profile.” 
American Institute of Physics. 

Walker, John S., and William L. Borden. “Policy and Progress in the H-Bomb 
Program: A Chronology of Leading Events.” Called the Walker-Borden 
Chronology in the notes. RG 128, NARA. 

Weisskopf, Victor F. “Banquet Speech at the Fortieth Anniversary Conference 
of the Los Alamos National Laboratory,” April 15, 1983, Los Alamos 
National Laboratory. 


Author’s Correspondence 


Samuel B. Ballen 
Hans A. Bethe 
Herbert Brownell 
Charles Critchfield 
Lloyd K. Garrison 
Ivan Getting 
Barry Goldwater 
Harold P. Green 
Lee Hancock 
John H. Manley 
J. Carson Mark 
Kathleen Mark 
John Nuckolls 
Abraham Pais 
Joseph Volpe 


Libraries and Oral History Collections 


American Philosophical Society Library: Edward U. Condon Papers, H. D. 
Smyth Papers, Stanislaw Ulam Papers 
Columbia University Oral History Collection: Kenneth Bainbridge, Edward L. 
Beach, Herbert Brownell, William A. M. Burden, Charles Coryell, Gordon 
Dean, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Lloyd K. Garrison, Gordon Gray, Edward S. 
Greenbaum, James Killian, Kenneth D. Nichols, Isidor Isaac Rabi, Norman 
Ramsey 
Cornell University Library: Hans Bethe Papers, Sterling Cole Papers 
Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library: Dwight D. Eisenhower Papers, 
Gordon Gray Papers, James Hagerty Papers 
Georgetown University Library, Special Collections: John Courtney Murray 
Papers 
Harvard University Libraries: 
Houghton Library: Time Inc. files 
Langdell Law Library: Lloyd Garrison Papers, Walter Barton Leach 
Papers 
Pusey Library: James B. Conant Papers 
Herbert Hoover Presidential Library: Bourke B. Hickenlooper Papers, Lewis L. 
Strauss Papers 
John F. Kennedy Presidential Library: McGeorge Bundy Papers, Glenn 
Seaborg Papers, Philip M. Stern Papers 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Archives: Edwin McMillan Papers 
Library of Congress: Joseph Alsop Papers, Vannevar Bush Papers, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer Papers, William S. Parsons Papers, Isidor Isaac Rabi Papers, 
Hoyt S. Vandenberg Papers 
Los Alamos National Laboratory: Norris Bradbury Papers, John Manley 
Papers, Carson Mark Papers 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Special Collections: J. Robert 
Oppenheimer Oral History Collection, Philip Morrison Papers, Cyril Smith 
Papers, Victor Weisskopf Papers, Carroll Wilson Papers 
Seeley Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University: Emmet Hughes 
Papers, David E. Lilienthal Papers, George F. Kennan Papers 
National Archive and Records Administration: Joint Congressional Committee 
on Atomic Energy Files, RG 128, in Washington, DC; Records of the U.S. 
Atomic Energy Commission, RG 326, at College Park, Maryland: AEC 
Secretariat Files; Gordon Dean Files; J. Robert Oppenheimer Personnel 
Security Board Files; Henry D. Smyth Files; Lewis L. Strauss Files; Records 
of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, RG 326, at Coordination and 
Information Center (CIC), Las Vegas, Nevada 
Harry S. Truman Presidential Library: Dean Acheson Papers, Gordon Arneson 
Papers, Gordon Dean Papers, Sidney Souers Papers, Harry S. Truman 
Papers, Eugene Zuckert Oral History 
University of California, Berkeley, Bancroft Library: Herbert Childs Papers, 
Ernest O. Lawrence Papers 
University of California, San Diego, Mandeville Special Collections: Maria 
Goeppert Mayer Papers 
University of Illinois: Louis Ridenour Papers 


University of Maryland, Center for International Security Studies, Nuclear 
History Program: Oral History with Theodore Taylor 

University of Wyoming: Clay Blair Papers 

U.S. Air Force Oral History Program: Interview of Lieutenant General Roscoe 
C. Wilson 

U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation Files: William Liscum Borden no. 
77-37709; Lewis L. Strauss no. 77-47503-2; J. Robert Oppenheimer no. 
10017828, at FBI Reading Room, Washington, DC 


Interviews 


The author is indebted to these individuals, each of whom she interviewed or 
talked with at least six times: Gennady Gorelik, Kay and John Manley, 
Carson and Kay Mark, David and Frances Hawkins, Emily Morrison, Philip 
Morrison, and Francoise Ulam. 

Adams, Ruth. April 29, 1985 

Alsop, Joseph. May 28, 1986 

Anderson, Grace. June 9, 1987 

Appel, Leonard. Nov. 14, 1985 

Arneson, Gordon. Nov. 23, 1985 

Bacher, Robert F. Feb. 3 and 4, 1987 

Bainbridge, Kenneth. Oct. 29, 1986 

Barnett, Henry and Shirley. Feb. 19, 1985 

Bates, Charles W. Oct. 5, 1983; Oct. 12, 1983; Oct. 17, 1983 

Beach, Commander Edward L. Nov. 1986 

Beckerley, James. June 6, 1987 

Bell, Daniel. Jan. 13, 1986 

Bell, George. Oct. 7, 1999; March 8, 2000 

Bethe, Hans. Dec. 3, 1986; Feb. 2, 1987; Aug. 11, 1997 

Beyer, William. April 28, 2001; Oct. 20, 2001 

Blair, Clay, Jr. Feb. 22, 1993; March 3, 1993; March 20, 1994 (telephone) 

Bowditch, Margaret Parsons. July 22, 1992 

Bradbury, Norris. Jan. 8, 1985; Aug. 27, 1986 

Brooks, Harvey. May 22, 1986 

Bundy, McGeorge. April 22, 1986 

Bunkin, Irving. Dec. 4, 1987 

Burroughs, Martha Parsons. March 12, 1985; April 8, 1985; May 24, 1985; 
May 27, 1985; June 10, 1985 (all by telephone) 

Carlson, Bengt. Oct. 8, 2001; Sept. 3, 2005; Sept. 6, 2005; Nov. 11, 2005; 
Nov. 12, 2005; Nov. 14, 2005. 

Carothers, James. Feb. 26, 1992 (telephone) 

Carter, Ashton. June 4, 1985 

Chalk, Rosemary. May 13, 1987 

Cherniss, Harold. Dec. 13, 1985 

Cherniss, Ruth Meyer. Dec. 13, 1985; Feb. 10, 1986 

Conant, Theodore. Nov. 1993 

Cooper, Necia. Aug. 27, 1986 

Corbett, Peggy Felt. Nov. 6, 1987 

Cotter, Francis P. Nov. 21, 1985; May 2, 1990 


Cowan, George. Sept. 28, 1997 

Crawford, Jack. Nov. 28 and 30, 1990 

Critchfield, Charles. Sept. 22, 1983; Oct. 28, 1987; Nov. 5, 1987 

Davis, Robert Raymond. Jan. 10, 1985 

Day, Michael. Feb. 26, 2000 

Dean, Deborah Gore. June 11, 2001 

Deutsch, Martin and Suzanne. Oct. 14, 1998 

DeWitt, Hugh. March 1, 1992 

Diamond, Luna. May 1, 1991 

Dow, Sterling. Feb. 15, 1985 

Drell, Sidney. Jan. 30, 1987 

Duffield, Priscilla Greene. Jan. 16, 1985; Nov. 13, 1987 

Durgin, Charlotte Warner Davis. Nov. 5, 1985; Jan. 14, 1986 

Dyson, Freeman. Dec. 13, 1985 

Ecker, Allan B. June 15 and 18, 1989 

Edsall, John. July 3, 1988 

Elliot, David C. Feb. 4, 1987 

Erdmann, Andrew. April 29, 1999 

Erikson, Erik and Joan. Feb. 6, 1987 

Everett, Dolores. Oct. 17 and 19, 1991 

Everett, William. July 23, 2000 (telephone) 

Fanton, Jonathan. Dec. 28, 1989 

Farley, Philip. Oct. 20, 1983; Feb. 2, 1987 (telephone) 

Feld, Bernard. Feb. 28, 1985 

Fergusson, Peggy. Aug. 9 and 10, 1993 

Feshbach, Herman. Feb. 14, 1990 

Fowler, William A. Feb. 2, 1987 

Friedman, Paul L. May 31, 1986 

Fritchey, Polly (Polly Wisner). June 16, 1989 

Fuller, Clarissa Parsons. Sept. 17, 1986 

Garwin, Richard. Dec. 9, 1986; Feb. 15, 2000 

Gasch, Judge Oliver. Nov. 13, 1991 

Gavin, General James M. June 10, 1986 

Getting, Ivan. June 24, 1986; Oct. 6, 1989 

Gilpatric, Roswell. Nov. 30, 1993 

Gingerich, Owen. Feb. 12, 1990 

Glauber, Roy. Sept. 12, 1985; Nov. 7, 1985; Jan. 29, 1986; Feb. 18, 1987; 
Dec. 1, 1988 

Goldberger, Marvin. Nov. 15, 1988 

Golden, William T. Jan. 3, 1990 

Goldstein, Jack. June 20, 1989 

Goodwin, Guy. June 15, 1989; July 21, 1989; Dec. 18, 1989 

Gorelik, Gennady. April 28, 1993; Nov. 6, 1998; Jan. 20, 1999; Sept. 10, 2001 

Graham, Loren. Feb. 1, 1988 

Gray, Boyden. May 3, 1991 

Gray, Gordon, Jr. April 4, 1989 

Gray, Nancy (Mrs. Gordon Gray). June 14, 1989 

Green, Harold P. Jan. 25, 1984; Feb. 21, 1984; March 7, 1984; April 27, 
1984; May 7, 14, 22, 1984; June 18, 1984; Nov. 13, 1991 


Haar, Karl. July 11, 1990 

Hancock, Lee. Aug. 22, 1983; Sept. 22, 1983; Dec. 13, 1983; Jan. 16, 1985 

Hancock, William. Sept. 25, 1990 

Hannifin, Jerry. July 19, 2003 (telephone) 

Harrington, Joan (Mrs. David Harrington). Nov. 26-27, 1990 

Hawkins, David and Frances. Jan. 30-31, 1985; Feb. 2, 1985; Oct. 4, 1991; 
May 1, 1994; Jan. 1, 1997; Oct. 12, 1997; Jan. 28, 1999; May 20, 2000 

Hein, Hilde Stern. March 7, 1987 

Heller, Leon. Oct. 9, 1999 

Hempelmann, Louis and Eleanor. Dec. 7, 1987; Dec. 10, 1987 

Hewlett, Richard G. May 3, 1990 

Hobson, Verna (Mrs. Wilder Hobson). Sept. 20, 1986 

Hoffman, Stanley. July 18, 1985 

Holbrook, Edythe M. Dec. 17, 1992 

Holbrook, John. Nov. 8, 1993 

Horsky, Charles. Dec. 19, 1986 (telephone) 

Hunt, John. June 26, 1986 

Johnson, Lyall. June 14, 1997 (telephone) 

Kaufman, William W. Feb. 12, 1996 

Kaysen, Carl. March 30, 1999 

Keeler, Norris. July 8, 1989 

Kempton, Mina. May 7, 1988 

Kennan, George F. Dec. 11, 1985 

Kerr, Walter. Jan. 5, 1985 

Kerst, Don. Oct. 29, 1987 

King, Percival L. D. P. Nov. 20, 1983; Dec. 20, 1983; Oct. 12, 1987; Nov. 5, 
1987 

Kuchment, Mark. May 5, 1985; May 9, 1985; May 27, 1985; Oct. 26, 1985 

Lamphere, Robert J. February 1996 (telephone) 

Lansdale, John. Nov. 12, 1991 

Lawrence, Molly. Feb. 24, 1992 

Leva, Marx. Nov. 29, 1990 

Lichtenstein, Alice. Jan. 23, 1986 

Lichtenstein, Immanuel. Feb. 21, 1987 

Lichtenstein, Nancy R. March 3, 1985; Dec. 10, 1985; Feb. 24, 1987; May 7, 
1988; Nov. 14, 1988 

Lilienthal, James and Betty. Jan. 17-18, 1985; Oct. 28-29, 1987; Nov. 20, 
1987 

Livingston, Lois. Oct. 31, 1987 

Livingston, M. Stanley. Sept. 23, 1983 

Lofgren, Edward J. July 19, 1988; Feb. 27, 1992 

Luff, Ruth. Jan. 4, 1992 (telephone) 

MacKenzie, John. Feb. 13, 1985 

MacKinnon, Judge George E. Nov. 13, 1991 

Malkov, Viktor. April 29, 1993 

Manley, John. Jan. 9, 1985; Jan. 18, 1985; Jan. 23, 1985; March 26, 1986; 
March 28, 1986; March 29, 1986; April 28, 1986; Oct. 17, 1987; Nov. 1, 
1987 

Mansfield, J. Kenneth. March 9, 1984; May 27, 1986; May 28, 1986; May 29, 


1986; May 31, 1986; June 1, 1986 

Mark, Carson. Jan. 6, 1985; Jan. 17, 1985; April 2, 1986; April 3, 1986; Aug. 
19, 1986; Aug. 20, 1986; Aug. 21, 1986; Aug. 25, 1986; Aug. 26, 1986; 
Oct. 17, 1987; Nov. 3, 1987; Dec. 10, 1988; Nov. 17, 1991 (telephone); 
Dec. 9, 1991 (telephone); June 14, 1993 

Marks, Anne Wilson. Aug. 2, 1986; Nov. 11, 1986; June 18, 1994; June 3, 
1998; July 21, 1998 

McKibbin, Dorothy. Jan. 6, 1985 

Meade, Roger. Aug. 22, 1986 

Meyer, Cord, Jr. Nov. 7, 1986 

Meyner, Robert and Helen. Nov. 4, 1984 

Mitchell, John F. B. June 29, 1998 (telephone) 

Mitchell, Victor S. and Donna R. Nov. 13, 1990; Nov. 15, 1990 

Murray, Daniel Bradley. Nov. 12, 1990 

Nabokov, Dominique. June 16, 1986 

Nagle, Darragh. July 23, 2001 

Nagle, William J. April 30, 1990; May 1, 1990 

Nekrich, Alexander M. March 11, 1991 

Nelson, Steve. Aug. 28, 1985 

Neumann, Honora Fergusson. May 5, 1988; Nov. 14-15, 1988 

Nitze, Paul. July 20, 1989 

Norton, Garrison. Sept. 28, 1992 

O’Keefe, Bernard J. March 27, 1985 

Olinger, Chauncey. April 14, 1989; Nov. 11, 2003 

Oppenheimer, Frank. Sept. 1, 1983 

Oppenheimer, Dr. Judith. Feb. 7, 1987 

Oppenheimer, Peter. Jan. 28, 1985; Nov. 16, 1987 

Oulahan, Courts. July 13, 1990 

Pais, Abraham. April 22, 1986 (telephone); Nov. 18, 1986 

Parkinson, Kenneth Wells. Nov. 14, 1991 

Peierls, Rudolph. March 6, 1986 

Pfau, Richard. July 11, 1989 (telephone); Aug. 4, 1989 (telephone); Nov. 3, 
1993 (telephone) 

Piel, Gerard. Oct. 4, 1989 

Pitzer, Kenneth. March 2, 1992 

Pound, John. Nov. 10, 1987 

Quesada, Elwood R. Sept. 26, 1992 (telephone) 

Rabi, Helen. Aug. 13, 1985; Nov. 13, 1985; April 14, 1989; April 28, 1989; 
Oct. 5, 1989; April 20, 1991 

Rabi, Isidor Isaac. Aug. 13, 1985; Jan. 30, 1986; Jan. 31, 1986; Feb. 21, 1987 

Raher, Patrick M. Nov. 11, 1991 

Ramsey, Norman. June 7, 1986 (telephone); June 5, 1989 

Redman, Leslie. Nov. 20, 1987; Dec. 10, 1987 

Robb, Irene Rice. Nov. 11, 1988 

Rosen, Louis. April 3, 1986; July 26, 2001 

Rosenfeld, Susan F. July 1, 1985 

Rota, Gian-Carlo. Sept. 15, 1986; Nov. 1, 1986 

Roy, Max. Oct. 11, 1991 

Rubel, John. Oct. 9, 1987 


Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. Dec. 2, 1985 

Schreiber, Raemer. Nov. 19, 1987 

Seidel, Robert. April 8, 1986; June 8, 1993; March 16, 2001; May 12, 2001 

Serber, Robert. Feb. 18, 1985; April 22, 1986 

Sherr, Pat. May 5, 1988 

Sherwin, Martin. March 1, 1985 

Shurcliff, William A. June 29, 1994 

Silverman, Samuel J. Oct. 5, 1989; July 2, 1998 

Singer, Louise Oppenheimer. June 18, 1986 (telephone) 

Slansky, Richard. Jan. 25, 1985; October 1991 

Sloss, Leon. March 2, 1998 

Smith, Alice K. and Cyril S. March 6, 1985; Nov. 29, 1985; May 20, 1986; 
Feb. 25, 1987; March 5, 1987; Nov. 3, 1990 

Smyth, Henry DeWolf. Dec. 10, 1985 

Stern, Philip. Nov. 14, 1986 

Stever, Guyford. April 27, 1990 (telephone) 

Straus, Donald B. Jan. 18, 1986 (telephone) 

Strauss, Alice H. Nov. 28, 1990 

Strauss, Lewis H. July 6, 1989 

Suid, Larry. April 29, 1985; June 17, 1985; Nov. 23, 1985 

Sylves, Richard. Aug. 5-6, 1986; March 30, 1987 

Teller, Edward. July 18, 1988; May 8, 1990; June 7, 1993 

Thorn, Robert. Nov. 23, 1987 

Topkis, Jay. July 1-2, 1998 

Tyler, Judge Harold R. Oct. 24, 1989 (telephone) 

Unna, Warren. Dec. 20, 1989 

Volpe, Joseph, Jr. Nov. 19, 1985; Nov. 21, 1985; July 6-7, 1989; May 12, 
1994 

Wald, Judge Patricia. Nov. 14, 1991 (telephone) 

Walkowicz, Christian Anne. Nov. 9, 1993 

Wechsler, Jacob. July 25, 2001; Oct. 19, 2001 

Weiner, Charles. Nov. 4, 1985 

Weisskopf, Victor. Feb. 25, 1985; Oct. 28, 1986 

Wheeler, John Archibald. Nov. 14, 1985 

Wheeler, Michael. March 24, 1998 

White, Stephen. Aug. 14, 1985; Aug. 24, 1985; Aug. 27, 1985; July 28, 1986; 
May 1987 

Wiesner, Jerome. May 28, 1987 (telephone) 

Wilson, Robert R. and Jane. Dec. 3, 1986; June 24, 1987 

Woodruff, Roy. June 9, 1993 

Wyzanski, Charles. Dec. 27, 1985 

Zacharias, Jerrold. Dec. 31, 1985; May 1, 1986 

Zuckert, Eugene. Nov. 28, 1990 


Interviews by Others 


Stanley Goldberg with John Lansdale, Feb. 7, 1990 
Fred “Dusty” Rhodes, Sept. 17, 1991 
Jack Holl with Lee Hancock, c. 1972, at Albuquerque Airport motel 


Bill Moyers with I. I. Rabi, A Walk Through the Twentieth Century, shown on 
PBS, June 26, 1983 
Arthur Lawrence Norberg, for the University of California, Berkeley (Bancroft 
Library), with Norris E. Bradbury, Feb. 11, 1976 
Darol K. Froman, June 7, 1976 
John H. Manley, July 9 and 11, 1976 
J. Carson Mark, June 8, 1976 
Raemer H. Schreiber, Feb. 13, 1976 
Silvan Schweber with George Bell, July 19, 1990 
Norris Bradbury, July 19, 1990 
Charles Critchfield, July 17 and 19, 1990 
Carson Mark, July 16 and 19, 1990 
Nicholas Metropolis, Aug. 20, 1990 
Edward Teller, July 21, 1990 
Garry Sturgess with K. D. Nichols, Oct. 30, 1989 


INDEX 


Abel, Elie, 247 

Acheson, Dean: Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 10, 60, 201, 218, 263; ad hoc panel 
on atomic policy appointed by, 59-60, 145; attempts to slow hydrogen 
bomb development, 50, 51-52; Dean complains about Teller to, 132; 
dinner with Oppenheimers before Gray board hearing, 199; at 
Dumbarton Oaks meeting on atomic weapons, 59; at final meeting of 
committee to advise Truman on hydrogen bomb, 53-54; and Alger Hiss, 
52; and Kennan, 34, 51; Lilienthal announces his retirement to, 50; meets 
with Truman about hydrogen bomb development, 54, 55; and Mike test 
postponement, 139, 140; and Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment, 147; as 
secretary of state, 52; on Soviet acquisition of atomic bomb, 20 

Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 10, 60, 201, 218, 263 

Adams, Sherman, 238, 306n2 

AEC. See Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) 

Air Force: Blair introduced to Air Force “cabal” by Murphy, 241-42; as 
continuing to order weapons from Los Alamos, 134; on delivery of 
hydrogen bomb, 258-59; hydrogen bomb wanted by, 57-58, 94; new 
laboratory supported by, 4, 130, 131, 134, 293n9, 293n12; nuclear- 
powered aircraft supported by, 4, 218; Oppenheimer’s security clearance 
canceled by, 152, 300n16; Strategic Air Command, 153, 163, 219, 259; 
Teller urges briefing about hydrogen bomb, 28; Vista report opposed by, 
4-5, 152, 153, 154 

Alarm Clock, 74, 83, 194 

Allardice, Corbin, 175 

Alsop, Joseph, 161, 163, 230, 247, 251, 306n2 

Alsop, Stewart, 230, 247, 268, 306n2 

Alvarez, Luis: animosity toward Oppenheimer, 218; at GAC’s Halloween 1949 
meeting, 36; Gray board testimony of, 216, 217-18; on hydrogen bomb 
development without testing, 295n12; and Latimer talk to Lawrence 
about Soviet atomic bomb, 26-27; and Lawrence meet with McMahon 
about hydrogen bomb, 27; and Lawrence meet with Teller about 
hydrogen bomb, 27; Lawrence wants on GAC, 129; on Lilienthal’s 
attitude toward hydrogen bomb, 28; and Oppenheimer’s Air Force 
security clearance cancellation, 152; Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment 


opposed by, 147; on panel on long-range uses of atomic weapons, 95, 
285n6; seen as part of Berkeley cabal, 216; Strauss’s alerting 
Oppenheimer opponents of impending attack, 301n6 

Ambrose, Stephen, 13, 260 

Anderson, Grace, 267 

Argonne National Lab, 244 

arms control: Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 10, 60, 201, 218, 263; Acheson on 
using Mike test for, 150; Fermi and Rabi on self-enforcing control, 40, 60; 
Stalin as obstacle to, 151; test bans, 40, 256-57. See also Disarmament 
Panel 

arms race, 3, 13, 57, 260 

Army-McCarthy hearings, 11, 13, 260 

Arneson, Gordon, 53 

Arnold, Lorna, 199 

atomic bomb (A-bomb): Atomic Energy for Military Purposes, 266-67; 
developing more efficient, 42, 69, 75, 84-87, 95; Dumbarton Oaks 
meeting on future of, 59-60; enhanced, 85; estimates of Soviet 
development of, 20, 277n3; Korean War and, 87, 88, 94, 118; 
Oppenheimer associated with, 1; Pacific tests of late 1940s, 76; for 
responding to hydrogen bomb attack, 48, 70; Soviet first test of 1949, 2, 
20-23; Soviet second and third tests, 124—25; tactical, 5, 12, 37, 87, 152- 
54; Taylor’s designs of, 84, 89; Teller’s declining to work on, 76-77, 245; 
for triggering hydrogen bomb, 42, 75, 100-103; U.S. arsenal in late 
1940s, 276n2 

Atomic Energy Commission (AEC): and Bethe’s Scientific American article, 70; 
Borden on opposition to hydrogen bomb development within, 98-99; as 
court of appeal for Gray board hearing, 196; Dean as chairman of, 117, 
170-71; detonation of first hydrogen bomb, 12, 141-42; expiration of 
Oppenheimer’s consultancy contract, 197, 225; Gray board decision 
upheld by, 13, 232; hearings on Lilienthal’s management of, 17; to 
investigate charges against Oppenheimer, 185; lawyer sought for 
Oppenheimer hearing, 191; Lilienthal as chairman of, 17-18; majority 
opinion on Gray board decision, 14, 231, 232, 233, 234; original 
commissioners of, 18-19; physicists’ response to Oppenheimer verdict of, 
243-45; Princeton meeting of June 1951, 120-22, 291n18; Smyth as 
commissioner, 266-67; Smyth’s minority opinion on Gray board decision, 
232, 234-35, 267; Strauss as chairman of, 170, 171, 184; Strauss leaves, 
259; Teller criticizes, 94; Truman orders hydrogen bomb research by, 55; 
verdict against Oppenheimer announced, 238; vindication sought for 
Gray board decision by, 231; “whole man” standard used by, 227. See 
also General Advisory Committee (GAC); Gray board 

Atomic Energy for Military Purposes (Smyth Report), 266-67 

Atoms for Peace, 183-84, 208, 257-58, 303n8 


Bacher, Robert: on AEC, 18; as “bucking up” Oppenheimer, 209; on panel on 
long-range uses of atomic weapons, 285n6; secrecy opposed by, 69; on 
Soviet atomic bomb, 20, 21; as speaking out about dangers of hydrogen 
bomb, 4; Strauss’s alerting Oppenheimer opponents of impending attack, 
301n6; visiting Oppenheimer at Princeton, 251 


Ballen, Samuel B., 200 

Baruch, Bernard, 60 

Bates, Charles W., 189-90, 192, 199-200, 222, 223-24, 263-64 

Beckerley, James, 198, 199 

Bell, George, 285n3, 287n19 

Belmont, Alan, 223 

Bentley, Elizabeth, 1 

Bethe, Hans: and advanced division proposed for Los Alamos, 125; asks Teller 
not to testify against Oppenheimer, 212; Borden’s revealing secret 
testimony of, 97-98; and breaches of security before Gray board, 198; on 
classified material lost by Wheeler, 157; as consultant at Los Alamos 
laboratory, 29, 71, 72; on dangers of hydrogen bomb, 4, 68-71; declines 
to work on hydrogen bomb, 30-31, 71-72, 123; at GAC’s Halloween 
1949 meeting, 35, 279n1; on hydrogen bomb’s genocidal nature, 67; 
joins hydrogen bomb project, 87; and Mike test, 138, 139, 140, 141, 260, 
295n10; Oppenheimer invited to American Physical Society meeting by, 
211; at Princeton AEC meeting of June 1951, 120, 121, 291n22; Scientific 
American article on hydrogen bomb, 69-71, 281n9, 281n10; on 
skepticism about Super model, 284n10; on Soviet Joe Four test, 194; and 
Strauss’s attempts to have Oppenheimer fired from Institute for Advanced 
Study, 251; and Taylor, 84; Teller attempts to recruit to work on 
hydrogen bomb, 29-31; Teller blames for failure of Super, 93; and Teller 
meet with Oppenheimer about hydrogen bomb, 30-31, 32; Teller on 
delay of hydrogen bomb development by, 73, 96; in Teller’s “The Work 
of Many People,” 248; Teller’s wartime failures under, 76, 282n20; on 
tritium requirement for hydrogen bomb, 79-80; Ulam on arguments 
between Teller and, 100; on Ulam-Teller concept, 122, 286n9, 287n19; 
as understanding meaning of atomic bomb, 265; U.S. and Soviet H-bomb 
progress compared by, 140; visiting Oppenheimer at Princeton, 251 

Bethe, Rose, 30, 212 

Beyer, William, 288n26 

Blair, Clay, 240-43, 245-47, 312n10, 313n15 

Bohr, Niels, 59, 82 

Booster test, 27, 71, 85 

Borden, William, 173-75; atomic bomb underestimated by, 97; attempting to 
get Teller to go to Livermore, 133; Bethe’s secret testimony revealed by, 
97-98; and Blair, 240-41; as conspiring with Strauss about Oppenheimer, 
173, 175, 176, 301n9, 301n13; Cotter hired to investigate Oppenheimer 
by, 155-56; on espionage agents among scientists, 99; FBI sent 
allegations against Oppenheimer by, 10-11, 172-73, 175, 177-78, 181, 
221-22; Gray board testimony of, 221-22; hydrogen bomb chronology 
of, 156-57, 175-76; as idealist, 174; as joint committee executive 
director, 24, 173, 174; joint committee testimony on hydrogen bomb, 24; 
on Lawrence and Alvarez on Soviet hydrogen bomb development, 27; as 
manipulative, 175-76; memo on AEC members opposed to hydrogen 
bomb development, 98-99; mysterious paper brought to Strauss by, 171- 
72; and new laboratory for hydrogen bomb research, 124, 129, 293n9; as 
not liking Strauss, 173, 301n9; as not understanding hydrogen bomb, 57; 
on Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment, 299n2; Oppenheimer’s loyalty 


questioned by, 10-11, 154-58, 172-73, 174, 175, 221; on saving bombs 
to use on Russia, 88, 283n8; and Strauss plan to make Teller new leader 
of scientific community, 240-41, 247, 312n7; Strauss refuses AEC job for, 
301n9, 312n6; Teller criticizes tritium estimates to, 117; Teller meets 
with in March 1950, 72-73, 96; Teller’s cultivating, 95-99; Teller’s 
influencing about Oppenheimer, 154-55, 175; and Teller’s relatives in 
Hungary, 313n18; and Teller’s threat to quit Los Alamos, 122; Walker- 
Borden report, 175-76; and Wheeler’s loss of classified material, 157, 
158, 176; as zealot, 97 

Boyer, Marion, 117 

Bradbury, Norris: Air Force trust in, 134; Bethe’s letter about hydrogen bomb 
to, 71-72; on classified material lost by Wheeler, 157; as director of Los 
Alamos laboratory, 42, 75; “Family Committee” created by, 76; and 
Finletter’s visit to Los Alamos, 293n10; on GAC’s decision on hydrogen 
bomb, 46; as giving up on Super, 91; Holloway put in charge of Mike test 
by, 122-23; on hydrogen bomb development and Los Alamos laboratory, 
42; and Mike test postponement, 139; as not resigning over new 
laboratory, 130, 292n8; Oppenheimer on leadership of, 124; 
Oppenheimer’s counsel about hydrogen bomb sought by, 29; on potential 
for building hydrogen bomb, 86, 90; as under pressure about hydrogen 
bomb, 125-26; at Princeton AEC meeting of June 1951, 120-21; 
reorganization plan for Los Alamos, 117-18, 119, 290n7; and Shepley- 
Blair book, 245, 246-47, 312n14; Teller offered charge of theoretical 
work on hydrogen bomb by, 122; Teller on leadership of, 72-73, 93, 116; 
Teller’s avenging himself on, 249; on Teller’s contributing better from 
outside Los Alamos, 123, 291n26; Teller’s ultimatum to, 77; on 
theoreticians needed at Los Alamos, 90; on Ulam and Teller, 112; Ulam 
explains his ignition idea to, 101; on Ulam’s contribution to hydrogen 
bomb, 104, 247, 286n11; Ulam supported by, 107; as understanding 
meaning of atomic bomb, 265 

Bradley, Omar N., 28, 35, 52 

Bravo test, 13, 193-94, 260, 268 

Brown, Martha Jane, 22 

Brownell, Herbert: in decision to go after Oppenheimer, 184-85; denies direct 
involvement in Oppenheimer case, 188, 239; refuses to provide lawyer 
for Gray board, 191; on rescinding Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 
179; Truman accused of protecting Communist spy by, 178 

Buckley, Oliver E., 34, 39 

Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, 68, 72, 244 

Bundy, McGeorge, 251, 297n14 

Bundy, Mary, 251 

Burden, William A. M., 131, 162, 293n9, 297n19, 298n22 

Burling, Edward, 188 

Bush, Vannevar: on ad hoc panel on atomic policy, 59, 145; on AEC verdict 
against Oppenheimer, 243-44; assessing fallout data from Soviet bomb, 
66; Gray board testimony of, 206; May-Johnson bill supported by, 261; 
and Mike test postponement, 139, 142, 260; on panel to assess Soviet 
atomic bomb progress, 20 


“Caesar’s wife” principle, 227 

Calkins, John, 78 

Campbell, Joseph, 233, 235-36 

Castle series of tests, 194 

Catledge, Turner, 241 

Chambers, Whittaker, 1-2 

Chandler, Otis, 208 

Cherniss, Harold and Ruth, 209, 252 

Chevalier, Carol, 185-86 

Chevalier, Haakon: Communist Party membership of, 6-7, 186; 
Oppenheimers spend Christmas 1953 with, 185-86, 205, 231; Strauss lies 
to Eisenhower about Oppenheimers and, 238 

Chevalier affair, 192-93; in Gray board hearing, 201-2, 205, 220-21, 222, 
228, 230, 233, 234, 308n9; Lawrence and, 308n9; Oppenheimer’s lying 
about, 10, 192, 202, 205, 212, 228, 230, 233, 308n9; Teller and, 212 

China, 52, 87, 94 

Christy, Bob, 244 

civil defense, 69 

Clark, Tom, 149 

Classical Super model. See Super model 

Clean Bomb project, 104, 257 

Cole, Sterling, 303n8 

Commons, Kenneth, 188 

Communist Party: Borden on 

scientists associating with, 99; 

Chevalier as member of, 6-7, 186; McCarthy on Communists in State 
Department, 2; Morrison and Hawkins as members of, 8, 165; 
Oppenheimer as fellow traveler, 5, 7, 204-5, 253; Frank Oppenheimer 
as member of, 5, 66, 98, 146, 215, 296n3; Oppenheimer denies 
membership in, 5, 7, 9; Oppenheimer’s connections with, 5-10, 66, 
115, 155-56, 192-93, 231, 233; Oppenheimer’s informing on 
suspected Party members, 10; Pash claims Oppenheimer was a member 
of, 221; Tatlock as member of, 5, 6, 156, 204; Weinberg case, 147, 148 

compartmentalized research policy, 67 

Compton, Arthur, 129, 261 

computers, 74—75, 137 

Conant, James B.: Acheson’s conferring with, 51; considers resigning from 

GAC, 56, 280n14; at Dumbarton Oaks meeting on atomic weapons, 59; 

GAC reappointment of, 147; at GAC’s Halloween 1949 meeting, 26, 34- 

35, 38-39; hydrogen bomb crash development opposed by, 3, 30, 36; and 

Leach, 312n9; letter to Oppenheimer about hydrogen bomb, 31-33; May- 

Johnson bill supported by, 261; nuclear-powered aircraft opposed by, 4; 

on Oppenheimer for GAC chairman, 279n4; Oppenheimer persuaded 

about hydrogen bomb development by, 33, 278n16; rumored to have 

sabotaged hydrogen bomb, 151 

Conant, Theodore, 279n4 

Congress for Cultural Freedom, 252 
Cotter, Frank, 155-56, 175, 181, 185 
Coughlan, Robert, 244, 248 


Critchfield, Charles, 134, 261, 262 
Crouch, Paul, 148, 149, 297n12, 302n2 
Cummings, Homer, 117 

Cutler, Robert, 170, 178, 179, 238, 304n9 


Dallet, Joe, 5, 7 

Davis, Bob, 251 

Davis, John W., 190 

Davis, Schatzi, 251-52 

Dean, Deborah Gore, 141, 295n13 

Dean, Gordon: as AEC chairman, 117, 170-71; Bethe asked to compare U.S. 
and Soviet H-bomb progress by, 140; and Bradbury on Teller’s 
contributing better from outside Los Alamos, 123, 291n26; on Bradbury’s 
resigning if new lab was set up, 130; and GAC’s decision on hydrogen 
bomb, 48, 49, 163; Gray board testimony of, 205-6; Los Alamos 
defended by, 4; and Mike test postponement, 140, 141, 295n10; Mike 
test revealed to Eisenhower by, 159; and new laboratory, 118-19, 124, 
131-32, 133, 135; as not liking Strauss, 170-71; and Oppenheimer’s GAC 
reappointment, 147, 148, 149, 150; and Oppenheimer’s security 
clearance, 171, 306n3; Oppenheimer’s summary of George test for, 90- 
91; at Princeton AEC meeting of June 1951, 120, 121; and Rosenberg 
case, 118, 290n8; on rumors about Oppenheimer, 147; on Shepley-Blair 
book, 246; Strauss criticizes Oppenheimer and Los Alamos to, 116; and 
Teller’s threat to quit Los Alamos, 122; on tritium for hydrogen bomb, 
284n11; and Wheeler’s loss of classified material, 157-58, 176 

de Hoffmann, Frederic: and Holloway as in charge of Mike test, 123; Shepley 
and Blair meet, 241; “spark plug” calculations by, 103; Strauss briefed 
by, 116; in Teller’s “The Work of Many People,” 248; and Teller’s threat 
to quit Los Alamos, 122; in Wheeler group, 83 

deterrence, 48, 70 

deuterium: burning problem, 80, 81, 85-86, 89, 90, 105; as hydrogen bomb 
fuel, 37; ignition problem, 77-90, 100-103, 119-22; in Mike test, 136- 
37; and tritium in George test, 85, 119 

De Witt, Hugh, 287n14 

Dickey, John, 145 

Disarmament Panel: Eisenhower and, 159-60, 169; on Mike test 
postponement, 140-41, 295n12; recommendations of, 150-51 

Dog test, 286n5 

Donkin, McKay, 312n12 

Doolittle, James H. “Jimmy,” 130-31, 160, 164 

Drummond, Roscoe, 227-28 

DuBridge, Lee: GAC reappointment of, 147; at GAC’s Halloween 1949 
meeting, 34, 38, 39; Gray board testimony of, 206; Murphy interviews, 
160; on Oppenheimer for GAC’s chairman, 279n4; rumored to have 
sabotaged the hydrogen bomb, 151; Super development opposed by, 48; 
on tritium requirement for hydrogen bomb, 90; as Vista group chairman, 
153, 154 

Dulles, Allen, 145, 248 

Dulles, John Foster, 257 


Durham, Carl, 175 
Dyson, Freeman, 252 


Early, Steven, 54 

Easy test, 286n5 

Ecker, Allan, 190, 217, 309n1 

Einstein, Albert, 67 

Eisenhower, Dwight D.: on AEC investigation of Oppenheimer, 184-85; and 
Atoms for Peace, 257-58; and Disarmament Panel, 159-60, 169-70; 
Executive Order 10450, 227; as getting rid of Oppenheimer without 
public discussion, 13, 260; and Gray selection, 191, 225, 310n1; 
isolationism opposed by, 159; Mike test and 1952 election, 139, 140, 
141; Mike test revealed to, 159; in Murphy’s second Fortune magazine 
article, 171; openness favored by, 159-60, 169-70; Oppenheimer’s 
security clearance suspended by, 11, 178-81; President’s Scientific 
Advisory Committee established by, 258, 259; Rabi and, 207, 208; resists 
taking on McCarthy, 178; on Sputnik, 258; and Strauss after the 
presidency, 260; Strauss appointed White House adviser on atomic 
energy, 160; Strauss as serving badly, 258, 259; Strauss congratulated 
over Oppenheimer hearing by, 238; Strauss nominated for commerce 
secretary by, 259-60; and Strauss on hydrogen bomb’s power, 194; 
Strauss’s access to, 238-39, 311n2; Strauss warns about Oppenheimer, 
170; test ban negotiations of, 256-57; travesty of justice countenanced 
by, 13-14; and Vista group, 153, 154; and Wheeler’s loss of classified 
material, 157-58 

Eltenton, George, 201, 202, 307n11 

ENIAC, 78, 86, 89, 90, 282n23 

Evans, Cerda, 78 

Evans, Foster, 78 

Evans, Ward, 192, 197, 222, 226, 227, 310n3 

Everett, Cornelius: on burning of deuterium, 80, 282n23; collaboration with 
Ulam, 107, 110, 288n26; Super’s unfeasibility shown by, 81, 86, 105, 
284n10; in Teller’s “The Work of Many People,” 248; on tritium 
requirement for hydrogen bomb, 78, 89, 117 

Everett, William, 288n26 

Executive Order 10450, 227 

Experiment in International Living, 174 


“Family Committee,” 76 

Farley, Philip, 8, 232-33, 235, 236-37, 311n11 

FBI: Borden sends allegations against Oppenheimer to, 10-11, 172-73, 175, 
177-78, 221-22; cooperating in investigation of Oppenheimer, 183, 185; 
and Fuchs betrayal, 66; in lobbying for hydrogen bomb, 59; 
Oppenheimer’s attorneys bugged by, 239; and Oppenheimer’s GAC’s 
reappointment, 146, 148; Strauss’s relationship with, 185; surveillance of 
Oppenheimer, 6, 9, 12, 156, 178, 187-89, 199-200, 298n25, 304n15. See 
also Hoover, J. Edgar 

Federation of Atomic Scientists, 262 

Fermi, Enrico: on burning of deuterium, 80, 81, 86, 89, 90, 105; at GAC’s 


Halloween 1949 meeting, 26, 34, 36, 39-40, 163; Joint Committee on 
Atomic Energy advised by, 97; leadership of hydrogen bomb program 
refused by, 123; leaves GAC, 99; and Monte Carlo method, 111; on self- 
enforcing control of atomic weapons, 40, 60; on Soviet Joe Four test, 
194; and Taylor, 84—85; and Taylor’s low-yield testing idea, 92; Teller 
blames for failure of Super, 93; Teller on delay of hydrogen bomb 
development by, 73, 96; Teller seeks news of October 1949 meeting 
from, 44; and Teller’s “The Work of Many People,” 248; on tritium 
requirement for hydrogen bomb, 78-79, 117, 282n21; on Ulam-Teller 
concept, 121-22; on U.S. vulnerability to coastal attack, 48 

Fermi, Laura, 248 

Finletter, Thomas: fails to testify before Gray board, 219; Griggs’s questioning 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty to, 152; and Mike test, 295n10, 295n12; Murphy 
as adviser to, 160; and Murphy’s Fortune article, 161-62; on 
Oppenheimer as subversive, 154, 298n22; Oppenheimer lunches with, at 
Pentagon, 153, 297n19; Oppenheimer’s Air Force security clearance 
canceled by, 152; and Oppenheimer’s GAC’s reappointment, 147; 
Oppenheimer’s relaying story about, 152; second laboratory supported 
by, 130-31, 134, 293n9; and Teller, 162; test ban supported by, 256; and 
Vista group, 153-54 

first use, policy of, 51, 67, 70 

Fisher, Adrian, 53 

Fisk, James, 147 

fission weapons. See atomic bomb 

Flemming, Arthur, 304n9 

Folkoff, Isaac “Doc,” 7 

Ford, Ken, 83 

Ford Foundation, 130 

Forrestal, James, 17, 19 

Fortas, Abe, 237 

Fortune (magazine), 160, 162-63, 171, 172, 177, 195 

Foster, William, 132 

Fowler, Willy, 160 

Frankel, Stanley, 111 

Friendly, Al, 268 

Froman, Darol: and Bradbury as under pressure about hydrogen bomb, 
292n33; “Family Committee” headed by, 76; on joint fission and fusion 
research, 289n6; Oppenheimer on leadership of, 124; at Princeton AEC 
meeting of June 1951, 120, 291n21; Super development supported by, 
43, 44 

Fuchs, Klaus: concern about revealing of hydrogen bomb by, 65-66; passes 
atomic secrets to Russia, 2, 65-67, 73, 96, 125, 131, 140; on second spy 
in Manhattan Project, 155; Teller on, 66, 73; and Teller’s wartime 
failures, 76 

fusion weapons. See hydrogen bomb 


“Gabriel” project, 104 
GAC. See General Advisory Committee (GAC) 
Gaither, Rowan, 292n7 


Gamow, George, 27, 77, 105, 248 

Garrison, Lloyd K.: on Borden’s allegation, 221; confirms Reston’s scoop about 
Oppenheimer hearing, 195; defense team lacking security clearances, 
198; defense work room bugged, 204; denied list of prosecution 
witnesses, 197-98; denied permission to meet with board, 197; Gray 
blames for publication of New York Times story on Oppenheimer hearing, 
196; as Oppenheimer’s defense attorney, 190, 254; and release of Gray 
board transcript, 229, 310n5; reprimanded for making objections, 197; 
requests for delays turned down, 225; Robb’s methods protested by, 203- 
4; summation of, 222 

Garwin, Richard, 122 

Gell-Mann, Murray, 134, 294n18 

General Advisory Committee (GAC) (Atomic Energy Commission): Berkeley 
group invited to join in research by, 132; Bethe on decision of, 71; 
Booster endorsed by, 85; Borden memo on opposition to hydrogen bomb 
development within, 98-99; as failing to press its case, 59; on fission 
bomb research at Los Alamos, 86-87, 95; on George test, 87; and Gray 
board hearing, 208; Halloween 1949 meeting of, 34-47; hydrogen bomb 
crash program opposed by, 3, 38-40, 151-52, 201, 262; Lilienthal 
announces Truman’s hydrogen bomb decision to, 55—56; Lilienthal 
requests meeting to discuss defense, 26, 37, 163; Livermore laboratory 
opposed by, 4, 124, 125, 127, 129, 132, 151, 262; Los Alamos scientists 
informed of decision of October 1949, 43-47; main report of Halloween 
1949 meeting, 36-38; majority annex to October 1949 report, 38-39; 
Manley as secretary of, 34; minority annex to October 1949 report, 39- 
40; moral language in report of, 58-59; Murphy’s Fortune magazine 
article on, 162, 163; on never producing hydrogen bomb, 38-39, 226; 
October 1950 meeting of, 89-90; Oppenheimer as chairman of, 2, 22, 28, 
262, 279n4; Oppenheimer’s reappointment blocked, 4, 145-51; 
politicians’ approach to hydrogen bomb compared with that of, 58; 
reconsidering October 1949 decision, 48-49; response to October 1949 
report of, 41; scientists exercising their responsibility through, 262; and 
secrecy ordered for H-bomb debate, 4, 41-42; and Soviet atomic test of 
1949, 22, 277n6; Strauss on hydrogen bomb and, 25, 26 

genocide, 3, 38, 39, 41, 58, 67 

George test, 85-86; date and size of, 119, 286n5; feasibility of Super model 
and, 90-91; GAC’s skepticism about, 87; in Murphy’s Fortune magazine 
article, 163; and radiation implosion, 102, 106, 119-20, 287n12, 
290n14; Teller’s interest in, 85-86, 91, 117 

Getting, Ivan, 219 

Gilpatric, Roswell, 160, 161-62 

Golden, William, 24-25, 181 

Goldstein, Max, 102 

Goodchild, Peter, 223, 224 

Gouzenko, Igor, 1 

Graves, Alvin, 43 

Gray, Boyden, 228 

Gray, Gordon, 225-26; as attempting to call hearing off, 228, 310n3; as 
chairman of Personnel Security Board in Oppenheimer case, 12, 191, 


225; confidentiality promised by, 196, 228, 229; dissociating himself 
from Borden’s allegation, 221; and Evans’s changing his mind, 222; as 
failing to rein Robb in, 203, 204; fairness attempted by, 225-26; feelings 
about his role, 227-28, 310n3; Garrison blamed for publication of New 
York Times story by, 196; Garrison reprimanded by, for making 
objections, 197; majority opinion written by, 226, 229-30, 239; on 
Oppenheimer’s stability, 236; prehearing examination of case files by, 
197; proceedings speeded up by, 197, 225; and public relations about 
Gray board decision, 230; and Robb’s request for Hoover to meet with 
Gray board, 223; rulings as tilted against defense, 225; Shepley and 
leaking of Oppenheimer transcripts by, 242-43; Teller asked whether 
Oppenheimer was security risk by, 214; and Teller’s The Legacy of 
Hiroshima, 249; as voting against Oppenheimer, 226 

Gray, Gordon, Jr., 228 

Gray, Nancy, 228 

Gray board, 195-237; AEC upholds decision of, 13, 232; Alvarez’s testimony 
before, 216, 217-18; Army-McCarthy hearings and, 13, 260; Borden’s 
testimony before, 221-22; breaches of security before, 198-99; Bush 
testimony before, 206; Chevalier affair as issue at, 201-2, 205, 220-21, 
222, 228, 230, 233, 234, 308n9; confidentiality of proceedings, 196, 228, 
229; Dean’s testimony before, 205-6; decision of, 12-13, 226-27; defense 
bugged, 12, 199-200, 204, 228-29, 239; defense denied list of 
prosecution witnesses, 197-98; defense hindered by government, 11-12, 
197-98; defense team lacking security clearances, 198; deliberations of, 
226; ending of, 222; government making up rules as it went along, 197; 
Gray as chairman of, 12, 191, 225; Griggs’s testimony before, 219-20; 
hearing room for, 200-201; Hoover asked to meet with, before 
deliberation, 222-24; Kennan’s testimony before, 206, 226; Latimer’s 
testimony before, 211, 217; Lawrence fails to appear before, 214-16, 
309n11; Lilienthal’s testimony before, 203-4; members of, 191-92; 
newspaper opinion on, 228; newspaper publication of testimony, 228-29; 
on Oppenheimer’s delaying hydrogen bomb program, 279n9; 
Oppenheimer’s testimony before, 201-4; Pash’s testimony before, 220- 
21; prehearing immersion in case files, 197; prosecution witnesses 
testifying during final week, 211; Rabi attempts to have hearings called 
off, 207, 208; Rabi’s testimony before, 206-9; respect for science 
undermined by, 264-65; Robb asks Hoover to meet with, 222-24; 
scientific community’s response to, 215, 244; as seeming to punish 
Oppenheimer for his opinions, 230, 231, 239, 244; spying allegations 
against Oppenheimer dismissed by, 8-9, 12, 226; Teller’s testimony 
before, 212-14, 218, 308n6; Wilson’s testimony before, 218-19; ZORC 
allegations, 163, 219-20 

Green, Harold: on Bates, 189; drafting charges against Oppenheimer, 182-83, 
184; on FBI’s offering assistance against Oppenheimer, 183, 303n5; on 
Gray as not understanding the proceeding, 227; on Gray board as 
conducted under wrong rules, 227; on Justice Department’s preparing to 
indict Oppenheimer, 296n8; on Strauss’s promise to purge AEC officials, 
303n1; on wiretap reports on Oppenheimer, 305n15; on Zuckert, 236 

Greenhouse tests, 286n5; Korean War and, 87, 90; Mark and, 101; proposed 


reorganization of Los Alamos after, 117; purpose of, 85; Quesada and, 94; 
Shepley-Blair book on, 245; Teller on success of, 125. See also George test 

Griggs, David Tressel: attempting to get Teller to go to Livermore, 133; Gray 
board testimony of, 219-20; Oppenheimer’s GAC’s reappointment 
opposed by, 296n8; Oppenheimer shows Halloween meeting annexes to, 
151-52; second laboratory supported by, 130, 131, 134, 293n9 

Groves, Leslie R.: Bradbury selected to run Los Alamos by, 75; and Chevalier 
affair, 202; clears Oppenheimer despite left-wing associations, 9, 193; 
compartmentalized research policy of, 67; at Dumbarton Oaks meeting 
on atomic weapons, 59; and May-Johnson bill, 261; Kitty Oppenheimer 
approaches about Gray board testimony of, 199; on Soviet acquisition of 
atomic bomb, 20; Strauss inquires about Oppenheimer, 66; as supplying 
“backbone” for Oppenheimer, 209 


Hagerty, James, 195-96, 238, 306n2, 311n2 

Hammack, Francis, 303n1 

Hancock, Lee, 191, 192, 228-29, 303n1 

Hanford, Washington, reactor, 74, 77 

Hansen, Chuck, 312n10, 313n15 

Hawkins, David, 8, 109, 165, 287n17, 288n28 

Haworth, Leland J., 309n10 

Hayward, John T., 133 

Hein, Hilde Stern, 6 

Heisenberg, Werner, 92 

Hempelmann, Louis and Eleanor, 167-68, 188, 251 

Herken, Gregg, 6, 300n16 

Hershberg, James, 278n15 

Hickenlooper, Bourke, 17, 166, 173 

“Hidden Struggle for the H-Bomb, The: The Story of Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
Persistent Campaign to Reverse U.S. Military Strategy” (Murphy), 162-63 

Hill, Al, 160, 219 

Hinshaw, Carl, 27 

Hiss, Alger, 1-2, 52-53, 188 

Hiss, Donald, 53, 188 

Hobson, Verna, 253-55 

Holloway, Marshall, 122-23, 124, 137 

Hoover, Herbert, 186, 239, 259 

Hoover, J. Edgar: asked to meet with Gray board before deliberation, 222-24; 
and Bates, 189-90; Borden sends allegations against Oppenheimer, 11, 
172-73, 175, 177-78, 221-22; on FBI cooperation in Oppenheimer 
investigation, 185; heads off McCarthy investigation of Oppenheimer, 
177, 302n2; information on Oppenheimer sent to government agencies 
by, 184; and lawyer for Oppenheimer hearing, 191; at meeting on AEC 
investigation of Oppenheimer, 184-85; and Murray, 145, 235; 
Oppenheimer’s Q clearance approved by, 178, 193; on rescinding 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 179; and Strauss exchange concerns 
about the Oppenheimers, 66, 67; Strauss promises to get Oppenheimer 
to, 182, 185, 303n1; and Strauss’s vendetta against Oppenheimer, 190; 
Strauss thanks for help in Oppenheimer case, 239; technical surveillance 


of Oppenheimer requested by, 187-88 

Hoyt, Fred, 142 

hydrogen bomb (H-bomb): Air Force interest in, 57-58, 94; arms race 
between U.S. and Soviet Union, 13, 57, 260; Bravo test, 13, 193-94, 260; 
burning of deuterium in, 80, 81, 85-86, 89, 90, 105; computers for 
developing, 74—75; debate over whether to develop, 24-33; delivery of, 
258-59; detonation of first, 12, 141-42; Eisenhower informed of, 159; 
and Europe-first school of thought, 88; “Family Committee” for research 
on, 76; final meeting of committee to advise Truman on, 53-54; first 
British test of, 256; Fuchs betrayal and, 65-66; GAC reconsiders October 
1949 decision, 48-49; GAC’s Halloween 1949 meeting on crash program 
for, 34-47; GAC votes against crash program for, 3, 38-40, 151-52, 201, 
262; ignition of, 77-80, 100-103, 284n11; military not informed of 
potential for developing, 35; Oppenheimer opposes crash program for, 2— 
4, 10, 13; physicists campaign against development of, 67-72; Princeton 
AEC meeting of June 1951 and, 120-22; public concern about, 256; 
public on development of, 61; radius of destruction of, 57; scientists and 
politicians divided over, 58; secrecy ordered for debate on, 4, 41-42, 55- 
56, 67; Soviets working on at time of Truman’s announcement, 57; Teller 
begins recruiting staff for Super program, 72; Teller on Oppenheimer’s 
delay of development of, 72, 73, 95, 96, 116, 146, 155, 212, 213; Teller 
on recruiting scientists for, 73-74, 86, 96; Teller’s Classical Super model 
of, 37, 58, 81; Teller’s estimate of time required to build, 27; tritium 
requirement for, 78, 79, 80, 89, 117, 282n22, 282n23, 284n11; Truman 
as not informed about potential for developing, 25, 26; Truman orders 
production of materials for, 74; Truman orders research on, 2, 55, 60-61, 
262. See also Super model; Ulam-Teller concept 

Hydrogen Bomb, The: The Men, the Menace, the Mechanism (Shepley and Blair), 
242-43, 245-47, 313n15 


intercontinental missiles, 258, 259 
international control of atomic weapons, 10, 59-60 
Item test, 106, 120, 286n5 


Jackson, C. D., 183 

Jackson, Robert H., 117 

Jastrow, Robert, 290n14 

JCAE. See Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the House and Senate (JCAE) 

Jenner, William, 165 

Johnson, Edwin, 51, 55 

Johnson, Joseph, 145 

Johnson, Louis: at final meeting of committee to advise Truman on hydrogen 
bomb, 53-54; hydrogen bomb development supported by, 49, 52; as 
leaking information about hydrogen bomb, 59; and Lilienthal, 51 

Johnson, Lyall, 201, 220, 309n1 

Johnson, Thomas H., 309n10 

Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the House and Senate (JCAE): AEC as 
answerable to, 18; and attempt to get Teller to go to Livermore, 133; 
Borden as executive director of, 24, 173, 174; leak on hydrogen bomb by, 


50-51; in lobbying for hydrogen bomb development, 24; McMahon as 
head of, 24; and new laboratory, 129, 131; and Teller’s critique of 
hydrogen bomb progress, 96-97; Walker-Borden hydrogen bomb 
chronology, 156-57, 175-76 


Kac, Mark, 109, 110 

Kapitsa, Pyotr, 27, 278n8 

Kellogg, Jerry, 43 

Kelly, Mervin J., 285n6 

Kennan, George: and “first use” policy, 51; at GAC’s Halloween 1949 meeting, 
34, 35, 36, 279n1; Gray board testimony of, 206, 226; Gray board 
testimony published, 229; on Kitty Oppenheimer, 253; and Oppenheimer 
on unilateral policy, 60; Oppenheimer secures Institute for Advanced 
Study appointment for, 252; on Oppenheimer’s intellect as too big for 
him, 308n26 

Kennedy, John F., 254-55, 257, 267 

Khariton, Yuli, 307n11 

Khrushchev, Nikita, 256, 257 

Killian, James R., 258, 259, 300n16 

King, Percival, 257, 258 

Konopinski, Emil, 83, 92 

Korean War, 87-88, 94, 118, 283n7 

Kramish, Arnold, 102 

Kurchatov, Igor, 278n8 


LA-1230, 103 

LAMS-1225, 102 

Lansdale, John, 193, 202 

LaPlante, Bryan, 180, 182, 192, 303n1, 302n7, 312n12 

Lapp, Ralph, 4, 69 

Larson, Clarence E., 309n10 

Latimer, Wendell: Gray board testimony of, 211, 217; seen as part of Berkeley 
cabal, 216; on Soviet acquisition of atomic bomb, 26-27; writing to 
Truman about Oppenheimer’s GAC’s reappointment, 147, 148 

Lauritsen, Charles C.: Mike test postponement advocated by, 138; Murphy’s 
interviewing of, 160; on panel on long-range uses of atomic weapons, 
285n6; visiting Oppenheimer at Princeton, 251; and Vista group, 154; 
and ZORC, 163, 219 

Lawrence, Ernest: Alvarez and Latimer discuss Soviet atomic bomb with, 26- 
27; and Alvarez meet with McMahon about hydrogen bomb, 27, 278n8; 
and Alvarez meet with Teller about hydrogen bomb, 27; as director of 
Livermore laboratory, 133; fails to appear before Gray board, 214-16, 
308n9, 309n11; Oppenheimer on attitude toward hydrogen bomb of, 32; 
and Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment, 145; second laboratory 
supported by, 127-30, 132, 133, 135; seen as part of Berkeley cabal, 216; 
Shepley and Blair meet, 241; Strauss’s alerting Oppenheimer opponents 
of impending attack, 301n6; and Teller’s UCLA loyalty oath dispute, 94; 
test ban opposed by, 256 

Lay, James, 53, 132 


Leach, W. Barton, 242, 312n9 

LeBaron, Robert, 29, 45, 131, 133 

Lee, T. D., 252 

Legacy of Hiroshima, The (Teller and Brown), 103, 249 

Lewis, Fulton, Jr., 17, 191 

Libby, Willard, 90, 148, 301n6 

Lichtenstein, Nancy, 251 

Life (magazine), 248 

Lilienthal, David, 17-23; on Acheson and Hiss, 52; Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 
10, 60, 201, 218, 263; as AEC chairman, 17-18; announces Truman’s 
hydrogen bomb decision to GAC, 55-56; on Conant, 36; decides to 
resign, 49, 50; at final meeting of committee to advise Truman on 
hydrogen bomb, 53, 54; and Fuchs betrayal, 65, 67; GAC’s meeting to 
discuss defense requested by, 26, 37, 163; government career of, 18, 
276n2; Gray board testimony of, 203-4; hearings on AEC management 
of, 17; hydrogen bomb development opposed by, 26, 28, 41, 48, 54, 
277n5; and Louis Johnson, 51; McMahon’s letter about hydrogen bomb 
development, 28; meets with Truman about hydrogen bomb 
development, 54-55; on Rabi, 36; and Soviet atomic test of 1949, 19-22; 
on Truman’s public admission of hydrogen bomb development, 52 

Lilienthal, Helen, 17, 18, 19 

Lippmann, Walter, 230 

Livermore laboratory: Air Force support for second laboratory, 4, 130, 131, 
134, 293n9, 293n12; first tests as failures, 246, 312n14; GAC opposes 
second laboratory, 4, 124, 125, 127, 129, 132, 151, 262; Lawrence in 
establishment of, 127-30, 132, 133, 135; miniaturized warheads as 
specialty of, 134; Murray as supporter of second laboratory, 116, 123, 
127-28, 129-30; official opening of, 133; Oppenheimer as opposed to 
second laboratory, 4, 128, 132; Shepley-Blair book on, 245; staff 
recruitment for, 134, 294n18; Teller as supporter of second laboratory, 4, 
116-19, 123-26, 128-29, 130, 131, 249 

Longmire, Conrad, 83 

Los Alamos laboratory: advanced division proposed for, 125; on AEC verdict 
against Oppenheimer, 244-45; Air Force continuing to order weapons 
from, 134; atomic tests of late 1940s, 76; Bethe as consultant at, 29, 71, 
72; Bradbury as director of, 42, 75; Bradbury’s reorganization plan for, 
117-18, 119, 290n7; computer built at, 75; “Family Committee,” 76; 
fission and fusion work carried out at, 118, 129, 289n6; GAC’s decision 
of October 1949 announced at, 43-47; hydrogen bomb development as 
reason for continuing, 42; as languishing after World War II, 42; more 
efficient atomic bombs developed at, 42, 69, 75, 84-87, 95; and new 
laboratory for hydrogen bomb research, 116-19, 123-26, 131, 132, 136; 
Oppenheimer as defender of ongoing work at, 4; Oppenheimer on 
leadership of, 124; Shepley-Blair book on, 245-47; shortages at, 75; 
Strauss’s criticism of, 116; Teller on increasing staff at, 73; Teller on 
moving hydrogen bomb research from, 116-17; Teller on Oppenheimer’s 
attempt to close, 72, 96, 285n8; Teller threatens to quit, 122; Teller visits 
after Oppenheimer verdict, 244—45; Theoretical Megaton Group, 122, 
137; theoreticians gathering in summer of 1950, 82-85; Ulam and 


atmosphere at, 109 
Lovett, Robert, 130, 132, 147, 150, 297n13 
Low, Francis, 134 
Luce, Clare Booth, 235, 311n17 
Luce, Henry R., 160, 161, 230, 235 
Lvov school of mathematicians, 107 
Lyons, Charlie, 156, 298n25 


MacArthur, Douglas, 94, 118 

McCarthy, Joseph: Army-McCarthy hearings, 11, 13, 260; Borden on, 174; on 
Communist sympathizers’ delaying of hydrogen bomb, 195; Eisenhower 
resists taking on, 178; Hoover heads off investigation of Oppenheimer by, 
177, 302n2; on “known” Communists in State Department, 2; and Mike 
test postponement debate, 141; and Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment, 
146, 148; and Oppenheimer’s left-wing past, 166; Strauss contrasts 
himself with, 238; Strauss heads off investigation of Oppenheimer by, 
170; Truman attacked by, 178; and Weinberg case, 150 

McCloy, John J., 59 

McCormack, James, 19, 20, 21, 24, 29, 285n6 

MclInerny, Jay, 148, 296n8 

McKellar, Kenneth, 19, 247 

MacKenzie, John, 180 

McKinney, Robert, 104 

McMahon, Brien: Borden brought to Joint Committee by, 173; Borden misses 
working with, 175; Borden prods to support hydrogen bomb program, 
97; and Borden’s doubts about Oppenheimer’s loyalty, 155, 156; Borden’s 
memo on AEC members who opposed hydrogen bomb, 98; Cotter hired 
to investigate Oppenheimer by, 155; Dean associated with, 117; 
hydrogen bomb supported by, 49-50, 52; Joint Committee on Atomic 
Energy chaired by, 24; Lawrence and Alvarez meet with, about hydrogen 
bomb, 27, 278n8; and leaks about hydrogen bomb, 51; on new 
laboratory, 130; on nuclear weapons for all three services, 123-24; 
Oppenheimer flattering, then ridiculing, 166; Oppenheimer’s GAC 
reappointment opposed by, 148, 296n8; plan to preempt Truman, 55; on 
Soviet possession of hydrogen bomb, 28; Teller asks about GAC decision 
of October 1949, 44; Teller testifies before Joint Committee, 96-97; visits 
Los Alamos to assess hydrogen bomb capability of, 43, 44-46 

McMahon Act (1946), 42, 261, 262 

McQuown, Evelyn, 232 

Manhattan Project: Fuchs on second spy in, 155; GAC’s members coming 
from, 262; Lawrence’s role in, 26-27; Oppenheimer as leader of, 1; 
Oppenheimer recruiting talent for, 29; Oppenheimer’s Communist Party 
connections and, 9; scientific sharing of ideas and secrecy balanced at, 
263; Teller’s role in, 3 

MANIAC calculator, 137 

Manley, John: on GAC not lobbying, 59; as GAC secretary, 34; at GAC’s 
Halloween 1949 meeting, 34, 35, 37, 40, 152, 279n1; Lawrence and 
Alvarez meet with, 27; Los Alamos scientists informed of GAC decision 
by, 43-46, 193, 279n9; on Soviets’ theft of hydrogen bomb research, 48; 


in talent search for Manhattan Project, 29; on Teller, 45-46 

Mansfield, J. K. “Ken,” 175 

Mao Tse-tung, 52, 87 

Mark, Carson: and Booster, 85; on Bradbury as under pressure about 
hydrogen bomb, 125, 292n33; on calculations for Super, 90; and Finletter 
visit to Los Alamos, 293n10; on GAC’s decision, 43, 46-47; on George 
test, 119-20; on Los Alamos’s working on both fusion and fission, 289n6; 
and Mike test, 137, 138; Oppenheimer on leadership of, 124; on 
Oppenheimer’s turning down leadership of hydrogen bomb program, 
123; on Oppenheimer verdict, 244; at Princeton AEC meeting of June 
1951, 120, 291n21; on Soviet Joe Four test, 194; and Taylor, 84; and 
Taylor’s low-yield testing idea, 92; on Teller and deuterium burning 
calculations, 80; on Teller and radiation implosion, 106; on Teller as 
physicist, 126; on Teller as resentful over Super, 93; on Teller’s 
reputation, 287n14; on tritium requirement for hydrogen bomb, 282n21, 
282n22; on Truman order’s influence on Ulam, 111; Ulam explains his 
ignition idea to, 101, 104, 286n5, 287n19; Ulam supported by, 107; as 
understanding meaning of atomic bomb, 265; and Wheeler’s group, 83 

Mark, Kay, 93 

Marks, Anne, 187, 253, 255, 305n15 

Marks, Herbert: on cross-examination of Borden, 222; in design of security 
board hearings, 203; FBI bugs office of, 187; first conversation with 
Oppenheimer about Gray board hearing, 187; on Oppenheimer’s defense 
team, 190, 199, 203; security clearance denied to, 198; serving as 
historical memory for defense team, 199 

Marshall, George Catlett, 52, 261 

Materials Testing Accelerator, 128-29, 135, 294n18 

Mayer, Maria Goeppert, 94 

May-Johnson bill, 261 

Metropolis, Nicholas, 111 

Mike test, 136-42; Acheson on arms control and, 150; Eisenhower informed 
of, 159; as going off as scheduled, 141-42; Holloway as in charge of 
preparing, 122-23; postponement advocated, 138-41, 260; size of, 142; 
Teller and, 112, 137-38, 142; Ulam-Teller concept tested by, 112, 136; as 
watershed in thermonuclear age, 260 

Mills, Mark, 256 

Mitchell, Donna, 181 

Mitchell, Victor, 181 

Mitchell, William: and Eisenhower’s “blank wall” order, 302n7; Green 
ordered to draft charges by, 182, 183, 303n2; on hydrogen bomb charges 
against Oppenheimer, 304n8; majority opinion delivered by, 232; 
Morgan chosen for Gray board by, 191 

Molotov, Vyacheslav, 257 

Monte Carlo method, 80, 111, 288n28 

Morgan, Thomas, 191, 197, 222, 226, 310n3 

Morrison, Philip, 8, 106, 165, 265, 300n15 

Murphy, Charles J. V., 160-61; first Fortune magazine article by, 161-65, 195, 
219; and Gray’s majority opinion, 229, 230; and majority opinion for 
AEC decision, 231, 232, 233, 239; on Oppenheimer-Finletter exchange, 


297n19; and public relations about Gray board decision, 230; 
Rabinowich accuses of violating security, 300n5; and release of Gray 
board transcript, 229; second Fortune magazine article by, 171; and 
Shepley-Blair book, 241-42, 313n15; Strauss thanks for help in 
Oppenheimer case, 239-40; and Teller’s The Legacy of Hiroshima, 249; on 
ZORC, 220, 309n8 

Murray, Daniel Bradley, 235 

Murray, John Courtney, 235, 311n17 

Murray, Thomas, 127; attempting to get Teller to go to Livermore, 133; and 
Fermi’s departure from GAC, 99; and Hoover, 145, 235; on hydrogen 
bomb charges against Oppenheimer, 184, 304n8; on new laboratory, 
116, 123, 127-28, 129-30; Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment opposed 
by, 145, 147; on rescinding Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 179; 
Strauss complains to Eisenhower about, 238; test ban supported by, 256; 
vote on Gray board recommendation, 232, 233, 235 


National Missile Defense, 264 

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 256 

Nelson, Margaret, 7 

Nelson, Steve, 7-8 

New York Herald Tribune, 228, 230 

New York Times, 195, 196, 228, 243 

Nichols, Kenneth D.: in appeal process for Gray board decision, 196, 230; and 
defense team’s lack of security clearances, 198; and Eisenhower’s 
suspension of Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 302n7; Farley warned 
about helping Smyth by, 232, 311n11; and Green on charges against 
Oppenheimer, 182-83; and letter to be presented to Oppenheimer by, 
184; on panel on long-range uses of nuclear weapons, 285n6; on 
rescinding Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 179; Strauss’s alerting 
Oppenheimer opponents of impending attack, 301n6; and Strauss’s 
telegram to Teller, 180 

Nichols, Louis B., 177, 310n6 

Nitze, Paul, 150 

Nordheim, Lothar, 120, 291n21 

Norstad, Lauris, 35, 153, 154 

Norton, Garrison, 154, 162, 297n19, 298n22 

nuclear-powered aircraft, 4, 218 

nuclear weapons. See atomic bomb; hydrogen bomb 


O’Brian, John Lord, 188, 190, 305n19 
“On Heterocatalytic Detonations: I. Hydrodynamic Lenses and Radiation 
Mirrors—I” (Ulam and Teller), 102-3 
On the Beach (Shute), 256 
Operation Crossroads, 76 
Operation Sandstone, 76, 84 
Oppenheimer, Frank, 5, 66, 98, 146, 214-15, 296n3 
Oppenheimer, Jackie, 5 
Oppenheimer, J. Robert 
and the Air Force: Air Force 


“cabal” opposed to, 242; Air Force security clearance canceled, 152, 
300n16; nuclear-powered aircraft opposed by, 4, 218; pet projects 
opposed by, 4; second laboratory opposed by, 4, 128, 132 

attacks on: in Murphy’s Fortune magazine articles, 162-63, 171; not 
reappointed to GAC, 4, 145-51, 165; rumors about, in early 1952, 147; 
security clearance suspended, 1, 11, 13, 178-81; Strauss’s vendetta 
against, 160, 161, 182, 185, 190; Teller’s avenging himself on, 249; 
Teller’s enmity toward, 3; warnings of what was to come, 165-66 

Communist Party connections of, 5-10; Cotter and, 155-56; denies 
Communist Party membership, 5, 7, 9; as fellow traveler, 5, 7, 204-5, 
253; friends called before Jenner committee, 165; in Gray board charges, 
192-93, 231, 233; informing on suspected Communists, 10; and Spanish 
Civil War, 7, 192, 204; Strauss and, 66, 115; Teller and, 98; and 
Weinberg case, 147-48, 149-50 

doubts about loyalty of: Borden’s doubts, 10-11, 154-58, 172-73, 174, 
175, 177-78, 221-22; Cotter hired to investigate, 155-56; Finletter 
considers him subversive, 154, 298n22; Griggs meeting in Princeton, 
151-52; Teller’s doubts, 98-99, 213, 214 

FBI surveillance of: agents vouch for loyalty of, 156, 298n25; during Gray 
board hearing, 12, 187-89, 199-200, 304n15; Hoover concerned to keep 
methods secret, 178; Tatlock visit of 1943, 6, 9; during World War II, 9 

Gray board hearings on, 195-237; attorneys for, 190; charges against, 192- 
93, 222; Chevalier affair at, 10, 192, 193, 201-2, 205, 212, 220-21, 228, 
230, 233, 234, 308n9; expiration of AEC consultancy contract, 197, 225; 
hydrogen bomb charges against, 184, 193, 212, 213, 217-18, 226, 233, 
234; ordered to hand over official documents, 188; responds to Strauss 
about charges, 187, 188; search for an attorney, 188, 190; Smyth 
thanked by, 269-70; spying allegations dismissed, 8-9, 12, 226; Strauss 
presents charges against, 185, 186-87; testimony of, 201-4; verdict on, 
12-13, 226-27 

after the hearing, 251-55; and Congress for Cultural Freedom, 252; death 
of, 270; Fermi Prize for, 254-55; growth during last ten years, 254; 
Shepley-Blair book on, 245; Strauss attempts to have him fired from 
Institute for Advanced Study, 251; and Teller’s The Legacy of Hiroshima, 
249 

and hydrogen bomb development: on advanced division proposed for Los 
Alamos, 125; Bethe and Teller meet with him about, 30-31, 32; Booster 
endorsed by, 85; Conant persuades about, 33, 278n16; Conant’s letter 
about, 31-33; considers resigning from GAC’s over Truman decision, 56, 
280n14; counsel sought about, 28-31; crash program opposed by, 2-4, 
10, 13; Finletter meeting about, 153, 297n19; on Fuchs betrayal, 65-66; 
at GAC’s Halloween 1949 meeting, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 42, 47; at GAC’s 
October 1950 meeting, 89, 90; on George test, 90-91; Kennan’s 
influencing, 279n1; leadership of program refused by, 123; Lilienthal 
requests GAC meeting to discuss defense, 26; Mike test postponement 
advocated by, 138, 140, 141, 260, 295n12; as not lobbying about, 59, 60; 
at Princeton AEC meeting of June 1951, 120, 121, 245, 291n20; on 
priority for fission research, 95; Strauss on opposition of, 66, 115-16; 
Teller blames for failure of Super, 93; Teller on delay by, 72, 73, 95, 96, 


116, 146, 155, 212, 213; and tritium requirement for hydrogen bomb, 
79; on Ulam-Teller concept, 121, 122; as undecided about, 30, 31, 32-33; 
ZORC allegations, 163, 219, 220 

as Manhattan Project leader, 1; recruiting talent for, 29; Teller allowed to 
work on thermonuclear ideas by, 3, 76-77; Teller not named head of 
Theoretical Division by, 3, 76, 249 

and national defense and weapons policy: and Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 10, 
60, 201, 218, 263; on ad hoc panel on atomic policy, 59-60, 145; Council 
of Foreign Relations speech of, 169; as Disarmament Panel chairman, 
140, 150-51, 159-60, 169; at Dumbarton Oaks meeting on atomic 
weapons, 59-60; as GAC’s chairman, 2, 22, 28, 262, 279n4; on 
international control of atomic weapons, 10, 59-60; May-Johnson bill 
supported by, 261; on optimizing U.S. military posture, 10; and Soviet 
atomic test of 1949, 20, 21, 22, 23, 277n4; as understanding meaning of 
atomic bomb, 265; Vista involvement of, 4-5, 12, 152-54, 162, 219 

personal characteristics of: cruel streak, 10; as demanding boss, 254; 
questioning motives of those standing in his way, 98; sharp tongue, 10, 
166 

personal relationships of: with Chevaliers in Paris, 185-86, 205, 231; 
marriage to Kitty Harrison, 6; relationship with Jean Tatlock, 5-6, 9, 
204, 208 

on secrecy: openness called for by, 169-70, 183; scientific sharing of ideas 
and secrecy balanced by, 263; views expressed on Eleanor Roosevelt’s 
television program, 4, 67-68 

Oppenheimer, Kitty Harrison: alcoholism of, 252-53; approaches Groves 
about Gray board testimony, 199; buys mink coat with Fermi Prize 
money, 255; and the Chevaliers, 185-86, 192; death of, 270; FBI 
surveillance of Oppenheimer and, 9-10; Gray board hearing’s effect on, 
209; after hearing, 251, 252-53; and the Hempelmanns, 167, 168; 
making Oppenheimer break with old friends, 253; marriage to Joe Dallet, 
7; marriage to Robert Oppenheimer, 6; and Oppenheimer’s GAC’s 
reappointment, 149; as stronger than Robert, 209 

Oppenheimer, Peter, 209, 251, 253, 270 

Oppenheimer, Toni, 209, 251, 270 

Oppenheimer hearing. See Gray board 

Orr, Bob, 242 

Overhage, Carl, 219-20 


Pais, Abraham, 251, 252 


Palisades of Fire project, 104 


Panda Committee (Theoretical Megaton Group), 122, 137 
Parsons, Martha, 179 

Parsons, William S. “Deak,” 20, 28-29, 179, 278n15, 285n6 
Pash, Boris, 201, 202, 212, 217, 220-21, 233, 309n1 

Paul, Randolph, 203 

Peress, Irving, 11 

Perkins, James, 297n13 

Persons, Wilton D. “Jerry,” 230, 306n2 

Piel, Gerard, 70 


Pike, Sumner, 18, 22, 48, 94, 98, 277n6 

Piore, Emmanuel, 219-20 

Pitzer, Kenneth: considered for AEC, 311n2; considered to head Los Alamos 
advanced division, 292n31, 295n1; Gray board testimony of, 217; 
Oppenheimer ridicules, 166, 296n5; on Oppenheimer’s GAC’s 
reappointment, 145-46, 147, 148; seen as part of Berkeley cabal, 216; 
Strauss meets with, before Gray board appearance, 211; Strauss’s alerting 
Oppenheimer opponents of impending attack, 301n6 

Placzek, George, 31 

Plank, Miriam, 80 

Plesset, Sidney, 293n10 

Ploughshare project, 104 

Polaris missile, 134 

President’s Scientific Advisory Committee (PSAC), 258, 259 

Project Vista, 4-5, 12, 152-54, 162, 219 

Project Whitney. See Livermore laboratory 

Puening, Katherine, 5 


Q clearance, 4, 44, 171, 178, 197, 300n16 
Quarles, Donald, 179 
Quesada, Elwood R. “Pete,” 94 


Rabi, Isidor Isaac: and Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 10, 60; on Air Force’s 
removing Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 300n16; and Atoms for 
Peace, 208; attempts to have Gray board hearings called off, 207, 208; on 
breaches of security before Gray board, 198-99; at GAC’s Halloween 
1949 meeting, 34, 36, 39-40; on GAC’s not lobbying, 59; at GAC’s 
October 1950 meeting, 90; Gray board testimony of, 206-9; Gray board 
testimony published, 229; Griggs-Oppenheimer meeting arranged by, 
151; Mike test postponement advocated by, 138, 141; on Oppenheimer 
for GAC’s chairman, 279n4; Oppenheimer’s counsel about hydrogen 
bomb sought by, 28, 278n15; on politicians’ misusing science, 264-65; 
President’s Scientific Advisory Committee suggested by, 258; on 
Savannah River reactors, 282n16; on scientists’ losing political power, 
263; on self-enforcing control of atomic weapons, 40, 60; and the 
Smyths, 211; on Soviet atomic bomb, 23; and Strauss’s attempts to have 
Oppenheimer fired from Institute for Advanced Study, 251; and Ulam, 
109; on Ulam-Teller concept, 121-22; on vendetta against Oppenheimer, 
165; and ZORC, 163, 219 

Rabinowich, Eugene, 300n5 

radiation implosion: Mark on Los Alamos physicists and, 104; Mike test of, 
112, 125, 136, 260; at Princeton AEC meeting of June 1951, 120-22; 
Soviets acquire, 194, 260; Teller conceiving, 102, 106, 287n12; Wheeler 
loses classified material on, 157 

Ramsey, Norman, 229 

RAND Corporation, 130, 131, 292n7 

Rawson, Ken, 242 

Rayburn, Sam, 189 

Reagan, Ronald, 257 


Reid, Helen Rogers, 240 

Reid, Ogden, Jr., 230, 310n6 

Reporter (magazine), 247 

Reston, James, 195, 196, 268 

Rhodes, Richard, 286n8 

Richtmyer, Robert, 289n28 

Rickover, Hyman, 240, 241, 301n9, 312n6 

Ridenour, Louis, 69, 94 

Rifkind, Simon, 190 

Robb, Roger: as AEC lawyer for Oppenheimer hearing, 191; and appeal 
process of Gray board decision, 230; and Chevalier affair, 201-2; defense 
denied list of prosecution witnesses by, 197-98; and defense team’s lack 
of security clearances, 198; on ethics panel, 223; Garrison’s protesting 
methods of, 203-4; Gray’s appeal to end hearing, 310n3; Hoover asked to 
meet with Gray board by, 222-24; joins AEC team for meals, 191, 197; 
and Lawrence, 214; and majority opinion for Gray board 
recommendation, 231, 232, 239; meets with Teller before Gray board 
appearance, 211-12; and Pash, 217, 309n1; and prehearing examination 
of case files by Gray board, 197; Strauss asks him to curtail his tactics, 
207; tactics of, 203; and Teller’s draft press statement about Gray board 
testimony, 247; and Teller’s Gray board testimony, 212-13, 308n6; 
wiretap information used by, 199, 200, 228-29 

Robinson, William E., 231 

Rogers, William P., 191 

Rolander, C. Arthur, 191, 192, 197, 200, 223, 228 

Roosevelt, Eleanor, 4, 67 

Rosenberg, Julius and Ethel, 118, 290n8, 296n8 

Rosenbluth, Marshall, 83, 126 

Rota, Gian-Carlo, 108-9 

Rowe, Hartley, 34, 36, 39 

Roy, Max, 126 

Russell, Bertrand, 256 

Russia. See Soviet Union 


Sakharov, Andrey, 260, 265 

Savannah River reactors, 282n16 

Schilling, Warner, 277n4, 278n16 

Schreiber, Raemer, 292n34 

Schwinger, Julian, 75 

Scientific American, 68, 69-71, 281n10 

scientists: Borden on, 99; as heroes after World War II, 260-61; May-Johnson 
bill protested by, 261; Oppenheimer hearing undermining respect for 
science, 264-65; President’s Scientific Advisory Committee, 258, 259; 
Teller on role of, 72; as understanding effects of discoveries, 261-63 

Seaborg, Glenn, 22-23, 35, 67, 280n1 

SEAC calculator, 137 

secrecy: Disarmament Panel’s criticizing, 150-51; Eisenhower favors 
openness, 159-60, 169; and GAC’s Halloween 1949 meeting, 41-42; 
Oppenheimer’s calling for openness, 169-70, 183; physicists’ criticizing, 


67-68; versus scientific sharing of ideas, 263-64; Seaborg on, 23; 
Truman orders for H-bomb debate, 4, 55-56, 67 

Segré, Emilio, 313n19 

Seitz, Fred, 292n31 

Serber, Robert, 36, 84, 270, 291n26 

Shepley, James, 230, 241, 242-43, 245-47, 312n10, 313n15 

Shute, Neville, 256 

Silverman, Samuel: and bugging of defense work room, 204; on cross- 
examination of Borden, 222; on Gray board’s prehearing immersion in 
files, 197; on memories of Oppenheimer and Marks, 199; on 
Oppenheimer’s defense team, 190; security clearance denied to, 198; on 
Teller’s Gray board testimony, 308n6 

Slansky, Richard, 286n9 

Smith, Cyril S., 34, 39, 40, 44, 279n1 

Smith, Gerard, 183-84, 304n6 

Smith, Ralph Carlisle, 244 

Smith, Walter Bedell, 312n7 

Smyth, Henry DeWolf: on AEC, 266-67; Atomic Energy for Military Purposes, 
266-67; on Atoms for Peace, 184, 304n6; and Bethe’s Scientific American 
article, 70; Borden on opposition to hydrogen bomb development of, 98; 
and breaches of security before Gray board, 306n5; at final meeting of 
committee to advise Truman on hydrogen bomb, 53; on Gray board 
hearing, 210-11; on hydrogen bomb charges against Oppenheimer, 184, 
304n8; as International Atomic Energy Agency ambassador, 267; 
interviewed for this study, 266; and Los Alamos reaction to Oppenheimer 
verdict, 244; and majority opinion on Gray board recommendation, 232, 
234; opinion on Gray board recommendation, 232, 234-35, 267; on 
Oppenheimer, 269; Oppenheimer’s eulogy delivered by, 270; 
Oppenheimer’s opinion of, 166, 210; Oppenheimer’s thanks to, 269-70; 
reconsidering GAC decision, 48, 49; on recruiting scientists for hydrogen 
bomb, 73-74; and release of Gray board transcript, 229, 230; on 
rescinding Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 179; Strauss attempts to 
bribe, 267-68; Strauss complains to Eisenhower about, 238; Strauss 
distrusted by, 210-11; Strauss’s staff spying on, 312n12; talks to press 
about Gray board hearing, 268-69; and “Thermonuclear Weapons 
Program Chronology,” 277n6; Wheeler recruited for Los Alamos by, 82; 
wife’s diary made public by, 269 

Smyth, Mary deConingh, 210, 211, 232, 234-35, 268-69 

Smyth Report (Atomic Energy for Military Purposes), 266-67 

Snapp, Roy, 188, 232 

Snyder, Murray, 306n2 

Souers, Sidney: at final meeting of committee to advise Truman on hydrogen 
bomb, 53; Murray presses case for new laboratory with, 127; 
Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment opposed by, 147, 148-49; Strauss 
discusses possibility of hydrogen bomb with, 25-26, 277n5; and Strauss’s 
support for hydrogen bomb, 49, 52 

Soviet Union: Acheson-Lilienthal plan rejected by, 60; assessing targets in, 
88-89; atomic bomb test of 1949, 2, 20-23; on Atoms for Peace, 257; 
Bethe compares U.S. and Soviet H-bomb progress, 140; estimates of 


atomic bomb development by, 20, 277n3; Fuchs passes atomic secrets to, 
2, 65-67, 73, 96, 125, 131, 140; hydrogen bomb race with U.S., 13, 57, 
260; intercontinental missiles developed by, 258, 259; Joe Four test, 194; 
Kennan on willingness to negotiate of, 35, 36; Khrushchev, 256, 257; 
Mike test and, 138-39, 142; penetration of U.S. government, 1-2; 
radiation implosion acquired by, 260; rebuilding ground forces, 61; 
second and third atomic tests, 124-25; Sputnik, 258; Stalin, 57, 61, 87, 
88, 151, 283n7; test ban negotiations with Eisenhower, 256-57; United 
States underestimates, 194; as working on hydrogen bomb at time of 
Truman’s announcement, 57 

Spanish Civil War, 7, 165, 192, 204 

“spark plug,” 103, 157 

Sputnik, 258 

Stalin, Joseph, 57, 61, 87, 88, 151, 283n7 

“Star Wars” (Strategic Defense Initiative), 104, 257, 264 

Stein, Paul, 288n21 

Stern, Philip, 297n13 

Stevens, Robert, 11 

Stevenson, Adlai, 139, 140, 256 

Stever, Guyford, 220 

Stimson, Henry L., 261 

Strategic Air Command (SAC), 153, 163, 219, 259 

Strategic Defense Initiative (“Star Wars”), 104, 257, 264 

Strauss, Alice, 25 

Strauss, Lewis, 186; access to Eisenhower of, 238-39, 311n2; on AEC, 18-19; 
as AEC chairman, 170, 171, 184; alerting Oppenheimer opponents of 
impending attack, 172, 301n6; Alsop brothers on, 247; and Alvarez’s 
Gray board testimony, 216, 217-18; and Atoms for Peace, 183-84, 208, 
257-58, 303n8; attempts to bribe Smyth, 267-68; attempts to have 
Oppenheimer fired from Institute for Advanced Study, 251; and Bates, 
189, 190; Borden as not liking, 173, 301n9; Borden brings mysterious 
paper to, 171-72; and Borden plan to make Teller new leader of scientific 
community, 240, 247, 312n7; Borden refused AEC job by, 301n9, 312n6; 
and Borden’s hydrogen bomb chronology, 157; and Borden’s letter to FBI 
about Oppenheimer, 173, 181, 301n13; and Bravo test, 193, 194; and 
Campbell, 235-36; commerce secretary nomination of, 259-60; Conant 
and, 279n4; as conspiring with Borden about Oppenheimer, 173, 175, 
176, 301n9, 301n13; Dean as not liking, 170-71; and defense team’s lack 
of security clearances, 198; and Eisenhower after presidency, 260; 
Eisenhower as badly served by, 258, 259; Eisenhower congratulates over 
Oppenheimer hearing, 238; and Eisenhower’s suspension of 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 178, 179-81, 302n7; Eisenhower 
warned about Oppenheimer by, 170; enmity for Oppenheimer, 3; 
expressing doubts about Oppenheimer to Lovett, 297n13; and FBI, 185; 
fifty-fourth birthday party of, 56; and Fuchs betrayal, 66, 67; as getting 
rid of Oppenheimer without debate, 13, 260; Golden letter about Russian 
atomic bomb, 24—25; and Gray’s majority opinion, 230; “gumshoeing” 
against scientists, 244, 312n12; Hoover asked to meet with Gray board 
by, 222, 223; hydrogen bomb development supported by, 25-26, 48, 49- 


50, 52, 163; and Lawrence’s failure to appear before Gray board, 214, 
215; lawyer sought for Oppenheimer hearing, 191; as leaking 
information about hydrogen bomb, 59; leaves AEC, 259; and Los Alamos 
reaction to Oppenheimer verdict, 244; McCarthy investigation of 
Oppenheimer headed off by, 170; majority opinion for Gray board 
recommendation, 231, 233, 239; at meeting on AEC investigation of 
Oppenheimer, 184—85; and Murphy, 160, 161; in Murphy’s Fortune 
magazine articles, 163, 171; New York Times story on Oppenheimer 
hearing triggered by, 195-96, 306n2; Oppenheimer case’s importance 
stressed by, 192, 263; Oppenheimer responds to charges, 187, 188; 
Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment opposed by, 147; on Oppenheimer’s 
opposition to hydrogen bomb development, 66, 115-16; Oppenheimer’s 
ridiculing of, 166-67; Oppenheimer’s security clearance approved by in 
1947, 193; presents Oppenheimer with charges against him, 185, 186- 
87; President’s Scientific Advisory Committee opposed by, 258, 259; 
promises Hoover to get Oppenheimer, 182, 185, 303n1; promise to 
Smyth violated by, 234; and public relations about Gray board decision, 
230; Rabi attempts to have Gray board hearings called off, 207, 208; and 
release of Gray board transcript, 229; and Shepley-Blair book, 243, 246, 
312n10, 313n15; Smyth’s distrust of, 210-11; and Smyth’s minority 
opinion on Gray board recommendation, 267; and Souers on hydrogen 
bomb, 25-26, 277n5; and Teller as allies, 115; and Teller on new 
laboratory for hydrogen bomb research, 123; and Teller’s draft press 
statement about Gray board testimony, 247; and Teller’s Gray board 
testimony, 218; Teller’s letter of thanks to, 247-48; and Teller’s The 
Legacy of Hiroshima, 249; and Teller’s “The Work of Many People,” 248; 
test ban opposed by, 256-57; thanks those who helped in Oppenheimer 
case, 239-40; vendetta against Oppenheimer, 160, 161, 182, 185, 190; 
and verdict of AEC commissioners, 231; as White House adviser on 
atomic energy, 160, 170; wiretap information used by, 189, 200; and 
Zuckert’s vote on Gray board recommendation, 236, 237 

Strauss, Lewis H., 302n7 

Sulzberger, Arthur Hays, 195 

Super model: Air Force as wanting, 57-58; Bradbury as giving up on, 91; 
deuterium burning in, 80; GAC rejects crash program for, 37-45, 58; 
George test and, 86; as infeasible, 81, 86, 89-91, 93, 105, 119, 284n10; 
Lawrence and Alvarez become supporters of, 27-28; as needed for 
neither deterrence or retaliation, 48; Oppenheimer on feasibility of, 58; 
and panel on long-range use of nuclear weapons, 95; politicians and 
generals on development of, 42; proponents continue to argue for, 52-53; 
as still on table in 1951, 120; tritium requirement for igniting, 74, 77-80, 
89, 117, 282n16, 282n21, 284n11; Ulam’s ignition idea for making 
possible, 101 

Super Oralloy bomb, 85 

Sutherland, Arthur, 165 

Sweeney, Mary, 232 


Taft, Robert A., 159, 160, 170 
Tatlock, Jean, 5-6, 9, 156, 204, 208 


Taylor, Caro, 84-85 

Taylor, Maurice “Gook,” 156, 298n25, 185 

Taylor, Theodore, 84-85, 88-89, 92 

Taylor instability, 137-38 

Teller, Edward, 92-99; on Air Force’s being briefed about hydrogen bomb, 28; 
Alarm Clock designed by, 74, 83; attempts to create support for hydrogen 
bomb at Los Alamos, 278n8; attempts to recruit Bethe to work on 
hydrogen bomb, 29-31; and Bethe meet with Oppenheimer about 
hydrogen bomb, 30-31, 32; and Borden meet in March 1950, 72-73, 96; 
Borden promotes to Blair, 240-41; and Borden’s cultivating each other, 
95-99; Borden’s doubts about Oppenheimer fueled by, 154-55, 175; and 
Borden’s hydrogen bomb chronology, 157; Borden’s trying to manipulate, 
176; on Bradbury, 72-73, 93, 116; Bradbury offers charge of theoretical 
work on hydrogen bomb, 122; Bradbury on his contributing better from 
outside Los Alamos, 123, 291n26; and burning of deuterium, 80; 
Classical Super model of hydrogen bomb, 37, 58, 81, 86, 89-91; on 
classified material lost by Wheeler, 157; declining to work on atomic 
bomb, 76-77, 245; discusses hydrogen bomb with McMahon, 45; 
estimate of time required to build hydrogen bomb, 27; fairness of, 92-93; 
as “Father of the H-bomb,” 104, 250, 257, 287n14; Finletter and, 162; 
and first Livermore tests as failures, 246; and Fuchs betrayal, 66, 73; 
GAC’s decision of October 1949 explained to, 43-44; at GAC’s October 
1950 meeting, 89, 90; and George test, 85-86, 87, 90-91; Gray board 
testimony of, 212-14, 218, 308n6; and Holloway put in charge of Mike 
test, 122-23; on ignition of hydrogen bomb, 77-78, 101-3, 119-22; 
Lawrence and Alvarez meet with, about hydrogen bomb, 27; leaves Los 
Alamos laboratory, 77; The Legacy of Hiroshima, 103, 249; letter of thanks 
to Strauss, 247-48; Life magazine story on, 248; at Livermore laboratory, 
133-34; at Los Alamos after Oppenheimer verdict, 244-45; Manley on, 
45-46; on Mike test, 112, 137-38, 142; in Murphy’s Fortune magazine 
article, 163; on new laboratory for hydrogen bomb research, 4, 116-19, 
123-26, 128-29, 130, 131, 133; Oppenheimer allows to work on 
thermonuclear ideas during war, 3, 76-77; Oppenheimer as not naming 
him head of Theoretical Division, 3, 76, 249; on Oppenheimer as security 
risk, 98-99, 213, 214; Oppenheimer on attitude toward hydrogen bomb 
of, 32; on Oppenheimer’s brother as Communist, 146, 296n3; on 
Oppenheimer’s delay of hydrogen bomb development, 72, 95, 96, 116, 
146, 155, 212, 213; Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment opposed by, 146, 
148; originality of, 126; positive qualities of, 92-93; press statement 
about Gray board testimony drafted by, 247; at Princeton AEC meeting of 
June 1951, 120, 121, 291n21; radiation implosion idea of, 102, 106, 
287n12; on recruiting scientists for hydrogen bomb, 73-74, 86, 96; 
recruiting staff for Livermore laboratory, 134; Robb meets with before 
Gray board appearance, 211-12; on scientist’s role, 72; as self-absorbed, 
93, 124; as settling old scores, 249-50; in Shepley-Blair book, 242; and 
Soviet atomic test of 1949, 23; on special hydrogen bomb division at Los 
Alamos, 117-18; and Strauss, 115, 116; Strauss and Borden plan to make 
him new leader of scientific community, 240, 247, 312n7; and 
suspension of Oppenheimer’s security clearance, 180, 302n8; and 


Taylor’s low-yield testing idea, 92; test ban opposed by, 256-57; 
threatens to quit Los Alamos, 122; Time story about, 241, 242; and 
tritium requirement for hydrogen bomb, 79, 284n11; UCLA loyalty oath 
dispute, 93-94; Ulam brings his ignition idea to, 101-3; Ulam on 
arguments between Bethe and, 100; Ulam’s employee evaluation by, 105; 
Ulam written out of history by, 103-6, 112, 250, 287n12; visionary 
schemes of, 104, 257; Walkowicz and, 242; wartime failures of, 76, 
282n20; and Wheeler’s group, 83; Wilson briefed after first Soviet atomic 
test by, 218; “The Work of Many People,” 103, 248-49 

Teller, Max, 93 

Teller, Mici, 94, 241 

Teller-Ulam concept. See Ulam-Teller concept 

test bans, 40, 256-57 

test moratorium, 150 

Theoretical Megaton Group (Panda Committee), 122, 137 

thermonuclear weapons. See hydrogen bomb 

Time (magazine), 161, 240, 241, 242, 313n15 

Toll, John, 83 

Tolman, Ruth, 253, 308n9 

Trinity test, 42, 98 

tritium: and deuterium in George test, 85, 119; public use of word, 68; 
requirement for Super, 27, 74, 77-80, 89, 117, 282n16, 282n21, 284n11 

Truman, Harry: atomic arsenal increased under, 276n2; Borden letter on need 
for large nuclear arsenal, 156; Brownell accuses of protecting 
Communists, 178; committee to advise on hydrogen bomb development 
meets with, 54-55; espionage scandals plaguing administration of, 52- 
53; Fuchs betrayal reported to, 65; hydrogen bomb research ordered by, 
2, 55, 60-61, 262; Korean War, 87, 94; on leaks about hydrogen bomb, 
51; and Lilienthal’s decision to resign, 49; loss of China attributed to, 52; 
McMahon and Strauss attempt to persuade to build hydrogen bomb, 49- 
50, 52; materials for hydrogen bomb ordered by, 74; as not informed 
about potential for hydrogen bomb, 25, 26; and Oppenheimer’s GAC 
reappointment, 147, 148, 149-50; public admission of possibility of 
hydrogen bomb, 52; refuses to speak to Murphy, 160; Savannah River 
reactors approved by, 282n16; secrecy for H-bomb debate ordered by, 4, 
41-42, 55-56, 67; and Soviet atomic test of 1949, 21, 22, 277n4 

Tyler, Carroll, 303n1 


Ulam, Adam, 108, 109 

Ulam, Claire, 83 

Ulam, Francoise: calculating tritium requirement, 78, 79; on Teller’s response 
to Ulam’s calculations, 79; on Truman order’s influence on Ulam, 111; on 
Ulam and radiation implosion, 287n12; on Ulam and von Neumann, 110; 
on Ulam’s collaboration with Everett, 288n26; on Ulam’s concern about 
weapons work, 46; and Ulam’s ignition idea, 101; on Ulam’s illness, 109; 
on Ulam’s standing up to Teller, 287n17; Janette Wheeler compared 
with, 83 

Ulam, Stanislaw, 100-112; “bomb in a box” idea of, 100; on burning of 
deuterium, 80, 81, 86, 89, 90, 105, 284n10; collaboration with Everett, 


107, 110, 288n26; family background of, 107; on GAC decision of 
October 1949, 46; on ignition of hydrogen bomb, 77, 100-103, 119-22; 
illness of, 108-9; Lawrence and Alvarez meet with, about hydrogen 
bomb, 27; as little known to public, 104, 247; Shepley and Blair meet, 
241; Teller makes unperson of, 103-6, 112, 250, 287n12; Teller’s 
avenging himself on, 249-50; Teller’s employee evaluation of, 105; in 
Teller’s “The Work of Many People,” 248, 249; on tritium requirement 
for hydrogen bomb, 78, 79, 80, 89, 105, 117, 282n22, 282n23, 284n10; 
Truman order’s influence on, 111-12; and von Neumann, 110-11; and 
Wheeler’s group, 83; work habits of, 107, 288n21 

Ulam-Teller concept: Fermi and Rabi on, 121-22; Mike shot as testing, 112, 
125, 136, 260; Oppenheimer on, 121, 122; Shepley-Blair book on, 245, 
246-47; Soviets come up with version of, 260; Teller’s contribution to, 
101-3; Ulam’s idea on ignition, 100-103. See also radiation implosion 

Ulam-Teller paper, 102-3 

UNIVAC calculator, 137 

Urey, Harold, 147, 148 

U-235, 82 

U-238, 142 


Vanderberg, Arthur, 17 

Vanderberg, Hoyt, 20, 28, 152, 160, 218 

“Venona” cables, 298n25 

“Vista” report, 4-5, 12, 152-54, 162, 219 

Vogel, Clark, 232 

Volpe, Joseph: on the defense’s walking out, 203, 204; on Gray board 
hearing, 196, 203; on Oppenheimer after hearing, 254; on Oppenheimer 
as not a spy, 298n25; Oppenheimer meets with, about charges against 
him, 187; and Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment, 148, 149; on 
Oppenheimer’s not weeping during Gray board hearing, 219; on 
Oppenheimer’s sharp tongue, 166-67, 296n5; on wiretaps of his phones, 
305n15; on Zuckert’s vote against Oppenheimer, 237 

von Karmann, Theodore, 242 

von Neumann, John: on classified material lost by Wheeler, 157; MANIAC 
calculator of, 137; and Monte Carlo method, 289n28; at Princeton AEC 
meeting of June 1951, 120; on scientists in world of espionage, 205; and 
the Smyths, 211; Teller’s writing about GAC decision to, 46; Ulam and 
Fermi’s consulting with, 78-79; Ulam invited to Princeton by, 108; 
Ulam’s ignition concept influenced by, 111-12; Ulam’s letter on Ulam- 
Teller concept, 249, 287n12; Ulam’s relationship with, 110-11; 
Walkowicz and, 242 

von Neumann, Klari, 78, 211 


Walker, John: attempting to get Teller to go to Livermore, 133; hydrogen 
bomb chronology of Borden and, 156-57, 158, 175-76; on 
Oppenheimer’s GAC reappointment, 299n2; second laboratory supported 
by, 129, 293n9 

Walker, Virginia, 180, 312n12 

Walker-Borden report, 175-76 


Walkowicz, Thaddeus F. “Teddy,” 163-64, 220, 242, 299n10, 309n8 

Wall Street Journal, 67 

Walters, Don, 156, 298n25 

Waymack, William, 18 

Webster, William, 20 

Wechsler, Jacob, 126, 136-37 

Weinberg, Joseph, 147-48, 149-50, 297n11, 302n2 

Weisskopf, Victor, 4, 31, 68, 251, 265 

Weiszacker, Friedrich von, 92 

Wheeler, Janette, 83 

Wheeler, John: and Borden’s hydrogen bomb chronology, 157; classified 
material lost by, 157-58, 176; at Los Alamos laboratory, 82-83; and new 
laboratory for hydrogen bomb research, 128; at Princeton AEC meeting 
of June 1951, 120, 291n21, 291n22; on shortage of physicists for 
hydrogen bomb, 86; on Teller before his Gray board appearance, 212; 
Ulam and, 111 

Whitman, Ann, 238 

Whitman, Walter G., 95, 154, 285n6, 306n3 

“whole man” standard, 227 

Wilson, Carroll, 20, 43, 98, 117, 303n1 

Wilson, Roscoe Charles, 28, 218-19, 285n6 

Wisner, Frank, 228, 229-30, 239 

“Work of Many People, The” (Teller), 103, 248-49 


York, Herbert: as acting director of Livermore laboratory, 133-34; on 
Lawrence and Livermore laboratory, 134-35; on Mike test, 142; and new 
laboratory for hydrogen bomb research, 128, 132, 133; Shepley and Blair 
meet, 241; on Ulam-Teller concept, 120 


Zacharias, Jerrold, 163, 219, 220, 229, 265, 310n4 

Zeldovich, Yakov, 260 

ZORC, 163, 164, 219-20, 309n8 

Zuckert, Eugene: Gray board documents left on train by, 229; and hydrogen 
bomb charges against Oppenheimer, 184, 304n8; and postponement of 
Mike test, 141; on Strauss as AEC chairman, 184; Strauss complains to 
Eisenhower about, 238, 239; vote on Gray board recommendation, 232, 
233, 236-37 


Photograph Credits 


Insert page 1: Courtesy of LANL Archives; page 2: Courtesy of Library of 
Congress, Harris and Ewing Collection; page 3: Niels Bohr Archive, 
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives; page 4: Courtesy of AIP 
Emilio Segré Visual Archives; page 5: Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual 
Archives, W. F. Meggers Gallery of Nobel Laureates; Courtesy of Edythe 
Holbrook; page 6: Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives; page 7: 
Courtesy of LANL Archives; page 8: Photograph by Frances Simon, 
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives, Frances Simon Collections; 
Courtesy of Kathleen Mark; page 9: Courtesy of Herbert Hoover Library; 
page 10: Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives; Harris and Ewing, 
News Service, courtesy MIT Museum and AIP Emilio Segré Visual 
Archives; Courtesy of Dolores Everett; page 11: Courtesy Atomic Heritage 
Foundation; page 12: National Archives and Records Administration, 
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives; page 13: Denis Galloway, 
courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives, Physics Today Collection; 
Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives, Physics Today Collection; 
page 14: Photograph by Kenneth Bainbridge, courtesy of AIP Emilio 
Segré Visual Archives; page 15: Photograph by Fernand Gignon, courtesy 
of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives, Physics Today Collection; page 16: 
Ulli Steltzer; page 17: Courtesy of United States Department of Energy; 
page 18: Courtesy of AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


