AUTHOR OF LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN: THE DUTY OF GENIUS 


RAY MONK 


Robert 
Oppenheimer 


Oe et ee eee renee ene e te ene n ene n nan e nent nem ee 


A LIFE INSIDE THE CENTER 


seer cierto RAY MONK 


Copyright © 2012 by Ray Monk 


All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Doubleday, a division of 
Random House, Inc., New York, and in Canada by Random House of Canada 
Limited, Toronto. 


www.doubleday.com 


Originally published in Great Britain as Inside the Centre: The Life of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer by Jonathan Cape, a division of The Random House Group 
Limited, London, in 2012. 


DOUBLEDAY and the portrayal of an anchor with a dolphin are registered 
trademarks of Random House, Inc. 


Jacket design by Emily Mahon 
Front jacket photograph © Corbis 
Spine photograph © The Granger Collection, NYC 


eBook ISBN: 978-0-385-50413-3 
Hardcover ISBN: 978-0-385-50407-2 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Monk, Ray. 

Robert Oppenheimer : a life inside the center / Ray Monk. — First U.S. 
edition. 

pages cm 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967. 2. Physicists—United States— 
Biography. 3. Atomic bomb—United States—History—20th century. 
4. Physicists—United States—Intellectual life—2O0th century. I. Title. 
QC16.062M66 2013 
530.092—dc23 
[B] 2012046045 


ISBN 978-0-385-50407-2 


v3.1 


Contents 


Cover 

Title Page 

Copyright 

List of Illustrations 

Preface and Acknowledgments 


Ly 


ub wWN 


Oo ON 


11, 
y bee 
13. 
14. 


15, 
16. 
|W A 


PART ONE: 1904-1926 
“Amerika, du hast es besser”: Oppenheimer’s German Jewish 
Background 


. Childhood 
. First Love: New Mexico 
. Harvard 
. Cambridge 
PART TWO: 1926-1941 
. Gottingen 


. Postdoctoral Fellow 

. An American School of Theoretical Physics 
. Unstable Cores 

10. 


Fission 


PART THREE: 1941-1945 
In on the Secret 
Los Alamos 1: Security 
Los Alamos 2: Implosion 
Los Alamos 3: Heavy with Misgiving 


PART FOUR: 1945-1967 
The Insider Scientist 
The Booming Years 
Massive Retaliation 


18. Falsus in uno 
19. An Open Book? 


Notes and References 
Bibliography 

Index 

About the Author 

Photo Inserts 

Other Books by This Author 


List of Illustrations 


First Insert 

1. Oppenheimer with his mother (© Historical/CORBIS) 
. Oppenheimer in the arms of his father (© Historical/CORBIS) 
. Oppenheimer building with blocks (© Historical/CORBIS) 


. 155 Riverside Drive (© Milstein Division of United States 
History, Local History and Genealogy, The New York Public 
Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations) 


BW N 


5. Oppenheimer at Harvard (© Harvard University Archives) 
6. William Boyd (© The National Library of Medicine) 


7. Paul Horgan (© J. R. Eyerman/Time & Life Pictures/Getty 
Images) 


8. Frederick Bernheim (image provided by the Duke Medical 
Center Archives) 


9. The Upper Pecos Valley (courtesy of the Palace of the 
Governors Photo Archives, New Mexico History Museum, 
Santa Fe/053755) 


10. Inside the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge (© Omikron/ 
Science Photo Library) 


11. Paul Dirac (© Bettmann/CORBIS) 

12. Patrick Blackett (© Science Photo Library) 

13. Niels Bohr (© Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory/Science Photo 
Library) 

14. Max Born (© Bettmann/CORBIS) 

15. Charlotte Riefenstahl (© Gottingen Museum of Chemistry) 

16. Werner Heisenberg (© Bettmann/CORBIS) 

17. Paul Ehrenfest 


18. Oppenheimer on Lake Zurich with I. I. Rabi, H. M. Mott- 
Smith and Wolfgang Pauli (© AIP Emilio Segré Visual 
Archives) 


19, 


20. 


BALE 
aes 
eo. 
24. 


25. 
26. 
2s 
28. 


29, 


Oppenheimer at Berkeley (courtesy of the Department of 
Physics, Physics and Astronomy Library) 


Oppenheimer with Robert Serber (© New York Times/Redux/ 
eyevine) 


Ernest Lawrence (© AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives) 
Kitty (© Historical/CORBIS) 
Perro Caliente (© Peter Goodchild) 


Haakon Chevalier (courtesy of The Bancroft Library, 
University of California, Berkeley) 


Frank Oppenheimer 

Jean Tatlock (© Dr. Hugh Tatlock) 

Steve Nelson (© United Press International Photos) 

Joe Weinberg, Rossi Lomanitz, David Bohm, and Max 
Friedman 

The staff of the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley (© Science 
Source/Science Photo Library) 


Second Insert 


30. 


Bl. 


i 


Kf 


34. 


re 
36. 
Se 
38. 


Bo 


Julian Schwinger (© Estate of Francis Bello/Science Photo 
Library) 
Richard Feynman (© Tom Harvey) 


The Los Alamos Ranch School (© Digital Photo Archive, 
Department of Energy [DOE], courtesy AIP Emilio Segré 
Visual Archives) 


General Groves (© Los Alamos National Laboratory/Science 
Photo Library) 


Enrico Fermi (© Argonne National Laboratory/Science Photo 
Library) 


The graphite pile at Stagg Field (© Historical/CORBIS) 

Hans Bethe (© Science Source/Science Photo Library) 

Klaus Fuchs (© Keystone/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) 
Edward Teller (© University of California Radiation 
Laboratory/Science Photo Library) 

Seth Neddermeyer’s early attempts at implosion (courtesy of 
the Los Alamos National Laboratory Archives) 


40. 


41. 


42. 


43. 


44. 


45. 


46. 


47. 


48. 


49. 


50. 


Bhs 


D2. 


53; 


54. 


5d. 
mo, 


Of 


The Nagasaki and Hiroshima bombs (Claus Lunau/Science 
Photo Library) 

The “Little Boy” design, as reverse engineered by John Coster- 
Mullen 

Workers at Oak Ridge (© Oak Ridge National Laboratory and 
Digital Photo Archive, Department of Energy [DOE], courtesy 
AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives) 

Preparing the Trinity Test (courtesy of the Los Alamos 
National Laboratory Archives) 

The Trinity explosion (© Historical/CORBIS) 

Oppenheimer and Groves at the Trinity Test site (Emilio Segré 
Visual Archives/American Institute of Physics/Science Photo 
Library) 

The effects of the atomic bombs in Japan (courtesy of the Los 
Alamos National Laboratory Archives) 

Oppenheimer and Kitty in Japan, 1960 (© Historical/ 
CORBIS) 

The cover of the first issue of Physics Today (courtesy of 
Berkeley Laboratory) 

Albert Einstein and Leo Szilard (© Time & Life Pictures/Getty 
Images) 

The Ulam-Teller design (© Carey Sublette and the 
NuclearWeaponArchive.org) 

The “Mike” Test 

Oppenheimer lectures Ed Murrow (© Bettmann/CORBIS) 
Oppenheimer with Paul Dirac and Abraham Pais at the 
Institute for Advanced Study (© Alfred Eisenstaedt/Getty 
Images) 

Oppenheimer, Toni, and Peter at Olden Manor, Princeton (© 
Alfred Eisenstaedt/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) 

Lewis Strauss (© Bettmann/CORBIS) 

Edward Teller congratulates Oppenheimer on his Fermi Prize 
(© Ralph Morse/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images) 
Oppenheimer speaking at last visit to Los Alamos (© 
Oppenheimer Archives/CORBIS) 


58. Oppenheimer photographed for Life magazine (© Time & Life 
Pictures/Getty Images) 


Preface and Acknowledgments 


The origins of this book lie in a review I wrote about fifteen years 
ago of a reissued edition of Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and 
Recollections, edited by Alice Kimball Smith and Charles Weiner. 
Until then, I knew about Oppenheimer only what everybody 
knows: that he was an important physicist, that he led the project 
to design and build the world’s first atomic bomb, and that he 
had his security clearance taken away from him during the 
McCarthy era because of suspicions that he was a communist, or 
even possibly a Soviet agent. 

What I did not know until I read this collection of his letters 
was what a fascinatingly diverse man he was. I did not know that 
he wrote poetry and short stories, that he had a deep love and 
wide knowledge of French literature, that he found the Hindu 
scriptures so inspiring that he learned Sanskrit in order to read 
them in their original language. Nor did I know how complicated 
and fragile his personality was, nor how intense his personal 
relations were with his father, his mother, his girlfriends, his 
friends and his students. 

Learning all this, I was surprised to discover that no full and 
complete biography of him had, at that point, been written. There 
was, I said in my review, a really great biography waiting to be 
written about Oppenheimer, a biography that would attempt to 
do justice both to his important role in the history and politics of 
the twentieth century and to the singularity of his mind, to the 
depth and diversity of his intellectual interests. Such a book 
would need to describe and explain his contributions to physics 
and to place them in their historical context. It would need to do 
the same with regard to his other intellectual interests and to his 
participation in public life. It would not be an easy book to write. 
In fact, it seemed perfectly possible that it would never be 
written. 

Since I wrote that review, several books about Oppenheimer 
have been written and published, which attempt to rise to at least 
some of the challenges I described. Chief among these is American 


Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer by 
Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, a book that was a long time in 
the making and the result of a staggering amount of research. 
American Prometheus is a very fine book indeed, a monumental 
piece of scholarship that I have had at my side ever since it was 
published. However (partly to my relief, since I was, by the time 
this book appeared, engaged on my own book), it is not the book 
I envisaged when I reviewed Smith and Weiner. Though Bird and 
Sherwin describe in exhaustive detail Oppenheimer’s personal life 
and his political activities, they either ignore altogether or 
summarize very briefly his contributions to physics. 

To take an example that might seem unimportant, but in fact is 
not, one would never know from reading Bird and Sherwin’s book 
how much of Oppenheimer’s time and intellectual energy was 
taken up with thinking about mesons. Mesons are subatomic 
particles, the existence of which was predicted in 1934 and 
discovered in 1936. For much of Oppenheimer’s scientific career 
they were a puzzle, resisting all attempts to make sense of the 
apparently contradictory evidence about their nature and their 
behavior that was gathered from laboratory experiments and 
observations of cosmic rays. Oppenheimer’s student, Edward 
Gerjuoy, in illustration of his point that “Oppie did his physics, 
talked about his physics, lived his physics, with an unusual 
passion,” gave as his prime example Oppenheimer’s frustrated 
determination to make sense of mesons: “it bothered him, it tore 
at him.” If one wants to understand Oppenheimer, one might 
think this passionate, decades-long search for an understanding of 
mesons is something one should look at. And yet almost nothing 
is said about it in Bird and Sherwin’s book. The word “meson” is 
not even in the index. 

The relationship between a biographical subject and his or her 
work has often been discussed. Many people, rightly in my 
opinion, insist that of course it is possible to understand a person’s 
work without knowing anything about their lives, Shakespeare 
being the obvious and most telling example. This does not make 
biography useless or superfluous, since the understanding of 
individual people is a worthwhile and interesting pursuit in itself. 
We want to understand Oppenheimer, not in order to understand 
his work, but just because he was an interesting man. However, 
though it is possible to understand Oppenheimer’s work in 


isolation from his life, the reverse, it seems to me, is not possible: 
we cannot claim to understand Oppenheimer unless we have at 
least some understanding of his work, especially when, as 
Gerjuoy’s comments make clear, that work was pursued with 
such passion and intensity and was such an important part of 
what made him the person he was. 

So, much as I admire Bird and Sherwin’s achievement, and 
much as I have learned from their work, theirs is not the book I 
imagined after I had read Oppenheimer’s letters. Nor, for 
basically similar reasons, is Charles Thorpe’s Oppenheimer: The 
Tragic Intellect, which came out the year after Bird and Sherwin’s 
and which has much of interest to say about Oppenheimer’s life 
as it was affected by, and as it affected, the society and politics of 
the time, but almost nothing to say about Oppenheimer’s life as it 
was shaped and driven by his desire to understand physics. 

Many people, including me, thought that a biography of 
Oppenheimer that put his contributions to physics at the center of 
the narrative would be written by the late Abraham Pais, who, it 
was widely known, had been working on a biography of 
Oppenheimer for many years before his death in 2000. A 
renowned particle physicist himself, Pais had known 
Oppenheimer well at Princeton, and had previously written 
excellent lives of Bohr and Einstein. Alas, when he died, Pais was 
a long way from finishing the book. What he had written, 
together with “supplementary material” added by Robert P. 
Crease, was published in 2006 as J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Life. It 
turned out that what Pais had been concentrating on was not 
Oppenheimer’s contributions to physics (to which he devotes only 
a short and highly derivative chapter), but rather his directorship 
of Princeton’s Institute for Advanced Study. Those looking for a 
scientific biography of Oppenheimer were thus forced to look 
elsewhere. 

David C. Cassidy, who had previously written an outstandingly 
good, scientifically literate biography of Heisenberg, published a 
biography of Oppenheimer in 2005 that many thought would fill 
the gap left open by Pais. Cassidy’s book, J. Robert Oppenheimer 
and the American Century, certainly gives more prominence to 
Oppenheimer’s scientific work than any previous biography. 
However, as indicated by his title, Cassidy has, like Thorpe, 
chosen to approach Oppenheimer’s life from a broadly historical 


and sociological perspective. Though there is much new 
biographical information in the book, its focus, for much of the 
time, is on Cassidy’s theme of “the American century”—that is, 
the growth of American political power and the preeminence of 
American science during the twentieth century. 

There is nothing wrong with such an approach, and much to be 
gained by pursuing it, but it cannot possibly produce the kind of 
biography that I envisaged and that I have tried to write. 
Oppenheimer’s place in history, his impact on American society 
and that society’s impact on him are all interesting topics, and 
ones that a biography of him cannot ignore. However, what most 
interests me is Oppenheimer himself, his extraordinary intellectual 
powers, his emotional and psychological complexity and his 
curious mixture of strengths and weaknesses in dealing with 
other people. Of the books that have come out in the last few 
years on Oppenheimer, the one that most closely approximates 
the one I wanted to write, in terms of balance and focus, is 
Jeremy Bernstein’s wonderful memoir, Oppenheimer: Portrait of an 
Enigma. If Bernstein had chosen to write a full biography rather 
than a brief memoir, he might well have made my book entirely 
superfluous. 

I have entitled my book [the British edition] “Inside the 
Centre” for many reasons, the first of which is to indicate my 
intention of writing an internal rather than an external biography 
—one that aims, first and foremost, to understand Oppenheimer 
himself. Of course this does not mean that I am not interested in 
the social and political background to Oppenheimer’s life. On the 
contrary, I am deeply interested in that background and, indeed, 
devote my first chapter to the German Jewish community in New 
York in which he was born and brought up. The legacy of that 
community, in fact, forms another reason for my title, as it seems 
to me that Oppenheimer cannot be understood without taking 
into account the importance of his deeply felt desire to overcome 
the sense of being an outsider that he inherited from his German 
Jewish background and his desire to get inside the center of 
American political and social life. This desire lies at the root of 
the ambivalence toward his Jewish ancestry that was noted by 
many of his closest friends, and at the root of what Einstein 
perceptively described as his unrequited love for the US. 
government. It also, I think, figures largely in his willingness to 


undertake the enormous task of leading the effort to build the 
world’s first atomic bomb, and his determination after the war to 
play a leading part in shaping U.S. atomic policy. It must be 
taken into account too in understanding why he felt compelled to 
defend himself against charges of disloyalty when it would have 
been so much easier simply to walk away from the battle. 

Moreover, as I have said above, it seems to me that, if one 
wants to understand Oppenheimer, one must attempt to 
understand his contributions to science, and the phrase “inside 
the center” captures some of the themes that dominate that work. 
Oppenheimer’s striving to understand mesons, for example, was 
driven, at least in part, by a desire to know what forces are acting 
inside the center of an atom, the pi-meson being the carrier of the 
strong nuclear force that binds nucleons (neutrons and protons) 
together. And, of course, the atomic bomb and the hydrogen 
bomb are possible only because of an understanding—which 
Oppenheimer helped to create—of the fission and fusion 
processes undergone by atomic nuclei. What many people 
consider to be Oppenheimer’s greatest contribution to physics— 
his work in the late 1930s on neutron stars and black holes— 
sheds light on what happens at the center of a massive star when 
it has burned up all its hydrogen and gravitational collapse takes 
over. 

Finally, there is Oppenheimer’s determination to be at the 
center of scientific discovery, an ambition that took him first to 
Cambridge to work at Rutherford’s Cavendish Laboratory, and 
then to Gottingen to work with Max Born at precisely the time 
when Born was playing a leading part in the creation of quantum 
mechanics. Eventually, combined with his fervent patriotism, this 
drove Oppenheimer to make America the world center of 
advances in physics. At every stage in this development the 
problems that he and his students chose to tackle were strongly 
influenced by his insistence on being at the center of theoretical 
physics, always wanting to be dealing with the fundamental 
questions, not the peripheral ones. 

I am not myself a physicist, but during the ten years that it has 
taken me to write this book I have made a concerted effort to 
understand those parts of physics to which Oppenheimer 
contributed. I have been helped in this by some wonderful 
historical and expository work that has been published in the last 


decade or so, most notably those books listed in the Bibliography 
by Jeremy Bernstein, Helge Kragh, Manjit Kumar, Jagdish Mehra 
and Helmut Rechenberg, and Silvan Schweber. I have also 
benefited considerably from the expertise of my friend James 
Dodd, whose work The Ideas of Particle Physics: An Introduction for 
Scientists, jointly authored with C. D. Coughlan and B. M. 
Gripaios, is one of the clearest textbooks I have ever read, and 
whose comments on an early draft of this book were invaluable. 
At an early stage in the research for this book I also received help 
from Brian Ridley, who kindly explained some notions in 
theoretical physics that were confusing me, and, at a much later 
stage, I received help via email from the physicists Jeremy 
Bernstein, Silvan Schweber and Kip Thorne. 

I would like to extend special thanks to my friend David 
Pugmire, who has provided me with unstinting encouragement 
and support throughout the writing of this book and who, when it 
was finished, read it through with meticulous care, making many 
astute and helpful comments. In this connection I would also like 
to thank Mike Cleeter, Sophia Efstathiou, Peter Middleton, 
Frederic Raphael, Danika Stow-Monk and Alan Thomas, who also 
read and made helpful comments upon an early draft. 

Research on this book necessitated several trips to Washington, 
D.C., to use the Library of Congress, the staff at which could not 
possibly have been more helpful and obliging. The same is true of 
the staff at the Nils Bohr Library in Copenhagen. I also need to 
thank the staff at my own institution, the University of 
Southampton, for providing such an excellent service. The 
university gave me research leave in order to concentrate on the 
book, for which I am immensely grateful. 

In Kristine Puopolo and Dan Franklin I have had the best 
publishers an author could wish for, giving me great support 
when I needed it most, showing encouraging faith in me and my 
project and exercising patience to the point of saintliness. I would 
also like to thank my editor, Alex Bowler, for his interest in the 
project, for his indispensable editorial skills and for the many 
ways in which he helped me to avoid errors and improve my text. 
The text has been improved in many ways too by the superb 
copyediting it received from Mandy Greenfield. I could not have 
written this book without the help of my agent, Gill Coleridge, 
who has become a good friend as well as an inexhaustible supply 


of good sense and cheering encouragement. My greatest debt, as 
always, is to my wonderful partner, Jenny, and our lovely 
children, Zala, Danika, Zeno and Myron, who are not children 
anymore, but whose loveliness has kept me going during the 
sometimes difficult years in which this book was written. 


Ray Monk 
Southampton 
May 2012 


1904-1926 


“Amerika, du hast es besser”: 
Oppenheimer’s German Jewish Background 


: . . Robert Oppenheimer, his frien 
Isidor Rabi once remarked, was “a man who was put eocther O 


many bright shining splinters,” who “never got to be an 
integrated personality.” What prevented Oppenheimer from being 
fully integrated, Rabi thought, was his denial of a centrally 
important part of himself: his Jewishness. As the physicist Felix 
Bloch, echoing Rabi, once put it, Oppenheimer “tried to act as if 
he were not a Jew and succeeded well because he was a good 
actor.” And, because he was always acting (“you carried on a 
charade with him. He lived a charade,” Rabi once remarked), he 
lost sight of who he really was. Oppenheimer had an impressive 
and wide-ranging collection of talents, abilities and personal 
characteristics, but where the central, united core of his 
personality ought to have been, Rabi thought, there was a gap 
and so there was nothing to hold those “bright shining splinters” 
together. “I understood his problem,” Rabi said, and, when asked 
what that problem was, replied simply: “Identity.” 

Rabi spoke as someone who, by virtue of his background, 
intelligence and education, was well placed to understand 
Oppenheimer’s “problem.” He and Oppenheimer had a great deal 
in common: they were roughly the same age (Rabi was six years 
older), they were both theoretical physicists, were both brought 
up in New York City and were both descended from European 
Jewish families. Behind this last similarity, however, lay a 
fundamental difference. Rabi was proud of his Jewish inheritance 
and happy to define himself in terms of it. Though he had no 
religious beliefs, and never prayed, he once said that when he 
saw Orthodox Jews at prayer, the thought that came into his 


mind was: “These are my people.” 

No such thought could have entered Oppenheimer’s mind, no 
matter who he was looking at. There was no group to whom he 
could point and say, “These are my people,” and not just because 
of his ambivalence about his Jewish background. It was also 
because that background itself, regardless of Oppenheimer’s 
feelings about it, could not have provided him with the sense of 
belonging and, therefore, the sense of identity that Rabi thought 
was missing in him. Rabi, despite his lack of religious beliefs, was 
Jewish in a fairly straightforward and unambiguous way; the 
Jews simply were “his people.” Theirs was the community to 
which he belonged. One cannot say the same about 
Oppenheimer. The sense in which he was Jewish, the sense in 
which he did—and did not—come from, and belong to, a Jewish 
community, is far more complicated and, as Rabi has perceptively 
noted, crucial in understanding the fragility of his sense of 
identity. 

For an understanding of the elusive nature of Oppenheimer’s 
Jewishness, the contrast between his family background and 
Rabi’s is instructive. Despite their many and important 
similarities, and despite the fact that they grew up within a few 
miles of each other, Rabi and Oppenheimer were born into and 
brought up in families that were culturally worlds apart. Rabi was 
a “Polish Jew.” Born in Galicia to a poor, Yiddish-speaking family 
of Orthodox Jews, he came to New York as an infant and was 
raised, first in the crowded slums of the Lower East Side and then 
in a tiny apartment in Brooklyn. Oppenheimer was born not in 
Europe, but in New York City, to a wealthy family that had 
abandoned its Jewish faith and traditions a generation earlier. 
The bustling and crowded “Jewish Ghetto” of the Lower East Side 
would have seemed utterly alien to the young Oppenheimer, who 
was brought up in an enormous luxury apartment in the genteel 
Upper West Side. The family had never spoken Yiddish, and, 
though German was his father’s first language, it was never 
spoken at home. 

And yet, despite regarding himself as neither German nor 
Jewish, Oppenheimer was seen, by Jews and non-Jews alike, as a 
“German Jew.” In New York in the early twentieth century the 
central division among the Jewish community was between, on 
the one hand, the German Jews and, on the other, the Polish and 


Russian Jews—the differences between the two groups accurately 
mirrored by the differences between Oppenheimer and Rabi. The 
German Jews, sometimes called “Uptown Jews,” were on the 
whole wealthier, more assimilated and less religious than their 
Polish and Russian counterparts, to whom they were notoriously 
condescending. At the time of Oppenheimer’s birth in 1904 there 
were more Polish and Russian Jews in New York than German 
Jews, but the Germans assumed leadership of the Jewish 
community and took it upon themselves to help “Americanize” 
the Russians and Poles, who reacted with resentment at what 
they saw as a dismissal of their religion and their customs. 

What Rabi called Oppenheimer’s problem—the problem of 
identity—was, in fact, a problem for the entire American Jewish 
community, perhaps its central problem. Certainly it was the 
issue at the heart of the tension between the two groups of Jews 
in New York City. For the Russian and Polish Jews, their sense of 
identity was bound up with their Jewishness: their Orthodox 
religious beliefs, their Yiddish language and their Jewish culture 
and traditions. That sense of identity, that culture, however, had 
been abandoned by the German Jews before they even came to 
America. 

The mass migration of German Jews to America that occurred 
in the mid-nineteenth century was intimately bound up with their 
earlier abandonment of the traditional trappings of Jewish 
identity. Haskalah, the Jewish Enlightenment of the late 
eighteenth century, was an essentially German movement, its 
prophet being the great Prussian Jewish thinker Moses 
Mendelssohn. Haskalah, which led in turn to that other essentially 
German movement, Reform Judaism, encouraged Jews to, 
literally and metaphorically, leave the ghettos in which they had 
been confined and embrace the modernizing ideas of the wider 
Western European Enlightenment. This meant using German 
rather than Hebrew as the language of worship, abandoning 
traditions and customs that served to isolate Jews from the rest of 
society, and reforming Jewish education so that it prepared 
people for the world at large rather than schooling them in a 
separate culture. The hope that inspired these changes was that, 
in return for abandoning those aspects of their culture that 
identified them as radically different from others, the Jews would 
receive from the gentile world a lifting of the discriminatory laws 


that affected almost every aspect of their lives, and a full 
acceptance as members of society with the same legal, financial 
and political rights as other citizens. Thus fully assimilated, Jews 
would no longer think of themselves as a separate race or nation, 
but rather as adherents of a religion. Their nationality would be 
German, and they would be not a bit less German for worshipping 
in a synagogue rather than a church. 

It was the dashing of this hope that persuaded hundreds of 
thousands of German Jews in the middle decades of the 
nineteenth century to turn their backs on their home country and 
look to America—a country founded upon the proposition that 
the equality of all men and the inalienability of the right to life, 
liberty and the pursuit of happiness were self-evident truths—to 
find the freedom and equality they had failed to achieve in 
Germany. Thus, in the eyes of German Jews, America became not 
only a refuge from discrimination and prejudice, but also the 
national embodiment of Enlightenment ideals, the ideals of 
Haskalah. Many of them therefore ceased trying to become 
accepted as Germans and sought instead to become accepted as 
Americans. 

“Amerika, du hast es besser.” These famous words of Goethe 
are contained in the poem “Den Vereinigten Staaten” (“To the 
United States”), written in 1827, when, as an old man, he 
reflected upon the advantages that youthful America had over the 
“Old Continent” in having no tradition, no “decaying castles,” 
and being therefore free from the continuous strife that comes 
from long memories. The image of America that Goethe’s poem 
conjures up is one of a tabula rasa, waiting, so to speak, to have 
its history written upon it. This was an image perfectly suited to 
arouse the interest and expectations of the German Jews, a group 
who longed to start afresh, free from the tensions and prejudices 
of the past. 

And so, beginning in the 1820s, the rallying cry “On to 
America” echoed throughout the Jewish community in Germany. 
A whole movement grew up dedicated to the encouragement of 
migration to the United States, publicizing the financial, social 
and political advantages of the New World, and providing hope 
and support to those prepared to make what must have been an 
alarming as well as an exciting fresh start. In books by Europeans 
who had been to America, in letters to relatives from those who 


had migrated, and in village meetings where people gathered to 
hear firsthand accounts of American life from migrants who had 
returned to visit families, the image of America as “the common 
man’s utopia” was spread, inspiring more and more Jews to set 
sail for the United States. 

A typical example of such inspirational firsthand accounts is a 
letter written in November 1846 by the journalist and academic 
Max Lilienthal, which was published in the German Jewish 
weekly newspaper Allgemeine Zeitung des Judenthums. Extolling 
“the beautiful ground of civil equality” that he had discovered in 
America, Lilienthal announced: “The old Europe with its 
restrictions lies behind me like a bad dream ... At last I breathe in 
liberty ... Jew or Christian, Christian or Jew—this old strife is 
forgotten, and only the man as such is respected and loved.” 
Encouraging others to follow his example, he urged: “Shake off 
the centuries-old dust of Jew-pressure ... become a human being 
like everybody else.” And, he promised, in America: “Jewish 
hearts are open in welcome. Jewish organisations ready to help 
anyone. Why should you go on carrying the burden of legal 
exclusion?” 

The number of German Jews willing and eager to “shake off 
the centuries-old dust of Jew-pressure” was so large that it 
completely transformed the American Jewish community. In 
1840, there were just 15,000 Jews in the United States; by 1880, 
there were 280,000, most of whom were of German origin. This 
influx of German Jews is known to Jewish historians as the 
“Second Migration”—the “First Migration” being the arrival in 
the seventeenth century of a small community of Sephardic Jews. 
These were descendants of the Jews expelled from Spain and 
Portugal in the fifteenth century, who, by the nineteenth century, 
were a well-established part of American life. 

These self-styled “old American Sephardic families” took pride 
in the fact that they had been in America for as many generations 
as the descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers, and tended to treat the 
new German arrivals with the kind of lofty disdain with which 
the German Jews would later treat the Russians and Poles. The 
first German Jews to arrive in America accepted the leadership of 
the old Sephardic community and even adopted the Sephardic 
form of worship. When the number of German Jewish migrants 
began to increase dramatically, however, the balance of power 


shifted and the German, Ashkenazi Jews replaced the Sephardim 
as the leaders of the American Jewish community. 

The mass influx into America of Russian and Polish Jews, 
which took place from 1880 to 1920, formed the “Third 
Migration,” and was on an entirely different scale from the 
previous two, being measured not in tens of thousands, or in 
hundreds of thousands, but in millions. Roughly two and a half 
million Jews from Eastern Europe arrived in the United States 
during the Third Migration, bringing with them a very different 
kind of Jewish culture from that of either the Sephardim or the 
Germans. 

The arrival of these Russian and Polish Jews was such an 
embarrassment to the established German Jewish community that 
their first reaction to it was to argue, through editorials in their 
newspaper, American Hebrew, and direct lobbying from their 
organization, the United Hebrew Charities of New York, for the 
introduction of tougher immigration laws. When this came to 
nothing and the number of Eastern European Jewish immigrants 
kept rising, the German Jews set up the Education Alliance, 
which organized Americanization programs in which the new 
immigrants were instructed in “the privileges and duties of 
American citizenship.” What drove these measures was not only 
the German Jews’ love of America, but also a dread of the anti- 
Semitism which they feared the Eastern European Jews would 
arouse. The Jewish historian Gerald Sorin points out: “These 
uptowners were very taken with Israel Zangwill’s play ‘The 
Melting Pot.’ They saw in it a reinforcement of their own 
proposed solution for the problems of downtown: the sooner 
immigrants from eastern Europe gave up their cultural 
distinctiveness and melted into the homogenized mass, the sooner 
anti-Semitism would also melt.” 

It was a strategy that German Jews had tried unsuccessfully in 
Germany, but which seemed to be working in the United States. It 
required, however, constant vigilance with respect to “cultural 
distinctiveness,” a vigilance that could easily slip into the kind of 
self-denial of which Rabi accused Oppenheimer. One form this 
vigilance took was an acute sensitivity among German Jews 
about their names. Sometimes this led to the abandonment of 
German-sounding surnames, a notable example being August 
Schonberg, the son of an impoverished Jewish family from the 


Rhineland, who would become famous as the millionaire New 
York banker August Belmont. More often, though, it took the 
form of changing one’s first name and giving to one’s children 
names that sounded reassuringly “American.” Joseph Seligman, 
another millionaire New York banker, brought his brothers, 
Wolfgang, Jacob and Isaias, over from Germany, but on arrival 
they became William, James and Jesse. The names of Joseph 
Seligman’s children look like a roll call of American heroes: 
George Washington Seligman, Edwin Robert Anderson Seligman 
and Alfred Lincoln Seligman (evidently “Abraham” was 
considered too Judaic). 

Of the American heroes commemorated in these names, the 
least well known today is undoubtedly Robert Anderson. He was 
a major in the U.S. army at the time of the outbreak of the Civil 
War in April 1861 and was involved in the opening hostilities, 
when Fort Sumter in South Carolina, which was then under his 
command, came under fire from the Confederates. For holding his 
ground and defending the fort for thirty-four hours Major 
Anderson was promoted by Abraham Lincoln to Brigadier General 
and became a national hero, not just for the duration of the war, 
but also for many decades afterward. Because of him, the name 
“Robert” became immensely popular. For anyone wanting to 
affirm the American identity of their offspring, it was the natural 
choice. Indeed J. Robert Oppenheimer was to like it so much that 
he ignored the “J” in his name and was known, by family and 
friends, simply as “Robert” or “Bob.” When he was asked what 
the “J” stood for, he would reply that it stood for nothing. In fact, 
as his birth certificate shows, it stands for “Julius,” his father’s 
name. For anyone striving to avoid “cultural distinctiveness,” the 
name “Robert Oppenheimer,” or even “J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 
had obvious advantages over “Julius Oppenheimer.” 

Even so, the surname remained, and it was as “culturally 
distinctive” as a name can be, identifying its bearers’ ancestors 
both geographically and ethnically. “As appears from his name,” 
one of Oppenheimer’s professors once wrote in an academic 
reference, “Oppenheimer is a Jew.” If, ignoring Haskalah, one 
clung to the notion of Judaism as defining a race, a nation or a 
tribe, rather than simply a religion, then the professor was 
correct. After the Napoleonic decree of 1808, which required 
Jews to take a surname, “Oppenheimer” was the name adopted 


by those Jews who lived in the area around the small and fairly 
obscure town of Oppenheim, which lies in the Hesse area of 
Germany, between Mainz and Worms, not far from Frankfurt. 
With regard to J. Robert Oppenheimer, what “appears from his 
name” is that his ancestors were among those Hessian Jews. 
Could he look upon them and say, “These are my people”? Well, 
after his political awakening in the 1930s, when his relatives— 
like all Jews in Germany—were facing the horrors of the Nazis, 
his determination to play a part in defeating Hitler’s regime did 
suggest some feeling of kinship with the victims of the Third 
Reich. But, until then, his reaction to his German Jewish relatives 
was to look upon them as if they came from a very distant time 
and place. When, as a child, he went to Germany on a family visit 
and met his grandfather, Benjamin Oppenheimer, who still lived 
just a few miles away from Oppenheim, his impression (or so he 
later recalled) was of “an unsuccessful small businessman, born 
himself in a hovel, really, in an almost medieval German village.” 
This, one feels, is the impression of a child used to the wealth of 
the Upper West Side and the modernity of twentieth-century 
Manhattan; whether Benjamin would be regarded as 
“unsuccessful,” his birthplace a “hovel” and his home town 
“medieval” by people with less exalted standards is, I think, 
doubtful. 

The “almost medieval village” was presumably Hanau, a town 
north-east of Oppenheim, where Benjamin Oppenheimer lived 
and where his son, Julius, was born in 1871. Julius spent just 
seventeen years in Hanau before, in 1888, leaving for America. 
Whatever the truth about Benjamin Oppenheimer’s 
circumstances, the family clearly had aspirations for a better life 
than was possible in Hanau and, like many other German Jews, 
thought they could fulfill those aspirations in America. Julius’s 
younger brother and sister, Emil and Hedwig, joined him a few 
years after he had set sail, and Julius himself was following the 
example of his two uncles, Solomon and Sigmund Rothfeld (“Sol 
and Sig” as they were known in the family), who had migrated to 
the United States a generation earlier. 

The ambition may have come from Benjamin’s wife, Babette 
Rothfeld, since the two uncles in question were her brothers. “Sol 
and Sig” left for America in 1869, nearly twenty years before 
Julius Oppenheimer came to join them, but more than thirty 


years after the “Second Migration” had begun. In those thirty 
years or so, a great deal had happened to the German Jewish 
community in America. Or, rather, one should say that in those 
years the American German Jewish community had been created, 
its development demonstrating both that the United States could 
indeed realize many of the hopes expressed in Max Lilienthal’s 
letter, and that it could not entirely live up to the promise of 
being a land in which the “old strife” between Jew and Christian 
had been forgotten. 

By 1869, the German Jewish migrants who had landed in 
America thirty or so years earlier had formed a successful social 
group, among whom were a surprisingly large number of families 
that had become extremely wealthy. Within a single generation, 
the Seligmans, the Lehmans, the Guggenheims, the Schiffs, the 
Goldmans and the Sachses had all amassed vast fortunes and 
become founders of some of the best-known, most successful and 
most powerful financial and commercial institutions in America. 
They had also created a fairly tight-knit community, known to its 
members as “Our Crowd,” a Jewish version of the more 
conspicuously wealthy group of families—the Astors, Vanderbilts, 
Morgans, Roosevelts, and so on—that constituted New York’s 
gentile high society during this period. “Our Crowd” was a self- 
consciously cohesive community, whose members worshipped 
together at the Temple Emanu-El (the Reform Jewish synagogue, 
whose imposing building on Fifth Avenue, opened in 1868, was a 
symbol of the success and aspirations of the German Jewish 
community), socialized together, took holidays together and 
chose their wives and husbands from each other’s families. The 
conformity of this community was satirized by one of its 
members, Emanie Sachs, in her novel Red Damask: 


Our crowd here. They cover their walls with the same silks. 
Why there isn’t a house we go to, including Sherry’s, that 
hasn’t a damask wall. They go to the same dentist and the 
same grocer and the same concerts. They think alike and act 
alike and they’re scared to death not to talk alike. The men go 
to jobs their fathers or grandfathers created, and all they do is 
sit at their desk & let the organizations work. 


Behind the conventionality satirized by Sachs was an earnest 


desire among the wealthy German Jewish community in New 
York to “fit in,” both with each other and with the wider society. 
As the names given to the Seligman offspring illustrate, what 
these prosperous German Jews wanted, perhaps above all, was to 
be accepted as Americans. 

The loyalty this generation of German Jewish migrants felt 
toward the United States had its origin in the contrast between 
the restrictions they had experienced in Germany and the 
freedom and opportunities they had found in America. Until the 
Civil War, America had been for these migrants almost everything 
that they had been promised it would be. Of course, every Jew in 
America would, at some time or other, have come across anti- 
Semitic prejudice, but the state itself was not Hebrews anti- 
Semitic; there was no institutionalized anti-Semitism enshrined in 
law, decree or officially sanctioned customs. In the years during 
and after the Civil War, however, this began to change, partly 
because of the conspicuous success of the German Jews, and 
partly because life in the United States for everyone during these 
years became darker and more troubled. 

Most notoriously, in December 1862, eighteen months into the 
war, General Ulysses Grant issued an order calling for the 
expulsion of Jews from the military district under his command, 
which included the states of Mississippi, Kentucky and Tennessee. 
The justification for this extraordinary order was the suspicion 
that Jews were engaged in illegal cotton trading. A month before 
he ordered the expulsion, Grant had issued an order banning 
Jews from traveling south into the cotton states. When this did 
not stop the black-market trading, he resorted to expulsion. 

Grant’s expulsion order came as a great shock to Jews 
throughout the United States. Writing in 1912, the Zionist Max 
Nordau remarked that Grant’s order showed “how thin the floor 
between Jews and Hell was (and most probably still is) even in 
enlightened free America... What an object lesson to Jewish 
optimists.” It was the first time that Jews in America had faced 
anti-Semitism in an institutionalized, officially sanctioned form, 
and they reacted to it not with resignation and disappointment, 
but with an angry refusal to accept it. A campaign against the 
order was organized, including petitions and delegations to the 
President (at least one of which was led by the aforementioned 
Max Lilienthal), and, although the episode was a blow to those 


who believed in America as a land free from Jew-hatred, perhaps 
the most remarkable thing about it was how quickly the President 
gave in to the protests. On January 3, 1863, just a few weeks 
after the order had been issued, President Lincoln instructed 
Grant to revoke the order. It was therefore, after all, still possible 
to believe in the United States as a nation without anti-Semitic 
prejudice, although its image in that respect had been badly 
tarnished. 

In 1869, the year Solomon and Sigmund Rothfeld arrived in 
New York, Ulysses Grant, having recently been elected President, 
began what would become, after reelection in 1872, an eight-year 
period in office. Despite his ill-judged expulsion order in 1862, he 
was not regarded as an enemy of the Jews. Rather, the opposite. 
Perhaps the reaction to his notorious order and the humiliation of 
having to rescind it had made him wary of upsetting Jewish 
opinion, for among his friends and political allies were many 
prominent Jews, including Joseph Seligman, whose family 
company by 1869 had a working capital of more than $6 million 
and who was at that time acknowledged as the leader of the New 
York German Jewish community. 

In a remarkable move, Grant offered to make Seligman 
Secretary of the Treasury, an offer which the flattered but 
surprised Seligman turned down. Grant nevertheless kept up 
friendly relations with Seligman, and, throughout Grant’s tenure 
in office, Seligman was a regular invitee for lunch at the White 
House. Partly because of his contacts with high office, Seligman 
was at this time, one of his biographers records, “becoming more 
Americanized, more gentilized, losing some of his feeling of 
Jewishness.” He began to spend less and less time at the 
Harmonie Club, the leading German Jewish gentlemen’s club, and 
more time at the predominantly gentile Union League Club. 

What Joseph Seligman seemed determined to prove was that it 
was possible for a Jew to be accepted by—and, indeed, into—the 
very highest tier of American society. Unfortunately for him, and 
for the Jewish (particularly the German Jewish) community as a 
whole, events in the 1870s appeared to show that there were 
quite definite and insuperable limits to such acceptance. 
Seligman’s first harsh lesson in this respect came in 1873, when 
he attempted to establish the first Jewish commercial bank 
(Seligman & Co. had previously been, as all Jewish bankers in the 


U.S. at that time were, merchant bankers only). Despite having a 
name chosen to sound as English, as non-German and as non- 
Jewish as possible (the “Anglo-California National Bank”) and 
despite having at its head Richard G. Sneath, “the first gentile 
and first non family member to be given a place of importance in 
a Seligman enterprise,” the bank was, as Seligman had to concede 
after just a few years, a failure. “The Bank would have more 
friends among the Americans,” Sneath advised Seligman, “but for 
their foolish prejudices against the religion of the bank.” 

Further indications that, among wealthy Americans, these 
“foolish prejudices” were on the increase were to follow. In 1877, 
in an incident that became famous as the “Seligman Affair,” it 
was brought painfully and unambiguously home to Joseph 
Seligman and to the country at large that Jews—even immensely 
wealthy Uptown German Jews, who loved America with more 
passion than they loved their Jewish heritage and who had 
friends in the very highest places—were not accepted in polite 
American society. The incident that forced the issue occurred 
when Seligman and his family tried to book into the Grand Union 
Hotel, the grandest hotel in Saratoga, and quite possibly the 
grandest in the whole United States. It had been owned by 
Alexander Stewart, the owner of A.T. Stewart & Company, the 
largest retail store in New York, who had a jealous dislike of 
Seligman, especially of his friendship with Grant. When Stewart 
died in 1876, his estate was managed by his friend, Judge Henry 
Hilton. For some years the Grand Union Hotel had been losing 
business, and Hilton decided that this was because its upper-class 
guests did not want to mix with Jews. When the Seligman family 
appeared at the hotel, therefore, they were told that it no longer 
accepted “Israelites.” 

Seligman’s response was to write a public letter to Hilton, 
which was published in all the main newspapers throughout the 
United States. In the furor that followed, most newspapers and 
the bulk of public opinion took Seligman’s side. The comic 
weekly Puck probably captured the prevailing view of the affair 
when it accompanied a two-page cartoon with an editorial that 
declared: “But in this country the Jew is not ostracized. He stands 
equal before the law and before society with all his fellow- 
citizens, of whatever creed or nationality.” The clergyman Henry 
Ward Beecher devoted to the incident one of his famous sermons, 


' 


“Gentile and Jew,” in which he declared his “love and respect” 
for Seligman. 

Despite these public declarations of support, the incident 
inspired other upper-class hotels and clubs to follow Hilton’s lead, 
and the sentence “Hebrews need not apply” became a common 
sight in advertisements for such places. In 1879, the New York 
Herald newspaper ran a story on “The Jews and Coney Island,” in 
which they interviewed Austin Corbin, the president of the 
Manhattan Beach Company, which had just taken the decision to 
ban Jews from its hotel and its beach. “We cannot bring the 
highest social element to Manhattan Beach if the Jews persist in 
coming,” Corbin said. “They won’t associate with Jews and that’s 
all there is about it.” The whole Seligman Affair, judges Stephen 
Birmingham, the author of “Our Crowd”: The Great Jewish Families 
of New York, “was to have a profound psychological effect on 
German Jewish life in New York, making it more defensive and 
insular, more proud and aloof and self-contained, more cautious.” 

Joseph Seligman himself was a broken man after the Saratoga 
incident and lived for just three more years after it. Very few 
people had tried harder than he to lose whatever “cultural 
distinctiveness” came from being German and Jewish. In his final 
years he took a further step in this direction when he gave public 
support to a movement that might be seen as an attempt by 
German Jews to lose their Jewishness without either becoming 
Christian or abandoning the ethical principles central to Judaism. 
It was called the Ethical Culture Society and it came to provide 
the spiritual milieu within which J. Robert Oppenheimer was 
raised. 

The leader of the Ethical Culture Society was Felix Adler, a 
German Jew whose father, Samuel Adler, was, from 1856 to his 
death in 1873, the rabbi of Temple Emanu-El, the spiritual center 
of “Our Crowd.” When Samuel Adler died, Felix, then just twenty- 
two years old, was invited to deliver a sermon at the Temple 
Emanu-El, presumably as a prelude to being invited to take his 
father’s place as rabbi. However, the sermon he gave, “The 
Judaism of the Future,” effectively put paid to any possibility 
there might have been of him succeeding his father. At the same 
time, however, it inspired in the minds of many who heard it a 
vision of what Reform Judaism might evolve into. 

In the sermon Adler spoke of the “ruins” of religion, among 


which he explicitly included Judaism, and asked the question: 
what remains when the ruins are removed? His answer, which 
would form the basis both for the Ethical Culture Society and for 
the Weltanschauung in which Oppenheimer was brought up, was: 
morality. Judaism, Adler proclaimed, was well placed to provide 
leadership to the religion of the future, since it always had been, 
essentially, a religion of deed rather than creed. In this sense, 
Adler claimed, Judaism as a moral force “was not given to the 
Jews alone,” but rather had a destiny “to embrace in one great 
moral state the whole family of men.” 

Adler’s talk of the “ruins” of Judaism did not go down well 
among the majority of the congregation of Temple Emanu-El, and 
he was never asked to address the synagogue again. However, for 
a small but influential minority his view of the “Judaism of the 
Future” seemed to be the perfect solution to two pressing 
problems: 1. how to be a Jew if one did not actually believe any 
elements of the Jewish creed; and 2. how to combine being a 
good Jew with being a good American. 

After a career as a rabbi was denied to him, Adler was offered, 
and accepted, a professorship in Hebrew at Cornell University. 
While there, he ran into trouble when he was accused of being an 
atheist, but, back in New York City, moves were afoot to attract 
him back as the head of the Judaism of the future—the vision of 
which he had outlined in his divisive sermon. And so, in 1876, 
Adler gave a talk in New York in which he announced the 
establishment of a new organization, the Ethical Culture Society. 
This was to be a religion without religious belief, a “practical 
religion.” “We propose,” Adler announced: 


to entirely exclude prayer and every form of ritual ... freely do 
I own to this purpose of reconciliation and candidly do I 
confess that it is my dearest object to exalt the present 
movement above the strife of contending sects and parties, and 
at once to occupy that common ground where we may all 
meet, believers and unbelievers, for purposes in themselves, 
lofty and unquestioned by any... freedom of thought is a 
sacred right of every individual man ... Diversity in the creed, 
unanimity in the deed. This is that practical religion from 
which none dissents. This is that Platform broad enough to 
receive the worshipper and the infidel. This is that common 


ground where we may all grasp hands as brothers united in 
mankind’s common cause. 


“Adler’s proposal for a new movement,” Howard B. Radest, a 
historian of the movement has written, “had the virtue of 
completing an Americanization without betraying what his 
listeners regarded as the core of their Jewish faith—its prophetic 
tradition ... It was, we suggest, no accident that Adler’s address 
echoed the First Amendment to the American Constitution and 
the Declaration of Independence, for at Cornell Adler had traced 
the connection between prophetic and democratic values.” 

The Ethical Culture Society received its certificate of 
incorporation in February 1877. It was not then, nor was it ever, 
a mass movement. In some ways it was more like an exclusive 
club: to become a member one needed the sponsorship of another 
member. “The Sunday Meeting,” Radest writes, “was a social 
occasion, too. Here one greeted old friends, came to see and be 
seen, came to be entertained.” It was not a religion at all, still less 
a proselytizing one. “Ethical Culture seemed to make it difficult 
for people to discover it or, having discovered it, to find their 
way into its ranks. In some circles the impression still exists of a 
rather select group.” 

Among that select group, right from its inception, were 
Solomon and Sigmund Rothfeld. With regard to the Rothfeld 
brothers’ time in New York, the historical record is somewhat 
sketchy. Little is known of their first five years in America, except 
that they set up some kind of business in the tailoring trade, 
which must have done fairly well. In 1874-5 they are listed in the 
New York City Directory as “importers of dry goods,” with offices 
in Worth Street, Lower Manhattan. More significant as a measure 
of their social and financial success, however, is the fact that in 
the following year they appear as founder charter members of the 
Ethical Culture Society, along with Joseph Seligman, Jacob Schiff 
and Henry Morgenthau. Within seven years of being in America, 
then, the Rothfeld brothers had joined “Our Crowd,” the elite of 
Manhattan German Jewish society. 

In 1880, that society (including, no doubt, the Rothfeld 
brothers) was united in mourning the death of Joseph Seligman, 
known since the Saratoga incident as “America’s leading Jew.” 
Shortly before his death, Seligman had asked that his funeral 


service should be directed by the Ethical Culture Society. Despite 
this request, the Seligman family and Gustav Gottheil, the rabbi 
at Temple Emanu-El, conspired to give him a “proper Jewish 
funeral” at the synagogue. In addition, a funeral service 
conducted by Felix Adler was held in Seligman’s house, an event 
that served to cement and increase the acceptance of Adler’s 
society among New York’s German Jewish elite. 

It was, however, increasingly becoming a separate elite. In 
1887, the nature of New York’s high society was spelled out when 
the first volume of the Social Register for New York appeared, 
listing the 2,000 or so families that were considered the créme de 
la créme of Manhattan. Not one of them was Jewish. Its author, 
Ward McAllister, suggested: “our good Jews might wish to put 
out a little book of their own.” In the face of such painful 
reminders that they were not accepted by New York high society, 
many prominent members of the German Jewish community 
migrated from the Upper East Side of Manhattan (where, along 
Fifth Avenue, the likes of the Astors had their grand 
“brownstones”) to form what has been described as “the first 
recognizably German Jewish upper-class neighborhood” on the 
Upper West Side. It was to this neighborhood that Solomon and 
Sigmund Rothfeld moved in 1887, after they had joined with 
their cousin, J. H. Stern, to form Rothfeld, Stern & Co., a 
company that specialized in importing tailoring materials. Their 
names would never appear in the Social Register, but among their 
immediate neighbors now were various Goldmans, Sachses and 
Guggenheims. 

Meanwhile the “Third Migration” of Jews to America was 
gaining momentum and, as the German Jewish community had 
feared, arousing a new and intensified form of anti-Semitism. In 
the same year that the Social Register was published and the 
Rothfeld brothers moved to the Upper West Side, an article 
appeared in Forum magazine entitled “Race Prejudice at Summer 
Resorts,” which identified anti-Semitism as “a new feature in the 
New World.” “Only within the present decade,” the article stated, 
“has there been an anti-Jewish sentiment openly displayed in the 
United States.” The blame for this was laid by Alice Rhine, the 
author of the article, firmly on Judge Hilton, whose exclusion of 
Jews from his hotel in Saratoga had set an example that other 
hotel and boardinghouse proprietors had followed. “In seeking 


reasons for this sweeping ostracism,” she wrote, “it is found that 
the Gentiles charge the Hebrews with being ‘too numerous’; ‘they 
swarm everywhere.’ ” It was also said, she recorded, that Jews 
lacked refinement; they dressed badly, had bad manners and 
showed disrespect for the Christian Sabbath. 

The kind of anti-Semitism discussed by Rhine was extremely 
mild, however, compared to the sort that was unleashed at 
around the same time in The American Jew, described as “the 
book that inaugurated racial anti-Semitism in America.” Its 
author was Telemachus Timayenis, a Greek immigrant. Whereas 
Rhine described a prejudice against Jews as identified by their 
culture, their language and their perceived lack of social graces, 
Timayenis’s target was the Jew as a racial type, identified by 
“their hooked noses, restless eyes, elongated ears, square nails, 
flat feet, round knees, and soft hands.” The Jews that he describes 
with venomous hatred wear “long coats dripping with filth, while 
their faces and beards looked suety with sluttishness”; they arrive 
in the United States penniless, and soon—suspiciously soon, 
according to Timayenis—become prominent bankers, and leaders 
of American industry. But despite his unease at the wealth of the 
German Jews, it is the wretched poverty of the eastern European 
Jews on the Lower East Side that most exercises Timayenis, who 
is also inclined to despise the Jews because they are refugees from 
prejudice. “Let the Jews of this country understand,” he writes, 
“that the American people do not want, and will not receive, the 
dregs of a race which has won only scorn and contempt from the 
people of Europe.” The message of The American Jew, repeated 
several times throughout the book, is: “The Jew must go!’ 

Timayenis, of course, did not speak for the whole American 
population, the majority of whom would have identified far more 
readily with the famous sentiments expressed by Emma Lazarus 
in the poem inscribed on the Statue of Liberty, which was 
dedicated by President Cleveland in 1886, sentiments that indeed 
were inspired by the piteous sight of the arrival to New York of 
the very Jews that had aroused the venom of The American Jew: 


Give me your tired, your poor, 
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, 
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. 


The Statue of Liberty would have been the first thing that 
Julius Oppenheimer saw when he came to the United States in 
1888 to join his prosperous and well-connected uncles and take 
his place among “Our Crowd.” He was at that time a slim, good- 
looking, but shy seventeen-year-old who spoke little English. 
However, he clearly lost no time in joining the cultural, spiritual 
and (perhaps most importantly) social world of his uncles. In the 
year of his arrival in New York, he is listed as a member of 
Adler’s Ethical Culture Society. Though he was, of course, 
immediately given a position in Rothfeld, Stern & Co., he could 
not yet afford to live on the Upper West Side and, for the first few 
years before his inexorable rise through the company’s hierarchy, 
lived in rented accommodation in Lower Manhattan, the same 
part of town in which the company had its office. 

In many ways Julius Oppenheimer was arriving in America at a 
bad time. The so-called “Gilded Age,” when unimaginably large 
fortunes were amassed by the “Robber Barons” (Carnegie in steel, 
Rockefeller in oil, Vanderbilt in railroads and Astor in real 
estate), and smaller but still significant fortunes were made by 
Jewish bankers and traders, was coming to an end, as the country 
headed toward recession. No doubt related to the darkening 
economic scene was the growth of racial anti-Semitism, which, 
while rarely as virulent as that expressed in The American Jew, 
could still shock many of those German Jewish migrants who had 
believed in America as a land free from the “old strife.” 

Among these was Jesse Seligman, who had inherited from his 
brother Joseph the title “New York’s leading Jewish banker,” and 
who in 1893 was given a particularly hurtful introduction to the 
new, more brutal form of anti-Semitism to which parts of 
American society had succumbed. Together with his brothers 
Joseph and William, Jesse Seligman had for many years been a 
member of, and fully accepted by, the predominantly gentile 
Union League Club. At the time of his death, Joseph Seligman 
had been a vice president of the club, and in 1893 Jesse— 
following in his older brother’s footsteps once again—was elected 
a vice president. He therefore did not anticipate any problems 
when he put up his son, Theodore, a young lawyer recently out of 
Harvard, for membership. Theodore’s application, however, was 
rejected, the club committee explaining to Jesse that it was “not a 
personal matter in any way, either as to father or son. The 


objection is purely racial.” Jesse immediately resigned and never 
set foot inside the Union League Club again. “His bitterness over 
the episode probably shortened his life, just as the affair with 
Judge Hilton shortened his brother’s,” writes Stephen 
Birmingham. He died just a year after the affair. 

The economic recession of 1893-5 hit the clothing industry 
harder than any other and resulted in mass unemployment, 
although Rothfeld, Stern & Co. seemed to ride out the recession 
better than most clothing firms in New York. It moved its office 
to cheaper accommodation on Bleecker Street, but other than that 
there was no sign that it suffered very much. In 1895, Julius’s 
younger brother Emil came to New York, by which time Julius, 
now twenty-four years old, was beginning to make his mark in 
the firm. In 1900, the company took the decision to specialize in 
the importation of cloak linings, something on which Julius 
Oppenheimer quickly became an expert, and from that point he 
seems to have become the company’s leading figure. In 1903, this 
was recognized when he was made a partner, a move that seems 
to have persuaded him that the time was right to marry and settle 
down. 

His chosen bride was Ella Friedman, who, though a member of 
the same German Jewish, Upper West Side community as the 
Rothfelds and Oppenheimers, was seen as significantly less 
German, less Jewish and more “American” than Julius. For one 
thing, Ella was not a migrant; she had been born in America, and 
English was her first language. According to her son, she did not 
speak German very well—something that seemed, if anything, to 
be a source of pride rather than of embarrassment. Her father, 
Louis Friedman, was indisputably a German Jew, but, having 
migrated (to Baltimore rather than to New York) in the 1840s, he 
had been in the U.S. a good deal longer than the Rothfelds or the 
Oppenheimers. Ella’s mother, Cecilia Eger, had herself been born 
in America and, though from a Germanic background (her father 
was German, her mother Austrian), was, so it was said in the 
family anyway, not a German Jew, since she was non-Jewish. The 
claim is precarious to say the least. Cecilia’s mother, Clara 
Binswanger, was—as her family tree in the American Jewish 
Archives reveals—about as Jewish as it is possible to be: both her 
maternal and paternal grandfathers were rabbis. Cecilia’s father, 
David Eger, was a prominent member of the Philadelphia Jewish 


community, mentioned several times in the 1894 publication The 
Jews of Philadelphia. If J. Robert Oppenheimer inherited his 
striking blue eyes from his grandmother Cecilia, as was widely 
believed in the family, it was not because she was, from a genetic 
point of view, any less Jewish than his paternal grandparents. 

Not only was Ella seen as more “American” than the family she 
was marrying into, but she was also seen as more “refined.” 
During the years that Julius spent working his way up the family 
textile business, Ella was studying art, first in her native 
Baltimore and then in Paris, where she made a particular study of 
the Impressionists. On her return to America she taught art at 
Barnard College, a liberal arts college for women in New York, 
which had opened in 1889 as an “annex” of Columbia University 
and from 1897 was housed in a building next to Columbia in 
Morningside Heights on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. By 
the time she met Julius, Ella was an _ established and 
accomplished painter, with private students and her own rooftop 
studio. Her father had died in the early 1890s and she lived with 
her mother, Cecilia, in an apartment at 148 West 94th Street. 
Two years older than Julius, she would have been in her mid- 
thirties when they met, described by a family friend as “a gentle, 
exquisite, slim, tallish, blue-eyed woman, terribly sensitive, [and] 
extremely polite.” She was born with an unformed right hand. To 
hide this—and the artificial thumb and finger that she used to 
compensate for it—she always wore gloves, and her deformity 
was never once mentioned or even alluded to by the family. 
When a girlfriend of Robert’s once asked him about it, she was 
met with stony silence. 

It is not entirely clear how Julius and Ella met. It may have 
been that Ella’s father was in the textile trade and knew the 
Rothfeld brothers, or it may have been that they had mutual 
friends in the Ethical Culture Society. Both suggestions have been 
made, although neither seems very likely. Her father had been 
dead for many years before she and Julius met, and it is not likely 
that her mother moved in the same circles as the Rothfelds. Nor is 
there any indication that Ella or anybody else in her family was a 
member of, or in any way interested in, Adler’s society. 

It seems more likely that it was their common interest in art 
that brought them together. By 1903, Julius, as a partner in a 
thriving company, was a wealthy man and could afford to indulge 


his growing passion for the visual arts. It is reported that he 
“spent his free hours on weekends roaming New York’s numerous 
art galleries.” If so, given the way that wealth and enthusiasm 
attract invitations and introductions, it is not difficult to imagine 
that someone in the New York art world—an artist, an agent, a 
gallery owner—brought Julius and Ella together. 

The cultural refinement that Ella represented was by this time 
something Julius craved. Though he had left school as a teenager, 
and had arrived in America speaking little English, he was 
determined to develop into the “proper gentleman” that his 
employees later described him as being. He dressed impeccably, 
acquired the social graces of the upper middle class and read 
widely, particularly in American and European history. 
Discovering that a German accent was a barrier to acceptance as 
a gentleman in the New York of the early twentieth century, 
Julius took drastic steps to remove all traces of his mother 
tongue, taking English lessons from an Oxford tutor, from whom 
he acquired the gentlemanly tones of the British educated elite. 

Ella and Julius were married on March 23, 1903, their wedding 
being the occasion of a very public statement that they did not 
consider themselves Jewish. The service was performed not by a 
rabbi, but by Felix Adler himself, and not in accordance with any 
Jewish tradition, but rather as an illustration of the “New Ideal” 
preached by the Ethical Culture Society. In his series of 
discourses, Creed and Deed, published in 1886, Adler had written, 
in connection with his notion of what the “Priests of the New 
Ideal” might be like: “there are special occasions in these passing 
years of ours, when the ideal bearings of life come home to us 
with peculiar force and when we require the priest to be their 
proper interpreter. Marriage is one of them.” And so Ella and 
Julius were, in a way, married by a priest, but not in a way that 
implied commitment to any religious creed. 

That Felix Adler officiated at Julius’s wedding was extremely 
apt, since in the years that followed Julius was to become one of 
Adler’s leading and most devoted disciples, his rise to prominence 
in his uncles’ company running parallel with his rise within the 
Ethical Culture movement. At the time of his wedding, as the 
Rothfeld brothers were entering their sixties and approaching 
retirement age, Julius Oppenheimer was preparing to take over 
the running of the company. It was an opportune time to seize 


the reins. The advent of ready-to-wear suits, which cut overheads, 
lowered prices and increased demand dramatically, had given the 
entire tailoring industry an enormous boost, and business was 
extremely good. The Rothfeld brothers, however, did not live to 
see the best years of their company. Longevity was never a family 
trait and both brothers died before they reached seventy, 
Solomon in 1904 and Sigmund three years later. Upon Sigmund’s 
death, in December 1907, Julius became president of Rothfeld, 
Stern & Co., which now had offices in that most prestigious of all 
New York addresses: Fifth Avenue. At thirty-six years old, Julius 
Oppenheimer was a man of means and substance. 

In the same year that he became president of Rothfeld, Stern & 
Co., Julius was elected onto the Board of Trustees of the Society. 
The following year he was appointed a member of the Society’s 
Finance Committee. These appointments put him in a position 
where he was rubbing shoulders with members of some of the 
most prominent “Our Crowd” families. By the first decade of the 
twentieth century, the nature of “Our Crowd” was changing 
somewhat. It was no longer dominated by people like Joseph 
Seligman, who had come over from Germany and made huge 
fortunes in business, but rather by their offspring, who typically 
were not businessmen, but something more refined (if less 
lucrative). They were men who, having inherited wealth—in 
some cases vast amounts of it—cared less about commerce than 
about matters of the intellect, of culture, of the spirit and of 
politics and society. Among them were the men who succeeded 
Felix Adler as president of the New York Ethical Culture Society:1 
Edwin Seligman, Joseph’s son, who was a professor of economics 
at Columbia University, then Robert D. Kohn, a famous architect, 
and Herbert Wolff, a leading civil-rights lawyer. 

In Howard B. Radest’s history of the Ethical Societies, Julius 
Oppenheimer’s role in the New York Ethical Culture Society is 
mentioned in passing by Herbert Wolff in an interesting and 
revealing anecdote: 


In the old days, if there was a deficit ... Felix Adler would be 
advised of the amount ... I remember one year ... $25,000 was 
needed. Professor Adler phoned to people like Joseph Plaut, B. 
Edmund David, Mr. Berolzheimer [the head of the Eagle Pencil 
Company, who bought St. Simons Island in Georgia], Mr. 


Oppenheimer, maybe one or two others. There was a command 
to appear at his office on a certain specified day at 5 o’clock in 
the afternoon. He then told these gentlemen that the deficit 
was $25,000 ... Each one—there were five present—said that 
he would undertake 1/5 or $5,000 ... The other members of the 
Society were not involved ... Some of them didn’t even know 
that there was a deficit. 


Though he and his society were almost entirely dependent on 
the money thus received from wealthy businessmen, Adler urged 
his disciples to accord little respect to making money. Being 
wealthy might seem to be “supremely enviable,” he wrote, but 
“the business of wealth-getting, and of wealth-enjoyment, when 
viewed at close range, turns out to be a very different matter. Its 
effect is almost inevitably unfortunate, not only on society at 
large, but on the mind and character of the wealthy themselves.” 
Indeed, he added: “I would urge the principle of self-limitation in 
regard to wealth,” and he made this “plea to the wealthy”: 


The first step to take, if they would set themselves right, is to 
live in the midst of superfluous wealth as if they were not the 
possessors of it; that is, to take for their own use only what 
they require for the essentials of a civilized life, and to regard 
the rest as a deposit for the general good, of which they 
themselves are not to be the beneficiaries. 


By donating $5,000 to the Ethical Culture Society whenever 
Adler asked him to, Oppenheimer was not only helping the 
Society, but also enabling himself to live a more ethically 
cultured life by shedding some potentially harmful superfluous 
wealth. “The habit of luxurious living is eating into the vitals of 
society, is defiling the family, and corrupting the state,” Adler 
preached. But, of course, opinions will vary as to what exactly the 
“essentials of a civilized life” are, and therefore how much wealth 
is required in order to provide them. Where is one to draw the 
line between the things that are an essential part of being 
civilized and the things that are mere luxuries? 

Julius and Ella Oppenheimer, though never ostentatious, 
certainly led what many would consider a luxurious life. Soon 
after they were married they moved into an apartment at 250 


West 94th Street, just down the road from Ella’s mother. It was a 
fairly large apartment in a fairly smart neighborhood, but nothing 
very out of the ordinary. Where, however, they went way beyond 
what most people would regard as being essential to a civilized 
life was in the furnishing and decorating of the apartment, 
particularly with regard to the paintings that adorned its walls. It 
was in those days customary among wealthy German Jewish New 
York families to have a private art collection. In this respect, as in 
so many others, the members of “Our Crowd” tended to veer on 
the side of conservatism, caution and conformity. Abby, the 
central character in Emanie Sachs’s Red Damask, sneers that they 
“haven’t enough physical courage to go in for sports like the rich 
Gentiles, and a little too much brains. So they go in for art 
collection with an expert to help. They wouldn’t risk a penny on 
their own tastes.” 

Left to his own devices, Julius might have fallen into the kind 
of conservatism mocked by Sachs, but in Ella he had his own 
expert, one who, having studied Impressionism in Paris, was 
certainly not afraid to risk money on her own taste. The result 
was an extraordinary private art collection that was to be the 
pride of the family for generations. It included a Rembrandt 
etching, paintings by Vuillard, Derain and Renoir, no fewer than 
three Van Goghs—Enclosed Field with Rising Sun, First Steps (After 
Millet) and Portrait of Adeline Ravoux—and a “blue period” 
Picasso, Mother and Child. 

The private contemplation of fine works of art might be seen as 
the very opposite of the way of life promoted by the Ethical 
Culture Society, a society that emphasized social responsibility 
and the importance of the deed, of doing something practical to 
help those less well off than oneself. This was a society that set 
up educational programs for the working class; that put forward 
practical suggestions for improving the health, the working 
conditions and the housing of the people of New York; that 
involved itself in trade-union disputes; and that helped set up a 
number of nationally important campaigning groups—the 
National Child Labor Committee, the Civil Liberties Union, the 
Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union, the Society for the 
Advancement of Colored People, and so on. Spending large sums 
of money (for even though Julius and Ella were “early buyers” of 
Van Gogh and Picasso, the cost of these paintings was still 


considerable) on works that would be seen only by one’s 
immediate family and one’s closest friends scarcely looks 
consistent with the ethics that inspired the movement and its 
many social and political initiatives. 

And yet, when looked at in another way, it was not only 
consistent with Adler’s vision, but a fulfillment of it. Despite the 
practical nature of much of the work of the Ethical Culture 
Society, and despite its repudiation of theology, Adler’s vision 
was first and foremost a spiritual one. His central motivation was 
to find a way of preserving the spiritual guidance that religions 
had provided, even after all faith in religious beliefs had been 
abandoned. He thought he had found what he was looking for in 
the philosophy of Immanuel Kant, with its emphasis on what 
Kant called the “Moral Law,” which Kant thought all of us would 
find in our hearts. In a famous passage that Adler quotes in his 
discourses, Creed and Deed, Kant writes: “Two things fill the soul 
with ever new and increasing admiration and reverence: the star- 
lit heavens above me, and the moral law within me.” According 
to Kant, the moral law is the same for all people at all times and 
at all places, and according to Adler: “The moral law is the 
common ground upon which all religious and in fact all true men 
may meet. It is the one basis of union that remains to us amid the 
clashing antagonisms of the sects ... all that is best and grandest 
in [religious] dogma is due to the inspiration of the moral law in 
man.” 

What, then, is the moral law? In Kant’s formulation, it is this: 
“act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can 
at the same time will that it become a universal law.” This means 
something like: do as you will be done by; or: do to others what 
you would be happy to have done to you. Adler’s formulation, 
however, is rather different: “The rule reads, ‘Act so as to bring 
out the spiritual personality, the unique nature of the other.’ ” 

One brings out the “spiritual personality” by awakening in 
other people the sense of the sublime, of the infinite. Art is able 
to do this, Adler emphasizes, since it is a “high endeavor” and 
“Truly disinterestedness is the distinguishing mark of every high 
endeavor.” Thus: “The pursuit of the artist is unselfish, the beauty 
he creates is his reward.” The goal of life is to pursue “the Ideal,” 
which “is void of form and its name unutterable.” We can find 
the Ideal within ourselves—in fact, we can only find it within 


ourselves—through the discovery and appreciation of the moral 
law; and the “high endeavors,” of art, science and public service, 
can help us find it. So the acquisition of fine works of art does 
not, after all, constitute “luxurious living,” but rather a means of 
fulfilling the “Moral Law.” 

It was in an environment governed by this idiosyncratic version 
of the moral law that a concerted effort would be made to “bring 
out the spiritual personality” of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 


1 Adler resigned as president of the New York Society in 1882, though of 
course he remained—as he is described on Julius and Ella’s marriage certificate 
—“Leader of the Society for Ethical Culture.” 


Childhood 


was in the extraordinarily tasteful 
and expensively furnished apartment in West 94th Street that, on 


April 22, 1904, J. Robert Oppenheimer was born. To help look 
after the baby, the Oppenheimers employed a nursemaid and, 
later, a governess. They also employed a cook, a chauffeur and 
three live-in maids to help Ella look after the apartment. There 
was no hint of decadence or overindulgence, but it was a 
luxurious life and a very sheltered one, too. “My life as a child 
did not prepare me in any way for the fact that there are cruel 
and bitter things,” Oppenheimer later recalled. His parents, 
particularly his mother, saw to it that everything and everyone 
with whom he came into contact was refined, tasteful and 
pleasant. From everything discordant, ugly or unpleasant he was 
shielded and protected. Above all, there was an atmosphere of 
moral rectitude. He was, he later considered, “an unctuous, 
repulsively good little boy,” his upbringing having offered him 
“no normal, healthy way to be a bastard.” 

Oppenheimer grew up surrounded by people trying to be and, 
as far as it is possible to tell, succeeding in being good. “Not 
religion as a duty,” ran one of Adler’s more austere maxims, “but 
duty as a religion.” There was some levity. Julius is remembered 
by one of Robert’s friends as “a hearty and laughing kind of 
person.” But the general tone was one of earnestness and 
propriety, Julius’s attempts at joviality at the dinner table— 
sometimes he would even burst into song—being met with acute 
embarrassment by his wife and son. A friend later recalled that 
Robert Oppenheimer would often be very critical of his father, 
particularly of what he perceived to be his vulgarity. On the other 
hand, he was never known to utter a word of criticism of his 


mother. Ella Oppenheimer was, as far as her son was concerned, 
beyond any kind of reproach. She, for her part, seemed 
determined to ensure that her family lived in a world from which 
all coarseness, vulgarity and discord had been expunged. She 
was, a family friend recalled, “a woman who would never allow 
anything unpleasant to be mentioned at the table.” She saw to it 
that Robert, and later his younger brother Frank, had as little as 
possible to do with the outside world. When their hair needed 
cutting, a barber came to the apartment; when they needed 
medical attention, a doctor was called for; when they needed to 
go anywhere, the chauffeur would take them in the family 
limousine. There was, Frank later said, “a general distrust of the 
pollution of the outside world.” 

Frank was not born until 1912, when Robert was eight—too 
late to be a childhood companion. When Robert was not yet four, 
however, in March 1908, Ella gave birth to her second son, Lewis 
Frank Oppenheimer, who lived for just forty-five days. His death 
was one of those unpleasant things that was never mentioned, 
and a main cause of the air of melancholy that seemed to pervade 
the Oppenheimer household. One of Robert’s friends described 
Ella as “a mournful person,” and one has the feeling that she 
never stopped mourning the death of her second son. Robert, 
naturally, had no memories of Lewis, but the ghost of his younger 
brother haunted the family, and therefore the apartment in which 
he grew up, in a way that was all the more pervasive because it 
was unacknowledged. After Lewis’s death, Ella, who was always 
an anxious mother, fretted terribly about any little illness that 
Robert caught. As Robert, who was never robust, either as a child 
or as a man, caught a large number of colds and other childhood 
illnesses, she fretted a great deal. She would only rarely allow 
him to play with other children, for fear of exposure to disease 
and infection. As a result, Robert grew up alone, his intellectual 
interests and abilities developing well beyond his years, but his 
social skills remaining stunted, thereby creating a sense of 
separation between himself and other people that, he said, he 
managed to overcome only in the spring of 1926 at the age of 
twenty-two.2 

His parents did everything they could to stimulate Robert’s 
intellectual and artistic interests. “I think my father was one of 
the most tolerant and human of men,” Oppenheimer later said. 


“His idea of what to do for people was to let them find out what 
they wanted.” In the case of Robert, whose precocious 
intelligence was manifest from a very early age, this meant 
providing him with everything in which he showed any interest. 
When, at about the age of five, he declared an interest in ancient 
and modern buildings and expressed a desire to become an 
architect, his father gave him photographs and prints of the great 
buildings of the world, together with books on architecture. 
Responding to his mother’s expectations of him, Oppenheimer 
next declared that he wanted to be first a poet and then a painter, 
and received in turn volumes of poetry, his own easel and an 
abundance of brushes and paint. In deference to his mother’s 
wishes, he took piano lessons but they were a great torture for 
him. The lessons stopped when Robert came down with some 
childhood illness or other and his mother asked him how he felt. 
“Just as I do when I have to take piano lessons,” he replied, no 
doubt realizing that the lessons would henceforth be canceled. 

The young Oppenheimer had everything a child could wish for 
—except the thing that most children wish for above all: the 
company of other children. So, though he acquired impeccable 
adult manners from an early age and was extremely (perhaps 
even unnaturally) well behaved, he never experienced the simple 
childhood pleasures of rambunctiousness and mischief that arise 
from playing with childhood companions. There was very little 
fun to be had in the ethically cultured, artistically refined and 
intellectually advanced Oppenheimer household. In place of fun 
there was a great deal of achievement, fueled by expectations 
that were absurdly high and felt by Oppenheimer to be even 
higher than they actually were. He always felt as if he were 
letting his parents down, if not intellectually, then morally. “I 
repaid my parents’ confidence in me,” he once remarked, “by 
developing an unpleasant ego which I am sure must have 
affronted both children and adults who were unfortunate enough 
to come into contact with me.” 

In 1909, Ella’s mother, now elderly and ailing, moved into the 
Oppenheimer apartment. In the summer of that year, Robert, 
then aged five, was introduced to his father’s side of the family 
during a visit to Germany. It was then that he met Benjamin 
Oppenheimer, who, after watching Robert playing with some 
building blocks, presented him with an encyclopedia of 


architecture—a strange gift for a five-year-old, and one that is 
hard to square with Robert’s recollection of Benjamin as an 
illiterate peasant. Benjamin’s other gift was to have a deep 
influence on the young Robert: a box of rocks, each labeled with 
its Latin and German names, obviously designed to be the starting 
point for a collection of minerals. Robert took the bait. Collecting 
and studying minerals became, and remained throughout his 
childhood, his main hobby. 

What little contact Robert had with other children was 
restricted to those he met through the Ethical Culture Society. 
Every Sunday the Society held a meeting that had something of 
the character of a weekly religious service, except that there were 
no prayers. At these meetings organ music was played and Felix 
Adler or a guest speaker would give a lecture, usually of a 
sermon-like nature. Julius and Ella, naturally, were regular 
attenders and, while they were at the meeting, Robert would 
attend the Sunday School, one of the rare occasions at which he 
was able to mix with other children. Until 1910, these meetings 
(attendance at which would sometimes reach a thousand) were 
held in Carnegie Hall, but in October 1910 the Society proudly 
opened its new, specially commissioned building at 2 West 64th 
Street, at the corner of Central Park West. At the dedication of the 
new building, with his parents in the audience, Robert, then aged 
six, joined the other children from the Society’s Sunday School in 
a presentation on ethical behavior, which was followed by 
communal singing led by the children. 

When Robert started school in September 1911, at the 
relatively late age of seven (he entered in the second grade), he 
would already have known many of the children with whom he 
would be taught, since the school chosen by his parents was, 
inevitably, the Ethical Culture School, located at 33 Central Park 
West (just around the corner from the new Society hall). Since 
the very beginning of the Ethical Culture Society, Adler had seen 
education as one of its principal activities, and in 1878 he set up 
a free kindergarten for working-class children. This proved to be 
very successful and three years later it was expanded into a 
tuition-free elementary school called the Workingman’s School, 
which, Adler announced in his opening address, aimed to provide 
working-class children with “a broad and generous education, 
such as the children of the richest might be glad in some respect 


to share with them.” 

As it turned out, the rich were glad to share the excellent 
education offered by the school, and, indeed, were prepared to 
pay for the privilege. So in 1890 the school (which had run into 
grave financial difficulties) started admitting fee-paying students, 
drawn mainly from the affluent families of the Ethical Culture 
Society who, because of anti-Semitic prejudice, were finding it 
impossible to place their children in the best private schools. 
Within a few years of the introduction of fee-paying students the 
school changed its character completely, replacing its original 
mission of providing a model education for the poor with the 
rather different aim of educating and training future leaders of 
society in the ideals of the Ethical Culture movement. By the time 
it moved into its Central Park West building in 1902, only 10 
percent of its students were working-class children on 
scholarships. Most of the other 90 percent were the children of 
Ethical Culture Society members, attracted not only by an 
education informed by the ideals of the Ethical Culture 
movement, but also by the quality of education on offer at the 
school, which by then was widely recognized as one of the best 
private schools in the country. Having by this time added a high 
school to the original elementary school, the Ethical Culture 
School was seen—by an increasing number of middle-class 
gentiles as well as by the German Jewish community—as an ideal 
preparation for admission to the top universities in the country. 

Despite the growing number of gentiles among its students, the 
school in Oppenheimer’s day was still widely viewed as a place 
for the education of Jewish children. The children themselves, 
however, came largely from families who, like the Oppenheimers, 
were assimilated to such an extent that their identity as Jewish 
was no longer entirely clear. One of Oppenheimer’s classmates, 
asked years later for her recollections of him, agreed that 
Oppenheimer felt uneasy about his Jewishness, but added: “We 
all did.” In its publicity material, the school emphasized its role 
in American culture, particularly in American democracy. “The 
school is to be a nursery of ‘re-formers,’ ” its catalog announced, 
with the aim of training people who would provide the leadership 
required to reform society so that it answered to the needs of, and 
expressed “the ideal aspirations of,” American democracy. 

The school, then, saw itself as shaping the minds of those who 


would in later life lead America, whether in politics, business, 
science or the arts. One might regard this as the application to 
the entire country of Adler’s version of the moral law: “Act so as 
to bring out the spiritual personality, the unique nature of the 
other.” The school would help America to realize its potential and 
become itself. Then, with its leaders trained in the ideals of 
Ethical Culture, America would at last fulfill the hopes of the 
German Jews who had gone there in the 1840s, expecting to find 
the embodiment of Enlightenment ideals. Even before he founded 
the Ethical Culture Society, when he was still a professor at 
Cornell, Adler had developed an exalted view of American 
democracy, which, in tracing a direct line between the Jewish 
prophetic tradition and the American democratic ideal, attributed 
to the latter a religious significance. In his first set of Sunday- 
morning lectures, he declared: “To larger truths America is 
dedicated.” America could, he argued, provide both political and 
spiritual liberty and so break the “spiritual fetters that load thy 
sons and daughters!” “All over this land,” he announced, 
“thousands are searching and struggling for the better, they know 
not what.” It was his role, the role of the Ethical Culture Society 
and of the students trained in its school, to teach those thousands 
what, exactly, they were searching for and thereby to define and 
exemplify what Adler was fond of calling the “American ideal.” 

Adler’s role as the spokesman for the spiritual importance of 
Americanization received recognition and support at the highest 
level when, in 1908, he was appointed by President Roosevelt 
himself as Theodore Roosevelt Professor at the University of 
Berlin, where he gave a series of lectures on “The Foundation for 
Friendly Relations Between Germany and America.” In a book 
that was published some years later, he argued that America 
represented a “New Ideal.” “The American ideal,” he declared, “is 
that of the uncommon quality latent in the common man.” 

This was something that was to become a central part of 
Oppenheimer’s worldview. If Oppenheimer seemed to later 
observers strangely untouched, for the most part, by the values of 
the Ethical Culture Society, with respect to America and what it 
represented, he was at one with Adler. His greatest love was 
possibly that which he felt for his country. In his mind at least, 
the answer to the question about the nature of his identity was 
simple: he was not German and he was not Jewish, but he was, 


and was proud to be, American. 

In this respect, Oppenheimer was a typical product of the 
Ethical Culture movement. Besides the patriotic focus in its 
publicity material, the Ethical Culture School did its best, on 
every available occasion, to present itself to parents and pupils as 
first and foremost an American school. Four times a year it held 
festivals in which the pupils would perform plays in front of the 
parents. These festivals did not include Hanukkah, Yom Kippur, 
Rosh Hashanah or Passover, but rather Thanksgiving, Christmas, 
Patriots’ Day and a May festival. The first of these that 
Oppenheimer took part in was the Christmas Festival of 1911, in 
which the pupils of his year (the second grade) presented a play 
that drew on elements of Viking mythology—Fire Spirits, Frost 
Giants, Ice Spirits, and so on—to present the triumph of life over 
death. It ended with a rousing chorus of “Noél, Noél.” 

During Oppenheimer’s first year at school he and his family 
moved into a new home. The apartment at West 94th Street was 
sold, and the family relocated to a much grander apartment that 
took up the whole eleventh floor at 155 Riverside Drive, a 
prestigious redbrick block on the Upper West Side right next to 
Riverside Park, with views of the Hudson River. In recent years 
155 Riverside Drive has become famous as the home of the 
characters in the popular television situation comedy Will & 
Grace, who live on the ninth floor. The scriptwriters no doubt 
chose Riverside Drive for the same reasons as the Oppenheimer 
family: it is an impressive address, signaling elegance, wealth and 
membership of Manhattan’s educational and artistic elite. In 
1912, it was where some prominent members of the fabulously 
wealthy Guggenheim family lived, including Benjamin 
Guggenheim, who, in April of that year, as a first-class passenger 
on board the fateful maiden voyage of the Titanic, famously 
insisted on facing death “like a gentleman.” Also living at 
Riverside Drive when the Oppenheimers moved there was 
Benjamin Guggenheim’s brother, William, notable for publishing 
an autobiography in the guise of a biography in which he said of 
himself that anyone who saw his “light complexion” and the cast 
of his features “would not have surmised his Semitic ancestry.” 

When they moved into this large and prestigious apartment the 
Oppenheimers took with them their impressive collection of 
paintings, as well as Ella’s mother and Robert’s governess. Ella 


was pregnant at the time and, on August 14, 1912, Francis 
Oppenheimer was born. Frank (as he was always known) was too 
young to be a a playmate for Robert, but as they grew up they 
would become close, and Robert’s correspondence with his 
younger brother reveals an intimacy that Oppenheimer was to 
share with very few people. 

Certainly, Oppenheimer had few (if any) close friends at 
school. He once remarked in later life that it was characteristic 
that he could not remember any of his classmates. They 
remembered him, of course. Particularly vivid are the memories 
of Jane Didisheim (later Jane Kayser), who, fifty years after 
knowing Robert at school, could recall him in telling detail: 


He was still a little boy; he was very frail, very pink-cheeked, 
very shy, and very brilliant of course. Very quickly everybody 
admitted that he was different from all the others and very 
superior. As far as studies were concerned he was good at 
everything ... Aside from that he was physically—you can’t say 
clumsy exactly—he was rather undeveloped, not in the way he 
behaved but the way he went about, the way he walked, the 
way he sat. There was something strangely childish about 
him ... He was abrupt when he came out of his shyness, but 
with all that a very polite sort of voice. He never seemed to 
want to come to the front of anything... If he did it was 
because he couldn’t do otherwise ... because he was so 
extraordinarily gifted and brilliant—that just pushed him. 


Another classmate remembers him as “rather gauche,” adding 
“he didn’t really know how to get along with other children.” 
Perhaps thinking that he was playing to his strengths, 
Oppenheimer—who could not become popular through playing 
sport or by being mature or streetwise—struck many of his fellow 
pupils as a little too anxious to demonstrate his intellectual 
precocity. As one of them put it, he had “a great need to declare 
his preeminence.” “Ask me a question in Latin and I will answer 
you in Greek,” he once remarked to a girl in his class. His math 
teacher recalled that he was difficult to teach because he was “so 
far ahead of everybody and very restless,” a view echoed by his 
other teachers. His grades, however, particularly in his early 
school years, do not confirm this impression of unreachable 


genius. They certainly were not bad, but they were mostly A— 
and B+, rather than the consistent A+ that one might have 
expected. 

Outside of school, his interests were scholarly, solitary and 
characteristic of a much older boy. “When I was ten or twelve 
years old,” he recalled as an adult, “minerals, writing poems and 
reading, and building with blocks still—architecture—were the 
three themes that I did.”3 What he meant by the single word 
“minerals” was the deep interest he had developed in mineralogy 
following his grandfather’s gift of a collection of rocks. On walks 
around New York’s Central Park, on summer holidays on Long 
Island and on family visits to Germany, Oppenheimer would 
collect rock samples, which he would then identify and display 
on Riverside Drive. In pursuit of this hobby, he joined the New 
York Mineralogical Club, its other members only realizing how 
young he was after they had invited him to present a paper and 
found themselves listening to a twelve-year-old boy. 

At the end of Oppenheimer’s third year of school, when he was 
ten years old, the First World War broke out. It would be another 
three years before the United States entered the war, but its 
effects were felt in America, in New York and among the 
Oppenheimer family long before that. For Rothfeld, Stern & Co. 
the war presented an opportunity to make a fortune supplying 
cloak linings for military uniforms, and, as a result, the 
Oppenheimers were able to buy a holiday home on Long Island. 
This was not a small summer house, but a mansion of some 
twenty-five rooms located in Bay Shore (which Oppenheimer 
always wrote as “Bayshore”), then fashionable and upmarket. To 
explore the Great South Bay during their holiday in this house 
Julius bought a forty-foot sailing yacht, the Lorelei, and, a few 
years later, a twenty-seven-foot sloop for Robert. 

Where the war had a less welcome impact on _ the 
Oppenheimers, as on the entire German Jewish community in 
New York, including the Ethical Culture Society, was in widening 
the publicly perceived gap between being German and being 
American—providing Julius and others with yet more reasons to 
lose all traces of their accents and all vestiges of their ethnic 
origins. For Felix Adler, the war was something of a disaster. His 
first response to it was to deliver, in October 1914, an address 
called “The World Crisis and Its Meaning,” an expanded version 


of which was published the following year. “Many of our fellow- 
citizens of German birth,” Adler declared, “aside from the 
profound anxiety descendants of all the nationalities now at war 
naturally feel for friends at the front, are troubled with a new 
misgiving as to their own place in the American nation.” The 
reason for this anxiety was plain: “Public opinion in the United 
States is decisively on the side of the Allies and this practically 
means on the side of England.” But, Adler insisted, America is not 
English; it represents, as he had been saying for thirty years, a 
New Ideal. “The German ideal,” he wrote, “roughly speaking, is 
that of efficiency.” “The national ideal of the English,” on the 
other hand, “may be described as that of noblesse oblige.” In 
contrast to both of these was the American ideal, which “is that 
of the uncommon quality latent in the common man.” The task 
facing adherents of Ethical Culture, Adler told his audience, was 
to keep alive during the strife the American ideal, which, properly 
understood, was not allied to either side in the conflict. 

As for the cause of the war, Adler offered a surprising analysis. 
Militarism—identified by many at the time as the cause—was, 
Adler said, “only a symptom”: “If we wish to put the blame 
rightly, or, setting aside the question of blame, if we wish to 
place the proximate cause rightly, let us place it on the shoulders 
of science.” “The time will come,” Adler announced, “when that 
scientist [that is, one who puts his work to use for war] will be 
considered and will consider himself a disgrace to the human race 
who prostitutes his knowledge of Nature’s forces for the 
destruction of his fellow men.” 

Adler’s address was widely perceived to be a plea for 
neutrality, and, in the atmosphere of the time, being neutral was 
regarded as being almost as bad as—indeed, barely 
distinguishable from—being pro-German. The year after Adler’s 
speech, the New York Times hit out at Adler for his “high opinion 
of the morality of the German people.” In the increasingly fervent 
anti-German atmosphere that was spreading throughout the 
United States (“Anything German, from symphony to sauerkraut, 
was suspect,” as Howard B. Radest puts it), it took courage to 
express any opinion other than full-blooded support for the Allies. 
Certainly no one in the Ethical Culture movement, despite their 
German heritage, was prepared to be openly in support of the 
Germans during the war. Some prominent members, however, 


including John Elliott and David Muzzey, the associate leader of 
the New York Society, were prepared to publicly support the 
pacifist case, which put them at odds with Adler himself, whose 
pro-American position compelled him, after the U.S. entered the 
war in April 1917, to declare his support for the war. From 
November 1917 onward, the Ethical Culture meetinghouse 
followed most other public buildings in flying the U.S. flag. Most 
of the Ethical Culture leaders who had previously been pacifist 
followed Adler in his support for the war, but John Elliott 
continued to pursue a pacifist line, devoting himself (even at the 
risk of being thrown out of the Society) to defending the rights of 
conscientious objectors. In this, Elliott was radically, and 
increasingly, out of step with Adler, who, in his Easter Sunday 
sermon of 1917, went so far as to argue that resistance to the war 
was treason. 

In the midst of this potentially ruinous split in the Ethical 
Culture movement, Oppenheimer, now thirteen years old, entered 
the high-school part of the Ethical Culture School. The school 
journal, Inklings, had by this time nailed its mast firmly to Adler’s 
colors and become belligerently pro-war. Encouraging students to 
do whatever they could for the war effort—joining the Auxiliary 
Red Cross, sewing bandages, and so on—Inklings declared it to be 
“the duty of every high school chap to put his shoulder down and 
buck up for his country”: “All of our brave plans and hopes for 
the future have to be cast aside to give place to the one 
predominant purpose of the entire nation ... We are in the fight 
and we have got to win!’ 

In its issue of March 1918, the journal expressed its solidarity 
with those who regarded political dissent as treachery. “In 
discussing the war,” its editors declared, “we must think of rights 
which are greater than the individual’s right to expression of 
personal views ... one thing we do not want is opposition to the 
government.” Three months later, this attack on government 
critics was renewed: “There is no room for dissenters and joy- 
killers. There is no room for those who complain of the 
government, of the suffering of the soldiers, of no results, of hard 
times, etc.” 

It is doubtful that Oppenheimer shared these sentiments. His 
father was such an admirer of Adler that it is difficult to imagine 
him doing anything but following Adler’s position at every stage; 


but there are signs that, during his high-school years, 
Oppenheimer began to distance himself, both from his father and 
from the Ethical Culture movement. In a satirical poem that he 
wrote for his father’s birthday he included the slightly mocking 
line, “he swallowed Adler whole like morality compressed,” and 
in his last year at the Ethical Culture School (1920-1) he wrote a 
poem for his English teacher which might naturally be read as an 
indictment of the line taken by Adler and Inklings during the war. 

The poem is untitled, but an apt name for it might be “The 
Damning Lie.” In its entirety, it reads: 


In Flanders’ fields the sun sinks low 
And clouds flamed crimson with its glow 
Unnumbered crosses—here we lie 

While life & love go swirling by 


Ours—had God decreed it so. 

He can not guide you where to go, 

He can not prompt with “yes” or “no” 
The stage of life; ours was to die 

In Flanders’ fields— 


Yet now we see: We have no foe. 
Nurtured by hatreds that must grow 
It was, we see, the damning lie 

And, in a quaking voice we cry 

“Let us have Peace”; the sun sinks low 
On Flanders’ fields. 


RO 


The “damning lie” of which the poem speaks is the insistence 
that it was the duty of those soldiers whose “unnumbered 
crosses” lie on Flanders’ fields to regard the soldiers on the other 
side as their “foe,” to hate them and kill them, even at the 
expense of their own lives. Once this is seen to be not just untrue, 
but a lie, the poem seems to suggest, then the faith that had 
previously compelled its acceptance has to be rejected. The most 
obvious interpretation of the image of the sinking sun that occurs 
both at the beginning and at the end of the poem is that it is a 
metaphor for death—not only the deaths of the buried soldiers, 


but also of the faith that had guided them to their graves. This 
would include their faith in God, but also their faith in all those 
people and institutions that had perpetuated the “damning lie”: 
the priests, the governments—and the leaders of the Ethical 
Culture Society, together with the teachers and pupils at the 
Ethical Culture School. 

The poem perhaps provides a clue as to what lies behind Rabi’s 
remark about Oppenheimer’s relationship with his school and the 
Ethical Culture movement: “From conversations with him I have 
the impression that his own regard for the school was not 
affectionate. Too great a dose of Ethical Culture can often sour 
the budding intellectual who would prefer a more profound 
approach to human relations and man’s place in the universe.” As 
Julius was so closely associated with the Ethical Culture 
movement, Oppenheimer, in distancing himself from Ethical 
Culture, was also distancing himself from his father—a process 
that, perhaps inevitably, was accompanied by feelings of guilt. 

If his first year at high school, 1917-18, was the year in which 
he broke free, to some extent, of the influence of Ethical Culture 
and his father, it was also the year in which Oppenheimer 
acquired a new father-figure, and possibly someone who could 
help him find the “more profound approach to human relations” 
that Rabi mentions him needing. That man was Herbert Winslow 
Smith, a Harvard graduate who came to the Ethical Culture 
School in 1917 to teach English. He was at that time still 
intending to finish a Ph.D. at Harvard, but enjoyed teaching at 
the Ethical Culture School so much that he stayed there, his Ph.D. 
unfinished and forgotten, for the rest of his life. 

Clearly in his element at the Ethical Culture School, Smith 
became known as a teacher willing and able to form close 
relationships with his pupils. He formed an especially deep 
interest in Oppenheimer, his later recollections of whom reveal a 
predilection for psychoanalysis and an assumption that he 
understood the young Oppenheimer as well as, if not better than, 
Oppenheimer’s own family. One of Smith’s repeated themes is the 
uneasiness of Oppenheimer’s relationship with his father. Julius 
Oppenheimer, Smith said, had a touch of “business vulgarity 
which acutely embarrassed Robert, although he would never 
mention it.” Many of Robert’s problems, according to Smith, were 
due to a “pronounced oedipal attitude” toward his father. 


It was in the summer after Smith’s first year at the school—the 
summer of 1918, as the First World War was coming to an end— 
that Oppenheimer, then fourteen years old, underwent an 
experience that Smith was convinced was one of the most 
important of his life, and which was for Smith the paradigm 
example of the ways in which Oppenheimer blamed his father for 
his suffering. 

The incident took place during Oppenheimer’s stay at Camp 
Koenig, a boys’ summer camp on Grindstone Island in Lake 
Ontario. The camp was run by Dr. Otto Koenig, the principal of 
the Sachs Collegiate Institute, a Jewish boys’ school on the Upper 
West Side of New York City. Koenig’s son, Fred, later professor of 
chemistry at Stanford University, became Oppenheimer’s only 
friend at the camp. “I often felt,” Fred Koenig said years later, 
“that what happened to Robert in camp that summer could easily 
account for much of his behavior—his actions—that people found 
so baffling.” 

At the camp Oppenheimer became the victim of increasingly 
vicious bullying. The other boys called him “Cutie” and mocked 
him for writing to his parents every day and for reading poetry. 
In one of his letters home Oppenheimer, perhaps trying to give 
the entirely false impression that he was mixing well with the 
other boys, told his parents that he was glad to be at the camp 
because he was learning a great deal from his fellow campers, 
especially about sex. This brought his enraged parents hurriedly 
to the camp, where his father demanded that the camp director 
do something about the spread of smut among the boys. When 
the camp director duly announced that disciplinary measures 
would be taken against those caught telling dirty stories, the boys 
sought their revenge on the telltale who had betrayed them. One 
evening, while taking a walk, Oppenheimer was captured and 
dragged to the icehouse, where he was stripped, his buttocks and 
genitals were painted green and he was tied up and left alone. As 
Fred Koenig later put it: “They, as it were, crucified him.” 

Despite this attack, Oppenheimer remained at the camp for the 
rest of the summer. “I don’t know how Robert stuck out those 
remaining weeks,” Koenig said. “Not many boys would have—or 
could have—but Robert did. It must have been hell for him.” 
Afterward, Oppenheimer mentioned the incident just once, when, 
at the age of twenty, he confided in Herbert Smith, who had by 


then become his closest friend. Both Smith and Fred Koenig (the 
only two friends of Oppenheimer’s who knew what he had 
endured on Grindstone Island) were convinced that it was a— 
perhaps the—defining moment of his life. 

One very interesting detail that Koenig mentioned in his 
recollections of Oppenheimer at summer camp in 1918 concerns 
their many walks together: 


We talked as we walked. I remember Robert quoting passage 
after passage of George Eliot. He found her conviction that 
there is a cause and effect relationship in human behavior, as 
well as in nature—her awareness of fate—to be fascinating. We 
discussed this at length. 


What particular passages Oppenheimer knew by heart is not 
known, though it is known that he was reading Middlemarch that 
summer and was greatly impressed by it. The theme of causal 
relations in human behavior is highlighted in that book through 
its central character, Tertius Lydgate, who is himself fascinated 
by the application of causal explanations to nature (as Eliot puts 
it, he “longed to demonstrate the more intimate relations of living 
structure and help to define men’s thoughts more accurately after 
the true order”), but who, ironically, is undone precisely because 
of his failure to understand human nature, particularly his own 
and that of his wife. 

The character of Lydgate parallels Oppenheimer to an 
extraordinarily close extent. First and foremost, Lydgate is an 
outsider, the only character in the book who does not actually 
come from Middlemarch. We first see him as a young, newly 
qualified doctor, who, full of optimism and idealism, arrives in 
the town to establish himself as a family physician. As a boy, 
Eliot tells us, Lydgate had been a quick learner, who loved books 
and to whom acquiring knowledge was exceptionally easy: “It 
was said of him that Lydgate could do anything he liked.” 
However, though he read widely and amassed at least a 
superficial knowledge and understanding of a vast range of 
subjects, “no spark had yet kindled in him an _ intellectual 
passion.” This changed one rainy day when, out of boredom, he 
took down a volume of an old encyclopedia and began reading 
the entry on “Anatomy.” “From that hour,” Eliot writes, “Lydgate 


felt the growth of an intellectual passion.” 

Inspired by this passion, Lydgate studies medicine, fired not 
only by an enthusiasm for achieving a scientific understanding of 
the human body, but also by an idealistic desire to reform the 
medical profession and to do some social good. He wants both to 
be an outstanding practitioner of medicine and to make a 
significant and lasting theoretical contribution to medical science. 
He has the natural ability, the training and the circumstances to 
achieve this demanding dual ambition, but one thing stands in his 
way: his character. “Lydgate’s conceit,” Eliot tells us, is “of the 
arrogant sort, never simpering, never impertinent, but massive in 
its claims and benevolently contemptuous.” Because of this 
character flaw, Lydgate, despite his good intentions, is not trusted 
by the people of Middlemarch, who are quick to think the worst 
of him when he becomes involved with a crooked financier. He 
ends up as an outwardly successful (that is, wealthy) medical 
practitioner, who is however inwardly unsuccessful, trapped as he 
is in a loveless marriage, surrounded by people with whom he 
feels no sense of companionship and having abandoned all hope 
of making any serious contribution to the theory of medical 
science. 

In many ways, Lydgate’s story parallels and anticipates 
Oppenheimer’s. Though Fred Koenig was sympathetic to 
Oppenheimer with respect to the treatment he received at the 
hands of the other boys at camp, he also acknowledged that “to 
some extent, he asked for it.” As Koenig remembers Oppenheimer 
that summer, he did not just stand out from the other boys, he 
did so deliberately. “Robert enjoyed being different,” Koenig 
recalled. “He was an intellectual snob, a mental exhibitionist.” He 
was “bright and sensitive, but very much in conflict with 
himself,” and, of course, at odds with the people around him. 

The inner conflict noted by Koenig was matched by a conflict 
between Oppenheimer and his father and _ perhaps, in 
Oppenheimer’s mind at least, between what was expected of him 
and what, in reality, he was. His later remarks that his childhood 
“did not prepare me in any way for the fact that there are cruel 
and bitter things” and that it had offered him “no normal healthy 
way to be a bastard” are symptomatic, perhaps, of a resentful 
feeling that his inability to fit in with people was to some extent 
his parents’, and particularly his father’s, fault. Smith remembers 


that, though he “never heard a murmur of criticism on Robert’s 
part of [his] mother,” Oppenheimer “was certainly critical 
enough of [his] father.” Indeed, said Smith, “the most important 
element I think in Robert’s life was his feeling that his own 
parents’, particularly his father’s, maladroitness had resulted in 
all sorts of humiliation to him’—chief among which was his 
“crucifixion” at Camp Koenig. 

After the summer of 1918, Oppenheimer returned to school to 
resume the second of his four high-school grades. The way his 
schooling was organized was that he progressed from one grade 
to the next every February, which was the beginning of the 
school’s second term. Each high-school grade was named after a 
Greek letter, so that he began “alpha grade” in February 1917 
and “beta grade” the following year. In February 1919, upon 
entry into “gamma grade,” he took part in a patriotic festival held 
at school, the centerpiece of which was an allegorical play called 
The Light, which recounted the battle against Brute Force by the 
combined forces of Peace, Justice and Civilization, culminating in 
the uniting of nations into the “true brotherhood of man.” On the 
night of the play the school mounted an “Americanization 
exhibit,” which contained, among other things, German helmets 
brought back from the Western Front by “some of our dough 
boys.” The exhibition might seem somewhat at odds with the 
theme of the play, but a link between the two might be seen in 
the Adlerian idea that, in defeating the Germans, the “dough 
boys” had helped to bring about the realization of the “American 
Ideal” and thus the triumph of “true brotherhood” over “brute 
force.” 

The years 1919-20 and 1920-1, his junior and senior years of 
high school, were extremely important ones for Oppenheimer’s 
intellectual development. They were the years in which he, like 
Lydgate in Middlemarch, “felt the growth of an_ intellectual 
passion.” In his case, it was not anatomy that aroused this 
passion, but chemistry, and what inspired it was not a textbook, 
but a particularly gifted teacher called Augustus Klock. Known to 
his students as “Gus,” Klock was an extremely popular teacher, 
remembered affectionately for his fund of jokes, his infectious 
enthusiasm for his subject and the Herbert Hoover collars he 
wore. He was to stay at the Ethical Culture school until 1960 and 
was mentioned by several generations of students as an inspiring 


teacher, including some who, in various ways, followed in 
Oppenheimer’s footsteps. They include the brothers Hans and 
Ernest Courant, whose father was a friend of Oppenheimer’s and 
who both became professional physicists, and Robert Lazarus, a 
renowned theoretical physicist who founded the computing 
division at the Los Alamos laboratory in New Mexico. In the 
memories of all of them the inspirational influence of Klock is 
emphasized, just as it was by Oppenheimer himself. When Klock 
died in 1963, Oppenheimer wrote: 


It is almost forty-five years since Augustus Klock taught me 
physics and chemistry ... He loved these sciences both as craft 
and knowledge. He loved the devices of the laboratory, and the 
great discoveries that had been made before, and the view of 
nature—part order, part puzzle, that is the condition of 
science. But above all, he loved young people, to whom he 
hoped to give some touch, some taste, some love of life, and in 
whose awakening he saw his destiny. 


Klock was equally complimentary about Oppenheimer. When, 
in 1948, he was interviewed for a profile of Oppenheimer in Time 
magazine, Klock remarked: “He was so brilliant that no teacher 
would have been skillful enough to prevent him from getting an 
education.” 

The way the science curriculum at the school was arranged was 
that physics was taught in the junior year, followed by chemistry 
in the senior year. In physics, Oppenheimer was introduced to 
atomic theory, which he described to the Time journalist as “A 
very exciting experience ... beautiful, wonderful regularities!” 
Seeing his son so inspired prompted Julius to arrange for Klock to 
give Robert a special individual intensive course during the 
summer of 1920. This summer was later recalled by Oppenheimer 
as an important turning point in his life, arousing in him a life- 
changing devotion to science: 


We must have spent five days a week together; once in a while 
we would even go off on a mineral hunting junket as a reward 
for this. I got interested then in electrolytes and conduction; I 
didn’t know anything about it but I did fiddle with a few 
experiments [although] I don’t remember what they were. I 


loved chemistry so deeply that I automatically now respond 
when people want to know how to interest people in science 
by saying, “Teach them elementary chemistry.” Compared to 
physics, it starts right at the heart of things and very soon you 
have that connection between what you see and a really very 
sweeping set of ideas which could exist in physics but is very 
much less likely to be accessible. I don’t know what would 
have happened if Augustus Klock hadn’t been the teacher in 
this school, but I know that I had a great sense of indebtedness 
to him. He loved it, and he loved it in three ways: he loved the 
subject, he loved the bumpy contingent nature of the way in 
which you actually find out about something, and he loved the 
excitement that he could stir in young people. In all three ways 
he was a remarkably good teacher. 


For Robert’s sixteenth birthday, Julius had given him the 
twenty-seven-foot sloop mentioned earlier to sail around the 
Great South Bay during the family’s holidays at their home in Bay 
Shore. Oppenheimer chose for the boat the rather clever name 
Trimethy, after the chemical compound trimethylamine, a 
colorless liquid that is responsible for the characteristic smell of 
decomposing fish—a name that at one and the same time 
announces his love for chemistry and suggests one of the most 
evocative aspects of the seashore: its smell. 

Until he acquired a boat, Oppenheimer had had neither 
aptitude nor interest in any physical activity. His PE scores at 
school were uniformly bad, he played as little sport as he could, 
and he even avoided using stairs whenever he could take a lift 
instead (his headmaster once wrote to his parents begging them 
to teach him how to use stairs, because his insistence on waiting 
for the lift was holding up classes). Once he got his own boat, 
however, he became adventurous to the point of recklessness. To 
the astonishment and dismay of Julius and, especially, Ella, 
Oppenheimer would sail his boat in all weathers, exploring every 
part of the Great South Bay and the Long Island Sound. Several 
times Julius had to come and rescue him and escort him home in 
a motor launch. Once, Oppenheimer and his younger brother 
Frank had to be rescued by the “Revenuers,” the coast-guard 
officers, because they had run aground on a mud bank. Another 
time, when trying to dock the boat at Cherry Grove on Fire 


Island, Robert misjudged the wind and slammed into the dock 
with such force that he knocked into the water a small girl who 
had come to watch him moor. 

A description of what it was like to accompany the teenage 
Oppenheimer on his sailing adventures has been left by Francis 
Fergusson, who has recalled a visit to the Oppenheimers’ Bay 
Shore home in 1921: 


It was a blowy day in spring—very chilly—and the wind made 
little waves all over the bay and there was rain in the air. It 
was a little bit scary to me, because I didn’t know whether he 
could do it or not. But he did: he was already a pretty skilled 
sailor. His mother was watching from the upstairs window and 
probably having palpitations of all kinds. But he had induced 
her to let him go. She worried, but she put up with it. We got 
thoroughly soaked, of course, with the wind and the waves. 
But I was very impressed. 


Fergusson was at this time Oppenheimer’s best friend. In fact, 
he was the only close friend Oppenheimer ever made while he 
was at the Ethical Culture School. 

Oppenheimer’s friendship with Fergusson of course suggests 
that his claim to have been unable to remember the names of any 
of his classmates was almost certainly not true. Indeed, among his 
classmates were a few whose names it seems hard to believe he 
could not recall. There was Jane Didisheim, for example, who, in 
the early 1920s came often to the Oppenheimers’ flat on 
Riverside Drive, usually at the invitation of Mrs. Oppenheimer, 
who evidently hoped to kindle a romance between Jane and her 
son. Exactly what Oppenheimer’s feelings for Jane were it is not 
possible to tell, but, whatever they were, they were sufficiently 
strong and sufficiently important to inspire him, when he was at 
Harvard, to write a story about her. (This story, like all 
Oppenheimer’s fiction, no longer exists.) Then there was Fred 
Bernheim, who was not strictly a classmate, being a year behind 
Oppenheimer at school, but was to become one of Oppenheimer’s 
closest friends at Harvard. Finally, there was Inez Pollak, who, 
together with her sister Kitty, visited Oppenheimer at Harvard, 
where her uncle, Paul Sachs (the son of Samuel Sachs, the 
cofounder of Goldman Sachs and an archetypal member of “Our 


Crowd”), was assistant director of the university’s Fogg Art 
Museum, to which he had made significant donations. 

It is simply not possible that Oppenheimer could, at any time in 
his life after meeting him in 1920, have forgotten Francis 
Fergusson’s name. Toward the end of his life, he said of 
Fergusson: “He is to this day one of my closest friends and our 
paths have crossed often.” What does seem likely, however, is 
that Oppenheimer might not have regarded this as an exception 
to his claim not to remember the names of any of his classmates, 
for the reason that he did not really regard Francis as having been 
one of them. Indeed, the fact that Fergusson was the single 
person at school with whom Oppenheimer became friends might 
be seen as a measure of his distance from his classmates, rather 
than an exception to it. For, as opposed to Jane Didisheim, Fred 
Bernheim and Inez Pollak, Fergusson was not a product either of 
the Ethical Culture School or of the cultural milieu from which it 
had grown. He was only at the school for one year—his (and 
Oppenheimer’s) senior year, 1920-l1—and he was, as 
Oppenheimer evidently felt himself to be, an outsider, among 
both the Ethical Culture movement and the New York German 
Jewish community. 

Fergusson was, as it were, the very opposite of a New York 
Jew: he was a gentile from the Southwest, the product of 
pioneering frontier people who were the very epitome of 
Theodore Roosevelt’s conception of true “Anglo-Saxon” 
Americans. Fergusson’s family (on his mother’s side German and 
on his father’s side Irish) had been in the United States for several 
generations and was, at the time Oppenheimer met him, one of 
the most established and prominent families in New Mexico. 
Francis’s father, H. B. Fergusson, had been a congressman for 
New Mexico, first in the 1890s when it was a mere territory and 
then, after it became a state in 1912, as its first representative in 
the House of Representatives. When Francis Fergusson came to 
the Ethical Culture School in 1920, his father had been dead for 
five years, but was still widely remembered, especially in the 
Southwest, as the author of the Fergusson Act of 1898, which 
allocated four million acres of land in New Mexico for 
educational and other public purposes. 

The Fergusson family was not as wealthy as many of the 
families who sent their children to the Ethical Culture School. 


They did not have the kind of money that the Goldmans, the 
Sachs or the Seligmans had. But they had things that 
Oppenheimer’s father, his mother and, above all, Oppenheimer 
himself, craved: they had literary culture, they had the kind of 
“class” that comes from membership in America’s cultural, 
intellectual and political elite, and they had a place in the very 
creation of America. They lived in a grand, adobe-style house in 
Albuquerque called La Glorieta, which itself has a significant 
place in the history of the Southwest. Widely regarded as the 
oldest house in Albuquerque, its origins lie in the seventeenth 
century, when it was built for, and inhabited by, members of the 
region’s ruling Spanish American elite. During the period (1821- 
48) when New Mexico was a province of Mexico rather than a 
territory of the United States, La Glorieta was the home of 
Manuel Armijo, the governor of the province. Fergusson’s family 
acquired the house in 1864, when his maternal grandfather, 
Franz Huning, bought it as a home for himself, his wife and their 
growing family. 

As one of the most prominent characters of the old frontier 
days, Franz Huning is something of a legendary figure in New 
Mexico. The story of his life was told by him in his memoir, 
Trader on the Sante Fe Trail, and has been retold many times since, 
in histories of the Southwest, in biographies and in fiction. 
Arriving in the United States as a teenager in 1848, Huning went 
west and lived the adventurous and perilous life of a frontier 
trader, driving oxen along the Sante Fe Trail. When he settled in 
Albuquerque he opened a general store, which was extremely 
successful, allowing him to invest in a variety of other ventures, 
including a flour mill, a sawmill and various ranches and farms. 
In addition to La Glorieta, he had a very grand house built for 
himself and his family in a distinctly European style, which 
became famous locally as “Castle Huning.” Toward the end of his 
life Huning was losing rather than amassing wealth, and it was an 
important part of the Fergusson family mythology to regard him 
as a pioneer and a merchant-adventurer, rather than a 
businessman. He belonged, they insisted, to the “Old West” and, 
as such, was uncomfortable and out of place with modern 
commercialism. When his daughter, Francis Fergusson’s mother, 
was interviewed in the 1930s about her famous father, she 
emphasized his cultural and scholarly achievements rather than 


his moneymaking skills, remarking: “I believe he always liked 
languages better than business.” She was especially concerned to 
tell the interviewer about her father’s fluency in Spanish and his 
role as an interpreter during the American occupation of New 
Mexico. 

On his father’s side, too, Francis’s family had a quintessentially 
American kind of glamour, again derived from their membership 
in an elite that had helped to define America and Americans, 
though in their case the elite in question was part of the “Old 
South” rather than the “Old West.” Francis’s grandfather, 
Sampson Noland Ferguson (the second s in the surname was 
added by Francis’s father for a reason that is lost to history), was 
a Southern gentleman, an aristocratic plantation owner from 
Alabama, who served as a captain in the Confederate army under 
his friend, General Lee, and, owing to his commitment to the 
Confederate cause, lost everything in the Civil War (he, 
patriotically but unwisely, sold his land for Confederate money). 
After the family’s land and wealth were thus dissipated, his son, 
Harvey Butler Fergusson (Francis Fergusson’s father), came to 
New Mexico to work as a lawyer. After a few years in the gold- 
rush town of White Oaks (chiefly remembered now for its 
associations with Billy the Kid), H. B. Fergusson moved to 
Albuquerque, where he became a successful lawyer, married 
Franz Huning’s daughter (thus acquiring both La Glorieta and 
Castle Huning) and then embarked on his political career. 

Growing up in Albuquerque and living in its oldest, most 
historically interesting house, Francis would repeatedly have 
been told the stories of the Old West, many of which would have 
involved members of his own family. Like Oppenheimer, he was 
born in 1904. Unlike Oppenheimer, he was the youngest of four 
siblings, two of whom—his elder sister, Erna, and his older 
brother, Harvey—became popular writers, famous most of all for 
writing about the history, the legends, the people and (in Erna’s 
case) the food of the Southwest. Particularly well known are 
Erna’s Dancing Gods: Indian Ceremonials of New Mexico and 
Arizona, Our South West and Mexican Cookbook and Harvey’s 
novel, Wolf Song, based on the life of Kit Carson, Rio Grande, his 
history of the Southwest, and his memoir, Home in the West. By 
the time Fergusson met Oppenheimer, the literary careers of his 
soon-to-be-famous siblings had already been launched. Harvey 


had just published his first novel, The Blood of the Conquerors, set 
among the Spanish American community in New Mexico, and 
Erna had started writing articles on the history of New Mexico for 
the Albuquerque Herald. Just as Francis’s ancestors had played an 
important part in the making of the West, so his siblings were to 
become instrumental in shaping the perception of it. To be 
introduced, as Oppenheimer was soon after getting to know 
Francis, to the Fergusson family was thus to be introduced to the 
history and mythology of the Southwest. Both introductions were 
to have large implications for the course of Oppenheimer’s life. 
Like his siblings, Francis had aspirations of becoming a writer. 
Unlike them, he was not content to study either at the University 
of New Mexico, where Erna had been a student, or at Washington 
and Lee University, the alma mater of both his father and his 
brother. He wanted to go to Harvard and, to that end, had come 
east to attend a high school in the Bronx that would prepare him 
for Harvard entrance. For his senior year he transferred to the 
Ethical Culture School, having, presumably, learned of its 
excellent record of getting students into Harvard. Soon after 
joining the school he and Oppenheimer had become close friends. 
Characteristically, Oppenheimer, when he recalled meeting 
Fergusson, never mentioned the things that most obviously 
marked him out from his other classmates—that he was a gentile, 
that he came from a distinguished and prominent family from the 
Southwest, that his father had been a congressman and that his 
siblings were famous writers—but rather remembered him as 
someone “who at that time had some interest in biology,” but 
whose “main interests were really a young man’s philosophic 
interests; he was preoccupied with the old difficulty that if 
everything is natural how can something be good, in the form 
[in] which the 19th century writers had sharpened this.” 
Fergusson, like Oppenheimer, formed a close relationship with 
Herbert Smith at the Ethical Culture School, and the three of 
them were to establish an extremely important bond. Smith, 
Fergusson remembers, was “very, very kind to his students”; he 
“took on Robert and me and various other people ... saw them 
through their troubles and advised them what to do next.” 
Smith’s contact with his students, at least his favorite ones, 
extended well beyond school hours. Oppenheimer, Fergusson and 
others would be invited to Smith’s home in New Jersey, where 


they would write and discuss literature; and, after they left 
school, Smith continued to act as their confidant and advisor 
through correspondence. 

Oppenheimer and Fergusson graduated from the Ethical 
Culture School in 1921, Oppenheimer in February and Fergusson 
in June. They had both been accepted by Harvard and both 
expected to go there in October that year, Oppenheimer to study 
chemistry and Fergusson to study biology. Immediately after his 
graduation, Oppenheimer spent the spring of 1921 working on a 
special, advanced-science project at school with Augustus Klock. 
He then set off for a summer holiday in Europe with his parents 
and his younger brother, Frank. They went to Germany, from 
where Oppenheimer set off on his own on what he later called “a 
long prospecting trip into Bohemia.” More specifically, he went to 
the old mineral mines near what was then called Joachimsthal 
(now Jachymov), on the Czech border, an area renowned in the 
nineteenth century for its silver, and a century later for its 
uranium. It was an ideal place for a rock collector, and 
Oppenheimer returned with a suitcase full of interesting 
specimens. Of more lasting importance to him, however, was that 
he also returned from the mines with a serious, almost fatal, case 
of dysentery. He arrived back in New York on a stretcher. 

On his parents’ insistence, he postponed his admission to 
Harvard for a year and spent the autumn and winter of 1921-2 at 
home, recuperating from the dysentery and from colitis, which 
was to remain a recurring problem for the rest of his life. 
Seventeen years old and impatient to leave home and take up his 
place at Harvard, where Fergusson, as planned, started in the 
autumn of 1921, he was a bad patient. Indeed, these months of 
convalescence seem to have brought out a_hitherto-unseen 
obnoxious side to his character; he was frequently irritable, and 
would sometimes lock himself in his room, ignoring his parents’ 
pleas to come out and to be reasonable. 

By the spring of 1922, his beleaguered parents had formed a 
plan to occupy his time and thoughts more profitably, one that 
would have the additional advantage of getting him off their 
hands for a while. They approached Herbert Smith to ask him 
whether he would consider taking a term off work (during which 
the Oppenheimers would take over the payment of his salary 
from the school) in order to accompany their son on a trip to the 


Southwest. The Southwest was chosen partly in order for 
Oppenheimer to spend some time with Fergusson’s family before 
joining him at Harvard after the summer, and partly because the 
climate, the fresh air and the spectacular countryside would 
provide an obvious and beneficial change from New York. The 
idea that Smith should take an entire term off work, however, 
was too much for the school, which vetoed the plan, whereupon 
it was proposed instead that Smith and Oppenheimer should 
travel to the Southwest during the summer holiday, a proposal 
that Smith (who had, it seems, performed a similar service earlier 
for Felix Adler’s nephew) was happy to accept. 

It was a trip that was to have a deep and lasting influence on 
Oppenheimer’s life. In later life he was fond of saying that he had 
two loves: physics and the New Mexican desert. Of those, the first 
was New Mexico. 


2 See this page. 

3 It is customary to remark on the elegance of Oppenheimer’s spoken and 
written language, but the curious awkwardness of the unidiomatic “themes 
that I did” is a feature that recurs surprisingly often in his writing, particularly 
in his letters. 


First Love: New Mexico 


reason. that Oppenheimer’s 
holiday in the Southwest in the summer of 1922 was to have suc 


deep and lasting effects on the course of his life was that it 
introduced him to people and places that would remain for him 
ideals by which others were measured. The Southwest, as Emanie 
Sachs emphasizes in Red Damask, was held in roughly equal 
measures of awe and contempt by members of the New York 
Jewish community, who regarded it, whether for good or ill, as 
the polar opposite of New York City. When her central character, 
Abby, discovers that her husband, Gilbert, has been offered a job 
in Texas, she urges him to accept it, on the grounds that, in the 
Southwest, they could escape from the sense of being outsiders. 
After all, she reasons, “you can’t be an outsider when you're a 
pioneer.” Gilbert, however, prefers to stay in New York, where 
life is more civilized. “Gilbert,” Sachs writes, “had been brought 
up to value orderly living and art and music and philanthropy 
and friends who valued them.” In drawing the contrast in this 
way, Sachs has, I think, provided important clues as to what 
Oppenheimer and Fergusson hoped to find in each other: where 
Oppenheimer looked to Fergusson and his family for the 
inspiration of the pioneer spirit and freedom from the sense of 
being an outsider, Fergusson, it seems likely, regarded 
Oppenheimer and his family as the very epitome of a life that 
valued “orderly living and art and music and philanthropy.” 

In any case, Fergusson’s family home in Albuquerque, La 
Glorieta, was, naturally, the first port of call for Oppenheimer 
and Smith. There, Fergusson, back from Harvard for the summer, 
introduced Oppenheimer to his friend Paul Horgan. Horgan 
would later find fame as a novelist and a historian, especially 


renowned—like Fergusson’s siblings—for writing about the 
history, characters, landscape and mythology of the Southwest. 
Born in Buffalo, New York, Horgan had lived in New Mexico 
since he was twelve, when his family moved to Albuquerque after 
his father, a vice president of a printing firm, contracted 
tuberculosis. At the time of meeting Oppenheimer, Horgan was a 
student at the New Mexico Military Institute in Roswell, where he 
was to remain for another year before moving to Rochester, New 
York, in order to study stage production at the Eastman School of 
Music. His writing career took off a few years after he returned to 
Roswell in 1926 to take up a post as librarian at the Military 
Institute. 

From their first meeting, Oppenheimer and Horgan took to 
each other warmly. Despite their differences in background and 
the fact that Horgan had little interest in science, they seemed to 
see in each other a kindred spirit. Indeed, among Oppenheimer, 
Fergusson and Horgan there quickly developed a shared sense of 
mutual admiration and liking, and, for the first time in his life, 
Oppenheimer found himself a member of a group of friends who 
shared interests, thoughts, confidences and experiences. They 
quickly began to think of themselves as a unit, a set of self-styled 
“polymaths” that Horgan would later describe as “this pygmy 
triumvirate” or “this great troika.” At the age of eighteen, it 
seems, Oppenheimer had finally found a group of people his own 
age to which he felt he belonged, and to whom he did not seem 
strange and alien. 

That Oppenheimer could find this sense of belonging only 
among gentiles in the Southwest is indicative not only of his 
sense of not belonging to the community within which he had 
been brought up, but also of his desire to actively distance 
himself from that community and to become a different person 
with a different social milieu. Before they set out for the 
Southwest, Oppenheimer startled Herbert Smith by asking him if 
they could both travel under the name “Smith,” passing 
Oppenheimer off as Smith’s younger brother. Smith would have 
nothing to do with this plan, which he saw as one among many 
signs of discomfort on Oppenheimer’s part with his Jewishness. 
This discomfort, Smith believed, also lay at the heart of 
Oppenheimer’s illnesses, both his dysentery and his colitis, which, 
he thought, had more likely psychological than biological origins. 


After all, Smith wondered, how could Oppenheimer have 
contracted dysentery when his family were so scrupulous in 
avoiding all contact with the outside world and drank nothing 
but bottled water? As for Oppenheimer’s colitis, Smith noted that 
it disappeared very suddenly as soon as they arrived in the 
Southwest, but reappeared whenever “someone disparaged the 
Jews.” One telling recollection of Smith’s concerns an occasion 
when, in a hurry to get his clothes packed, he asked Oppenheimer 
for help in folding a jacket. “He looked at me sharply,” Smith 
remembered, “and said, ‘Oh yes, the tailor’s son would know how 
to do that, wouldn’t he?’ ” 

In New Mexico, among the “great troika” of himself, Fergusson 
and Horgan,1 Oppenheimer could, at least temporarily, escape 
from being the Jewish “tailor’s son” from New York City and be 
part of a culture that defined itself in opposition to trade and 
business, that saw itself rooted in the mountains, rivers and 
valleys of the Southwestern countryside and the noble and 
courageous adventurousness of the pioneers that had tamed it. As 
Erna Fergusson puts it in her book, Our South West: 


The Southwest can never be made into a land that produces 
bread and butter. But it is infinitely productive of the 
imponderables so much needed by a world weary of getting 
and spending. It is a wilderness where a man may get back to 
the essentials of being a man. It is magnificence forever 
rewarding to a man courageous enough to seek to renew his 
soul. 


This emphasis on the role of the Southwest in “renewing” the 
soul pervades much of the work of Horgan and the Fergussons. In 
the same book, for example, Erna writes: 


Such a country, inscrutable, unconquerable and like nothing 
his kind had ever seen, naturally affected the man who dared 
to face it. It made, in fact, a new type of man who may renew 
himself in other challenging conditions or who may prove to be 
only a passing phase due to submerge in the babbittry that has 
come with the trains. 


The conquering of the West as a metaphor for conquering the 
self was one that Horgan was very fond of. For example, in an 


essay he wrote in the 1940s, he suggested: “Maybe everyone has 
a kind of early West within himself that has to be discovered, and 
pioneered, and settled. We did it as a country once. I think plenty 
of people have done it for themselves as individuals.” 

That Oppenheimer had, to some extent, “found himself” during 
his trip to the Southwest, that it enabled him to blossom in ways 
that had been impossible in New York, is attested to by the way 
his new friends remembered him during this summer. “He was 
the most intelligent man I’ve ever known,” Paul Horgan said. 
“And with this, in that period of his life, he combined incredibly 
good wit and gaiety and high spirits ... He had a great superiority 
but great charm with it, and great simplicity at that time.” He 
also noted Oppenheimer’s “exquisite manners,” adding: “I’ve 
always been puzzled by later reports of his arrogance and his self- 
centeredness ... I can’t identify that in him at all.” The man he 
describes seems barely recognizable as the awkward, arrogant, 
socially maladroit teenager remembered by Oppenheimer’s 
schoolmates during his time at the Ethical Culture School, to 
whom the words “charm,” “gaiety” and “high spirits” certainly 
would not have suggested themselves when attempting to 
describe his personality. 

One of the many ways in which the summer of 1922 brought 
forward a newly invigorated Oppenheimer was with respect to 
his interest in, and attraction to, girls. He later confided to his 
brother Frank that he had become strongly attracted to Horgan’s 
sister, Rosemary, and, later on in the trip, he met a woman with 
whom it would probably not be too much to say he fell in love. 
Her name was Katherine Chaves Page and she was then twenty- 
eight years old and just married to a man twice her age, an 
“Anglo”s businessman called Winthrop Page who lived in 
Chicago. 

Katherine herself was a member of an aristocratic Spanish 
hidalgo family, who had lived in the Southwest for many 
generations and had been in their day still more prominent than 
the Hunings and Fergussons. Their history was even more 
romantic and evocative of the “Old West.” Her grandfather, 
Manuel Chaves, had been a famous soldier, nicknamed “El 
Leoncito” (“the little lion”) because of his bravery. He was a 
cousin of the aforementioned governor of New Mexico, Manuel 
Armijo, and boasted that his lineage could be traced back to one 


of the original Spanish conquistadores. Having fought the Navajos 
and the Americans on behalf of the Mexicans, he swore an oath to 
the United States in 1848 after the American victory in the 
Mexican-American War and proceeded to fight Apaches and 
Mexicans on behalf of his newly adopted nation. In the Civil War 
he fought on the Union side and helped them to defeat an 
attempt to take New Mexico for the Confederacy. After his 
famous last battle as an Indian-fighter in 1863, in which he led 
fifteen men against 100 Navajos, he established a home for 
himself in the San Mateo Mountains, west of Albuquerque, where 
he made a living ranching and where he built a family chapel, in 
which he, his wife and his children were buried. 

Katherine’s father was Amado Chaves, the second son of 
Manuel Chaves, whose life story could hardly have been in 
sharper contrast to that of his Indian-, American- and Mexican- 
fighting father. After studying law and business in Washington, 
D.C., Amado Chaves returned to New Mexico and pursued a 
career as a lawyer and politician, becoming mayor of Santa Fe, 
and then speaker of the legislative assembly of New Mexico and 
superintendent of the state’s public education system. In both 
capacities he would no doubt have had much contact with H. B. 
Fergusson, which is presumably how the links between the two 
families—later cemented by the close friendship of Katherine and 
Erna Fergusson—began. In 1893, Amado Chaves married the 
“Anglo” Kate Nichols Foster, the daughter of an English-born 
architect, and the following year Katherine was born. 

As well as the ranch that Amado had inherited from his father 
in San Mateo, the Chaves family also had a house in Albuquerque 
that Kate Nichols Foster had designed. In addition they acquired 
some land in the Upper Pecos Valley, near the town of Cowles, 
some twenty miles or so north of Santa Fe, where they built a 
guest ranch (or “dude ranch”) called “Los Pinos,” high up on the 
hills with splendid views of the Pecos Valley and the Sangre de 
Cristo mountains. It was here that Oppenheimer spent the most 
memorable part of his summer trip to the Southwest, developing 
not only an attachment to Katherine, but also a deep affection for 
this part of New Mexico. 

To Oppenheimer, the Chaveses, their history, the countryside 
of northern New Mexico and, especially, Katherine herself were 
all excitingly and wonderfully grand and he became infatuated. 


According to Fergusson, Oppenheimer would bring flowers to 
Katherine “all the time” and would “flatter her to death whenever 
he saw her.” Katherine seems to have enjoyed the attention and 
to have returned it. “For the first time in his life,” Smith later 
recalled of the time they spent in Los Pinos, Oppenheimer “found 
himself loved, admired, sought after.” Inspired by Katherine’s 
example, Oppenheimer developed a love of horse riding and, 
together with the rest of the group, explored the slopes and 
valleys of the area around Cowles; this included—most 
momentously from a historical point of view—the Pajarito 
Plateau, upon which stands what is now the town of Los Alamos, 
but which in the summer of 1922 contained nothing but the Los 
Alamos Ranch School. A lasting memento of the horse rides 
Oppenheimer and Katherine took together is what to this day is 
still called “Lake Katherine,” one of the highest lakes in New 
Mexico, which is contained in a cirque (what in England would 
be called a coombe) just below Santa Fe Baldy, one of the tallest 
summits of the Sangre de Cristo mountains. On one of their rides 
together, Oppenheimer and Katherine, or so the story goes, 
discovered this hitherto unknown lake. 

By the time he and Smith left New Mexico, Oppenheimer was a 
skilled and proud horseman and was, it seems, determined to 
prove himself to be as adventurous and as brave as the ancestors 
of the Fergussons and the Chaveses. On their way back to New 
York, Oppenheimer and Smith decided to ride on horseback 
through Colorado. The question thus arose as to which route they 
should take. Oppenheimer’s suggestion was that they should take 
a trail that led through the highest pass of the snow-capped 
mountains, a route Smith felt sure would lead to their death by 
freezing. Eventually they settled the matter by tossing a coin, 
and, as Smith later commented: “Thank God I won.” 

On his return to New York, Oppenheimer seemed to everyone 
who knew him a changed person. His old classmate Jane 
Didisheim remarked: “He had become less shy. I think he had 
become gayer also.” But his mother’s hopes that a romance might 
develop between Jane and Robert were forlorn. Not only was 
Robert infatuated with a very different kind of woman back west; 
but he had, emotionally at least, severed himself completely from 
“Our Crowd” and become a different person—one who, he hoped, 
would be fit for Harvard. 


4 It is possible, I think, that Oppenheimer gave the name “Trinity” to the first 
atomic-bomb test site in Alamogordo—not far from Albuquerque and Roswell 
—in memory of the New Mexican “troika” that he had joined in the summer of 
1922. 

5 In the Southwest the word was used to describe anyone who was not either of 
Spanish or of Native American ancestry, so Germans, Norwegians, Danes, and 
so on were as much “Anglos” as English people were. 


Harvard 


he summer hotel that is ruined by 
admitting Jews meets its fate not because the Jews it admits are 


of bad character, but because they drive away the Gentiles, and 
then after the Gentiles have left, they leave also.” 

These words were written not, as one might think, by an anti- 
Semitic commentator on the “Seligman Affair,” but by Abbot 
Lawrence Lowell, the president of Harvard. And they were 
written not in the 1870s, but in the early summer of 1922, just a 
few months before Oppenheimer was due to take up his place at 
Harvard to study chemistry. During that summer, Lowell sparked 
an acrimonious nationwide controversy by announcing publicly 
that he was seeking measures to restrict the number of Jews that 
his university admitted. In the previous decade, the proportion of 
Jews at Harvard had risen sharply from 10 to 20 percent. This 
was much larger than at most of the other Ivy League universities 
—at Yale the figure was 7 percent and at Princeton a mere 3 
percent—and among both staff and students there was growing 
talk about the “Jewish problem.” Harvard, it was said, was going 
the same way as Columbia University in New York City, where, 
by 1920, 40 percent of the students were Jewish. For Lowell, the 
vice president of the Immigrant Restriction League and a firm 
believer in the superiority of both the Christian religion and the 
“Anglo-Saxon race,” this was an intolerable prospect. 

Unlike his famous predecessor, Charles Eliot, who had used his 
presidency to establish and build upon Harvard’s international 
reputation as a leading center of academic research, Lowell’s first 
priority was to maintain and, if possible to increase, Harvard’s 
reputation for undergraduate teaching, and, in particular, its 
reputation for educating students who would go on to be leaders 


in their chosen field, not just in academic life, but also in 
commerce, law and politics. His models were Oxford and 
Cambridge, universities that recruited students of good 
“breeding” and equipped them with the learning, the manners, 
the contacts and the confidence to take their place at the very 
head of society. 

The growth in the proportion of Jews at Harvard threatened 
this vision of what the college ought to be by raising the 
possibility of “WASP flight,” the desertion of the college by the 
families of the Protestant elite, something that had already 
occurred at Columbia. To prevent this, Lowell believed that it was 
necessary, openly and frankly, to restrict the numbers of Jews— 
that is, to introduce a quota system. It was no good, he thought, 
trying to limit the number of Jews by adopting criteria, whether 
of academic ability or of behavior, which gentiles would pass but 
Jews would fail, since there simply were no such criteria. The 
problem was not that Jews were not good students, or that they 
were bad people; it was that, just by being Jews and for no other 
reason, they were unacceptable, except in small enough numbers, 
to the “Anglo-Saxon” elite that Lowell’s Harvard sought to attract. 

Lowell’s initial move to restrict the number of Jews was an 
attempt to persuade Harvard’s admissions committee to adopt 
discriminatory procedures, imposing higher standards on 
members of the “Hebrew race” than on other applicants, so that 
only those “Hebrews ... possessed of extraordinary intellectual 
capacity together with character above criticism” would be 
allowed in. When the chairman of the admissions committee 
refused to adopt such a fundamental change without the explicit 
assent of Harvard’s faculty, Lowell was forced to debate the issue, 
first with his academic colleagues and then with the public at 
large. At a faculty meeting on May 23, 1922, Lowell managed to 
pass a motion calling upon the admissions committee to “take 
into account the... proportionate size of racial and national 
groups in the membership of Harvard College,” but, within a 
week, he received four separate petitions asking him to call a 
special meeting to allow the faculty to reconsider a move that one 
petition described as “a radical departure from the spirit and 
practice of the College.” 

The subsequent special faculty meeting, held on June 2, agreed 
to rescind the motion passed on May 23, but left in place a 


decision to appoint a special committee “to consider principles 
and methods for more effectively sifting candidates for 
admission.” Lest anyone was in any doubt about what this meant, 
Lowell added a statement to the minutes of the meeting making it 
explicit that “the primary object in appointing a special 
Committee was to consider the question of Jews.” By now, the 
admissions policies of Harvard were national news, reported in 
all the main newspapers and the subject of much comment, a 
good deal of which was vehemently critical of Lowell’s methods, 
aims and motives. 

A few weeks after the announcement that the special 
committee was to be appointed, the American Hebrew printed an 
illuminating exchange of letters between Lowell and the lawyer 
and Harvard graduate A. A. Benesch. Reminding Lowell that 
Jacob H. Schiff, Felix Warburg “and other eminent Jews of New 
York City” (including Benesch himself) had been important 
contributors to Harvard’s endowment fund, the lawyer told 
Lowell: 


Students of the Jewish faiths neither demand nor expect any 
favors at the hands of the university; but they do expect, and 
have a right to demand, that they be admitted upon equal 
terms with students of other faiths and that scholarship and 
character be the only standards for admission. 


In reply, Lowell pointed out the existence of “a rapidly growing 
anti-Semitic feeling in this country” and claimed that the strength 
of anti-Semitism among students increased as the number of Jews 
increased, and that therefore it was best tackled by keeping the 
proportion of Jews small. Benesch’s riposte to this was 
devastating: “Carrying your suggestion to its logical conclusion 
would inevitably mean that a complete prohibition against 
Jewish students in the colleges would solve the problem of anti- 
Semitism.” 

Lowell’s official response to the controversy he had unleashed 
was to try to present himself as someone tolerant of minorities, 
whose chief concern was to establish and maintain racial 
harmony. “We want,” he insisted, “to have both Gentiles and 
Jews in all colleges and universities and strive to bring the two 
races together.” Unfortunately for Lowell, a rather franker version 


of his views was made public in December 1922, when details of 
a private conversation that he had had on the matter with Victor 
Kramer, a Harvard alumnus, were published in the New York 
Times. The real answer to the problem, Lowell told Kramer, was 
for Jews to abandon their religion, recognizing that it had been 
superseded by Christianity. “To be an American,” he insisted, “is 
to be nothing else.” If the proportion of Jews at Harvard could be 
kept down to about 15 percent, Lowell reasoned, then Harvard 
could “absorb” them—that is, turn them into good Americans. 

Throughout Oppenheimer’s first academic year at Harvard, 
while the special committee appointed in June continued to 
deliberate, Lowell did his best behind the scenes to keep the 
numbers of Jews down by whatever means he could. As Benesch 
had noted, the proportion of scholarships won by Jewish 
candidates was, at 50 percent, much greater than the overall 
proportion of Jews at college, suggesting a disproportionate 
degree of success when they were allowed to compete on equal 
terms. Though he had failed to persuade the admissions 
committee to impose quotas, Lowell had more luck with the 
dean’s office, which was responsible for the allocation of 
scholarships, persuading it to ensure that the percentage of 
scholarships allotted to Jews did not exceed the total percentage 
of Jewish students, and thus, in effect, imposing a quota of about 
20 percent. 

Another measure was designed specifically to identify Jews 
among applicants, in order to ensure that Harvard did not 
unknowingly admit Jews. Starting in the autumn of 1922, all 
applicants were required to state their “race and color,” their 
religion, the maiden name of their mother, the birthplace of their 
father and to answer the question: “What change, if any, has been 
made since birth in your own name or that of your father? 
(Explain fully.)” As a double check, the school from which the 
applicant was applying was also asked to indicate the applicant’s 
“religious preference so far as known.” 

On April 7, 1923, the Committee on Methods of Sifting 
Candidates for Admissions finally delivered its report. The 
committee had thirteen members, three of whom were Jews, 
including Paul Sachs, the uncle of Oppenheimer’s Ethical Culture 
classmate, Inez Pollak. The members had been carefully chosen, 
not least the Jewish members, to be as sympathetic as possible to 


Lowell’s position. Sachs, for example, was seen as an upper-class 
German Jew and thus “far removed from the element” (primarily 
the Russian and Polish Jews) that Lowell was targeting. Despite 
this, the committee’s final report provided little support for 
Lowell. Its principal recommendation was that “no departure be 
made from ... the policy of equal opportunity for all regardless of 
race and religion.” 

In the short term, therefore, Lowell’s plans were thwarted and 
the rise in the proportion of Jewish students was allowed to 
continue for another couple of years. By 1924 it was 25 percent 
and the following year 27.6 percent. In 1926, after years of 
persistent fighting, Lowell decided to achieve through stealth 
what he had failed to achieve openly. When Dean Mendell of Yale 
visited Harvard that year, he reported: “They are... going to 
reduce their 25 percent Hebrew total to 15 percent or less by 
simply rejecting without detailed explanation. They are giving no 
details to any candidate any longer.” 

The Harvard that eighteen-year-old Oppenheimer entered in 
the autumn of 1922, then, was a college in the midst of one of the 
most rancorous controversies in its history, whose president had 
revealed himself to be fully prepared to pander to the anti- 
Semitism of some parts of American society in order to pursue his 
vision of Harvard as an institution for the education of the 
“Anglo-Saxon” elite. And yet, in the letters that Oppenheimer 
wrote from Harvard, at least those that survive, he never once 
mentions, or even so much as alludes to, the controversy. Neither 
does he give any indication of how the anti-Semitism at college 
affected him personally, even though his later friend David 
Hawkins once remarked (presumably on the basis of 
conversations with Oppenheimer) that it was “not a negligible 
fact in Robert’s background that he had been a victim of 
considerable anti-Semitism at Harvard and elsewhere.” 

In the surviving correspondence of the time,7 there is not only 
no hint of this, but there are even, here and there, mildly anti- 
Semitic phrases used by Oppenheimer himself, such as when he 
addresses Herbert Smith as “Shylock” and when, in a letter to 
Francis Fergusson, he attributes Smith’s “misanthropy” to his 
having to kowtow to “skinflint Jews.” The only time in his letters 
that Oppenheimer mentions President Lowell is a_ passing 
reference in a letter to Smith to “the benign Lowell,” which one 


might imagine must have been meant sarcastically, although the 
letter provides no indication whatever that this is so. It is as if 
Oppenheimer were determined to present himself not as a victim 
of Lowell’s prejudices, but as a beneficiary of them. 

In his letters to Herbert Smith particularly (and, in his first year 
at Harvard, the only letters that survive are those to Smith), 
Oppenheimer strove hard to create the impression that he was 
fitting in very well with the other students. “Harvard has so far 
been most delightful,” he wrote soon after arriving. “It has 
crushed none of my romantic illusions of what it ought to have 
been.” “I have,” he insisted, “not suffered from loneliness,” 
adding unconvincingly: “There are plenty of amusing fellows with 
whom to read, talk, play tennis and make expeditions into the 
hills and toward the water.” In fact, throughout his three years at 
Harvard he had a remarkably small circle of friends, and the few 
people who knew him well during those years all report that he 
did not mix easily with the other students. 

It is perhaps indicative of how hard it was in Harvard during 
the 1920s for a Jew—even a Jew as wealthy, as American and as 
un-Jewish as Oppenheimer—to mix with gentiles that his closest 
friend at the college was someone whose background was 
practically identical to his own. Frederick Bernheim was a 
German Jew from New York who had been at the Ethical Culture 
School and had come to Harvard, like Oppenheimer, to study 
chemistry. In later life he was a very renowned professor of 
pharmacology, nominated for the Nobel Prize for his research 
into effective treatments for tuberculosis. Bernheim had not 
known Oppenheimer at school, as he was a year younger, but, as 
a result of Oppenheimer’s enforced “gap year,” the two were now 
freshmen together. As it happened, as well as studying the same 
subject, they were living in the same hall, having both been 
allocated rooms at Standish Hall, a freshman dormitory facing the 
Charles River.s Standish was not a Jewish dorm, but it was 
notable for being one of the few freshman halls that admitted 
both Catholics and Jews alongside its predominantly Protestant 
students. 

Both Oppenheimer and Bernheim had arrived at Harvard 
determined not to allow their ethnic background to restrict their 
social mobility. “I wanted not to be involved in a sort of Jewish 
enclave,” Bernheim later said; “at that time there was a good deal 


of anti-Semitism, and ... [I wanted to] be able to go around with 
the non-Jewish students, which I proceeded to do for the first 
year.” Oppenheimer had exactly the same attitude. Nevertheless 
the two were thrown together, not just for their freshman year, 
but for the whole of their time at Harvard, living in their second 
and third years as roommates in a shared house on Mount 
Auburn Street. 

Largely because of their relative isolation from other students, 
the friendship between Bernheim and Oppenheimer became 
intense—from Bernheim’s point of view, rather too intense. 
Oppenheimer was, Bernheim recalls, “a little bit possessive.” 
Oppenheimer resented it if Bernheim went out with a girl, and 
would object if Bernheim invited someone to dinner too often. As 
Bernheim put it, Oppenheimer had “a sort of feeling that we 
should make a unit.” 

That Oppenheimer had so few friends at college was not 
entirely due to the anti-Semitic climate of 1920s Harvard. It was 
also, to some extent at least, a matter of his own choosing. He 
was presented with at least one golden opportunity to enlarge his 
circle of friends, but chose not to take it. Soon after he arrived at 
Harvard, another ex-student from the Ethical Culture School, 
Algernon Black, tried to help him make friends. Black, who was a 
couple of years older than Oppenheimer and in his final year at 
Harvard, was from a relatively poor, originally Russian, New 
York Jewish family. In later life he was to find fame as a 
broadcaster, a social reformer and a spokesman for the Ethical 
Culture Society. At Harvard he was a leading member of the 
Liberal Club, one of the few student clubs (apart from those that 
were specifically for them) open to Jewish students. One day, 
noticing Oppenheimer eating on his own in the club dining room, 
Black introduced him to John Edsall, a third-year chemistry 
student who was also an enthusiastic and prominent member of 
the Liberal Club. An established Bostonian, a gentile and the son 
of the Harvard Dean of Medicine, Edsall was potentially an 
invaluable link between Oppenheimer and mainstream Harvard 
society. He was, moreover, greatly impressed by Oppenheimer’s 
obvious intellectual gifts. 

At the time that he and Oppenheimer were introduced by 
Black, Edsall had just been chosen by the Liberal Club to be the 
editor of its new journal, which did not yet have a name. It is an 


indication of the impact Oppenheimer made on Edsall that the 
title he chose was one suggested to him by Oppenheimer: The 
Gad-Fly. This was an allusion to Socrates’s description of himself 
in Plato’s Apology as a gadfly whose role in society was “to sting 
people, and whip them into a fury, all in the service of truth.” 
Eagerly embracing this image, Edsall, in his editorial for the first 
issue, published in December 1922, announced: “Among the 
collegiate herd of sacred cows and their worshippers now buzzes 
the Gad-Fly.” 

Oppenheimer was persuaded by Edsall to serve as assistant 
editor and to write for the journal for the first issue and for the 
second, which came out in March 1923. In truth, however, 
Oppenheimer had no appetite for this, or, it seems, for any other 
role in Harvard student politics, and after that left the Liberal 
Club and wrote no more for its journal. His decision to leave the 
club at that particular time confirms the impression that he was 
determined to have nothing at all to do with the controversy at 
Harvard over the issue of Jewish students. For it was precisely at 
that time, with Lowell’s Committee on Methods of Sifting 
Candidates for Admissions about to submit its report, that the 
issue was coming to a head and that the Liberal Club got involved 
in it, taking a public stand against discriminatory admissions 
policies. Even while he was a member, Oppenheimer’s attitude to 
the Liberal Club was one of lofty alienation. “I don’t know what 
that was all about,” he later said of his brief participation in it. “I 
felt like a fish out of water.” In only his second letter to Smith 
from Harvard, written in November 1922, he seemed determined 
to distance himself from the club, referring disparagingly to its 
“asinine pomposity.” 

Whether he was aware of it or not (and it is hard to see how he 
could not be aware of it), Oppenheimer, by quitting the Liberal 
Club, was cutting off his most promising means of making new 
friends. He had, as far as one can tell, little more to do with 
Algernon Black and, it would appear, not much to do with Edsall 
either, until the two of them renewed their friendship at 
Cambridge, in England, in 1925. This left him with the “unit” 
that he had formed with Fred Bernheim. The only other person 
Oppenheimer would allow to join this “unit”’—and, apart from 
Bernheim, the only close friend Oppenheimer had at Harvard— 
was another chemistry student, William Clouser Boyd. Boyd was 


a gentile from Missouri. He has recalled how he and 
Oppenheimer were classmates in Chemistry 3, which was a 
course in qualitative analysis.o Recognizing Boyd as the most 
advanced student in the class, Oppenheimer used to show him his 
work to check that it was right, much to the irritation of some of 
the other classmates. “Who is this guy Oppenheimer who keeps 
coming to you?” Boyd remembers one of them saying. “I think 
he’s a pest.” “I didn’t think he was a pest,” Boyd insisted; it was 
obvious to him that Oppenheimer was “a very talented person, 
very able and very sensitive, and we had lots of interests in 
common aside from science. We both tried to write and we wrote 
poetry, sometimes in French, and we wrote stories in imitation of 
Chekhov.” Here, Boyd and Bernheim differed. While 
Oppenheimer’s literary interests were part of what drew him and 
Boyd together, they threatened to drive him and Bernheim apart 
—Bernheim remarking that he found Oppenheimer “a little bit 
precious in the way he quoted French poetry, Verlaine, 
Baudelaire and so on. And I tended to resent it.” 

To Boyd’s surprise, the one art Oppenheimer had very little 
interest in, or understanding of, was music. “I was very fond of 
music,” he remembers, “but once a year he would go to an opera, 
with me and Bernheim usually, and he’d leave after the first act. 
He just couldn’t take any more. Totally amusical, I thought then.” 
It was a trait that others have commented on as well. Herbert 
Smith, for example, once said to Oppenheimer: “You’re the only 
physicist ’'ve ever known who wasn’t also musical, and I never 
heard you refer to music.” 

Like Bernheim, Boyd in later life became an eminent scientist; 
in his case a professor of immunology at Boston. In the 1950s he 
was famous for his work on the genetics of race, and, under the 
name Boyd Ellanby, also for his science-fiction writing, two of his 
best-known stories being “Category Phoenix” and “Chain 
Reaction.” In a popular science book he wrote with Isaac Asimov 
called Races and People, Boyd used his research to undermine 
ideas about “races” that were then prevalent, including the very 
ideas that had had such a baleful influence on Oppenheimer’s 
time at Harvard. There is, Boyd and Asimov argued, no such 
thing as the “Anglo-Saxon” race, nor, they insisted, is “Jew” a 
racial category. Widespread adoption of these views in the 1920s 
would have utterly transformed Oppenheimer’s life. 


Boyd, Bernheim and Oppenheimer were, Boyd has said, “the 
closest friends any of us had.” The three of them formed a 
“troika” that was a kind of counterpart to the troika that 
Oppenheimer had formed in the summer of 1922 with Paul 
Horgan and Francis Fergusson. Between the two “troikas” there 
was remarkably little contact. With regard to Horgan, this is 
hardly surprising. During Oppenheimer’s first year at Harvard, 
Horgan was still in New Mexico, completing his final year as a 
“cadet” at the Military Institute in Roswell. Then, in 
Oppenheimer’s remaining two years, Horgan was in Rochester. 
The two kept in touch with each other by letter, and, in the 
summer of 1923, Horgan spent some time at the Oppenheimer 
family summer house on Long Island, where he evidently met 
Bernheim. In his later letters to Horgan, Oppenheimer 
occasionally mentions Boyd and Bernheim, but there was never 
any real opportunity for Horgan to get to know Oppenheimer’s 
Harvard friends very well. 

On the other hand, as a fellow student at Harvard, Fergusson 
could very easily have become acquainted with Bernheim and 
Boyd. Fergusson, of course, had already been at Harvard for a 
year when Oppenheimer arrived, and during Oppenheimer’s 
freshman year was a sophomore majoring in biology and living in 
private accommodation on Prescott Street, a short walk from 
Standish Hall. Oppenheimer saw a good deal of Fergusson at 
Harvard, and yet Bernheim, when asked years later, was doubtful 
that he ever met Fergusson. Even more strangely, after Fergusson 
left, Oppenheimer’s letters to him from Harvard never once 
mention Bernheim.io They mention Boyd occasionally, though 
not very often, and at least once in a tone that reveals Fergusson 
took a rather condescending attitude toward him, an attitude 
with which Oppenheimer seems willing to acquiesce (“Boyd, as 
you charitably predicted, has improved,” he wrote to Fergusson 
during the Christmas vacation of his second year). Still, between 
Bernheim and Fergusson there seems to have been absolutely no 
contact whatever. 

One might have thought that Oppenheimer’s insistence on 
compartmentalizing his friends was based on a desire to separate 
them into literary and scientific groups, with no contact between 
the two, and that this is why Fergusson, while at Harvard, had 
little to do with Boyd and nothing at all to do with Bernheim. The 


problem with this is that Oppenheimer’s friends do not lend 
themselves to such rigid compartmentalization. One might, 
roughly speaking, regard Bernheim, Boyd and Oppenheimer as a 
scientific group and Fergusson, Horgan and Oppenheimer as a 
literary one, and it is true that Bernheim had little interest in 
literature and Horgan no interest in science. But Fergusson and 
Boyd combined literary and scientific interests, and in both cases 
that intellectual breadth was one of the most important things 
that drew them to Oppenheimer, and him to them. For 
Oppenheimer, and for at least two of his closest friends, it was 
crucial that science and literature were not kept in strictly 
separate compartments. 

It is more likely, I think, that Oppenheimer kept Boyd and 
(especially) Bernheim away from Fergusson simply because he 
did not think they were good enough for Fergusson. Oppenheimer 
liked and respected Bernheim and Boyd, but he did not venerate 
them as he did Fergusson. From the available correspondence and 
the reminiscences of the people involved, one gets a strong sense 
of a “pecking order” among Oppenheimer’s friends, with 
Bernheim and Boyd looking up to Oppenheimer, while 
Oppenheimer in turn looked up to Fergusson and (to a slightly 
lesser extent) to Horgan. Fergusson, one feels, was not 
accustomed to looking up at people, preferring to look down on 
them. He could even, on occasion, sound condescending toward 
Oppenheimer himself, well aware of being an ideal to which 
Oppenheimer aspired. Soon after Oppenheimer arrived at 
Harvard, Fergusson wrote to Smith, saying that he had “seen 
something of Robert lately” and reporting: “his conversation this 
year is a caricature of yours, ornamented with some of Paul’s and 
my more elaborate affectations.” 

In the same letter Fergusson told Smith about a club he had set 
up, which was, apart from the Liberal Club, the only club at 
Harvard that Oppenheimer joined. Its purpose was to discuss 
science and the philosophy of science at a deeper level than was 
possible in undergraduate courses. Oppenheimer later referred to 
it as “a little science club which was partly faculty but mostly 
graduate.” As Fergusson described it to Smith, the motivation in 
setting the club up was to “get professors to say interesting 
things”: “We meet Mondays in one of the members’ rooms—a big 
room, with a fireplace and deep chairs. We invite a professor to 


come and address us on anything he wants. When he has finished 
we discuss. Such at least is the plan.” Among its members, 
Fergusson told Smith, were “an aberrant Cambridge Puritan, a 
boy from Atlanta, a New York German, learned in chemistry, a 
Minnesota exquisite, a Greek assistant in philosophy, a 
mathematics genius, and many other diverse and highly flavored 
fishes.” Despite being both scientists and friends of Oppenheimer, 
Bernheim and Boyd were not, it seems, invited to join this club 
(the “New York German, learned in chemistry” could not have 
been Bernheim, for surely then he would have remembered 
meeting Fergusson). Indeed, it seems very likely that 
Oppenheimer was the only freshman invited to join what was 
clearly intended to be a club primarily for graduate students and 
staff members. 

The diversity of academic disciplines from which the club’s 
members were drawn—philosophy, mathematics and chemistry, 
as well as, no doubt, others not mentioned by Fergusson—reflects 
what was for Oppenheimer one of the best things about his time 
at Harvard. Lowell’s emphasis on equipping his students with a 
broad education rather than encouraging them, or even allowing 
them, to become narrow specialists may have been inspired by a 
snobbish reverence for Oxford and Cambridge, but it produced a 
kind of higher education that was ideally suited to Oppenheimer’s 
abilities and tastes. For many science students at Harvard, the 
requirement to take freshman courses in humanities was regarded 
as an unwelcome distraction from “real work,” a barrier that had 
to be overcome as quickly and painlessly as possible. For 
Oppenheimer, on the other hand, it was an opportunity that he 
eagerly embraced. In his first year, in addition to two courses in 
chemistry (one on elementary organic chemistry and the other on 
qualitative analysis), he took two courses in mathematics 
(analytic geometry and an introduction to calculus), and three 
courses in the humanities: one on rhetoric and English 
composition, one on French prose and poetry and another on the 
history of philosophy. This last course, taught by the notable 
Harvard philosopher Ralph Eaton, was remembered by 
Oppenheimer with particular fondness in later life. Eaton, he 
said, was “a wonderful man” and the course was “really very 
good ... [I] had a nice time with it.” 

In a letter to Smith, Oppenheimer speaks with satisfaction and 


pride of the “quiet futility of most of the courses” that he was 
taking at Harvard, which, he says, are “as amusing as Crome 
Yellow and are at least as delightful in a somewhat Pecosian 
way.” The joint allusion here to the worlds of Ottoline Morrell’s 
Garsington (as satirized by Aldous Huxley) and Katherine Page’s 
Pecos perhaps reveals what Oppenheimer really wanted from 
Harvard: membership of a cultural, literary and intellectual elite. 
And perhaps in this there is a further clue as to why he kept 
Bernheim and Fergusson apart. In his ignorance of, and disdain 
for, literary culture, in his concentration on chemistry and his 
readiness to become exactly the kind of narrow specialist looked 
down upon at Lowell’s Harvard (and perhaps also in his German 
Jewish New York background), Bernheim personified the kind of 
person who would not become—or even aspire to become—a 
member of the elites, whether based in Oxford, Pecos or Harvard. 

Fergusson, however, was already a member of two of those 
elites (Pecos and Harvard) and was about to become a member of 
the third. When Oppenheimer arrived at Harvard, he discovered 
that Fergusson did not expect to stay there very long. He had 
applied for, and (as it turned out, rightly) expected to receive, a 
Rhodes Scholarship to go to Oxford, which he planned to use to 
study not biology, but English literature. Fergusson, in fact, had 
decided that the milieu of Crome Yellow was precisely where he 
belonged. When, the previous year, during Oppenheimer’s 
enforced convalescence, Fergusson began his studies at Harvard, 
he had been somewhat disenchanted. Writing to Smith, he said 
that Harvard “is not an educational institution”: 


Instead of five thousand keen, intellectually alive, well-read 
young men who have come here to think out ideas and to learn 
the ideas of others, I find five thousand tawdry yokels, yanked 
from fat farms and snoring small towns, to bellow at ball 
games. 


Fergusson had, it seems, been teased by his fellow students for 
choosing to visit an art museum rather than watching the annual 
football game between Harvard and Yale, which made him feel 
that there was something of a gulf between his sensibilities and 
those of the typical Harvard student. “I did not come here to be 
made a 100 percent American; I am not going to be a ‘bizzness’ 


man,” he told Smith. “I came here to acquire an education, and I 
hope to be a person of intelligence some day.” Unlike 
Oppenheimer, Fergusson could make these kinds of criticisms, 
secure in the knowledge that he was regarded by the Harvard 
community as “100 percent American.” In fact, in many ways he 
was the very embodiment of Lowell’s ideal student: he was 
“Anglo-Saxon,” a Protestant, an academic all-rounder and a 
member of America’s ruling class. And, despite his preference for 
art over football, he must have had at least some athletic or 
sporting prowess, for otherwise he would not have been even a 
candidate for a Rhodes Scholarship. 11 

Established in 1902 under the terms of the will of the British 
imperialist Cecil Rhodes, these scholarships were expressly 
designed to create an Anglo-Saxon elite to govern the world. “I 
contend,” Rhodes once said, “that we are the finest race in the 
world and that the more of the world we inhabit the better it is 
for the human race,” and it was in pursuit of such a vision that he 
founded the scholarships that bear his name. The recipients of 
these scholarships, drawn from the British Empire, Germany and 
America, would spend two years at Oxford, after which, it was 
hoped, they would return to their part of the world, able and 
motivated to maintain and increase the global dominance of 
Anglo-Saxon civilization and culture. The selection criteria for 
these scholarships were widely admired by the presidents of 
America’s Ivy League universities, especially Lowell, who saw in 
them a model for Harvard to adopt in its admissions procedures. 
Rhodes had said that he did not want mere “bookworms” to 
benefit from his scholarship; rather, he was looking for competent 
scholars who demonstrated “fondness of and success in mainly 
outdoor sports” and who also possessed “brutality,” “moral force 
of character and of instincts to lead” and “manhood, truth, 
courage [and] devotion to duty.” Rhodes even came up with a 
formula that gave weights to these considerations: 40 percent 
scholarship, 20 percent athletics, 20 percent leadership and 20 
percent “manhood ...” To be awarded a Rhodes Scholarship was a 
mark of academic distinction, but it was not only, or even 
primarily, that. It was primarily an indication that one was 
accepted as the sort of person Rhodes thought should rule the 
world and (therefore) the sort of person Lowell thought Harvard 
ought to be producing. 


Thus, while Oppenheimer at Harvard was reminded at every 
turn that, no matter what he did, he would never gain admittance 
to the highest strata of American society, Fergusson, in gaining a 
Rhodes Scholarship, was confirmed as being exactly the sort of 
person that particular elite wanted as a member. Though 
Oppenheimer was to move to England to pursue postgraduate 
studies, it never occurred to him to apply for a Rhodes 
Scholarship. Fergusson not only got the Rhodes Scholarship, but 
he got it to study literature, thus establishing himself in yet 
another way as a model to which Oppenheimer aspired, but could 
never reach. Though he had gone to Harvard to study chemistry, 
what dominates the letters Oppenheimer wrote during his first 
year and a half at Harvard is his determination to be seen—by 
Smith, Fergusson and Horgan—as a literary man. Again and again 
in his letters to those three, Oppenheimer mentions stories that 
he is writing and seeks from them critical reactions to drafts that 
he has sent them. 

For example, in January 1923, he tells Smith: “I am again in 
the toils of a short story. It is not to be as pretentious or subtle as 
the last, and so there is some chance of its not being as vile.” As 
summarized by Oppenheimer for Smith, the plot of the story is as 
follows: a young mining engineer (Oppenheimer, at this time, 
thought he himself would become a mining engineer after 
graduating from Harvard), a sophisticated and introspective 
person, starts his career full of contempt for the miners he 
encounters, whose filth, poverty and baseness make him laugh. 
Soon, however, he is brought to realize his own vulnerabilities 
and to understand that he himself is likely to disintegrate, thus 
collapsing the gap between himself and the miners. Upon this 
realization, his complacency vanishes and the story ends with the 
engineer listening, with respect and even reverence, to a person 
Oppenheimer describes as “a disgusting and doddering syphilitic, 
with whom, earlier in the day, he would have nothing to do.” 

A week or so later, Oppenheimer wrote to Smith with news of 
another effort: “I shall send you my story, which, at present, is 
complete but illegible ... it is taken with scarcely any colitic 
revisions from an incident of my cousin with my uncle and my 
aunt.” In March, he told Smith that on an expedition to Cape Ann 
(a rocky peninsula on the northernmost tip of Massachusetts Bay, 
about thirty miles north of Boston), he had “received another 


inspiration to write a story,” which he described as “very short, 
exceedingly bad, and only barely justified by the difficulty of the 
thing.” Two months later, he sent Smith some more stories: “Here 
are the masterpieces ... Please don’t read Conquest until the last; I 
am certain you will dislike it.” He assured Smith that Fergusson 
had liked three of the stories and begged him not to say that 
Conquest was “sentimental drivel,” for then: “I shall seek death.” 

None of these stories survives in any form. Oppenheimer was 
thorough—and thoroughly effective—in his determination to 
deny posterity the chance to judge his merits as a novelist and 
short-story writer. The reason for this is no doubt that he became 
convinced he had no particular talent in these areas. In his letters 
during his first year at Harvard, one can see his faith in himself as 
a writer draining away in the face of the criticisms that his work 
received from his correspondents. Smith seems to have been 
comparatively encouraging, while tempering his enthusiasm with 
what he no doubt thought was gentle and constructive criticism. 
The criticisms that survive in Oppenheimer’s side of the 
correspondence are that the writing suffered from being an 
“imitation of Katherine Mansfield” and from an “artificiality of 
emotional situation.” Oppenheimer seemed initially undaunted 
by these criticisms, defending himself against the first by 
claiming that his imitation was not “conscious” and against the 
second by remarking: “I should not have the hardihood to write a 
story that was not based upon a very real emotional experience.” 

In the face of Fergusson’s criticisms, however, Oppenheimer’s 
short-lived faith in his literary gifts collapsed altogether. One can 
see this collapse take place in a long letter Oppenheimer wrote to 
Fergusson during the Christmas vacation of 1923, which he was 
spending at Bay Shore, while Fergusson was in Oxford, having 
just finished his first term as a Rhodes scholar. The main purpose 
of the letter was ostensibly to respond to the opening chapters of 
a novel that Fergusson was working on, a copy of which he had 
sent to Oppenheimer. To Smith, Oppenheimer had commented 
pithily on these chapters, comparing them to the work of 
Fergusson’s by now famous brother, Harvey. He had, he 
remarked, “nothing but admiration for the Harveyesque slickness 
and totally unHarveyesque perspicacity” of the opening of the 
novel. He was, however, “dismayed and rendered hysterical by 
the notes for its continuation.” 


To Fergusson himself, Oppenheimer was a good deal less pithy. 
“T am overwhelmed,” he told him, “at the ease and directness and 
literary slickness of the thing”: 


Your style is as simple and unstilted as your brother’s, but it is 
supple enough to keep it from seeming grotesque when you 
want to say something unusually neat, or when you are 
concerned with a little modest lyricism. 


What he singled out for praise was Fergusson’s “skill with 
people,” with the notable exception of the central character of the 
story, who, Oppenheimer assumed, was based on Fergusson 
himself. “I find it hard to swallow,” Oppenheimer told Fergusson, 
“in the same person, such naiveté and such sophistication.” This 
led Oppenheimer into a revealing comparison between himself 
and Fergusson, both as people and as writers: 


I suppose it is never quite possible for us to understand each 
other’s layers of naiveté. And it is that which keeps [me] from 
agreeing entirely with what you say about the junk I sent you. 
I think all the snarkiest things you say—and, by the way, thank 
you for troubling—are perfectly true. Even to me it is obvious 
that my women are gargoyles and my lyricism either absent or 
buried. But what I can’t understand, for instance, is that you 
should think the Rain thing sophisticated, or the hero, in 
Litany, unnatural ... What I meant, you see, was that the hero 
was prevented, being not very intelligent in the first place, 
from detecting his trouble, or doing anything but maunder 
about it, by his utterly frivolous and vain and complacent 
preconceptions which he had so diligently constructed in times 
of other stress. It may be perfectly true that no rational man 
would act that way, and that, to you, a knowledge of 
thermodynamics and a dilettante dawdling in literature implies 
a divine intelligence in all things. That’s not so. Always you 
used to insist that a person was either intelligent or not, and— 
perhaps I misunderstood—not that he might be intelligent here 
or there, and blind as a fool in everything else. 


Having by now left the evaluation of Fergusson’s novel far 
behind, Oppenheimer is compelled to explain why he persists in 
his “dilettante dawdling in literature” even though, by his own 


judgment, what he produces is “junk”: 


I find these awful people in me from time to time, and their 
expulsion is the sole excuse for my writing. I have none of that 
mere glee in narration, the conteur’s delight, which you and 
Chekhov and your brother seem to have. I write to get rid of an 
ideal and impossible system, and it is, as you so cleverly 
remark, not writing at all; and it is that which makes the things 
of so exclusively masturbatic character. I am sorry to have 
bored you. 


It was the last time Oppenheimer wrote to Fergusson for 
eighteen months and the very last time he mentioned his own 
attempts at writing fiction in correspondence with anyone. At the 
age of nineteen, he seems, after spending much of the preceding 
year and a half making a sustained attempt to prove otherwise to 
himself and to his friends, to have decided that, whatever he was 
or might become, he was not, and could never be, a writer. That 
particular “charade” was over. 

The truth of Isidor Rabi’s observation that Oppenheimer “lived 
a charade” is especially evident in his letters from Harvard, in 
which he seems to be trying on personalities, attitudes and 
manners of speech, much in the way that adolescents 
characteristically experiment with different signatures. The 
physicist Jeremy Bernstein, who knew Oppenheimer well toward 
the end of his life, has said of one of these letters (a typical 
example) that “the whole tone makes one’s flesh creep.” And one 
can see what he means: the letters are written in a horribly self- 
consciously “literary” style and are often painfully artificial. The 
tone is that of a young man trying desperately to be someone that 
he is not. That “someone” might be identified as Francis 
Fergusson, or the kind of person that Fergusson represented, the 
type prized at Lowell’s Harvard. Oppenheimer’s father had 
acquired the voice and the manners of this type, and 
Oppenheimer himself had developed some of the literary, 
intellectual and cultural interests characteristic of its members, 
but, despite this, Oppenheimer—as his experiences at Harvard 
would have made clear to him—would never have been accepted 
as, or mistaken for, this type of student. 

Another thing Oppenheimer was not—and Fergusson would 


again be a constant reminder of this—is the rather different but 
related type of person that one finds exalted in the literature of 
the Southwest, the literature that formed the cultural backdrop to 
the “troika” into which Oppenheimer had been accepted in the 
summer of 1922. In the novels and essays of Paul Horgan, Erna 
and Harvey Fergusson and the writers they emulated and 
admired, one finds a kind of ideology, at the center of which is a 
particular type of man. One might define this man positively in 
terms of his courage, his honesty, his horsemanship, his 
preference for the country over the city, his indifference to 
making money, and so on, but one might equally define him 
negatively as not a New York Jewish businessman. Horgan and 
the Fergussons were too liberal, too sophisticated and too 
“civilized” to be openly and publicly anti-Semitic, but the novelist 
Willa Cather, whom both Horgan and Harvey Fergusson admired 
deeply, had no such inhibitions in spelling out the kind of person 
who might embody the opposite of their collective ideal. 

In Cather’s 1919 short story, “Scandal,” the villain was given a 
name and a history that would have struck a deep and 
uncomfortable chord with Oppenheimer: he is a rich, Jewish 
garment manufacturer named Sigmund Stein (the name and 
occupation are so close to those of Oppenheimer’s uncle Sigmund 
that one can’t help wondering if Cather had him in mind), who 
arrives penniless in the United States, but gets a job at 
“Rosenthal’s garment factory” (again, the surname seems 
designed to echo the “Rothfeld” of Oppenheimer’s uncles) and 
works his way up the firm. At this point, “Stein” becomes less like 
Sigmund Rothfeld, but still more uncomfortably like Julius 
Oppenheimer: 


While he was still at the machine, a hideous, underfed little 
whippersnapper, he was already a youth of many-colored 
ambitions, deeply concerned about his dress, his associates, his 
recreations. He haunted the old Astor Library and the 
Metropolitan Museum, learned something about pictures and 
porcelains, took singing lessons, though he had a voice like a 
crow’s. When he sat down to his baked apple and doughnut in 
a basement lunch-room, he would prop a book up before him 
and address his food with as much leisure and ceremony as if 
he were dining at his club. He held himself at a distance from 


his fellow-workmen and somehow always managed to impress 
them with his superiority. 


In his endeavor to be accepted into the best society, Stein 
acquires a fine art collection, learns Spanish and cultivates the 
company of poets and writers: “His business associates thought 
him a man of taste and culture, a patron of the arts, a credit to 
the garment trade.” Determined to present an impressive figure in 
New York society, Stein appears in public arm-in-arm with a 
famous concert singer called Connie Ayrshire. Or so New York 
society is led to believe. In fact the woman is an employee of 
Stein’s, a factory girl called Ruby, chosen for her physical 
similarity to Connie Ayrshire and dressed in clothes identical to 
those habitually worn by the singer. When Stein marries an 
heiress from California, the married couple move into a grand 
house on Fifth Avenue “that used to belong to people of a very 
different sort,” and Stein has no further use for Ruby, whom he 
abandons to her fate as an impoverished drunk. The final irony is 
that the real Connie Ayrshire is hired to perform at the Steins’ 
housewarming party, prompting her, at the end of the story, to 
liken her fate to that of Ruby: “She and I are in the same boat. 
We are both the victims of circumstance, and in New York so 
many of the circumstances are Steins.” 

In her portrayal of Sigmund Stein, Cather has provided an 
instructive example of the kind of anti-Semitism that formed a 
backdrop to Oppenheimer’s years at Harvard, if not to his entire 
life. It is an example that is especially unsettling, not only in the 
strikingly exact parallels between Stein and the Rothfeld/ 
Oppenheimers, but also in the close associations between Cather 
and the group of writers Oppenheimer had befriended. Paul 
Horgan had an especially deep admiration for Cather. He had 
been taught at school by Cather’s sister, and had met Cather 
herself briefly in Santa Fe, when she was researching her novel 
about the city’s famous Archbishop Lamy, Death Comes for the 
Archbishop. Horgan himself was to write a huge biography of 
Lamy and an essay about Cather called “Willa Cather’s 
Incalculable Distance,” in which he celebrated her as “a true 
artist of prose.” 

Oppenheimer was evidently influenced by his friends’ 
admiration of Willa Cather, at least to the extent of reading her 


1923 novel, A Lost Lady, almost as soon as it came out. Whether 
he shared Horgan’s high opinion of Cather’s prose, Oppenheimer 
never said. What seems to have struck him most forcibly was that 
the world described by her was the world into which he had been 
accepted in the summer of 1922. “Doesn’t A Lost Lady remind 
you,” he wrote to Smith in November 1923, “vaguely and 
sentimentally, of Mrs. Page?” 

At the heart of A Lost Lady is an elegiac sense of loss for the 
Old West, represented by its heroine, Marian Forrester, a woman 
whose enormous charm seems tied to a society that is passing 
away—that is, the society the virtues of which are extolled in the 
works of Harvey Fergusson and Paul Horgan: the pioneering 
Southwest. In the words of one commentator, Mrs. Forrester 
“represents civilization in the West, for all the amenities of 
gracious living which can make life the agreeable and charming 
thing which at best it can be.” Her husband is a railroad-builder 
who “embodies all the virtues which Willa Cather has led us to 
expect in a pioneer: the imagination to see, the strength to 
achieve, and an absolutely incorruptible moral integrity.” Like 
Franz Huning, as portrayed by the Fergussons, Mr. Forrester, 
though he has made a good deal of money, is represented not as a 
businessman, but as a “natural aristocrat,” a type Cather 
explicitly contrasts with bankers and businessmen. In A Lost Lady 
the story of Marian Forrester is told largely through the eyes of a 
young man called Niel Herbert, who, as a teenager, develops an 
infatuation for her, which over the years is threatened by the 
changes in her brought about by the death of her husband and 
the collapse of the values she represents and the culture to which 
she belongs. What Cather portrays as destroying and then 
replacing that culture is the world of commerce and 
moneymaking, the world she had previously personified in the 
figure of Sigmund Stein, but which here is represented by a 
young lawyer named Ivy Peters. When, late in the story, Niel 
Herbert returns to his hometown to discover that, as the 
Forresters have declined, Ivy Peters has flourished, he reflects: 


The Old West had been settled by dreamers, great-hearted 
adventurers, who were unpractical to the point of 
magnificence; a courteous brotherhood, strong in attack but 
weak in defense, who could conquer but could not hold. Now 


all the vast territory they had won was to be at the mercy of 
men like Ivy Peters, who had never dared anything, never 
risked anything. They would drink up the mirage, dispel the 
morning freshness, root out the great brooding spirit of the 
space, the color, the princely carelessness of the pioneer. 


What Marian Forrester was to Niel Herbert, Katherine Chaves 
Page was to Oppenheimer: the embodiment of a noble ideal, the 
representative of a way of life that was superior to, but 
threatened by, the culture within which Oppenheimer himself 
had grown up. 

As it happened, during Oppenheimer’s first year at Harvard, 
Mrs. Page was living in New York City, having accepted a one- 
year position teaching Spanish at Finch Junior College. When he 
returned home for a few days in February 1923, Oppenheimer 
invited her, along with Herbert Smith and Jane Didisheim, to 
dinner on Riverside Drive with his parents. It was an 
uncomfortable evening. The contrast, as Oppenheimer felt it, 
between the “princely” romance of the Old West, represented by 
Katherine, and the world of commerce, represented by his father 
and his Ethical Culture circle, was almost unbearable for him. 
After the dinner he wrote to Smith reassuring him that he, at 
least, had “scintillated more than any of that dismal gathering,” 
adding: “Mrs. Page started bravely enough, but soon grew silent 
under the weight of paternal banalities and Ethical gossip and 
Jane’s sighs of happiness came disastrously near, I thought, to 
groans of despair, when someone asked her if she had ever been 
out west.” 

That evening was to be the last time Oppenheimer saw 
Katherine until he returned to New Mexico in the summer of 
1925. In the meantime, whenever Smith, Fergusson or Horgan 
mentioned the Southwest, Oppenheimer responded with effusive 
yearning for both the society of the Chaveses and the landscape 
of New Mexico. In January 1923, shortly before Katherine came 
to Riverside Drive for dinner, he wrote to Smith: “Are you again, 
O fortunate wretch, to spend a summer in New Mexico?” When 
he heard from Fergusson that Smith was indeed planning to visit 
New Mexico that summer, and that Fergusson was planning to 
take him and his two companions to Hopi country, he declared 
himself to be “insanely jealous”: 


I see you riding down from the mountains to the desert at that 
hour when thunderstorms and sunsets caparison the sky; I see 
you in the Pecos “in September, when I’ll want my friends to 
comfort me, you know,” spending the moonlight on Grass 
Mountain; I see you vending the marvels of the upper Loch, of 
the upper amphitheater at Ouray, of the waterfall at Telluride, 
the Punch Bowl at San Ysidro—even the prairies round 
Antonito—to philistine eyes. Do you remember that first 
evening in Denver when we scrambled our luggage? 


And when, in the summer of 1923, Fergusson was back in New 
Mexico, prior to leaving for Oxford, Oppenheimer wrote: 


But oh, beloved, how I envy you! Three hours sleep: witty, 
charming; the soul and supporter of Los Pinos; the all but 
gastronomic consoler to the Pecos’ host—successful; doing a 
little intellectual work on the side; blessed with enormous 
activity—Mon Dieu—Francis, you choke me with anguish and 
despair. 


And he ended: “Please, I almost whimper it, please write again.” 

After the following summer, when Smith had again been in 
New Mexico, Oppenheimer told him that he wanted to “hear 
about your adventures”: 


...and Los Pinos, and the desert, and Mrs. Page, about all 
those things that gripe and make me notice how blue and 
sunny the sky is and what an exquisite filigree the chrome and 
coral leaves make, against it. And if, personatim, you should be 
able to come up for a day or two, and would, out of that, grant 
me an hour at tea, I should be so happy that I should smile 
slobber on your photographs, and talk about Grass Mountain 
and Ouray. 


In the same letter Oppenheimer mentioned “the classic 
confectionery bearing the Chaves coat of arms.” This was a 
reference to a magnificent cake that Oppenheimer had sent to 
New Mexico for the seventieth birthday of Katherine’s father, Don 
Amado Chaves, having specially ordered it, at great expense, 
from a bakery in Manhattan. Smith, who went with him to the 
bakery to order it, remarked many years later that the gesture 


was characteristic of Oppenheimer’s thoughtfulness and an 
expression of how pleased he was to be accepted by the Chaves 
circle. But, however much he may have wished or aspired to have 
been from a non-Jewish, Southwestern family, preferably with 
ancestors that could be traced back to the conquistadores, or at 
least to the pioneers, the reality was that when the vacations 
came, Oppenheimer returned, not to Pecos, but to the Upper West 
Side of Manhattan, and not to a family whose history in the 
United States spanned many generations, but to a nouveau-riche 
family who only a generation earlier had been (in Oppenheimer’s 
eyes) German “peasants.” 

In that summer of 1923, Oppenheimer took a holiday job in a 
laboratory in New Jersey, in the hope, so he told Francis 
Fergusson in July, of finding an adventure “similarly satisfying” 
to that he had experienced in New Mexico. Thus he had 
“searched the plant and the hotel for possible persons”—that is, 
people who would interest him in something like the way 
Fergusson, Horgan and Page had interested him. But, he reported: 


Only one wretch have I found, and he penniless and dissipated; 
but he is six foot seven, has fine black moustachios, is a 
Bostonian via Oxford, is properly pessimistic and boasts 
cleverly about the right sort of thing, has read, and well, 
writes, and is a bit of a scientist. He works at a different plant 
and lives in a different city, but has come over for an evening a 
couple of times. But he has lost his job, and is going to South 
America. He is not a Jew. 


Once this non-Jewish, educated Bostonian left, there was 
nothing keeping Oppenheimer at the laboratory. “The job and 
people are bourgeois,” he told Fergusson, “and lazy and dead; 
there is little work and nothing to puzzle at; and the 
establishment has among it less than one sixteenth of a sense of 
humour. So I am going home.” 

By the time he wrote to Fergusson again, in the middle of 
August, Oppenheimer was in Bay Shore, where, he was delighted 
to report, “Paul [Horgan] has been with me for the past three 
weeks. Of course I have been happy.” The two of them, he wrote, 
had been “spending a most civilized and unexciting time down 
here, writing, reading enormously, traveling to town from time to 


time for books and exhibits and plays, and sallying every evening 
in tuxedoes, pathetically to ransack Bayshore or Islip for a vestige 
of adventure.” Horgan has recorded that he found the 
Oppenheimers’ house in Bay Shore comfortable, spacious and 
impressive: “It was my first taste as a resident of rather excessive 
luxury and grandeur and comfort on that scale. I enjoyed it 
enormously.” He recalls that some days they would go on 
Trimethy, some days they would go riding and other days they 
would go to the theater in New York. 

Horgan had by this time graduated from the Military Institute 
in New Mexico and, after the summer, was starting his course at 
the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, in upstate New York. 
The Oppenheimers had planned to travel to Quebec for the last 
part of the summer and so agreed to give Paul a lift to Buffalo on 
the way—Buffalo being not far from Rochester. As Oppenheimer 
recounted the journey to Fergusson, it was the occasion for the 
tension between the Old West, as represented by Horgan, and the 
new money, as represented by his parents, to come to the fore 
once again: 


And toward the end there developed such an_ intricate 
panorama of complications that I was regaled with a daily 
scene. Toward the end, you see, mother and father grew a little 
jealous of Paul, and a little irritated at the ease with which he 
disregarded obstacles whose conquests formed the central 
jewels in the Oppenheimer crown. The matter was further 
embellished by two luscious complexes, oozing ichor: mother’s 
and father’s, which tried to apologize for being Jews; the 
Horgan’s, which whinnied and shied clumsily about richesse 
and poverty. 


Horgan himself was unaware of this “panorama of 
complications” and remembers only that Oppenheimer’s parents 
were charming and welcoming. About his own “complex” over 
money, and Mr. and Mrs. Oppenheimer’s complex about being 
Jewish, he remembers nothing. 

During the weeks that Oppenheimer spent in Bay Shore that 
summer he had for company not only Paul Horgan, but also 
Bernheim and Boyd, both of whom were invited, but probably 
not at the same time as each other. Boyd was impressed with the 


elegance of the house and with Oppenheimer’s sailing skills; 
Bernheim, on the other hand, had doubts about Oppenheimer’s 
seamanship and considered the holiday home “just an ordinary 
kind of house.” 

What everyone who spent time with Oppenheimer remembers 
about that summer was that he seemed always, whatever else he 
was doing, to be reading physics. Paul Horgan recalls: 


... we would go out on the boat—he was a very good sailor, 
good navigator—and anchor out in the shallow part of Great 
South Bay, off Bay Shore, and I would be up on the forward 
deck, working at a typewriter, writing desperately bad 
imitations of Chekhov and other short story writers, and Robert 
would be in the cockpit, sprawled over a book on 
thermodynamics and chuckling with great connoisseurship 
over it. It always impressed me very much. 


It seems likely that the book Horgan saw Oppenheimer reading 
while sailing was not “a book on thermodynamics,” but rather 
The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism by James 
Jeans. Toward the end of his life Oppenheimer still had the book 
and mentioned in an interview how “salt-encrusted” his copy of it 
was, remarking: “it’s clear that I studied that when I went sailing 
in the summer.” The importance the book had for him is alluded 
to in his letter to Fergusson of August 16, written from Bay Shore. 
Responding to the news that Fergusson had written stories set in 
both Harvard and Pecos, Oppenheimer writes: “But really, 
maestro, I am terribly—yes, terribly, eager to see your things, and 
would even burn my new Jean’s Electromagnetics for a glimpse 
of the Pecos one.” 

First published in 1908, The Mathematical Theory of Electricity 
and Magnetism was, the author states in the preface, intended to 
cover the same ground as James Clerk Maxwell’s classic 1873 
text, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, but in a “more 
elementary” way: “The present book is written more especially 
for the student, and for the physicist of limited mathematical 
attainments.” Jeans, in fact, had a gift for explaining difficult 
ideas simply, a gift that he was to put to influential and lucrative 
use later on in life in his best-selling books The Universe Around 
Us (1929) and The Mysterious Universe (1930), as well as in his 


1942 book, Physics and Philosophy. He was thus the ideal author 
to guide Oppenheimer through the arcane world of twentieth- 
century theoretical physics, as Oppenheimer had, up until the 
summer of 1923, no formal training in physics whatsoever, and 
rather less training in mathematics than one would expect a 
physicist to have had at that point in his education. 

This had not prevented Oppenheimer, in his first year (as a 
chemistry student) from trying to master, in his spare time as it 
were, and without any formal guidance, some of the most 
difficult ideas of modern physics. During that year his scientific 
interests shifted from chemistry to physics as it gradually dawned 
on him that, as he later put it, “what I liked in chemistry was 
very close to physics.” After all, he reflected, “if you were reading 
physical chemistry and you began to run into thermodynamical 
and statistical ideas you’d want to find out about them.” In the 
same interview, he added: “I can’t emphasize strongly enough 
how much I read and more really just in exploration.” 


You see, it’s a very odd picture; I never had an elementary 
course in physics except for a very elementary school course 
and to this day I get panicky when I think about a smoke ring 
or elastic vibrations. There’s nothing there—just a little skin 
over a hole. In the same way my mathematical formation was, 
even for those days, very primitive, and this was more than 
evident in the way I went about some of the things I did later. 


His education in physics, he acknowledged, was_ best 
characterized as “a very quick, superficial, eager familiarization 
with some parts of physics, with tremendous lacunae and often 
with a tremendous lack of practice and discipline.” 

Characteristically, these lacunae did not prevent Oppenheimer 
from beginning his career as a physicist by jumping straight into 
the deep end. In May 1923, toward the end of his first year at 
Harvard, he wrote to Edwin C. Kemble. Though still a junior 
member of the physics department, Kemble was notable for being 
the only theoretical physicist at Harvard and for being the only 
one abreast of developments in the then rapidly developing and 
unnervingly novel field of quantum theory. In his letter, 
Oppenheimer asked Kemble for permission to take his course on 
thermodynamics, Physics 6a, which ran during the autumn 


semester of the following year. This was, on the face of it, an 
extraordinary request. Physics 6a was a graduate course, 
normally taken only by those students who had completed their 
undergraduate studies and had excelled in advanced-level physics 
courses. A requirement for taking Physics 6a was that students 
had successfully completed Physics C, a final-year undergraduate 
course. Oppenheimer was asking Kemble to waive this 
requirement. 

Besides having not completed Physics C, at this point in his 
education Oppenheimer had not taken any degree-level physics 
courses. Nor had he audited any. Realizing that, under these 
circumstances, he would have to present a fairly exceptional case 
for being regarded as a_ graduate-level physics student, 
Oppenheimer provided Kemble with a list (a “partial list,” he 
insisted) of “several works on Thermodynamics and related 
subjects” that he had read during his first few months at Harvard. 
The list goes far beyond what one would have expected from an 
undergraduate majoring in physics, let alone one majoring in 
chemistry, and demonstrates an impressive linguistic breadth, in 
that two of the books on the list were in French and another two 
in German. 

Included on the list were some impressively up-to-date 
textbooks, two of which—Thermodynamics by Gilbert Newton 
Lewis and Merle Randall (which was to go into several editions 
and become a widely used, usually graduate-level textbook) and 
James Crowther’s Molecular Physics—had only just been 
published that year.12 Another book on the list, the massive 
three-volume work A System of Physical Chemistry by William C. 
McC. Lewis, devoted its third volume, first published in 1920,13 
to quantum physics. 

As well as being up to date, the list also revealed a much 
deeper interest in the history and philosophy of science than one 
would expect from an undergraduate science student. It included, 
for example, the work usually credited as the very foundation of 
thermodynamics, “On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous 
Substances” by Josiah Willard Gibbs, which was first published as 
a pair of articles in the journal Transactions of the Connecticut 
Academy of Arts and Sciences between 1874 and 1878. 
Oppenheimer also included a number of works by scientists 
known for their contributions to the philosophy of their subject, 


including Henri Poincaré and Wilhelm Ostwald. The 
aforementioned William C. McC. Lewis, though much less well 
known than either Poincaré or Ostwald, was also someone with a 
deep interest in philosophy. He had, on his appointment to the 
chair in physical chemistry at Liverpool University in 1914, 
devoted his inaugural lecture to a philosophical discussion of 
“Physical Chemistry and Scientific Thought,” in which he 
expressed many thoughts that chime with the brief remarks 
Oppenheimer made on the subject. Urging his listeners not to 
adhere to an overly rigid demarcation between philosophy and 
science, Lewis remarked that “any man who has followed a line 
of directed thought is necessarily a philosopher and science is 
really only a particular form of philosophy.” 

At its meeting of June 6, Harvard’s physics department 
considered Oppenheimer’s letter to Kemble and, noting that “Mr. 
Oppenheimer, according to his own statement, had read rather 
widely in Physics for one of his age,” voted to allow him to take 
Physics 6a without taking Physics C. Surprisingly, no one from 
the department seems to have done anything to ascertain whether 
Oppenheimer was telling the truth about having read these 
books, or to check whether, if he had read them, he had learned 
anything from them. According to Oppenheimer’s recollection: 
“Years later I was told that when the faculty met to consider this 
request, George Washington Pierce [a member of the physics 
department] ... said, ‘Obviously if he says he’s read these books, 
he’s a liar, but he should get a Ph.D. for knowing their titles.’ ” 

It would be astonishing if there were not some exaggeration, at 
the very least, in Oppenheimer’s claims to have read all the books 
that he lists, and there are, indeed, a few indications that he was 
not entirely familiar with them all. For example, the bibliographic 
information he provides is scanty and occasionally inaccurate. 
For none of the books does he offer such standard citation details 
as the first names or the initials of the author, the name of the 
publisher, the date or place of publication. “On the Equilibrium 
of Heterogeneous Substances” is listed as “On the Equilibria of 
Heterogeneous Systems”; the German word Spektrallinien in the 
title of one of the books he listsi4 is given as “Spectral-linien”; 
and the details of the three-volume work by William C. McC. 
Lewis mentioned above are given in such a mangled way that a 
good deal of detective work is needed to identify the books being 


referred to.is If one could get a Ph.D. for knowing these titles, 
Oppenheimer would, it seems, only just have scraped through the 
viva. 

Nevertheless, when he returned to Harvard for his second year 
in the autumn of 1923, he did so as someone who, though lacking 
any kind of formal training in physics, was eager to begin 
graduate-level courses in the subject. His passion for physics, 
which became more intense as his undergraduate career 
progressed, eclipsed and eventually extinguished his earlier 
preoccupation with short-story writing, a process no doubt helped 
by the fact that Francis Fergusson was no longer at Harvard, 
having left for Oxford to pursue his studies in English literature. 
On the day Fergusson left, Oppenheimer sent him a telegram, 
delivered to his ship, the SS Albania, offering “one last wave of 
ululation applause” and telling him that “it would delight me to 
hear from time to time of your achievements.” During the 
following months, he continued to write to Fergusson and also to 
Horgan in Rochester and to Smith in New York, but his letters 
grew less frequent and dwelled less and less on literature and 
more and more on physics—his earlier talk of the stories he had 
written or planned to write now replaced with talk about 
equations and theoretical ideas. 

Some of the courses he took in his second year provided him 
with genuine and lasting stimulation. As in his first year, he took 
a great variety of courses, including a year-long course in French 
literature, a philosophy course in the theory of knowledge, two 
mathematics courses and three in chemistry, but it was the 
graduate physics courses—especially Heat and Elementary 
Thermodynamics, taught by Edwin Kemble, and Advanced 
Thermodynamics, taught by the distinguished experimental 
physicist Percy Bridgman—that really made him come alive 
intellectually. Astonishingly, his lack of foundational training in 
physics proved no hindrance to him in mastering the very 
difficult material these courses contained, and Oppenheimer was 
not only able to hold his own with the graduate students taking 
them, many of whom were three or four years older, but quickly 
established himself as one of the very best students in the classes. 

It is customary to describe physics at Harvard at this time as 
being something of a backwater, with the important theoretical 
advances being made in Copenhagen and the German universities 


and the decisive experimental work being done at Cambridge, 
England. And it is true that neither Kemble nor Bridgman was the 
equal of such towering figures in physics as Rutherford at 
Cambridge, Bohr at Copenhagen or Born at Gottingen. However, 
neither were they entirely negligible figures. Kemble was at the 
forefront of the development of American theoretical physics and 
Bridgman was justifiably pleased to have brought him to 
Harvard, where he provided the foundation for one of the most 
rapidly growing centers of theoretical physics in the United 
States. Bridgman himself was an experimenter rather than a 
theorist, and had little knowledge or understanding of the 
quantum theory that was then being developed in Europe. He was 
nevertheless one of the leading American physicists of his 
generation, a position acknowledged in 1946, when he was 
awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on high 
pressures. 

Though Bridgman had fought hard to attract Kemble to 
Harvard, there is little sign that they became particularly good 
friends. In many ways they were opposites; Kemble, the theorist, 
was a devout Christian, while Bridgman, the experimentalist, was 
a strident atheist. Both of them became enormously impressed 
with Oppenheimer, though neither of them seemed to grow 
especially close to him. The only anecdote Bridgman told about 
Oppenheimer in later life was designed to illustrate his rather off- 
putting intellectual showiness. Once, he said, he invited 
Oppenheimer to his house for dinner. Seeing Oppenheimer 
admiring a picture of the Greek temple at Segesta, Sicily, 
Bridgman mentioned that it had been built around 400 be. “I’m 
sorry to contradict you about the date,” responded Oppenheimer, 
“but I judge from the capitals on the columns that it was built 
about 50 years earlier.” 

Oppenheimer was at this time still just nineteen years old. As 
always, he seemed intellectually much older, and socially and 
personally much younger. This meant that, on an intellectual 
level, he was able to mix with people who, on a social and 
personal level, remained distant from him. One such person was 
Jeffries Wyman, whom Oppenheimer had probably met during 
his first year, but who became a friend during this second year, 
when they were both enrolled in the same graduate physics 
courses. A few years older than Oppenheimer, Wyman had 


majored in philosophy before switching to biology. In 
Oppenheimer’s first year at Harvard, Wyman had been in his final 
year of undergraduate study, planning to enter Harvard Graduate 
School the following year to take courses in chemistry as well as 
physics, prior to leaving for England, where he would pursue 
postgraduate research in biochemistry at Cambridge. 

Wyman was as secure and as confident a member of Harvard’s 
intellectual and social elites as it was possible to be. He came 
from an old, established Bostonian family, many of whom were 
extremely distinguished. His grandfather, also called Jeffries 
Wyman, was one of the most celebrated naturalists of his 
generation and had been professor of anatomy at Harvard in the 
mid-nineteenth century, as well as the first curator of the 
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology and one of the 
founders of the National Academy of Sciences. Wyman’s best 
friend, both as an undergraduate at Harvard and throughout 
much of his life, was John Edsall, whom Oppenheimer had met 
through the Liberal Club, and who was from a similarly 
established background. 

Wyman had been encouraged to befriend Oppenheimer by 
Francis Fergusson (“Francis was full of talk about Bob 
Oppenheimer,” Wyman later remembered). In his last-minute 
telegram to Fergusson, Oppenheimer had been careful to add 
“Jeffries too sends greetings,” in order, perhaps, to let Fergusson 
know that he and Wyman had indeed become friends. In fact, 
Wyman’s attitude to Oppenheimer was a little circumspect. His 
initial impressions, he said later, were that Oppenheimer “was a 
little precious, and perhaps a little arrogant, but very interesting, 
full of ideas.” He noted, as Boyd had, that Oppenheimer was 
“completely blind to music. In fact he told me that music was 
positively painful to him.” He also remembers that Oppenheimer 
“found social adjustment very difficult, and I think he was often 
very unhappy. I suppose he was lonely and he didn’t fit in well 
with the human environment.” “We were good friends,” Wyman 
added, “and he had some other friends, but there was something 
that he lacked, perhaps some more personal and deep emotional 
contact with people than we were having, because our contacts 
were largely, I should say wholly, on an intellectual basis. We 
were young people falling in love with ideas right and left and 
interested in people who gave us ideas, but there wasn’t the 


warmth of human companionship perhaps.” 

The nearest Oppenheimer got to “the warmth of human 
companionship” was with Bernheim and Boyd. For their second 
and third years, Oppenheimer and Bernheim occupied large 
adjoining rooms in a house on Mount Auburn Street, known in 
Harvard as the “Gold Coast” because of its reputation as the place 
where only the wealthiest students lived. Oppenheimer brought 
to these rooms oil paintings, etchings and a tea urn in which he 
brewed only Russian tea. “He wasn’t a comfortable person to be 
around, in a way,” Bernheim later commented, “because he 
always gave the impression that he was thinking very deeply 
about things. When we roomed together he would spend the 
evenings locked in his room, trying to do something with Planck’s 
constant or something like that.ic I had visions of him suddenly 
bursting forth as a great physicist and here I was just trying to get 
through Harvard.” Boyd was a regular visitor to the house on 
Mount Auburn Street, and remembers that Oppenheimer seemed 
never to study, or in any case that “he was pretty careful not to 
let you catch him at it.” 

In fact, Oppenheimer did little else but study. He was 
determined to get through his degree in three years, rather than 
the customary four (as, indeed, were Bernheim and Boyd), which 
meant that he had to take six courses at a time, rather than the 
usual four, but he also audited a number of courses and, in 
addition, spent vast amounts of time in the library (he later said 
he “ransacked” the library in something like the way the Goths 
ransacked Rome), reading an extraordinary number of books on a 
vast range of subjects. He seemed determined, if not to know 
everything, then at least to give the impression that he knew 
everything. 

“T am working very hard now,” Oppenheimer wrote to Smith in 
November 1923, “so hard that I fear your epithet of grind.” In a 
subsequent letter, he outlined to Smith the kinds of things that 
filled his day-to-day existence: 


Generously, you ask what I do...I labor, and write 
innumerable theses, notes, poems, stories, and junk; I go to the 
math lib and read and to the Phil lib and divide my time 
between Meinherr Russell and the contemplation of a most 
beautiful and lovely lady who is writing a thesis on Spinoza— 


charmingly ironic at that, don’t you think? I make stenches in 
three different labs, listen to Allard gossip about Racine, serve 
tea and talk learnedly to a few lost souls, go off for the 
weekend to distill the low grade energy into laughter and 
exhaustion, read Greek, commit faux pas, search my desk for 
letters and wish I were dead. Voila. 


It is this particular letter of which Jeremy Bernstein has 
remarked: “The whole tone makes one’s flesh creep.” And yet it is 
one of Oppenheimer’s most honest and forthright letters. The 
tone is affected, to be sure, but the picture it draws of his time at 
Harvard, full of intense and varied intellectual activities, mixed 
with frustrated glances at apparently unattainable women and the 
constant battle to keep suicidal depression at bay, rings entirely 
true. 

Jeffries Wyman says about himself and his circle of friends at 
Harvard: “We were all too much in love with the problems of 
philosophy and science and the arts and general intellectual life 
to be thinking about girls.” But Oppenheimer’s letters to Smith 
reveal that this was not entirely true. As well as the contemplation 
of the “lovely lady” studying Spinoza described above, there was 
also, in a letter written in January 1924, mention of a “ravishing 
creature” who served food to the people who attended a literary 
salon on Beacon Hill, and “whose charm is pretty largely 
responsible for my frequent ascents of the hill.” For the most part, 
though, Oppenheimer’s company at Harvard was restricted to 
men. None of his friends remembers him ever taking a girl out. 

It was not all hard work, however. Oppenheimer, Bernheim 
and Boyd would often have dinner at Locke-Ober’s, the famously 
elegant and famously expensive French restaurant in Boston, after 
which they would walk the six miles back to Cambridge, along 
the Charles River. Boyd also remembers an occasion on which, 
during a winter walk along the shore with Oppenheimer and 
Bernheim, one dared the others to go swimming, upon which 
they all stripped and plunged into the freezing water. And 
Bernheim recalls that sometimes they would take a train out of 
Cambridge, get off at a randomly chosen point and spend the 
night walking back. There were also weekend trips to Cape Ann. 
Here, Oppenheimer and Bernheim, sometimes joined by Boyd, 
would stay overnight at an inn they had discovered at Folly Cove, 


where the food was extremely good. In a letter to Smith, 
Oppenheimer claimed that he and Bernheim were thinking of 
buying, or possibly renting, a “ramshackle cottage way out on 
Cape Ann,” which “lies way above the water, amid huge cliffs of 
yellow granite, and looks across a miraculously blue ocean to the 
shore line of Maine.” But these plans never came to anything and 
Bernheim later remarked that, as far as he was concerned, those 
cliffs of yellow granite existed only in a “mythological landscape” 
of Oppenheimer’s imagining. 

Still, these walks and weekend trips aside, Oppenheimer’s time 
was mostly spent in intense study. “Even in the last stages of 
senile aphasia,” as he put it to Smith, “I will not say that 
education, in an academic sense, was only secondary when I was 
at college. I plow through about five or ten big scientific books a 
week.” In the New Year of 1924, Smith learned that he had been 
appointed the new principal of the Ethical Culture high school. 
Congratulating him, Oppenheimer begged him not to overwork 
and was also prompted to reflect: “For me, and, I suspect, for you, 
it was never the opinion merely of the multitude that counted so 
much; it was the opinion and the conduct of the great.” 

At the end of the year, Oppenheimer discovered that he had 
been awarded an A in every course he took, except his second- 
semester math course in probability, for which he got a B. His A 
in the notoriously difficult graduate course on thermodynamics, 
taught by Kemble, was especially noteworthy. For a second-year 
student of chemistry, who had never taken any undergraduate 
course in physics, to get an A on this course was completely 
unheard of. After spending part of the summer with his family in 
Europe, Oppenheimer returned to Harvard in October 1924 for 
his final year. Soon after the start of term, he wrote to Smith to 
tell him that his plans for the following year were not quite 
decided. One possibility was to follow Edsall and Wyman to 
Cambridge, England, for, as he told Smith, he had been offered a 
place at Christ’s College. Another was to stay at Harvard (“I 
cannot decide to leave this Puritanical hole, even for all the 
vacuity of my life here”) and pursue research with Bridgman. 

In his final year, Oppenheimer took more courses than ever, 
and, as always, they were extremely diverse. With a discernible 
note of excitement, he told Smith: “I am taking a course with 
Whitehead of Russell & Whitehead, Cambridge, on the 


Metaphysical presuppositions of science.” Whitehead, who had 
been Bertrand Russell’s tutor in mathematics at Cambridge, had 
become famous as Russell’s coauthor of the monumental three- 
volume Principia Mathematica, published in 1910-13, which 
sought to show that the theorems of arithmetic could be derived 
from axioms of logic. In 1924, Whitehead, who since the First 
World War had concentrated on writing philosophy rather than 
mathematics, accepted an offer from Harvard to join their 
philosophy department. He was by then already sixty-three years 
old and was to stay in the United States for the rest of his life (he 
died in 1947, having retired from teaching ten years earlier). 
Whitehead’s course consisted of seminars rather than lectures and 
attracted very few students. In this first year it attracted just 
Oppenheimer and one other brave student. Many years later, 
writing to Bertrand Russell to congratulate him on his ninetieth 
birthday, Oppenheimer recalled: 


It is almost forty years ago that we worked through the 
Principia Mathematica with Whitehead at Harvard. He had 
largely forgotten, so that he was the perfect teacher, both 
master and student. I remember how often he would pause 
with a smile before a sequence of theorems and say to us: 
“That was a point Bertie always liked.” For all the years of my 
life I have thought of this phrase whenever some high example 
of intelligence, some humanity, or some rare courage and 
nobility has come our way. 


In addition to Whitehead’s course, Oppenheimer took two 
courses each in chemistry, physics and mathematics and a history 
course called “History of England from 1688 to the Present 
Time.” He also audited many courses, including a graduate 
seminar given by the distinguished mathematician George 
Birkhoff on Sturm-Liouville equations (a type of differential 
equation), a subject chosen, Oppenheimer later remembered, 
“because he’d been working on it and wanted to talk about it.” 
Birkhoff, Oppenheimer recalled, “was a remarkable fellow. He 
would begin: ‘Well, you know, walking across the yard this 
morning it occurred to me ...’” Birkhoff’s course was, 
Oppenheimer said, the only mathematics course at Harvard that 
he remembered with any happiness. 


Birkhoff, as well as being MHarvard’s most eminent 
mathematician, was also one of its most controversial and 
eccentric professors, whose interests extended far beyond 
mathematics. In 1933, after spending a year traveling around the 
world studying the art, music and poetry of various cultures, he 
published a book called Aesthetic Measure, which put forward a 
mathematical theory of aesthetics, the center of which was a 
formula for measuring aesthetic value. He was also passionate 
about promoting American mathematicians, and, in this capacity, 
famously aroused the ire of Einstein, who in the 1930s was once 
heard to denounce him as “one of the world’s greatest academic 
anti-Semites,” after Birkhoff had urged the appointment of 
American mathematicians in favor of European Jewish refugees, 
whose cause Einstein was supporting. In the 1920s, Birkhoff 
wrote a recommendation for Oppenheimer that included a 
sentence that one could regard as evidence either of his anti- 
Semitism or of his willingness to overcome it: “He is Jewish but I 
should consider him a very fine type of man.” 

Though it was theoretical physics that had _ excited 
Oppenheimer’s enthusiasm, it is interesting that it never occurred 
to him to pursue postgraduate research with Kemble, rather than 
with Bridgman, who was resolutely experimental in his approach 
to the subject. When he looked back on his time at Harvard, it 
was his relationship with Bridgman that Oppenheimer singled out 
as most important for his intellectual development. “I found 
Bridgman a wonderful teacher,” he recalled, “because he never 
really was quite reconciled to things being the way they were and 
he always thought them out.” Bridgman, he said, “was a man to 
whom one wanted to be an apprentice.” 

Why Oppenheimer decided against becoming Bridgman’s 
“apprentice,” and why he opted instead to pursue research at 
Cambridge, is not entirely clear. He must have made the decision 
by the New Year of 1925, since he then wrote to Smith telling 
him that Christ’s College had written to him asking for fees and 
for “a certificate from my ‘head-master’ at school, which is you.” 
In April, he wrote to Francis Fergusson, telling him that he would 
be in England at the end of August or the beginning of 
September, which would give him time before the start of term to 
see Fergusson. He proposed that they should go to Wales 
together, where they could “ruminate conjointly on our sins” and 


Fergusson could pass on to Oppenheimer the benefit of his 
experience of English society, in particular “how to treat the 
tutors & the dukes.” 

In the meantime, Oppenheimer completed his degree at 
Harvard. Despite describing his work to Smith as “frantic, bad 
and graded A,” in his final year he, for the first and only time in 
his undergraduate career, got two Bs: one for Whitehead’s course 
and the other for dynamics. Nevertheless, in June 1925 (though 
the record notes that it was “as of 1926”), Oppenheimer was 
awarded the A.B. summa cum laude (the equivalent of a first- 
class degree in the UK) in chemistry. Boyd and Bernheim also 
completed their degrees that summer and the three of them 
celebrated in Bernheim’s room with (this being the period of 
Prohibition) some laboratory alcohol. As Bernheim remembers it, 
he and Boyd “got plastered,” while Oppenheimer “took one drink 
and retired.” 


6 Strikingly, in this exchange, while Benesch speaks of the Jewish “faith,” 
Lowell speaks of the Jewish “race.” 

7 It must be stressed that most of Oppenheimer’s correspondence from this 
period has not survived. There are no letters, for example, to or from his 
parents, though it is certain that he wrote frequently to them throughout his 
three years at Harvard. 

8 In 1931, Standish and its neighbor Gore Hall combined to form Winthrop 
House. 

9 “Qualitative analysis” in chemistry contrasts with “quantitative analysis”; 
whereas the former is concerned with the identification of chemical 
compounds in a given sample, the latter is concerned with measuring the 
amount of each compound in the sample. 

10 After Oppenheimer moved to Cambridge, England, in 1925, his letters to 
Fergusson, then at Oxford, do mention Bernheim, referring to him as “Fred.” 

11 In connection with Fergusson’s disdain for the ritual of the annual Harvard- 
Yale football match and his (justifiably) confident expectation of a Rhodes 
Scholarship, it is interesting to compare him with Oppenheimer’s freshman 
friends: Bernheim, who was so keen to get tickets for the match that he applied 
twice, and Boyd, who applied for a Rhodes Scholarship, but was rejected. 

12 The first edition of Crowther’s Molecular Physics was published in 1914, but, 
given the nature of Oppenheimer’s list, it seems likely that he had in mind the 
third edition, published in 1923. 

13 It is not clear whether Oppenheimer was using the second or third edition of 
this work. It was, in any case, not the first—published in 1916—since that had 
only two volumes. For publishing details of the second and third editions, see 
the Bibliography. 

14 Arnold Sommerfeld’s Atombau und Spektrallinien, which had originally been 


published in 1919 and by 1923 was available in English as Atomic Structure and 
Spectral Lines, was generally regarded as, in the words of one historian of 
science, “the textbook bible of the subject for physicists the world over.” 

15 A System of Physical Chemistry was published in a series called Textbooks of 
Physical Chemistry edited by Sir William Ramsay. Oppenheimer does not give 
either the title of the series or of Lewis’s three-volume work; he only gives the 
titles of the individual volumes, listing their author as “Ramsay; Lewis.” 

16 Referred to by the letter h, Planck’s constant is a fixed numerical value (6.5 
x 10-27), which is the constant of proportionality between the energy of light 
and its frequency. It is central to quantum physics, and has been since its 
inception, being used by Planck and subsequent physicists to describe the very 
notion of a “quantum” of energy. It is discussed at length in the third volume 
of Lewis’s A System of Physical Chemistry. 


Cambridge 


u will tell me how to.treat the 
tutors & the dukes & I shall ‘tremble. ” Oppenheimer’s plea to 


Fergusson for help in preparing for Cambridge was partly in jest, 
but it also expressed a very real and deep anxiety. He was indeed 
trembling at the prospect of trying, and possibly failing, to 
achieve what Fergusson, with apparently very little effort, had 
already achieved: namely, acceptance into the highest level of 
English literary and intellectual society. Herbert Smith 
understood this all too well and tried to alert Fergusson to it in a 
letter written shortly before Oppenheimer’s arrival in England, in 
which he advised him that “your ability to show him 
[Oppenheimer] about should be exercised with great tact, rather 
than in royal profusion. And instead of flying at your throat—as I 
remember your being ready to do for George What’s-his- 
name ... when you were similarly awed by him—I’m afraid he’d 
merely cease to think his own life worth living.” 

Oppenheimer’s original plan, outlined in the letter quoted in 
the previous chapter, was to sail to England at the end of August 
or the beginning of September 1925, leaving him a few weeks 
before the start of term, which he hoped to spend in Wales 
together with Fergusson, “sailing and recuperating from 
America.” In a subsequent letter, written in July, this plan had 
changed somewhat. Giving an exact date on which he expected to 
arrive in England—September 16—Oppenheimer told Fergusson 
that he intended to see him in Cambridge soon after this date, 
and then, after a couple of weeks in Cambridge (“to see about 
laboratory facilities and such matters”), he planned to go with 
Fergusson not sailing in Wales, but walking in Cornwall. 

In the meantime, Oppenheimer spent much of August in New 


Mexico, which he had not visited since his trip there in the 
summer of 1922, but which remained the place he most 
cherished and in which he felt most appreciated and accepted. 
This time he was accompanied by his parents and Frank, who was 
now thirteen. “The Parents are really quite pleased with the 
place,” Oppenheimer wrote to Smith from Los Pinos, “and are 
starting to ride a little. Curiously enough they enjoy the frivolous 
courtesy of the place, and all is well.” In fact, Julius and Ella 
spent most of the trip staying in luxury at the exclusive and 
expensive Bishop’s Lodge hotel, on the outskirts of Santa Fe, 
joining their son at the Pages’ ranch for just a few days. Most of 
Oppenheimer’s time was spent with Katherine Page and Paul 
Horgan, who was back in New Mexico after finishing his course 
at Rochester. Horgan remembers one ride in particular, in which 
he and Oppenheimer, crossing the Sangre de Cristo mountain 
range, got caught in a thunderstorm, “immense, huge, pounding 
rain,” to shelter from which they sat under their horses while 
they ate their lunch. “I was looking at Robert,” Horgan recalls, 
“and all of a sudden I noticed his hair was standing straight 
up ... responding to the static. Marvelous.” 

After this restorative time among the camaraderie of his New 
Mexican friends, Oppenheimer returned to New York to find 
rejection and his first taste of academic failure. Waiting for him 
on his return was a letter from Cambridge telling him that his 
application to study with Sir Ernest Rutherford as a research 
student had been rejected (though the offer of a place at Christ’s 
College still stood). This was a powerful blow. The reason 
Oppenheimer had chosen to go to Cambridge, rather than staying 
at Harvard and continuing to work with Bridgman, was that he 
hoped to work with Rutherford, so as, he later said, to get “near 
the center” of the world of physics. 

In fact, Rutherford had, for many years, been right at the 
center. A New Zealander by birth, he had arrived in Cambridge in 
1895 to pursue postgraduate work and had been in England ever 
since, apart from a nine-year spell at McGill University in 
Montreal from 1898 to 1907, where he conducted the research 
into radioactivity that won him the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. In 
1907 he was appointed professor of physics at the University of 
Manchester, where he stayed until 1919, when—now Sir Ernest 
Rutherford (having been knighted in 1914)—he returned to 


Cambridge as director of the Cavendish Laboratory. Since its 
creation in 1874, under its first director, James Clerk Maxwell, 
the Cavendish had been recognized as the world’s foremost center 
of experimental physics. In 1925, Rutherford’s list of honors and 
titles was completed when he was admitted into the Order of 
Merit, generally regarded as the most prestigious award it is 
possible to receive in the British honors system. 

What Oppenheimer would have known Rutherford for, and 
what most people today still know him for, is his development, in 
1911, of the planetary model of the atom, which pictures an atom 
as consisting of a positively charged nucleus around which orbit 
negatively charged electrons. This was a revolutionary way of 
picturing the atom, which it took imagination, intuition and a 
willingness to be led by experimental evidence to conceive. 
Rutherford’s predecessor at the Cavendish, J. J. Thomson, had 
paved the way by being the first person to demonstrate that an 
atom was not the indivisible, hard ball previously imagined, 
when in 1897 he discovered the existence of particles, later called 
electrons, that were part of an atom. These tiny “subatomic” 
particles, Thomson showed, were negatively charged, which, 
given that atoms themselves were neutral, meant that the other 
part of the atom had to be positively charged. As Thomson 
pictured it, an atom was made up of a positively charged mass 
into which electrons were embedded. On this “plum pudding” 
model, the positive charge was understood to be evenly spread 
throughout the atom. In a series of ingenious experiments 
conducted at Manchester, Rutherford demonstrated that this 
could not be so and that the positive charge of an atom was, 
rather, concentrated in a tiny “nucleus.” To appreciate how tiny 
this nucleus is, if an atom were the size of a golf course, then the 
nucleus would be the size of just one of its holes. According to 
Rutherford’s model, the electrons orbit this nucleus like planets 
around the sun. An atom is less like a plum pudding and more 
like a solar system. 

Rutherford’s theory was significantly refined in 1913 by the 
man whom Oppenheimer would come to admire more than 
anyone else in the world: the Danish physicist Niels Bohr. Bohr 
had arrived in Cambridge in 1911 to work with J. J. Thomson, 
but was disappointed to discover that Thomson, then in his fifties 
and past his best as a scientist, was uninterested in him or his 


work. After meeting Rutherford when he came to give a paper at 
Cambridge, Bohr decided he would rather work with him than 
with Thomson and so transferred from Cambridge to Manchester. 
At Manchester, under Rutherford’s benign and sympathetic 
guidance, Bohr devoted himself to the theoretical problems raised 
by Rutherford’s model of the atom. At the heart of these problems 
was the fact that, according to the laws of physics as they were 
then understood, the atom as pictured by Rutherford would be 
inherently unstable. Newton’s laws of motion tell us that an 
object moving in a circle undergoes acceleration, and Maxwell’s 
theory of electromagnetism tells us that a charged particle, like 
an electron, will lose energy in the form of electromagnetic 
radiation as it accelerates (it will, in other words, emit light). 
Very quickly, the electron’s energy would be completely 
dissipated and, unable to continue its orbital motion, it would 
collapse into the atomic nucleus. As this did not, in fact, happen, 
something had to be wrong, either with Rutherford’s model or 
with classical physics—or, as it turned out, with both. 

Bohr’s daring solution, outlined in a series of three papers 
published in 1913, was to jettison classical physical laws and 
replace them with what is now called “old quantum theory,” but 
which Oppenheimer, as a student, would have known simply as 
“quantum theory.” On the “Rutherford-Bohr model,” as it was 
henceforth known, the electrons in an atom are held in their 
orbits by the electromagnetic attraction between the negatively 
charged electrons and the positively charged atomic nucleus. In 
order to understand the behavior of electrons in their “static 
orbits,” Bohr maintained, we need to appeal, not to the laws of 
classical physics, but rather to the quantum theory developed by 
Planck and Einstein in their attempts to understand the behavior 
of the “photons” of light. Electrons do not, as classical theory 
would suggest, lose energy as they orbit the nucleus, so long as 
they stay in the same orbits. They absorb or emit energy only 
when they move from one orbit (or, as Bohr would now have it, 
“stationary state”) to another, and when they do that, they move, 
not in a continuous motion, but in jumps or “quanta,” the 
mathematics of which is centered on h, Planck’s famous constant, 
which Oppenheimer had spent so much time pondering at 
Harvard. Furthermore, according to Bohr, electrons are only 
“permitted” certain states; namely those allowed for in the 


mathematics of quantum theory. The properties of chemicals are 
determined by the number of electrons they have, which gets 
larger and larger as one goes through the periodic table, from the 
lightest element, hydrogen, which has just one electron, to the 
heaviest, uranium, which has ninety-two. As more electrons are 
added, they are allotted places in the “stationary states” around 
the nucleus. If an electron jumps from one state to another, then 
(and only then) does it emit light. Otherwise, it stays in its state, 
suffering no energy loss. Why electrons are only permitted certain 
states Bohr could not explain, but the hypothesis that they were 
so restricted turned out to be too powerful to ignore; it allowed 
an extraordinarily neat account of the molecular structure of 
chemicals to be given that provided a physical explanation of the 
entire periodic table. 

A detailed account of the Rutherford-Bohr model of the atom, 
and of the “old quantum theory” of which it forms a fundamental 
part, is given in William C. McC. Lewis’s Quantum Theory, the 
third volume of A System of Physical Chemistry, one of those works 
that Oppenheimer claimed to have read in his first year at 
Harvard. Another one of those works, Arnold Sommerfeld’s 
Atombau und Spektrallinien, was entirely devoted to that model, 
Sommerfeld’s account of which became accepted not only as the 
definitive statement of Bohr’s theory, but also as a significant 
improvement upon it, so that the model came to be called the 
“Bohr-Sommerfeld model.” 

Having, at least purportedly, read Lewis and Sommerfeld, and 
having heard Rutherford’s name mentioned in all the physics 
courses he took at Harvard, as well as in his conversations with 
Bridgman and Kemble, it is not surprising that Oppenheimer 
would regard the Cavendish Laboratory as being at, or at least 
near, the “center” of new developments in physics. What is a little 
curious, however, is that Oppenheimer should have wanted to 
pursue research in experimental rather than theoretical physics. 
After all, in his letter to Fergusson from Harvard in the spring of 
1925 he had remarked, in relation to some work he had been 
doing with Bridgman: “that brief excursion convinces me that my 
genre, whatever it is, is not experimental science.” Given this 
realization, and the fact that it had been theoretical physics that 
had fascinated him since his first year at Harvard, why did he 
apply to work in a laboratory with a man known throughout the 


world as an experimentalist? In an effort to explain this later in 
life, Oppenheimer said that he did not know that one could make 
a living as a theoretical physicist. This is difficult to believe. After 
all, he was taught by Edwin Kemble, whom he surely knew to be 
a theoretical physicist, even if he had not realized that many, 
perhaps most, of the physicists he had read or read about—Bohr, 
Einstein, Sommerfeld, and so on—were also _ theoretical 
physicists. It seems that he decided he wanted to be at Cambridge 
because that is where many of his Harvard friends had gone, and, 
having decided that, he was led by the reputation of Rutherford 
and the Cavendish, and by Cambridge’s preeminence in 
experimental physics and its comparative neglect of theoretical 
physics, to attempt to overcome his ineptitude for experimental 
work. 

It would turn out to be a grievous error of judgment. For one 
thing, it put Bridgman in a difficult position when it came to 
writing Oppenheimer a reference recommending him to 
Rutherford. While Bridgman could say in all honesty that 
Oppenheimer had a “perfectly prodigious power of assimilation,” 
“a high degree of originality” and “much mathematical power,” 
he felt obliged to point out that “his weakness is on the 
experimental side”: 


His type of mind is analytical, rather than physical, and he is 
not at home in the manipulation of the laboratory ... [in his 
laboratory work, Oppenheimer] was evidently much 
handicapped by his lack of familiarity with ordinary physical 
manipulations. 


Bridgman also felt obliged to add: “As appears from his name, 
Oppenheimer is a Jew, but entirely without the usual 
qualifications of his race. He is a tall, well set-up young man, 
with a rather engaging diffidence of manner, and I think you 
need have no hesitation whatever for any reason of this sort in 
considering his application.” 

In the context of the anti-Semitism that plagued American 
academic life in the 1920s, and in particular the ongoing 
controversy at Harvard about Lowell’s desire to impose quotas on 
Jewish students, Bridgman’s remarks are entirely understandable 
and clearly well intentioned. However, they were, as far as 


Rutherford was concerned, entirely unnecessary and possibly 
offensive in their assumption of a background prejudice against 
Jews who were not tall, “well set-up” and diffident. It is certainly 
not true that there was no anti-Semitism in British academic life, 
but Rutherford himself was, as far as one can tell, entirely free 
from it. Raised on a farm in New Zealand, he was emphatically 
not a typical Cambridge professor; his outlook was robustly and 
resolutely egalitarian, without snobbery or racism. In the 1930s, 
he became the first president of the Council for Assisting Refugee 
Academics, which was formed to help Jewish academics forced to 
flee Nazi Germany. That Oppenheimer’s name betrayed a Jewish 
ancestry would have been of no concern whatsoever to him. 

However, that Oppenheimer’s weakness as a physicist was “on 
the experimental side” would surely have persuaded Rutherford 
that he was not an ideal candidate for a postgraduate research 
position at the Cavendish. Accordingly, in the letter that 
Oppenheimer received on his return to New York from New 
Mexico, Rutherford wrote that, as he already had so many 
“excellent applicants,” he could not take Oppenheimer on as a 
research student, at least for a time. While his place at Christ’s 
College was still open, then, Oppenheimer would have to suffer 
the indignity of being, for a while at least, an undergraduate 
student. Later in the academic year, Oppenheimer was told, he 
could be accepted as a graduate student, so long as the 
Cambridge authorities were, in the meantime, convinced that he 
had some aptitude for original work, whether experimental or 
practical. 

The registrar at Christ’s College, responsible for graduate 
admissions, was the famous explorer Raymond Priestley, who had 
been a member of first Shackleton’s and then Scott’s expeditions 
to the Antarctic, the latter of which was the subject of Priestley’s 
best-selling book, Antarctic Adventure. In the First World War, 
Priestley was decorated with the Military Cross for his part in the 
celebrated capture by the Allies of the Riqueval Bridge, which he 
wrote about in another popular book, Breaking the Hindenburg 
Line. After the war he was elected a Fellow of Christ’s and 
devoted himself to academic administration. After receiving 
Rutherford’s rejection, Oppenheimer wrote to Priestley, telling 
him that he would be taking up his offered place, but that he 
“should like to be admitted to the University as a research 


student as soon as possible.” “If admission cannot be granted at 
once,” Oppenheimer added, “I should be quite willing to wait a 
term.” 

As soon as he arrived in Cambridge on September 16, 1925, 
before setting off on his walking holiday with Fergusson, 
Oppenheimer wrote again to Priestley, formally applying to be 
considered as a graduate student, reading in physics, analysis and 
physical chemistry, in preparation for undertaking “as soon as it 
seems advisable” a research problem in physics. He was 
particularly interested, he told Priestley, in the theory of 
electronic conduction, especially those aspects of it “which can 
give an indication of the laws of force to which the motion of 
electrons is subject.” He would, he said, “be very glad of an 
opportunity for further experimental work, and, if possible, for 
critical advice in the corresponding theoretical problems.” In 
support of his application for graduate status, Oppenheimer wrote 
out a list of all the relevant courses he had taken at Harvard and 
submitted his degree, his grade cards and his references. “If any 
more definite information is required,” his letter to Priestley ends, 
“T shall be glad to try to give it. I am twenty-one years old.” 

Having thus made his case to be admitted as a doctoral student, 
rather than the undergraduate he officially still was, 
Oppenheimer set off on his walking holiday in Cornwall with 
Fergusson. For the reasons anticipated by Smith, this tour with 
Fergusson, instead of easing Oppenheimer gently into English 
social life, seems to have left him feeling intimidated, awed and 
firmly persuaded that he would never be accepted by “the tutors 
& the dukes.” Fergusson, during his two years in England, had 
become associated with the very set of artists, writers and 
intellectuals that Oppenheimer had read about in Aldous Huxley’s 
Crome Yellow, and who met at Ottoline Morrell’s Oxford home, 
Garsington. This included, but was not restricted to, the 
Bloomsbury Group of Virginia Woolf and John Maynard Keynes. 
As Oppenheimer put it in a letter to Smith, Fergusson “knows 
everyone at Oxford; he goes to tea with Lady Ottoline Morrell, 
the high priestess of civilized society & the patroness of Eliot & 
Berty;i7 & he is a member of a congress of litterateurs who meet 
every summer at Pontigny to talk about ‘Mysticism & Literature’ 
& other such modest things.” 

The meetings at Pontigny that Oppenheimer mentions here 


were a series of annual colloquia that took place every year 
between 1910 and 1939 at the former Cistercian abbey at 
Pontigny in Burgundy. They were organized by the philosopher 
and literary critic Paul Desjardins, who owned the abbey. “To be 
invited to Pontigny,” writes a biographer of one of the regular 
attendees, Prince Mirsky, “was to be recognised as a member of 
European intellectual aristocracy.” Though the leading figures at 
Pontigny were French intellectuals, such as André Gide and 
Charles Du Bos, there were also many connections between the 
Pontigny colloquia and the Bloomsbury/Morrell Group. Roger Fry 
and Lytton Strachey (both members of the Bloomsbury Group and 
regular invitees to Garsington), for example, were habitual 
attendees at Pontigny. 

That Fergusson moved in such grand literary and intellectual 
circles was daunting enough, but even more dispiriting was what 
Fergusson later described as the “rather Russian account” he gave 
Oppenheimer of what it was like to be an American student in 
Europe—an account that seems to have left Oppenheimer with 
the conviction that he would forever be shut out from whatever 
was best in Cambridge life. After their walking tour, 
Oppenheimer wrote to Fergusson, telling him: “I do not think that 
Cambridge can be quite so bad as Oxford. But its excellencies are 
just as fantastically inaccessible, and there are vast, sloppy strata 
where there is nothing, absolutely nothing, to be found.” He had 
not entirely given up hope, however. “By next term,” he told 
Fergusson, “I think I may have some people to show you.” 

Whether Oppenheimer ever did find any people at Cambridge 
he thought impressive enough to introduce to Fergusson is 
doubtful. As it had been at Harvard, his social circle was small. In 
fact, to begin with, it consisted of some of the very same people 
he had mixed with at Harvard, many of whom were now at 
Cambridge. Jeffries Wyman and John Edsall had arrived there the 
previous year, although, after a month or so, Wyman decided to 
transfer to University College London in order to work with the 
physiologist Archibald Vivian Hill, famous (as Wyman himself 
would later be) for his research on hemoglobin. Edsall decided to 
stay at Cambridge, living in St. John’s College and working at the 
Cambridge Biochemistry Laboratory under the supervision of the 
eminent biochemist F. Gowland Hopkins. Though Wyman was in 
London, he and Edsall saw much of each other and both thrived 


in England, socially and intellectually. 

Oppenheimer might have expected his closest companion to 
have been Fred Bernheim, who arrived in Cambridge at the same 
time as him, in order, like Edsall and Wyman, to study 
biochemistry. Bernheim, however, was determined to liberate 
himself from what he had often felt was the overbearing and 
suffocating atmosphere of his friendship with Oppenheimer. 
Having settled into King’s College, Bernheim made the 
Biochemistry Laboratory the center of his personal as well as his 
scholarly life. It was there that he met his future wife, Mary L. C. 
Hare, who would herself become a biochemist of some eminence. 
In a letter to Fergusson of November 15, 1925, Oppenheimer 
mentions “some terrible complications with Fred, and an awful 
evening, two weeks ago, in the moon.” The Moon was 
presumably a pub in Cambridge, and the complications were no 
doubt connected with the fact that Bernheim seemed content to 
accept that the friendship he and Oppenheimer had shared at 
Harvard had not survived the move to Cambridge. “I have not 
seen him since,” Oppenheimer told Fergusson, “and blush when I 
think of him.” 

So, with Bernheim keeping him at arm’s length, Edsall and 
Wyman sharing a bond that did not include him, and Fergusson 
established in a milieu that was not open to him (and into which 
Fergusson showed no sign of wanting to introduce him), 
Oppenheimer’s initial few months at Cambridge were isolated. 
Nor was he making any new friends. Christ’s was a smaller and 
less well-endowed college than either King’s (where Bernheim 
was) or St. John’s (where Edsall was), but equally ancient, having 
been founded in 1505 by Lady Margaret Beaufort, Henry VIII’s 
grandmother. It was distinguished by a tradition of academic 
excellence in both science and poetry, being the college of 
England’s most famous scientist, Charles Darwin, and arguably 
her greatest poet, John Milton. Of the students who studied there 
who belonged to Oppenheimer’s generation, one of the most 
notable was C. P. Snow, the physicist and novelist, who, in his 
1959 lecture “The Two Cultures,” famously lamented the gulf 
between scientists and literary intellectuals. Christ’s, evidently, 
was a college in which scientific and literary gifts could be 
nurtured side by side. Moreover, it was a college unusually 
friendly to students from America. The master of the college at 


the time Oppenheimer arrived was the zoologist Sir Arthur 
Shipley, who combined his academic work with writing popular 
and literary books and had spent some time in the United States 
as part of the British University Mission, one of whose aims was 
to promote postgraduate study by Americans at British 
universities. Such a college, one might have thought, would have 
been Oppenheimer’s natural home. And yet his time at Christ’s 
was brief, difficult and the most emotionally turbulent few 
months of his life. 

Surely one reason that Oppenheimer seems to have made no 
new friends at Christ’s is that, instead of living in college, he 
lodged in what he described as a “miserable hole” somewhere in 
the city. He took all his meals in college, but, even so, seems not 
to have befriended—or been befriended by—any of his fellow 
students. Nor, to begin with, did he make any friends among his 
fellow physicists. This was no doubt partly because of his status. 
Not being a research postgraduate, he would not, initially at 
least, have mixed much with the famously brilliant young men 
who worked with Rutherford at this time. He would, rather, have 
been expected to attend undergraduate lectures and spend his 
time at the Cavendish, learning basic laboratory skills instead of 
pursuing original research. After just a month of this lonely and 
humiliating existence, Oppenheimer wrote to Fergusson, spelling 
out his situation in uncharacteristically direct language: “I am 
having a pretty bad time. The lab work is a terrible bore, and I 
am so bad at it that it is impossible to feel that I am learning 
anything ... The lectures are vile. And you know the rest.” 

The most detailed record of Oppenheimer’s misery during his 
first term at Cambridge is contained in a curious document 
written by Fergusson dated “February 1926” and entitled 
“Account of the Adventures of Robert Oppenheimer in Europe.” 
In chronicling (and, in later interviews,  recollecting) 
Oppenheimer’s emotional upheavals during this period, 
Fergusson takes a_ resolutely psychoanalytical approach, 
emphasizing Oppenheimer’s relations with his parents and his 
sexual frustration, the combination of which he evidently sees as 
the cause of the trouble. Oppenheimer, Fergusson records, “was 
completely at a loss about his sex life.” His initial impression on 
seeing Oppenheimer again, Fergusson remembered, was that he 
“seemed more self-confident, strong and upstanding,” which he 


attributed to Oppenheimer’s having “nearly managed to fall in 
love with an attractive gentile in New Mexico.” Within a few 
months of Oppenheimer’s time at Cambridge, however, Fergusson 
describes him as having a “first class case of depression”—a 
depression that was “further increased and made specific by the 
struggle he was carrying on with his mother.” 

In the autumn of 1925, Oppenheimer’s parents, alarmed by the 
state of their son’s mind, insisted on traveling to Cambridge in 
order to be with him. Fergusson’s journal contains an 
extraordinary description, presumably based on what he had 
been told by Oppenheimer, of their arrival in England. 
Oppenheimer, having arranged to meet them from their ship, 
caught a train to Southampton and, according to Fergusson: 


He found himself in a third-class carriage with a man and a 
woman who were making love, and though he tried to read 
thermodynamics he could not concentrate. When the man left, 
he [Oppenheimer] kissed the woman. She did not seem unduly 
surprised. But he was at once overcome with remorse, fell on 
his knees, his feet sprawling, and with many tears, begged her 
pardon. 


After this, Oppenheimer fled the compartment. At 
Southampton, on his way out of the station, he saw the woman 
below him when he was on the stairs, and tried to drop his 
suitcase on her head. “Fortunately,” writes Fergusson, “he 
missed.” 18s 

From Southampton train station, Oppenheimer proceeded to 
the port. Before he saw either his mother or father, however, he 
caught sight of Inez Pollak, his old classmate from Ethical 
Culture. Apparently, Inez had been invited by Oppenheimer’s 
mother, who, as Fergusson put it, “tried to put them together” as 
a cure for Oppenheimer’s depression. One of the many 
complications concerning this arrangement was that, according to 
Fergusson, Ella Oppenheimer considered Inez to be “ridiculously 
unworthy” of her son. 

So Oppenheimer returned to Cambridge with his mother, his 
father and the hapless Inez Pollak, whom he did his best to 
“court.” Fergusson writes that Oppenheimer “did a very good and 
chiefly rhetorical imitation of being in love with her” and that 


she “responded in kind.” This led to them sharing a bed together, 
although this did not go according to plan: “There they lay, 
tremulous with cold, afraid to do anything. And Inez began to 
sob. Then Robert began to sob.” At that moment they heard Ella 
Oppenheimer knocking on the door and shouting, “Let me in, 
Inez, why won’t you let me in? I know Robert is in there.” Shortly 
after this Inez left for Italy, her parting gift from Oppenheimer 
being a copy of The Possessed by Dostoyevsky. 

At this point, with his parents still in Cambridge, 
Oppenheimer’s mental state was at its very worst. Fergusson’s 
emphasis on the importance of Oppenheimer’s sexual frustration 
as a cause of his emotional problems is entirely understandable, 
but there were other important causes, not least the fact that he 
felt, for the first time in his life, unequal to the academic 
demands made on him. “The academic standard here would 
depeople Harvard over night,” he told Fergusson. All the 
scientists at Cambridge were “uncommonly skillful at blowing 
glass and solving differential equations.” 

To help him acquire some of the skills required of an 
experimental physicist, Oppenheimer had been assigned a tutor at 
the Cavendish. This was Patrick Blackett, who in later life would 
win the Nobel Prize in Physics, become ennobled as Baron 
Blackett and be awarded the Order of Merit. In the mid-1920s, 
Blackett was a dashing and glamorous figure, described by the 
literary critic I. A. Richards as “a young Oedipus. Tall, slim, 
beautifully balanced and always looking better dressed than 
anyone.” Before coming to Cambridge he had served in the navy, 
seeing action during the First World War at the Battle of Jutland 
and winning promotion from midshipman to lieutenant. After the 
war he was sent by the admiralty to Magdalene College, where he 
studied mathematics and physics. His great ability was quickly 
recognized and, by the time Oppenheimer arrived at the 
Cavendish, Blackett (by then a Fellow of King’s) was regarded by 
Rutherford and his colleagues as one of the most valued members 
of their team. In March 1924, Blackett married Constanza Bayon, 
a beautiful and brilliant language student at Newnham, who, for 
some reason, was always known as “Pat.” 

In the summer of 1924, Blackett had made one of his most 
important contributions to physics when he managed to 
photograph a nuclear transformation process taking place. This 


was the culmination of a research project that he had been asked 
to undertake by Rutherford, exploring what happens when a 
nitrogen nucleus is hit by an alpha particle.i9 Rutherford knew 
that a proton (a positively charged subatomic particle that forms 
part of the nucleus) would be emitted by the particle, but did not 
know whether, after the collision, the alpha particle would be 
deflected away from the nitrogen nucleus or absorbed by it. 
Rutherford thought the former more likely, but Blackett’s 
photographs proved the latter. What Rutherford had imagined 
was a “disintegration process” was actually an “integration” 
process; the nitrogen nucleus absorbed the alpha particle (minus 
the emitted proton), thereby transmuting into an isotope of 
oxygen.20 Blackett’s remarkable photographs, reproduced many 
times since, showed this transmutation of one element into 
another, this “modern alchemy,” taking place. 

When the great German experimental physicist James Franck 
came to Cambridge in 1924 to give a paper, Blackett got to know 
him and arranged to spend the following academic year, 1924-5, 
at Franck’s own university, Gottingen, which was acquiring a 
reputation of being at the center of the exciting developments 
then taking place in physics. Franck himself won the Nobel Prize 
in 1925 for the experiments he and his fellow Nobel laureate, 
Gustav Hertz, had performed, which provided experimental 
confirmation of the Bohr-Rutherford model of the atom. At 
Gottingen, Franck worked closely with the leading theoretical 
physicist at the university, Max Born, and together they built up 
an internationally renowned center for research in physics that 
was to rival and even surpass Cambridge, attracting to Gottingen 
some of the best students and researchers in physics throughout 
the world. Blackett thrived at G6ttingen and returned to 
Cambridge brimming with excitement over the latest 
developments in quantum theory. He and his wife gained a 
reputation for being the “handsomest, gayest, happiest pair in 
Cambridge” and their home in Bateman Street became “a 
favourite haunt of left-wing and Bohemian academics.” 

To Oppenheimer, Blackett was, like Francis Fergusson, a model 
of unattainable excellence and a reminder of his own failures and 
inadequacies. As a physicist, Blackett was especially proficient in 
the very aspects of research that Oppenheimer found difficult: 
namely, those involving laboratory skills. A glimpse of Blackett’s 


views on the importance of laboratory skills is provided in his 
contribution to a collection of essays that was published in the 
1930s. The aim of the collection was to provide prospective 
Cambridge applicants with information about the various subjects 
studied at the university, each subject being introduced by a 
distinguished Cambridge practitioner of it (Richard Braithwaite 
on philosophy, C. P. Snow on chemistry, C. H. Waddington on 
biology, and so on). Blackett’s contribution was an essay on “The 
Craft of Experimental Physics” that has since become one of his 
most-quoted pieces of writing and is revealing as an indication of 
the demands made upon Oppenheimer during his time as 
Blackett’s tutee. 

The experimental physicist, Blackett writes, “is a Jack-of-All- 
Trades, a versatile but amateur craftsman”: 


He must blow glass and turn metal, though he could not earn 
his living as a glass-blower nor ever be considered as a skilled 
mechanic; he must carpenter, photograph, wire electric circuits 
and be a master of gadgets of all kinds; he may find invaluable 
a training as an engineer and can profit always by utilising his 
gifts as a mathematician. In such activities will he be engaged 
for three-quarters of his working day. 


“The combination of these abilities in one individual with the 
right temperament to use them is rare,” Blackett adds. “Many a 
theoretically gifted student may fail, while learning to be an 
experimenter, through clumsy fingers.” 

His confidence already severely dented by Rutherford’s 
rejection of him as a research student, Oppenheimer’s self-esteem 
took a further battering when he failed abjectly to live up to the 
demanding criteria spelled out by Blackett for being a successful 
experimental physicist. He simply did not have the practical 
abilities emphasized by Blackett, and his unsuccessful attempts to 
acquire such abilities brought him deep unhappiness. This, 
together with his other emotional problems, led him, within a 
few months of being at Cambridge, to the brink of mental, 
emotional and physical collapse. 

At Harvard, Oppenheimer might have behaved in ways that 
struck people as odd, affected or intense, but at Cambridge his 
behavior was not just strange—it was indicative of severe mental 


instability. Sometimes, he later recalled, he would stand alone in 
front of a blackboard for hours, chalk in hand, waiting for 
inspiration to strike. On other occasions the silence would be 
broken by his own voice, repeating over and over again, “The 
point is, the point is ... the point is.” Once Rutherford himself 
was alarmed to see Oppenheimer fall fainting to the floor of the 
laboratory. In an interview he gave late in life, Jeffries Wyman 
recalled that Oppenheimer told him he “felt so miserable in 
Cambridge, so unhappy, that he used to get down on the floor 
and roll from side to side.” 

Most bizarre, though, was an event that occurred toward the 
end of Oppenheimer’s first term at Cambridge. In what looks like 
an attempt to murder his tutor, or at the very least to make him 
seriously ill, Oppenheimer left on Blackett’s desk an apple 
poisoned with toxic chemicals. The act seems charged with 
symbolism: Oppenheimer as the jealous queen leaving a poisoned 
apple for Snow White, the “fairest of them all,” whose beauty and 
goodness are admired by everybody. The incident was hushed up 
at the time, and none of his friends knew about it until they were 
told of it by Oppenheimer himself, usually in some more or less 
misleading version. That his feelings toward Blackett mixed 
fervent admiration with fierce jealousy, however, was obvious to 
those who knew him well. John Edsall, for example, noticed the 
jealousy and speculated plausibly about what had aroused it. It 
was, he suggested, due to Oppenheimer’s feeling that: 


Blackett was brilliant and handsome and a man of great social 
charm, and combining all this with great brilliance as a 
scientist—and I think he had a sense of his own comparative 
awkwardness and perhaps a personal sense of being physically 
unattractive compared to Blackett and so on. 


There has been some confusion (most of it created by 
Oppenheimer himself) as to whether he really did leave an apple 
on Blackett’s desk or whether his claim to have done so should be 
regarded as metaphorical. In his interview with Martin Sherwin, 
conducted in 1979, Francis Fergusson says that Openheimer told 
him that “he had actually used cyanide or something 
somewhere,” suggesting that the attempted poisoning had been 
very real indeed. Fergusson adds: “Fortunately the tutor 


discovered it. Of course there was hell to pay with Cambridge.” 

In fact, Cambridge seems to have reacted with extraordinary 
equanimity. They did not press criminal charges, nor did they 
expel Oppenheimer or even suspend him. The reason for this 
seems to be that his parents were still in Cambridge. His father 
negotiated an agreement with the university authorities, 
according to which Oppenheimer would be allowed to continue 
his studies and merely be put on probation, on condition that he 
agreed to undergo frequent treatment by a Harley Street 
psychiatrist. 

Fergusson describes meeting Oppenheimer in London after one 
of his psychiatric sessions. “I saw him standing on the corner,” he 
recalls, “waiting for me, with his hat on one side of his head, 
looking absolutely weird.” And he went on, “He looked crazy at 
that time ... He was sort of standing around, looking like he 
might run or do something drastic.” When he asked Oppenheimer 
how the session had gone, Oppenheimer “said that the guy was 
too stupid to follow him and that he knew more about his 
troubles than the doctor did.” 

As soon as this dreadful first term at Cambridge was over, 
Oppenheimer was taken by his parents to France for a 
recuperative holiday. He later remembered that on a cold, rainy 
day he was walking along the Brittany coast when, just as Smith 
had foreseen: “I was on the point of bumping myself off.” A few 
days after Christmas 1925, Oppenheimer had arranged to meet 
Fergusson in Paris, where he told him about the poisoned-apple 
incident and confessed that there was some doubt as to whether 
he would be allowed to continue as a student at Cambridge. “My 
reaction was dismay,” Fergusson later told Sherwin, adding, 
somewhat oddly: “But then, when he talked about it, I thought he 
had sort of gone beyond it, and that he was having trouble with 
his father.” 

In Paris, Fergusson said, Oppenheimer “began to get very 
queer.” Considering that, up to this point in his narrative 
Fergusson had described Oppenheimer as: (a) forcing himself 
upon a woman in a train carriage, (b) attempting to injure that 
woman by dropping a suitcase on her, (c) sobbing at the prospect 
of sex with an old school friend, and (d) attempting to murder his 
university tutor by presenting him with a poisoned apple, the 
word “began” seems a little out of place. But Oppenheimer’s 


behavior in Paris, as described by Fergusson, was very odd 
indeed. After finding that her son had locked her into her hotel 
room, Ella insisted that he see a Parisian psychiatrist. The 
diagnosis was sexual frustration and _ the prescription, 
accordingly, sex with a prostitute. 

Soon after this, Fergusson went to see Oppenheimer in his 
Parisian hotel room and discovered him to be in “one of his 
ambiguous moods.” He showed Oppenheimer some _ poetry 
written by his girlfriend, Frances Keeley, and told him that she 
was now his fiancée. Then, Fergusson describes: 


I leaned over to pick up a book, and he jumped on me from 
behind with a trunk strap and wound it around my neck. I was 
quite scared for a little while. We must have made some noise. 
And then I managed to pull aside and he fell to the ground 
weeping. 


Having failed to kill one paragon of excellence, it seems, 
Oppenheimer was moved to attempt to kill the other. 

When Oppenheimer returned to Cambridge, he wrote to 
Fergusson: 


You should have, not a letter, but a pilgrimage to Oxford, made 
in a hair shirt, with much fasting and snow and prayer. But I 
will keep my remorse and gratitude, and the shame I feel for 
my inadequacy to you, until I can do something rather less 
useless for you. I do not understand your forbearance nor your 
charity, but you must know that I will not forget them. 


The nearest Oppenheimer came to explaining his odd behavior 
was to highlight the importance of what he described in this 
letter to Fergusson as “the awful fact of excellence”: “As you 
know, it is that fact now, combined with my inability to solder 
two copper wires together, which is probably succeeding in 
getting me crazy.” 

Oppenheimer was by this time a graduate research student, 
though not, as he had earlier hoped, supervised by Rutherford, 
but rather by Rutherford’s predecessor, the aged and semiretired 
J.J. Thomson. When Rutherford took over as director of the 
Cavendish in 1919, he insisted on having complete control and 
got Thomson to put in writing that he would not in any way 


interfere with Rutherford’s running of the place. In return for this 
assurance, Thomson was granted space in the laboratory for his 
own research and was allowed to supervise some research 
students. These tended to be the ones, like Oppenheimer, that 
Rutherford did not want to supervise. 

Thomson was nearly seventy years old and had been for many 
years somewhat off the pace in the rapidly changing world of 
theoretical physics. The monumental developments in the subject 
that had occurred in the early twentieth century were things that 
he either ignored or resisted. He never accepted either Einstein’s 
theory of relativity or Rutherford’s planetary model of the atom, 
and quantum theory had passed him by altogether. In his old age, 
he remained deeply devoted to Trinity College and developed an 
absorbing interest in gardening. He is remembered fondly by 
those who knew him as genial and kind, but he was not the man 
to guide an emotionally turbulent, brilliant young man—suffering 
agonies of sexual frustration, social isolation and a crippling 
ineptitude for practical laboratory work—through the intricacies 
of modern physics. 

The details of Oppenheimer’s research under Thomson’s 
supervision are now lost. In a letter to Fergusson of November 
1925, he says that Thomson “thought my experiments quite good, 
but didn’t help much otherwise,” but he does not say what those 
experiments were. Later in life he described his research as a 
study of “what happened with beams of electrons and thin films 
of metal,” a description that could perfectly well apply to a good 
deal of the research conducted at the Cavendish during this 
period, but which also ties in with Oppenheimer’s description to 
Priestley that September of his intended research topic: the 
theory of electronic conduction, especially those aspects of it 
“which can give an indication of the laws of force to which the 
motion of electrons is subject.” To make the “thin films of metal” 
he needed for this research, Oppenheimer had to undergo what 
he later recalled as “the miseries of evaporating beryllium on to 
collodion, and then getting rid of the collodion, and so on.” The 
resulting beryllium films were used not only by Oppenheimer, 
but also by James Chadwick, Rutherford’s second-in-command at 
the Cavendish, famous for the discovery of neutrons in 1932. 

“The business in the laboratory was really quite a sham,” 
Oppenheimer later remarked, “but it got me into the laboratory, 


where I heard talk and found out a good deal of what people 
were interested in.” In other words, the only value he later saw in 
his experience of experimental physics at Cambridge was that it 
stimulated his interest in contemporary developments in 
theoretical physics. As it turns out, that stimulus was enough to 
help him eventually overcome the acute psychological problems 
he had suffered in the autumn of 1925. John Edsall remembers 
that in the New Year of 1926, though it was obvious that 
Oppenheimer was undergoing some sort of crisis (“there was a 
tremendous inner turmoil”), he nevertheless “kept on doing a 
tremendous amount of work, thinking, reading, discussing 
things.” 

What brought about this burst of activity was Oppenheimer’s 
discovery that theoretical physics was undergoing what the Nobel 
laureate Steven Weinberg has described as “the most profound 
revolution in physical theory since the birth of modern physics in 
the seventeenth century.” Most of the important contributions to 
this “profound revolution” were made by young physicists just a 
few years older than Oppenheimer himself. It was, it was 
commonly remarked, the period of Knabenphysik (boy physics). 

The “boys” in question fully realized that they were living in 
exciting times. Oppenheimer, soon after arriving at Cambridge, 
found himself caught up in that excitement. In November 1925, 
he had written to Fergusson saying that there were “certainly 
some good physicists” at Cambridge, emphasizing “the young 
ones I mean.” He had, he told Fergusson, “been taken to all sorts 
of meetings,” including “several rather pallid science clubs.” 
Pallid or not, it was at these science clubs that Oppenheimer was 
introduced to the epoch-making work in theoretical physics that 
was then going on, and where he got to meet and get to know 
some of the Knaben who were ushering in the new epoch. 

The best known of these clubs is the Kapitza Club, which had 
been formed by the Russian physicist Peter Kapitza upon his 
arrival at the Cavendish in 1921, to provide an informal 
atmosphere within which ideas in physics could be discussed and 
debated. Kapitza, the son of a tsarist general, but a fervent 
supporter of the Bolshevik revolution, was one of the most 
colorful characters at the Cavendish and a favorite of 
Rutherford’s. He and Blackett vied with each other to be regarded 
as Rutherford’s chief assistant. The club Kapitza established in his 


own name became an important forum for the exploration of new 
ideas in physics, providing both a means by which 
experimentalists and theorists at Cambridge could learn from 
each other and an opportunity for Cambridge physicists to hear 
papers from distinguished physicists from other countries. 
Blackett was a member of this club and it was no doubt he who 
introduced Oppenheimer to it. The club met at the young 
experimentalist John Cockcroft’s room in the Cavendish, where, 
in addition to Kapitza himself, Oppenheimer would have 
encountered not only all the leading experimental physicists at 
Cambridge, but also the man who would very soon become 
recognized as one of the world’s leading theorists: Paul Dirac. 

Just two years older than Oppenheimer, Dirac had been a 
research graduate student in physics at St. John’s College since 
1923, having previously completed degrees in both electrical 
engineering and applied mathematics at the University of Bristol. 
He was tall and thin and had a reputation for saying as little as 
possible. He would now almost certainly be diagnosed as 
“autistic”; the many stories that circulated about him describe the 
kind of behavior characteristic of Asperger’s syndrome. He 
combined an extraordinarily intense, obsessive interest in 
mathematics and physics with an almost complete lack of interest 
in anything else, including politics, literature and everyday 
conversation. Oppenheimer, remembering Dirac later in life, 
remarked that he was “not easily understood [and] not concerned 
to be understood. I thought he was absolutely grand.” 

Coming from a relatively impoverished, lower-middle-class 
family in Bristol, Dirac was certainly not “grand” in the social 
sense, but there was, undeniably, a certain grandeur in his 
exceptional intellectual ability. That he was socially awkward 
may have been, for Oppenheimer, an advantage; there is no sign 
that Dirac, for all his extraordinary brilliance, induced in 
Oppenheimer the murderous envy that Fergusson and Blackett 
had provoked. Dirac may have been the cleverest graduate 
physicist at Cambridge, and possibly even the greatest scientist 
the university had produced since Newton, but he did not, like 
Fergusson, mix with Europe’s literary, artistic and philosophical 
elite; nor was he, like Blackett, widely regarded as the most 
handsome, best-dressed and most charismatic figure on the 
Cambridge social scene. Oppenheimer was thus able to admire 


him without feeling awed or envious. 

Though still a graduate student, Dirac was invited to give a 
course of lectures on quantum theory in the academic year 1925- 
6. Entitled “Quantum Theory (Recent Developments),” it was the 
first course on quantum mechanics ever given at a British 
university. Among the few students who attended it was 
Oppenheimer, who, like the other attendees, was no doubt 
conscious of the privilege of being given access to Dirac’s latest 
thoughts on the subject before they were announced and 
published to the outside world. “Dirac gave us what he himself 
had recently done,” remembers one member of this privileged 
group, adding: “We did not, it is true, form a very sociable group, 
but for anyone there it was impossible to forget the sense of 
excitement at the new work.” 

Possibly through Dirac, or possibly through Blackett, 


Oppenheimer was introduced to,the ¥ 2V Club, usually referred 
to as the “Del Squared V Club,” ¥ being a mathematical symbol 
and_ W2 being an operator (the “Laplacian operator”) frequently 
used in theoretical physics. Where the Kapitza Club consisted 
mainly of experimental physicists, the Viv Club was for 
theorists. There Oppenheimer would have met all the leading 
theoretical physicists at Cambridge, including most notably Ralph 
Fowler, Dirac’s supervisor and Rutherford’s son-in-law. Fowler, 
who has been described as “a generous-spirited man with the 
build of Henry VIII and the voice of a drill sergeant,” was, until 
Dirac’s fame overshadowed him, the foremost theoretical 
physicist at Cambridge and, crucially for both Dirac and 
Oppenheimer, the one most fully abreast of developments on the 
continent. 21 

It was Fowler, for instance, who was first aware of the 
importance of the work of the French physicist Louis de Broglie, 
the man who took the initial steps toward the quantum- 
mechanics revolution. De Broglie, a member of one of the most 
ancient and distinguished French aristocratic families, had 
studied medieval history at the University of Paris before, under 
the influence of his elder brother, switching to physics. In the 
autumn of 1923, two years before Oppenheimer’s arrival at 
Cambridge, de Broglie had published a series of three short 
papers in the French journal Comptes rendus, putting forward the 
outlandish suggestion that electrons should be regarded as being 


both particles and waves. 

The inspiration for this was Einstein’s Nobel Prize-winning 
suggestion in 1905 that light, previously thought of as consisting 
of waves, should be thought of as being made up of discrete 
“quanta,” or “photons” as they are now called. Einstein had used 
this idea to account for the “photoelectric effect”—that is, the fact 
that, when light is shone onto a metal surface, electrons are 
emitted, the energy of the electrons depending not on the 
intensity of the light, but on its frequency. This quantum theory 
of light (or, more generally, of electromagnetic radiation) was 
confirmed in 1922 in a series of experiments conducted by the 
American physicist Arthur Compton. De Broglie, in a flash of 
inspiration, saw that, if Einstein’s suggestion regarding light were 
extended to electrons, some of the difficulties faced by the 
Rutherford-Bohr-Sommerfeld model of the atom might be 
overcome. In particular, it would be possible to answer the 
question that Rutherford, with his unerring instinct for the heart 
of a problem, had raised about Bohr’s model of the atom: how do 
electrons “know” which orbits to travel on? Or, to put it another 
way, why are electrons only “allowed” certain orbits? De 
Broglie’s hypothesis of the wave-particle duality of electrons 
provided a brilliant answer to this: as electrons are waves, they 
can only circle the nucleus in certain orbits, namely those that 
correspond to multiple whole units of their wavelengths. 

To begin with, de Broglie’s brilliant idea aroused remarkably 
little interest among physicists. Fowler was one of the first to see 
any value in it, and it was he who in October 1923 submitted to 
the Philosophical Magazine an English version of de Broglie’s 
articles. Entitled “A Tentative Theory of Light Quanta,” this 
appeared in print in February 1924, and, though it made de 
Broglie’s revolutionary idea accessible to English-speaking 
physicists, it failed to attract very much attention. In fact, it 
required the advocacy of Einstein himself to make theorists take 
de Broglie seriously. In the spring of 1924, de Broglie wrote up 
his ideas and presented them as a Ph.D. thesis, which was 
examined the following November. One of the examiners was 
Paul Langevin, who sent de Broglie’s thesis to Einstein, asking 
him what he thought. The reply was unequivocal: “He has lifted a 
corner of the great veil,” wrote Einstein. De Broglie was duly 
awarded his doctorate and, five years later, after his hypothesis 


had been confirmed experimentally, was awarded the Nobel 
Prize. 

Once it had been applauded by Einstein, de Broglie’s audacious 
idea of wave-particle duality caught the imagination of physicists 
everywhere. Patrick Blackett was reported to have returned from 
his year in Gottingen “brimful of talk and enthusiasm about de 
Broglie and wave mechanics.” In August 1925, a month before 
Oppenheimer arrived at Cambridge, Paul Dirac gave a paper to 
the Kapitza Club on de Broglie’s ideas. 

By then, however, the attention of the few physicists keeping 
abreast of these developments had shifted to the work of the 
young German physicist Werner Heisenberg. Having received his 
doctorate (supervised by Arnold Sommerfeld) from the University 
of Munich in 1923, when he was still only twenty-one, 
Heisenberg moved to GO6ttingen to take up a position as Max 
Born’s assistant. During the first half of the academic year 1924- 
5, as Born was due to be in the United States on a lecture tour 
(which, in the event, he postponed until the following year), 
Heisenberg arranged to spend some months at Bohr’s institute in 
Copenhagen. There at the same time, taking sabbatical leave from 
Cambridge, was Ralph Fowler, who was thus able to add 
Heisenberg to his already impressive list of personal contacts 
among the leading and up-and-coming physicists in Europe. 
Meanwhile, Patrick Blackett was at Gottingen, discussing with 
Franck and Born (and then, when he returned to Gottingen in 
April 1925, with Heisenberg) the wave-particle duality of the 
electron posited by de Broglie. 

Though de Broglie’s theory gave a convincing explanation of 
why electrons were confined to the orbits, or energy states, 
specified in Bohr’s model of the atom, it introduced an enormous 
problem of its own: how could an electron possibly be both a 
particle and a wave? We can picture electrons as waves vibrating 
around the nucleus, or we can picture them as material objects 
orbiting the nucleus, but we cannot, surely, picture them as both 
at the same time. De Broglie’s initial attempt to solve this 
conundrum was to imagine electrons as particles moving along a 
wavelike path, but this stripped the theory of its power to explain 
Bohr’s orbits, since no good explanation could be given as to why 
electrons were tied to those wavelike paths. The beauty of de 
Broglie’s theory lay precisely in the thought that an electron was 


a wave, the wavelength of which explained the “static orbits” of 
Bohr’s theory. And yet there were very good reasons for 
believing, and abundant experimental evidence to suggest, that 
electrons were particles. 

Heisenberg’s novel response to this problem was to jettison all 
talk of orbits, particles and waves and refrain from picturing the 
electron at all. We must, he declared, confine ourselves to what 
can be observed. We cannot observe the orbiting of the nucleus 
by the electron; all we can observe is the energy given off by an 
electron when it “jumps” from one state to another. The reason 
we can observe this is that the energy in question takes the form 
of visible light, thus enabling the technique of investigation 
known as spectroscopy: the study of the spectra of light emitted 
by electrons of various elements, which allows physicists to 
associate each element with its characteristic and unique 
spectrum of colored light. It is upon the data provided by 
spectroscopy that Bohr’s theory of atomic structure was built 
(hence the title of Sommerfeld’s classic book on the subject: 
Atombau und Spektrallinien [Atomic Structure and Spectral 
Lines]), and when Heisenberg announced his intention of 
confining himself to what can be observed, he meant primarily: 
observed using the techniques of spectroscopy. 

In June 1925, shortly after he returned to Gottingen from 
Copenhagen, Heisenberg, ill with hay fever, decided to recuperate 
on the North Sea island of Helgoland. There, thinking alone about 
the strictly observable properties of electrons, inspiration struck 
him and he formulated the basic ideas of the branch of physics 
that was to claim the attention of Oppenheimer and most of his 
contemporaries: quantum mechanics. The fundamental aim of 
this branch of physics is to provide quantum theory with a 
mechanics—that is, a mathematical model that would explain the 
apparently bizarre movements of electrons and of subatomic 
particles generally. What occurred to Heisenberg in Helgoland 
was (to him) a brand-new kind of mathematics, which one could 
use to model the behavior of electrons. 

At the heart of this mathematics was a numbering system that 
assigned to electrons a pair of numbers, p (representing the 
electron’s momentum—that is, its mass multiplied by its velocity) 
and q (representing the electron’s position), and a technique of 
multiplying these pairs of numbers. The troubling aspect of this 


new mathematical model was that the multiplication rules for it 
were not commutative—that is, p X q was not, in general, equal 
to q X p. Heisenberg had no explanation for this departure from 
the basic rules of arithmetic, nor could he offer a picture of the 
physical processes that obeyed such odd rules. What he did have 
was a mathematical modeling of the behavior of electrons, and 
this itself was exciting enough to ensure that he did not sleep 
very much in Helgoland; and enough, too, to ensure that, six 
years later, he won the Nobel Prize. 

Returning to Gottingen in a state of excitement and optimism 
about his new work, Heisenberg hurriedly wrote up his new 
theory as a paper entitled “Quantum Theoretical Reinterpretation 
of Kinematic and Mechanical Relations,” which he gave to Born 
to submit for publication, while he himself left for Cambridge to 
fulfill a prior arrangement to deliver a talk to the Kapitza Club. 
The talk, delivered on July 28, 1925, was not on _ his 
revolutionary new ideas, but Heisenberg did mention his recently 
written paper to his host, Fowler, who asked to see it when 
Heisenberg had proof copies available. When, at the beginning of 
September, Fowler duly received a proof copy, he sent it to Dirac 
with a scribbled message on the front page: “What do you think 
of this? I shall be glad to hear.” 

Dirac was at this time in Bristol for the summer vacation. After 
an initial glance at Heisenberg’s paper, he put it to one side, 
seeing little interest in it. When he returned to Cambridge in 
October, he took up the paper again and this time became 
fascinated with it and quickly convinced of its fundamental 
importance. He realized that the key to it was the 
noncommutative multiplications that had puzzled Heisenberg, 
and, unlike Heisenberg, he recognized these as being akin to a 
mathematical construction called a “Poisson bracket,” which had 
been introduced into mathematics in the nineteenth century. 
Using the method of Poisson brackets, Dirac provided 
Heisenberg’s theory with a new mathematical foundation, the 
center of which was the equation (p X q) — (q X p) = ih/2n, 
which not only says that the multiplication of p and q is non- 
commutative (if it were commutative, of course, (p X q) — (q X 
Pp) would be equal to zero), but also provides an exact quantity by 
which p xX q differs from q X p, a quantity that uses the magical 
ingredient h, Planck’s constant, together with that equally 


) 


mysterious “imaginary” number, i, which is the square root of 
—1, 

By the time Heisenberg’s paper was published in November 
1925, Dirac had sent his own paper—immodestly entitled “The 
Fundamental Equations of Quantum Mechanics’—to the 
Proceedings of the Royal Society for publication in December. 
Astonishingly, the very same fundamental equation that Dirac 
had discovered had, at the same time, been discovered 
independently by Born and his new assistant, Pascual Jordan, 
who included it in a paper that they wrote together in September. 
Like Dirac, Born and Jordan realized that the noncommutativity 
in Heisenberg’s mathematics was not unprecedented, though they 
saw affinities not with Poisson brackets, but with the matrix 
mathematics developed in the nineteenth century by the British 
mathematician Arthur Cayley. In October, Born, Jordan and 
Heisenberg worked together to produce a long and detailed paper 
called “On Quantum Mechanics II” (often referred to as the Drei- 
Manner-Arbeit, the “Three-Man Paper”), which provided a 
rigorous mathematical foundation for Heisenberg’s new quantum 
mechanics, but which, because it was received by the Zeitschrift 
fiir Physik nine days after the Proceedings of the Royal Society 
received Dirac’s paper, cannot claim to have been the first to do 
so. 

By the New Year of 1926, then, a revolution in physics had 
taken place; the basic theory of quantum mechanics had been 
formulated and had received two different, but essentially 
similar, mathematical foundations. And Oppenheimer, merely by 
being at Cambridge during the academic year of 1925-6 and 
getting to know Fowler and Dirac, was right at the center of 
events. The effect on him was galvanizing and he began to 
immerse himself in the rapid developments that followed the 
birth of this new subject. 

Among these developments was Dirac’s second paper on the 
new theory, “Quantum Mechanics and a_ Preliminary 
Investigation of the Hydrogen Atom,” sent off for publication at 
the end of January 1926, which introduced a now-famous 
distinction between classical numbers, or “c-numbers,” which 
commute, and quantum numbers, or “q-numbers,” which do not. 
Before this article appeared in print, Dirac presented it on 
March 2 as a paper to the Del Squared V Club, with Oppenheimer 


among those present. The club minutes record that after Dirac’s 
paper there followed a “lengthy discussion,” in which, no doubt, 
Oppenheimer took a full part. 

On March 7, Oppenheimer wrote a letter to Fergusson, the tone 
of which is markedly different from his previous letter of 
January 23, written shortly after, and mainly to apologize for, the 
bizarre attempted strangling in Paris. Whereas then he had struck 
a remorseful and confessional tone, now he sounds brisk, 
businesslike and jocular. “My regret at not having strangled you 
is now intellectual rather than emotional,” he told Fergusson, 
assuring him that, if he chose to visit Oppenheimer in Cambridge 
before he went to Italy “it will be perfectly safe & I shall be very 
glad to see you.” Rather warily, Fergusson responded positively 
to this invitation and came to Cambridge sometime in March. 
Oppenheimer, he recalls, put him up in a room next door to his 
own, “and I remember thinking that I’d better make sure that he 
didn’t turn up in the night, so I put a chair up against the door. 
But nothing happened.” When Fergusson alluded _ to 
Oppenheimer’s behavior during the Christmas vacation, 
Oppenheimer told him not to worry; he was, he insisted, “over 
that.” 

Oppenheimer told Fergusson that he would probably have to 
spend the Easter vacation at Cambridge because he had so much 
work to do. Almost certainly, the work in question consisted not 
of his laboratory experiments, but rather of a paper in theoretical 
physics that was to become his first publication. If he could take a 
break from this work, he told Fergusson, he would go for a short 
walking holiday in Corsica with Wyman and Edsall, in which 
case, he wrote, he hoped that he would be able to meet Fergusson 
in Italy. In the event, Oppenheimer did manage to tear himself 
away from his theoretical studies for the projected holiday in 
Corsica, though he did not, as it turned out, succeed in joining 
Fergusson in Italy. 

Shortly before he left for Corsica, Oppenheimer, along with the 
rest of the theoretical physics community, received a bolt out of 
the blue. On March 13, the German academic journal Annalen der 
Physik published an article by the Austrian physicist Erwin 
Schrédinger called “Quantization as a Problem of Proper Values” 
which seemed to put the recent quantum-mechanics revolution in 
a completely new light. Or rather, it seemed to show how it 


would look in the old light, before the advent of Knabenphysik. In 
particular, what Schro6dinger—who, at thirty-eight years old, was 
himself certainly no Knabe—appeared to demonstrate was that 
quantum mechanics could quite readily be absorbed into old, 
familiar physics using old familiar mathematics. All the results 
that had been derived by Heisenberg, Born, Jordan and Dirac 
using esoteric and obscure methods of mathematics could, 
Schrédinger demonstrated, equally be derived from a theory that 
used only that most well-understood and widely used of 
mathematical tools: the differential equation. Moreover (and this 
was either a great advantage or a step backward, depending on 
one’s understanding of the physics of electrons), unlike the 
theories of Heisenberg, Born, Jordan and Dirac, Schrodinger’s 
theory allowed one to visualize what was happening inside an 
atom. Building on de Broglie’s work, Schrodinger’s theory called 
on one to imagine that an electron simply is a wave. In place of 
the term “quantum mechanics,” therefore, Schrodinger called his 
theory “wave mechanics.” 

The reaction among physicists, particularly the older ones, to 
Schrédinger’s theory (which would be developed over three 
further landmark papers published in 1926) was almost 
universally and unrestrainedly enthusiastic. Max Planck wrote to 
Schrodinger, telling him that he had read his first paper “like an 
eager child hearing the solution to a riddle that had plagued him 
for a long time.” Einstein told him “the idea of your work springs 
from true genius.” Even Max Born became quickly convinced that 
wave mechanics provided the “deepest form of the quantum 
laws.” Heisenberg, however, hated Schrédinger’s theory, seeing in 
it a desperate attempt to cling to an outdated and unsupportable 
visualization of the “orbits” of electrons. Dirac, too, disliked 
Schrédinger’s theory, at least initially. When, however, it was 
proved—by Dirac, Schrodinger and many _ others—that, 
mathematically, Schrodinger’s theory was equivalent to both the 
matrix mechanics of Born, Jordan and Heisenberg and the 
“fundamental equations” of Dirac himself, Dirac overcame his 
objections and treated Schrédinger’s version of the theory as an 
interesting, and sometimes useful, alternative formulation of 
quantum mathematics. 

Once the mathematical equivalence of the three versions of 
quantum mechanics was realized, there remained the question— 


which Dirac was inclined to dismiss as “philosophical,” but which 
Born, Heisenberg, Bohr and others regarded as fundamental— 
namely: how does one understand the physical reality that can be 
modeled equally by each of these three different theories? What, 
exactly, is being modeled by the mathematics? What, really, is an 
electron? A particle? A wave? Could it possibly be both? Might it 
possibly be neither? How should one, if indeed one should at all, 
picture an electron and its movements? 

With these questions hanging in the air over the entire 
community of theoretical physicists, Oppenheimer embarked on 
his holiday with Wyman and Edsall, his mind more or less 
completely preoccupied with the exciting developments in 
quantum theory. In a short autobiographical article that Edsall 
wrote at the end of his life, he remembers Oppenheimer during 
this holiday as “passionately eager to solve the problems of 
quantum physics.” Oppenheimer, Edsall writes, was, unlike their 
mutual friend Dirac (whom Edsall knew as a fellow graduate 
student at St. John’s College), “intensely articulate”; he 
“conveyed to me the deep excitement and promise of what was 
going on in quantum mechanics ... The feeling that he gave me 
for the central importance of the subject stayed with me.” 

There was a great deal of talk during this holiday. For ten days, 
Edsall, Wyman and Oppenheimer walked through the 
mountainous Corsican countryside, covering the entire length of 
the island, beginning in the north and ending in the impressive 
medieval citadel of Bonifacio, on the southernmost tip of the 
island, overlooking the strait that separates Corsica from Sardinia. 
They spent their nights in small inns, peasant huts or even 
occasionally out in the open. They had, it seems, very little to do 
with the locals, and so, spending all day and all night together, 
there was plenty of time and opportunity for discussion. As well 
as physics, Oppenheimer talked of French and Russian literature, 
especially Dostoyevsky. When Edsall expressed a preference for 
Tolstoy, Oppenheimer insisted: “No, no. Dostoevsky is superior. 
He gets to the soul and torment of man.” Once, in a conversation 
about people who had achieved great things, whether in science 
or literature, Oppenheimer remarked: “The kind of person that I 
admire most would be one who becomes extraordinarily good at 
doing a lot of things but maintains a tear-stained countenance.” 

Despite this remark, the Oppenheimer remembered by Edsall 


and Wyman during this holiday was far removed indeed from the 
Oppenheimer that Fergusson had encountered in France just 
three months previously. They even, on one occasion, saw him 
convulsed with mirth. What prompted this unprecedented event 
was a misunderstanding between Edsall and the Corsican police 
over some photographs that Edsall was taking of the famous 
fortifications at Bonifacio. Convinced that he was some kind of 
spy, the police took Edsall to the station for questioning. Wyman 
and Oppenheimer accompanied him, and, while they sat waiting 
in a corridor, they could hear Edsall trying to explain that he was 
not a spy, but a tourist. Though he himself could not stop 
laughing at the absurdity of the situation, Wyman was astonished 
when he looked up at Oppenheimer to see him slapping his thighs 
and chuckling. 

This incident at Bonifacio, coming at the end of the trio’s ten- 
day hike, suggests that, from Oppenheimer’s point of view, the 
holiday achieved its purpose of helping him to unwind and fully 
regain his sanity. In fact, it seems to have done much more than 
that. Several times throughout his life Oppenheimer emphasized 
the enormous importance that these ten spring days in Corsica 
had for him. They had an impact similar to, but even greater 
than, his first trip to New Mexico in 1922. Indeed, Oppenheimer 
suggested on a number of occasions, this holiday was the turning 
point in his life. 

To one of his earliest biographers, Nuel Pharr Davis, whose 
Lawrence & Oppenheimer was _ published the year after 
Oppenheimer’s death, he spoke of “what began for me in Corsica” 
and drew attention to the significance of an undocumented 
episode that occurred during his time there, an episode that he 
described as “a great and lasting part” of his life. The reason he 
was telling him about this, Oppenheimer told Pharr Davis, was to 
counteract the impression that the turning point in his life had 
been the security trial in 1954: “You see, don’t you, that I’m 
proving this point to you now. With something important to me 
not in those records.” As for what that “something” was, 
Oppenheimer was teasingly evasive. “You ask whether I will tell 
you the full story or whether you must dig it out,” he wrote to 
Pharr Davis. “But it is known to few and they won’t tell. You 
can’t dig it out. What you need to know is that it was not a mere 
love affair, not a love affair at all, but love.” “Geography,” he 


added, “was henceforth the only separation I recognized, but for 
me it was not a real separation.” 

Pharr Davis guessed that what Oppenheimer was alluding to 
here was a love for “a European girl who could not marry him.” 
This is perhaps true, but, even if it is, there is clearly more to 
understand about why Oppenheimer’s spring break in Corsica 
was such an important event in his life. His later friend Haakon 
Chevalier recalled Oppenheimer once telling him, many years 
after the event, that “one of the great experiences in his life” 
occurred in Corsica in 1926. The experience in question, 
however, had nothing to do with a “European girl,” or anyway 
not a real one. It was, rather, his reading of Proust’s A la recherche 
du temps perdu. 

Once, when the topic of cruelty came into the conversation, 
Chevalier recalled, Oppenheimer surprised him by quoting from 
memory, word for word, a passage from Proust’s novel. The 
passage comes in the first volume of Du cété de chez Swann, when 
Mademoiselle Vinteuil goads her lesbian lover to spit on a 
photograph of her recently departed father. In describing this 
scene, Proust emphasizes to his readers that there is something 
theatrical about Mlle. Vinteuil’s “sadism.” She is not really evil; 
rather, she finds it erotic to pretend to be so. In fact, Proust 
writes, it is precisely because she is not really evil that she can 
derive orgasmic pleasure from the grotesque performance of her 
lover. In the passage Oppenheimer memorized and recited to 
Chevalier, Proust writes: 


Perhaps she would not have considered evil to be so rare, so 
extraordinary, so estranging a state, to which it was so restful 
to emigrate, had she been able to discern in herself, as in 
everyone, that indifference to the sufferings one causes, an 
indifference which, whatever names one may give it, is the 
terrible and permanent form of cruelty. 


Why did this passage mean so much to Oppenheimer that he 
learned it by heart? And why was reading it one of the great 
experiences of his life? 

A clue to this might be contained in some remarks 
Oppenheimer made toward the end of his life, when he took part 
in a series of conferences partially sponsored by the Congress for 


Cultural Freedom—a group of politically liberal intellectuals 
united by their opposition to communism—on the relationship 
between science and culture. “We most of all should try to be 
experts on the worst among ourselves,” he said at one such 
meeting, and, as if to confirm that he had always been acutely 
aware of the worst in himself, he made the following confession: 


Up to now and even more in the days of my almost infinitely 
prolonged adolescence, I hardly took any action, hardly did 
anything, or failed to do anything, whether it was a paper on 
physics, or a lecture, or how I read a book, how I talked to a 
friend, how I loved, that did not arouse in me a very great 
sense of revulsion and of wrong. 

It turned out to be impossible ... for me to live with anybody 
else, without understanding that what I saw was only one part 
of the truth... and in an attempt to break out and be a 
reasonable man, I had to realize that my own worries about 
what I did were valid and were important, but that they were 
not the whole story, that there must be a complementary way 
of looking at them, because other people did not see them as I 
did. And I needed what they saw, needed them. 


In other words, Oppenheimer was able to live with other 
people only when he came to see that they did not necessarily see 
him as he saw himself, and therefore that his words and deeds 
did not arouse in others the sense of revulsion they aroused in 
him. This realization, brought about perhaps by a combination of 
Proust, conversations with good friends and the pleasures of the 
Corsican countryside, had an enormous effect on him. When he 
returned from Corsica, he said, he “felt much kinder and more 
tolerant” and “could now relate to others.” 

Oddly, Oppenheimer chose to leave Corsica in a way that 
persuaded Wyman and Edsall that he was still, after all, a little 
mad—or at least, as Wyman later put it, “passing through a great 
emotional crisis.” Having reached Bonifacio, the plan was to 
proceed to Sardinia, but, while the three of them were having 
dinner at their inn, a waiter approached Oppenheimer to tell him 
when the next boat left for France. Naturally, Edsall and Wyman 
immediately asked him why he was leaving so abruptly and 
unexpectedly. “I can’t bear to speak of it,” said Oppenheimer, 


“but I’ve got to go.” As Wyman later remembered it, the three of 
them drank a little more wine and then Oppenheimer said: “Well, 
perhaps I can tell you why I have to go. I’ve done a terrible thing. 
I’ve put a poisoned apple on Blackett’s desk and I’ve got to go 
back and see what happened.” Why Oppenheimer should, in an 
effort to explain his decision to return to Cambridge in the spring 
of 1926, confess to something he had done seven months earlier, 
suggesting that he had only just done it, takes some 
understanding. Indeed, it might well be inexplicable, though it 
seems reasonable to suppose that, having spent ten days and 
nights living so closely with Edsall and Wyman, Oppenheimer felt 
obliged to confess to them the secret of his bizarre behavior the 
previous autumn. 

However, the reason he wanted to get back to Cambridge, it 
seems safe to suppose, is that he wanted to finish writing his 
paper on quantum physics, and, with this in mind, it is possible to 
arrive at the following speculative explanation of his “confession” 
to Wyman and Edsall: before he set off for Corsica, Oppenheimer 
had left on Blackett’s desk an early draft of his first paper on 
quantum mechanics, which he now, ten days into his holiday in 
Corsica, realized contained serious errors (that is, it was 
“poisoned”). Desperate to get back to Cambridge to continue 
work on his paper and to correct the mistakes it contained, and 
feeling obliged to confess his previous sins to Edsall and Wyman, 
he exploited the analogy to tell them a story that contained, at 
one and the same time, a literal confession about what he had 
done the previous autumn and a metaphorical explanation of why 
he had to break short his holiday and return to Cambridge. 
Whether there is any truth at all in this speculative suggestion, 
what is not in doubt is that, after his holiday in Corsica, 
Oppenheimer was a different person. Whereas just a few months 
earlier he had felt paralyzed, depressed and unequal to the 
demands made upon him, now he was confident, productive and 
energetic. 

When he returned to England in the spring of 1926 the country 
was in political turmoil, heading toward the general strike, which 
lasted from May 3 to May 12. The country was engulfed in class 
war, with the middle classes doing everything they could to 
negate the effects of the strike. At Cambridge, this involved 
undergraduates temporarily abandoning their studies in order to 


drive buses or trains or lorries—anything to keep deliveries going 
and prevent the economy and society from grinding to a halt. So 
many Cambridge students took part in these strike-breaking 
activities that the university decided to postpone the summer 
exams. A minority of students and academics, including Patrick 
Blackett, were on the side of the workers and voiced their support 
for the strike. Paul Dirac, meanwhile, ignored it and spent this 
time finishing his Ph.D. thesis. Entitled simply “Quantum 
Mechanics,” it was the first doctoral thesis ever to be submitted 
on the subject and contained work that had already been 
recognized as being of fundamental importance. 

Oppenheimer, who had not yet even begun work on his Ph.D. 
thesis, managed, within a few weeks of returning from Corsica, to 
complete the paper that was to become his first publication. Its 
title was “On the Quantum Theory of Vibration-Rotation Bands.” 
On May 24, 1926, it was received by the Cambridge 
Philosophical Society, the venerable scientific society (established 
in 1819 “for the purpose of promoting scientific inquiry”) to 
which Oppenheimer had been elected as an “associate” in 
January 1926, and was published in their Proceedings in July. 
Though he was later disparaging about it (“That was a mess, that 
first paper”), the very fact that he was able, so soon after his 
severe problems during the winter, to write a publishable paper 
on a subject right at the cutting edge of advanced physical theory 
was a notable achievement. 

The paper might be seen as one of the earliest contributions to 
the subject of “quantum chemistry,” in that it attempts to apply 
the new quantum mechanics of Heisenberg, Born, Jordan, Dirac 
and Schrodinger (all of whose papers are cited in it) to the 
understanding not of atoms, but of molecules. In particular, 
Oppenheimer seeks to show the applicability of Dirac’s version of 
the mathematics of quantum mechanics to the understanding of 
diatomic molecules; that is, molecules, like those of oxygen (O2) 
and hydrogen (H2), that consist of two atoms. The vibration and 
rotation of these molecules produce characteristic spectra of 
electromagnetic radiation, the frequencies of which Oppenheimer 
attempts in this paper to derive from within Dirac’s theory. 

Compared with what Dirac was producing at this time, 
Oppenheimer’s first paper was a minor piece of work. It addresses 
a problem that is of secondary, rather than fundamental, 


importance, and, moreover, it has a weakness that would have 
been unthinkable in anything by Dirac: it contains mathematical 
errors. Nevertheless, its publication was enough to transform 
Oppenheimer from a failing experimental physicist to an up-and- 
coming theorist. When distinguished visitors came to Cambridge, 
Oppenheimer was now introduced to them as one of the Knaben 
leading the revolution in theoretical physics. When Paul 
Ehrenfest, the professor of physics at Leiden, came to Cambridge, 
for example, Oppenheimer remembers that “we went out on the 
river and talked about collision problems, Coulomb’s law ... and 
so on.” A short while after Ehrenfest’s visit to Cambridge, 
Oppenheimer met him again, when he and other American 
physicists at Cambridge spent a week at the University of Leiden. 
There he met Ehrenfest’s young, but already famous, assistants, 
Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck, who together had been 
the first to put forward the idea that electrons possess the 
property of spin. Oppenheimer’s reception among the theoretical 
physicists at Leiden recalls his acceptance by the literary “troika” 
in New Mexico in 1922. Uhlenbeck remembers Oppenheimer as 
being a “very warm person” who was “so involved in physics” 
that it “was as if we were old friends because [we] had so many 
things in common.” Oppenheimer, for his part, recalls that it was 
“wonderful” at Leiden and that he “realized then that some of the 
troubles of the winter had been exacerbated by the English 
customs.” 

Back in Cambridge, Oppenheimer resumed his theoretical 
studies and began work on a second paper on quantum 
mechanics, this time on what is known as the “two-body 
problem.” This is, in general, the problem of providing a 
mathematical model of two bodies orbiting one another. Newton 
had provided a solution of this problem for classical physics, and 
Dirac and Schrodinger had investigated it from the point of view 
of quantum mechanics. Oppenheimer’s aim was to provide a 
more complete quantum-mechanical solution to this problem 
than had so far been achieved. 

At the beginning of June 1926, while hard at work on this 
problem, Oppenheimer had one of the most memorable moments 
of his time at Cambridge—indeed, of his entire life—when he was 
introduced to Niels Bohr. Bohr, who was in England to receive 
the honor of being made a foreign member of the Royal Society, 


happened to be in Rutherford’s room at the Cavendish when 
Oppenheimer walked in. Rutherford, who by then looked upon 
Oppenheimer as a promising theorist rather than a distinctly 
unpromising experimentalist, immediately introduced him to 
Bohr. As custom and politeness demanded in such a situation, 
Bohr asked Oppenheimer what he was working on and, on being 
told that it was the two-body problem, asked him how it was 
going. “I’m in difficulties,” Oppenheimer replied. “Are the 
difficulties mathematical or physical?” Bohr asked. “I don’t 
know,” Oppenheimer answered, prompting Bohr to remark: 
“That’s bad.” The encounter made a deep and lasting impression 
on Oppenheimer. After meeting Bohr, he once said, “I forgot 
about beryllium and films and decided to try to learn the trade of 
becoming a theoretical physicist.” Bohr’s question to him, he 
thought, was a very good one, a question that went right to the 
heart of his difficulties. “I thought it put a rather useful glare on 
the extent to which I became embroiled in formal questions 
without stepping back to see what they really had to do with the 
physics of the problem.” 

Perhaps because of the arithmetical mistakes in his first paper, 
Oppenheimer took immense care to ensure that the mathematics 
in this second paper was free from error. Edsall remembers how, 
at Oppenheimer’s request, he spent hours one Sunday checking 
the figures in this paper, even though he himself had little idea 
what they meant. His reward was a footnote acknowledging his 
help while misspelling his name (“I am indebted to Mr J.T. 
Edsahl for checking these calculations”). By the middle of July 
the paper was finished and it appeared that month inthe 
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society under the title 
“On the Quantum Theory of the Problem of the Two Bodies.” 

By a fortuitous coincidence, this second paper brought 
Oppenheimer to the attention of one of the leading figures in 
quantum mechanics at the very point when he was making his 
greatest contribution to the subject. That figure was Max Born, 
who had already played a key role in the development of the 
matrix version of quantum mechanics and was on the brink of 
providing the definitive interpretation of the theory. A summary 
of that interpretation had been given in a short paper that Born 
published on July 10, 1926, called “Zur Quantenmechanik der 
Stossvorgange” (“On the Quantum Mechanics of Collision 


Processes”). Ten days later, Born sent off a longer, more polished 
and refined paper with the same title to the journal Zeitschrift fiir 
Physik, and on July 29—three days after the publication of 
Oppenheimer’s second paper—Born came to Cambridge to deliver 
this paper as a talk to the Kapitza Club with the English title “On 
the Quantum Mechanics of Collisions of Atoms and Electrons.” 
This paper was to have a profound impact on the way quantum 
mechanics was understood, addressing head-on exactly the 
question raised by Bohr’s brief discussion with Oppenheimer, the 
question about how one was to understand the physical reality 
that lay behind the mathematics of quantum mechanics. 

The immediate aim of Born’s paper was to bring quantum 
mechanics to bear on the subject of how particles behave when 
they collide with each other; his more general intention was to 
provide an interpretation of the mathematical formulae of 
quantum mechanics. In both respects, his conclusions were 
startling, from both a physical and a philosophical point of view; 
so startling that many people, including Einstein, refused to 
accept them. Still more remarkable, especially in the light of 
Einstein’s resistance, is the fact that those conclusions became 
widely accepted and remain today the generally held view among 
scientists. 

Regarding collisions, Born showed that quantum mechanics, 
unlike classical Newtonian mechanics, is nondeterministic. In 
Newtonian mechanics, what happens to one body after it collides 
with another (for example, a billiard ball hitting another billiard 
ball) is entirely determined by the laws of motion. So, if you 
repeat a collision (hit a billiard ball into another in exactly the 
same way), exactly the same thing will happen. If the ball 
deflected to the left the first time, it would deflect to the left 
every time you repeated the shot. In quantum mechanics, 
however, the situation is very different. According to Born, 
quantum mechanics allows identical experiments to have 
different outcomes: one time, the particle might be deflected to 
the left; another time, to the right. Any outcome is possible; some 
outcomes, however, are more probable than others. It is this 
feature of quantum mechanics that persuaded Einstein that the 
theory could not possibly be right and prompted him to make his 
famous remark (in a letter to Born): “God does not play dice.” 

The nondeterministic, probabilistic nature of quantum 


mechanics provided Born with an intriguing answer to the 
general question regarding the physical reality described by its 
equations, allowing him to decide between the particle-like 
“quanta” described by the mathematics of Heisenberg and Dirac 
and the waves described by Schrédinger’s differential equations. 
Basically, he came down on the side of regarding electrons as 
particles, while providing an ingenious explanation for why 
Schrédinger’s wave mechanics “worked.” Schrédinger believed 
that the success of his wave functions showed that de Broglie was 
right—electrons are waves—and his problem was to explain why, 
in countless experiments (including the original experiments of 
J. J. Thomson back in the 1890s), electrons seemed to behave 
like particles. For Born, it was the other way around; electrons 
were particles (or at least discrete “quanta”) and what required 
explanation was why they seemed to behave like waves. His 
answer to this last question invoked the probabilistic nature of 
quantum theory that he had demonstrated in his analysis of 
collisions. The waves of de Broglie and Schrédinger, Born argued, 
had no physical reality. Rather, they were probability waves. 
What they described was the probability of an electron being in a 
particular place at a particular time. Quantum mechanics, 
according to Born, is unable to say definitely whether an electron 
is or is not at a particular place at a particular time; it can only 
say what the odds are that it is here or there. And this is not 
because of the limitations of our knowledge; it is an inherent 
feature of physical reality, linked to its nondeterministic nature. 
This “statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics,” as it 
became known, was quickly adopted by other leading physicists, 
most notably Heisenberg and Bohr (who famously defended it 
against Einstein on numerous occasions), and it was for 
discovering it that Born was awarded the Nobel Prize, though 
oddly not until 1954, more than twenty years after the same 
honor had been awarded to de Broglie, Heisenberg, Schrodinger 
and Dirac.22 

Though Born had already sent his paper to the Zeitschrift, it had 
not yet been published when he came to Cambridge to deliver his 
talk to the Kapitza Club on July 29, 1926. When it was published, 
in September 1926, a footnote had been added, acknowledging 
the importance of Oppenheimer’s paper on the two-body 
problem. For a twenty-two-year-old research student who had not 


yet completed a Ph.D. thesis, this was a significant feather in his 
cap. Born was evidently very impressed with Oppenheimer. In the 
second week of August, Born returned to England to read a paper 
at the annual meeting of the British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, which that year was held in Oxford. The 
paper, entitled “Physical Aspects of Quantum Mechanics,” was 
Born’s most direct statement yet on the question of how, in the 
light of quantum mechanics, we are to understand physical 
reality, and was responsible for spreading his idea of probability 
waves to theoretical physicists in Britain. When the paper was 
published in Nature the following year, it carried the following 
acknowledgment: “Translated by Mr Robert Oppenheimer. The 
author is very much obliged to Mr Oppenheimer for his careful 
translation.” 

By the summer of 1926, then, Oppenheimer had not only 
established himself as a promising young theorist; he had become 
a collaborator with the person who at that time was leading the 
effort of the international community of physicists to understand 
the extraordinary world of quantum mechanics. He had, in fact, 
positioned himself where he had wanted to be: at the “center” of 
theoretical physics. His year at Cambridge had allowed him to 
achieve this, partly because it had enabled him to see that, in 
1926, the center of theoretical physics was not Cambridge, but 
Gottingen. The person to work with was not Ernest Rutherford, or 
even Niels Bohr, but rather Max Born. Accordingly, on August 18, 
1926, a week after the meeting at Oxford, Oppenheimer wrote to 
Raymond Priestley, asking for permission to spend the following 
year at G6ttingen, under the supervision of Born, who, 
Oppenheimer informed Priestley, was “particularly interested in 
the problems at which I hoped to work.” Reflecting on his 
decision to leave Cambridge for Gottingen, Oppenheimer later 
said that, though he “had very great misgivings about myself on 
all fronts,” he still felt determined to pursue his inclination to 
become a theoretical physicist: “Here was something I felt just 
driven to try.” 

He may have had misgivings, but he must also have known 
that, in pursuing this inclination, he had every chance of meeting 
with success. He had never stood any chance of impressing the 
“tutors & the dukes” of British high society, he would never have 
been invited to Garsington or to Pontigny, and he would never be 


described (as Blackett had been by I. A. Richards) as “a young 
Oedipus,” but he had succeeded in impressing one of the foremost 
quantum physicists in the world—an achievement that brought 
him not just near the center of theoretical physics, but right 
inside it. 


17 T. S. Eliot and Bertrand Russell. 

1s It is impossible to tell how much of this story is true. Can one believe that 
Oppenheimer deliberately dropped his suitcase, intending it to hit the woman? 
Did he really kiss her? And, perhaps most improbably of all: can one really 
imagine him traveling third-class? 

19 An alpha particle, as Rutherford was the first to establish, is a helium 
nucleus. It is (we now know, though this was not known before the discovery 
of neutrons in 1932) made up of two protons and two neutrons. What 
Rutherford and the physicists of the 1920s knew about alpha particles/helium 
nuclei was that they had an atomic weight of 4 and that they, like all nuclei, 
were positively charged. Chiefly, however, alpha particles were associated in 
the minds of the scientists of this period with what Rutherford had christened 
“alpha radiation,” which occurs when a radioactive element such as radium 
decays. The radioactive decay simply is the emission of alpha particles. As 
these particles include two protons, the decayed radium (atomic number 88) 
turns into radon (atomic number 86), and then, successively, into polonium 
(84) and lead (82). 

20 Nitrogen has atomic number 7, so that when it absorbs a proton it becomes 
element number 8—i.e., oxygen. 

21 It is indicative of the attitude toward theoretical physics at Cambridge 
during this period that Fowler’s official position was college lecturer in 
mathematics. 

22 As far as I know, no authoritative answer has been given as to why it took so 
long to award Born the Nobel Prize. Jeremy Bernstein has speculated that it is 
because, in 1933, when Heisenberg, Dirac and Schrédinger were honored, it 
would have been natural to have included Born and Jordan, but Jordan was a 
member of the Nazi Party and unacceptable. Therefore the committee had to 
wait until they had a reason for giving it to Born alone. This might explain why 
Born did not receive the prize in 1933, but it hardly explains why he had to 
wait a further twenty-one years. 


1926-1941 


Gottingen 


n the starkest contrast to his arrival in 
Cambridge just a year earlier, Oppenheimer arrived in Gottingen 


in the summer of 1926 in a state of almost unrestrained self- 
confidence. As Max Born put it, Oppenheimer seemed “conscious 
of his superiority.” In his autobiography Born complains several 
times about Oppenheimer’s arrogance, without appearing to 
recognize the central role he himself had played in nurturing it. 
Whereas at Cambridge, Oppenheimer arrived having been 
rejected by the leading physicist there, at Gottingen he arrived 
having been invited by the leading physicist there, who made no 
secret of the fact that he was extremely impressed with, and 
indeed a little intimidated by, Oppenheimer’s intelligence. 
Though apparently unaware of what it revealed, Born tells a 
story that perfectly conveys the role he played in allowing, even 
encouraging, Oppenheimer to be “conscious of his superiority.” 
The story concerns Born’s most famous paper, “The Quantum 
Mechanics of Collision Processes,” the one that he read to the 
Kapitza Club in July 1926, when he first met Oppenheimer. Born 
says that when he finished writing the paper, he showed it to 
Oppenheimer in order for him to check the difficult and involved 
calculations it contained. This must have been, I think, in August 
1926, when Born returned to England to read the paper that 
Oppenheimer translated to the British Association for the 
Advancement of Science at Oxford. Born had by then received the 
proofs of “The Quantum Mechanics of Collision Processes” from 
the Zeitschrift fiir Physik, and it is presumably these proofs that he 
showed to Oppenheimer. What would immediately have struck 
Oppenheimer, and boosted his confidence enormously, was the 
footnote Born added to the paper at the proof stage drawing 


attention to the importance of Oppenheimer’s work on the two- 
body problem. Born, who was self-critical to a fault, says that he 
asked Oppenheimer to check the calculations because “I was 
never very good at long calculations and always made silly 
mistakes.” All his students knew this, he says, but Oppenheimer 
“was the only one frank and rude enough to say it without 
joking.” For, after he had checked the paper, Oppenheimer 
returned it to Born, saying, with an astonished expression: “I 
couldn’t find any mistake—did you really do this alone?” “I was 
not offended,” Born insists. “It actually increased my esteem for 
his remarkable personality.” 

Born was at that time a forty-three-year-old professor at one of 
the most distinguished universities in the world, at the height of 
his career, having, in the preceding few years, published work of 
fundamental, Nobel Prize-winning importance—work _ that 
persuaded brilliant young physicists from all over the world to 
come to Gottingen to study with him. Oppenheimer, meanwhile, 
was a twenty-two-year-old student, recently recovered from a 
severe mental illness, who was entirely unknown to the world at 
large and whose publications to date numbered just two articles. 
From the point of view of mathematical competence, Born had 
taken a Ph.D. in mathematics, examined by David Hilbert, widely 
recognized as the greatest mathematician of his day, who 
regarded Born as a student of exceptional mathematical ability. 
Born was also regarded by his peers in theoretical physics as a 
scientist whose greatest strength was his facility with difficult and 
esoteric mathematics. Oppenheimer, on the other hand, had not 
yet taken a Ph.D. in either mathematics or physics, and, though 
regarded as an undergraduate as someone who, in Percy 
Bridgman’s words, had “much mathematical power,” 
acknowledged himself that there were significant gaps in his 
mathematical education. His first published paper had been 
marred by mathematical errors and throughout his life he would 
have a reputation among physicists as someone prone to mistakes 
in mathematical calculations. Objectively, there was no reason 
whatsoever for Born to look up to Oppenheimer, particularly with 
regard to his mathematical acumen, nor was there any excuse for 
Oppenheimer to look down on Born. That, within a month of 
knowing each other, their relationship developed in a way that 
made it possible for Oppenheimer to be condescending toward 


Born about his mathematical competence says a great deal about 
the personalities of both men; about Born’s insecurities and about 
Oppenheimer’s ability to, as it were, cast a spell. 

Another key to understanding Oppenheimer’s self-assurance at 
Gottingen, compared to the self-doubts and anxieties he had felt 
at Cambridge, may lie in the contrast between the two 
universities themselves. The University of Gottingen, though not 
the oldest in Germany (Heidelberg, Leipzig and several others 
predate it by hundreds of years), is certainly one of the most 
prestigious and is commonly held to be Germany’s equivalent to 
Cambridge (with Heidelberg its equivalent to Oxford). What 
would have struck Oppenheimer when he arrived in Gottingen in 
the summer of 1926, however, are the many ways in which it is 
very unlike Cambridge. These differences are immediately 
apparent: the University of G6ttingen’s oldest and grandest 
buildings are elegant and graceful, rather than Gothic and 
ecclesiastical, betraying its origins in the eighteenth-century 
Enlightenment, rather than in thirteenth-century monastic 
scholarship. Not being a collegiate university, it has no dons, 
fellows or high table. It has its own famous and celebrated 
esoteric rituals (the most famous of which is that Ph.D. students 
should, on passing their oral examination, be carried by cart to 
the market square in the center of town, where they have to kiss 
the statue of the Gdnseliesel, the goose girl), but it does not have 
the weight of 700 years of tradition bearing down upon it. 

Moreover, the postwar atmosphere of a defeated nation is very 
different from that of the victors. At Gottingen in the 1920s one 
would not have been aware of living in a carefree “Jazz Age” or 
the “Roaring Twenties”; neither was there any parallel to the 
calculatedly unconventional, self-consciously effete aestheticism 
that characterized British university life in the postwar period: 
the world depicted, for example, in Evelyn Waugh’s Brideshead 
Revisited. The atmosphere at G6ottingen in the 1920s was 
emphatically not “gay.” Rather, as Oppenheimer later put it, it 
was “bitter, sullen ... discontent and angry and loaded with all 
those ingredients which were later to produce a major disaster.” 
Gottingen was, as this description hints, fertile ground for the 
then-burgeoning Nazi movement. In 1922, one of the very first 
branches of the Nazi Party was set up there and three years later, 
just a year before Oppenheimer arrived, a chemistry student 


named Achim Gercke, later a key figure in the Nazi movement, 
began to compile a list of Jewish professors at the university, so 
that, when the Nazis came to power, they would immediately 
know whom to expel in the name of racial purity. 

The portentous sullenness created by such racial hatred was felt 
deeply by Oppenheimer, who, after less than a year, was glad to 
leave Gottingen. And yet, despite all this, for the nine months or 
so that he was there, Oppenheimer thrived at GO6ttingen as 
conspicuously as he had foundered at Cambridge. The anger, the 
resentment, the increasingly vehement and vicious anti-Semitism, 
though of course extremely unpleasant, were not, as it turned out, 
as debilitating or oppressive as the “excellence” at Cambridge had 
been. At Gottingen, no matter what else he had to endure, he did 
not have to deal with people who mixed with dukes, who felt 
comfortable at high table, and who discussed literature and 
philosophy with internationally renowned French intellectuals. 
Rather, at Gottingen, he was the one who intimidated people with 
his social, intellectual and cultural preeminence, as exhibited by 
his ostentatious wealth, his mastery of the French language and 
French poetry, his astonishingly wide-ranging knowledge and his 
refined taste in everything from literature to clothes, architecture 
to hand luggage. 

If anyone at Gottingen seemed aristocratic, it was Oppenheimer 
himself, who was elaborately well mannered in an almost courtly 
fashion and seemed to take toward his fellow students an attitude 
of noblesse oblige. Word got out among the other graduate 
students that, if you admired any of Oppenheimer’s possessions, 
he would feel obliged to present it to you as a gift. Soon after he 
arrived at Gottingen he and some other students traveled by train 
to Hamburg to attend a seminar. Among the group was a doctoral 
student named Charlotte Riefenstahl (no relation to the 
filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl), who, when the group’s luggage was 
collected together at the platform, could not help noticing a very 
fine, and obviously extremely expensive, pigskin bag, which 
looked out of place among the cheap and battered suitcases 
surrounding it. When she asked whose it was, she received the 
answer: “Who else but Oppenheimer’s.” Intrigued, she sought out 
Oppenheimer, sat next to him on the train home and, somewhat 
to his bafflement, complimented him on his beautiful luggage. 
Thus began a friendship that Oppenheimer, in his courtly way, 


tried unsuccessfully to turn into a romance, and, sure enough, 
when he left Gottingen, he insisted on giving his pigskin bag to 
Fraulein Riefenstahl. 

Postwar G6ttingen provided Oppenheimer with plenty of 
opportunities for condescension, full as it was with people who 
had fallen on hard times. Among those was the family with whom 
Oppenheimer lodged. At Cambridge he had complained of the 
“miserable hole” he lodged in; at Gottingen, his lodgings were in 
a large and comfortable house on Giesmarlandstrasse owned by a 
recently impoverished family. The family were the Carios, who, 
Oppenheimer later remembered, “had the typical bitterness on 
which the Nazi movement rested.” Dr. Cario was a physician 
who, having lost his savings as a result of postwar inflation, also 
lost his job when he was disqualified for malpractice. To make a 
living and to keep their spacious home, the family was forced to 
take lodgers, which was clearly a source of resentment and 
humiliation for them. 

Among those lodgers were two other physicists, Karl T. 
Compton and Edward Condon (the connection between the Cario 
family and the physics department may have been made through 
Dr. Cario’s son, who was a physics student). Condon was a couple 
of years older than Oppenheimer, and, on the face of it at least, 
further advanced academically, having completed his Ph.D. at 
Berkeley that summer. Like many other postdoctoral American 
physicists, he decided to come to Germany to study with the 
pioneers of quantum mechanics. He came quickly to regret his 
choice of Gottingen, finding that Max Born, with whom he had 
wanted to study, was unwilling to spare him much time or 
attention. As Born remembers it: “The Americans were too 
numerous for me to have much time for all of them.” 


Some of them, such as Condon, were therefore disgruntled. He 
complained about everything in Gottingen: the primitive digs 
without a proper bath, the food in the restaurants, the bad bus 
services, etc., and last but not least the overworked professor 
who had so little time for him. 


It was not an easy time for Condon. His only income was a 
small postdoctoral fellowship, and, though just twenty-four, he 
had a wife and baby to support. Such pressures were entirely 


alien to Oppenheimer, who did nothing to disguise his own great 
wealth and took an uncomprehendingly lofty view of Condon’s 
domestic commitments. An incident that stayed in Condon’s 
mind, and that he relayed many years later, concerns an occasion 
when Oppenheimer invited him and his wife, Emilie, for a walk. 
Emilie explained that she had to refuse the invitation because she 
had to look after their infant child. “All right,” replied 
Oppenheimer, “we’ll leave you to your peasant tasks.” 

Though clearly intended as a joke, such displays of faux- 
aristocratic hauteur were, from Condon’s point of view, irritating 
rather than amusing, but what Condon found even worse was 
Oppenheimer’s determination to impress upon everybody at 
Gottingen just how very clever he was. “Trouble is,” Condon once 
remarked, “that Oppie is so quick on the trigger intellectually 
that he puts the other guy at a disadvantage. And, dammit, he is 
always right, or at least right enough.” Oppenheimer did not, like 
Condon, arrive at Gottingen with a doctorate. However, what 
Oppenheimer did have—and what Condon was never to have, but 
what he most craved at G6ottingen—was Max Born’s admiration 
and respect. “He and Born became very close friends,” Condon 
later remembered, “and saw a great deal of each other, so much 
so, that Born did not see much of the other theoretical physics 
students who had come there to work with him.” 

Born’s respect for Oppenheimer was clear to everyone at 
Gottingen and seemed to elevate him above his fellow students. 
But, having got away with taking a condescending attitude 
toward Born himself, it was not only his fellow postgraduates and 
postdoctoral students like Condon that Oppenheimer felt able to 
look down upon, but also established physicists such as his other 
co-lodger, Karl T. Compton. Compton was not an easy target for 
superciliousness. He came from an extremely distinguished 
family; his father, Elias Compton, was dean of the University of 
Wooster, and his brother, William, would later become president 
of the State College of Washington. His other brother, Arthur, was 
a world-renowned experimental physicist, with whose work 
Oppenheimer would certainly have been familiar. Arthur 
Compton’s most famous work was his discovery in 1922 of the 
“scattering” of X-rays, a discovery for which he received the 
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1927 and, since 1923, he had been 
professor of physics at the University of Chicago. Though Arthur 


did not lodge with the Cario family, he, like his brother Karl, was 
spending the year 1926-7 in Gottingen. In his memoir, Atomic 
Quest, he recalls how he met Oppenheimer “when he was a 
member of the colony of American students of James Franck and 
Max Born at Gottingen,” and describes him as “one of the very 
best interpreters of the mathematical theories to those of us who 
were working more directly with the experiments.” Coming from 
the man about to win the Nobel Prize, this is an extraordinary 
compliment to pay a twenty-two-year-old who had not yet 
completed his Ph.D. thesis. 

Though not a Nobel laureate, Karl Compton himself was, when 
Oppenheimer met him, an established physicist and a man of 
some eminence. Thirty-nine years old, he was a full professor at 
Princeton and a key figure in the American scientific 
establishment. He was already vice president of the American 
Physical Society and, during Oppenheimer’s year at Gottingen, 
was to become its president. Compton was also that year made 
chairman of the physics section of the National Academy of 
Sciences. His career culminated just a few years later, in 1930, 
when he was appointed president of the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. 

Extraordinarily, despite his many distinctions, honors and 
positions, Compton felt intimidated by Oppenheimer. He is 
reported as feeling that, though he could hold his own with the 
younger man in science, when Oppenheimer talked about 
literature, philosophy or politics, he felt at a loss. For his part, 
Oppenheimer felt able to be as condescending toward Compton as 
he was toward Condon. In a letter to Francis Fergusson, of 
November 1926, he wrote: 


There are about 20 American physicists & such here. Most of 
them are over thirty. Professors at Princeton or California 
[where Condon had taken his Ph.D.] or some such place, 
married, respectable. They are mostly pretty good at physics, 
but completely uneducated & unspoiled. They envy the 
Germans their intellectual adroitness, & want physics to come 
to America. 


Of course, as usual in Oppenheimer’s letters to Fergusson, one 
has to make allowance for his apparent need to impress and his 


consequent compulsion to show off. Thus, telling Fergusson in 
uncharacteristically direct terms that “the science is much better 
than at Cambridge, & on the whole, probably the best to be 
found,” he could not resist adding: 


They are working very hard here & combining a fantastically 
impregnable metaphysical disingenuousness with the gogetting 
habits of a wall-paper manufacturer. The result is that the work 
done here has an almost demoniac lack of plausibility to it & is 
highly successful. 


The description this offers of Born’s statistical interpretation of 
quantum mechanics, alluding to both its success in making sense 
of the results obtained from experiment and the high 
philosophical (metaphysical) cost it exacts (the abandonment of 
causal determinism), is very apt, but it could be seen to be so, 
surely, only by someone who already knew something about it. 

Even allowing for a certain theatrical tendency to exaggerate, 
there is an extraordinarily self-confident tone in this letter, and in 
the few others from this period that survive. Oppenheimer tells 
Fergusson that he is not sure whether he will go back to 
Cambridge before he returns to the States, and adds, almost as a 
casual aside: “I’ll probably get a degree here in March.” At the 
root of the extreme confidence manifested in his relations with 
others, and in his prediction that he could complete his Ph.D. 
within six months of arriving at G6ttingen, was his close 
relationship with Born, with whom—in striking contrast to 
Condon—he spent an immense amount of time, not only in 
lectures and seminars, but also at Born’s home. Within a very 
short time he became regarded, and came to regard himself, not 
as Born’s student, but as his collaborator. For example, in a letter 
to Edwin Kemble, written about two weeks after his letter to 
Fergusson, Oppenheimer uses the phrase “another problem on 
which Prof. Born and I are working,” as if he and the head of the 
most prestigious center of theoretical physics in the world at that 
point were now essentially partners. 

Nor did he seem to regard himself as the junior partner in this 
collaboration. In Born’s seminar on quantum mechanics, 
Oppenheimer would unapologetically interrupt whoever was 
speaking—whether another student or Born himself—walk up to 


the blackboard, take the chalk from the speaker’s hand and say 
something like “No, that is wrong,” “That is not how it is done” 
or “This can be done much better in the following manner.” This 
lordly manner impressed his fellow students, one of whom later 
remarked, “I felt as if he were an inhabitant of Olympus who had 
strayed among humans and was doing his best to appear human.” 
But it also irritated them. Some of them complained to Born and 
asked him to do something about it. “But,” Born writes in his 
autobiography, “I was a little afraid of Oppenheimer, and my 
half-hearted attempts to stop him were unsuccessful.” 

Still, however brilliant Oppenheimer was, and however certain 
he himself was of the value of what he had to say, the students 
had come to Gottingen to learn from Born, not him. And so, one 
day, Born arrived at his seminar to find on his desk a sheet of 
paper disguised as a piece of medieval parchment, upon which 
was written, in archaic ornamental script, a threat to boycott the 
seminars unless Oppenheimer’s disruptions ceased. The driving 
force behind the document, Born later came to believe, was the 
future Nobel laureate Maria Goppert, then a precocious twenty- 
year-old undergraduate physics student. Realizing that he had to 
take the boycott threat seriously, but still afraid to confront 
Oppenheimer directly, Born devised an elaborate plan to make 
Oppenheimer aware of the trouble he was causing. The next time 
Oppenheimer came around to Born’s house, Born left the 
“parchment” document on his desk, then exited the room to take 
a prearranged call from his wife, Heidi. “This plot worked,” Born 
writes in his autobiography. “When I returned I found him rather 
pale and not so voluble as usual. And the interruptions in the 
seminar ceased altogether.” Born worried for the rest of his life 
whether he had offended Oppenheimer in this way and was 
inclined to believe that Oppenheimer’s lingering resentment over 
the incident was the reason why, in later life, Born never received 
any invitations from universities in the U.S. 

Born’s intense interest in, and admiration of, Oppenheimer 
naturally aroused the interest of other physicists and, by the end 
of 1926, Oppenheimer—though he had not by then published 
anything remotely comparable to the path-breaking work of 
Dirac, Heisenberg, Jordan and Born himself—was beginning to be 
spoken of in the same breath. At that time the U.S. National 
Research Council was, in partnership with the Rockefeller 


Foundation, looking to fund promising young American physicists 
who could bring to the U.S. a knowledge and understanding of 
cutting-edge European physics. (This is what Oppenheimer was 
alluding to in his letter to Fergusson when he wrote that “They 
[the American physicists at Gottingen] envy the Germans their 
intellectual adroitness, & want physics to come to America.”) In 
his role as a member of the NRC’s fellowship selection committee, 
Karl Compton reported to the Rockefeller Foundation on 
December 6, 1926: “As far as I can learn, Condon and a very 
young chap named Oppenheimer are the star performers in 
physics.” Two weeks later, this view was echoed by Born himself, 
who, when asked by the Rockefeller Foundation for his opinion 
on the young American physicists he had encountered, wrote: “I 
would like to point out here only one who rises above the 
average. He is Mr Robert Oppenheimer, a young American who is 
extraordinarily good in mathematics, has good physical 
understanding and promises to become an exceptional scholar.” 

Oppenheimer’s growing reputation at G0ottingen—one is 
tempted to call it “mystique”’—was not, however, entirely based 
on Born’s high opinion of him. By the end of 1926, he was 
producing written work that was at least beginning to justify the 
things said about him by Compton and others. Most significant 
was an article he sent to Zeitschrift fiir Physik on Christmas Eve 
entitled “Zur Quantentheorie kontinuierlicher Spektren” (“On the 
Quantum Theory of Continuous Spectra”), which formed his 
Ph.D. thesis and was, at twenty-five pages, one of the longest 
articles he ever published. The distinguished physicist Abraham 
Pais has described this article as “quite important,” since it 
introduced various mathematical techniques that are still in use. 
In particular, Oppenheimer devised for this article a method of 
calculating, in a quantum-mechanical way, the absorption of light 
by hydrogen, a method that is used even now for understanding 
the physical processes that occur in the interiors of stars. This, 
Pais emphasizes, was “unexplored territory at the time,” and, as 
such, must be regarded as some kind of breakthrough, although, 
compared to the work of Dirac, Heisenberg, Jordan and Born, it 
was a fairly minor breakthrough, an application of the theory of 
quantum mechanics, rather than a fundamental step in the 
creation and development of that theory. 

Paul Dirac, whom Oppenheimer venerated as a_ physicist 


perhaps more than any other except Niels Bohr, took a 
notoriously austere view of work that was not of the first 
importance. At St. John’s College, he once crushed a fellow 
doctoral student, Robert Schlapp—who was then researching the 
reflection of X-rays from crystals—with the remark, “You ought 
to tackle fundamental problems, not peripheral ones.” Later in 
life, when he gave a public lecture on “The Development of 
Quantum Mechanics,” Dirac conveyed the same attitude. Talking 
about the time just after the initial formulation of quantum 
mechanics, he remarked: “It was very easy in those days for any 
second-rate physicist to do first-rate work.” What he meant, he 
explained, was that, once the mathematical techniques of 
quantum mechanics had been developed: 


It was then an interesting game people could play to take the 
various models of dynamical systems, which we were used to 
in the Newtonian theory, and transform them into the new 
mechanics of Heisenberg ... Whenever one solved one of the 
little problems, one could write a paper about it. 


It is not entirely clear that Dirac would have regarded the topic of 
Oppenheimer’s Ph.D. thesis as “one of the little problems,” but it 
seems entirely possible. 

Oppenheimer was to get to know Dirac very well in the second 
half of his stay at Gottingen, since in February 1927 Dirac arrived 
in Gottingen and moved into the Cario family house, replacing 
the disgruntled Condon, who had left for Munich, hoping to 
receive from Arnold Sommerfeld the attention he had failed to 
receive from Born. “The most exciting time I had in Gottingen,” 
Oppenheimer once said, “and perhaps the most exciting time in 
my life was when Dirac arrived and gave me the proofs of his 
paper on the quantum theory of radiation.” 

It is unlikely that the excitement was reciprocated. Dirac was a 
notoriously solitary man. An interviewer once said to Dirac: 
“Oppenheimer indicates that, when he was in Gottingen, he 
thinks you saw as much or more of him than anyone else there.” 
“That is so,” Dirac replied. “We sometimes went for long walks 
together, although I had many walks alone.” Though 
Oppenheimer often expressed his admiration for Dirac, there is, 
as far as I am aware, just one occasion on which Dirac is on 


record as expressing admiration for Oppenheimer, and that is a 
rather special case, since the occasion was Dirac’s acceptance of 
the J. Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Prize, an annual prize 
awarded by the University of Miami. “I am especially happy to be 
awarded the Oppenheimer Prize,” Dirac said in his speech, 
“because I was a great friend and admirer of Oppenheimer.” 
Strikingly, however, when he specifies the “admirable qualities” 
that he saw in Oppenheimer, his emphasis is on expository gifts 
rather than on scientific achievement. His admiration for 
Oppenheimer, he makes clear, centers on his expertise “as a 
chairman for a discussion or a colloquium.” 

Unlike Karl Compton, Dirac was not impressed by 
Oppenheimer’s knowledge of and interest in literature. On the 
contrary, he rather disapproved of it. Once he remarked to 
Oppenheimer: “I don’t see how you can work on physics and 
write poetry at the same time. In science, you want to say 
something nobody knew before, in words everyone can 
understand. In poetry, you are bound to say something that 
everybody knows already in words that nobody can understand.” 

Dirac came to Gottingen from Bohr’s institute in Copenhagen, 
where he had been since September 1926, and where he had 
produced two pieces of fundamentally important work. The first 
laid the foundation for what is now known as “transformation 
theory,” showing how one can transform any statement of 
quantum physics written in Schrddinger’s wave theory into one 
written either in Heisenberg’s matrices or Dirac’s brackets. The 
second (the one Oppenheimer alludes to in the quotation above) 
established a new and important field of study: quantum 
electrodynamics, bringing quantum mechanics to bear on the 
understanding of electromagnetic radiation. 

Though Oppenheimer’s work did not approach the importance 
of Dirac’s, at Gottingen the two were often associated with each 
other as young, brilliant theorists at the cutting edge of the new 
physics. In a letter to S.W. Stratton, president of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, written on February 13, 
1927, Born repeated the view he had earlier reported to the 
Rockefeller Foundation, that, among the Americans working at 
Gottingen, Oppenheimer stood out as being “quite excellent.” A 
few weeks later, the American physicist Earle Kennard wrote to a 
friend: “There are three young geniuses in theory here, each less 


intelligible to me than the others.” The three were Oppenheimer, 
Jordan and Dirac. 

American physicists were very keen to be kept abreast of 
theoretical developments in Europe because, as they were all 
aware, important things were happening so quickly that it was a 
constant battle to stay with the pace. As Edward Condon once put 
it: “Great ideas were coming out so fast during that period that 
one got an altogether wrong impression of the normal rate of 
progress in theoretical physics.” 

In March 1927, Heisenberg published an article called “On the 
Intuitive Content of Quantum-theoretical Kinematics and 
Mechanics,” which contained the first expression of the idea that 
everyone now associates with quantum theory: the uncertainty 
principle. This states that there must always be some degree of 
uncertainty in our knowledge of quantum-mechanical systems, 
such as the interiors of atoms. Heisenberg showed that if 
quantum mechanics is correct (and, for the purpose of the article, 
Heisenberg used Dirac’s formulation of the theory, because that 
was the most general), then the more precise our determination 
of the position of a subatomic particle, the less precise will be our 
determination of its momentum, and vice versa. The reason for 
this is that subatomic particles, such as electrons, are so small 
that ordinary visible light will not be sufficient to fix their 
positions, because the wavelength of the light is much bigger 
than the particle. To fix the position of the particle more 
precisely, one would have to use electromagnetic radiation with 
much shorter waves (and therefore greater frequencies), such as 
gamma radiation. But these high-frequency waves carry great 
energy, enough to deflect, and thereby alter the momentum of, 
the electron. So, we can be precise about the position of an 
electron only by affecting (and thereby introducing some 
imprecision in the measurement of) its momentum, and we can 
only gain a precise measurement of its momentum if we use low- 
energy, low-frequency radiation, the wavelengths of which are 
too great for a precise determination of position. 

A few months before Heisenberg’s uncertainty paper was 
published, Oppenheimer wrote a letter to George Uhlenbeck in 
Leiden, showing that he himself was giving at least some thought 
to fundamental questions about the interpretation of quantum 
mechanics. “My own feeling,” he told Uhlenbeck, “is that, 


whereas it is often correct to regard W [the wave function] as a 
probability amplitude, this interpretation is not the most 
fundamental one. It seems to me that the problem has entered a 
new stage now, & essentially because of Dirac’s last paper.” He 
was right, of course, that the problem had entered—or was about 
to enter, after the publication of Heisenberg’s paper—a new 
stage. But, despite being shared by, among others, Einstein, 
Oppenheimer’s feeling that Born’s probabilistic interpretation of 
the wave function is not the most fundamental has not, so far, 
been justified; the search for a yet more fundamental 
interpretation still goes on. 

Oppenheimer’s own research, as he outlined to Uhlenbeck, did 
not center on this fundamental question of interpretation, but 
consisted rather in the kind of problem disparaged by Dirac: 
showing that quantum mechanics could be successfully applied 
to, as Oppenheimer put it, “such effects as polarization & 
depolarization of mercury resonance lines & impact radiation.” 
This work led to two papers, both of which were published in 
Zeitschrift flir Physik, the journal most associated with the leading 
work in quantum mechanics. 

Oppenheimer had been prompted to write to Uhlenbeck after 
meeting one of his colleagues, the experimental physicist E. C. 
Wiersma, who came to Gottingen to give a paper. Wiersma had 
evidently told Oppenheimer that Uhlenbeck had accepted a 
position at the University of Michigan, starting the following 
academic year. “I am very glad,” Oppenheimer told Uhlenbeck. “I 
shall be going to America (Pasadena) next July & if you think of 
going at the same time & have no better plans, perhaps we might 
arrange to go together.” 

Oppenheimer had, shortly before this, received a letter offering 
him one of the National Research Council postdoctoral 
fellowships. Given that he had not actually applied for such a 
fellowship and that he had not yet received his doctorate, this is a 
measure both of how far Oppenheimer’s reputation had spread by 
the spring of 1927 and of how keen American universities were at 
this time to attract physicists with expertise in quantum 
mechanics. His decision to use the fellowship to go to the 
California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena shows 
how powerful the pull of the American Southwest remained for 
him, as other prestigious universities were only too eager to 


attract him, not the least of which was Harvard. 

On April 3, 1927, Oppenheimer’s old mentor at Harvard, Percy 
Bridgman—apparently unaware that Oppenheimer had already 
been offered an NRC fellowship—wrote to him, hoping to lure 
him back to Harvard. “From what I hear,” Bridgman wrote, “I 
judge that you have your doctor’s degree already. I saw Fowler in 
Oxford last August, and he gave the most glowing account of the 
work you had been doing with him.” 


Had you thought of applying for a National Research 
Fellowship for next year in case you are getting your degree? If 
this appeals to you at all I am sure that we would all be very 
glad indeed to have you at Harvard again and together with 
Kemble and Slater23 you ought to make a team that would get 
some significant theoretical work done. 


Perhaps in response to this approach, Oppenheimer changed 
his plans somewhat and arranged to spend his time as an NRC 
postdoctoral fellow first at Harvard and then at Caltech. 

For now, though, he had to actually get his Ph.D., which, as 
everyone assumed, was purely a formality. The paper he had 
already published the previous December was accepted as a Ph.D. 
dissertation, and a viva (an oral examination) was scheduled for 
May 11, the examiners being Born and James Franck. Neither 
examiner had any doubt that Oppenheimer should pass and the 
examination was kept fairly short. Franck spent about twenty 
minutes asking Oppenheimer questions and, on leaving the 
examination room, was heard to say: “I’m glad that is over. He 
was on the point of questioning me.” The dissertation was passed 
“with distinction.” One problem remained: officially, 
Oppenheimer was not even a student at Gottingen. He had, it 
seems, neglected to register. Remarkably, Born persuaded the 
authorities to overlook this arguably fundamental problem, on 
the extraordinarily implausible grounds of Oppenheimer’s 
poverty. “Economic circumstances,” he wrote to the Prussian 
Ministry of Education, “render it impossible for Herr 
Oppenheimer to remain in Gottingen after the end of the summer 
term.” 

Actually, by this time Born had a vested interest in ensuring 
that Oppenheimer did not spend more time than was necessary in 


Gottingen. The two had begun to collaborate and the partnership 
was proving to be, from Born’s point of view, extremely stressful. 
Working with Oppenheimer seemed to strip him of his self-belief 
and render him incapable of scientific work. “My soul was nearly 
destroyed by that man,” he wrote to Paul Ehrenfest soon after 
Oppenheimer left; and, returning to the subject in another letter 
to Ehrenfest about a year later, he claimed that Oppenheimer’s 
“presence destroyed the last remnants of my _ scientific 
capabilities.” The nearest he came to explaining the destructive 
effect Oppenheimer had was his remark to Ehrenfest: “Through 
his manner to know everything better and to continue any idea 
you give him, he has paralyzed all of us for three-quarters of a 
year.” In other words, the problem with Oppenheimer was that 
he always wanted to be better than the people around him. 

The most lasting fruit of the collaboration between Born and 
Oppenheimer was a published paper, “Zur Quantentheorie der 
Molekeln” (“On the Quantum Theory of Molecules”), which, 
though one of the least well known of Born’s works, is to this day 
the most frequently cited of all Oppenheimer’s publications. In 
the field of quantum chemistry it is considered a classic paper, 
and every undergraduate textbook in that field has a section on 
the paper’s central idea, which has become known as the “Born- 
Oppenheimer approximation.” 

As Oppenheimer once put it, the purpose of the paper is to use 
quantum mechanics to explain “why molecules were molecules.” 
It was chemistry that had first attracted Oppenheimer to science, 
and one of his hopes for quantum mechanics was that it could be 
used to shed light on the fundamental nature of chemical 
compounds. His first paper, written while he was still in 
Cambridge, had sought to take an initial step in that direction; 
now, together with Born, he was determined to show how 
quantum mechanics could be extended from the understanding of 
atomic structures to the understanding of molecular structures. 
This was an extremely ambitious undertaking. 

The calculation of the energy states of molecules is far more 
complicated than that of atoms, which is, in any case, immensely 
complicated—so complicated that it has only ever been done 
completely for the very simplest atoms, such as that of hydrogen, 
which consists of a single proton and a single electron. The 
complications arise from, among other things, the fact that the 


wave function at the heart of quantum mechanics describes a 
three-dimensional wave. The possible positions of an electron are 
envisaged in three dimensions, x, y, z, and so the associated wave 
of the electron—which, according to Born’s statistical 
interpretation of the theory, provides the probabilities of the 
electron being in any of the positions describable for possible 
values of x, y and z—is three-dimensional. 

The electrons, these three-dimensional waves, are pictured as 
orbiting the nucleus, which is itself in motion, vibrating and 
rotating. The total energy of an atom is given by the energies of 
the electrons, together with the rotational and vibrational 
energies of the nucleus. With just one electron—as in the case of 
hydrogen—this is complicated enough, but with two or more 
electrons, it becomes dizzyingly complicated, since, with the 
introduction of each new electron, one has to take into account 
the forces operating between one electron and another and 
between the electrons and the nucleus. Now, consider a molecule, 
which is made up of two or more atoms, and one can see how the 
complications increase exponentially. Think, for example, of a 
molecule of water, which is made of two hydrogen atoms and an 
oxygen atom. Each hydrogen atom has a single electron, while 
each oxygen atom has eight electrons. So, there are three nuclei 
and ten electrons in the molecule. To calculate the total energy of 
the molecule, one has to calculate the energy of each electron, 
the energy of each of the three nuclei and the energy of the 
molecule itself, which, of course, will also be in motion. 

What Born and Oppenheimer presented in their joint paper was 
a mathematical technique—which has since become a 
cornerstone of the entire discipline of quantum chemistry—for 
calculating the energy of a molecule through a series of 
approximations. First, the energies of the electrons are calculated 
on the assumption that the nuclei are stationary. This is an 
approximation, but not a wild one, since the mass of the nucleus 
is so much greater than that of the electrons that, from the point 
of view of the electron, so to speak, the nucleus is stationary. 
Then, the vibrations of the nucleus are calculated, and finally the 
rotational energy of the molecule. Though each of these 
calculations is an approximation, the result is to turn what had 
previously been a completely impossible calculation into one 
that, though difficult, is at least possible, thereby enabling one to 


bring the insights of quantum mechanics to bear on the questions 
that had attracted Oppenheimer to science in the first place— 
questions about the fundamental nature of chemical substances. 

The paper had a difficult gestation. Its first draft, produced by 
Oppenheimer during the Easter vacation of 1927, was only five 
pages long. “I thought this was about right,” Oppenheimer later 
said. “It was very light of touch and it seemed to me all that was 
necessary.” Born thought otherwise. He was, he later recalled, 
“horrified” by Oppenheimer’s first draft and used his position as 
the senior partner to insist upon a more expansive rewrite. “I 
didn’t like it,” Oppenheimer later said, “but it was obviously not 
possible for me to protest to a senior author.” 

Because of the wrangling over presentation, and the rewriting 
it necessitated, the paper was not sent off for publication until the 
end of August 1927. In the meantime, in June, Edwin Kemble 
visited Gottingen and reported to a Harvard colleague: 


Oppenheimer is turning out to be even more brilliant than we 
thought when we had him at Harvard. He is turning out new 
work very rapidly and is able to hold his own with any of the 
galaxy of young mathematical physicists here. Unfortunately 
Born tells me that he has the same difficulty about expressing 
himself clearly in writing which we observed at Harvard. 


About two weeks later, much to Born’s relief, Oppenheimer left 
Gottingen. 

He left with a doctorate, a growing international reputation as 
one of the most brilliant young physicists of his generation, and a 
small but important circle of friends united by their brilliant 
intelligence, their eminence and their shared passion for 
understanding the strange world of quantum mechanics. It was 
this last aspect that dominated his own memories of G6ttingen. 
“In the sense which had not been true in Cambridge and certainly 
not at Harvard,” Oppenheimer remembered, “I was part of a little 
community of people who had some common interests and tastes 
and many common interests in physics.” 

One should not, however, be misled by these memories to think 
of Oppenheimer being part of a community of people at 
Gottingen itself. As Born told Ehrenfest, the paralyzing effect that 
Oppenheimer had exerted on Born himself was felt also by his 


students (as Born rather melodramatically put it, Oppenheimer 
“ruined my young people”). No, the “community” that 
Oppenheimer had in mind consisted of people who came to 
Gottingen as visiting scholars from other institutions. Of the 
people he mentioned by name as members of that community, 
not one of them was a physicist based at Gottingen. Indeed, with 
regard to two of them—Gregor Wentzel, who was at the 
University of Leipzig, and Wolfgang Pauli, from the University of 
Hamburg—he was not even sure whether he met them in 
Gottingen or in Hamburg (the latter seems more likely). The one 
person he mentioned by name who was actually based at 
Gottingen was Richard Courant, who was a mathematician rather 
than a physicist and had very little to do with the development of 
quantum mechanics. The final person named by Oppenheimer in 
connection with the “little community” was Werner Heisenberg, 
who continued to be based at Copenhagen until the autumn of 
1927, when he was made a professor at Leipzig. 

If there is a single person at Gottingen with whom 
Oppenheimer might conceivably have formed some sort of 
community during his time there, it is Paul Dirac, who in June 
1927 left Gottingen for Leiden, where he stayed as a guest of Paul 
Ehrenfest for a month before returning to Cambridge. When it 
was time for Oppenheimer to leave Gottingen, he followed Dirac 
to Leiden, joining him as Ehrenfest’s guest. This is what prompted 
Born, in the letter quoted previously, to write to Ehrenfest about 
Oppenheimer. Most of the letter, dated July 16, 1927, is 
typewritten and concerned with matters of a professional interest. 
Then, in a handwritten postscript, Born wrote: 


Oppenheimer, who was with me for a long time, is now with 
you. I should like to know what you think of him. Your 
judgment will not be influenced by the fact that I openly admit 
that I have never suffered as much with anybody as with him. 
He is doubtless very gifted but without mental discipline. He’s 
outwardly very modest but inwardly very arrogant. Through 
his manner to know everything better and to continue any idea 
you give to him, he has paralyzed all of us for three-quarters of 
a year. I can breathe again since he’s gone and start to find the 
courage to work. My young people have the same experience. 
Do not let yourself keep him for any length of time. 


Ehrenfest evidently replied in a way that indicated that he did 
not share Born’s view of Oppenheimer. “Your information about 
Oppenheimer was very valuable to me,” Born told him in a letter 
of August 7, 1927. “I know that he is a very fine and decent man 
but one can’t help it if someone gets on your nerves.” By the time 
Born wrote this, Oppenheimer himself was back in the U.S., 
having set sail to New York from Liverpool in mid-July. His plan 
was to spend the rest of the summer with his family before taking 
up his postdoctoral fellowship at Harvard in October. 

It was, in some ways, an unfortunate time for a quantum 
physicist to be leaving Europe, since two of the most significant 
events in the history of quantum mechanics were about to 
happen, the first in Italy and the second in Belgium. The first was 
the announcement by Niels Bohr of the principle of 
complementarity, the importance of which Oppenheimer himself 
in later life was to emphasize at every opportunity and which, 
together with Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, forms the so- 
called Copenhagen Interpretation of quantum mechanics. The 
principle of complementarity says that waves and particles are 
inconsistent, but complementary, features of the reality of 
photons and electrons. Light really is made up of particle-like 
quanta (photons) and it really does consist of waves. Depending 
on how we measure it, we see it as waves or as particles, but 
never both. Nevertheless, for a complete understanding of 
photons and electrons, both are necessary. We must not attempt 
to reduce waves to particles or particles to waves, Bohr thought; 
we must rather accept each as complementing the other. 

Bohr announced the principle of complementarity in a paper 
called “The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of 
Atomic Theory,” which he delivered at the International Physics 
Congress, held in Como, Italy, in September 1927. In the paper, 
he argued that complementarity was the bedrock upon which 
quantum theory was based. The uncertainty principle, for 
example, Bohr claimed, was simply a consequence of 
complementarity; that we cannot measure both position and 
momentum precisely at the same time is a special case of the 
more general truth that we cannot see an electron or a photon 
both as a particle and a wave at the same time. To 
complementarity and the uncertainty principle, Bohr added 
Born’s statistical interpretation of Schrodinger’s wave function, to 


form what he now regarded as a complete and finished theory— 
that is, quantum mechanics—but which others regard as the three 
essential elements merely of the Copenhagen Interpretation of 
quantum mechanics. Either way, it is the most influential and 
most important set of ideas in twentieth-century physics, with 
consequences that go way beyond physical science to the most 
basic and general philosophical ideas. If Born’s statistical 
interpretation of the wave function requires one to abandon 
determinism, the uncertainty principle forces one to abandon the 
age-old conception of causality, which held that, given a 
complete description of the position and momentum of an object, 
one could causally predict its future. Meanwhile, the principle of 
complementarity seems to force one to rethink the very idea of an 
“outside world,” the idea that we can observe the things and 
events around us without interfering with them. On Bohr’s 
understanding, to observe is to measure, and to measure is to 
influence which side of the wave-particle duality we are dealing 
with (since it is the method of measurement that determines 
whether we see waves or particles). Virginia Woolf, in 
emphasizing the importance of the art exhibition “Manet and the 
Post-Impressionists,” once famously remarked: “On or about 
December 1910, human character changed.” In the same spirit, 
one might say: “On or about September 1927, the physical world 
changed.” 

Attending the Como conference were more than seventy 
physicists from all over the world. Born was there to give a paper 
on the statistical interpretation of the wave function. Heisenberg 
was there and, though he did not give a paper, he spoke in 
support of Bohr’s paper, giving, in the process, his own outline of 
uncertainty. Also there were Rutherford, de Broglie, Wolfgang 
Pauli, Arnold Sommerfeld and Arthur Compton. If Oppenheimer 
had been in Europe at the time, he would surely have attended. 

The second momentous event in the autumn of 1927 was the 
fifth Solvay Congress, held in Brussels during the last week in 
October. The Solvay Congresses (named after their sponsor, the 
Belgian industrialist Ernest Solvay) had begun in 1911, the first 
in the series having the theme “Radiation and the Quanta.” The 
idea was to gather together the twenty or so most distinguished 
physicists in the world to hammer out an ongoing, open question. 
The star of the first conference had been the young Albert 


Einstein. After the second conference in 1913, the series was 
interrupted by the First World War and then deeply affected by 
the postwar exclusion of German physicists, which condemned 
the third and fourth conferences, held respectively in 1921 and 
1924, to a discussion of the most fundamental questions in the 
absence of many of the leading physicists. 

No such problems beset the fifth Solvay Congress, which was 
anticipated with great excitement within the international 
community of theoretical physicists for a number of reasons. 
First, its theme of “Electrons and Photons” was the hot topic of 
the day, and the wording of the invitation (the Solvay Congresses 
were strictly invitation-only) made it clear that the “conference 
will be devoted to the new quantum mechanics and to questions 
connected with it.” Second, since the admission of Germany into 
the League of Nations in 1926, German scientists could no longer 
be treated as members of an enemy country, which meant that 
the conference could invite not only quantum pioneers like Max 
Planck, but also the leading members of the younger generation 
of German physicists, such as Heisenberg and Born, who had 
founded, developed and shaped the new quantum theory. Finally, 
the readmittance of German physicists into the international 
community meant that Albert Einstein, the leading opponent of 
the new theory, could engage publicly with its chief proponents. 

And so the stage was set for what has gone down in history as 
the great debate about the science and philosophy of quantum 
mechanics, in which almost all the most notable defenders and 
opponents of the new theory—the radical consequences of which 
had been spelled out and emphasized by Born, Heisenberg and 
Bohr—were gathered in one place. The defenders included, as 
well as Bohr, Born and Heisenberg, Paul Dirac and Wolfgang 
Pauli. Representing the opposition were Einstein, Planck, 
Schrédinger and de Broglie. Also present were Marie Curie, 
Arthur Compton and Ralph Fowler. It was an extraordinarily 
prestigious group; of the twenty-nine people who attended, 
seventeen were or would become Nobel Prize winners. At stake in 
their discussions was not only a new physical theory, but a 
proposed fundamental change in the way we think about 
determinism, causality and the nature of scientific theory. One 
way of crystallizing the issue that lay at the center of the debates, 
using a phrase that recurred again and again during the 


conference, is to ask the question that Einstein had raised in his 
letter to Born: Does God play dice or not? 

The congress ran from Monday, October 24 to Friday, 
October 28. The format chosen was for reports to be delivered on 
various aspects of quantum mechanics, with each of them 
followed by a lengthy discussion. Only five reports were delivered 
during the entire conference, such was the determination of the 
organizers to give plenty of time for discussion. On the first day, 
reports were given by William L. Bragg from Manchester on X-ray 
reflection and Arthur Compton on the photoelectric effect. The 
following day, Louis de Broglie reported on “The New Dynamics 
of Quanta,” outlining and defending his own view—which 
received almost no support from the delegates—that both wave 
and particle existed, although not as envisaged by Bohr and Born, 
but rather in a way that visualized particles being guided or 
“piloted” by waves. 

Throughout these early papers, Einstein remained silent. He 
even stayed silent when, on Wednesday, October 26, Born and 
Heisenberg presented a joint report on quantum mechanics that 
seemed calculated to provoke him into discussion. After outlining 
matrix mechanics, transformation theory, the probability 
interpretation, uncertainty and complementarity, Born and 
Heisenberg ended with the uncompromising statement: “We 
consider quantum mechanics to be a closed theory, whose 
fundamental physical and mathematical assumptions are no 
longer susceptible of any modification.” 

Einstein finally broke his silence on the last day of the 
conference, when, in place of reports, the organizers had 
arranged for the entire day to be taken up with a wide-ranging 
general discussion that was to be the climax of the whole event. 
As it turned out, the discussion was dominated by a series of 
exchanges between Bohr and Einstein. First Einstein would 
propose what he took to be a fatal flaw in quantum mechanics, 
then Bohr would respond, invariably identifying a flaw in 
Einstein’s own arguments. In a letter to his students at Leiden, 
Ehrenfest described Bohr as “towering over everybody ... step by 
step defeating everybody.” This reflected the general view. As the 
conference closed, Heisenberg wrote: “I am satisfied in every 
respect with the scientific results. Bohr’s and my views have been 
generally accepted; at least serious objections are no longer being 


made, not even by Einstein and Schrodinger.” 

At the Como conference quantum mechanics had received its 
definitive and final statement; at the fifth Solvay Congress, in the 
form it had been given at Como, it triumphed over its most 
influential skeptics. One imagines that Oppenheimer would have 
longed to be in Europe at this moment when the movement to 
which he had pinned his colors came of age and emerged 
victorious. However, competing—and winning—against his desire 
to be at the forefront of modern physics was his love of America. 
In the summer of 1927, with quantum mechanics poised to make 
its greatest triumph, his deepest desire was to be back home; he 
had by then been away for almost two years and was extremely 
homesick. 

Oppenheimer wanted to spend time revisiting familiar places 
and being with his family, especially his brother. To his dismay, 
his parents had sold the Bay Shore house the previous winter, but 
his boat, the Trimethy, was still moored there and so he and Frank 
were still able to go sailing along the Long Island coast. After a 
while the two of them took the boat up to Nantucket Island, 
Massachussetts, where they joined their parents for a holiday. 
There, Frank remembers: “My brother and I spent most of the 
days painting with oils on canvas the dunes and grassy hills.” 

Oppenheimer no doubt enjoyed creating a permanent reminder 
of the countryside he loved, and had missed during his two years 
in Europe. At Leiden, in his anxiety to return home, he had 
evidently overdone his praise of his homeland. “He’s too much,” 
a fellow student remarked. “According to Oppenheimer, even the 
flowers smell better in America.” It wasn’t just the landscape he 
loved, either. Along with other American physicists studying in 
Europe, Oppenheimer had been upset by how little respect there 
was for American science among Europeans. As Isidor Rabi put it: 
“We were not highly regarded, I must say, nor was there any 
thought that America would amount to anything as far as physics 
was concerned. There were a few people, certainly, but one 
looked down their noses on Americans ... We felt very bad about 
this.” A sense of what American physicists had to put up with can 
be gained from Paul Dirac’s response when he was asked in 1927 
by Edward Condon if he would like to visit America: “There are 
no physicists in America.” 

The NRC fellowship scheme was one way of stimulating 


American physics; another was attracting European physicists to 
work in American universities. Max Born, during his visit to the 
U.S. in 1925-6, had received several job offers. He declined, but 
many others accepted, including Oppenheimer’s Dutch friends 
George Uhlenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit, who both accepted 
positions at the University of Michigan, starting in the autumn of 
1927. Charlotte Riefenstahl, meanwhile, was offered and 
accepted a job at Vassar College. 

So it was that in the late summer of 1927, Uhlenbeck, 
Goudsmit and Riefenstahl, along with Uhlenbeck’s new wife, Else, 
traveled together to New York aboard the SS Baltic. There at the 
dockside to welcome them to America was Oppenheimer, 
together with his father’s car, complete with uniformed 
chauffeur. “We all got the real Oppenheimer treatment,” 
Goudsmit later said, “but it was for Charlotte’s benefit really. He 
met us in this great chauffeur-driven limousine, and took us 
downtown to a hotel he had selected in Greenwich Village.” The 
hotel was the Brevoort, one of New York City’s oldest and most 
famous hotels, known for its French cuisine and fine wines, and 
chosen by Oppenheimer for his guests because of its European 
atmosphere. In the evening, Oppenheimer treated the party to 
dinner at a Brooklyn hotel from which they could see the lighted 
Manhattan skyline. Having persuaded the Uhlenbecks to delay 
their journey to Ann Arbor, the next day he took them, together 
with Charlotte, to meet his parents at their apartment on 
Riverside Drive. Else Uhlenbeck later recalled the beautifully 
furnished living room, the Van Gogh and other paintings, Mrs. 
Oppenheimer’s graciousness and Frank, just turned fifteen, 
standing at the door looking shy and awkward. 

After the Uhlenbecks and Goudsmit left for Ann Arbor, 
Charlotte stayed in New York for a few weeks, where, as 
Oppenheimer’s guest, she ate at the very finest restaurants in the 
city. As she was well aware, she was being courted, but the 
courtship was short-lived. This was not only because she had to 
leave for Vassar, and he for Harvard, but also because she came 
to think that Oppenheimer was not emotionally ready for a 
romantic attachment. She found the atmosphere at Riverside 
Drive stifling, and Oppenheimer evasive and detached whenever 
she asked him anything personal, for example about his past. She 
was particularly put off when she asked him about his mother’s 


gloved hand and was met with a stony silence. If, when she 
arrived in New York, she was tempted to consider Oppenheimer a 
possible future husband, by the time she left such temptations 
had been overcome. 


23 John C. Slater, then a young physics professor at Harvard. Later he became 
chairman of the physics department at MIT. 


Postdoctoral Fellow 


the summer of _ 1927, when 
Oppenheimer started his me as a postdoctoral fellow, he must 


have arrived at Harvard with a scientific paper already written, 
or at least nearly finished. For his first published article as “J. R. 
Oppenheimer. National Research Fellow” is dated “August 1927” 
and is reported as having been sent from the Jefferson Physical 
Laboratory at Harvard. The article, published in the Physical 
Review, is entitled “Three Notes on the Quantum Theory of 
Aperiodic Effects,” and is today one of his better-known and 
most-cited publications, containing as it does one of the earliest 
discussions by a physicist of the strange phenomenon of 
“tunneling,” whereby a particle, such as an electron or an alpha 
particle, can “tunnel” its way through a barrier, even though it 
lacks the energy that classical physics would require it to have to 
perform such a feat. 

Oppenheimer was at Harvard for a mere five months (he left 
for Caltech at the end of 1927), but he published two more 
articles during his time there: one on the polarization of impact 
radiation in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
and another on the capture of electrons by alpha particles in the 
Physical Review. In a letter to Paul Dirac, written on 
November 28, Oppenheimer—after sending his “very best 
felicitations” on the news that Dirac had been made a Fellow of 
St. John’s College—gave Dirac a fairly detailed summary of all 
three papers, perhaps revealing that, despite describing them as 
“a lot of little things, but nothing at all important,” he was 
actually quite proud of his productivity. 

Oppenheimer also mentioned to Dirac that he had sent a paper 
on what is known as the “Ramsauer effect” to Ehrenfest. The 


Ramsauer effect is a phenomenon discovered by the German 
physicist Carl Ramsauer that defies explanation by Newtonian 
physics, but is explicable using quantum mechanics. What 
Ramsauer discovered was that when electrons move through 
certain gases, the probability of a collision between an individual 
electron and an individual atom of the gas does not, as 
Newtonian physics would predict, decrease with the energy of the 
electron; rather, at a certain low energy, the probability of 
collision reaches a minimum below which it will not sink. The 
explanation for this relies upon taking into account the wavelike 
properties of the electron in a quantum-mechanical way. 

Oppenheimer thought he had an alternative explanation of the 
Ramsauer effect, one that could be generalized for all atoms and 
molecules. Unfortunately, Ehrenfest noticed several errors in 
Oppenheimer’s calculations, forcing Oppenheimer to delay 
publication of the paper. While he reworked his figures, he 
published a short note in the Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, announcing his conclusions and promising: “Details of 
the theory will be published elsewhere.” In fact, the paper was 
abandoned and contributed only to Oppenheimer’s reputation as 
a physicist who, while undeniably brilliant, was prone to making 
mathematical mistakes. 

Not that such errors affected his ability to intimidate. Philip 
Morse, who would later enjoy an illustrious career as a physicist 
and an administrator, was in 1927 a Ph.D. student at Princeton, 
and has recalled in his autobiography how, when he came to 
Harvard to attend a seminar that autumn, he met “a thin high- 
strung postdoctoral fellow by the name of Oppenheimer, who 
gave me a bad case of inferiority by talking mysteriously about 
Dirac electrons and quaternions. I didn’t know what he was 
talking about and his talk didn’t enlighten me.” “Oppie always 
affected me that way,” Morse adds. “I never could figure out 
whether his sibylline declarations were just a form of one- 
upmanship or whether he really did see a lot more in a theory 
than I did. Some of both, I finally decided.” 

Oppenheimer seems to have made few new friends during this 
second period at Harvard, but he did reestablish contact with two 
old friends: John Edsall, who was then at Harvard Medical 
School, and William Boyd, who was studying for a Ph.D. in 
biochemistry at Boston University Medical School. With Boyd in 


particular, Oppenheimer shared an unusual intimacy. He told 
Boyd about his psychological problems at Cambridge and also 
showed him a poem he had written, which Boyd encouraged him 
to send to Harvard’s avant-garde literary magazine, Hound & 
Horn, which had just been founded by a group of English 
undergraduates inspired by T. S. Eliot’s The Criterion. The poem, 
in full, is as follows: 


CROSSING 

It was evening when we came to the river 
with a low moon over the desert 

that we had lost in the mountains, forgotten, 
what with the cold and the sweating 

and the ranges barring the sky. 

And when we found it again, 

in the dry hills down by the river, 

half withered, we had 

the hot winds against us. 


There were two palms by the landing: 
the yuccas were flowering; there was 

a light on the far shore, and tamarisks. 
We waited a long time, in silence. 

Then we heard the oars creaking 

and, afterwards, I remember, 

the boatman called to us. 

We did not look back at the mountains. 


One of Oppenheimer’s earliest biographers, Denise Royal, has 
interpreted the poem as an expression of Oppenheimer’s “own 
dry, sterile intellectuality,” but it seems more obviously a 
nostalgic evocation of his beloved New Mexico. Far from being 
sterile, the desert in the poem—with its yuccas, palms and 
tamarisks—is fertile, warm and welcoming, its “forgotten” new 
moon appearing to call Oppenheimer from the “cold” mountains 
that he is leaving behind without so much as a backward glance. 
These mountains might, it seems to me, represent the peaks of 
academia—Cambridge, Gottingen and MHarvard—that he is 
anxious to leave in favor of a return to the New Mexico desert. 

In any case, as soon as the Christmas holiday season was over, 


Oppenheimer left Harvard and headed for the Southwest, to 
spend the rest of his NRC fellowship at the California Institute of 
Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena. Ten miles northeast of Los 
Angeles in the South California desert, Pasadena was then a fairly 
small town (with about 50,000 inhabitants), notable mainly for 
two things: first, hosting the Rose Bowl, an annual college 
football game that has been played in Pasadena on the first day of 
each new year since 1902; and second, the California Institute of 
Technology itself, which though only six years old in 1927, was 
already recognized as one of the leading centers of scientific 
research in the U.S. At the head of Caltech (his official title was 
“Chairman of the Executive Council”) was the Nobel Prize- 
winning physicist Robert A. Millikan, who, while often derided as 
a pompous anti-Semite, was an extraordinarily successful fund- 
raiser and administrator. 

From its beginnings in 1921, Caltech had a special relationship 
with the National Research Council. Its founder, the astronomer 
George Ellery Hale, had been the chairman of the NRC, and, 
through the influence of first Hale and then Millikan (who got to 
know Hale when he served as vice chairman of the NRC), a 
substantial proportion of NRC fellows conducted their research at 
Caltech. Through his connections with the NRC, Millikan would 
have received reports about Oppenheimer from Gottingen and 
Harvard, and was clearly already considering him as a potential 
permanent member of the staff. 

At this time appropriately trained physicists—that is, those who 
had studied under the leading quantum physicists in Europe— 
were scarce and the competition to hire them was intense. This is 
reflected in the first surviving letter that Oppenheimer wrote 
from Pasadena, which was to Kemble at Harvard, advising him 
about potential appointments. William Houston, who was then 
assistant professor of physics at Caltech, was, Oppenheimer told 
Kemble, “very much the man you want,” though “You may have 
a little trouble getting him, as they are very fond of him here.” 
(Oppenheimer, it is a little easy to forget, was still only twenty- 
three.) 

Oppenheimer also mentioned to Kemble the work of one of 
Caltech’s most promising young chemists, Linus Pauling. For a 
short while, Pauling and Oppenheimer got on very well. Pauling’s 
interests coincided with Oppenheimer’s and, in time, he was to 


produce the definitive textbook on a subject very close to 
Oppenheimer’s heart, the theory of chemical bonding (as 
Oppenheimer had put it: what makes a molecule a molecule). 
Pauling’s graduate work had been on the use of X-ray diffraction 
to determine the structure of crystals, and he had, before he met 
Oppenheimer, published several papers on the crystal structure of 
minerals. In an act of extraordinary kindness that shows how 
much regard he must have had for Pauling, Oppenheimer gave 
him his entire collection of minerals—the collection he had built 
up since the age of five, when his grandfather presented him with 
the box of rocks that had first inspired his interest in science. 
Pauling, Oppenheimer later recalled, “was then still stuck on 
crystals—inorganic crystals—so that he not only used them but 
he was very pleased [with] these enormous calcites.” 

Oppenheimer and Pauling formed a plan of working together 
on what is now known as quantum chemistry. In particular, they 
intended to produce jointly authored work on the nature of the 
chemical bond. However, before this work had got very far, 
Pauling cut off his relations with Oppenheimer. The reason was 
that Oppenheimer was taking far too much interest in Pauling’s 
pretty wife, Ava. Conforming to what one would later recognize 
as Oppenheimer’s “type,” Ava Helen Pauling was not only very 
attractive, she was also socially aware and politically active. She 
is credited with inspiring and encouraging her husband’s later 
concern with the issues of nuclear proliferation and world 
peace.24 Oppenheimer made a bizarre approach to Ava one day; 
while her husband was at work, he went to their house and 
invited her to join him—without her husband—on a “tryst to 
Mexico.” She refused and told her husband about it, whereupon 
he decided to have nothing more to do with Oppenheimer. After 
Linus Pauling’s death, there was discovered among his papers a 
Caltech envelope marked “Poems by J. Robert Oppenheimer 
1928.” It contained eleven poems: six on nature, three on love, 
and two on aging and death. It is possible that Oppenheimer 
presented this collection to Pauling, but more likely, I think, that 
he gave it to Ava, as part of his clumsy attempt to seduce her. 

In a letter he wrote to Frank at about the time he was wooing 
Ava Pauling, Oppenheimer offered his teenage brother some 
advice on how to treat women—advice that, he wrote, “may 
possibly be of use to you, as the fruit and outcome of my erotic 


labors.” The woman’s profession, he told Frank, was “to make 
you waste your time with her,” while “it is your profession to 
keep clear.” “The whole thing,” he added, “is only important for 
people who have time to waste. For you and me, it isn’t.” 


And for the last rule: Don’t worry about girls, and don’t make 
love to girls, unless you have to: pon’T bo as a Duty. Try to find 
out, by watching yourself, what you really want; if you 
approve of it, try to get it; if you disapprove of it, try to get 
over it. 


Another woman in whom Oppenheimer showed special interest 
during his time at Caltech was as unavailable to him as Ava 
Pauling had been. This was Helen Campbell, who was a friend 
and Vassar classmate of Inez Pollak, and, when Oppenheimer first 
met her, was engaged to a physicist at Berkeley called Samuel K. 
Allison. She and Allison married in May 1928. This, however, did 
not deter Oppenheimer from spending as much time alone with 
her as he could. He took her out to dinner, read Baudelaire to her 
and talked with her about psychoanalysis and New Mexico. It did 
not lead to romance, but neither did it lead to Samuel Allison 
breaking off contact with Oppenheimer. 

While Oppenheimer was having his amorous advances 
rebuffed, he himself was fending off professional advances from 
universities. He later recalled that he had “many invitations to 
university positions, one or two in Europe, and perhaps ten in the 
United States.” In his letter to Frank he says: “I am trying to 
decide whether to take a professorship at the University of 
California next year or go abroad.” He had visited Berkeley and 
was attracted to it partly because it was not an important center 
of theoretical research, thus offering him, as it were, a blank 
sheet upon which to write his own script. Or, as he put it: 


I thought I’d like to go to Berkeley because it was a desert. 
There was no theoretical physics and I thought it would be nice 
to try to start something. I also thought it would be dangerous 
because I’d be too far out of touch, so I kept the connection 
with Caltech. 


What he wanted was a joint appointment, working half the time 
at Berkeley and the other half at Caltech. 


Meanwhile, he was being assiduously courted by Harvard. On 
April 10, 1928, Professor Theodore Lyman, director of the 
department of physics at Harvard, wrote to Oppenheimer offering 
him a lectureship. Oppenheimer replied on April 21, saying that 
he would “like to be able to accept” the offer, but he “planned to 
spend next year in Europe.” About two weeks later, Oppenheimer 
wrote again to Lyman, finally refusing the offer at Harvard and 
telling him that he had accepted instead precisely the 
arrangement he had wanted: first he would spend the following 
year abroad, then he would take up a joint appointment, dividing 
himself between Berkeley and Caltech. 

Oppenheimer’s plan to spend a year abroad conducting 
postdoctoral research under the guidance of the great European 
physicists was perhaps a result of what he described in his letter 
to Edwin Kemble as “the Ramsauer fiasco,” feeling that he still 
needed to improve his technical competence if he was to make 
important contributions to theoretical physics. Explaining the 
decision to the head of the Berkeley physics department, Elmer 
Hall, Oppenheimer said it was based on his intention to “try to 
learn a little physics there.” Abraham Pais thought, more 
specifically, that Oppenheimer’s experiences at Caltech “revealed 
to him his deficiencies in mathematics,” which made him want to 
return to Europe. Because he wanted to pursue postdoctoral work 
in Europe rather than the U.S., Oppenheimer’s application to 
renew his NRC fellowship came under the auspices of the 
Rockefeller Foundation’s International Education Board, which on 
April 26, 1928, considered and approved Oppenheimer’s 
application to work on “problems of quantum mechanics” first 
with Ralph Fowler in Cambridge and then with either Ehrenfest 
in Leiden or Bohr in Copenhagen. 

Having thus secured both his fellowship for the year 1928-9 
and his two teaching positions, starting the year after that, 
Oppenheimer left Caltech in July 1928, intending to spend the 
first part of the summer at Ann Arbor and the second part in New 
Mexico with his family. The attraction of Ann Arbor was not only 
the chance it offered of reuniting with Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck, 
but also the opportunity of attending the famous summer school 
in theoretical physics, which had become (and would remain 
until the Second World War) an annual event, attracting 
distinguished theoretical physicists from all over the world. 


From Ann Arbor, Oppenheimer on August 2 wrote to the 
International Education Board to tell them that he would have to 
postpone his fellowship because he had tuberculosis and “several 
doctors have told me that it would not be very wise to go abroad 
until I am better.” For a few years Oppenheimer had suffered 
from a nasty, persistent cough, caused no doubt by his heavy 
smoking, but it is unlikely that he had tuberculosis. Frank, asked 
many years later, thought there never had been a secure and 
confirmed diagnosis of tuberculosis, leading some to wonder— 
just as Herbert Smith had wondered about Oppenheimer’s 
“dysentery” before starting at Harvard—whether Oppenheimer, 
ill with worry about whether he could meet the expectations he 
and others had of himself, had invented a medical cause for his 
feeling unwell, one that would allow him to delay the challenge 
that he faced. 

After the summer school finished, Oppenheimer headed for 
New Mexico, as planned. In his letter to Frank the previous 
spring, Oppenheimer had asked him what his plans were for the 
summer. “If you are out here [that is, in the Southwest],” he 
suggested, “we might knock around for a fortnight on the desert.” 
During Oppenheimer’s time at Caltech, his family’s situation had 
changed somewhat. Having already sold the Bay Shore house, in 
1928 they sold the Riverside Drive apartment too and moved into 
a smaller apartment on Park Avenue, between 47th and 48th 
Streets in midtown Manhattan—then, as now, one of the most 
expensive areas in the world. Frank, who would turn sixteen on 
August 14, 1928, was, like his older brother, tall, slim and good- 
looking, but without his brother’s intensity and instability. 

While Oppenheimer had been attending the summer school at 
Ann Arbor, Frank had been at a summer camp in Colorado. They 
arranged to meet at Katherine Page’s house in Los Pinos. 
Oppenheimer arrived a few days before Frank and was taken by 
Katherine to a cabin a mile or so from her ranch at Cowles. It was 
built of half-trunks and adobe mortar and commanded a 
magnificent view of the Sangre de Cristo mountains and the 
Pecos River. “Like it?” Katherine asked, and when Oppenheimer 
nodded, she told him that it was available for rent. “Hot dog!” 
said Oppenheimer. “That’s what you should call it,” Katherine 
told him. “Hot Dog. Perro Caliente.” 

When Frank arrived, he and Oppenheimer moved into Perro 


Caliente, which they persuaded their father that winter to lease. 
When the lease ran out in 1947, Oppenheimer bought it outright. 
For the rest of his life Perro Caliente was to be his refuge. For two 
weeks, Oppenheimer and his brother stayed at the cabin and 
cemented a mutual admiration for, and bond with, each other. 
Almost every day they rode in the mountains, acquiring a 
reputation among the locals for expert horsemanship. While they 
rode, they talked about physics, poetry, literature, philosophy and 
religion. Francis Fergusson visited them and would later tell how, 
after a hot and tiring day on the range, he headed for the icebox 
in the cabin, to find only half a bottle of vodka, a jar of pickled 
artichokes, some caviar and a can of chicken livers. 

Despite this inadequate nutrition, Oppenheimer’s health 
improved enormously during his time in New Mexico, and on 
August 25 he wrote from there to the NRC’s Fellowship Board, 
thanking them for their letter of August 16 (in which, in response 
to Oppenheimer’s statement that he had tuberculosis, they had 
told him that his fellowship had been withdrawn) and telling 
them: “It now seems certain that I shall be able to take the 
fellowship of the International Education Board ... I therefore 
very much hope that the withdrawal of the fellowship will not 
prove permanent.” 

Understandably perplexed, the IEB asked Oppenheimer to 
undergo a complete medical examination. The Oppenheimer 
brothers had arranged, after their two-week sojourn in New 
Mexico, to meet their parents at the Broadmoor Hotel in Colorado 
Springs. Thus it was in Colorado Springs that Oppenheimer 
underwent the medical examination insisted upon by the IEB. It 
took place on September 18, 1928, and was conducted by a Dr. 
Gerald B. Webb, who found no trace of tuberculosis and reported 
that, apart from having some ten months previously a “slight 
sinus infection and slight tonsillitis since,” Oppenheimer was in 
“first class” medical condition. After receiving this report, the 
NRC approved the IEB stipend, although, unusually, it was not for 
twelve months but for nine, starting on November 1. 

In the meantime, after taking a few driving lessons, the 
Oppenheimer brothers bought a car, a Chrysler Roadster, and set 
off for Pasadena. Before they were even out of Colorado, they had 
an accident. With Frank at the wheel, the car skidded on some 
loose gravel and rolled over into a ditch. The windscreen was 


shattered, the cloth top ruined and Oppenheimer’s right arm 
broken. Remarkably, they got the car running again the next day, 
but Frank drove it onto a slab of rock from which they were 
unable to move. They spent that night on the desert floor, as 
Frank remembered it, “sipping from a bottle of spirits ... and 
sucking on some lemons.” Oppenheimer arrived in Pasadena 
disheveled, unshaven, one arm in a sling and with little time to 
pack and prepare to leave for Europe. However, during what had 
been an eventful and memorable summer, his little brother had 
been transformed into his closest friend. 

In his original submission to the NRC for a_ postdoctoral 
fellowship, Oppenheimer had stated his intention of starting on 
September 16, working first with Fowler in Cambridge and then 
with either Ehrenfest in Leiden or Bohr in Copenhagen. In the 
event, with the fellowship starting in November, he went straight 
to Leiden. Of all the great physicists he had met during his 
previous two years in Europe, it was Ehrenfest with whom he 
formed the closest attachment. They all admired Oppenheimer’s 
manifest intellect, but Ehrenfest really liked him. 

And for Ehrenfest, more than perhaps any other great scientist, 
liking people and being liked by them was important. A working- 
class Jew from Vienna who became the successor to the great 
H. A. Lorentz at Leiden, Ehrenfest was a man of passionate 
intensity, who inspired admiration as a physicist and devotion as 
a teacher and friend. His biographer Martin Klein has written of 
him: 


His way of being alive involved thinking about physics, talking 
and arguing about physics, working to his utmost to 
understand physics, and teaching it to anyone who showed an 
interest in  it—students, colleagues, laymen, casual 
acquaintances, children. Others have been as_ intensely 
committed to science, but Ehrenfest was unique in his need to 
have close human contacts as an essential part of doing 
physics, in the breadth of human experience and the range of 
emotions that went into his scientific activity. 


His close friend Einstein said: 


He was not merely the best teacher in our profession whom I 


have ever known; he was also passionately preoccupied with 
the development and destiny of men, especially his students. 
To understand others, to gain their friendship and trust, to aid 
anyone embroiled in outer or inner struggles, to encourage 
youthful talent—all this was his real element, almost more 
than his immersion in scientific problems. 


Though perfectly capable of following highly abstract 
mathematics, Ehrenfest was famous among physicists for 
distrusting overly complicated formalistic treatments of physical 
problems. In this, he was often contrasted with Max Born. The 
great physicist Victor Weisskopf, who studied at Gottingen, 
remarked that Ehrenfest taught him “to distrust the complicated 
mathematics and formalisms that were then very popular at 
Gottingen” and thereby “showed me how to get at the real 
physics.” 

When, in the early summer of 1928, Oppenheimer expressed a 
desire to spend some of his time as a postdoctoral student 
working with Ehrenfest at Leiden, he naturally wrote to Ehrenfest 
asking for his support and received in reply the following 
characteristically forthright and warm response: 


If you intend to mount heavy mathematical artillery again 
during your coming year in Europe, I would ask you not only 
not to come to Leiden, but if possible not even to Holland, and 
just because I am really so fond of you and want to keep it that 
way. But if, on the contrary, you want to spend at least your 
first few months patiently, comfortably and joyfully in 
discussions that keep coming back to the same few points, 
chatting about a few basic questions with me and our young 
people—and without thinking much about publishing (!!!)— 
why then I welcome you with open arms!! 


Though it had been Ehrenfest who had spotted the 
mathematical mistakes in Oppenheimer’s Ramsauer paper, it is 
typical of him that his concern was not that Oppenheimer was 
incompetent in mathematics, but that he would attach too much 
importance to it. Ehrenfest’s greatest concern in physics was 
always with attaining clarity, genuine understanding. 

Oppenheimer in later life emphasized how much he admired 


Ehrenfest. “I thought of him,” he once said, “in semi-Socratic 
terms, and I thought I would learn something from him and 
indeed certainly did.” The intention of both Oppenheimer and 
Ehrenfest was that Oppenheimer would, during his time at 
Leiden, not only pursue his own research, but also act as 
Ehrenfest’s assistant. To everybody’s astonishment, Oppenheimer, 
in this latter capacity, gave a few seminars at Leiden in Dutch, a 
language he seemed to have learned in a matter of months. “I 
don’t think it was very good Dutch,” he later recalled, but it was, 
nevertheless, greatly appreciated. 

However, Oppenheimer’s principal interest was his own 
research, and, despite his great admiration of Ehrenfest, he could 
not be persuaded to abandon altogether his tendency to look for 
mathematical techniques to solve the questions of physics. “I 
think that his [Ehrenfest’s] interest in simplicity and clarity was 
really a great thing,” Oppenheimer once said, “but I probably still 
had a fascination with formalism and complication, so that the 
large part of what had me stuck or engaged was not his dish.” 
Very quickly after arriving at Leiden, therefore, Oppenheimer 
came to think that—his affection for, and admiration of, 
Ehrenfest notwithstanding—he would be better off somewhere 
else. “There was not a great deal of life in the physics in Leiden at 
the time,” he recalled. “I think Ehrenfest was depressed: I don’t 
think that I was of great interest to him then. I don’t think he told 
me what was on his mind and I have a recollection of quiet and 
gloom.” 

Indeed, Ehrenfest was depressed, far more so than anybody 
realized at the time. Two things drove him to depression. The 
first was the state of physics, which seemed to move further and 
further away from the kind of clarity he himself sought to 
achieve, in favor of mathematical techniques, the physical 
interpretation of which remained clouded in mystery and 
controversy. The second was his youngest son, Vassily (“Wassik”), 
who was born with Down syndrome. Within a few years these 
two pressures would weigh more and more heavily on Ehrenfest. 
Finally, he could stand no more, as he tried to explain in a letter 
that he wrote (but never sent) to a number of his closest friends, 
including Bohr and Einstein. “I absolutely do not know any more 
how to carry further during the next few months the burden of 
my life, which has become unbearable,” he began, adding: 


In recent years it has become ever more difficult for me to 
follow the developments in physics with understanding. After 
trying, ever more enervated and torn, I have finally given up in 
desperation. This made me completely weary of life ... I did 
feel condemned to live on mainly because of the economic 
cares for the children. I tried other things, but that helps only 
briefly. Therefore I concentrate more and more on the precise 
details of suicide. I have no other practical possibility than 
suicide, and that after having first killed Wassik. Forgive me ... 


On September 25, 1933, having made arrangements for his 
other children, Ehrenfest accompanied Wassik to the Professor 
Watering Institute in Amsterdam, where he was being treated. 
While they sat in the waiting room, Ehrenfest shot Wassik and 
then himself. “None of us,” Oppenheimer wrote to Ehrenfest’s 
former assistant Uhlenbeck, “who were his students, shall be 
quite free of guilt in this his desperation.” 

Of course, in November 1928, Oppenheimer had no way of 
knowing just how deep Ehrenfest’s depression was and to what it 
would drive him. He knew only that he wanted to get away from 
Leiden, which, he said later, “spoiled this period from the point of 
view of physics.” After his disappointing time with Ehrenfest, 
Oppenheimer intended to go to Copenhagen to work with Bohr, 
but, as an interim measure, he spent a few weeks at the 
University of Utrecht with Bohr’s old student and disciple 
Hendrik Kramers. “Bohr is Allah,” Wolfgang Pauli once said, “and 
Kramers is his Prophet.” Another frequently made comparison 
was with Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell, with Bohr 
being the intuitive Faraday and Kramers the mathematically 
minded Maxwell. Kramers was in many ways ideally suited to 
being Oppenheimer’s mentor, not only because of his inclination 
toward formal ways of approaching physics, but because of the 
many other things they had in common, including a veneration of 
Bohr and a wide range of intellectual and cultural interests. 
Kramers, for example, combined being a professor of physics with 
playing the cello to a very high standard, writing poetry and 
editing a literary magazine. Indeed, though they did not become 
especially close, Oppenheimer and Kramers got on very well, and 
Oppenheimer enjoyed his time at Utrecht, the most lasting legacy 
of which was the nickname he acquired there: Opje. Though the 


anglicized version, Oppie, became more widely known and used, 
among Oppenheimer’s closest friends Opje was the preferred 
form. 

From Utrecht, on December 30, 1928, Oppenheimer wrote a 
long letter to Frank, who had written an essay on aesthetics and 
had sent it to his brother. Consequently, most of the letter is 
taken up with an interesting extended discussion of the subject, 
which shows not only how close the two brothers had become, 
but also how much deep thought Oppenheimer had given to the 
subject. Frank’s central point in the essay had evidently been that 
an expression of personal, individual taste (“I like it,” and so on) 
is not an artistic judgment. With this, Oppenheimer agreed. In a 
rather schoolmasterly way, however, he ticked Frank off for 
showing “a lamentable ignorance of history in the matter,” but 
added that that was “almost irrelevant.” More problematic, 
Oppenheimer maintained, was a difficulty that faced anybody 
who wanted to insist on the universality and objectivity of artistic 
standards, namely that “appreciation of art is in fact neither 
universal nor objective, that it depends on education, experience, 
taste; that, in its critical aspects, it is defined only by the ‘I like 
its’ of the sensitive and the initiated.” The solution to this 
difficulty, Oppenheimer suggested, was to accept that “the value 
of a picture is best defined as relative, not to the person, but to 
what one may vaguely call the civilization: the public, traditional 
culture and experience of the civilization for which it was 
painted.” He recommended that Frank read Roger Fry’s 
Transformations: Critical and Speculative Essays on Art, which had 
been published the previous year. The letter ended with some 
entirely general advice: “discipline, work, honesty, and, toward 
other people, a solicitude for their welfare and as complete an 
indifference as possible to their good opinion.” 

A few days later, on January 3, 1929, Oppenheimer was back 
in Leiden, from where he wrote to the IEB’s Paris office, saying 
that, “at the suggestion of Ehrenfest and of Kramers,” he had 
changed his plans: instead of going from Leiden to Copenhagen to 
work with Bohr, he now intended to go to Zurich to work with 
Wolfgang Pauli. He had, he said, written to Pauli asking for his 
consent and still intended to go to Copenhagen after he had 
worked with Pauli. “I hope,” he concluded, “that it will be 
possible for you to grant this permission without waiting for the 


discretion of the American Board; for I should like to leave Leiden 
in the next weeks.” The following week, Ehrenfest wrote to the 
IEB, saying that Oppenheimer (“a very ingenious physicist”) 
would be better off going to Zurich, not only for educational 
reasons, but also because of his health, in particular “that 
obstinate cough which had not been in order since his arrival in 
Holland.” “Please,” pleaded Ehrenfest, “put this charming, fine— 
but whose health is questionable—young man under medical 
control, but without letting him know that I wrote you about it.” 

Ehrenfest, it seems, had very strong views about where 
Oppenheimer should go in order to develop to its fullest his 
potential as a physicist. Part of Ehrenfest being, as Einstein put it, 
“passionately preoccupied with the development and destiny of 
men” was that he took an intense interest in where and with 
whom his students should study. In the case of Oppenheimer, he 
felt strongly, as Oppenheimer later told an interviewer, “that 
Bohr with his largeness and vagueness was not the medicine I 
needed.” Rather, Ehrenfest felt that Oppenheimer needed 
“someone who was a professional calculating physicist,” who 
could give him “more discipline and more schooling,” and the 
man he chose for this task was Wolfgang Pauli. 

As Abraham Pais has said, Ehrenfest’s view that Pauli rather 
than Bohr could offer Oppenheimer what he most needed was “a 
wise judgement with far-reaching consequences for Robert’s 
career.” Ehrenfest had evidently come to this conclusion soon 
after Oppenheimer’s arrival in Leiden. In a letter to Pauli of 
November 26, 1928, he urged him to accept Oppenheimer, and 
showed, in the process, how perceptive he was about 
Oppenheimer’s strengths and weaknesses, how much he liked him 
and how much he cared about making sure that Oppenheimer 
worked with the right person. He was writing, he told Pauli, 
“about a physicist (a good one though), namely Oppenheimer.” 


The poor devil is with us in Leiden ... under pressure of my 
schoolmasterly character. He has always very witty 
ideas ... But then the great misery starts that I cannot grasp 
anything that cannot be “visualised.” And, although he then 
with imperturbable calm and kindness tries to meet my wishes, 
the result is that I bother more than help him. He does not 
think of complaining ... I am really convinced that, for the full 


development of his (great) scientific talent, Oppenheimer still 
needs “recutzeiTIG a bisserl (!) LEBEvoLL zurechtgepriigelt worden 
sollte” [timely and a bit lovingly to be beaten into shape]. He 
thoroughly deserves this kindness since he is a rare and decent 
fellow ... Therefore I would like it very much if he can come to 
you after Leiden. This idea appeals very much to him. 


The man at the JEB’s Paris office charged to deal with 
Oppenheimer was Dr. W. J. Robbins, to whom Oppenheimer 
wrote on January 23, 1929, enclosing a note from Pauli 
approving his plan of working with him, and saying that he was 
now already in Zurich, having made the trip at his own expense, 
which came to $15 for his fare and $29 for his luggage. In a 
subsequent letter of February 4, he explained: “The luggage was 
frightfully expensive, because of the weight of the books and 
offprints. I can see no reason, a priori, why the Board should pay 
for this.” He also told Robbins, perhaps confusingly: “I did not, of 
course, leave Holland until I had assurance from Professor Pauli 
that I might work with him; but I had no letter which I could 
submit to the Board to indicate his consent.” 

A possible explanation for this last statement is that Pauli gave 
his consent not in a letter, but face-to-face. In the middle of 
January 1929, both Oppenheimer and Pauli were in Leipzig, 
attending a regional meeting of the German Physical Society. 
Both had been drawn by the presence there of Heisenberg: 
Oppenheimer to hear him lecture on his recent work on 
ferromagnetism, and Pauli to discuss a piece of work that he and 
Heisenberg had planned to write jointly. 

Heisenberg had been at Leipzig since 1927, when, at the 
astonishingly young age of twenty-five, he had been appointed to 
the chair of physics there. At about the same time, his interests 
and Pauli’s began to converge, both stimulated by the work of 
Dirac’s that had so excited Oppenheimer at Gottingen. What 
Dirac had achieved in that work was to take the first step in the 
direction of a theory that would unite quantum mechanics and 
electrodynamics into what is now known as QED, or quantum 
electrodynamics. Oppenheimer had been disappointed that Dirac 
had not developed that theory at Gottingen; now, Heisenberg and 
Pauli were about to combine their formidable energies and 
talents in the pursuit of such a development, and, fortunately for 


Oppenheimer, they were about to do this just at the moment 
when he was going to start work with Pauli. 

In its classical form, electrodynamics—the understanding of 
electromagnetic forces—received its definitive formulation in the 
differential equations of James Clerk Maxwell, who, in the 1860s, 
was the first to realize that light was a form of electromagnetic 
radiation. In Clerk Maxwell’s theory, developed and refined by 
later physicists, such as Heinrich Hertz, electromagnetic radiation 
was understood to consist of waves in the “ether,” which, after 
the discovery of the electron by Thomson in 1896, was 
considered to be an electromagnetic “field” that mediated 
between individual electrons. All this changed with Einstein’s 
work in 1905: first, the ether was abolished; second, 
electromagnetic radiation was seen as consisting of discrete 
“quanta”; third, energy and matter were now regarded as 
equivalent to each other (this is the importance of the famous 
equation E = mca); and finally, in accordance with the theory of 
relativity, the speed of light (as of all electromagnetic radiation) 
was held to be the same for all observers, faster than which 
nothing was allowed to travel, which necessitated fundamental 
changes in the equations used to calculate the energies of waves 
of radiation or particles of matter. 

The problem was that no consistent theory of electrodynamics 
had yet emerged that took into account these revolutions in 
physics brought by Einstein and then later by quantum theory. 
Einstein had shown how the basic equations of electrodynamics 
could be made relativistic, but they still described the continuous 
waves of classical electrodynamics, not the discontinuous 
“quantized” light envisaged by Einstein and in quantum theory. 
What was needed, and what Dirac had shown might be possible, 
was a relativistic quantum-field theory. 

As soon as he read Dirac’s 1927 paper, Pauli wrote to 
Heisenberg proposing a project to construct a complete quantum 
electrodynamics analogous to the Clerk Maxwell formulation of 
the classical theory. That year, both had too much else to do to 
make much progress on this, but the following year the project 
received fresh stimulus, again provided by Dirac, who published a 
paper with the Royal Society that introduced what is now known 
as the “Dirac equation.” This is an equation for calculating the 
energy of electrons that, unlike the famous Schrédinger wave 


function, takes relativity into account, a factor that becomes 
increasingly important as the speed of the electrons approaches 
the speed of light. 

Furthermore, the Dirac equation could deal more naturally and 
more easily than the Schrédinger function with the “spin” of 
electrons and therefore with Pauli’s great contribution to physics: 
the exclusion principle. Formulated by Pauli in 1924, the 
exclusion principle was hailed by Einstein as a “new law of 
nature,” and its importance was recognized and appreciated more 
and more as theoretical physics developed in the 1920s and ’30s. 
In Heisenberg’s lecture on ferromagnetism that Oppenheimer 
attended at Leipzig, for example, much use was made of the 
exclusion principle. Eventually, prompted by Einstein, its 
importance was recognized by the Nobel Prize committee, who in 
1945 awarded Pauli the Nobel Prize in Physics on the basis of the 
exclusion principle (Heisenberg’s contribution was recognized 
much earlier—he received his Nobel Prize in 1932). 

What the principle states is that no two electrons in the same 
atom can exist in the same quantum state, where the quantum 
state of an electron is characterized by four “quantum numbers.” 
One of these numbers, postulated by Pauli, is a two-valued 
“degree of freedom,” which Oppenheimer’s friends Goudsmit and 
Uhlenbeck identified in 1925 as the “spin” of an electron. 
Because the spin of the electron is measured to be one half that of 
Planck’s constant, and the spin of the photon is an integral unit, 
the equations describing the behaviors of the two particles are 
different. Dirac’s equation provides the relativistically correct 
treatment of spin % particles such as the electron.25 

What Pauli and Heisenberg hoped to do was use the conceptual 
tools and the mathematical techniques that Dirac had provided to 
forge their proposed quantum-field theory. It was a huge 
challenge and they had very little time to rise to it, since 
Heisenberg was committed to a lecture tour of the United States, 
beginning on March 1, 1929, that would keep him away from 
Europe for most of the rest of the year. Nevertheless, rise to it 
they did, and the paper, “On the Quantum Dynamics of Wave 
Fields,” was duly delivered for publication before Heisenberg’s 
departure for the United States. 

From the very beginning of his association with Pauli, 
therefore, Oppenheimer was present at the birth of important 


new ideas, and Pauli’s joint paper with Heisenberg was to set the 
agenda for Oppenheimer’s own research during his time at Zurich 
and for many years after that. This contributed to something that 
Oppenheimer’s later student and friend Robert Serber noted, 
namely that during his time with Pauli, Oppenheimer’s “interests 
changed and thereafter were devoted to the more fundamental 
questions of physics.” 

Apart from allowing him to introduce himself to Pauli and gain 
his consent for coming to Zurich, Oppenheimer’s brief time at 
Leipzig in January of 1929 was important for another reason. For 
it was there that he met for the first time the man who would 
come to know and understand him perhaps better than any other: 
Isidor Rabi. “I first met him in Leipzig,” Rabi later recalled. “He 
had just got his degree a year or so before, and there were a lot of 
stories about him—as a personality: his good wit, his sarcasm and 
so on.” The two got on so well not only because of the similarities 
in their New York Jewish background mentioned earlier, but also 
because of their shared sense of affronted pride when faced by 
the attitude toward American scientists that prevailed in Europe. 
After working at Hamburg under the great experimental physicist 
Otto Stern, Rabi had come to think that German students were no 
better than American students. In fact, he came to think the 
American system of university education was on the whole better: 
“What we needed were the leaders.” He and Oppenheimer were 
united in their determination to be two of those leaders. 

Like Oppenheimer, Rabi was being funded by an IEB 
fellowship. After spending the first few months of his fellowship 
in Hamburg, with Stern, Rabi had gone to Leipzig in the New 
Year of 1929 hoping to study under Heisenberg. When he arrived 
there, however, he learned of Heisenberg’s plan to leave for the 
U.S. at the beginning of March and so decided, on Heisenberg’s 
advice, to go to Zurich to work with Pauli. It was at Zurich, from 
February to July 1929, that the friendship between Rabi and 
Oppenheimer blossomed. “I got to know him quite well,” Rabi 
recalled, “because our intellectual interests about various things 
—science, philosophy, religion, painting—were similar and 
different from the interests of most young physicists at that time. 
We saw a good deal of one another.” 

As Ehrenfest foresaw, Zurich was just the right place for 
Oppenheimer, and Pauli just the right man. Summing up his 


experiences in Europe as an IEB fellow, Oppenheimer later said: 


The time with Ehrenfest had seemed terribly inadequate to 
what was really in Ehrenfest and the time with Kramers had 
seemed good but not very substantial—very good personally, 
very close, but not very substantial. The time with Pauli 
seemed just very, very good indeed. 


“T got,” he said, “to be not only extremely respectful but also 
extremely fond of Pauli and I learned a lot from him.” 

In his younger days, Pauli had been Max Born’s assistant at 
Gottingen, but Oppenheimer’s relationship with Pauli could not 
have been more different from that with Born, nor could there be 
a character whose personality differed more sharply from Born’s 
than Pauli’s. Where Born was fragile and introverted, Pauli was 
blunt and unafraid to give offense. He was known as “the Wrath 
of God” because of the ferocity of his criticisms of shoddy 
thinking. He was, from a young age, impossible to intimidate. As 
a young graduate student in Munich, Pauli had attended a talk 
given by Einstein and contributed to the discussion by saying: 
“You know, what Mr. Einstein said is not so stupid!” Once, in 
discussion with a colleague who asked him to slow down because 
he could not think as fast as Pauli, Pauli replied: “I do not mind if 
you think slowly, but I do object when you publish more quickly 
than you can think.” Most famously, he once said of an unclear 
paper: “Das ist nicht nur nicht richtig, es ist nicht einmal falsch!” 
(“Not only is it not right, it’s not even wrong.”) His own 
reputation was based as much on his contributions to public 
discussion and on his voluminous correspondence with the top 
physicists of the day as it was on his publications, and he was 
entirely indifferent to the concern for priority that worried many 
scientists. 

Oppenheimer did not altogether escape Pauli’s biting wit. “His 
ideas are always very interesting,” Pauli is reported to have said 
about Oppenheimer, “but his calculations are always wrong.” 
Pauli would also impersonate Oppenheimer’s habit of murmuring 
“nim-nim-nim” while he was thinking what to say and groping 
for words, and took to calling him “the nim-nim-nim man.” Rabi 
recalls: “Pauli once remarked to me that Oppenheimer seemed to 
treat physics as an avocation and psychoanalysis as a vocation.” 


On the whole, however, Pauli had, from the beginning, a good 
impression of Oppenheimer, as he reported in a letter to 
Ehrenfest of February 15, 1929: “I believe that Oppenheimer is 
quite comfortable in Zurich, that he can work well here, and that 
scientifically it will still be possible to pull many good things out 
of him.” 


His strength is that he has many and good ideas, and has much 
imagination. His weakness is that he is much too quickly 
satisfied with poorly based statements, that he does not answer 
his own often quite interesting questions for lack of 
perseverance and thoroughness, and that he leaves his 
problems in a half-digested stage of conjecture, belief or 
disbelief. 


This acute analysis contains few surprises, but Pauli then goes 
on to criticize Oppenheimer for something that nobody had 
noticed before: his respect for authority. Oppenheimer, Pauli told 
Ehrenfest, “considers all I say as final and definitive truth. I do 
not know the origins of this need for others’ authority.” That 
Oppenheimer had such a need would certainly have been news to 
Born. 

At Zurich, Oppenheimer seems to have come close to finding 
what he had claimed to (but alas failed to) find at Gottingen, 
namely, a community of like-minded scholars. Rudolf Peierls, 
who had been a student of Heisenberg’s at Leipzig, but who had 
received and taken the same advice as Rabi to transfer to Zurich, 
has described the spring and early summer of 1929 as “rather 
short for all that seems to have happened.” As well as writing a 
great deal, he recalls, there was “plenty of time for concerts and 
cinema, and for sailing.” 


It was then easy to rent a sailboat for a few hours, and I liked 
to take friends out on the lake. I even persuaded Pauli to come 
sailing—I cherish a photo showing him, Robert Oppenheimer, 
and I. I. Rabi on the boat. 


The photograph survives and shows a_ dapper-looking 
Oppenheimer, cigarette in hand and hat on head, talking to Rabi 
and another young American physicist called H. M. Mott-Smith. 
All three look lost in thought and deep in conversation. 


Meanwhile, on the right of the picture, Pauli, smiling 
mischievously, stares at the camera. 

In a description that recalls his fellow students’ impressions of 
his undergraduate days at Harvard, Rabi remembers that 
Oppenheimer “worked very hard that spring but had a gift of 
concealing his assiduous application with an air of easy 
nonchalance.” 


Actually, he was engaged in a very difficult calculation of the 
opacity of surfaces of stars to their internal radiation, an 
important constant in the theoretical construction of stellar 
models. He spoke little of these problems and seemed to be 
much more interested in literature, especially the Hindu 
classics and the more esoteric Western writers. 


Though it was an intellectually fruitful period for him, 
Oppenheimer published only one paper during his time at Zurich, 
a paper called “Uber die Strahlung der freien Elektronen im 
Coulombfeld” (“On the Radiation of Electrons in a Coulomb 
Field”), which he sent to the Zeitschrift fiir Physik on May 6, 1929. 
Pauli was extremely impressed with this piece of work. “Using 
flawless methods,” he wrote to Sommerfeld in Munich, 
Oppenheimer “has calculated everything one can desire.” 

In a letter to Bohr of July, Pauli described Oppenheimer’s paper 
as “a continuation of the work of Heisenberg and myself on QED” 
and for a while there was talk of a three-way collaboration. As it 
turned out, Heisenberg and Pauli published the second (and final) 
part of their jointly authored attempt to formulate new rules for 
quantum electrodynamics as a two-man paper (with an 
acknowledgment to Oppenheimer) in September 1929, while 
Oppenheimer waited until November, when he was back in the 
U.S., to deliver his own contribution to the subject: a paper for 
the Physical Review entitled “Note on the Theory of the 
Interaction of Field and Matter.” 

A possible explanation for the abandonment of the plan to 
work together with Heisenberg and Pauli lies in Oppenheimer’s 
continued bad health. The persistent cough that had so alarmed 
Ehrenfest did not go away, and Dr. Robbins of the Rockefeller 
Foundation kept (as he was asked to by Ehrenfest) a close eye on 
the situation. On April 30, 1929, Robbins wrote to Oppenheimer: 


“First and foremost is the question of your health.” It would, 
Robbins said (apparently in response to a request from 
Oppenheimer), be quite appropriate to terminate his IEB 
fellowship a month early in order for him to prepare his teaching 
in Berkeley for the coming academic year. The fellowship was 
due to finish at the end of July, so, presumably, Robbins was now 
expecting it to finish at the end of June. 

In a letter written on May 14, in reply to Robbins’s letter of 
April, Oppenheimer said that he was “fairly certain that I shall be 
able to continue with the work until July” and he still hoped, as 
he had originally stated was his intention, to visit Bohr in 
Copenhagen for two weeks at the end of June. Oppenheimer 
devoted the rest of this letter to an attempt to answer Robbins’s 
request for some suggestions as to how the difficulties 
experienced by American students in Europe might be overcome. 
Oppenheimer’s analysis of those difficulties, perhaps inevitably, 
strikes an autobiographical note. They are, he began, “most acute 
in men who combine a certain weakness, timidity, hesitancy of 
character with a quite robust vanity—or, perhaps, more 
accurately—with an urgent desire for excellence.” These students, 
he went on, are away from their friends, and also “from the 
pampering of an American university, and from a language which 
they can control,” and are “introduced to the more critical, more 
disciplined, more professional science of Europe.” This state of 
affairs: 


induces in the victim a state of surrender, and a false 
metaphysical melancholy which replaces, and makes 
impossible, an active participation in the European scheme, 
and an honest attempt to learn from it. The melancholy is 
presumably unpleasant; it is usually dissipated by return to 
America, and the consequent renewal of the pampering. But it 
acts as a protective coating for the American against that 
which he was sent to Europe to learn; almost always it is a 
sterile melancholy. It is the melancholy of the little boy who 
will not play because he has been snubbed. 


Oppenheimer’s suggested solution was a lot less interesting 
than his description of the problem. “I think,” he told Robbins, 
“that the most useful preventative would be to let the men know 


a little better what their situation will be, and to warn them of 
the collapse, so that they may be on their guard against it, and 
may make a conscious and specific effort to avert it.” 

Oppenheimer never did go to Copenhagen, nor did he stay in 
Zurich till his fellowship finished at the end of July. Instead he 
terminated his fellowship a month early and returned to the U.S. 
in July. This may have been because of his cough, or it may have 
been, as he had earlier explained to Robbins, because he was 
anxious to leave himself enough time to prepare for his teaching 
duties in California. But the letter to Robbins suggests another 
reason: he simply wanted to get back home. He himself wrote in 
later life: “In the spring of 1929 I returned to the United States. I 
was homesick for this country, and in fact I did not leave it again 
for nineteen years.” 

Oppenheimer’s homesickness at the end of his time in Zurich is 
illustrated by an episode recounted by Felix Bloch, who was then 
a young physicist working with Pauli. Bloch remembers visiting 
Oppenheimer’s apartment in Zurich and being struck by the many 
things he had brought with him from New Mexico: “I was 
particularly impressed by the beautiful Navajo rug he had on his 
sofa.” Bloch had never been to the U.S. and asked Oppenheimer 
to tell him about his country. Had he not had a genuine interest 
in knowing more about the U.S., he later told Oppenheimer’s first 
biographer, Denise Royal, he might easily have regretted his 
request, such was “the intensity of Oppenheimer’s affection for 
his country.” 

On May 6, 1929, Oppenheimer wrote to Frank, thanking him 
for the birthday present Frank had sent of a book on Degas 
(Oppenheimer turned twenty-five on April 22), and suggesting 
arrangements for the coming summer in New Mexico. First, he 
told Frank, Perro Caliente—“house and six acres and stream”— 
was theirs for the next four years and there was an allowance of 
$300 for restoration. Second, Katherine Page would go out to the 
Pecos in May, Julius and Ella would be ready to leave New York 
by the middle of June, and he himself would be back in the U.S. 
“about the middle of July” and “determined not to spend more 
than a week or so in the East.” So, he concluded, Frank should 
take their parents out west in the middle of June, and he “and a 
suitable friend” should “try to open up the place, get horses, learn 
to cook, make the hacienda as nearly habitable as you can, and 


see the country.” Meanwhile, he assured Frank, he himself 
planned to “come straight out to the Pecos, and have about three 
weeks there.” 

So it was that in June 1929 Frank arrived at Los Pinos with two 
school friends, Ian Martin and Roger Lewis. From a Sears, 
Roebuck catalog Frank ordered furniture, rugs and kitchen 
equipment, and he and his friends stayed with Katherine Page 
while they waited for it to arrive. Shortly after the arrival of the 
mail-order goods, Oppenheimer himself arrived with a wagon 
loaded with bootleg whisky, mineral oil, peanut butter and 
Viennese sausages. For the next three weeks the four of them 
spent the days riding the mountains and the nights reading and 
drinking. “We’d get sort of drunk,” Frank remembered, “when we 
were high up, and we’d act all kind of silly.” Oppenheimer had to 
leave sooner than Frank. He went first to Pasadena and then to 
Berkeley, from where he wrote to his brother, thanking him for a 
letter in which he provided an account of what he and his friends 
had been up to since Oppenheimer’s departure. “It made me a 
little envious,” Oppenheimer confessed, “and pleased me awfully 
to hear of gay times at Perro Caliente. And I can think how let 
down you will feel now that it is so nearly time to close up.” As 
Oppenheimer prepared to begin his career as a teacher of physics, 
it was the New Mexican desert that restored his physical and 
spiritual health sufficiently for him to feel able to meet the 
challenges ahead. 


24 Pauling was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1962 for his campaigns 
against nuclear-weapon testing. As he had already, in 1954, been awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Chemistry, he thereby became, along with Marie Curie, one of 
only two people to have received two Nobel Prizes in different fields. 

25 1am grateful to my friend James Dodd for explaining this to me. 


An American School of Theoretical Physics 


didn’t start to make, a_ school,” 
Oppenheimer said toward the end of his life, recalling his early 


days at Berkeley, “I didn’t start to look for students. I started 
really as a propagator of the theory which I loved, about which I 
continued to learn more.” The latter part of this statement is 
clearly true, but the first part seems contradicted by remarks he 
made elsewhere in the same interview that have already been 
quoted: “I thought I’d like to go to Berkeley because it was a 
desert. There was no theoretical physics and I thought it would 
be nice to try to start something.” 

In fact, he did build a school at Berkeley, one that the eminent 
physicist Hans Bethe has described as “the greatest school of 
theoretical physics that the United States has ever known.” And, 
despite his statement to the contrary, Oppenheimer went to 
Berkeley precisely in order to build a school. It had become 
important to him, as it had to Rabi, and to many American 
physicists who had experienced the condescension directed at 
them by their European counterparts, to establish a world center 
for theoretical physics in the U.S. In some of his remarks about 
Berkeley, however, he indulges in a bit of condescension of his 
own. For example, his description of Berkeley as a “desert” and 
his statement that there was no theoretical physics there are both 
a little overstated. After all, Edward Condon, whom Oppenheimer 
had met at Gottingen, had studied at Berkeley, both as an 
undergraduate and as a graduate, and had learned enough 
theoretical physics to get a Ph.D. in the subject and to be 
accepted as a postdoctoral student by both Max Born and Arnold 
Sommerfeld. 

What is true, however, and what Condon’s career illustrates, is 


that if, as a Berkeley graduate, one wanted to pursue research on 
quantum mechanics under the supervision of leading experts in 
that field, it was essential to leave Berkeley and, preferably, go to 
Europe. Condon has given vivid accounts of some of the people 
who taught him at Berkeley in the early 1920s, and, while he 
clearly admired many of them, he would have been the first to 
admit that most of them were not top-flight research scientists. In 
fact, the professor who had the greatest influence on him, 
William Howell Williams, conducted no original research, 
published not a single paper and remained almost entirely 
unknown to the wider scientific community. After a brief career 
as a soldier, Williams had become a high-school teacher of 
physics—an “extraordinarily good” one, according to Condon— 
and then a lecturer in physics at Berkeley. In time, he was 
promoted to full professor, but, because he never completed his 
Ph.D., his promotion was slow, and, in his subsequent bitterness 
and insecurity Williams turned to drink. “In other words,” 
Condon concludes, “[Williams] never fitted into the normal 
academic pattern, but he was a very sympathetic and 
understanding person ...and he also was an extremely able 
interpreter of modern theoretical physics.” 

The chairman of the Berkeley physics department in the days 
when Condon was a student there was E.P. Lewis, an 
experimental physicist who, Condon recalls, “had a certain 
amount of spectroscopic work going on with very crude and 
home-made apparatus. He belonged really to that school of love 
and string and sealing wax, the junkiest kind of home-made 
apparatus.” Lewis was not a physicist of the first rank, but he did 
publish more than seventy papers during his lifetime. When he 
died in 1926, he was replaced by a man called Elmer Hall, who, 
like Williams, does not seem to have published anything during 
his entire career. Hall was, however, still chair of the department 
when Oppenheimer joined in 1929, and remained in that post 
until his death in 1932. 

One of the people at Berkeley most dedicated to improving and 
expanding its physics department was a professor of chemistry. 
Gilbert N. Lewis, one of America’s most distinguished physical 
chemists, had been at Berkeley since 1912, and was to stay there 
until his death in 1946. Though he was in the chemistry 
department, Lewis often worked with physicists, including, most 


notably, Richard Tolman at Caltech. Together with Merle 
Randall, his colleague at Berkeley, Lewis cowrote the book on 
thermodynamics that became the standard teaching text for 
graduate-level courses on the subject (it was one of the books 
Oppenheimer claimed to have read at the end of his first year at 
Harvard), and was well known and well regarded by both 
chemists and physicists. 

Helped and encouraged by Gilbert Lewis, the transformation of 
the physics department at Berkeley into one of the world’s 
leading centers of physical research did not begin in 1929 with 
the appointment of Oppenheimer, but rather in 1918, with the 
appointment of Raymond T. Birge. Birge, like E. P. Lewis, was a 
spectroscopist, and, like Gilbert N. Lewis, was interested in the 
area of scientific research where physics and chemistry meet. 
During the early part of his career at Berkeley he published a 
number of papers that made significant contributions to the “old 
quantum theory” (the theory that centered on the Rutherford- 
Bohr-Sommerfeld model of the atom), including one that was 
cited by Sommerfeld himself in his “bible,” Atombau und 
Spektrallinien. For an American scientist in the early 1920s even 
to be noticed by the leading European scientists was unusual; to 
be cited by an acknowledged authority like Sommerfeld was a 
rare honor indeed. In recognition of his role in thus putting 
Berkeley physics on the map, Birge was made a full professor in 
1926. Though he would not take over as chairman of the 
department until after E. P. Lewis’s death in 1932, Birge was, 
when Oppenheimer joined in 1929 (and had been for some time 
before that), recognized as its leading figure. 

Condon seems not to have liked Birge, labeling him one of the 
“pedants” who held back the promotion of William Howell 
Williams, thereby driving him to drink. Nevertheless, it was Birge 
who was responsible for most of the major steps that enabled 
Berkeley’s physics department to compete with the best in the 
world. Though Birge shared Gilbert Lewis’s enthusiasm for 
bridging the gap between chemistry and physics, ironically the 
close cooperation between the two departments at Berkeley was, 
to begin with, hampered by a clash between these two major 
figures. The clash was caused by Birge’s insistence on teaching 
the Rutherford-Bohr-Sommerfeld model of the atom, which 
contradicted Lewis’s own “cubical” theory. In a short time, of 


course, the Rutherford-Bohr-Sommerfeld model prevailed, and 
many chemists at Berkeley, including at least two who went on to 
win the Nobel Prize—William Giauque and Harold Urey— 
acquired their understanding of that model from Birge’s lectures. 

Because Birge, unlike his predecessors at Berkeley, published 
work that was read and cited by the leading European physicists, 
those physicists became more inclined to visit Berkeley. It was 
after a visit from Max Born that Condon was inspired to go to 
Gottingen; other great physicists to visit the department during 
the 1920s were Heisenberg, Sommerfeld and Ehrenfest. Birge also 
attracted to Berkeley home-grown American physicists who were 
active research scientists and conversant with modern theoretical 
work, most notably Leonard Loeb, who joined the department in 
1923 and was promoted to full professor in 1929, the year 
Oppenheimer joined. Though Condon singled out William Howell 
Williams for special praise as a teacher, it was principally from 
Birge and Loeb that he acquired his knowledge and 
understanding of modern theoretical physics. 

Birge and Loeb made it their joint business to expand the 
physics department and made sure every promising young 
American scientist knew that if they came to Berkeley they would 
be well paid, enjoy a perfect atmosphere for research and have 
excellent opportunities for rapid promotion. Before the 
appointment of Oppenheimer, their greatest success in this 
recruitment drive was with the young experimental physicist 
Ernest Lawrence, originally from South Dakota. Since 1927, 
Lawrence had been an assistant professor of physics at Yale, 
where he had completed his Ph.D. under the English physicist 
William Swann. Swann left Yale the same year, after which 
Lawrence grew dissatisfied. He did not get on well with the 
chairman of the physics department, John Zeleny, who refused to 
allow him to supervise graduate students, reserving them for 
more senior members of faculty. Lawrence was also impatient for 
promotion to associate professor, which Zeleny again refused. 
Hearing that Birge and Loeb were keen to build up the Berkeley 
department, Lawrence wrote to them and received an offer of an 
associate professorship, which he immediately accepted. Zeleny’s 
parting words to Lawrence’s family were: “Ernest is making a 
mistake.” 

Lawrence arrived at Berkeley in the summer of 1928, and 


discovered to his delight that, far from having to fight to 
concentrate on graduate teaching and_ research, such 
concentration was exactly what Birge, Loeb and Hall wanted from 
him. Encouraged by this, Lawrence threw himself without 
restraint into his work. He slept on campus at the faculty club, 
gave classes on electromagnetic theory and devoted himself to 
physics all day and every day, including weekends. At the center 
of his work was a preoccupation with solving a problem that had 
been articulated by none other than Ernest Rutherford. 
Rutherford, noting that all progress so far made in understanding 
atomic structure had come about through the bombardment of 
atoms by various particles such as alpha particles, drew attention 
to the dangers of relying on nature, in the form of naturally 
radioactive substances like radium, to provide these bombarding 
particles. In a lecture to the Royal Society in 1927, Rutherford 
urged his colleagues throughout the world to put their minds to 
devising a means of producing high-energy particles artificially. 
This would not only free researchers from their dependence on 
relatively rare radioactive substances, but might also mean that 
particles could be produced that had even more energy, and 
therefore more potential for atomic disintegration, than those 
released by naturally occurring radioactivity. 

It was Lawrence’s chief ambition to rise to that challenge. By 
the time Oppenheimer arrived at Berkeley, a year after him, 
Lawrence had not yet built his first cyclotron (as his particle 
accelerator came to be called), but he had already achieved the 
conceptual breakthrough that subsequently allowed him to design 
and build it. The breakthrough came one afternoon in the 
university library. Lawrence was casually flicking through a 
German electrical-engineering journal when he saw a diagram of 
a device for producing high voltages using positively charged 
particles. Essentially, the device increased the energy of the 
particles by alternately pulling them toward a negative charge 
and then pushing them away by switching to a positive charge. 
Immediately, Lawrence realized that this basic principle, if 
applied to a device with circular trajectories, might allow one to 
keep increasing the energy of the ions almost without limit. The 
next day, he was seen hurrying across campus looking extremely 
elated and called out to a colleague’s wife: “I’m going to be 
famous.” 


During Oppenheimer’s first year at Berkeley, Lawrence began 
to build his cyclotron, which in January 1931 successfully 
accelerated hydrogen ions up to energies of 80,000 volts.2« The 
following year, a considerably bigger machine achieved one 
million volts. Inspired by this success, the university set up the 
Radiation Laboratory, specifically for the purpose of conducting 
research using the cyclotron, and in 1936 it became an official 
department of the University of California, with Lawrence as its 
director. Three years later, Lawrence became the first person 
employed at an American state university to receive the Nobel 
Prize, by which time, no doubt, even John Zeleny would have 
admitted that neither Berkeley’s decision to hire Lawrence nor 
Lawrence’s decision to leave Yale had been a mistake. 

From the moment he arrived at Berkeley and moved into the 
faculty club, Oppenheimer took to Lawrence warmly. He admired 
what he described as Lawrence’s “unbelievable vitality and love 
of life,” which allowed him to “work all day, run off for tennis, 
and work half the night.” For the first few years of Oppenheimer’s 
work at Berkeley, he and Lawrence spent a good deal of time 
together. They were not only united by their shared devotion to 
physics; there was also between them the attraction of opposites. 
Lawrence had an open, confident and untroubled manner. He 
made friends easily and had none of Oppenheimer’s enigmatic 
elusiveness. Harold F. Cherniss, who was a doctoral student in 
classics at Berkeley when he met Oppenheimer in 1929, 
remarked: “The more intimately I was acquainted with him, the 
less I knew about him.” Oppenheimer, Cherniss thought, “wanted 
friends very much,” but “he didn’t know how to make friends.” 

Oppenheimer may not have been very good at developing close 
friendships, but he knew how to charm people, and partly 
through Lawrence and partly through the magnetism exerted by 
his own exotic appeal, he quickly became integrated into the 
social life at Berkeley. “His mere physical appearance,” Cherniss 
remembers, “his voice and his manners made people fall in love 
with him—male, female. Almost everybody.” A story often told 
later of his first few days at Berkeley concerns a picnic that the 
Berkeley physicists and their wives had arranged in order for him 
to get to know everybody. Seizing the opportunity to impress, 
Oppenheimer said he would take care of the food, promising to 
cook for them an Indonesian dish called nasi goreng, which he had 


been taught by George Uhlenbeck’s wife, Else. After they had 
driven across the Bay and Oppenheimer produced the dish, 
however, it was met with universal repugnance (“It tasted like 
sweepings from a Bombay gutter,” one person there remembered) 
and was ever after referred to as “nasty gory.” Not only was it 
foul, but there was not enough of it, Oppenheimer assuming that 
everyone else would be content, as he was, with just a mouthful. 
After waiting unsuccessfully for Oppenheimer to realize that they 
were all still hungry, the members of the group were relieved 
when Lawrence announced: “We passed a hot-dog stand about 
two miles back.” To Oppenheimer’s evident bewilderment, 
everyone immediately got in the car and went looking for the 
hot-dog stand. 

“T have been pretty busy,” Oppenheimer wrote to Frank on 
September 7, 1929, shortly before the start of term, “preparing 
lectures and giving miscellaneous counsel and working and 
getting to know people.” In his next letter he offered Frank 
himself some counsel when he returned to the question of how to 
treat women, or “the refractory problem of the jeunes filles 
newyorkaises,” as Oppenheimer put it. Frank had evidently 
mentioned being ill at ease with women, in response to which 
Oppenheimer’s counsel was to associate only with those women 
who took responsibility for putting him at ease. “The obligation,” 
he told Frank, “is always on the girl for making a go of 
conversation: if she does not accept the obligation, nothing that 
you can do will make the negotiations pleasant.” 

Perhaps this advice offers some clue as to why Oppenheimer’s 
relations with women during this time seem to have been 
restricted to those who were already married. To meet a woman 
who was the wife of a colleague did not impose on him the 
obligation to initiate contact, with all the potential for 
embarrassment and risk of rejection that is involved in, say, 
asking a woman out for a date. Helen Allison, with whom 
Oppenheimer had flirted during his time as an NRC fellow at 
Caltech in 1928, remembers at Berkeley “young wives falling for 
Robert, charmed by his conversation, gifts of flowers, etc.” 
Oppenheimer, she thought, “had an eye for women,” but his 
attentions “should not be taken too seriously.” 

“T can’t think that it would be terrible of me to say—” 
Oppenheimer wrote to Frank, “and it is occasionally true—that I 


need physics more than friends.” At Berkeley, Oppenheimer was 
eventually able to combine his need for friends with his need for, 
and love of, physics, and to combine both with his desire to build 
an American school of theoretical physics by finding his friends 
from among his students. This, however, was a long process. In 
the first year or two, most of the students who took his courses 
found them incomprehensible and him intimidating. 

The lectures Oppenheimer mentions preparing in his letter to 
Frank were part of a graduate course on quantum mechanics that 
he gave in the first semester of the 1929-30 academic year. His 
teaching at Berkeley was entirely confined to graduates. It was, 
he said later, “very rarely and only in quite different contexts that 
I ever worked with undergraduates. I think they didn’t think I’d 
be any good for them and it didn’t occur to me to ask to teach 
freshman physics or anything like that.” As well as the course on 
quantum mechanics, he gave a graduate seminar concentrating 
on some aspect of theoretical physics, the title of which rotated 
between “Introduction to Theoretical Physics” and “Methods of 
Theoretical Physics.” Oppenheimer did not approach this 
teaching in the spirit of someone preparing students for an exam 
(in fact, as some of his students complained, he never set them 
any tests and so had no formal means of assessing how much they 
had understood). Rather, as he says in the quotation given at the 
beginning of this chapter, he approached it from the point of 
view of “a propagator of the theory which I loved.” As far as he 
was concerned, he was there not to teach—and certainly not to 
assess—students, but to bring quantum mechanics to Berkeley. 

“T think from all I hear I was a very difficult lecturer,” he 
admitted. “I started as a lecturer who made things very difficult.” 
Oppenheimer’s notes for his lectures on quantum mechanics 
survive and show that he did indeed make great demands upon 
his students. The way he remembered it was that “I found 
myself ... the only one who understood what this was all about, 
and the gift which my high-school teacher of English had noted 
for explaining technical things came into action.” Presumably by 
“this” he meant quantum mechanics, though in fact he was not 
the only one at Berkeley with any understanding of quantum 
mechanics: Birge, Loeb, Williams and Lawrence were all familiar 
with the Schrodinger wave-function version of the theory. All of 
them, however, were unfamiliar with, and baffled by, 


Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics and Dirac’s transformation theory, 
and these are what, just two weeks into the course, Oppenheimer 
asked his students to understand. Naturally many of them 
struggled, and when they asked for further elucidation, they were 
referred to books, most of which were written in German. 

“Almost immediately,” Birge later said, “students came to 
complain that he was going too fast.” Birge asked to see 
Oppenheimer’s notes and, after reading them, urged his students 
to persevere. Oppenheimer, meanwhile, complained to Birge: 
“Tm going so slowly that I’m not getting anywhere.” “This,” Birge 
recalled, “was my first intimation of the speed at which 
Oppenheimer’s mind worked.” Oppenheimer delivered his 
lectures in a low, quiet voice, while smoking incessantly; as soon 
as he finished a cigarette, he stubbed it out and lit a new one, 
almost in a single action. “Since we couldn’t understand what he 
was saying,” one of his students remembered, “we watched the 
cigarette. We were always expecting him to write on the board 
with it and smoke the chalk, but I don’t think he ever did.” 

For the first two years of his joint post Oppenheimer would 
lecture at Berkeley from August until Christmas and then journey 
350 miles south to Pasadena, teaching at Caltech from January 
until June, before spending as much of the summer as he could in 
New Mexico. After two years of this, Berkeley (the administrators 
of which were never entirely happy with having to share 
Oppenheimer with another university) changed the dates of their 
semesters, so that the first semester extended into January, 
making this arrangement impossible. Oppenheimer was 
determined to maintain the connection with Caltech, so he 
negotiated with Berkeley an agreement to teach at Caltech for the 
last six weeks of the academic year, just before the summer 
break. In this way, the fifty-fifty split that he had originally 
envisaged was transformed into an arrangement whereby he was 
basically employed by Berkeley, but released by them to spend a 
few weeks each year in Pasadena. 

“In Pasadena,” Oppenheimer later said, “I taught all right, but 
it was never an important part of the Caltech curriculum except 
conceivably that first year in the spring of ’30 when I was there a 
long time and where I probably gave a pretty good ‘course of 
sprouts’ in quantum theory.” The title of this “course of sprouts” 
was “Topics in Theoretical Physics.” Again, it was restricted to 


graduates, and, perhaps because Oppenheimer had _ higher 
expectations of Caltech students than he had of Berkeley students, 
it was pitched at an even higher level, consisting of dense and 
concentrated discussions of subjects dealt with in recent research 
papers. 

His first lecture in this course attracted about forty students, 
among whom was Carl D. Anderson, then a Ph.D. student and 
later a very eminent physicist. “I didn’t know what Oppenheimer 
was talking about,” Anderson has recalled. “He, in those days, 
was not a good lecturer. He paced back and forth, and wherever 
he happened to be at that instant, he would write some squiggles 
on the blackboard—part of an equation—and they were scattered 
all over at random.” Within a few weeks Anderson was the only 
student still registered for the course. When he, too, went to see 
Oppenheimer to ask him for permission to drop the course, 
Oppenheimer pleaded with him to stay—without Anderson, he 
would have no course, and without a course, he would have no 
official position at Caltech. As an inducement, Oppenheimer 
promised Anderson that, if he remained on the course, he would 
be guaranteed to get an A, on which basis Anderson remained. 

In addition to his “course of sprouts,” Oppenheimer was 
persuaded by Richard Tolman to give some extra evening lectures 
on Dirac’s quantum electrodynamics. These were open to anyone 
who wanted to come, but were intended chiefly for academic 
members of staff. In the event, the first of the proposed series was 
attended by about a dozen people. Again, Carl Anderson was 
present and remembers that, after Oppenheimer had talked for 
about two hours, Richard Tolman got up and said: “Robert, I 
didn’t understand a damn word you said tonight, except ...” And 
then he went up to the blackboard and wrote an equation. “That’s 
all I understood.” In reply, Oppenheimer told him that he had got 
that equation wrong. “And,” says Anderson, “there was never a 
second meeting of this attempt on Oppenheimer’s part to tell 
various people, mostly faculty, what Dirac’s theory was all 
about.” 

During this first spring at Pasadena, Oppenheimer was visited 
by his parents. The previous year Julius had sold his share of the 
family business. Whether by luck or judgment, it is impossible to 
say, but Julius had thus protected the family fortune from the 
effects of the Wall Street Crash of October 1929. So little impact 


did the crash have on his family, and so little interest did he show 
in politics at this time, that Oppenheimer later recalled that he 
did not even know the crash had happened until long after the 
event, when he was told about it by Ernest Lawrence. In March 
1930, Julius and Ella, their fabulous wealth still intact, came out 
west to visit their son. “We had a delightful evening at the 
Tolmans,” Julius wrote to Frank from Pasadena. “Tomorrow 
afternoon we are going there for tea and shall meet a number of 
the professors and some other of Robert’s friends, and on Friday 
we are going with Mrs. Tolman to Los Angeles to hear the 
Tchaikovsky concert.” Robert, Julius wrote, was “very busy with 
conferences, lectures, and his own work, but we manage to see 
him a short time daily.” 

Julius was unhappy about the state of Oppenheimer’s car, an 
old Chrysler, and so, “against severe protest,” insisted on buying 
him a new one, which “he is most delighted with ... he has 
reduced his speed about 50% from what he used to drive, so we 
hope no further accidents will occur.” The recklessness of 
Oppenheimer’s driving was legendary. In a previous letter to 
Frank, he himself had written: “From time to time I take out the 
Chrysler, and scare one of my friends out of all sanity by 
wheeling corners at seventy. The car will do seventy-five without 
a tremor. I am and shall be a vile driver.” The accident Julius 
mentions is possibly the occasion on which Oppenheimer crashed 
his car while trying to impress and scare his passenger, the writer 
Natalie Raymond (“Nat” as she was known to her friends, one of 
whom described her as “a dare-devil, an adventurer”), by racing a 
train. She was knocked unconscious and, at first, Oppenheimer 
thought she was dead. Her compensation was to be presented by 
Julius with a Cézanne drawing and a small painting by the 
French artist Maurice de Vlaminck. 

The day after Julius wrote to Frank, Oppenheimer also wrote to 
him. Oppenheimer’s letter is one of the most interesting he ever 
sent his brother, containing as it does a series of reflections on 
what Rabi recognized as Oppenheimer’s central problem: 
identity. Frank had written to him expressing a fear characteristic 
of his age (he was then seventeen), namely that the Frank his 
older brother had known had disappeared. Oppenheimer 
responded with warmth and reassurance. “It is not easy,” he told 
Frank, “to believe that the Frank I know is completely vanished; 


and I should be very very sorry if that were so.” Nevertheless, he 
paid Frank the compliment of treating the issue he had raised— 
the question of personal identity—with complete seriousness. “I 
think,” he wrote, “that you do overestimate the inconstancy and 
incoherence of personal life”: 


for I believe that throughout the variations—and they are wild 
enough, God knows—there is, there should be, and in mature 
people there comes more and more to be a certain unity, which 
makes it possible to recognize a man in his most diverse 
operations, a kind of specific personal stamp. 


Oppenheimer was, evidently, inclined to take philosophical 
questions very seriously indeed, for a reason he spelled out to 
Frank: “The reason why a bad philosophy leads to such hell is 
that it is what you think and want and treasure and foster in the 
times of preparation that determines what you do in the pinch, 
and that it takes an error to father a sin.” The letter ended with 
the affectionate plea: “Don’t you go and change too much, now; 
because I think you were pretty damn nice before.” 

As he did at Berkeley, Oppenheimer lived, while he lectured at 
Caltech, in the faculty club. His friends in Pasadena included 
Richard Tolman, whom he already knew, and the Danish 
physicist Charles C. Lauritsen. Tolman and his wife, Ruth, became 
especially close friends (it was they who introduced Oppenheimer 
to Natalie Raymond), and he often dined at the Tolmans’ home, 
as did his parents when they were in Pasadena. Contact with 
people like Tolman and Lauritsen, people who were closely in 
touch with recent developments in physics, was one of the main 
reasons Oppenheimer was reluctant to give up his position at 
Caltech. 

However, although it was at Caltech that Oppenheimer thus 
stayed in touch with current research, it was at Berkeley that he 
hoped to build his peculiarly American school of theoretical 
physics. To accomplish this, he knew that he would have to 
attract to Berkeley more able students than the ones he had 
inherited, and so, at the many conferences and meetings he 
attended, he kept an eye out for possible recruits. One of the most 
promising recruiting grounds in this respect was the summer 
school at Ann Arbor, which, together with a restorative few 


weeks at Perro Caliente, became one of the annual fixtures of his 
summers. The very first graduate student to begin a Ph.D. thesis 
under Oppenheimer’s supervision had gone to Berkeley as a result 
of having attended the summer school at Ann Arbor. This was 
Melba Phillips, originally from Indiana, who, while a master’s 
student at Battle Creek College in Michigan, had attended the 
summer school and been inspired by a course given by Edward 
Condon on quantum mechanics. On Condon’s recommendation, 
she applied to Berkeley and found herself in the autumn of 1930 
being assigned Oppenheimer as her Ph.D. supervisor. 

By that time, Oppenheimer already had three Ph.D. students, 
but they had begun their research work under another supervisor. 
They were Harvey Hall and J. Franklin Carlson, both of whom 
had started under William Howell Williams, and Leo Nedelsky, 
who had been working with Samuel Allison. All three flourished 
under Oppenheimer and went on to have successful careers in 
physics. Oppenheimer devoted considerable energy to his Ph.D. 
students, working closely with them and making sure that when 
they left Berkeley they had significant publications to their name. 
To achieve this, he developed a practice of publishing joint 
papers with his Ph.D. students, and during the 1930s a good 
proportion of his work consisted of such joint publications. 

The first to benefit from this was Harvey Hall, with whom 
Oppenheimer published a major two-part article called 
“Relativistic Theory of the Photoelectric Effect,” which was 
received by the Physical Review on May 7, 1931. The 
photoelectric effect is the name given to the emission of electrons 
when metal is exposed to light of a certain frequency. The 
phenomenon has enormous importance in the development of 
physics because it was in an attempt to explain it that Einstein 
put forward the proposal that light is made up of particle-like 
“quanta,” upon which quantum physics was built. The specific 
subject of the Hall-Oppenheimer article was the application to the 
observations of this phenomenon of Dirac’s theory of the electron. 
This was also the subject of Hall’s Ph.D. thesis, which was 
submitted and passed in the summer of 1931, making Hall 
Oppenheimer’s first Ph.D. student to complete his doctorate. 

In the late 1940s, the San Francisco office of the FBI, looking 
for dirt on Oppenheimer, found an employee of the University of 
California, a “very reliable individual” (in fact, it was 


Oppenheimer’s colleague Leonard Loeb, who formed an intense 
dislike of Oppenheimer), who claimed that it was “common 
knowledge” at Berkeley that Oppenheimer had “homosexual 
tendencies” and that he was “having an affair with Hall.” Rumors 
get repeated and thus persist, but in this case there is very little 
substantiation. Hall was not, as far as anyone knows, homosexual. 
He married in 1934, had two sons and a daughter, and was to 
remain with his wife, Mary, for sixty-nine years (he died in 2003, 
at the age of ninety-nine). Evidence that Oppenheimer was 
homosexual, or even that he was believed to be so, is also scarce. 
David Cassidy, in his biography of Oppenheimer, quotes a letter 
from Robert Millikan to Richard Tolman from 1945, in which 
Millikan claims that at various times both Pauling and Lawrence 
had expressed doubts over “the character of [Oppenheimer’s] 
influence on younger associates,” but, apart from being thirdhand 
hearsay, it is not at all clear what exactly (other than a vague 
sense of moral impropriety) is being suggested here. 

Most physicists, when considering the collaboration between 
Hall and Oppenheimer, have been more concerned about the 
sloppiness of their mathematics than the supposed looseness of 
their morals. Quoting with approval a remark made by one of 
Oppenheimer’s later students, Robert Serber, that Oppenheimer’s 
“physics was good, but his arithmetic awful,” Abraham Pais has 
drawn attention to the serious “carelessness” in the work on the 
photoelectric effect that Oppenheimer published with Hall. A 
central claim in their paper was that experimental results showed 
that something was wrong with the theory of quantum 
electrodynamics as so far developed. In particular, they claimed 
that observations of photoelectric phenomena had revealed 
energies of electrons far greater—twenty-five times greater—than 
were predicted by the Dirac equation, and that therefore there 
must be some error in the theory based on this equation. In fact, 
as Pais points out: “The error was his.” Oppenheimer and Hall 
had simply miscalculated. 

At the root of the problem was not only Oppenheimer’s 
legendarily erratic mathematics, but also his almost obsessive 
conviction, and determination to prove, that there was something 
wrong with the Dirac equation and the theory of quantum 
electrodynamics built upon it. Serber has remarked that this 
determination created a “fundamental barrier to Oppenheimer’s 


success in making progress with the difficulties of quantum 
electrodynamics”—a good illustration of which is Oppenheimer’s 
short paper “On the Theory of Electrons and Protons,” which he 
published in the Physical Review as a “letter to the editor” in the 
spring of 1930.27 The paper deals with an acknowledged problem 
in Dirac’s theory of electrons, which is that the Dirac equation 
allows for solutions that attribute negative energy to electrons. 
Dirac referred to these negative-energy states as “holes” and 
suggested that they might represent the place of positively charged 
particles. As the only positively charged particle then known was 
the proton, Dirac suggested that the negative-energy states are 
actually occupied by protons. 

Oppenheimer, however, showed that these positive charges in 
Dirac’s theory could not have the mass of a proton (which is 
much bigger—about 2,000 times bigger—than that of an 
electron), but must rather have the same mass as an electron. In 
other words, the theory demands the existence of a hitherto 
unknown particle: a positively charged electron, or what is now 
known as a “positron.” But because he was convinced that the 
theory was wrong, Oppenheimer did not draw from _ his 
arguments the obvious conclusion, namely that positrons must 
exist. He thought he had found not evidence for the existence of 
positrons, but rather another reason for thinking something was 
amiss with the Dirac equation. 

Dirac accepted Oppenheimer’s argument about the mass of the 
“anti-electron,” but, having faith in his famous equation, drew 
the conclusion that Oppenheimer’s skepticism prevented him 
from drawing, and announced in a paper written in the spring of 
1931 “a new kind of particle, unknown to experimental physics, 
having the same mass and opposite charge to an electron.” Later 
in the year, during a lecture at Princeton, Dirac insisted that these 
anti-electrons “are not to be considered as a mathematical fiction; 
it should be possible to detect them by experimental means.” 
When, shortly later, experimental evidence for the existence of 
positrons was announced, it was Dirac, not Oppenheimer, who 
got the credit for having correctly predicted it. 

During his attendance at the Ann Arbor summer school in 
1931, Oppenheimer was able to renew personal contact with the 
European physicists, including Wolfgang Pauli, who arrived full 
of talk about yet another “new kind of particle, unknown to 


experimental physics,” which he called the “neutron.” It was an 
unfortunate choice of word, since “neutron” had already been 
used by Rutherford for something very different from what Pauli 
had in mind. In 1920, Rutherford had suggested that the nuclei of 
atoms heavier than hydrogen contained not only protons, but also 
neutral particles of a similar mass, to which he gave the name 
“neutrons.” He proposed this as a way of making sense of 
observational data concerning the mass and electrical charge of 
various nuclei. For example, a helium nucleus (an alpha particle) 
has four times the mass of a proton, but only twice the charge, 
which would make sense if, instead of being made up of four 
protons, the helium nucleus consisted of two protons and two 
neutrons. Attempts to discover this neutral particle, however, 
proved unsuccessful, although at the very time that Pauli was 
talking about his neutron at Ann Arbor, moves were afoot at the 
Cavendish that would shortly result in experimental confirmation 
of Rutherford’s. 

Pauli’s “neutron” was put forward to solve a very different 
problem. This “neutron” was much smaller than Rutherford’s and 
was something that Pauli thought must exist in order to explain 
beta radiation. The distinction between alpha and beta radiation 
had been made by Rutherford in 1897, and subsequently it was 
discovered that alpha radiation consists of alpha particles—that 
is, helium nuclei—while the much more penetrative beta 
radiation consists of streams of electrons, which are emitted from 
a decaying nucleus.2s 

The problem that Pauli sought to solve arose out of 
experimental observations that showed that beta radiation did 
not always have the same energy; rather, there was a continuous 
energy spectrum in beta decay, with electrons being emitted with 
a range of energies from near-zero upward. If we are to 
understand beta radiation as the decay of a nucleus with a given 
and fixed mass, then the electrons that are emitted ought to be 
emitted with the same energy in every case, otherwise energy is 
not conserved—the energy of the decayed nucleus plus the 
electron is not equal to the energy of the original nucleus. Some 
mass or energy has gone missing. So, in the face of the observed 
fact of the continuous spectra of beta emissions, either what was 
usually considered a fundamental physical principle—the law of 
the conservation of energy—had to be abandoned or beta 


radiation could not be understood as simply the emission of 
electrons; something else had to be going on.29 

In response to this problem, Bohr, among others, was prepared 
to abandon conservation of energy, but for Pauli this was too 
great a step, and, in order to preserve conservation of energy, he 
suggested what he called a “desperate way out”: “To wit, the 
possibility that there could exist in the nucleus electrically 
neutral particles, which I shall call neutrons ... The mass of the 
neutrons should be of the same order of magnitude as the 
electron mass...The continuous beta-spectrum would then 
become understandable from the assumption that in beta-decay a 
neutron is emitted along with the electron, in such a way that the 
sum of the energies of the neutron and the electron is constant.” 
In other words, Pauli’s “neutron” would supply the missing 
energy: the energies of the electron, the decayed nucleus and the 
“neutron” would equal the energy of the nucleus before decay. 

Pauli’s remarks quoted above were made in December 1930 in 
a letter to colleagues attending a conference on radioactivity, 
where the main topic of discussion was the problem of the 
continuous beta spectrum. He was evidently tentative about the 
proposed new particle (which he later called “that foolish child of 
the crisis of my life”),30 since he did not publish anything about it 
in the period between writing the above letter and his attendance 
at the Ann Arbor summer school in 1931. Nor did he present a 
paper about it at Ann Arbor. He did, however, talk a great deal 
about it, both in private conversations and in seminars. Among 
those listening intently to him were Oppenheimer and J. Franklin 
Carlson (“Frank Carlson” to everyone who knew him), who, since 
Hall’s graduation the previous year, was now the student with 
whom Oppenheimer worked most closely. As a result of listening 
to Pauli’s discussions, Carlson and Oppenheimer left Ann Arbor 
with an idea of how Pauli’s hypothetical new particle could 
furnish the topic for both future joint research and for Carlson’s 
Ph.D. thesis. 

After Ann Arbor, Oppenheimer spent some time at Perro 
Caliente with Frank, and then went to New York to visit his 
parents, before returning on August 10 to Berkeley. From there 
he wrote to Frank, who was still in New Mexico. In Michigan, 
Oppenheimer had bought Frank a secondhand car, a Packard 
Roadster that he called Ichabod, possibly after the Old Testament 


character, or possibly with reference to Robert Browning’s poem 
“Waring,” about a departed friend, of which verse six begins: 


Ichabod, Ichabod, 

The glory is departed! 

Travels Waring East away? 
Who, of knowledge, by hearsay, 
Reports a man upstarted 
Somewhere as a god. 


Frank, Oppenheimer wrote, could collect Ichabod from the 
Packard dealership in Ann Arbor, where he had left it to be 
repaired. What state the car was in when Oppenheimer bought it 
is not known, but after he had used it to drive to Ann Arbor, it 
was in urgent need of repair. Summer-school participants 
remember Oppenheimer’s arrival in Ichabod: everybody heard a 
loud crunch as the rim of one of its wheels hit the gravel, and 
graduate students rushed out to change the flat tire. 

Frank was then about to start his second year as a physics 
student at Johns Hopkins University, and it seems that the plan 
was for him, once he had collected the car, to drive to New York 
to see their parents, before heading off for Baltimore. Ella 
Oppenheimer had recently been diagnosed with leukemia. “I am 
afraid you will find mother pretty weak and miserable,” 
Oppenheimer warned Frank. “The reports have not been very 
encouraging.” He added that he intended to go to New York at 
Christmas: “I have a long vacation, and shall plan to spend most 
of it with her.” 

In the event, Ella’s condition worsened rather more quickly 
than had been anticipated and Oppenheimer was forced to fly to 
New York midway through the semester. On October 6, 1931, 
Oppenheimer received a telegram from his father: “Mother 
critically ill. Not expected to live.” Denise Royal, in her 1969 
biography of Oppenheimer, quotes “a friend” who saw 
Oppenheimer shortly after he received the telegram and 
remembers the agony on his face: “He had a terribly desolate 
look. ‘My mother’s dying. My mother’s dying,’ he repeated over 
and again.” 

Before this, Oppenheimer, together with Frank Carlson, had 
written a short notice, another “letter to the editor” of the 


Physical Review, announcing a new line of research that would, 
they promised, be developed in a subsequent article. The aim of 
the research was to investigate whether the “neutron” discussed 
by Pauli at Ann Arbor might hold the key to an ongoing scientific 
mystery: the nature of cosmic rays. 

The suggestive name “cosmic ray” had been coined by Robert 
Millikan at Caltech in the 1920s, but the phenomenon of very 
penetrative radiation occurring high in the earth’s atmosphere 
had been identified and studied in the first few years of the 
twentieth century. Millikan became fascinated by these “rays” 
and was the first to prove that they entered the earth’s 
atmosphere from outer space (hence “cosmic”). In the 1920s and 
’30s, Millikan was involved in several controversies regarding the 
composition of cosmic rays, most notably with Arthur Compton, 
who held that they consisted primarily of protons. Millikan, on 
the other hand, thought they consisted of photons—that is, they 
were not particles at all, but pure electromagnetic radiation. At 
stake in this dispute, at least from Millikan’s point of view, was 
something deeper and more general than a mere scientific 
disagreement. For Millikan, indeed, the issue had _ religious 
significance. 

For both Compton and Millikan, and for everybody else 
interested in cosmic rays, the intriguing thing about them is their 
extraordinary energy, which in the 1920s and ’30s was measured 
at up to 100 million electron volts (since then, energies far higher 
than that have been detected). There were two ways such energy 
could be released: either heavy atoms were decaying and 
releasing protons and electrons as they transformed into lighter 
elements, or light atoms were fusing with other light atoms to 
form heavier elements, releasing gamma radiation as they did so. 
In other words, only two things would produce such energetic 
rays: the decay of matter or the creation of it. Millikan was 
religiously committed to the latter view: cosmic rays, he believed, 
were the “birth cries” of new atoms created by God to counter the 
effects of decay, and, as such, it was important for him to believe 
—and to convince others to believe—that they were made up of 
photons. 

In their “letter to the editor,” Oppenheimer and Carlson 
dismissed both Millikan’s view that cosmic rays were photons and 
also Compton’s view that they were made up of protons. Perhaps, 


they suggested, cosmic rays might consist of the “neutrons” 
posited by Pauli. At the end of their note, Oppenheimer and 
Carlson promised that the results of their calculations of the 
collisions between electrons and Pauli’s neutrons would be 
“published very shortly.” 

Oppenheimer and Carlson’s letter was dated October 9, 1931. 
Three days after that, Oppenheimer was in New York to be at his 
mother’s bedside as she lay dying. “I found my mother terribly 
low,” he wrote to Lawrence, “almost beyond hope.” 


Every day since I have been here she has seemed a little 
stronger, a little more herself. She is in very great pain and 
piteously terribly weak; but there is a bare chance that she may 
have still a little period of remission. I have been able to talk 
with her a little; she is tired and sad, but without desperation; 
she is unbelievably sweet. 


Four days later, Oppenheimer wrote again to Lawrence, 
thanking him for his “sweet message” and “lovely roses.” “Things 
are pretty bad here,” he told him. “Mother, after a short reprise, 
has been growing rapidly very much worse; she is comatose, now; 
and death is very near.” 


We cannot help feeling now a little grateful that she should not 
have to suffer more, that she should not know the despair and 
misery of a long hopeless illness. She has been always hopeful 
and serene; and the last thing she said to me was, “Yes— 
California.” 


Ella died the following day. Oppenheimer’s old friend and 
teacher Herbert Smith spent that afternoon with him, and 
remembers him saying immediately after his mother’s death: “I 
am the loneliest man in the world.” 

Oppenheimer’s letters to Lawrence from New York show how 
much he disliked being away from Berkeley, from physics and 
from the school of young theorists that he was developing. “I feel 
pretty awful to be away so long,” he told Lawrence. “You will do 
what you can for the fatherless theoretical children, won’t you?” 
In the following letter he insisted: “You must let me know if there 
is anything that I can do for you here; and if a word from me can 
be of any help to my deserted students, do not, please, hesitate to 


ask for it.” 

As soon as he decently could, Oppenheimer returned to his 
“deserted students” in Berkeley. Before he did so, he arranged to 
meet his father, together with Frank, in New Orleans in 
December. The plan was for the three of them to spend ten days 
together there over the Christmas period, before Oppenheimer, 
Frank and, no doubt, a number of Oppenheimer’s students, 
including Frank Carlson, attended the meeting of the American 
Physical Society, which was held in New Orleans on December 29 
and 30. 

Coming so soon after Ella’s death, it is hard to imagine the 
family holiday being anything other than mournful, and, as it 
happened, the American Physical Society meeting was also quite 
an ordeal. Robert Millikan—who as president of Caltech was, in 
some sense, Oppenheimer’s boss—chose these meetings to 
publicly, vociferously and belligerently defend his theological 
understanding of cosmic rays against non-believers, including 
Oppenheimer and Carlson, whose letter to the editor of the 
Physical Review dismissing Millikan’s views had appeared in print 
in November. Millikan evidently felt that he had much to lose if 
his views on cosmic rays were publicly discredited, since he had 
devoted a good deal of time and energy to trying to persuade not 
only his fellow physicists, but also the general public, of those 
views. He had been interviewed by the New York Times on the 
subject, and had given many public presentations of his claim 
that cosmic rays were evidence of God’s existence and His 
beneficence. In the New Year of 1932, Time magazine carried an 
interview with him in which he made the same claim. It was 
evidently not a view that he was willing to give up lightly. 

Clearly shaken by the vehemence of Millikan’s attack in New 
Orleans, Oppenheimer, in a letter to Lawrence written on the way 
back to California, thanked him for the “comforting words” he 
had whispered to him during Millikan’s onslaught. “I was pretty 
much in need of them,” he told Lawrence, “feeling ashamed of 
my report, and distressed rather by Millikan’s hostility and his 
lack of scruple.” He also told Lawrence that he had received a call 
from a news reporter, saying that he had been sent by Lawrence 
and asking him his views on the controversy, but “I did not give 
him anything; I hope that in that I did not offend your wishes.” 

If Oppenheimer was hoping that, by not parading his dispute 


with Millikan before the general public, he could soften Millikan’s 
attitude, he was mistaken. For the rest of his life Millikan treated 
Oppenheimer with unremitting hostility. “Millikan loathed 
Oppenheimer,” Birge recalls, “wouldn’t match the promotions we 
gave him here, and harassed him maliciously.” At Berkeley, 
Oppenheimer had been promoted to an associate professorship at 
the start of the 1931-2 academic year, but it would be another 
three years before Caltech followed suit. “Millikan just left his 
name in the faculty register,” Birge remarked, “and made him 
miserable when the chance came.” 

Instead of giving his response to Millikan’s attack to a news 
reporter, Oppenheimer no doubt wanted to return to the issues 
involved in a dignified and properly academic fashion, by 
fulfilling the promise he and Carlson had made in their note to 
the Physical Review to publish “very shortly” their calculations 
concerning the collisions between electrons and _ Pauli’s 
“neutrons.” However, almost as soon as he returned to Berkeley 
from New Orleans, the work he and Carlson were planning to 
undertake was overtaken by a series of momentous experimental 
discoveries that has led to the year of 1932 being described as a 
miraculous year in physics. 

The first of these was announced in a paper published in the 
January 1, 1932, issue of the Physical Review entitled “A 
Hydrogen Isotope of Mass 2.” The paper had three authors: 
Ferdinand Brickwedde, G. N. Murphy and Harold Urey, the last of 
whom, after gaining his Ph.D. at Berkeley under Gilbert Lewis, 
was an associate professor at Columbia University. What Urey 
and his colleagues had to report was the discovery of deuterium, 
an isotope of hydrogen that is twice as heavy, having an atomic 
mass of 2, rather than 1.31 Physicists had long wanted to find a 
chemical with an atomic mass of two because of the potential 
such a thing would offer for the investigation of the structure of 
nuclei. The nucleus of hydrogen, with an atomic mass of just one, 
has no structure, while all other known chemicals, prior to the 
discovery of deuterium, had three or more particles in their 
nuclei and so had a structure too complicated to investigate in 
detail. Deuterium, however—the “hydrogen atom of nuclear 
physics,” as the physicist Victor Weisskopf once called it— 
allowed physicists to bring to the study of nuclei everything they 
knew about two-body systems, thus making extremely detailed 


calculations possible. 

The nucleus of deuterium is a perfect example of the kind of 
thing that had persuaded Rutherford back in 1920 that there 
must be such a thing as a neutral particle with the same mass as a 
proton. In fact, with remarkable prescience, Rutherford had 
explicitly predicted “the possible existence of an atom of mass 
nearly 2 carrying one charge, which is to be regarded as an 
isotope of hydrogen.” The fact that, as Rutherford had predicted, 
deuterium has twice the mass, but the same charge as normal 
hydrogen, would seem to indicate that the additional mass has no 
charge, which in turn would be perfectly explained if one were to 
imagine the deuterium nucleus to consist, as Rutherford had 
imagined, of one proton and one neutron. The only thing 
blocking this way of picturing it was that neutrons had not yet 
been discovered. However, this barrier was removed little more 
than a month after Urey’s announcement of the discovery of 
deuterium, when, on February 27, 1932, there appeared in Nature 
a letter to the editor by James Chadwick of the Cavendish 
Laboratory, which, with undue but characteristic restraint, 
Chadwick entitled “Possible Existence of a Neutron.” 

What Chadwick presented in this short communication was 
what almost every physicist who read it agreed to be conclusive 
evidence of the existence of neutrons. Chadwick had collected 
this evidence from a series of experiments that he performed, 
working day and night,32 over a period of three weeks in the first 
two months of 1932. His inspiration came from a piece published 
in the journal Comptes rendus on January 18, 1932, in which the 
French physicists Frédéric Joliot and his wife, Iréne Curie, 
described a puzzling phenomenon they had witnessed in an 
experiment in which they bombarded beryllium with very 
energetic alpha particles emitted from polonium. What they 
recorded was that this produced extremely powerful radiation 
from the beryllium, which they assumed to be gamma radiation— 
that is, photons. So powerful was this “gamma radiation” that 
when they placed paraffin wax in front of it, it knocked protons 
out of the wax with an energy of 4.5 million volts. In order to 
achieve this, the supposed gamma radiation would have required 
an energy of about fifty-five million volts, an energy previously 
encountered only by those studying cosmic rays. 

When Chadwick read this report, he realized immediately that 


a more likely explanation of the phenomenon recorded by Joliot 
and Curie was that the protons were being knocked out of the 
paraffin wax by neutrons, which, being roughly the same size as 
protons, would need a kinetic energy only slightly larger than 
that of the protons they set in motion. Using what, by today’s 
standards, looks like a makeshift and unimpressive piece of 
equipment, Chadwick was able to repeat the experiment 
conducted by Joliot and Curie, and to extend it by showing that 
the radiation from beryllium ejects particles from hydrogen, 
helium, lithium, carbon, oxygen and argon. His results, he stated 
in his letter to Nature, were difficult to explain if one assumed, as 
Joliot and Curie had done, that the emissions from beryllium 
were gamma radiation, adding: “The difficulties disappear, 
however, if it be assumed that the radiation consists of particles 
of mass 1 and charge 0, or neutrons.” 

By the time he wrote up his results in full for the June 1932 
issue of Proceedings of the Royal Society, Chadwick had overcome 
any doubts and his paper was published under the less tentative 
title “The Existence of a Neutron.” Oppenheimer and Carlson 
seem to have waited for this full version of Chadwick’s report to 
appear before returning to the subject of neutrons, since it was 
not until July 18, 1932, that they fulfilled the promise they had 
made the previous October and sent their own detailed paper on 
“The Impacts of Fast Electrons and Magnetic Neutrons” to the 
Physical Review. Perhaps somewhat oddly, Oppenheimer and 
Carlson do not mention Chadwick or cite his work (though they 
are surely alluding to it when they mention experimental 
evidence for the existence of neutrons). One might suppose that 
this is because they were concerned with Pauli’s neutron, which 
has a mass thousands of times smaller than that of Chadwick’s, 
but this is not borne out by the paper, which shows, rather, a 
confusion between the two. 

On the one hand, Oppenheimer and Carlson speak of the 
neutron as “a hypothetical elementary neutral particle” whose 
existence was “tentatively proposed by Pauli.” On the other hand, 
though they point out that Pauli had supposed this hypothetical 
particle would have a mass “not much greater than the electron,” 
they say: “One may, however, assume that the neutron has a mass 
close to that of the proton’—an assumption surely based on 
Chadwick’s calculations. The notion of a “magnetic neutron” 


employed by Oppenheimer and Carlson is, then, an uneasy 
mixture of the very different notions of Pauli and Chadwick. It is 
therefore perhaps not surprising that their paper should end with 
the conclusion that it is unlikely that cosmic rays consist of such 
“magnetic neutrons,” since “there is no experimental evidence for 
the existence of a particle like the magnetic neutron.” 

That Oppenheimer and Carlson were not the only ones 
confused about the relation between Pauli’s hypothetical particle 
and the discoveries of Chadwick is suggested by a witty pastiche 
of Goethe’s play Faust that was performed at Bohr’s institute in 
Copenhagen in April 1932. In this version of the Faustian legend, 
the role of Mephistopheles is played by Pauli, who is trying to 
tempt “Faust”—Ehrenfest—into believing in a particle that has no 
mass and no charge (and is therefore practically undetectable). 
Oppenheimer is given a very brief part in the play, in a scene that 
takes place at “Mrs. Ann Arbor’s Speakeasy” (the Ann Arbor 
summer school). There, Mephisto/Pauli tempts the drunken 
“American physicists sitting sadly at the Bar,” including 
Oppenheimer, into accepting the existence of the neutron. In the 
finale of the play, Chadwick appears “and says, with pride”: 


The Neutron has come to be. 
Loaded with mass is he. 

Of Charge, forever free. 
Pauli, do you agree? 


To which Mephisto/Pauli replies: 


That which experiment has found— 
Though theory had no part in— 

Is always reckoned more than sound 
To put your mind and heart in. 

Good luck, you heavyweight Ersatz— 
We welcome you with pleasure. 


In 1934, the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi proposed the name 
“neutrino” (little neutron) to distinguish Pauli’s hypothetical 
particle from Chadwick’s “heavyweight,” and it would not be 
until 1955 that experimental confirmation of the existence of 
neutrinos would be produced. Oppenheimer and Carlson’s idea 
that Pauli’s neutrino might hold the key to understanding the 


nature of cosmic rays was sunk by the confusion between the two 
neutral particles, and, in any case, turned out to be wrong— 
whichever “neutron” it concerned. 

Having his ideas overtaken by experimental developments 
seems to have had a salutary effect on Oppenheimer, who 
henceforth made it his business to know everything going on in 
experimental physics. Raymond Birge has recalled: “In our 
seminars Oppenheimer knew more experimental physics than 
even the experimental physicists did. He could reel off figures 
and equations relating to experiments better than any 
experimental physicist in the room.” Among the seminars in 
question were the weekly Wednesday-afternoon colloquia, where 
experimentalists and theorists met for discussion, and the Journal 
Club, which met every Tuesday evening to go through recent 
work, both experimental and theoretical. Lawrence’s assistant, 
Milton Stanley Livingston, remembers that at these meetings the 
experimentalists “sat afraid to ask Oppenheimer anything,” with 
the exception of Lawrence himself, who won their admiration for 
his willingness to “pop up and ask something silly.” 

This close collaboration between theorists and experimentalists 
at Berkeley was to be mutually beneficial in the mid- to late 
1930s, but in the crucial year of 1932 there are signs that 
communication was not all it should have been: not only was 
Oppenheimer wrong-footed by experimental developments, but 
Lawrence seemed to be held back by a lack of appreciation of 
certain crucial theoretical points. 

Most of Lawrence’s efforts were directed at building bigger and 
bigger cyclotrons and accelerating protons to greater and greater 
energies. A key moment in this development came in February 
1932, when his latest cyclotron succeeded in accelerating protons 
to an energy of one million volts. “I wrote the figure on the 
blackboard,” Livingston later remembered. “Lawrence came in 
late one evening. He saw the board, looked at the microammeter 
to check the resonance current and literally danced around the 
room.” Ever the publicist, Lawrence lost no time in spreading the 
news, and the next day Livingston recalls: “We were busy all that 
day demonstrating million-volt protons to eager viewers.” The 
San Francisco Examiner sent a reporter to Berkeley to see what 
was going on, and announced excitedly that Lawrence and 
Livingston “are setting about trying to break up the atom and 


release its terrific energy.” Reporting on plans to build an even 
bigger cyclotron, the Examiner went on: “With the greater 
magnet, they hope to shatter the atom completely with an 
ultimate 25,000,000-volt impact.” 

But, as quantum theorists had known for many years before 
this, and as Oppenheimer must surely have been aware, there was 
a very good chance of splitting the atom with much lower 
energies than these. Indeed, the key theoretical point in 
understanding this centers on a phenomenon that Oppenheimer 
himself had been among the first to consider: the mysterious 
process known as “quantum tunneling.” Due to the fact that, 
according to quantum theory, protons, along with electrons, and 
so on, are both particles and waves, there is a_ significant 
possibility that the particles that make up a nucleus can suddenly 
appear outside the electrical barrier (the “Coulomb barrier”) that 
surrounds the nucleus. Rutherford had known about the 
phenomenon, but had pictured it as electrons pulling protons out 
of their shell, like tugboats pulling liners out to sea. It was the 
Russian physicist George Gamow who first realized that it was a 
direct consequence of the wavelike nature of subatomic particles, 
and that quantum mechanics offered the means to quantify and 
predict the probability of such “tunneling” occurring. 

Gamow’s analysis appeared in print twice in quick succession 
in the autumn of 1928: in German in the Zeitschrift fiir Physik on 
October 12, and in English in Nature on November 24. Actually, 
in terms of being the first to publish such an analysis, Gamow 
had narrowly been beaten to it by an article by Edward Condon 
and Ronald Gurney that appeared in Nature in September, but, 
from the point of view of the history of splitting the atom, 
Gamow’s account is more important for two reasons: first, unlike 
Condon and Gurney, Gamow was less concerned with how 
protons might get out of the nucleus than how they might get in; 
and second, it was Gamow’s account that stimulated the work 
that led to the world’s first splitting of the atom. 

Shortly before it was published, an advance copy of Gamow’s 
Zeitschrift article was sent to John Cockcroft at the Cavendish 
Laboratory, who saw immediately its implication that atoms 
might be split with relatively low-voltage protons. Rutherford, 
when he made a public appeal for progress in artificial 
acceleration of particles, had thought that one needed eight 


million volts or more. However, in a series of calculations that 
Cockcroft wrote out, showed to Rutherford, but did not publish, 
he demonstrated that, if Gamow’s analysis was correct, a “mere” 
300,000 volts would probably be enough. 

Encouraged by Rutherford, Cockcroft worked together with his 
Cavendish colleague Ernest Walton to design and build a machine 
capable of accelerating protons to the required 300,000 volts. By 
May 1930, they had a machine capable of 280,000 volts and felt 
able the following August to publish an account of their work in 
the Proceedings of the Royal Society, in which they took the 
possibly risky step of making public Cockcroft’s calculation that 
300,000 volts would be enough to penetrate the nucleus and so 
split the atom. Around the same time, however, Rutherford gave 
a speech in which he claimed: “What we require is an apparatus 
to give us a potential of the order of ten million volts.” Whether 
Rutherford believed this, or whether these words were a 
smokescreen, is difficult to say, but, knowing perfectly well that 
Lawrence and his team were constructing machines capable of 
more than one million volts, Rutherford continued to encourage 
Cockcroft and Walton in their endeavors using more modest 
machinery. 

In January 1932, Cockcroft received a letter from his old friend 
Joseph Boyce, who told him: “I have just been on a very brief 
visit in California and thought you might be interested in a brief 
report on high-voltage work there.” The “place on the coast 
where things are really going on,” reported Boyce, “is Berkeley”: 


Lawrence is just moving into an old wooden building back of 
the physics building, where he hopes to have six different high- 
speed particle outfits. One is to move over the present device 
by which he whirls protons in a magnetic field and in a very 
high frequency tuned electric field and so is able to give them 
velocities a little in excess of a million volts. 


Lawrence, Boyce added, “is a very able director, has many 
graduate students, adequate financial backing, and his work so 
far ... has achieved sufficient success to justify great confidence 
in his future.” 

In the light of such reports, Rutherford’s encouragement 
became more urgent. On April 14, 1932, after they had been told 


by Rutherford to “stop messing about and wasting their time,” 
Cockcroft and Walton, without any great hopes of success, fired 
some accelerated protons at a sample of lithium, a very light 
metal with an atomic mass of 7. The result was so astonishing 
that Rutherford and Chadwick were called to the laboratory to 
verify that there was no mistake in their observations. What they 
all saw were the familiar scintillations that told of the emission of 
alpha particles.33 There was only one conclusion to draw: the 
protons had caused the lithium nucleus to break up, forming two 
alpha particles (that is, helium nuclei, which have an atomic mass 
of 4, which makes perfect mathematical sense, since the 
combined atomic masses of the lithium nucleus plus the proton is 
8, equivalent to two helium nuclei). In other words, what 
Cockcroft and Walton had achieved was the world’s first splitting 
of the atom by artificial means. What is more, they had done it 
with protons accelerated to a voltage significantly below the 
300,000 that Cockcroft had calculated. In subsequent tests, they 
discovered that lithium nuclei could be disintegrated at 125,000 
volts, which was far below what anybody had thought possible. 

When Cockcroft and Walton measured the energy of the alpha 
particles emitted from the reaction, the results provided both 
dramatic confirmation of the most famous equation in science— 
E = mc2z—and a startling illustration of the kind of energy that 
can be released by an atomic reaction. For the answer was eight 
million volts. Since from each lithium nucleus there emerged two 
alpha particles, this means that, from the collision of a single 
proton, traveling with an energy of 125,000 volts, with a single 
lithium nucleus, sixteen million volts of energy had been released 
(two alpha particles, each with an energy of eight million volts). 
Little wonder, then, that people immediately started to wonder 
how such tremendous energy releases might be used in 
explosives. 

Partly because he was acutely conscious that this kind of 
speculation would inevitably follow the announcement of their 
achievement, Rutherford—after helping Cockcroft and Walton 
write up their experiment for Nature—urged upon them the 
importance of keeping quiet about it until a sober account had 
appeared in print. But, as Walton spelled out in a letter written to 
his girlfriend, Freda, this was not Rutherford’s only reason for not 
letting the news leak out. “We know,” Walton wrote, “that people 


in the States are working along similar lines and Rutherford 
would like to see any credit going to the Cavendish. He is not 
fond of American physicists in general on account of their 
tendency to do a great deal of boasting about very little.” 

And yet Rutherford was evidently itching to announce the 
news. On April 28, 1932, two days before the report for Nature 
appeared, he chaired a meeting at the Royal Society in London on 
“The Structure of Atomic Nuclei,” which had been organized 
primarily to allow discussion of Chadwick’s discovery of the 
neutron. Rutherford arranged for Cockcroft and Walton to be 
present at this occasion, and then, before introducing Chadwick, 
announced their achievement in disintegrating the lithium 
nucleus. 

Two days later the Nature piece appeared, but, meanwhile, 
Rutherford’s announcement at the Royal Society had attracted the 
attention of the press, and on Sunday May 1, 1932, the Reynold’s 
Illustrated News, under the heading “sctENcE’s GREATEST DISCOVERY,” 
reported: 


A dream of scientists has been realised. The atom has been 
split, and the limitless energy thus released may transform 
civilisation ... This is the greatest scientific discovery of the 
age. 


The same day the Sunday Express went with: “The Atom Split. 
But World Still Safe,” while the Daily Mirror pleaded: “Let it be 
split, so long as it does not explode.” The idea that atom-splitting 
would lead to extremely powerful bombs had been around since 
the 1920s. Bertrand Russell mentioned it in his 1923 best-seller 
The ABC of Atoms, and it formed the central idea in a play called 
Wings over Europe, in which scientists threaten world leaders that 
they will use atom bombs to destroy the major cities of the world 
unless an international policy is agreed to use the tremendous 
energy released by nuclear reactions. The play had premiered in 
New York in 1928, but, by a strange coincidence, was showing in 
London at the very time that news broke about the splitting of the 
atom by Cockcroft and Walton. 

As it turned out, of course, the fear of the energy that might be 
released from within a nucleus was, in general, well founded. 
However, for the moment it was premature; the kind of energy 


release observed in the disintegration of lithium, though 
extremely impressive, could not be used to make explosives. This 
is for two reasons. First, though there is a dramatic difference 
between the energy of the penetrating protons and the energy of 
the released alpha particles, one has to bear in mind that, at 
125,000 volts, only one proton in about ten million will penetrate 
the nucleus. Thus, the total energy needed to release the sixteen 
million volts of the two alpha particles is about 1.25 billion volts. 
Second, an explosive requires a chain reaction, which had not yet 
been witnessed and which could not possibly occur with the 
disintegration of a light element like lithium. Rutherford’s famous 
dismissal as “moonshine” of the idea that atomic-splitting might 
be a source of energy in the future was, therefore, perfectly 
reasonable in the light of what was then known. However, it was 
while pondering a report of that remark in The Times that it 
suddenly occurred to the Hungarian scientist Leo Szilard, that, if 
one could find an element that disintegrated when bombarded 
with neutrons, and if that element emitted two neutrons for every 
one it absorbed, then a chain reaction could occur that would be a 
source of enormous energy. 

It would take a few years for the rest of the world to catch up 
with Szilard. Meanwhile, the story of Cockcroft and Walton’s 
achievement was picked up by newspapers all over the world, 
including the New York Times, which in its Sunday edition on 
May 8, under the heading “The Atom Is Giving Up Its Mighty 
Secrets,” described the experiment and commented: “Never was a 
result more unexpected obtained.” This was no doubt read by 
Ernest Lawrence, who was at that time preparing to get married 
to Mary Blumer in New Haven, Connecticut. The wedding took 
place on May 14, by which time, it is certain, Lawrence knew 
that he had been preempted as the first person to smash the 
atom. It is therefore not true, as legend has it, that he heard the 
news while on honeymoon. It is possible, however, that the 
telegram his assistant James Brady remembers receiving 
—“Cockcroft and Walton have disintegrated the lithium atom. 
Get lithium from chemistry department and start preparations to 
repeat with cyclotron’—was sent by him while still on 
honeymoon. 

The news from the Cavendish did not stop Lawrence from 
building bigger and bigger machines, nor did it damage his 


ability to attract huge funds for these projects—indeed, if 
anything, it helped by stirring up interest—but it must have made 
him aware of the importance of being well informed about 
theory, just as Chadwick’s discovery of the neutron had made 
Oppenheimer aware of the importance of keeping up with 
experimental developments. 

The fourth and final major development in experimental 
physics during the annus mirabilis of 1932—the discovery of the 
positron by Carl Anderson of Caltech—exhibited a lack of 
communication between theorists and experimentalists that 
seems nothing short of bizarre. As Graham Farmelo, Paul Dirac’s 
biographer, has said: “Many of the characters in this strange 
denouement, including Dirac, behaved in ways that are now 
barely comprehensible.” 

Among those characters whose behavior seems inexplicable 
was Oppenheimer himself. There are several reasons why one 
might have expected Oppenheimer to have been in close contact 
with Anderson while he conducted the research that led to the 
discovery of the positron. In the first place, Anderson, as we have 
seen, had been a student of his. Indeed, during his first lecture 
course at Caltech in 1930, Anderson had been his only student. 
Second, though Anderson’s postdoctoral research was conducted 
with Millikan rather than with Oppenheimer, it was on a subject 
in which Oppenheimer had a deep interest: the nature of cosmic 
rays. Third, the hypothetical existence of the positron, a particle 
with the same mass as an electron but with a positive rather than 
negative charge, had been discussed by Oppenheimer in print, 
when he showed that Dirac’s theory of quantum electrodynamics 
—the very theory he had tried to explain in a lecture attended by 
Anderson—demanded it. And yet, despite all this, when Anderson 
discovered the positron, he did so apparently unaware that the 
existence of such a particle had been predicted by Dirac, or 
indeed that the possibility of its existence had been discussed at 
all by anybody. 

Anderson had started his research on cosmic rays in the 
autumn of 1930, after he had completed his Ph.D. Though he 
worked with Millikan, he regarded Millikan’s theological view of 
cosmic rays as mere wishful thinking, and certainly did not feel 
himself obliged to provide evidence for it. Rather, he wanted to 
gather hard evidence about the nature of cosmic rays, and so 


developed a method of photographing their activity inside a 
cloud chamber, which allowed him to make visual records of the 
paths of charged particles emitted from cosmic-ray collisions. By 
the autumn of 1931, Anderson had about 1,000 such photographs 
and, in November, he wrote to Millikan, who was then in 
Cambridge in order to give a paper at the Cavendish, sending him 
some photographs that puzzled him. What the photographs 
appeared to show were collisions that resulted in the 
simultaneous emission of a negatively charged particle, which 
was surely an electron, and a positively charged particle, which 
Anderson assumed to be a proton. 

Millikan could shed little light on these photographs, but 
exhibited them at the Cavendish anyway, presenting them merely 
as evidence of the tremendous energies of cosmic rays, which he 
thought explicable only by adopting his own theological 
interpretation of them. Among Millikan’s audience at the 
Cavendish, however, was Patrick Blackett, who was deeply 
intrigued by Anderson’s photographs and resolved to find an 
explanation for them. In fact, the explanation for the 
phenomenon Anderson had photographed had already been given 
by Dirac in his lecture at Princeton in October, in which he had 
said that it should be possible to detect positrons—or, as he was 
calling them at this time, “anti-electrons’—experimentally. In 
collisions between pairs of ultra-energy photons, Dirac explained, 
sometimes the photons should disappear and in their place should 
appear a pair of particles: an electron and an “anti-electron,” a 
process subsequently named “pair production.” 

Clearly, this is what had happened inside Anderson’s cloud 
chamber, but when Millikan addressed the Cavendish in 
November, Dirac was still in Princeton, and nobody else seems to 
have made the connection between Dirac’s prediction and 
Anderson’s photographs. Why did the connection not occur to 
Oppenheimer? Or, if it did, why did he not mention it to 
Anderson? Late in life, Anderson recalled that around this time he 
“talked to Oppenheimer quite a bit,” but also that “I found it hard 
to talk to Oppenheimer because his answers were usually, at least 
to me, encased in some sort of mysticism. I couldn’t understand 
what he was saying, but the idea of pair production, if he had 
said that, I would have understood.” As Farmelo remarks: “It 
beggars belief that Oppenheimer never pointed out the 


connection between Dirac’s theory and Anderson’s experiment to 
Dirac, to Anderson or to anyone else. Yet that appears to be what 
happened.” 

Several possibilities suggest themselves. One is that the idea of 
pair production simply did not occur to Oppenheimer. After all, 
he was not at Dirac’s Princeton lecture and the lecture had not 
been published, so he might well have remained ignorant of 
Dirac’s latest thoughts on the question. But even if the specific 
notion of pair production did not occur to him, it still seems odd 
that he did not mention what he had already said in print— 
namely that Dirac’s theory demanded the existence of a positively 
charged particle with the same mass as the electron. Another 
thought is that he was reluctant to help someone working on 
cosmic rays with Millikan, because he assumed that the point of 
his research was to lend support to an analysis of cosmic rays that 
he thought was mistaken. Most likely, though, is that he was still 
so convinced that Dirac’s theory was wrong that the last thing he 
thought Anderson could possibly have photographed was 
evidence that it was right. This does not entirely resolve the 
puzzle, since it raises the question: if Oppenheimer did not think 
Anderson had photographed the positron, what did he think he 
had photographed? A proton? 

In any case, after he had shown his photographs to Millikan, it 
was to be another nine months before Anderson’s further 
experiments allowed him to summon up the confidence to go into 
print with the claim that he had discovered a new particle. In that 
time, Urey discovered deuterium, Chadwick discovered the 
neutron, and Cockcroft and Walton split the atom. Meanwhile, 
Dirac himself was losing faith in his own theory. In April 1932, 
shortly before the dramatic announcement of Cockcroft and 
Walton’s achievement, Dirac was in Copenhagen, attending the 
meeting at which the pastiche of Goethe’s Faust mentioned above 
was performed. Dirac, of course, appears as a character in the 
play, which pokes fun at his “hole” theory of quantum 
electrodynamics. Throughout the meeting, in fact, Dirac had to 
put up with a great deal of skepticism about his theory. Nobody, 
it seems, believed it, least of all Bohr, who is recorded as saying: 
“Tell us, Dirac, do you really believe in that stuff?” Dirac did not 
say so publicly, but a couple of years later he told Heisenberg 
that he had, privately, ceased to believe in his theory in the 


months before the discovery of the positron was made public. In 
July 1932, a month before Dirac’s thirtieth birthday, it was 
announced that he was to succeed Sir Joseph Larmor as the 
Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge, the chair that 
had previously been held by Isaac Newton and was subsequently 
to be held by Stephen Hawking. The appointment made Dirac 
financially secure, but it also came with expectations. It was thus 
a bad time to be associated with a discredited theory. 

Of course, Dirac’s theory was soon to be confirmed, but it took 
an extraordinarily long time for anyone to realize or admit that it 
had been confirmed. On August 2, 1932, Anderson obtained a 
photograph of a track that seemed to have been left by an 
electron except that, from the direction of its curvature, he could 
see that it was positively charged. Still knowing nothing of Dirac’s 
“anti-electron,” Anderson thought he had discovered a previously 
unknown and unsuspected particle. The discovery of a new 
particle, however, was such a rare and unexpected event that he 
took his time to consider all other possibilities before he 
committed himself in print to the claim that that was what had 
happened. Not until the beginning of September did he send a 
short report of his discovery, with the tentative title “The 
Apparent Existence of Easily Deflectable Positives,” to the journal 
Science. The two-page article ended with the statement: “It seems 
necessary to call upon a positively charged particle having a mass 
comparable with that of an electron.” 

Unlike the previous major breakthroughs of 1932, the 
discovery of the positron was not immediately heralded as an 
important achievement. Very few people seem to have even read 
Anderson’s report and, of those who did, most seem not to have 
believed it. Anderson did not publish his fully worked-out follow- 
up article in the Physical Review until March 1933. Astonishingly, 
in the intervening period, even now that the discovery of the 
positron had been announced in print, Oppenheimer still did not 
mention to Anderson that his discovery confirmed Dirac’s 
prediction, nor did he tell him the explanation of how positrons 
appear that Dirac’s theory provides. “It is surprising to me,” 
Anderson later said, with admirable restraint, “that Oppenheimer 
during the six months after I first published the paper on the 
positron—I had no idea, even though I’d searched my mind and 
gone nuts trying to figure out how these things could be—it’s 


very surprising to me that Oppie didn’t think of that idea. It’s the 
sort of thing you would have expected him to think of.” It is all 
the more surprising because in a letter to Frank, undated but 
almost certainly written in the autumn of 1932, Oppenheimer 
mentions “Anderson’s positively charged electrons” as one of the 
things he and his students were thinking about. 

On February 17, 1933, before Anderson had sent off his 
detailed paper to the Physical Review, he was shocked to read in 
the newspapers that the discovery of the “positive electron” had 
been announced in London by someone else. The person in 
question was Patrick Blackett, Oppenheimer’s old laboratory 
supervisor, who, since Millikan’s presentation of Anderson’s 
photographs at the Cavendish in November 1931, had been 
conducting his own researches into cosmic rays and taking his 
own, even more impressive photographs. In this he had been 
helped by an Italian visitor to the Cavendish, Giuseppe 
Occhialini, whom everyone knew as “Beppo.” Occhialini had 
arrived at the Cavendish already having had some experience in 
investigating cosmic rays using Geiger counters. Together, 
Blackett and Occhialini devised an ingenious method of getting 
cosmic rays to, as it were, take photographs of themselves. They 
did this by placing Geiger counters above and below a cloud 
chamber, in such a way that when a cosmic ray was detected, a 
photograph was taken. 

Blackett and Occhialini did not read Anderson’s report in 
Science until January 1933, by which time they had amassed an 
impressive collection of photographs that showed, even more 
clearly than Anderson’s pictures, the paths of positively charged 
particles. Where they had a huge advantage over Anderson was in 
having the time, the goodwill and the active interest of Paul 
Dirac, who realized that their photographs confirmed his 
prediction of the “anti-electron” and was thus able to overcome 
his previous doubts about his own theory. “I was quite intimate 
with Blackett at the time,” Dirac later remembered, “and told him 
about my relativistic theory of the electron.” 

Thus, with Dirac’s help, when Blackett and Occhialini 
presented their results in public, which they did on February 16, 
1933, at the Royal Society in London, they were able, unlike 
Anderson, not only to announce a new particle, but also to 
explain how that particle was produced. And it was the 


explanation that made the new particle so interesting. For this 
was an even more astonishing illustration of the Einsteinian 
formula E = mcz than the splitting of the atom had been. The 
formula asserts the equivalence of mass and energy, and what 
Cockcroft and Walton had demonstrated was an example of mass 
being converted into energy and, in the process, they had shown 
just how much energy could be released from a small amount of 
mass—as Einstein’s formula asserts. But what Patrick Blackett 
was able to show—using dramatic photographs of rays from outer 
space, no less—was the equivalence going in the other direction: 
energy becoming mass! Whereas Anderson had “gone nuts” trying 
to work out how positrons could possibly exist, Blackett knew 
perfectly well from his discussions with Dirac how they could be: 
they had been created by the conversion of energy into mass, in 
accordance with the “pair production” that was predicted by 
Dirac’s theory. In presenting his photographs of the “positive 
electron” (as he called it at this time), Blackett was scrupulous in 
spelling out its connections with Dirac’s theory, showing on the 
one hand how it provided evidence for that theory, and on the 
other hand how the theory helped to explain things about the 
particle that might be puzzling. For not only could Dirac’s theory 
explain how the particle came into being, but it could also 
explain why the positron had remained undetected for so long. 
The answer is that, as an “anti-particle,” it has a very short life 
because, as soon as it comes into contact with its opposite 
number—in this case, an electron—it is annihilated. 

In the starkest contrast to Anderson’s announcement the 
previous September, Blackett and Occhialini’s results were 
immediately hailed as an important, indeed sensational, 
breakthrough. The morning after Blackett’s presentation at the 
Royal Society, their achievement was reported in the New York 
Times, the Manchester Guardian and the London Daily Herald, 
which described it as the “Greatest Atom Discovery of the 
Century.” Whenever he was interviewed by reporters, however, 
Blackett was careful to stress that he had been anticipated, and 
that the real discoverer of this new positive particle was 
Anderson. When Anderson’s own detailed treatment of the 
particle appeared in the Physical Review, however, it was already 
old news, except for one thing. In place of Dirac’s “anti-electron” 
and Blackett’s “positive electron,” Anderson introduced the name 


that subsequently stuck: the positron. 

The astonishing series of breakthroughs in 1932 occupied 
Nobel Prize committees for many years to come: Harold Urey 
won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1934 for his discovery of 
deuterium, while the Nobel Prize in Physics went to Paul Dirac in 
1933, partly, at least, for his prediction of the positron; James 
Chadwick in 1935, for discovering the neutron; Carl Anderson in 
1936, for his discovery of the positron; Ernest Lawrence in 1939, 
for inventing the cyclotron; Patrick Blackett in 1948, for his work 
on nuclear physics and cosmic rays (chief among which was his 
identification of the positron as Dirac’s “anti-electron”); and 
Cockcroft and Walton in 1951, for splitting the atomic nucleus. 

These breakthroughs also provided the topics for research 
pursued by Oppenheimer and his students for the following few 
years, concentrating as they did on the investigation of 
deuterium, cosmic rays, the positron and the phenomenon of pair 
production. From the point of view of American physics, the 
encouraging thing about the list of Nobel laureates created by the 
breakthroughs of 1932 was that three of them (Urey, Anderson 
and Lawrence) were American. All three of them, however, were 
experimentalists. In theory, the Americans still lagged behind the 
Europeans, though they were catching up. Oppenheimer’s 
contributions to the theoretical issues of that day may have been 
a step or two behind the leading Europeans, and he may have 
made some glaring errors here and there, and, in the case of 
Anderson, shown an inexplicable reticence, but he had at least 
made contributions, some of which were discussed at the 
forefront of physical theory. Moreover, he had done this without 
once, since the start of his appointments in California, setting foot 
in Europe. 

By this time, Oppenheimer was settled in California. At 
Berkeley, he had moved out of the faculty club at the start of the 
1931-2 academic year, and into what he described to Frank as “a 
little house up on the hill with a view of the cities and of the 
most beautiful harbor in the world ... There is a sleeping porch; 
and I sleep under the Yaqui34 and the stars and imagine I am on 
the porch at Perro Caliente.” After the family holiday in New 
Orleans following Ella’s death, Oppenheimer brought his father 
with him when he returned to California. For a few weeks in the 
New Year of 1932 they lived together; not, however, in Berkeley, 


but in Pasadena, which Julius preferred. Julius, Oppenheimer 
told Frank, “is very much pleased with this place, liking the 
cottage—which is in fact excruciatingly ugly—and not I think 
sorry to have me under the same roof.” 

He reassured Frank that their father, who was by now sixty 
years old, “looks well, better than in months.” Julius, in fact, was 
enjoying himself in Pasadena, learning French, attending 
concerts, taking driving lessons and even joining in some 
academic seminars. Every morning, Oppenheimer reported, Julius 
and he were served breakfast by the Tolmans’ maid, Moline, who 
“after I am gone listens with enchanting patience to F[ather]’s 
reports on high finance.” On January 18, 1932, Julius himself 
wrote to Frank, telling him: “I am meeting lots of Robert’s friends 
and yet I believe that I have not interfered with his activities.” 
Julius, impressed both with his son and with Caltech for having 
such distinguished connections, reported to Frank that Robert 
“has had a couple of short talks with Einstein.” 

These talks would probably have taken place during the second 
of Einstein’s three visits to Caltech. During the first, in the New 
Year of 1930, he came to love Pasadena so much that he took to 
calling it “paradise.” In between discussing cosmic rays with 
Millikan and relativity with Tolman, Einstein had toured the 
movie studios of Hollywood, had dinner at Charlie Chaplin’s 
Beverly Hills home and attended a banquet in his honor, at which 
there had been 200 guests. So much in demand was he that a 
millionairess gave Caltech $10,000 for the privilege of meeting 
him. Evidently hoping to recruit him permanently, Millikan 
invited him back for the New Year of 1932—a visit that, at 
Einstein’s request, was rather more low-key. Though he loved 
California, Einstein was less impressed with Millikan, whose 
political conservatism clashed with his own determination to 
speak out on behalf of the poor, the dispossessed and the 
persecuted. 

More to Einstein’s taste was the educator Abraham Flexner, 
who, having secured funding of $5 million, was in the process of 
establishing an Institute for Advanced Study. During Einstein’s 
second visit to California, Flexner took the opportunity to sound 
him out about the possibility of joining his proposed new 
institute. The reply was encouraging enough for Flexner to visit 
Einstein in Germany during the summer of 1932, where he told 


Einstein that the new institute would be based in Princeton and 
asked him to name his own price and conditions. Einstein initially 
declined, but the rapid growth in the power and influence of the 
Nazis in Germany forced him to reconsider. When he left 
Germany for his third visit to Caltech in December 1932, his 
ostensible plan was to return to Germany two months later before 
taking up his position at Flexner’s new institute, but in reality he 
probably knew that he would not be returning. 

While Einstein was in Pasadena in January 1933, the news 
came that Hitler had been made Chancellor. He was still there on 
March 5 when he heard that the Nazi Party had received the most 
votes (44 percent) of any party in Germany’s general election. 
Einstein returned to Europe at the end of March, but sensibly did 
not step foot in Germany, where his home had been seized, his 
books burned and his theories officially repudiated as “Jewish 
science.” Throughout the new “Reich” scientists who were not, 
like the physicist Philipp Lenard, active Nazis or, like Max Planck 
or Werner Heisenberg, prepared to work under the Nazis, were 
making plans to leave Germany. The many Jewish scientists, of 
course, had no choice. Max Born, having been thrown out of 
Gottingen because he was Jewish, prepared to move to England, 
where Cambridge had offered to take him. Leo Szilard, 
meanwhile, left Germany with his life savings hidden in his 
shoes. After a few months in England, Einstein returned to the 
United States and, with much fanfare, took up his appointment at 
the Institute for Advanced Study. He never once returned to 
Europe. 

Of all this turmoil in Germany—the home of his ancestors and 
some of his not-very-distant relations, as well as of many of the 
scientists for whom he had the greatest regard—there is not a 
single word in Oppenheimer’s letters, even when he touches on 
subjects that relate to it. For example, in a letter to Frank written 
on March 12, 1932, he tells him that their father, his health 
having been restored by his time in California, is now returning 
to New York. “I have urged him very strongly not to go to Europe 
alone this summer,” Oppenheimer writes. One might think this 
advice was prompted by Oppenheimer’s concern at his father 
placing himself at the mercy of the violent anti-Semitism that had 
erupted in Germany. The rest of the letter suggests, however, that 
his concern was not about the conditions in Germany, but merely 


about his father’s physical condition. “Only if things should break 
unexpectedly well,” he writes, “e.g. should he find a very good 
person to travel with, ought he, or will he, go abroad.” He adds: 
“T have said that next summer I should consider going myself, 
that in that case we could at least cross both ways together.” 

Again, in October 1933, he wrote to his brother about Frank’s 
plans to study at Cambridge. “The theoretical physics should be 
awfully good in Cambridge,” he told him, “with Dirac there, and 
Born.” But nowhere does he reflect on, or even mention, why 
Born was in Cambridge. In March 1934, he responded to an 
appeal for financial support for dismissed German physicists by 
pledging 3 percent of his salary for two years. Apart from that, he 
remained silent until his interest in political and social questions 
was finally aroused in 1936. Until then, his attitude is summed up 
by a remark he once made to Leo Nedelsky: “Tell me, what has 
politics to do with truth, goodness and beauty?” 

Oppenheimer’s concern with truth, goodness and beauty led 
him in the early 1930s to a serious study of ancient Hindu 
literature; so serious, indeed, that he took lessons in Sanskrit so 
that he could read the Hindu texts in their original language. The 
first mention of this comes in his letter to Frank of August 10, 
1931, in which he writes: “I am learning Sanskrit, enjoying it 
very much, and enjoying again the sweet luxury of being taught.” 

His teacher was Arthur Ryder, who was professor of Sanskrit at 
Berkeley. Harold Cherniss has described Ryder as “a friend half 
divine in his great humanity.” In his views on education, he was a 
curious mixture of the ultra-traditionalist and the iconoclast. He 
believed on the one hand that a university education ought to 
consist primarily of Latin, Greek and mathematics (with the other 
sciences and humanities given as a reward to good students and 
the social sciences ignored altogether). On the other hand, his 
approach to the teaching of Sanskrit was refreshingly free from 
the deadening hand of dry scholarship. He regarded the learning 
of Sanskrit as the opening of a door onto great literature, not as 
an academic discipline. Perhaps for that reason he was the ideal 
teacher for Oppenheimer, who held him in enormously high 
regard. “Ryder felt and thought and talked as a stoic,” 
Oppenheimer once told a journalist, extolling him as “a special 
subclass of the people who have a tragic sense of life, in that they 
attribute to human actions the completely decisive role in the 


difference between salvation and damnation. Ryder knew that a 
man could commit irretrievable error, and that in the face of this 
fact, all others were secondary.” 

Oppenheimer gave few details of his learning of Sanskrit or of 
his reading of the Hindu classics. In a letter to Frank of January 
1932, he alludes very briefly to the Hindu god Shiva; the 
following autumn he mentions that he is reading “the Cakuntala” 
(more usually spelled Shakuntala, a verse play written by the 
great Sanskrit poet and dramatist Kalidasa) and promises Frank 
that at their next meeting he will afflict him “with clumsy 
translations of the superb poems”; and a year later that he is 
reading the Bhagavad Gita, which “is very easy and quite 
marvelous.” Then, in June 1934, he writes to Frank, thanking 
him for “the precious Meghaduta and rather too learned Veda,” 
which were presumably birthday presents. “The Meghaduta I 
read with Ryder, with delight, some ease, and_ great 
enchantment,” Oppenheimer told his brother. “The Veda lies on 
my shelf, a reproach to my indolence.” Otherwise known as “The 
Cloud Messenger,” the Meghaduta is a poem by Kalidasa that tells 
how a cloud is used to take a message from an exiled subject of 
Kubera, the god of wealth, to his wife in the Himalayan 
Mountains. The Vedas are the most ancient of Hindu scriptures, 
consisting of hymns, poems and mantras. 

Apart from these very brief mentions of Sanskrit literature, 
Oppenheimer’s only other allusion to Hinduism in_ his 
correspondence comes in yet another letter to Frank, in which he 
tells him that he has called his third and latest car “Garuda,” 
after, he says, “the mechanical bird which the carpenter made for 
his friend the weaver who loved a princess”—a description that 
shows a knowledge of the collection of fables known as the 
Panchatantra, rather than of the Upanishads scriptures, or the epic 
poem the Mahabharata, in both of which Garuda is depicted quite 
differently as a minor deity who carries the supreme god, Vishnu. 

Though detailed discussion of his reading is absent, one can see 
the influence of Hinduism in much of what Oppenheimer writes 
to his brother. For example, in a letter to Frank, undated but 
probably written in January 1932, he speaks of “that delectatio 
contemplationis which is the reward and reason of our way of life” 
and says that, though such things are not to be expected, 
nevertheless “we try to do everything to invite them, cultivate a 


little leisure, and a certain detached solitariness, and a quiet 
discipline which uses but transcends the discipline of our duties.” 

In some ways, these remarks carry echoes of some of Felix 
Adler’s maxims, but, in their emphasis on detachment, 
separateness and transcendence they seem closer to the Bhagavad 
Gita than to the Ethical Culture movement, with its 
encouragement to engage politically and socially so as to improve 
the lives of others. Even more clearly indebted to Hindu ideas is 
the extended disquisition on the notion of discipline that 
Oppenheimer included in a letter to Frank two months later. The 
view Oppenheimer puts forward there is that discipline is to be 
valued independently from, and more than, “its earthly fruit.” 
“Discipline is good for the soul,” as Oppenheimer puts it, and it is 
not good because it leads to good results, or because it enables us 
to do things. That discipline is good for the soul “is more 
fundamental than any of the grounds given for its goodness.” It 
is, as it were, good in itself. What Oppenheimer writes about 
discipline to Frank is worth quoting at length, because it offers, I 
think, some valuable clues about the way he looked at life, and 
how that enabled him to do the things he did. 


I believe that through discipline, though not through discipline 
alone, we can achieve serenity, and a certain small but 
precious measure of freedom from the accidents of incarnation, 
and charity, and that detachment which preserves the world 
which it renounces. I believe that through discipline we learn 
to preserve what is essential to our happiness in more and 
more adverse circumstances, and to abandon with simplicity 
what would else have seemed to us indispensable; that we 
come a little to see the world without the gross distortion of 
personal desire, and in seeing it so, accept more easily our 
earthly privation and its earthly horror—But because I believe 
that the reward of discipline is greater than its immediate 
objective, I would not have you think that discipline without 
objective is possible: in its nature discipline involves the 
subjection of the soul to some perhaps minor end; and that end 
must be real, if the discipline is not to be factitious. Therefore I 
think that all things which evoke discipline: study, and our 
duties to men and to the commonwealth, war, and personal 
hardship, and even the need for subsistence, ought to be 


greeted by us with profound gratitude; for only through them 
can we attain the least detachment, and only so can we know 
peace. 


These thoughts carry direct echoes of the Bhagavad Gita, which 
begins on the battlefield with the great warrior Prince Arjuna 
despairing at the suffering of war and coming to doubt that there 
is any glory in killing the “teachers, fathers and sons” who face 
him. He therefore wants no more part in the “evil of destruction.” 
The god Krishna, however, tells him that his concern for the 
deaths of his kinsmen and enemies is misplaced, since the spirit 
does not perish with the body and it is the spirit alone that is of 
value. Arjuna must fight, Krishna urges, not because of what 
fighting will accomplish, but rather because it is his duty to fight. 
“Set thy heart upon thy work,” Krishna says, “but never on its 
reward. Work not for a reward; but never cease to do thy work.” 
Toward the end of the book Krishna preaches “freedom from the 
chains of attachment, even from a selfish attachment to one’s 
children, wife or home,” a freedom achievable by “retiring to 
solitary places, and avoiding the noisy multitude,” Krishna 
continues: “A constant yearning to know the inner Spirit, and a 
vision of Truth which gives liberation: this is true wisdom leading 
to vision.” He then speaks of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—light, fire 
and darkness—and says: “Any work when it is well done bears 
the pure harmony of Sattva” and “From Sattva arises wisdom.” 

According to Isidor Rabi, Oppenheimer “would have been a 
much better physicist if he had studied the Talmud rather than 
Sanskrit ... it would have given him a greater sense of himself.” 
Rabi was inclined to link Oppenheimer’s interest in Sanskrit texts 
with his expertise in French literature; both, he thought, were 
part of Oppenheimer’s attempt to persuade himself and others 
that he was not Jewish. If he had mastered the literature of his 
own tradition, rather than those of others, Rabi thought, 
Oppenheimer would not have had the problems that come with 
denying one’s own background. “The Jewish tradition,” Rabi 
thought, “even if you don’t know it in detail, is so strong that you 
renounce it at your own peril. Doesn’t mean you have to be 
orthodox, or even practise it, but if you turn your back on it, 
having been born into it, you’re in trouble.” 

As we have seen, the sense in which Oppenheimer was “born 


into” the Jewish tradition is elusive, perhaps too elusive for Rabi’s 
point to be persuasive, because there is no clear way in which we 
can see Oppenheimer turning his back on his own tradition. In his 
family, as in many of the German Jewish families that made up 
Oppenheimer’s cultural background, the back-turning had been 
done a generation or two earlier. In the introduction he wrote to 
the published collection of speeches given at Oppenheimer’s 
memorial, Rabi offered another reason for thinking that the 
influence of Hinduism on Oppenheimer’s physics had been for the 
worse, this time in an effort to explain “why men of 
Oppenheimer’s gifts do not discover everything worth 
discovering.” The answer, he suggests, is that “in some respects 
Oppenheimer was over-educated in those fields which lie outside 
the scientific tradition, such as his interest in religion, in the 
Hindu religion in particular, which resulted in a feeling for the 
mystery of the universe that surrounded him almost like a fog. He 
saw physics clearly, looking toward what had already been done, 
but at the border he tended to feel that there was much more of 
the mysterious and novel than there actually was.” 


He was insufficiently confident of the power of the intellectual 
tools he already possessed and did not drive his thought to the 
very end because he felt instinctively that new ideas and new 
methods were necessary to go further than he and his students 
had already gone. Some may call it a lack of faith, but in my 
opinion it was more a turning away from the hard, crude 
methods of theoretical physics into a mystical realm of broad 
intuition. 


It is difficult to know whether the work that Oppenheimer did 
in the period after 1932 exemplifies or refutes Rabi’s remarks. On 
the one hand, this was one of Oppenheimer’s most impressively 
concentrated periods of work, during which he worked on the 
most fundamental, and difficult, problems that theoretical physics 
had to face at that time. Addressing these problems took all of the 
very considerable talents and energy at Oppenheimer’s disposal. 
Or, anyway, most of them; it is true that he combined his work in 
physics with, for example, learning Sanskrit and reading ancient 
Greek—things that most of us would regard as significant 
achievements in their own right—but, for the most part, he 


approached physics at this time with something of the attitude 
recommended by Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita: freedom from 
attachments, seclusion from the “noisy multitude” and, above all 
perhaps, a “constant yearning to know.” If he showed some 
interest in things of beauty, such as the literature he read, he 
showed almost none in the social and political upheavals that 
were happening at that time. Whether one thinks of this as a 
good or a bad thing, it is certainly hard to see that it hindered his 
progress in physics, and hard too to regard it as anything but an 
application of the outlook he had acquired from Hinduism. 

On the other hand, despite his extremely hard work and his 
utter absorption in physics at this time, it is true that he did not 
accomplish anything remotely comparable to the achievements of 
Bohr, Heisenberg, Dirac et al. And the reason for that may have 
something to do with his Hindu-influenced attitudes. Regarding 
work as being valuable for its own sake, regardless of its results, 
may have inspired in him a devotion to work that others lacked, 
but it may also, as Rabi suspected, have made him less single- 
minded than the very best physicists with regard to solving 
problems, and more accepting of the idea that some problems 
were simply insoluble. Someone like James Chadwick or Ernest 
Lawrence, or even Paul Dirac, worked at a problem in order to 
solve it; Oppenheimer took pleasure in the work itself. 

And yet, if Oppenheimer approached physics from the point of 
view of someone who saw in it “truth, goodness and beauty,” he 
also had at least one practical result in mind—namely, the 
development and growth of the peculiarly American school of 
theoretical physics that he had set out to create. In contrast to 
Paul Dirac, say, who had very few graduate students and spent 
very little time with those he had, Oppenheimer did almost 
everything, including his own research, with his students. 

For both Oppenheimer and his students, the research agenda 
was set by the remarkable discoveries of 1932, as Oppenheimer 
spelled out in his letter to Frank in the autumn of that year. He 
begins his report with the very distinction that forms the heart of 
the Bhagavad Gita view of work: “The work is fine: not in the 
fruits but the doing.” He goes on: 


There are lots of eager students, and we are busy studying 
nuclei and neutrons and disintegrations; trying to make some 


peace between the inadequate theory and the absurd 
revolutionary experiments ... We have been running a nuclear 
seminar, in addition to the usual ones, trying to make some 
order out of the great chaos, not getting very far with that. We 
are supplementing the paper I wrote last summer [the one he 
published with Frank Carlson on “magnetic neutrons”] with a 
study of the radiation in electron-electron impacts, and 
worrying about the neutron and Anderson’s positively charged 
electrons, and cleaning up a few residual problems in atomic 
physics. I take it that there will be a lull in the theory for a 
time; and that when the theory advances, it will be very wild 
and very wonderful indeed. 


During the year 1932-3, Frank Carlson, having received his 
Ph.D. in April 1932, was Oppenheimer’s research associate, 
Melba Phillips was in the final year of her Ph.D. studies, and Leo 
Nedelsky, who, like Carlson, had completed his Ph.D. in 1932, 
was still in Berkeley, having had no success in finding an 
appointment. Harvey Hall, meanwhile, had found a job at 
Columbia as an instructor in physics. Oppenheimer, perhaps 
thinking he was helping out, asked Nedelsky to lecture for him 
during the weeks he left Berkeley to go to Caltech. “It won’t be 
any trouble,” Oppenheimer told him, “it’s all in a book.” The 
book, however, turned out to be in Dutch. When Nedelsky 
reported that this would be a problem, Oppenheimer airily 
replied: “But it’s such easy Dutch.” 

In 1932, these graduate students were joined by some 
postdoctoral students, holders of the coveted National Research 
Fellowship, who, now that Oppenheimer was there, regarded 
Berkeley as a serious rival to Cambridge, Copenhagen and 
Gottingen as a place in which to pursue postdoctoral research. In 
1932-3, Oppenheimer worked with two of these NRF 
postdoctoral students. The first was Wendell Furry, a Methodist 
minister’s son from Indiana, who had taken his Ph.D. at the 
University of Illinois. Furry had attended the Ann Arbor summer 
school in 1931 and had been deeply impressed at seeing 
Oppenheimer, the only American invited to share the platform 
with the galaxy of European stars on display, standing up to none 
other than Wolfgang Pauli. When he went to Berkeley, however 
(to begin with at any rate), Furry felt hopelessly out of his depth, 


finding that when he attended Oppenheimer’s lectures he did not 
understand a word of them. It took him a year to regain his 
confidence. 

In the meantime, Oppenheimer began to work closely with 
Milton Plesset, his second National Research Fellow, though he 
had arrived not at Berkeley but at Caltech, initially hoping to 
work with Paul Epstein, the Russian physicist who had been there 
since 1921. Plesset had done his Ph.D. at Yale on a subject close 
to Oppenheimer’s heart, Dirac’s theory of the electron, and so it 
was natural that Oppenheimer would take some interest in his 
work and that they should start working together. After all, 
people who understood Dirac’s quantum electrodynamics were 
few and far between. As Plesset later recalled: “The state of 
theoretical physics in this country at that time was not very 
advanced, except for Oppenheimer.” When Oppenheimer arrived 
in Pasadena, Plesset remembers, “things really started to move.” 
He and Oppenheimer got interested in what Plesset describes as 
“a problem with the Dirac electron” and together they wrote a 
short paper that “put a new light on the Dirac theory.” 

That paper, entitled “On the Production of the Positive 
Electron,” was published as a letter to the editor in the Physical 
Review in the summer of 1933 and is the first of a series of papers 
in which Oppenheimer, usually together with one of his students, 
attempted to address what he saw as the problems in Dirac’s 
theory of the electron. This had been an ongoing preoccupation 
of his since Dirac had first shown him the theory in 1928, but, 
after the discovery of the positron in 1932, this preoccupation 
took on a rather different form. He could no longer, as he had 
before, point to the negative energy states in the theory as 
evidence of a problem; these states were filled, as Dirac had 
predicted, with positively charged particles. Indeed, the paper 
jointly written by Oppenheimer and Plesset begins with the 
following acknowledgment: “The experimental discovery of the 
positive electron gives us a striking confirmation of Dirac’s theory 
of the electron.” It had quickly been confirmed that positrons 
could be created not only by the impact of cosmic rays, but also 
in the laboratory. In their paper, Oppenheimer and Plesset 
discuss, in particular, the experiments at Caltech conducted by 
Carl Anderson and his colleague Seth Neddermeyer, in which 
they showed that pairs of electrons and positrons are created 


when the very energetic gamma radiation from thorium C“ passes 
through lead. From Dirac’s theory, they point out, one can make 
predictions about the frequency of pair production that are 
confirmed by the experimental evidence, but only—and this is 
where Oppenheimer thought major changes in the theory were 
needed and where his interest really lay—up to energies of a 
certain limit. Beyond that limit, Oppenheimer and Plesset claim, 
the theory fails. 

In the penultimate paragraph of their short paper, 
Oppenheimer and Plesset make what Abraham Pais has described 
as a “fundamental observation,” namely that “fast electrons and 
positives [positrons] ... will themselves tend to produce further 
pairs”—a prescient anticipation of the phenomenon of showering 
that would later be studied intensely by physicists, including 
Oppenheimer himself. Pais is less complimentary about the 
mathematics in the paper, pointing out: “Their final formula was 
wrong, as usual, as others rapidly noted.” 

These two aspects of Oppenheimer’s work—his originality and 
his mathematical carelessness—are neatly captured in a 
recommendation that Ralph Fowler wrote to Edwin Kemble of 
Harvard, when Harvard expressed an interest in trying to lure 
Oppenheimer away from California. Kemble knew Oppenheimer 
himself, of course, but he also knew that Fowler had seen him on 
many occasions during his rise to prominence, the latest of which 
was a visit Fowler made to Berkeley in the autumn of 1932. 
Dated November 30, 1933, Fowler’s report reads: 


I fancy he is not a very good lecturer and his work is still apt to 
be full of mistakes due to lack of care, but it is work of the 
highest originality and he has an extremely stimulating 
influence in a theoretical school as I had ample opportunities 
of learning last fall. 


Nevertheless, despite his unreliable mathematics, Oppenheimer 
was successfully putting both Berkeley and Caltech on the 
international map. When distinguished physicists came to 
California, the man who made the most impression on them was 
usually Oppenheimer. This was certainly the case when God 
himself, Niels Bohr, came to Pasadena in the summer of 1933. 
This was the only opportunity Oppenheimer had had to discuss 


physics with his greatest scientific idol since their initial meeting 
at Cambridge in 1926, and it seems to have been remembered by 
both as a pleasant and instructive occasion. At the very end of 
their 1933 paper, Oppenheimer and Plesset extend their 
“profound thanks” to Niels Bohr, “who has helped us to 
understand the essential consistency of the theory which we have 
here applied.” For his part, Bohr was very pleased to be able to 
discuss physics with Oppenheimer, his meeting with whom seems 
to have been the highlight of his visit. He was much less 
enchanted with Millikan, but nevertheless agreed to meet the 
trustees of Caltech to tell them how well the school of physics 
was doing. On June 14, 1933, Oppenheimer wrote to Bohr to 
thank him for his visit, and to send him a copy of the paper he 
had written with Plesset, who was about to leave Pasadena to 
spend a year at Bohr’s institute. 

Plesset remembers that Bohr’s institute that summer was 
“swarming” with refugees from Nazi Germany, mostly Jewish 
scientists. Shortly after Plesset’s arrival, the institute held its 
annual seminar, which for a number of reasons is remembered as 
a melancholy occasion. Dirac, Heisenberg and Ehrenfest were 
among the attendees, and Plesset recalls “a lot of discussion over 
the validity of Dirac’s theory. People were groping still.” 

In especially poor spirits at Bohr’s seminar was Paul Ehrenfest, 
who was described as looking “pudgy-faced and overweight” and 
“losing his grip on physics.” When the time came to leave, Dirac, 
who had grown close to Ehrenfest, saw him waiting for a taxi, 
looking flustered and unhappy, and thanked him for his 
contributions to the discussions. This elicited from Ehrenfest an 
extreme and, for Dirac, extremely worrying, reaction: “What you 
have said, coming from a young man like you, means very much 
to me because, maybe, a man such as I feels he has no force to 
live.” A few days later, the dreadful news came that Ehrenfest 
had shot himself, prompting Dirac to write a four-page letter to 
Bohr describing in detail his last moments with Ehrenfest and 
telling him that he could not help blaming himself for what had 
happened. 

News of Ehrenfest’s death seems to have reached Oppenheimer 
rather slowly. On October 7, 1933, nearly two weeks after the 
suicide, he wrote to Frank, apparently still unaware of it. What 
was more on his mind was what he described as the “work with 


pairs,” which he told Frank “has gone along nicely.” He was now 
more certain than ever that Dirac’s “theory gives the wrong 
answer for the production of very high energy pairs” and seemed 
confident that he and his students were making progress in 
“cleaning up the formalism.” 

Oppenheimer’s close attention to experimental work in this 
period is illustrated in the letter to Frank, as are some of the 
problems that it caused him. Lawrence, he writes, “has definitely 
established the instability of the H2 [deuterium] nucleus. It 
decomposes upon collision into neutron and proton, to the tune 
of about six million volts.” This, he adds, with a discernible note 
of triumph, makes a “hopeless obstacle” to Heisenberg’s theory of 
the nucleus. As it turned out, Heisenberg’s theory was a good deal 
more trustworthy than Lawrence’s observations. 

Lawrence that autumn was given the honor of being invited to 
the seventh Solvay Congress in Brussels, which was held in the 
week of October 22-29, 1933. The theme originally chosen was 
the application of quantum mechanics to chemistry, but, in the 
light of the momentous discoveries of 1932, this was changed to 
the nucleus. Lawrence’s invitation was the source of great pride 
at Berkeley. It was, his Ph.D. student Robert Thornton has said, 
“Lawrence’s first European recognition.” When the time came for 
Lawrence to leave for Belgium: “The whole staff went down to 
the train to see him off. Next morning they got together in the lab 
and then took off for a kind of two-day picnic climbing Mount 
Lassen. They were so happy you’d have thought they were all 
going to talk at the Solvay Congress.” 

Unfortunately for Lawrence, his appearance at the Solvay 
Congress turned out to be something of a humiliation. 
Heisenberg, Bohr, Chadwick and Iréne Curie all used the occasion 
to express skepticism about his results, unimpressed by his claim 
that they had been obtained (and could only be obtained) with a 
machine capable of 800,000 volts. No matter how many volts he 
had at his command, they insisted, from a theoretical point of 
view, his interpretation of his results did not make sense. 
According to Nuel Pharr Davis: “Lawrence left the conference 
feeling bad.” A colleague at Berkeley described it as “one of 
Lawrence’s saddest experiences.” About a month later, it was 
shown by scientists at the Carnegie Institution in Washington that 
Lawrence’s results had been skewed by impurities. 


From Oppenheimer’s point of view, Lawrence’s trip to Brussels 
had a benefit quite independent of Lawrence’s own work and 
reputation; namely, that it would allow Lawrence to hear, and 
report back to Oppenheimer on, Paul Dirac’s latest thoughts. 
Dirac’s paper, entitled “Theory of the Positron,” was on precisely 
the topic that consumed Oppenheimer’s thoughts and energies 
during this period, and he was pleased to see that, in some 
respects, Dirac’s thoughts were moving in his direction. However, 
just as Oppenheimer was immersing himself in quantum 
electrodynamics, Dirac was becoming disillusioned with it. In 
particular, he despaired of ever solving the problem that 
Oppenheimer had been among the first to point out and discuss: 
the problem that the theory gave infinite answers to questions 
that seemed to demand a finite answer. These infinities plagued 
the whole subject of quantum electrodynamics until its 
reformulation in the late 1940s by Richard Feynman, Freeman 
Dyson, Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga. 

For the next two years, however, quantum electrodynamics was 
almost the sole topic of Oppenheimer’s thoughts, his 
correspondence and the papers he wrote with his students. His 
ambition was nothing less than a reformulation of the kind that 
was finally achieved in the late 1940s. As he put it in a letter to 
George Uhlenbeck, he and his students were hoping to develop a 
general formalism together with its physical interpretation. “The 
formalism,” he told Uhlenbeck, “has some resemblance to 
Schrédinger’s earlier attempts ... The theory seems very pretty to 
me, and is in every way consistent with the possibilities of 
measurement.” 

His work continued, however, to be dogged by mathematical 
error. In November 1933, he and Leo Nedelsky sent a letter to the 
editor of the Physical Review entitled “The Production of Positives 
by Nuclear Gamma Rays,” in which they presented a method of 
calculating the probability that an electron-positron pair would 
be produced by the gamma rays emitted by a nucleus. Three 
months later, they were forced to publish an erratum confessing 
that in their final formula they had missed a factor of one third. 

Oppenheimer nevertheless continued to publish important 
work, the most ambitious of which was a paper entitled “On the 
Theory of the Electron and the Positive,”35 which was received by 
the Physical Review on December 1, 1933. This, his largest and 


most important paper during this period, was written jointly with 
Wendell Furry, who, now in his second year as an NRF, had 
recovered his confidence and his productivity. He was even able, 
on occasion at least, to stand up to Oppenheimer. During this 
period, it is reported, “it was a common sight to see them pacing 
the streets of Berkeley, engaged in constant harangue. Colleagues 
would hoist a thumb in their direction and observe that ‘The 
Fuzzy and the Furry are in conference.’ ” 


Once they paused on a corner while Oppenheimer threw up his 
arms and said, “Wendell, you have to rationalize everything. 
You seem to be completely incapable of understanding 
anything that cannot be put into words.” Furry smiled, 
gratified by the remark. Oppenheimer rocked back and roared 
at him, “I didn’t mean that as a compliment.” 


Their paper aimed at nothing less than a completely new 
formulation of Dirac’s theory of the electron, one that sought to 
avoid the inconsistencies and the infinities of Dirac’s theory and 
to capture at a more fundamental level the physical realities of 
electrons and positrons. 

The theory as formulated by Furry and Oppenheimer was 
widely recognized as a formal improvement on Dirac’s version, 
and Oppenheimer was very proud of it. He sent it to, among 
others, Bohr, Uhlenbeck, Pauli and Dirac. He also presented a 
version of it to the Boston meeting of the American Physical 
Society in December 1933. Few people, however, were persuaded 
that it represented a major, fundamental advance on Dirac’s 
work. Pauli was especially dismissive, writing to Heisenberg on 
January 21, 1934: “A short while ago, Oppenheimer sent me a 
manuscript ... that completely ignored the problems treated by 
Dirac and ourselves.” From Dirac himself there was no response 
at all. In order to elicit at least some response, Oppenheimer tried 
taking advantage of the fact that Frank was in Cambridge, writing 
to him on January 7, 1934, and telling him that he had sent the 
paper to Dirac. “I do not know how Dirac liked what we wrote,” 
Oppenheimer told Frank, “but if you see him you might warn him 
that we shall send more presently.” 

In a letter to the editor of the Physical Review, dated February 
12, 1934, Oppenheimer and Furry pointed out some serious 


problems with their own theory, and then, four months later, sent 
another letter pointing out problems with Dirac’s new version of 
the theory. And still, as Oppenheimer complained in a letter to 
Uhlenbeck, “from Dirac we have not had a murmur.” The 
following year, Oppenheimer persuaded Dirac to come to 
Pasadena and further persuaded him to listen to a fifteen-minute 
presentation by two graduate students who worked on quantum 
electrodynamics, seeking to build on Dirac’s work. After the 
presentation was over, the students braced themselves for Dirac’s 
comments. The only question Dirac asked, however, was: “Where 
is the nearest post office?” 

Almost as if it were cause and effect, what Dirac’s biographer 
calls his “golden creative streak” came to an end just at the time 
he received the highest honor that a scientist can receive: the 
Nobel Prize. The telephone call telling him that he was to share 
the 1933 prize in physics with Erwin Schréddinger came on 
November 9. Almost pathologically wary of publicity, Dirac’s first 
impulse was to turn it down, but Rutherford warned him: “A 
refusal will get you more publicity.” And so the following month, 
accompanied by his mother, Dirac traveled to Stockholm to 
receive the prize. His mother did not share either Dirac’s taciturn 
nature or his dislike of publicity, so, while he avoided the press, 
she was only too happy to give interviews. Asked by one 
journalist about her son’s interest in the opposite sex, she replied: 
“He is not interested in young women.” And so, inevitably, the 
next day, the newspaper headline was: “Thirty-One-Year-Old 
Professor Dirac Never Looks at Girls.” 

Just two months later, Oppenheimer was himself the subject of 
a somewhat similar headline. “Forgetful Prof Parks Girl, Takes 
Self Home” announced the San Francisco Chronicle on February 
14, 1934, underneath which it told the story of how, at four 
o’clock in the morning, a policeman on patrol in the hills 
overlooking Berkeley had found Melba Phillips in a panic, sitting 
alone in a parked car that belonged to Oppenheimer. She and 
Oppenheimer had been sitting in the car together, she told police, 
when he had excused himself to go for a walk. Now, two hours 
later, he had still not returned. The police searched the area for 
him and then phoned the Berkeley faculty club, where he was 
staying at the time. The staff of the faculty club found him in bed, 
asleep. The newspaper report says that Oppenheimer told police 


that, after leaving the car, he had forgotten about Melba and 
gone home. Raymond Birge, in telling this story, comments: “Like 
all geniuses, Oppenheimer was very absent-minded.” But, in fact, 
he wasn’t. “I never saw the slightest evidence of any 
absentmindedness in Oppie,” one of his students recalls, “quite 
the contrary in fact.” 

If one resists the temptation to think that this 
“absentmindedness” was merely an affectation, then one seems 
forced to conclude two things: first, that the problems of quantum 
electrodynamics had a_ really extraordinary hold on 
Oppenheimer’s thoughts at this time; and second, that his interest 
in Melba Phillips was, by comparison, slight. In any case, though 
Melba stayed at Berkeley for another year, and would join in with 
the intellectual and social life centered on Oppenheimer’s 
graduate students, she never again agreed to go on a date with 
her erstwhile Ph.D. supervisor (she had received her Ph.D. in May 
1933). 

On June 4, 1934, Oppenheimer wrote to Frank, who was still in 
Cambridge, telling him that, though he was continuing to work 
on “disentangling the still existing miseries of positron theory,” 
he hoped his latest “manifesto,” written jointly with Furry, would 
be his last word on the subject. Theoretical physics, he told 
Frank, “is in hell of a way,” largely due to “the utter impossibility 
of making a rigorous calculation of anything at all.” He 
mentioned that he had been asked to go to Princeton for a year 
and permanently to Harvard: “But I turned down these 
seductions, thinking more highly of my present jobs, where it is a 
little less difficult for me to believe in my usefulness, and where 
the good Californian wine consoles for the hardness of physics 
and the poor powers of the human mind.” That summer he would 
be at Perro Caliente without Frank, but with the Uhlenbecks: “We 
are going to miss you terribly, and it is with very mixed feelings 
that I shall return to the mountains without you.” 

Oppenheimer drove to New Mexico from Ann Arbor, where he 
attended the summer school, with the Uhlenbecks as his 
passengers. He had boasted to Frank that “Garuda does ninety- 
five with an unopened throttle,” but in demonstrating his car’s 
speed to the Uhlenbecks by racing trains across the open prairie, 
he got something in his eye that scratched his eyeball so badly 
that, for a while, he had to wear an eye-patch and George 


Uhlenbeck had to take over the driving. After a six-week holiday 
in Perro Caliente, the Uhlenbecks returned to Berkeley with 
Oppenheimer. When they finally got back to Ann Arbor, George 
Uhlenbeck learned that Hendrik Kramers had been invited to 
succeed Ehrenfest at Leiden and that he, George, had been invited 
in turn to succeed Kramers at Utrecht. Much as he loved America 
and Ann Arbor, there was never any doubt that he would accept. 
Oppenheimer wrote to him acknowledging the inevitability that 
he would accept, but expressing his sadness “that the American 
part of you, which has grown so big, will gradually disappear.” “I 
have such a feeling about America,” Oppenheimer wrote. “And 
let us think, if you must leave us now, that you will come back 
some time to America; that by accepting in full the 
responsibilities of being a Dutchman, you will have earned for 
yourself the right to be a little of an American too.” 

That summer, Oppenheimer’s burgeoning school of theoretical 
physics—what Wolfgang Pauli described as the “nim-nim-nim 
boys”—was strengthened by the arrival of no fewer than three 
new NRC fellows: Robert Serber, Edwin Uehling and Frederick W. 
Brown. This represented nearly half the total number of awards 
for theoretical physics in the whole United States (three out of 
seven), showing that, by now, after just five years, Oppenheimer 
had succeeded in his aim of transforming Berkeley into the 
leading school of theoretical physics in the country. 

Robert Serber, who had taken his Ph.D. at the University of 
Wisconsin, had originally planned to spend his National Research 
Fellowship at Princeton working with the Hungarian-American 
physicist Eugene Wigner, but, just like Wendell Furry before him, 
he decided after attending the Ann Arbor summer school and 
seeing Oppenheimer in action that Berkeley was the place to be. 
“When I arrived,” he remembers, “I discovered that most of the 
National Research Fellows in theoretical physics were already 
there.” “The word had gotten around,” he said in an interview 
many years later; “Oppenheimer had the most lively school in 
theoretical physics in the country then.” 

One of the Ph.D. students to arrive that year was Willis E. 
Lamb, the future Nobel laureate and Oxford professor, who, after 
graduating in chemistry from Berkeley, had decided to pursue 
doctorate work in physics, and, as he later put it, “naturally I 
wanted to work with Oppenheimer.” “Oppenheimer’s office,” 


Lamb remembers, “was room 219 LeConte Hall.” 


As were many of his students, I was given a small table in the 
room. Oppenheimer had no desk, but only a table in the 
middle of the room, heavily strewn with papers. One wall was 
entirely covered by a blackboard and hardly ever erased. One 
set of open shelves had reprints of Oppenheimer’s publications. 
I was allowed to have a copy of most of these. 


More details of the way Oppenheimer worked with his students 
have been given by Serber: 


His group would consist of eight or ten graduate students and 
about a half dozen postdoctoral fellows. He would meet the 
group once a day in his office. A little before the appointed 
time its members would straggle in and dispose themselves on 
the tables and about the walls. Oppie would come in and 
discuss with one after another the status of the student’s 
research problem, while the others listened and offered 
comments. All were exposed to a broad range of topics. 
Oppenheimer was interested in everything, and one subject 
after another was introduced and coexisted with all the others. 
In an afternoon we might discuss electrodynamics, cosmic rays, 
astrophysics and nuclear physics. 


Undeterred by the criticisms of colleagues—one of whom 
likened him to a mother hen fussing over her chickens— 
Oppenheimer quite deliberately set out to mold his group of 
graduate students (Ph.D. students as well as NRC fellows) into a 
social as well as an intellectual unit. 

The first evening that Edwin Uehling spent with this group very 
nearly gave him a criminal record. It started at Oppenheimer’s 
apartment, where Uehling and his wife were invited to meet 
Oppenheimer’s other graduate students, including Melba Phillips. 
Then they had dinner at a Mexican restaurant, where they drank 
wine and listened to music until after midnight, after which, on 
the way back to Berkeley, they were chased by the police because 
they—Oppenheimer in “Garuda” and Uehling in his Buick—were 
speeding. After a police car collided with Uehling’s Buick, 
Uehling was charged with dangerous driving (later reduced to not 
observing due caution) and Oppenheimer with speeding, but, 


much to everyone’s relief, the incident was not reported in the 
press. 

Oppenheimer (at that time thirty years old), Serber emphasizes, 
“was a bachelor then, and a part of his social life intertwined 
with ours.” 


Often we worked late and continued the discussion through 
dinner and then later at his apartment on Shasta Road. When 
we tired of our problems, or cleaned up the point at issue, the 
talk would turn to art, music, literature and politics. If the 
work was going badly we might give up and go to a movie. 
Sometimes we took a night off and had a Mexican dinner in 
Oakland or went to a good restaurant in San Francisco. In the 
early days this meant taking the Berkeley ferry and a ride 
across the bay. The ferries back to Berkeley didn’t run very 
often late at night, and this required passing the time waiting 
for them at the bars and night clubs near the ferry dock. 
Frequently we missed several ferries. 


After the Berkeley spring semester ended in April, and it was 
time for Oppenheimer to leave for Pasadena, Serber recalls: 
“Many of his students made the annual trek with him.” 


Some things were easier in those days. We thought nothing of 
giving up our houses or apartments in Berkeley, confident that 
we could find a garden cottage in Pasadena for twenty-five 
dollars a month. We didn’t own more than could be packed in 
the back of a car. In Pasadena, in addition to being exposed to 
the new information on physics, we led an active social life. 
The Tolmans were good friends, and we had very warm 
relations with Charlie Lauritsen and his group ... We spent 
many evenings at the Mexican restaurants on Olivera Street 
and many nights partying in Charlie Lauritsen’s garden. 


Danish by birth, Lauritsen had been in the United States since 
1916, when he emigrated with his wife and small baby, and in 
Pasadena since 1926. Before he came to Caltech and started an 
academic career, he had been a radio engineer—a background he 
put to good use in his work in experimental physics. At Caltech’s 
high-voltage laboratory Lauritsen worked on developing “super- 
voltage” X-rays for use in medicine. Then, after Cockcroft and 


Walton succeeded in splitting the atom, Lauritsen, now working 
at the new Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, converted one of the X- 
ray tubes into a particle accelerator, and began work on the 
artificial production of neutrons and the bombardment of 
deuterium. 

In the early summer of 1934, Oppenheimer and Lauritsen 
wrote a short paper together about the scattering of gamma rays 
produced by thorium C”. It was the only paper they ever wrote 
together, but they continued to have a great influence on each 
other’s work. Lauritsen, like Lawrence in Berkeley, would look to 
Oppenheimer to keep him informed about the latest 
developments in theory, while Oppenheimer kept a close eye on 
Lauritsen’s laboratory work, looking for things that needed 
explaining and that might provide the subject matter for papers 
written by himself and his students. 

Another avenue for collaborative work opened up in the 
summer of 1934 with the arrival at Stanford University of Felix 
Bloch. Bloch was a Jewish physicist from Switzerland, whom 
Oppenheimer had known and liked in Zurich. After leaving 
Zurich, Bloch had worked with Bohr in Copenhagen and with 
Enrico Fermi in Rome before accepting a post as a lecturer at 
Leipzig. He was driven out of his job by the Nazi regime and, like 
many others, came to the United States. Along with (to mention 
only the most prominent) Einstein at Princeton, Hans Bethe at 
Cornell and James Franck at Johns Hopkins, Bloch thus became 
part of the extraordinary enrichment of American physics that 
was brought about through the absorption of Jewish émigrés. 
Indeed, within a few years the United States had replaced 
Germany as the world’s leading center for the study of physics, 
partly because many of the people who had made Germany 
preeminent in the field were now working in American 
universities. As the relentlessly patriotic Oppenheimer was quick 
to point out, these refugees would not have had the impact they 
did had there not been “a rather sturdy indigenous effort in 
physics,” but Oppenheimer, of all people, knew the influence that 
world-leading physicists could have. 

For this reason, no doubt, as well as for the reason that he 
happened to like and respect him, Oppenheimer helped to find 
Bloch a position at Stanford, which is about thirty miles south of 
Berkeley, on the other side of the San Francisco Bay. Every week, 


after Bloch’s arrival in California, there would be a joint seminar 
open to both his students and Oppenheimer’s: one week at 
Stanford, the next at Berkeley. As Bloch later remembered them: 
“One of us would go up and tell about something he had thought 
about and read about, and then there would be discussions. It 
was very stimulating for me. I did not feel quite as isolated as I 
would have felt otherwise.” 

After the seminar, Oppenheimer would treat the entire group 
(which would vary in size between twelve and twenty people) to 
dinner at Jack’s, his favorite restaurant in San Francisco, “a fish 
place down in the harbour,” as Bloch remembered it. “These were 
post-depression days,” Serber recalls, “and students were poor. 
The world of good food and good wines and gracious living was 
far from the experience of many of them, and Oppie was 
introducing them to an unfamiliar way of life.” On one occasion, 
Serber says, “Bloch grew expansive, and leaned over and picked 
up the check. He looked at it, blinked, leaned over again and put 
it back down.” 

Wendell Furry was no longer at Berkeley, as Oppenheimer had 
succeeded in finding him a job at Harvard, starting in the autumn 
of 1934. The series of Oppenheimer-Furry papers therefore came 
to an end, and Oppenheimer worked instead on a joint paper 
with Melba Phillips, who since completing her thesis in 1933 had 
been unable to find a full-time academic post and so had stayed 
at Berkeley. “There were no jobs,” she remembered, “but one 
could get enough part-time work, part-time teaching, to live; and 
we stayed and did work, grading papers and so forth. There were 
several of us who did that. I stayed there for two more years, and 
it was during that period that I taught practically everything that 
was thrown my way, filling in for everybody, it felt like.” 

In the spring of 1935, a promising topic for Oppenheimer and 
Phillips to work on together was provided by Lawrence’s 
cyclotron experiments. After the debacle of the Solvay Congress 
at the end of October 1933, Lawrence’s work had received fresh 
impetus in January 1934, with the startling discovery that it was 
possible to create radioactive materials artificially. The discovery 
had been made in Paris by Frédéric and Iréne Joliot-Curie (the 
pair combined surnames after their marriage in 1926), who 
showed that, by bombarding boron with alpha particles, it was 
possible to create a radioactive isotope of nitrogen, and by 


bombarding aluminum, radioactive phosphorus was produced. As 
the medical applications for radioactive materials were by then 
being explored and the demand for them was therefore 
increasing, the discovery attracted a great deal of excitement 
because it promised a cheap and plentiful supply. Laboratories all 
over Europe and America began to turn their attention to the 
possibilities opened up by this discovery. In Rome, most notably, 
Enrico Fermi decided to see what happens when one bombards 
elements with neutrons rather than alpha particles, and 
discovered that it was possible to create radioactive materials in 
that way too. 

In the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley, work was dramatically 
interrupted by Lawrence on the day he saw the Joliot-Curies’ 
article in Comptes rendus. Running through the door waving a 
copy of the article, Lawrence translated for the benefit of his staff 
some key sentences, including one that made direct reference to 
the power of the cyclotron. Noting that their own apparatus was 
puny by comparison, the Joliot-Curies speculated what might be 
achievable with something like the cyclotron. For example, they 
said, nitrogen-13, which should be radioactive, might be 
produced by bombarding carbon with deuterons—that is, 
deuterium nuclei, which, because they have only half the atomic 
mass of alpha particles, should be roughly twice as penetrative. 
Immediately the cyclotron was set up to fire a beam of deuterons 
at a sample of carbon and a Geiger counter wired up to record 
any radioactivity produced. “Click ... click ... click... went the 
Geiger counter,” recalled Milton Livingston. “It was a sound that 
no one who was there would ever forget.” 

Throughout 1934, Lawrence’s cyclotron was put to use making 
radioactive materials, many of which had never been seen before. 
“It was a wonderful time,” one of Lawrence’s assistants later said. 
“Radioactive elements fell in our laps as though we were shaking 
apples off a tree.” The New York Times ran an editorial on 
Lawrence, in which it said: “Transmutation [and] the release of 
atomic energy are no longer mere romantic possibilities.” In the 
wake of this excitement, Lawrence was courted by rival 
universities even more assiduously than Oppenheimer had been, 
and to keep him the University of California increased his salary 
so that he became by far the best-paid scientist there. The 
Radiation Laboratory was made independent from the physics 


department, given its own budget and its own director: Lawrence. 

Meanwhile, relations between the theoretical physicists and the 
“Rad Lab” grew ever closer. One of the new generation of 
physicists appointed to positions in the lab, Ed McMillan, became 
an accepted member of the Oppenheimer group and often joined 
them on their trips to San Francisco. Likewise, Oppenheimer and 
his students became familiar faces in the laboratory. The topic of 
Oppenheimer’s joint paper with Melba Phillips was provided by 
experiments conducted by Ed McMillan, Lawrence and a 
postdoctoral student at the Rad Lab called Robert Thornton. What 
Lawrence, McMillan and Thornton had discovered was _ that 
radioactive isotopes could be created by the bombardment of 
various elements with deuterons with less energy than the 
prevailing theory predicted. 

In their paper, “Note on the Transmutation Function for 
Deuterons,” Oppenheimer and Phillips gave an explanation for 
this that was quickly accepted—the “Oppenheimer-Phillips 
process” becoming an accepted part of nuclear physics and 
finding its way into the textbooks. Together with the Born- 
Oppenheimer approximation, the Oppenheimer-Phillips process 
became Oppenheimer’s best-known piece of work among students 
and experimental physicists. The process in question is this: when 
an element, for example carbon, is bombarded with deuterons, 
the neutron in the deuteron binds with the carbon atom to form 
an isotope, in this case carbon-13, while the proton is emitted. 
The reason this process happens at lower energies than one 
would expect, Oppenheimer and Phillips explain, is that the 
deuteron is less stable than the target nucleus and, as it moves 
toward the target, it does so, so to speak, “neutron-first,” so that 
the neutron is able to overcome the electrostatic barrier that then 
repels the proton. 

In the spring of 1935, Oppenheimer wrote to Lawrence from 
Pasadena to say that he was sending Melba Phillips “an outline of 
the calculations & plots I have made for the deuteron 
transmutation functions.” The analysis, he reported, “turned out 
pretty complicated, & I have spent most of the nights of this week 
with slide rule & graph paper.” The results, he stressed, needed to 
be checked by Melba very carefully: “You must give M time to 
work it over.” As this suggests, Melba Phillips was a more 
competent and more careful mathematician than Oppenheimer, 


and was often turned to when difficult calculations needed to be 
made. In fact, many of his students were better mathematicians 
than he was. Willis Lamb remembers: “Oppenheimer’s lectures 
were a revelation. The equations he wrote on the board were not 
always reliable. We learned to apply correction-factor operators 
to allow for incorrect signs and numerical coefficients.” However, 
if Oppenheimer benefited from Melba Phillips’s mathematical 
skills, she benefited from his intuitions into the nature of physical 
phenomena and his reputation. After their joint paper was 
published in the summer of 1935, she suddenly found jobs 
coming her way: first a teaching post at Bryn Mawr and then, 
more prestigiously, a research fellowship at the Institute for 
Advanced Study in Princeton. 

Because of the nature of the experimental work going on at 
both Berkeley and Pasadena, involving as it did much 
bombardment of nuclei and many transmutations and 
disintegrations to explain, Oppenheimer was drawn into the area 
of nuclear physics, where his contributions, such as his joint 
paper with Melba Phillips, were accepted readily and warmly 
applauded. However, it was not where his heart was. “I never 
found nuclear physics so beautiful,” he was once quoted as 
saying. He much preferred to think about electrodynamics and 
field theory. He never spelled out why this was, but his interest in 
Hinduism and the remarks by Rabi quoted earlier perhaps 
provide a clue: he preferred to think about what connected things 
than what disintegrated them. Dirac’s relativistic quantum 
electrodynamics excited him because it promised to bring 
together relativity theory and quantum theory. His 
disappointment with it, I suspect, was not fundamentally to do 
with the troublesome infinities, but rather had to do with the fact 
that, in its talk of particles, anti-particles and “holes,” it presented 
a vision of discrete and separate things, rather than one of the 
interconnectedness of everything. 

Oppenheimer wrote little on quantum electrodynamics after 
1935, but he kept up with the literature on it and his students 
continued to work on it and, in some cases, make important 
contributions to it. One suspects that his disengagement from it— 
as well as having to do with his interest in other rapidly 
developing areas, such as cosmic-ray research and nuclear physics 
—had something to do, like his initial engagement with it, with 


his relations with Paul Dirac. 

Dirac spent the year 1934-5 at the Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton, where he worked on the second edition of his 
classic text, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Remarkably, 
Dirac, then thirty-two years old, found love in Princeton, when he 
met Eugene Wigner’s sister, Margit, whom he married in 1937. 
Even after their marriage, according to the many Dirac stories 
that circulate among physicists, he was in the habit of 
introducing her as “Wigner’s sister” rather than as “my wife, 
Margit.” Oppenheimer visited Princeton in the new year of 1935, 
but Dirac was away. He did, however, see Einstein and visit the 
Institute for Advanced Study, but, as he wrote to Frank, his 
impressions were not favorable: “Princeton is a madhouse: its 
solipsistic luminaries shining in separate & helpless desolation. 
Einstein is completely cuckoo; Dirac was still in Georgia. I could 
be of absolutely no use at such a place, but it took a lot of 
conversation & arm waving to get Weyl36 to take a no.” 

It would evidently take something more connected to the real 
world than the Institute for Advanced Study to tempt 
Oppenheimer away from the school of physics that he had so 
successfully built up. 


26 One electron volt is the energy of an electron when it has experienced the 
potential of one volt. In the context of discussing the energies of particles, 
physicists frequently abbreviate “electron volts” to simply “volts.” 

27 The advantage of publishing a short paper as a letter to the editor is that it 
can appear in print within a very brief time—Oppenheimer’s letter was dated 
February 14, 1930, and appeared in the March 1 issue of the journal. The 
disadvantage is that it has less authority than if it has gone through the normal 
peer-review procedure. 

2s A full understanding of beta decay was not arrived at until a few years after 
Pauli’s postulation of the neutrino, and therefore many years after Rutherford’s 
original identification and naming of it. What Rutherford knew was that there 
was a form of radioactive decay different from alpha decay, in which the 
radiation consisted not of positively charged helium nuclei, but of much 
smaller, negatively charged particles, which he correctly identified as 
electrons. What was subsequently discovered is that these electrons are being 
emitted from neutrons that are decaying into protons. 

29 To understand the problem, it might help to give an example. A nucleus of 
cobalt (with atomic number 27) undergoes beta decay and so gains a proton, 
thus transforming into nickel (atomic number 28). In this process, an electron 
is emitted. What puzzled Pauli and other physicists at this time was that, when 
this happens, the figures often do not add up: the total energy of (in this case) 


the nickel nucleus plus the electron sometimes does, and sometimes does not, 
equal the energy of the original cobalt nucleus, depending on the energy of the 
electron, which varies along a continuous spectrum. 

30 Pauli was at the time going through an emotionally draining divorce from 
his first wife. 

31 The notion of an isotope originated in 1912, when the chemist Frederick 
Soddy coined the word to describe two or more atoms that occupy the same 
place in the periodic table, but have different radioactive properties. After the 
discovery of the neutron in 1932, it was realized that two isotopes of the same 
element differ with respect to the number of neutrons in their nuclei. 

32 C. P. Snow reports that, during this period, a “dialogue passed into 
Cavendish tradition: ‘Tired, Chadwick?’ ‘Not too tired to work.’ ” 

33 When an alpha particle hits a screen made of a suitable substance (zinc 
sulfide was the most commonly used), it emits a tiny flash of light known as a 
“scintillation.” The experiments of Rutherford and his team at the Cavendish— 
and, indeed, the work pursued at most advanced physics laboratories—made 
use of this fact to detect the presence of alpha particles. 

34 1 am rather puzzled as to what Oppenheimer might mean by this. The Yaqui 
are a Native American tribe, whose original lands were in what is now Mexico, 
California and Arizona. Presumably, further up the hill on which 
Oppenheimer’s house stood, there lived a group of Yaqui people. 

35 It would not be until the summer of the following year that Oppenheimer 
became resigned to the word “positron,” which he regarded as a barbaric 
mixture of Latin (posi-) and Greek (-tron). 

36 The great German mathematician Hermann Wey] had been at the institute in 
Princeton since 1933. 


Unstable Cores 


ae ntil the summer of 1935, _ the 
longest, most intimate, most revealing letters that Oppenheimer 


wrote were to his brother, Frank. In that summer, however, the 
series of letters came to a temporary end when Frank moved to 
California. He did so to begin a Ph.D. at Caltech with Charles 
Lauritsen (“Charlie” to both Oppenheimers and to most people 
who knew him). Frank was then twenty-three years old. Since 
graduating from Johns Hopkins two years earlier, he had spent 
about eighteen months at the Cavendish in Cambridge and 
another six months at the University of Florence. He had also 
spent some time in Germany. Though he always felt himself to be 
under the shadow of his accomplished older brother, there was 
one respect in which, by the time he returned to the U.S., he had 
succeeded where Robert had failed: he had mastered the skills 
needed for laboratory work and to become an experimental 
physicist. 

Another way in which Frank differed from his brother was that, 
throughout his school and university education, he had taken an 
active interest in politics. From the first, his political sympathies 
were with the downtrodden. “I remember once,” he laughingly 
said in an interview, recalling an incident during his school days, 
“T went with some friends to hear a concert at Carnegie Hall that 
didn’t have a conductor. It was a kind of ‘down with the bosses’ 
movement.” In the 1928 presidential election, Frank, while still at 
school, had taken part in the campaign to elect the Democratic 
Party candidate, Al Smith, who famously aroused the fierce and 
frightening antagonism of the Ku Klux Klan, both for his liberal 
politics and for being a Roman Catholic. The campaign was 
unsuccessful—Smith was beaten by Herbert Hoover—but it 


provided a focus for liberal politics in the U.S. that paved the way 
for Franklin D. Roosevelt’s victory in 1932 and the “New Deal” 
that followed. 

In the light of what was to occur in the 1950s, one interesting 
aspect of the 1928 Smith campaign was the candidate’s use of the 
word “un-American” to characterize not those on the left of 
American politics, but those on the right. When he arrived in 
Oklahoma City to be greeted by the Ku Klux Klan burning crosses, 
Smith said: “To inject bigotry, hatred, intolerance and un- 
American sectarian division into a campaign. Nothing could be so 
out of line with the spirit of America. Nothing could be so foreign 
to the teachings of Jefferson. Nothing could be so contradictory 
of our whole history.” He went on: “The best way to kill anything 
un-American is to drag it out into the open, because anything un- 
American cannot live in the sunlight.” 

Frank Oppenheimer’s approach to politics is perfectly captured 
in these quotations. As he drifted further and further to the left, 
he did so quite openly, feeling that he had nothing to hide, and 
feeling also that not only was there nothing unpatriotic about 
left-wing politics, but indeed such politics were perfectly in 
keeping with the spirit and the history of America. If you were 
brought up, as Frank and Robert Oppenheimer were, to believe 
that America was the embodiment of the tolerance, freedom and 
egalitarianism that the German Jews of the nineteenth century 
had left their homeland to find, then it would have been—and 
was—utterly alien to think of its spirit as being represented and 
defended by such people as the Ku Klux Klan or, later, the 
paranoid anti-communists of the McCarthy period. It was, as Al 
Smith had said, the bigotry of those people, not the targets of 
their bigotry, that was “un-American.” 

“When I went to Hopkins,” Frank continued in the interview 
quoted above, “I knew quite a few people...I didn’t know 
whether they were party members or not, but they were 
interested in left-wing politics, and I learned about it.” In 
England, he was “a little more on the fringe” of radical politics, 
but in Italy “there were people there of varying degrees of 
leftness,” including Patrick Blackett’s coworker on the discovery 
of the positron, Giuseppe Occhialini, who by then had returned to 
the University of Florence and was, according to Frank, “quite 
left.” Mussolini’s Italy, which had been a Fascist state for many 


years, had, during Frank’s time there, just embarked on its 
aggressive foreign policy: “It was the year before the Abyssinian 
War. There was a brigade of soldiers just below the lab there, 
who were always singing and cheering.” 

The singing and cheering of the Italian soldiers, though a 
constant reminder of the nature of the military dictatorship that 
ruled the country, was not felt by Frank to be especially 
menacing. “In Italy,” Frank remembers, “the soldiers didn’t seem 
especially aggressive. I never saw any of them marching. The 
policemen weren’t any different, and were probably gentler, than 
New York policemen. The towns seemed very relaxed to me.” In 
Germany the previous year, however: “I had seen people 
marching down the streets, and really sort of lots of this behavior 
in the bars, and the whole society seemed corrupt. And then I had 
some relatives there who could tell me some of the terrible 
things.” Having mixed with left-wing people at Johns Hopkins, 
the Cavendish and the University of Florence, and having seen for 
himself the viciousness of the Nazi regime in Germany, it was 
only natural that, when he went to California, Frank should 
choose as his friends people concerned about the threat of fascism 
and interested in improving the lot of the poor and the 
dispossessed. 

In fact, Frank already knew a number of such people, namely 
some of his brother’s students, among whom were a few who 
would later achieve fame because their politics offended the 
American right. One of these was the unassuming Wendell Furry, 
who had left for Harvard in 1934. At Harvard, Furry joined the 
Communist Party and therefore became a target for McCarthyites 
in the 1950s. Furry won the admiration of many by refusing 
either to take cover behind the Fifth Amendment or to name any 
of his comrades in the Party. Likewise, Harvard won admiration 
for refusing to sack Furry. The case left deep scars, however. In a 
book called Moscow Stories, published in 2006, the writer and 
expert in Russian affairs Loren R. Graham describes how, coming 
himself from Farmersburg, the same small town in Indiana in 
which Furry had grown up, he became fascinated by Furry’s 
story. As a small child, he had been told by his schoolteacher that 
he was the cleverest boy she had ever taught, with one exception: 
Wendell Furry. And yet, she said, she was ashamed of Furry and 
hoped that Graham did not end up like him. “How did he end 


up?” Graham asked. “He is a communist,” came the reply. That 
was in 1941. Many years later, in 1974, Graham met Furry and 
they swapped stories about Farmersburg. A short while after that 
meeting Furry retired and a few years later he died. “In the last 
months of his life,” according to Graham: 


after the death of his wife Betty from cancer, the old physicist 
was confined to a nursing home near Fresh Pond in Cambridge, 
where he had nightmares about the persecution he and his 
family endured years earlier. In the night, to the stupefaction 
of the attendants, he would cry out, “The FBI, the FBI, they are 
after me! Call the American Civil Liberties Union and Gerald 
Berlin [Furry’s lawyer]!” 


Melba Phillips came from a remarkably similar background to 
Wendell Furry. She, too, was raised by a Methodist family in a 
small town in a farming community in Indiana, in a place called 
Hazleton, just fifty or sixty miles south of Farmersburg. And she, 
too, became politically radical, though it is not clear whether she 
ever became a member of the Communist Party. When, in the 
McCarthy period, she was summoned to answer questions about 
her political activities in the 1930s, she refused to say whether or 
not she had ever been a member of the Party, pleading the Fifth 
Amendment. For this, she was sacked from her position at 
Brooklyn College. 

There is no documentary record of Frank Oppenheimer ever 
meeting Wendell Furry, but, given how much time Furry spent 
with Robert Oppenheimer between 1932 and 1934, it would be 
surprising if they had never come across each other. Certainly, 
Frank knew Melba Phillips very well indeed, and the two of them 
became close friends and remained so until Frank’s death. Her 
memories of Frank are particularly warm. She met him first, she 
remembers, at Perro Caliente in the summer of 1932, “when I 
stopped for a few days on the way back to school from a visit to 
my family in Indiana.” 


As I got off the train at Glorietta Pass there they were—Robert, 
whom I knew from Berkeley, Frank, and Roger Lewis, who was 
the Damon to Frank’s Pythias or vice versa. Frank was turning 
20 that summer; I was five years older and working on a Ph.D. 


The back of the car was already loaded with supplies for the 
ranch, but we crowded in, drove up to Cowles in relative 
comfort, thence up the dirt road to the cabin ... 

Perro Caliente, our destination, had many visitors over the 
years ... We ate, and later slept, on the porch, looking toward 
the mountains across the valley, but the evenings were cold 
even in August. After dinner there was a roaring fire in the big 
living room, good talk, and Frank playing the flute. I have a 
vivid memory of Frank playing ... He usually played in the 
evening, at least during my first visit there. 


“We were not political in any overt way,” Melba said of herself, 
Oppenheimer and her fellow students, but, her biographer writes, 
“the grim news from Germany in 1933-4, and the labor unrest 
that hit California during the Great Depression, motivated them 
to take an active interest in world affairs.” 

As we have seen, in the year 1933-4 there is little in 
Oppenheimer’s correspondence or anywhere else to indicate the 
“active interest” in politics described here, but, coinciding with 
the arrival of Robert Serber and his wife, Charlotte, in the 
summer of 1934, there is at least some indication of such interest. 
In Serber’s autobiography there is an intriguing account of a rally 
in support of the longshoremen’s strike in 1934, which 
Oppenheimer was invited to attend. He, in turn, invited Serber, 
Charlotte and Melba Phillips to come along. As Serber remembers 
it: “We were sitting up high in a balcony, and by the end we were 
caught up in the enthusiasm of the strikers, shouting with them, 
‘Strike! Strike! Strike!’ ” 

This makes it sound as if the rally they attended was being held 
to decide upon strike action, but this cannot be right, since the 
strike (which was a major event in the history of both 
unionization and the Communist Party in America) had begun in 
May 1934, before Serber met Oppenheimer. More likely, it was 
one of the meetings held in July 1934, when the longshoremen’s 
strike escalated into a general strike, after two strikers had been 
killed by police firing into a crowd of pickets. The general strike 
ended soon afterward, but the result was an increase in the power 
of the longshoremen’s union and an improvement in their terms 
of employment—victories that the Communist Party would claim 
for itself. 


At the time of Frank’s arrival at Caltech, Robert Serber had 
been a National Research Fellow at Berkeley for a year and had 
become the person closest to Oppenheimer, both personally and 
scientifically, and would remain so until his departure in 1938. 
Though Serber was, like Oppenheimer himself, more interested in 
physics than politics, he had grown up in an environment of 
which political engagement was an accepted and expected part. 
He and his wife both came from fairly well-off Jewish families in 
Philadelphia. His father was a lawyer active in the local 
Democratic Party, while Charlotte’s father, a doctor, was a well- 
known leftist radical. In the 1940s, both Robert and Charlotte 
Serber would receive close attention from the FBI, though their 
agents could never gather enough incriminating evidence against 
Robert to justify taking any action against him. This almost 
certainly means that Robert Serber never joined the Communist 
Party. When the question was put directly to him in the 1940s, 
however, Oppenheimer expressed the belief that Charlotte 
probably was a member. 

Almost certainly, the first contact that either of the 
Oppenheimer brothers had with someone happy to call 
themselves a communist was when, in the spring of 1936, 
halfway through Frank’s first year at Caltech, they met a twenty- 
four-year-old graduate student of economics at Berkeley called 
Jacquenette Quann. “Jackie” (as everyone called her) was a 
working-class French-Canadian woman, who worked as a waitress 
and babysitter to pay her way through university. While an 
undergraduate, she had joined the Young Communist League, 
attracted to it not through any intellectual commitment to 
Marxism-Leninism, but rather through its involvement with 
practical issues, such as the rights of workers and the threat of 
fascism, about which she was concerned. She came into the 
Oppenheimers’ lives quite by accident one evening when she was 
babysitting for Wenonah Nedelsky, the estranged wife of 
Oppenheimer’s student Leo Nedelsky. Robert, accompanied by 
Frank, went to visit Wenonah and the two of them met Jackie, 
whose plain-speaking exuberance quickly won Frank over. Within 
a short time he and Jackie were lovers, and that summer he 
invited her to Perro Caliente. On September 15, 1936, they were 
married. 

Oppenheimer did not approve of his younger brother’s rush 


into matrimony. “He tried to put us off from getting married,” 
Jackie later said. “He was always saying things like ‘Of course, 
youw’re much older than Frank’—I’m eight months older actually 
—and saying that Frank wasn’t ready for it. Later he used to refer 
to me as ‘the waitress my brother has married.’” In a formal 
statement he wrote at the time of his security hearing in 1954, 
Oppenheimer wrote tersely: “My brother Frank married in 1936. 
Our relations thereafter were inevitably less intimate than 
before.” Under cross-examination, he elaborated on this a little, 
adding that not only were relations between him and Frank less 
intimate after Frank’s marriage, but they were also “occasionally 
perhaps somewhat more strained.” More expansive is a statement 
quoted by Peter Michelmore in his 1969 book, The Swift Years: 
The Robert Oppenheimer Story, the source of which Michelmore 
does not give. Frank’s “defection,” Michelmore writes, “hurt 
Robert deeply, for he wrote petulantly of his brother’s marriage, 
‘It was an act of emancipation and rebellion on his part against 
his dependence on me. Our early intimacy was never again 
established.’ ” 

Apart from his evident anxiety at losing the most intimate, 
most important relationship he had, another worry Robert had 
about Jackie’s influence on Frank was that it was bad for his 
physics. Frank, Robert later said, “worked fairly well at physics 
but he was slow. It took him a long time to get his doctor’s 
degree. He was very much distracted by his other interests.” It is 
sometimes assumed that something similar happened to Robert 
Oppenheimer—that after he began to take an interest in politics 
his work in physics lost some of its earlier intensity. In fact, the 
opposite is true: the very best physics he ever wrote was 
produced precisely during the period of his political awakening. 

During the period 1935-8—while he was in his early thirties— 
the focus of that work was provided by Oppenheimer’s continued 
interest in cosmic rays. During the 1930s, there were two reasons 
for a physicist to be interested in cosmic rays: first, they were an 
interesting and puzzling phenomenon in their own right, 
presenting physicists with the challenge of saying what they were 
made of and how they originated; and second, their tremendous 
energy allowed physicists their only opportunity (until the advent 
of particle accelerators many times more powerful than 
Lawrence’s early cyclotrons) of seeing whether physical theories, 


such as quantum electrodynamics, successfully held up when 
used to measure and predict the behavior of particles traveling at 
something approaching the speed of light, which is when 
relativistic effects become relevant. 

For these reasons, the study of cosmic rays became the focus in 
the 1930s for some of the most interesting experimental physics 
and some of the leading theoretical work; the experimentalists 
would take off on adventurous expeditions to far-flung corners of 
the world to measure radiations at high altitudes, and the 
theorists would use the information thus obtained to test the 
validity of theories and to inspire new insights into the makeup of 
the physical world, which with every step forward seemed to be 
more complicated and stranger than anybody had imagined. 

Oppenheimer was well placed to contribute to this work, since 
some of the most important observations of cosmic rays were 
being undertaken by two experimentalists at Caltech: Carl 
Anderson, the discoverer of the positron, and his colleague Seth 
Neddermeyer. In a paper he published at the end of 1934 entitled 
“Are the Formulae for the Absorption of High Energy Radiations 
Valid?,” Oppenheimer paid tribute to the work of these two in a 
footnote that read: “Such clarity as there is in this account of the 
experimental situation I owe entirely to Dr. Anderson and Mr. 
Neddermeyer, who have with great patience explained to me just 
what the evidence is, what it indicates, and how little it proves.” 

At the beginning of that paper Oppenheimer notes that the 
observations of cosmic rays made by Anderson and Neddermeyer 
have “made it possible to extend our knowledge of the specific 
ionization and energy loss of electrons from particles of a few 
million volts on up to a few billion.” Despite the progress made at 
Berkeley by Lawrence’s Radiation Laboratory, it would be some 
time before that kind of energy could be created artificially. With 
regard to what those observations of such extraordinary energies 
reveal about the accepted formulae for calculating high-energy 
radiation, Oppenheimer remarks that it is “possible to do justice 
to the great penetration of the cosmic rays only by admitting that 
the formulae are wrong, or by postulating some other and less 
absorbable component of the rays to account for their 
penetration.” It is a dichotomy reminiscent of that which 
Oppenheimer had earlier posed in relation to positively charged 
electrons: either Dirac’s theory of the electron was wrong, or such 


particles had to exist. And just as in this earlier case, 
Oppenheimer missed out on an important advance in physical 
theory by choosing the wrong side of the dichotomy, saying that 
the theory was wrong, rather than insisting that this “less 
absorbable component” of cosmic rays had to exist. For, as would 
be revealed in the ensuing years, this “less absorbable 
component” was yet another new particle. 

During 1935, Oppenheimer’s intellectual energies, as we have 
seen, were directed toward the questions that arose from the 
artificial creation of radioactive isotopes, questions that gave rise 
to the paper he and Melba Phillips wrote in the summer of 1935, 
which introduced the “Oppenheimer-Phillips process.” In turning 
from the analysis of what happens when a deuteron splits into a 
proton and a neutron to the consideration of cosmic rays, 
Oppenheimer may have thought that he was, temporarily at least, 
leaving nuclear physics behind. However, nuclear physics and 
cosmic-ray physics were about to come together in an unexpected 
way. In the early part of 1935, an article appeared in an obscure 
journal that remained completely unknown to people researching 
cosmic rays and would not have seemed relevant to their research 
even if they had known of it. Nevertheless, that article was to 
play a major role in the subsequent development of cosmic-ray 
physics, to provide a theory that is still accepted today in 
fundamental nuclear physics, and to change the subsequent 
course of particle physics. 

The article in question was entitled “On the Interaction of 
Elementary Particles I” and appeared in the Proceedings of the 
Physical and Mathematical Society of Japan, which had received it 
at the end of November 1934. Its author was a Japanese 
theoretical physicist called Hideki Yukawa, who had come up 
with a novel theory to answer a fundamental question in nuclear 
physics: what holds the particles in a nucleus—the protons and 
the neutrons—together? Clearly, protons and neutrons are not 
held together by electrostatic forces, since neutrons do not have 
any charge. Nor can they be held together by gravity, as the 
gravitational force is very many orders of magnitude too weak to 
account for the binding energies observed. Yukawa put forward 
the bold suggestion that there is a hitherto-unknown basic 
physical force—now known as the “strong nuclear force”’—that 
exerts a pull between the protons and the neutrons in the nucleus. 


He further hypothesized that there must be a hitherto-unknown 
particle, which would have a mass somewhere between an 
electron and a proton, that would carry the force, in much the 
same way that, in quantum electrodynamics, electromagnetism is 
carried by the photon. Yukawa even speculated that this new 
particle “may also have some bearing on the shower produced by 
cosmic rays.” American university libraries did not, as a rule, 
subscribe to Proceedings of the Physical and Mathematical Society of 
Japan, but Yukawa sent Oppenheimer a copy of it. For about 
eighteen months after its publication Oppenheimer might well 
have been the only English-speaking scientist to have read it. 

As it turned out, cosmic-ray research would indeed confirm 
Yukawa’s hypothesis of a particle bigger than an electron but 
smaller than a proton, and, thus confirmed, that hypothesis 
would in turn provide the solution to the puzzle about the 
penetrative power of cosmic rays that had prompted 
Oppenheimer to talk about their having a “less absorbable 
component.” However, as would become gradually clear (it took 
about twelve years, beginning in 1935) amid much confusion and 
controversy, the penetrative particle in cosmic rays is not the 
carrier of the “strong nuclear force’—that is another particle 
somewhat like it. How confused the initial picture of these 
particles was can be gleaned from their changing nomenclature: 
to begin with, before it was realized they were different, they 
were called “mesotrons,” which was changed to “mesons” for 
reasons of linguistic probity (the Greek word for “middle” being 
“mesos” rather than “mesotros”); then, to distinguish them from 
each other, the one that is a component of cosmic rays was called 
a “u-meson” (mu-meson), and the one that is the carrier of the 
strong nuclear force was called the “a-meson” (pi-meson). Then it 
was decided that mesons are by definition carriers of the strong 
nuclear force and therefore that the mu-meson is not a meson at 
all. It was accordingly renamed the “muon,” while the other was 
renamed the “pion.” Playing a leading role in both the creation 
and the clearing up of these confusions, and thus being there at 
the birth of what has grown into the (for most people) utterly 
bewildering new discipline of particle physics, were Oppenheimer 
and his students. 

Much of the key observational evidence of cosmic rays that led 
to the discovery of the “mesotron” was collected by Anderson and 


Neddermeyer at the summit of Pikes Peak in the Rocky 
Mountains, where they went in the summer of 1935. There, at an 
altitude of about 14,000 feet, they set up the equipment they had 
brought with them and took thousands of photographs of 
extremely high-energy cosmic-ray collisions. Without knowing 
anything about Yukawa’s article, Anderson wrote to Millikan at 
Caltech from the top of Pikes Peak to say he thought he had 
evidence of a particle intermediate in mass between electrons and 
protons. He was a cautious man, however, and did not want to 
publish this result until he was completely sure of it. It was 
therefore not until the summer of 1936 that Anderson and 
Neddermeyer published a scholarly account of their trip to Pikes 
Peak in the Physical Review. Entitled “Cloud Chamber 
Observations of Cosmic Rays at 4,300 Meters and Near Sea 
Level,” their article reproduced some of their more dramatic 
photographs, taken both at Pikes Peak and in Pasadena, and in a 
very modest and hesitant way tried to make sense of them. 
Without actually declaring that they had found a new particle, 
they gave good reasons why the penetrative particle they had 
photographed could not be either a proton or an electron. They 
also made the important announcement that their observations 
refuted something that had been widely believed by physicists, 
namely that the theory of quantum electrodynamics broke down 
when applied to particles of extremely high energy. They had 
observed particles at more than one billion volts, they recorded, 
and the theory had stood up very well. 

It was this last aspect of the article that most interested 
Oppenheimer. He had been saying for years that the theory broke 
down at high energies, but he did not seem to mind being proved 
wrong on that account. On the contrary, he seemed delighted 
with the findings reported by Anderson and Neddermeyer, not 
least because they allowed him to pick a theoretical fight with 
Heisenberg, a fight he felt confident of winning. Heisenberg had 
recently been drawn into the analysis of cosmic rays, thinking 
that he had a new insight that would shed light on their nature. 
The insight in question was one derived from recent work 
published by Enrico Fermi on the subject of beta decay. Taking 
up the issue that had prompted Pauli to suggest the neutrino (a 
name conferred on the as-yet-undiscovered particle by Fermi), 
Fermi had proposed a completely new analysis of beta radiation 


that bore a striking analogy to Yukawa’s new analysis of nuclear 
forces. The analogy was no accident; Fermi’s theory was 
published at the beginning of 1934, about ten months before 
Yukawa’s, and was one of the main inspirations for Yukawa’s 
theory. Like Yukawa, what Fermi proposed was the introduction 
of a new basic force into physics—what is now called the “weak 
nuclear force”—to explain beta emissions. This new force would 
act upon electrons, neutrinos and nucleons (protons and 
neutrons) and would explain the process whereby a neutron 
decays into a proton, emitting as it does so beta radiation 
(electrons) and neutrinos. 

In a paper that he published in June 1936, Heisenberg 
suggested that this new force field postulated by Fermi held the 
key to understanding cosmic rays. In particular, he believed that 
the phenomenon that had earlier attracted the attention of 
Oppenheimer—the “showers” of electron/positron production— 
might be explained by Fermi’s new field. At the root of 
Heisenberg’s analysis was the belief that the accepted theory of 
quantum electrodynamics broke down at the extremely high 
energies observed in cosmic radiation. As Anderson and 
Neddermeyer had shown this belief to be false, the motivation for 
Heisenberg’s theory had disappeared. This was pointed out in a 
confrontational manner by Oppenheimer in a paper called “On 
Multiplicative Showers,” which he cowrote with Frank Carlson 
(for whom he had not yet managed to find an academic position 
and who therefore remained at Berkeley and Caltech), and sent to 
the Physical Review at the end of 1936. “It would seem,” declared 
Oppenheimer and Carlson, that Heisenberg’s theory “is without 
cogent experimental foundation; and we believe that in fact it 
rests on an abusive extension of the formalism of the theory of 
the electron neutrino field.” 

Oppenheimer and Carlson ended their paper with the 
suggestion that the observations of Anderson and Neddermeyer 
pointed to “another cosmic ray component” that would explain 
the showers that seem unlikely to have been made by electrons or 
protons. In this, of course, they were simply echoing what 
Anderson and Neddermeyer had said. The latter pair had been 
convinced that they had evidence of a new particle ever since 
they went to Pikes Peak in the summer of 1935, and in May 1937 
they finally committed themselves in print to the claim that their 


observations showed “the presence of some particles less massive 
than protons but more penetrating than electrons.” Their caution, 
however, proved costly, in that, in the same volume of the 
Physical Review that their article was published, there appeared a 
short report of experiments conducted by two physicists at 
Harvard, J.C. Street and E.C. Stevenson, which seemed to 
establish the existence of exactly the same new particle. It is 
therefore not uncommon, much to Anderson’s later chagrin, for it 
to be said and written that the particle was discovered by Street 
and Stevenson. 

In a letter to the editor of the Physical Review, dated June 1, 
1937, and published under the heading “Note on the Nature of 
Cosmic-Ray Particles,” Oppenheimer and Serber drew attention to 
the fact that Yukawa had seemingly predicted this new particle. 
Many years later, Serber noted proudly that this was the first time 
anyone had referred to Yukawa’s paper and that “a very 
conscious purpose of our paper was to call attention to Yukawa’s 
idea.” This was not their only purpose, however. Their paper was 
also, though it did not mention Heisenberg by name, part of 
Oppenheimer’s ongoing campaign against Heisenberg, drawing 
attention as it did to Yukawa’s suggestion that “the possibility of 
exchanging such particles of intermediate mass would offer a 
more natural explanation of the range and magnitude of the 
exchange forces between proton and neutron than the Fermi 
theory of the electron-neutrino field.” 

In the same issue of the Physical Review appeared an article that 
Oppenheimer and Serber had written a little earlier, in March 
1937, together with Lothar Nordheim and his wife, Gertrude. 
Lothar Nordheim was a German physicist, who, because he was 
Jewish, had had to leave his position in Gottingen. Through the 
Emergency Committee for Displaced Scholars, he had been given 
a visiting professorship at Purdue University in Indiana. 
Nordheim was considered an expert on Fermi’s theory of beta 
decay, so his appearance in the United States provided 
Oppenheimer with a good opportunity to publish an authoritative 
refutation of Heisenberg’s use of that theory, which is what their 
joint paper, called “The Disintegration of High-Energy Protons,” 
amounts to. The argument the four authors outline is that, when 
Fermi’s theory is brought to bear on observations of the 
disintegration of protons (by this time it was known that protons 


were the main component of cosmic rays), it completely fails to 
explain the phenomenon of cosmic-ray showers. “The point of 
view adopted by Heisenberg in his theory of showers,” 
Oppenheimer and his fellow authors write, is to regard as valid 
“just those implications of present theory which would at first 
seem most subject to suspicion.” In the light of their analysis, 
they conclude bluntly, Heisenberg’s theory “no longer affords any 
explanation of showers.” 

Immediately before the publication of these new discoveries 
and these attacks on his theory, Heisenberg was, as he wrote to 
Pauli on April 26, 1937, “optimistic concerning the discovery of 
Fermi processes in cosmic radiation.” Three days later, 
Heisenberg, still professor of physics at Leipzig, got married. After 
his honeymoon he was due to take up a new, more prestigious 
appointment in Munich, as Arnold Sommerfeld’s successor. His 
appointment to this coveted position, however, was delayed by 
the maneuvering of hard-line Nazis, distrustful of the “white Jew” 
that they accused Heisenberg of being. Heisenberg wanted to 
travel, but it was not until the spring of 1938 that he was allowed 
to leave Germany to visit Britain, from where, he wrote to his 
wife that “it is important to me now to lose myself entirely in 
physics.” At both Cambridge and Manchester he spent many 
hours discussing cosmic rays and the new Yukawa particle with 
people who knew what they were talking about, such as Patrick 
Blackett. From what he learned from these discussions, 
Heisenberg was able to marshal new arguments for his view on 
cosmic radiation. Or at least part of that view. He gave up 
(because it had been effectively destroyed) the claim that Fermi’s 
theory could explain cosmic-ray showers, but retained the view 
that had motivated that claim, namely that quantum- 
electrodynamic theory ceased to be valid above a certain energy, 
and that the showers associated with the newly discovered 
particle were proof of that fact. 

In May 1938, Heisenberg wrote a paper called “The Limits of 
Applicability of the Present Quantum Theory,” which he sent to 
Bohr in Copenhagen and delivered as a lecture to several 
audiences made up of those German physicists who had chosen to 
stay in Hitler’s Germany. In the early summer of 1939, 
Heisenberg was again allowed to leave Germany and this time 
went to the United States, where he spent a month visiting old 


colleagues and friends at various American universities. The 
highlight of his visit was a symposium on cosmic rays at Chicago, 
where a dispirited Heisenberg listened as one paper after another 
poured scorn on his latest theory. Most scornful of all was 
Oppenheimer. “According to Heisenberg’s recollection of the 
meeting,” writes David Cassidy in his biography of Heisenberg, 
“the animated discussion following his session soon degenerated 
into a shouting match between himself and J. Robert 
Oppenheimer.” At the beginning of August, Heisenberg set off to 
return to Germany. Scarcely more than a month later, his country 
would be at war with Britain. 

It was clearly very important to Oppenheimer to win his 
argument with Heisenberg and one senses that, for him at least, 
there was more at stake than the cogency or otherwise of certain 
views about the nature of cosmic-ray showers. It was important 
to him not only to win that argument, but also to defeat 
Heisenberg. Winning the argument would be a triumph of 
American science over German science, striking a blow against 
the Nazi regime, whose ridiculous views about the dangers of 
“Jewish science” and the superiority of “deutsche Physik” 
Heisenberg now represented, not because those were his views 
but because, as a patriotic German, he had decided to work for 
the Nazis rather than leave the country. 

What Oppenheimer later called his “smouldering fury about the 
treatment of Jews in Germany” had served to awaken in him a 
sense of comradeship with the German Jews in general and, in 
particular, with his own family. After his father died on 
September 20, 1937, Oppenheimer arranged for Julius’s youngest 
sister, Hedwig Stern, together with her son, Alfred, and his family 
to emigrate to the United States. Hedwig had originally planned 
to live in New York, but Oppenheimer persuaded her and her 
family to settle instead in Berkeley. She lived there for the rest of 
her life and remained very fond of her nephew. When she died in 
1966, Alfred wrote to Oppenheimer to say that she had led a full 
and active life and that: “Your closeness has made it richer still.” 

Alfred has recalled a significant and revealing conversation he 
had with Oppenheimer soon after he and his mother arrived in 
the United States. When, he remembered, he asked Oppenheimer 
how they would fare in America and what America was really 
like, Oppenheimer replied: 


It is big here, not just geographically, but in thinking and 
spirit. You can move with ease from place to place and among 
people of all social rank and economic standing. And all people 
have the possibility to a high degree of influencing their 
destiny because they have the democratic means. There is a 
direction for the people and for the country, but this is re- 
evaluated all the time. You have seen atrocities in Europe and 
you wonder, can it happen here? I would reply that there is a 
lack of coercion here, a depressurizing safety valve built into 
the very nature of a democracy like America’s. Totalitarianism 
is far less likely here than in Europe. 


These comments were made at the very time, toward the end of 
1937, that Oppenheimer was undergoing a political awakening, 
which would later lead him to face charges of being “un- 
American.” 

Anger at the Nazi persecution of the Jews and a feeling of 
identity with that Jewish community were important factors in 
Oppenheimer’s shift in the 1930s from someone who demanded 
to know “what has politics to do with truth, goodness and 
beauty?” to someone deeply and actively committed to radical 
politics. But there were other factors compelling him in that 
direction. He himself mentioned the importance of seeing “what 
the depression was doing to my students.” That is, they could not 
get jobs, or the jobs they could get were inadequate, which made 
Oppenheimer, who had taken such a conspicuous lack of interest 
in the stock-market crash of 1929, begin, as he put it, “to 
understand how deeply political and economic events could affect 
men’s lives.” When, after his father’s death, he came into his 
inheritance, he made a will leaving his money to Berkeley to 
provide fellowships for graduate students. 

Another important factor in his involvement with left-wing 
groups, again emphasized by Oppenheimer himself, was his need 
for comradeship. “I began,” he said, “to feel the need to 
participate more fully in the life of the community.” When he 
started to join with others to pursue political goals, he felt 
something he often longed for, but very rarely achieved: a sense 
of belonging: “I liked the new sense of companionship, and at the 
time felt that I was coming to be part of the life of my time and 
country.” Robert Serber’s account of what seems to have been 


Oppenheimer’s very first act of engagement with the political 
tumult of the 1930s—his participation in the rally in support of 
the longshoremen’s strike in 1934, which ended with the 
improbable image of Oppenheimer shouting “Strike! Strike! 
Strike!” along with the crowd—seems to bear this out. 

“The matter which most engaged my sympathies and interests,” 
Oppenheimer wrote, “was the war in Spain.” 


This was not a matter of understanding and informed 
convictions. I had never been to Spain: I knew a little of its 
literature; I knew nothing of its history or politics or 
contemporary problems. But like a great many other Americans 
I was emotionally committed to the Loyalist cause. I 
contributed to various organizations for Spanish relief. I went 
to, and helped with, many parties, bazaars, and the like. Even 
when the war in Spain was manifestly lost, these activities 
continued. The end of the war and the defeat of the Loyalists 
caused me great sorrow. 


The Spanish Civil War began on July 17, 1936, when a group 
of generals led by the fascist General Franco, and supported by 
various conservative and nationalist groups, attempted to remove 
by force the elected leftist government. It ended in April 1939 
with a victory for the fascists. As soon as the war broke out, it 
became a cause célébre among left-leaning people, especially 
those in Britain and the United States, who saw it as the front line 
in the battle between fascism and democracy. The governments of 
the democratic countries, however, were prepared to do little to 
help the Loyalist cause, leaving the Soviet Union as the one 
country prepared to help. 

This state of affairs meant that the international effort to 
support the Loyalist government and oppose the spread of fascism 
was led by the international Communist Party, which thus seized 
the opportunity to increase its influence. So dominant was the 
Communist Party in the various campaigns and projects designed 
to provide help to the Loyalists that it was more or less 
impossible to contribute to those campaigns and projects without 
coming into contact with, and working alongside, communists. 
More than 3,000 U.S. citizens went to Spain to serve the Loyalist 
cause, some as soldiers (two entire battalions, with the patriotic 


names Abraham Lincoln and George Washington, were made up 
of volunteers from America), others as doctors, nurses, ambulance 
drivers, and so on. Not all of them were communists by any 
means, but simply to get to Spain they would all have had to 
work with communists, since it was the Communist Party that 
was organizing the operation: arranging boats to Spain, trains 
across the country and helping to place the volunteers where they 
might be of most help to the cause. 

There is some question about whether—and, if so, in what 
sense—Oppenheimer ever became a member of the Communist 
Party, but there is no question that he became what is known as a 
“fellow traveler.” The first sign of his being interested in 
communism (rather than merely supportive of left-wing causes 
such as the longshoremen’s strike in 1934) occurred in the 
summer of 1936, when he astonished a friend by claiming to 
have read all three volumes of Marx’s Das Kapital on the train 
from Berkeley to New York. At around the same time he claimed 
to have bought and read the complete works of Lenin. There is 
little in his recorded conversations, his writings or his 
correspondence to suggest a detailed familiarity with Marx’s 
Kapital and the complete works of Lenin, so perhaps one should 
treat these claims with some skepticism, but the mere fact that he 
made them suggests a fairly radical break with the past. 

It also provides some justification for his often quoted remark 
“Beginning in late 1936, my interests began to change,” a remark 
that has frequently misled people into thinking that there was a 
shift in his interests away from physics. As we have seen, this was 
very far from the case. Another mistake that is often made is to 
think that Oppenheimer was referring here to one particular 
event that happened in 1936, namely his meeting and falling in 
love with Jean Tatlock. 

In 1936, Jean Tatlock was twenty-two years old and a medical 
student at Stanford, hoping to become a psychiatrist. She is 
remembered by those who knew her at this time as slim, 
beautiful and intense. Her father was John Tatlock, a professor of 
English literature at Berkeley and widely recognized as one of the 
world’s leading experts on the work of Geoffrey Chaucer. Jean 
had grown up in Cambridge, Massachusetts, because her father 
was at Harvard before switching to Berkeley. While studying 
English literature at Vassar, she took a year off to take pre-med 


courses at Berkeley, and then in 1935 began her medical studies 
at Stanford. During her year at Berkeley (1933-4), she had joined 
the Communist Party and wrote regularly for its newspaper, the 
Western Worker. She was not, however, ideologically committed 
to communism. Indeed, ideologically she was, from a communist 
point of view, hopelessly bourgeois, being far more interested in 
—and, one suspects, knowledgeable about—the works of Freud 
and Jung than those of Marx. 

Oppenheimer met Jean Tatlock at a fund-raising party for the 
Spanish Loyalist cause hosted by his landlady, Mary Ellen 
Washburn, who was later described by the FBI as an “active 
member of the Communist Party.” This meeting, according to 
Oppenheimer, took place in “the spring of 1936,” but, as the 
Spanish Civil War did not break out until July of that year, it 
seems more plausible to assume it occurred some time soon after 
that. In any case, by the autumn of 1936 he and Jean were 
dating. Though there was a considerable age gap (he had turned 
thirty-two in 1936, and so was ten years older than her), he was, 
by all accounts, completely in love with her. 

Her role in “radicalizing” him, however, seems to have been 
overplayed. It is true that she was a member of the Communist 
Party and, as such, deeper into radical activism than he was. But 
on the other hand, her membership of the Party, probably 
because of her commitment to Freudian psychoanalysis, was, as 
Oppenheimer put it, an “on again, off again” affair. Communism, 
Oppenheimer wrote, “never seemed to provide for her what she 
was seeking. I do not believe that her interests were really 
political.” Though he and Jean were both drawn into, and 
sympathetic toward, the leftist political currents that converged 
on the efforts to support the Loyalists in Spain, it was, one 
suspects, far more important to them and their intimacy that they 
had in common both a deep love of literature and a fervent 
interest in psychiatry. 

It was primarily with others that Oppenheimer would develop 
his interest in left-wing politics. With Jean, he shared a love of, 
for example, the poetry of John Donne (a particular favorite of 
hers) and an exploration of the depths of the human soul, which 
the theories of Freud and Jung promised to shed light upon. 
When Oppenheimer said that he did not believe Jean’s interests 
were really political, and that communism could not provide 


what she was seeking, what he seemed to have in mind was the 
evident fact that Jean’s problems were fundamentally 
psychological. 

As the daughter of a Harvard and later a Berkeley professor, 
Jean knew how to behave in the company of sophisticated and 
intellectual people. She was, as Robert Serber noted, “quite 
composed in any social gathering.” In this respect she differed 
from, for example, Frank’s wife, Jackie, who neither knew nor 
cared how one should behave in the “social gatherings” that the 
Oppenheimers were accustomed to attend. And yet, whereas 
Jackie was robustly defiant about the way she was, Jean was 
plagued by self-doubts. Serber remembers that she had “these 
terrible depressions,” which would affect Oppenheimer: “He’d be 
depressed some days, because he was having trouble with Jean.” 

At the root of Oppenheimer’s “trouble with Jean,” it seemed, 
was the fact that she did not love him as much as he loved her. 
Their love affair lasted from the autumn of 1936 to the spring of 
1939, during which time he twice proposed to her. She turned 
him down on both occasions and the end, when it came, was 
brought about by her. As he had many years earlier with 
Charlotte Riefenstahl, Oppenheimer turned Jean away from him 
by courting her a little too insistently. He overdid it. “No more 
flowers, please Robert,” she would tell him. Refusing to listen, 
Oppenheimer would appear with more flowers. One time she 
threw his gardenias to the floor, shouting to her friend: “Tell him 
to go away, tell him I am not here.” Serber remembers that Jean 
“disappeared for weeks, months sometimes, and then would taunt 
Robert mercilessly. She would taunt him about whom she had 
been with and what they had been doing. She seemed determined 
to hurt him, perhaps because she knew Robert loved her so 
much.” By 1939, this—the greatest love Oppenheimer had yet 
known and, in the opinion of some of his friends, the greatest 
love he would ever know—was over. 

In the three years of his relationship with Jean Tatlock, 
Oppenheimer’s world changed completely. Though he always 
denied that he had ever been a member of the Communist Party, 
he did once admit that he “had probably belonged to every 
Communist-front organization on the west coast.” When the 
remark was quoted back at him, he said it was not true and that 
it was a “half-jocular overstatement,” but it does, it seems to me, 


capture the spirit of his involvement with communism pretty 
accurately. 

Always more open and less complicated than his older brother, 
Frank Oppenheimer made no secret of the fact that he had 
become a member of the Communist Party. He and Jackie joined 
the Party together early in 1937, after they had seen a 
membership application form in People’s World, the West Coast 
Communist Party magazine. “We clipped it out and sent it in,” 
Frank said later. “We were really quite overt about it— 
completely overt about it.” It was Party policy at that time for 
members to have an alias. Frank’s was “Frank Folsom,” after the 
famous California prison. Soon after he joined, he drove to 
Berkeley to tell Robert the news. According to Oppenheimer 
himself, he was “quite upset” about Frank joining the Party, 
though he does not say why. One imagines that it was because he 
was very aware that Communist Party members found it hard to 
get jobs, and, as Oppenheimer knew only too well from the 
experiences of his students, academic jobs were hard enough to 
find anyway. 

Despite his reaction to this news, Oppenheimer accepted an 
invitation from Frank and Jackie to attend a Communist Party 
meeting at their house in Pasadena, “the only thing,” he later 
claimed, “recognizable to me as a Communist Party meeting that 
I have ever attended.” With something of the tone with which he 
is said to have referred to Jackie as “the waitress my brother 
married,” Oppenheimer described the event in the following 
terms: 


The meeting made no detailed impression on me, but I do 
remember there was a lot of fuss about getting the literature 
distributed, and I do remember that the principal item under 
discussion was segregation in the municipal pool in Pasadena. 
The unit was concerned about that and they talked about it. It 
made a rather pathetic impression on me. It was a mixed unit 
of some colored people and some who were not colored. 

I remember vividly walking away from the meeting with 
Bridges [Calvin Bridges, a geneticist at Caltech] and his saying 
“What a sad spectacle” or “What a pathetic sight” or something 
like that. 


The meeting was of what was known as a “street unit” of the 
Communist Party, consisting of local people, most of whom, 
because Frank and Jackie lived in a predominantly black 
neighborhood, were black. The campaign to desegregate the local 
swimming pool was remembered very differently by Frank, who 
was clearly shocked at the treatment then meted out to black 
people: “It’s really hard to imagine; they just allowed blacks in 
Wednesday afternoon and evening, and then they drained the 
pool Thursday morning.” The campaign to end this segregation 
was not successful, but it illustrates the kind of practical issue 
that moved Jackie and Frank to join the Communist Party. 

Shortly afterward Frank was asked by the Party to make use of 
his Caltech connections to organize a communist group at the 
university, leaving Jackie to continue leading the “street unit.” 
Much against Frank’s own inclinations, the university group was 
secret. It consisted of about six members, including the chemist 
Sidney Weinbaum and the rocketeers Frank Malina and Hsue- 
Shen Tsien, all of whom preserved strict secrecy because, as 
Frank put it, “they were scared of losing their jobs.” 

Oppenheimer had nothing to do with Frank’s secret Caltech 
group and quite possibly did not know of its existence. He was, 
however, drawn into Communist Party activities in a number of 
different ways. Through his participation in the Spanish Civil War 
campaigns, he made contact with the prominent left-winger 
Thomas Addis. Addis was professor of medicine at Stanford and, 
as such, knew Jean well. One day, Oppenheimer recalled, Addis 
asked Oppenheimer to come to his laboratory in Stanford to 
discuss how he could best serve the Loyalist cause in Spain. He 
said, “You are giving all this money through these relief 
organizations. If you want to do good, let it go through 
Communist channels, and it will really help.” “He made it clear,” 
Oppenheimer wrote, “that this money, unlike that which went to 
the relief organizations, would go straight to the fighting effort.” 
He went on: “I did so contribute; usually when he communicated 
with me, explaining the nature of the need. I gave him sums in 
cash, probably never much less than a hundred dollars, and 
occasionally perhaps somewhat more than that, several times 
during the winter.” 

Between 1937 and 1942 Oppenheimer would meet Addis—or 
Isaac Folkoff, the treasurer of the local Communist Party—several 


times a year and hand over between $100 and $300 in cash to be 
used by the Communist Party as they saw fit. His income at that 
time was about $15,000, made up of a university salary of around 
$5,000 and $10,000 from his inheritance (this was at a time 
when one of Oppenheimer’s students considered himself to be 
comfortably well off when he received a grant of $650 a year). As 
he later estimated that, through Addis and Folkoff, he was giving 
the Communist Party about $1,000 a year, this means that he was 
supporting the party to the tune of about 7 percent of his 
(extremely large) income. In the light of these statistics, the 
question of whether he was actually a card-carrying member of 
the Party becomes somewhat academic. He was, in a very 
practical and real sense, a supporter of the Communist Party. 
Moreover, in terms of the time, effort and money spent on Party 
activities, he was a very committed supporter, far more so than 
many people who did pay their membership dues and carry a 
membership card. 

When Oppenheimer was later accused (simply by throwing his 
own words back at him) of having joined Communist Party front 
organizations, one of the more unlikely and puzzling examples 
given was the Western Consumers Union. This was an 
organization led by the Berkeley economist Robert A. Brady, 
dedicated to testing various consumer products and providing 
people with information that would enable them to make 
informed choices about which products to buy. It still exists and 
is not now, nor has it ever been, a communist organization. Brady 
was well known as an anti-fascist, but not as a communist. The 
Western Consumers Union was listed by the House Committee on 
Un-American Activities as a subversive organization, a communist 
front, from 1944 to 1954. This perhaps indicates that there was 
some evidence of an (apparently unsuccessful) attempt to 
infiltrate the organization by the Communist Party, but it may 
equally signify nothing more than the notorious paranoia of that 
particular committee. 

What is odd, and what Oppenheimer himself clearly found hard 
to explain, was how and why he found himself a member of the 
council that ran the Western Consumers Union. When questioned 
about it later, he said that he had been asked to join by Brady 
and his wife, Mildred Edie, who both “had enthusiasm” for it. “It 
was a very inappropriate thing for me to do,” he conceded: “I 


know nothing about the business.” Of his involvement with the 
Western Consumers Union, the documentary record consists of 
three letters written by Oppenheimer: one to Mildred Edie giving 
a halfhearted report on his attempts to find buyers and testers for 
various products, and two to Brady saying that he was too busy 
to attend meetings of the council. Though the Western Consumers 
Union would be mentioned repeatedly in future attempts to paint 
Oppenheimer as a dangerous subversive, there was in truth very 
little there from which to create such a picture. 

Of far greater significance was Oppenheimer’s involvement in 
the Teachers’ Union, which was affiliated to the American 
Federation of Labor, and which represented the interests not just 
of schoolteachers, but also of university lecturers and professors. 
It was through the Teachers’ Union that Oppenheimer got to 
know Haakon Chevalier, who came from a mixed French and 
Norwegian background and taught French literature at Berkeley. 
Tall, blond and handsome, Chevalier cut an impressive figure. He 
was three years older than Oppenheimer and far more worldly. 
He had married his first wife, Ruth, in 1922, and, after divorcing 
her in 1930, married his second wife, Barbara, in 1931. Barbara 
was an heiress, and the Chevaliers lived in great comfort in a 
large home that became the center of radical, left-wing Berkeley 
society. When he and Oppenheimer met in 1937, Chevalier was 
probably already a member of the Communist Party. 

Certainly, according to his later account, Chevalier was already 
a member of the Teachers’ Union when he met Oppenheimer, and 
the two of them set up a Berkeley campus branch, “Local 349,” 
with Chevalier as president and Oppenheimer as “recording 
secretary.” “For four years,” Chevalier has recalled, “we worked, 
with some success, to increase union membership both in the 
schools and in the university, to promote action to improve 
teaching conditions and standards and to encourage a more 
active participation on the part of teachers in political and 
community life.” The focus, however, was not as sharply on 
issues relating to teachers as one might have assumed: 


In bursts of what I suppose can only be described as immature 
fervor we felt ourselves called upon, in our union meetings, to 
make pronouncements and to pass resolutions on all sorts of 
political, civil rights and even international issues extraneous 


to the business of the Teachers Union and thereby caused, I am 
afraid, a certain amount of disaffection and pangs of 
conscience among some of our more timid members. 


As part of this wider remit, the Teachers’ Union organized 
fund-raising parties on behalf of the Spanish Loyalists, which, 
according to Chevalier, were “invariably lively and successful 
affairs” that raised “thousands of dollars for the alleviation of 
human suffering.” Though Oppenheimer later dismissed the 
Teachers’ Union as a “miserable thing” that “fell apart because it 
grew into a debating society,” he also specifically listed his 
participation in it as an example of the comradeship that had 
drawn him into radical politics. 

Another form that this comradeship possibly took, a far more 
controversial form, was Oppenheimer’s involvement in what 
Chevalier has described privately as a Communist Party “unit.” 
Publicly, in his memoir of Oppenheimer, Chevalier describes the 
formation of this unit as follows: 


We had decided, Oppenheimer and I, at our first meeting—this 
I do remember—to ask a small number of our friends, all 
colleagues, whom both of us knew, respected and trusted, and 
who shared our views, to join us and to form a discussion 
group that would meet from time to time, as occasion might 
dictate. This group—the number, in the course of time, varied 
from six to ten—was promptly formed, and we met, more or 
less regularly, every week or two during college sessions, not at 
all during the long summers, for the next five years. Our last 
reunion, as far as I remember, must have been in the late fall of 
1942. 


This is not how Chevalier had originally wanted to describe the 
group. What he had wanted to write, he told Oppenheimer in a 
letter written in 1964, was the “story...of your and my 
membership in the same unit of the CP from 1938 to 1942.” As 
Oppenheimer had always denied Party membership, Chevalier’s 
letter naturally horrified him. “I have never been a member of the 
Communist Party,” he replied, “and thus have never been a 
member of a Communist Party unit. I, of course, have always 
known this. I thought you did too. I have said so officially time 


and time again.” In the light of this, Chevalier spoke in his book 
of the “discussion group” mentioned above. To another member 
of this unit/discussion group, the union organizer, Lou Goldblatt, 
Chevalier wrote: “I had originally planned to reveal the fact that 
O. had been, from 1937 to 1943, a CP member,37 which I knew 
directly. On thinking it over, I decided that I shouldn’t, even 
though the fact is of considerable historical importance.” 

That Chevalier was not alone in regarding this group as a secret 
Communist Party unit has become apparent in two documents 
that have recently been made public on the website associated 
with Gregg Herken’s book, Brotherhood of the Bomb. The first of 
these is an unpublished manuscript by Chevalier’s wife entitled 
“Robert Oppenheimer and Haakon Chevalier: From the Memoirs 
of Barbara Chevalier.” After telling the story of how Oppenheimer 
read Marx on a train, Barbara Chevalier adds: “Shortly thereafter 
he and Haakon joined a secret unit of the Communist Party. 
There must have been 6 or 8 members—a doctor, a wealthy 
businessman (maybe).” Later in the memoir she writes: “Oppie’s 
membership in a closed unit was very secret indeed.” 

The gist of Barbara Chevalier’s account is confirmed in another 
unpublished document made available on the same website, 
“Venturing Outside the Ivory Tower: The Political Autobiography 
of a College Professor” by the Berkeley history professor Gordon 
Griffiths. Griffiths describes how, in 1939, when he returned to 
Berkeley after studying at Oxford, he wanted to resume 
membership of the U.S. Communist Party, but his new wife, 
Mary, was worried about the idea. A compromise, suggested by 
the graduate mathematician and Communist Party member 
Kenneth May, was adopted whereby Griffiths “could perform a 
useful function for the Party that involved little or no risk of 
exposure.” That function was to liaise between the Party and 
what Griffiths describes as “the faculty Communist group,” the 
Berkeley members of which were Chevalier, Oppenheimer and 
the Icelandic scholar Arthur Brodeur. To those three names, 
Chevalier, in private correspondence, has added names from 
outside the Berkeley faculty: Thomas Addis of Stanford, Robert 
Muir of the California Labor Bureau, Lou Goldblatt and the 
anthropologist Paul Radin.3s 

This group, Griffiths writes, “met regularly, to the best of my 
recollection, twice a month, in the evening at Chevalier’s or 


Oppenheimer’s house.” Griffiths’s job was to deliver party 
literature to the group and collect membership dues from 
Chevalier and Brodeur. Presumably alluding to Oppenheimer’s 
arrangements with Addis, Griffiths writes: “I was given to 
understand that Oppenheimer, as a man of independent wealth, 
made his contribution through some special channel.” “Nobody 
carried a party card,” Griffiths remembers. “If payment of dues 
was the only test of membership, I could not testify that 
Oppenheimer was a member, but I can say, without any 
qualification, that all three men considered themselves to be 
Communists.” 

In the light of this evidence, it is hard to resist the conclusion 
that Oppenheimer was a member of a secret communist unit at 
Berkeley, very like the one that his brother had helped to set up 
in Pasadena. It is perfectly possible, however, to square that with 
Oppenheimer’s repeated denials that he was a member of the 
Communist Party, if one uses as the criteria of membership the 
payment of dues and the possession of a membership card. The 
question of whether Oppenheimer was a communist or not is thus 
rather like the question of whether he was or was not a German 
Jew. He did not consider himself to be German, Jewish or 
communist, and yet, as those words are commonly used, he was 
ethnically a German Jew and politically a communist. One does 
not have to accuse either Oppenheimer or common usage of 
being wrong here; one just has to be careful in distinguishing the 
sense in which he was and was not German or Jewish or a 
communist. 

And to say that Oppenheimer was indeed a member of a secret 
communist unit is not to lend any support to the notion that 
Oppenheimer was engaged in anything subversive. Not 
everything secret is subversive. According to Griffiths, this secret 
group did not do very much “that could not have been done as a 
group of liberals or Democrats.” They encouraged each other to 
support the Teachers’ Union and the Loyalist cause in the Spanish 
Civil War and they discussed current events from a broadly 
Marxist point of view. “In short,” Griffiths concludes, “there was 
nothing subversive or treasonable about our activity.” It should 
not be imagined, for example, that this “secret unit” of the 
Communist Party took its orders from the Soviet Union, or even 
from the American Communist Party. True, Griffiths collected 


dues and delivered party literature, but there was no 
acknowledgment on anybody’s part that the Party could tell these 
people what to do or what to think. When Chevalier was asked 
what made this unit a Communist Party group rather than “just a 
group of people who were Left,” he replied: “We paid dues.” 
Asked whether they received any orders, he answered: “No. In a 
sense we weren’t [regular party members].” 

Oppenheimer’s silence about the “secret unit” to which he 
belonged is impressively resolute and unyielding. Never once, in 
all his subsequent interviews, interrogations and _ cross- 
examinations—some of which were conducted by people trained 
at the highest level in the skills required to prise secrets out of 
people—did he even hint at its existence. But then, as he himself 
said: “Look, I have had a lot of secrets in my head a long time. It 
does not matter who I associate with. I don’t talk about those 
secrets.” Not revealing things about himself was something he 
was extraordinarily good at. 

Leaving Oppenheimer’s impressive silence about the “secret 
unit” aside, there is nothing in what has been revealed about it 
that does not square with his own statements about his attitudes 
toward the Communist Party. He himself acknowledged that, 
because of the groups he joined, the people he was friends with 
and the financial contributions he made to the Party, he “might 
well have appeared at the time as quite close to the Communist 
Party—perhaps even to some people as belonging to it.” 
However, one has to remember, he emphasized, that it was quite 
common in the 1930s for communists and noncommunists to 
work together: “This was the era of what the Communists then 
called the United Front, in which they joined with many non- 
Communist groups in support of humanitarian objectives. Many 
of these objectives engaged my interest.” But: “I never was a 
member of the Communist Party. I never accepted Communist 
dogma or theory; in fact, it never made sense to me.” 

When pressed to confirm that he knew “that Communists stood 
for certain doctrines, and certain philosophies and took certain 
positions,” Oppenheimer replied: 


... it seems clear to me that there were tactical positions on 
current issues, which might be very sensible-looking or popular 
or might coincide with the views of a lot of people who were 


not Communists. There was also the conviction as to the nature 
of history, the role of the classes and the changing society, the 
nature of the Soviet Union, which I would assume was the core 
of Communist doctrine. 


Clearly, it was important to Oppenheimer to distinguish these 
two kinds of convictions. He might share with the Communist 
Party views on the Spanish Civil War or the rise of fascism or the 
unionizing rights of workers, but this did not mean that he 
shared, or even found comprehensible, the general, philosophical 
views that communists were supposed to hold, such as 
“dialectical materialism ... the more or less determinate course of 
history and the importance of the class war” (which were the 
three that Oppenheimer named in addition to the ones mentioned 
above). 

Of course, this still leaves undecided Oppenheimer’s views on a 
range of issues associated with communism. Did he believe in the 
inevitable collapse of capitalism? Did he look forward to a 
revolution that would result in the dictatorship of the proletariat? 
I think the implied answer to these two questions—implied by the 
above quotations—is “no.” And neither, as far as I know, is there 
anything in Oppenheimer’s recorded utterances to suggest 
otherwise. What he did believe in, and is on record as arguing 
for, is socialism, which he thought was the natural outcome of 
Roosevelt’s New Deal. In a political tract, published under the 
auspices of the Communist Party of California, which 
Oppenheimer is reliably said (by Chevalier and Griffiths) to have 
written, he quotes with approval a statement about the New Deal: 
“once start such things and you are on the road to socialism; once 
worry about the food and work and life of your poor, and you 
can’t stop.” “We agreed with that,” Oppenheimer writes, “we 
regarded it as an argument for the New Deal, not against it.” “We 
tend to believe,” he goes on, “that any consistent effort to raise 
the standard of living, to promote the culture and freedom and 
political responsibility of the people as a whole will lead to 
socialism.” 

In regarding the Communist Party as an ally of the New Deal, 
Oppenheimer was very far from being alone. Indeed, this was 
precisely how the American Communist Party presented itself in 
the 1930s, as primarily an American party, rather than as an 


agent of the Comintern. In 1937, its internal structure was 
reorganized so that it looked more like traditional American 
political parties. Its leader, Earl Browder, in the words of Maurice 
Isserman, a historian of the Party, “wanted to be a leader of a 
national movement with power and influence of its own.” Under 
Browder: 


The Communists began to identify themselves as part of the 
political coalition that supported the New Deal’s domestic 
programs, while enthusiastically welcoming every move by the 
Roosevelt Administration that could be interpreted as favoring 
collective international security. The Communists argued that 
their own political program corresponded to Roosevelt’s true 
intentions. 


The slogan that Browder adopted for his party in the period 
1936-9 could hardly have been more suited to a man of 
Oppenheimer’s political outlook: “Communism Is Twentieth 
Century Americanism.” 

Isserman’s analysis of the effectiveness of this slogan on its 
target audience during the late 1930s rings very loud bells for 
anyone familiar with Oppenheimer’s background: 


A significant proportion of those who joined then and stuck 
with the movement were the children of Jewish immigrants 
(the percentage of Jewish membership in the CP, about 15 
percent in the mid-1920s, grew to around half the party’s 
strength in the 1930s and 1940s). 

Like every second generation in the history of American 
immigration, they hungered for the full assimilation that had 
eluded their parents’ grasp. Had they come of age in less 
unsettled times they might have chosen another route, but in 
the early 1930s it seemed for a moment as if an American 
version of the October Revolution offered the quickest and 
surest path from marginality to influence and integration. 


In his 1936 essay “What Is Communism?” Earl Browder 
responded to the question asked of communists by the editorials 
in the newspapers of William Randolph Hearst—“If you don’t like 
this country, why don’t you go back where you came from?”— 
with the following exuberantly patriotic rhetoric: 


The truth is ... we Communists like this country very much. 
We cannot think of any other spot on the globe where we 
would rather be than exactly this one. We love our country. 

... We are determined to save our country from the hell of 
capitalism. And most of us were born here, so Hearst’s gag is 
not addressed to us anyway. 

... The revolutionary tradition is the heart of Americanism. 
That is incontestable, unless we are ready to agree that 
Americanism means what Hearst says, slavery to outlived 
institutions, preservation of privilege, the degradation of the 
masses. 

We Communists claim the revolutionary traditions of 
Americanism. We are the only ones who consciously continue 
those traditions and apply them to the problems of today. 

We are the Americans and Communism is the Americanism of 
the twentieth century ... 

Americanism, in this revolutionary sense, means to stand in 
the forefront of human progress. It means never to submit to 
the forces of decay and death. It means constantly to free 
ourselves of the old, the outworn, the decaying, and to press 
forward to the young, the vital, the living, the expanding. 


This, one feels, is an outlook with considerable appeal to the 
man who grew up with the sermons of Adler on the meaning of 
America and the importance of the “Americanization” of Jewish 
immigrants, and who lectured, among others, Felix Bloch, George 
Uhlenbeck and Alfred Stern on the virtues of his home country. 

With regard to the Soviet Union, Oppenheimer later said, “the 
talk that I heard at that time had predisposed me to make much 
of the economic progress and general level of welfare in Russia, 
and little of its political tyranny.” But his views on that changed, 
first by reading about the show trials, and then, more decisively, 
in the summer of 1938, when three physicists whose opinions he 
respected—George Placzek, Victor Weisskopf and Marcel Schein 
—talked to him about their own experiences of Russia. Placzek, 
Weisskopf and Schein were all from Central European Jewish 
backgrounds; Placzek from Moravia, Weisskopf from Vienna and 
Schein from Bohemia. They were also all first-rate physicists. As 
life for Jews became unbearable under Nazi-controlled areas of 
Europe, the United States was not the only country to realize that 


some of those Jews could make extremely valuable contributions 
to its universities. The Soviet Union also extended a helping hand 
to Jewish scientists, and succeeded in attracting Schein and 
Guido Beck to the University of Odessa, and then, through Beck, 
persuaded Placzek and Weisskopf to work with the Russian 
physicist Lev Landau at his new institute in Kharkov, near Kiev. 

By 1938, it had all gone horribly wrong for everyone 
concerned. Landau was investigated during the Great Purge, 
arrested and imprisoned; and Beck, Schein, Placzek and 
Weisskopf were forced to flee, horrified at what they had 
witnessed. As Oppenheimer put it, the description of the Soviet 
Union he received from these three very well-respected scientists 
was of “a land of purge and terror, of ludicrously bad 
management and of a long-suffering people.” “It’s worse than you 
can imagine,” Weisskopf told him. “It’s a morass.” As Weisskopf 
later remarked: “These conversations had a very deep influence 
on Robert. This was a decisive week in his life.” This is confirmed 
by a letter written a few months later by Felix Bloch to Isidor 
Rabi. Oppenheimer, Bloch wrote, “is fine and sends you his 
greetings; honestly, I don’t think you wore him out but at least he 
does not praise Russia too loudly any more which is good 
progress.” 

Oppenheimer might also have received a fairly clear-eyed 
picture of what was happening in the Soviet Union from one of 
his students. George Volkoff, who came to Berkeley to work with 
Oppenheimer in 1936, was born in Moscow, but brought up in 
Manchuria, where his father worked as a schoolteacher. Volkoff 
left Manchuria to study physics at the University of British 
Columbia in Canada, and never saw his parents again. His mother 
died in Manchuria, and in 1936 his father returned to Russia, 
where he was caught up in the purges and sent to Siberia, dying 
there in 1943. “Alone in North America,” an obituary of Volkoff 
stated, “it did not help George emotionally that many of his 
associates continued to have rosy views of the Soviet Union.” 

With Volkoff, Oppenheimer wrote one of his most interesting 
papers, one of a series of three, each written with a different 
coauthor, on a subject with which Oppenheimer had not 
previously been associated: astrophysics. Though these papers 
received little attention at the time, they are now generally 
considered to be his greatest work, free of the mathematical 


errors that dogged his work on quantum electrodynamics and 
containing original and prescient insights that have been the basis 
of much subsequent important work. Many people think that, if 
he had lived a little longer, Oppenheimer would have received 
the Nobel Prize for these papers. 

The particular subject of the paper Oppenheimer wrote with 
Volkoff at the end of 1938 was the physics of neutron stars. The 
concept of a neutron star had been introduced into physics just 
five years earlier at a meeting of the American Physical Society in 
1933, only a year after the discovery of the neutron, by the Swiss 
physicist Fritz Zwicky and the German astronomer Walter Baade. 
Both were based in Pasadena, Zwicky at Caltech and Baade at the 
Mount Wilson Observatory. Zwicky, like many people at Caltech, 
was interested in cosmic rays, and, via Millikan’s view that these 
rays were the “birth cries” of matter coming to us from outer 
space, this led him to a subject that Baade was already interested 
in: supernovae. 

Supernovae are extraordinarily bright explosions in outer 
space, which have been observed and recorded at irregular 
intervals since the second century ad. One of the most famous 
appeared in ad 1054, when it was recorded by court astronomers 
in China, who described it as a “guest star” and noted that it was 
brighter than Venus or any other star. It stayed visible, even in 
daylight, for twenty-three days, and at night could be seen for 
two years. In 1572 another supernova was observed by the 
Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, who wrote a book about it, De 
Nova Stella, in which he showed that this “new star” had to be 
further away from us than the moon and that therefore the view 
that the “starry heavens” were immutable was wrong. 

The word “supernova” was introduced in the early 1930s by 
Baade and Zwicky. Even though their term incorporated from 
ancient descriptions the word “nova,” with its suggestions that 
these temporary bright stars were “new,” they were the first to 
develop a theory that explained supernovae as the death-throes of 
a star. A supernova, in their account, is a stellar explosion that 
marks the “cessation of its existence as an ordinary star.” They 
also “tentatively” suggested what is now the accepted theory, that 
“the super-nova process represents the transition of an ordinary 
star into a neutron star.” 

To understand what a neutron star is, it is helpful to consider 


the kind of dying star known as a “white dwarf.” In the 
nineteenth century, a mysterious star named Sirius B was 
discovered, which was much fainter than its partner, Sirius A. It 
was assumed that this was because it was cooler, but it was found 
to be, in fact, much hotter. This could only mean that it was, by 
comparison, extremely small. It was a star with the mass of our 
sun, but the volume of a mere planet; in other words, its density 
was extraordinary—much higher than anything encountered on 
earth. In the 1920s, these small, dense stars were given the name 
“white dwarfs” and a theory was developed to explain them. The 
theory was that ordinary stars, such as our sun, are huge furnaces 
of hydrogen—the pressure and the heat at their core being 
sufficient to fuse hydrogen nuclei into helium (though how, 
exactly, that nuclear fusion worked was not clear until Hans 
Bethe’s work on the question was published in 1939). After a 
time, which will be several billions of years, the star runs out of 
hydrogen, and is no longer able to keep itself stable through 
thermonuclear reactions. At that stage, gravity takes over, and 
pulls all the particles that make up the star toward the center. 
The star thus gets smaller and smaller and denser and denser. 
Eventually it gets so dense that there is no longer any room for 
the atomic electrons39 to move about as they do in normal 
conditions. At this point, the “white dwarf’ cannot get any 
smaller or denser and so achieves stability, the stability being 
attributable to what is called the “degeneracy pressure” of the 
atomic electrons—namely, the fact that they are now all pressed 
together, unable to move. 

In 1931 the Indian physicist Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar 
showed that the process described above meant that white dwarfs 
had a maximum mass, which he calculated to be 1.4 solar masses 
(where a “solar mass” is a mass equivalent to that of our sun). 
Anything with a mass greater than that, Chandrasekhar 
demonstrated, would exert a gravitational force too great for even 
degeneracy pressure to withstand. Most stars (something over 90 
percent) are estimated to fall below the “Chandrasekhar limit,” 
but that still means that a significant number of stars will not end 
up as white dwarfs. What happens to them is the problem solved 
by Baade and Zwicky and the notion of a “neutron star.” 

A star with a core of more than 1.4 solar masses will exert 
enough gravitational pressure to overcome degeneracy pressure 


with really spectacular consequences. A massive star, in its dying 
phases, will consist of layers of matter, each layer getting more 
and more dense as one approaches the core. If the core is over the 
Chandrasekhar limit, the moment will arrive when it suddenly 
collapses under gravitational pressure. In one-tenth of a second, 
the material that makes up the core will explode and disintegrate 
into its basic constituent particles—protons, neutrons, electrons. 
At the fantastically high temperatures that are generated by this 
process, the velocities of the electrons approach that of light. But, 
being in such a dense, degenerate state, they have nowhere to go. 
And so, at terrifically high energies, they are pushed into the 
protons themselves, forming neutrons. This process, called 
“neutronization,” results in an enormous increase in density; the 
core of the star is no longer made up of chemicals of any sort; it is 
rather one big nucleus. As this happens, the outer layers of the 
star, the non-neutronized sections, fall toward the center, but are 
repelled by a shock wave of enormous energy that blows the star 
to smithereens. If the star originally had a mass twenty-five times 
the size of our sun, then what would be left is a neutron core with 
a mass equal to our sun and a volume the size not of a planet or 
even of a country, but of a city. The rest of the mass would be 
blown away. That explosion is a supernova, and the remaining 
core is a neutron star. 

Ever since he arrived in California, Oppenheimer had taken an 
interest in the work being done at the Mount Wilson Observatory. 
In 1933, he gave a talk on “Stars and Nuclei” to the Mount 
Wilson-Caltech Astronomy and Physics Club. His interest in 
astrophysics was evidently reawakened by Volkoff, who gave a 
talk at Berkeley in 1937 on “The Source of Stellar Energy.” This, 
as we have seen, is where astrophysics and nuclear physics meet, 
since the source of stellar energy is to be found in nuclear 
reactions. In 1938, Oppenheimer organized a symposium on 
“nuclear transformations and their astrophysical significance” for 
that year’s meeting of the American Physical Society, which was 
held in San Diego. Oppenheimer was to give a paper on stellar 
energy, but before the meeting he learned that whatever he had 
to say on that subject was about to be trumped by Hans Bethe’s 
Nobel Prize-winning work on the subject. 

Soon after the meeting Oppenheimer published the first of his 
three papers on astrophysics, a letter to the editor of the Physical 


Review written jointly with Serber, called “On the Stability of 
Stellar Neutron Cores.” Acknowledging their debt to Bethe for “an 
interesting discussion of these questions,” Oppenheimer and 
Serber took up the question that had recently been discussed by 
Lev Landau: was there, for neutron stars, an equivalent to the 
“Chandrasekhar limit”? That is to say, does a neutron core have 
to be of some certain mass in order to remain stable? Like 
Landau, Oppenheimer and Serber considered a possible minimum 
limit, rather than a maximum, and came to the conclusion that 
Landau’s estimate of 0.001 solar masses was too low. The 
minimum limit was, they reckoned, more like 0.1 solar masses. 

The second paper in the series, the one written with Volkoff 
and entitled “On Massive Neutron Cores,” was received by the 
Physical Review on January 3, 1939. An altogether more 
substantial piece of work than the Oppenheimer-Serber paper, it 
is often credited now with presenting the first serious theory of 
neutron stars. From it comes what has become known as the 
“Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit,” an upper limit for a stable neutron 
core, which they calculated to be 0.7 solar masses. The present 
estimate is between 3 and 5 solar masses. It was notoriously 
difficult to do the calculation for the reasons that Oppenheimer 
and Volkoff spelled out. First, the nuclear forces that operate 
between neutrons were not as well understood as the 
electromagnetic forces that operate between the electrons in a 
white dwarf. Second, when considering white dwarfs it is not 
necessary to take relativistic effects into account; the 
gravitational forces are weak enough for Newtonian theory to be 
sufficient. With the enormous gravitational forces at work in a 
neutron star, however, one needs to use general relativity, which 
introduces extremely complex and difficult equations. 

Despite these difficulties, Oppenheimer and Volkoff laid out the 
basic theory of neutron stars—nearly thirty years before there 
were any empirical grounds for believing that such things really 
exist. The abstruse mathematics in the article, versions of which 
now appear in astrophysics textbooks under the name 
“Oppenheimer-Volkoff (O-V) equation oof hydrostatic 
equilibrium,” was apparently the work of Volkoff alone. “I 
remember being greatly overawed by having to explain to 
Oppenheimer and Tolman what I had done,” he later 
remembered. “We were sitting out on the lawn of the old faculty 


club at Berkeley. Amidst the nice green grass and tall trees, here 
were these two venerated gentlemen and here I was, a graduate 
student just completing my Ph.D., explaining my calculations.” 
What those calculations showed was extremely interesting: first, 
that neutron stars could indeed exist, so long as their mass was 
greater than 0.1 solar masses and less than 0.7 solar masses; 
second, that “the question of what happens, after energy sources 
are exhausted, to stars of mass greater than 1.5 solar masses still 
remains unanswered”;40 and most intriguingly of all: “There 
would seem to be only two answers possible to the question of 
the ‘final’ behavior of very massive stars: either the equation of 
state we have used so far fails to describe the behavior of highly 
condensed matter... or the star will continue to contract 
indefinitely, never reaching equilibrium.” According to their 
calculations, in other words, there is nothing, in stars with 
sufficient mass, to prevent the gravitational collapse from 
carrying on indefinitely, but how can something collapse, as it 
were, infinitely? The alternatives presented by their work, they 
concluded, “require serious consideration.” 

Even to have raised the question of indefinite gravitational 
collapse required impressive boldness and imagination, but in his 
next paper Oppenheimer went one better: he answered it. The 
third and final paper in this series on astrophysics, though more 
or less completely ignored for nearly thirty years after its 
publication, has now become the most respected of them all. 
Jeremy Bernstein has called it “one of the great papers in 
twentieth-century physics.” Cowritten with Hartland Snyder, who 
is remembered by Robert Serber as “the best mathematician of 
our Berkeley group,” it is entitled “On Continued Gravitational 
Contraction” and was published in the September 1939 issue of 
the Physical Review. 

The paper is celebrated for predicting the existence of what are 
now, and have been since the 1960s, called “black holes,” the 
next stage of a dying star of sufficient mass after it has passed 
through the white dwarf, supernova and neutron-star phases. 
“When all thermonuclear sources of energy are exhausted,” runs 
the very first line of the paper, “a sufficiently heavy star will 
collapse.” Furthermore, unless its mass is reduced in various ways 
(for example, by radiation) to that of our sun, “this contraction 
will continue indefinitely.” 


The genius and the novelty of the paper lie in giving an 
account of what “indefinite contraction” might mean. In the 
death of a massive star, we have imagined it going from many 
times bigger than our sun (its initial state as a glowing furnace of 
hydrogen) to something about the size of a planet (a white 
dwarf), then something about the size of, say, San Francisco (a 
neutron star). At each stage, its density gets greater and greater. 
Now we must imagine it contracting toward what is called a 
“singularity,” namely zero volume and infinite density. As 
Oppenheimer put it in a letter to George Uhlenbeck while he was 
working on this paper: “The results have been very odd.” To 
describe this “oddness,” Oppenheimer and Snyder use the field 
equations of Einstein’s theory of relativity, the physical realities 
of which they illustrate from the points of view of two observers: 
one far away from the collapsing mass and the other inside it. It 
is a feature of relativity that, from the point of view of someone 
outside a gravitational field, time inside the field will run more 
and more slowly as the strength of the gravitation increases. 
Therefore, to an outside observer, the collapse of the mass will 
take an infinite amount of time; to the unfortunate observer 
inside the gravitational field, on the other hand, it is all over in 
an instant. Moreover, nothing can escape from the indefinitely 
collapsing mass, not even radiation; the blackness of a black star 
is absolute. “The star thus tends to close itself off from any 
communication with a distant observer,” Oppenheimer and 
Snyder write; “only its gravitational field persists.” 

In four pages, mostly filled with the imposing equations of 
relativistic gravitational theory, Oppenheimer and Snyder 
provided a way of understanding the collapse of a neutron star 
into a black hole, the implications of which are still being 
explored today. Pick up a popular book on black holes now and 
the chances are that what you will see is a description extending 
over several pages, even several chapters, of the physical realities 
that correspond to the equations of Oppenheimer and Snyder. 
Almost certainly, the book will also attempt to convey the nature 
of black holes using the device adopted by Oppenheimer and 
Snyder of imagining two observers. 

And yet, during Oppenheimer’s lifetime, this remarkable paper 
—and the ones preceding it written with Serber and Volkoff— 
were greeted with silence from both astronomers and physicists. 


This silence ended with the discovery in 1967 of “pulsars,” 
which, it was realized, are rotating neutron stars; the following 
year it was discovered that what had been known for a long time 
as the Crab Nebula was in fact the remnant of the 1064 
supernova and that in the middle of it was a neutron star. Since 
then, neutron stars have even been photographed. As for black 
holes, though they have not been (and could not be) 
photographed, there is now abundant evidence that they exist 
and they are the subject of intensive theorizing and observational 
work. 

One of the leading figures in the study of black holes, John 
Archibald Wheeler, was also one of the first people to revive 
interest in Oppenheimer’s work on the subject, and is credited 
with having introduced the term “black hole.” In the 1960s, 
shortly before Oppenheimer’s death, Wheeler tried to talk to him 
about his work on gravitational collapse, but Oppenheimer was 
not interested. Had he lived just a few years longer, Oppenheimer 
would have seen the empirical evidence which confirmed that the 
theory developed by him and his students in the late 1930s was 
not just a piece of mathematics, but was a description of physical 
reality. 

One reason for the initial lack of interest in these great papers 
of Oppenheimer and his students has to do with the timing of two 
very different events. Oppenheimer’s paper with Volkoff was 
written in the very month that it was announced that scientists in 
Germany had discovered nuclear fission; his paper with Snyder, 
meanwhile, was published on the very day that the Second World 
War began. For the time being, the question of what happened 
inside a massive stellar core was of far less interest, and far less 
import, than the questions of what might be made to happen 
inside a uranium nucleus and what might become of Europe. 


37 Chevalier was evidently a little hazy on the exact years, as these do not 
match the dates he gave in his letter to Oppenheimer. 

38 It has worried some people that Griffiths mentions three members of the 
unit, while Chevalier mentions seven. However, Griffiths does not say it only 
had three members. He says rather: “Of the several hundred members of the 
faculty at Berkeley three were members of the communist group.” As neither 
Addis nor Radin was at Berkeley during the period in question and the other 
two were not university people at all, this is perfectly consistent with 
Chevalier’s description of the group having seven members. 


39 “Atomic electrons” are those outside the nucleus, as opposed to those that 
are emitted from the nucleus in beta decay. 

40 The figures here are perhaps confusing. The Chandrasekhar limit of 1.4 solar 
masses given previously is a calculation of how much mass a white dwarf can 
have without collapsing into a neutron star. The Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit of 
0.7 solar masses is a calculation of how much mass a neutron star can have and 
still be stable—that is, without collapsing further. What happens to a neutron 
star that continues to collapse is an unanswered question, which is why 
Oppenheimer says the question of what happens to large stars (those more 
massive than 1.5 suns) still remains unsolved. The full story about the 
gravitational collapse of large stars, he is indicating, has yet to be told. 


Fission 


rae : he response of scientists to the news 
of nuclear fission in the New Year of 1939 was in itself a 


remarkable chain reaction, with Oppenheimer and his colleagues 
on the West Coast of America somewhat at the end of the chain. 

It began with two chemists in Berlin, the eminent Otto Hahn 
and his young assistant Fritz Strassmann. They had been 
bombarding uranium with fairly slow, low-energy neutrons, 
trying to repeat the experiments conducted in Paris by Iréne 
Curie and her assistant, which had produced some puzzling 
results. On December 19, 1938, Hahn wrote to his friend and 
former colleague Lise Meitner, who, because she was Jewish, had 
recently fled Germany and was now in Sweden. Meitner was a 
very able physicist to whom Hahn had often appealed in the past 
to explain his results. Now he asked her to explain something that 
had utterly perplexed him and Strassmann: when their slow 
neutrons hit uranium, the result seemed to be the emission of 
barium. 

To understand why this was so puzzling, one has to take a step 
back and survey what had been achieved up to that point in the 
way of changing one element into another. Rutherford, back in 
1919, had been the first modern alchemist, changing nitrogen 
into oxygen by bombarding it with alpha particles. What, exactly, 
was happening in this process was made clear by the photographs 
Blackett took in 1924: nitrogen, with atomic mass 14, was 
absorbing the alpha particle (mass 4), producing oxygen (mass 
17) and emitting a proton (mass 1), or, in symbols: N14 + a4 > 
O17 + pi. Then, in 1932, Cockcroft and Walton had split a 
lithium atom by bombarding it with protons, and again there was 
no mystery about what was happening: lithium (mass 7) was 


absorbing a proton (mass 1) and then splitting into two helium 
nuclei, each with a mass of 4: Li7 + p1 > a4 + a4. 

At the heart of these processes is not only some fairly basic 
arithmetic (14 + 4 = 17 + 1 and7+4+ 1 = 4 + 4), but also 
some fairly basic chipping away at atomic nuclei, with nothing 
more dramatic than the absorption and emission here and there 
of an alpha particle and/or a proton. But it is impossible to 
understand how barium could be emitted from uranium by such 
means. Uranium is a very heavy element. In fact, it is the heaviest 
naturally occurring element. It has ninety-two protons and, in its 
most common and stable form, 146 neutrons, giving it an atomic 
mass of 238. Barium has fifty-six protons and, in its most 
common and stable form, eighty-two neutrons, giving it a mass of 
138. You cannot, therefore, get barium from uranium by either 
adding or subtracting a proton or an alpha particle; you need to 
lose about 100 nucleons (protons and/or neutrons)! Whatever 
that is, it is not “chipping.” 

Hahn and Strassmann had already strained credulity by 
suggesting earlier that what they had witnessed was the emission 
of an isotope of radium (atomic number 88, atomic mass 223-8), 
but it was just about conceivable how this might happen by, as 
they said, “the emission of two successive alpha particles” 
(together with a couple of neutrons or protons). But no amount of 
juggling with the figures could explain how barium could be 
emitted from uranium on the assumption that transmutation was 
due to the emission or absorption of protons, neutrons or alpha 
particles. Something else was going on, something not previously 
encountered. 

In Sweden, Meitner was joined by her nephew Otto Frisch, a 
young physicist who had lately been working in Copenhagen with 
Niels Bohr. On Christmas Eve 1938, Frisch and Meitner discussed 
the results obtained by Hahn and Strassmann. “But it’s 
impossible,” Frisch remembers them thinking. “You couldn’t chip 
a hundred particles off a nucleus in one blow.” 

Following a suggestion by George Gamow, Bohr had recently 
put forward the idea that an atomic nucleus is more like a liquid 
drop than a billiard ball; not a hard, stable object, but something 
continually moving, wobbling, with the forces acting not only on 
it but in it, pulling it in different directions. Among those forces 
in an atomic nucleus is the electrostatic repulsion that protons 


exert on one another. Seen like this, the heavier the nucleus is, 
the less stable it should be, because it will have more protons, all 
trying to pull away from the others. That is, in fact, why no 
elements heavier than uranium exist in nature; as soon as they 
are created, they pull themselves apart. 

This fact was not well understood in 1938. Up to then, 
scientists thought that by bombarding uranium with neutrons 
they would create heavier, “transuranic” elements. They thought 
that the uranium would absorb a neutron, which would then, 
through beta decay, transform into a proton, thus creating a new, 
heavier element. Thinking about the results Hahn and Strassmann 
had obtained in terms of Bohr’s image of the nucleus as a drop of 
water, Frisch and Meitner realized that the opposite had 
happened: instead of the uranium absorbing a neutron, the 
neutron had hit a wobbling nucleus (which they pictured like a 
balloon full of water, pinched at the middle), making it wobble a 
bit more until it split in half. Frisch and Meitner also realized that 
this splitting—to which Frisch gave the name “fission’—would 
release enormous amounts of energy, namely the binding energy 
holding the nucleons of the uranium nuclei together. They were 
able to be fairly precise about how much energy would be 
released, since they knew that the separated pieces of the split 
uranium nucleus—one of barium, the other (therefore) of 
krypton4i—would have a slightly smaller combined mass than 
that of the original nucleus, and were able to calculate what that 
difference would be. The answer is: a mass equal to one-fifth of a 
proton. Then, using the famous formula E = mcz2, they could 
convert that mass into energy and thus work out that the amount 
of energy released by the fission of uranium is 200 million 
electron volts, which, not coincidently, is exactly the amount of 
energy Frisch and Meitner had calculated would be needed to 
pull the protons apart. 

All this was understood by Frisch and Meitner on Christmas 
Eve 1938. For about a week they were the sole possessors of this 
(potentially, at least, literally) earth-shattering knowledge. Then, 
on January 1, 1939, Meitner wrote to Hahn, telling him that she 
and Frisch “consider it perhaps possible energetically after all that 
such a heavy nucleus bursts.” Two days later Frisch was back in 
Copenhagen, where he told Bohr the news. “I hadn’t spoken for 
half a minute,” Frisch remembers, “when he struck his head with 


his fist and said, ‘Oh, what idiots we have been that we haven’t 
seen that before.’ ” 

By January 6, Frisch and Meitner, working together on the 
phone, had drafted a paper on fission that they intended to send 
to Nature. Bohr was leaving for the United States the next day, 
and before he left Frisch told him about the paper and handed 
him two pages of it, which was all he had been able to type out in 
the time available. He also told Bohr about an experiment he 
proposed to conduct in Copenhagen to confirm Hahn and 
Strassmann’s result. Bohr promised not to mention fission in 
America, until he had heard from Frisch that his paper had been 
received by Nature. Frisch decided not to send the theoretical 
paper he had written with his aunt until he had conducted his 
experiments. These were done quickly and did indeed confirm the 
remarkable fact that uranium can be split apart by slow neutrons, 
thus releasing enormous amounts of nuclear energy. Frisch 
dashed off a paper reporting on his experiments and on 
January 16 sent both papers to Nature. 

On the same day, Bohr, accompanied by his colleague Léon 
Rosenfeld, arrived in New York. On the way over the two of them 
had read the pages that Frisch had given Bohr, and had spent 
almost the entire time discussing fission. Bohr, however, forgot to 
mention to Rosenfeld his promise to Frisch not to discuss it with 
the Americans. When they arrived in New York they were met by 
Enrico Fermi, who had, after receiving the 1938 Nobel Prize, fled 
Italy and was now working at Columbia University. With Fermi 
was the Princeton physicist John Archibald Wheeler. While Bohr 
went off with Fermi to spend the day and night as his guest in 
New York, Wheeler accompanied Rosenfeld to Princeton. Thus it 
was that, on the train from New York to Princeton, Wheeler 
became the first person in America to hear that nuclear fission 
had been achieved. 

It so happened that that day, a Monday, was when the physics 
department at Princeton held its Journal Club, where they 
discussed new results in physics. Naturally, therefore, Wheeler 
asked Rosenfeld to give a short report of fission to the assembled 
faculty members and graduate students, and, of course, the news 
caused quite a stir. Isidor Rabi and Willis Lamb, who were both 
then working at Columbia University, happened to be at 
Princeton that week, so they returned to New York bearing the 


news to, among others, Fermi (to whom Bohr, of course, had said 
nothing). Fermi at once devised an experiment similar to Frisch’s 
to confirm the result, and meanwhile Bohr continued on his 
journey across the United States, now (having written a letter to 
Nature giving appropriate credit to Frisch and Meitner) feeling 
free to discuss fission with anyone who wanted to discuss it, 
which was almost everyone he met. 

His next stop was Washington, to attend the annual Theoretical 
Physics Conference, cosponsored by the Carnegie Institution and 
George Washington University. There, in front of fifty-one of 
America’s best physicists, including Harold Urey, George Gamow, 
Edward Teller, Hans Bethe and George Uhlenbeck (who was now 
back at the University of Michigan, having just returned from 
Holland), Bohr announced the news. Immediately two 
experimentalists at the Carnegie Institution returned to their labs 
to set up an experiment. 

By now, before Frisch and Meitner’s paper had even appeared 
in print, it seemed as if every physicist on the East Coast knew 
about fission, and at least two laboratories had conducted 
experiments that confirmed the results. The news had still not hit 
the West Coast (as one physicist remarked: “We didn’t make long- 
distance calls in those days”), but this was about to change. 
Attending the Washington conference was a science writer from 
the Washington Evening Star, whose report on the sensational 
discovery was published on January 28. The next day, the San 
Francisco Chronicle picked up the story. 

Luis W. Alvarez, a colleague of Lawrence’s at the Radiation 
Laboratory, seems to have been the first physicist at Berkeley to 
receive the news. He later recalled: 


I remember exactly how I heard about it. I was sitting in the 
barber chair in Stevens Union having my hair cut, reading the 
Chronicle. I didn’t subscribe to the Chronicle, I just happened to 
be reading it, and in the second section, buried away some 
place, was an announcement that some German chemists had 
found that the uranium atom split into two pieces when it was 
bombarded with neutrons—that’s all there was to it. So I 
remember telling the barber to stop cutting my hair and I got 
right out of that barber chair and ran as fast as I could to the 
Radiation Laboratory where my student Phil Abelson, who is 


now editor of Science, had been working very hard to try and 
find out what transuranium elements were produced when 
neutrons hit uranium; he was so close to discovering fission 
that it was almost pitiful. He would have been there, 
guaranteed, in another few weeks. 


When Alvarez arrived at the laboratory, panting, with his news 
about fission, Abelson was there, making observations on what he 
thought were traces of transuranic elements. Alvarez recalls: 


I played it kind of dramatically when I saw Phil. I said: “Phil, 
I’ve got something to tell you but want you to lie down first.” 
So being a good graduate student he lay down on the table 
right alongside the control room of the cyclotron. “Phil, what 
you are looking at are not transuranium elements, they are 
elements in the middle of the periodic table.” ... 1 showed him 
what was in the Chronicle, and of course he was terribly 
depressed. 


Like many other American experimental physicists, Alvarez, on 
hearing about fission, immediately set up an experiment to 
confirm it. Only after he had the experiment up and running did 
Oppenheimer hear the news. His first reaction was “That’s 
impossible” and, according to Alvarez, he “gave a lot of 
theoretical reasons why fission couldn’t really happen.” 


When I invited him over to look at the oscilloscope later, when 
we saw the big pulses, I would say that in less than fifteen 
minutes Robert had decided that this was indeed a real effect 
and, more importantly, he had decided that some neutrons 
would probably boil off in the reaction, and that you could 
make bombs and generate power, all inside of a few minutes. 
He just had a block on the thing because he was so sure that 
Coulomb barriers wouldn’t permit the nucleus to undergo 
fission. But it was amazing to see how rapidly his mind 
worked, and he came to the right conclusions. 


That day, Oppenheimer called Felix Bloch at Stanford. “You 
must come to Berkeley immediately,” he told him. “There is 
something of the utmost importance I must show you.” “There 
was a note of urgency in his voice,” Bloch later said, “one I don’t 


recall ever hearing in Oppenheimer before.” As soon as Bloch 
arrived in Berkeley, Oppenheimer’s first words to him were: 
“They have discovered fission.” Glenn T. Seaborg, a chemist at 
Berkeley, remembers that, very soon after the news hit the West 
Coast, a seminar was held to discuss uranium fission. “I do not 
recall ever seeing Oppie so stimulated and so full of ideas.” 

Oppenheimer’s almost feverish excitement is clear from the 
letter he wrote to Willie Fowler, a day or two after hearing about 
fission, both in its content and in its breathless style. It reads as if 
it were written in an enormous hurry: 


The U business is unbelievable. We first saw it in the papers, 
wired for more dope and have had a lot of reports since. You 
know it started with Hahn’s finding that what he had taken for 
Ra in one of the U activities fractionally crystallized with Ba. 
And then the recognition that the ekauranium [transuranic] 
series was chemically compatible with a series starting with 
Ma, running on through Rhe and Os and Pd. And then 
understanding suddenly why there were such long chains of 
beta decay, to get rid of the neutron excess with which half a U 
nucleus would start ... Many points are still unclear: where are 
the short lived high energy betas one would expect? Are there 
strong gammas as one would think from the big dipole 
moments of the pieces? In how many ways does the U come 
apart? At random, as one might guess, or only in certain ways? 
And most of all, are there many neutrons that come off during 
the splitting, or from the excited pieces? If there are then a 10 
cm cube of U would be quite something. 


“What do you think?” he asked Fowler. “It is, I think, exciting, 
not in the rare way of positrons and mesotrons, but in a good 
honest practical way.” 

As it turned out, Fowler was not very interested. When he was 
later asked about when and how he had first heard of fission, he 
replied airily: “I remember very vaguely about fission. I guess we 
got the word from Oppenheimer. I would be hard put to say for 
sure.” 


At that time, we weren’t doing very much with neutrons and 
didn’t have any strong neutron sources, so I frankly can’t 


remember wanting to do anything in that area, and I don’t 
believe Charlie [Lauritsen] did. We were so busy with the 
things we were doing ourselves at that time that we did not 
respond to the fission discovery in the way that many other 
labs did. There was always the joke, “Well, that’s heavy 
element physics, we’re in the business of bombarding light 
elements, nothing heavier than neon around here.” So I never 
did any experiments in fission and I’m pretty sure that Charlie 
didn’t. 


Oppenheimer’s excitement about the discovery seems, from the 
very beginning, to have had its roots not in pure science, but in 
the possibility that it would lead to extremely powerful 
explosives. That, presumably, is what he meant when he said to 
Fowler that it was interesting “in a good honest practical way.” It 
is certainly what he meant when he mentioned how “interesting” 
a 10-cm cube of uranium would be, as is made clear in a letter he 
wrote to Uhlenbeck on February 5. If it turned out, Oppenheimer 
said, that a significant number of neutrons were released with the 
fission reaction, then a chain reaction could occur, in which case: 
“I think it really not too improbable that a ten cm cube of 
uranium deuteride (one should have something to slow the 
neutrons without capturing them) might very well blow itself to 
hell.” 

Robert Serber had in the summer of 1938 left Berkeley to take 
up an assistant professorship at the University of Illinois in 
Urbana, but, Serber says in his autobiography, “Oppie would 
write me every Sunday.” 


From one of those Sunday letters, which I received in January 
1939, I learned of the discovery of fission. In that first letter 
Oppie mentioned the possibility of nuclear power and of an 
explosive. My immediate reaction, and I’m sure that of most 
other nuclear theorists, was that I should have thought of 
fission myself. 


Oppenheimer no doubt missed Serber badly during those 
frenetic opening months of 1939. There is nobody with whom he 
would rather have discussed the implications of fission than 
Serber, nobody whose help he would rather have had in thinking 


through all the questions that he had listed in his letter to Willie 
Fowler. However, with Serber miles away in the Midwest, and 
Fowler (like, it seems, the rest of Caltech) uninterested, 
Oppenheimer turned to his students. 

As students completed their Ph.D. theses and moved on—the 
lucky ones to academic appointments—the group of graduates 
that surrounded Oppenheimer and followed him between 
Berkeley and Pasadena was continually changing, their adoration 
and unconscious imitation of him the only thing that stayed 
constant. In the summer of 1938, Willis Lamb graduated and 
moved to New York, where, as mentioned earlier, he worked at 
Columbia University. George Volkoff and Hartland Snyder, 
however, were still at Berkeley, and so were two other students, 
Philip Morrison and Sidney Dancoff. Following in Volkoff’s 
footsteps, two other University of British Columbia graduates had 
joined Oppenheimer: Robert Christy in 1936 and the Japanese- 
born Shuichi Kusaka in 1937. Two new students in the academic 
year 1938-9 were Bernard Peters and Joseph Weinberg. 

In Berkeley, even among other students, Oppenheimer’s 
graduates were considered a bohemian crowd. Morrison has been 
described as “a scrappy little man on fire with his science,” who 
“hitch-hiked from Pittsburgh and lunched on cat meat to stay 
near Oppenheimer.” Joe Weinberg, meanwhile, “had originally 
started from the Lower East Side of New York and eventually 
found his way to the mecca with the clothes he wore and a spare 
pair of shoes in a paper sack.” Raymond Birge became concerned 
about the class of people Oppenheimer was attracting. “New York 
Jews flocked out here to him and some were not as nice as he 
was,” Birge said. “Lawrence and I were very concerned to have 
people here who were nice people as well as good students.” 

Indeed, it had been Birge’s concern to have “nice people” at 
Berkeley that had prevented Oppenheimer from securing a job for 
Robert Serber there. When he urged Birge to appoint Serber, 
Birge is reputed to have said (not to Oppenheimer, but in a letter 
to someone else): “One Jew in the department is enough.” Birge 
and Lawrence laid down two rules governing appointments: 1. no 
one with a Ph.D. from Berkeley; and 2. no bohemians. The first 
ruled out Oppenheimer’s graduate students, the second his NRC 
fellowship students like Serber. 

To Lawrence’s great displeasure, almost all of Oppenheimer’s 


students were left-wing and many of them already were (or later 
became) members of the Communist Party. Of them all, Bernard 
Peters had the most colorful past. He was a German Jew who had 
escaped Dachau and arrived in the U.S. with his wife, Hannah, in 
1934. They settled in New York, where, while Hannah trained as 
a doctor, Peters worked in an import business. In 1937, when 
Hannah finished her medical degree, they bought a car and drove 
out west, where Hannah became a research fellow at Stanford 
and Peters worked as a longshoreman. Through Jean Tatlock they 
met Oppenheimer, who encouraged Peters to come to Berkeley as 
a graduate student in physics. 

For some reason, Joe Weinberg did not start in September 
1938, but arrived rather in February 1939. He had, it seems, been 
sent there mid-term by his physics professor at Wisconsin, 
Gregory Breit, who told him that Berkeley was one of the few 
places in the world where “a person as crazy as you could be 
acceptable.” As soon as he arrived, Weinberg went to 
Oppenheimer’s room, to find a meeting in full flow. After being 
introduced to, among others, Lawrence, Snyder, Morrison and 
Dancoff, he joined Morrison and Dancoff for lunch at the student- 
union restaurant. The conversation was dominated by fission and 
a telegram that had recently arrived from Bohr. “On the basis of 
the data,” Weinberg remembered, “we designed a bomb.” 
Morrison, however, was convinced that it would not work, that 
the chain reaction would peter out before leading to an explosion. 
Nevertheless, Morrison recalls that, within a week of them all 
learning about fission, “there was on the blackboard in Robert 
Oppenheimer’s office a drawing—a very bad, an execrable 
drawing—of a bomb.” 

Remarkably, despite all this excitement, there is no evidence 
that, in the months that followed, Oppenheimer did any serious 
scientific work on the theory of nuclear fission; no evidence, for 
example, of any sustained attempt to answer the questions that 
he told Fowler urgently needed addressing. There is instead a 
rather conspicuous silence on the subject. Although in February 
1939 his students were apparently designing bombs in the 
student-union canteen and he was leaving drawings of explosives 
on his blackboard for all to see, after that, until the autumn of 
1941 when he was invited to contribute to the U.S. bomb project, 
one searches in vain for the word “bomb,” or indeed the word 


“fission,” in his letters and in the recollections of conversations 
with friends. The only recorded exception to this silence that I 
know of is Fowler’s recollection that at Caltech “Oppie gave some 
lectures on what was essentially the Bohr-Wheeler theory of 
fission.” 

Assuming this was in the summer of 1939, then Oppenheimer, 
characteristically, was lecturing on a brand-new theory, one that 
had yet to appear in print. It was, moreover, one that was directly 
applicable to the questions Oppenheimer had raised upon hearing 
the news of fission, and therefore to the question of whether 
fission could lead to the construction of an atomic bomb. The 
theory was worked out by Bohr and Wheeler in Princeton in the 
spring of 1939, written out by Wheeler in June and appeared in 
the Physical Review on September 1, in the same issue that 
contained Oppenheimer and Snyder’s seminal article on black 
holes. 

The origins of the Bohr-Wheeler theory lie in conversations the 
two had in Princeton in the first week of February 1939, after 
they returned from the Washington conference. With the entire 
community of American physicists still buzzing with the news of 
fission, Bohr asked Wheeler if he would like to work on a more 
detailed theory of the phenomenon. “It was an exciting time,” 
says Wheeler in his autobiography, though he emphasizes that, 
for them at least, the excitement was to do with pure science, not 
explosives: “Bombs and reactors were only in the backs of our 
minds as we worked together. We were trying to understand a 
new nuclear phenomenon, not design anything.” 

To inform their theoretical deliberations, Bohr and Wheeler 
asked the experimental physicists at Princeton to conduct some 
experiments to determine how the probability of fission in 
uranium varies with the energy of the incoming neutrons. The 
results were puzzling: the probability is high for high-energy 
neutrons and diminishes as the energy diminishes, until, at very 
low energies, it becomes high again. Why should this be? Taking 
a walk to ponder this question, Bohr, accompanied by Rosenfeld, 
went from the faculty club to Einstein’s office (which he was 
borrowing at the time), where he rushed to the blackboard, 
saying: “Now listen: I have it all.” 

What Bohr had realized was that the high probability of fission 
at low energies was due to a rare isotope of uranium, U-235, 


present only in 0.7 percent of natural uranium. The more 
common form of uranium, U-238, being more stable, requires 
higher-energy neutrons to split it. Low-energy neutrons stand a 
higher chance of hitting the nucleus, because their wavelengths 
are longer, but upon impact they will only split the more unstable 
U-235 nuclei. So, high-energy neutrons stand a good chance of 
splitting any uranium nuclei they happen to hit, including those 
of U-238, while low-energy neutrons stand a good chance of 
hitting all nuclei, and of splitting those of U-235, but the neutrons 
in between are not traveling fast enough to split U-238, or slow 
enough to stand a good chance of hitting anything. 

On February 7, Bohr sent the Physical Review an initial paper 
that did not go into all the theoretical details that he and Wheeler 
had discussed, but did announce the important conclusion they 
had reached: that fission by slow neutrons was possible only in 
less than 1 percent of naturally occurring uranium. Oppenheimer 
must have read this, and must have made use of it in his lectures 
on fission at Caltech, but there is no mention of it in his 
correspondence. 

The next important question to answer was: are neutrons—so- 
called “secondary” neutrons—emitted during the fission process 
(“If there are then a 10 cm cube of U would be quite 
something”)? The answer to this was provided by Leo Szilard 
early in March 1939, after some experiments he conducted at 
Columbia seemed to establish that “the number of neutrons 
emitted per fission [is] about two”—a result quickly confirmed by 
experiments in other laboratories, including Fermi’s. This meant 
that the chain reaction imagined by Szilard when he pondered 
Rutherford’s lecture on the splitting of the atom some years 
earlier was indeed a possibility. “That night,” Szilard said later, 
“there was little doubt in my mind that the world was headed for 
grief.” 

In the light of these results, Szilard, accompanied by Fermi and 
Eugene Wigner, tried to warn the U.S. government about the 
danger. Through George Pegram, dean of physics at Columbia, 
they managed to secure a meeting between Fermi and Admiral 
Stanford C. Hooper, technical assistant to the Chief of Naval 
Operations. At the meeting, however, Fermi made the mistake of 
lecturing the admiral on neutron physics rather than talking 
about bombs. His lecture therefore failed to inspire the required 


sense of urgency. “Couldn’t you arouse the admiral’s interest in 
the atomic bomb?” Fermi’s wife asked him many years later. 
“You are using big words,” Fermi replied. “You forget that in 
March 1939, there was little likelihood of an atomic bomb.” 

Szilard and Fermi had both written papers reporting on the 
neutron-emission experiments, but Szilard persuaded Fermi that, 
for the moment at least, they should not be published. At 
Princeton, Szilard and Wigner met Bohr in order to persuade him 
not to publish any further research on fission. At this meeting 
they were joined by yet another Hungarian, and a man who 
would subsequently play a major role in Oppenheimer’s life: 
Edward Teller. Four years younger than Oppenheimer, Teller had 
left Hungary for Germany when he was just eighteen. He took his 
Ph.D. at Leipzig, with Heisenberg as his supervisor, and then 
worked with Bohr in Copenhagen, before taking up a position at 
George Washington University, in Washington, D.C., in 1935. By 
1939, he was an established part of the American scientific world, 
known equally for his scientific brilliance and his personal 
pugnaciousness. 

On this occasion the three Hungarians failed to persuade Bohr 
of the necessity to keep fission research under wraps. Bohr hated 
secrecy, believing openness to be essential to the progress of 
science. He was also not convinced that the secondary emission of 
neutrons alone guaranteed the possibility of an atomic bomb. It 
would make the bomb possible if one could get hold of a 
sufficiently large lump of pure (or fairly pure) U-235, but such 
are the difficulties of isotope separation that Bohr was convinced 
it would never happen. “It can never be done,” he insisted, 
“unless you turn the United States into one huge factory.” 

In March and April, the Paris group led by Frédéric Joliot-Curie 
published two papers (in English) reporting their own 
experiments on secondary neutrons and giving their own 
conclusion that, in a sufficiently large amount of uranium, a 
chain reaction was indeed possible. After this, Szilard has 
recalled, “Fermi was adamant that withholding publication made 
no sense.” He might equally have drawn the opposite conclusion. 
As soon as these papers came to the attention of the Reich 
Ministry of Education, the German government imposed a ban on 
the export of uranium and set up a conference that initiated a 
research program on nuclear fission. 


On July 12, 1939, Szilard and Wigner made their now-famous 
trip to Peconic, Long Island, to meet Einstein. Their initial reason 
for wanting to talk to Einstein was that they knew he was on 
good terms with the King and Queen of the Belgians. The Congo, 
then a Belgian colony, owned the world’s largest supply of 
uranium, and Szilard and Wigner wanted, through Einstein, to 
alert the Belgians to the global importance of their uranium 
supplies. First they had to explain to Einstein what had been 
discovered about fission and secondary neutrons, all of which 
(despite the fact that some of the key ideas had been discovered 
in his room at Princeton and written on his blackboard) was new 
to him. Then the three of them drafted a letter to the Belgian 
ambassador in Washington, a copy of which they sent to the U.S. 
State Department. Back in New York, Szilard, worrying about 
whether they had done the right thing, sought the counsel of a 
prominent banker, Alexander Sachs, who had served as advisor to 
the Roosevelt government. Sachs’s advice was that the letter 
should not have gone to a government department; rather, it 
should go directly to the President. 

So on August 2, this time accompanied by Teller, Szilard 
returned to Long Island to see Einstein again, and the three of 
them worked on a letter to Roosevelt, which, after going through 
several drafts, ended up warning the President that, in light of the 
experiments on secondary neutrons conducted by Joliot, Fermi 
and Szilard, “it may become possible to set up a nuclear chain 
reaction in a large mass of uranium, by which vast amounts of 
power and large quantities of new radium-like elements would be 
generated.” This, they went on, “would also lead to the 
construction of bombs. A single bomb of this type, carried by boat 
and exploded in a port, might very well destroy the whole port 
together with some of the surrounding territory.” They 
recommended that the President set up a permanent contact 
between the government and the physicists working on chain 
reactions. The letter was signed “Yours very truly, Albert 
Einstein.” After several delays, on October 11, 1939, it was 
delivered in person to the President by Sachs. “What you are 
after,” Roosevelt is reported to have said to Sachs, “is to see that 
the Nazis don’t blow us up.” “Precisely,” replied Sachs. Ten days 
later, the U.S. bomb project, in its initial form as the Advisory 
Committee on Uranium, was born. 


Despite his evident excitement about fission and its possible 
application to weaponry when the news first broke, there is 
nothing to indicate that, throughout the months that led up to 
Sachs’s crucial meeting with Roosevelt, Oppenheimer was in any 
way concerned with or involved in—or even particularly 
interested in—the scientific breakthroughs and __ political 
maneuvers that culminated in the establishment of the U.S. 
research program. Other than his lectures on the Bohr-Wheeler 
theory of fission in the spring and summer of 1939, he seems to 
have concentrated on other things, principally his paper with 
Snyder on black holes. It is thus a curious fact that while Szilard, 
Fermi, Wheeler, Bohr and many other physicists (both theoretical 
and experimental) were establishing the relevant facts about the 
fission of uranium and laying down the fundamental principles 
upon which the physics of the atom bomb was built, 
Oppenheimer—the “father of the atom bomb”—was 
contemplating the gravitational collapse of stars in outer space, 
and in the process making his greatest ever contribution to 
science. 

Why Oppenheimer seemed so uninterested in fission during 
these crucial months is something of a mystery. It is possible, of 
course, that he remained intensely interested in fission from 
February 1939 until his involvement in the U.S. bomb project two 
and a half years later, but that the conversations in which this 
interest was discussed went unrecorded and unrecalled, and the 
writings that expressed it have not survived. However, given how 
thoroughly this period has been researched, how many interviews 
with the relevant people have been conducted, and what an 
intense spotlight has been shone by historians on these months, 
this seems unlikely. Nor is this apparent lack of interest in fission 
confined to Oppenheimer; it extends also to his friends and 
students. At both Berkeley and Caltech his friends and colleagues 
seemed reluctant to pursue the science of nuclear fission, while 
his students, though they had seemed to share his initial 
enthusiasm, were writing their Ph.D. theses on other things: 
Volkoff and Snyder on astrophysics, Christy on cosmic rays, 
Kusaka on the mesotron, and Dancoff, Morrison and Weinberg on 
quantum electrodynamics. 

In January 1940, a very thorough review of the literature on 
fission by the Princeton physicist Louis Turner was published in 


Reviews of Modern Physics. In his introductory paragraph Turner 
notes that “Although less than a year had passed since the 
discovery by Hahn and Strassmann that the capture of neutrons 
by uranium nuclei may lead to their disruption to form lighter 
nuclei, nearly one hundred papers on this subject have already 
appeared.” Turner then summarizes the findings of those papers 
under such headings as “Neutrons Produced in Fission,” “Theory 
of Fission,” “Secondary Neutrons,” and so on. At the end of his 
review article Turner lists all the papers that he had discussed, 
among which are strikingly few by scientists at Berkeley and 
Caltech. There is nothing by Oppenheimer or any of his students, 
nothing by Lawrence or any of his students, and only three by 
people working at the Rad Lab: one by Abelson, one by Ed 
McMillan and one by a new arrival, the Jewish Italian physicist 
Emilio Segré. 

Segre, who had worked with Fermi in Italy, joined the Rad Lab 
in the autumn of 1938. He was drawn there by the possibilities of 
the cyclotron, but, as he describes in his autobiography, soon 
after he arrived he began to understand why those possibilities 
had so far failed to result in important discoveries and 
fundamental scientific breakthroughs. “The more familiar I 
became with the Rad Lab,” Segré writes, “the more surprised I 
was; it operated very differently from any other laboratory I had 
been in. There were many students, but they seemed to me to be 
left to themselves, without scientific guidance.” 


The truth was that Lawrence’s interest centered on the 
cyclotron and on building the Rad Lab’s diverse activities; his 
knowledge of and interest in nuclear physics were limited. 
Students, in practice, served as cheap labor for the building 
and tending of the cyclotron and any move that might divert 
them from this task was frowned upon. It was difficult for me 
to understand the scientific policy of the Rad Lab. The 
cyclotron was a unique device, with seemingly infinite 
potential, but the main concern of those who controlled it was 
apparently to make the machine bigger and put it to work in 
areas outside of physics; there was little thought given to 
making proper use of what was on hand for nuclear studies. 


The “areas outside of physics” that Segré mentions here are 


primarily areas of medical research. Though Lawrence always 
stressed in public how important the cyclotron was to 
fundamental physics, to others, particularly to those with money 
to donate, he emphasized the value of the cyclotron for producing 
radioactive isotopes that had applications in both medical 
research and practical medicine. There was no doubt that the 
machine had proved its worth for that purpose; Segré’s concern 
was evidently that students attracted to the Rad Lab with the 
intention of pursuing fundamental physical research were instead 
used to keep the cyclotron going as a kind of factory for 
producing isotopes. 

Segre’s view that Lawrence’s knowledge of, and interest in, 
nuclear physics was limited was held by many other scientists, 
but many too would have agreed with the following summary of 
Lawrence’s strengths and weaknesses given by Hans Bethe: 


Lawrence was a tremendous influence on the development of 
physics, good in that he made people conscious of big 
accelerators. His enthusiasm for this one instrument of research 
was marvellous. So was the way he could make big foundations 
and government agencies give him money. He was not so much 
interested in the results of research—he left that to others— 
and in this sense he was not even a good physicist. 


Bethe seems right on all counts. Despite being wrong-footed 
time and time again by new discoveries in physics, despite, as 
Heilbron and Seidel put it in their history of the Rad Lab, “the 
disagreeable fact that no major discovery had yet been made in 
any cyclotron laboratory,” Lawrence somehow managed to turn 
each lost opportunity into a successful case for pouring more and 
more money into his ambitions of building bigger and bigger 
machines. 

Though he had at his disposal the world’s most powerful 
accelerator, and a budget that other laboratories could only 
dream of, Lawrence had missed every major discovery in physics 
since 1932: deuterium and the neutron, the splitting of the 
lithium nucleus, the positron, the artificial creation of radioactive 
isotopes, the mesotron and, finally, nuclear fission—all of them 
had been discovered either by using much less powerful 
equipment than the Berkeley cyclotrons or by analyzing cosmic 


rays, the high energies of which are provided by nature free of 
charge. 

And yet, despite his conspicuous lack of scientific achievement, 
in the 1930s Lawrence was by far America’s most famous 
scientist. In 1937 Time magazine put him on their cover, calling 
him “the cyclotron man, foremost U.S. destroyer and creator of 
atoms.” His lecture tours were a great success, he had honorary 
degrees conferred on him by South Dakota, Princeton and Yale, 
and he was showered with grants, prizes and donations. He was 
an extremely successful promoter of his own product, and, in the 
face of much evidence to the contrary, was remarkably good at 
persuading people, especially those with funds, that what was 
needed for scientific breakthroughs in nuclear physics were 
bigger and bigger cyclotrons. Measured by the diameter of their 
magnets, the inexorable progress was this: the 11-inch was 
followed by the 27-inch, and then a 37-inch. 

When news of fission broke, Lawrence’s mind was concentrated 
on getting his newest and biggest cyclotron to date—a 60-inch— 
up and running. In the wake of the announcement of fission, and 
with a brass neck that had got him where he was, Lawrence sent 
letters to physicists around the world, detailing the “successes” of 
the Rad Lab, and claiming that curiosity about fission among his 
colleagues was so overwhelming that many of them were 
committing the “heresy” of suspending work on the planned new 
cyclotron in order to study fission. “For obvious reasons,” 
Lawrence pointed out, “we want to find out whether neutrons are 
given off in the splitting process.” On that point, too, the Rad Lab 
was scooped; while Alvarez gained inconclusive results from the 
cyclotron, Fermi, Szilard and Joliot provided the affirmative 
answer that set the U.S. bomb project in motion. Meanwhile, 
Lawrence went back to the task of setting up the 60-inch 
cyclotron, and when, in the summer of 1939, it was up and 
running, he started thinking about his next machine, which he 
said would have a 120-inch magnet, weigh 2,000 tons and be 
capable of energies of 100 million volts. 

Although it is easy to sneer at Lawrence’s obsession with bigger 
and bigger machines and at the fact that, as Bethe put it, he was 
“not even a good physicist,” one should also remember the other 
half of Bethe’s assessment, his statement that: “Lawrence was a 
tremendous influence on the development of physics, good in that 


he made people conscious of big accelerators.” The American 
public were not entirely wrong to regard him as their greatest 
scientist. The 60-inch cyclotron that distracted Lawrence from the 
news of fission, for example, was used to make significant 
scientific discoveries in 1940 and thereafter. In this way, 
Lawrence, despite his limitations as a scientist, did indeed make 
an important contribution to science. Segré reports that Lawrence 
had expected to receive the Nobel Prize in 1938 and was 
disappointed when it went instead to Fermi. Lawrence may not 
have been completely surprised, then, to learn, as he did on 
November 9, 1939, that his time had come. He was to receive the 
1939 Nobel Prize “for the invention and development of the 
cyclotron and for the results obtained by its aid, especially with 
regard to artificially radioactive elements.” 

When the award was presented to him on February 29, 1940 
(in Berkeley rather than in Sweden, because of the dangers of 
traveling in Europe), Lawrence used his acceptance speech to 
plead for funding for his new dream machine, which had now 
swollen to a 184-inch model, weighing 3,000 tons, the cost of 
which would be about $2 million. Two months later, he heard 
that the Rockefeller Foundation had agreed to give him $1.15 
million to develop the new cyclotron, which, together with other 
contributions, guaranteed that it would be built. In 
acknowledging his thanks, Lawrence said that he expected it to 
be complete by the summer of 1944, barring any “unforeseen 
difficulties.” Of course, there were any number of unforeseen 
difficulties, but the 184-inch cyclotron was built and, after being 
pressed into service as the first “Calutron” during the war, 
underwent a fundamental redesign as a “synchrocyclotron,” 
which produced beams of deuterons with energies of nearly 200 
million volts and was used to make important scientific 
breakthroughs. What in 1939 looked like a distraction from real 
science, in favor of a misguided obsession with mere size, looked 
after the war like a prescient anticipation of the age of “big 
science.” Lawrence’s instinct that larger and larger machines 
capable of greater and greater voltages would be essential to the 
scientific research of the future turned out to be entirely correct. 

It was not just in relation to science that Segré found his new 
colleagues at Berkeley unsophisticated. “Talking politics with 
American colleagues,” he says, “I found an incomprehension of 


things European that was appalling to me.” Illustrative of what he 
meant were Lawrence’s sometimes extraordinarily naive and ill- 
informed reactions to, and views about, European affairs. Shortly 
after the Munich Agreement in October 1938, for example, 
Lawrence wrote to the British scientist Wilfrid Mann, who had 
recently returned to London after working at the Rad Lab: “You 
have been having a very anxious time recently, but let us hope 
the war clouds have passed and that we have ahead of us at least 
a decade of peace. I don’t think it absurd to believe it is possible 
that we have seen a turning point in history, that henceforth 
international disputes of great powers will be settled by peaceful 
negotiations and not by war.” On August 29, 1939, just three 
days before Germany invaded Poland, Lawrence wrote to his 
parents: “I still think war is going to be avoided. All this 
discussion must mean that Hitler is backing down.” 

But what of Oppenheimer? Segré has some equally tart 
observations about him. Oppenheimer, he says: 


... was considered a demigod by himself and others at 
Berkeley, and as such he spake in learned and obscure 
fashions. Besides, he knew quantum mechanics well, and in 
this he was unique at Berkeley. He taught it in none too easy a 
fashion, which showed off his prowess and attracted a number 
of gifted students. Oppenheimer’s loyal disciples hung on his 
words and put on corresponding airs. Just as we in Rome had 
acquired Fermi’s intonation, in Berkeley Oppenheimer’s 
students walked as if they had flat feet, an infirmity of their 
master’s. 


With regard to the celebrated cultural sophistication of 
Oppenheimer and his students, Segré was not impressed: 


Oppenheimer and his group did not inspire in me the awe that 
they perhaps expected. I had the impression that their 
celebrated general culture was not superior to that expected in 
a boy who had attended a good European high school. I was 
already acquainted with most of their cultural discoveries, and 
I found Oppenheimer’s ostentation slightly ridiculous. In 
physics I was used to Fermi, who had a quite different solidity, 
coupled with a simplicity that contrasted with Oppenheimer’s 


erudite complexities. 


It is with regard to politics, however, that Segré is especially 
damning. “Oppenheimer and most of his acolytes,” he says, 
“followed the political line of the Communist Party of the United 
States, which was highly uncritical and simple-minded.” He had 
the impression that Oppenheimer regarded him as a “great 
Fascist” (“I was a Fascist Party member, as every Italian state 
employee was required to be by law, but it did not take much 
acumen to figure out that I could not be a Fascist at heart”), 
while, according to him, Oppenheimer—in following the 
Communist Party line—“deemed that the European quarrels were 
caused by capitalist imperialists, and that Holy Communism 
would avoid them.” 

In the light of the reports quoted earlier—that Oppenheimer’s 
faith in the Soviet Union was strongly undermined in the summer 
of 1938—one might think Segré misunderstood the degree to 
which Oppenheimer was prepared to follow slavishly the 
Communist Party line, or that at the very least he was 
exaggerating. What evidence there is, however, supports Segré. A 
key event here is the Treaty of Non-Aggression, signed by 
Germany and the Soviet Union on August 23, 1939, which 
shocked most liberals and a good number of Communist Party 
members, and effectively put an end to the strategy Earl Browder 
had pursued throughout the 1930s of presenting the Communist 
Party as the upholder of, and natural heir to, the tradition of 
American liberalism. Indeed, the pact put Browder and the 
American Communist Party in an extraordinarily difficult position 
and ended any hope they might have had of continuing to be part 
of a broad “popular front.” After years of upholding communism 
as the one force that had the strength and determination to halt 
the spread of fascism in Europe, how could Browder and the 
Communist Party possibly justify an agreement—something close 
to an alliance—between the world’s most repugnant fascist state 
and its only communist state? Against his own inclinations, 
Browder was forced to insist in public that the pact was “a 
wonderful contribution to peace” and to deny that it made 
Poland’s position more insecure. He, however, was obliged by his 
position to follow the party line; Oppenheimer was not. 

In 1954 Oppenheimer mentioned the Nazi-Soviet pact as one of 


the things that influenced his “changing opinion of Russia,” but 
also insisted that this “did not mean a sharp break for me with 
those who hold to different views.” Those who held to different 
views, of course, included all who, despite everything, 
maintained the Party line, for instance all of Oppenheimer’s 
friends and students—and there were many—who remained 
members of the Communist Party after the signing of the pact. 
One of those was Haakon Chevalier, who in his book 
Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship raises the question of the 
pact and then, ostensibly in order to illustrate the quality of 
Oppenheimer’s analyses of political events, offers the following 
account of Oppenheimer’s reaction to the anti-communist feeling 
that followed: 


It was in the fall of 1939, too, that Opje42 proved himself to be 
such an impressive and effective political analyst. The Soviet- 
German pact, and later the invasion of Poland by the USSR and 
the Soviet war with Finland, had confused and upset many 
people, even among the most open-minded and liberal. Opje 
had such a simple, lucid way of presenting facts and arguments 
that one felt in him a kind of passionate commitment which 
was contagious. He communicated with extraordinary 
effectiveness his own conviction that political events were 
motivated by human events that could be made to yield their 
significance if examined objectively, in the light of the factors 
that had conditioned them. 


After reading this account, what Oppenheimer actually thought 
of the pact, or of the war, remains utterly opaque. The 
documentary record is a little clearer. In a letter to Willie Fowler 
at Caltech that seems to have been written on or about September 
9, 1939, Oppenheimer writes: “I know Charlie [Lauritsen] will 
say a melancholy I told you so over the Nazisoviet [sic] pact, but I 
am not paying any bets yet on any aspect of the hocus-pocus 
except maybe that the Germans are pretty well into Poland. Ga 
stink.” 

In the ensuing months of what is commonly called the “phoney 
war,” while no hostilities were exchanged between Germany and 
France or Britain, Poland was divided up between Germany and 
the Soviet Union and the latter invaded Finland. The belief that 


the Nazi-Soviet pact was nothing more than a cynical temporary 
agreement between two dictatorships, allowing each to expand 
without fear of the other, seemed to be amply confirmed. 
Moreover, because the Soviet Union seemed so indifferent to the 
plight of the European democracies—indeed, its propaganda 
seemed to hold the British Empire in greater contempt than Nazi 
Germany—and its foreign policy so out of keeping with anything 
with which American liberal opinion could sympathize, it seemed 
no longer possible, so long as the American Communist Party 
took its “line” from Moscow, to believe that the views of the 
Party were those that a loyal American, concerned only with 
local, American issues, would have arrived at independently. 

And yet, in his February 1940 pamphlet Report to Our 
Colleagues mentioned previously,43 that is exactly the belief for 
which Oppenheimer tried to argue. Published under the auspices 
of the “College Faculties Committee, Communist Party of 
California,” this pamphlet had as its purpose presenting to 
academic colleagues at Berkeley, Stanford and Caltech the 
political views of the discussion group/Communist Party unit to 
which Oppenheimer, Chevalier and others belonged. According to 
Gordon Griffiths, Oppenheimer was not the sole author of this 
pamphlet, but he “took special pride in it.” 

How Oppenheimer could have been proud of the document is 
something of a puzzle, since it contains almost no original 
thought, being simply a presentation of the official Communist 
Party line, nor does it contain any fine writing or telling phrase; 
its style is that of a Party tract. What it seeks to persuade 
“colleagues” of is that the attacks on the Communist Party made 
in the wake of the Nazi-Soviet pact and the invasions of Poland 
and Finland should be seen not in relation to global politics, but 
rather in relation to American politics and in particular the plight 
of the poor and the unemployed in the U.S. Instead of focusing on 
the pact made between Hitler and Stalin, the report urges, 
colleagues should look at the “strange things” that were 
happening to the New Deal, and, in particular, to the cuts in relief 
funding that had been announced at both a federal level by 
Roosevelt and a local level by the California legislature. In this 
context, the report argues, it can be seen that the purpose of the 
attacks on communists is “to disrupt the democratic forces, to 
destroy unions in general and CIO [Congress of Industrial 


Organizations] unions in particular, to make possible the cutting 
of relief, to force the abandonment of the great program of peace, 
security and work that is the basis of the movement toward a 
democratic front.” 

Despite its attempt to focus on issues such as poor relief and 
unemployment, what comes through most strongly in the Report 
is its echoing of the slogan of the Communist Party manifesto: 
“Keep America Out of the Imperialist War!” The communists, the 
Report claims, possess “some of the clearest voices that oppose a 
war between the United States and Russia,” the silencing of 
which, it alleges, is the hidden motive behind the attacks being 
made on the Communist Party. It would, the report emphasizes 
and reiterates, “be an evil thing for this country to go to war, or 
to join a war, against Russia.” Warming to its theme, it goes on: 
“In a war against Russia almost anything could be illegal except 
the rich making money and the poor dying.” 

This fear of a war with Russia is evident too in the second and 
last Report to Our Colleagues, published in April 1940, which 
states unequivocally: “There has never been a clearer issue than 
that of keeping this country out of the war in Europe.” When the 
report tries to make this clarity apparent, however, it slips into 
communist rhetoric that makes uncomfortable reading for anyone 
inclined to think Segré was being misleading about 
Oppenheimer’s political views: 


Europe is in the throes of a war. It is a common thought, and a 
likely one, that when the war is over Europe will be socialist, 
and the British Empire gone. We think that Roosevelt is 
assuming the role of preserving the old order in Europe and 
that he plans, if need be, to use the wealth and the lives of this 
country to carry it out. We think, that is, that Roosevelt is not 
only a “war monger” but a counter-revolutionary war-monger. 
We think it is this that has turned him from something of a 
progressive to very much of a reactionary. 


So, why is it so clear that the U.S. should stay out of the war? 
Because, it seems, if it stays out, the British Empire will collapse, 
which will be a good thing. But won’t that signal the victory of 
Nazism rather than of socialism? How does one get from the 
collapse of the British Empire to the “likely” outcome of a 


socialist Europe? The most natural interpretation of this seems to 
be that Oppenheimer (and the “College Faculties Committee, 
Communist Party of California”) foresees the defeat of Britain 
being followed by the defeat of a weakened Germany at the 
hands of the Soviet Union. If this is right (and it is hard to find an 
alternative that would make sense of the above passage), then, if 
anything, Segré was being kind in his characterization of 
Oppenheimer’s views (“that the European quarrels were caused 
by capitalist imperialists, and that Holy Communism would avoid 
them”). Oppenheimer’s view seems rather to be: the war is 
actually a good thing, precisely because it is caused by capitalist 
imperialists, who, in defeating and weakening each other, will 
allow “socialism,” in the form of the Soviet Union, to triumph 
over Europe—but only if the U.S. stays out of the struggle, 
thereby allowing the defeat of Britain to take place. 

It is possible, I think, that these Reports to Our Colleagues help 
to explain the curious avoidance of research into fission and its 
possible use in explosives by Oppenheimer and his students, 
despite their evident excitement at, and absorption in, the issue 
when it was first announced. Given the emphasis manifest in 
these reports on the need for the United States to stay out of the 
war, together with the repeatedly expressed fear that America 
would not stay out of the war, but rather go into it with the 
intention of fighting Russia, it seems at least possible that 
Oppenheimer and his students avoided work on the physics of 
fission because they did not want to contribute to a war they 
passionately believed the United States should not be involved in. 
One is reminded here of Felix Adler’s argument for American 
neutrality in the First World War, and of his denunciation of any 
scientist willing to put his or her services at the disposal of the 
war effort: “The time will come when that scientist will be 
considered and will consider himself a disgrace to the human race 
who prostitutes his knowledge of Nature’s forces for the 
destruction of his fellow men.” 

Report to Our Colleagues had originally been intended as an 
ongoing series of publications. The fact that there were only ever 
two of them, Chevalier says, is “for some reason which I have 
forgotten—possibly because of the rapidly changing perspectives 
in the world situation.” Certainly Oppenheimer’s own political 
perspective seems to have changed rapidly and fundamentally 


within just a few months of the publication of the second Report, 
the change prompted by sudden, drastic and _ shocking 
developments in the world. After the Nazi invasion of Denmark 
and Norway in April 1940, the collapse of Holland and Belgium 
in May and the fall of France in June, was it possible for a liberal 
intellectual to continue to believe that it was of the utmost 
importance for the U.S. to remain neutral? With most of Western 
Europe under the control of Hitler’s Germany, Spain under Franco 
and Italy under Mussolini, was it still possible to think that a 
socialist Europe was the “likely” outcome of the war? And, 
finally, could Oppenheimer still believe, as he appears to have 
done up until April 1940, that the Soviet Union had acted wisely 
and in the interests of the “democratic front” in signing a 
nonaggression pact with Germany, thereby standing by while this 
rapid expansion of the Reich took place? 

If Hans Bethe’s recollections are accurate, the answer to all 
those questions is “no.” In the summer of 1940, Bethe met 
Oppenheimer at a conference held by the American Physical 
Society in Seattle from June 18 to 21. On June 20, Bethe and 
Oppenheimer (together with Volkoff and Snyder) took part in a 
seminar on “The Present Crisis in the Quantum Theory of Fields.” 
This was about a fortnight after the British evacuation from 
Dunkirk, two days after the German army marched into Paris and 
two days before the French surrender, when, at Hitler’s 
insistence, the armistice was signed in the very railway coach 
that had been used in November 1918 for the armistice that 
ended the First World War. 

In these dark times, Bethe remembers a party of about ten 
people at the home of Edwin Uehling, previously a student of 
Oppenheimer’s and now a professor at the University of 
Washington in Seattle. During his time at the conference 
Oppenheimer was a guest at the Uehlings’ house. At this party, 
Bethe recalls a conversation about the European situation in 
which there were expressed some deep anxieties about the future. 
Oppenheimer, Bethe remembers, addressed the group in the 
following words: 


This is a time when the whole of western civilization is at 
stake. France, one of the great exponents of western 
civilization, has fallen, and we must see to it that Britain and 


the United States don’t fall as well. We have to defend western 
values against the Nazis. And because of the Molotov—von 
Ribbentrop pact [i.e. the Nazi-Soviet pact] we can have no 
truck with the Communists. 


Bethe thinks this may have been “the first occasion in which 
Oppenheimer talked about political matters not from the 
standpoint of the left, but from the standpoint of the West.” If 
Bethe’s recollections are accurate, then a mere two months after 
the publication of the second Report to Our Colleagues, 
Oppenheimer had adopted exactly the view that he was, in that 
report, concerned to refute: namely, that it was important to take 
sides in the war in order to protect democracy against fascism. 

However, apart from the remark “we can have no truck with 
the Communists,” Oppenheimer’s views, as reported by Bethe, are 
not quite as far from those of the American Communist Party as 
they might at first appear. As Maurice Isserman writes in his 
history of the American Communist Party: 


The Communists, for all their hostility to the Allied cause, were 
unprepared for and dismayed by the swift collapse of French 
resistance in May 1940. They assumed, as Stalin had when he 
signed the non-aggression pact, that the German and French 
armies were relatively well matched. When and if the “phoney 
war” ever came to an end, the Communists expected the 
conflict to turn into a stalemate similar to the one on the 
western front in the First World War. 


Isserman provides telling quotations from the communist press 
during the sequence of Nazi victories. After the fall of Norway, 
the People’s World attacked Britain as “the greatest danger to 
Europe and all mankind”; after Beligum and Holland were 
overrun, the Daily Worker could still maintain: “This is not our 
war”; but, writes Isserman: “The fall of France eventually 
provoked some anxious second thoughts among Communists.” 
Communists who had previously excused the Nazi-Soviet pact 
“now had to face up to the possibility that Hitler got the better 
bargain.” In June, the Daily Worker even printed a letter from one 
of its readers, asking the question that was surely on the minds of 
many communists in the summer of 1940: “Will not Hitler, in the 


event of a crushing victory over Great Britain and France, turn his 
armies against the USSR?” 

It may be, as Bethe believed, that Oppenheimer’s speech to his 
fellow physicists in Seattle represented a shift in his allegiance 
away from the Communist Party and toward the West, as 
represented by Britain, France and the U.S., but, after the fall of 
Norway, Denmark, Belgium, Holland and France, and the 
apparent imminent fall of Britain, it is also clear that many 
American communists had begun to wonder whether their 
previous analysis of world events had been correct, whether the 
interests of the Soviet Union and socialism were really best served 
by the collapse of Great Britain and the nonintervention of the 
U.S. It was rather looking as though the Soviet Union, Great 
Britain and the U.S. had a shared interest in defeating the (now 
massively extended) Third Reich. 

Most Americans, of course, neither knew nor cared how 
American communists were reacting to the new, deeply alarming 
situation in Europe. What struck them was that the Communist 
Party was closely connected with the Soviet Union, which had 
signed a deal with Nazi Germany that had allowed—indeed, 
seemed designed to allow—that deeply alarming situation to 
occur. Thus was generated a “Red Scare” that prefigured the anti- 
communism of the 1950s and made life extremely uncomfortable 
for communists in America. In June 1940, soon after the collapse 
of France, Congress passed the Alien Registration Act, better 
known as the Smith Act, which required all resident noncitizens 
to be registered and fingerprinted. It also authorized the 
deportation of foreigners belonging to revolutionary groups, and, 
most damagingly for the Communist Party, made it a crime to 
conspire to advocate or teach the necessity or desirability of 
overthrowing the government. After this Act came into force, it 
was no longer necessary to prove that an individual had, in fact, 
acted to overthrow the government, nor that he or she had 
advocated the overthrow of the government; all that was 
necessary was to show that the individual in question had joined 
an organization that favored such advocacy. The Smith Act was 
hotly followed by the Voorhis Act, which required all 
organizations “subject to foreign control” to register with the 
Justice Department. 

These two Acts signaled the start of a state-sponsored 


harassment of the Communist Party. Local party offices were 
raided by police, files were confiscated, suspected Communist 
Party members were purged from public office, and an official 
view was adopted that “the very acceptance of Communist Party 
membership is, in and of itself, an overt act incompatible with the 
public service.” It was widely believed that the rapid fall of 
France was attributable to “fifth columnists,” and that America 
urgently needed to identify and weed out those people in public 
life whose loyalties lay with foreign powers. By the autumn of 
1940, the American Communist Party was an unpopular and 
beleaguered organization, deeply distrusted by the government 
and the people and only barely legal. In the wake of the Voorhis 
Act, the party felt forced to end its formal affiliation with the 
Comintern. This helped preserve its legality, though it was not 
enough to guarantee its acceptance. In the presidential elections 
of November 1940, the Communist Party succeeded in getting 
Earl Browder onto only twenty-two state ballots; in the other 
states, its participation in the ballot was either refused outright or 
made impossible by the intimidation of sponsors and supporters. 

Oppenheimer himself was a passionate supporter of Roosevelt 
during this election, urging upon his friends, colleagues and 
students the importance of returning the author of the New Deal 
for a third term. This does suggest a fairly complete volte-face 
from the view of Roosevelt as a “war monger” that he had 
advocated in his April Report, though evidence as to why he 
changed his mind about the President is extremely scarce. From 
the point of view of his career, however, as he knew only too 
well, it would have been suicidal to have openly supported the 
communists. 

In the summer of 1940, then, Oppenheimer had many good 
reasons for distancing himself from the Communist Party, one of 
which may indeed have been, as Bethe thought, that his own 
views had changed, that he had been shocked by the collapse of 
France into seeing things from the perspective of defending the 
West rather than that of supporting “socialism” as represented by 
the Soviet Union. That something important to him took place at 
the Uehlings’ Seattle home is confirmed by a letter that 
Oppenheimer wrote to them on July 4, thanking them for their 
hospitality, the tone of which goes far beyond that of a normal 
“bread-and-butter” thank-you letter. Oppenheimer, writing from 


the Tolmans’ house in Pasadena, told “Ruth & Ed”: “It is time 
now that I wrote a word to you of the sweet days together in your 
home ...I hope you will still have warm memories of a visit 
which was to your visitor so sweet.” Oppenheimer told the 
Uehlings that in about a week’s time he would be going to Perro 
Caliente with Frank, Jackie and their baby daughter, Judith. 
Oppenheimer does not mention this to the Uehlings, but he had 
also invited some other people to New Mexico that summer: 
Robert and Charlotte Serber and Katherine and Richard Harrison. 

Oppenheimer had met Katherine (“Kitty”) Harrison at a party 
at Charles Lauritsen’s house the previous summer, and the two 
had become strongly attracted to each other. She later said that 
she “fell in love with Robert that day, but hoped to conceal it.” At 
the time she was twenty-nine years old, six years younger than 
Oppenheimer. Richard Harrison was her third husband. The 
wedding had taken place in November 1938, less than a year 
before she met Oppenheimer, and already it was clear that the 
marriage was not a success. For most of those nine months Kitty 
had lived apart from her husband. He was a British doctor whom 
she had known as a teenager and then met again in Philadelphia 
in the spring of 1938, when she was studying biology at the 
University of Pennsylvania. Shortly after their wedding, Harrison 
moved to Pasadena to take up a residency, while she stayed in 
Philadelphia to finish her degree. She had, by this time, decided 
that it was “an impossible marriage” and that she was ready to 
leave him. 

Kitty’s life up until her move to Pasadena had been eventful 
and emotionally tumultuous. She had been born Katherine 
Puening, in Germany, her family emigrating to the U.S. when she 
was just two years old. Her father, Franz Puening, was an 
engineer; her mother, Kaethe Vissering, was from a prominent 
European aristocratic family, the main branches of which were 
Dutch and German. Through her mother, Kitty was related to 
(among many other members of Europe’s aristocracy) King Albert 
I of Belgium and Queen Victoria of Great Britain. Wilhelm Keitel, 
Hitler’s field marshal and de facto war minister, was her mother’s 
cousin. She liked to describe herself as a “German princess,” 
though it is not entirely clear what her claim to that title was. She 
told friends that her father was a “prince of a small principality in 
Westphalia”; if so, it is something of a mystery why he chose to 


work as an engineer in a Pittsburgh steel company. He begged 
her to keep quiet about her aristocratic background, but 
somehow everybody who knew her knew all about it. 

Throughout her life Kitty combined an aristocratic hauteur 
with a leaning toward bohemianism. At the age of twenty-two she 
married her first husband, a musician she met in Paris called 
Frank Ramseyer. After a few months, however, she discovered 
that he was both homosexual and a drug addict. The marriage 
was annulled and she returned to America. At a New Year’s Eve 
party in 1933 she was introduced to Joe Dallett, the son of a 
wealthy German Jewish businessman and a member of the 
Communist Party. “I fell in love with him at this party,” Kitty 
later said, “and I never stopped loving him.” Less than two 
months later she and Dallett were married and living in 
Youngstown, Ohio, where he worked as a union organizer. 

Very quickly Kitty discovered that life as the wife of a 
Communist Party union organizer was not as glamorous as she 
had perhaps imagined it to be. “These were days of poverty such 
as I had never before experienced,” she recalled with horror. 


We lived in a house, part of which we rented for $5 per month. 
Our only income was a relief payment of $12.40 every two 
weeks. The house had a kitchen, but the stove leaked and it 
was impossible to cook. Our food consisted of two meals a day 
which we got at a grimy restaurant. The price was 15¢ each 
and the meal consisted of soup, meat, potato, cabbage, a 
doughnut and coffee. 


“Because of Joe’s insistence,” Kitty remembers, “I was finally 
permitted to join the Party, but not until I had done a number of 
tasks which were extremely painful to me, such as selling the 
Daily Worker on the street and passing out leaflets at the steel 
mill.” 

Clearly, this was no life for a princess. “As time went on,” she 
later said, “although Joe and I continued to be very much in love, 
the poverty became more and more depressing to me.” Finally, in 
June 1936, after less than three years of marriage, “I told Joe that 
I could no longer live under such conditions and that I was 
separating from him.” 

She moved to England, where her parents were then living, and 


became a student at a school of dress design. For some months 
she heard nothing from Dallett, but then discovered that her 
mother had been intercepting his letters. After writing to him 
asking him to take her back, she found out that he was coming to 
Europe, having volunteered to fight in the Spanish Civil War. In 
March 1937, she was briefly reunited with Dallett, when she met 
him, together with his Communist Party colleague Steve Nelson, 
in Paris. After a few days there, Dallett and Nelson continued to 
Spain, while Kitty returned to London. Seven months later, 
leading a battalion in an offensive against the fascist-held town of 
Fuentes del Ebro, Dallett was shot and killed by machine-gun fire. 
At that time Nelson was in Paris, where he was joined by Kitty, 
who had hoped to go from there to Spain to reunite with her 
husband. It was Nelson who told her the news about Dallett’s 
death. “She literally collapsed and hung on to me,” Nelson later 
recalled. “I became a substitute for Joe, in a sense. She hugged 
me and cried, and I couldn’t maintain my composure.” 

When she returned to the States, Kitty agreed to the publication 
of Joe’s letters to her under the title Letters from Spain. After 
living with Nelson and his wife in New York City for a few 
months, Kitty moved to Philadelphia, where she met and married 
Richard Harrison. By coincidence, while she was living and 
studying there, she met Robert and Charlotte Serber. In his 
autobiography Robert Serber describes how, after leaving 
Berkeley in September 1938 for the job at the University of 
Illinois, he and Charlotte went back to Philadelphia to spend 
some time with their respective parents before he started at 
Urbana. At the home of Charlotte’s parents, Robert remembers, 
“we met a very attractive girl, Kitty Puening, a biology student.” 
She and Charlotte’s father, it seemed, moved in the same social 
and political circles. The next time Serber met Kitty was at that 
fateful garden party held by the Lauritsens in Pasadena in the 
summer of 1939. 

Even after their move to Urbana, the Serbers continued to 
spend their summers in the west, dividing their time between 
Berkeley, Pasadena and Perro Caliente. In the summer of 1940, 
when they arrived at Berkeley, Oppenheimer was just about to 
leave for New Mexico, where they, together with Frank and 
Jackie, were due to join him later. Oppenheimer told Serber that 
he had invited Richard and Kitty Harrison, but that Richard could 


not make it. “Kitty might come alone,” Oppenheimer said. “You 
could bring her with you. I’ll leave it up to you. But if you do it 
might have serious consequences.” As Oppenheimer had clearly 
hoped they would, the Serbers brought Kitty along with them. A 
day or two after they arrived, Serber recalls, Oppenheimer and 
Kitty rode out to Los Pinos to stay overnight as guests of 
Katherine Page. The next day, after they had returned, Katherine, 
“looking very aristocratic on her bay horse, came trotting up to 
the ranch house and presented Kitty with her nightgown, which 
had been found under Oppie’s pillow. The rest of us made no 
comment.” 

That afternoon Kitty and Jackie went riding, “and when they 
returned, Jackie, who was on the lead horse, had a stiff neck from 
conversing over her shoulder.” Jackie formed a deep and lasting 
dislike of Kitty, whom in her forthright way she described as “a 
bitch.” “Kitty was a schemer,” Jackie said. “She was a phoney. All 
her political convictions were phoney, all her ideas were 
borrowed. Honestly, she’s one of the few really evil people I’ve 
known in my life.” It is a view that is echoed by Abraham Pais, 
who knew both Oppenheimers well in their later years. Kitty, Pais 
once said, is “the most despicable female I have ever known.” 
Serber, on the other hand, was devoted to her. 

As Oppenheimer had predicted to Serber, bringing Kitty to 
Perro Caliente had “serious consequences.” By the end of the 
summer, Kitty was pregnant with Oppenheimer’s child. Richard 
Harrison, who presumably knew that his wife was having an 
affair with Oppenheimer and that his marriage to Kitty stood no 
chance of working, agreed that a quick divorce was in the 
interests of everyone concerned. After Kitty had spent the 
required six weeks living in Reno, she was able to obtain a 
divorce, and the day the divorce came through—November 1, 
1940—she and Oppenheimer were married. Soon after the 
wedding, Oppenheimer and Kitty moved into a large rented 
house at 10 Kenilworth Court, Berkeley, which became the social 
center not only of Oppenheimer’s group of graduate students, but 
also of left-wing Berkeley political life. 

Oppenheimer’s remark to Bethe that “we can have no truck 
with the Communists”—whatever it did mean—certainly did not 
mean that he was prepared to turn his back on the people whose 
solidarity in political sympathies and activities he had so 


cherished since 1936. As he himself made clear, and as was 
perhaps inevitable, his personal and social life was intertwined 
with his political campaigning in a way that made it difficult, if 
not impossible, to extricate himself from that political life, even 
had he wanted to. His colleagues who were Communist Party 
members were also his family, his friends and his students. A 
party given by him and Kitty at Kenilworth Court, therefore, 
would have been, to the FBI and to every other observer, 
indistinguishable from a social gathering of communists. 

Oppenheimer’s marriage to Kitty extended his social circle to 
include not only the “parlour pinks” with whom he had 
previously mixed—the communist professors, lecturers and 
students who formed the “units” that he and his brother had 
joined—but also high-level communist officials and organizers, 
the kind of people whom, especially during the “Red Scare” of 
1940 onward, the American security services kept closely within 
their sights. This is not because Kitty’s commitment to anything 
one might call communist ideology was any stronger than his—if 
anything, it was a good deal weaker—but rather because she was 
the widow of Joe Dallett, a martyr to the Loyalist cause in Spain 
and a Communist Party hero. 

One of these high-level communists was Steve Nelson. Since 
Kitty had lived with him and his wife in 1938, she and Nelson 
had had no contact with each other. In the meantime, Nelson had 
risen within the ranks of the Communist Party, having been 
identified as an up-and-coming leader. 

Nelson’s real name was Stefan Mesarosh. He was born in 
Croatia and spoke English with a heavy Croatian accent. He came 
to the U.S. in 1920, aged seventeen, and became a U.S. citizen 
five years later. In the intervening period he had joined the 
Communist Party. In 1929, he became a full-time functionary of 
the Party and was sent to the International Lenin School in 
Moscow to be trained in espionage techniques. During his two- 
year training period he was sent on clandestine missions to 
Germany, Switzerland, France, India and China. After serving in 
Spain and rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel, he was sent to 
southern California, where his job was to ferret out party 
infiltrators and to steal the files of organizations hostile to the 
American Communist Party. 

In 1939, Nelson was transferred to San Francisco to become 


chairman of the local branch of the Party. The following year, 
after the passing of the Smith and Voorhis Acts, he went 
“underground,” ready to lead the local Party in secret in the 
event that (as then looked likely) the organization became illegal. 
He spent much of this time living under an assumed name in a 
cabin in Redwood City, California. 

It was while he was living thus, in the autumn of 1940, that 
Nelson met Oppenheimer, of whom he had previously never 
heard. They met at a fund-raising party in Berkeley, in aid of 
refugees from the Spanish Civil War (which had ended in defeat 
for the Loyalists in April 1939). Oppenheimer was the featured 
speaker at this party and in his speech he said that the fascist 
victory in Spain had led directly to the outbreak of war in 
Europe. After he had given his speech, Oppenheimer approached 
Nelson and said: “I’m going to marry a friend of yours, Steve.” 
When he explained what he meant, Nelson exclaimed “Kitty 
Dallett!,” whereupon Kitty appeared and the two old comrades 
hugged. Subsequently, Nelson and his wife visited the 
Oppenheimers at their home in Kenilworth Court. 

Another person whom the FBI was extremely interested in was 
William Schneiderman, district organizer of the California branch 
of the Party and a man whose political activities were a cause for 
concern at the very highest level of American government. On 
May 18, 1940, J. Edgar Hoover had written to the Secretary of 
the Treasury, Henry Morgenthau, to tell him that a “confidential 
source” (that is, a wiretap) had heard Schneiderman tell a party 
meeting in San Francisco that the Communist Party intended to 
use its influence in the relevant workers’ unions to delay 
production in aircraft factories, chemical plants and shipyards. 
This was enough to ensure that wherever Schneiderman went, an 
FBI agent followed. On December 1, 1940, this led the FBI to 
Chevalier’s house, where Schneiderman addressed a meeting of 
communists and communist sympathizers, explaining to them the 
latest changes in the party line. The FBI agents keeping 
surveillance outside the house made a record of the registration 
plates of all the cars parked outside, one of which they later 
discovered belonged to Oppenheimer. 

Chevalier did not know Schneiderman well and neither did 
Oppenheimer. Asked about this meeting in 1946 by the FBI, 
Oppenheimer denied all knowledge of it; asked again in 1950, he 


said he now remembered it since his wife had refreshed his 
memory. In his security hearing in 1954 he remembered it in 
some detail, recalling that about twenty people were present, 
including Thomas Addis and Isaac Folkoff, the Communist Party 
treasurer to whom he continued to give regular payments of 
between $100 and $150 a month. He also remembered that the 
purpose of the meeting was “to acquaint the interested gentry 
with the present line or the then line of the Communist Party.” 

By the same means with which they heard Schneiderman’s 
plans for delaying factory production, the FBI heard Folkoff refer 
to Oppenheimer as “the big shot.” This, together with 
Oppenheimer’s presence at a meeting at which Schneiderman 
presented the Communist Party line, was sufficient cause for the 
FBI to start treating Oppenheimer as a potentially dangerous 
subversive and, on March 28, 1941, it opened what was to 
become over the years a massive file on Oppenheimer. On the 
same day, Oppenheimer’s name was added to a list drawn up by 
the FBI of “persons to be considered for custodial detention 
pending investigation in the event of a national emergency.” A 
short while later, Oppenheimer wrote to Willie Fowler in 
Pasadena, saying that he might not be able to make it to 
Washington for the forthcoming April conference on elementary 
particles. “I may be out of a job by then,” he wrote, “because UC 
is going to be investigated next week for radicalism and the story 
is that the committee members are no gentlemen and that they 
don’t like me. We’ll do the best we can.” 

As it happened, the investigation into radicalism at Berkeley 
presented Oppenheimer with few problems. The fact remained, 
however, that in maintaining contact with and lending financial 
support to the Communist Party, Oppenheimer was, as he well 
knew, playing with fire. In case he needed reminding of this fact, 
a demonstration of it close to home was given in the summer of 
1941 with respect to his brother. Frank had finished his Ph.D. at 
Caltech in the summer of 1939 and had then, no doubt through 
Robert’s help, got a job at Stanford, working with Felix Bloch. 
After just two years, however, Stanford let Frank know that they 
would not be renewing his contract; he was out of work. One 
contributing factor here was that Frank and Bloch did not get on 
with one another, but it was also made clear to Frank that his 
Communist Party membership and his political activities were 


barriers to keeping his job. At about this time Frank and Jackie 
left the Party, but the damage his membership had done to his 
career was by no means over. 

On May 12, 1941, just seven months into her marriage to 
Oppenheimer, Kitty gave birth to a baby boy, whom they named 
Peter. By this time of the year they were in Pasadena, from where 
they wrote to the Chevaliers inviting them to meet the new 
arrival. Thus it was that Chevalier was with Oppenheimer in 
Pasadena on June 22, 1941, when they heard the news that Nazi 
Germany had broken its pact with the Soviet Union and had 
begun an invasion of Russia. “It was on our way to the beach that 
we heard over the radio of the Nazi invasion of the Soviet 
Union,” Chevalier remembered, “and as we drove, both shocked 
and terribly excited by the news, we heard the whole of 
Churchill’s speech denouncing Hitler and welcoming the Soviet 
Union as an ally, pledging Great Britain’s full cooperation in a 
united war effort.” 

That night, Chevalier recalls, “we sat up with Opje and Kitty 
till the small hours, listening to the news broadcasts and trying to 
analyze the significance of this latest Nazi move.” Apparently 
blind to the irony of what he is describing, Chevalier remarks: 
“Hitler had destroyed at one stroke the dangerous fiction, so 
prevalent in liberal and political circles, that fascism and 
communism were but two different versions of the same 
totalitarian philosophy. The communist and democratic forces 
were now allies committed to fighting their common fascist 
enemy.” 

The entry of the Soviet Union into the war came as something 
of a relief to many American communists, since it brought them 
back onto the same side as their countrymen. The U.S. had not 
yet actually entered the conflict, but preparations for war were 
going on everywhere. In a letter to the Uehlings written just a few 
days after Peter was born and about a month before the Nazi 
attack on Russia, Oppenheimer, again warmly thanking the 
Uehlings for their hospitality the previous summer (“even now a 
year later I want to thank you for it again”), wrote disconsolately: 
“T think we'll go to war.” At this time the imminence of war was 
something from which he felt detached and which he saw as 
inimical to the development of his subject. “I expect,” he told the 
Uehlings, “unless there is a drastic change in policy on the part of 


the research boards, that physics in our sense will just about stop 
by next year.” 

As he conceded, though, the war preparations had been good 
for physics in at least one sense: for the first time since he started 
teaching, students graduating with higher degrees in physics were 
almost guaranteed employment. With regard to a position that 
the Uehlings’ own university had advertised for a spectroscopist, 
Oppenheimer wrote: “You are going to find it pretty hard to get 
any decent physicist these days, with the demand suddenly 
exceeding the supply.” If they were wanting to employ any 
theoretical physicists at Seattle, Oppenheimer added, “there will 
be some first rate ones coming up next year.” 


This year’s crop is pretty well spoken for already. The situation 
in Berkeley & here in Pasadena is in some ways very gloomy: 
here especially almost all the men active in physics have been 
taken away for war work. Those left are swamped in 
administrative & teaching duties & their own defense problems. 
The number of graduates too is way down: the losses heaviest 
among the men about to finish in nuclear physics, but 
noticeable all along the line. In Berkeley we’ve lost Alvarez, 
McMillan, 2/3 Lawrence, [Bernice] Brode, Loeb. Only the last 
is not missed. 


Oppenheimer always liked to be “at the center,” and it is clear 
from this letter that he felt that he and his diminishing band of 
graduates working on, as he put it, “theories of mesotron field & 
the light they throw on ‘Heisenberg’ showers, proton isobars, 
scattering & other such recondite matters” were being confined to 
the periphery—the center being the secret work on nuclear 
physics from which, for the moment at least, he was excluded. 

Actually, just as Oppenheimer’s work on neutron stars and 
black holes, which had looked so exotic in 1938-9, now looks 
like his greatest achievement in physics, so the “recondite” work 
that he and his students pursued in the period 1939-41, which 
looked peripheral at a time when nuclear physics held sway with 
physicists and research funding bodies, now looks more central. 
This is particularly true in the area of quantum electrodynamics, 
in which the work done under Oppenheimer at Berkeley is now 
being recognized as a precursor to the work done by the people— 


Julian Schwinger, Richard Feynman, Freeman Dyson and Sin-Itiro 
Tomonaga—who finalized that theory in the late 1940s. In fact, 
one of Oppenheimer’s students, Sidney Dancoff, came extremely 
close to arriving at something similar to that later version of 
quantum electrodynamics, and, according to the historian of 
science, Silvan Schweber, would have got there before Schwinger 
et al., had he not made a mistake in his calculations. 

Oppenheimer thought very highly of Dancoff, as can be seen by 
a letter he wrote to F. Wheeler Loomis, the chairman of the 
physics department at the University of Illinois, in May 1940, 
urging him to offer Dancoff the one-year instructorship that, 
through Serber, Oppenheimer knew Loomis had going vacant. 
Lawrence, Oppenheimer told Loomis, had wanted to employ 
Dancoff in the Radiation Laboratory, “but we are all agreed that 
that is not the ideal place for him.” Dancoff was, Oppenheimer 
wrote, “a good physicist, well trained and with good ideas and 
great technical facility in calculation.” The only reason he did not 
already have an academic position was that “jobs for theorists are 
not too common, and he has had the competition of older men of 
greater reputation: Schiff, Schwinger, Snyder for instance in 
Berkeley.” In response, Loomis offered the one-year post to 
Dancoff, who then remained at Illinois for the rest of his short life 
(he died in 1951, shortly before his thirty-eighth birthday). 

Of the “older men of greater reputation” that Oppenheimer 
mentions, the odd one out would seem to be Hartland Snyder, 
who was not, in fact, any older than Dancoff (they were the same 
age) and who was, academically, slightly behind, finishing his 
Ph.D. six months after Dancoff. Snyder, though, had the 
enormous advantage of being Oppenheimer’s coauthor on their 
classic paper on black holes, while, for some_ reason, 
Oppenheimer never published anything with Dancoff. 

The other two were indeed more senior. Leonard Schiff, a New 
York Jew of Lithuanian background, had come to Berkeley as an 
NRC fellow, and in the summer of 1938 was given the 
challenging task of replacing Robert Serber as Oppenheimer’s 
research associate. Schiff would later become known as a brilliant 
teacher and the author of a commonly used textbook on quantum 
mechanics that was based on Oppenheimer’s lectures at Berkeley. 
However, possibly because he was dissatisfied with him as a 
replacement for Serber, Oppenheimer is recorded as being rather 


cruel to Schiff. Edward Gerjuoy, who started work as a graduate 
student of Oppenheimer’s at Berkeley in 1938, the same time that 
Schiff began his two-year stint as Oppenheimer’s research 
associate, reports that when Schiff gave a seminar discussion of a 
book with some rather difficult mathematics in it, Oppenheimer 
“asked Schiff searching questions about each and every equation 
Schiff wrote down.” “On more than a few occasions,” Gerjuoy 
remembers, “Oppie had Schiff, who was a gentle soul, visibly on 
the verge of tears.” 

Julian Schwinger, who replaced Schiff as Oppenheimer’s 
research associate in the summer of 1940, though no less gentle 
than Schiff, was too brilliant a physicist and too confident in his 
abilities to be browbeaten in the same way. Schwinger, who 
would go on to win the Nobel Prize in 1965 for his part in the 
development of the modern formulation of quantum 
electrodynamics, could hold his own with any physicist. At 
Schwinger’s first seminar as Oppenheimer’s research assistant, 
Gerjuoy recalls, Oppenheimer’s students “were wondering how 
long it would take Julian to shrivel under Oppie’s questioning.” 
They were in for a shock: 


Julian started talking and very soon Oppie, in accordance with 
his usual practice, asked Julian a question, which Julian 
answered. More questions came; more questions were 
answered. After about a dozen questions, answered by Julian 
with no visible sign of distress whatsoever, Oppie stopped 
firing questions and let him finish his seminar essentially 
without further interruption. Nor did he ever again unduly 
interrupt during any succeeding seminar of Julian’s. 


By the time he gave this seminar Schwinger had already been 
at Berkeley for more than a year, having arrived as an NRC 
postdoctoral student in the summer of 1939. He was from a 
remarkably similar background to Oppenheimer. His father, a 
German-speaking Jew from Central Europe, arrived in the U.S. as 
a teenager in 1880, made a fortune in the clothing trade and 
bought a large apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. 
In fact, the apartment in which Schwinger grew up was on the 
very same street, Riverside Drive, that Oppenheimer had grown 
up on. As a child, Schwinger was precocious even by 


Oppenheimer’s standards. At the age of thirteen he read, and 
understood, Dirac’s The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, which he 
later described as “my bible.” At the age of sixteen Schwinger 
wrote his first paper on quantum-field theory, which remained 
unpublished, but the following year he published two letters to 
the editor of the Physical Review. He was then a student at City 
College, New York, where, bored by lectures that just told him 
what he already knew, he developed what would become a 
lifelong habit of sleeping during the day and beginning work in 
the evening. After a year, he transferred to Columbia to work 
with Isidor Rabi, who held him in such high regard that he asked 
Schwinger—while still an undergraduate—to lecture to his 
graduate students when he was out of town. In the summer of 
1936, still only eighteen, Schwinger received his undergraduate 
degree. 

Less than a year later, Schwinger was ready to submit his Ph.D. 
thesis, but Columbia’s rules would not allow him to graduate 
with a Ph.D. without spending at least two years in residence, so 
he published the work as a collection of articles, which, when the 
time came, he bound together and presented as his Ph.D. work. 
To stop him getting bored, Rabi arranged for Schwinger to spend 
the first part of the academic year 1937-8 at the University of 
Wisconsin, working with Gregory Breit and Eugene Wigner. By 
the time he returned to Columbia in the spring of 1938, 
Schwinger was a young physicist with an international reputation 
and was being offered academic positions at several universities, 
both in Europe and in the U.S. Despite the many alternatives 
offered to him, Schwinger chose to apply for an NRC fellowship 
in order to spend some time at Berkeley working with 
Oppenheimer. Rabi recalls that he tried to persuade Schwinger to 
go to Zurich to work with Wolfgang Pauli, but Schwinger 
“thought Oppenheimer was a more interesting physicist.” When 
he was asked later in life about this decision, Schwinger replied: 
“Oppenheimer was the name in American theoretical physics. 
Where else could I have gone?” That the most intellectually 
precocious, sought-after young theoretical physicist in the 
country should choose to stay in America rather than sit at the 
feet of one of the founders of quantum theory in Europe, and 
that, in particular, he would rather work with Oppenheimer than 
with Pauli, was the fulfillment of Oppenheimer’s ambitions for 


himself and for the department he had built up. One might, 
without too much hyperbole, regard Schwinger’s decision to go to 
Berkeley as a symbolic moment, marking the point at which the 
center of gravity in theoretical physics shifted from Europe to the 
United States. 

Of course it is possible that, in the summer of 1939, Schwinger 
had other reasons for not wanting to travel to Europe. In fact, as 
it happened, the day he arrived in Berkeley was September 1, the 
very day the German army invaded Poland. Nevertheless, it is 
clear from the things he read, the things he cites in his published 
papers and the problems that he chose to work on, that 
Schwinger regarded the work being done by Oppenheimer and 
those influenced by him as more interesting and more important 
than anything going on in Europe at that time. 

Though he was still only twenty-one when he came to Berkeley 
as an NRC fellow, Schwinger’s reputation among theoretical 
physicists as a rare talent preceded him and Oppenheimer had 
heard much about him before they met. In turn, Schwinger knew 
about Oppenheimer’s reputation as a teacher and he arrived 
determined to resist any attempt at domination. It would, he 
knew, be a struggle. Oppenheimer, Schwinger recalls, “was 
overwhelming. [He] was not only impressive, he liked to impress. 
He was a showman. I was impressed, no question about it. But I 
also resisted him.” At first, this resistance led to some friction 
between the two. Rabi remembered: 


I spoke to Oppenheimer later and he was terribly disappointed. 
He came to the point of writing a letter to the National 
Research Council suggesting that Julian go somewhere else, 
because it took a man like Oppenheimer quite a bit to get used 
to Julian. Pauli once referred to Oppenheimer’s students as 
being Zunicker. Somebody who knows enough German knows 
what this means—people who nod heads—and Julian was not 
that way—that, and his hours. 


One source of tension was Schwinger’s refusal to cooperate 
with Oppenheimer’s way of working with his graduate students. 
As Schwinger recalls: 


At the early stage perhaps I didn’t measure up in the sense of 


ritual, in which everybody would come into Oppenheimer’s 
office at some early hour of the morning and they would sit 
around and talk. I presume I was still a late riser and so never 
came to these get-togethers. Maybe he didn’t like my dissident 
ways at first. I never heard a direct statement, but it’s very 
plausible that I was a strange fish to begin with until he 
appreciated that I could produce nevertheless. So perhaps in 
the first month he didn’t quite like the “cut of my jib.” 


Oppenheimer and Schwinger soon overcame their initial 
difficulties with each other—Oppenheimer learned to accept 
Schwinger’s refusal to come to his office in the morning, and 
Schwinger reminded himself that “After all, I was there to learn 
from him’”—and, within two months of Schwinger’s arrival, they 
were collaborating on a joint letter to the editor of the Physical 
Review. The subject was a problem arising out of some results of 
experiments performed by Lauritsen and Fowler at Caltech, the 
explanation of which Oppenheimer thought might require the 
postulation of new physical forces. Oppenheimer had given the 
problem to Schiff, who had made no headway with it. In an 
interview much later in life, Schwinger remembered: “Schiff was 
then Oppenheimer’s assistant in Berkeley, and the problem got 
handed down from one to the next. Oppenheimer was interested 
in this, so Schiff said, ‘Hey, Schwinger, why don’t you look into 
this?’ So I did. And obviously it got done in a day or so.” The key 
to solving the puzzle, as it had been several times in the past 
when Oppenheimer had thought that experimental results 
showed the breakdown of quantum electrodynamics, was the 
realization that the existing theory was perfectly adequate to 
explain the laboratory observations. 

The solution to the problem was Schwinger’s, but the wording 
of the letter was Oppenheimer’s, and Schwinger was not entirely 
happy with the result. In particular, he was irritated that, having 
presented Schwinger’s solution, Oppenheimer then, 
characteristically, went on to speculate about cases where the 
theory might not hold. Schwinger later said: 


He wrote that letter to the Physical Review incorporating 
whatever calculations and ideas I had but at the same time 
mentioning other possibilities. To me it was a purely 


electrodynamic process and exactly what was to be expected. 
On the other hand he, in the spirit of the time, was convinced 
that electrodynamics had broken down and so in the letter 
there is still a reference to the possibility of some new short- 
range force between electrons and protons, which I had no 
great stock in, but there it was. 


One of the most important things demonstrated by 
Oppenheimer and Schwinger in their jointly written letter was 
the physical reality of what is called “vacuum polarization,” 
which, in Schwinger’s words “means no more than the fact that 
an electron-positron combination is coupled to _ the 
electromagnetic field and it may show itself as real or virtual.” 
Ironically, it was Sidney Dancoff’s neglect of this very 
phenomenon that lay at the heart of his error mentioned earlier, 
the error that prevented him from anticipating Schwinger’s 
greatest contribution to physics: the “renormalization” of 
quantum electrodynamics. As Schwinger’s biographers remark, 
though he and Dancoff got to know each other well at Berkeley, 
“history might have developed differently if the two of them had 
had more time to discuss their respective research interests in 
greater detail.” 

After Schwinger’s year as an NRC fellow expired in the summer 
of 1940, Oppenheimer immediately appointed him as Schiff’s 
replacement as research associate. In that role Schwinger stayed 
for just a year, during which the focus of his and Oppenheimer’s 
research interests was the attempt to understand the particle that 
Oppenheimer in those days still called the “mesotron” (it was not 
until after the war that he began calling it the “meson”). As we 
now know, and as mentioned in the previous chapter, what 
Oppenheimer called the “mesotron” was, in fact, two very 
different particles: the mu-meson (or muon), which is a 
component part of cosmic rays, and the pi-meson (or pion), 
which is the carrier of the strong nuclear force. In the period from 
1939 to 1942 almost all of Oppenheimer’s published work, and a 
good deal of the work undertaken by his graduate and 
postdoctoral students, was devoted to solving the puzzles of the 
“mesotron,” most of which arose from the mistaken assumption 
that the mu-meson and pi-meson were the same thing. 

In trying to explain how Oppenheimer exerted such an 


inspirational influence on his students, Edward Gerjuoy writes: “I 
feel Oppie did his physics, talked about his physics, lived his 
physics, with an unusual passion, which had to inspire students; 
in any event it sure inspired me.” As an example of this passion, 
Gerjuoy describes Oppenheimer’s absorption in the problem of 
the “mesotron”: 


To give you just one of many possible illustrations, it bothered 
him, it tore at him, that he didn’t understand how the pi 
mesons, which in nuclei were so_ strongly interacting, 
penetrated the earth’s atmosphere so readily. Maybe he should 
have hit upon the idea that the mesons reaching the earth’s 
surface really weren’t pi mesons, but instead were other 
weakly interacting mesons—those we now term mu mesons; 
but since he hadn’t conceived of mu mesons he couldn’t stop 
talking about the anomaly that atmospheric penetration by pi 
mesons represented, in seminar after seminar and in less 
formal conversations with groups of his students. 


At about the same time that he cowrote his letter to the editor 
with Schwinger, Oppenheimer put his name to a long article, 
cowritten with Robert Serber and Hartland Snyder, called “The 
Production of Soft Secondaries by Mesotrons,” in which they 
analyzed the “soft component” of cosmic rays as being made up 
of electrons and gamma rays that were released in mesotron 
“showers.” Their conclusion was the familiar one: that the 
standard quantum theory is sufficient to explain the emissions of 
electrons and gamma rays up to a certain energy, but that “the 
problem of extending the formulae above these critical energies 
probably goes beyond the framework of the present theory.” That 
“probably,” together with the speculative suggestion of the 
breakdown of the theory, was exactly the kind of thing to which 
Schwinger had so strongly objected. 

Schwinger himself spent much of his time at Berkeley puzzling 
over the “mesotron’—as his biographers correctly note, 
“everybody at Berkeley was talking about mesons”—and, in 
addition to his joint work with Oppenheimer, wrote papers on the 
subject with William Rarita, a physicist from Brooklyn College 
who was then on a sabbatical visit to Berkeley, and with Herbert 
Corben, an Australian, who after studying at Cambridge had 


come to Berkeley on a postdoctoral fellowship. In a letter to the 
editor of the Physical Review published in March 1941, called “On 
the Spin of the Mesotron,” Oppenheimer referred to this work of 
Schwinger, Rarita and Corben, and to a paper by Robert Christy 
and Shuichi Kusaka, and to yet another on the subject by Eldred 
Nelson, also a graduate student of his. All three of these students 
—Christy, Kusaka and Nelson—wrote their Ph.D. theses on 
mesotrons. The general impression of these publications is that 
almost all the finest minds at America’s greatest center of 
theoretical physics were engaged in trying to understand the 
huge discrepancy between the observed properties of the particles 
that make up cosmic rays with the theoretical calculations based 
on standard quantum electrodynamics. Here is the clearest 
instance yet of Serber’s remark that Oppenheimer’s progress was 
hindered by his almost obsessive conviction that the standard 
theory was wrong; if he had trusted that theory a little more, it 
would surely have occurred to him that the discrepancies were 
due to the misidentification of the cosmic-ray particle (the muon) 
with the Yukawa particle (the pion). 

In June 1941, Oppenheimer and Schwinger sent another jointly 
written paper, “On the Interaction of Mesotrons and Nuclei,” to 
the Physical Review, this time concentrating on the “mesotron” as 
the carrier of the strong nuclear force—that is, the pion. The 
paper was, according to Schwinger’s later recollection, essentially 
written by him, Oppenheimer simply adding his name to it after 
it had been written. Indeed, he implied, it could not have been 
written by Oppenheimer, involving as it did quantum-mechanical 
treatments of meson fields, the mathematics of which was beyond 
Oppenheimer’s competence. Oppenheimer, Schwinger said, was 
“adequate technically to deal with the semi-classical treatment of 
spin,” but “He was not adequate, or at least he never attempted 
to follow or join in, with the quantum treatment, which was more 
elaborate.” “Well,” he added, with more than a hint of 
condescension, “he was trying to keep his hands in lots of 
different topics and it is very difficult to work intensively on all 
these subjects.” 

A few days after that paper was sent off, Schwinger and 
Oppenheimer both presented several papers at an American 
Physical Society meeting in Pasadena, although not with each 
other. One of Schwinger’s papers was with Edward Gerjuoy, and 


two of Oppenheimer’s papers (both on mesotrons) were jointly 
written, one with Christy and the other with Nelson. After that, 
Schwinger left California to take up a place at Purdue University. 
Despite the fact that, as Schwinger later put it, “I still did not 
quite know how to act in the face of His Majesty,” he and 
Oppenheimer parted on good terms. Neither, however, seemed 
particularly sorry to part; Schwinger was not offered, nor did he 
apply for, another year as Oppenheimer’s research associate. He 
left with his admiration for Oppenheimer still intact, but 
tempered somewhat by what he saw as Oppenheimer’s loss of 
creativity due to his acceptance of the role of organizer and 
manager, rather than that of a single-minded research physicist. 
Oppenheimer, Schwinger later said, “very much insisted on 
displaying that he was on top of everything, which he very often 
was,” but, inevitably, in striving to be on top of everything, 
Oppenheimer skirted over the details of particular subjects, and, 
for Schwinger, the details were everything. Oppenheimer’s grasp 
of specific topics, Schwinger recalled, “became more and more 
superficial, which I regretted very much. It was a lesson to me, 
never to lose completely your touch with the subject, otherwise 
it’s all over.” Oppenheimer, he thought, “could pull it off better 
than most people”: 


He did have a quick brain. There was no question about that, 
but I think the brain must be supplemented by long hours of 
practice that go into the fluidity and ease. Without the 
technical practice, sooner or later you get lost. 


Schwinger’s comments on Oppenheimer are perceptive. As he 
was possibly the first person to realize, the summer of 1941 
marked the end of Oppenheimer’s time as a creative scientist and 
the beginning of an entirely different phase in his life. 

Schwinger’s recollections of Oppenheimer having lost touch 
with his subject chime with Oppenheimer’s letter to the Uehlings 
in May, in which he struck a melancholy note about the future of 
“physics in our sense.” As we have seen, however, that letter 
conveys a sense of Oppenheimer feeling out of touch not so much 
with theoretical physics as with “all the men active in physics 
[who] have been taken away for war work.” And, after all, he 
was right to feel that important work was being done from which 


he was excluded. By the summer of 1941, much progress had 
been made on the physics of fission and its possible application to 
explosives, which Oppenheimer would have known nothing 
about. Most crucially, an unexpected answer had been provided 
to one of the questions Oppenheimer had first raised when the 
discovery of fission had been announced: what is the critical mass 
of uranium? The question of critical mass could be put like this: 
given that neutrons are released in fission and that a chain 
reaction is therefore possible, how large would a lump of 
uranium have to be in order to sustain a chain reaction long 
enough to produce a massive explosion? In a small amount of 
uranium, the neutrons released by fission would escape from the 
surface before they had initiated another fissure. The question 
that arises, then, is: how large would a piece of uranium have to 
be in order for the neutrons to set up a fission chain reaction 
rather than escape from the surface? 

One answer to that question with which Oppenheimer would 
have been familiar was published by Rudolf Peierls in October 
1939. Peierls was a German Jewish physicist whom Oppenheimer 
had met in Zurich and who had been in England since 1933. 
Since 1937 Peierls had been professor of physics at the University 
of Birmingham. In the Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society for October 1939 he published a formula for calculating 
critical mass and applied it to a simplified case of natural 
uranium fissioned by unmoderated fast neutrons. The answer he 
obtained was that the critical mass was several tons—too much 
for a practical weapon—a result that confirmed what Bohr had 
already said: an atomic bomb was not a realistic proposition. 

By the time Peierls’s paper was published, he had been joined 
in Birmingham by another German Jewish refugee physicist, the 
codiscoverer of fission, Otto Frisch. Frisch had also been thinking 
about critical mass and had asked himself a question that, 
remarkably, no other physicist had yet asked. “One day in 
February or March 1940,” Peierls later recalled, “Frisch said, 
‘Suppose someone gave you a quantity of pure 235 isotope—what 
would happen?’” In order to calculate accurately the critical 
mass of pure uranium-235, Frisch and Peierls needed what 
theoretical physicists call “the numbers”—namely, the basic facts 
established by experiment and observation. In this case, one of 
“the numbers” was already well known—the number of neutrons 


released per fission—but for much of the rest they had to guess. 
They did not know, for example, the fission cross-section for 
uranium-235 (that is, how likely it was that a neutron hitting a 
uranium-235 nucleus would cause it to fission), but from Bohr 
and Wheeler’s work they felt able to assume that every neutron 
that hits a nucleus would produce fission (this turned out not to 
be quite right, but it was close enough). Further informed guesses 
allowed them to calculate how quickly the chain reaction would 
go through the uranium, how many “generations” of fission 
would take place before the uranium expanded too much for 
further fission to take place, and how much energy would be 
released. 

The result staggered them. Far from being measured in tons, as 
Bohr and every other physicist had previously calculated the 
critical mass of natural uranium fissioned by slow neutrons to be, 
Frisch and Peierls calculated the critical mass of pure 
uranium-235 fissioned by fast neutrons to be about one kilogram. 
In fact, as we now know, because all the relevant “numbers” have 
been determined by laboratory experiment, it is rather more than 
that, being about fifteen kilograms. Nevertheless, as Frisch and 
Peierls were the first to realize, it is a matter of kilograms, not 
tons. And the energy release from that relatively small lump of 
uranium would be enormous. Frisch and Peierls calculated it to 
be equivalent to several thousand tons of TNT. The problem, of 
course, is that the separation of U-235 from natural uranium is 
difficult—so difficult that most people who had considered it did 
not regard it as a practical means of making a bomb. In the light 
of the calculations made by Frisch and Peierls, however, it looked 
considerably more practical. To be sure, an expensive industrial 
plant would have to be built, but, as Peierls remembers himself 
and Frisch saying to each other: “Even if this plant costs as much 
as a battleship, it would be worth having.” 

For the second time in just under two years Frisch found 
himself one of only two people in possession of a shattering piece 
of information. Realizing that what had occurred to them might 
also occur to scientists working for the Nazis (Heisenberg, for 
one, was more than capable of doing the same calculations), 
Frisch and Peierls quickly wrote up their analysis as a two-part 
report—the first part, “Memorandum on the Properties of a 
Radioactive ‘Super-bomb,’” stating their conclusions in 


nontechnical terms, and the second, “On the Construction of a 
‘Super-bomb’; Based on a Nuclear Chain Reaction in Uranium,” 
providing the technical details. As Jeremy Bernstein has said: 
“What is impressive about these papers is their absolute clarity.” 
No one who read them could fail to be convinced that, if a fairly 
small lump of the 235 isotope could be separated from natural 
uranium, a bomb of awesome power could be constructed. Frisch 
and Peierls even explained how such a bomb could function: two 
subcritical lumps of uranium-235 could be brought together, thus 
forming a critical mass. “Once assembled,” they remarked, “the 
bomb would explode within a second or less, since one neutron is 
sufficient to start the reaction and there are several neutrons 
passing through the bomb every second, from the cosmic 
radiation.” This was, essentially, the design of the bomb that 
exploded over Hiroshima some five years after it was conceived 
by Frisch and Peierls (though, in the Hiroshima bomb, a neutron 
initiator—a mixture of polonium and beryllium—was used, rather 
than relying on passing cosmic rays). 

Frisch was at this time still classed as an enemy alien, and 
Peierls had only just received British citizenship; neither would 
be a candidate for active participation in the British war effort. So 
they gave their memorandum to Mark Oliphant, the head of the 
physics department at Birmingham, who had been responsible for 
recruiting both of them, and who, after adding a covering note 
declaring “I am convinced that the whole thing must be taken 
rather seriously,” sent it to Henry Tizard, an Oxford-trained 
chemist who served as the civilian chairman of the British 
government’s Committee on the Scientific Survey of Air Defence. 
Tizard then set up a separate committee, consisting entirely of 
people who had learned their physics at the Cavendish: Oliphant, 
Chadwick, Cockcroft and, as chairman, G.P. Thomson. The 
committee met for the first time on April 10, 1940, and, 
according to Oliphant, was immediately “electrified by the 
possibility” of an atomic bomb. 

“Electrified” was hardly a word that one could have used at 
this time to describe the Advisory Committee on Uranium, which 
President Roosevelt had set up in October 1939 under the 
chairmanship of the government scientist Lyman Briggs, a man 
more noted for caution than for dynamism. After its first meeting 
a report had been sent to the President, recommending that Fermi 


and Szilard be provided with the pure graphite and uranium they 
needed to investigate the possibility of a controlled chain 
reaction, and advising the President such a chain reaction might 
be useful as a “source of power in submarines.” After reading the 
report, Roosevelt said he wanted to keep it on file. In the summer 
of 1940, the uranium committee was absorbed into the newly 
formed National Defense Research Council (NDRC), headed by 
James Conant of Harvard and Vannevar Bush of the Carnegie 
Institution. Briggs was kept on as head of the fission project, but 
he now reported to Conant. 

Meanwhile, the war effort in Britain was revitalized in May by 
the election of Winston Churchill. The following month, with the 
fall of France, Britain saw itself as standing alone in resisting the 
menace of Nazi Germany, and a renewed determination to 
succeed in that resistance was felt across the entire country. G. P. 
Thomson’s committee was not immune to that sense of 
determination. In June it renamed itself the “MAUD Committee” 
after an apparently enigmatic telegram from Lise Meitner to an 


English friend, which read: “meT NIELS AND MARGRETHE RECENTLY BOTH 
WELL BUT UNHAPPY ABOUT EVENTS PLEASE INFORM COCKCROFT AND MAUD RAY 


KENT.” The message was sent to Cockcroft, who thought “Maud 
Ray Kent” must be an anagram for “Radium Taken,” confirming 
suspicions that the Germans were taking radium from 
laboratories in occupied countries. Later, they discovered that 
Maud Ray was the name of a woman who lived in Kent. 

In December 1940, the MAUD Committee received a report 
from Franz Simon, another émigré German physicist working in 
Britain, concerning the estimated cost of a plant capable of 
separating one kilogram of uranium-235 from natural uranium. 
The cost of such a plant, Simon said, would be about £5 million. 
The following February, Conant flew to London to establish 
communication between his committee and the British 
government. He was impressed by what he saw; it was, he said, 
“the most extraordinary experience of my life.” 


I saw a stout-hearted population under bombardment. I saw an 
unflinching government with its back against the wall. Almost 
every hour I saw or heard something that made me proud to be 
a member of the human race. 


Remarkably, it was in London that Conant, the man to whom 


the head of the U.S. fission research project now reported, first 
heard about the possibility of using fission to create an atomic 
bomb. The subject came up in conversation with Frederick 
Lindemann, Winston Churchill’s scientific advisor, with whom 
Conant had lunch at a London club. According to Conant’s later 
recollection, Lindemann “introduced the subject of the study of 
fission of uranium atoms.” 


I reacted by repeating the doubts I had expressed and heard 
expressed at NDRC meetings... “You have left out of 
consideration,” said [Lindemann], “the possibility of the 
construction of a bomb of enormous power.” “How would that 
be possible?” I asked. “By first separating uranium 235,” he 
said, “and then arranging for the two portions of the element 
to be brought together suddenly so that the resulting mass 
would spontaneously undergo a self-sustaining reaction.” 


Conant did not press the subject, since “this was entirely an 
unofficial and private communication and represented a highly 
speculative scheme,” but the fact remained that, when he 
returned to the U.S., there was now at least one person involved 
in the American uranium research project who understood that a 
fission bomb was not a remote possibility. 

Meanwhile, Ernest Lawrence was becoming increasingly 
exasperated by the lack of urgency shown by Briggs’s uranium 
committee and took every opportunity to let his feelings be 
known to anyone with any influence in Washington. When 
Conant, soon after his trip to Britain, went to Berkeley to give a 
paper, Lawrence took the chance to urge him to “light a fire 
under the Briggs committee.” Briggs came under further pressure 
when Kenneth Bainbridge, a nuclear physicist from Harvard, 
followed Conant to Britain and was invited to attend a meeting of 
the MAUD Committee. There Bainbridge discovered in detail 
what Conant had heard in passing: that the British had “a very 
good idea of the critical mass and assembly” and that they 
thought an atomic weapon could be made in three years. 

Bainbridge’s report led Vannevar Bush to appoint a new 
committee to take “an energetic but dispassionate review of the 
entire situation.” Lawrence was asked to serve on this committee 
and Arthur Compton was chosen as its head. The review was 


completed quickly and the committee’s report delivered on May 
17, 1941. Unlike the Frisch-Peierls memorandum, Compton’s 
report did not emphasize the importance of fast-neutron fission, 
and played down the possibility of an atomic bomb. Its central 
focus was the importance of Fermi’s experiment to produce a 
chain reaction in natural uranium. 

The report led to further agonizingly slow progress and the 
establishment of yet another bureaucratic organization: the Office 
of Scientific Research and Development, with Bush as its director, 
answerable only to the President. The key word here is 
“development.” This committee had authority not only to initiate 
research, but also to employ engineers and technicians to actually 
produce things. Bush’s move upward left Conant in sole charge of 
the NDRC. 

In yet another effort to get things moving in the U.S., the 
British MAUD Committee invited Charles Lauritsen, then in 
England working for the NDRC, to attend its meeting of July 2, 
1941, to hear the committee’s draft final report, drawn up by 
G. P. Thomson. Lauritsen listened, took notes and a week later 
reported the MAUD findings to Bush. The report concluded that it 
would be possible to make a uranium bomb with twenty-five 
pounds of uranium-235, which would cost about £5 million to 
produce. In spite of this very large cost, the report considered 
“that the destructive effect, both material and moral, is so great 
that every effort should be made to produce bombs of this kind.” 
With this report in hand, Conant later said, it became clear to 
both him and to Bush that “a major push along the lines outlined 
was in order.” 

In order, perhaps, but—to the increasing dismay of the British 
—still not in effect. At the end of August, Mark Oliphant flew to 
the U.S. to see what was happening. “If Congress knew the true 
history of the atomic-energy project,” Leo Szilard once said, “I 
have no doubt but that it would create a special medal to be 
given to meddling foreigners for distinguished services, and Dr. 
Oliphant would be the first to receive one.” In Washington, 
Oliphant called on Briggs and was “amazed and distressed” to 
find that “this inarticulate and unimpressive man” had put the 
MAUD Committee’s reports in a safe, without showing them to 
the other members of the uranium committee. As soon as he 
could, he met with the uranium committee and, to the shock of 


some of them, spelled out the possibilities of using fission to 
make an explosive. It was the first time some of the committee 
had heard the word “bomb” used in this context. One of its 
members, Samuel Allison, later recalled: “I thought we were 
making a power source for submarines.” 

From Washington, Oliphant flew to California to meet 
Lawrence, who, he had reason to believe, had a greater sense of 
urgency about the project than prevailed among the government 
scientists. On September 21, 1941, Lawrence drove Oliphant up 
“Cyclotron Hill” to see the site of the still-to-be-built 184-inch 
cyclotron. When they returned to Lawrence’s office, they were 
joined by Oppenheimer. Assuming that Oppenheimer was privy 
to the official secrets that he and Lawrence had been discussing, 
Oliphant continued to talk about the MAUD report, about the 
optimism that the British scientists had expressed concerning the 
possibility of building an atomic bomb, and about the 
cooperation between Britain and the States on the research and 
development of the bomb. Noting that Lawrence had begun to 
look extremely uncomfortable, and registering the shocked 
expression on Oppenheimer’s face, Oliphant realized that he had 
just revealed to Oppenheimer for the first time the existence of a 
project to build an atomic bomb. Clearing his throat, 
Oppenheimer suggested to Oliphant that it might be advisable not 
to continue this conversation, since he was not involved with the 
project. “But that’s terrible,” replied Oliphant. “We need you.” 

By thus passing this information on to him, Oliphant may 
possibly have guaranteed that Oppenheimer would become 
involved in the project. For, even if it had not been decided that 
Oppenheimer’s theoretical skills would be invaluable to the 
project, he now knew too much to be left out. 


41 Take the fifty-six protons of barium from the ninety-two of uranium, and you 
are left with thirty-six, the atomic number of krypton. 

42 While most people in California anglicised it to “Oppie,” Chevalier insisted 
on keeping to the Dutch original of the nickname. 

43 See this page. 


1941-1945 


In on the Secret 


fter he had let slip to Oppenheimer 
the Allies’ most important and most close y guarded military 


secret, Oliphant returned to Washington, leaving a written 
summary of the MAUD report’s findings with Lawrence. In 
Washington, Lawrence had arranged for Oliphant to meet Bush 
and Conant, but from both Oliphant received a rather frosty 
reception. Adopting a somewhat stricter approach to official 
secrets than had prevailed in California, neither Bush nor Conant 
would admit to knowing anything about the MAUD report and 
both gave Oliphant the cold shoulder. To Bush, Conant dismissed 
Oliphant’s information as “gossip among nuclear physicists on 
forbidden subjects,” and remarked testily: “Oliphant’s behavior 
does not help the cause of secrecy.” 

The encounter between Oliphant and Bush and Conant reveals 
a fundamental difference between the priorities of Britain and the 
United States at this time. For the British, maintaining strict 
secrecy was of secondary importance to the crucial task of 
building an atomic bomb before the Germans, who, they had 
reason to believe, were pressing ahead with their own atomic- 
weapons program. 

From the perspective of the U.S., things looked rather different. 
America was not yet at war with Germany, nor was the Soviet 
Union yet its ally. Indeed, insofar as the Americans regarded 
themselves as being at war in the autumn of 1941, it was a war of 
espionage against the Soviet Union. The truly breathtaking extent 
of Soviet espionage—industrial, scientific and military—during 
this period would not become fully apparent until many years 
after the war, but the U.S. authorities already knew enough to be 
certain that the Russian embassy in Washington and the 


consulates in New York and San Francisco were operating as 
centers of a major spying operation. Using an elaborate system of 
“legals” and “illegals’—the former operating under their own 
names, the latter working under cover of false names and 
disguises—and employing a mixture of people working through 
the American Communist Party and others working directly for 
the Soviet Union, a vast amount of information was being 
collected from manufacturing companies, universities, military 
bases and government offices and sent via official cables to 
Moscow. 

In Britain, the Soviet espionage operation had been, and 
continued to be throughout the war, extraordinarily effective. The 
“Cambridge Five’—Anthony Blunt, Guy Burgess, Donald 
Maclean, Kim Philby and John Cairncross—alone were 
responsible for the handing over to Moscow of a substantial 
number of top British military secrets. Partly, no doubt, because 
of their status as accepted members of the British social and 
educational elite, they were, with only minimal security checks, 
appointed to the kind of positions that gave them access to the 
Allies’ most closely guarded documents (Blunt, Cairncross and 
Philby worked for British intelligence, while Maclean and, 
intermittently, Burgess were employed by the Foreign Office). 
Through Cairncross, for example, the Soviets received, just a 
week or so after the final meeting of the MAUD Committee, a full 
account of that meeting and a copy of its final report. 

Neither Britain nor the U.S. knew about the activities of these 
five until after the war. They were exposed by an operation that 
the U.S. had put into place precisely because of their suspicions of 
the Soviets. This was the so-called “Venona” project, in 
accordance with which the U.S. telegraph companies were 
instructed to keep a copy of every cable sent from the U.S. to 
Moscow. These messages, hundreds of thousands of them, were 
preserved and studied and, after many of them had been 
decoded, provided the U.S. authorities with a detailed picture of 
the astonishing extent and success of Soviet espionage. 

The decoding, however, could not be done in time to prevent 
most of the espionage that occurred during the war, and the U.S. 
had to rely chiefly on the counterintelligence efforts of the FBI. 
While the British lacked the manpower, and to some extent the 
will, to do very much about Soviet espionage, the U.S. could 


afford to invest the vast sums it took to employ several thousand 
FBI agents to try to prevent their secrets from being handed over 
to Moscow. 

Because the FBI knew that the American Communist Party 
played a key role in the information-gathering efforts of the 
Soviets, they naturally centered their counterintelligence effort on 
Communist Party members and people close to them. Thus it was 
that, while Oliphant was eagerly revealing to Oppenheimer the 
secret of the British and the American atomic-bomb projects, the 
FBI was keeping a file on him. 

At this time, though the FBI regarded Oppenheimer as 
suspicious, they did not treat the surveillance of him as a 
particularly high priority. They may have kept a file on him, but 
they did not—as they did with people identified as senior figures 
in the Soviet espionage network—have him followed, bug his 
phone or install microphones in his house. And, in fact, the file 
they opened on him in March 1941 contained, six months later, 
very little. It recorded: 1. his attendance at Chevalier’s home at a 
meeting in December 1940, at which Isaac Folkoff and William 
Schneiderman were also present; 2. Folkoff’s reference to him as 
“the big shot”; 3. his subscription to the Communist Party 
newspaper, People’s World; and 4. his membership of several 
Communist front organizations. And that was about it. It was 
more than enough to persuade J.Edgar Hoover that 
Oppenheimer needed to be watched, but it fell a long way short 
of suggesting that he was engaged in any kind of espionage. Of 
course, before his meeting with Oliphant, Oppenheimer, even if 
he had wanted to hand over secret information to the Soviets, 
would have been unable to do so, since he did not have access to 
any secrets. In the months after that meeting and, indirectly at 
least, as a result of that meeting, that was to change drastically. 

With Ernest Lawrence (if not with Bush and Conant), Oliphant 
had succeeded in his aim of using the MAUD Committee’s 
findings to instill a sense of urgency with regard to the 
development of an atomic bomb, and, in his desire to hurry the 
project along, Lawrence had an influential ally in Arthur 
Compton. On September 25, 1941, somewhat to his annoyance, 
Conant was subjected to what he described to Bush as an 
“involuntary conference” on the atomic bomb with Lawrence and 
Compton. This took place at Compton’s home in Chicago, where 


Conant was staying as a guest while attending the celebrations 
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of Chicago University. 
Unknown to Conant, Compton had invited Lawrence, who was 
also in Chicago for the celebrations, to come to his home to 
present to Conant his case for pressing urgently ahead with the 
development of the bomb. After taking the opportunity to 
reprimand Lawrence for allowing the secret of the bomb to be 
given away to Oppenheimer, Conant listened to Lawrence’s 
arguments for adopting the MAUD Committee’s findings and 
working with the British on building the bomb. Then, turning to 
Lawrence, Conant said: “Ernest, you say you are convinced of the 
importance of these fission bombs. Are you ready to devote the 
next several years of your life to getting them made?” After a 
moment’s hesitation, Lawrence replied: “If you tell me this is my 
job, Pll do it.” 

Though it had been discussed unofficially by American 
scientists for months, and Lauritsen had supplied officials with a 
précis, the MAUD report was not officially delivered to Conant 
until October 3, 1941. Six days later, Bush presented its findings 
to President Roosevelt, whose response was to set up a high-level 
policy group—consisting of Bush and Conant, together with the 
Vice President, the Secretary of War and the Army Chief of Staff 
—who would henceforth be responsible for the management of 
the atomic-bomb project, acting on advice from Arthur Compton’s 
committee. In response to this development, Compton called a 
meeting of his committee for October 21 in Schenectady, in 
upstate New York. A week before the meeting, Lawrence cabled 
Compton to say: “Oppenheimer has important new ideas. Think it 
desirable he meet with us Tuesday. Can you arrange invitation?” 
After a second request, in which Lawrence emphasized that he 
had “a great deal of confidence in Oppenheimer,” Compton 
capitulated and agreed to allow Lawrence to bring him. 

Within a month of his impromptu meeting with Oliphant, 
therefore, Oppenheimer had gone from being completely ignorant 
of, and excluded from, the U.S. atomic-bomb program to being 
right at the heart of it. This seems to have resulted in a flurry of 
what the FBI, at least, regarded as extremely suspicious 
Communist Party activity on Oppenheimer’s part. On October 3, 
1941, the agency learned from a “reliable confidential informant” 
(a wiretap on Folkoffs phone) that Folkoff had been in touch 


with Oppenheimer to advise him that he would not be able to 
meet him at the weekend and had instead arranged for him to 
meet Steve Nelson. Three days later, from the same “informant” 
the FBI learned that Nelson had contacted Folkoff to say that he 
had received $100 from “him.” Then, on October 14, a mere 
week before the Schenectady meeting, the wiretap revealed that 
Oppenheimer had contacted Folkoff to ask him to arrange for 
Rudy Lambert (the head of the California Communist Party labor 
commission) to contact him and to tell him that “Steve” had 
contacted him and given him a message for Folkoff. 

There is no record of Oppenheimer’s meeting with Lambert— 
nor even any confirmation that it took place—nor is there any 
way of knowing what message Steve Nelson wished to pass on to 
Folkoff via Oppenheimer. Coming at precisely the moment when 
Lawrence was pressing for Oppenheimer to be invited to a secret 
meeting to discuss progress on the atomic bomb, it is natural to 
wonder whether Oppenheimer might have been passing on 
information about this meeting to people who would then be able 
to inform Moscow. On the basis of the available evidence, 
however, it seems more likely that Oppenheimer’s purpose was to 
let Folkoff know that henceforth his contacts with the Party 
would be severely reduced. 

Oppenheimer knew (from Frank’s experience, for example) 
how damaging it could be to one’s career to be perceived as a 
communist, and there are many signs that, by the autumn of 
1941, what he wanted more than anything was to be involved in 
government work related to the war—work which, he well knew, 
was wholly incompatible with close associations with the 
Communist Party. In his letter to Willie Fowler in the spring of 
1941 mentioned earlier, Oppenheimer had written: “I think 
surely if I were asked to do a job I could do really well and that 
needed doing Id not refuse.” The sense one has from 
Oppenheimer’s letters of the spring and summer of 1941 is that 
he felt excluded from what was important, an impression 
supported by the Berkeley chemist Martin Kamen, who recalls 
that, though Oppenheimer had previously been the person 
everybody spoke to about their research, in 1941 this began to 
change: 


All of a sudden, nobody’s talking to him. He’s out of it. There’s 


something big going on over there [at the Rad Lab], but he 
doesn’t know what it is. And so he was getting more and more 
frustrated and Lawrence is very worried because he feels that, 
after all, Oppenheimer can certainly figure out what’s going 
on, so the security is nonsense to keep him out of it. Better to 
have him in. And I imagine that’s what finally happened; they 
said it’s easier to monitor him if he’s inside the project than 
outside. 


Oppenheimer himself said that he was “not without envy” of 
the men he knew who had gone off to work on radar or other 
aspects of military research, “but it was not until my first 
connection with the rudimentary atomic-energy enterprise that I 
began to see any way in which I could be of direct use.” 

As usual, Oppenheimer’s behavior was ambiguous and difficult 
to interpret. If he had wanted to avoid political controversy in 
order to “be of direct use,” it was rather odd of him, on October 
13, 1941, to write a strongly worded letter of protest to Senator 
F. R. Coudert, who was cochairman of the committee appointed 
by the State of New York to investigate communist infiltration of 
the New York City college system. After making the perfectly 
reasonable point that the Bill of Rights “guarantees not the right 
to a belief, but the right to express that belief, in speech or in 
writing,” and that therefore the teachers accused of communism 
were engaged in “practices specifically protected by the Bill of 
Rights,” Oppenheimer could not help himself ending his letter 
with some straightforward and, in the context, surely superfluous, 
abuse: “It took your own statement, with its sanctimonious 
equivocations and its red baiting, to get me to believe that the 
stories of mixed cajolery, intimidation and arrogance on the part 
of the committee of which you are the chairman, are in fact true.” 
This is not the tone of a man determined to keep a low profile 
and avoid offending the political establishment. The vitriol in the 
letter, however, might be seen as further evidence of 
Oppenheimer’s frustration and anxiety over the possibility that he 
might be excluded from war-related work because of his 
connections with the Communist Party, and his anger at the 
implied suggestion that he was not entirely loyal to the U.S. 

A week after thus registering his disapproval of those who 
would deny communists their constitutional rights, Oppenheimer 


was traveling with Lawrence across the U.S., from Berkeley to 
Schenectady, to take part in a meeting that would turn out to be 
an important milestone in the Allied project to build an atomic 
bomb. The meeting opened with Lawrence reading Oliphant’s 
summary of the MAUD report. Compton then reported on various 
meetings that he had had with leading scientists, at which he 
received the latest information on key scientific questions relating 
to the bomb from those most qualified to give it. One assumes 
that much of this information would have been new to 
Oppenheimer. 

Compton reported that in his meetings with Fermi he had 
received an estimate of the critical mass of U-235 that put it at 
about 100 pounds. This was considerably more than the Frisch- 
Peierls estimate, but still low enough to make the bomb a 
practical proposition. But, whether one needed two pounds or 
100 pounds, the extraction of U-235 from natural uranium 
remained an extraordinarily difficult task. Compton’s advice on 
how best to tackle this problem came from the Nobel Prize— 
winning chemist Harold Urey, who told Compton about the 
various methods of separating the fissionable isotope, all of which 
would require a massive investment in time and manpower if 
they were to produce enough U-235 to make a bomb. 

The most promising methods of separation, Urey told Compton 
(and Compton reported to the Schenectady meeting), were 
gaseous diffusion and centrifugal separation. The former requires 
the uranium to be converted from a metal into a gas and then 
forced through the microscopic holes of a filter, or “barrier.” 
Because the U-235 isotope is slightly lighter than U-238, it will 
pass through the barrier more readily, so that the barrier will act 
as a way of “enriching” the uranium—that is, increasing the 
proportion of U-235. Among the many problems with this method 
are that the gas is extraordinarily corrosive and the process has to 
be repeated many times, making it laboriously slow. At the time 
of Compton’s meeting with Urey, only microscopic amounts of 
enriched uranium had been produced by this method. The idea 
that it might furnish the basis for production of the isotope on an 
industrial scale looked fanciful. 

Similar problems attended the centrifuge method, which is 
today the main method used to enrich uranium, but which in 
1941 was a new and relatively untested technique. The basic idea 


is to place the uranium, again in a gaseous form, in a cylinder, 
which is then rotated very quickly, forcing the heavier U-238 to 
the outer edge and concentrating the lighter U-235 near the 
center. Considering both methods fairly promising, Urey gave it 
as his view that the assembly of a critical mass of U-235 was, 
though extremely difficult, quite achievable with sufficient 
resources. 

An alternative to the arduous business of collecting together an 
appreciable amount of U-235 was to make a bomb from the 
newly discovered element of plutonium, or “element 94,” as it 
was then still known (it did not receive its name or its symbol, 
Pu, until March 1942). Plutonium does not exist in nature. It is 
one of the elusive “transuranics”—elements heavier than uranium 
—that Fermi and others had been looking for, and which they 
thought would be the result of bombarding uranium with 
neutrons. That transuranic elements could be created had been 
believed by physicists for a long time, and that element 94 would 
be fissionable had been predicted by Bohr and Wheeler in their 
classic papers on fission in 1939. 

In his January 1940 summary paper on the literature of fission 
Louis Turner had drawn attention to the possibility that there 
might be alternatives to U-235 as a fissionable material. If, 
instead of fissioning, an atom of U-238 captures the neutron fired 
at it, then it becomes U-239, which, Turner suggested, might 
fission. But, even if it did not, it would almost certainly be 
unstable and thus, by beta decay, transmute into the hitherto- 
unknown element 93 (that is, an element with 93 protons—one 
more than uranium). And this element would, in turn, decay into 
element 94, which, Turner predicted, would be even more 
fissionable than U-235. 

Turner was right on all counts, as would eventually be shown 
by a series of experiments in 1940 and 1941. In the spring of 
1940, using the 60-inch cyclotron, Ed McMillan and Phil Abelson 
produced element 93—later named neptunium (Neptune being 
the planet beyond Uranus)—by bombarding uranium with 
neutrons. Astonishingly, they published their results. Their paper 
announcing the discovery of element 93 appeared in the Physical 
Review of June 1940, much to the disgust of James Chadwick, 
who persuaded the British embassy to make a formal protest to 
Berkeley. Though the British were, compared to the U.S., not 


particularly vigilant about the protection of their war secrets 
from Soviet espionage, the open publication of work directly 
helpful to the Nazi bomb project was something about which they 
were emphatically not prepared to take a relaxed view. 

On February 23, 1941, Glenn Seaborg and his research team at 
Berkeley, again using the 60-inch cyclotron, made a conclusive 
identification of element 94 from the decay of element 93, and a 
month later showed that this element would, indeed, fission like 
U-235. This time they did not publish. Instead, Seaborg, together 
with Eugene Wigner at Princeton, joined Compton’s team of 
advisors, whom they told that element 94 was indeed more 
fissionable than U-235 and that it was realistic to believe that a 
critical mass of it could be produced in a uranium nuclear 
reactor. 

So Compton’s report to the Schenactady meeting concluded 
that, according to the best scientific advice he had received, an 
atomic bomb was a possibility. The next person to speak was 
Oppenheimer, who gave his own estimate of the critical mass of 
U-235, which he put at about 220 pounds—more conservative 
than Fermi’s estimate, but more or less in the same ballpark 
(hundreds, rather than thousands, of pounds). 

Compton’s biggest disappointment at this meeting was with the 
engineers who were present (at the express insistence of Bush) in 
order to provide practical estimates of how long the bomb would 
take to build and how much it would cost. The reason the 
meeting was held at Schenectady was that this was the site of the 
laboratories of General Electric, who provided the engineers. And 
yet, to Compton’s exasperation, the engineers refused to offer any 
opinion regarding the likely timescale and/or cost of the project. 
There was, in their opinion, simply too little data even to hazard 
a guess. As some kind of answer was needed, Compton himself 
suggested a time of three and a half years and a cost of “some 
hundreds of millions of dollars’—an estimate that, at Bush’s 
suggestion, he played down in his final report, “lest the 
government should be frightened off.” 

In his autobiography Compton reported that he had “always 
been rather proud of these forecasts, considering the limited 
data.” His estimate of the time required to build a bomb was 
indeed remarkably accurate. Once the project was formally under 
way, it did indeed take three and a half years to complete. The 


cost, however, would turn out to be $2 billion, largely because of 
the difficulties of isotope separation. 

On the basis of the Schenectady meeting, Compton prepared a 
report which stated unequivocally that “a fission bomb of 
superlatively destructive power will result from bringing quickly 
together a sufficient mass of element U-235” and recommended: 
“Full effort toward making atomic bombs is essential to the safety 
of the nation and the free world.” After Compton presented this 
report to Bush on November 6, Bush in turn presented it to the 
President on November 27. 

On December 6, Bush gathered together a small group 
consisting of himself, Conant, Briggs, Lawrence and Compton to 
hear the President’s response to Compton’s report. This was that a 
new committee should be constituted. It was to be called S-1 
(that is, “Section One,” the first section of the Office of Scientific 
Research and Development), and its membership should consist 
of Conant, Briggs, Lawrence and Compton, together with Eger V. 
Murphree, the director of research at Standard Oil, Columbia’s 
George Pegram and Harold Urey, both of whom were at that time 
in England learning about the creation of the parallel British 
project, called, with a deliberate attempt to be misleading, the 
“Tube Alloys” project. The S-1 committee, with a budget of 
several million dollars, was to spend six months investigating 
further the possibility of making atomic bombs, and, if after that 
time it looked likely that such bombs were feasible, then 
practically unlimited funds would be made available to see the 
project through to completion. 

Conant was made chairman of this new committee, with Briggs 
as vice chairman. Urey was to take charge of investigating the 
diffusion method, Murphree was to assume responsibility for 
researching the centrifuge method, and Lawrence was to 
investigate a new method that he had devised, using converted 
cyclotrons to separate the uranium isotopes electromagnetically. 
Compton had the dual responsibilities of the design of the bomb 
and research into the possible use of plutonium, which meant 
overseeing the construction of the world’s first nuclear reactor. 

Oppenheimer was not included in the S-1 committee, which 
perhaps indicates that, though his contributions to the 
Schenectady meeting were valued, he was considered too 
unreliable from a political point of view to be included in such 


sensitive work. Lawrence was determined to _ involve 
Oppenheimer, but in this he was not helped by Oppenheimer’s 
apparent determination to remain involved in left-wing political 
activity. When Oppenheimer invited Lawrence to a meeting at his 
home of the American Association of Scientific Workers (a union 
organization), Lawrence refused to attend and banned his staff 
from attending. “I don’t think it’s a good idea,” he told 
Oppenheimer. “I don’t want you to join it. I know nothing wrong 
with it, but we’re planning big things in connection with the war 
effort, and it wouldn’t be right. I want no occasion for somebody 
in Washington to find fault with us.” In reply, on the day that 
Lawrence left for Washington to receive the President’s response 
to Compton’s report, Oppenheimer wrote to him: 


I had hoped to see you before you left, but will write this to 
assure you that there will be no further difficulties at any time 
with the A.A.S.W. I think that your own feeling about the men 
working directly with you will have a good deal of weight also 
with those scientists whose defense efforts are not in the 
Radiation Laboratory, and I doubt very much whether anyone 
will want to start at this time an organization which could in 
any way embarrass, divide or interfere with the work we have 
in hand. 


In the light of this letter, it is surprising, to say the least, that 
on December 6—the very day that Lawrence was in Washington 
receiving President Roosevelt’s response—Oppenheimer chose to 
attend a fund-raising event for veterans of the Spanish Civil War, 
which, he surely knew, would be attended by almost every high- 
ranking Communist Party official in California and, as such, was 
almost certain to bring him to the renewed attention of the FBI. 

The party was held at the home of Louise Bransten, known to 
the FBI as an intimate friend of Gregory Kheifetz, an agent for the 
NKVD (the forerunner of the KGB) working undercover at the 
Soviet consulate in San Francisco. Kheifetz had been instructed to 
find out about U.S. uranium research and so had been cultivating 
scientists. He was no doubt delighted to be introduced to 
Oppenheimer, and, according to Jerold and Leona Schecter in 
their controversial book Sacred Secrets, the two had lunch the 
next day, at which Oppenheimer expressed concern that the 


Germans would build an atomic bomb before the Allies. The 
Schecters also claim that at this lunch Oppenheimer told Kheifetz 
about Einstein’s famous letter to Roosevelt and about a secret 
project involving outstanding physicists, including Nobel Prize 
winners. 

If what the Schecters say is true, it would explain the reference 
to Oppenheimer in a letter written by a Soviet intelligence officer 
in 1944, which claims that Oppenheimer—“one of the leaders of 
scientific work on uranium in the USA”—while “an unlisted 
member of the apparatus of Comrade Browder, informed us about 
the beginning of the work.” It is possible to be skeptical both 
about this letter and about the account offered by the Schecters of 
Oppenheimer’s lunch with Kheifetz, but, even if one takes both at 
face value, one still does not get a picture of Oppenheimer as 
engaged in Soviet espionage. He knew a lot more than he is 
reported as telling Kheifetz, and, though it would have been 
indiscreet of him to mention Einstein’s letter and the existence of 
the secret project, such revelations do not begin to compare with 
the actions of real spies like the “Cambridge Five,” or even with 
Oliphant’s behavior in Berkeley. In any case, by the time of 
Oppenheimer’s alleged lunch with Kheifetz, the U.S. and the 
Soviet Union were allies, since, if it took place the day after the 
fund-raising party for Spanish war veterans, then it occurred on 
December 7, 1941, the day that the Japanese attack on Pearl 
Harbor brought the U.S. into the Second World War. 

When the S-1 committee met on December 18, 1941, the new 
political and military situation had made the project in which 
they were engaged far more urgent. At this meeting, Pegram and 
Urey reported back from England on the optimism that prevailed 
there regarding the diffusion method of isotope separation, and 
Lawrence presented a convincing case for the practicality of the 
electromagnetic method. Urey also reported on_ research 
undertaken by Jesse W. Beams at Virginia, which suggested that 
the centrifugal method was entirely feasible. It says much about 
the state of play regarding all these methods, however, that 
Compton regarded the production of plutonium to be in some 
ways easier and more practical than any of them; after all, in 
order for that to work, one had to: 1. produce a nuclear chain 
reaction, which had never before been achieved; 2. operate this 
reaction at a level to produce the quantities of plutonium needed, 


a feat that no one at the time knew was even possible; and 3., in 
Compton’s words, “learn the chemistry and metallurgy of the new 
chemical element plutonium, so that when the plutonium was 
made within the uranium it could be extracted, reduced to metal 
and fashioned into the shapes required for the bomb.” Faced with 
the newly urgent imperative to make a success of their project 
and with the seemingly equal claims of each of the four methods 
of producing fissionable material, the S-1 committee made the 
momentous decision to pursue them all. 

As Compton points out in his autobiography: “The period from 
December 1941, when authority was given to push the atomic 
project, until June 1942, when the Army assumed responsibility, 
was critical.” It was during this period that those, like Lawrence 
and Compton, who believed an atomic bomb could be built had 
to produce convincing evidence that it was possible, and produce 
a workable plan for making the bomb in three or four years. 

At the next meeting of the S-1 committee, held at Compton’s 
house on January 24, 1942, the decision was made to base the 
work on the uranium chain reaction and the production of 
plutonium in one place, rather than keep it dispersed throughout 
various American universities. Pegram, naturally, wanted that 
place to be Columbia, where Fermi and Szilard had been working 
together on a nuclear reactor throughout the previous year. 
Lawrence argued vigorously for the project to be based at 
Berkeley. Princeton was also considered a possibility. In the end, 
Compton settled on his own university, Chicago. “You'll never get 
a chain reaction going here,” Lawrence scoffed. “The whole 
tempo of the University of Chicago is too slow.” Compton 
countered by promising to have the chain reaction going by the 
end of the year. “I’ll bet you a thousand dollars you won’t,” said 
Lawrence, but when Compton took the bet, immediately lowered 
the stakes to “a 5 cent cigar.” “I won the bet,” Compton remarks 
in his autobiography, “but I haven’t yet received the cigar.” 

During the spring of 1942, Fermi, Szilard and others prepared 
to relocate to Chicago to join what Compton had decided to call 
the “Metallurgical Laboratory.” At the same time Oppenheimer 
was moving, step by step, from the periphery of the project into 
its very center. At every stage in this development his progress 
was threatened by the suspicions aroused by his radical politics 
and the circles of friends and associates into which those politics 


had placed him. During this period many of the people whose job 
it was to protect the U.S. from Soviet espionage grew increasingly 
suspicious of Oppenheimer and there were several requests to 
place him under tighter surveillance. On January 26, 1942, 
Special Agent N. J. L. Pieper of the San Francisco office of the FBI 
wrote to J. Edgar Hoover, listing Oppenheimer as one of four 
people (the others were Addis, Chevalier and a man called 
Alexander Kaun) who “represent, in the opinion of this office, a 
group which is inimical to the welfare of this country.” Pieper 
recommended that “the highly confidential source of information 
and surveillance mentioned in Bureau teletype of recent date 
should be utilized”—that is, their telephones should be bugged 
and microphones should be installed in their homes. “This group 
of individuals,” Pieper went on, “is on such a plane that it is 
unlikely that any confidential Party informant now available to 
this office will be able to reach them and determine their actual 
position in the Party.” 

In his reply, dated February 10, Hoover granted permission to 
maintain “technical surveillance” of Chevalier and Kaun, but not 
of Addis and Oppenheimer. Pieper tried again in March and was 
again refused, Hoover reminding him that in future he should 
“follow proper procedure” and ask for such permission by phone 
rather than by letter. Evidently, if and when the day came for 
him to grant permission to tap Oppenheimer’s phone, Hoover was 
reluctant to have a written record of that decision. 

At this time Hoover knew nothing about the U.S. bomb project 
or the S-1 committee. The worries that he and his agents had 
about Oppenheimer were quite general ones, based on the 
understandable (if not infallible) assumption that anyone who 
regularly met the likes of Nelson, Folkoff, Schneiderman and 
Kheifetz was up to no good. If Hoover had known that 
Oppenheimer was in possession of detailed top-secret information 
regarding the development of a weapon that the U.S. government 
was beginning to believe would win the war for them, there is 
surely no doubt that he would have placed him under the closest 
possible surveillance. 

James Conant was aware of how much Oppenheimer knew, and 
he also, after Oliphant’s visit, had good reason for thinking that 
the security standards at Berkeley were not all they should have 
been. He was therefore a worried man. In February 1942, he 


summoned First Lieutenant John Lansdale of the U.S. Army 
Military Intelligence Service to his office and explained to him 
that the U.S. was in a race with the Germans to build an atomic 
weapon. “Whoever gets this first will win the war,” Conant told 
him, adding that it was therefore important to find out if the 
physicists at Berkeley could be trusted to keep a secret. As 
instructed by Conant, Lansdale traveled to Berkeley and, under 
the cover of being a law student, spent two weeks assessing the 
situation. What he discovered horrified Conant. Lansdale found 
that he was able to wander freely around the site of the 
unfinished 184-inch cyclotron (soon to be converted into a 
uranium-enriching machine), and that Lawrence’s work on a 
government project to build an explosive was common 
knowledge at Berkeley and the subject of open and casual 
conversations in the cafeteria. “Oh! ... Oh! ... Oh my goodness!” 
Conant is reported to have uttered at the news. In response, he 
sent Lansdale back to Berkeley, this time in uniform, to give the 
physicists a dressing-down and to warn them that breaches in 
security could undermine the project. 

By March 9, 1942, when Bush wrote a progress report to 
President Roosevelt, Lawrence’s electromagnetic method of 
enriching uranium seemed to be emerging as the front-runner 
among the various methods of producing U-235. Bush 
recommended to the President that a centrifuge plant should be 
built, which, he suggested, could be up and running by the end of 
1943. A gaseous-diffusion plant, Bush advised, could start to 
deliver weapon-grade uranium by the end of 1944. An 
electromagnetic plant, however, could be completed by the 
summer of 1943. 

Though Oppenheimer was not yet officially part of the U.S. 
bomb project, he was, in practice, devoting all his energies to it, 
having been brought into it “through the back door,” as it were, 
by Lawrence. For most of his time at Berkeley, Lawrence had 
been in the habit of bringing to Oppenheimer theoretical 
problems raised by his experimental work, and he saw no reason 
to stop doing that now. Indeed, for Lawrence it was more 
important than ever to make use of Oppenheimer’s acute mind, 
since so much now depended on understanding the enrichment 
and possible fission of uranium before their German rivals. 

So immersed was Oppenheimer in his collaborative work with 


Lawrence on bomb-related questions that, even though he was 
not officially employed on war work, he wrote to Robert Millikan 
on March 20, 1942, resigning his part-time post at Caltech in 
order to give his full attention to war-related research. “New and 
compelling reasons,” wrote Oppenheimer, “have arisen for my 
leaving Berkeley as little as possible.” Six days later, Lawrence 
wrote to Conant, suggesting that Oppenheimer’s involvement in 
the work of the S-1 committee be made official, or, as Lawrence 
put it, urging “the desirability of asking Oppenheimer to serve as 
a member of S-1”: 


I think he would be a tremendous asset in every way. He 
combines a penetrating insight into the theoretical aspects of 
the whole program with solid common sense, which sometimes 
in certain directions seems to be lacking, and I am sure that 
you and Dr. Bush would find him a useful adviser. 


With Lansdale’s report from Berkeley still fresh in his mind, 
Conant was in no hurry to bring a suspected security risk on 
board. Conant was, however, unable to tell Lawrence who he 
should and should not appoint to the Rad Lab and thus was 
unable to prevent Lawrence from inadvertently creating one of 
the biggest security nightmares of the entire U.S. bomb project. 
For, in involving Oppenheimer in his work, Lawrence was also 
opening the door to Oppenheimer’s students and, in this way— 
despite Lawrence’s own political conservatism and hostility to 
left-wing political activity—the Rad Lab acquired a reputation as 
a hotbed of radicalism. Lawrence had already taken on Frank 
Oppenheimer, who, after Pearl Harbor, was put in charge of 
building the 184-inch cyclotron. According to the historian Gregg 
Herken, Lawrence’s “boys”—the other Rad Lab scientists— 
remembered Frank “nervously chain-smoking, pacing back and 
forth on the wooden latticework that rose above the big magnet.” 

Lawrence’s plan was to persuade the government, via the S-1 
committee, to invest hundreds of millions of dollars in a large- 
scale industrial plant of “Calutrons” (as he was calling the 
modified cyclotrons) in order to produce the U-235 required for 
the bomb. It was a plan beset with all kinds of problems, some of 
which required a better understanding than they had at this time 
of the physics behind the electromagnetic separation of isotopes, 


which is where Oppenheimer and his students came in. 

Thus it was that in the early summer of 1942 two of 
Oppenheimer’s students, Stanley Frankel and Eldred Nelson, were 
working on the “theoretical” problem of how to improve the 
focusing of the Calutron beam. Their paper on the subject was 
shown by Oppenheimer to another of his students, Rossi 
Lomanitz. “Uranium was never mentioned,” Lomanitz later said. 
“It didn’t need to be.” Lomanitz was one of a group of 
Oppenheimer’s students who were active in radical politics and, 
quite probably, members of the Communist Party. Among the 
other members of this group were Lomanitz’s roommate, David 
Bohm, and their close friend Max Friedman, both of whom were 
recruited by Oppenheimer into the Rad Lab over the spring and 
summer of 1942. A fourth member, Joe Weinberg, was 
considered too radical to be employed on such security-sensitive 
work. 

The 184-inch Calutron was switched on for the first time on 
May 26, 1942, by which time Oppenheimer, though he had not 
yet received security clearance, was playing a pivotal role in the 
work of the S-1 committee. Without actually becoming a member 
of the committee, as Lawrence had proposed, Oppenheimer was 
appointed as a consultant, with special responsibility for 
investigating the physics of fast-neutron collisions. His 
predecessor in this position was Gregory Breit, a physicist at the 
University of Wisconsin (it had been Breit who suggested that Joe 
Weinberg transfer from Wisconsin to Berkeley to work with 
Oppenheimer), who had been involved in the uranium project 
from the beginning. Breit had a reputation for being a difficult 
man to work with, partly because of his almost obsessive concern 
with secrecy. As one of the editors of the Physical Review, Breit 
had used his influence to persuade physicists to impose upon 
themselves a voluntary ban on publishing anything that might 
have military value for the duration of the war. When the S-1 
committee was formed, Breit was asked by Compton to act in a 
consultancy role as the head of a small group advising the 
committee on the physics of fast neutrons and the related 
question of the design of the bomb. Breit’s official title, which 
Oppenheimer took delight in inheriting, was “Co-ordinator of 
Rapid Rupture.” 

It is not entirely clear when Oppenheimer was asked to take 


over from Breit. In his autobiography Robert Serber recalls that 
“a few weeks after Pearl Harbor’—so, around Christmastime 
1941—he received a phone call from Oppenheimer, who told him 
that he was in Chicago and wanted to come to Urbana to talk to 
Serber about something. When he arrived, the two went for a 
walk in the countryside: “There, alone in that rural setting, he 
told me that he was going to be appointed to head the weapons 
end of the atomic-bomb project, to replace Gregory Breit in that 
position.” Oppenheimer wanted Serber to come to Berkeley as his 
assistant on the project. Serber agreed to come, but, he says, 
could not leave Urbana until the end of that semester and so did 
not arrive in Berkeley until the end of April 1942. 

Clearly, however, Oppenheimer could not replace Breit until 
Breit left, which he did not do until May. It seems possible that, 
from December 1941 until May 1942, Oppenheimer and Breit 
were working alongside one another. One of Breit’s tasks in his 
role as “Co-ordinator of Rapid Rupture” was to hold a series of 
seminars in order to allow the exchange of ideas among members 
of his small group. For a while, at least, these seminars were held 
at Chicago, with both Oppenheimer and Breit taking part. Samuel 
Allison, a member of Breit’s group, recalls: 


Breit was always frightened something would be revealed in 
the seminars. Oppenheimer was frightened something would 
not. I backed Oppenheimer and challenged Breit to cut the 
censorship. He accused me of being reckless and hostile to him. 
I failed. The seminars became uninformative. 


“Breit was a terrible choice,” another member of the Met Lab 
stated. “He was actually capable of turning a technical problem 
into a fist fight.” Nuel Pharr Davis, in his book on Oppenheimer 
and Lawrence, records a power struggle between Oppenheimer 
and Breit over leadership of Breit’s group: 


Compton, who had become impressed with something firm and 
bold in Oppenheimer’s manner, gave Breit no backing. Breit 
realized that Oppenheimer stood for the new climate of 
opinion. He tentatively suggested Oppenheimer visit him on 
his home grounds at Wisconsin to thresh their difficulties out, 
and he hinted that Oppenheimer might like to make Wisconsin 


his base so that they could work closely together. But when the 
time came to give a definite invitation, Breit simply could not 
do it. He turned in his resignation to Compton and got 
completely out of the fission project on June 1, 1942. 


One of the few pieces of documentary evidence relating to 
Breit’s replacement by Oppenheimer is a letter Breit wrote to 
Briggs on May 18, 1942. “I do not believe that secrecy conditions 
are satisfactory in Dr. Compton’s project,” Breit wrote: 


Within the Chicago project there are several individuals 
strongly opposed to secrecy. One of the men, for example, 
coaxed my secretary there to give him some official reports out 
of my safe while I was away on a trip ... The same individual 
talks quite freely within the group...I have heard him 
advocate the principle that all parts of the work are so closely 
interrelated that it is desirable to discuss them as a whole. 


That individual was Enrico Fermi, who, it will be remembered, 
took a great deal of persuading back in 1939 that secrecy should 
be imposed. There was evidently no way that Fermi and Breit 
could continue to work together on the same project, and, as 
Fermi was entirely indispensable, it was Breit who left, providing 
Oppenheimer with his first official position as part of the U.S. 
atomic-bomb project. 

Strictly speaking, Oppenheimer was still not officially allowed 
to know anything about the project, not even the fact of its 
existence, since he did not yet have security clearance. On April 
28, 1942, he filled out a government security questionnaire, but 
his application for clearance took more than a year to be 
approved. Meanwhile he not only continued to have access to the 
deliberations of the people charged with providing the U.S. with 
its first atomic bomb, but also to play an increasingly central role 
in shaping those deliberations. 

At about the same time that Oppenheimer filled out his security 
form, Robert and Charlotte Serber arrived in Berkeley. As Serber 
recalls, the day after they arrived: 


I went down to Oppie’s office in Le Conte Hall where he had 
accumulated a number of British documents concerning bomb 
design. I remember there was a paper on critical mass and 


something on efficiency, I don’t remember. The papers were 
rudimentary but were really quite helpful in getting us started. 


Seven months after Oliphant’s visit, it seems, the MAUD report 
was still serving a role as inspiration. 

Compton, it will be remembered, had been given six months 
from December 1941 in which to make the case for investing 
hundreds of millions of dollars in the atomic-bomb project, and 
that time was coming to an end. At a meeting of the S-1 
committee on May 23, 1942, it was decided to recommend going 
ahead with what were now five methods of providing fissionable 
material for a bomb—centrifuge, gaseous diffusion, 
electromagnetic separation and two different methods of 
producing plutonium—at an estimated cost of $500 million. On 
June 17, Compton’s suggestions were approved by President 
Roosevelt, who also recommended transferring the project from 
civilian to military control. 

From that moment on, the U.S. no longer had a research 
project led by scientists with the aim of investigating the 
possibility of building an atomic bomb; it had an engineering 
project run by the U.S. Army with the aim of actually building an 
atomic bomb. And security now was no longer a matter of 
voluntary agreements; it was something imposed on the project 
by a team of 300 members of the U.S. Army’s Counter 
Intelligence Corps, under the able leadership of (the newly 
promoted) Captain John Lansdale. Three days after the President 
had given his approval to Compton’s recommendations, the 
project was discussed at the highest possible political level, when, 
at the second Washington conference, Roosevelt and Churchill 
agreed that America and Great Britain should cooperate with 
each other in their joint effort to beat the Nazis in the race to 
produce the world’s first atomic bomb. 

At this point, Oppenheimer’s part in the joint project was still 
the fairly minor one that he had inherited from Breit. However, 
the discussion group he led had two main tasks—to investigate 
fast-neutron collisions and to think about bomb design—and the 
second of these was hardly a peripheral concern. In effect, 
Oppenheimer, though his application for security clearance had 
not yet been approved and he was not yet a member of the S-1 
committee, was now in charge of designing the bomb. 


His main accomplice in this crucial task was Serber, who 
within a month or so of arriving at Berkeley achieved more in 
getting the bomb designed than Breit’s team had managed in the 
previous five months. He was helped by having at his disposal the 
combined talents of Stanley Frankel and Eldred Nelson, the two 
graduate students of Oppenheimer’s who had helped to improve 
the beam of the Calutron. They were still employed by Lawrence 
at the Rad Lab, but, so long as, in Serber’s words, “I didn’t take 
up so much time that Ernest’s requirements suffered,” Serber had 
them as his assistants. He assigned them the task of improving 
the calculation of critical mass and was surprised when they came 
back to him with a formula that allowed an exact solution to the 
problem, “provided, of course, one knew all the physical 
constants, such as the value of the cross sections and the number 
of neutrons per fission.” As far as those difficulties were 
concerned, no more theory was necessary; all that was required 
were the results of further experiments. 

While Nelson and Frankel were calculating critical mass, Serber 
looked into the problem of efficiency. When a lump of uranium 
goes critical, not all the material will fission, because the uranium 
will expand with the heat and be blown apart by the explosion 
before most of it fissions. So the problem of efficiency is: how 
much of the uranium in a bomb will actually fission and therefore 
be converted into explosive energy? Given the extreme difficulty 
of separating U-235 from natural uranium, the question of 
efficiency was very important, since the more efficient the bomb, 
the less enriched uranium would be required. 

The basic design of the uranium bomb had already been laid 
out by Frisch and Peierls in their memorandum of 1940: two 
subcritical pieces of uranium would be brought together to form 
one supercritical piece. The problem with this design was that, 
for it to work, the two pieces would have to be brought together 
very quickly, otherwise a stray neutron would most likely set off a 
chain reaction before the two pieces were in place, causing the 
bomb to “fizzle.” To avoid this, the fissionable materials had to 
be extremely pure, and the “gun” firing the two pieces together 
had to be extremely fast. This meant that Oppenheimer’s team 
had to investigate and solve two sets of questions, one involving 
the chemistry of uranium and plutonium and the other involving 
firearms and explosives. 


Faced with these kinds of problems, Oppenheimer’s instinct 
was the exact opposite of Breit’s; whereas Breit had wanted above 
all to protect the secrecy of the discussions among his group, 
even if that meant inhibiting those discussions, Oppenheimer 
wanted above all to encourage those discussions, even if that 
meant compromising a little on security. In July 1942, therefore, 
he and Serber decided to host a meeting at Berkeley of, as 
Oppenheimer put it, “luminaries’—top-level physicists whose 
expertise might be brought to bear on the problems facing them. 

The man Oppenheimer wanted most urgently involved in this 
meeting was someone who, up to this point, had not been 
involved in the bomb project at all, and who had, in fact, 
remained deeply skeptical that an atomic bomb could possibly be 
built. That man was Hans Bethe, widely regarded at this time as 
the leading nuclear physicist in the world. Bethe’s review articles 
of the late 1930s were seen as being so authoritative they had 
become known as “Bethe’s Bible.” His work on stellar energy, 
which was eventually (in 1967) to win him the Nobel Prize, was 
well known to Oppenheimer, as it was to most physicists, 
providing as it does a profound and fundamentally important 
analysis of how nuclear fusion lies at the heart of the energy 
produced by stars. 

Having been removed from his post at Tiibingen because he 
was partly Jewish, Bethe had, since 1935, been at Cornell, where 
he was to remain for the rest of his career. Though he badly 
wanted to contribute to the Allied war effort, he had refused to 
have anything to do with the atomic-bomb project because he 
thought it extremely unlikely to succeed. “Separating isotopes of 
such a heavy element [as uranium] was clearly a very difficult 
thing to do,” he later said, “and I thought we would never 
succeed in any practical way.” To help enlist Bethe, Oppenheimer 
approached John H. van Vleck, a professor of physics at Harvard, 
and asked him to convince Bethe that his participation was 
necessary. 

Though not yet fully convinced that the project would be 
successful, Bethe agreed to come to the meeting at Berkeley 
organized by Oppenheimer and Serber. On the way, he stopped at 
Chicago to pick up his old friend Edward Teller, who had also 
been invited. At Chicago, Teller explained to Bethe the progress 
that had been made at the Met Lab and, in particular, the 


progress made with the project led by Fermi and Szilard to create 
plutonium in a nuclear reactor. At what was to become the 
famous rackets court at Stagg Field, Bethe saw the “tremendous 
stacks of graphite” that Fermi and Szilard had amassed as part of 
what would be the world’s first nuclear reactor.44 “I then,” he 
remembered, “became convinced that the atom-bomb project was 
real and that it would probably work.” 

For his part, Teller was so convinced the fission bomb would 
work that he had lost interest in it as a theoretical problem. Much 
more interesting to him was the possibility, first mentioned 
speculatively to him by Fermi one day over lunch, of a fusion 
bomb. Just as the fission of heavy elements releases great 
amounts of energy, so does the fusion of lighter elements. In fact, 
fusion—if it could be achieved—offers much greater yields of 
energy than fission. 

The individual nucleons that make up a nucleus have a greater 
total mass than the nucleus itself. In combining to make up a 
nucleus, they lose some of their mass. This is called “mass 
defect.” The missing mass is converted into the energy required 
to hold the nucleons together—that is, it becomes what is called 
“binding energy.” In both fission and fusion, nuclei with 
comparatively low binding energies are converted into nuclei 
with high binding energies—that is, elements with comparatively 
high mass per nucleon are converted into elements with 
comparatively low mass per nucleon. As Frisch and Meitner were 
the first to realize, this missing mass is released as energy, 
potentially as a massive explosion. 

It sounds contradictory that both the fusion of lighter elements 
and the fission of heavier elements release energy. One might 
expect that, if energy is released by the process of fission, it 
would be absorbed by the process of fusion. The explanation for 
this lies in what is known as the “curve of binding energy.” Not 
all elements have the same binding energy. Neither does the 
difference go up or down in continuous proportion to the mass of 
the element. Rather, the binding energy starts off small for the 
lightest elements, such as hydrogen, helium and lithium, and then 
increases until one gets to iron (atomic number 26, with a mass 
of 56), then it decreases again. 

Thus, while it is true that the collected mass of the individual 
nucleons that make up a uranium nucleus will be greater than the 


mass of the nucleus itself—just as the collected mass of the 
individual nucleons that make up a helium nucleus will be 
greater than the nucleus itself—it is also true, as noted in the 
previous chapter, that the collected mass of the separated pieces 
of the split uranium nucleus (say, barium, krypton, plus two 
neutrons) will have a slightly smaller combined mass than that of 
the original nucleus. The reason for this is to be found in the 
curve of binding energy, which shows that the mass defect 
(binding energy) for barium and krypton is greater than that for 
uranium, so those nuclei have a correspondingly lower mass per 
nucleon either than the nucleons considered individually or than 
the nucleons combined into a uranium nucleus. 

Thus, if you fuse together nuclei of elements lighter than iron, 
or fission nuclei heavier than iron, the result will be the creation 
of nuclei that have a greater mass defect than the ones you 
started with, and thus a tremendous release of energy in 
accordance with the equation E = mc2. The amount of energy 
released per fusion of, say, hydrogen is less (by about one-tenth) 
than the amount of energy released per fission of uranium, but, 
because the nuclei are so much lighter (by about one-fiftieth) and 
therefore there are more of them in any given quantity of 
material, the energy release per kilogram will be far greater in 
fusion than in fission. 

It had been assumed that a fusion bomb was an impossibility 
because of the tremendous heat that would be required to get the 
nuclei moving energetically enough to fuse together. To get a 
fusion reaction going, one would have to reproduce something 
similar to the conditions that prevail inside the sun. What Fermi 
mentioned casually to Teller over lunch was the possibility that 
such heat might, after all, be created: by fission. At Chicago, 
Teller, together with the young physicist Emil Konopinski, set to 
work on a report on the possibility of a fusion bomb and 
concluded that, as Teller later put it, “heavy hydrogen [deuterium 
or tritium] actually could be ignited by an atomic bomb to 
produce an explosion of tremendous magnitude.” 

When he was invited to the meeting organized by Oppenheimer 
and Serber, Teller asked that Konopinski should also be included, 
and, when Bethe arrived in Chicago to accompany him to 
Berkeley, he found that Teller’s mind was racing far ahead of the 
issue they were being collected together to think about. “We had 


a compartment on the train to California, so we could talk 
freely,” Bethe remembered. “Teller told me that the fission bomb 
was all well and good and, essentially, was now a sure thing. In 
reality, the work had hardly begun. Teller likes to jump to 
conclusions. He said that what we really should think about was 
the possibility of igniting deuterium by a fission weapon—the 
hydrogen bomb.” 

Apart from Bethe, Konopinski, Teller and van _ Vleck, 
Oppenheimer had also invited Felix Bloch from Stanford and 
Richard Tolman from Caltech. So, with Serber, Nelson, Frankel 
and himself, that made ten. According to one account, the 
meeting began with an attempt by Oppenheimer to bring the 
contributors face-to-face with the fact that what they were doing 
was planning to build a bomb of hitherto unimaginable power. To 
help them to visualize what this might entail (and presumably to 
overcome any lingering squeamishness there might be about the 
fact that they were engaged in the design of an explosive), 
Oppenheimer drew their attention to some details of a large 
explosion that had occurred in 1917 in the harbor of Halifax, 
Nova Scotia. The explosion was caused by a collision between 
two ships, one of which was carrying 5,000 tons of TNT, and 
resulted in the deaths of up to 2,000 people and the destruction 
of an area of almost one square mile. No one knew how powerful 
the atomic bomb would be, but the best guess was that it would 
be several times more powerful than the Halifax explosion (in 
fact, the Hiroshima bomb was three times and the Nagasaki bomb 
four times more powerful, though the number of people killed in 
each case was more than twenty times the number killed in 
Halifax). 

With everybody’s mind thus focused, Serber explained what 
had been done so far, both by Breit’s team and, in the preceding 
few months, by Oppenheimer’s. Nelson and Frankel then gave 
their critical-mass calculations and, remembers _ Serber; 
“Everybody agreed that it looked under good control from a 
theorist’s point of view.” Bethe’s recollections confirm Serber’s 
impression. “The theory of the fission bomb was well taken care 
of by Serber and two of his young people,” he remarked later. 
They “seemed to have it well under control so we felt we didn’t 
need to do much.” 

With all the “luminaries” apparently agreeing with his view 


that the fission bomb was essentially “now a sure thing,” Teller 
turned the discussion away from fission and toward fusion. As 
Serber remembers it, what Teller was proposing was “a 
detonation wave in liquid deuterium set off by being heated by 
the explosion of an atomic bomb.” In his autobiography Serber 
describes how, when Teller mentioned this idea, “everybody 
forgot about the A-bomb, as if it were old hat, something settled, 
no problem, and turned with enthusiasm to something new.” 

Everyone present realized that if the “Super” (as they began 
calling it) could be made to work, it would be many times more 
powerful than an atomic bomb. In an atomic bomb, one kilogram 
of uranium would explode with the force of (roughly) 15,000- 
20,000 tons of TNT; in a thermonuclear, hydrogen bomb, one 
kilogram of deuterium would explode with the force of 80,000- 
100,000 tons. Moreover, deuterium is relatively cheap and 
plentiful. Twenty-six pounds of it would not be difficult to 
acquire, and that, potentially, could make a bomb equivalent to 
about one million tons of TNT. 

That was startling enough, but, recalls Serber: 


At one point Edward [Teller] asked if the fission bomb could 
ignite the earth’s atmosphere. In view of the difficulties 
encountered in considering the Super this seemed extremely 
unlikely, but in view of the importance of the consequences, 
Hans [Bethe] took a look at it and put numbers to the 
improbability. 


While Bethe was looking at the numbers, Oppenheimer—who 
took the apocalyptic scenario presented by Teller more seriously 
than either Serber or Bethe—made a long-distance call to 
Compton to tell him that his group had “found something very 
disturbing.” Compton asked how soon Oppenheimer could come 
to Chicago to see him and talk about it. The following day came 
Oppenheimer’s reply. And so, early the next morning, 
Oppenheimer took the train to Chicago, where Compton met him 
in his car. As they drove back to Compton’s house, Oppenheimer 
recounted the discussion that his group had been having about 
fission, fusion and the possibility of global catastrophe, which, as 
Compton writes, “could not be passed over lightly.” 


Was there really any chance that an atomic bomb would 
trigger the explosion of the nitrogen in the atmosphere or of 
the hydrogen in the ocean? This would be the ultimate 
catastrophe. Better to accept the slavery of the Nazis than to 
run a chance of drawing the final curtain on mankind! 


With Compton, Oppenheimer agreed there could be only one 
answer to the crisis, which was, in Compton’s words: 
“Oppenheimer’s team must go ahead with their calculations. 
Unless they came up with a firm and reliable conclusion that our 
atomic bombs could not explode the air or the sea, these bombs 
must never be made.” 

By the time Oppenheimer got back, Bethe had done the figures 
and discovered, as he put it, “some unjustified assumptions in 
Teller’s calculations.” Bethe, in fact, never took seriously the idea 
that they could destroy the earth’s atmosphere and was surprised 
that Oppenheimer had thought it worth troubling Compton with, 
“but then Oppie was a more enthusiastic character than I was. I 
would have waited until we knew more.” 

With the apocalyptic worry disposed of, the group got back to 
discussing bomb physics, again concentrating on the “Super.” 
What came as a pleasant surprise to the members of the group, 
even to those who knew Oppenheimer well, was what an 
extraordinarily capable chairman he showed himself to be. 
Oppenheimer had never previously organized anything—he had 
never, for example, served as chairman of his department at 
Berkeley—and yet, here he was, in charge of nine of the country’s 
most distinguished physicists, revealing himself to be an able 
leader who commanded the respect of everyone present. 

“The conference didn’t exactly end,” remembers Serber, “it sort 
of fizzled out. After a week people began to leave, some stayed on 
a couple of weeks longer.” For everyone involved, it had been a 
memorable series of discussions, Oppenheimer’s handling of 
which had been a revelation. “As Chairman, Oppenheimer 
showed a refined, sure, informal touch,” Teller later said. “I don’t 
know how he had acquired this facility for handling people. 
Those who knew him well were really surprised. I suppose it was 
the kind of knowledge a politician or administrator has to pick up 
somewhere.” It was crucial to the success of the meetings, 
however, that these political and administrative gifts went hand- 


in-hand with the kind of deep insight into both science and 
scientists that was required to get the best out of the participants. 
“A spirit of spontaneity, adventure and surprise prevailed during 
those weeks in Berkeley,” Teller remarked, “and each member of 
the group helped move the discussion toward a positive 
conclusion.” These sentiments were echoed by Bethe, who 
recalled: “The intellectual experience was unforgettable.” 


We were forever inventing new tricks, finding ways to 
calculate, and rejecting most of the tricks on the basis of the 
calculations. Now I could see at first-hand the tremendous 
intellectual power of Oppenheimer, who was the unquestioned 
leader of our group. 


By the time the conference had “fizzled” to an _ end, 
Oppenheimer’s own reputation and position within the U.S. bomb 
project had been transformed from that of a useful, but not 
essential advisor to that of an indispensable leader and facilitator. 

His report from the meeting of the “luminaries” was received 
and approved by the S-1 committee toward the end of August 
1942. Its central message was that an atomic (fission) bomb could 
indeed be built, but that it “would require a major scientific and 
technical effort.” Such a bomb would need more U-235 than 
some previous estimates had suggested—about 66 pounds—but 
its power would be something like 150 times greater than had 
previously been thought—that is, equivalent to about 100,000 
tons of TNT. The report also touched on the possibility of the 
“Super,” saying that a 66-pound fission bomb could, in principle, 
be used to initiate a fusion explosion in liquid deuterium, two or 
three tons of which would explode with the force of 100 million 
tons of TNT, completely destroying an area of 360 square miles. 

In the light of the conclusions drawn by Oppenheimer, the S-1 
committee submitted a report to Bush, summarizing the findings 
of the “luminaries” and claiming that enough fissionable material 
for an atomic-bomb test could be obtained by March 1944. “We 
have become convinced,” the report stated, “that success in this 
program before the enemy can succeed is necessary for victory. 
We also believe that success of this program will win the war if it 
has not previously been terminated.” 

By the end of August 1942, Bush was giving it as his opinion 


that “nothing should stand in the way of putting this whole affair 
through to a conclusion.” To him, it was clear that what was now 
required was strong leadership. The same thought had occurred 
to General Brehon B. Somervell, who was in charge of the section 
of the army that included the Engineering Corps, and Somervell 
knew just the man to provide that strong leadership. 

That man was Colonel Leslie Groves, a large and indomitable 
figure, who stood six feet tall and weighed about 250 pounds. 
Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth D. Nichols, who served under him for 
many years, called him “the biggest sonovabitch I’ve ever met in 
my life, but also one of the most capable individuals.” Groves had 
recently undertaken successfully the demanding task of 
supervising the construction of the Pentagon, which, 
impressively, he completed well within the budget he had been 
allocated. For this, and other reasons, he had a reputation for 
being a man who got things done. On September 17, 1942, he 
was in Washington, testifying to the Military Affairs Committee, 
when he met General Somervell, who told him: “The Secretary of 
War has selected you for a very important assignment.” 

Groves was not particularly happy about this appointment, 
even though Somervell told him that if he did it correctly, “it will 
win the war.” Groves wanted to get out of Washington and into 
battle, commanding soldiers, not directing civilian scientists. The 
silver lining offered to him was that, as reward for taking on the 
job, he would be promoted to brigadier general. The project of 
which General Groves (as everybody henceforth called him) was 
now in overall charge had already been christened the 
“Manhattan Project” by his predecessor, Colonel Marshall, who 
worked out of an office in Manhattan. Even though Groves had 
his office in Washington rather than Manhattan, he kept this 
previous name for the project, its misleading connotations 
considered by him to be an asset. 

From the very beginning, Groves ran the project with a 
characteristic determination to get the job done and let nothing 
and nobody stand in his way. With a confidence and speed that 
inspired both admiration and fear, he took several decisive steps 
in the first few days of his appointment. On his first day in 
command, he sent Nichols to buy 1,250 tons of uranium ore from 
the Belgians, who had been trying to interest the U.S. government 
in it for the previous six months. The next day, he persuaded 


(“bullied” is probably the word) the civilian head of the War 
Production Board to give the Manhattan Project a top-priority 
AAA rating, which meant that he would not have to compete 
with any other war project for funds and resources. The same 
day, he acquired for the project a plot of land in Tennessee that 
extended over 50,000 acres. It was called Oak Ridge and would 
serve as the site for the industrial plants that would be required 
to produce the enriched uranium needed for the bomb. 

As yet, however, it had not been decided exactly what plants 
would be built at Oak Ridge. Having been briefed by Bush on the 
work of the S-1 committee, Groves decided to visit every major 
site involved in the project. He began with the Westinghouse 
Research Laboratory in Pittsburgh and the University of Virginia, 
which were responsible for the development of the centrifuge 
method of isotope separation. At both places, Groves was 
horrified to learn how little had been achieved and in what a 
leisurely manner the work was being conducted. Though it would 
become in modern times the main method of enriching uranium, 
the centrifuge method was, on Groves’s orders, abandoned by the 
Manhattan Project. 

Groves next went to New York to visit Columbia, where Harold 
Urey and his colleague John Dunning were working on the 
gaseous-diffusion method. There, Groves discovered that the 
theory of gaseous diffusion was developing nicely, but it had not 
been used to produce even a speck of U-235, nor did it look at all 
likely that it could be used on an industrial scale for a long time. 

On October 5, Groves went to Chicago, where he was shown 
the pile of graphite that was being amassed for the nuclear 
reactor, and where he attended a meeting of the scientists 
working at the Met Lab. It was an impressive group that included 
no fewer than three Nobel laureates (Compton, Fermi and 
Franck), as well as Szilard, Wigner and about a dozen others. 
However, the meeting was tense; the scientists, especially Szilard, 
were suspicious of the military, and Groves was contemptuous of 
what he regarded as the arrogance and impracticality of the 
theorists. At the end of the meeting, Groves told the scientists 
that, though he did not have a Ph.D., he had ten years of formal 
education after he left college, so “That would be the equivalent 
of about two PhDs, wouldn’t it?” There was an embarrassed 
silence, and then Groves left. “You see what I told you?” Szilard 


exclaimed after Groves had gone. “How can you work with 
people like that?” 

After Chicago, Groves traveled to Berkeley to meet Lawrence 
and see the Calutron, which Lawrence demonstrated with all the 
winning, boyish enthusiasm that had served him so well and 
landed him so many prizes and so much research funding in the 
past. Groves, however, was not especially impressed with the 
machinery or especially charmed by Lawrence’s breezy optimism. 
Rather, he saw in Lawrence the same frustrating failure to see the 
project in industrial, rather than academic, terms that he had 
seen everywhere else. Groves wanted someone to start talking 
about getting pounds, not micrograms, of enriched uranium. 
Instead of which, Lawrence, having shown Groves the 
magnificence of the 184-inch Calutron, was forced to admit, 
when asked how much uranium he had separated so far: “Well, 
actually, we don’t get any sizeable separation at all. I mean, not 
yet. This is still experimental, you see ...” 

Oppenheimer’s first meeting with Groves took place on October 
8, 1942, at a lunch hosted by Robert Sproul, president of 
Berkeley. In some ways, the meeting is reminiscent of the 
moment in 1926 when, as an unknown, twenty-two-year-old 
graduate student at Cambridge, Oppenheimer had _ been 
introduced to Max Born, then the leading theorist in the emerging 
field of quantum mechanics. At that meeting Oppenheimer had 
seemed to cast a spell over Born, a spell that resulted in an 
invitation to come to Gottingen, the very center of research into 
quantum mechanics, where he was treated as if he in some way 
had superiority over Born. Similarly, when he met Groves, 
Oppenheimer was, compared to the people Groves had already 
met, a relatively junior member of the project. He was not, like 
Compton, Fermi, Franck and Lawrence, a Nobel Prize winner; nor 
was he, like Szilard, Teller and Wigner, an originator of the 
atomic-bomb project. Moreover, he seemed, in his love of French 
poetry, his absorption in the literature of Hinduism and his 
resolutely theoretical approach to physics, the very personification 
of the remote academic whom Groves had come to despise. 

And yet, on meeting the thirty-eight-year-old Oppenheimer, 
Groves was immediately won over, feeling that here, at last, was 
someone who could see and understand the real problems that 
the project faced. A clue to Oppenheimer’s success with both 


Born and Groves perhaps lies in a remark Haakon Chevalier once 
made about him: “He was always, without seeming effort, aware 
of, and responsive to, everyone in the room, and was constantly 
anticipating unspoken wishes.” 

Certainly, Oppenheimer seems to have had an unerring sense of 
what Groves wished to hear. In his own account of the history of 
the Manhattan Project, Now It Can Be Told, Groves says 
remarkably little about his first meeting with Oppenheimer, and 
nothing at all about his own first impressions. He says only that 
at this first meeting they “discussed at some length the results of 
his study and the methods by which he had reached his 
conclusions.” From this, it is impossible to say why Groves took 
such a liking to Oppenheimer, but in the autobiographical 
statement that Oppenheimer prepared for his security case in 
1954, one begins to realize what Groves might have seen in him. 
Remembering the period immediately after the meeting of 
“luminaries” at Berkeley in July 1942, Oppenheimer writes: 


In later summer, after a review of the experimental work, I 
became convinced, as did others, that a major change was 
called for in the work on the bomb itself. We needed a central 
laboratory devoted wholly to this purpose, where people could 
talk freely with each other, where theoretical ideas and 
experimental findings could affect each other, where the waste 
and frustration and error of the many compartmentalized 
experimental studies could be eliminated, where we could 
begin to come to grips with chemical, metallurgical, 
engineering, and ordnance problems that had so far received 
no consideration. We therefore sought to establish this 
laboratory for a direct attack on all the problems inherent in 
the most rapid possible development and production of atomic 
bombs. 


He also says that, when Groves assumed control of the project, 
“T discussed with him the need for an atomic bomb laboratory,” 
and reveals that he, at least, was happy with the idea of “making 
it a Military Establishment in which key personnel would be 
commissioned as officers,” even to the extent of taking the first 
steps toward joining the army himself. 

If this is what Groves meant by “the results of his study and the 


methods by which he had reached his conclusions,” then one can 
see why he liked what he heard so much. From the other 
scientists he had been met with either condescension and hostility 
or a resolute determination to impress and appear upbeat. Now 
here was a scientist talking Groves’s language and echoing his 
own thoughts and frustrations, expressing the dissatisfaction that 
he himself had felt about the pace of the work being carried out, 
and emphasizing the need for a major change in the organization, 
for more central control, in order to get the project moving more 
quickly. All this, one imagines, was music to Groves’s ears. 

So impressed was Groves that a week later, while he was again 
visiting Chicago, he asked Oppenheimer to join him in order to 
discuss his idea of a central laboratory. Then, when the time 
came for Groves to leave for New York, he asked Oppenheimer to 
accompany him on the journey. So it was that Oppenheimer and 
Groves, together with Kenneth Nichols and Colonel Marshall—all 
four of them squeezed into a tiny compartment on a train— 
discussed how and where the bomb laboratory might be created. 
From this conversation the idea of a single laboratory was 
developed, now envisaged as a place, preferably in a remote 
location away from prying eyes and ears, where all the scientists 
working on the design and production of the bomb—rather than 
on chain reactions, methods of isotope separation, and the like— 
could be gathered together. There, under the watchful control 
and guidance of the military, the scientists could pursue their 
work, while sharing with each other (but not with anybody else) 
their ideas and information. 

Before he set off for Chicago, Oppenheimer wrote to John 
Manley, the experimental physicist who had been appointed as 
his assistant, telling him that Groves had seemed “convinced of 
the necessity for proceeding immediately with the construction of 
the laboratory and the reorganization of our work.” He also 
advised him that “some far reaching geographical change in plans 
seems to be on the cards,” since Groves had apparently gone off 
his original idea of placing the laboratory at Oak Ridge (in fact, 
Oppenheimer had talked him out of it, on the grounds that the 
laboratory should not be envisaged as a mere appendage of the 
isotope-separation plant). 

Manley, who was a specialist in neutron physics, had worked 
with Fermi and Szilard at Columbia before taking up a position at 


the University of Illinois in 1937. Since January 1942 he had 
been a member of the Met Lab at Chicago, where he remained 
after his appointment as Oppenheimer’s assistant in fast-neutron 
research. “I let myself be persuaded to join Oppenheimer with 
some misgivings,” he later recalled. “I had only briefly met him. I 
had given a colloquium in Berkeley a year or two before and I 
was somewhat frightened of his evident erudition and his lack of 
interest in mundane affairs.” 

To Manley’s surprise, he and Oppenheimer got on well. While 
Oppenheimer and his team at Berkeley made calculations, 
Manley’s task was to supply them with measurements taken from 
experiments using the particle accelerators at no fewer than nine 
universities. “I can’t tell you how difficult those experiments 
were,” Manley wrote. “The amounts of material to work with 
were infinitesimal ... just practically invisible quantities.” 
Particularly frustrating was the problem of liaising with the 
various centers of research, which was the main factor in 
persuading Oppenheimer and Manley of the need for a single 
laboratory. 

In a subsequent letter written after his train ride to New York 
with Groves, Oppenheimer told Manley that Groves had been out 
west and that “the question of site is well along toward 
settlement.” Evidently, by this time (the first week of November 
1942), Oppenheimer had managed to steer Groves’s thoughts 
about the location of the laboratory toward the countryside that 
Oppenheimer knew and loved best: the mountains of northern 
New Mexico. “It is a lovely spot,” Oppenheimer told Manley, 
“and in every way satisfactory, and the only points which now 
have to be settled are whether the human and legal aspects of the 
necessary evacuations make insuperable difficulties.” The delicate 
nature of one of these difficulties is perhaps indicated at the end 
of the letter, where he reveals that he is not sending a copy of it 
to Compton. He would, he wrote, be happy if Manley told 
Compton “anything about the developments in physics that you 
think he would like to hear.” But, he implored: “Don’t tell him 
about the laboratory.” As he grew closer to Groves, as the 
theoretical subgroup of S-1 that he headed acquired a greater and 
greater role, and as the plans for a central laboratory seemed 
more and more likely to succeed, Oppenheimer surely guessed 
that Compton’s position as the head of the scientific aspect of the 


Manhattan Project was likely to be short-lived. If the plan for a 
central laboratory went ahead and Oppenheimer were placed in 
charge of that laboratory, then, instead of Oppenheimer working 
as a consultant for a project headed by Compton, Compton 
would, in effect, be working for a project led by Oppenheimer. 

On November 16, Oppenheimer, together with Ed McMillan 
and Colonel Dudley, visited Jemez Springs, New Mexico. In the 
afternoon they were joined by Groves, who, confirming the view 
that Oppenheimer and McMillan had already come to, 
pronounced abruptly as soon as he arrived: “This will never do.” 
The canyon was too deep, its walls too steep to consider as a 
suitable spot for a major program of building. Oppenheimer then 
suggested as an alternative a boys’ school on the east side of the 
Jemez range that was built on a flat mesa: the Los Alamos Ranch 
School. “As soon as Groves saw it,” McMillan later recalled, “he 
said, in effect, ‘This is the place.’” On December 7, 1942, the 
school was issued with a formal notice of eviction, and it closed 
the following February. A month after that, the first scientists 
arrived at what was, by then, a bomb laboratory. Officially, it 
was now called “Project Y.”45 

From the time that Oppenheimer and Groves first discussed the 
possibility of a single laboratory in October 1942 until the time 
that scientists began arriving at Los Alamos in March 1943, there 
seems to have been an _ assumption, particularly on 
Oppenheimer’s part, that he himself would be appointed as its 
director. However, it is far from clear when the decision was 
made to appoint Oppenheimer as the head of this laboratory. 46 
He did not receive his formal letter of invitation to take up the 
post, signed by Conant and Groves, until February 1943, but the 
decision must have been taken at least a month or two before 
that. In Now It Can Be Told, Groves discusses the decision at some 
length, emphasizing that, although Oppenheimer had headed the 
Berkeley study group, “neither Bush, Conant nor I felt that we 
were in any way committed to his appointment as director of 
Project Y.” Moreover, “no one with whom I talked showed any 
great enthusiasm about Oppenheimer as a possible director of the 
project.” 

There were, as Groves makes clear, some very powerful reasons 
for that lack of enthusiasm. Not only had Oppenheimer never 
directed a laboratory of any kind before, but he had never 


directed anything. He “had had almost no administrative 
experience of any kind,” as Groves puts it. Also (and this point 
seems to have weighed particularly heavily on Groves’s mind), 
Oppenheimer, unlike the heads of the major laboratories 
associated with the Manhattan Project—Compton at Chicago, 
Urey at Columbia and Lawrence at Berkeley—did not have a 
Nobel Prize. He thus, says Groves, lacked “the prestige among his 
fellow scientists that I would have liked the project leader to 
possess.” Finally there was the problem that, as Groves puts it, 
Oppenheimer’s “background included much that was not to our 
liking by any means.” This last problem was to rumble on for 
some months after Oppenheimer’s appointment, with the security 
organization (“which was not yet under my complete control,” 
Groves writes) unwilling to grant clearance to someone with so 
many links to important communists. 

In his book, Groves seems to suggest that he appointed 
Oppenheimer, despite the many reasons not to, simply because “it 
became apparent that we were not going to find a better man.” 
Of the “better men” he considered, Lawrence could not be spared 
from the electromagnetic project, Compton could not be spared 
from Chicago, and Urey, as a chemist rather than a physicist, was 
not qualified. There were, of course, other possibilities— 
Lawrence pushed hard for Groves to appoint Ed McMillan—but it 
is fairly clear that Groves liked Oppenheimer and believed 
strongly that he was the man for the job. When Oppenheimer was 
asked many years later to explain why Groves chose him, his 
reply illustrated why throughout his life he had struck people as 
arrogant. Groves, he said, “had a fatal weakness for good men.” 

By November 30, 1942, when he wrote to Conant summarizing 
the results of recent scientific work, Oppenheimer seemed already 
to regard himself as the de facto head of the new laboratory. He 
speaks of “the men we are after,” and warns Conant: 


The job we have to do will not be possible without personnel 
substantially greater than that which we now have available, 
and I shall only be misleading you and all others concerned 
with the S-1 project if I were to promise to get the work done 
without this help. 


As it turned out, the men Oppenheimer was after included 


many of the top scientists in the country. To get them, as he was 
advised by both Isidor Rabi and the Cornell physicist Robert 
Bacher, he would have to drop the idea of the laboratory being a 
military establishment. The scientists he wanted and needed, they 
told him, would hardly be willing to join the army and conduct 
their research in uniform. 

Having shelved that idea, Oppenheimer—clearly in as great a 
hurry as Groves to get the project moving—was able to recruit 
many of the people he wanted by the end of the year. In this he 
was helped enormously by Manley, who knew personally almost 
every physicist in the U.S. working on fast-neutron research. As 
Manley remembers: “I was supposed to talk to people in the fast 
neutron groups at Princeton and Wisconsin and try to persuade 
them to come to Los Alamos.” One problem with this was that 
Manley himself had never been to New Mexico and knew nothing 
about Los Alamos: 


So I dug out some maps of New Mexico and I looked all over 
those maps trying to find where it might be. He’d said it was 
near the “Hamos” Mountains, and I looked for hamos and I 
couldn’t find it on the map, on any map of New Mexico. I 
hadn’t any Spanish and, of course, I didn’t know that those 
doggone mountains are spelled jemez. 


Despite his inability to find Los Alamos on the map, Manley did 
succeed in persuading most of the physicists he spoke to to join 
the project. 

Equally important was his success in appropriating the 
machines that the experimentalists would need. From Wisconsin 
he obtained two Van de Graaff generators, from Harvard a 
cyclotron, and from Illinois his own Cockcroft-Walton accelerator. 
To make tracking these things more difficult, they were sent first 
to a medical officer in St. Louis, Missouri, and from there to Los 
Alamos. The difficulty of getting the necessary equipment to the 
remote spot in the New Mexico mountains made Manley wonder 
“whether, if Oppenheimer had been an experimental physicist 
and known that experimental physics is really 90 percent 
plumbing and you’ve got to have all that equipment and tools and 
so on, he would ever have agreed to start a laboratory in this 
isolated place.” 


Much as he respected and grew to admire and _ like 
Oppenheimer, Manley was, especially to begin with, acutely 
conscious of Oppenheimer’s lack of experience of both 
laboratories and administration, and took a good deal of 
persuading that Oppenheimer was actually capable of 
administering a large laboratory. His doubts were increased by 
the fact that Oppenheimer seemed to take so little interest in how 
the laboratory might be organized. “I bugged Oppie for I don’t 
know how many months about an organization chart—who was 
going to be responsible for this and who was going to be 
responsible for that. But each time he would seem to be as 
unresponsive as an experimental physicist would think a theorist 
would be.” Finally, in January 1943, Manley flew out to 
California and went to Oppenheimer’s office. As he pushed open 
the door he noticed that Edward Condon was there: “Oppie 
practically threw a piece of paper at me as I came in the door and 
said, ‘Here’s your damned organization chart.’ ” 

The organization described by the chart, which remained in 
place for the first year of the laboratory’s existence, divided the 
lab into four main sections: 1. Theoretical, which initially was to 
be led by Oppenheimer himself; 2. Experimental, headed by 
Robert Bacher; 3. Chemistry and Metallurgy, led by the Berkeley 
chemist Joseph Kennedy and the British-born metallurgist Cyril S. 
Smith; and 4. Ordnance, which would, in time (it took some 
months to find the right man for this job), be headed by William 
“Deak” Parsons of the U.S. Navy. Each of these divisions (except 
the Theoretical Division, which was by far the smallest) was split 
into groups, so that, for example, the Experimental Division 
contained a “Cyclotron Group,” led by Robert Wilson, which was 
charged with (among other things) the crucial task of measuring 
the time it takes for neutrons to be emitted after fission. Manley 
himself was put in charge of the “D-D Group,” which had 
responsibility for determining by experiment which material 
(candidates included tungsten, carbon and beryllium) could best 
be used as a “tamper” to bounce escaping neutrons back into the 
fissioning uranium, thereby improving the bomb’s efficiency. 

The reason Condon was in Oppenheimer’s office was that 
Oppenheimer had decided to appoint him as associate director of 
the laboratory. Oppenheimer’s first choice for that role was 
another old friend from his student days in Europe, Isidor Rabi, 


but Rabi could not be persuaded to accept the job. He had several 
reasons for not wanting to move to Los Alamos. First, his wife, 
Helen, was vehemently opposed to going there. Second, Rabi 
thought the project to build a fission bomb had only a fifty-fifty 
chance of success. And third, he considered the work he was then 
doing on radar to be a crucial contribution to the war effort. 
Fourth, and perhaps most importantly, he was, as he later wrote, 
“strongly opposed to bombing,” on the grounds that “You drop a 
bomb and it falls on the just and the unjust.” Nevertheless, he 
was prepared to act as a consultant on the project, and came 
often to oversee developments and offer advice. 

The first piece of advice Rabi offered was to make an important 
change to the organization chart that Oppenheimer had drawn 
up. There was simply no way, Rabi urged (and Bacher seconded), 
that Oppenheimer could combine being director with being head 
of a division. Oppenheimer thus changed his mind and put Hans 
Bethe in charge of the Theoretical Division, a choice that was as 
obvious as it was excellent, but which offended Edward Teller, 
who felt that he should have got the job. 

While Oppenheimer and Manley were arranging the Los 
Alamos laboratory, the Met Lab in Chicago achieved the first 
fundamentally important milestone in the pursuit of a fission 
bomb by creating the world’s first chain reaction. It happened on 
December 2, 1942, a very cold Chicago winter’s day. Fermi, 
knowing the time was right for the pile he had constructed to go 
critical, had gathered about twenty people in the rackets court at 
Stagg Field, and was conducting affairs with complete confidence 
that everything would go as planned. One of the people present 
was the physicist Herb Anderson, who remembers: “the sound of 
the neutron counter, clickety-clack, clickety-clack. Then the clicks 
came more and more rapidly, and after a while they began to 
merge into a roar... Suddenly Fermi raised his hand. ‘The pile 
has gone critical,’ he announced.” Compton, who had watched 
the momentous event, returned to his office and phoned Conant. 
“The Italian navigator has just landed in the New World,” he told 
him. 

Within a few weeks of this dramatic demonstration that a 
controlled nuclear reaction was possible—and the consequent 
realization that plutonium could indeed be manufactured on an 
industrial scale—work started on two sites that together would 


constitute an almost unimaginably huge engineering project. In 
addition to the site in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, the Manhattan 
Project acquired a site at Hanford in the state of Washington, 
which would be used for a series of plutonium-producing 
reactors, the prototype of which was quickly constructed at Oak 
Ridge. Immediately, the Army Engineering Corps began to 
supervise the building of houses, the construction of roads and 
the recruitment of workers. Each site would require tens of 
thousands of people. Within a few months, both Hanford and Oak 
Ridge would be fairly sizeable towns. In areas where the 
depression of the 1930s had led to large-scale unemployment, the 
prospect of well-paid work was extremely welcome and neither 
site had trouble finding the requisite workforce, even though the 
people thus hired were told nothing about the purpose of the 
work they were doing. It is one of the most extraordinary aspects 
of the Manhattan Project that the existence of an atomic-bomb 
building program was successfully kept secret from the very 
people who worked on the plants that supplied the necessary 
fissionable material. 

At its peak, the Manhattan Project employed more than 
150,000 workers, the majority of whom worked at Oak Ridge or 
Hanford. They included more than 80,000 construction workers 
and about 68,000 operations and research personnel. Most of the 
latter were employed on dull, repetitive tasks that were necessary 
to keep the isotope separation plants and the reactors going. An 
excellent social history of the Manhattan Project, Atomic Spaces 
by Peter Bacon Hales, has attempted to convey what it was like to 
work at these sites. “New workers entering these factories,” Hales 
writes, “found them to be confusing and sometimes terrifying 
watrens of piping, walls of analog dials, valves and knobs, 
marked with Bakelite labels in the arcane language of the 
engineer. The electromagnetic plant alone used close to 250,000 
valves to control the materials coursing through 1,175 miles of 
piping.” 

Most of the people employed to watch the dials and turn the 
valves and knobs were women. They were trained only in the 
skills required to do their specific job, which might be, for 
example, turning a knob when a dial they were watching moved 
too far to the left or to the right. What the dial was measuring 
and what the knob was controlling were kept secret from them 


and, while at work, they were not allowed to talk to their fellow 
employees, but only with their immediate superiors. Faced with 
almost any alternative, few people would have chosen to work 
under such conditions, but Groves did everything he could to 
ensure that, for many people, there was no alternative. He 
persuaded the Secretary of War, Robert Patterson, for example, to 
issue a directive to the U.S. Employment Service, instructing it to 
ensure that in its offices near Oak Ridge and Hanford “workers 
must not be offered any other employment until after they have 
been rejected for employment on these projects.” 

Most of the workers at these plants lived in rapidly built basic 
flats and houses that were constructed especially for them close 
to their places of work. Shops, schools, post offices and even town 
halls were built to ensure that the workers had as few reasons as 
possible to venture outside the perimeters of the site in which 
they lived, and over time these sites became home to something 
close to the kind of communities one might find in any other 
American small town. 

Meanwhile, by the end of December 1942, Oppenheimer was 
playing a leading role himself in the creation of a new town and a 
new community at Los Alamos. In a letter he wrote to Hans and 
Rose Bethe on December 28, he discussed not physics or bombs, 
but such things as the salaries on offer to scientists willing to 
come to Los Alamos (20 percent on top of what they were already 
earning), the arrangements under way for the management of the 
town, what kind of school education would be provided and by 
whom, how many hospitals there would be, what laundry 
facilities would exist, what kind of restaurants would be 
available, what recreation would be on offer, how mail would be 
collected and delivered and what the housing would be like. The 
man in charge of the construction and management of the town 
was Colonel J. M. Harmon, and, Oppenheimer told the Bethes, 
the best guarantee that the arrangements would be satisfactory 
“is in the great effort and generosity that Harmon and Groves 
have both brought to setting up this odd community and in their 
evident desire to make a real success of it.” 

In his attempts to lure the scientists he wanted, it was perhaps 
inevitable that Oppenheimer would become involved in all 
aspects of planning for life in this “odd community.” After all, in 
urging them to come to Los Alamos, he was asking them not only 


to join a laboratory, but to take part in a new, hitherto untried 
and somewhat bizarre way of life: an isolated, self-contained 
community dedicated to a single task and committed to the 
utmost secrecy. And yet, for all that, his primary responsibility 
was for the scientific aspects of the work, as Conant and Groves 
made plain in a long letter of February 25, 1943, laying out 
Oppenheimer’s new job description. 

“We are addressing this letter to you,” they began, “as the 
Scientific Director of the special laboratory in New Mexico in 
order to confirm our many conversations on the matters of 
organization and responsibility.” The laboratory, they went on, 
“will be concerned with the development and final manufacture 
of an instrument of war.” Its work was to be divided into two 
periods: the first would be devoted to “experimental studies in 
science, engineering and ordnance,” while the second would 
involve “large-scale experiments involving difficult ordnance 
procedures and the handling of highly dangerous material.” 
During the first period, the laboratory “will be on a strictly 
civilian basis,” but when the work enters the second period 
(“which will not be earlier than January 1, 1944”), “the scientific 
and engineering staff will be composed of commissioned 
officers.” The militarization of the scientific staff thus outlined 
never took place, but the letter shows just how reluctant the 
leaders of the Manhattan Project were to abandon it. 

The laboratory, the letter further spelled out, was part of a 
larger project run by the Military Policy Committee, chaired by 
Bush and, in his absence, Conant. Groves “has been given over-all 
executive responsibility for this project.” The responsibilities of 
the Scientific Director—Oppenheimer—were given in this letter 
as: 


a. The conduct of the scientific work so that the desired goals 
as outlined by the Military Policy Committee are achieved at 
the earliest possible dates. 

b. The maintenance of secrecy by the civilian personnel under 
his control as well as their families. 


As the Los Alamos Ranch School was being transformed by a 
massive and hurried construction program into a town fit to serve 
as home to some of the greatest scientists in the world and their 


families, Oppenheimer spent the first few months of 1943 
preparing to achieve the goals he had been set by Conant and 
Groves. His plan was to begin the scientific work of the 
laboratory in the spring of 1943 with a series of introductory 
lectures given by Serber, which would summarize the current 
state of knowledge (most of which had not been published 
because of the voluntary self-censorship adopted by scientists in 
this area), followed by a large conference at which the work still 
remaining to be done would be outlined. In preparing for this 
conference, which was scheduled to take place in April 1943, 
Oppenheimer was helped enormously by Isidor Rabi, who 
became, as Hans Bethe put it, “the fatherly advisor to Oppie.” 

Oppenheimer himself moved to New Mexico on March 16, 
1943, about three weeks before most of the other scientists and 
about a month before the conference was due to start. Shortly 
before he left Berkeley, an incident, later widely known as the 
“Chevalier Affair,” took place that would come to haunt him for 
the rest of his life. It happened at the Oppenheimers’ home during 
a dinner party they gave for the Chevaliers, knowing that they 
would not be seeing them again for a long time. Shortly before, 
Chevalier had been approached by George Eltenton, a British 
chemist and member of the Communist Party who lived in 
Berkeley and worked for Shell. Toward the end of 1942, Eltenton 
himself had been approached by people from the Soviet consulate 
in San Francisco, asking him if he knew anything about the work 
being done at the Rad Lab at Berkeley—work which, the Soviets 
believed, was of great military importance. 

One reason they had for this belief was that Steve Nelson had 
been tipped off about it by a member of the Young Communist 
League called Lloyd Lehmann, who, on October 10, 1942, was 
caught on the FBI microphones installed in Nelson’s house telling 
Nelson that “an important weapon was being developed.” 
Unfortunately for Oppenheimer, Nelson and Lehmann then went 
on to talk about someone working on the project who was 
“considered a ‘Red,’ ” who had been involved in the Teachers’ 
Committee and the Spanish Committee, but whom the 
government allowed to remain because he was such a good 
scientist. As the FBI would have been quick to realize, the man 
meant here was most likely Oppenheimer. Much more damaging 
were the remarks caught by the microphone about Rossi 


Lomanitz, who, it was said, was working on the project, but was 
“considering quitting it.”47 To this, Nelson was heard to say that 
it was important that Lomanitz stay on the project in order to 
provide the Party with information about it. Naturally, it was 
agreed, Lomanitz would have to function as an undercover Party 
member. This recorded conversation in Nelson’s house would 
have extremely far-reaching consequences for Lomanitz. For the 
rest of the war he would be kept under tight surveillance, and 
strict measures would be taken to separate him from any military 
and government secrets. 

In response to this request for information about the projected 
new weapon, Eltenton told Peter Ivanov from the Soviet 
consulate that he would ask Chevalier to approach Oppenheimer. 
Chevalier agreed to do what he could, with the result that, when 
he arrived at the Oppenheimers’ home for the dinner party, he 
was, essentially, on a spying mission. Chevalier’s side of the story 
—given in his memoir, The Story of a Friendship—is that he was 
not approaching Oppenheimer for information, but rather 
alerting him to the fact that Eltenton had proposed sharing 
whatever information he had with Soviet scientists. It is, 
however, rather difficult to believe that, not least because 
Chevalier’s wife, Barbara, has dismissed it as a fabrication. 
According to her: “Haakon was one hundred percent in favor of 
finding out what Oppie was doing and reporting it back to 
Eltenton. I believe Haakon also believed that Oppie would be in 
favor of cooperating with the Russians. I know because we had a 
big fight over it beforehand.” 

Oppenheimer, at his security hearing in 1954, said that, at this 
dinner party, Chevalier followed him into the kitchen and, when 
the two of them were alone, told him that he had seen George 
Eltenton recently and that Eltenton had a “means of getting 
technical information to Soviet scientists.” Oppenheimer says he 
reacted to this by saying something like “But that is treason” or 
“That is a terrible thing to do,” with which Chevalier agreed and 
no more was said: “It was a brief conversation.” 

Eltenton later told the FBI that, after this dinner, Chevalier told 
him there was “no chance whatsoever of obtaining any data” and 
that “Oppenheimer did not approve.” He also said that the next 
time Ivanov came to his house, he told Ivanov that Oppenheimer 
had refused to cooperate. By this time FBI microphones had 


picked up several remarks indicating that Oppenheimer was 
distancing himself from his former friends in the Communist 
Party. In the conversation between Nelson, Lehmann and a third 
man mentioned earlier it was said of the scientist who had been 
considered a “Red” that, though he had in the past been active in 
Communist Party activities, he was now “jittery.” Then, in 
December, they heard Nelson saying that Bernard Peters had told 
him that Oppenheimer could not be active in the Party, because 
of his involvement in a special project. 

Shortly after Chevalier’s ham-fisted and unsuccessful attempt to 
recruit him as a spy, Oppenheimer arranged to meet Nelson for 
lunch. “I just want to say goodbye to you,” Oppenheimer told 
him. From a security point of view, Oppenheimer’s behavior 
during this lunch was unimpeachable. He told Nelson that he was 
leaving to take part in work that was related to the war effort, 
but did not tell Nelson what that work was about or where he 
was going. The impression Nelson formed from this meeting was 
that Oppenheimer, influenced by his wife, was determined to 
make a name for himself, and that that determination was 
turning him away from the Communist Party. “I think now he’s 
gone a little further away from whatever association he had with 
us,” Nelson remarked to a fellow communist a few weeks after 
this lunch with Oppenheimer: “Now he’s got the one thing in the 
world, and that’s this project and that project is going to wean 
him from his friends.” Nelson was right; this lunchtime meeting 
in March 1943 was the last time he ever saw Oppenheimer. 

Nelson’s impression that Oppenheimer’s all-consuming interest 
in “this project” was driven by ambition, and that this ambition 
was fueled by Kitty, was surely right. Missing, however, from 
Nelson’s assessment was the importance of Oppenheimer’s deeply 
felt and lifelong patriotism. In the 1930s he had set out to build 
an American school of theoretical physics that would enable the 
U.S. to replace Germany as the leading center for research in that 
area; now he had a chance to lead a project that would not only 
demonstrate the superiority of American physics, but would also, 
in so doing, equip the U.S. with a weapon that would enable it to 
win the war against Germany. 

The idea that he would endanger this position for the sake of 
doing a favor to old friends, or for the sake of enabling the Soviet 
Union to build a bomb of its own, is risible, as Chevalier had 


discovered. In arranging his farewell dinner with Chevalier and 
his farewell lunch with Nelson, there is a sense that Oppenheimer 
was not only saying goodbye to them, but was also marking the 
transition in his life from one phase to another. As he prepared to 
leave for New Mexico, he evidently saw himself as leaving behind 
not only his old comrades, but also his politically radical past. As 
he was to discover, however, the security services saw it rather 
differently. 


44 The reactor Fermi was building was one that would use uranium-238 to 
generate nuclear energy through fission. Being a reactor rather than a bomb, it 
needed slow neutrons rather then fast ones, the aim being to produce a 
controlled fission chain reaction, not an explosion. The piles of graphite were to 
serve as what is called a “moderator,” the purpose of which is to slow the 
neutrons down. A by-product of this kind of reactor is plutonium. If it worked, 
Fermi’s experiment would show two crucial facts: first, that it is possible to 
initiate a chain reaction in uranium-238; and second, that it is possible to 
produce plutonium on a more or less industrial scale. 

45 Just as Oak Ridge was “Site X,” so Hanford was “Site W,” the 
electromagnetic plant at Oak Ridge was “Y-12,” the gaseous-diffusion plant 
was “K-25,” the uranium reactor at Oak Ridge “X-10” and the thermal diffusion 
plant “S-50.” 

46 Gregg Herken, in Brotherhood of the Bomb, says it was on the train between 
Chicago and New York on October 15, 1942, but offers no evidence for this. 

47 That Lomanitz was at this time considering leaving his work at the Rad Lab 
was confirmed in an interview with Martin Sherwin in 1979, in which he 
discussed his moral qualms about creating such a powerful weapon and said 
that when he mentioned those qualms to Oppenheimer, Oppenheimer’s 
response was: “Look, what if the Nazis get it first?” 


Los Alamos 1: Security 


ulld di d oth d 
machines roared up and down digging ditches for the Pee nons 


of future buildings. Everything was conducted in an element of 
extreme haste and mystery.” 

This is how Peggy Pond Church, daughter of Ashley Pond, the 
founder of the Los Alamos Ranch School, remembered the noisy 
and bewildering chaos that engulfed her previously tranquil 
home in the first few months of 1943. The task of making real 
Oppenheimer’s vision of an atomic-bomb laboratory in his 
beloved New Mexico mountains was enormous and hugely 
difficult, the more so because it had to be done extremely quickly 
and, as far as possible, in secret. Several thousand workmen, none 
of whom knew the purpose of the facility they were helping to 
construct, labored hard to build roads, homes, offices and 
laboratories, under great pressure to get everything done as soon 
as was humanly possible. 

Despite these intense efforts, when Oppenheimer arrived on 
March 16, 1943, nothing was yet finished. He and his family 
were due to move into the building that had been the 
headmaster’s house, but, like all the other early arrivals, 
Oppenheimer spent the first few weeks living, not at Los Alamos, 
but at a hotel in Santa Fe, thirty-five miles southeast of Los 
Alamos. The nearest city of any size, Santa Fe became the first 
port of call for anybody going up to the new laboratory. There, 
the Manhattan Project acquired an office at 109 East Palace, an 
adobe building in the oldest part of the city that had once 
belonged to a Spanish conquistador. This office was where all 
new recruits initially reported for work. To run it, Oppenheimer 
employed a local woman called Dorothy McKibbin, whose job it 


was to welcome new arrivals, issue them with security passes and 
arrange transport for them to Los Alamos. Until its task was 
finished, Mrs. McKibbin never knew, and never asked, what the 
purpose of the laboratory was. Her devotion to both 
Oppenheimer and her task was, however, unerring, and her 
enthusiasm for greeting the scientists, engineers and others who 
descended on her adopted hometown unflagging. 

Among the first scientists to arrive after Oppenheimer were 
John Manley, Robert Serber and Hans Bethe, whose wife, Rose, 
came a week before him in order to help Oppenheimer arrange 
the living spaces. The first to be housed in Los Alamos were 
Oppenheimer and Kitty, who, together with the infant Peter (his 
second birthday still more than a month away), were finally able 
to move into their new home by the end of March. Though not at 
all grand by normal standards, the Oppenheimers’ house, a one- 
story log-and-stone cottage, was to become the envy of the entire 
Los Alamos community. Though it lacked a kitchen, it was one of 
only six houses on the Hill that had its own bathtub. Very soon, 
those six became known collectively as “Bathtub Row,” the most 
elite housing Los Alamos could offer. 

Most people who knew them well thought that Kitty was very 
pleased that her husband had been appointed to direct such an 
important enterprise as the United States atomic bomb 
laboratory, and many considered her to be proud to the point of 
being haughty in her dealings with her husband’s employees, but 
it should not be assumed that she liked being at Los Alamos. On 
the contrary, her life there seemed to be one of almost unrelieved 
torment. She had no interest in doing what might have been 
expected of the director’s wife: holding parties and being at the 
center of the laboratory’s social life. She took herself too seriously 
as a scientist and an intellectual for that. To begin with, she was 
given a part-time job as a laboratory technician, working with a 
team studying the medical effects of radiation, but she soon 
abandoned that, and sank into a listless, depressed and lonely 
existence, enlivened only by bouts of drinking, sometimes with 
others, but often alone. Peter, meanwhile, received little attention 
from either of his parents. 

Soon after the Oppenheimers came the Serbers, who, to begin 
with, lived in what was known as the “Big House.” This had 
previously been the boys’ dormitory and, with just one big 


bathroom in the entire building, was intended for single men. As 
those single men began to arrive, the unsuitability of the Big 
House for married couples became increasingly manifest (“two or 
three fellows were embarrassed by walking in on Charlotte while 
she was taking a shower,” Serber remembers), and, after a little 
while, the Serbers moved into one of the specially built duplexes. 
These consisted of two apartments next to each other, each 
apartment having its own bathroom, which, by the standards of 
the housing at Los Alamos, was luxurious to an enviable extent. 

The Serbers’ immediate neighbors in this duplex were Robert 
and Jane Wilson, who had recently arrived from Princeton. 
Wilson was there as head of the Cyclotron Group, part of the 
Experimental Physics Division led by Robert Bacher. His 
participation was crucial, not only because he was one of the 
leading experimental physicists in the field of neutron research, 
but also because he brought with him Princeton’s cyclotron, one 
of the very few accelerators that the new laboratory had at its 
disposal. The others were two Van de Graaff generators from 
Wisconsin, which were put at the disposal of the Electrostatic 
Generator Group led by J. H. Williams from the University of 
Minnesota, and Manley’s own Cockcroft-Walton accelerator, 
which accompanied him from Illinois and provided the data that 
Manley’s “D-D Source Group” used to work out what material 
would form the best “tamper.” 

None of these machines was up and running until June 1943, 
which is when experimental physics at Los Alamos really started. 
Getting the machines to Los Alamos and then setting them up in 
an as-yet-uncompleted laboratory at the top of a mountain in a 
remote part of New Mexico was so difficult that it seemed to 
some of those charged with accomplishing it an almost insane 
plan. To get to Los Alamos from Santa Fe required crossing the 
Rio Grande at a place called Otowi, where there was what Serber 
has described as “a toy one-lane suspension bridge that looked as 
if it might be safe for two horses.” “It was hard to believe,” writes 
Serber, “that all the construction trucks for Los Alamos had to 
cross that bridge and then climb 1,500 feet up a perilous switch- 
backed dirt road to the top of Los Alamos Mesa.” 

Among those who had their doubts about the wisdom of 
building the laboratory in such a place was John Manley, whose 
job it was to work with the army engineers on the design and 


construction of the laboratories that would house _ the 
accelerators. Manley recalls that he was particularly concerned 
with the long, narrow building that would house the two Van de 
Graaff generators and the Cockroft-Walton machine. As he told 
the engineers, the Van de Graaffs were extremely heavy machines 
that would need a good, strong foundation underneath them, 
while the Cockcroft-Walton was a tall vertical machine that 
required a basement. Given these requirements, Manley writes: 
“Cost and construction time could obviously be saved if they 
selected the terrain properly’—that is, the building should be 
built over a slope, with the Cockcroft-Walton machine in the 
lower, deeper part of the building. When he went to inspect the 
buildings, however, Manley discovered that, instead of making 
use of the sloping terrain, the engineers had needlessly created 
their own slope by actually digging a basement for the Cockcroft- 
Walton machine and then using the resulting debris to make the 
foundation for the Van de Graaffs. “That was my introduction to 
army engineering,” Manley remarked. 

Part of the point of building the new laboratory in a remote 
part of New Mexico was to keep it from prying eyes, but, of 
course, in some ways it was far more conspicuous there than it 
would have been in a large center of population. In a small town 
like Santa Fe, the arrival of dozens of strangers could not possibly 
go unnoticed. In fact, as locals were quick to see and remark 
upon, there were two distinct kinds of strangers descending on 
their town: first, there were the young bohemian-looking 
characters with open-necked shirts, who seemed polite, if a little 
unworldly; and then there were the besuited, slightly threatening 
men in fedora hats who invariably went around in twos and had 
a watchful, furtive demeanor. That the first group were scientists 
was rather less obvious than that the second group were security 
agents. 

Most of those agents would have been working for the army, 
rather than the FBI. In March 1943, the FBI was explicitly 
ordered by Major General Strong, the head of G-2 (the branch of 
the U.S. Army concerned with counterintelligence), to close its 
file on Oppenheimer. Security issues relating to anyone—even 
civilians—working on a military project, Strong insisted, were the 
responsibility of the army. Astonishingly, the FBI was not 
officially informed about the Manhattan Project until April 1943, 


after it had learned of its existence through their surveillance of 
Communist Party leaders. Though under orders to confine 
themselves to civilians, FBI agents would inevitably often find 
themselves covering the same ground, even following some of the 
same people, as G-2 agents, and, despite the reluctance of 
military intelligence to confide in them, the FBI was generally 
quick to inform G-2 of anything that might concern them. 
Complementing these two security agencies, and sometimes 
causing further complications, was the Manhattan Project’s own 
security organization, which, though officially part of G-2, was 
under the direct command of General Groves, and thus to some 
extent separate from it. To start with, this organization consisted 
of just a few men, whose main job was to liaise with G-2 and the 
FBI, but by the autumn of 1943 it was large enough for Groves to 
insist that it took over all security responsibilities relating to the 
project. As Los Alamos, Oak Ridge and Hanford continued to 
expand, so did the Manhattan Project’s own security force, so that 
by the end of the war it had working for it nearly 500 “creeps,” 
as the agents came to be called. 

The man whom Groves chose to head the Manhattan Project’s 
own security force was John Lansdale, who, after a series of rapid 
promotions, was by this time a Lieutenant Colonel. Lansdale 
worked closely with Groves, who evidently shared Conant’s high 
opinion of him. Like Groves, he was based in Washington, but 
most of the people working for him were based on the West 
Coast. At Berkeley, for example, Lansdale set up a secret, 
disguised office, run by Lieutenant Lyall Johnson, which became 
the center of a covert surveillance operation, keeping a watchful 
eye on the research scientists working at the Rad Lab. 

Before the Manhattan Project took complete responsibility for 
its own security, there was something of a turf war between John 
Lansdale and G-2’s head of counterintelligence for the West 
Coast, Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash. Pash was a formidable 
figure. Even by the standards of military security officers, he was 
passionately and belligerently anti-communist, his antagonism 
fueled partly by his family history and his personal experience of 
fighting the Bolsheviks in Russia. He had been born in the U.S., 
but was from a Russian family (his father was a Russian Orthodox 
bishop, based in San Francisco) and had gone to Russia during 
the civil war that followed the revolution in order to fight 


alongside the White Army. Since America’s entry into the Second 
World War, Pash had been an enthusiastic and dedicated member 
of the U.S. Army’s counterintelligence division, welcoming the 
opportunity to hunt down Soviet spies, among whom, he was 
convinced, was Oppenheimer himself—a _ conviction that 
remained with him throughout the war and beyond. When, after 
the war, newspapers reported the spying activities of the Soviet 
spy Klaus Fuchs, Pash was reported as remarking that he “would 
next be reading about Dr. Oppenheimer’s involvement in such 
activities.” When he was asked at Oppenheimer’s security 
hearings in 1954 whether in 1943 he considered Oppenheimer a 
security risk, he replied straightforwardly: “Yes I did.” 

From his office in San Francisco, Pash orchestrated an intense 
security effort to keep Oppenheimer under surveillance: his 
phone was tapped, microphones were installed in his home, 
agents were employed to act as his chauffeur, and wherever 
Oppenheimer went, G-2 men followed. At Los Alamos, the G-2 
man in charge of security was Captain Peer de Silva, who was as 
convinced as Pash that Oppenheimer was a security risk, and who 
was under orders from Pash to keep Oppenheimer under the 
closest possible scrutiny. 

It is unclear how aware Oppenheimer was of the intensity with 
which he was being scrutinized by security agents. It is said that 
the agents who served as his drivers were thwarted in their 
efforts to hear what he was saying to his fellow passengers 
because of his habit of winding the window down in order to 
create a wind noise that would drown out his conversation. This 
may have been a clever ploy to prevent his conversations from 
being heard by men he knew to be security agents, but it seems 
equally possible that, on the assumption that he thought his 
drivers were civilians, it was a perfectly sensible precaution. 

When he arrived at Los Alamos, Oppenheimer was in the 
extremely odd and vulnerable position of having been appointed 
director of the most secret laboratory in the country while still 
not having the security clearance that would normally be a 
prerequisite for taking up even the most junior appointment in 
that laboratory. He and Groves seemed to take the view that he 
could start work before receiving his clearance, on the 
assumption that it would eventually be granted. Pash and de 
Silva were rather of the opinion that Oppenheimer’s request for 


clearance should be refused and that he should be removed from 
the bomb project as soon as possible. 

Two weeks after Oppenheimer moved to New Mexico, at a time 
when he and his colleagues were still making hurried 
preparations for the opening of the new laboratory, Pash received 
news from the FBI that would, he thought, finally convince the 
authorities that his suspicions of Oppenheimer were well 
founded. It concerned a conversation picked up by the “technical 
surveillance” of Steve Nelson’s home between Nelson and a man 
known to the FBI at this time only as “Joe” (which is how Nelson 
addressed him in the conversation). As the FBI would discover 
two months later, “Joe” was Oppenheimer’s friend and ex-student 
Joe Weinberg. 

The conversation took place in the early hours of the morning 
on March 30, 1943. Weinberg had arrived at Nelson’s house the 
previous evening, telling Nelson’s wife, Margaret, that he had 
some important information to pass on—so important that he was 
prepared to wait several hours for Nelson to return home in order 
to discuss it with him. As Nelson discovered when he got home, 
the information Weinberg had was indeed of great importance 
and was bound to be of enormous interest to the Soviet Union: 
people engaged in the new weapon project (which, Weinberg 
thought at this time, would include himself) were about to be 
relocated to a remote spot where experiments on explosives could 
be conducted in secret. Clearly feeling nervous and (as he freely 
admitted to Nelson) “a little bit scared,” Weinberg spoke in a 
whisper when giving Nelson some technical details of the project. 
The classified information that he passed on to Nelson centered 
on developments at Oak Ridge, which Weinberg must have heard 
about from friends who worked at the Rad Lab. The FBI notes on 
the conversation at this point become a little sketchy—it was 
evidently difficult to hear what Weinberg was saying—but the 
gist is clear enough. A separation plant, Weinberg told Nelson, 
was already being built in Tennessee that was expected to employ 
thousands of people, the separation method being “preferably 
that of the magnetic spectrograph with electrical and magnetic 
focusing.” Toward the end of the conversation Weinberg 
discussed with Nelson how he might be able to provide 
information in the future via his sister, who lived in New York, 
and Nelson emphasized how important it was not to put anything 


in writing. 

The conversation left no doubt at all that Weinberg was 
willing, indeed eager, to play an important role in Soviet 
espionage. And though the FBI did not yet know who “Joe” was, 
they did know that he was an ex-student of Oppenheimer’s. That 
much was clear from the conversation, in which Oppenheimer 
was mentioned several times, usually referred to as “the 
professor.” Pash clearly thought the mere fact that Oppenheimer 
was associated with two people plotting espionage would be 
enough to establish him as a security risk, but in fact the FBI 
notes of the conversation provide pretty good grounds for 
thinking that Oppenheimer was not a risk. Whenever “the 
professor” came up in the conversation, either Nelson or 
Weinberg (or both) made some comment to the effect that he had 
cut his links to the Party and that he was emphatically not 
prepared to pass on secrets to the Soviet Union. 

At one point, Nelson remarked that Oppenheimer was “very 
much worried now and we make him feel uncomfortable,” to 
which Weinberg responded by saying that Oppenheimer kept him 
off the project because he was worried that he would “attract 
more attention” and also because “he fears that I will 
propagandize.” Oppenheimer, Weinberg told Nelson, had 
“changed a bit ... You won’t believe the change that has taken 
place.” Nelson agreed, saying: “To my sorrow, his wife is 
influencing him in the wrong direction.” Evidently on the basis of 
his recent farewell lunch with Oppenheimer, Nelson told 
Weinberg that Oppenheimer, encouraged by his wife, was keen to 
dissociate himself from his former colleagues in the Communist 
Party, because he did not want to threaten his central role in the 
important project to which he had been recruited. 

Even if it did not implicate Oppenheimer, this conversation 
between Weinberg and Nelson provided irrefutable evidence of a 
threat to the security of a top-secret military project, and, as such, 
it was taken very seriously indeed by the FBI, to whom “Joe’s” 
information was as much a revelation as it was to Nelson. The FBI 
immediately delivered a transcript of the conversation to Colonel 
Pash, whose response was to fly to Washington to tell Groves and 
Lansdale that he had evidence of Oppenheimer’s involvement in 
espionage. 

Of course, what Pash had was fairly conclusive evidence that 


4 


Oppenheimer—much to the disappointment of his former friends 
in the Communist Party—was not involved in espionage. Indeed, 
from the point of view of incriminating Oppenheimer, the 
conversation between Nelson and “Joe” did not tell Groves and 
Lansdale anything new; it simply confirmed what they already 
knew about him, and what they had discussed with each other 
many times, namely that he had a history of close associations 
with communists. Lansdale later recalled that when he and 
Groves first looked through Oppenheimer’s FBI file (he could not 
remember exactly when this was, but thought it was while Los 
Alamos was still being built, so probably sometime in the first 
two months of 1943), Oppenheimer’s political history caused 
them “a great deal of concern” and they discussed it at length. 
“General Groves’s view, as I recall,” Lansdale said, “was (a) that 
Dr. Oppenheimer was essential; (b) that in his judgment—and he 
had gotten to know Dr. Oppenheimer very well by that time—he 
was loyal; and (c) we would clear him for this work whatever the 
reports said.” So, on the question of Oppenheimer’s loyalty, 
General Groves had already firmly made up his mind, and he was 
a man who trusted his own judgment. Nothing short of 
incontrovertible evidence that Oppenheimer was a security risk 
would make him drop his conviction that Oppenheimer was the 
man to get the job done. 

However, it was now clear that the Soviets already knew much 
about the American atomic-bomb project (more, for example, 
than the FBI knew at the time) and that, unless the flow of 
information was stopped immediately, there was a_ strong 
possibility they would very soon know a good deal more. It thus 
became a matter of urgent importance to discover the identity of 
“Joe” and prevent him having any further access to sensitive 
information. So seriously did G-2 take this that they immediately 
established a closer working relationship with the FBI. Thus, on 
April 5, 1943, General Strong met J. Edgar Hoover’s assistant, 
E. A. Tamm, to inform him officially of the existence of the 
Manhattan Project. The following day, Groves and Lansdale met 
with two representatives of the FBI to discuss ways in which the 
two security organizations might cooperate in order to establish 
“Joe’s” identity and protect the project from Soviet espionage. 

A few days before those meetings the FBI had already gathered 
some counterintelligence that was, they now realized, of 


immediate interest to G-2’s attempt to maintain the security of 
the Manhattan Project. In response to the conversation between 
Nelson and “Joe,” they had decided to keep Nelson under 
constant, twenty-four-hour surveillance, and on April 1 their 
agents had seen him walk to a corner shop, from where he 
phoned the Soviet consulate in San Francisco to arrange a 
meeting with Ivanov. When the meeting subsequently took place, 
on April 6, FBI agents were there to observe it. Then, on April 10, 
FBI agents watching Nelson’s house noted the arrival there of 
none other than Vasily Zubilin, the head of the NKVD espionage 
operation, who was based at the Soviet embassy in Washington. 
The microphones inside the house picked up a long conversation 
between the two about the structure of the Soviet espionage 
operation and the respective roles played within it by the 
American Communist Party and the NKVD (Nelson was worried 
that the former was being bypassed by the latter). Agents also 
heard Zubilin counting out large amounts of money to give to 
Nelson, who exclaimed: “Jesus, you count money like a banker.” 
Presumably Nelson and Zubilin soon realized that US. 
counterintelligence was onto them, because this was the last time 
that either was recorded as having anything to do with espionage. 

While the security forces were trying to discover his identity, 
Weinberg managed to insinuate himself into a position in which 
he would have access to secret information. Sometime in April 
1943, Oppenheimer, despite his earlier reservations about hiring 
Weinberg, employed him at the Rad Lab to work on some 
calculations that were part of the effort to improve the focusing 
of the beam of the Calutron. Of course, Oppenheimer knew 
nothing of the recorded conversation between Weinberg and 
Nelson. However, Pash and de Silva later cited Oppenheimer’s 
willingness to employ Weinberg as evidence of his complicity 
with Soviet espionage. Lansdale, on the other hand, when asked 
years later about this period, not only did not see anything 
suspicious in Oppenheimer’s behavior, but went out of his way to 
praise Oppenheimer for being “very helpful” in the attempt to 
impress upon his fellow scientists at Los Alamos the importance 
of maintaining strict security. 

“The scientists en masse presented an extremely difficult 
problem,” Lansdale said, adding: “I hope my scientist friends will 
forgive me, but the very nature of them made things difficult.” 


Scientists, by their very nature, like to share information, which 
put them somewhat at odds with the people whose job it was to 
ensure that information was not shared. From both sides there 
was, from the very beginning, mutual incomprehension. In the 
many reminiscences of Los Alamos written by scientists, the 
security arrangements are almost invariably regarded with a 
mixture of contempt and amusement. Robert Serber, for example, 
describes the initial attempts to secure the Los Alamos site as 
comically lax and amateurish. “Oppie,” he writes, “wrote passes 
for us on University of California stationery which didn’t well 
survive being carried in hip pockets.” 

As Serber remembers it, the first guards at the site were 
Spanish American construction workers who were “dragooned to 
man the gate.” After that, the army took over “and brought in 
MPs who were mostly ex—New York cops and put the New York 
cops on the horses—probably none of them had ever seen a horse 
before—and set them to patrolling the fences.” Unsurprisingly, 
“they called that off after a couple of weeks.” 

Serber also remembers taking part in a plan, devised by 
Oppenheimer and army security, to spread false rumors about 
what was happening at the Mesa. The rationale behind this is 
given in a letter from Oppenheimer to Groves, dated April 30, 
1943. “We propose,” Oppenheimer wrote: 


that it be let known that the Los Alamos Project is working on 
a new type of rocket and that the detail should be added that 
this is a largely electrical device. We feel that the story will 
have a certain credibility; that the loud noises which we will 
soon be making here will fit in with the subject and that the 
fact, unfortunately not kept completely secret, that we are 
installing a good deal of electrical equipment, and the further 
fact that we have a large group of civilian specialists would fit 
in quite well. 


What struck Oppenheimer as a credible plan, however, turned 
out, in practice, to be a laughable failure. Together with others 
from the laboratory, Serber was instructed to go to a bar in Santa 
Fe and start talking in a loud voice about the electric rocket they 
were working on. The problem they encountered was that, no 
matter how loudly they discussed it, no one seemed very 


interested. Eventually Serber approached a drunk at the bar and 
said to him: “Do you know what we’re doing at Los Alamos? 
We're building an electric rocket!” It was, Serber admits, mission 
unaccomplished: “the FBI and Army Intelligence never reported 
picking up any rumors about electric rockets.” 

Equally unsuccessful was another idea Oppenheimer came up 
with to mislead potential snoops, this time involving Wolfgang 
Pauli, who since 1940 had been a physics professor at Princeton. 
Oppenheimer’s idea, he told Pauli in a letter written in May 1943, 
was one “that I think deserves to be taken seriously, although I 
know that you will laugh at it.” It was that Pauli could use his 
“sreat talents for physics and burlesque” by writing phoney 
articles on aspects of theoretical physics and publishing them 
under the names of, for example, Bethe, Teller, Serber and 
Oppenheimer, thus forestalling questions the enemy might have 
about why these top physicists had apparently stopped publishing 
any work and preventing them from drawing the obvious 
conclusion that, as Oppenheimer put it, “we are finding good uses 
for our physicists.” 

In his reply, Pauli reported that he was having problems 
getting funding for his research from the Rockefeller Foundation 
and the director of the Institute for Advanced Study, and so, 
though he “would be glad to be helpful in the suggested way,” he 
felt compelled to publish what he was writing under his own 
name in order “to prove to the quoted money-givers that after all 
I am working on something for their money,” fearing, he added, 
“their sense for burlesque to be rather undeveloped.” In any case, 
Pauli wrote, he doubted the scheme would work, since why 
would the enemy not believe that “the persons whose names 
figure as authors are not occupied beside some scientific work 
also with war problems?” And then “the whole Don-Quichotery 
would be in vain.” 

Despite the suspicions of him entertained by Pash, de Silva and 
other security officers, then, Oppenheimer seemed, on the face of 
it, wholeheartedly—if sometimes quixotically—in support of the 
security efforts of army intelligence. In this, as Lansdale pointed 
out, he stood out among his fellow scientists, some of whom, like 
Serber, adopted an attitude of amused disdain toward the security 
restrictions, while others were openly contemptuous and 
provocative. As he has recounted in his famous public lecture, 


' 


“Los Alamos from Below,’ 
Feynman. 

Feynman was among the first to arrive at Los Alamos, being 
part of what Oppenheimer described as a “job lot” of scientists 
from Princeton who came with Robert Wilson. He would later 
win the Nobel Prize and become one of the best-known physicists 
in the world, but in 1943 Feynman was a young man of twenty- 
four who had only just completed his Ph.D. thesis. Though young, 
he had already impressed many of the most eminent scientists in 
America with the sharpness of his intellect and the originality of 
his mind—Wilson at Princeton and Teller at Chicago among them 
—and was very shortly to make a deep impression on Hans Bethe 
at Los Alamos. To the security staff at Los Alamos, however, 
Feynman was a mischievous and vexatious nuisance. 

From the very beginning, Feynman was determined to thumb 
his nose at the precautions he was asked to adopt. All the 
physicists at Princeton had been told not to buy their train tickets 
to Albuquerque, New Mexico, from Princeton, since it was a small 
station and, if everyone bought tickets to Albuquerque from 
there, suspicions would be aroused. “And so,” Feynman later said, 
“everybody bought their tickets somewhere else.” Everyone, that 
is, except Feynman, “because I figured if everybody bought their 
tickets somewhere else ...” 

Once at Los Alamos, Feynman discovered to his horror that his 
letters to his wife, and hers to him, were being examined and, at 
times, censored. His wife, on learning this, repeatedly mentioned 
in her letters to him that she felt uncomfortable knowing that the 
censor was looking over her shoulder as she wrote. This led to 
Feynman receiving a note: “Please inform your wife not to 
mention censorship in her letters.” But, of course, as Feynman 
gleefully pointed out, he himself was under instructions not to 
mention censorship, so he wrote back: “I have been instructed to 
inform my wife not to mention censorship. How in the heck am I 
going to do it?” Feynman was presented with another 
opportunity to be a thorn in the side of the security effort when 
he discovered that the workmen on the site had cut themselves a 
hole in the fence, so as to enable them to leave for home without 
having to go through the official gate. So Feynman went out 
through the gate, walked around to the hole, came back in and 
then went out again through the gate, “until the sergeant at the 


chief among the latter was Richard 


gate began to wonder what was happening. How come this guy is 
always going out and never coming in?” 

In the memoirs of the scientists who worked at Los Alamos, the 
pervasive presence of the army and the security measures they 
imposed are almost universally prominent. Apart from the 
extraordinary location, the fact that the laboratory was a military 
establishment was, in the eyes of the civilian scientists—most of 
whom would have had little or no prior experience of being with 
soldiers and working under army regulations—its most novel and 
noteworthy aspect. For many of these scientists, Groves was the 
very embodiment of everything they found strange, irksome and 
idiotic about the army. As such, he often appears in scientists’ 
recollections of Los Alamos as a figure of fun, a man whose 
limited understanding of physics and brutish manner made him a 
legitimate target of derision. Edward Teller, for example, though 
claiming to have “neutral” feelings about Groves (and therefore, 
he emphasizes, better feelings about him than most of the 
scientists at Los Alamos), remarks that Groves’s opening speech to 
the scientists “seemed about what would be expected from a 
person who knew nothing about the project he was supervising.” 
Teller says that he was puzzled to hear that Groves had 
complained about Hungarian being spoken on the site, since he 
and his wife were at the time the only Hungarians there and had 
spoken Hungarian only in their own apartment. Then he 
discovered that Groves had heard Felix Bloch’s sons speaking in 
their Swiss German dialect and “had confused that strange 
language with one even more peculiar.” 

The task of maintaining good relations between the scientists 
and the military officers fell to the associate director of the 
laboratory, Edward Condon. In his autobiography, Groves goes so 
far as to say that maintaining good relations was Condon’s “major 
responsibility.” Whether or not it was his principal task, it was 
certainly a difficult and thankless one, made much worse by the 
fact that Condon and Groves very quickly developed extremely 
poor opinions of each other (“Condon was not a happy choice,” 
Groves remarks dismissively). The biggest issue on which they 
failed to see eye-to-eye was “compartmentalization,” the policy— 
which Groves regarded as “the very heart of security”—according 
to which workers on the Manhattan Project knew only what they 
needed to know in order to do their jobs and no more. The 


workers at Oak Ridge and Hanford, for example, did not know 
that they were helping to produce uranium and plutonium, nor 
did the workers at one site even know of the existence of the 
other. It was this policy that had resulted in the strange situation 
mentioned earlier, of the FBI investigating breaches to the 
security of a project the existence of which they were officially 
unaware. Groves felt strongly that this policy should apply also to 
scientists, so that those working at the Met Lab at Chicago, for 
example, should know nothing about what was going on at Los 
Alamos. 

Condon thought this was ridiculous and fundamentally 
incompatible with the successful pursuit of science. The issue 
came to a head toward the end of April, just six weeks after 
Oppenheimer and Condon had moved to Los Alamos, when 
Oppenheimer flew to Chicago to discuss the schedule for 
plutonium production with Arthur Compton. Groves was furious 
and, on Oppenheimer’s return, stormed into Oppenheimer’s office 
to make his feelings known to both Oppenheimer and Condon. 
Condon stood up to Groves and defended this breach of 
compartmentalization, but was puzzled to see that Oppenheimer 
was not supporting him. A few days later, Condon resigned, 
giving his reasons in a long letter to Oppenheimer. “The thing 
that upsets me most,” he told Oppenheimer, “is the extraordinary 
close security policy.” 


I do not feel qualified to question the wisdom of this since I am 
totally unaware of the extent of enemy espionage and sabotage 
activities. I only want to say that in my case I found that the 
extreme concern with security was morbidly depressing— 
especially the discussion about censoring mail and telephone 
calls, the possible militarization and complete isolation of the 
personnel from the outside world. I know that before long all 
such concerns would make me so depressed as to be of little if 
any value. 


He was, he said, “so shocked that I could hardly believe my 
ears” when Groves reproached them for discussing technical 
questions with Compton: “I feel so strongly that this policy puts 
you in the position of trying to do an extremely difficult job with 
three hands tied behind your back that I cannot accept the view 


that such internal compartmentalization of the larger project is 
proper.” 

So alien did this way of thinking strike Groves that he was 
convinced Condon had kept the real reason for his resignation 
quiet. “The considerations he cited in his letter of resignation,” 
Groves said of Condon, “did not seem to justify his departure.” 
His own impression, he went on, was that Condon was 
“motivated primarily by a feeling that the work in which we were 
engaged would not be successful, that the Manhattan Project was 
going to fail, and that he did not want to be connected with it.” 
As far as I am aware, there is no evidence in anything Condon 
wrote or said to support Groves’s interpretation of his reasons for 
leaving the project. 

During his brief time at Los Alamos, Condon made at least one 
important and lasting contribution, not only to the work of the 
laboratory, but also to the physics of atomic-bomb manufacture, 
and that was his writing up and editing of Robert Serber’s 
introductory lectures, which formed The Los Alamos Primer (the 
title was Condon’s), a copy of which was given to every scientist 
on their arrival. There are several references among the memoirs 
and histories of Los Alamos to the fact that Serber was not a 
particularly good lecturer, but in print the lectures present a 
masterfully lucid account of bomb physics, some of the credit for 
which must go to Condon. 

There were five lectures, the first of which was given on April 
5, 1943, and the last on April 14. The first lecture begins with the 
admirably clear and forthright statement: “The object of the 
project is to produce a practical military weapon in the form of a 
bomb in which the energy is released by a fast-neutron chain 
reaction in one or more of the materials known to show nuclear 
fission.” Actually, from a security point of view, in its use of the 
word “bomb,” this statement was a little too clear. “After a couple 
of minutes,” Serber later recalled, “Oppie sent John Manley up to 
tell me not to use that word. Too many workmen around, Manley 
said. They were worried about security. I should use ‘gadget’ 
instead.” The word “gadget” stuck and became the one everyone 
at Los Alamos used to refer to the thing they were designing and 
manufacturing. 

After spelling out the purpose of the project, Serber’s lectures 
go on to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding all 


aspects of bomb physics, much of which had remained 
unpublished and was therefore news to anyone not previously 
involved in the atomic-bomb project. He begins with a discussion 
of the fission process itself, emphasizing that the energy release in 
fission is, per atom, more than ten million times that of an ordinary 
combustion process, such as that of a fire or a chemical explosion. 
Serber then explains the phenomenon of a chain reaction and 
says that it would take eighty generations of reactions to fission 
one kilogram of U-235. Those eighty generations would take 
place in 0.8 microseconds (a microsecond being one-millionth of 
a second), producing an explosion equivalent to 20,000 tons of 
TNT. 

The lectures next provide a summary of what was then known 
about the physics and chemistry of the relevant materials, U-238, 
U-235 and Pu-239, and explain how plutonium is produced from 
uranium by a series of nuclear reactions. The calculations 
required to estimate critical mass are given and explained, and 
are used to provide a basic figure of 200 kilograms for U-235, 
which, Serber explains, “more exact diffusion theory” developed 
at Berkeley in the summer of 1942 brought down to 60 
kilograms. When a tamper is used to reflect back neutrons that 
would otherwise escape, Serber goes on, the critical mass for 
U-235 would possibly be as low as 15 kilograms, and for Pu-239 
lower still. But, he was at pains to emphasize, all this was, in the 
spring of 1943, theoretical and uncertain. A large part of the task 
facing the laboratory was to provide experimental data upon 
which more reliable and accurate calculations could be made: 


To improve our estimates requires a better knowledge of the 
properties of bomb materials and tamper: neutron 
multiplication number, elastic and inelastic cross sections, 
overall experiments on tamper materials. Finally, however, 
when materials are available, the critical masses will have to 
be determined by actual test. 


In a section headed “Damage,” Serber demonstrated just how 
much scientists already knew about the devastation that an 
atomic bomb would cause. “Several kinds of damage will be 
caused by the bomb,” he stated. First, there would be the damage 
from neutron radiation, which he estimated to be effective within 


1,000 yards of the explosion. In notes that Serber added in 199248 
to the published version of The Los Alamos Primer, he says that in 
1943 he had “overlooked a more serious source of lethal 
radiation,” namely the release of extremely energetic gamma 
radiation, the range of which, for the Hiroshima bomb, was 4,000 
feet. Second, there is the damage caused by the blast or shock 
wave. Serber estimates that a bomb equivalent to 100,000 tons of 
TNT would have a destructive radius of about two miles. Other 
topics covered by his introductory lectures included the efficiency 
of the explosion (the proportion of the material that is actually 
fissioned before it all expands and blows apart), the possible 
methods of detonation and the various techniques of assembly. 

The very last thing Serber dealt with in these lectures, under 
the heading “Shooting,” was the question of how the bomb was 
to be “fired”—how, that is, the subcritical pieces of fissionable 
material (uranium or plutonium) were to be brought together to 
form a supercritical mass. The first method he considered was the 
simple mechanism envisaged by Frisch and Peierls in their 
memorandum, in which a small “bullet” of the material is fired 
into a subcritical mass, thus making it supercritical. This had the 
advantage of being very straightforward, but the disadvantage of 
posing enormous ordnance problems, namely those of designing 
and manufacturing a “gun” capable of firing the “bullet” 
sufficiently quickly to prevent the bomb fizzling before it 
exploded. Another method discussed by Serber was the 
“implosion” method, which was eventually used in the world’s 
first atomic-bomb explosion in July 1945. In this method pieces 
of the material are arranged in a circle and then brought together 
very quickly. 

Though it has long been associated with Seth Neddermeyer, 
implosion was not invented by him, but rather by Richard 
Tolman, who suggested it at the Berkeley conference in 1942. 
Tolman and Serber collaborated on a memorandum on the 
subject at that time and, when urged by Conant and Bush to 
pursue the method in March 1943, Oppenheimer replied: “Serber 
is looking into it.” In Oppenheimer’s original organizational chart 
of Los Alamos, the investigation of implosion was one of the 
things that was earmarked as_ Serber’s responsibility. 
Neddermeyer, however, became an enthusiastic advocate of the 
idea after hearing Serber’s lecture, and immediately dedicated 


himself to its development. 

Neddermeyer’s development of the implosion concept was 
presented to the other scientists at Los Alamos at a major ten-day 
conference that began the day after Serber’s lectures finished. 
From April 15 to 24, while the laboratories were still being built 
and the infrastructure of the growing town of Los Alamos was 
still being developed, an extraordinary collection of the best 
scientists in America—both native Americans and émigrés, those 
now working on the program and those still working at their own 
universities—met to discuss the scientific questions that needed 
to be answered if an atomic bomb was ever going to be built. 

On the first day of the conference, Oppenheimer, covering 
some of the same ground as Serber, summarized the present state 
of knowledge. With regard to the production of fissionable 
material by the enormous plants being constructed at Oak Ridge 
and Hanford, he told his audience that he estimated that from 
early 1944 100 grams of uranium-235 and, a year later, 300 
grams of plutonium could be shipped every day. Oppenheimer 
also discussed the “Super” that had so captured Teller’s 
imagination the previous summer, but insisted that it was at a 
much earlier stage of development than the “gadget” and, as 
such, of decidedly secondary importance. On the two subsequent 
days Manley laid out the details of the forthcoming experimental 
program, and Bethe discussed the physical constants that needed 
to be discovered, such as the critical mass, the number of 
neutrons emitted per fission, the various cross-sections and the 
efficiency of the explosion. On day four Serber led a discussion on 
the tamper. The issues covered in subsequent discussions 
included: experimental methods, the properties of natural 
uranium, detonation by gun method, the chain reaction produced 
by “the pile” at Chicago, and, finally, the ways in which the 
critical mass, timescale and damage of the bomb might be 
discovered experimentally. 

It was, of course, soon after this conference that Condon left 
the project, which made some reorganization necessary. Back in 
November 1942, Conant had convened a committee to review 
progress in the various research projects then under way relating 
to the production of an atomic bomb. Chaired by Warren K. 
Lewis, a professor of chemical engineering at MIT, this review 
committee produced a report on December 4, recommending the 


continuation of a concerted program of plutonium production via 
the pile process then being pursued by Fermi at Chicago. In May 
1943, a second Lewis committee was given the task of reviewing 
the Los Alamos program. Up until then, the running of the 
laboratory had been the responsibility of a planning board, the 
membership of which had grown steadily. At its first meeting of 
March 6, 1943, the planning board had consisted of 
Oppenheimer, Condon, Wilson, McMillan, Manley and Serber. A 
few weeks later, this board had grown in two directions: 
Oppenheimer and Condon heading a subgroup concerned with 
the administration of the laboratory, while Wilson, Serber and 
others took responsibility for planning the scientific program. At 
two subsequent meetings in early April, several more scientists 
were added to the board, including Feynman, Teller, Bethe and 
Neddermeyer. Now, in addition to planning the first three months 
of the experimental program, due to start in June, the board also 
discussed the problems that arose from the rapid expansion of the 
laboratory. Already it had 150 members of staff, and the 
available housing was almost filled. The board decided to delay 
any further hiring and recommended that the laboratory should 
“be more far-sighted about expansion” in the future. 

Members of the Lewis committee attended these planning 
board meetings, after which they produced a report that judged 
progress to be satisfactory, but recommended that the laboratory 
should be considerably expanded so as to include within its remit 
not only the design and manufacture of the bomb, but also, for 
example, the investigation of the metallurgy and purification of 
plutonium (previously chiefly the responsibility of the Met Lab in 
Chicago) and all issues relating to the ordnance of the bomb— 
that is, the design and manufacture of the specific mechanisms 
for firing and using the bomb. As the official history puts it, this 
report destroyed altogether “the original concept of Los Alamos 
as a small physical laboratory.” 

Prior to the Lewis committee’s report, ordnance had been the 
responsibility of Richard Tolman and was treated as a scientific 
set of problems. The report, however, reflected Groves’s view that 
ordnance needed to be dealt with by someone with a practical 
rather than a purely scientific frame of mind, “so that,” as Groves 
put it, “we will have service equipment instead of some dream 
child.” The kind of person Groves wanted “would have to set up 


ballistic tests of experimental bombs, plan for the combat use of 
the weapon and quite possibly be the one to use the bomb in 
actual battle.” In other words, it had to be a military man. 

After trying and failing to find someone he thought could do 
the job among the list of army ordnance officers, Groves turned 
to Bush in Washington, who recommended a naval officer: 
Commander William “Deak” Parsons, a man with several years’ 
experience of ordnance and gunnery research. On May 5, 1943, 
Parsons was ordered to report without delay to Admiral Ernest 
King, and, he later recalled, “I was plunged into the Manhattan 
District with a set of verbal orders and a discussion with Admiral 
King lasting less than ten minutes.” Groves, in his autobiography, 
says that, on meeting Parsons, he was immediately impressed 
with his “understanding of the interplay between military forces 
and advanced scientific theory” and claims that “within a few 
minutes I was sure that he was the man for the job.” 

The following day, Parsons was introduced to Oppenheimer 
and the two of them took the train together to Los Alamos. 
During the journey, Parsons has recalled, they agreed that, while 
the scientists would “produce the nuclear guts of the gadget,” 
Parsons’s division would be responsible for engineering those guts 
into “a totally reliable service weapon.” Parsons had no 
background in nuclear physics, but what he, with his background 
in ordnance, could see that the scientists had not, even now, 
appreciated was the scale of the task facing them. When Parsons 
first arrived at Los Alamos in May 1943, Oppenheimer’s plan of 
the laboratory had swollen from his original conception of about 
a dozen scientists and staff to a workforce of about 300 people. A 
few days later, as a result of Parsons’s reappraisal of the situation, 
the anticipated workforce had more than doubled, most of the 
increase going into the ordnance-engineering division. After 
sizing up the situation at Los Alamos, Parsons returned to 
Washington for a few weeks. When he reported for work at Los 
Alamos in June, he had been promoted to captain, and made it 
clear to everyone that he regarded himself as firmly in charge of 
his part of the operation. Working under him, as group heads, 
were Ed McMillan, Charles Critchfield and Seth Neddermeyer, the 
last of whom had by this time become head of the Implosion 
Experimentation Group. Within two months, Parsons had added 
five more groups to his division and, in the words of his 


biographer, “pulled together a top-notch ordnance-development 
team, [begun] the design of the nuclear gun, brought new 
support to the implosion method of nuclear assembly, readied the 
test range at Anchor Ranch, [begun] the planning for the tactical 
delivery of the bomb, and started testing scale models.” 
Considering there was at this time almost no uranium, and 
absolutely no plutonium available for experiments, this was 
pretty remarkable progress. 

Notwithstanding Oppenheimer’s somewhat optimistic estimates 
of the daily production of uranium and plutonium to be expected 
in the coming years, the scientists and engineers at Los Alamos 
knew that it would be two years or so until enough fissionable 
material would be available to actually build a bomb. Their job, 
the urgency of which was felt by everyone concerned, was to 
have the theory, design and manufacture problems solved in time 
for the arrival of sufficient quantities of the fissionable materials. 
As one history of the Manhattan Project puts it, once the material 
was ready to use, “every month’s delay had to be counted as a 
loss to the war.” The fact that fissionable material was in such 
short supply at the start of the new laboratory’s work meant that, 
to a much larger extent than would otherwise have been the case, 
the enterprise was reliant upon theory. Thus the theoretical 
physicists that Oppenheimer had recruited—which included, of 
course, a good proportion of the best in the country—were 
absolutely central to the project, even though it was, in essence, an 
engineering project. As Feynman once put it: “All science stopped 
during the war except the little bit that was done at Los Alamos. 
And that was not much science; it was mostly engineering.” 

Unlike the experimentalists, who required the equipment to be 
up and running before they could begin their work, the 
theoreticians could start right away. So, during the months of 
May and June, while the builders continued to construct houses 
and laboratories, and the leaders of the project continued to 
construct ever more elaborate organizational charts and to revise 
upward their estimates of how many people the project would 
need, the theoreticians—needing only their slide rules, their 
minds and, occasionally, a blackboard—could get on with their 
calculations. As Teller had emphasized the previous summer in 
Berkeley, the basic science of the atomic bomb had already been 
done. There was no doubt, from a theoretical perspective, that 


the fission of uranium or plutonium could potentially produce an 
explosive of enormous power. There was no fundamental 
theoretical science left to do regarding the fission process. On the 
other hand, in the spring of 1943, the idea of a bomb based upon 
the science of fission was only theoretical. The Met Lab in 
Chicago had succeeded in producing a chain reaction, but nobody 
had even come close to building an atomic bomb. In order to 
make that a reality, the theoreticians needed to work with the 
experimentalists and the engineers, not only in the formulation of 
fundamentally new physics, but also in the performing of certain 
mathematical calculations that only they could do because only 
they understood. 

“Every day,” Feynman remembers, “I would study and read, 
study and read. It was a very hectic time.” Though still young and 
as yet relatively undistinguished, Feynman quickly established a 
lively rapport with Bethe. As Feynman remembers it, Bethe 
would come into their office, explaining his ideas, and Feynman 
would say: “No, no, you’re crazy. It’ll go like this.” 


And he says, “Just a moment” and explains how he’s not crazy, 
I’m crazy. And we keep on going like this. You see, when I hear 
about physics, I just think about physics, and I don’t know who 
I’m talking to, so I say dopey thinks like “no, no, you’re 
wrong,” or “you’re crazy.” But it turned out that’s exactly what 
he needed. 


Despite the fact that it fundamentally contradicted the idea of 
compartmentalization, Oppenheimer insisted on having a weekly 
colloquium, in which scientists could exchange information and 
criticize each other’s ideas. Having failed to recruit Rabi and to 
keep Condon, he became more and more accommodating to the 
anti-military sensibilities of many top scientists. For example, 
after the April conference, he decided that the perfect man to 
lead the Experimental Physics Division was Robert Bacher. 
Bacher accepted the position, but only after he made it clear to 
Oppenheimer that his letter of acceptance should be regarded 
also as a letter of resignation if the laboratory ever became, as 
was Officially still the intention, fully militarized. Partly because 
of the trenchant opposition to militarization shown by Bacher and 
his fellow scientists, the intention to bring the laboratory under 


full military control was never realized. As Bacher rather 
diplomatically recalled: 


It had been planned that Los Alamos would turn to be a 
military laboratory, but I think Groves, who was a very 
sagacious man about such things, even though he first thought 
that compartmentalization was the most important thing that 
you could have in a laboratory, began to realize that that 
would defeat him, he’d defeat himself in this, and that the very 
openness that a civilian laboratory had was a big advantage, 
and it provided very much greater flexibility. 


It seems possible that in insisting on making his views on 
militarization clear from the start, Bacher was responding to what 
had happened to Condon, who had left Los Alamos bewildered by 
Oppenheimer’s willingness to conform to the dictates of military 
authority, even when they conflicted with the requirements of 
science. As Condon suspected, Oppenheimer shared his views on 
compartmentalization—as, surely, did all the scientists at Los 
Alamos—but what Condon did not know was that Oppenheimer 
was not in a position to openly support Condon’s objections to 
the security arrangements at Los Alamos. As he himself did not 
yet have security clearance, Oppenheimer could ill afford to 
alienate those responsible for providing security. Indeed, as a 
result of Joe Weinberg’s late-night conversation with Steve 
Nelson, things were far worse than Oppenheimer himself could 
possibly have known. 

In the spring of 1943, at the time that Condon left the project 
and the organization of the laboratory was being put into place, 
the chances of Oppenheimer being granted security clearance did 
not look good. Though Weinberg had not yet been identified as 
“Joe,” the authorities knew perfectly well who “the professor” 
was, and Pash and de Silva were not alone in their view that a 
man who numbered among his friends and students at least three 
people who were either actively engaged in Soviet espionage or 
closely associated with those who were (Nelson, Lomanitz and 
the as-yet-unidentified “Joe”) was not the man to appoint as the 
head of the U.S.’s most important and most secret military 
research project. And that was before they knew anything about 
Haakon Chevalier’s attempt to persuade Oppenheimer to aid 


Eltenton’s espionage efforts—the disclosure of which, 
Oppenheimer knew, would almost certainly bring an end to his 
directorship of the Los Alamos laboratory before it had really 
begun. 

And so Oppenheimer kept that particular secret to himself for 
several months, during which he was followed everywhere by 
Pash’s agents, who continued to hunt for irrefutable confirmation 
that he was not to be trusted. Meanwhile, the FBI stepped up its 
investigation of those civilians not employed by the Manhattan 
Project who yet seemed to be taking an unhealthy interest in it, 
particularly those people who had a history of involvement with 
the Communist Party. This, of course, included some of the 
radical young scientists connected with Berkeley’s Radiation 
Laboratory, the best known of whom, to both the FBI and to army 
intelligence, was Lomanitz, whose every movement was now 
closely watched by both agencies. 

In June 1943, the constant surveillance of Lomanitz resulted in 
the identification of Weinberg as “Joe.” A G-2 agent following 
Lomanitz saw him pose with three friends for a picture taken by a 
commercial photographer at one of the entrances to the Berkeley 
campus. As soon as the four men were out of sight, the agent 
approached the photographer and bought the negative of the 
picture he had taken. The other three men in the photograph 
were identified as David Bohm, Max Friedman and Joseph 
Weinberg, and in a short while the agency was able to identify 
Weinberg as “Joe.” All four of the people in the photograph were 
physicists at Berkeley, all of them politically radical and all of 
them associated with Oppenheimer (Bohm, Lomanitz and 
Weinberg had been students of his, and Friedman was regarded 
socially as a member of the same group). 

For the rest of the war each of these four friends was watched 
closely by the security services, who saw to it that none of them 
had any access whatsoever to sensitive information. When 
Oppenheimer asked for Bohm to be transferred to Los Alamos, his 
request was refused on the grounds that Bohm could not possibly 
be granted security clearance. Lomanitz, meanwhile, was offered 
a job liaising between the Rad Lab and Oak Ridge, but before he 
could take up the position he was drafted into the army. 
Friedman was hired first by the Rad Lab and then by the Met Lab 
in Chicago, but was quickly fired from both. Weinberg, like 


Lomanitz, was drafted into the army. As a direct result of the 
monitoring of Weinberg’s conversation with Nelson in March 
1943, then, the Soviets would have received no further 
information about the U.S. bomb project from Weinberg, 
Lomanitz, Bohm, Friedman or Nelson. That particular “spy ring” 
was effectively shut down. 

The idea that those four, together with Nelson, constituted a 
spy ring is not altogether fanciful; Weinberg, for one, had shown 
himself perfectly prepared to pass secret information to the 
Soviets via Nelson. And, given their connections with 
Oppenheimer, and the fact that Oppenheimer had recruited (or at 
least tried to recruit) at least three of them to positions that 
would give them access to secret information, it was perfectly 
natural to suspect Oppenheimer of being in some sense a member 
of that “spy ring.” 

In June 1943, at about the same time that Weinberg was being 
identified as “Joe,” Oppenheimer himself provided further reason 
for suspicion when, followed, as ever, by army intelligence 
agents, he left Los Alamos for Berkeley. His ostensible reason for 
the trip was to recruit a personal assistant, his chosen candidate 
for the job being his friend, the Berkeley philosopher David 
Hawkins—a man with many connections to radical, left-wing 
politics, suspected by the FBI of being a communist. Such a 
choice added a little more credibility to Pash’s suspicions of him, 
but much more serious grounds for questioning his judgment, if 
not his loyalty, were provided by Oppenheimer’s decision to use 
this trip to California to pay a visit to his ex-lover, Jean Tatlock, 
who was at this time living in San Francisco. 

By the summer of 1943 Jean was far more interested in 
psychology than politics—she was working as a child psychiatrist 
at Mount Zion Hospital, and was herself receiving psychoanalysis 
from the Freudian doctor Siegfried Bernfeld—but, nevertheless, 
she was well known to the security services as a woman with a 
history of communist sympathies, activities and connections. 
Before Oppenheimer left for Los Alamos in March, Jean had 
asked him to visit her, but he had refused. When he was asked 
later why, on this occasion, he did see her, he replied: 


She had indicated a great desire to see me before we left. At 
that time I couldn’t go. For one thing, I wasn’t supposed to say 


where we were going or anything. I felt that she had to see me. 
She was undergoing psychiatric treatment. She was extremely 
unhappy. 


Asked why she “had to” see him, Oppenheimer replied: “Because 
she was still in love with me.” 

What transpired when the two met is recorded in some detail 
by the report that Pash’s agents sent to the FBI. On June 14, 
1943, those agents reported, Oppenheimer went from Berkeley to 
San Francisco, where he was met by Jean Tatlock, “who kissed 
him.” The two then drove in her car to a local bar, where they ate 
and had a few drinks, after which Jean drove them back to her 
apartment on Montgomery Street, San Francisco. The agents, 
sitting in a car outside the apartment, noted that at half past 
eleven the lights went off, and the following morning. 
Oppenheimer and Jean left the building together. That evening 
the two met again in downtown San Francisco, where they 
“greeted each other affectionately” and then went to have dinner 
together at a place called Kit Carson’s Grill. After dinner Jean 
drove him to the airport, where he caught a plane back to New 
Mexico. 

At this time, of course, Oppenheimer did not know that Joe 
Weinberg had incriminated both himself and, potentially, 
everybody close to him. But he did know that he himself was 
regarded with some suspicion by those whose job it was to 
provide the Manhattan Project with security from espionage, and 
he presumably also knew, or might well have surmised, that the 
success or failure of his application for security clearance was 
therefore still in the balance. Given this, and given that he was in 
daily contact with members of U.S. Army intelligence, it is 
surprising that he did not assume, or at the very least suspect, 
that his every movement was being watched. Or, even more 
surprising, that he chose to spend a night with Jean even though 
he was most likely being kept under surveillance. At his security 
hearing in 1954, he squirmed uncomfortably when asked about 
the occasion: 


Q. You have no reason to believe she wasn’t a Communist, do 
you? 
A. No. 


Q. You spent the night with her, didn’t you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That is when you were working on a secret war project? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you think that consistent with good security? 

A. It was, as a matter of fact. Not a word—it was not good 
practice.49 


“Not good practice” hardly does justice to the scale of 
Oppenheimer’s lapse in judgment at this point. Taking everything 
we know about Oppenheimer and Jean Tatlock at this time, it 
seems extremely unlikely that what they talked about that night 
was the work being conducted at Los Alamos, but, to a mind full 
of suspicion (of both communists in general and of Oppenheimer 
in particular), it was natural to imagine that Oppenheimer might 
be using Tatlock as a go-between, in order to pass on to the 
Soviet Union details of the Manhattan Project. 

Certainly such thoughts occurred to Pash, who, on June 29, 
1943, two weeks after Oppenheimer’s trip to Berkeley and San 
Francisco, made a formal recommendation to the Pentagon to 
refuse security clearance to Oppenheimer on the grounds that he 
“may be connected with the Communist Party,” citing in evidence 
Oppenheimer’s visit to Jean and his decision to appoint Hawkins 
as his assistant. Pash recommended not only that Oppenheimer 
be replaced as scientific director of Los Alamos, but also that he 
be thoroughly investigated and interviewed. 

Fortunately for Oppenheimer, Groves trusted Pash’s judgment 
less than that of John Lansdale. At about the same time as he 
wrote to the Pentagon recommending Oppenheimer’s dismissal, 
Pash wrote a memo to Lansdale suggesting that, if Oppenheimer 
was not fired, then he should be summoned to Washington to be 
told that the security services knew all about his communist 
connections and warned that the authorities would not tolerate 
any attempt by Oppenheimer to pass classified information to 
members of the Communist Party. Pash considered Oppenheimer 
to be potentially disloyal to his country, but, like Steve Nelson, he 
also saw how important it was to Oppenheimer to be heading an 
important government project and thought that the threat of 
losing his high-profile job, his reputation and his honor would be 
enough to keep him in check. “Consequently,” Pash concluded, 


“it is felt that he would lend every effort to cooperating with the 
Government in any plan which would leave him in charge.” 
Lansdale’s view of Oppenheimer differed sharply from Pash’s. 
He had by this time met Oppenheimer and Kitty at Los Alamos 
several times and had come to the conclusion that Oppenheimer 
was neither a communist nor a threat to security. When he was 
asked at Oppenheimer’s security case in 1954 why, in 1943, he 
had formed the judgment that Oppenheimer was not a 
communist, Lansdale gave the following interesting reply: 


My working definition of a Communist is a person who is more 
loyal to Russia than to the United States. That is the definition 
I formed very early during my work on the Communist 
problem in the War Department, and which I still think is a 
sound definition. You will note that has nothing to do with 
political ideas. 

Unquestionably Dr. Oppenheimer was what we would 
characterize and as hide-bound a Republican as myself 
characterizes as extremely liberal, not to say radical. 
Unfortunately, in this problem of determining who is and who 
is not a Communist, determining who is loyal and who is not, 
the signs which point the way to persons to be investigated or 
to check on are very frequently political liberalism of an 
extreme kind. The difficult judgment is to distinguish between 
the person whose views are political and the person who is a 
Communist, because communism is not a political thing at all. 


Lansdale, as he later emphasized in the same testimony, 
considered Oppenheimer to be a loyal American citizen who 
would put the interests of his own country first, and was 
therefore, according to the above definition, not a communist. 
Asked whether he had formed the same impression about Kitty, 
he replied: 


Mrs. Oppenheimer impressed me as a strong woman with 
strong convictions. 

She impressed me as the type of person who could have 
been, and I could see she certainly was, a Communist. It 
requires a very strong person to be a real Communist. 


However, Kitty’s strength of personality was, Lansdale came to 


think, a force acting in favor of Oppenheimer’s trustworthiness: 


I formed the conviction over many interviews with her and 
many discussions with her that she had formed the conviction 
that Dr. Oppenheimer was the most important thing in her life 
and that his future required that he stay away from Communist 
associations and associations with people of that ilk. 

It was my belief that her strength of character—I think 
strength of character is the wrong word—her strength of will 
was a powerful influence in keeping Dr. Oppenheimer away 
from what we would regard as dangerous associations. 


In other words, Lansdale had come to exactly the same 
conclusion as Steve Nelson: influenced by Kitty, Oppenheimer 
was quite prepared to separate himself from his old communist 
friends and comrades in order to maintain the trust of the U.S. 
government and therefore hold on to his position as head of an 
important military project. 

In a memo to Groves written in July 1943, Lansdale outlined 
this view of Oppenheimer and his wife. While listing all the 
“derogatory information” that the FBI and G-2 had gathered 
about Oppenheimer—his connections with communist front 
organizations, his friendship with leading Communist Party 
members, his personal connections with Jean Tatlock and Haakon 
Chevalier (“believed to be a Communist Party member”), and 
reliable reports from within the Communist Party that he was 
considered a member—and conceding that this information was 
troubling, Lansdale opposed Pash’s recommendation that 
Oppenheimer should be denied clearance and fired. As an 
alternative he recommended Pash’s fall-back position, but instead 
of placing the emphasis where Pash had placed it—on the use of 
the derogatory information to intimidate Oppenheimer into 
refusing to have anything to do with espionage—Lansdale 
emphasized the possibility that their information, and the 
possibly dire consequences it might have for Oppenheimer, could 
be used to persuade him to turn informant. Oppenheimer, 
Lansdale suggested, should be told that there were doubts about 
his loyalty “because of his known interest in the Communist Party 
and his association with and friendship for certain members of 
the Communist Party” and invited to prove his loyalty by 


providing Groves and Lansdale with information about any 
threats to security that he might have heard about. In other 
words, Oppenheimer should be made to feel that, in order to 
demonstrate his loyalty to his country, he would have to betray 
his old friends in the Communist Party. 

In the light of Lansdale’s assessment, Groves took a 
characteristically decisive step. On July 20, 1943, he issued the 
following instructions to the U.S. District Engineer: 


In accordance with my verbal instructions of July 15, it is 
desired that clearance be issued for the employment of Julius 
Robert Oppenheimer without delay, irrespective of the 
information which you have concerning Mr. Oppenheimer. He 
is absolutely essential to the project. 


Oppenheimer was thus granted his clearance, though this, of 
course, did not put an end to the matter. Pash and de Silva were 
still convinced that he was aiding and abetting Soviet espionage, 
while Groves and Lansdale, convinced that he was not, were 
determined to use him to reveal further information about people 
who were. At precisely the time when experimental work at Los 
Alamos could begin, therefore, Oppenheimer spent much of his 
time involved in various ways with issues of security. This no 
doubt contributed to his feeling, which he conveyed at this time 
to Robert Bacher, that he was not equal to the task with which he 
had been charged. In response, Bacher told him what Groves also 
clearly believed: he had no alternative but to continue, since 
there was no one else capable of doing the job. 

Oppenheimer’s resolve to carry on was surely fortified by a 
letter he received at the beginning of July 1943 from President 
Roosevelt himself, asking him to assure the scientists working at 
Los Alamos that their efforts were appreciated: “I am sure we can 
rely on their continued wholehearted and unselfish labors. 
Whatever the enemy may be planning, American science will be 
equal to the challenge.” In his reply, Oppenheimer took the 
opportunity to emphasize to the President how importantly he 
took the security of the project: 


You would be glad to know how greatly your words of 
reassurance were appreciated by us. There will be many times 


in the months ahead when we shall remember them. 

It is perhaps appropriate that I should in turn transmit to you 
the assurance that we as a group and as individual Americans 
are profoundly aware of our responsibility, for the security of 
our project as well as for its rapid and effective completion. It 
is a great source of encouragement to us that we have in this 
your support and understanding. 


That Oppenheimer was not entirely trusted by those for whom 
he worked was made clear in a letter that he received from 
General Groves written on July 29, 1943, telling him that 
henceforth he was requested: (a) to “refrain from flying in 
airplanes of any description”; (b) that he should be accompanied 
by “a competent, able bodied, armed guard” acting as chauffeur 
during any road trip “above a few miles”; and (c) that, in driving 
about Los Alamos, “a guard of some kind should be used, 
particularly during hours of darkness.” 

This letter was evidently part of a tightening of security that 
was soon to have the drastic and lasting consequences mentioned 
earlier for those ex-students of Oppenheimer’s who were 
identified as actual or possible communist spies. The first affected 
was Lomanitz, who on July 27 was told by Ernest Lawrence that 
he had been promoted to group leader at the Rad Lab, having 
responsibility for overseeing the building of Calutrons at Oak 
Ridge. Three days later, before he could take up his new position, 
Lomanitz received a letter telling him that he had been drafted 
into the army. “It was really a sort of a strange thing,” Lomanitz 
later explained, “because Dr. Lawrence had just had a talk with 
me about some new work that he wanted me to undertake which 
was supposedly more important, which was to go out to Oakridge 
and be a liaison man between Berkeley and Oakridge while 
Oakridge was building a couple of hundred of these machines.” 

Neither Lomanitz nor Lawrence, of course, knew that the FBI 
had been listening to Lehmann’s indiscreet conversation with 
Steve Nelson back in October 1942, or that Lomanitz’s comradely 
photograph with Weinberg, Friedman and Bohm had led to all 
four of them being identified as members of an espionage ring. 
Both were puzzled. According to Lomanitz, Lawrence’s initial 
reaction was: “Oh, there has to be a mistake. I’ll take care of it.” 
But, Lomanitz discovered: “It turned out that it was not a mistake 


and he was not able to take care of it.” Not that he didn’t try. 
Lansdale remembers: “Ernest Lawrence yelled and screamed 
louder than anybody else about us taking Lomanitz away from 
him.” In his desperation, Lomanitz phoned Oppenheimer at Los 
Alamos, who immediately sent off a telegram to the Pentagon 
saying that a “very serious mistake is being made. Lomanitz now 
only man at Berkeley who can take this responsibility.” On July 
31, 1943, Oppenheimer cabled Lomanitz, saying: “Have 
requested in proper places reconsideration of support for your 
deferment. Cannot guarantee outcome but have made strong 
request.” 

As Oppenheimer, Lomanitz and Lawrence all discovered, 
however, the army was implacable in its decision not to allow 
Lomanitz to work on the atomic-bomb project and to enlist him. 
Toward the end of his life, in 2001, Lomanitz gave an interview 
in which he revealed that, nearly sixty years after the event, he 
still believed that the purpose in getting him out of Berkeley was 
not to prevent a security leak, but rather to weaken and then to 
close down the Rad Lab branch of the Federation of Architects, 
Engineers, Chemists and Technicians (FAECT), which he and 
Oppenheimer had helped to establish and to run. 

In fact, it was the other way around: the authorities were 
indeed keen to close down the Rad Lab branch of FAECT, but this 
was because they saw it as a communist front organization and a 
threat to the security of the bomb project. Removing Lomanitz 
was part of an attack not on trade unionism, but specifically on 
the Communist Party and, more specifically, on the use made of 
communist members of FAECT by Soviet intelligence to gain 
information on U.S. military programs. It was Lansdale’s hope 
that Oppenheimer’s vulnerability with regard to his past 
associations with the Communist Party would allow him to be 
exploited by the security services to aid them in that attack. 

Some confirmation that Lansdale’s hopes might be well 
founded in this respect came from a meeting he had with 
Oppenheimer at Los Alamos on August 10, 1943, a full report of 
which is contained in a memo he sent Groves two days later. 
Lansdale told Groves he had made it clear to Oppenheimer that it 
was no use asking the authorities to defer Lomanitz’s draft, since 
“he had been guilty of indiscretions which could not be 
overlooked or condoned.” Oppenheimer—perhaps assuming, like 


Lomanitz, that what the authorities had against his ex-student 
was his involvement in political (rather than espionage) activities 
—told Lansdale that he had insisted very strongly to Lomanitz 
that, if he joined the atomic-bomb project, “he must forego all 
political activity.” He also told Lansdale “he knew that Lomanitz 
had been very much of a Red as a boy when he first came to the 
University of California,” but professed to have no knowledge of 
his political activities since then. When told by Lansdale that the 
investigation of Lomanitz had revealed that he had certainly not 
forgone any political activity, Oppenheimer, according to 
Lansdale, replied: “That makes me mad.” Lansdale goes on: 


There then ensued a general discussion of the Communist 
Party. Oppenheimer was told that from a military intelligence 
standpoint we were quite unconcerned with a man’s political 
or social beliefs, and we were only concerned with preventing 
the transmission of classified information to unauthorized 
persons, wherever that person’s loyalties might lie, or whatever 
his social, political, or religious beliefs might be. 


At this point in the conversation, Oppenheimer endeavored to 
give Lansdale the impression that he himself took a rather 
tougher line against Communist Party members than that taken 
by the army: 


[He] stated that he did not agree with us with respect to the 
Communist Party. He stated that he did not want anybody 
working for him on the project that was a member of the 
Communist Party. He stated that the reason for that was that 
“one always had a question of divided loyalty.” He stated that 
the discipline of the Communist Party was very severe and was 
not compatible with complete loyalty to the project. He made 
it clear he was not referring to people who had been members 
of the Communist Party, stating that he knew several now at 
Los Alamos who had been members. He was referring only to 
present membership in the Communist Party. 


“Oppenheimer gave every appearance of sincerity in this 
discussion,” Lansdale concluded, telling Groves that his own view 
was that “what Dr. Oppenheimer was trying to convey was, in the 
case of Lomanitz, that Lomanitz had been worried about his 


obligations to the party, and that Oppenheimer had told him that 
he must give up the party if he came on the project.” He also 
“had the definite impression that Oppenheimer was trying to 
indicate that he had been a member of the party, and had 
definitely severed his connections upon engaging in this work.” 
“On the whole,” Lansdale’s memo ends, “it seemed that 
Oppenheimer, in a rather subtle way, was anxious to indicate to 
this officer his position in that regard.” 

On August 12, the day that Lansdale wrote his memo about 
Oppenheimer to Groves, FBI agents watched as Bohm, Friedman 
and Lomanitz arrived at a meeting at Weinberg’s apartment that 
was also attended by Steve Nelson and his Communist Party 
assistant, Bernadette Doyle. The surveillance of Lomanitz and his 
friends was part of an extensive FBI operation entitled 
“CINRAD”—“Communist Infiltration of the Radiation 
Laboratory”—which was eventually to build up files on more 
than 300 Communist Party members in Berkeley. So seriously 
was the threat to security posed by the group of communists at 
the Rad Lab taken that it was discussed at the highest possible 
level. On August 17, Groves, after presenting a progress report on 
the atomic-bomb project to the U.S. government’s Top Policy 
Group, went on to summarize the army’s investigation of what he 
called the “California trouble.” On the same day he had delivered 
to Henry Stimson, the Secretary of War, a draft memo for the 
President advising that FAECT should be ordered to stop all 
activity regarding the Radiation Laboratory. Within a few months 
the memo achieved its end when FAECT’s Rad Lab branch was 
forced to close. 

Lansdale’s conversation with Oppenheimer of August 10 
evidently persuaded Oppenheimer that it was not enough for him 
to distance himself from his old communist friends and comrades; 
he also had to be seen to be active in combating the threat to 
security that they represented. The clumsy attempt by Chevalier 
to enlist his aid in George Eltenton’s espionage activities, about 
which he had previously been entirely quiet, now seemed to him 
to offer a relatively harmless way of giving the security forces 
what they wanted: information on communist espionage 
attempts. Not that Oppenheimer wanted to inform on Chevalier, 
but Eltenton seemed a promising target. After all, Eltenton was no 
friend of his and he had, much to Oppenheimer’s annoyance, 


actively sought to involve both him and Chevalier in espionage. A 
few days after his conversation with Lansdale, therefore, 
Oppenheimer went to see Groves and gave him Eltenton’s name 
as someone who needed to be watched. 

About a week later, on August 25, 1943, Oppenheimer went to 
Berkeley with, it seems, the intention of addressing the problems 
that Lansdale had discussed regarding security at the Rad Lab. He 
first went to the secret office of Lieutenant Lyall Johnson and 
asked him whether it would be all right to speak to Lomanitz, 
who at that time was still on campus, continuing to hope that his 
draft into the army could be deferred. Johnson granted 
Oppenheimer permission to speak to Lomanitz, though he 
stressed that in his opinion Lomanitz was dangerous. As he was 
leaving Johnson’s office, Oppenheimer told him (as he had 
previously told Groves) that there was a man called George 
Eltenton of whom the security officers in Berkeley should be 
aware. Eltenton, Oppenheimer told Johnson, worked for Shell 
and was an active member of FAECT. 

Oppenheimer then went to Lawrence’s office in the Rad Lab, 
where he had arranged to meet Lomanitz. It is not entirely clear 
exactly why Oppenheimer wanted to meet Lomanitz. Was he still 
trying to help Lomanitz keep his job at the Rad Lab? Was he 
trying to find out what truth there was in what Lansdale had said 
about Lomanitz—that he had, despite his promise to 
Oppenheimer, kept up his political activities, including taking an 
active part in FAECT business, and that he had been guilty of 
“indiscretion”? Or was his purpose to pass on to Lomanitz the fact 
that he had aroused the suspicions of counterintelligence officers? 
The evidence is scanty and restricted to what Oppenheimer 
himself told Pash, Lansdale and the security hearing of 1954. At 
his hearing, Oppenheimer said: “With the approval or the 
suggestion, I don’t remember, of the security officer, I endeavored 
to persuade Lomanitz to get the thing straight with the security 
people.” To Lansdale, Oppenheimer revealed that Lomanitz had 
told him that he was being “framed.” “I said I think that’s 
nonsense, why would you be framed, and he said, ‘Well, part of 
the general scheme ... maybe they’re after bigger game than the 
party.’ ” 

In other words, Lomanitz thought, as he continued to think for 
the rest of his life, that the aim of the authorities in drafting him 


into the army was to destroy FAECT. Oppenheimer claims that by 
this time he had come to the view that it was a lost cause to keep 
Lomanitz at the Rad Lab. “I persuaded him, I think,” 
Oppenheimer told Lansdale, “that he should not try to stay on the 
project there.” 

Worried about being overheard by Lawrence’s secretarial staff, 
and also perhaps suspecting that Lawrence’s office was being 
bugged,s0 Oppenheimer and Lomanitz went outside to continue 
their discussion on the street, after which Oppenheimer returned 
to Lawrence’s office to find Weinberg and Bohm waiting to see 
him. Oppenheimer told Lansdale: 


These two fellows were concerned with only one thing. They 
said they had worked closely with Rossi [Lomanitz], they 
thought he was a good guy and that they thought he was being 
framed for his activities in the union and his political 
sympathies, and they thought that because of this they were 
also in danger of such a nature that they should get out of the 
project into some other useful work or they were likely to be 
treated the same way. 


In response, Oppenheimer claimed, he told them “if they were 
violating any of the three rules which meant active in union, 
maintaining any contacts with Reds, not maintaining discretion, 
they were useless to the project.” When Lawrence briefly 
appeared, Oppenheimer asked him to witness the promises of 
Weinberg and Bohm to stay away from politics. That night, 
Oppenheimer had dinner in Berkeley with Robert Bacher, and 
was overheard by “creeps” telling Bacher that he had given 
Lawrence “hell” over the lax security at the Rad Lab. 

The indications are that Oppenheimer, when he went to bed on 
the night of August 25, 1943, probably considered that he had 
done much that day to improve both the security position at 
Berkeley and his own reputation among the security officers. He 
had volunteered information about possible communist spies, had 
told Lomanitz to forget his promised group leadership, had 
elicited promises from Weinberg and Bohm to stay away from 
politics, and had given Lawrence a dressing-down about the weak 
security in the Rad Lab. Not a bad day’s work, he might have felt. 
However, what he had done was to sow the seeds for his own 


downfall and that of many of his friends, students and colleagues. 

For what he had succeeded in conveying to Lyall Johnson was 
very different from what he had meant to convey. What 
interested Johnson about the “information” Oppenheimer had 
provided was not that George Eltenton was a communist, active 
in FAECT and keen to supply the Soviets with information about 
U.S. military projects. The security services already knew that. 
What interested Johnson was that Oppenheimer knew that. As 
soon as Oppenheimer left his office, therefore, Johnson phoned 
Boris Pash to tell him about his meeting with Oppenheimer. To 
Pash, this looked like the opportunity he had been waiting for to 
prove Oppenheimer’s involvement in Soviet espionage. Pash 
immediately arranged to see Oppenheimer the following morning 
and also arranged for their conversation to be recorded. The 
result was a recording that would be played, replayed, 
transcribed and minutely analyzed for the rest of Oppenheimer’s 
life and beyond. 

In responding to questions from Pash and Johnson about 
Eltenton, Oppenheimer seems in this recorded interview to be 
extraordinarily inept, which some commentators have attributed 
to his arrogance in not taking seriously the possibility that he 
might be intellectually outmaneuvered by people of inferior 
intelligence. What seems most apparent, however, is that 
Oppenheimer was simply not prepared for the questions he 
received. He went to Johnson’s office on the morning of 
August 26, expecting to discuss Lomanitz with Johnson alone. He 
did not expect Pash to be there, did not expect the conversation 
to be recorded and did not expect to be questioned about 
Eltenton. He thought, it appears, that the security officers would 
simply be grateful that he had provided them with a possible 
lead, not that they would grill him about it. After all, when he 
told Groves about Eltenton, he did not have to face lots of 
searching questions about how he knew Eltenton to be involved in 
espionage. For this reason it seems not to have occurred to him 
that, if he was to keep Chevalier’s name out of it, he had better 
have a convincing explanation of how he came to know about 
Eltenton. When called upon to provide such an explanation, 
therefore, he responded in the worst possible way by making up a 
story on the spot, one that could not possibly withstand the 
intense scrutiny it received—a “cock and bull story,” as he was 


later compelled to confess. 

Pash began by telling Oppenheimer what a pleasure it was to 
be able to speak to him face-to-face, since, in maintaining the 
security of the atomic-bomb project, he felt as if General Groves 
had “placed a certain responsibility in me and it’s like having a 
child, that you can’t see, by remote control.” Then, getting 
straight to the point, he continued: “Mr. Johnson told me about 
the little incident, or conversation, taking place yesterday in 
which I am very much interested and it had me worried all day 
yesterday since he called me.” 

How far Oppenheimer was understanding the mentality of 
security officers is revealed in his reply to this, in which he 
assumed that what Pash was worried about was his conversation 
with Lomanitz. He also showed himself willing to be far more 
critical of Lomanitz than was strictly necessary in the 
circumstances: 


I was rather uncertain as to whether I should or should not talk 
to him [Lomanitz] when I was here. I was unwilling to do it 
without authorization. What I wanted to tell this fellow was 
that he had been indiscreet. I know that that’s right that he had 
revealed information. I know that saying that much might in 
some cases embarrass him. It doesn’t seem to have been 
capable of embarrassing him to put it bluntly. 


“That is not the particular interest I have,” Pash told him. “It is 
something a littlke more, in my opinion, more serious. Mr. 
Johnson said there was a possibility that there may be some other 
groups interested.” 

Clearly wrong-footed by this, and entirely unprepared for it, 
Oppenheimer started to babble, ending up by appearing to 
endorse the idea of sharing information about the atomic bomb 
with the Russians: 


I think that is true, but I have no first-hand knowledge that 
would be, for that reason, useful, but I think it is true that a 
man, whose name I never heard, who was attached to the 
Soviet consul, has indicated indirectly through intermediary 
people concerned in this project that he was in a position to 
transmit, without any danger of a leak, or scandal, or anything 


of that kind, information, which they might supply ... I will 
take it to be assumed that a man attached to the Soviet 
consulate might be doing this. But since I know it to be a fact, I 
have been particularly concerned about any indiscretions 
which took place in circles close to the consul or which might 
come in contact with it. To put it quite frankly, I would feel 
friendly to the idea of the Commander-in-Chief informing the 
Russians that we were working on this problem. At least, I can 
see that there might be some arguments for doing that, but I do 
not feel friendly to the idea of having it moved out the back 
door. I think that it might not hurt to be on the lookout for it. 


Refusing to be deflected from his main purpose, Pash then 
pressed Oppenheimer: “Could you give me a little more specific 
information as to exactly what information you have?” At this 
point, having not thought through an adequate story, 
Oppenheimer fell back on equivocation, vagueness and 
straightforward dishonesty. The approaches for information, he 
claimed, “were always to other people, who were troubled by 
them and discussed them with me.” Furthermore, he told Pash, 
“the approaches were always quite indirect, so I feel that to give 
more, perhaps, than one name, would be to implicate people 
whose attitude was one of bewilderment rather than one of 
cooperation.” The one name he was prepared to give was the one 
he had already given: Eltenton. 


He has probably been asked to do what he can to provide 
information. Whether he is successful or not, I couldn’t know. 
But he talked to a friend of his who is also an acquaintance of 
one of the men on the project, and that was one of the 
channels by which this thing went. Now I think that to go 
beyond that would be to put a lot of names down, of people 
who are not only innocent but whose attitude was 100 percent 
effective. 


At this point Oppenheimer probably realized he was in trouble. 
He had said that Eltenton had approached, possibly through 
intermediaries, people working on the atomic-bomb project for 
information to pass on to the Soviet Union, and, as he by this 
point in the conversation no doubt realized, Pash was not going 


to rest until he had secured the names of the intermediaries, the 
people who had been approached and (though Pash and his 
colleagues probably already knew this part) Eltenton’s contact at 
the Soviet consulate. With regard to the last of these, 
Oppenheimer responded: 


I mean I don’t know the name of the man attached to the 
consulate. I think I may have been told or I may not have been 
told and I have, at least not purposely, but actually forgotten. 
He is—and he may not be here now. These incidents occurred 
of the order of about five, six, seven, months ago. 


Again, this response gave away more information than was 
necessary. He did not need to inform Pash that he was possibly 
told the name of Eltenton’s contact at the Soviet consulate, nor 
did he need to reveal that he knew, at least roughly, when these 
incidents took place. 

With regard to the names of the people who had been 
approached, Oppenheimer at first tried to evade the question, and 
then, perhaps realizing he had to say something, began to concoct 
his “cock and bull story”: “I have known two or three cases, and I 
think two of the men were with me at Los Alamos. They are men 
who are very closely associated with me.” Now he had committed 
himself to saying far more than he needed to. He knew, of course, 
of one person who had been approached, through an 
intermediary, by Eltenton: namely himself. Did he really know of 
one or two others who had been similarly approached? He later 
claimed that he did not, that these other cases simply did not 
exist. So why on earth did he tell Pash and Johnson that he knew 
two or three people “closely associated” with himself who had 
been approached indirectly by Eltenton for information on the 
bomb project? The only explanation he gave for this at his 
security hearing was: “I was an idiot.” Indeed, under the 
circumstances, it is hard to think of anything more idiotic, which 
shows, I think, how little prepared Oppenheimer was for the 
questions Pash and Johnson put to him. 

When asked to name the intermediary, Oppenheimer’s initial 
response was: “I think it would be a mistake ... I think I have told 
you where the initiative came from and that the other things 
were almost purely accident and it would involve people who 


ought not be involved in this.” When pressed, he gave a few 
hints, some of them entirely unhelpful (“He is a man whose 
sympathies are certainly very far left, whatever his affiliations, 
and he may or may not have regular contacts with a political 
group”), and some that might indeed lead his inquisitors to 
Chevalier (“It’s a member of the faculty, but not on the project”). 

When Pash and Johnson returned to the question of who this 
nameless intermediary had approached, Oppenheimer again 
provided a curious detail. Asked if the people who had been 
approached had been contacted at the same time, he replied: 
“They were contacted within a week of each other ... but not in 
each other’s presence.” “And then,” said Pash, “from what you 
first heard, there is someone else who probably still remains here 
who was contacted as well.” “I think that is true,” replied 
Oppenheimer. Driving home the importance of this point, Pash 
emphasized that, according to Oppenheimer’s story, there had 
been a plan to leak information to the Soviet consulate from 
contacts who worked on the atomic-bomb project, “and we may 
not have known all the contacts.” “That is certainly true,” replied 
Oppenheimer. “That is why I mentioned it.” After a bit more 
prevarication he let slip further details about the people who had 
been approached: first, that they “have a feeling toward this 
country and have signed the Espionage Act”; second, that one of 
the men “has gone, or is scheduled to go, to Site X [Oak Ridge].” 
Putting all these hints together, it would have been natural to 
come to the conclusion that General Groves was to reach: that 
two of the people Oppenheimer had described as_ being 
approached by Eltenton were himself and his brother Frank, and 
that his evasions had to do with his desire—his duty—to protect 
Frank. 

Several times toward the end of the discussion, Pash let 
Oppenheimer know in no uncertain terms that he had not heard 
the last of this. He repeatedly asked Oppenheimer if it would be 
all right to interview him again at Los Alamos, to which 
Oppenheimer gave his evidently unenthusiastic assent. Pash also 
referred repeatedly to the fact that he would not drop his 
attempts to discover the name of the intermediary. “We certainly 
would give a lot of thanks and appreciation for the name of that 
intermediary,” he told Oppenheimer, since “we are going to have 
to spend a lot of time and effort which we ordinarily would not in 


trying to ... trying to run him down before we even can get on to 
these others.” The clear implication was that, in withholding his 
name, Oppenheimer was not protecting the intermediary; rather, 
he was just wasting the time of military-intelligence officers. “We 
will be hot under the collar until we find out what is going on,” 
Pash promised. 

Before he left, Oppenheimer tried two further tactics to rescue 
the situation. The first was to make grandiose declarations of his 
loyalty to his country and of his own concern for security (“I 
think that I would be perfectly willing to be shot if I had done 
anything wrong”). The second was, rather ignobly, to insist that 
security at his Los Alamos was a good deal better than it was at 
Lawrence’s Rad Lab (“I feel responsible for every detail of this 
sort of thing down at our place and I will be willing to go quite 
far in saying that everything is 100 percent in order. That doesn’t 
go for this place up here”). Neither tactic made any impression on 
Pash; he was, he told Oppenheimer, like a bloodhound on a trail 
and, whatever Oppenheimer might say or do, that trail was going 
to lead him to the identities of (a) Oppenheimer’s intermediary, 
and (b) the three members of the bomb project who had been 
approached to leak information to the Soviets. 

The conversation left Pash more convinced than ever that 
Oppenheimer was involved in espionage, and, though he had 
been unable to convince either Groves or Lansdale of this, his 
view was shared by other important members of the security 
services, who shared also his fervent desire to protect the bomb 
project from Oppenheimer’s complicity. The FBI had always 
regarded Oppenheimer with suspicion and were only too pleased 
to ally themselves with Pash’s campaign against him. On 
August 27, the day after Oppenheimer’s disastrous meeting with 
Pash and Johnson, an FBI agent recommended placing a wiretap 
on Jean Tatlock’s phone, on the grounds that Oppenheimer might 
use either her or her telephone in order to contact “the 
Comintern Apparatus.” Five days later, J. Edgar Hoover took up 
the suggestion in a memo to the Attorney General, saying that 
tapping her phone would help in “determining the identities of 
espionage agents within the Comintern Apparatus,” because she 
was “the paramour of an individual possessed of vital secret 
information regarding this nation’s war effort” and “a contact of 
members of the Comintern Apparatus.” Jean’s phone was duly 


tapped, but no information relevant to the protection of the U.S. 
was ever gathered by such means. 

On September 2, 1943, the day after Hoover’s memo to the 
Attorney General, the case against Oppenheimer was summarized 
in a memo to Pash written by Pash’s man at Los Alamos, Captain 
Peer de Silva. With regard to the recent developments in the 
espionage case relating to the Manhattan Project, de Silva began, 
“the part played by J.R. Oppenheimer is believed to take on a 
more vital significance than has heretofore been apparent.” After 
summarizing Oppenheimer’s discussion with Pash and Johnson, 
de Silva states: “The writer wishes to go on record as saying that 
J.R. Oppenheimer is playing a key part in the attempts of the 
Soviet Union to secure, by espionage, highly secret information 
which is vital to the security of the United States.” In support of 
this view, de Silva writes that Oppenheimer, despite having gone 
on record as believing that Communist Party membership is 
incompatible with access to military secrets, “has allowed a tight 
clique of known Communists or Communist sympathizers to grow 
up about him within the project, until they comprise a large 
proportion of the key personnel in whose hands the success and 
security of the project is entrusted.” “In the opinion of this 
officer,” de Silva goes on, “Oppenheimer either must be 
incredibly naive and almost childlike in his sense of reality, or he 
himself is extremely clever and disloyal. The former possibility is 
not borne out in the opinion of the officers who have spoken with 
him at length.” What struck de Silva about Oppenheimer’s recent 
disclosure of information regarding Eltenton and his unnamed 
intermediary was its timing: immediately after Oppenheimer had 
been alerted to the fact that his ex-students were being 
investigated for leaking information. “Until alerted to the fact 
that an investigation was in progress,” de Silva wrote, 
Oppenheimer “made absolutely no attempt to inform any 
responsible authority of the incidents which he definitely knew to 
have occurred and which, he claims, he did not approve.” 

De Silva concluded that “Oppenheimer is deeply concerned 
with gaining a worldwide reputation as a scientist, and a place in 
history” through his leadership of the Los Alamos laboratory. The 
army, he maintained, “is in the position of being able to allow 
him to do so or to destroy his name, reputation, and career, if it 
should choose to do so.” He ended up suggesting that, if “strongly 


presented to him,” the fact that the army could destroy his 
reputation, “would possibly give him a different view of his 
position with respect to the Army, which has been, heretofore, 
one in which he has been dominant because of his supposed 
essentiality.” 

Four days later, this uncompromising assessment was sent to 
Lansdale by Pash, who added to it the statement: “This Office is 
still of the opinion that Oppenheimer is not to be fully trusted 
and that his loyalty to a Nation is divided. It is believed that the 
only undivided loyalty that he can give is to science and it is 
strongly felt that if in his position the Soviet Government could 
offer more for the advancement of his scientific cause he would 
select that Government as the one to which he would express his 
loyalty.” 

Meanwhile, the close surveillance of Weinberg and his friends 
continued. On September 3, the day after de Silva wrote his 
memo to Pash, agents following Weinberg saw him post a thick, 
large envelope addressed to Al Flanigan, a graduate student at 
Berkeley and a friend of Steve Nelson’s. When the agents opened 
the envelope they found that it contained a manuscript article 
entitled “The Communist Party and the Professions,” together 
with a brief, unsigned covering note, which said: “Please do not 
communicate with me during this period, nor discuss with others 
my reasons for this request.” The note also asked Flanigan to pass 
this message on to “S. or B.”—presumably Steve Nelson and 
Bernadette Doyle—“without mentioning my name.” Copies of the 
manuscript and the note were sent to Pash, who regarded them as 
evidence that the purpose of Oppenheimer’s meeting with 
Weinberg and Bohm was to tip them off that they were being 
watched. 

On September 12, Lansdale conducted an interview with 
Oppenheimer, this time in Groves’s office in Washington. Like 
Pash’s interview a couple of weeks earlier, it was recorded and 
transcribed. The tone of the interview, however, was very 
different. As Lansdale made clear to Oppenheimer, he liked, 
admired and trusted him. He began the interview by telling 
Oppenheimer, “without intent of flattery or complimenting or 
anything else,” that “you’re probably the most intelligent man I 
ever met,” and ended it by emphasizing: “I want you to know 
that I like you personally, and believe me it’s so. I have no 


suspicions whatsoever, and I don’t want you to feel that I have.” 
Everything he later did and said suggests that Lansdale was being 
quite sincere in these remarks. 

Lansdale’s purpose, too, was quite different from Pash’s. He did 
not want to trip Oppenheimer into revealing his complicity with 
espionage; he wanted, rather, to extract from him information 
that might be helpful in identifying those who were involved in 
espionage. And, in particular, he wanted the name of the 
intermediary whom Eltenton had used to try to obtain secret 
information regarding the Manhattan Project. The way 
Oppenheimer began the conversation shows that he still had not 
understood that the security forces regarded the Eltenton 
espionage attempt as a much bigger concern than the 
“indiscretions” committed by Lomanitz and his friends. For, when 
Lansdale mentioned his interview with Pash, Oppenheimer 
immediately launched into an explanation of why he wanted to 
talk to Lomanitz, as if that was what Lansdale would be most 
concerned about: 


I thought I might be able to talk him out of some of this 
foolishness so I asked Johnson for permission to do that. I had 
a rather long discussion with Lomanitz which I should describe 
as pretty unsuccessful, or at least only partially successful. And, 
of course, Johnson had expressed the opinion that he was 
dangerous and why, and that Pash ought to be brought in on it. 
So I told Pash some of the reasons why I thought it was 
dangerous and I suppose that is probably what you mean. 


Straightaway, Lansdale let him know that his main concern was 
the intelligence and counterintelligence surrounding the attempts 
by the Soviet Union to penetrate the secrets of the Manhattan 
Project. Summing up the situation, he told Oppenheimer, “They 
know, we know they know, about Tennessee, about Los Alamos, 
and Chicago,” given which: “It is essential that we know the 
channels of communication.” Appearing to recognize and 
sympathize with the feeling of many of the scientists that security 
concerns were actually an obstacle to getting the job done, 
Lansdale told Oppenheimer that he had a delicate line to tread. 
“We don’t want to protect the thing to death,” he remarked, but, 
on the other hand, it was clear that some degree of protection was 


needed. And, therefore, Lansdale needed the name of that 
intermediary. Oppenheimer, however, refused to provide the 
name: “I’ve thought about it a good deal because Pash and Groves 
both asked me for the name, and I feel that I should not give it.” 
“T don’t see how,” Lansdale told him, “you can have any 
hesitancy in disclosing the name of the man who has actually 
been engaged in an attempt at espionage to a foreign power in 
time of war.” But Oppenheimer was implacable in his refusal to 
land Chevalier in what he knew would be a lot of trouble. 

Changing tack, Lansdale tried to use Oppenheimer’s communist 
past to glean information about Communist Party members. 
“Who do you know,” he asked, “on the project in Berkeley who 
are...or have been members of the Communist Party?” 
Unhelpfully, Oppenheimer replied: “I know for a fact, I know, I 
learned on my last visit to Berkeley, that both Lomanitz and 
Weinberg were members.” Pressed to tell Lansdale something he 
did not already know, Oppenheimer—seemingly at random— 
chose to identify Charlotte Serber as having been in the past a 
member of the Communist Party. When asked whether Robert 
Serber had been a member, Oppenheimer replied: “I think it 
possible, but I don’t know.” 


Lanspate. Now, have you yourself ever been a member of the 
Communist Party? 

OPPENHEIMER. No. 

LANSDALE. You’ve probably belonged to every front organization 
on the coast. 

OPPENHEIMER. Just about. 


In Lansdale’s search for names of Communist Party members, 
an awkward moment for Oppenheimer came when his inquisitor 
asked: “How about Haakon Chevalier?” On this occasion, 
however, Oppenheimer remained cool and unflustered. “Is he a 
member of the Party?” he responded, adding: “He is a member of 
the faculty and I know him well. I wouldn’t be surprised if he 
were a member, he is quite a Red.” 

Frustrated by such suave evasions, Lansdale laid his cards on 
the table: 


we’ve got the case of Dr. J. R. Oppenheimer, whose wife was at 


one time a member of the party anyway, who himself knows 
many prominent Communists, associates with them, who 
belongs to a large number of so-called front organizations and 
may perhaps have contributed financially to the party himself, 
who becomes aware of an espionage attempt by the party six 
months ago and doesn’t mention it, and who still won’t make a 
complete disclosure. I may say that I’ve made up my mind that 
you yourself are OK or otherwise I wouldn’t be talking to you 
like this, see? 


“T’d better be. That’s all I’ve got to say,” Oppenheimer replied. 

At the end of what had been, from his point of view, a 
frustrating and fruitless interview Lansdale warned Oppenheimer, 
with respect to the name of the intermediary: “Don’t think it’s the 
last time I’m going to ask you, ’cause it isn’t.” Before he left, 
Oppenheimer—rather needlessly, but in an evident determination 
to appear to be cooperative—volunteered the suspicion that 
Bernard Peters was involved in the Communist Party: “I know 
that he was in Germany, and that he was actually in prison there, 
and I also know that he has always expressed a very great interest 
in the Communists, and I think whether he is a member or not 
would perhaps partly depend on whether he was a citizen or 
whether he was working on a war job.” 

While Lansdale was expressing his liking for and admiration of 
Oppenheimer, Pash was doing his best to expose him as a spy. 
Ten days before Lansdale’s interview with Oppenheimer, Pash 
had sent Groves an insistent, slightly nagging memo, telling him: 
“Tt is essential that name of professor [that is, the intermediary 
between Eltenton and Oppenheimer] be made available in order 
that investigation can continue properly.” He went on to “request 
names of individuals contacted by professor in order to eliminate 
unnecessary investigation and following of leads which may come 
to the attention of this office.” “Has anyone,” he demanded to 
know, “approached JRO at any time while he was connected with 
the project? If so, was it the professor, Eltenton, or some other 
party?” 

One imagines that Groves was not used to being addressed in 
this manner by someone of lower rank and that he did not much 
care for Pash’s tone or for Pash himself, who was, in his obsessive 
pursuit of Oppenheimer, in danger of becoming a nuisance. 


Nevertheless when he, Oppenheimer and Lansdale traveled 
together on a train to Chicago a day or two after Oppenheimer’s 
interview with Lansdale, Groves took the opportunity to put to 
Oppenheimer the questions Pash had raised with him. The topics 
discussed were summarized in a memo by Lansdale dated 
September 14. According to this memo, Oppenheimer’s attitude 
to Lomanitz had hardened somewhat since his discussion with 
Lansdale a day or two earlier. Whereas then he had described his 
discussion with Lomanitz as “pretty unsuccessful, or at least only 
partially successful,” now he described it as “very unsatisfactory” 
and Lomanitz himself as “defiant.” The memo goes _ on: 
“Oppenheimer was sorry that he had ever had anything to do 
with him [Lomanitz], and he did not desire any further 
connection with him.” With regard to the name of the Berkeley 
professor who had acted as Eltenton’s intermediary, Lansdale’s 
memo states: 


Oppenheimer’s attitude was that he would give the name of the 
intermediate contact at the University of California if pressed 
to do so, and told by General Groves that we had to have it, 
but that he did not want to do so because he did not believe 
that any further contacts had been made and was confident 
that the contacts that had been with the project had not 
produced any information. He intimated further that it was a 
question of getting friends of his into difficulties and causing 
unnecessary troubles when no useful purpose could be served. 


Groves then put several names to Oppenheimer that Pash had 
suggested as possibilities for the people this intermediary had 
contacted. Among them was Al Flanigan, “who now appears,” 
wrote Lansdale, “from subsequent developments to be the 
contact.” Oppenheimer told Groves and Lansdale that he did not 
know Flanigan except casually, “but that he had the reputation of 
being a real ‘Red.’” This, presumably, ruled Flanigan out, since 
Oppenheimer had previously said he knew the three contacts 
rather well. As far as one can tell from the memo, the rest of the 
conversation was taken up with Oppenheimer telling Groves and 
Lansdale what they already knew: that Kitty, Frank and Charlotte 
Serber had been Communist Party members and that he himself, 
though not a member of the party, had been a member of several 


Communist Party front organizations. 

Possibly the most significant thing to emerge from this train of 
conversation was the weakness of Oppenheimer’s loyalty to 
Lomanitz, Weinberg, Bohm and Friedman, all of whom were 
henceforth to face whatever difficulties their loyalty to the 
Communist Party brought them without much in the way of 
support from Oppenheimer. Lomanitz had tried extremely hard to 
find jobs on the West Coast that would entitle him to defer his 
draft, but every time he was offered such a post, the offer would 
be withdrawn before he could be issued with such a deferment. 
On one occasion Friedman, who had just bought a new Pontiac, 
drove Lomanitz around the Bay Area looking for work, and they 
found a new company that made radar tubes and was interested 
in hiring Lomanitz. As Lomanitz later remembered it, when the 
man in charge started haggling about wages, he said to him: 
“Look. ’[m making $300 a month right now. I’ll go to work for 
you for half that if you’ll just send in immediately a request for 
my deferment.” He was offered the job, and the man duly applied 
for deferment. The next day, however, Lomanitz was told by his 
local draft board that the application had been withdrawn. 
Friedman, meanwhile, was advised by his former employers at 
Berkeley that he would do better if he moved out of the area. 

So it was that Lomanitz and Friedman left Berkeley on the 
same day, September 23, Friedman dropping Lomanitz off at the 
army induction center before setting off for Denver, Colorado, 
looking for a new job. Before they left, the two of them drafted a 
letter to Oppenheimer, explaining the problems they had been 
experiencing (“Promised jobs kept disappearing at the last 
moment”) and stating as their “firm conviction” that “union 
discrimination is the cause of all that has happened.” The night 
before they left, Weinberg hosted a farewell party for them at his 
apartment, where he was heard by counterintelligence agents, 
listening to the conversation via the microphones they had 
installed, telling them that, in the words of an agent’s report, “he 
didn’t believe Max [Friedman] was in his present predicament 
because of his Union affiliations but because of something else.” 
A few days later, Lomanitz tried calling Oppenheimer at Los 
Alamos, but Oppenheimer refused to take the call. 

Throughout the following months, Groves and Lansdale 
continued to insist to suspicious colleagues in the security 


services that, as Groves put it to a G-2 officer, Oppenheimer “will 
continue to be loyal to the United States.” Groves, especially, did 
not want Oppenheimer to be distracted from his work at the 
laboratory by insistent and incessant questioning about his 
communist past and associates. He wanted Oppenheimer to get 
on with the job of building a bomb. Pash, meanwhile, devoted a 
great deal of time to trying to identify Eltenton’s intermediary 
and contacts, making lists of suspects—invariably drawn from the 
physics and chemistry departments at Berkeley—which he 
distributed to G-2 and the FBI offices. At Oppenheimer’s security 
hearing, Pash recalled how Oppenheimer’s mention of, but refusal 
to name, a contact of Eltenton’s who had gone, or was about to 
go, to Oak Ridge involved him in a “tedious project”: “We had to 
go through files, try to find out who was going to go to site X.” By 
this means he identified just one suspect, “and I took measures to 
stop—at least I asked General Groves to stop the man’s movement 
to that area.” Another time, according to Philip Stern, the author 
of a book on the Oppenheimer security case, one of the people 
identified by Pash as a candidate for one of Eltenton’s contacts 
“suddenly, and without prior indication, boarded the Daylight, the 
crack San Francisco—Los Angeles train”: 


In order to gain time to get his agent to Los Angeles, Pash 
ordered the train stopped en route. Unhappily, his order was 
carried out in a most peremptory and undiplomatic way. 
Railroad officials were outraged. They complained to the 
commanding general, but since Pash’s project was ultrasecret, 
Pash had not informed his superiors of his actions; nor could 
they pry any information out of the Colonel even after the rude 
train-stopping was traced to him. The ironic footnote is that 
the object of Pash’s pursuit turned out to have nothing 
whatever to do with the case. 


In November 1943, Groves seized upon a perfect opportunity to 
get Pash off the case and to make more constructive use of his 
bloodhound instincts. The opportunity arose as a result of the 
turning fortunes of the Allies. The past year had seen a series of 
decisive Allied victories that left no doubt that the question was 
not whether but when the Nazis would be defeated. In November 
1942, the British under General Montgomery had routed 


Rommel’s army at the Battle of El Alamein in Egypt, while the 
Americans landed a huge force in Morocco and Algeria, ready to 
link up with the British. In January 1943, the Russians won the 
hard-fought and extremely bloody Battle of Stalingrad, forcing 
the Germans to begin their long retreat from Russia and Eastern 
Europe. Six months later, in July 1943, the Russians beat the 
Germans in the massive tank battle at Kursk, and an Allied force 
of British, Canadian and American soldiers landed in Sicily, 
preparing to move through Italy. In September, the Italians 
surrendered and the following month declared war on Germany, 
whose forces still occupied much of Italy. Plans were afoot for 
two major Allied landings: the first in Anzio, in preparation for 
retaking Rome and driving the Germans out of Italy, and the 
second in Normandy, in preparation for retaking Paris and 
driving the Germans out of France. Meanwhile, the Russians were 
making steady progress pushing the Germans out of Poland. 

In his Thanksgiving Day proclamation of November 25, 1943, 
President Roosevelt was able to find much for which to give 
thanks: 


God’s help to us has been great in this year of the march 
towards world-wide liberty. In brotherhood with warriors of 
other United Nations our gallant men have won victories, have 
freed our homes from fear, have made tyranny tremble, and 
have laid the foundation for freedom of life in a world which 
will be free. 


It is a proclamation that captures the tone of that time. Very 
few people doubted that the Allies would win the war. One very 
important question, however, remained unanswered and, for 
many who understood its importance, the optimism they felt 
about the seemingly inevitable defeat of the Nazis was tempered 
by anxiety. That question was: how far had the Germans got in 
building an atomic bomb? After all, everyone knew that, in 
Heisenberg, the Germans had someone who was, from a scientific 
point of view, every bit as able as Oppenheimer to exploit the 
tremendous energy released by nuclear fission in the manufacture 
of a deadly weapon. And, in persuading scientists to come to Los 
Alamos, Oppenheimer would almost invariably make use of this 
anxiety, arguing that it was important for everyone who could be 


useful to the project to join it, because not only was it of the 
utmost importance that the Allies beat the Germans in this deadly 
race, but the Germans had got a head start. 

And so a mission was formed to accompany what was 
confidently assumed would be the successful Allied landings in 
Europe. Its aim was to determine what progress the Italians and 
the Nazis had made on the bomb. Heading the scientific side of 
the mission was Oppenheimer’s old friend from Holland, Sam 
Goudsmit; heading the military side, so he was informed on the 
day Roosevelt made his Thanksgiving proclamation, was 
Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash. The mission was called Alsos, the 
Greek for “Groves.” On December 7, 1943, it left for North Africa, 
and within a week was in Naples, where it was based for the next 
few months, during which Pash, Goudsmit and their subordinates 
tried to find out as much as they could glean from Italian 
scientists. 

On November 27, shortly before he left for North Africa, Pash 
forwarded to Lansdale a memo entitled “Possible identity of 
unnamed professor referred to by Dr. J. R. Oppenheimer,” which 
had been written by Lieutenant James S. Murray, one of Pash’s 
agents. “Efforts of this office during the past month,” Murray 
wrote, “have been directed in an attempt to ascertain the identity 
of the professor contact.” He went on: 


A record check of all professors and associates in both the 
physics and chemistry departments at the University of 
California was made with the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
and the results thereof contained in a progress report from this 
office dated October 20, 1943. A continued survey and check 
has been made and it is believed that it is entirely possible that 
the professor might be one of the following. 


Murray then listed nine Berkeley scientists, one of whom was Joe 
Weinberg, whom he thought were candidates for being the 
unnamed professor. Of course, Chevalier was not one of those 
listed, since he was not a physicist or a chemist. With the 
implication that he had narrowed down the search to those nine 
people, Pash left Washington for North Africa. 

A week or so after Pash left the U.S., those nine names were 
put aside after the true identity of Eltenton’s intermediary was at 


last revealed. On December 12, during a visit to Los Alamos, 
Groves called Oppenheimer to his office and ordered him to 
reveal the intermediary. Oppenheimer duly named Chevalier, but 
did not admit that he himself was the person whom Chevalier 
had contacted for information on Eltenton’s behalf. The following 
day, Lansdale wrote to the FBI, telling them what they surely 
ought to have known already: that Oppenheimer had told army 
security that three members of the atomic-bomb project had, as 
Lansdale put it, “advised him that they were approached by an 
unnamed professor at the University of California to commit 
espionage.” 

Lansdale went on to provide the fresh information that, having 
been ordered to name the professor, Oppenheimer had named 
Chevalier. The same day, Colonel Nichols, Groves’s second-in- 
command, sent telegrams to Lieutenant Johnson in Berkeley, de 
Silva in Santa Fe and the security officer at Oak Ridge, telling 
them that Oppenheimer had named Chevalier as Eltenton’s 
intermediary. The telegrams differed slightly (the one to de Silva, 
for example, mistakenly referred to Chevalier as a professor at the 
Rad Lab), but all three stated that Oppenheimer had expressed 
the belief that Chevalier had not approached anyone “other than 
[the] three original attempts.” 

When Lansdale was asked at Oppenheimer’s security hearing to 
recall the first time he heard that Haakon Chevalier was the man 
he and (more strenuously) Pash had been trying to identify since 
the previous August, he was puzzled that his memory of the event 
did not match the written record. What he remembered, he said, 
was that Oppenheimer, at the time he named Chevalier, also 
revised his previous account about the three contacts, saying that 
there had actually been just one contact and that was his brother, 
Frank. Having read the contemporaneous documents, Lansdale 
testified, he could see that “the information was that the contact 
was with three persons ...I have no explanation as to how I 
translate it from three into one.” And he went on: “I called 
General Groves last night and discussed it with him in an attempt 
to fathom that and I can’t figure it out. But the record shows 
clearly that there were three.” 

Groves was also puzzled. Asked whether he recalled the 
conversation in which Oppenheimer revealed Chevalier’s name to 
him, he replied: “Yes, but I have seen so many versions of it. I 


don’t think I was confused before, but I am certainly starting to 
become confused today.” “It was always my impression that he 
wanted to protect his brother,” Groves added. 

So the contemporaneous telegrams tell one story, Lansdale’s 
memory tells another, and Groves’s somewhat confused 
recollection seems, rather shakily, to support Lansdale. To add to 
the confusion, Oppenheimer told a third version of his 
conversation with Groves. According to Oppenheimer: “When I 
did identify Chevalier, which was to General Groves, I told him of 
course that there were not three people, that this had occurred in 
our house, that this was me.” 

Oppenheimer’s claim that he told Groves the only person 
Chevalier had contacted was himself is not supported by any 
record or any recollection and can, I think, be discounted, since it 
is contradicted by every other account. The question that 
remains, then, is: did he, as the telegrams sent out on December 
13, 1943, suggest, stick with his story that Chevalier had 
contacted three people, or did he, as Lansdale’s memory and 
Groves’s less clear impression indicate, tell Groves that the story 
of the three contacts had been a “cock and bull story,” and that 
there had been only one contact and that contact was Frank? 

The answer seems to be the latter. In FBI interviews with 
Groves, Lansdale and the U.S. Army lawyer Major William 
Consodine, the following story emerges: when ordered to name 
Eltenton’s intermediary, Oppenheimer named Chevalier. When 
asked to name Chevalier’s three contacts, however, Oppenheimer 
agreed to do so only on condition that Groves kept the names to 
himself, and, in particular, that he did not pass the names on to 
the FBI. Assuming that the three were Lomanitz, Weinberg and 
Bohm or Friedman—and therefore already under surveillance— 
Groves agreed. Oppenheimer then told him that there had been 
only one contact, namely Frank. When Groves returned to 
Washington, he discussed Oppenheimer’s response with Lansdale 
and Consodine, and asked them whether he should be bound by 
his promise to Oppenheimer not to reveal Frank’s name to the 
FBI. Consodine argued that he was not bound, because the 
demands of national security overrode those of a personal 
promise. Groves, however, was worried that, if he revealed 
Frank’s name to the FBI, Oppenheimer would leave the project 
and—as Groves had long believed that Oppenheimer was 


essential to the project—that was, to him, more or less 
unthinkable. 

So Groves honored his promise not to reveal Frank’s name to 
the FBI, and the telegrams that were sent out to the various army- 
security offices duly maintained Oppenheimer’s original “cock 
and bull story” about there being three contacts. Meanwhile, 
Lansdale, uncharacteristically and quite possibly uniquely, 
disobeyed Groves.s1 “I remember distinctly,” Lansdale was to tell 
the security hearing of 1954, “going over to the FBI and visiting 
Mr. [E. A.] Tamm, who was then, I believe, assistant to J. Edgar 
Hoover, and Mr. [Lish] Whitson, who was the FBI Communist 
expert, [and telling them] that it was Frank Oppenheimer and 
that we had got that information, or that General Groves had 
obtained that information, on the express term that it would not 
be passed on.” He added: 


Nothing could be clearer in my memory than that incident of 
going over at night and talking to Tamm and Whitson. Nothing 
could be clearer in my memory than General Groves’s direction 
that I was not to pass it on to anybody, which I promptly 
violated in a very unmilitary manner ... General Groves told 
me that, but I found it necessary to violate General Groves’s 
direction in that regard and to give to the Bureau the identity 
of Frank Oppenheimer. 


Just as Groves seems not to have let Nichols in on the secret, so 
Hoover and Tamm seem to have kept their own subordinates in 
the dark—at least for a while. By March 5, 1944, however, the 
story about Frank must have become known to FBI agents 
investigating the communist infiltration of the Rad Lab, since it is 
mentioned in a memo of that date entitled “Cinrad.” The memo 
was written by FBI agent William Harvey and says that, after 
conferring with Groves, Oppenheimer “finally stated that only 
one person had been approached by Chevalier, that one person 
being his brother, Frank Oppenheimer.” 

What seems to have bothered Groves (and almost everybody 
who subsequently investigated the matter—including the FBI, 
army security, lawyers, journalists, historians and biographers) 
amazingly little about this story is that it stands no chance 
whatsoever of being true. If Chevalier approached Frank (and 


there is no evidence at all that he did, and prima facie evidence, 
in the form of denials by both Chevalier and Frank, that he did 
not), then it is not true that he approached only one person, since 
by Oppenheimer’s and Chevalier’s own admissions, Chevalier did 
approach Oppenheimer. So either Frank and Chevalier were 
lying, and Chevalier approached both Frank and Robert 
Oppenheimer—in which case, Oppenheimer was lying to Groves 
about there being only one contact—or Chevalier did not 
approach Frank, in which case the story Oppenheimer told 
Groves in December 1943 is every bit as much (and quite 
possibly more) of a “cock and bull story” as the one he had told 
Pash in October. Either way, if his aim had been to protect 
Chevalier, that had gone horribly wrong. If his aim had been to 
protect Frank, then he had achieved partial and temporary 
success. If, on the other hand, his aim had been to protect 
himself, at least for as long as it took to build the bomb, then he 
had achieved complete success, but only because, given Groves’s 
determination to keep him as director of Los Alamos, almost 
nothing he could have done would have resulted in failure in that 
regard. 

Shortly before he named Chevalier to Groves, Oppenheimer 
had exchanged some very warm and sympathetic letters with 
him. In November 1943, Chevalier, not knowing where 
Oppenheimer was or what he was working on, wrote him what 
he later described as an “SOS call.” “Are you still in this world?” 
he wrote to his old friend. “Yes, I know you are, but I am less 
sure about myself. I am in deep trouble. All my foundations seem 
to have been knocked out from under me, and I am alone 
dangling in space, with no ties, no hope, no future, only a past— 
such as it is.” “I am close to despair,” he went on, “and in such a 
moment, I think of you and I wish you were about to talk to.” 


I don’t know if this will reach you, which is the reason why I 
do not write you more. I should like to hear from you if you 
can spare time for the personally human, in these days when 
the human seems to become depersonalized. 


On December 3—having in the meantime, to his astonishment 
and delight, received a reply—Chevalier wrote again: “I can’t tell 
you how much it meant to me to receive your warm and 


unmistakably Oppjesque letter. I was startled, too, for when I 
wrote my SOS call I had no hope of receiving an answer.” His 
despair, he explained, was partly to do with the breakup of his 
marriage, but also to do with his unwillingness, after a year’s 
sabbatical, to return to teaching at Berkeley when he felt that, in 
the middle of the war, there were so many more important jobs 
to be done: 


I am, I suppose, in a sense a symbol of our time—perhaps an 
unimportant and negative one. I have certain talents, strong 
feelings and convictions and a definite capacity for work—and 
I have no place in this world. I feel very close to people and to 
the important problems of our time, and yet I seem to be 
unable to get into a position where I can fulfill an important 
function. 


Chevalier was writing from New York. He told Oppenheimer: 


The specific reason I came here was to get a war-job. I came 
here with very good sponsorship—in fact I was asked to come 
here to work in the OWI [Office of War Information] and 
eventually be sent overseas in the Outpost Division. I have 
been here since the first of September and the job is still 
hanging fire, so to speak, for reasons that you know. I am 
investigating all possibilities, but it is likely that I will find the 
same obstacles elsewhere. Meanwhile my money ran out ... I 
nearly got a job on Time at $150 a week a few weeks ago, but 
again was blocked in the last round on the same grounds. 


In January 1944, Chevalier learned that his application for 
clearance for his proposed job at the Office of War Information 
had been rejected. In his memoir of his friendship with 
Oppenheimer, Chevalier recalls how, after four months of waiting 
to hear about his application for security clearance, he was called 
into the office of Joe Barnes from the Office of War Information: 


His face was somber. He had just come back from Washington 
and there, exceptionally, he had been shown my FBI file. He 
said it contained allegations that were so fantastic as to be 
utterly unbelievable. “Someone obviously has it in for you,” he 
said. 


Chevalier did not learn until many years later exactly what 
these allegations were that had cost him his job at the OWI. “The 
last thing I could have imagined was that they had anything to do 
with Opje.” 

For the rest of the war, and for some time after that, Chevalier 
was put under close surveillance by the FBI, whose agents 
monitored his every move. He himself seems to have remained 
entirely unaware that he was being trailed, watched and listened 
to. For the first six months of 1944 he stayed in New York, 
earning a living as a journalist, translator and interpreter, before 
returning to California and eventually to teaching at Berkeley. 
Not until after the war was he interviewed by the FBI. Until then 
they were evidently hoping that their surveillance of him would 
lead to more information about Soviet espionage, which it did 
not. 

The surveillance of Jean Tatlock, meanwhile, had been in 
operation since the end of August 1943 and had continued even 
after Pash’s departure in November, the FBI evidently sharing 
Pash’s view that she might be a go-between for Oppenheimer and 
the Soviet Union. By the time the Los Alamos laboratory was up 
and running, however, Jean Tatlock had little interest in politics, 
consumed as she was by more personal anxieties. On January 5, 
1944, Charlotte Serber received a telegram from a friend of 
Jean’s in Berkeley, Mary Ellen Washburn, telling her that Jean 
had committed suicide the previous day and asking her to break 
the news to Oppenheimer. She took the telegram to her husband, 
who in turn went to see Oppenheimer. “When I got to his office,” 
Robert Serber writes in his autobiography, “I saw by his face that 
he had already heard. He was deeply grieved.” 

Jean’s body had been discovered by her father the morning 
after she died. Worried that she had not been answering her 
phone, he had gone to her apartment, where, after getting no 
reply by ringing the doorbell, he climbed in through a window. 
He found her in the bath, her head submerged in water. On her 
dining-room table he found a suicide note, saying that she had 
become “disgusted with everything,” that she thought she “would 
have been a liability all my life,” and that, in killing herself, she 
felt that “at least I could take away the burden of a paralyzed 
soul from a fighting world.” 

How had Oppenheimer heard the news of Jean’s suicide before 


Serber could tell him? The answer seems to be through the 
security services’ surveillance of her apartment. According to Bird 
and Sherwin’s biography of Oppenheimer, Captain Peer de Silva 
—a man committed to Pash’s view that Oppenheimer and Tatlock 
were engaged in espionage—claims in an unpublished manuscript 
to have been the person who first informed Oppenheimer that 
Jean had killed herself. When told, de Silva writes, Oppenheimer 
“went on at considerable length about the depth of his emotion 
for Jean, saying that there was really no one else to whom he 
could speak.” Bird and Sherwin, citing several instances of de 
Silva getting his facts wrong (for instance, de Silva asserts 
wrongly that Jean had cut her throat), insist: “De Silva is not a 
reliable observer, and it is not credible that Oppenheimer would 
confide in him.” That de Silva is not a reliable witness is 
demonstrably true, and that Oppenheimer would not treat him as 
a confidant is almost certainly also correct. However, I find it 
entirely plausible to suppose that, apart from Jean’s distraught 
father, the first people to learn of her suicide were the FBI and 
G-2, and, though Oppenheimer had no reason to regard de Silva 
as someone in whom to confide, I also find it perfectly believable 
that he responded to the news in the way that de Silva reports. 
After all, Oppenheimer obviously at this stage did not realize 
quite how deeply de Silva held him in contempt or how 
suspicious he was of him. 

On January 6, the day after Oppenheimer learned of Jean’s 
suicide, de Silva wrote a memo to the army security agent 
Captain Calvert at Oak Ridge, headed “Conversation with J.R. 
Oppenheimer,” in which he reported the substance of a talk that 
he had had with Oppenheimer en route to Santa Fe. “During the 
course of the conversation,” de Silva wrote, “Oppenheimer 
touched on the subject of what persons at Berkeley were in his 
opinion truly dangerous.” 


He named David Joseph Bohm and Bernard Peters as being so. 
Oppenheimer stated, however, that somehow he did not 
believe that Bohm’s temperament and personality were those 
of a dangerous person and implied that his dangerousness lay 
in the possibility of his being influenced by others. Peters, on 
the other hand, he described as a “crazy person” and one 
whose actions would be unpredictable. He described Peters as 


being “quite a Red” and stated that his background was filled 
with incidents which indicated his tendency toward direct 
action. 


When presented later with de Silva’s description of this 
conversation, Oppenheimer doubted its accuracy. The tone was 
wrong, he thought, and he also doubted that he had ever said 
Bohm was dangerous, since he was certain that he had never 
believed he was. He also rejected the implication in de Silva’s 
memo that he himself had initiated the conversation and 
volunteered the opinion that Bohm and Peters were dangerous. “I 
think,” Oppenheimer said, “what I was asked by de Silva [was] 
‘Here are four names, Bohm, Weinberg, and somebody else and 
Peters; which of these would you regard as the most likely to be 
dangerous?’ and I think I answered Peters.” 

Even if we accept Oppenheimer’s version of the conversation, it 
is impossible to avoid the impression that he betrayed someone 
who had been his student and his political comrade, if not his 
friend, and whose wife had been for a time his doctor. And, as he 
was repeatedly asked at his security case, if he considered Peters 
to be unpredictable, crazy and potentially dangerous, why, in the 
autumn of 1942, had he asked Peters and his wife to come to Los 
Alamos? His unconvincing answer was that he believed that, 
though Peters had been a member of the Communist Party in 
Germany, he had ceased to be so during the time of his friendship 
with Oppenheimer, and that Peters was not dangerous in October 
1942, but became so after he had turned down Oppenheimer’s 
invitation to come to work at Los Alamos. 

Quite why Oppenheimer wanted to, or at the very least was 
willing to, blacken Peters’s reputation is unclear. Like many of 
the things he said to security officers during these years, his 
remarks about Peters would come back to haunt him and severely 
damage his own reputation. There are some indications that 
Oppenheimer came to dislike Peters personally (when Sam 
Goudsmit once asked him about Peters, Oppenheimer replied: 
“Just look at him. Can’t you see he can’t be trusted?”), which 
might explain his cavalier attitude toward Peters’s reputation. In 
the case of David Bohm, though, there is not even that possible 
explanation. 

Just as he had with Peters, Oppenheimer had tried to recruit 


Bohm for Los Alamos. In March 1943, however, he was told that 
Bohm had been refused clearance, supposedly on the grounds 
that he still had relatives in Germany. Oppenheimer was 
understandably skeptical that those were the real grounds, and, 
despite his supposed remarks to de Silva about Bohm being 
potentially dangerous if led the wrong way, he was still, a year 
later, prepared to consider bringing Bohm to Los Alamos. On 
March 12, 1944, just two months after his conversation with de 
Silva, Oppenheimer was in Berkeley on business and, of course, 
being watched closely by army counterintelligence agents. What 
they learned was that Oppenheimer, during this trip, stayed at a 
hotel with Frank. Agents saw the Oppenheimer brothers leave the 
hotel and walk up and down the road outside, “engaged in 
earnest conversation with each other.” Then David Bohm 
appeared, and “J.R. Oppenheimer and Bohm engaged in 
conversation for five minutes but Frank stood about 10 feet away 
from them and did not participate in the conversation.” 

When he returned to Los Alamos, Oppenheimer—presumably 
realizing that his conversation with Bohm had been observed, 
reported and filed—went to see de Silva to volunteer information 
about it. According to a memo written by de Silva on March 22, 
1944, Oppenheimer told him that: 


... just as he was preparing to leave his hotel at Berkeley on 
his return trip, David Joseph Bohm came to see him. Bohm 
inquired about the possibilities of his being transferred to 
project Y on a permanent basis, stating that he had a “strange 
feeling of insecurity” in his present surroundings. Oppenheimer 
stated he did not commit himself to Bohm but told him that he 
would let Bohm know if an opportunity were open at this 
project, and that if Bohm did not hear from Oppenheimer he 
should assume that such an arrangement was not workable and 
to forget the matter. Oppenheimer asked the undersigned if he 
would have objections to Bohm coming to project Y. The 
undersigned answered yes. Oppenheimer agreed and said the 
matter was therefore closed. 


Bohm, like Weinberg, would spend the rest of the war at 
Berkeley, with agents monitoring his every movement, listening 
to his every phone call and making sure he had no access 


whatsoever to classified information. Oppenheimer, meanwhile, 
was able to forget, at least for a time, the suspicions leveled 
against his loyalty to the United States, and get on with the task 
of designing and building an atomic bomb. 


48 Despite being a heavy smoker and working for much of his life with 
powerfully radioactive materials, Serber lived to an impressive old age, dying 
in 1997 (some thirty years after Oppenheimer) at the age of eighty-eight. 

49 This is how it appears in the transcript. Presumably what Oppenheimer 
actually said was: “No, in a word, it was not good practice.” 

50 In his interview of 2001 Lomanitz said: “I remember that it was his 
[Oppenheimer’s] habit that if one talked about something, ‘Let’s just walk 
outside and talk about it out there.’ In other words, he assumed that the 
phones were tapped.” 

51 The idea that Lansdale would disobey an order given to him by his 
commanding officer is so unlikely that one is forced to speculate that he 
informed the FBI of Frank’s name with Groves’s full permission—the pretense 
that this was against Groves’s wishes allowing him to maintain that he had kept 
his promise to Oppenheimer, and the fact that Lansdale informed the FBI orally 
rather than in writing preventing anyone from proving otherwise. That he and 
Lansdale had connived to deceive Oppenheimer might also, I think, explain 
Groves’s uncharacteristically foggy recollection of the event. 


Los Alamos 2: Implosion 


k t in the devel t of 
the Allied atomic bomb Wis the aennae by Churchill and 


Roosevelt on August 19, 1943, of the Quebec Agreement, which, 
in effect, subsumed the British “Tube Alloys” program under the 
Manhattan Project. “It is vital to our common safety in the 
present war,” the agreement stated, “to bring the Tube Alloys 
project to fruition at the earliest moment,” and “this may be more 
speedily achieved if all available British and American brains and 
resources are pooled.” One of the terms of this agreement was 
that “In the field of scientific research and development there 
shall be full and effective interchange of information and ideas 
between those in the two countries engaged in the same sections 
of the field.” Another was that “we will not either of us 
communicate any information about Tube Alloys to third parties 
except by mutual consent.” As it turned out, these two terms were 
not consistent with each other. As the Venona transcripts were 
later to reveal, so effective was the Soviet penetration of the 
British atomic-bomb project and so ineffective was British 
counterintelligence that it was not possible to share information 
with the British without at the same time inadvertently 
communicating it to the Soviet Union. 

Since the very beginning of the Tube Alloys project the Soviet 
Union had gained information on many of its secrets, primarily 
through the efforts of the Cambridge Five. Those five did not, 
however, have access to the detailed, technical information that 
the Soviets would need to build their own bomb. For that, they 
needed a scientist working on the project, and, from the summer 
of 1941, they had just such a person: a quiet, unobtrusive 
German, whom Hans Bethe once described as the only physicist 


he had ever met who had truly changed the course of history. His 
name was Klaus Fuchs. 

Fuchs was a committed socialist and fervent anti-Nazi who had 
fled Germany in 1933, at the age of twenty-two. He studied at 
Bristol under Nevill Mott and at Edinburgh under Max Born, 
before, in May 1941, being invited by Rudolf Peierls to join the 
Tube Alloys project. By that time he had become a British citizen. 
Taking the view for which Oppenheimer had expressed sympathy 
in his discussions with Pash and Lansdale—namely that the 
Soviets had a right to know what their allies had discovered 
about the feasibility of making an atomic bomb—Fuchs 
considered it his duty to pass on to the Soviet Union any 
information that might be useful to them. 

In August 1941, Fuchs established contact with an NKVD agent 
and from then on was, to the later dismay and astonishment of 
Peierls and his wife (with whom Fuchs lived in Birmingham), a 
regular informant on the progress of the Allied bomb project. 
That Fuchs was able to act so easily as a Soviet informant is an 
illustration of the differences between the British and the 
American attitudes to security, the British being more interested 
in the fact that Fuchs was an outstanding physicist with 
something to contribute to the Tube Alloys project than they 
were in the fact that he was a potential security risk—something 
they might well have discovered for themselves, had they shown 
a little more interest. As early as 1934, the German authorities 
had informed the British that Fuchs was a communist, but this 
tip-off was dismissed because it came from the Gestapo. In 
January 1943, the question of Fuchs’s political activities was 
again raised, this time by British security, but an MI5 officer 
declared herself unconcerned. Fuchs, she said, “bears a good 
personal reputation and is considered a decent fellow.” Later that 
year, the same officer observed: “As he [Fuchs] has been in his 
present job for some years without apparently causing any 
trouble, I think we can safely let him continue in it.” In 
November 1943, as a result of the Quebec Agreement, the British 
scientists working on Tube Alloys were told they were 
transferring to the United States. Unfortunately for the U.S. 
project, clearance for these scientists was in the hands of MI5, 
who, concerning Fuchs, reported: “He is rather safer in America. 
It would not be easy for Fuchs to make contacts with communists 


there.” Before he left the UK, Fuchs was given instructions via the 
Soviet intelligence service on how to do just that. 

The first group of scientists to leave the UK to join the 
Manhattan Project included James Chadwick and Otto Frisch 
from Liverpool, William Penney from London, James Tuck from 
Oxford and Peierls and Fuchs from Birmingham. While the others 
went to Los Alamos, Peierls and Fuchs went to New York to work 
at Columbia on the development of the gaseous-diffusion method 
of isotope separation. Much of this work was written up by Fuchs 
himself, who managed to send copies of all his papers to the 
Soviets. Fuchs’s contact in New York was Harry Gold, a chemist 
who had been acting as a Soviet courier since 1940. On February 
5, 1944, Gold received from Fuchs a detailed report on gaseous 
diffusion and other aspects of the atomic-bomb project, which he 
then delivered to Soviet intelligence officers. Throughout his time 
in New York, which lasted until he was transferred to Los Alamos 
in August 1944, Fuchs met regularly with Gold, and, after a break 
of a few months, managed to resume contact with the Soviets 
while at Los Alamos. 

Most of the scientists working on the Manhattan Project were 
shocked and disapproving when they learned after the war what 
Fuchs had done. They felt betrayed. On the other hand, the view 
that the Soviets, as allies, ought to be treated like the British and 
given access to information about the bomb was. fairly 
widespread. What worried the scientists far more was the thought 
that the Germans might get the bomb. “We were desperately 
afraid that the Germans would beat us in our objective,” Rudolf 
Peierls wrote. “Of course, everybody was anxious to know what 
progress, if any, the Germans were making with atomic energy.” 
When Peierls was asked by British intelligence for suggestions on 
ways of finding out how far the German project had developed, 
he provided a list of names of people whose movements should, if 
possible, be watched. At the head of the list, of course, was 
Heisenberg. In reply, Peierls received a message from British 
intelligence that said Heisenberg had been in the UK shortly 
before the war, “and we have no record that he ever left the 
country.” “I was shocked by this reaction,” Peierls writes, “and 
reflected that if this was a fair sample of British intelligence, the 
outlook seemed grim.” 

His faith in the reliability of British security thus diminished, 


Peierls did a little intelligence-gathering of his own. He looked 
through recent editions of German academic journals in physics, 
copies of which were obtained by his university through neutral 
countries. In particular, he looked at the Physikalische Zeitschrift, 
which published a list of the lecture courses in physics in all 
German universities. With a few notable exceptions, such as 
Heisenberg, Peierls was reassured to find that most German 
physicists “were in their normal places and teaching their normal 
subjects.” He concluded that, though there “did seem to be some 
atomic research going on, and Heisenberg and a few others were 
probably connected with it ... the picture emerged that Germany 
had no crash program, no large-scale project that required a 
major participation by scientists.” 

As the Alsos mission was soon to discover, Peierls was quite 
correct. Others, however, particularly those working for the 
Manhattan Project, were less sanguine. On August 21, 1943, 
Bethe and Teller wrote to Oppenheimer, expressing their concern 
about recent newspaper reports that the Germans might be in 
possession of a powerful new weapon, which was expected to be 
ready sometime between November 1943 and January 1944. 
Their guess was that this new weapon was an atomic bomb: “It is 
not necessary to describe the probable consequences which would 
result if this proves to be the case.” 

Until 1944, Allied information about the progress of the Nazi 
bomb project remained scarce. Outside Germany, one of the few 
people to have had any kind of contact with Heisenberg since the 
war started was Niels Bohr. The nature and purpose of that 
contact, however, have been the subject of controversy ever since 
an account of it was published in 1956 in the German edition of 
the book Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, by the German journalist 
and writer Robert Jungk. The basis of that account was a letter 
written by Heisenberg to Jungk, in which he describes how, in 
September 1941, he took the opportunity of a visit to 
Copenhagen to attend a scientific meeting to call upon his old 
friend Bohr. At the outbreak of war Denmark had been a neutral 
country, but since April 1940 it had been under German 
occupation. As Bohr was half-Jewish and openly anti-Nazi, his 
position in Denmark was perilous, but, because of the semi- 
autonomy that the Nazis granted Denmark, he was not in any 
immediate danger. 


He was, though—as both he and Heisenberg were fully aware 
—under close surveillance, and so, Heisenberg told Jungk, when 
he visited Bohr at his office, the two decided to take a walk 
through town while they talked. During this walk, Heisenberg 
claimed, he asked Bohr “whether it was right for physicists to 
devote themselves in wartime to the uranium problem—as there 
was the possibility that progress in that sphere could lead to 
grave consequences in the technique of war.” Heisenberg 
remembers that Bohr reacted to this question with frightened 
alarm. The last time Bohr had thought deeply about fission—in 
Princeton in 1939 together with John Wheeler—he had 
concluded that there was no danger of anyone actually making an 
atomic bomb because of the difficulties of isotope separation. “Do 
you really think that uranium fission could be utilised for the 
construction of weapons?” Heisenberg recalls Bohr asking him, to 
which Heisenberg replied: “I know that this is in principle 
possible, but it would require a terrific technical effort, which, 
one can only hope, cannot be realised in this war.” He went on: 


Bohr was shocked by my reply, obviously assuming that I had 
intended to convey to him that Germany had made great 
progress in the direction of manufacturing atomic weapons. 
Although I tried subsequently to correct this false impression, I 
probably did not succeed in winning Bohr’s complete trust. 


When Bohr read this account, he was appalled at how little it 
accorded with his own memory of that meeting, and so he wrote, 
but did not send, a letter to Heisenberg, repudiating it. 
“Personally,” he wrote, “I remember every word of our 
conversations, which took place on a background of extreme 
sorrow and tension for us here in Denmark.” What made a 
particularly strong impression on him, he told Heisenberg, was 
“that you and [Heisenberg’s colleague, Carl von] Weizsacker 
expressed your definite conviction that Germany would win and 
that it was therefore quite foolish for us to maintain the hope of a 
different outcome of the war.” He also remembered Heisenberg 
giving him the “firm impression that, under your leadership, 
everything was being done in Germany to develop atomic 
weapons”: 


I listened to this without speaking since [a] great matter for 
mankind was at issue in which, despite our personal friendship, 
we had to be regarded as representatives of two sides engaged 
in mortal combat. That my silence and gravity, as you write in 
the letter, could be taken as an expression of shock at your 
reports that it was possible to make an atomic bomb is a quite 
peculiar misunderstanding, which must be due to the great 
tension in your own mind. From the day three years earlier 
when I realized that slow neutrons could only cause fission in 
Uranium 235 and not 238, it was of course obvious to me that 
a bomb with certain effect could be produced by separating the 
uraniums. In June 1939 I had even given a public lecture in 
Birmingham about uranium fission, where I talked about the 
effects of such a bomb but of course added that the technical 
preparations would be so large that one did not know how 
soon they could be overcome. If anything in my behaviour 
could be interpreted as shock, it did not derive from such 
reports but rather from the news, as I had to understand it, that 
Germany was participating vigorously in a race to be the first 
with atomic weapons. 


Years later Oppenheimer, evidently basing his account on what 
he had heard from Bohr, said that Bohr had thought that 
Heisenberg and Weizsacker came to Copenhagen “less to tell 
what they knew than to see if Bohr knew anything that they did 
not.” 

After his visit from Heisenberg, Bohr stayed in Denmark for 
another two years, during which time the situation for Danes 
hostile to the Nazis became ever worse. In the summer of 1943, 
the semi-autonomy enjoyed by Denmark throughout its 
occupation by Germany came to an abrupt end when, enraged by 
the Danes’ refusal to obey an order to declare martial law, the 
Nazis reoccupied Copenhagen. Soon afterward it became very 
clear that Danish Jews—even those who were internationally 
renowned, Nobel Prize-winning physicists—were no longer safe. 
In the autumn of 1943, Bohr received a warning that he was 
about to be arrested by the Gestapo, whereupon he made plans to 
escape to Britain with his family. 

Earlier that year, in January, Bohr had received, through 
clandestine means, a letter from James Chadwick, urging him to 


leave Denmark and promising him a warm welcome in Britain 
“and an opportunity of service in the common cause.” Realizing 
that this was an effort to enlist him for the Allied attempt to build 
an atom bomb, Bohr replied turning the offer down. Not only, he 
told Chadwick, did he feel it his duty “to help resist the threat 
against the freedom of our institutions and to assist in the 
protection of the exiled scientists who have sought refuge here,” 
but also “I have to the best of my judgment convinced myself 
that, in spite of all future prospects, any immediate use of the 
latest marvellous discoveries of atomic physics is impracticable.” 
However, he did not rule out a change of _ prospects, 
circumstances or mind in the future, and then, he promised 
Chadwick, “I shall make an effort to join my friends and I shall be 
most thankful for any support they might be able to give me for 
this purpose.” 

A few months later, in August 1943, Bohr wrote again to 
Chadwick announcing a change of mind. “In view,” he told 
Chadwick, “of the rumours going around the world, that large 
scale preparations are being made for the production of metallic 
Uranium, and heavy water to be used in atomic bombs, I wish to 
modify my statement as regards the impracticability of an 
immediate use of the discoveries in nuclear physics.” 

What had changed his mind? Jeremy Bernstein has suggested 
(persuasively, I think) that the cause of Bohr’s volte-face was a 
visit he received in Copenhagen from the German physicist 
J. Hans D. Jensen in the summer of 1943. Jensen had been urged 
to speak to Bohr by Heisenberg, who, realizing that his own visit 
to Copenhagen had been something of a disaster, thought Jensen 
—well known among physicists to be politically left-wing—might 
soften Bohr’s attitude toward the German atomic program. Much 
had happened in the two years that separated the two visits. In 
September 1941, when Heisenberg had visited Bohr, there was 
every reason to think that the Germans might win the war, and 
some reason, among the German physicists associated with what 
was Officially known as the “Uranium Research Program,” to 
think that the Nazis might be ahead of the Allies in the race to 
build an atomic bomb. 

At an early stage, the Nazi bomb project had abandoned any 
attempt to build a bomb from uranium-235. The effort involved 
in separating uranium isotopes on an industrial scale was more 


than the wartime economy of Nazi Germany could cope with, 
especially as nobody on the Nazi side had realized what Frisch 
and Peierls realized—namely that the critical mass of U-235, 
using fast rather than slow neutrons, was surprisingly small. As 
was revealed after the war, Heisenberg’s thinking about critical 
mass was fundamentally flawed. On his calculations, a bomb 
would require about one ton of pure U-235, and obtaining such a 
quantity was clearly out of the question. What Heisenberg and 
the other German physicists had realized at a fairly early stage, 
however, was that plutonium would be just as good as U-235 in a 
fission bomb and that it could be produced relatively easily in a 
nuclear reactor using unenriched uranium and slow neutrons. 

For most of the war, therefore, the Nazi atomic project 
concentrated on building a reactor. The design of this reactor 
underwent several changes, but at an early stage it was decided 
not to use graphite as a moderator, as Fermi had done in Chicago, 
but rather to use heavy water. Heavy water differs from ordinary 
water in that its molecules consist not of two atoms of ordinary 
hydrogen and an atom of oxygen (H20), but rather of two atoms 
of deuterium and an atom of oxygen (D20 or 2H20), deuterium 
being the isotope of hydrogen the nucleus of which has a neutron 
as well as a proton. It is indeed possible to build a reactor using 
heavy water as a moderator, and several such reactors have in 
fact been constructed; the first to go critical was built by the 
Allies in Argonne, Illinois, in 1944. The problem, however, is that 
such reactors need many tons of heavy water (the one at Argonne 
used 6% tons), which, though nothing like as difficult to obtain as 
uranium-235, is not easy to produce. 

With the occupation of Norway in 1940, the Germans acquired 
the first and largest heavy-water production plant in the world, 
the Vemork plant at Lake Tinn, about eighty miles west of Oslo, 
which produced about twelve tons a year. The supply of heavy 
water from Vemork to the German atomic-bomb project, 
however, was successfully interrupted by a series of Allied attacks 
on the plant, most notably a commando raid in February 1943, a 
bombing raid in November 1943 and, finally, the sinking, in 
February 1944, of a ship loaded with heavy water that the Nazis 
were attempting to transfer to Germany. Heisenberg had 
estimated that a reactor built with the purpose of producing 
plutonium would need about five tons of heavy water. Thanks to 


the Allied operations in Norway, the German bomb project 
received in total during the war no more than three tons. 
Meanwhile, as part of the Canadian contribution to the 
Manhattan Project, a plant in Trail, British Columbia, was, from 
1943 onward, producing six tons a year. 

In the face of the huge technical and theoretical problems that 
stood in the way of designing and building an atomic bomb, and 
in the light of the deteriorating economic and military situation 
of Nazi Germany as the war went on, the German bomb project 
was scaled down at exactly the time when the Allied project 
gained its irresistible momentum, namely in the first half of 1943. 
When Heisenberg came to Copenhagen in September 1941, Nazi 
Germany had an atomic-bomb program based on the plan of 
building a heavy-water nuclear reactor that would produce 
enough plutonium to build a bomb; by the time Jensen visited 
Copenhagen in the summer of 1943, it had been conceded by the 
Nazis that there was little chance of nuclear energy having any 
direct military use for them and the sole purpose of what was left 
of their atomic program was to build a reactor for industrial 
purposes. In May 1943, Heisenberg gave a lecture to engineers 
and military officers in which he outlined a possible design for 
such a reactor. His design used plates of uranium, three tons of it, 
immersed in one and a half tons of heavy water. When Jensen 
visited Bohr he explained this design and emphasized that the 
intention was to use it for civil rather than military purposes. 

Bohr evidently took from his conversation with Jensen only the 
information that the Germans were pressing ahead with the 
utilization of fission energy, without taking seriously, or perhaps 
without believing, the assurances that the intention was to build 
only a reactor, not a bomb—hence his remark to Chadwick that 
“large-scale preparations are being made for the production of 
metallic Uranium, and heavy water to be used in atomic bombs.” 
As is shown by the rest of his letter to Chadwick, Bohr’s 
knowledge and understanding of atomic-bomb physics at this 
time were fairly rudimentary and indeed, in some important 
respects, flawed and confused. He clearly knew nothing at all 
about plutonium and evidently believed that bombs could be 
made using slow neutrons and heavy water. The differences 
between an atomic reactor and an atomic bomb were obviously 
still not clear in his mind. 


When he left Denmark to go to Britain, Bohr took with him a 
drawing of the reactor Jensen had described to him, apparently 
believing it to show the design of the Nazi atomic bomb and 
therefore thinking it had great military significance.s2 Bohr and 
his wife escaped Denmark by boat to Sweden and then by plane 
to Britain, arriving in Croydon, near London, on October 5, 1943. 
He was met from the plane by Chadwick, who took him to the 
Savoy Hotel in London, where he brought Bohr up to date on the 
developments in the Tube Alloys project: the Frisch-Peierls 
memorandum, the MAUD report and the Manhattan Project. That 
evening, Bohr officially became a member of the Tube Alloys 
project, and therefore part of the British “brains and resources” 
that the Quebec Agreement had stipulated should be shared with 
the U.S. 

So it was that Bohr and his son, Aage, who was by this time a 
notable physicist in his own right and who had followed his 
parents to London, sailed to America at the end of November 
1943 as part of the British mission to join the Manhattan Project. 
They arrived in New York on December 6, and then went to 
Washington to meet General Groves, after which they traveled 
with Groves by train to New Mexico, where Oppenheimer, with 
great and evident delight, welcomed them. After giving “Nicholas 
Baker” and his son “James” (as Niels and Aage Bohr were code- 
named) time to settle in, Oppenheimer convened a meeting of 
some of his most senior scientists, including Bacher, Bethe, Serber 
and Teller, to discuss the drawing that Bohr had brought with 
him and which he had already discussed with Groves. “It was 
clearly a drawing of a reactor,” Hans Bethe later recalled, “but 
when we saw it our conclusion was that these Germans were 
totally crazy—did they want to throw a reactor down on 
London?” The following day, Oppenheimer was able to write to 
Groves telling him that what was depicted in the drawing Bohr 
had brought with him from Denmark “would be a quite useless 
military weapon.” 

Though Bohr had much to learn and very little to teach about 
the physics of the atomic bomb, he was so revered and so 
inspirational that having him at Los Alamos seemed to lift the 
spirits of all the scientists there. On January 17, 1944, after Bohr 
had left Los Alamos for Washington, Oppenheimer wrote to 
Groves to say that he hoped Bohr’s collaboration with the project 


would continue, “since it has been of great help to us and is likely 
to be so throughout the year”: 


By word and deed Dr. Baker has done everything he could to 
support this project and to indicate that he is sympathetic not 
only with its purposes and general method of procedure, but 
with the policies and achievements of the project’s overall 
direction. I should like to make it quite clear that the effect of 
his presence on the morale of those with whom he came in 
contact was always positive and always helpful, and that I see 
every reason to anticipate that this will be true in the future. 


“Bohr at Los Alamos was marvelous,” Oppenheimer said years 
later. He “took a lively technical interest” in what was going on 
and talked to many people, but his real function there, 
Oppenheimer said, was that: 


he made the enterprise which looked so macabre seem hopeful 
and he spoke with contempt of Hitler, who with a few hundred 
tanks and planes had hoped to enslave Europe; he said nothing 
like that would happen again and his own high hope [was] 
that the outcome would be good and that in this the role of 
objectivity, friendliness, cooperation that science had 
established would play a helpful part—all this was something 
that ... we wished very much to believe. 


By giving the project his blessing, Bohr, in the minds of many 
of the scientists at Los Alamos, gave it a legitimacy and a prestige 
that it did not have before, and this renewed their enthusiasm for 
the task and their willingness to put up with the otherwise 
uncongenial military situation in which they found themselves. 
That, presumably, is what the official history of Los Alamos 
means when it states that Bohr’s influence “was to bring about 
stronger and more consistent cooperation with the army in the 
pursuit of the common goal.” Regarding the technicalities of 
building a bomb, Bohr, despite his interest in the work being 
done at Los Alamos, realized that he had little to contribute. 
“They didn’t need my help in making the atom bomb,” he is 
reported to have told a friend after the war. What he did have to 
contribute—and in this respect he exerted an enormous influence 
on Oppenheimer’s own thinking—were some wide-ranging 


thoughts on the politics of the bomb, which, had they been 
adopted, might have had a profound impact on the subsequent 
history of the world during the second half of the twentieth 
century. 

When, almost as soon as he arrived in England, he was brought 
up to speed by Chadwick on the progress that had been made in 
designing and building a bomb, Bohr was disconcerted to 
discover how little thought had been devoted, either in England 
or in the United States, to the political implications the bomb 
would have for the postwar world. On his second night in 
England Bohr dined with Sir John Anderson (later Lord 
Waverley), who was then Chancellor of the Exchequer and the 
Cabinet minister responsible for Tube Alloys. Anderson was 
unusual among politicians in having a reasonably good grasp of 
the science behind the bomb, having studied science at the 
University of Leipzig, where he wrote his dissertation on the 
chemistry of uranium. Oppenheimer had a great deal of respect 
for Anderson, whom he described as “a conservative, dour and 
remarkably sweet man, who was very congenial in his spirit to 
Bohr and was a good friend to him.” It was Anderson who invited 
Bohr to join the Tube Alloys project and then to go to Los Alamos 
as a member of the British mission. 

Because of the universal esteem in which he was held, Bohr, 
though in many ways a simple and unassuming man, was given 
access to people at the very top of the social and political order. 
While he was in Washington, before he went to Los Alamos, a 
reception in his honor was held at the Danish embassy, at which 
he was able to renew his acquaintance with Felix Frankfurter, a 
Supreme Court associate and a close personal friend of the 
President. Though there was little opportunity on this occasion 
for extended discussion, Frankfurter invited Bohr to have lunch 
with him the next time he was in Washington. 

When he left Los Alamos at the end of January 1944, Bohr 
went to Washington to take up this invitation. By this time he 
had thought very seriously about the postwar situation and had 
had what he regarded as a_ revelation about the 
“complementarity” of atomic bombs—a revelation as important, 
he believed, as his earlier epiphany regarding the 
complementarity of subatomic particles. Just as electrons are at 
one and the same time waves and particles, so, Bohr now 


believed, atomic bombs were at one and the same time the 
greatest danger to mankind and the greatest boon. Atomic bombs 
could put an end to civilization and human life itself, or, precisely 
because of that, they could bring an end to war. What was 
needed, Bohr felt, was a spirit of cooperation and, above all, 
openness. If the power of atomic bombs was made clear to 
everybody, Bohr reasoned, there would be at least the possibility 
of cooperation and therefore the possibility that this terrible 
weapon could turn out, because of its very terribleness, to be the 
best thing mankind had ever invented. 

Bohr’s view was therefore the exact opposite of the policy that 
the U.S. had adopted ever since the discovery of fission. Where 
that policy had been based on the attempt to prevent the Soviets 
from acquiring the “secret” of the bomb, Bohr believed that the 
best thing would be to consult the Soviet Union about the 
dangers to humanity posed by the development of such powerful 
weapons, and to treat the problem of controlling such weapons as 
one that demanded international cooperation rather than 
competition. In this way, he believed, those weapons would force 
upon the countries of the world a fundamental change in 
international relations, one that would make war itself obsolete. 

Astonishingly, Frankfurter was sympathetic to Bohr’s ideas and, 
even more astonishingly, thought President Roosevelt would be 
responsive to them. He thus offered to arrange a meeting between 
Bohr and Roosevelt. In a private memorandum he wrote about a 
year later, Frankfurter says that, when he mentioned Bohr’s ideas 
to Roosevelt, the President “shared the hope that the project 
might bring about a turning point in history.” The atomic bomb, 
Roosevelt told Frankfurter, “worried him to death,” and he “was 
very eager for all the help he could have in dealing with the 
problem.” He was therefore keen to meet Bohr, but, he said, he 
would not discuss this crucially important issue behind the back 
of his ally Winston Churchill, and so, before he met Bohr, he 
wanted Bohr to meet Churchill. 

At the beginning of April 1944, therefore, Bohr, accompanied 
by Aage, flew to London for a meeting with Churchill. Shortly 
before, Anderson had written a memorandum for Churchill 
outlining Bohr’s ideas and recommending that the Soviet Union 
be informed about “this devastating weapon.” He went on to 
propose that it be invited “to collaborate with us in preparing a 


scheme for international control.” On his copy of the 
memorandum Churchill had written beside the word 
“collaborate” the uncompromising reaction: “On no account.” 

Churchill kept Bohr waiting for over a month and did not see 
him until May 16. In the meantime, Bohr received via the Soviet 
embassy an invitation to go to the Soviet Union, “where 
everything will be done to give you and your family a shelter and 
where we now have all the necessary conditions for carrying on 
scientific work.” He was also told by a Soviet official that they 
knew he had been in America and was asked directly what 
information he had received about the war work of American 
scientists, a question to which Bohr responded with bland 
generalities. 

After his warm reception by Anderson and Frankfurter, Bohr’s 
meeting with Churchill was a bitter disappointment. The meeting 
lasted a bare thirty minutes, most of which was taken up with 
Churchill’s vehement dismissal of the idea of sharing information 
about the bomb with the Soviet Union. Bohr left the meeting 
under no doubt that his “revelation” would, if Churchill had 
anything to do with it, have no influence whatsoever on shaping 
Allied policy in the postwar period. This rebuff was something 
about which he remained angry for the rest of his life. “It was 
perfectly absurd to believe that the Russians cannot do what 
others can,” he later said. “There never was any secret about 
nuclear energy.” Churchill, for his part, dismissed Bohr from his 
mind—remarking to Frederick Lindemann (now Lord Cherwell), 
who had accompanied Bohr to Downing Street: “I did not like the 
man when you showed him to me, with his hair all over his 
head”—and turned his attention back to the preparations for D- 
Day. 

These landings took place on June 6, 1944, and by the time 
Bohr left England an Allied force of several hundred thousand 
men was advancing through France. Back in Washington, he was 
urged by Frankfurter to put his ideas down in writing in the form 
of a memorandum for the President. This led to a meeting with 
Roosevelt in August, in which Roosevelt expressed sympathy for 
Bohr’s ideas and suggested that Churchill could be won around. 
After Roosevelt and Churchill met in September, however, the 
opposite happened: Roosevelt came around to Churchill’s view on 
the matter, the two of them agreeing not only that “the 


suggestion that the world should be informed regarding tube 
alloys, with a view to international agreement regarding its 
control and use, is not accepted,” but also that “Enquiries should 
be made regarding the activities of Professor Bohr and steps taken 
to ensure that he is responsible for no leakage of information 
particularly to the Russians.” 

“The President and I are much worried about Professor Bohr,” 
Churchill wrote to Cherwell on September 20, citing as grounds 
for concern Bohr’s unauthorized discussions with Frankfurter and 
his contacts with the Soviet Union. “It seems to me,” Churchill 
declared, “Bohr ought to be confined or at any rate made to see 
that he is very near the edge of mortal crimes.” In the event, 
Churchill was dissuaded from actually locking Bohr up, but that 
was the end of Bohr’s personal contacts with the leaders of the 
Western world. After recounting this story in his lectures on Bohr, 
Oppenheimer remarks: “This was not funny, it was terrible and it 
shows how very wise men, dealing with very great men, can be 
very wrong.” 

By the autumn of 1944, when Churchill and Roosevelt were 
agreeing to dismiss any notion of sharing the “secret” of the 
atomic bomb, it was becoming increasingly clear to the Allies 
that the Nazis, though fully aware of the potential military use of 
nuclear fission, had achieved only very limited progress toward 
building a bomb. In February 1944, the Alsos mission had 
returned to Washington from Italy, where they had been able to 
do little but wait for the Allies to break through the German lines. 
After the landings at Anzio in January, the Allied forces had met 
with determined resistance at Monte Cassino, preventing them 
from advancing into Rome. When the Germans were finally 
defeated at Monte Cassino in May, however, the Alsos mission 
returned to Italy, and Colonel Pash was able to enter Rome with 
the victorious Allied forces on June 5. 

After questioning the leading physicists left in Italy and finding 
that they knew next to nothing about the German atomic-bomb 
program, Pash and his team switched to France, where they 
followed the advance of the massive force that had landed on D- 
Day. In August 1944, following the liberation of Paris, Alsos was 
able to interrogate Frédéric Joliot-Curie, who told them at least 
something they did not already know, namely that the German 
program was probably led by Kurt Diebner. Then, finally, in 


November 1944, after Strasbourg was taken by the Allies, Pash 
and Goudsmit, after reading through files taken from 
Weizsacker’s office, had pretty conclusive proof that the Germans 
had not so far managed to construct a working nuclear reactor, 
and that they had no serious program to build an atomic bomb. 

The knowledge that there was no danger at all of the Nazis 
building an atomic bomb before the Allies did not have the effect 
that one might have expected. Most of the scientists who had 
been recruited to Los Alamos had been persuaded to work on the 
project because of the awful possibility of losing the race against 
the Nazis. Now that it was clear there was no such possibility, did 
that not call into question the whole rationale of the Allied bomb 
project? In fact, only one person left the project after the 
discovery of the rudimentary state of the Nazi bomb effort. That 
man was Joseph Rotblat, a Polish Jew who had done pioneering 
work on nuclear fission at the University of Warsaw, after which 
he was offered a fellowship at Liverpool to work with Chadwick. 
He arrived in Liverpool in the summer of 1939, having left his 
wife in Poland because she was too ill to travel. The intention 
was that she would follow him to England, but after the Nazi 
invasion of Poland she was unable to leave the country and he 
was unable to return. He never saw her again. 

Feeling deeply the anxiety aroused by the prospect of the Nazis 
being first to develop the atomic bomb, Rotblat was an 
enthusiastic participant in the British Tube Alloys project and was 
happy to go with the British mission to Los Alamos. In March 
1944, however, when he had been at Los Alamos for just two 
months, he received what he later described as a “disagreeable 
shock,” when, at a dinner party given by the Chadwicks, he heard 
Groves say: “You realise of course that the main purpose of this 
project is to subdue the Russkies.” “Until then,” Rotblat said, “I 
had thought that our work was to prevent a Nazi victory, and 
now I was told that the weapon we were preparing was intended 
for use against the people who were making extreme sacrifices for 
that very aim.” On December 8, 1944, very soon after it had been 
established beyond all reasonable doubt that there was no danger 
either of the Nazis winning the war or of them developing the 
bomb, Rotblat left the Manhattan Project. Despite efforts by the 
FBI to show that he had been a Soviet spy, he went on to have an 
outstanding career as a physicist. Feeling betrayed by the use of 


the atomic bomb against the Japanese, Rotblat devoted himself 
for the rest of his life to the cause of nuclear disarmament, his 
contribution to which was recognized by the award of the Nobel 
Peace Prize in 1995. 

Astonishingly, Rotblat was the only person ever to leave the 
Manhattan Project on grounds of conscience. Why? A clue, 
perhaps, is contained in Fermi’s remark, when, during a visit to 
Los Alamos, he exclaimed to Oppenheimer: “I believe your people 
actually want to make a bomb.” Though most of them had 
originally been motivated by the thought of the Nazis getting 
there first, after a while at Los Alamos they simply wanted to see 
the project through to a successful conclusion. This, I think, 
cannot be understood without taking into account just how 
successful Oppenheimer was as the director of the Los Alamos 
laboratory. 

When scientists were asked to recall their time at Los Alamos, 
one thing that is repeated over and over again is how 
inspirational Oppenheimer was. His influence went beyond that 
of a laboratory director; he was seen as the leader of an entire 
community—a community that was somehow purer, more noble, 
better than the world from which it was so conspicuously and 
effectively cut off. For his book on Oppenheimer and Lawrence, 
Nuel Pharr Davis collected a series of eulogies of Oppenheimer 
from those who had worked with him on the bomb. Among them 
was the British scientist James Tuck, who captured the prevailing 
mood of the place when he described Los Alamos as “the most 
exclusive club in the world,” where “I found a spirit of Athens, of 
Plato, of an ideal republic”: 


By the grace of God the American government got the right 
man. His function here was not to do penetrating original 
research but to inspire it. It required a surpassing knowledge of 
science and of scientists to sit above warring groups and unify 
them. A lesser man could not have done it. Scientists are not 
necessarily cultured, especially in America. Oppenheimer had 
to be. The people who had been gathered here from so many 
parts of the world needed a great gentleman to serve under. I 
think that’s why they remember that golden time with 
enormous emotion. 


True, Oppenheimer had never managed a laboratory (or 
anything) before, and as a physicist he was as purely theoretical 
as it is possible to be. And yet, in a way that amazed and 
impressed everybody who knew him, his entire life up to that 
point—his early interest in minerals, his determinedly wide- 
ranging education at Harvard, his absorption in the literature and 
art of America, France, England, Germany, Italy and Holland, his 
mastery of several European languages, his omnivorous 
devouring of all aspects of theoretical physics and his close 
following of major developments in experimental physics—turned 
out to be the perfect preparation for the task he had been set. He 
was the ideal man to lead Los Alamos, considered not just as a 
laboratory, but also as a new kind of city, one with far more than 
the normal proportion of extremely clever people and one, 
moreover, devoted to the accomplishing of a_ single, 
extraordinarily demanding task. 

Hans Bethe memorably remarked to Pharr Davis that 
Oppenheimer “worked at physics mainly because he found 
physics the best way to do philosophy,” adding: “This 
undoubtedly had something to do with the magnificent way he 
led Los Alamos.” Bethe is surely right. Oppenheimer could bring 
to the task the intellectual detachment of a man who could see 
the bigger picture and therefore not get bogged down in detail. 
However, though this is true and important, what sticks in many 
people’s minds is the remarkable way in which he could grasp the 
details in every aspect of the laboratory’s work. Norris Bradbury, 
who was to replace Oppenheimer as the director of Los Alamos, 
recalls: “Oppenheimer could understand everything, and there 
were some hard physics problems here to understand.” 


I’ve seen him deal incredibly well with what looked like dead- 
end situations technically speaking. It was not that his 
decisions were always correct. But they always opened up a 
course of action where none had been apparent. They were 
made with a sense of dedication that moved the whole 
laboratory. Don’t forget what an extravagant collection of 
prima donnas we had here. By his own knowledge and 
personality he kept them inspired and going forward. 


“He could understand anything,” echoed Robert Serber. “One 


thing I noticed: he would show up at innumerable different 
meetings at Los Alamos, listen and summarize in such a way as to 
make amazing sense. Nobody else I ever knew could comprehend 
so quickly.” 


And along with this, he developed tremendous tact. There was 
a big advisory council that gave Los Alamos the appearance of 
a democracy just because he handled it so well. Everybody was 
convinced that his problems were the urgent and important 
ones, because Oppenheimer thought so. 


Oppenheimer had arrived on “the Hill” (as people who lived 
there called Los Alamos) determined to use all his persuasiveness, 
all the power of his many and varied intellectual gifts and the 
best physicists in the country (and beyond) to solve the very 
difficult problem he had been set: to design and build a type of 
bomb that no one had ever seen, which could be manufactured 
with either of two metals, one of which was a rare isotope of 
uranium that was extremely difficult to separate and the other a 
metal that did not exist in nature, and which, up to that point, 
existed only in microscopic amounts. The design of this bomb 
was dependent upon a number of facts about these metals that so 
far remained unknown: what were the critical masses of U-235 
and plutonium? What were their densities? When they fissioned, 
how many neutrons were released per fission? How fast did the 
emitted neutrons travel? And, given the time restraints placed 
upon the completion of this project—the target set was two 
bombs, usable for military purposes, to be produced by the 
summer of 1945—the design of these bombs had to proceed 
alongside (not after) the scientific discovery of these facts. In other 
words, the bomb had to be engineered in the dark, with the 
expectation that it would be re-engineered when light dawned. 
This was extremely wasteful, but the U.S. government was 
apparently prepared to give Groves an unlimited budget to see 
this project through. 

From the very beginning it had been decided that both uranium 
and plutonium bombs would be built. Each had its advantages 
and disadvantages. The advantage of uranium was that, thanks to 
the early theoretical work done by Bohr and Wheeler in 1939 and 
the intensive experimental work subsequently carried out in both 


Britain and America, the basic science of the fission process for 
U-235 was pretty well known and understood. It is true, as David 
Hawkins points out in his official history of Los Alamos, that in 
April 1943, when the scientists started to gather on the Hill, there 
were still two possible reasons for doubting that an atomic bomb 
using U-235 could be made. The first was that “the neutron 
number had not been measured for fission induced by fast 
neutrons, but only for ‘slow’ fission.” The second was that “the 
time between fissions in a fast chain might be longer than had 
been assumed.” However, even Hawkins concedes it was 
“extremely unlikely” that either of these questions, once settled, 
would turn out to provide a serious barrier in the way of building 
a uranium bomb. And so, rather quickly, it was proved. By the 
end of 1943, both these questions had been answered: the 
neutron number for fast fission was greater than two, and 
therefore an explosive chain reaction using fast neutrons could be 
produced just as surely as Fermi in Chicago had produced a 
controlled, nonexplosive chain reaction using slow neutrons. And, 
as Robert Wilson established, the time between fissions in U-235 
was not long enough to prevent an explosion from occurring. 

After the first nine months of the laboratory’s work, then, the 
science of a uranium bomb was, as Teller had announced it as 
being a year earlier, a solved problem. The problem was, as Bohr 
had seen in 1939 and as the Germans had discovered for 
themselves, that the effort involved in separating enough U-235 
to make a bomb was almost unimaginably huge. When Bohr 
arrived in Los Alamos, having been brought up to date on the 
Manhattan Project by Chadwick, Groves and Oppenheimer, he 
said to Teller: “You see, I told you it couldn’t be done without 
turning the whole country into a factory. You have done just 
that.” 

In fact, at the end of 1943, it was beginning to look as if even 
turning the whole country into a factory might not be enough; 
the construction of the enormous electromagnetic and gaseous- 
diffusion plants at Oak Ridge, occupying several square miles and 
employing tens of thousands of people, did not look likely to 
produce what was required to make one bomb, let alone two. The 
Y-12 (electromagnetic) site, in the words of the historian of the 
atomic bomb, Richard Rhodes, was by that time “dead in the 
water with hardly a gram of U-235 to show for all its enormous 


expense.” Neither had gaseous diffusion—though it was looking 
like a more promising method than electromagnetic separation— 
yet produced any significant amounts of enriched uranium. In 
January 1944, the navy began work on a plant in Philadelphia 
that used a different method of isotope separation: thermal 
diffusion. As this looked promising, a thermal-diffusion plant, 
S-50, was added to the existing plants at Oak Ridge. In the 
meantime, Lawrence and the Rad Lab team at Berkeley worked 
around the clock to get the Calutrons at Y-12 working, while the 
physicists at Columbia, supported by Fuchs and Peierls, worked 
equally hard trying to perfect the gaseous-diffusion plants at 
K-25; but it was clear to Groves and Oppenheimer that, even with 
this truly colossal effort, there was no possibility whatsoever of 
having enough U-235 to make two bombs by the summer of 
1945. If they were going to achieve this target, they would have 
to produce at least one plutonium bomb. 

But, of course, plutonium too had its problems. Just as the 
severe difficulties in separating uranium-235 had convinced the 
Germans that the only practical route to the atomic bomb lay in 
producing plutonium, so the British Tube Alloys project had 
considered only the uranium bomb, for reasons equally 
compelling: plutonium does not exist in nature and nobody knew 
very much about it. The idea that one could build a bomb using a 
metal, the basic science of which had yet to be done, seemed 
fanciful. At Los Alamos, Oppenheimer set about coordinating that 
basic science, while at the same time, designing a bomb that 
would make use of its results. Inevitably, therefore, there was a 
lot of guesswork and many false starts. 

Given that the physics of uranium fission was relatively well 
advanced and the task of making a bomb out of uranium 
(assuming enough U-235 could eventually be produced) relatively 
straightforward, the Los Alamos laboratory concentrated its 
considerable financial and intellectual resources on the plutonium 
bomb. When the scientists at Los Alamos talked of the “gadget,” 
what they were referring to more often than not was the 
plutonium bomb. And, in particular, during the first year of the 
laboratory’s work, they were referring to a plutonium bomb using 
what Serber in his introductory lectures had called the “gun 
assembly method.” This is the basic bomb design originally 
envisaged by Frisch and Peierls in their memorandum, in which 


the fissionable material—uranium-235 or plutonium—is split into 
two subcritical parts, one larger than the other. The smaller part 
is then fired into the larger part, thus assembling a supercritical 
mass of the fissionable substance. 

Though much about the chemistry and metallurgy of plutonium 
remained to be discovered, two extremely important things about 
it were already known. The first was that its critical mass is 
smaller than that of U-235, though exactly how much smaller had 
yet to be determined. The second was something brought to 
Oppenheimer’s attention by Glenn Seaborg, the discoverer of 
plutonium, just before work at Los Alamos began, the full 
significance of which would not be appreciated until the summer 
of 1944, when the realization dawned that, in fact, it threatened 
to undermine the entire bomb project. 

What Seaborg pointed out was that plutonium, despite its many 
advantages as a fissionable bomb material, had a potential 
disadvantage, which has to do with what is called “spontaneous 
fission.” Unlike ordinary nuclear fission, spontaneous fission does 
not require the nucleus of an atom to be hit by a neutron; it is, 
rather, a kind of radioactive decay, like the alpha emissions of 
substances such as radium (or, indeed, uranium and plutonium)— 
something that occurs without anything being done to the 
material. When spontaneous fission takes place, the result is the 
same as ordinary nuclear fission: the nucleus splits, neutrons are 
emitted and energy is released. Spontaneous fission created a 
problem for gun-assembly atomic bombs because the neutrons 
emitted by it might set off a chain reaction before the two pieces 
of the fissionable material could be brought together. This chain 
reaction, though it would produce a great deal of heat and 
energy, would not be explosive, and therefore the bomb would 
“fizzle.” 

Just as it was known that heavy nuclei with odd mass numbers 
—U-235 and Pu-239—are more liable to undergo ordinary 
nuclear fission, so it was known that those with even mass 
numbers, such as U-238, are more likely to undergo spontaneous 
fission. This meant, Seaborg explained to Oppenheimer, that 
Pu-240, an isotope of plutonium, would be likely to have a high 
rate of spontaneous fission. In the spring of 1943, this was a 
merely theoretical worry, since no Pu-240 had yet been created, 
but, Seaborg warned, it was likely that the plutonium produced in 


a nuclear reactor would not be pure Pu-239, but rather a mixture 
of Pu-239 and Pu-240. This is because in a reactor there are far 
more free neutrons flying around than in a laboratory accelerator 
such as a cyclotron (until the nuclear reactors at Oak Ridge and 
Hanford started to go critical, the only plutonium anyone had 
ever seen had been produced by cyclotrons), and it is therefore 
more likely that some Pu-239 nuclei would absorb a neutron and 
become Pu-240. 

To begin with, this warning of spontaneous fission, though 
taken seriously, was not treated as potentially fatal to the entire 
project, largely because it was assumed that the differences 
between accelerator-produced plutonium and reactor-produced 
plutonium would not be so very great. Soon after work got under 
way at Los Alamos, Emilio Segré was put in charge of 
experiments designed to measure the rate of spontaneous fission 
in both uranium and plutonium, using material obtained from 
cyclotrons, and his initial results were very encouraging. The rate 
was, he discovered, not large enough to make the gun method 
impossible. True, the gun in the plutonium bomb would have to 
fire its “bullet” pretty fast, and the gun barrel would have to be 
pretty long, but there seemed to be no reason, in principle, why 
such a gun could not be designed and built. One thing making it 
easier, ballistics experts were quick to point out, was that, unlike 
almost every other gun ever made, it would be fired just once, so 
durability was not an issue. 

When the figures were established, Deak Parsons and _ his 
rapidly growing ordnance team were set the task of designing a 
gun capable of firing a piece of plutonium a distance of seventeen 
feet into another larger piece of plutonium at a speed of 3,000 
feet per second. Making this task much more demanding was the 
fact that they were to do so in advance of any hard information 
about the relevant chemical and metallurgical properties of 
plutonium. Dealing with such uncertainties might be what 
theoretical—and, to a lesser extent, experimental—physicists did 
for a living, but it was not what engineers were used to. The first 
three men chosen to head the Engineering Group in Parsons’s 
division left after a short time in the job, because, as Parsons put 
it, of the “frustrations which these people experienced when one 
week they thought they had a problem in mind, and had evolved 
a solution, only to find, when they proposed it, that the concept 


of the problem had changed in the meantime and their solution 
was irrelevant.” 

Despite the many difficulties and uncertainties, by January 
1944 the “gadget” had been designed and a suitable name, the 
“Thin Man,” had been chosen for it. All that remained, so it was 
believed, was for Parsons and his Ordnance Division to test the 
dropping of it and work out the details of its internal ballistics. A 
few months later, however, in April 1944, Segré finally received 
some samples of reactor-produced plutonium and, to everybody’s 
horror, discovered that the rate of spontaneous fission was five 
times that of the cyclotron-produced samples he had measured 
earlier. Just as Seaborg had warned, the plutonium had far more 
Pu-240 in it than that produced by a cyclotron. The alarming but 
inescapable conclusion was that the “Thin Man” was a nonstarter. 
The whole idea of a gun-assembly plutonium bomb—the idea 
that up until then had formed the central focus for almost all the 
work done at Los Alamos—would have to be abandoned. 

This was devastating news, but in Segré’s earlier measurements 
of spontaneous fission in uranium there was a silver lining: a gun- 
assembly bomb made with uranium would work and, in fact, was 
even more straightforward than they had thought. The uranium 
bullet could be fired at a mere 1,000 feet per second and the 
length of the gun could be reduced from seventeen feet to six. 
Thus, in place of the plutonium “Thin Man” bomb, there emerged 
the uranium “Little Boy,” the bomb that would be dropped on 
Hiroshima. So confident were Oppenheimer and his colleagues 
that “Little Boy” would work that they did not see any need to 
test it. The bomb was designed and built and then left to one side, 
waiting for the U-235 that would form both the bullet and its 
target. 

Until recently, every book about the history of the atomic 
bomb has contained a false description of Little Boy’s design. 
Perhaps misled by the Frisch-Peierls memorandum and by The Los 
Alamos Primer, the published accounts of the bomb invariably 
state that the gun assembly worked by firing a small uranium 
bullet into a slightly subcritical mass of U-235, thus forcing it to 
go supercritical. In fact, the material was split almost in half: at 
one end of the gun was a group of rings of U-235 that formed 40 
percent of the supercritical mass, and at the other end another 
group of slightly larger rings that formed 60 percent. And it was 


this latter, larger group that was fired onto the smaller group. At 
the same time, neutrons were emitted from a polonium-beryllium 
“initiator,” thus causing the supercritical mass to explode. 

For more than fifty years this was an official secret, known only 
to those who worked on the bomb. Then, in 2004, a truck driver 
from Illinois called John Coster-Mullen published a book that 
contained the first-ever publicly available accurate description of 
the Little Boy bomb. Coster-Mullen’s hobby was model-making 
and he had set himself the task of producing an accurate model of 
the Hiroshima bomb, to accomplish which he made a close study 
of every photograph and every document available. His research 
convinced him that the accounts published up to that time were 
wrong, and he set about correcting them. That he, a man without 
a university degree in physics (or, indeed, anything else), was 
able to reverse-engineer the bomb and produce an accurate and 
detailed account of its design shows, perhaps, the wisdom of 
Bohr’s remark that there never was any secret about how to make 
a fission bomb. Or, as Coster-Mullen himself has put it, what his 
research has shown is that the real secret of the atomic bomb is 
how easy it is to build one. 

At the beginning of July 1944, Oppenheimer broke the news to 
the scientists gathered for the Los Alamos weekly meeting that 
the plutonium “gadget,” as it had been conceived up until that 
point, would have to be abandoned; there was absolutely no 
prospect of producing a gun-assembly plutonium bomb. The 
reason it took three months to make this announcement is that 
Segré, Oppenheimer and Groves, so appalled were they at the 
consequences of Segré’s results, kept hoping that further 
experiments, further measurements, would show those results to 
be incorrect. Alas, no matter how many times Segré and his team 
counted the spontaneous fissions produced by reactor-produced 
plutonium, the result was always the same: too high for gun 
assembly to be workable. Groves had even been reluctant to 
inform the scientists at the Met Lab in Chicago of the results. 
When, at the beginning of June 1944, Robert Bacher told him of 
his intention to report Segré’s findings to the scientists there, 
Groves replied: “Do you think that needs to be reported to them?” 
“Of course,” Bacher replied, “it’s a fundamental fact of the 
material they’re working on.” When he did tell them, Bacher 
recalls that Compton “went just as white as that sheet of paper.” 


In the late spring of 1944, then, it looked extremely doubtful 
that the Manhattan Project would succeed in achieving the goals 
set for it. For, if there was no prospect of a gun-assembly 
plutonium bomb, neither, given the agonizingly slow progress at 
Oak Ridge, was there any hope of producing two gun-assembly 
uranium bombs by the following summer. If they were to meet 
the target set for them, therefore, they would have to start from 
scratch and design a plutonium bomb fundamentally different 
from the “gadget” they had had in mind during the previous year. 

That the laboratory was able to do just that is astonishing and 
demonstrates, as well as the resolute determination of everyone 
involved, the foresight and adaptability that Oppenheimer 
brought to his task as director. Thanks to his foresight, an 
alternative to the gun-assembly plutonium bomb lay ready to 
hand: the implosion method of detonation, first suggested by 
Richard Tolman, elaborated upon by Robert Serber and pursued 
with tenacious dedication at Los Alamos by Seth Neddermeyer. 
Oppenheimer’s adaptability is shown in the way that, in the 
summer of 1944, he reorganized the whole laboratory, turning it 
away from the “Thin Man” and toward what became known as 
the “Fat Man,” the plutonium implosion bomb that would— 
thanks to an almost unimaginably intense effort—be ready for 
military use just a year later. 

For the first six months of work at Los Alamos, implosion was 
very much a side issue, comparable in that respect to the work 
Edward Teller was pursuing on the “Super.” Like the Super, it 
was seen as something that was potentially interesting, both 
scientifically and militarily, but, compared to the gun-assembly 
gadget, of marginal concern to the project. To pursue implosion, 
Neddermeyer had a team of just eight people, who spent their 
time in a remote canyon performing experiments with explosives 
that most people on the Hill thought were leading nowhere. 
Among those sceptics was L. T. E. Thompson, a naval ballistics 
expert whom Parsons consulted and whose judgment he trusted 
above that of any other advisor. “Dr. Tommy” (as he was known 
to Parsons and his family) came to Los Alamos in the summer of 
1943 and observed a demonstration given by Neddermeyer of the 
basic idea of implosion. “It seems to me,” Thompson announced 
afterward, “there is a fundamental difficulty with the system that 
makes it quite certain not to be satisfactory.” 


The “system” he was commenting upon was, in some important 
respects, quite different from the implosion device first envisaged 
by Tolman and described by Serber. What Tolman and Serber had 
imagined was a way of assembling a critical mass of plutonium 
(or uranium) that brought together several pieces of the metal 
arranged in a circle. What Neddermeyer had in mind, rather, was 
something more subtle, which would exploit the fact that critical 
mass is affected by density. For a fairly straightforward reason, 
the critical mass of a dense piece of material is lower than that of 
a less-dense piece. The reason is that, in a dense piece of matter, 
the distance—and therefore the time—that a neutron has to 
travel before it causes fission is smaller, and so, the denser the 
material is, the smaller it can be while still being able to undergo 
the eighty generations of fission needed for an explosion. 

Neddermeyer’s concept of implosion exploited this fact in a 
novel way. Instead of having a bomb that assembled a critical 
mass by bringing together two or more subcritical masses—which 
was the idea behind both the gun-assembly design and the 
Tolman-Serber version of implosion—Neddermeyer proposed 
turning a subcritical mass of material into a supercritical mass by 
squeezing it. His design called for a subcritical hollow sphere of 
uranium or plutonium to be blown inward, imploded, uniformly, 
so that its density increased to the point at which it would go 
supercritical. The squeezing would be achieved by explosives 
arranged around the sphere. The “fundamental difficulty” that 
Thompson identified was that the design required the external 
pressure on the sphere to be exactly symmetrical. If it were not, 
the sphere would not be transformed into a denser sphere, but 
rather flattened, “in about the manner of a dead tennis ball hit 
with a hammer,” as Thompson put it in a letter to Oppenheimer 
of June 1943. 

Until September 1943, Neddermeyer was almost alone at Los 
Alamos in thinking that this problem could be overcome and that 
implosion would turn out to offer a practical method of creating 
an atomic bomb. In their efforts to solve the problem, 
Neddermeyer and his team conducted experiments in which they 
surrounded stove pipes with TNT, which they then detonated, 
trying to get the pipes to collapse symmetrically. The results were 
not encouraging. Those who were called upon to witness these 
experiments, and the nonsymmetrically flattened pipes they 


invariably produced, were unimpressed. Then, in September 
1943, Oppenheimer, Groves and some of the leading 
theoreticians at Los Alamos suddenly began to take implosion 
more seriously and to regard it as a centrally important part of 
the laboratory’s work. This was six months before Segré’s 
devastating news about the spontaneous fission of reactor- 
produced plutonium, and was completely unrelated to any 
perceived problems with the gun-assembly design. The renewed 
interest in implosion was, rather, stimulated at this early stage by 
the problems in obtaining significant amounts of enriched 
uranium, in the light of which a method that offered the 
possibility of building a bomb that required a smaller critical 
mass of uranium and did not need such pure uranium seemed 
well worth exploring. 

Fresh hope for the implosion program was provided that 
September by a visit to Los Alamos of John von Neumann. Von 
Neumann was a Jewish émigré from Budapest who was 
considered, among some extraordinarily stiff competition (Teller, 
Szilard, Wigner, to name but three), to be the most brilliant of the 
Hungarian scientists associated with the Manhattan Project. 
Having, while still a young man, made fundamentally important 
contributions to a wide variety of disciplines (including logic, 
mathematics, quantum theory and economics), von Neumann 
moved to the United States in 1930, and in 1933, at the age of 
twenty-nine, was appointed professor of mathematics at 
Princeton’s Institute for Advanced Study. He had the kind of mind 
that could turn to anything and, as luck would have it, during the 
war he became interested in the mathematics and physics of 
explosives. This led to a series of consultancies, mainly for the 
U.S. Navy, in which he demonstrated time and time again the 
military usefulness of a powerful intellect. Oppenheimer and 
Parsons were desperate to get him to Los Alamos, but were 
unable to tempt him to come on a full-time basis. The best they 
could do was persuade him to make “an occasional visit to Santa 
Fe,” as Parsons put it in a letter to him of August 1943. 

On his first such visit, at the end of September 1943, von 
Neumann, during the two weeks that he was at Los Alamos, put 
the implosion program on a completely different footing, 
replacing the skeptical indifference toward the project that had 
prevailed up until that point with a lively, intense and optimistic 


interest. This was largely because of the seriousness with which 
he himself treated Neddermeyer’s research. Such was the awe in 
which von Neumann was held that the leading scientists at Los 
Alamos began to think that, if he was interested in implosion, 
there must be something to it. With regard to the technical 
problem that Neddermeyer was attempting to solve, von 
Neumann’s initial contribution was to suggest two things: 1. 
increase the amount of explosive used to implode the fissionable 
material so as to increase the speed of the implosion; and 2. use 
“shaped” explosive charges, which make better use of the 
physical properties of shock waves (in the mathematics of which 
von Neumann was by this time probably the world’s leading 
expert). 

Shaped charges (or “hollow charges” as they are known in 
Britain) had been discovered in the nineteenth century, but were 
not exploited militarily until the advent of armor-piercing shells 
in the Second World War. The basic idea is that, instead of having 
a solid explosive charge—like, say, a stick of dynamite—one 
hollows the charge out, leaving an empty space. It was found that 
this concentrates the energy produced by the explosion (because 
the energy released rushes to fill the empty space), allowing more 
penetrative weapons to be designed and built. Von Neumann was 
an expert on this kind of charge and realized that if, instead of 
simply surrounding his target material with TNT, Neddermeyer 
arranged a series of shaped charges around it and was then able 
to ensure the charges all went off at the same time, implosion 
might just work. 

Charles Critchfield, who was a member of Neddermeyer’s team, 
has described how von Neumann’s suggestions “woke everybody 
up.” After von Neumann’s visit, he remembered, Teller called 
him, saying: “Why didn’t you tell me about this stuff?” At a 
meeting of the Los Alamos Governing Board of October 28, 1943, 
Oppenheimer gave reasons for giving high priority to the 
implosion program—reasons based largely on the interest that 
von Neumann had shown in it. He mentioned in passing that von 
Neumann believed that the speed of implosion (if the charge was 
great enough and arranged well enough) was so great that “there 
is less danger of pre-detonation,” but at this stage what really 
excited Oppenheimer, Groves and Teller about implosion was the 
promise it offered of reducing the quantity of enriched uranium 


needed to make a bomb. In his report to the Governing Board of 
November 4, 1943, Oppenheimer remarked that “both Groves 
and Conant seemed very much in favor of pushing the implosion 
method ... the only one which offers some hope of justification 
for the electromagnetic method.” In other words, the only 
remaining hope for the hugely expensive Calutrons at Oak Ridge 
was not that they could produce enough enriched uranium for a 
gun-assembly bomb—that clearly looked like a false hope—but 
rather that they might produce enough, slightly impure, uranium 
to make an implosion bomb. 

If implosion looked more interesting, attractive and promising 
after von Neumann’s visit, it also became more urgent—too 
urgent to leave in the hands of Neddermeyer and his tiny group. 
Oppenheimer thus began to enlarge the program and recruit into 
it people with more experience of explosives. His first target was 
George Kistiakowsky, the Ukrainian-born professor of chemistry 
at Harvard, who was director of the National Defense Research 
Committee’s Explosive Research Laboratory at Bruceton, 
Pennsylvania, and probably the most eminent expert on the 
chemistry of explosives in the U.S. Kistiakowsky was at first 
reluctant to come to Los Alamos, “partly,” he later said, “because 
I didn’t think the bomb would be ready in time and I was 
interested in helping to win the war.” He nevertheless agreed to 
visit Los Alamos in October 1943 as a consultant. What he found 
dismayed him. “The situation is a mess,” he wrote to Conant after 
his visit. “The real difficulty is that there is a serious lack of 
mutual confidence between Parsons and Neddermeyer.” 
Furthermore, though Parsons “is now committed to a vigorous 
prosecution” of implosion research, it “is doubtful that he 
believes in its success.” 

Kistiakowsky recommended an _ enlargement and a 
reorganization of the implosion program, with the appointment 
of a new leader for it, someone who could work with Parsons. 
Though he was still reluctant to commit himself to the task, it 
was clear to everyone that he himself was the right man for it. 
However, he took some time to see what was staring everybody 
else in the face and did not join the laboratory on a full-time 
basis until February 1944. In the meantime, while still acting as a 
consultant, he set about reorganizing the research program, 
providing it with a more rigorous scientific method and a detailed 


list of particular experimental studies to carry out. When he 
eventually joined Los Alamos, it was as a deputy leader of the 
Ordnance Division, with responsibility for implosion (with Ed 
McMillan as the other deputy, with responsibility for gun 
assembly). Kistiakowsky and McMillan were also made members 
of the Governing Board, as was Kenneth Bainbridge, who was at 
the same time appointed leader of a newly created division 
dedicated to the problems of bomb assembly. 

Though much research still needed to be done, certain features 
of the design of the implosion bomb were fixed in the autumn of 
1943. Its maximum size, for example, was determined by the size 
of the bomb bay in the B-29 bomber that would be used to 
deliver it: five by twelve feet. Also, it was realized from the 
beginning that an implosion bomb could not be long and slender, 
but would have to be round and large, hence the name “Fat 
Man.” Apparently, the hope was that anyone listening covertly to 
discussions about modifying B-29s to accommodate “Thin Man” 
and “Fat Man” would interpret them as referring to plans to 
transport, respectively, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister 
Churchill. 

Directing the program to design and build “Thin Man,” which 
lasted from March 1943 to July 1944, had been a demanding job, 
but its demands paled before those required to complete “Fat 
Man” by the deadline of the summer of 1945. This latter was a 
truly gargantuan task that involved, among other things: 
mastering, and in some cases, inventing new mathematical 
techniques to describe and predict the behavior of shock waves; 
determining, by experiment and observation, the right shape for 
the explosive charges that would be used to implode the 
fissionable material; inventing a method of initiating the chain 
reaction in an implosion device; developing a new branch of 
physics (the hydrodynamics of implosion);53 and designing and 
constructing a kind of bomb that no one before the war had even 
envisaged. 

Moreover, for Oppenheimer, it involved maintaining smooth 
personal relations with, on the one hand, military and security 
men, and, on the other, prickly, obsessive scientists with large 
and easily bruised egos. Seth Neddermeyer was not an easy man, 
and he had developed an intense obsession with making his 
version of implosion work. In effectively sidelining him, while 


keeping him working on the program under the leadership of 
someone else, Oppenheimer demonstrated rare tact, sensitivity 
and understanding. 

In March 1944, still thinking of implosion as a means of 
making a uranium bomb with as little uranium as possible, 
Oppenheimer wrote to Groves that the “prime objective” of the 
laboratory for the coming year was “to bring to a successful 
conclusion the development of the implosion unit with U-235.” 
The arrival of the British mission at the end of 1943 and the 
beginning of 1944 gave Oppenheimer the opportunity to pick yet 
more brains for hints on how to solve the problem of squeezing a 
ball of uranium without deforming it. Chief among these fresh 
brains was that of Rudolf Peierls, who, when implosion research 
received its new impetus, was still attached to the Columbia 
University group in New York, but who in February 1944 came to 
Los Alamos for a visit. “At that time,” Peierls writes in his 
autobiography, “the laboratory was urgently required to obtain 
numerical solutions to the equations for the implosion.” As it 
happened, the equation required “was of the same form as that 
for the blast wave in air, for which I had done my numerical 
experiments ... I therefore came just at the right time to explain 
the step-by-step method by which the equation could be solved 
and the limits of the size of the steps.” Doing it step-by-step was 
important, because these calculations were to be done on IBM 
punch-card machines, the ancestors of modern computers. After 
the February visit Oppenheimer wrote to Groves confirming the 
usefulness of his discussions with Peierls, with whom, he 
reported, he had gone “into the technical aspects of the British 
methods in considerable detail.” Oppenheimer was now 
“planning to attack the implosion problem along these lines with 
the highest possible urgency.” 

Developing implosion was both a theoretical and an 
experimental matter. Indeed, as had been shown during von 
Neumann’s visit in the autumn of 1943, implosion raised 
theoretical questions interesting enough even for Edward Teller, 
who had steadfastly refused even to pretend to be stimulated by 
what he regarded as the merely engineering problems raised by 
the gun-assembly method. After his visit to Los Alamos, von 
Neumann kept up a correspondence with Teller, and in January 
1944, Teller was appointed head of a small group of the 


Theoretical Division, devoted to solving the mathematical and 
theoretical problems raised by implosion. After Peierls’s visit in 
February, the work of this group was centered on using the 
mathematical techniques developed by the British. 

The effort—indeed, the perceived need—to solve the problems 
of implosion was soon considered sufficiently important for 
Bethe, in March 1944, to reorganize the entire Theoretical 
Division to meet “the great and increased urgency of the 
implosion program.” In accordance with this reorganization, 
Teller was put in charge of group T-1, the responsibilities of 
which were officially described as “Hydrodynamics of Implosion, 
Super.” Oppenheimer and Bethe both thought it was obvious that 
the first of these was the more important. Teller, however, whose 
interest in implosion in January seems to have waned by March, 
thought otherwise, and from the spring of 1944 onward spent 
almost all his time working on the Super. The short section of his 
autobiography that he devotes to his abandonment of work on 
implosion presents a somewhat unclear picture of why, exactly, 
he lost interest in it. After describing “Johnny” von Neumann’s 
visit to Los Alamos and his conversations with him about “fast” 
implosion, Teller seems keen to convey the importance of those 
discussions and to highlight his own role in them: 


The next morning, Johnny and I presented our findings to 
Oppenheimer. He immediately grasped their implications. 
Within a week, magnificent administrator that he was, he had 
turned the direction of the research around. From then on, our 
main efforts were no longer devoted to a gun-assembled 
weapon but rather to the implosion assembly.54 


But, having stressed his role in providing the guiding ideas of 
the implosion problem, Teller recounts how, after “Johnny” had 
left, Bethe called him into his office and told him: “I want you to 
take charge of solving the equations that will be needed to 
calculate implosion.” This, Teller says, was a task he was 
reluctant to take on because it “seemed far too difficult”: “Not 
only were other people more capable than I of providing such 
work, but I also suspected that a job that formidable might not be 
completed in time to have any influence on a bomb that could be 
used during this war.” 


As a reason for concentrating on the Super—which stood no 
chance whatsoever of being completed in time to influence the 
outcome of the war—this seems strikingly unconvincing. Besides, 
if Teller had originated the central ideas that inspired the 
renewed interest in implosion, who did he think could possibly be 
more capable of seeing it through to completion? 

Interspersed with his account of how he helped to establish and 
then backed away from the rejuvenated implosion program, 
Teller provides some personal reflections that, one suspects, are 
more to the point in explaining why he abandoned it. Though he 
enjoyed Bethe’s company, Teller says, “as physicists we approach 
problems differently.” Whereas Bethe was a brick builder, Teller 
was a brick layer; he liked to build things, rather than provide 
other people with the tools: “I much prefer (and am better at) 
exploring the various structures that can be made from brick, and 
seeing how the bricks stack up.” Then, apparently apropos of 
nothing, Teller confesses that when Oppenheimer told him that 
he had appointed Bethe as head of the Theoretical Division, “I 
was a little hurt.” “I had worked on the atom bomb project longer 
than Bethe. I had worked hard and fairly effectively on recruiting, 
and on helping Oppie organize the lab during the first chaotic 
weeks.” 

In other words, it seems to be implied, Teller quit working on 
implosion because he could not bear the thought of being 
consigned to working on a mere brick-building task, working 
under another brick builder. He wanted to be working not on 
small mathematical tasks in the service of a goal set by someone 
else, but on large tasks in which he could pursue his own vision. 
He wanted to be the boss, not the under-laborer—especially if it 
turned out that the particular under-laboring task he had been set 
was one that someone else, namely Peierls, was better at than he. 

On May 1, 1944, Oppenheimer wrote to Groves, asking if, as a 
matter of the “greatest urgency,” Teller (“who is, in my opinion 
and Bethe’s, quite unsuited for this responsibility”) could be 
relieved of his role in the implosion program and replaced by 
Peierls. But even now, and despite the tone of his letter to Groves, 
Oppenheimer did not completely fall out with Teller. On the 
contrary, he actively encouraged him to devote his energies to 
the Super and even—at a time when he and the entire laboratory 
were stretched to the limit—made time to see him for an hour’s 


discussion every week. 

Peierls came to Los Alamos to take up leadership of the 
implosion theory group on June 3, 1944. Soon afterward 
Oppenheimer gave a party for Lord Cherwell, Churchill’s 
scientific advisor, but somehow forgot to invite Peierls. When he 
came to Peierls’s office the next day to offer abject apologies for 
this unintended slight, Oppenheimer told him: “There is an 
element of comfort in this situation: it might have happened with 
Edward Teller.” 

Shortly before Peierls’s arrival, a major breakthrough in the 
theory of implosion was made by another member of the British 
mission, James Tuck, who had worked previously on armor- 
piercing shells. Drawing on that work, he came up with a means 
of solving the problem of creating the smooth, symmetrical, 
inward-moving spherical shock wave that implosion required, 
which had, in practice, until this point proved impossible to 
create. The best one could do was simulate such a spherical shock 
wave by placing jets of explosive energy in a_ spherical 
arrangement. This, however, created a series of diverging and 
converging shock waves, the physics and mathematics of which 
were at this time only imperfectly understood. What Tuck, 
building on von Neumann’s suggestion of shaped charges, 
envisaged was a way of arranging the explosive charges so that 
the waves of energy produced by them converged. The 
arrangement Tuck had in mind called for a series of “lenses,” 
analogous to optical lenses. Just as an optical lens forces waves of 
light to converge on a target, so Tuck’s lenses would force waves 
of explosive energy to converge, thus increasing their force and 
enabling the “fast implosion” envisaged by von Neumann to be 
realized. Such an arrangement was, however, as David Hawkins 
puts it in his official history of Los Alamos, “a completely untried 
and undeveloped method, which no one wished to employ unless 
it became absolutely necessary to do so.” After Segré’s shattering 
news about spontaneous fission in reactor plutonium, it looked as 
if it might indeed be necessary to employ this untried method. 
The laboratory needed to take risks. After all, in the summer of 
1944, a mere twelve months before the deadline for producing 
the bomb, there was, as Hawkins puts it, “not a_ single 
experimental result that gave good reason to believe that a 
plutonium bomb could be made at all.” 


In August 1944, then, the entire laboratory was reorganized to 
reflect the central importance of the effort to solve the many 
problems that stood in the way of making an implosion bomb. 
Stanislaw (“Stan”) Ulam, the Polish mathematician and friend of 
Teller’s who arrived in Los Alamos at the end of 1943, has 
recalled with amusement the “fascination with organizational 
charts” that he found at Los Alamos: 


At meetings, theoretical talks were interesting enough, but 
whenever an organizational chart was displayed, I could feel 
the whole audience come to life with pleasure at seeing 
something concrete and definite (“Who is responsible to 
whom,” etc.). 


As a result of the August 1944 reorganization, those charts 
became more complicated as divisions multiplied, new groups 
were added and hundreds more men _ were recruited. 
Oppenheimer calculated that, if the laboratory were to solve the 
problems of implosion in time to have a plutonium bomb ready 
for the summer of 1945, he would need an additional 600 men. 
These, of course, would not all have to be distinguished 
physicists, chemists or ballistics experts. What was needed was 
relatively unskilled labor to carry out the experiments and make 
the observations and measurements that were required to solve 
the many scientific problems that remained unsolved. Why did 
Oppenheimer need so many men? The answer lies in the sheer 
number of questions raised by implosion. For example, in order to 
understand the nature of implosion itself, and to know what was 
needed to achieve the smooth symmetrical shock wave it 
required, literally thousands of experiments—analogous to, but 
far more sophisticated than, those conducted by Neddermeyer 
and his team on stove pipes—needed to be carried out. 

In September 1944, the theoretician Robert Christy suggested 
that the metal to be imploded should be a solid ball, rather than 
the hollow sphere envisaged by Neddermeyer. After this had been 
accepted, the problem of implosion was tackled by experiment 
after experiment in which the implosion of a solid sphere of 
metal, usually cadmium, was attempted and measurements taken 
to see how close each successive attempt had come to producing 
that elusive uniform, symmetrical shock wave. The methods used 


to make these measurements were many and varied, and some 
were invented at Los Alamos. For example, Robert Serber came 
up with a novel idea that became the basis of what was called the 
“RaLa method.” The idea was to put a radioactive substance—the 
one chosen was an isotope of lanthanum (La-140), called 
Radiolanthanum (hence “RaLa”)—at the center of the metal 
sphere being imploded. The gamma rays emitted by this 
radioactive source would be absorbed by the metal in proportion 
to its density, so the density changes in the metal as it was 
imploded could be measured by recording the intensity of the 
gamma radiation before, during and after the detonation. In this 
way, they could see how close they were to achieving a uniform, 
symmetrical shock wave. Other methods of measuring what 
happens when a lump of metal is imploded were devised using X- 
rays and photographs. 

In addition to these meticulous experiments and observations 
concerned with the nature of implosion, much experimental work 
had to be carried out in order to design and manufacture the 
shaped explosive charges, providing answers to such questions as: 
what material should the explosive charge be made of? how, 
exactly, should it be shaped? and how should the shaped charges, 
the “lenses,” be arranged around the plutonium core? As a result 
of these experiments, a design was arrived at that was far more 
complex than the gun-assembly bomb originally planned. The 
weapon that was now envisaged looked like an enormous 
football, at the center of which was a 3%-inch solid sphere of 
plutonium with a hole for the initiator, around which was a 
uranium tamper with a diameter of nine inches, in turn 
surrounded by thirty-two explosive charges, all carefully shaped 
into “lenses,” concentrating the shock wave at the center of the 
sphere. In all, “Fat Man” would be fifty-four inches wide and 
weigh nearly 5,500 pounds. 

This design—which, astonishingly, was arrived at in February 
1945, just six months after the major reorganization—was the 
outcome of observing innumerable detonations, requiring tens of 
thousands of charges. To supply these, the laboratory had its own 
workshop, which became in effect a factory, employing dozens of 
young men. These men, like most of the 600 extra people that 
Oppenheimer had estimated he needed, were “SEDs,” members of 
the U.S. Army’s Special Engineering Detachment. “They were kids 


mostly,” Kistiakowsky said, “with partial college education, but 
there were even a few Ph.D.s.” The SEDs had a difficult time at 
Los Alamos, where they worked the long hours of the scientists, 
while keeping up the disciplined and tightly structured life of 
soldiers. They lived not in the kind of houses or apartments 
provided for the scientists, but in crowded barracks, within which 
they had just a tiny space of their own. “We had reveille at six,” 
one of them recalled, “we had drill and exercises at six-thirty and 
the fatigues until eight a.m.—and sometimes, working on 
something in the workshops, we had not gotten to bed until two 
or three in the morning.” 

Of course, with such a massive influx of personnel, it was 
inevitable that standards of security would decline. It was clearly 
impossible to watch the movements of every one of the hundreds 
of people who came to Los Alamos in the summer of 1944, and in 
any case it seems not to have occurred to Groves, de Silva or 
Lansdale that among the young men of the Special Engineering 
Detachment there might be some who would be willing to spy for 
the Soviet Union. And yet there was at least one such person, 
David Greenglass, whose willingness to pass information to the 
Soviets, though it may not have been very significant in 
increasing Soviet knowledge of the bomb, would turn out to have 
drastic consequences for his sister and her husband, Ethel and 
Julius Rosenberg. 

Greenglass had studied mechanical engineering before, at the 
age of twenty-one, being inducted into the U.S. Army in 1943. He 
and his wife, Ruth, were at that time both members of the 
Communist Party. After working for a while at Oak Ridge, 
Greenglass was sent to Los Alamos in August 1944, as part of the 
Special Engineering Detachment. During his time at Oak Ridge, 
and for the first three months of working at Los Alamos, 
Greenglass did not know that he was working on the atomic- 
bomb project. At Los Alamos he was employed in the workshop 
making molds for the shaped explosives that were needed for the 
implosion experiments. He had no idea what these “lenses” were 
for, and no understanding of the implosion process of which they 
were such an essential part. 

Greenglass learned that he was working on the atomic-bomb 
project in November 1944, when he was told by his wife, Ruth, 
who in turn had been told by the Rosenbergs. At the Rosenbergs’ 


expense, Ruth (who lived in New York) had gone to New Mexico 
to visit her husband, whom she had not seen since his transfer to 
Los Alamos. They spent a few days together in Albuquerque, 
where Ruth relayed the information to Greenglass. The 
Rosenbergs had been communists since the early 1930s, and 
Julius Rosenberg was the hub of a spy network that sought to 
gather information about secret military and industrial projects. 
Before she left New York, the Rosenbergs gave Ruth Greenglass a 
list of questions to ask her husband about the layout and the 
personnel at Los Alamos. 

A few months later, in January 1945, David Greenglass came to 
New York on leave and provided the Rosenbergs with a 
description and a drawing of the lens molds he was making. He 
also, then or later, provided the Rosenbergs with a rough, and 
presumably not very useful, drawing of the “Fat Man” bomb. 
After Greenglass’s return to Los Alamos, Julius Rosenberg 
arranged for him to meet a Soviet contact periodically to pass on 
anything else he had managed to find out. That contact was none 
other than Harry Gold, the man Fuchs had been meeting to share 
information about gaseous diffusion. Indeed, it would be via the 
connections with Fuchs and Gold that Greenglass, and therefore 
the Rosenbergs, were exposed as spies in 1950. At the 
Rosenbergs’ trial, Greenglass testified against his sister, leading 
her to be executed alongside her husband on June 19, 1953. 
Greenglass himself was sentenced to fifteen years in prison. In 
1960, after serving ten years, he was released and rejoined his 
wife in New York. Nearly forty years later, he told a reporter 
from the New York Times that his testimony against his sister had 
been a lie told in order to protect his wife, who was never 
charged in connection with the affair. 

The Greenglass affair clearly upset John Lansdale. Speaking in 
1954, at Oppenheimer’s security hearing, he referred twice to 
“the inexcusable Greenglass case.” The word “inexcusable” seems 
to have been chosen by Lansdale to refer not to Greenglass’s 
behavior (though no doubt he would have thought it applicable 
to that), but to his own lapse in failing to catch Greenglass. “He is 
certainly an example of one we missed,” he remarked ruefully. 
When he was asked to confirm that Oppenheimer had no 
responsibility for Greenglass “in any way, shape or form,” 
Lansdale replied: “I don’t believe so. I will take full responsibility 


for that one. That was the outstanding blunder of the century.” 

Of course, from a security point of view, the much more serious 
espionage of Klaus Fuchs was a far bigger blunder, but in that 
case Lansdale could perhaps take some comfort from the fact that 
it was a blunder committed by the British security services rather 
than his own. Unknown to Lansdale, however, there had been at 
least one other “blunder” committed by his own team, one that 
led to the Soviets acquiring much more useful information than 
they ever got from David Greenglass. Again it involved a young 
man brought to Los Alamos in 1944, though this time a fully 
fledged scientist rather than a relatively uninformed member 
of SED. 

The man in question was Theodore Hall. Known as “Ted Hall” 
for most of his life, he was the youngest child of a Russian Jewish 
family, the Holtzbergs, from New York. The change of name came 
when he was eleven, when his older brother, Ed, discovered that 
a Jewish name was a barrier to employment. A precociously 
brilliant boy, Ted won a place to study at the prestigious 
Townsend Harris High School. Already he had dreams of being a 
physicist. When his mother asked what he would like for his 
twelfth birthday, he told her he wanted The Mysterious Universe 
by James Jeans. In 1942, just before his seventeenth birthday, 
Hall, who had already spent two years at Queens College, 
transferred to Harvard. There his imagination was fired by a 
course on “Kinetic Theory and Statistical Mechanics,” given by 
Oppenheimer’s ex-student and collaborator Wendell Furry. The 
following year, still only eighteen, Hall took a postgraduate class 
on quantum mechanics and attracted the attention of its 
convenor, John H. van Vleck, one of the “luminaries” who had 
taken part in the pre-Los Alamos seminars at Berkeley in the 
summer of 1942. When Bush told van Vleck and Edwin Kemble, 
who was still at Harvard, that more bright physicists were needed 
for Los Alamos, Hall was one of those selected, becoming, in the 
New Year of 1944, the youngest scientist to work on the bomb 
project. 

At first, Hall was assigned to work under Bruno Benedetto 
Rossi, measuring fission cross-sections using fast neutrons on the 
U-235 that was beginning to arrive from Oak Ridge. While he was 
working on this, in June 1944, Hall graduated in absentia from 
Harvard. Soon afterward he was promoted to a new position as 


leader of a team making and testing equipment for the RaLa 
experiments. In particular, Hall and his team were making the 
ionization chambers that would detect the gamma rays emitted 
from the radioactive lanthanum. “We were turning out ionization 
chambers like sausages,” Hall later said. “It made me feel funny 
to blow up all those ionization chambers we had built so 
carefully. We would just destroy them and build some more.” 

In October 1944, soon after his nineteenth birthday, Hall was 
given two weeks’ leave, which he spent in New York. While there, 
he decided to tell the Soviet Union about the work being done at 
Los Alamos. He was not recruited, nor was he bribed. His 
decision was made quite unilaterally and independently. When he 
tried to explain it later in life, he said: “It seemed to me that an 
American monopoly was dangerous and should be prevented.” 
Hall’s method of contacting the Soviets was remarkable for its 
lack of guile. He simply walked into the offices of Amtorg, the 
Soviet import-export company, and told the first person he saw 
there, a man stacking boxes, that he had secret information he 
would like to share. The man put him in touch with Sergei 
Kurnakov, a writer and journalist who was also a low-ranking 
NKVD officer. When Hall met Kurnakov, he handed him a file 
that he had written containing a report on the activities at Los 
Alamos, which was subsequently sent to Moscow. By the time he 
returned to Los Alamos, Hall was officially a Soviet agent, with 
his own code-name: Mlad, an old Slavic word for “young.” 

After his return to Los Alamos, Hall took part in several crucial 
RaLa experiments that culminated in a set of three, conducted in 
February 1945, which finally produced the smooth shock wave 
they had been looking for. The crucial step that made this 
possible was the invention by Luis Alvarez of an electric 
detonator that enabled all the shaped explosives to be detonated 
at exactly the same time. After repeating the successful 
experiment on February 24, the design for “Fat Man” was settled. 
“Now we have our bomb,” Oppenheimer was heard to exclaim. 

Almost as soon as the design was complete, Soviet agents 
received details of it. On February 16, 1945, Klaus Fuchs, who 
had been out of contact with the Soviets since his move from 
New York to Los Alamos in August 1944, met Harry Gold in 
Boston, where Fuchs’s sister lived. The information Fuchs was 
able to hand Gold was wide-ranging, detailed and accurate; it 


covered the design of the bomb, the metallurgy of plutonium, 
Segre’s results on spontaneous fission in plutonium and much 
more. However, because of the convoluted logistics of espionage, 
Fuchs’s report did not reach Moscow until April 1945, by which 
time the Soviets already had a report on the two types of bomb 
being developed at Los Alamos, less detailed than Fuchs’s, but no 
less accurate. The source of this information was almost certainly 
“Mad,” with some additional details from David Greenglass. 

When Lansdale spoke in 1954 of the Greenglass case as the 
“blunder of the century,” he would not have known anything 
about Hall’s more serious espionage. The FBI, on the other hand, 
knew about Hall from the same source that they knew about 
Fuchs, Gold and Greenglass: the Venona transcripts. Unlike 
Fuchs, Gold and Greenglass, however, Hall, when he was 
interviewed by the FBI, made no confession; he simply denied 
everything. Faced with the choice of attempting to prosecute Hall 
on the basis of Venona evidence—and therefore revealing to the 
outside world the existence of that evidence—or of keeping 
Venona a secret at the expense of letting Hall go free, the FBI 
chose not to prosecute. Hall was therefore able to pursue a 
successful career as a scientist, ending up as the director of a 
biological laboratory in Cambridge, England, where he lived from 
1962 until his death from cancer in 1999. Toward the end of his 
life, when his role in Soviet espionage became widely known 
through the publication of the Venona transcripts, Hall made an 
unrepentant statement, declaring that “in essence, from the 
perspective of my 71 years, I still think that brash youth [his 
earlier self] had the right end of the stick. I am no longer that 
person; but I am by no means ashamed of him.” 

What Fuchs and Hall handed over to the Soviets in the spring 
of 1945—the design of the plutonium implosion bomb—was 
arguably Oppenheimer’s greatest achievement. Not that he 
himself had designed it, but it was he who had planned and 
coordinated the remarkable effort required to produce the design; 
he who had led weekly meetings of scientists to bring problems 
out into the open; he who had been able to discuss the 
mathematics of implosion with Peierls, the merits of various 
explosive materials with Kistiakowsky, the implications of RaLa 
experiments with Rossi, the invention of electric detonators with 
Alvarez, and to oversee dozens of groups of scientists employing 


hundreds of SEDs on thousands of experiments. It was the birth of 
what is known today as “Big Science.” 

The effort involved in leading and coordinating a scientific 
project on such an unprecedented scale was having a physically 
observable effect on Oppenheimer. In 1944, he was still only 
forty, but he looked at least ten years older. He had always been 
slender, but, by the end of the year, his weight had dropped to 
115 pounds and he looked gaunt. He had been a heavy smoker 
for years, but now he was never without a cigarette or a pipe and 
his persistent, nasty cough got worse. He also drank too much, 
though in this respect he was outdone by Kitty, upon whom the 
strain seemed, if anything, to take an even greater toll. 

As the wife of the director, Kitty was in a perfect position to be 
Los Alamos’s leading hostess, at the very center of its social life. 
This was, however, a role she had absolutely no interest in filling. 
She and Oppenheimer gave parties, but they were infrequent and 
rather joyless affairs. While Deak Parsons’s wife, Martha, moved 
to fill the vacant position of social hub, Kitty became an 
increasingly isolated figure. “She didn’t get along very well with 
women,” remarked Priscilla Duffield, Oppenheimer’s secretary, 
and her imperious manner and sharp tongue also alienated many 
men. Kitty was, Duffield said, “one of the few people I’ve ever 
heard men—and very nice men—call a bitch... She could be 
really mean. She could also cause trouble for you, so you had to 
be very careful.” 

It is a view echoed by many, including Phil Morrison’s wife, 
Emily, who recalled that, though Kitty could be “very 
bewitching,” she was certainly “someone to be wary of.” Kitty 
would, Emily Morrison later said, adopt and reject people 
apparently at random, so that even those she treated well felt 
insecure in her friendship, watching her be mean to others and 
wondering whether they would be next to feel her spite. Of the 
people she suddenly turned on, one of the most difficult for 
Oppenheimer was Charlotte Serber, who, for some reason, Kitty 
suddenly stopped having anything to do with. “Everybody was 
aware of it, and it was very hurtful,” remembered Shirley Barnett, 
the wife of the Oppenheimers’ pediatrician. “But Kitty was 
capable of that.” Barnett herself was adopted by Kitty as a 
companion, because, she thought, “I was young and _ less 
threatening than the others.” Kitty would take her shopping to 


Santa Fe or Albuquerque. “She always had a bottle of something 
with her when she was driving, and you could always tell when 
she was getting drunk because she would talk more freely.” “She 
was fascinating,” Barnett concluded, “but not very nice.” 

Jackie Oppenheimer, who came to Los Alamos in early 1945, 
when Frank was transferred there from Oak Ridge, recalled her 
own unhappy experiences of Kitty and her drinking: 


It was known that we didn’t get on well together and she 
seemed determined that we should be seen together. On one 
occasion she asked me to cocktails—this was four o’clock in 
the afternoon. When I arrived, there was Kitty and just four or 
five other women—drinking companions—and we just sat 
there with very little conversation—drinking. It was awful and 
I never went again. 


Making Kitty’s life more difficult, and driving her deeper into 
alcoholism, was the birth of her daughter, Katherine. “Toni,” as 
she would be known throughout her life, was born on December 
7, 1944, right in the middle of the most intense period of 
Oppenheimer’s time as director. This was when the search for a 
workable implosion design was at its most feverish, and before it 
was known that it would end successfully. It was when 
Oppenheimer was at his busiest and most anxious, and, though 
the baby was publicly heralded as a source of great delight and 
an endless stream of visitors came to the hospital especially to see 
her and to share (what was assumed to be) the Oppenheimers’ 
joy, the truth was, at that point in their lives, the responsibility of 
looking after a baby was the very last thing either Kitty or Robert 
Oppenheimer wanted. 

Jackie Oppenheimer was shocked when she arrived at Los 
Alamos to discover that, after Toni’s birth, Kitty “would go off on 
a shopping trip for days to Albuquerque or even to the West 
Coast and leave the children in the hands of a maid.” Even more 
shocking to some was the fact that in April 1945, when Toni was 
just four months old, Kitty left Los Alamos for Pittsburgh, taking 
Peter, now nearly four years old, with her, but leaving baby Toni 
in the hands of a friend called Pat Sherr, who had recently had a 
miscarriage. She would not return for three and a half months, 
during which time Oppenheimer, fantastically busy, showed little 


inclination to spend much time with his daughter. “It was all very 
strange,” Sherr later said. “He would come and sit and chat with 
me, but he wouldn’t ask to see the baby.” Then, one day, shortly 
before Kitty’s return, Oppenheimer asked Sherr if she would like 
to adopt Toni. “Of course not,” Sherr replied. Why would he even 
ask such a thing? “Because,” said Oppenheimer, “I can’t love 
her.” 

Poor little Toni arrived at a bad time, her first six months 
coinciding with the preparations for perhaps the most momentous 
scientific experiment in history: the test of the implosion bomb. 
The decision to conduct a full-scale test of an implosion bomb 
had been made back in March 1944, a month or so before it was 
finally established that implosion was the only hope for a 
plutonium bomb. Implosion was such a complicated and as yet 
little-understood process that it was felt such a test would be 
necessary. Responsibility for organizing the test was given to E-9, 
a specially created group of the Engineering Division, which after 
the massive reorganization of the late summer of 1944 became 
“X-2 Development, Engineering, Tests,” part of Kistiakowsky’s 
Explosives Division. The group leader was Kenneth Bainbridge. 

In March 1945, X-2 was dissolved and Bainbridge was put in 
charge of what by then had acquired the name “Trinity Project.” 
When Oppenheimer was asked many years later about the name 
“Trinity,” he gave characteristically evasive answers. In 1962, 
Groves himself asked Oppenheimer about it, suggesting that 
perhaps the name was chosen because it would be inconspicuous 
in an area where a lot of rivers and peaks were called “Trinity.” 
In his reply, Oppenheimer rejected that suggestion. “Why I chose 
the name,” he told Groves, “is not clear, but I know what 
thoughts were in my mind. There is a poem of John Donne,5s 
written just before his death, which I know and love. From it a 
quotation”: 


As West and East 
In all flat Maps—and I am one—are one 
So death doth touch the Resurrection. 


“That still does not make a Trinity,” Oppenheimer acknowledged, 
“but in another, better known devotional poemss Donne opens, 
‘Batter my heart, three person’d God’; beyond this, I have no 


clues whatever.” 

These allusions to Donne suggest that Oppenheimer chose the 
name in memory of Jean Tatlock, who loved Donne’s poetry, but 
it also seems possible that the name occurred to Oppenheimer in 
memory of the “pygmy triumvirate,” the “great troika” of which 
he had been a part during his first trip to New Mexico. After all, 
the site chosen for the Trinity test, the Jornada del Muerto region 
northwest of Alamogordo, was not very far from areas of New 
Mexico—Roswell and Albuquerque, in particular—associated 
with that group, especially with Paul Horgan, the man who had 
coined those names. 

The decision to use the Jornada del Muerto was made in 
September 1944, after which the U.S. Army took steps to secure 
an area occupying more than 400 square miles for the use of the 
test. On this site a base camp was constructed, which was ready 
by the end of December 1944. This then became home to a 
detachment of military police led by Lieutenant H. C. Bush. 

With the successful conclusion of the implosion research in 
February 1945, Groves announced that the design of “Fat Man” 
was frozen. That job was finished. The following month, 
Oppenheimer created a new division, the Trinity Project Division, 
made up chiefly of scientists from the Research Division, which 
would have responsibility for the coming test in Jornada del 
Muerto. The division leader was Kenneth Bainbridge. Despite all 
the work that had been done on the metallurgy of plutonium, the 
energy release of fission using fast neutrons, and so on, there was 
little consensus on exactly how big the blast would be when the 
Fat Man bomb went off. Some were still skeptical that it would 
work at all, while among those who expected some kind of 
explosion the estimates of the energy yield, in terms of equivalent 
amounts of TNT, varied from 200 to 10,000 tons. 

As Bainbridge was beginning the preparations for the Trinity 
test, the world outside Los Alamos was changing quickly and 
drastically. Hitler’s Third Reich was collapsing rapidly, under 
assault from the east by the Russians, from the west by the Allies, 
and from the air by the most relentless and deadly bombing 
campaign the world had ever seen. In February 1945 the historic 
city of Dresden was reduced to a smoking ruin when nearly 4,000 
tons of high-explosive bombs and incendiary devices were 
dropped on it by more than 1,000 British and American heavy 


bombers. About 25,000 people were killed and more or less the 
entire city was destroyed. Berlin, too, came under heavy 
bombardment, and by April Russian tanks were approaching the 
city. 

On April 12, 1945, on the brink of victory over the Germans, 
President Roosevelt suddenly died of a brain hemorrhage. At Los 
Alamos, three days later, a memorial service was held in a 
cinema, at which Oppenheimer, as Philip Morrison later put it, 
“spoke very quietly for two or three minutes out of his heart and 
ours.” The memorial address that Oppenheimer gave on that 
occasion has subsequently been published, revealing its 
eloquence to be tinged with a slightly histrionic note that was 
perhaps in keeping with the mood of his audience. “We have 
been living through years of great evil,” Oppenheimer said, “and 
of great terror.” 


Roosevelt has been our President, our Commander-in-Chief 
and, in an old-fashioned and unperverted sense, our leader. All 
over the world men have looked to him for guidance, and have 
seen symbolized in him their hope that the evils of this time 
would not be repeated; that the terrible sacrifices which have 
been made, and those that are still to be made, would lead to a 
world more fit for human habitation. It is in such times of evil 
that men recognize their helplessness and their profound 
dependence. One is reminded of medieval days, when the 
death of a good and wise and just king plunged his country 
into despair and mourning. 


He ended with reflections on a quotation from the Bhagavad 
Gita: “Man is a creature whose substance is faith. What his faith 
is, he is.” 


The faith of Roosevelt is one that is shared by millions of men 
and women in every country of the world. For this reason it is 
possible to maintain the hope, for this reason it is right that we 
should dedicate ourselves to the hope that his good works will 
not have ended with his death. 


Just over two weeks after Roosevelt’s death, Hitler too was 
dead, having shot himself in his bunker under Berlin on finally 
accepting that the war was lost. A week later, on May 8, 1945, 


the Germans offered their unconditional surrender. 

At Los Alamos, the defeat of Germany did not in any way 
diminish the sense of urgency with which the newly established 
Trinity Project Division set about its task of organizing the test of 
the plutonium bomb. Before attempting the full test, it was 
decided that a kind of dress rehearsal should be conducted, using 
100 tons of TNT. The point of this was to calibrate and test the 
equipment that would be used for the real thing. This rehearsal 
took place on the morning of May 7, 1945. The TNT, stacked on a 
platform on top of a 20-foot tower, was exploded and 
measurements taken of the blast effect, the shock waves and the 
damage to equipment. 

By this time, it was clear to everybody—as it had long been 
clear to Groves, if not to Oppenheimer—that, if the bomb was 
going to be used, it would be used against the Japanese. Already 
B-29 bombers had inflicted on Japan a bombing campaign even 
more intense and more deadly than that unleashed upon 
Germany, with the cities of Tokyo, Nagoya, Osaka and Kobe 
bearing the brunt of the attacks. The firebombing of Tokyo on 
March 9 and 10, during which nearly 2,000 tons of incendiary 
bombs were dropped, setting large parts of the city ablaze and 
killing around 100,000 people, was at the time the most 
destructive air raid ever witnessed. 

Yet, however deadly the attacks, they seemed to produce little 
diminution in the will to fight among the Japanese people, and it 
seemed clear that, if Japan were to be defeated, it would have to 
be, like Germany, invaded by an enormous land army. In his 
autobiography, Now It Can Be Told, Groves draws attention to the 
plans drawn up by the U.S. military during 1945 for an invasion 
of Japan, and the potentially colossal U.S. casualties those plans 
predicted. Back in the summer of 1944, the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
had adopted a strategy for the invasion of Japan that envisaged 
an assault on Kyushu, Japan’s southernmost island, on October 1, 
1945, with the final push into Tokyo taking place three months 
later. This basic plan was confirmed as Allied strategy in April 
1945, when it was estimated that thirty-six divisions—more than 
1.5 million men—would be required, and, Groves adds darkly, “it 
was recognized that casualties would be heavy.” On May 25, 
1945, recalibrated orders were given to the heads of the three 
armed forces to prepare the invasion of Kyushu, starting that 


November. 

Meanwhile, Groves was hoping that the Manhattan Project 
would make such an invasion unnecessary, thereby providing an 
adequate response to the question Groves feared more than any 
other: what had the American people got from the $2 billion they 
had spent on the development of the atomic bomb? For Groves, 
the question that needed to be addressed was not whether to drop 
the bomb on Japan, but on which Japanese city or cities it should 
be dropped. On May 10 and 11, Oppenheimer hosted at Los 
Alamos meetings of the newly constituted Target Committee, 
which established criteria for the selection of targets. The minutes 
of these meetings have now been published and provide a 
chillingly matter-of-fact record of the way those present 
contemplated, with apparent calm, the deaths of tens of 
thousands of people and the destruction of sites of great historic 
and religious importance. The four targets recommended by the 
meeting were, in order: 1. Kyoto, 2. Hiroshima, 3. Yokohama and 
4. Kokura Arsenal. The first two of these were rated AA. Of the 
first, the minutes comment: “From the psychological point of 
view there is the advantage that Kyoto is an intellectual center 
for Japan and the people there are more apt to appreciate the 
significance of such a weapon as the gadget.” Hiroshima, it is 
remarked, “is a good radar target and it is such a size that a large 
part of the city could be extensively damaged.” “There are 
adjacent hills which are likely to produce a focusing effect which 
would considerably increase the blast damage.” The influence of 
Bohr is discernible when, under the heading of “Psychological 
Factors in Target Selection,” it is noted that, as well as “obtaining 
the greatest psychological effect against Japan,” they should also 
aim at “making the initial use sufficiently spectacular for the 
importance of the weapon to be internationally recognized when 
publicity on it is released.” 

Oppenheimer was also appointed, together with Fermi, 
Lawrence and Arthur Compton, as a member of the Scientific 
Advisory Panel to the War Department’s Interim Committee, 
which had the task of planning postwar atomic policy. At a 
meeting of this committee on May 31, 1945, the minutes reveal 
that the committee’s chairman, Secretary of War Henry L. 
Stimson, “expressed the view, a view shared by General Marshall, 
that this project should not be considered simply in terms of 


military weapons, but as a new relationship of man to the 
universe.” What Stimson meant by this, apparently, was that: 


This discovery might be compared to the discoveries of the 
Copernican theory and of the laws of gravity, but far more 
important than these in its effect on the lives of men. While the 
advances in the field to date had been fostered by the needs of 
war, it was important to realize that the implications of the 
project went far beyond the needs of the present war. It must 
be controlled if possible to make it an assurance of peace 
rather than a menace to civilization. 


Later in the meeting this theme was picked up by 
Oppenheimer, who took the opportunity to present Bohr’s vision 
of openness. He is recorded as arguing: 


It might be wise for the United States to offer to the world free 
interchange of information with particular emphasis on the 
development of peace-time uses. The basic goal of all 
endeavors in the field should be the enlargement of human 
welfare. If we were to offer to exchange information before the 
bomb was actually used, our moral position would be greatly 
strengthened. 


The tone of the meeting became markedly less high-minded 
during the discussion of the “effect of the bombing on the 
Japanese and their will to fight.” Oppenheimer stressed that in 
this connection “several strikes would be feasible,” and that “the 
visual effect of an atomic bombing would be tremendous. It 
would be accompanied by a brilliant luminescence which would 
rise to a height of 10,000 to 20,000 feet. The neutron effect of the 
explosion would be dangerous to life for a radius of at least two- 
thirds of a mile.” As for the number of deaths that such an 
explosion might cause, Oppenheimer offered the (extremely 
conservative, as it turned out) figure of 20,000, based, he 
reported, on the assumption that the occupants of the bombed 
city would seek shelter when the air raid began and that most of 
them would be under shelter by the time the bomb went off.57 

“After much discussion concerning various types of targets and 
the effects to be produced,” the minutes state, Stimson expressed 
the view that “we could not give the Japanese any warning; that 


we could not concentrate on a civilian area; but that we should 
seek to make a profound psychological impression on as many of 
the inhabitants as possible.” The “most desirable target,” in 
Stimson’s view, “would be a vital war plant employing a large 
number of workers and closely surrounded by workers’ houses.” 
Evidently to Groves’s chagrin, Stimson ruled out Kyoto as a 
target city, on the grounds that, as Groves puts it in his 
autobiography, it was “the ancient capital of Japan, a historical 
city and one that was of great religious significance to the 
Japanese.” Stimson, Groves reports, had visited Kyoto when he 
was Governor General of the Philippines “and had been very 
much impressed by its ancient culture.” “On the other hand,” 
writes Groves, “I particularly wanted Kyoto as a_ target 
because ... it was large enough in area for us to gain complete 
knowledge of the effects of an atomic bomb. Hiroshima was not 
nearly so satisfactory in this respect. I also felt quite strongly, as 
had other members of the Target Committee, that Kyoto was one 
of the most important military targets in Japan.” Groves did not 
let the matter drop and repeatedly urged the choice of Kyoto as 
the first target of an atomic bomb right up until the Potsdam 
Conference in July, at which Stalin, Churchill and the new 
President, Harry S. Truman, decided the future of Europe. From 
Potsdam, Stimson sent a telegram saying that he had discussed 
the matter with President Truman, who agreed with him. “There 
was,” Groves says, “no further talk about Kyoto after that.” 
Though Stimson thus saved Kyoto and urged the case for a 
military rather than a civilian target, the assumption that the 
bomb would be used against the Japanese was not challenged by 
anybody on the committee. Nor was there much dissent from this 
assumption among the scientists at Los Alamos. There was, of 
course, some discussion of the political and moral questions 
surrounding their work, especially after it became clear that 
Germany did not have a serious atomic-bomb project and then 
that the war against Germany would end in victory without the 
bomb. Oppenheimer, however, rather discouraged such 
discussions. Robert Wilson remembers organizing a public 
meeting at Los Alamos to discuss “The Impact of the Gadget on 
Civilization,” which about twenty people attended, including 
Oppenheimer, who, on this and other occasions, put forward the 
argument he had learned from Bohr: the bomb was such a 


powerful weapon that it had a chance of being the best thing that 
had ever happened to mankind by bringing an end to war itself, 
but it could do this only if its awesome power were made clear to 
everyone and this could, in turn, only be done if it were actually 
used. 

At Los Alamos there was a general acceptance of this argument, 
but not so at the Met Lab in Chicago, where the scientists had, 
throughout the war, been more prepared to be openly at odds 
with Groves and the military. Indeed, at the Interim Committee 
meeting of May 31, 1945, one of the topics for discussion was 
“Handling of Undesirable Scientists,” a heading under which 
Groves, according to the minutes, “stated that the program had 
been plagued since its inception by the presence of certain 
scientists of doubtful discretion and uncertain loyalty.” Not 
coincidently, the next item for discussion was “Chicago Group.” 

Chief among the “undesirable scientists” at Chicago was Leo 
Szilard, whom Groves had wanted to intern as an undesirable 
alien. As the war was coming to an end, as the work of the 
Manhattan Project was nearing completion, and as preparations 
for the Trinity test continued their inexorable path toward the 
demonstration of the power of nuclear fission, Szilard—the man 
who had first envisaged a chain reaction and who had been 
instrumental in the famous letter from Einstein to Roosevelt that 
urged the launching of the atomic-bomb project—began to turn 
his mind to the political and social implications of the bomb. He 
quickly became convinced that the use of the atomic bomb 
against Japan would have extremely grave consequences for 
postwar politics. Before Roosevelt’s death, Szilard had tried to 
alert him to the dangers of a nuclear arms race and the 
consequent importance of international control of atomic bombs, 
putting forward the argument that using the bomb against Japan 
would accelerate the former and jeopardize the latter. Then, after 
Truman was sworn in, Szilard tried to arrange a meeting with 
him to discuss the political issues raised by the bomb. He was 
told instead to meet James Byrnes, the South Carolinian who 
would soon be appointed Secretary of State. The meeting was a 
disaster, with Byrnes dismissing Szilard as someone whose 
“general demeanor and ... desire to participate in policy-making 
made an unfavorable impression on me,” while Szilard came 
away angry, frustrated and depressed at what he saw as Byrnes’s 


inability to understand anything. 

Szilard, however, was not easily deflected and the day before 
the Interim Committee’s meeting of May 31 he traveled to 
Washington to try to persuade Oppenheimer that it would be a 
serious mistake to use the bomb against Japanese cities. “The 
atomic bomb is shit,” Szilard remembers Oppenheimer saying on 
this occasion, “a weapon with no military significance. It will 
make a big bang—a very big bang—but it is not a weapon which 
is useful in war.” Oppenheimer restated his view that the bomb 
should be used against the Japanese, but that the Russians should 
be told about the bomb and its intended use. “Don’t you think,” 
he told Szilard, “that if we tell the Russians what we intend to do 
and then use the bomb in Japan, the Russians will understand 
it?” “They'll understand it only too well,” Szilard replied. 

Prompted by Arthur Compton, who promised to convey the 
opinions of Chicago scientists to the Scientific Panel ahead of the 
next meeting of the Interim Committee in June, Szilard organized 
a committee of like-minded souls, including most notably Glenn 
Seaborg, the discoverer of plutonium, under the chairmanship of 
James Franck, the Nobel laureate, who had been in charge of 
experimental physics at Gottingen during Oppenheimer’s time 
there, to prepare a written account of his views. The result was 
what has become known as the Franck Report, which was sent to 
Henry Stimson on June 12, 1945. In place of the Bohr- 
Oppenheimer vision of an end to war brought about by a 
demonstration of the unprecedentedly deadly power of atomic 
bombs, the authors of the Franck Report urged the importance of 
an “international agreement on total prevention of nuclear war.” 
What they shared with Bohr was the view that the “secret” of the 
bomb was an illusion: other nations could, of course, they 
emphasized, work out how an atomic bomb was made. Where 
they differed from Oppenheimer and his fellow members of the 
Target and the Interim committees was on the question of 
whether it was justified to use the bomb to kill huge numbers of 
Japanese people. What the Franck Report recommended was a 
demonstration before “the eyes of representatives of all the 
United Nations” of the power of the atomic bomb. This could be 
done, they urged, by exploding the bomb “on the desert or a 
barren island,” and then giving Japan an ultimatum to surrender. 
Only if the Japanese refused to surrender should the bomb be 


used against them. 

The main focus of the report, however, was not Japan, but the 
postwar international situation. “Nuclear bombs,” the report 
emphatically reiterated, “cannot possibly remain a ‘secret 
weapon’ at the exclusive disposal of this country for more than a 
few years. The scientific facts on which their construction is 
based are well known to scientists of other countries.” Therefore: 


Unless an effective international control of nuclear explosives 
is instituted, a race for nuclear armaments is certain to ensue 
following the first revelation of our possession of nuclear 
weapons to the world. Within ten years other countries may 
have nuclear bombs, each of which, weighing less than a ton, 
could destroy an urban area of more than ten miles. In the war 
to which such an armaments race is likely to lead, the United 
States, with its agglomeration of population and industry in 
comparatively few metropolitan districts, will be at a 
disadvantage compared to nations whose population and 
industry are scattered over large areas. 


Using the bomb against the Japanese, the report argued, could 
have far-reaching consequences for both the United States and 
the entire world, for: “If the United States were to be the first to 
release this new means of indiscriminate destruction upon 
mankind, she would sacrifice public support throughout the 
world, precipitate the race for armaments, and prejudice the 
possibility of reaching an international agreement on the future 
control of such weapons.” The report was an extraordinarily 
farsighted and persuasive document that demanded to be taken 
seriously, not only because of the intrinsic merits of its 
arguments, but also because it was written by scientists who had 
been central to the development of the atomic bomb from the 
very beginning and who understood, as well as anyone, its 
destructive power. 

The task of formulating an official response to the report was 
delegated by Stimson to the Scientific Panel, who reported back 
to the Interim Committee in a memo dated June 16, 1945. “It is 
clear,” Oppenheimer, Fermi, Lawrence and Compton wrote, “that 
we, as scientific men, have no proprietary rights [and] ... no 
claim to special competence in solving the political, social, and 


military problems which are presented by the advent of atomic 
power.” Nevertheless, they were prepared to weigh up the 
competing views that: (a) a demonstration of the bomb should be 
given in order to induce the surrender of the Japanese; and 
(b) the bomb provided an “opportunity of saving American lives 
by immediate military use.” “We find ourselves,” they reported, 
“closer to the latter views: we can propose no _ technical 
demonstration likely to bring an end to the war; we see no 
acceptable alternative to direct military use.” 

At its meeting of June 21, 1945, therefore, the Interim 
Committee felt able to reaffirm its position that, as a War 
Department memo put it, “the weapon should be used against 
Japan at the earliest opportunity, that it be used without 
warning, and that it be used on a dual target, namely, a military 
installation or war plant surrounded by or adjacent to homes or 
other buildings most susceptible to damage.” The committee also 
recommended that, at the forthcoming “Big Three” meeting in 
Potsdam, “there would be considerable advantage, if the 
opportunity arises ... in having the President advise the Russians 
simply that we are working intensely on this weapon and that, if 
we succeed as we think we will, we plan to use it against the 
enemy.” 

Meanwhile, Szilard, having lost his battle to influence the 
Interim Committee, was hard at work visiting scientists and 
trying to persuade them to put on record their opposition to using 
the bomb against Japanese cities. “I understand that at frequently 
recurring intervals Dr. Szilard is absent from his assigned place of 
work at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago,” Groves wrote 
to Compton on June 29, “and further that he travels extensively 
between Chicago, New York and Washington, DC.” Szilard had 
written a petition to the President, urging him “to rule that the 
United States shall not resort to the use of atomic bombs in this 
war unless the terms which will be imposed upon Japan have 
been made public in detail and Japan knowing these terms has 
refused to surrender,” which he was circulating among the 
scientists involved with the Manhattan Project, trying to get as 
many of them as possible to sign it. 

The petition went first to the Met Lab, then to the scientists at 
Oak Ridge and finally to Los Alamos. In a letter to accompany the 
petition, Szilard wrote: 


However small the chance might be that our petition may 
influence the course of events, I personally feel that it would be 
a matter of importance if a large number of scientists who have 
worked in this field went clearly and unmistakably on record 
as to their opposition on moral grounds to the use of these 
bombs in the present phase of the war. 


“The fact that the people in the United States are unaware of the 
choice which faces us,” he added, “increases our responsibility in 
this matter.” 

One of the people to whom Szilard sent a copy of the petition, 
together with this letter, was Edward Teller, who recalls that it 
“made good sense to me, and I could think of no reason that 
those of us at Los Alamos who agreed shouldn’t sign it.” 

Before signing and circulating the petition, however, Teller 
discussed it with Oppenheimer, who, he later wrote, began 
talking about Franck and Szilard “in a way that, until then, he 
had reserved for General Groves.” Then Oppenheimer asked 
Teller: “What do they know about Japanese psychology? How can 
they judge the way to end the war?” According to Teller’s 
recollection, Oppenheimer’s view was that such decisions were 
best made by “our political leaders” rather than “individuals who 
happened to work on the bomb project.” As a result of this 
conversation, Teller, somewhat to his later regret, refused to sign 
the petition. 

Oppenheimer’s opposition to Szilard’s views carried great 
weight at Los Alamos, a fact of which Szilard himself was well 
aware. “Of course,” he wrote in a letter addressed to some of the 
scientists at Los Alamos whom he knew and liked best, “you will 
find only a few people on your project who are willing to sign 
such a petition. I am sure you will find many boys confused as to 
what kind of thing a moral issue is.” In fact, the petition did not 
have even the limited influence that Szilard hoped for it, since it 
never reached the President. That Szilard’s views were shared by 
many of the scientists working on the project was, however, put 
on record when Compton was asked by Colonel Nichols about the 
views of his colleagues at the Met Lab. An opinion poll was 
conducted, in which about two-thirds of the scientists at the Met 
Lab took part. The poll asked the respondents to say which of five 
statements most accurately represented their view. Nearly half— 


46 percent—chose statement 2, which read: “Give a military 
demonstration in Japan, to be followed by a renewed opportunity 
for surrender before full use of the weapons is employed.” A 
further 26 percent chose statement 3: “Give an experimental 
demonstration in this country, with representatives of Japan 
present; followed by a new opportunity for surrender before full 
use of the weapons is employed.” Thus, 72 percent of those 
polled agreed with Franck and Szilard that the bomb should be 
demonstrated to the Japanese before being used against their 
cities. Only 15 percent chose statement 1: “Use the weapons in 
the manner that is from the military point of view most effective 
in bringing about prompt Japanese surrender at minimum human 
cost to our armed forces.” Nevertheless, by the time this poll was 
conducted,ss this last statement was the one that most accurately 
represented U.S. government policy. 

According to Richard Rhodes’s excellent book The Making of the 
Atomic Bomb, Truman made the decision to drop the bomb on 
Japan on Junel, the day after the Interim Committee had 
recommended at its May 31 meeting “that the bomb be used 
against Japan as soon as possible; that it be used on a war plant 
surrounded by workers’ homes; and that it be used without prior 
warning.” Henry Stimson, as Secretary for War, was ultimately 
responsible for that advice, but he remained deeply troubled by 
the thought of using the bomb to obliterate Japanese cities, while 
preferring that to the drawn-out bloodshed that would result from 
an attempted invasion. What Stimson wanted, ideally, was to 
make it possible for Japan to surrender before it was either 
invaded or bombed into submission. 

On July 2, Stimson prepared a memo to Truman entitled 
“Proposed Program for Japan,” in which he reviewed the 
appalling loss of life that would result from an invasion of Japan 
and suggested that this prospect might be avoided by “giving 
them a warning of what is to come and a definite opportunity to 
capitulate.” After all, he argued, “Japan is not a nation composed 
wholly of mad fanatics of an entirely different mentality from 
ours” and: “We have a national interest in creating, if possible, a 
condition wherein the Japanese nation may live as a peaceful and 
useful member of the future Pacific community.” Because he 
realized it was an extremely important consideration for the 
Japanese, Stimson added that in his opinion, when giving the 


Japanese an opportunity to surrender, “we should add that we do 
not exclude a constitutional monarchy under the present 
dynasty,” which would, he advised the President, “substantially 
add to the chances of acceptance.” By this time, however, 
Stimson’s influence on Truman was much less than that of James 
Byrnes, who was sworn in as Secretary of State on July 3 and was 
inclined to take a much less conciliatory line on Japan. 

During the first few days of July, preparations were under way 
for two events that would coincide and would determine the 
shape of postwar politics: the Trinity test in New Mexico and the 
Potsdam summit in Germany. In the minds of those shaping the 
military and foreign policies of the United States, these two 
events were linked in the sense that, it was hoped, the Trinity test 
would strengthen Truman’s hand in the Potsdam negotiations. 

The date fixed for the Trinity test was July 16, which was, not 
coincidentally, the day that the Potsdam conference began. The 
dress rehearsal conducted two months earlier—the “100-ton test,” 
as it came to be known (though that figure was an 
approximation)—had provided an invaluable opportunity to go 
through the complicated set of procedures that such a test would 
involve. On a wooden platform some 800 yards away from the 
proposed ground zero of the Trinity test, a huge pile of TNT was 
detonated, while the instruments developed by Bainbridge’s team 
measured, among other things, how far the radioactive particles 
were dispersed, the optical and nuclear effects of the blast and, 
most crucially for the coming test, the yield of the blast. This last 
measurement confirmed the accuracy of their gauges, which 
successfully showed that the 108 tons of TNT had exploded with 
the energy of 108 tons of TNT. Now they could be confident that 
they would indeed learn from the Trinity test itself exactly what 
the yield of the Fat Man implosion bomb was. 

Preparations for Trinity were, like almost everything associated 
with the Manhattan Project, conducted on an _ almost 
unimaginably vast scale. This was a scientific experiment like no 
other. Several roads and many houses had to be built especially 
for it. At the end of 1944, the camp at the Trinity site had 
housing for 160 military personnel. On June 1, 1945, there were, 
in addition to the military personnel, 210 scientists and technical 
aides there. By the middle of July this figure had grown to 250, 
and on the eve of the test there were 425 people camped there. 


The gadget itself was assembled on Friday, July 13, a date 
chosen with black humor by Kistiakowsky, in order, he said, to 
bring luck. The time chosen for the test was 4a.m. on the 
morning of July 16. “This hour,” says Groves, “had been fixed 
with the thought that an explosion at that time would attract the 
least attention from casual observers in the surrounding area, 
since everyone would be asleep.” Groves and Oppenheimer 
agreed to meet at lam. that morning. Groves urged 
Oppenheimer to get some sleep beforehand and “set the example 
by doing so myself.” Oppenheimer, however, slept not a wink. 

At the appointed hour, Oppenheimer and Groves met and went 
to the control dugout, “South 10,000,” an observation site named 
after its distance in yards (about five and a half miles) from 
ground zero. From then on, reports Groves: 


Every five or ten minutes, Oppenheimer and I would leave the 
dugout and go outside and discuss the weather. I was devoting 
myself during this period to shielding Oppenheimer from the 
excitement swirling around us, so that he could consider the 
situation as calmly as possible, for the decisions to be taken 
had to be governed largely by his appraisal of the technical 
factors involved. 


Because of bad weather, the test was delayed until 5:30 a.m. 
With twenty minutes to go, Samuel Allison started the countdown 
over a loudspeaker. At 5:25 a.m., to indicate that there were just 
five minutes to go, a rocket was fired into the air; another was 
fired at 5:29 to say that there was just one minute left. To 
everybody there, it felt like an awfully long minute. “I never 
realized seconds could be so long,” James Conant whispered to 
Groves. Everyone else was silent. 

Then, finally, at precisely 5:29 and 45 seconds, those present 
witnessed the world’s first atomic explosion. “My first 
impression,” Groves recalled, “was one of tremendous light, and 
then, as I turned, I saw the now familiar fireball.” He had 
planned, after the test, on having discussions with Oppenheimer 
on some important points regarding the bomb, but: 


These plans proved utterly impracticable, for no one who had 
witnessed the test was in a frame of mind to discuss anything. 


The reaction was simply too great. It was not only that we had 
achieved success with the bomb; but that everyone—scientists, 
military officers, and engineers—realized that we had been 
personal participants in, and eyewitnesses to, a major 
milestone in the world’s history and had a_ sobering 
appreciation of what the results of our work would be. 


Oppenheimer’s recollections of Trinity, filmed for a television 
documentary in 1965, have provided what remains his most 
famous utterance—indeed, one of the most famous utterances of 
the twentieth century. “We knew the world would not be the 
same,” he said. 


A few people laughed, a few people cried. Most people were 
silent. I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture, the 
Bhagavad Gita: Vishnu is trying to persuade the prince that he 
should do his duty, and to impress him, takes on his multi- 
armed form and says: “Now I am become death, the destroyer 
of worlds.” I suppose we all thought that one way or another. 


Because of its use in this context by Oppenheimer, “Now I am 
become death, the destroyer of worlds” has become one of the 
best-known lines from the Bhagavad Gita. Those who go looking 
for them, however, often fail to find them, since in most English 
translations of the text they do not appear. The Sanskrit word 
that Oppenheimer translates as “death” is more usually rendered 
as “time,” so that, for example, in the Penguin Classics edition, 
the line is given as: “I am all-powerful Time, which destroys all 
things.” In the famous translation by the nineteenth-century poet 
Edwin Arnold it appears as: “Thou seest Me as Time, who kills, 
Time who brings all to doom, The Slayer Time, Ancient of Days, 
come hither to consume,” which conveys an image diametrically 
opposed to that of a sudden release of deadly power. 
Oppenheimer, however, was following the example of his 
Sanskrit teacher, Arthur Ryder, whose translation reads: “Death 
am I, and my present task destruction.” 

A vivid description of Oppenheimer at the moment of the 
explosion has been left by Groves’s assistant, Brigadier General 
Thomas F. Farrell. “Dr. Oppenheimer,” Farrell remembers, “on 
whom had rested a very heavy burden, grew tenser as the last 


second ticked off. He scarcely breathed.” 


He held on to a post to steady himself. For the last few 
seconds, he stared directly ahead and then when the announcer 
shouted “Now!” and there came this tremendous burst of light 
followed shortly thereafter by the deep growling roar of the 
explosion, his face relaxed into an expression of tremendous 
relief. 


It was that sense of relief that was felt most palpably by the 
majority of the scientists there. “Some people claim to have 
wondered at the time about the future of mankind,” Norris 
Bradbury remarked. “I didn’t. We were at war and the damned 
thing worked.” Similarly, when Frank Oppenheimer, who was 
with his brother when the bomb went off, was asked about their 
initial reaction, he recalled: “I think we just said ‘It worked.’ ” 

The New York Times journalist William L. Laurence, who had 
been chosen by Groves to describe the event for posterity, 
remembers the euphoric emotional release brought on by the 
realization among the scientists that their huge, complicated— 
and extremely expensive—task had been completed successfully: 
“A loud cry filled the air. The little groups that hitherto had stood 
rooted to the earth like desert plants broke into dance.” Scientists 
took it in turns to howl jubilantly into the PA system. 

For some, that sense of euphoric relief was short-lived and 
tempered by exhaustion and anxiety. As Victor Weisskopf put it: 
“Our first feeling was one of elation, then we realized we were 
tired, and then we were worried.” When Fermi returned to Los 
Alamos, his wife Laura remembers: “He seemed shrunken and 
aged, made of old parchment, so entirely dried out and browned 
was he by the desert sun and exhausted by the ordeal.” Rabi has 
recalled that, though initially he was “thrilled,” after a few 
minutes, “I had goose flesh all over me when I realized what this 
meant for the future of humanity.” When, back at base camp, 
Rabi caught sight of Oppenheimer returning from the dugout in a 
jeep he shared with Farrell, he did not see a man contemplating 
the Hindu scriptures, but a disconcerting triumphalism: “T’ll never 
forget his walk; I’ll never forget the way he stepped out of the 
car ... his walk was like High Noon ... this kind of strut. He had 
done it.” Farrell walked over to Groves and said: “The war is 


over.” “Yes,” replied Groves, “after we drop two bombs on 
Japan.” 

The power of the bomb was estimated to be around 20,000 
tons of TNT, which was at the high end of the various predictions 
made by the Los Alamos scientists. (The scientists had a betting 
pool to see who could come closest to guessing the exact yield of 
the bomb; the prize went to Rabi, who had guessed 18,000 tons.) 
The light from the blast could be seen more than 100 miles away 
and the heat generated by it could be felt twenty miles away. The 
U.S. Army did everything they could to keep it out of the 
newspapers, but there was no hope of keeping something of that 
magnitude a secret. “My God,” one security official remarked, 
“you might as well try to hide the Mississippi River.” Instead, 
they issued a press release claiming that the blast was due to the 
accidental explosion of a “remotely located ammunition 
magazine.” 

Just a few hours after the blast, at 8 a.m., Groves called George 
Harrison in Washington, who in turn sent a coded cable to 
Stimson in Potsdam: 


Operated on this morning. Diagnosis not yet complete but 
results seem satisfactory and already exceed expectations. 
Local press release necessary as interest extends great distance. 
Dr. Groves pleased. He returns tomorrow. I will keep you 
posted. 


The following day, Harrison sent another message, using a 
more elaborate series of coded remarks to provide some details: 


Doctor Groves has just returned most enthusiastic and 
confident that the little boy is as husky as his big brother. The 
light in his eyes discernible from here to Highold and I could 
hear his screams from here to my farm. 


Decoded, this meant: 1. that the uranium “Little Boy” device 
was likely to be as powerful as the plutonium “Fat Man” bomb 
tested at Trinity; 2. that the light from the bomb could be seen 
200 miles away (200 miles being the distance from Washington 
to Highold on Long Island);59 and 3. that the sound of the 
explosion traveled about forty miles (the distance from 
Washington to Stimson’s farm in Upperville, Virginia). 


Stimson immediately passed this information on to Truman, 
who was, Stimson later recalled, “tremendously pepped up by it.” 
A few days later, Stimson received a long memo from Groves, 
written together with Farrell, which combined statistical details 
of the test with personal impressions of what it was like to be 
there. “For the first time in history,” Groves wrote, “there was a 
nuclear explosion. And what an explosion!” 


For a brief period there was a lighting effect within a radius of 
20 miles equal to several suns in midday; a huge ball of fire 
was formed which lasted for several seconds. This ball 
mushroomed and rose to a height of over ten thousand feet 
before it dimmed. 


The mushroom cloud, Groves wrote, “deposited its dust and 
radioactive materials over a wide area.” Following and 
monitoring the cloud were several doctors and scientists, who 
reported finding some radioactive material as much as 120 miles 
away, but at no place, Groves told Stimson, was the level of 
radioactivity high enough to necessitate evacuation. 

With his memo, Groves enclosed a number of other 
descriptions of the test, including the one by Farrell quoted 
earlier, which concluded on an apocalyptic note. The “awesome 
roar” of the blast, Farrell wrote, “warned of doomsday and made 
us feel that we puny things were blasphemous to dare tamper 
with the forces heretofore reserved to the Almighty.” “The feeling 
of the entire assembly,” Groves added, “was similar to that 
described by General Farrell, with even the uninitiated feeling 
profound awe.” An even stronger feeling, he went on, was that 
the faith of those responsible for this “Herculean project” had 
been justified: 


I personally thought of Blondin crossing Niagara Falls on his 
tight rope, only to me this tight rope had lasted for three years 
and of my repeated confident-appearing assurances that such a 
thing was possible and that we would do it. 


Groves’s memo reached Potsdam on July 21. By this time 
Churchill had already been told about Trinity, but Truman and 
his advisors were still unsure about how to play it with regard to 
the Russians. In a diary entry of July 19, Stimson, reflecting on 


the repressiveness of Stalin’s regime and the contrast with “a 
nation whose system rests upon free speech and all the elements 
of freedom, as does ours,” recorded that he was “beginning to feel 
that our committee which met in Washington on this subject and 
was so set upon opening communications with the Russians on 
the subject may have been thinking in a vacuum.” When, two 
days later, Groves’s memo arrived, Stimson read it out in its 
entirety to Truman and Byrnes: “They were immensely pleased. 
Truman said it gave him an entirely new feeling of confidence.” 
The memo was then shown to Churchill. The four of them, 
Stimson recorded in his diary, were “unanimous in thinking that 
it was advisable to tell the Russians at least that we were working 
on that subject, and intended to use it if and when it was 
successfully finished.” 


52 Thomas Powers (see Heisenberg’s War) believes that this drawing was given 
to Bohr by Heisenberg, but this was emphatically denied by Bohr’s son, which 
is why Bernstein developed the account that I have followed, which traces the 
origin of the drawing to Jensen’s visit to Bohr in 1943. 

53 The reason the word used in this context is “hydrodynamics” rather than 
simply “dynamics” is that, under the enormous pressure of implosion, the 
material used—uranium or plutonium—starts acting like a liquid rather than a 
solid. 

54 This was a more gradual process than Teller implies. The shift of focus from 
gun assembly to implosion, as I have tried to describe, was motivated by many 
different considerations and received many different impetuses, the visit to Los 
Alamos by John von Neumann being but one of them. The visit of Peierls was 
another. The really crucial development, however—the one that made it 
absolutely imperative to solve the problems of implosion—was the discovery in 
the spring of 1944 that it was impossible to build a gun-assembly bomb using 
reactor-generated plutonium. 

55 “Hymne to God, My God, in My Sicknesse.” 

56 “Holy Sonnet 14.” 

57 Given the experience of bombing up to that point, this is perhaps a natural 
assumption. However, as the “air raid” in question would consist of a single 
airplane, there was little reason to suppose that the city’s occupants would 
realize they were about to be bombed. In fact, the inhabitants of Hiroshima did 
not pay much attention to the plane that dropped the bomb that destroyed 
their city, precisely because they did not—could not—imagine an air raid that 
did not involve a great number of airplanes. 

58 The date of the poll is a little uncertain because of a confusion in the record. 
The memo containing the results of the poll is dated July 13, 1945, but it gives 
the date of the poll as July 18. Assuming that the memo was not, in fact, 
written five days before the events it describes, it seems most likely that the 
first date is an error and that the poll did indeed take place on July 18. 


59 This was probably an exaggeration. 


Los Alamos 3: Heavy with Misgiving 


n July 23, 1945, barely a week 
after the Trinity test, the U.S. Secretary of War, Henry D Stimson, 


recorded in his diary a conversation he had had that day with 
George Marshall, the Army Chief of Staff, in which the two had 
agreed that “now with our new weapon we would not need the 
assistance of the Russians to conquer Japan.” The following day, 
Truman told Stalin about the atomic bomb. Or rather, as Truman 
later recalled it: “I casually mentioned to Stalin that we had a 
new weapon of unusual destructive force.” To Truman’s great 
surprise, Stalin showed little interest. “All he said was that he was 
glad to hear it and hoped we would make ‘good use of it against 
the Japanese.’ ” Stalin, of course, already knew a great deal about 
the Manhattan Project, and the Soviets had been told by Fuchs in 
May that a test of the bomb was being planned for July. What 
Truman and his advisors did not know was that the Soviet 
Union’s own atomic-bomb project was already well under way, 
accelerated by the information provided by Fuchs, Greenglass et 
al. 

On the same day that Truman had this strangely muted 
exchange with Stalin, a directive—drafted by Groves and 
approved by Marshall and Stimson—was issued to General Carl 
Spaatz, the new commander of the Strategic Air Forces, which 
would be responsible for delivering the bomb. The air force, the 
directive stated, “will deliver its first special bomb as soon as 
weather will permit visual bombing after about August 3, 1945, 
on one of the targets: Hiroshima, Kokura, Niigata and Nagasaki.” 
Two days later, the Potsdam Declaration was issued, calling for 
the Japanese to surrender and defining the surrender terms 
acceptable to the U.S. and the UK, which, on that very day, had a 


new Prime Minister, Clement Attlee having decisively beaten 
Churchill in the UK’s general election. 

“The prodigious land, sea and air forces of the United States, 
the British Empire and of China,” the declaration announced, “are 
poised to strike the final blows upon Japan.” And therefore: “We 
call upon the government of Japan to proclaim now that 
unconditional surrender of all Japanese armed forces, and to 
provide proper and adequate assurances of their good faith in 
such action. The alternative for Japan is prompt and utter 
destruction.” Truman instructed Stimson that the directive of 
July 24, ordering General Spaatz to deliver the bomb as soon 
after August 3 as the weather permitted, “would stand unless I 
notified him that the Japanese reply to our ultimatum was 
acceptable.” On July 28, Radio Tokyo announced that the 
Japanese government would continue to fight. The official 
Japanese response was “Mokusatsu,” the meaning of which has 
been much debated by historians. It was interpreted by the U.S. 
to mean “ignore,” but it can also mean “treat with silent 
contempt.” Neither meaning, of course, would constitute a 
response that Truman was likely to regard as acceptable, and so 
Japan had now to face the “prompt and utter destruction” 
promised by the Potsdam Declaration. 

At Los Alamos by this time the euphoria of the Trinity test had 
given way to a somber mood, as they went about the task of 
preparing the bomb. In the minds of many was the dreadful 
realization that, as Sam Allison put it: “They’re going to take this 
thing and fry hundreds of Japanese!” The High Noon strut that 
Rabi had seen in Oppenheimer immediately after Trinity was no 
longer in evidence. His secretary, Anne Wilson, recalls that he 
looked depressed rather than triumphant, as if he were thinking: 
“Oh God, what have we done! All this work, and people are going 
to die in the thousands.” One day, noticing that Oppenheimer 
seemed particularly distressed, Wilson asked him what was 
wrong. He replied: “I just keep thinking about all those poor little 
people.” 

On the day of the Trinity test, the Little Boy casing was shipped 
to Tinian, an island in the western Pacific, south of Japan, from 
where the U.S. Air Force had decided the atomic bombing raids 
would be launched. Soon afterward the enriched uranium to be 
placed in the casing was flown out, the final assembly of the 


bomb to be performed by a team of about sixty people from Los 
Alamos, including Deak Parsons, Luis Alvarez, Phil Morrison and 
Robert Serber. For this specific task the scientists were put in 
uniforms and given ranks: Serber was, to his great pride, made a 
colonel, Alvarez a lieutenant colonel and all the others captains. 
Two huts at the air force base served as “laboratories,” one for 
Little Boy, one for Fat Man. 

Which of the four Japanese cities mentioned in the directive to 
General Spaatz would be the first to be bombed was not decided 
until a few days before the raid. On July 30, Spaatz cabled 
Washington to say that he had heard that Hiroshima was the only 
one of the four that did not have Allied prisoner-of-war camps. In 
reply, he received orders that “Hiroshima should be given first 
priority.” That day, the assembly of Little Boy was completed and 
General Farrell reported to Groves that the mission could be 
flown the following day, August 1. This, however, proved to be 
impossible because of the weather, a typhoon making flying 
impossible. 

The man chosen to pilot the B-29 bomber that would deliver 
the bomb was Colonel Paul Tibbets, who, on August 4, after three 
days of anxious weather-watching, called a briefing for the crews 
of the seven planes that would be used during the mission (one 
for the bomb, three for a cloud-cover assessment the day before 
the drop, two to photograph and observe the bombing, and a 
seventh as a spare in case the first malfunctioned). The crewmen 
were astonished when they arrived at the meeting to find the 
briefing hut surrounded by military policemen armed with rifles. 
They were even more astonished when Tibbets introduced Deak 
Parsons, who told them that the bomb they were about to drop 
was the most destructive weapon ever made. When Parsons had 
finished, Tibbets took over to tell the men how honored he and 
they were to be taking part in a raid that would “shorten the war 
by at least six months.” 

The following day, Tibbets named the plane he had chosen to 
fly after his mother—Enola Gay—and hurriedly found a sign- 
writer to paint the name in foot-high letters immediately below 
the pilot’s window. A few hours later, at 2:45 a.m. on August 6, 
the newly named Enola Gay set off from Tinian on its way to 
Hiroshima. Mid-flight, Tibbets announced to the crew that the 
weapon they were carrying was in fact an atomic bomb. The 


journey took more than six hours. At 9:14 Tinian time (8:14 a.m. 
local time), the bomb was dropped over Hiroshima. “Fellows,” 
Tibbets announced on the Enola Gay’s intercom, “you have just 
dropped the first atomic bomb in history.” What the crewmen 
experienced was a blinding glare, followed by two shock waves 
so intense they thought they had been hit by heavy guns. After 
the second shock wave, Tibbets has recalled: “We turned back to 
look at Hiroshima. The city was hidden by that awful 
cloud ... boiling up, mushrooming, terrible and incredibly tall.” 

As they looked back, the crewmen were awestruck to see that 
where, two minutes earlier there had been a city, there was now 
what one of them likened to “a pot of boiling black oil.” The tail 
gunner, Robert Caron, had the best view: 


I was trying to describe the mushroom, this turbulent mass. I 
saw fires springing up in different places, like flames shooting 
up on a bed of coals. I was asked to count them. I said, “Count 
them?” Hell, I gave up when there were about fifteen, they 
were coming too fast to count. I can still see it—that 
mushroom and that turbulent mass—it looked like lava or 
molasses covering the whole city, and it seemed to flow 
outward up into the foothills where the little valleys would 
come into the plain, with fires starting up all over, so pretty 
soon it was hard to see anything because of the smoke. 


With a yield of 12,500 tons of TNT, the Hiroshima bomb was a 
good deal less powerful than the Fat Man tested at Trinity. To the 
people of Hiroshima, however, it was a destructive force the like 
of which none of them could previously have imagined. The 
temperature at the hypercenter of the explosion was an 
inconceivable 5,400°F, enough to inflict primary burns on 
everybody within a two-mile radius. But it was not only the heat 
and power of the blast that terrified and confused the population 
of the city (estimated to have been about 255,000), but also the 
instantaneous suddenness of that power. “I just could not 
understand,” one witness later said, “why our surroundings had 
changed so greatly in one instant.” The appalling horror 
experienced by the inhabitants of Hiroshima was conveyed with 
searing intensity and vividness by the writer John Hersey in a 
long article, based on eyewitness accounts, that was published in 


the New Yorker in August 1946. Indeed, the magazine devoted its 
entire issue to the piece, something it had never done before and 
has never done since. It did so on this occasion, the editors 
explained, “in the conviction that few of us have yet 
comprehended the all but incredible destructive power of this 
weapon, and that everyone might well take time to consider the 
terrible implications of its use.” 

The article was a publishing sensation. The issue sold out 
within hours of publication, the entire text was broadcast on the 
radio and a book version was rushed out, which became a best- 
seller. To some extent, Hersey’s account of Hiroshima was a 
fulfillment of the hope that Bohr had instilled in Oppenheimer 
and which became, in the absence of a genuine possibility that 
the Germans would build an atom bomb first, Oppenheimer’s 
rationale for building the bomb and recommending its use on 
civilians: the hope, that is, that the shock of seeing just how 
powerful the bomb was would be so great that the people and 
governments of the world would demand international 
cooperation to end war. 

Certainly few things could be more shocking than the scenes 
described, with a restraint that makes them even more powerful, 
in Hersey’s article. Rather than attempting a synoptic overview of 
the destruction, Hersey concentrates on the stories of particular 
individuals, such as the Reverend Mr. Kiyoshi Tanimoto, who, at 
the time of the explosion, was helping a friend to move some 
belongings to a house two miles out of town, where they would 
be safe from the bombing raids that they, like everyone in 
Hiroshima, feared and expected to come soon (Hiroshima being 
the only important city, other than Kyoto, that had thus far not 
been heavily bombed). Along the way, the two men heard the air 
siren that warned of the approach of American planes, and then 
the all-clear that was sounded when it was realized that only 
three planes were approaching. Then, just outside the house (so 
about two miles from the center of the explosion), they saw a 
tremendous flash of light. Mr. Tanimoto dived to the floor. When 
he stood up again, he saw that his friend’s house had collapsed. 
He ran into town, thinking he could help people. As he 
approached the city center, he passed hundreds of badly burned 
people fleeing in the opposite direction. There were collapsed 
buildings, fires and desperate, wounded people everywhere he 


looked. Wanting to rescue people trapped on sandspits in the 
river, he took a boat, which had been surrounded by a group of 
five nearly naked and badly burned men, and began to ferry the 
wounded away from the fires. At one sandspit Tanimoto saw a 
group of about twenty men and women, and, writes Hersey: 


He drove the boat onto the bank and urged them to get aboard. 
They did not move and he realized that they were too weak to 
lift themselves. He reached down and took a woman by the 
hands, but her skin slipped off in huge glovelike pieces. 


Many more eyewitness accounts have subsequently been 
published, confirming and adding to the details in Hersey’s 
terrifying and horrible account. One man recalls that the streets 
were full of people whose skin was black and hanging from their 
bodies. “Many of them died along the road—I can still picture 
them in my mind—like walking ghosts.” Other horrors described 
include “a woman with her jaw missing and her tongue hanging 
out of her mouth,” “people with their bowels and brains coming 
out,” a “dead child lying there and another who seemed to be 
crawling over him in order to run away, both of them burned to 
blackness.” To one person who saw many such dreadful sights, 
however, the most shocking experience was of climbing a hill and 
looking down and_ seeing “that Hiroshima had 
disappeared ... Hiroshima didn’t exist—that was mainly what I 
saw—Hiroshima just didn’t exist.” Almost all the buildings in the 
city (the official estimate was 70,000 out of 76,000) were 
damaged or destroyed by the bomb. As for casualties, there has 
been some dispute, but the best estimate seems to be 135,000, of 
which 66,000 died and 69,000 were injured. In other words, the 
casualties amounted to more than half of the total population. Of 
the people who were 3,000 feet or closer to the center of the 
blast, the bomb killed more than 90 percent. 

It would be some weeks before the harrowing details of the 
suffering inflicted upon the people of Hiroshima were known to 
the scientists who made it possible. Indeed, it took nearly a day 
for the bare fact of the bombing to reach most of them. Two 
notable exceptions were Deak Parsons, who was aboard the Enola 
Gay during its fateful mission, in order to carry out, mid-flight, 
the very last stages of assembly, and Luis Alvarez, who was 


aboard one of the two observation planes that accompanied Enola 
Gay. The first person to hear the news who was not actually on 
one of the planes was General Farrell, who was on Tinian island. 
At about 9:40 a.m. local time—twenty-five minutes after the 
explosion—Farrell received a radio message from Parsons, who 
was on the Enola Gay, heading back to Tinian: 


Deak to Farrell: Results in all respects clear-cut and successful. 
Immediate action to carry out further plans [that is, prepare for 
the second bomb] is recommended. Greater visible effects than 
at Alamogordo. Target was Hiroshima. Proceeding to Tinian 
with normal conditions in airplane. 


The remark about the visible effects being greater than at the 
Trinity test gave Farrell the impression that the yield of the bomb 
was at least 20,000 tons of TNT. 

The time difference between Tinian and Washington is fourteen 
hours, so when the Enola Gay left Tinian at 2:45 a.m. on Monday, 
August 6, it was 12:45 p.m. on Sunday, August 5 in Washington. 
That morning Groves had arrived at his office to find a cable 
telling him that takeoff was scheduled for that day. He therefore 
waited for the report of the takeoff. By 2 p.m. he had heard 
nothing, so, to relieve the tension, he went out to play tennis. 
That evening at 6:45, while having dinner at the Army-Navy 
Club, he was called to the phone and told that the plane had left 
on schedule. In fact, this was just half an hour before the bomb 
would be dropped on Hiroshima, but of course neither Groves nor 
whoever he spoke to in Tinian would have known that. After 
dinner, Groves went back to his office to spend the night there, 
awaiting news from the Pacific. “The hours went by,” he writes in 
his autobiography, “more slowly than I ever imagined hours 
could go by, and still there was no news.” At 11:30 p.m.—nearly 
four hours after the original message—Groves received a copy of 
the report of the bombing that Parsons had sent to Farrell from 
the Enola Gay. After he received this message, Groves remembers, 
“T went to sleep on the cot that had been brought into my office, 
after telling the Duty Officer to call me when the next message 
came in.” 

At about 3 p.m. local time on August 6 (1 a.m. in Washington), 
the Enola Gay returned to Tinian. It arrived in triumph, with 200 


or more soldiers, technicians and scientists there to greet it and 
cheer the crew. General Spaatz was there to pin the Distinguished 
Service Cross on the breast of Colonel Tibbets’s overalls. 
Afterward, in the briefing room, Parsons was awarded the Silver 
Star. Four and a half hours later, Groves was awakened to be told 
that a cable had arrived from General Farrell, reporting 
“additional information furnished by Parsons, crews, and 
observers on return to Tinian.” Parsons and other observers, 
Farrell reported, “felt this strike was tremendous and awesome 
even in comparison with New Mexico test.” 

President Truman had not yet arrived back in the States from 
the Potsdam conference. He heard the news midway across the 
Atlantic Ocean on board the USS Augusta. As he tells the story in 
his Memoirs: “I was eating lunch with members of the Augusta’s 
crew when Captain Frank Graham, White House Map Room 
watch officer, handed me the following message”: 


To the President 
From the Secretary of War 


Big bomb dropped on Hiroshima August 5 at 7:15 p.m. 
Washington time. First reports indicate complete success which 
was even more conspicuous than earlier test. 


“I was greatly moved,” Truman writes. “I telephoned Byrnes 
aboard ship to give him the news and then said to the group of 
sailors around me, ‘This is the greatest thing in history. It’s time 
for us to get home.’ ” 

In Truman’s absence, it fell to Groves, with the assistance of 
William L. Laurence, the New York Times journalist whom he had 
invited to witness Trinity, to prepare a statement about the 
bombing. The announcement, read out by the President’s press 
secretary, was made at 11 a.m., Washington time. Containing, as 
it did, the first public acknowledgment of the atomic-bomb 
project, it had a sensational impact throughout the world. 
“Sixteen hours ago,” it began: 


an American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima, an 
important Japanese Army base. That bomb had more power 
than 20,000 tons of TNT... It is an atomic bomb. It is a 
harnessing of the basic power of the universe. The force from 


which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those 
who brought war to the Far East. 


“We have spent two billion dollars on the greatest scientific 
gamble in history,” the statement continued, “and won.” If the 
Japanese did not now accept the terms of the Potsdam 
ultimatum, they could “expect a rain of ruin from the air, the like 
of which has never been seen on this earth.” 

Much to his chagrin, listening to this statement on the radio— 
at what, for him in Los Alamos, would have been 9 a.m. on the 
morning of Monday August 6—was the first confirmation 
Oppenheimer had that the bomb had gone off successfully. He 
had expected to be told before it was made public. Indeed, he had 
sent his assistant John Manley to Washington with the express 
purpose of phoning him as soon as the news reached Groves’s 
office. Just as Manley was about to phone, however, Groves 
stopped him, telling him that no one was to tell anybody about it 
until the President had announced it. 

There was, perhaps, some consolation for Oppenheimer in the 
fact that the statement emphasized the importance of what it 
called “the achievement of scientific brains in putting together 
infinitely complex pieces of knowledge held by many men in 
different fields of science into a workable plan”: “The battle of 
the laboratories held fateful risks for us as well as the battles of 
the air, land and sea, and we have now won the battle of the 
laboratories as we have won the other battles.” 

At Los Alamos, the effect of the announcement was an 
emotional release every bit as powerful as that which had 
followed the Trinity test. On that occasion it had been centered 
on the demonstration that what they had been designing and 
building actually worked. On this occasion it was to do with the 
fact that, where previously they had worked in furtive secrecy, 
now the spotlight had been shone upon them. What they had 
achieved had been recognized—by the President no less—as a 
crucially important task. They were celebrities. 

That evening at Los Alamos there was a big assembly to 
celebrate their success. Oppenheimer made a dramatic entrance, 
walking from the back of the room to the stage and, once there, 
clasping his hands together like a prize-winning boxer. To ecstatic 
cheering, Oppenheimer told the crowd that it was too early to say 


what the results of the bombing had been, but that “the Japanese 
didn’t like it.” His only regret, he said, was that “we hadn’t 
developed the bomb in time to use it against the Germans.” This, 
according to the young physicist who later recalled the event, 
“practically raised the roof.” 

The following day, August 7, 1945, the front pages of 
newspapers all over the world were dominated by the 
extraordinary revelations contained in the statement made on 
Truman’s behalf, about the destruction of Hiroshima, the atomic- 
bomb project and about Oppenheimer. Overnight, Los Alamos 
changed from being a secret to being the most talked-about place 
in the world. Among those talking about it were the German 
physicists who had worked on the abortive Nazi bomb project, 
including Heisenberg, Weizsacker and Otto Hahn, the last of 
whom had first announced the startling fact about nuclear fission 
back in January 1939. Those scientists had been captured by the 
Allies and at the time of the Hiroshima bombing were being held 
in a country house in Cambridgeshire called Farm Hall. Unknown 
to the scientists, microphones placed around the house were 
picking up almost every word they said to each other, so that a 
complete record exists of how they reacted to the news about 
Hiroshima. 

The officer in charge of Farm Hall, Major T. H. Ritter, reported 
in a memo that, shortly before dinner on the evening of August 6, 
he told Hahn that the BBC had announced that an atomic bomb 
had been dropped. 


Hahn was completely shattered by the news and said he felt 
personally responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands 
of people, as it was his original discovery which had made the 
bomb possible. He told me that he had originally contemplated 
suicide when he realised the terrible potentialities of his 
discovery and he felt that now these had been realised and he 
was to blame. With the help of considerable alcoholic 
stimulant he was calmed down and we went down to dinner 
where he announced the news to the assembled guests. 


The news was greeted with incredulity, particularly by 
Heisenberg, who declared: “I don’t believe a word of the whole 
thing.” The reason he gave for his skepticism reveals how little 


the German scientists knew about atomic-bomb physics. Such a 
bomb, Heisenberg declared, would require “ten tons of pure 
U-235,” which, understandably, he did not believe the Allies 
could possibly have acquired. 

Heisenberg’s skepticism, however, did not last long. At 9 p.m. 
that evening, the German scientists gathered around a radio set to 
listen to the BBC news. It began: “Here is the news: It’s 
dominated by a tremendous achievement of Allied scientists—the 
production of the atomic bomb.” “The greatest destructive power 
devised by man,” the report continued, “went into action this 
morning—the atomic bomb. British, American and Canadian 
scientists have succeeded, where Germans failed, in harnessing 
the basic power of the universe.” 

Some details in the report that captured the attention of the 
German scientists included: 1. that the cost of the project was 
£500 million (equivalent to $2 billion at the time); 2. that up to 
125,000 people were employed in the factories that were built for 
the program, few of whom knew what they were producing; and 
3. that the material used to make the bomb was uranium. 

The report also included a statement prepared by Churchill 
before he left office, which emphasized the part played by Britain 
in the bomb program, especially in its early stages. “By God’s 
mercy,” Churchill said, somewhat rubbing it in for those listening 
at Farm Hall, “British and American science outpaced all German 
efforts. These were on a considerable scale, but far behind.” “The 
whole burden of execution,” he declared, “constitutes one of the 
greatest triumphs of American—or indeed human—genius of 
which there is a record.” 

Listening to the broadcast made the German scientists 
appreciate the colossal scale of the Manhattan Project. “We were 
unable to work on that scale,” Hahn remarked to his colleagues, 
later adding: “I am thankful we didn’t succeed.” Heisenberg 
recalled that about a year earlier he had been told by someone in 
the German Foreign Office that the Americans had threatened to 
drop a uranium bomb on Dresden if the Germans did not 
surrender soon. “I was asked whether I thought it possible, and 
with complete conviction, I replied ‘No.’ ” 

The next day, August 7, the German scientists at Farm Hall— 
like millions of people all over the world—spent the entire 
morning poring over the newspaper reports of the Hiroshima 


bombing. Among the other impressed readers of the newspapers 
that day was Haakon Chevalier, who, on learning what his old 
friend had been up to, wrote him a note of congratulations, 
telling him: “You are probably the most famous man in the world 
today ... 1 want you to know that we are very proud of you.” It 
was three weeks before he received a reply. 

The delay was possibly partly to do with Oppenheimer’s 
difficulties in knowing what to say to a man whom he had named 
to the security services as the key go-between in what was 
regarded as one of the most serious attempts at atomic espionage 
of the entire war. However, even without that problem, 
Oppenheimer would have had little time for purely personal 
correspondence in the days immediately after the Hiroshima 
bombing. The scientific task was done, but much was happening 
—politically, militarily and socially. 

Truman finally returned to Washington from Potsdam on the 
evening of August 7 and was immediately caught up in a 
whirlwind of activity generated by Groves, who was determined 
to proceed as quickly as possible with a second atomic bombing 
of Japan. He and Admiral William Purnell, Groves writes in his 
autobiography, “had often discussed the importance of having the 
second blow follow the first one quickly, so that the Japanese 
would not have time to recover their balance.” This second bomb 
would have to be of the Fat Man type, there being no chance of 
assembling another uranium bomb at this stage (in fact, the Little 
Boy bomb remained one of a kind; the Fat Man design, despite its 
complicated assembly, being easier to manufacture, safer to 
transport and more powerful). After the success of the Trinity 
test, the only thing standing in the way of using a Fat Man bomb 
in Japan was the availability of plutonium. Groves had originally 
been advised that a plutonium bomb could be ready to use on 
August 20. At the end of July, this was revised to August 11. 
Groves, however, was too impatient to wait that long and, 
somewhat against the advice he was given by the scientists, saw 
to it that the bomb was assembled, loaded and ready to use by 
the evening of August 8. 

At Tinian, therefore, there was little time to reflect on the 
Hiroshima bomb. Bernard O’Keefe, a young navy officer who was 
part of the assembly team, remembers: “With the success of the 
Hiroshima weapon, the pressure to be ready with the much more 


complex implosion device became excruciating.” 


Everyone felt that the sooner we could get off another mission, 
the more likely it was that the Japanese would feel that we had 
large quantities of the devices and would surrender sooner. We 
were certain that one day saved would mean that the war 
would be over one day sooner. 


While the bomb that would destroy Nagasaki was being 
hurriedly assembled, diplomatic maneuvers were being pursued 
with equal urgency—the bombing of Hiroshima having 
accelerated both the Soviet Union’s plans for joining the war 
against Japan and the Japanese plans for negotiating peace. On 
August 8, the Japanese Foreign Minister was hoping to secure 
Soviet mediation in the search for acceptable surrender terms. 
When, however, his ambassador in Moscow met the Soviet 
Foreign Minister, Vyacheslav Molotov, he was told that, far from 
brokering a peace, the Soviet Union was entering the war against 
Japan, with effect from the following day. Bearing in mind the 
time difference between Moscow and Japan, this meant that, 
within two hours of that meeting, at midnight local time, the 1.6 
million Soviet troops that had massed on the Manchurian border 
received their orders to attack. 

Meanwhile, at Tinian the Fat Man bomb assembled by O’Keefe 
and his team was loaded into the bomb bay of a B-29 called 
Bock’s Car, named after its usual pilot, Frederick Bock. On this 
mission, however, the bomber would be piloted by Major Charles 
W. Sweeney, who had been told that his primary target was 
Kokura, one of Japan’s most important arsenals. The secondary 
target was the port of Nagasaki, an important center of 
shipbuilding. Neither the President nor Oppenheimer and the rest 
of the Scientific Advisory Panel were involved in the decision to 
carry out this second atomic bombing. Indeed, no separate 
decision was made, or deemed necessary. The directive of July 24 
had ordered General Spaatz to drop the first bomb “after about 
August 3” and subsequent bombs “as soon as made ready by the 
project staff.” He would therefore keep dropping whatever bombs 
were made available to him until he was ordered to stop. 

Just before dawn on August 9, Bock’s Car took off from Tinian. 
Unlike the first mission, this second one was beset with problems. 


For one thing, the weather—squally showers and storms—was 
hardly ideal. Second, they discovered just before takeoff that 
Bock’s Car had a defective fuel pump, which meant that 800 
gallons of fuel could not be pumped into the engine from the 
bomb bay. This meant that the plane would have to fly to Japan 
and back with the extra weight of those gallons of fuel. Despite 
these problems, so keen were Groves and Purnell to get a second 
bomb off quickly that there was no question of delaying the 
flight. Immediately before taking off, Sweeney was approached 
by Purnell. “Young man,” he said, “do you know how much that 
bomb cost?” “About twenty-five million dollars,” Sweeney 
replied. “See that we get our money’s worth,” Purnell told him. 
Accompanied by just one observation plane (the other got 
separated in the bad weather), Bock’s Car arrived at Kokura at 
10:44 a.m. local time to find that the target was obscured by 
cloud. Sweeney therefore decided to switch to Nagasaki. The sky 
above that city too was covered in cloud, but at about 11 a.m. a 
hole opened in the cloud cover long enough (twenty seconds) for 
the bombardier to see the target. The bomb was dropped and 
exploded with a force significantly greater than that of the 
Hiroshima Little Boy bomb: 22,000 rather than 12,500 tons of 
TNT. Because the hills around the city contained the blast, 
however, the casualties at Nagasaki were not quite so high. The 
best estimate seems to be that at the moment of impact around 
40,000 people died and 60,000 were injured. It is thought that, 
by 1946, mainly because of the lingering effects of radiation, the 
number of deaths caused by the bomb had risen to about 70,000. 
Robert Serber was supposed to be on one of the observation 
planes for this second mission, but the pilot ordered him off the 
plane because he did not have a parachute. As Serber was the 
only one who knew how to operate the high-speed camera that 
was to have been used, no photographs of the raid were taken 
from the air. Even if he had been on board, no photographs 
would have been taken, since the plane in question was the one 
that got separated. When the bomb was being dropped on 
Nagasaki, that observation plane was still flying over Kokura. By 
the time the pilot realized what had happened and flew to 
Nagasaki, the bomb had been dropped and the mushroom cloud 
had already appeared. “The only picture we got,” recalls Serber 
ruefully, “was taken by his tail gunner with a snapshot camera.” 


Moments before the bomb was dropped, the other observation 
plane dropped some instruments attached to parachutes that 
would enable the scientists to measure the force of the blast and 
some of its effects. Among those instruments was a pressure 
cylinder to which Serber, Alvarez and Morrison had attached a 
personal letter to the Japanese physicist Ryokichi Sagane, whom 
they had known at Berkeley and who was then a professor at the 
University of Tokyo. The point of the letter was to tell Sagane on 
good authority about the threat facing Japan: 


You have known for several years that an atomic bomb could 
be built if a nation were willing to pay the enormous cost of 
preparing the necessary material. Now that you have seen that 
we have constructed the production plants, there can be no 
doubt in your mind that all the output of those factories, 
working 24 hours a day, will be exploded on your homeland. 

... We implore you to confirm these facts to your leaders, 
and to do your utmost to stop the destruction and waste of life 
which can only result in the total annihilation of all your cities 
if continued. As scientists we deplore the use to which a 
beautiful discovery has been put, but we can assure you that 
unless Japan surrenders at once, this rain of atomic bombs will 
increase manifold in fury. 


To some extent, this threat of more bombs was a bluff. 
Immediately after the Nagasaki bombing the Allies did not 
possess any more atomic bombs. It is true that, as Groves puts it, 
“our entire organization both at Los Alamos and on Tinian was 
maintained in a state of complete readiness to prepare additional 
bombs,” but, as he himself reported to General Marshall, the 
earliest date at which the next bomb could be assembled for use 
was August 17, and almost everybody expected the war to be 
over by then. Even Groves says that when he received reports 
indicating that the Nagasaki bomb had inflicted a smaller number 
of casualties than they had expected, he was relieved, “for by that 
time I was certain that Japan was through and that the war could 
not continue for more than a few days.” 

In fact, the very day after the bombing of Nagasaki, 
Washington received a message sent via Switzerland that the 
Japanese were ready to accept the terms of the Potsdam 


Declaration, except one: they would not accept “any demand 
which prejudices the prerogatives of His Majesty as a Sovereign 
Ruler.” At the same time the Japanese government issued an 
urgent plea to the United States to call a halt to the atomic 
bombing. This bomb, the Japanese declared, had “the most cruel 
effects humanity has ever known.” Its use in “massacring a great 
number of old people, women, children; destroying and burning 
down Shinto and Buddhist temples, schools, hospitals, living 
quarters, etc.,” the statement claimed, constituted a “new crime 
against humanity and civilization.” 

It was not just the Japanese who had had enough of the 
terrifying carnage of nuclear warfare. From the diary of Henry 
Wallace, who was at the time a member of Truman’s cabinet, we 
learn that on August 10 Truman gave the order to stop the atomic 
bombing. Truman, Wallace records, “said the thought of wiping 
out another 100,000 people was too horrible. He didn’t like the 
idea of killing, as he said, ‘all those kids.’ ” The following day, 
James Byrnes, as Secretary of State, responded to the not-quite 
unconditional Japanese offer of surrender in a way that sought to 
nullify the one condition they had made, insisting: 


From the moment of surrender the authority of the Emperor 
and the Japanese Government to rule the state shall be subject 
to the Supreme Commander of the Allied powers who will take 
such steps as he deems proper to effectuate the surrender 
terms. 


Despite having people around him who were urging him to 
continue the fight, Emperor Hirohito realized there was no sane 
course of action left open to him other than the acceptance of 
these terms. “I cannot endure the thought of letting my people 
suffer any longer,” he told his ministers and counselors on the 
morning of August 14. “A continuation of the war would bring 
death to tens, perhaps even hundreds, of thousands of persons. 
The whole nation would be reduced to ashes. How then could I 
carry on the wishes of my imperial ancestors?” 

Later that day, Truman announced that Japan had accepted the 
terms of surrender offered by the Allies. The war was over. The 
following day, the Emperor took the unprecedented step of 
broadcasting a message to his subjects, telling them that, partly 


because “the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel 
bomb, the power of which to do damage is indeed incalculable,” 
he had ordered the acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration. 

“Seldom, if ever,” commented the journalist and broadcaster 
Edward Murrow, “has a war ended leaving the victors with such a 
sense of uncertainty and fear, with such a realization that the 
future is obscure and that survival is not assured.” To be sure, 
“VJ Day” was celebrated with parties and processions, both in the 
UK and in the U.S. Especially relieved and thankful that the war 
was over were the three million U.S. servicemen poised to launch 
an invasion of Japan in October, few of whom had any doubt that 
what had saved them was the atomic bomb. “Let me tell you,” 
writes Serber in his autobiography, “we were really heroes out 
there in the Pacific. There were an awful lot of guys who weren’t 
looking forward to landing on the Japanese beaches.” One of 
those men awaiting orders to invade was Rossi Lomanitz, who 
wrote to his old teacher: “Hey, Oppie, you’re about the best loved 
man in these parts.” 

On the day of the surrender Serber wrote to his wife, Charlotte, 
from Tinian, telling her: “There’s surprisingly little excitement or 
jubilation here. The army seems to be taking the news quite 
soberly ... There is no sign at all, so far, of any celebration.” At 
Los Alamos, the celebrations of peace were led by the GIs, who 
sounded sirens and klaxons and partied all over the laboratory. 
Among the scientists, there were mixed feelings. George 
Kistiakowsky remembers: 


A whole damn bunch started wanting to arrange to fire 21 
guns. We didn’t have any guns so I got hold of one of my 
young assistants and we drove to the explosive store and got 
out 21 cases, 50-pound cases of composite TNT, set them up in 
the field and exploded them. It was quite a show. Then I came 
back to the party and was told I’d exploded only 20. 


However, the sense of triumph among the scientists at Los 
Alamos had been severely mitigated by the knowledge that their 
work had resulted in the deaths of tens—perhaps hundreds—of 
thousands of people. And many of them were struggling to see 
those deaths as justified, especially in connection with the second 
bombing. Otto Frisch recalls: “Few of us could see any moral 


reason for dropping a second bomb ... Most of us thought the 
Japanese would have surrendered in a few days anyhow.” 

Certainly Oppenheimer was not, as he had been after Trinity, 
swaggering like a cowboy, nor was he, as he had been after 
Hiroshima, raising his hands in the air like a prize-winning boxer. 
On the contrary, on August 9, the day of the Nagasaki bombing, 
he was described in an FBI report as being a “nervous wreck,” 
and the following day, when Lawrence came to Los Alamos for a 
meeting of the Scientific Advisory Panel, he found Oppenheimer 
unable to keep his mind for long off the distressing news of 
casualties from Nagasaki. Even before the bomb on Nagasaki, 
Oppenheimer was brought face-to-face with some of the 
extremely unpleasant realities of atomic bombing when he was 
asked to comment on reports of long-term damage from 
radiation. In a newspaper report published on August 8, he was 
quoted as saying: “There is every reason to believe that there was 
no appreciable radioactivity on the ground at Hiroshima and 
what little there was decayed very rapidly.” If Oppenheimer did 
not already know when he made that remark that it was 
misleading, he soon would know. In the days, weeks, months and 
years that followed, more and more information emerged from 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, not only about the utterly horrific 
scenes in the immediate aftermath of the bombings, but also 
about the grisly and deadly long-term effects of radiation 
poisoning. 

According to Alice Kimball Smith, who was there at the time, 
there was at Los Alamos in the days following Nagasaki an 
increasing “revulsion” toward the bombings, which, even for 
those who thought they were justified by the end of war, brought 
with it “an intensely personal experience of the reality of evil.” 
Some comfort was felt, says Smith, when word got round that 
“Oppie says that the atomic bomb is so terrible a weapon that 
war is now impossible.” 

This, of course, is the justification for using the bomb against 
civilians that Oppenheimer acquired from Bohr, and which he in 
turn persuaded many others to adopt. Though it had some 
plausibility as a justification for dropping one bomb, it was very 
hard to see how it justified the bombing of Nagasaki. Shirley 
Barnett, one of Oppenheimer’s secretaries at Los Alamos, was 
probably speaking for many when she said: “The reasons for 


using the first bomb were valid. I didn’t have any doubts about it. 
But I did feel bad about Nagasaki. The biggest sadness of my life, 
and that of many others, was the dropping of the second bomb.” 

In his remorse and anxiety following the second bomb (“He 
smoked constantly, constantly, constantly,” Dorothy McKibbin 
remembers of those days), Oppenheimer was determined to do 
everything he could to fulfill Bohr’s vision of the good that might 
come from the terrible weapon he had built. The report of the 
Scientific Advisory Panel that Lawrence had traveled to Los 
Alamos to help him write is dominated by that vision of an end of 
war—representing it as the only sane response, not only to the 
fearsome demonstration of the power of atomic bombs that the 
world had just witnessed, but also to the even more fearsome 
weapons that would inevitably be built in the future. 
Emphasizing that the panel was unable to recommend ways to 
ensure U.S. hegemony in the field of atomic weapons, the report 
—in the form of a letter from Oppenheimer to Stimson—stated: 
“We believe that the safety of this nation ... can be based only on 
making future wars impossible.” The concluding remarks urged 
upon the Interim Committee a “unanimous and_ urgent 
recommendation” that “all steps be taken, all necessary 
international arrangements be made, to this end.” 

On August 17, Oppenheimer traveled to Washington to deliver 
the letter personally to Stimson’s aide, George Harrison (Stimson 
himself was away), and also to Vannevar Bush. In conversation 
with these two, Oppenheimer, as he later put it in a letter to 
Lawrence, “had an opportunity with them to explain in more 
detail than was appropriate in a letter what our common feelings 
were in this all important thing.” These “common feelings,” it 
seems, arose out of the “revulsion” described by Alice Kimball 
Smith. What Oppenheimer told Harrison and Bush was that the 
scientists “felt reluctant to promise that much real good could 
come of continuing atomic-bomb work” and would be rather 
inclined to regard such bombs as “just like poison gasses after the 
last war.” This last analogy might suggest—though Oppenheimer 
does not spell this out in his letter to Lawrence—that they were 
urging the government to make atom bombs illegal. 

Oppenheimer evidently had hopes of winning the politicians in 
Washington around to his own and Bohr’s point of view, and 
there were some grounds for those hopes. After all, the 


government had taken what seemed to many at the time the 
extraordinary step of publishing on August 12, 1945—two days 
before the Japanese surrender and the end of the war—a fairly 
full and, on the face of it, fairly open account of the Manhattan 
Project: Atomic Energy for Military Purposes, written by the 
Princeton physicist Henry Smyth, in collaboration with Richard 
Tolman. The “Smyth Report,” as it came to be known, became at 
once a best-seller. The openness of the U.S. government was 
applauded by many and severely criticized by others, including 
the British scientist James Chadwick. 

Phil Morrison recalls reading the manuscript of the report at 
Los Alamos and marveling: “Could all this be printed out so 
plainly for all to read, when we had kept it quiet for so long? It 
was a little shocking.” But, he adds: “Our excitement dwindled on 
publication ... the most vivid Los Alamos material had largely 
been excised under the sober blue pencils of Richard Tolman’s 
office.” Neither Hiroshima nor Nagasaki is mentioned in the 
report. “Rather,” writes Morrison, “this is the narrative of a 
Manhattan Project that for the physicists and for this document 
alike reached its peak at Trinity.” And the apparent openness is 
largely an illusion. What worried Chadwick and others is that 
some clues are given about the merits of different methods of 
isotope separation; but nothing is revealed about the biggest 
secret of the Manhattan Project: implosion. All in all, the purpose 
of the Smyth Report was not to share information, but to 
establish the limits of what could and, perhaps more importantly, 
could not be shared. 

If the publication of the Smyth Report on August 12 had 
aroused in Oppenheimer and his colleagues hopes that the 
climate of opinion in Washington was, at the end of the war, 
favorable to a Bohr-like perspective on nuclear weapons, then his 
meetings with Harrison and Bush on August 17 soon showed 
those hopes to be ill-founded. With regard to international 
cooperation, Oppenheimer told Lawrence: “I had the fairly clear 
impression from the talks that things had gone most badly at 
Potsdam, and that little or no progress had been made in 
interesting the Russians in collaboration or control.” 

“While I was in Washington,” he added, “two things happened, 
both rather gloomy.” The first was that President Truman had 
issued “an absolute Ukase, forbidding any disclosures on the 


atomic bomb.” The second was that Harrison showed 
Oppenheimer’s letter to Secretary Byrnes, “who sent back word 
just as I was leaving that ‘in the present critical international 
situation there was no alternative to pushing the MED 
[Manhattan Engineer District] program full steam ahead.’ This 
may have been somewhat garbled in transmission, but I fear not.” 

A “memo for the record,” written on August 18 by George 
Harrison, shows that Oppenheimer’s fears were well founded. 
“Secretary Byrnes,” Harrison writes, “was definitely of the 
opinion that it would be difficult to do anything on the 
international level at the present time and that in his opinion we 
should continue the Manhattan Project with full force.” 


Secretary Byrnes felt so strongly about all this that he 
requested me to tell Dr. Oppenheimer for the time being his 
proposal about an international agreement was not practical 
and that he and the rest of the gang should pursue their work 
full force. 


Frustrated and demoralized, Oppenheimer returned to Los 
Alamos, and then, with Kitty, took a break for a few days at Perro 
Caliente. From there, he caught up on_ his personal 
correspondence, including a belated reply to Chevalier’s letter of 
August 7. Chevalier had written not just to send congratulations, 
but also to empathize with the ambivalence that he was sure 
Oppenheimer must be feeling. “I can understand now,” Chevalier 
wrote, “the sombre note in you during our last meetings.” “There 
is a weight in such a venture which few men in history have had 
to bear. I know that with your love of men, it is no light thing to 
have had a part, and a great part, in a diabolical contrivance for 
destroying them.” 

Oppenheimer’s reply, written on August 27, responded to and 
echoed this solemn tone. “The thing had to be done, Haakon,” he 
told his old friend, while conceding: “Circumstances are heavy 
with misgiving, and far, far more difficult than they should be, 
had we power to re-make the world to be as we think it.” 

The same tone pervades other letters that he wrote during this 
retreat to the Pecos, several of them to important people from his 
past whom he had not seen for many years, and who, like 
Chevalier, had sent their congratulations on his now-famous 


achievement. To his old teacher Herbert Smith, he wrote: “You 
will believe that this undertaking has not been without its 
misgivings; they are heavy on us today, when the future, which 
has so many elements of high promise, is yet only a stone’s throw 
from despair.” In a letter to his old Harvard friend, Frederick 
Bernheim, he wrote that he and Kitty had come to their ranch “in 
an earnest but not too sanguine search for sanity.” His letter ends 
ominously: “There would seem to be some great headaches 
ahead.” 

While at the ranch, Oppenheimer took the opportunity to think 
seriously about what he would do after he left Los Alamos, which 
would be sometime in the autumn. Having replaced Lawrence as 
the most famous scientist in the country, he was not short of 
offers. Columbia, Princeton and Harvard had all made it clear to 
him that they were prepared to offer him a very large salary. He 
was tempted by these offers, not only because of the pay, but 
because he had serious doubts about whether he wanted to return 
to either Berkeley or Caltech. During his time at Los Alamos he 
had been frustrated and exasperated by the difficulties he had 
experienced in dealing with the University of California, to whose 
provost, Monroe Deutsch, he wrote immediately before he set out 
for the Pecos. “You will understand,” he told Deutsch, “that I did 
not come lightly or irresponsibly to a position of feud with the 
officers of the University. Nevertheless I wish that you would 
express to them my profound regret that the project could not be 
operated in a spirit of greater mutual confidence and cordiality.” 

Having got that off his chest, Oppenheimer then wrote a long 
letter to Charles Lauritsen at Caltech expressing several 
misgivings about returning there and asking various questions, 
none of which, he emphasized, were conditions of his return, “but 
I think it will be apparent that what we do will be affected by the 
answers collectively.” He wanted to know, for example, what 
provisions there would be to support graduate students, and 
whether the department had enough money to buy a big 
cyclotron. He also urged on Lauritsen the merits of attracting 
Rabi to Pasadena. “Don’t you yourself think,” he wrote, “that it 
would be a good idea to bring a man, not ingrown in the 
institute, of such rare qualities as scientist and man?” But, more 
important than all these things, was his last question: 


Would the institute welcome and support, if in conscience we 
thought it right, my advisory participation in future atomic 
national policy? I am plenty worried about this, far more of 
course than about the personal things, and if there were a real 
chance of helping would want to feel that this was welcome. 


After the horrors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, what 
Oppenheimer wanted, more than anything, was a chance to turn 
the atomic bomb into—as he put it in a letter to an old family 
friend called Marcy Bier—“a real instrument in the establishment 
of peace.” That, he told her, “is almost the only thing right now 
that seems to matter.” 

At the beginning of September, Oppenheimer returned to Los 
Alamos to find that it was facing its first fatality. Henry K. 
Daghlian was a young physicist who had joined Los Alamos in the 
autumn of 1944, when, aged just twenty-three, he was recruited 
to work with Otto Frisch on the notorious “tickling the dragon’s 
tail” experiments. These involved bringing a mass of fissionable 
material to near-critical levels, a process Richard Feynman 
remarked was like tickling the tail of a sleeping dragon. Daghlian 
survived that experience, but on August 21, 1945, suffered an 
accident when performing similar experiments on plutonium. The 
point of these experiments was to determine how the critical 
mass of plutonium could be reduced by a tamper of tungsten 
carbide, and what Daghlian was doing was surrounding a 
plutonium core with bricks of the tamper material. As he was 
moving the final brick over the core, he was alerted by neutron 
counters to the fact that the addition of that brick would make 
the plutonium core supercritical. He tried to withdraw the brick 
quickly, but dropped it onto the plutonium assembly, at which 
point there was a burst of light and a release of vast amounts of 
radiation. He quickly disassembled the tamper he had built, but 
his body had been exposed to about 500 rem of radiation, and his 
right hand to about 20,000 rem (where 1,000 is regarded as a 
fatal dose). Immediately after the accident, Daghlian was rushed 
to the Los Alamos hospital, where he died on September 15. 
During those last twenty-six days of his life he suffered terribly 
from nausea, vomiting and, toward the end, an inability to 
reason. 

The haunting thought that could not now be dispelled was that 


what Henry Daghlian was suffering had been inflicted upon 
countless Japanese people in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, thereby 
challenging in the most dramatic way possible the sanguine 
responses given by Oppenheimer and Groves to the publicly 
expressed concern about the effects of radiation. The issue was 
one that especially irked Groves, who was determined to show to 
the public at large that reports of lingering radiation and the 
horrors of radiation sickness were exaggerated and that the risk 
presented by radiation poisoning was very small. Indeed, Groves 
thought the reports of radiation sickness were a Japanese hoax. 
To back himself up, he phoned a military doctor at Oak Ridge, 
Lieutenant Colonel Rea, and read out what the newspapers had 
reported about the suffering of radiation-sickness victims. “I think 
it’s good propaganda,” Rea told him. “That’s the feeling I have,” 
Groves replied. 

Groves was sufficiently troubled by the issue, however, to send 
a team of scientists to Japan to investigate the levels of radiation 
in Hiroshima and Nagasaki and to study its effects. Among the 
team, which was headed by General Farrell, were Phil Morrison 
and Robert Serber. “I’ll be delayed a couple of weeks in 
returning,” Serber wrote to his wife. “There’s a rather unpleasant 
job still to do.” After being in Japan for a couple of days, he told 
her: “The most striking impression continues to be the complete 
breakdown, bankruptcy, destitution of everything in Japan.” In a 
subsequent letter he wrote that any sympathy he might have felt 
for the Japanese people had been dispelled by meeting prisoners 
of war and hearing their stories of “callousness, starvation, and 
slave labour.” The tone changed again, however, when he got to 
Nagasaki and saw for himself the damage wrought by the bomb. 
“The ruins were hard enough to endure,” he wrote in his 
autobiography, “but the really harrowing experience was a visit 
to a Nagasaki hospital.” 


It was a makeshift hospital, a building with the front wall 
blown out, the patients on cots inside and on stretchers outside 
on the ground. This was five weeks after the bombing and the 
patients were mostly suffering from flash burn or radiation 
sickness. 


About three weeks earlier, soon after the survey team had 


arrived in Japan, General Farrell gave a press conference at the 
Imperial Hotel in Tokyo, at which he stated unequivocally that 
there was no radioactivity left on the ground at Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki and that all those who had died had been killed either 
by the blast or by the fires. No one, he insisted, had died from 
radiation sickness. When the Australian journalist Wilfred 
Burchett challenged this, saying that he had been to Hiroshima 
and had seen for himself people dying of radiation sickness, 
Farrell accused him of having succumbed to “Japanese 
propaganda.” Now Serber, Morrison and the other members of 
the team were seeing for themselves that Farrell had been wrong. 
It is true that their Geiger counters had been unable to detect 
radioactivity on the ground, but it was also undeniably true that 
many people, several weeks after the blasts, were dying horribly, 
as Henry K. Daghlian had died, because of their exposure to 
radiation. 

Serber and Morrison arrived back at Los Alamos on October 15. 
In a report that he gave to the people of Los Alamos (published as 
“Serber Describes Japan” in the Los Alamos Newsletter), Serber 
wrote: “No one that has not actually seen the completeness of the 
destruction in Hiroshima and Nagasaki can have any idea of what 
a terrible thing atomic warfare is.” In the light of that terror, 
Serber told his readers (and fellow workers in creating the bomb): 
“T hoped that there would be an unanimous insistence on the free 
interchange among all nations of information dealing with atomic 
power. The alternative seems to me a desperate arms race and 
one that can only end in terrible catastrophe.” 

By now this was a view shared by many, probably most, of the 
scientists at Los Alamos, who, indeed, had formed an 
organization—the Association of Los Alamos Scientistseo—with 
the express purpose of campaigning for such a position. The 
origins of this organization go back to the spring of 1945, when 
concerned scientists at Los Alamos got together for informal 
discussions of the political consequences of their work. This led, 
after the war, to a meeting of about sixty scientists on August 20, 
1945, at which they elected a committee, charged with the task 
of drawing up a statement of aims and organizing a more general 
meeting. By this time, those involved were unanimously agreed 
that, as one of their members put it, “the international control of 
atomic energy was the vital issue and should be the only issue 


with which the organization was concerned.” At a mass meeting 
on August 30, attended by no fewer than 500 people, the 
structure of the organization was decided and an executive 
committee, chaired by the young physicist William Higinbotham, 
was elected. Members of the committee included, among others, 
John Manley, Victor Weisskopf and Robert Wilson, the last of 
whom felt especially strongly about the issues raised, partly 
because he had tried—and failed—to generate public discussion 
about these issues before the bombing of Hiroshima, and partly 
because he had felt betrayed by the decision to use the bomb, 
without warning and without discussion among the scientists who 
had built it, on civilians. 

Within a week of this meeting the executive-committee 
members of ALAS had drafted a document urging upon the 
Truman administration a policy of international cooperation. “In 
the event of future wars,” the document warned, the use of 
atomic bombs “would quickly and thoroughly annihilate the 
important cities in all countries involved.” It must be assumed 
that “bombs will be developed which will be many times more 
effective” than the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs, and, 
moreover, that those bombs “will be available in large numbers.” 
Echoing the Scientific Advisory Panel report drafted by 
Oppenheimer soon after the Nagasaki bombing, the ALAS 
document emphasized that there was very little defense against 
such bombs, and that there was no “secret” about how to build a 
bomb: “The development of the atomic bomb has involved no 
new fundamental principles or concepts; it consisted entirely in 
the application and extension of information which was known 
throughout the world before intensive work started.” It was 
therefore “highly probable that with sufficient effort, other 
countries, who may, in fact, be well underway at this moment, 
could develop an atomic bomb within a few years.” What the 
scientists therefore presented as the only sane policy—the only 
policy that would avoid a disastrous arms race—was one of 
openness and collaboration with other countries in order to 
achieve the international control of atomic weapons that was a 
prerequisite for avoiding the horrors of future atomic war. 

On September 9, 1945, Oppenheimer sent a copy of the ALAS 
statement to George Harrison, telling him that it had been 
circulated to 300 scientists, just three of whom had refused to 


sign it. “You will probably recognize,” he told Harrison, “that the 
views presented are in closest harmony to those I have discussed 
with the Interim Committee.” A week went by without any 
response from the Truman administration, and on September 18 
Oppenheimer flew to Washington to act as an emissary for the 
Los Alamos scientists. In a teletype message back to Los Alamos, 
he reported: 


Mr. Harrison points out that since this document was presented 
to the President, who has regarded it as an expression of 
scientists’ views, it is not appropriate for anyone other than the 
President to release it for publication. It is my feeling, and the 
general feeling of all with whom I have talked, that public 
discussion of the issues involved is very much to be desired, 
but that it should follow rather than precede the President’s 
statement of national policy, which will be conveyed in his 
message to Congress. 


It is a measure of how trusted and revered Oppenheimer was 
among the scientists at Los Alamos that the executive committee 
of ALAS was able to convince its members to agree to the 
suppression of their document—at least until Truman announced 
his policy. 

The policy recommended by Truman was put before Congress 
on October 3 in the form of the May-Johnson Bill, named after its 
proposers: Representative Andrew May and Senator Edwin 
Johnson. To the dismay of many scientists—most notably, and 
most vocally, Leo Szilard and Harold Urey—the bill seemed to be 
founded upon the view that the United States had a “secret” that 
it needed to protect, rather than the philosophy of openness 
recommended by ALAS. May and Johnson were seen, by both the 
army and its critics, as politicians friendly to the military—May 
was the chairman of the House of Representatives Military Affairs 
Committee and Johnson was a member of the corresponding 
Senate Military Affairs Committee—and their bill reflected the 
military concern for security. Scientists guilty of violating 
security, the bill proposed, should be, at the very least, fined 
$100,000 and, at worst, imprisoned for up to ten years. 

“Tf this bill passes,” Szilard said at a meeting of the Atomic 
Scientists at Chicago (a group set up in parallel with, and with 


similar aims to, ALAS), “we have no choice but to get out of this 
work.” It is true, as Groves emphasized publicly at the time and 
emphasizes again in his autobiography, that the bill did not 
propose military control of atomic energy. What it proposed 
instead was the establishment of an Atomic Energy Commission, 
which would have authority over all aspects, both peaceful and 
military, of the U.S.’s atomic energy program. There would be 
nine commissioners, appointed by the President, who would be 
part-time and would appoint a general manager to conduct the 
day-to-day business. However, what worried scientists was not 
only the draconian measures proposed for maintaining secrecy 
(which, almost all scientists felt, was a lost cause—for the reasons 
given in the ALAS document), but also that military men would 
be allowed to serve as commissioners. The Atomic Energy 
Commission would not be, as most scientists felt it should be, an 
entirely civilian body. 

The May-Johnson Bill was passed quickly by the House, but 
when it reached the Senate it stalled over a territorial dispute 
between the Military Affairs Committee and the Foreign Relations 
Committee about who had jurisdiction over atomic-energy affairs. 
The consequent delay allowed opponents of the bill to marshal 
their forces. Led by Szilard, the scientists who had worked for the 
Manhattan Project—at Chicago, Oak Ridge and Los Alamos— 
began campaigning for the May-Johnson Bill to be scrapped and 
for the appointment of a joint congressional committee to 
reconsider atomic policy. 

To many people’s surprise, Oppenheimer not only did not join 
this campaign, but argued publicly against it, declaring his 
support for the bill and urging his colleagues to support it as well. 
On October 7, Oppenheimer returned from Washington to Los 
Alamos with a copy of the bill, which he discussed with the ALAS 
executive committee, telling them that he, Lawrence, Compton 
and Fermi were all in favor of passing the bill, on the grounds 
that it was the best way of getting what they all wanted: 
international cooperation on controlling atomic bombs. 
Astonishingly, the result of that discussion was that the 
committee voted unanimously to support the bill, putting ALAS 
somewhat at odds with many of the other scientists involved in 
the Manhattan Project at Chicago and Oak Ridge. 

Why was Oppenheimer prepared to side with the military and 


use his influence among scientists to give the military what they 
wanted? Frank Oppenheimer, himself active in ALAS, has said 
that his brother “felt that he had to change things from within.” 
This may be so, but one cannot help thinking that Oppenheimer 
was spending more effort in ensuring that he stayed “within” 
than he did attempting to effect any change. It is reminiscent of 
his willingness, when the Los Alamos laboratory was being 
established, to wear military uniform and attempt to persuade all 
the other scientists to follow suit. As on that occasion, 
Oppenheimer, in supporting the May-Johnson Bill, had 
underestimated the strength of the opposing feeling. 

On October 11, Herbert Anderson, who after working at Los 
Alamos had moved back to Chicago at the end of the war, wrote 
to William Higinbotham expressing some of that feeling. “I must 
confess,” he told him, “my confidence in our leaders 
Oppenheimer, Lawrence, Compton and Fermi, all members of the 
Scientific Panel advising the Interim Committee and who 
enjoined us to have faith in them and not influence this 
legislation, is shaken.” Anderson’s own view, shared by many at 
Chicago, was that the security measures proposed by the bill were 
“frightening.” “They place every scientist in jeopardy of a jail 
sentence or a large fine.” 

Making sure that the scientists opposing the May-Johnson Bill 
did not give up without a fight, Ed Condon, Leo Szilard and 
others traveled to Washington to meet sympathetic Congressmen 
the day after Anderson’s letter to Higinbotham. They found it 
surprisingly easy to gain a sympathetic hearing. “Mention to a 
Senator’s secretary at the door that you’re a ‘nuclear physicist’ 
and you come from Los Alamos,” Szilard’s assistant, Bernard Feld, 
said, “and you were ushered right in to see the Senator.” 

Meanwhile, Robert Wilson, who did not share either 
Oppenheimer’s view of the May-Johnson Bill or the ALAS 
executive committee’s faith in Oppenheimer, took it upon himself 
to rewrite the original ALAS document and issue it as a press 
release. “It was a declaration of independence from our leaders at 
Los Alamos,” Wilson later said, adding that the lesson he had 
learned was that those leaders, however admirable they might be, 
were, if put in a position of power, “not necessarily to be relied 
upon.” The press release, which made the front page of the New 
York Times, again made it very clear that, in contrast to the May- 


Johnson Bill’s emphasis on the importance of tight security, the 
scientists who had created the atomic bomb did not believe the 
technology could be kept a secret for very long. “The scientific 
background necessary to develop an atomic bomb,” the statement 
began, “is generally known throughout the world.” 


The technical design and industrial methods of production are 
at present the secret of this country, Great Britain and Canada. 
However, it is certain that other countries can achieve these 
ends by independent research. Before many years they also 
may be manufacturing bombs, bombs which may be tens, 
hundreds, or even thousands of times more powerful than 
those which caused such devastation at Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. 


Wilson’s statement was published on October 14. The next day, 
Robert Serber returned to Los Alamos from Japan. He thus 
arrived to find everybody discussing politics, and in particular the 
issue that he, with his firsthand experiences in Nagasaki and 
Hiroshima still fresh in his mind, regarded as of crucial 
importance: the necessity for international cooperation. 

As it happened, the following day was Oppenheimer’s last as 
director of Los Alamos and the occasion for a large ceremony at 
which he, on behalf of the laboratory, accepted from General 
Groves the Army-Navy Award for Excellence and a Certificate of 
Appreciation from the Secretary of War. To a crowd of several 
thousand, practically the entire population of Los Alamos, 
Oppenheimer delivered what Dorothy McKibbin has described as 
“one of the best speeches that has ever been done.” It was 
certainly a very skillful piece of work. Somehow it managed to 
address the controversy that had engulfed the atomic scientists in 
a way that avoided saying anything particularly controversial and 
also expressed what many people felt. “It is our hope,” he began, 
“that in years to come we may look at this scroll, and all that it 
signifies, with pride.” 


Today that pride must be tempered with concern. If atomic 
bombs are to be added as new weapons to the arsenals of the 
warring world, or to the arsenals of nations preparing for war, 
then the time will come when mankind will curse the names of 


Los Alamos and Hiroshima. 


“The peoples of this world must unite or they will perish,” he 
went on. The war had “written these words,” and the atomic 
bomb “has spelled them out for all men to understand.” 

Immediately after the ceremony Oppenheimer went to 
Washington. He went with the earnest intention of doing 
whatever he could, wielding whatever political influence his 
newfound fame had given him, to ensure that the world, in the 
face of the threat of annihilation brought about by atomic bombs, 
united rather than perished. As he left for Washington, however, 
he knew that, despite the warm reception given to his speech at 
Los Alamos, he had been unable even to unite those scientists 
who agreed with him about the importance of international 
cooperation and control of atomic energy. Dealing with top-level 
politicians and military men who did not share this point of view 
was, he well knew, going to be the biggest challenge he had yet 
faced. 


60 That the initials of this organization spell out the word “alas” was probably 
intentional, but I have seen no conclusive confirmation of this. 


1945-1967 


The Insider Scientist 


he day after_ his resignation as 
director of the Los Alamos laboratory, Oppenheinter was in 


Washington to give evidence to Congress as it considered the 
May-Johnson Bill. “He’d better be careful,” his secretary, Anne 
Wilson, said to her predecessor, Priscilla Greene. “He is going to 
get into terrible trouble.” What prompted this sense that he was 
in danger, she later said, was her awareness of how many 
enemies Oppenheimer had made. “The woods,” she remarked, 
“were always thick with people who had nasty things to say 
about Robert.” It was, she observed, the downside of being so 
charismatic: “There were always people who were vying for his 
attention, and those who felt snubbed by him, or felt hurt 
because they thought Robert didn’t love them anymore.” 

In Washington, Oppenheimer spoke to a Senate subcommittee 
on science on October 17, 1945, and to the House Committee on 
Military Affairs the following day. To the senators, Oppenheimer 
emphasized that his testimony would be “somewhat academic,” 
corresponding “to my position as professor of physics rather than 
to my position as maker of bombs.” He spoke in general terms 
about the need scientists felt for freedom, making what he 
described as “a plea for not over-organizing the work of 
scientists, and for trusting, as we have in the past, their own 
judgment of what work is worth doing.” The implication was 
clear: even though it had turned out that the work of scientists 
had enormous political and military consequences, the planning 
of scientific research should not be placed in the hands of 
politicians or the military, but rather handed back to the 
scientists themselves. In context, this was a somewhat odd point 
to emphasize, given that he was in Washington to lend support to 


a bill widely disliked by scientists precisely because they saw it as 
handing control of their work over to the military. 

The tension between Oppenheimer’s plea for scientific freedom 
and his support for a bill that sought to enforce secrecy through 
the use of extremely harsh punishments was exploited by Howard 
J. Curtis from the Association of Oak Ridge Scientists, who was 
there to give evidence against the bill. “If the so-called secret of 
the atomic bomb is to be kept in this country,” Curtis argued, 
“then American science as we have known it, will cease to exist.” 
Science, as Oppenheimer himself had stressed, required freedom, 
and that was clearly incompatible with the bill’s proposals for 
trying to keep some scientific facts a secret. Oppenheimer tried to 
argue that, because technology and science were two different 
things, there was “no technical difficulty about keeping 
considerable parts of this secret” without interfering with 
scientific research, but Curtis rejected this, since: “The two are so 
closely connected that it would be impossible to pick out any 
single fact and say ‘this is a scientific fact, devoid of industrial 
applications’ and any attempt to do so seems ludicrous.” The only 
solution to the problem of secrecy, Curtis concluded, was 
international control of atomic energy. 

Oppenheimer’s problem was that he agreed entirely with this 
point of view, but had somehow managed to position himself on 
the other side of the argument. The reason was that he did not 
much care what domestic policy was adopted, since he was 
certain the real issue was the international question; whatever 
domestic policy was adopted would be a stopgap measure, since 
it would have to be changed in the light of any international 
agreement that was reached. He backed the May-Johnson Bill, 
therefore, not because he believed it was a wise policy, but 
because he wanted to see some bill—any bill—passed so that the 
real questions, the international questions, could be discussed. 

Not that his advocacy of the May-Johnson Bill was particularly 
full-blooded. Indeed, it seemed almost deliberately feeble. Upon 
being asked specifically what he thought of the bill, he replied 
airily: “The Johnson bill, I don’t know much about.” So lukewarm 
was his support of the bill that the following day his remarks 
were reported by one newspaper as an “oblique attack” on it. The 
apparent revelation (it is very hard to believe that he was telling 
the truth) that he did not actually know much about the bill was 


received by the scientists at Los Alamos, whom he had earnestly 
urged to support it, with understandable misgivings. It is reported 
that when he met some ALAS members after giving his testimony, 
he received what one of them described as “the coolest reception 
I have ever seen Oppie given by a group of scientists.” At the next 
meeting of the ALAS executive committee Victor Weisskopf 
recommended that in future “Oppie’s suggestions be studied more 
critically.” 

After his appearance at the Senate, Oppenheimer attended a 
dinner organized by Watson Davies of the Science Service news 
agency, with the aim of educating senators about atomic energy. 
Fermi, who also supported the May-Johnson Bill, had been 
invited, as had (representing the other side of the debate) 
Condon, Szilard and Urey. Among the senators present was Brien 
McMahon, the Democratic senator for Connecticut, who had 
become the champion in the Senate of those opposed to the May- 
Johnson Bill. Also present were two members of Truman’s 
government, James Newman and Henry A. Wallace, who were 
likewise sympathetic to the scientists opposing the bill. If 
Oppenheimer did not already realize it, the dinner must have 
made him aware that the May-Johnson Bill—disliked by 
scientists, opposed by influential senators and even rejected by 
members of Truman’s administration—had very little chance of 
becoming law. He was on the losing side. 

Henry Wallace, who had been Vice President during 
Roosevelt’s third term and was now Truman’s Commerce 
Secretary, recorded in his diary that at the dinner Oppenheimer 
told him he wanted to speak to him privately. They agreed to 
meet the following morning to walk together through downtown 
Washington up to Wallace’s office at the Department of 
Commerce, before Oppenheimer went on to Capitol Hill to give 
evidence to the House of Representatives. “I never saw a man in 
such an extremely nervous state as Oppenheimer,” Wallace wrote. 
“He seemed to feel that the destruction of the entire human race 
was imminent... He thinks the mishandling of the situation at 
Potsdam has prepared the way for the eventual slaughter of tens 
of millions or perhaps hundreds of millions of innocent people.” 
Seeing that Oppenheimer obviously wanted to have a personal 
and direct influence on U.S. policy, Wallace advised him to 
contact the new Secretary of War, Robert Patterson, asking for an 


appointment with the President. 

After leaving Wallace, Oppenheimer went to give evidence to 
the House Committee on Military Affairs, the meeting chaired by 
Andrew May himself. A number of other scientists had also been 
invited, including Ed Condon and Leo Szilard. May opened 
proceedings at 10 a.m. with a short speech in which he denied 
that his committee was trying to rush the bill through and 
promised to give “patient consideration” to the scientists who had 
come to give evidence. Then he called his first witness, “a Dr. 
Sighland”—that is, Leo Szilard. In his testimony Szilard outlined 
his own proposal for the control of atomic energy, which 
involved dividing the task into three—1. the production of fissile 
materials; 2. the organization of scientific research; and 3. the 
design and production of bombs—each to be administered by a 
government-owned, civilian corporation. Under his plan there 
would also be a commission, consisting of cabinet members, 
which would coordinate national and foreign policy relating to 
atomic energy. In the question period that followed Szilard was 
asked very few questions about his proposal and a great many 
about his nationality and his disputes with the army. He was 
followed by Herbert Anderson, who read out a statement from 
scientists at Oak Ridge and Chicago that expressed their criticisms 
of the May-Johnson Bill. 

After a break for lunch, Compton and Oppenheimer gave their 
testimonies. Oppenheimer’s, Szilard later said, was a 
“masterpiece.” What he meant, it seems, is that it was a masterly 
piece of equivocation. “He talked in such a manner that the 
congressmen present thought he was for the bill but the physicists 
present all thought that he was against the bill.” For example, 
when asked if he thought it was a good bill, Oppenheimer 
replied: 


The bill was drafted with the detailed supervision of Dr. Bush 
and Dr. Conant, with the knowledge and agreement of the 
former Secretary of War, Mr. Stimson ... I think if they liked 
the philosophy of this bill and urged this bill it is a very strong 
argument. 


“To the congressmen,” Szilard said, “this might mean that 
Oppenheimer thinks this is a good bill, but no physicist believes 


that Oppenheimer will form an opinion on the basis of his good 
opinion of somebody else’s opinion.” 

It seems possible that Szilard (assuming he was not being 
sarcastic) was crediting Oppenheimer here with too much 
subtlety. It may be that, realizing the May-Johnson Bill was a lost 
cause, Oppenheimer shifted his emphasis away from defending 
the bill and toward flattering the people who, whatever the fate 
of the bill, would help to determine the atomic policy of the 
United States. When he was asked whether he was bothered by 
the fact that the May-Johnson Bill allowed military men to act as 
commissioners, he replied: “I think it is a matter not what 
uniform a man wears but what kind of man he is.” He added: “I 
cannot think of an administrator in whom I would have more 
confidence than General Marshall.” 

In connection with the issue at stake in the dispute between 
himself and Curtis, Oppenheimer endeavored to put some 
distance between science and bomb-making. Producing the bomb, 
he said, was “an enormous technological development,” but: “It 
was not science, and its whole spirit was one of frantic 
exploitation of the known; it was not that of the sober, modest 
attempt to penetrate the unknown.” His chief concern, it seems, 
both on this occasion and during the previous day’s meeting, was 
to make what he described as “a plea for leaving much of the 
scientific strength of the country in the universities and technical 
schools, the small institutions in which scientists have worked in 
the past and in which they will have the leisure and privacy to 
think those essential, dangerous thoughts which are the true 
substance of science.” 

The plea was well made, and revealing of Oppenheimer’s own 
desire at the time to leave the bomb-making of Los Alamos 
behind him in favor of a return to the purity of theoretical 
physics, but, as an argument in favor of the May-Johnson Bill, it 
was, to say the least, unconvincing. Indeed, the proposers of that 
bill might well have thought that, with supporters like 
Oppenheimer, they had little need of enemies. In any case, the 
bill was rejected and a Senate special committee on atomic 
energy was set up, with Brien McMahon as its chairman, to 
consider the issues afresh and propose alternative legislation. The 
first round in what would be an ongoing battle between the 
scientists and the military for control of atomic-energy policy had 


thus been won by the scientists. Oppenheimer, in his efforts to 
play the part of an “insider scientist,” had succeeded—for the 
time being anyway—only in being pushed a little further away 
from the center. 

A golden opportunity to reverse this and to gain access to the 
very top of U.S. policy-making came on October 25, just a week 
after his ineffective testimony to Congress, when, having followed 
Wallace’s advice, Oppenheimer was granted an interview with 
the President. The meeting, however, went badly, resulting in 
Truman telling his Undersecretary of State, Dean Acheson: “I 
don’t want to see that son-of-a-bitch in this office ever again.” 
Evidently Oppenheimer’s remarkable ability to charm just the 
right person at just the right time—which had worked so well 
with Max Born in 1926 and General Groves in 1942—had, on this 
occasion, deserted him. 

No doubt part of the problem was that Oppenheimer’s view of 
Truman was clouded by the conviction he had expressed to 
Wallace: that Truman had made a terrible mess of things at 
Potsdam. By not being open with the Russians and gaining their 
trust in preparation for international collaboration on atomic 
weapons, Truman, Oppenheimer believed, had missed a chance— 
perhaps the only chance—to avert a nuclear arms race, thereby 
exposing humanity to the possibility of a war fought with atomic 
bombs and the consequent slaughter of hundreds of millions of 
people. He was therefore not inclined, as he would have been if 
he had met Roosevelt, to treat the President with deferential 
respect. So when Truman began the conversation by telling 
Oppenheimer, in reference to the debates then going on about the 
May-Johnson Bill and its alternatives, “The first thing is to define 
the national problem, then the international,” Oppenheimer did 
nothing to disguise or conceal his disagreement. He sat in silence 
for an uncomfortably long time, and then, when Truman looked 
at him impatiently for a response, simply contradicted him. 
“Perhaps,” Oppenheimer said, “it would be best first to define the 
international problem.” 

The interview went from bad to worse when Truman asked 
Oppenheimer when he thought the Russians would develop their 
own atomic bomb. Oppenheimer replied, as he had when asked 
the same question in Congress, that he did not know. Truman 
then said that he did know. The answer, he said confidently, was 


“never.” Obviously Truman had not understood what 
Oppenheimer had said in his final Scientific Panel report and 
what the Los Alamos scientists had tried to tell him in their ALAS 
document: that the technology of using the energy released from 
nuclear fission to make a bomb was not something that could be 
kept a secret; it was something that scientists everywhere, 
including Russia, would be able to work out for themselves. Two 
days after this meeting with Oppenheimer, Truman showed his 
lack of understanding of this point again, this time in public, 
when in his Navy Day address given in New York he spoke of 
keeping the destructive power of atomic bombs in the possession 
of the U.S. as a “sacred trust.” 

“IT saw him [Oppenheimer] pretty often around that time,” 
William Higinbotham has recalled. “From the way he looked, I 
think I could tell that Truman’s statement and_ the 
incomprehension it showed just knocked the heart out of him.” In 
the interview with Truman, Oppenheimer’s dejection must have 
been visibly manifest, since Truman—shocked at the gap between 
Oppenheimer’s reputation as a suave, brilliant, articulate high 
achiever and the hesitant, mumbling figure in front of him—was 
moved to ask what the matter was. “Mr. President,” said 
Oppenheimer slowly, “I feel I have blood on my hands.” The 
remark infuriated Truman and effectively put an end both to the 
meeting and to Oppenheimer’s chances of being treated by the 
President as a trusted insider. “I told him,” Truman said 
afterward, “the blood was on my hands—to let me worry about 
that.” Six months after the meeting, Truman was still railing 
against the “cry-baby scientist” who had come to his office “and 
spent most of his time wringing his hands and telling me they had 
blood on them because of his discovery of atomic energy.” 
Truman’s final words to Oppenheimer were: “Don’t worry, we’re 
going to work something out, and you’re going to help us.” As he 
left the Oval Office, however, Oppenheimer would have been 
only too aware that he was not, and never would be, someone the 
President would turn to if he wanted help. 

Oppenheimer left Washington a chastened man. His attempts to 
insinuate himself into the top levels of U.S. politics had failed, 
and in making them he had alienated the politically active 
scientists whom he had hoped to lead. A chance to win back the 
trust of some of those scientists came at the beginning of 


November, when he was invited back to Los Alamos to give a 
speech to ALAS. It was a chance that he seized. His return to Los 
Alamos was a triumph. Five hundred people crammed into the 
largest movie theater on the Hill to hear him, and, according to 
Alice Kimball Smith: “Years later, when former ALAS members 
were asked about postwar political activity, the answer invariably 
began (and sometimes ended) with ‘I remember Oppie’s speech.’ ” 

In content and tone the speech contrasted sharply with the 
testimony Oppenheimer had given in Washington. Indeed, in 
several places, it flatly contradicted what he had said in 
Washington. For example, whereas he had told the House of 
Representatives that making the bomb had been “an enormous 
technological development,” but “it was not science,” in his 
speech to ALAS he emphasized that it was science and that was 
precisely the motivation for doing it. There were many motives 
for being involved in making the bomb, Oppenheimer said in his 
speech. There was the fear that the enemy would get there first, 
there was the sense of adventure, there were various political 
considerations. “But when you come right down to it,” 
Oppenheimer told the members of ALAS, “the reason we did this 
job is because it was an organic necessity.” 


If you are a scientist you cannot stop such a thing. If you area 
scientist you believe that it is good to find out how the world 
works; that it is good to find out what the realities are; that it 
is good to turn over to mankind at large the greatest possible 
power to control the world and to deal with it according to its 
lights and values. 


Similarly inconsistent with what he had said in Washington 
were the remarks in the speech about secrecy. Whereas in his 
appearance before the Senate he had defended the May-Johnson 
Bill’s concern with secrecy, to the scientists at Los Alamos he 
declared that “the almost unanimous resistance of scientists to the 
imposition of control and secrecy is a justified position,” since 
“secrecy strikes at the very root of what science is.” 

Again whereas in Washington he had been respectful to the 
point of being deferential to those in power, in this speech he was 
openly critical of the President, remarking that “the views 
suggested in the President’s Navy Day speech are not entirely 


encouraging.” In particular, he took issue with Truman’s U.S.- 
centric view of the issue: the idea that the world could, and had 
to, look to the U.S. to keep possession of atomic bombs as a 
“sacred trust.” This “insistent tone of unilateral responsibility for 
the handling of atomic weapons,” Oppenheimer told his 
audience, “is surely the thing which must have troubled you, and 
which troubled me, in the official statements.” 

In place of Truman’s insistence on putting America’s interests 
first, and domestic concerns before international ones, 
Oppenheimer outlined a robustly international perspective. What 
he proposed was agreement between nations, first to set up an 
international atomic-energy commission that, without any 
interference from the heads of any particular state, had control 
over the development of peaceful uses of atomic energy, and 
second to “say that no bombs be made.” In every respect the 
speech echoed the views of the scientists at Los Alamos, and they 
left the theater feeling that Oppenheimer had spoken for them. 
He may have failed to win the President around to his way of 
seeing the issues, but he had at least reestablished himself as the 
voice, the heart and the conscience of the Los Alamos scientists. 

Oppenheimer had begun his ALAS speech with a rueful remark 
about himself. He would like, he said, to speak to them as a 
fellow scientist, adding: “If some of you have long memories, 
perhaps you will regard it as justified.” It felt like a long time had 
passed since he was able to concentrate on the kind of pure, 
disinterested, theoretical physics that he loved, and he was 
anxious to return to that way of thinking. That is why he had 
resigned his directorship of Los Alamos so quickly; he wanted to 
return to academic life. Though he was flattered by the offers 
from the East—Harvard, Princeton, Columbia—what he wanted 
most of all was to return to either Berkeley or Caltech, or both. As 
he explained in a letter to Conant, rejecting the Harvard offer, “I 
would like to go back to California for the rest of my days” 
because “I have a sense of belonging there which I will probably 
not get over.” 

Nevertheless, as his letters of August to Deutsch, Lawrence and 
Lauritsen had revealed, he had serious misgivings about both 
Berkeley and Caltech. In letters to Sproul and Birge written at the 
end of September, he asked them to say frankly whether, in the 
light of the quarrels he had had with officials from the University 


of California during his war work, he would be entirely welcome 
at Berkeley. Both assured him that he would find an extremely 
warm welcome there, but he remained unconvinced. His doubts 
about Caltech were more easily overcome and on October 16, the 
day he resigned from Los Alamos, he wrote to William Houston, 
the chair of the physics department at Caltech, formally accepting 
the offer of a professorship of physics and promising to arrive in 
Pasadena during the first week of November. For the moment, 
nothing was decided about Berkeley. He had not actually 
resigned his position there, so the door remained open for him to 
return. For the time being, his leave of absence was extended, 
giving him more time to decide whether he wanted to return. 

In the meantime, after giving his ALAS speech, he and Kitty 
drove to California. Leaving Kitty in Berkeley, Oppenheimer went 
on to Pasadena, where he stayed as a guest of the Tolmans. For 
the following term this was to be the pattern: Oppenheimer 
spending one or two nights a week in Pasadena, while Kitty and 
the children remained in Berkeley. At Caltech, he later claimed: “I 
did actually give a course, but it is obscure to me how I gave it 
now.” Indeed, it is difficult to see how he could possibly have 
given a course. As well as arriving late, he was called back to 
Washington several times to give evidence to McMahon’s Senate 
special committee. “I was sort of reluctant to do it,” he later said, 
“on the ground that I hoped to stay put. But I came back.” 

What compelled him to keep going back to Washington, despite 
the strong urge to “stay put,” was the hope that he might have 
some influence in directing U.S. policy away from the 
unilateralism of Truman’s public utterances and toward the 
internationalism espoused by most scientists. The gulf between 
scientists and politicians, and the horror with which scientists 
contemplated military control over scientific research, were 
increased at the end of November 1945, when newspapers 
reported that U.S. forces in Japan had seized and destroyed five 
cyclotrons that belonged to Japanese universities. The machines 
were cut to pieces with welding torches and then the fragmented 
parts were buried deep in the Pacific Ocean. The brutality, the 
incomprehension and the naked stupidity of this act filled 
scientists everywhere with revulsion and ended forever any 
chance of atomic scientists in the States agreeing to allow the U.S. 
Army any role in directing and organizing their research. 


In his efforts to push forward an internationalist perspective on 
atomic energy, Oppenheimer discovered that he had an extremely 
welcome ally. Isidor Rabi, it turned out, had been thinking along 
exactly the same lines. Rabi was then living on Riverside Drive, 
where Oppenheimer grew up, and, when Rabi was on the East 
Coast Oppenheimer would often stay with him. “Oppenheimer 
and I met frequently and discussed these questions thoroughly,” 
Rabi later told Jeremy Bernstein. “I remember one meeting with 
him, on Christmas Day of 1945, in my apartment. From the 
window of my study we could watch blocks of ice floating past on 
the Hudson.” By the end of that evening Rabi and Oppenheimer 
had arrived at a plan for taking control of atomic-energy policy 
out of the hands of individual governments and giving it to the 
international community as a whole. 

In the New Year of 1946, Oppenheimer was provided with an 
opportunity of putting his and Rabi’s plan into effect when he 
was appointed to a Board of Consultants advising a special 
committee drawn up by Secretary Byrnes. The committee was 
charged with the task of drawing up a proposal for international 
control of nuclear weapons and was chaired by Undersecretary of 
State Dean Acheson. He appointed as chair of the Board of 
Consultants a liberal New Dealer, David Lilienthal. From 
Oppenheimer’s point of view, Lilienthal turned out to be a perfect 
choice, not least because he developed a respect for Oppenheimer 
that bordered on hero worship. 

Oppenheimer and Lilienthal first met on January 22, 1946, 
when Oppenheimer came to Washington to attend the first 
meeting of the Board of Consultants. They met in Oppenheimer’s 
hotel room, where, Lilienthal recorded in his diary, Oppenheimer 
“walked back and forth, making funny ‘high’ sounds between 
sentences or phrases as he paced the room, looking at the floor.” 
“T left liking him,” he added, “greatly impressed with his flash of 
a mind.” The next day, when he saw Oppenheimer in action in a 
meeting of Acheson’s committee (the members of which included 
Conant, Bush and Groves), Lilienthal’s admiration was 
unrestrained. Oppenheimer, he wrote, was “an extraordinary 
personage” and “a really great teacher”—his evidence to the 
committee being, for Lilienthal, “one of the most memorable 
intellectual and emotional experiences of my life.” He later told 
the lawyer Herbert Marks that it was “worth living a lifetime just 


to know that mankind has been able to produce such a being” as 
Oppenheimer. 

Nor was Lilienthal alone in his admiration of Oppenheimer. 
“All the participants, I think,” Dean Acheson later wrote, “agree 
that the most stimulating and creative mind among us was Robert 
Oppenheimer’s.” Not that Oppenheimer’s influence was 
universally welcomed. Groves, in particular, looked on in dismay 
at the way things were going. He had not wanted to appoint a 
Board of Consultants, believing that he, Conant and Bush “knew 
more about the broad aspects of the problem ... than any panel 
that could be assembled,” and did not like the composition of the 
board that was, against his advice, appointed. Lilienthal, Groves 
remarked, “had little or no knowledge of the subject whatever,” 
and he was rather scathing about the reverence for Oppenheimer 
that prevailed among the members of the board. “Everybody 
genuflected,” he sniffed. “Lilienthal got so bad he would consult 
Oppie on what tie to wear in the morning.” 

Not only was Oppenheimer the most respected person on the 
Board of Consultants, but he was also the only scientist. He 
therefore had little trouble imposing his views on the other 
members and turning the whole process of framing a proposed 
international policy on atomic energy into a vehicle for 
advancing the views that Bohr had developed during the war and 
that he and Rabi had discussed on Christmas Day. The first 
meeting of the Board was on January 23, and from then until the 
Board submitted its report to the Secretary of State on March 16, 
the business of drafting the proposal took up all of Oppenheimer’s 
time. He later described the first few weeks like this: 


The way it worked is that we met and in the first few weeks, a 
week or two, my job was that of teacher. I would get back at 
the blackboard and say you can make energy this way in a 
periodic table, and that way and that way. This is the way 
bombs are made and reactors are made. I gave, in other words, 
a course. I gave parts of this course also to Mr. Acheson and 
Mr. McCloy at night informally. Then we listened to parts of it 
that I didn’t know anything about, where the raw materials 
were, and what kind of headache that was. Then everybody 
was kind of depressed, the way people are about the atom, and 
we decided to take a recess. 


On February 2, Oppenheimer sent Lilienthal a long memo that 
became the foundation of the board’s report. Its central idea was 
very radical. What Oppenheimer proposed was that a single 
international agency, the Atomic Development Authority, should 
be established with extremely far-reaching powers. It would not 
only have responsibility for all aspects of the development and 
control of atomic energy, including the power to inspect the 
atomic facilities in any nation in the world, but would also 
actually own all the uranium and every atomic-energy plant in 
the world. Under the terms of Oppenheimer’s proposal, no nation 
would be allowed to build atomic bombs and no nation would be 
able to build atom bombs, since all the materials necessary for 
such bombs would be in the hands of the Atomic Development 
Authority. 

On March 7, Acheson’s committee, together with its associated 
Board of Consultants, met to discuss and vote on a plan that was 
substantially drawn from Oppenheimer’s memo. Remarkably, all 
except one voted in favor of the plan. Predictably the one 
exception was Groves, who was implacably opposed to the idea 
of giving up the U.S. monopoly of atomic weapons and handing 
over to the United Nations America’s uranium, its separation 
plants, its plutonium plants and its advanced knowledge. Despite 
Groves’s opposition, however, the plan was approved, and, after a 
few revisions and amendments were made, was sent to Secretary 
of State Byrnes on March 16. To Groves’s horror, the State 
Department authorized publication of the report, which became 
known as the “Acheson-Lilienthal Plan.” Acheson’s committee 
had advised against publication, Groves says in_ his 
autobiography, since “we did not feel it wise to disclose to the 
Russians just how far the United States was willing to go in 
sharing its knowledge before negotiations had even been 
arranged for.” 

In fact, the United States government was not willing to go as 
far as the Acheson-Lilienthal Plan proposed, and quickly took 
steps to ensure that it would not be required to do so. On 
March 5, just two days before the Acheson committee met to 
consider Oppenheimer’s plan, the thinking that would dominate 
the policy of both the U.S. and the UK was expressed with great 
force by Winston Churchill in a speech he gave in Fulton, 
Missouri. The speech, which is generally regarded as marking the 


beginning of the Cold War, famously described the growth of 
Soviet influence in Eastern Europe as the descent of an “iron 
curtain,” behind which was “the Soviet Sphere.” The spread of 
Soviet influence, he urged, must be contained by—if necessary— 
military force. The view put forward by Churchill could not have 
been more antithetical to Oppenheimer’s. Indeed, at times he 
gave the impression of arguing directly against the views that 
were embodied in the Acheson-Lilienthal Plan: 


It would nevertheless, ladies and gentlemen, be wrong and 
imprudent to entrust the secret knowledge or experience of the 
atomic bomb, which the United States, Great Britain and 
Canada now share, to the world organisation [the UN], while it 
is still in its infancy. It would be criminal madness to cast it 
adrift in this still agitated and un-united world. No one in any 
country has slept less well in their beds because this knowledge 
and the method and the raw materials to apply it are at present 
largely retained in American hands. 


Having lost the last election to Clement Attlee, Churchill was 
not at this time Prime Minister and was not, officially at any rate, 
speaking for the UK or the U.S. government. But any doubts that 
the views of Truman and Byrnes accorded better with those of 
Churchill than with those advanced in the Acheson-Lilienthal 
Plan would soon be removed. 

On the very day that he received the plan, Byrnes appointed as 
his spokesman at the United Nations on the international control 
of atomic energy a seventy-five-year-old financier called Bernard 
Baruch, who, he knew, would be opposed to its proposals. “That 
was the day I gave up hope,” Oppenheimer later said. As well as 
being politically conservative and skeptical about international 
control of atomic energy, Baruch had a vested interest in not 
surrendering ownership of uranium, having investments in a 
company that had a stake in uranium mines. As soon as he was 
appointed, Baruch set to work on “revising” the Acheson- 
Lilienthal Plan, turning it into, as Byrnes put it to Acheson, “a 
workable plan.” To help him in this aim, Baruch chose a team of 
politically right-wing advisors that included two bankers, a 
mining engineer and, as “interpreter of military policy,” General 
Groves. 


Three months separated the appointment of Baruch on 
March 16 and his appearance at the United Nations, where he 
presented the U.S. proposal for international control of atomic 
energy on June 14. During those months the proposal underwent 
fundamental changes that altered completely its character as an 
expression of the Bohr-Rabi-Oppenheimer philosophy of 
international cooperation. Also during those months 
Oppenheimer’s personal position as a trusted and prestigious 
advisor to the U.S. government was fatally compromised by an 
increasingly vicious campaign against him, led by powerful 
figures in the U.S. political establishment. 

Chief among those figures was J. Edgar Hoover, the head of the 
FBI, whose opinion that Oppenheimer was a dangerous and 
subversive communist had been entirely unaffected by the fame 
and celebrity that Oppenheimer had acquired as “Father of the 
Atom Bomb.” On April 26, 1946, Hoover wrote to the Attorney 
General, Tom C. Clark, recommending “technical surveillance” 
(that is, wiretapping) of Oppenheimer “for the purpose of 
determining the extent of his contacts with Soviet agents, and for 
the additional purpose of identifying other espionage agents.” 
Permission was granted, and a bug was installed on 
Oppenheimer’s phone on May8. It did not take the 
Oppenheimers long to work out that they were being listened to. 
Every phone call was transcribed and sent by the FBI San 
Francisco office to Hoover, including a conversation between 
Oppenheimer and Kitty on May 10 that included the following 
exchange: 


JRO: ... Are you there, dear? 

KO: Yes 

JRO: The FBI must just have hung up. 
KO: (Giggles) 


Two days later, the FBI summary of another conversation 
between Oppenheimer and Kitty included the following: “At this 
point there was a clicking sound and Oppenheimer asked, ‘Are 
you still there? I wonder who’s listening to us?’ Kitty replies 
lackadaisically, ‘The FBI, dear.’ ” 

The transcripts of Oppenheimer’s phone calls were forwarded 
to Byrnes, who would have taken special interest in the 


disparaging way in which Oppenheimer discussed Baruch—whom 
he invariably called “the old man”—in these conversations. 

Relations between Oppenheimer and Baruch during this time 
went from bad to worse. They first met early in April, at a time 
when Baruch was trying to recruit Oppenheimer as a scientific 
advisor. The meeting, reminiscent of Oppenheimer’s encounter 
with Truman the previous October, was a disaster. Baruch forced 
Oppenheimer to admit that his proposals, with their emphasis on 
openness and cooperation, were fundamentally incompatible with 
the character of Stalin’s Soviet regime. Baruch also horrified 
Oppenheimer by revealing some of the ways in which he wanted 
to amend the Acheson-Lilienthal Plan. The United Nations, 
Baruch thought, should authorize the U.S. to keep a stockpile of 
atomic bombs to serve as a deterrent. He also wanted to restrict 
the power of the proposed Atomic Development Authority in two 
crucial ways: first, it should not own and control uranium mines; 
and second, it should not have power over the development of 
atomic energy. Oppenheimer left the meeting convinced that he 
could not possibly work with Baruch, and turned down the 
invitation to act as his scientific advisor. 

In what was possibly a tactical error, Oppenheimer did not 
confine himself to private expressions of his views on 
international control of atomic energy; he also gave public 
lectures on the subject. Wherever he lectured there was sure to be 
an FBI agent in the audience, who would send Hoover a summary 
of what he had said. In one such lecture, given at Cornell on 
May 15, Oppenheimer told his audience grimly: “Mark my words, 
if there is no international control of atomic energy, the next war 
will be fought to prevent an atomic war, but it will not be 
successful.” In another, given in Pittsburgh the following day, he 
talked of his proposed international Atomic Development 
Authority as a “world government,” remarking that what the 
Acheson-Lilienthal Plan amounted to was the “renunciation of 
national sovereignty.” 

In the burgeoning FBI file on Oppenheimer, these views were 
duly recorded and cited when the Bureau was called upon to 
justify its continued surveillance of Oppenheimer. That 
surveillance, an FBI report states, “has from day to day kept this 
office aware of Dr. Oppenheimer’s travels about the country and 
the subject matter of many of his speeches as well as information 


as to his opinions on highly controversial matters concerning the 
atom bomb.” The report concludes: 


In view of the above recommendation of the San Francisco 
Field Division and the further fact that through Oppenheimer’s 
telephone conversations with other scientists working on a 
draft of an international plan for the control of atomic energy, 
it is helpful in determining Oppenheimer’s actual views on this 
subject, it is recommended that this technical surveillance be 
continued. 


The FBI file also contains a letter to the Secretary of War, 
Robert Patterson, from a certain Gregory C. Bern, dated June 3, 
1946, describing the atomic bomb as “the United States’ top 
military secret” and castigating those atomic scientists who were 
“engaged in treasonable activity to transfer our military secret to 
our greatest enemy, the Soviet government.” “Of course,” Bern 
goes on, “this plot is concealed in their so-called ‘bomb-control’ 
idea via the media of the UNO, of which the Soviet government is 
a member.” “It must be noted that Robert Oppenheimer is a 
member of two Communist Front organizations and therefore his 
agitation for the plan which would place us at the mercy of 
Soviet war criminals is easily explainable.” 

The view, expressed by almost all competent atomic scientists, 
that there was no “secret” about how to build an atomic bomb 
was thus not only rejected by influential people in the U.S. 
political establishment, but was regarded as a treasonous plot. 
Whereas the scientists knew that their counterparts in Russia and 
elsewhere would be able to work out how the energy from fission 
could be used to make a bomb, many politicians and military 
leaders—to most of whom the physics of fission was an utter 
mystery—shared Truman’s view that the Russians were incapable 
of penetrating that mystery. Among them was General Groves, 
who, on March 14, 1946, just two days before the Acheson- 
Lilienthal Plan was sent to the State Department, gave a talk at 
the Waldorf Hotel in New York, in which he was reported by the 
writer Merle Miller as telling his audience “that the United States 
didn’t need to worry about the Russians ever making a bomb. 
‘Why,’ he said, smiling, ‘those people can’t even make a jeep.’ 
You should have heard the applause; thunderous is the only way 


to describe it; a great many people stood and cheered.” This was 
the man on whom Baruch was relying for military advice. On that 
advice Baruch added to his panel of consultants Edgar Sengier, a 
Belgian mining magnate who had worked with Groves on 
supplying the Manhattan Project with uranium ore, and who had 
an even greater stake than Baruch himself in ensuring that 
ownership of uranium was not transferred to an international 
agency. 

On May17, the day after his lecture in Pittsburgh, 
Oppenheimer was back in Washington to attend a meeting with 
Baruch that had been arranged by Acheson, who was hoping to 
bring all sides together. In response to Oppenheimer’s lectures 
and newspaper interviews, Baruch had complained to Acheson 
about being undercut. Oppenheimer himself remembered: “Mr. 
Baruch told me that I had scooped his speech that he was going 
to make at the opening of the UN. That was not true.” 

At the meeting Baruch made it clear to Oppenheimer just how 
far his own views diverged from those that had informed the 
Acheson-Lilienthal Plan. Unsurprisingly, given the vested 
interests of himself and at least one of his advisors, Baruch was 
not prepared to advocate the international ownership of uranium. 
He also insisted on building into the plan some procedures for 
punishing nations that violated its terms. The punishment he had 
in mind, it turned out, would be administered by the U.S., using 
its stockpile of atomic weapons. He also announced at this 
meeting that he would be proposing that the Soviet Union should 
give up its right to veto the actions of the new international 
atomic authority. In short, what Baruch was preparing to propose 
at the United Nations was exactly what Oppenheimer had wanted 
to avoid: the continuation of the U.S. monopoly of atomic 
weapons, the preservation of national ownership of the means of 
making atomic weapons and the imposition by force of a policy 
of preventing other nations from acquiring such weapons. This 
was not a proposal motivated by internationalism, but one that 
sought to preserve the national interests of the United States. 

To nobody’s surprise, when the “Baruch Plan” (as it was now 
known) was presented to the United Nations Energy Commission 
at its meeting in New York on June 14, it was emphatically 
rejected by the Soviet Union. On June 19, the Soviets countered 
with their own proposal that all existing stockpiles of atomic 


weapons should first be destroyed and then a committee should 
be established to discuss the exchange of scientific information. 
This, in turn, was rejected by the United States. For several 
months afterward negotiations continued, without any real hope 
of coming to an agreement. 

Meanwhile the FBI continued its close surveillance of 
Oppenheimer, listening to his phone conversations, following him 
everywhere he went and making a note of everything he did and 
everyone he spoke to. Almost daily, Hoover would receive reports 
from the San Francisco office, detailing Oppenheimer’s activities. 
As evidence that Oppenheimer “would place us at the mercy of 
Soviet war criminals,” however, these reports were, to say the 
least, unconvincing. Whenever called upon to justify their 
suspicion of Oppenheimer, the FBI invariably resorted to 
repeating what was already known: that Oppenheimer had 
belonged to several Communist Party front organizations in the 
1930s, that he had several friends who were members of, or 
sympathetic to, the Communist Party and, most damningly of all, 
that Oppenheimer, by his own admission, had been approached 
by his friend Chevalier to leak information about the atomic- 
bomb project to the Soviet Union. 

This last piece of “derogatory information” is repeated over and 
over again in the FBI file, as if it held the key to a major 
conspiracy. And when, on June 4, Chevalier himself came to 
Oppenheimer’s house, FBI agents were there, eager to report to 
Hoover that “the Oppenheimers were friendly with the man 
believed to be Chevalier.” Hoover was also sent a transcript of a 
phone conversation between Chevalier and Kitty that took place 
when Oppenheimer himself was away on June 13, and of an 
unsuccessful attempt by Chevalier to contact Kitty on June 18. 

About a week later, on June 26, Chevalier, who had only been 
back in Berkeley for about a month, received an unexpected and 
extremely unwelcome visit at his home from two FBI agents, who 
demanded that he accompany them to their San Francisco office. 
Once there, Chevalier was subjected to a tough, eight-hour-long 
interview, focusing on his relationships with George Eltenton and 
Oppenheimer. Every now and then, Chevalier later recalled, one 
of the agents would speak “in monosyllables and brief, enigmatic 
phrases,” to someone on the telephone. It turned out that he was 
speaking to another agent based in the FBI office in Oakland, 


where George Eltenton was being interviewed. Eventually one of 
the FBI agents said to Chevalier: “I have here three affidavits 
from three scientists on the atomic bomb project. Each of them 
testifies that you approached him on three separate occasions for 
the purpose of obtaining secret information on the atomic bomb 
on behalf of Russian agents.” 

Puzzled by the mention of three scientists, but sure now that 
the FBI must somehow have received information about his 
conversation with Eltenton and his abortive attempt to approach 
Oppenheimer on Eltenton’s behalf, Chevalier told the agents the 
story, such as it was, of his extremely brief and unsuccessful 
experience of acting on behalf of Soviet intelligence. At the same 
time, in Oakland, Eltenton told roughly the same story: after 
being approached by Peter Ivanov from the Soviet consulate, he 
had asked Chevalier to ask Oppenheimer if he would be willing to 
pass information to the Soviets. A few days later, Eltenton said, 
Chevalier “dropped by my house and told me that there was no 
chance whatsoever of obtaining any data and Dr. Oppenheimer 
did not approve.” No matter how many times they were asked, no 
matter how much pressure was put on them, neither Chevalier 
nor Eltenton said anything that provided any support to the idea 
that three scientists had been approached. Indeed, Chevalier put 
his claim in writing: “I approached no one except Oppenheimer 
to request information concerning the work of the radiation 
laboratory.” 

Despite all their strenuous—indeed, obsessive—attempts to 
prove Oppenheimer’s complicity in a major espionage effort, all 
the FBI had to show for hours of interviewing and days of 
surveillance was evidence of a momentary, clumsy exchange 
between Oppenheimer and Chevalier, in which Oppenheimer 
refused to provide information. Why, despite the lack of any kind 
of evidence, was the FBI so convinced that Oppenheimer must be 
in league with the Soviet Union? The answer seems to be that 
they were unable, otherwise, to account for his postwar political 
views. On the other hand, Chevalier, on his return to Berkeley in 
the summer of 1946, was shocked to discover how far 
Oppenheimer’s political views had shifted to the right and how 
anti-Soviet he had become. “I cannot tell you why,” Oppenheimer 
told Chevalier, “but I assure you I have real reason to change my 
mind about Russia. They are not what you believe them to be.” 


This is not how it seemed to the FBI. They had no direct 
evidence that he was pro-Russian (despite looking very hard to 
find some), but there were two aspects to his postwar political 
attitudes that they found hard to explain without attributing to 
him a desire to help the Soviet Union. The first was his, to their 
minds, otherwise unfathomable advice to the U.S. to give up its 
monopoly of atomic weapons, share information with the Soviets 
and cooperate with them on the development and control of 
atomic energy. The second was his apparently fervent conviction 
that no more atom bombs should be built and his opposition to 
any further atomic bomb tests. 

When he was asked what should become of Los Alamos after 
the war, Oppenheimer replied: “Give it back to the Indians.” Of 
course, such a plan was never even considered. Instead, though 
employing far fewer people, it continued to exist after the war as 
both a research establishment and as an atomic-bomb production 
facility, with Norris Bradbury replacing Oppenheimer as director. 
Its first postwar task was to produce further “Fat Man’-type 
bombs, some of which would be stockpiled and others set aside 
for a series of tests that was planned to take place in the summer 
of 1946. 

These tests, code-named “Operation Crossroads,” were first 
devised at the end of 1945 as a means of investigating the effect 
of an atomic bomb on a naval fleet. The idea was to assemble a 
fleet of obsolete and captured ships, some German and some 
Japanese, and then attempt to destroy them in various ways using 
atomic bombs. Three such tests were planned. In the first, named 
Able, a B-29 was to drop a bomb over the fleet; in the second, 
Baker, a bomb was to be exploded just below the surface of the 
sea, attacking the fleet from below; while in the third, Charlie, a 
bomb was to be exploded half a mile under the ships. The place 
chosen for the tests was Bikini Atoll, in the middle of the Pacific 
Ocean. Unlike the Trinity test, these were not to be secret, but 
rather extremely public, with the media and observers from all 
over the world, including Russia, invited to witness what was 
expected (and no doubt hoped) to be a shocking spectacle. 

Adding further to both President Truman’s dislike of him and 
the FBI’s suspicion of him, Oppenheimer wanted nothing to do 
with Operation Crossroads. The tests were originally scheduled 
for May 1946, but, at the request of Secretary Byrnes (who did 


not want them to influence the negotiations over international 
control of atomic energy), were postponed until July. On May 3, 
responding to a request that he attend the tests and contribute to 
the analysis of the results gained from them, Oppenheimer wrote 
to Truman asking to be excluded from the scientific panel 
associated with the tests. Like many other scientists, 
Oppenheimer told Truman, he had misgivings about their 
scientific value and whether they could possibly reveal anything 
that was not already known. After all, on the basis of what had 
already been witnessed at Trinity, Hiroshima and Nagasaki, it 
could safely be predicted that “If an atomic bomb comes close 
enough to a ship, even a capital one, it will sink it.” And if the 
point was to investigate the effects of radiation, this could be 
done much more cheaply and more effectively in the laboratory. 
But, over and above those considerations, Oppenheimer raised 
doubts about “the appropriateness of a purely military test of 
atomic weapons” at a time when “our plans for effectively 
eliminating them from national armaments are in their earliest 
beginnings.” In other words, for Oppenheimer it seemed at best 
pointless and at worst dangerous for the U.S. to be testing bombs 
at the very time when it was (or anyway, in Oppenheimer’s view, 
ought to have been) trying to convince the world to adopt a plan 
designed to ensure that no further bombs were made or used. The 
point was lost on Truman, who forwarded Oppenheimer’s letter 
to Acheson, adding a short note dismissing Oppenheimer as the 
“cry-baby scientist,” who had come to the White House six 
months earlier. 

Oppenheimer’s opposition to the tests became known to the 
press, by whom he was perfectly prepared to be quoted on the 
subject. On June 11, the San Francisco office of the FBI sent 
Hoover a transcript of a phone conversation between 
Oppenheimer and a journalist for the New York Herald Tribune 
called Steve White. The pair discussed the forthcoming Bikini 
test, Oppenheimer confirming it as his view that there was no 
need for a test to determine that any ship within a certain radius 
of an atomic bomb would be destroyed. The conversation 
continued: 


Wurtz: I also have another quotation here but I haven’t got your 
name on it. 


OpPENHEIMER: What’s that? 

Wutre: If the bomb fails entirely, it will likely prove something. 
It will prove that you can’t do these things without good 
people. 

OppPENHEIMER: OK. That shouldn’t have my name on. 


Many of the misgivings that Oppenheimer expressed to Truman 
and to the press were expressed persuasively in an anonymous 
article published in the February 15, 1946, edition of the Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists of Chicago, a journal that had only been in 
existence for two months, but was already recognized as the voice 
of the politically concerned scientists of the Manhattan Project. In 
addition to the points made by Oppenheimer in his conversation 
with White, the Bulletin article also made the telling, and, as it 
turned out, prescient observation: 


Naval vessels are mechanically stronger than buildings, so that 
over comparable distances, the effect of a bomb on a warship 
would be less than on a building. Most of the ships will be 
several miles away from the explosion, so that they will 
probably remain afloat. Those who have been led to expect the 
overwhelming destruction of the fleet will thus be disappointed 
and public opinion may be lulled into a feeling of false security 
—along the line of “Oh, the atomic bomb is not so terrible—it’s 
just another big bomb.” 


In fact, this is just what happened at the first test, Able, which 
took place on July 1, 1946, in front of an audience of more than a 
hundred people, including two observers from the Soviet Union. 
The fleet to be destroyed consisted of twenty-three ships, the 
central target of which was the battleship USS Nevada. Of these, 
only two were sunk by the initial blast (within twenty-four hours, 
a further three sank); the Nevada remained afloat. “Dressed in all 
the trappings of an exaggerated and sometimes frivolous 
publicity,” The Economist reported, “the first Bikini atom bomb 
experiment has left rather the impression of a fireworks display 
which slightly misfired.” One of the Soviet observers remarked 
that the damage inflicted by the bomb was “not so much.” In fact, 
the blast, measured at 23,000 tons of TNT, was as powerful as 
any bomb that had yet been exploded, and the test did provide 


incontrovertible evidence of the devastating effect of radiation. 
On board the ships were hundreds of mice, rats, goats and pigs, 
the death rate of which was enough to suggest that, though the 
Nevada remained afloat, had it been fully manned, it would, 
within a few days have been, a “ghost ship,” a floating coffin for 
a crew whose every member would have died. 

The second test, Baker, took place on July 25 and provided a 
much more arresting display. A “Fat Man” bomb was suspended 
beneath a landing craft and detonated just ninety feet 
underwater. The result was spectacular indeed: the landing craft 
was vaporized and a huge vertical column of water and steam 
was created, which destroyed ten ships. By this time, however, 
there was little public interest in, and much criticism of, the tests. 
The Soviet reaction was expressed in a Pravda editorial that 
described the tests as “common _ blackmail,” which 
“fundamentally undermined the belief in the seriousness of 
American talk about atomic disarmament.” The third test, 
Charlie, was called off. 

The day before the Baker test, Lilienthal recorded in his diary a 
meeting with Oppenheimer in his hotel room in Washington. 
Oppenheimer, he wrote, “is in deep despair about the way things 
are going in the negotiations in New York.” 


It is difficult to record how profoundly hopeless he thinks it is; 
indeed, when I said that there are some situations in which one 
cannot acknowledge despair, he took me to task for this, in a 
gentle but firm way, saying that it was this sense of a 
“reservoir of hope” that was quite wrong, for it does not exist. 


If the Baruch Plan failed, Oppenheimer told Lilienthal, it: 


will be construed by us as a demonstration of Russia’s warlike 
intentions. And this will fit perfectly into the plans of that 
growing number who want to put the country on a war 
footing, first psychologically, then actually. The Army directing 
the country’s research; Red-baiting; treating all labor 
organizations, CIO first, as Communist and therefore traitorous 
etc. 


Lilienthal recorded that Oppenheimer “paced up and down in 
the frenetic way,” saying all this “in a really heart-breaking tone.” 


He is really a tragic figure; with all his great attractiveness, 
brilliance of mind. As I left him he looked so sad: “I am ready 
to go anywhere and do anything, but I am bankrupt of further 
ideas. And I find that physics and the teaching of physics, 
which is my life, now seems irrelevant.” It was this last that 
really wrung my heart. 


Oppenheimer did in fact, during that summer, make some 
moves toward returning to physics. He finally agreed, for 
example, to return to his old arrangement of lecturing at Berkeley 
for half the year and Caltech for the other half, beginning that 
autumn. After his experiences at Los Alamos and, during the year 
following the war, his experience of being part of U.S. policy- 
making at the very top of the political process, he no doubt knew 
that he could not simply return to his prewar life. Nevertheless, 
there are signs that at least part of him wanted just that. Even 
during the war, despite his quip to Pauli that “for the last four 
years I have had only classified thoughts,” he had managed to 
publish at least one article on theoretical physics. Admittedly the 
article in question—“Cosmic Rays: Report of Recent Progress, 
1936-1941,” published in a collection commemorating the 
seventy-fifth anniversary of the University of California—was 
synoptic and introductory, rather than an original contribution to 
research. Nevertheless, it gives some indication of what 
Oppenheimer was hoping to return to when the war was over. In 
a section on “Mesons and Nuclei” Oppenheimer discusses the 
puzzles that arise from the enigmatic Yukawa particle, to which 
he had devoted so much of his energy during the 1930s. The 
existence of this particle—named the “meson” because its mass 
put it somewhere in the middle between the tiny electron and the 
comparatively huge proton—was postulated by Yukawa in order 
to explain nuclear forces, and, it was thought, was observed in 
cosmic rays. The troubles arose from the fact that the properties 
of the particle detectable in cosmic rays were not consistent with 
it being the particle postulated by Yukawa. “The situation in this 
respect,” Oppenheimer writes, “is not only rather complicated; it 
is also very incompletely understood, and presents at the moment 
the principal challenge to theoretical physics.” 

It was this “principal challenge” to which Oppenheimer wanted 
to devote himself. Astonishingly, even right in the middle of the 


UN negotiations over international atomic-energy policy, he had 
managed to pursue original research into an aspect of this 
challenge. On June 26, 1946, the Physical Review received a paper 
jointly written by Oppenheimer and Hans Bethe entitled 
“Reaction of Radiation on Electron Scattering and Heitler’s 
Theory of Radiation Damping.” This was a response to work 
published in 1941 and 1942 by the German Jewish physicist 
Walter Heitler, who, after escaping Hitler’s Germany, had worked 
first at Bristol with Nevill Mott and then at Dublin with Erwin 
Schrodinger. At Dublin, Heitler collaborated with the Chinese 
physicist Peng Huanwu on a mathematical theory that, they 
hoped, would contribute to the understanding of cosmic rays, 
mesons and quantum electrodynamics. The paper by 
Oppenheimer and Bethe (which, at eight pages, was by 
Oppenheimer’s standards fairly long) was a reaction to the 
Heitler-Peng paper, “The Influence of Radiation Damping on the 
Scattering of Mesons,” which had been published in the 
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society in 1942. What 
Oppenheimer and Bethe showed was that the equations devised 
by Heitler and Peng had only limited success in describing the 
scattering of electrons by electromagnetic energy. As an attempt 
to meet the “principal challenge,” this paper with Bethe was 
small beer, but, given what else Oppenheimer was doing in the 
summer of 1946, its very existence is something of a marvel. 

On returning to California that summer after his work on the 
Baruch Plan, Oppenheimer narrowly missed what might have 
become an opportunity to build on the extraordinary work on 
astrophysics that he had done immediately before the war, the 
work now regarded as his most important contribution to science. 
Waiting for him on his return to Berkeley was a letter, dated July 
15, 1946, from the Harvard astronomer Donald Menzel, whom 
Oppenheimer had known in the 1920s and ’30s, when Menzel 
was working at the Lick Observatory in California. What Menzel 
wanted was to arouse Oppenheimer’s interest in some 
speculations he had regarding the structure of the sun. His 
suggestion, prompted in part by Bethe’s seminal work on solar 
structure, was that the sun should be regarded as an enormous 
atom, with most of its mass concentrated in an extremely dense 
“nucleus.” “I think that this problem is important from the 
physical standpoint,” Menzel told Oppenheimer, “because it may 


be tied up with the generation of cosmic rays.” Next time 
Oppenheimer was in the east, he suggested, perhaps the two of 
them could meet in New York, Philadelphia or Washington to talk 
about it. 

Oppenheimer’s reply, written on August 8, was fairly 
encouraging. “I would like to talk over with you your ideas on 
stellar interiors,” he told Menzel, suggesting that the forthcoming 
American Physical Society meeting in Princeton might provide an 
opportunity. “I may have to come East before then,” 
Oppenheimer wrote, “but I devoutly hope not.” Menzel, as he 
told Oppenheimer in a subsequent letter, was unable to attend 
the Princeton meeting, but was still hoping to lure Oppenheimer 
into further thinking on the subject. “There are certainly a lot of 
interesting and important problems in astrophysics,” Menzel told 
Oppenheimer, “relating to atomic structure, nuclear structure, 
and interpretation of spectra. If only we could get together once 
in a while, as we used to many years ago, I am sure we could 
have a lot of fun.” 

Even while Oppenheimer and Menzel were exchanging these 
letters, however, moves were afoot in Washington that would 
guarantee that both Oppenheimer’s devout hope not to return to 
the east and Menzel’s hope that he and Oppenheimer could have 
fun discussing astrophysics were destined to be thwarted. On 
August 1, President Truman signed the McMahon Bill, bringing 
into law the Atomic Energy Act. 

Brien McMahon had first presented his bill to Congress in 
December 1945 as an alternative to the defeated May-Johnson 
Bill. Its fundamental principle was to ensure—as the May- 
Johnson Bill had so conspicuously failed to—that atomic-energy 
policy was kept in civilian rather than military hands. Its chief 
means of ensuring this was through the creation of the entirely 
civilian Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), which would have 
responsibility for the development and control of both military 
and nonmilitary uses of atomic energy. The man Truman chose to 
be the first chairman of the AEC was David Lilienthal, thus 
ensuring that Oppenheimer would be called back to Washington 
to play a key role in the shaping of U.S. atomic-energy policy. 

The Atomic Energy Commission was a five-man body, which, 
according to the terms of the McMahon Act, took over from the 
Manhattan Project on January 1, 1947. This meant, for example, 


that Los Alamos was now a civilian rather than a military 
establishment. Apart from Lilienthal, the commissioners were 
Sumner T. Pike, a businessman from New England; William T. 
Waymack, a farmer and newspaper editor from Iowa; Robert F. 
Bacher, the only scientist on the commission; and Lewis L. 
Strauss, a politically conservative banker and reserve admiral. 
Strauss, who insisted that his name be pronounced “straws,” was 
a former shoe salesman who had become extremely wealthy and, 
through acting as an aide to President Hoover, politically 
influential. On October 24, 1946, Oppenheimer was recorded by 
the FBI as remarking about Strauss: “He is not greatly cultivated 
but will not obstruct things.” 

By the time he discovered the makeup of the AEC, 
Oppenheimer himself had already been interviewed by the FBI, in 
what was both a follow-up to the Bureau’s interviews with 
Chevalier and Eltenton and, presumably, a precautionary move 
prior to Oppenheimer’s involvement in the work of Lilienthal’s 
commission. Given that he knew his phone was being bugged by 
the FBI, it cannot have come as much of a surprise to 
Oppenheimer when FBI agents arrived at his Berkeley office to 
interview him, especially as, by then, he had already heard from 
Chevalier about his ordeal in June. 

In his book, Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship, Chevalier 
describes going to a cocktail party at the Oppenheimers’ house, at 
which he told Oppenheimer about his FBI interview. He does not 
give a date, but as he describes it as “a kind of house-rewarming,” 
it is natural to suppose that it took place sometime in August 
1946, soon after Oppenheimer’s return to Berkeley from 
Washington. Chevalier remembers that he and his wife “had been 
asked to come early, so as to have a private visit before the rest of 
the guests arrived.” The FBI interview was so much on his mind, 
Chevalier recalls, “that after the first exchange of greetings I 
almost immediately broached the subject. Opje’s face at once 
darkened. ‘Let’s go outside,’ he said.” 

Out in the garden, away from the FBI’s “technical surveillance,” 
Chevalier gave Oppenheimer a detailed account of the interview. 
Oppenheimer, he says, “was obviously greatly upset. He asked me 
endless questions. We paced back and forth on the uneven 
ground.” Oppenheimer told Chevalier that he had been right to 
tell the FBI about his 1942 conversation with him concerning 


Eltenton, and, in turn, sought Chevalier’s reassurance that he had 
been right to tell the FBI about the same thing. “I had to report 
that conversation, you know ...” he told Chevalier. Chevalier was 
not altogether convinced of the necessity of that, and when he 
asked Oppenheimer about the alleged approaches to three 
scientists, Oppenheimer “gave no answer. He was extremely 
nervous and tense.” When Kitty arrived to tell him that the other 
guests were arriving, he dismissed her and continued asking 
Chevalier questions. Then, when Kitty appeared a second time, 
this time more insistent, “Opje let loose with a flood of foul 
language, called Kitty vile names and told her to mind her 
goddam business and to get the... hell out.” It was, Chevalier 
reports, “the first time I had seen Opje behave immoderately. I 
could not imagine what could have provoked his intemperate 
outburst.” 

It was about a month later, on September 5, that Oppenheimer 
himself was interviewed by Bureau agents—the same ones who 
had interviewed Eltenton in June. However much it had 
unnerved and disturbed him, his conversation with Chevalier had 
at least given Oppenheimer some idea of what he might say to 
limit the damage he had done with his careless interview with 
Pash back in 1943. The story he told was the one that the FBI had 
heard from Chevalier and Eltenton. With regard to the part of the 
story that Chevalier and Eltenton repeatedly and consistently 
denied—the part about the mysterious three  scientists— 
Oppenheimer now claimed that this was a concoction on his part, 
designed to protect Chevalier’s identity. How, exactly, it was 
supposed to do that was something that he failed to explain 
throughout his life, despite being asked to do so many, many 
times. Oppenheimer told the agents that he would be reluctant to 
testify against Chevalier, and that he had not told Chevalier that 
he had mentioned his name in connection with the alleged 
espionage incident (which, of course, was not true). He also gave 
the surely false impression of being surprised that Joe Weinberg 
was a communist. Meanwhile, in a repetition of the strategy used 
with Chevalier and Eltenton, Weinberg himself was at the same 
time being interviewed by the FBI. He too was less than entirely 
honest, denying ever having met Steve Nelson at Nelson’s house. 
As the FBI now had documented evidence that both Oppenheimer 
and Weinberg had provided false statements, Hoover evidently 


thought there was a case for prosecution and sent copies of these 
interviews to the Attorney General. To MHoover’s_ great 
disappointment, the Attorney General decided against 
prosecution. As his agents continued their surveillance of 
Oppenheimer, Hoover bided his time, confident that another 
chance to use his “derogatory information” about Oppenheimer 
would present itself. 

As many people noted at the time, the four commissioners 
chosen to work with Lilienthal on the AEC were an odd selection 
in that, apart from Bacher, none of them knew very much about 
atomic energy. How were a banker, a farmer and a businessman 
supposed to make informed and expert judgments on such things 
as the development of civilian uses of atomic energy or the nature 
and size of the USA’s arsenal of atomic weapons? How were they 
expected to oversee the future development of Los Alamos, Oak 
Ridge and Hanford? The answer was to appoint a panel of experts 
to advise them. This panel was called the General Advisory 
Committee, and, unlike the AEC itself, it was packed with experts 
from the very top of the field. Eight people in total were chosen 
to sit on the General Advisory Committee, and an extremely 
impressive collection they were: James Conant, Isidor Rabi, Glenn 
Seaborg, Cyril Smith, Lee DuBridge (the president of Caltech), 
Hood Worthington of Du Pont (who had built the nuclear reactors 
at Hanford), Hartley Rowe of United Fruit and, of course, 
Oppenheimer. 

In December 1946, Lewis Strauss flew to California to meet 
Oppenheimer. He went not only to discuss AEC business, but also 
to make Oppenheimer an offer. In his capacity as a trustee of the 
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Strauss had been 
authorized by the other trustees to offer Oppenheimer the job of 
director of the institute, with effect from October 1947. The 
English-literature scholar Frank Aydelotte, who had been the 
institute’s director since 1939, had earlier in the year announced 
his intention of retiring, and, after a survey of faculty members, it 
emerged that the most popular choice to replace him was 
Oppenheimer. 

Rather prematurely, on December 23, the New York Times 
reported that Oppenheimer would be joining the institute as 
director the following autumn. In fact, Oppenheimer had not yet 
made up his mind, and, somewhat to Strauss’s annoyance, would 


not do so for another three months. There are strong signs that 
uppermost in his mind during this long deliberation was the 
question of whether or not he could attract exciting young 
physicists to Princeton. When Strauss reported back to the 
institute’s trustees, he told them: “Dr. Oppenheimer has requested 
that in addition to administrative duties, he be permitted to 
devote some of his time to teaching in order that he may remain 
in direct contact with young scholars.” As the institute was a 
research-only establishment and did not actually have any 
students, this request was met by asking Princeton University to 
select a handful of graduate students for Oppenheimer to teach. 

It was not only bright graduate students that Oppenheimer 
wanted contact with, however. He also longed to discuss physics 
with the brightest young research scientists who, having 
completed their graduate work, were beginning their careers. As 
Oppenheimer knew from his own experience as a postdoctoral 
student, these were the people who would be taking the next big 
steps in the subject. These young people, however, were always 
in demand, and, at the end of the war, there was extremely tight 
competition for the rising stars. One of Oppenheimer’s 
frustrations with Berkeley was the failure of its physics 
department to attract, or even to attempt to attract, Richard 
Feynman, about whom Oppenheimer had written to Birge as 
early as November 1943. Feynman was, Oppenheimer told Birge, 
“in every way so outstanding and clearly recognized as such, that 
I think it appropriate to call his name to your attention, with the 
urgent request that you consider him for a position in the 
department at the earliest time that that is possible.” Six months 
later he wrote again, stressing the urgency of the situation in the 
light of the fact that Feynman had already been offered a position 
at Cornell. On October 5, 1944, Oppenheimer wrote rather testily 
to Birge to tell him that it was too late: Feynman had accepted 
the position at Cornell. “I shall of course,” he told him, “do my 
best to call to your attention any men who are available and 
whom we should want to recommend strongly for the 
department.” 

Feynman’s chief rival as leading young physicist in the United 
States was Julian Schwinger, who was at this time the subject of 
an undignified struggle to secure his services between van Vleck 
at Harvard and Rabi at Columbia. When Schwinger visited 


Berkeley at the end of 1946, Oppenheimer could not resist trying 
to recruit him. “Would you like to come to Berkeley?” 
Oppenheimer asked him directly. As it happened, Schwinger 
rather liked the idea of living in California, but he very much did 
not like the idea of working with Oppenheimer, because of the 
danger of being overwhelmed by him. As Schwinger later 
remembered the conversation: “And then he said—and this still 
bothers me—‘Would it change your opinion any if you learned 
that I wasn’t staying here?’ He did not tell me that he was going 
off to Princeton.” 

Schwinger, though tempted (especially after he knew that 
Oppenheimer would no longer be at Berkeley), turned the offer 
down and went to Harvard instead. Trying to explain the decision 
in later life, he said: “I still said no, and now I’m not sure why. 
But I have the feeling that I was shocked by his duplicity.” 

Another rising young physicist at this time, though significantly 
less well established and less revered than Feynman and 
Schwinger, was Abraham Pais, a Dutch Jewish physicist who had 
worked with Bohr in Copenhagen and had been invited to spend 
the year 1946-7 at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. 
As a young physicist who had earned Bohr’s respect, Pais was in 
great demand and, within a few months of being in the States, 
had received job offers from the University of Illinois, UCLA, the 
University of North Carolina and Columbia. Despite these offers, 
Pais continued to assume that when his year at Princeton was up, 
he would return to Bohr’s institute in Copenhagen. 

Oppenheimer, however, had other ideas. Pais had met 
Oppenheimer within a few days of arriving in the U.S. in 
September 1946, when he gave a paper at the annual meeting of 
the American Physical Society, which that year was held in New 
York. At the meeting, Pais naturally gravitated toward his fellow 
Dutchmen, Uhlenbeck, Goudsmit and Kramers, the last of whom, 
during one of the sessions, scribbled a note, saying: “Turn around 
and pay your respects to Robert Oppenheimer.” Pais recalls: 


I turned and there, right behind me, sat the great man, who up 
to that moment had been known to me only from newspaper 
articles. He grinned pleasantly at me and stretched out his 
hand, which I shook. Most remarkably—or so I thought—he sat 
there in a short-sleeved open shirt. 


Pais’s second meeting with Oppenheimer came on the last day 
of January 1947, when he attended that year’s meeting of the 
American Physical Society, again in New York, but this time at 
Columbia. On that occasion Oppenheimer had been invited to 
give the annual Richtmyer Memorial Lecture, his subject being 
“Creation and Destruction of Mesons.” Pais remembers: 


Oppenheimer spoke before a packed house. He was a rhetor 
rather than a speaker. Then, as on numerous occasions, I was 
struck by his priestly style. It was, one might say, as if he were 
aiming at initiating his audience into Nature’s divine mysteries. 


After the lecture, Pais went to say hello to Oppenheimer, who 
said that he had something urgent he needed to discuss with him. 
Would Pais wait until he could disengage himself from the 
crowd? “As I stood waiting,” Pais later recalled: 


I tried to play back what he had just said, and I recall my 
thought: What the Hell do I remember about his talk? I had 
been intrigued, nay moved, by his words, but now I found 
myself unable to reconstruct anything of substance. I would 
now say that this was not just a matter of stupidity on my part. 


“Let’s walk down Broadway and find a bar,” Oppenheimer 
suggested to Pais when he finally succeeded in shaking off the 
crowd. Having found a bar, Oppenheimer told Pais that he had 
been offered the directorship of the Institute for Advanced Study 
and pleaded with him to keep open the possibility of remaining 
there. A few months went by, and then in early April 1947, 
having decided to accept an offer from Harvard, Pais received a 
call from Oppenheimer. “I have just accepted the directorship of 
the Institute for Advanced Study,” Oppenheimer told him, “and I 
desperately hope that you will be there next year, so that we can 
begin building up theoretical physics there.” Flattered by the 
personal attention and the pleading tone, Pais changed his mind 
about Harvard and accepted. 

The job at Princeton held many attractions for Oppenheimer, 
among which were the small, interdisciplinary nature of the 
establishment, the chance it gave him—as he had done when he 
first arrived at Berkeley—to build an important center of 
theoretical physics and, not least, the fact that it would relieve 


him of the necessity to make so many cross-continental air flights. 
Flying so often from east to west, spending so much of his life on 
airplanes and in airports, was wearing him out. Thus, to a certain 
extent, his appointment as director of the Institute for Advanced 
Study and his appointment as a member of the Atomic Energy 
Commission’s General Advisory Committee were linked: 
accepting the first would enable him to fulfill more easily his 
duties for the second. 

On January 8, 1947, Oppenheimer was in Washington for the 
first meeting of the GAC. He arrived late, only to discover that 
the others had voted him, in his absence, their chairman. For the 
next few years the GAC was to be, in effect, Oppenheimer’s 
committee and, given the balance of intellectual power between 
the two panels, this meant also that his was to be the dominant 
voice in the AEC. One might have expected him to use that 
influence to pursue the internationalist perspective that he had 
inherited from Bohr and that he had worked so hard to push 
during the previous year. However, the failure of the negotiations 
at the UN had deeply disillusioned him. True, he had not liked 
the way that Baruch had modified the proposals or the belligerent 
way in which he had negotiated for them, but much more 
disillusioning was the intransigence of the Soviet Union. When 
Hans Bethe came to Berkeley that January, he was surprised, as 
Chevalier had been, by the vehemence of Oppenheimer’s anti- 
Soviet views. The two of them, Bethe remembered, had “quite 
long conversations about the fate of the atomic energy control 
plan. He told me then that he had given up all hope that the 
Russians would agree to a plan.” 


Particularly he pointed out how much the Russian plan was 
designed to serve the Russian interests and no other interests, 
namely, to deprive us immediately of the one weapon which 
would stop the Russians from going into Western Europe, if 
they so chose, and not give us any guarantee on the other hand 
that there would really be a control of atomic energy, nor give 
us any guarantee that we would be safe from Russian atomic 
attack at some later time. 


FBI microphones would have recorded this conversation, as 
they would have recorded Oppenheimer expressing similar views 


on very many occasions, none of which dented J. Edgar Hoover’s 
apparently immovable conviction that Oppenheimer was a 
communist sympathizer and a _ potential Soviet spy. His 
appointment to the GAC gave Hoover the opportunity to launch a 
renewed investigation into Oppenheimer. Indeed, it presented 
him with the duty of doing so, it being one of the measures of the 
McMahon Act that all AEC employees who had previously been 
cleared to work on the Manhattan Project had to be investigated 
by the FBI. So, in February 1947, FBI agents interviewed dozens 
of Oppenheimer’s friends and colleagues and, in the light of the 
information gathered (none of which gave any new grounds for 
suspicion), a fresh dossier on Oppenheimer was written. Before 
sending this to the AEC, Hoover sent it, along with another 
dossier on Frank Oppenheimer, to General Vaughan, Truman’s 
military aide. “You will note,” Hoover wrote in his accompanying 
letter, “that both these individuals have a good overall knowledge 
of the Atom Bomb Project, and that both have been strongly 
alleged to be members of the Communist Party.” 

About a week later, on Saturday, March 8, Hoover sent the 
same document to the AEC. The following Monday the 
commissioners met to discuss what to do about the FBI file. 
Conant and Bush announced themselves unconcerned; there was 
nothing in this new dossier, they said, that added to what they 
had seen, and dismissed, in 1942. When asked for his opinion, the 
AEC’s lawyer, Joseph Volpe, replied: 


Well, if anyone were to print this stuff in this file and say it is 
about the top civilian advisor to the Atomic Energy 
Commission, there would be terrible trouble. His background is 
awful. But your responsibility is to determine whether this man 
is a security risk now, and except for the Chevalier incident, I 
don’t see anything in this file to establish that he might be. 


The commissioner most shocked by the FBI’s revelations was 
Lewis Strauss, who, Volpe recalls, was “visibly shaken” by them. 
Oppenheimer had told him the previous December, in connection 
with the offer of the Princeton job, that there was “derogatory 
information” about him, but Strauss had not seemed worried. 
Now he and Lilienthal, as chair of the commissioners, were forced 
to take this information seriously. 


On March 11, the AEC members decided to take the issue 
straight to the top and went to the White House to tell the 
President about the FBI suspicions of Oppenheimer. Of course 
Truman already knew about those suspicions and was not very 
concerned about them. At that particular moment Truman was 
much more concerned about the crises in Greece and Turkey, 
both of which looked in danger of falling under communist rule, 
becoming part of what Churchill had described as “the Soviet 
Sphere.” In response to this threat, on March 12, 1947, Truman 
announced to Congress what became known as the Truman 
Doctrine, the policy of lending support to “free peoples” 
threatened by communism. As it happened, Oppenheimer was in 
Washington at this time and received from Acheson a preview of 
the Truman Doctrine. “He wanted me to be quite clear,” 
Oppenheimer later said, “that we were entering into an adversary 
relationship with the Soviets, and whatever we did in the atomic 
talk we should bear that in mind.” Soon after this, Baruch’s 
successor as U.S. spokesman on atomic energy at the UN, 
Frederick Osborn, was surprised to hear Oppenheimer say that 
the U.S. should simply withdraw from talks with the Soviet 
Union, which, he said, would never agree to a workable plan. 

While Truman was busy formulating the Truman Doctrine, he 
told the AEC members that he was too busy to meet them and 
instead they met his aide, Clark Clifford, who, to their relief, did 
not seem very concerned about Oppenheimer’s FBI file either. By 
the end of March the AEC had testimonials vouching for 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty from an impressive array of people, 
including Secretary of War Robert Patterson and General Groves. 
On August 11, the AEC were ready to agree unanimously to 
approve Oppenheimer for clearance, by which time the FBI, for 
the time being anyway, had decided to cease their “technical 
surveillance” of him. He was officially no longer regarded as a 
security risk. On the contrary, he was now the man most 
responsible for framing U.S. policy on the development of atomic 
energy. 

What makes the doubts about Oppenheimer’s loyalty seem so 
perverse is that, from this distance anyway, one of his most 
striking characteristics is his deep, and sometimes fierce, devotion 
to his country. It is one of the very few things that remained 
constant throughout his life and is clearly evident in almost 


everything he did. It was behind both the extraordinary energy 
and effort that he put into directing Los Alamos and his 
determination to play a leading role in the formation and 
execution of America’s atomic policies. It is also evident—and 
had been from the very beginning of his academic career—in his 
concern to establish the U.S. as the world’s center of theoretical 
physics. 

In the postwar period Oppenheimer was to see that dream he 
had had in the 1920s—of America replacing Germany as the 
country where the most fundamental developments in physics 
took place—become a reality. Moreover, he himself was able to 
play a leading part in making it a reality, not (as he had done 
before the war) through his publications and his teaching, but 
rather through the influence that he wielded at a series of 
important conferences. 

The first, and most important, of these was the Shelter Island 
Conference, which took place in June 1947 and has gone down in 
history as one of the most important conferences in the 
development of physics in the twentieth century. Rabi said it 
“would be remembered as the 1911 Solvay Congress is 
remembered, for having been the starting-point of remarkable 
new developments,” while Richard Feynman has said: “There 
have been many conferences in the world since, but P’ve never 
felt any to be as important as this.” 

Shelter Island was the conference at which Willis Lamb 
introduced the discoveries about hydrogen spectra—the so-called 
Lamb shift—for which he won the Nobel Prize. It was at Shelter 
Island, too, that Rabi reported on experiments conducted in his 
laboratory at Columbia, which measured, with an unprecedented 
degree of accuracy, the magnetic interactions between the 
protons and electrons in hydrogen and found that the 
measurements obtained disagreed, slightly but significantly (by 
about 0.22 percent), with those derived from the then-accepted 
theory. The conference was also the occasion at which Robert 
Marshak first proposed that the puzzles about the meson, to 
which Oppenheimer himself had devoted so much thought over 
the previous decade, could be solved by what became known as 
the “two-meson hypothesis.” Moreover, it was at this conference 
that Richard Feynman gave the first public presentation of what 
became known as “Feynman diagrams”s1 and, in the attempt to 


understand the startling series of experimental observations that 
had been made in 1947, the seeds were sown for the major 
advances in quantum electrodynamics that Feynman and 
Schwinger were to make in the coming years. 

Not only were all these young physicists American, but, unlike 
Oppenheimer and most of his generation, all of them had been 
graduate students at American universities: Lamb at Berkeley, 
Marshak at Cornell, Feynman at Princeton and Schwinger at 
Columbia. For a long time the U.S. had been the country in which 
the best physics was being done (much of it by refugees, 
emigrants and people trained overseas), but now it was also the 
country producing the best physicists. 

In terms of the number of participants, the Shelter Island 
Conference was not large. Just twenty-three people took part, but 
every one of them was either a world-renowned scientist (like 
Bethe, Fermi, Rabi, Teller, Uhlenbeck and Wheeler) or widely 
identified as an up-and-coming star (for example, Feynman, Pais 
and Schwinger). Together with Kramers and Weisskopf, 
Oppenheimer was asked to act as a “discussion leader,” each of 
whom was asked to draw up an outline of what they thought 
ought to be discussed under the general heading “Foundations of 
Quantum Mechanics.” Weisskopf’s outline was divided into three: 
1. problems in quantum electrodynamics; 2. problems in 
understanding nuclear and meson phenomena; and 3. proposed 
experiments using high-energy particles. Kramers concentrated 
entirely on issues in quantum electrodynamics, while 
Oppenheimer’s outline was focused solely on the problems of 
understanding mesons and, in particular, the discrepancy 
between the currently accepted theory and experimental results. 

One such result (mentioned by name in Weisskopf’s outline and 
alluded to in Oppenheimer’s) was an experiment carried out in 
Italy during the war, of which Oppenheimer, in a nontechnical 
lecture he gave later in the year, gave an excited and colorful 
account. Now confident of America’s unquestioned position at the 
forefront of physics, he could afford to be generous in his 
assessment of work in Europe, and told his audience that “of the 
two or three important experimental discoveries of the last two 
years, two at least come from Europe”: 


One was carried out long before its publication in the cellar of 


an old house in Rome by three Italians who were under 
sentence of death from the Germans because they belonged to 
the Italian Resistance. They were rescued by an uncle of one of 
the men from a labor squad at Cassino, and smuggled into a 
cellar in Rome. They got bored there, and they started to do 
experiments. These experiments were published last spring; 
and in the field of fundamental physics they created a real 
revolution in our thinking. 


The Italian scientists in question were Marcello Conversi, Ettore 
Pancini and Oreste Piccioni (when Fermi gave a seminar 
explaining the importance of their experiment, he remarked 
jokingly that he “would not dare to pronounce those names”). In 
February 1947, the Physical Review published a letter of theirs, 
“On the Disintegration of Negative Mesons,” reporting on 
experiments they had conducted in 1945, which showed 
conclusively that something was fundamentally wrong with 
meson theory as it then stood. According to that theory, the 
mesons found in cosmic rays were also the particles that Yukawa 
had suggested as carriers for the nuclear force that binds protons 
and neutrons together in a nucleus. Mesons are found with both 
negative and positive charges, and, if that theory is correct, then 
negative mesons should always be absorbed by surrounding 
nuclei, whereas positive mesons should not. Because every 
nucleus is positively charged, positively charged mesons should 
be repelled, and instead of being absorbed will decay very 
quickly (mesons have a life of only a few microseconds) into 
electrons and neutrinos. What Conversi, Pancini and Piccioni 
found was that, contrary to the theory, negatively charged 
mesons—though absorbed by the nucleus of the relatively heavy 
element of iron—decayed in carbon, which is a much lighter 
element. What Weisskopf and Oppenheimer wanted the 
illustrious scientists gathering at Shelter Island to discuss was: 
what is going on? Why do the carbon nuclei not absorb the 
negatively charged mesons? 

The conference started on Monday, June 2, at the Ram’s Head 
Inn, Shelter Island, at the tip of Long Island. Reflecting the 
postwar celebrity of nuclear physicists, the event was reported in 
gushing terms by the New York Herald Tribune: 


Twenty-three of the country’s best known theoretical physicists 
—the men who made the atom bomb—gathered today in a 
rural inn to begin three days of discussion and study, during 
which they hope to straighten out a few of the difficulties that 
beset modern physics. 

It is doubtful there has ever been a conference quite like this 
one. The physicists, backed by the National Academy of 
Science, have taken over the Ram’s Head Inn... The 
conference is taking place with almost complete informality, 
aided by the fact that the scientists have the inn all to 
themselves and feel that there is no one to mind if they take off 
their coats and get to work. 


The organizer of the conference, Duncan MacInnes, recorded in 
his diary that “it was immediately evident that Oppenheimer was 
the moving spirit of the affair,” while the chairman of the 
conference, Karl Darrow, has recorded: 


As the conference went on the ascendancy of Oppenheimer 
became more evident—the analysis (often caustic) of nearly 
every argument, that magnificent English never marred by 
hesitation or groping for words (I never heard “catharsis” used 
in a discourse on [physics], or the clever word “mesoniferous,” 
which is probably O’s invention), the dry humour, the 
perpetually-recurring comment that one idea or another was 
certainly wrong, and the respect with which he was heard. 


Abraham Pais says his recollections confirm these impressions: 


I had heard Oppenheimer speak before but had never yet seen 
him in action directing a group of physicists during their 
scientific deliberations. At that he was simply masterful, 
interrupting with leading questions (at physics gatherings 
interruptions are standard procedure), summarizing the main 
points just discussed, and suggesting how to proceed from 
there. 


The first day was dominated by the reports of Lamb and Rabi 
of the startling experimental results mentioned above. Lamb’s 
experiments, conducted like Rabi’s at Columbia, and, again like 
Rabi’s experiments, using radar technology developed during the 


war, measured the energy of electrons far more precisely than 
had previously been possible and established that electrons in 
hydrogen atoms do not behave as Paul Dirac’s theory would 
predict. Electrons at one level, Lamb discovered, have a higher 
energy than those at another, rather than (as Dirac’s theory 
would suggest) all of them having the same energy. An 
explanation of this “shift” would, as Oppenheimer suggested in 
the discussion that followed Lamb’s presentation, require a new 
understanding of quantum electrodynamics (QED). The results 
reported by Rabi of experiments conducted by two students of 
his, John Nafe and Edward Nelson, also seemed to call for 
adjustments to QED, since they gave accurate and reliable 
measures of the “magnetic moments” of the electrons in hydrogen 
that contradicted what the Dirac theory would predict. During 
the second day papers by Kramers and Weisskopf addressed the 
theoretical issues raised by what became known respectively as 
the Lamb shift and the “anomalous magnetic moment,” and 
Schwinger indicated during the discussion of Kramers’ paper 
what shape might be taken by the new understanding of QED 
that these observational results seemed to demand. 

On the final day of the conference, June 4, Oppenheimer led an 
extended discussion of the problems physicists faced in 
understanding mesons. In the ensuing discussion Robert Marshak 
made his now-famous suggestion that these puzzles might be 
solved by distinguishing two kinds of meson, one bigger than the 
other. The bigger of the two would be the Yukawa particle, 
responsible for the strong nuclear force, which decays into the 
smaller of the two—that is, the mesons found in cosmic rays— 
which in turn decay into electrons. In fact, though the 
participants at the Shelter Island Conference did not yet know 
this, experimental evidence confirming Marshak’s hypothesis had 
already been published. 

In the issue of the British journal Nature published on May 24, 
1947 (and therefore not available in the States until a few days 
after the Shelter Island Conference), a group of experimental 
physicists based at Bristol and led by Cecil Powell reported on 
some investigations they had conducted, which demonstrated the 
existence of a process whereby what they called a “primary” 
meson could decay into a “secondary” meson. The authors of this 
report pointed out that the existence of this process resolved 


many of the puzzles about mesons, including those presented by 
the experiments of the Italian group. These experiments by 
Powell and his group form the second example that Oppenheimer 
gave in his lecture, mentioned earlier, of important experimental 
discoveries coming from Europe. 

In a letter he wrote to Frank Jewett, the president of the 
National Academy of Sciences, Oppenheimer described the 
Shelter Island Conference as “unexpectedly fruitful.” “The three 
days were a joy to us,” he told Jewett, adding that the 
participants “came away a good deal more certain of the 
directions in which progress may lie.” A few months later, when, 
in the aftermath of the conference, several fundamentally 
important papers had been published by those present, 
Oppenheimer was even more effusive, saying that the conference 
was, for most of the participants, “the most successful conference 
we had ever attended.” Out of it, he claimed, had come “a new 
understanding of the probable role of the meson in physical 
theory, and the beginnings of a resolution of the long outstanding 
paradoxes of the quantum electrodynamics.” By the end of the 
year, he was circulating plans for a second meeting to be held the 
following spring. 

When the conference finished, Oppenheimer did not return to 
California, but went on instead to Harvard, where he was to 
receive an honorary degree. To avoid the usual difficulties of 
traveling to or from Shelter Island, he arranged for a private 
seaplane to fly him from Port Jefferson to Bridgeport, 
Connecticut, where he could catch a train to Boston. As 
Schwinger, who taught at Harvard, and Rossi and Weisskopf, who 
were both at MIT, also had to return to Boston, Oppenheimer 
invited them to join him. On the way they flew into a storm, so 
the pilot decided to land at the only available place, which 
happened to be a naval base, which civilian aircraft were not 
supposed to use. They disembarked to find an angry naval officer 
waiting to give them a dressing-down. “Don’t worry,” 
Oppenheimer said to the pilot. “Let me handle this.” As he 
stepped off the plane he offered his outstretched hand to the 
officer and said calmly: “My name is Oppenheimer.” “The 
Oppenheimer?” gasped the officer. Upon being reassured that he 
was indeed in the presence of the most famous physicist in the 
country, the officer changed his attitude completely, welcomed 


Oppenheimer and his companions to the officers’ club where they 
were served tea and biscuits, and then arranged for them to be 
driven to the local railway station, from where they were able to 
take a train to Boston. 

Having at last reached Harvard, Oppenheimer was awarded his 
honorary degree at the graduation ceremony on June 5. The 
ceremony turned out to be a historic occasion, because, in a 
speech that he gave to the graduates, General Marshall 
announced a major new policy initiative: the European Recovery 
Program, or Marshall Plan as it became known, which offered 
billions of U.S. dollars to European countries, on the condition of 
closer cooperation. 

Oppenheimer, as his evidence to Congress in support of the 
May-Johnson Bill had shown, had a deep admiration for General 
Marshall. Haakon Chevalier tells a revealing story that illustrates 
not only Oppenheimer’s warm regard for Marshall, but also his 
delight at finding himself moving in the same circles as the 
esteemed Secretary of State, whom Time magazine would that 
year name as “Man of the Year.” Chevalier recalls meeting Phil 
Morrison in New York during this period and, in the course of 
catching up and reminiscing, asking him about Oppenheimer. “I 
hardly see him any more,” Morrison replied. “We no longer speak 
the same language ... He moves in a different circle.” To illustrate 
what he meant, Morrison told Chevalier that at one of his most 
recent meetings with him, Oppenheimer kept saying, “George 
thinks this ...” and “George says that.... ” Eventually Morrison 
felt compelled to ask who this “George” was. “You understand,” 
he told Chevalier, “General Marshall to me is General Marshall, 
or the Secretary of State—not George.” Oppenheimer, he 
remarked, had changed profoundly: “He thinks he’s God.” 

In the summer of 1947, as he, Kitty and the children prepared 
to leave California to move into Olden Manor, the splendid 
residence reserved for the director of Princeton’s Institute for 
Advanced Study, Oppenheimer was at the very height of his 
reputation, among scientists, politicians and the general public. 
As the sociologist Philip Rieff has written, during these years 
“Oppenheimer became a symbol of the new status of science in 
American society. His thin handsome face and figure replaced 
Einstein’s as the public image of genius.” Anne Wilson’s concern 
that he would get into “terrible trouble” in the East seemed, for 


the moment at least, to have been misplaced. 


61 A Feynman diagram is a pictorial representation of the interactions of 
subatomic particles. A typical diagram might show, for example, an electron 
and a positron annihilating each other, emitting waves of electromagnetic 
energy. 


The Booming Years 


: his is an unreal place,” Abraham 
Pais wrote, after he had been at Princeton’s Institute for 


Advanced Study for a few months. “Bohr comes into my office to 
talk, I look out at the window and see Einstein walking home 
with his assistant. Two offices away sits Dirac. Downstairs sits 
Oppenheimer.” 

Apart from Einstein, the two other great physicists Pais 
mentions, Bohr and Dirac, were brought to the institute by 
Oppenheimer during his very first year there. Both were figures 
who had for Oppenheimer great symbolic importance: Bohr, the 
physicist from the previous generation for whom Oppenheimer 
had the greatest respect and the man whom he revered above all 
others; and Dirac, the greatest physicist of Oppenheimer’s own 
generation, whose career had been closely watched by 
Oppenheimer, sometimes with rivalry, but always with enormous 
admiration. It was no surprise that Oppenheimer wanted to 
attract Bohr and Dirac to the institute, but Pais himself was, in 
fact, more representative of Oppenheimer’s ambitions for the 
place. As Oppenheimer well knew, the next big steps in physics 
would not be taken by men of Bohr and Einstein’s generation, or 
even by those of Oppenheimer and Dirac’s generation; they 
would be taken by people the age of Pais, Schwinger, Feynman 
and so on. It was those young people, above all, whom he wanted 
to come to Princeton to be “directed” by him. 

Having insisted that his contract permit him to devote some of 
his time to teaching graduate students, Oppenheimer abandoned 
the plan of depending on the trustees of the institute to identify 
suitable students at Princeton, and instead took the precaution of 
bringing his own. In a move that recalls the annual migration 


from Berkeley to Pasadena that students like Serber were 
prepared to take in the 1920s and ’30s in order to maximize their 
time with Oppenheimer, in the summer of 1947 no fewer than 
five students—Hal Lewis, Robert Finkelstein, Saul Epstein, Leslie 
Foldy and Sig Wouthuysen—came with Oppenheimer when he 
left California for the East. 

In December 1947, soon after Oppenheimer moved to 
Princeton, Life magazine ran an article about the institute under 
the heading “The Thinkers: The Institute for Advanced Study Is 
Their Haven.” The atomic bomb, the piece began by saying, was 
a “devastating projection of this century’s most abstruse 
thinking.” In the light of this demonstration of the power of 
thought, “the thinker has come into his own,” and therefore the 
institute, being “one of the most imposing collections of minds 
gathered in one place,” had become recognized as “one of the 
most important places on earth.” 

The photographs accompanying the article, however, picture 
for the most part a distinctly unimposing collection of elderly 
men: the economist Walter W. Stewart reclining on his couch and 
looking as if he is about to fall asleep; the classics scholar 
Benjamin Merritt peering through a magnifying glass at an 
ancient Greek inscription; the mathematician Oswald Veblen 
leaning back in his chair and staring with apparent bewilderment 
at his desk; and, of course, Einstein, who is pictured twice, once 
in front of an audience and again sitting with Oppenheimer, 
telling him, according to the caption, “about his newest attempts 
to explain matter in terms of space,” and looking in both pictures 
like an ancient Old Testament prophet. 

In the starkest contrast to these pictures are two of 
Oppenheimer. In the first—captioned “talking shop”—he is 
shown engaged in obviously earnest and intense discussion with 
Dirac and Pais, all three of them looking quite sure that what 
they are discussing is of great importance. In the second— 
captioned “Oppenheimer’s students’—Oppenheimer is shown 
perched on a desk, with five young men evidently hanging on to 
his every word. By accident or design, the contrast between the 
two sets of photographs sends a very clear message: under 
Oppenheimer, the institute would no longer be the resting place 
for eminent old men whose best work was behind them; it was to 
be a place where up-and-coming young men who meant business 


would make new and fundamental contributions to scientific 
knowledge. 

These were exciting years for physics, as Oppenheimer, after 
the Shelter Island Conference, knew they would be, and he was 
determined to be, as far as possible, at the center of 
developments. Indeed, though Oppenheimer was at this time 
chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission’s General Advisory 
Committee, and as such perhaps the most influential person in 
the country in the development of America’s atomic policies, and 
though he had moved east partly so that his regular trips to 
Washington would not be so difficult or time-consuming, it was 
actually physics, rather than politics, that dominated his first two 
years at Princeton. As he had done in the 1930s, he published 
jointly with his students. In October 1947 he submitted the paper 
he had given at Shelter Island, “The Multiple Production of 
Mesons,” to the Physical Review as a joint publication, cowritten 
with Hal Lewis and Sig Wouthuysen. A few months later he 
submitted another paper, “Note on the Stimulated Decay of 
Negative Mesons,” this time cowritten with Saul Epstein and 
Robert Finkelstein. But, more importantly, he directed his 
students to the area where, in the wake of Shelter Island, the 
fundamentally important new steps would be taken: that is, to 
quantum electrodynamics, in which, as Oppenheimer knew, the 
solution to the puzzles posed by the recent experiments 
conducted at Columbia would be found. 

Oppenheimer encouraged the young physicists at the institute 
to attend the many important seminars and conferences being 
given at that time, not just in America, but also in Europe. For 
example, he encouraged Pais to travel to a small conference in 
Copenhagen in September 1947, where Cecil Powell reported on 
his recent experiments at Bristol, which demonstrated the truth of 
Marshak’s “two-meson” hypothesis. It was there that Pais first 
heard the names that would soon become accepted for the two 
particles: the pi-meson and the mu-meson. When he returned, 
Oppenheimer asked Pais to give a seminar reporting on what he 
had learned at Copenhagen. To Pais’s surprise, Einstein turned up 
to hear his account of Powell’s work. “It was,” says Pais, “the 
only occasion in all my institute years that I saw Einstein present 
at a physics seminar given by someone other than himself.” 

Oppenheimer was so excited by the developments in physics 


during this time that he could not resist mentioning them, or at 
least alluding to them, even in his public, nontechnical lectures. 
One example of this—his mention of the experiments conducted 
by the three Italian scientists, Conversi, Pancini and Piccioni, in 
his lecture “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem,” given in 
September 1947—has already been mentioned. Another example 
occurred a couple of months later. On November 13-15, 1947, 
Oppenheimer was in Washington to attend the tenth Washington 
Conference on Theoretical Physics. Also there was Schwinger, 
who gave a report on a series of calculations that he had made 
relating to the quantum-mechanical interactions between 
electrons and photons, particles and radiation, in a relativistic 
field. These calculations were so subtle, so intricate and so 
complicated that Schwinger was possibly the only man then alive 
who could have performed them, but they also pointed to the 
fundamental change in QED that was needed to account for the 
Lamb shift and the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron. 
Feynman, who was at the conference, reports that he himself “did 
not have time to understand what exactly Schwinger had done,” 
but he knew that, whatever it was, it had to be interesting, 
because “it got Oppy so excited.” What excited Oppenheimer was 
the possibility that both the energy shift of electrons observed by 
Lamb and the anomalous increase in the magnetic charge of 
electrons reported by Rabi, Nafe and Nelson could be accounted 
for by the same set of calculations. This strongly suggested that 
something new and important had been discovered about the way 
electrons react to their own magnetic fields. 

“The importance of Schwinger’s calculation cannot be 
underestimated,” writes the physicist and historian of physics 
Silvan Schweber: 


In the course of theoretical developments there sometimes 
occur important calculations that alter the way the community 
thinks about particular approaches. Schwinger’s calculation is 
one such instance. By indicating, as Feynman had noted, that 
“the discrepancy in the hyperfine structure of the hydrogen 
atom ... could be explained on the same basis as that of the 
electromagnetic self-energy, as can the line shift of Lamb,” 
Schwinger had transformed the perception of quantum 
electrodynamics. He had made it into an effective, coherent, 


and consistent computational scheme. 


Just ten days after the Washington conference, on 
November 25, Oppenheimer gave a public lecture at MIT entitled 
“Physics in the Contemporary World.” His theme was the 
“temporarily disastrous effect on the prosecution of pure science” 
that the Second World War had had, because of the “demands of 
military technology,” and the speed with which the science of 
physics, especially, had recovered from that disastrous effect. “It 
has,” he told his audience, “been an exciting and an inspiring 
sight to watch the recovery—a_ recovery testifying to 
extraordinary vitality and vigor in this human activity. Today, 
barely two years after the end of hostilities, physics is booming.” 

As examples of the booming progress that physics was then 
making, Oppenheimer mentioned three things: 1.the new 
discoveries about mesons and the consequent progress in 
understanding elementary particles (“Almost every month has 
surprises for us in the findings about these particles. We are 
meeting new ones for which we are not prepared. We are 
learning how poorly we had identified the properties even of our 
old friends among them”); 2. Schwinger’s dramatic improvements 
to Dirac’s QED (“A newly vigorous criterion for the adequacy of 
our knowledge of the interactions of radiation and matter. Thus 
we are beginning to see in this field at least a partial resolution, 
and I am myself inclined to think rather more than that, of the 
paradoxes that have plagued the professional theorists for two 
decades”); and 3.the identification of the pi-meson as the 
Yukawa particle (“the increasing understanding of those forces 
which give to atomic nuclei their great stability, and to their 
transmutations their great violence”). Finally he mentioned the 
importance of recognizing the connections between these three: 


It is the prevailing view that a true understanding of these 
forces may well not be separable from the ordering of our 
experience with regard to elementary particles, and that it may 
also turn on an extension to new fields of recent advances in 
electrodynamics. 


Unfortunately, Oppenheimer’s central message in this lecture— 
that physics was emerging from its wartime shackles into a new 


golden era of exciting fundamental progress—has been largely 
lost to posterity because of a momentary lapse into hyperbole. 
Referring to the role that scientists played not only in developing 
the atomic bomb, but also in recommending their development 
and advising on their use, he remarked: “In some sort of crude 
sense which no vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement can quite 
extinguish, the physicists have known sin; and this is a 
knowledge which they cannot lose.” So arresting was this remark, 
and so widely reported, that it came to overshadow everything 
else Oppenheimer said in this lecture. The lecture has thus 
acquired a reputation for being a gloomy and introspective 
confession of guilt rather than for being what it is—a cheery 
celebration of the dawn of a golden age of physics. 

As is shown by Oppenheimer’s mention in his MIT lecture of 
the possibility of solving “the paradoxes that have plagued the 
professional theorists for two decades,” the reason he was so 
excited about Schwinger’s calculations was not just that they 
promised to explain both sets of the experiments conducted at 
Columbia, but also because, in doing so, they promised to solve 
the problems in quantum electrodynamics that Oppenheimer 
himself had worked on before the war. In particular, Schwinger’s 
work offered a way of overcoming the problems that 
Oppenheimer had long believed pointed to a fundamental flaw in 
Dirac’s theory. These problems centered on the fact that, though 
the theory seemed in general to work well, at various points 
when one tried to use it to make very precise or detailed 
calculations, the answers it gave had to be wrong because they 
involved infinities, where the answer (for example, to questions 
about the energy of an electron at a certain state) had to be finite. 
This was the problem that Sidney Dancoff came so close to 
solving back in 1939. Now, it seemed, Schwinger was on the 
brink of providing the definitive solution. 

Oppenheimer was not the only physicist excited at the progress 
promised by Schwinger’s calculations. On his way back to 
Harvard from the Washington conference, Schwinger paid a visit 
to Columbia, where he gave a progress report on_ his 
groundbreaking work. After he had gone, Rabi wrote to Bethe, 
telling him that, in his view, Schwinger’s theory was undoubtedly 
correct. He concluded: “God is great!” Bethe replied in equally 
excited terms: “I have heard about Schwinger’s theory and find it 


very wonderful...It is certainly wonderful how those 
experiments of yours have given a completely new slant to a 
theory and how the theory has blossomed in a relatively short 
time. It is as exciting as in the early days of quantum mechanics.” 

In late December 1947, Schwinger sent a report of his 
treatment of the anomalous magnetic moment to the Physical 
Review, in the course of which he mentioned the work that 
Dancoff had done with Oppenheimer in 1939 and the “confusion” 
it had generated. Before this paper appeared in print, physicists 
had a chance to hear Schwinger report on his new theory at the 
annual meeting of the American Physical Society, which was held 
at Columbia from January 29 to 31, 1948. Oppenheimer and Pais 
attended the meeting, taking the train together from Princeton to 
New York on January 29. Their main interest, of course, was to 
hear Schwinger. He, however, was not scheduled to speak until 
the last day. In the meantime, Pais remembers, he and 
Oppenheimer were impressed by one of the other speakers, a 
young British physicist called Freeman Dyson. “As he proceeded 
to give his talk,” Pais recalls, “Robert and I nodded at each other: 
this kid is smart.” Educated at Winchester public school and at 
Trinity College, Cambridge, Dyson was a member of a very 
distinguished British family, his father being the well-known 
composer George Dyson. At the time Oppenheimer and Pais met 
him, Dyson was six months into a visiting fellowship at Cornell, 
where he had been working with Bethe and Feynman. After his 
talk, Oppenheimer approached him and invited him to spend the 
following academic year at the institute, an invitation Dyson 
promptly accepted. 

When the time came for Schwinger’s lecture on the final day of 
the conference, it was discovered that 1,600 people had 
registered to hear him speak. The afternoon’s session was 
hurriedly rearranged so that he could give his lecture twice. In a 
letter that Dyson wrote his parents about the meeting, the 
excitement generated by Schwinger’s paper is vividly captured: 


The great event came on Saturday morning, and was an hour’s 
talk by Schwinger, in which he gave a masterly survey of the 
new theory which he has the greatest share in constructing and 
at the end made a dramatic announcement of a still newer and 
more powerful theory, which is still in embryo. This talk was 


so brilliant that he was asked to repeat it in the afternoon 
session, various unfortunate lesser lights being displaced in his 
favour. There were tremendous cheers when he announced 
that the crucial experiment had supported his theory: the 
magnetic splitting of two of the spectral lines of gallium (an 
obscure element hitherto remarkable only for being a liquid 
metal like mercury) were found to be in the ratio of 2.00114 to 
1: the old theory gave for this ratio exactly 2 to 1, while the 
Schwinger theory gave 2.0016 to 1. 


Feynman was at this historic talk and, in the discussion period, 
said that he had a different method of calculating the magnetic 
moment of the electron and that his calculations supported 
Schwinger. “I was not showing off,” Feynman later said. “I was 
just trying to say that there’s no problem, for I had done the same 
thing that he had done and it had come out all right.” The 
problem was, as Feynman later conceded: “People knew 
Schwinger, but most of them did not know me.” 


I heard later from several people who were at the APS meeting 
that I sounded funny to them. “The great Julian Schwinger was 
talking when this little squirt got up and said, ‘I have already 
done this, Daddy, you’re in no trouble at all! Everything will be 
OK!” 


Feynman’s time would come, but, for the moment, all eyes 
were on Schwinger. Schwinger’s opportunity to present in detail 
the “still newer and more powerful theory” mentioned by Dyson 
came at the end of March 1948, when the second conference in 
the series that had begun the previous year at Shelter Island was 
held. As, by common consent, Oppenheimer was the dominant 
figure at Shelter Island, it was only natural that he should take a 
lead in organizing and securing funding for this second 
conference. Just a few days after the Shelter Island Conference 
had finished, Oppenheimer was writing to the National Academy 
of Sciences, urging them to support a second conference. 

On December 10, 1947, Oppenheimer had circulated all the 
participants of the Shelter Island Conference, suggesting that the 
next one should be held from March 30 to April 2, 1948—days 
when he knew his distinguished visitors to the institute, Bohr and 


Dirac, would be free to attend. As the Ram’s Head Inn was not 
available during those days, Oppenheimer and Pais went looking 
for an alternative and found what they considered to be an ideal 
place, a hotel in the Pocono Mountains, Pennsylvania, called 
Pocono Manor. 

At Pocono, Schwinger was given as much time as he wanted 
and delivered a talk that took up almost an entire day. At the end 
of it, Oppenheimer was heard to remark: “Now it does not matter 
any more whether things are infinite.” John Wheeler took notes 
of the talk, which covered no fewer than forty pages. Pais has 
described Schwinger’s talk as “a major tour de force in which he 
unveiled a detailed new calculus.” Dyson was not there (“I was 
not invited because I was not yet an expert”), but he had good 
firsthand accounts of the talk from Bethe and Feynman. 
Schwinger, Dyson writes, “had a new theory of quantum 
electrodynamics which explained all the Columbia experiments. 
His theory was built on orthodox principles and was a 
masterpiece of mathematical technique. His calculations were 
extremely complicated, and few in the audience stayed with him 
all the way through the eight-hour exposition. But Oppy 
understood and approved everything.” 

One thing Oppenheimer did not yet understand, however, was 
Feynman’s own version of quantum electrodynamics, which he 
presented after Schwinger in a paper called “Alternative 
Formulation of Quantum Electrodynamics.” Dyson, who had got 
to know Feynman well by this time and liked him a great deal, 
writes: “Dick tried to tell the exhausted listeners how he could 
explain the same experiments much more simply using his own 
unorthodox methods. Nobody understood a word that Dick said. 
At the end Oppy made some scathing comments and that was 
that. Dick came home from the meeting very depressed.” Pais, 
who was, of course, actually there, remembers it slightly 
differently. No one could follow Feynman’s methods, he recalled, 
but “the speed with which Feynman could reproduce results also 
found by Schwinger convinced us that he was on to something.” 
Certainly Schwinger thought Feynman was on to something. “The 
Pocono conference,” he later said, “was my first opportunity to 
learn what Feynman was doing,” and “as his talk proceeded, I 
could see points of similarity.” Feynman himself remembers that 
at Pocono he and Schwinger “got together in the hallway and 


although we’d come from the end of the earth with different 
ideas, we had climbed the same mountain from different sides 
and we could check each other’s equations.” 

Actually, Feynman and Schwinger were not the only two 
climbers of this particular mountain, as Oppenheimer discovered 
when he returned to Princeton. Waiting for him there was a letter 
from the Japanese physicist Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, telling him about 
recent work done in Japan that seemed in some important 
respects to anticipate Schwinger’s work, or, anyway, to have 
arrived independently at very similar results. Tomonaga and his 
colleagues had been stimulated by reading Sidney Dancoff’s 1939 
paper to attempt exactly what Schwinger had achieved: a way of 
avoiding infinities in QED. Moreover, their method of 
accomplishing this, though not as fully worked out as 
Schwinger’s, was, from a mathematical point of view, practically 
identical. With the letter Tomonaga sent Oppenheimer a 
collection of papers by the Japanese scientists that would appear 
in the Japanese English-language journal Progress of Theoretical 
Physics. 

Upon receiving this package from Tomonaga, Oppenheimer 
sent him a telegram: “Grateful for your letter and papers. Found 
most interesting and valuable mostly paralleling much work done 
here. Strongly suggest you write a summary account of present 
state and views for prompt publication in Physical Review. Glad to 
arrange.” Oppenheimer also sent a copy of Tomonaga’s letter to 
all the participants of the Pocono Manor conference, telling them: 
“Just because we were able to hear Schwinger’s beautiful report, 
we may better be able to appreciate this independent 
development.” 

Tomonaga was only too pleased to take Oppenheimer’s advice, 
and on May 28, 1948, Oppenheimer received his summary of the 
work done in Japan, which was subsequently published in the 
July 15 edition of Physical Review, under the title “On Infinite 
Field Reactions in Quantum Field Theory,” together with an 
accompanying note from Oppenheimer, which spoke of the 
“remarkable work carried out in Japan in recent years.” On 
April11, after seeing the letter from Tomonaga that 
Oppenheimer had sent to all the Pocono delegates, Freeman 
Dyson wrote to his parents, correctly pointing out: “The reason 
that everyone is so enormously pleased with this work of 


Tomonaga is partly political.” 


Long-sighted scientists are worried by the growing danger of 
nationalism in American science, and even more in the minds 
of the politicians and industrialists who finance science. In the 
public mind, experimental science at least is a thing only 
Americans know how to do, and the fact that some theorists 
have had to be imported from Europe is rather grudgingly 
admitted. In this atmosphere the new Schwinger theory tended 
to be acclaimed as a demonstration that now even in 
theoretical physics America has nothing to learn, now for the 
first time she has produced her own Einstein. You can see that 
if the scientists can say that even in this chosen field of physics 
America was anticipated and indeed by a member of the much- 
despised race of Japanese, this will be a strong card to play 
against nationalistic politics. 


Things had come full circle since the days when Rabi, Condon 
and Oppenheimer had suffered from an acute awareness of the 
condescension with which European theoretical physicists treated 
their American counterparts. Now those same scientists had to 
check themselves and celebrate the achievements of others, so as 
not to appear to be basking in their own, self-evident superiority. 
For there is no doubt that there was at this time a sense in 
America that, as Oppenheimer had said in his MIT lecture, 
science, and particularly physics, was booming. 

One reflection of this was the launch of a new, semi-popular 
magazine called Physics Today, the first issue of which was 
published in May 1948. The magazine was published by the 
American Institute of Physics, the “whole idea” of which was, in 
the words of one of its historians, to bring “mutually 
unacquainted specialists in all branches of physics together into a 
kind of operational unity for enhancement of physics as an 
important field of human endeavour.” The aim of the magazine, 
in the words of the same historian, was “to present the special 
fields in interesting terms that all physicists and most laymen 
could understand.” There were attempts by the magazine to resist 
the kind of nationalism that Freeman Dyson mentions in his letter 
to his parents—it included, for example, reports on what was 
happening in physics in England and the rest of Europe—but, 


nevertheless, the leading article of its first issue was a piece by 
Vannevar Bush on “Trends in American Science.” Moreover, its 
first cover was a piece of triumphalism that would have been 
understood only in America. What the cover showed was a hat, 
resting on a piece of machinery. What the editor of the magazine 
assumed (no doubt correctly) their readers would know was that 
this hat, being a pork-pie hat, was Oppenheimer’s hat, and that the 
machinery was a cyclotron. The editor’s intention was to 
symbolize the triumph of civilian over military control of atomic 
energy. Whether or not he was successful in that, what is 
indisputably symbolized by the cover is the pivotal and iconic 
role played by Oppenheimer during this period—so famous that 
he did not actually need to be pictured in order to be represented. 

In June 1948, Oppenheimer returned to California to take part 
in a three-day conference at Caltech on cosmic rays that had been 
organized to celebrate Robert Millikan’s eightieth birthday. 
Among those present were John Wheeler, Bruno Rossi, Carl 
Anderson, Frank Oppenheimer and two experimental physicists, 
George Rochester from Manchester and Louis Leprince-Ringuet 
from Paris, both of whom had collected evidence from cosmic-ray 
observations of yet another meson, this one (soon to be called the 
K-meson or kaon) much heavier than the pi-meson and the mu- 
meson. A brief contemporary report of the conference published 
in the magazine Engineering and Science Monthly states laconically: 
“Out of it all came general agreement that the symposium was an 
extremely successful affair; that our knowledge of these 
mysterious rays that bombard the earth from outer space is still 
fragmentary but progressing well, and that no one has yet 
determined from whence they come or how they originated.” 

A similar impression is given in the concluding remarks to the 
symposium that Caltech’s president, Lee DuBridge, had asked 
Oppenheimer to give. Indeed, in these remarks Oppenheimer 
appears far more interested in the recent developments in 
theoretical physics made by Schwinger than he does in anything 
that was actually discussed during the symposium. After 
remarking that he found it “hard to disbelieve Leprince-Ringuet’s 
evidence for a very heavy meson,” he quickly turned his summary 
into an exposition of “the developments in electrodynamics that 
are so much associated with Schwinger’s name,” speculating that 
in those developments may lie a solution to the unsolved 


problems in cosmic-ray studies and particle physics. 

Still more obsessed with the new QED than Oppenheimer was 
Freeman Dyson, who developed during the summer of 1948 a 
fervent ambition to understand fully all three versions of the new 
theory—Schwinger’s, Tomonaga’s and Feynman’s—and 
demonstrate the equivalence of all three. Dyson was disappointed 
not to have been invited to the Pocono conference in March, but 
delighted when Bethe showed him Tomonaga’s papers, 
particularly as one of the things Tomonaga demonstrated was 
something that Feynman had been saying for a long time: that 
Schwinger’s results could be obtained without the formidably 
difficult mathematics that Schwinger himself had used to derive 
them. “To me that was very important,” Dyson later said. “It gave 
me the idea that this was after all simple.” 

In order to improve his understanding of Schwinger’s theory, 
Dyson signed up for the Ann Arbor summer school in Michigan, 
where Schwinger would be delivering a series of lectures. Up to 
that point the main source for Schwinger’s ideas were the notes 
taken of his mammoth Pocono talk. This would change over the 
next two years, as Schwinger wrote up his ideas in a series of 
important articles that were published in the Physical Review, but, 
for a young physicist like Dyson, impatient to master the new 
theory, the Ann Arbor lectures were a golden opportunity to learn 
it straight from its originator. 

The summer school was due to start on July 19, two weeks 
after the end of term at Cornell. During his year at Cornell, Dyson 
had seen much of Feynman and had come not only to admire 
him, but to like him a great deal. To fill those two weeks, then, 
Dyson accepted an offer he received from Feynman to accompany 
him on a trip to Albuquerque, “where love had drawn him.” 
Being with Feynman twenty-four hours a day as they traveled 
across the United States provided Dyson with the perfect chance 
to understand Feynman’s own version of the new theory, which, 
like Schwinger’s, was as yet unpublished. “I knew,” Dyson writes 
in his autobiographical book, Disturbing the Universe, “that 
somewhere hidden in Dick’s ideas was the key to a theory of 
quantum electrodynamics simpler and more physical than Julian 
Schwinger’s elaborate construction.” By the time he left Feynman 
to go to Ann Arbor, Dyson had a pretty firm grasp of that key. 

From Ann Arbor, Dyson wrote to his parents: 


Yesterday the great Schwinger arrived, and for the first time I 
spoke to him; with him arrived a lot of new people who came 
to hear him especially. His talks have been from the first 
minute excellent; there is no doubt he has taken a lot of trouble 
to polish up his theory for presentation at this meeting. I think 
in a few months we shall have forgotten what pre-Schwinger 
physics was like. 


The lectures that Schwinger gave during the five weeks of the 
summer school were, in fact, identical to the series of articles that 
would soon start appearing in print. In Disturbing the Universe 
Dyson says he learned less from the lectures—which he describes 
as “a marvel of polished elegance, like a difficult violin sonata 
played by a virtuoso, more technique than music”—than from 
personal conversations with Schwinger. In the lectures, Dyson 
says, Schwinger’s theory “was a cut diamond, brilliant and 
dazzling,” but in conversation, “I saw it in the rough, the way he 
saw it himself before he started the cutting and polishing. In this 
way I was able to grasp much better his way of thinking.” After 
spending five weeks working through “every step of Schwinger’s 
lectures and every word of our conversations,” Dyson felt that he 
“understood Schwinger’s theory as well as anybody could 
understand it, with the possible exception of Schwinger.” 

After the summer school, Dyson took a two-week holiday in 
California, during which he did not think about physics, and 
then, in September, on a Greyhound bus heading back east, he 
experienced some kind of epiphany. “As we were droning across 
Nebraska,” Dyson recalls, ideas “came bursting into my 
consciousness like an explosion.” 


Feynman’s pictures and Schwinger’s equations began sorting 
themselves out in my head with a clarity they had never had 
before. For the first time I was able to put them all together. 
For an hour or two I arranged and rearranged the pieces. Then 
I knew that they all fitted. I had no pencil or paper, but 
everything was so clear I did not need to write it down. 
Feynman and Schwinger were just looking at the same set of 
ideas from two different sides. Putting their methods together, 
you would have a theory of quantum electrodynamics that 
combined the mathematical precision of Schwinger with the 


practical flexibility of Feynman. 


By the time he reached Princeton to take up the one-year 
fellowship that Oppenheimer had offered him at the institute, 
Dyson had already mapped out the paper he would write, the 
title of which would be “The Radiation Theories of Tomonaga, 
Schwinger and Feynman.” Walking to the institute for the first 
time, he reflected that he—a twenty-four-year-old at the start of 
his career and with no major publications to his name—felt 
himself in a position “to teach the great Oppenheimer how to do 
physics.” 

According to a letter he wrote his parents, Dyson, after 
spending “five days stuck in my rooms, writing and thinking with 
a concentration which nearly killed me,” finished writing his 
article on the seventh day of being in Princeton. As it happened, 
Oppenheimer was not at that time in Princeton, but in Europe, 
where he would remain for the next six weeks, attending 
conferences in France, England, Denmark and Belgium and 
revisiting old haunts and old friends. Dyson, together with seven 
other young physicists who had been invited to spend the year at 
the institute (most of them students of Schwinger’s), was using 
Oppenheimer’s office while a new building that would contain 
their individual offices was hurriedly being completed. 

Actually, though Dyson did not know it, Oppenheimer already 
knew the general outline of the paper, since, before completing it, 
Dyson had written to Bethe “announcing the triumph.” In his 
letter, he told Bethe: “I have succeeded in re-formulating the 
Schwinger method, without any changes of substance, so that it 
gives immediately all the advantages of Feynman theory,” 
adding: “Incidentally, the complete equivalence of Schwinger and 
Feynman is now demonstrated.” Like Oppenheimer, Bethe was 
then in Europe, and a few days after he received Dyson’s letter, 
he and Oppenheimer were both in Birmingham attending a four- 
day conference on “Problems of Nuclear Physics,” which was held 
on September 14-18. The organizer of the conference was Rudolf 
Peierls, who remembers: 


In the middle of the conference somebody had a letter from 
Dyson ... summarizing the results he had just obtained in 
linking the Feynman and Schwinger approaches and showing 


connections and also in proving that the infinities could be 
thrown out not merely in the first order in which they 
appeared but to all orders, which was an important formal 
result. 


There had been very few international conferences since the 
war ended, and at these European meetings the tendency was for 
the Europeans to learn what was happening in America. 
Everywhere he went, Oppenheimer wrote home to Frank, “there 
is the phrase ‘you see, we are somewhat out of things.’ ” His 
return to Europe had, he told his brother, confirmed him in the 
knowledge “that it is in America largely that it will be decided 
what manner of world we are to live in.” 

At the eighth Solvay Congress, held in Brussels from 
September 27 to October 2, 1948, Oppenheimer was asked to 
report on progress in quantum electrodynamics. His report, of 
course, emphasized the importance of Schwinger’s work. After a 
historical account of the development of the “old” QED by Dirac, 
Pauli and Heisenberg, Oppenheimer’s report stressed the infinity 
problems that theory gave rise to, citing his own 1930 paper on 
the subject. To solve these problems, he told his audience, “more 
powerful methods are required,” the development of which 
“occurred in two steps, the first largely, the second almost 
wholly, due to Schwinger.” Oppenheimer’s account of 
Schwinger’s breakthroughs, however, was markedly free of the 
excitement with which he had discussed them earlier in the year. 
Indeed, the tone of the report was strikingly downbeat, especially 
toward the end, where Oppenheimer drew attention to some 
perceived weaknesses in the theory, such as the fact that it could 
not deal with the forces acting between mesons inside nucleons. 
These weaknesses, he concluded, suggested that the new quantum 
electrodynamics was not a “closed”—that is, a completed— 
system. Schwinger had made an important step forward, but his 
was not the last word on the subject. 

Back in Princeton, Dyson, having sent his paper on Feynman, 
Schwinger and Tomonaga off to the Physical Review (it was 
received on October 6, 1948), was awaiting Oppenheimer’s 
return from Europe with some trepidation. On October 10, he 
wrote to his parents: “The atmosphere at the Institute during 
these last days has been rather like the first scene in ‘Murder in 


the Cathedral’ with the women of Canterbury awaiting the return 
of their archbishop.” A few days later, when Oppenheimer finally 
arrived back, Dyson was astonished to discover that he seemed 
not only to have lost his enthusiasm for the new QED, but to have 
become actively hostile toward it. Oppenheimer was, Dyson 
wrote home, “unreceptive to new ideas in general, and Feynman 
in particular.” 

In Disturbing the Universe Dyson writes that he had known that 
Oppenheimer did not appreciate Feynman: 


but it came as a shock to hear him now violently opposing 
Schwinger, his own student, whose work he had acclaimed so 
enthusiastically six months earlier. He had somehow become 
convinced during his stay in Europe that physics was in need of 
radically new ideas, that this quantum electrodynamics of 
Schwinger and Feynman was just another misguided attempt to 
patch up old ideas with fancy mathematics. 


Why Oppenheimer’s attitude to the new theory changed so 
drastically after his trip to Europe in the autumn of 1948 is 
something of a mystery. He never explained it to Dyson or to 
anyone else, and no documents or recorded conversations exist 
that can shed much light on it. It is possible that he was 
influenced by spending several weeks in an atmosphere very 
different from the triumphant, optimistic mood that prevailed 
among American scientists during this time. It seems possible, 
too, that he was influenced by specific views of individual 
European scientists, many of whom were much more skeptical 
toward, and less impressed with, Schwinger’s theory than their 
American counterparts. As the historian of science Jagdish Mehra 
puts it: “The old guard in Europe was not altogether satisfied 
with Schwinger’s breakthroughs.” Particularly resistant was Paul 
Dirac, who remained unconvinced by the new theory till his 
dying day. When Dyson once asked Dirac what he thought of the 
new developments, Dirac replied: “I might have thought the new 
ideas were correct if they had not been so ugly.” It was a view 
that Dirac was to state in print in many places, including a paper 
he published in 1951, which provided a new theory of the 
electron. In it he wrote: 


Recent work by Lamb, Schwinger, Feynman and others has 
been very successful in setting up rules for handling the 
infinities and subtracting them away, so as to leave finite 
residues which can be compared with experiments, but the 
resulting theory is an ugly and incomplete one and cannot be 
considered as a satisfactory solution of the problem of the 
electron. 


Dirac’s use of the word “incomplete” here echoes so strongly 
the sentiments expressed by Oppenheimer that one is very 
tempted to imagine that, more than anything else, it was the 
influence of discussions with Dirac that prompted Oppenheimer’s 
change of attitude toward Schwinger’s theory. Dirac was, after 
all, at the eighth Solvay Congress and is on record as having 
responded to Oppenheimer’s report with an attack on the new 
theory. 

Whatever its cause, Oppenheimer’s change of heart put a great 
strain on his relations with Dyson. Within a few days of his return 
to Princeton, Oppenheimer gave Dyson a copy of the report he 
had delivered at the Solvay Congress. Dyson, already upset at 
Oppenheimer’s attitude toward his paper on Feynman, Schwinger 
and Tomonaga, was sufficiently horrified by Oppenheimer’s 
report to write a memo on the subject. On October 17, Dyson sent 
the memo to Oppenheimer, together with a note that explained 
that he had written it because “I disagree rather strongly with the 
point of view expressed in your Solvay Report.” The memo 
consisted of six numbered points, almost all of which centered on 
a defense of Feynman’s version of the new theory. “As a result of 
using both the _ old-fashioned quantum-electrodynamics 
(Heisenberg-Pauli) and Feynman electrodynamics,” Dyson wrote, 
“T am convinced that the Feynman theory is considerably easier 
to use, understand, and teach.” 

Dyson was naturally apprehensive about Oppenheimer’s 
reaction to this memo, but, in fact, the next time the two met 
Oppenheimer told him that he was delighted by it and had 
arranged for Dyson to give a seminar twice a week for the 
following four weeks, as an opportunity for him to put his views 
to the other members of the institute. As Dyson discovered at the 
first seminar in the series, however, Oppenheimer evidently saw 
these occasions as being an opportunity for him to express his 


views as well. In the next letter home to his parents, Dyson wrote 
about how difficult Oppenheimer had made it for him to put 
across his ideas: 


I have been observing rather carefully his behaviour during 
seminars. If one is saying, for the benefit of the rest of the 
audience, things that he knows already, he cannot resist 
hurrying on to something else; then when one says things that 
he doesn’t know or immediately agree with, he breaks in 
before the point is fully explained with acute and sometimes 
devastating criticisms, to which it is impossible to reply 
adequately even when he is wrong. If one watches him one can 
see that he is moving around nervously all the time, never 
stops smoking, and I believe that his impatience is largely 
beyond his control. 


During the second seminar, “we had our fiercest public battle 
so far, when I criticized some unwarrantably pessimistic remarks 
he had made about the Schwinger theory. He came down on me 
like a ton of bricks, and conclusively won the argument so far as 
the public was concerned.” The following day, Dyson told his 
parents, he was rescued by Hans Bethe, who came down to talk 
to the seminar “about some calculations he was doing with the 
Feynman theory.” 


He was received in the style to which I am accustomed, with 
incessant interruptions and confused babbling of voices, and 
had great difficulty in making even his main point clear; while 
this was going on he stood very calmly and said nothing, only 
grinned at me as if to say “Now I can see what you are up 
against.” After that he began to make openings for me, saying 
in answer to a question “Well I have no doubt Dyson will have 
told you all about that,” at which point I was not slow to say in 
as deliberate a tone as possible, “I am afraid I have not got to 
that yet.” Finally Bethe made a peroration in which he said 
explicitly that the Feynman theory is much the best theory and 
that people must learn it if they want to avoid talking 
nonsense; things which I had begun saying but in vain. 


After the seminar Bethe and Oppenheimer dined together, and 
during dinner Bethe must have said something about 


Oppenheimer’s treatment of Dyson, because after that 
Oppenheimer listened to Dyson without interrupting, and at the 
end of the last seminar made a short speech saying how much 
they had all learned from Dyson’s talks. The next morning, Dyson 
found in his mailbox a short note from Oppenheimer, saying 
simply “Nolo Contendere,” a legal term derived from the Latin for 
“T do not wish to contend.” 

By the time these seminars had finished, toward the end of 
November 1948, Dyson had achieved, simply by word of mouth 
(his paper would not actually appear in print until February 
1949), a reputation, in both America and Europe, as an extremely 
gifted and promising young physicist, and he was consequently 
bombarded with job offers. The Commonwealth Fellowship that 
had allowed him to spend two years in the U.S. stipulated that, 
when those two years were over, he had to return to either Great 
Britain or one of the Commonwealth countries. He was therefore 
unable to accept a position that Rabi offered him at Columbia, 
which he deeply regretted. “It’s a grim prospect,” he told his 
parents, “to be cut off without more than rumours and months- 
old reports of what Feynman or Schwinger or Columbia or 
Berkeley is doing.” 

To avoid this “grim prospect” becoming a permanent state of 
affairs, Oppenheimer made Dyson a generous proposal, based on 
a very flattering comparison. Both Bohr and Dirac, Oppenheimer 
told Dyson, had felt compelled to return to their home countries 
after their visiting fellowships at the institute, but he had made 
for them an arrangement whereby they could visit the institute 
every third year so that they could keep in touch with people and 
developments in the United States. “Certainly,” Oppenheimer told 
Dyson, “we shall be able to do something of the kind for you.” A 
short while later, Dyson went to see Oppenheimer to tell him 
that, among British universities, he had received offers from 
Birmingham, Bristol and Cambridge, and to ask for advice on 
choosing between the three. “Well,” said Oppenheimer, 
“Birmingham has much the best theoretical physicist to work 
with, Peierls; Bristol has much the best experimental physicist, 
Powell; Cambridge has some excellent architecture.” Perhaps, by 
this time, Oppenheimer had broken free of the spell exerted by 
Dirac. In any case, Dyson chose to go to Birmingham. 

Intoxicated by his newfound celebrity, Dyson wrote to his 


parents: “I am really becoming a Big Shot.” However, as a 
celebrity, he was nowhere near being in Oppenheimer’s league. 
On November 8, 1948, in the middle of Dyson’s series of 
seminars, the cover of Time magazine was taken up with a 
painting of Oppenheimer, looking thoughtful and troubled, 
beneath which was the quotation (which, in the context of the 
Dyson-Oppenheimer exchanges, acquires a rather ironic flavor): 
“What we don’t understand we explain to each other.” The article 
heralded by the cover was a long, surprisingly intimate profile of 
Oppenheimer, who seemed to have taken a liking to the 
interviewer, to whom he revealed many things about himself that 
he did not often reveal, even to close friends. Many of his 
remarks about his childhood that seem to appear in every article 
or book written about him—that he was an “unctuous, 
repulsively good little boy,” that his life as a child “did not 
prepare me in any way for the fact that there are cruel and bitter 
things,” that his home offered him “no normal, healthy way to be 
a bastard,” and so on—have their origin in this Time article. His 
life is told in some detail, using both his words and those of his 
friends, schoolmates and teachers, including—and here, in the 
increasingly hysterical anti-communism that was sweeping 
through the States at the time, he was taking something of a 
calculated risk—his active involvement in left-wing politics 
during the 1930s, when, he is quoted as saying, “I woke up to a 
recognition that politics was a part of life.” 


I became a real left-winger, joined the Teachers Union, had lots 
of Communist friends. It was what most people do in college or 
late high school. The Thomas Committee doesn’t like this, but 
I’m not ashamed of it; ’m more ashamed of the lateness. Most 
of what I believed then now seems complete nonsense, but it 
was an essential part of becoming a whole man. If it hadn’t 
been for this late but indispensable education, I couldn’t have 
done the job at Los Alamos at all. 


The “Thomas Committee” mentioned by Oppenheimer was the 
House of Representatives’ Committee on Un-American Activities 
(HUAC), which, under the chairmanship of J. Parnell Thomas, 
had been holding hearings throughout the spring and summer of 
1948, investigating alleged communist subversion. The most 


sensational outcome of these hearings came in August 1948, 
when Whittaker Chambers, a senior editor at Time magazine, 
accused Alger Hiss, a lawyer and an official in the State 
Department, of having been a member of a secret communist cell. 
At the time that Oppenheimer was being interviewed for Time, 
Hiss was engaged in legal proceedings against Chambers, which, 
following the revelation by Chambers of fresh evidence against 
Hiss, were to lead to Hiss’s conviction, and subsequent 
imprisonment, in 1950 for perjury. 

In a letter he had written Frank from Europe, Oppenheimer 
remarked how hard it had been while he was away “to follow in 
detail what all is up with the Thomas Committee,” and describing 
the Hiss case as “a menacing portent.” Oppenheimer was 
evidently (and rightly) concerned that HUAC would come 
gunning for Frank, and advised him to get himself a good lawyer, 
someone like Herb Marks, who, Oppenheimer told his brother, 
knew his way round Washington, Congress and the press. 
Coincidentally, when the Time profile of Oppenheimer came out, 
among those who wrote to him about it was Herb Marks, who 
complimented him particularly on the “pre-trial” touch— 
presumably a reference to Oppenheimer’s open disclosure of his 
left-wing past. Replying to Marks, Oppenheimer told him that 
was the only thing he had liked about the article, “where I saw an 
opportunity, long solicited, but not before available.” 

The Time piece ended with some remarks about the Institute for 
Advanced Study, which Oppenheimer said he liked to think of as 
an “intellectual hotel,” a “place for transient thinkers to rest, 
recover and refresh themselves before continuing on their way.” 
He hoped that some people, Oppenheimer told his interviewer, 
like Dirac and Bohr, would make periodic returns to Princeton, so 
as not to lose touch with the U.S. His recent experiences in 
Birmingham and Brussels had shown him how “despairing the life 
of the intellect had become in postwar Europe,” which had given 
him a renewed sense of the importance of the institute: “Viewed 
from Princeton, the Institute might have its shortcomings; viewed 
from Europe, it had something of the special glow of a monastery 
in the Dark Ages.” 

In an earlier interview, this time for the New York Times, 
published in April 1948, Oppenheimer had apparently given a 
rather different impression of his role as the institute’s director. 


Suppose, the reporter had written (in remarks presumably based 
on things Oppenheimer had said), you had funds based on a 
$21 million endowment, and: 


Suppose you could use this fund to invite as your salaried 
house-guests the world’s greatest scholars, scientists and 
creative artists—your favorite poet, the author of the book that 
interested you so much, the European scientist with whom you 
would like to mull over some speculations about the nature of 
the universe. That’s precisely the set-up that Oppenheimer 
enjoys. He can indulge every interest and curiosity. 


The New York Times description actually gives a fairly accurate 
account of how Oppenheimer used the funds placed at his 
disposal. In almost every appointment he made, one can see a 
very personal influence at play. This has already been mentioned 
in connection with Bohr and Dirac, but it is no less evident in 
those who came the following year. These included, for example, 
Oppenheimer’s old friend Francis Fergusson, who, in the many 
years since he and Oppenheimer had last seen each other, had 
become an eminent critic and writer on theater. Fergusson taught 
at Bennington College, Vermont, where he founded the drama 
department. During his time at the institute Fergusson wrote The 
Idea of a Theatre, which was to become his best-known work. 
Another old friend who arrived at the institute in 1948 was 
Harold Cherniss, the ancient-Greek scholar whom Oppenheimer 
had known at Berkeley. No less personal, albeit in a different 
way, was Oppenheimer’s invitation to the Japanese physicist 
Hideki Yukawa, whose work had had such a profound influence 
on Oppenheimer’s and who also arrived in 1948. 

Finally there was T.S. Eliot, who had long been both 
Oppenheimer’s favorite poet and Fergusson’s. Indeed, over the 
years Fergusson had published many essays about various aspects 
of Eliot’s work. Eliot, too, came in 1948, arriving while 
Oppenheimer was still in Europe. Dyson remembers him as being 
“prim and shy.” Eliot, he says, “appeared each day in the lounge 
at teatime, sitting by himself with a newspaper and a teacup.” 
Neither Dyson nor any of his contemporaries could muster the 
courage to approach him. “None of our gang of young scientists,” 
Dyson recalls, “succeeded in penetrating the barrier of fame and 


reserve that surrounded Eliot like a glass case around a mummy.” 
Pais says he “was dying to have conversations with Eliot but 
refrained from approaching him, less out of shyness than from an 
ingrained sense not to bother him with trivia.” He did, however, 
have one conversation with the great poet, when they happened 
to share a lift. “This is a nice elevator,” Eliot remarked, to which 
Pais replied: “Yes, this is a nice elevator.” “That,” Pais writes, 
“was all the conversation with Eliot I ever had.” 

Eliot’s biographer Peter Ackroyd says that Eliot “felt lonely and 
homesick” at Princeton, precisely because “he suffered from the 
fate of many famous men”—that is, “most people were afraid to 
talk to him.” In November 1948, it was announced that Eliot had 
won the Nobel Prize in Literature. Consequently, according to 
Dyson: “Newspapermen swarmed around him and he retreated 
even further into his shell.” Years later, Dyson asked 
Oppenheimer what he thought of Eliot. He replied that, though 
he loved Eliot’s poetry and regarded him as a genius, he was 
disappointed with his stay at the institute. “I invited Eliot here,” 
Oppenheimer told Dyson, “in the hope that he would produce 
another masterpiece, and all he did here was to work on The 
Cocktail Party, the worst thing he ever wrote.” 

Dyson’s time at the institute, on the other hand, despite his 
acrimonious spat with Oppenheimer, was a triumph, and, in fact, 
Oppenheimer became one of his leading admirers and supporters. 
Before submitting for publication the report he gave at the Solvay 
Congress, Oppenheimer rewrote it, adding to it several mentions 
of Dyson’s paper on Feynman, Schwinger and Tomonaga (which 
he describes as being “in press”) and drawing attention to Dyson’s 
own original contributions to the theory that—Oppenheimer’s 
temporary doubts notwithstanding—had so captured the 
imaginations of physicists during the latter part of 1948. On 
December 30, Oppenheimer wrote to Peierls in Birmingham: 


One piece of news which you need to know is how very very 
good Dyson is. He wants to return, and in fact must return, to 
England for the next years, but we have made a flexible 
arrangement with him to come back here for as many 
semesters as he can spare. I think he likes the arrangement and 
we are all delighted by it. 


In January 1949, Dyson went with Oppenheimer to New York 
to attend the annual meeting of the American Physical Society, of 
which Oppenheimer had recently been elected president. On the 
first day of the meeting, Dyson wrote to his parents, he received 
confirmation of his own celebrity when a young physicist from 
Columbia gave a talk during which he repeatedly referred to the 
“beautiful theory of Feynman-Dyson.” The next day, Dyson 
recalls, “Oppenheimer gave a presidential address in the biggest 
hall”: 


and such was the glamour of his name after being on the cover 
of Time that the hall was packed with two thousand people half 
an hour before he was due to start. He spoke on the title 
“Fields and Quanta” and gave a very good historical summary 
of the vicissitudes of our attempts to understand the behaviour 
of atoms and radiation. At the end he spoke with great 
enthusiasm of my work and said that it was pointing the way 
for the immediate future even if it did not seem deep enough 
to carry us farther than that. I was thinking happily to myself: 
Last year it was Julian Schwinger, this year it is me. Who will 
it be next year? 


It was not only Oppenheimer whose interests were moving 
away from Schwinger and toward Feynman and Dyson; the whole 
physics community was moving in the same direction. Dyson’s 
paper would not appear in print until shortly after the 
conference, and Feynman’s classic papers setting out his version 
of QED would not appear until September 1949, but word of 
mouth is a quick, efficient and powerful means of communication 
and, even before these papers came out, there was much talk 
among physicists of “Feynman diagrams” or, for a while at least, 
“Dyson graphs.” 

This January 1949 meeting has, in fact, gone down in history 
as the moment when not just the world at large, but Feynman 
himself, realized the power of his diagrammatic methods of 
performing the extraordinarily intricate calculations required in 
quantum electrodynamics. It was this meeting, Feynman later 
said, “when I really knew I had something. That was the moment 
that I really knew that I had to publish—that I had gotten ahead 
of the world.” The particular incident that prompted this 


realization was one that involved Oppenheimer, and, more 
specifically, it involved Oppenheimer’s relish for publicly 
crushing the views and arguments of others. 

Murray Slotnick, a young physicist at Cornell who had worked 
with Hans Bethe, reported at the meeting on a certain extremely 
complicated calculation in meson theory that he had done 
relating to the interaction between a neutron and the electrostatic 
field of an electron. He had done this calculation for both 
“pseudoscalar” and “pseudovector” interactions, getting a finite 
result for the first and an infinite result for the second. In the 
discussion period after Slotnick’s presentation, Oppenheimer 
flummoxed Slotnick by asking “What about Case’s Theorem?” 
When asked to explain what he meant, Oppenheimer said that 
Kenneth Case, an ex-student of Schwinger’s who was now at the 
Institute for Advanced Study, had just proven that the two kinds 
of interactions had to be the same—a proof that Case would be 
presenting to the conference the following day. Since Slotnick’s 
calculations violated Case’s Theorem, Oppenheimer insisted, they 
had to be wrong. As Case’s Theorem had not been published, nor 
was there even a pre-print of it available, Slotnick, naturally, did 
not know how to respond, and so allowed Oppenheimer’s point to 
stand and accepted that his own work had been summarily 
refuted. 

Feynman was not there during this exchange, but when he 
arrived at the conference later that day he was asked for his 
opinion on Slotnick’s calculation and “Case’s Theorem.” Feynman 
had never studied meson theory, but his methods of calculation 
using “Feynman diagrams” had been developed precisely to 
perform calculations relating to interactions between particles 
and electrostatic fields, so he was pretty sure that he could do 
this calculation. Sure enough, after a few hours that evening, he 
had results for both the pseudoscalar and pseudovector cases, 
results that confirmed his hunch that Slotnick was right. The next 
day, Feynman sought out Slotnick and showed him his work of 
the previous evening. Slotnick was absolutely dumbstruck. He 
had spent two years on this problem, and Feynman had solved it 
in an evening. Not only that, but Feynman’s calculation was more 
fine-grained than Slotnick’s, since he had built in a variable for 
the momentum transferred by the electron, a complication that 
Slotnick had ignored. It was Slotnick’s flabbergasted reaction that 


convinced Feynman that he really had something wonderful. 
“That was the moment I got my Nobel Prize,” Feynman said, 
“when Slotnick told me that he had been working two 
years ... That was an exciting moment.” 

That day, after Case had given his talk, Feynman got up and 
asked: “But what about Slotnick’s calculation? Your theorem must 
be wrong because a simple calculation shows that it’s correct. I 
checked Slotnick’s calculation and I agree with it.” “I had fun 
with that,” Feynman later remarked. After the conference he 
worked out what was wrong with Case’s reasoning, a laborious 
task, since it involved working with Schwinger’s formalism. What 
made it worthwhile was the demonstration that, as Dyson had 
been saying for a long time, Feynman’s methods were easier and 
quicker to use than Schwinger’s and, therefore, likely to give 
more reliable results. After the meeting Feynman worked hard to 
write up his version of the new theory and on April 8, 1949, the 
Physical Review received “The Theory of Positrons,” the first 
published account by Feynman of his method of calculating the 
energies of electrons and positrons—that is, his first statement of 
the new QED. Three days after delivering this paper, Feynman 
was in Oldstone-on-the-Hudson, Peekskill, about forty miles north 
of New York City, for the third and final conference in the series 
that had begun at Shelter Island two years earlier. 

Like the one at Pocono, this conference was organized by 
Oppenheimer, who, a month before it began, had sent to the 
invitees a rather brisk, businesslike letter, informing them that 
the Oldstone Inn had been reserved for the nights of April 10-14. 
“We will start work on Monday morning and should have four 
full days together.” Twenty-four scientists attended the 
conference. Among those who had not been at the other two were 
Yukawa, now a visiting fellow at the institute, and Freeman 
Dyson, whose invitation was recognition of his newfound status 
as a member of the elite group of leading physicists. 

“We had lovely weather for the conference,” Dyson wrote to his 
parents soon after it had finished, “and could sit outside 
whenever we were not conferring. However, since the conference 
was run by Oppenheimer, that was not often.” 


One of the things which simply amazes me about Oppenheimer 
is his mental and physical indefatigability; this must have a lot 


to do with his performance during the war. There was no fixed 
program for the conference, and so we just talked as much or 
as little as we liked; nevertheless Oppenheimer had us in there 
every day from ten a.m. till seven p.m. with only short breaks, 
and on the first day also after supper from eight till ten, this 
night session being only dropped on the second day after a 
general rebellion. And all through these sessions Oppenheimer 
was wide awake, listening to everything that was said and 
obviously absorbing it. 


Everyone agreed that this Oldstone conference was, as Pais 
puts it, “Feynman’s show.” Having worked out his methods 
systematically, Feynman was now able to demonstrate them 
persuasively, and at Oldstone, Pais writes, Feynman’s version of 
QED “began its rapid and never-waning rise in popularity.” At the 
end of the meeting Oppenheimer wrote to the National Academy 
of Sciences, the sponsors of all three conferences in the series, 
expressing, on behalf of the people who had taken part, “a real 
sense of satisfaction for the fruitfulness and value of the 
conference.” He added: 


The two years since the first conference have marked some 
changes in the state of fundamental physics, in large part a 
consequence of our meetings. The problems of electrodynamics 
which appeared so insoluble at our first meeting, and which 
began to yield during the following year, have now reached a 
certain solution; and it is possible, though in these matters 
prediction is hazardous, that the subject will remain closed for 
some time. 


Remarkably, he was not exaggerating. During the two years of 
these conferences, QED went from being a set of unsolved 
problems to what Feynman insisted was a part of physics that “is 
known, rather than a part that is unknown.” “At the present 
time,” Feynman declared in 1983, more than thirty years after 
the theory was developed, “I can proudly say that there is no 
significant difference between experiment and theory!” 


We physicists are always checking to see if there is something 
the matter with the theory. That’s the game, because if there is 
something the matter, it’s interesting! But so far, we have 


found nothing wrong with the theory of quantum 
electrodynamics. It is, therefore, I would say, the jewel of our 
physics—our proudest possession. 


In 1965, Feynman, Schwinger and Tomonaga were awarded 
the Nobel Prize in Physics for their respective contributions to 
constructing this “jewel.” Dyson has been called the greatest 
physicist not to have won the prize, his main rival for that title 
being Oppenheimer himself. 


Massive Retaliation 


ete , uring the two_years that American 
physicists excitedly solved the problems of quantum 


electrodynamics—or excitedly watched them being solved—the 
world outside became a much darker place. The Berlin Blockade 
of 1948-9 and the Communist Party victories in Czechoslovakia 
(1948) and Hungary (1949) had persuaded public opinion in the 
West that the Soviet Union was indeed, as Churchill had 
predicted, attempting to expand its sphere of influence and that 
democracy therefore had to be defended from the communist 
threat. The postwar world that many scientists had dreamed of in 
1945—a world of international cooperation, based on the mutual 
recognition of the folly of a nuclear arms race—never looked like 
materializing. Instead what transpired was exactly what the 
scientists had warned against: growing tensions between the 
world’s superpowers brought about and fostered by the mutual 
suspicion, paranoia and fear that inevitably accompanied the 
forlorn attempt to keep scientific facts secret from scientists. 

In December 1948, Oppenheimer gave a lecture in Rochester 
entitled “The Open Mind,” in which, while accepting the failure 
of past attempts to cooperate with the Soviet Union and agreeing 
that the blame for that failure lay chiefly with the Soviets, he 
emphasized, against the prevailing cultural current, the 
advantages of openness and magnanimity in international 
relations. “We need to remember that we are a powerful nation,” 
he urged. The United States did not have to conduct its affairs in 
an atmosphere of fearful suspicion. The policies developed and 
pursued in such an atmosphere “appear to commit us to a future 
of secrecy and to an imminent threat of war.” As a model of an 
alternative attitude, Oppenheimer cited the example of Ulysses 


Grant, who, at the end of the Civil War, spoke to the defeated 
Confederate General Lee and allowed Lee’s troops to keep their 
horses, since “they would need them for the spring plowing.” 
Even in recognition of the evils committed by the Soviets in the 
past, Oppenheimer urged, Americans should keep an open mind 
about the future and act from a position of magnanimous strength 
rather than fearful weakness. 

When he gave this lecture Oppenheimer possibly imagined 
himself to be, as he believed the United States to be, in a position 
of unassailable strength. It was just a month earlier that he had 
been on the cover of Time magazine, which began its long article 
on him with an impressive list of his achievements and titles: 


More & more physicists are coming to know the Institute as the 
home of an authentic contemporary hero of their trade: Dr. J. 
(for nothing) Robert Oppenheimer, who is president of the 
American Physical Society, chairman of the technical advisers 
to the Atomic Energy Commission, and one of the world’s top 
theoretical physicists. Laymen know him as the man who 
bossed the production of the atom bomb. Last week, at 44, 
Oppenheimer was beginning his second year as director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study. 


In the years that followed, however, it would be shown that 
none of those titles and achievements could save him from the 
very fear and suspicion against which he had campaigned. For 
five years, starting in the summer of 1949, his standing—among 
his fellow scientists, among politicians and among military men— 
would be systematically attacked in a concerted and successful 
attempt to ruin him. What made the attack all the more pitiable 
to watch was the fact that his enemies were able to use against 
him his own personal and moral weaknesses, which were often 
cruelly exposed during these years. 

The first serious blow to Oppenheimer’s reputation, and the 
moment when those personal and moral frailties were first held 
up for all to see, was his appearance before HUAC on June 7, 
1949. As Oppenheimer had correctly remarked in his letter to 
Frank the previous October, the revelations about Alger Hiss that 
had come out of the HUAC hearings were a “menacing portent” 
of things to come. Having investigated communist “subversion” 


among actors in Hollywood and politicians in Washington, in 
April 1949 the committee, under its new chairman, John Wood, 
turned its attentions to scientists, and, in particular, to the group 
of young radicals at Berkeley that had so concerned the FBI and 
military security during the war. 

The four young scientists whose group photograph had been 
bought by an agent tailing Rossi Lomanitz—David Bohm, who 
was now teaching physics at Princeton University; Max Friedman, 
who, having changed his name to Ken Manfred, was at the 
University of Puerto Rico; Joseph Weinberg, who was now a 
colleague of Frank’s at Minnesota, and Lomanitz himself, who 
was teaching at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee—were all 
subpoenaed to testify before HUAC. All of them except Weinberg 
pleaded the Fifth Amendment. Weinberg, who of course did not 
know the FBI had a transcript of his conversation with Steve 
Nelson back in March 1943, continued to deny any involvement 
with espionage. 

In contrast, Oppenheimer knew all about his FBI file and what 
it contained, and was very alarmed to discover that one of the six 
members of HUAC, Harold Velde, was a former FBI man. When 
his turn to testify duly arrived, Oppenheimer took with him the 
AEC’s lawyer, Joseph Volpe. As it turned out, the meeting seemed 
to go quite well. The committee members went out of their way 
to assure Oppenheimer that his loyalty, having been vouched for 
by General Groves, was not in doubt. In response to their polite 
and gentle, even deferential, questioning, Oppenheimer repeated 
what had by now become the standard version of the “Chevalier 
Affair” (the chief feature of which was that Chevalier had 
approached just one scientist, namely Oppenheimer himself) and 
was no doubt relieved not to be asked why he had originally 
claimed that Chevalier had approached three scientists. He also 
gave bland and protective answers to questions about Lomanitz 
and Weinberg. When asked about Frank, he said: “Mr. Chairman, 
I will answer the questions you put to me. I ask you not to press 
these questions about my brother. If they are important to you, 
you can ask him. I will answer, if asked, but I beg you not to ask 
me these questions.” Remarkably, the response to this was to 
withdraw the question. 

With regard to the unfortunate Bernard Peters, however, 
Oppenheimer revealed himself to be willing not only to confirm 


the damaging things he had said to Peer de Silva in January 
1944, but also to elaborate on them. He confirmed that he had 
described Peters as “a dangerous man and quite Red,” and added 
that Peters had been a member of the German Communist Party, 
but had “violently denounced” the American Communist Party, 
because it was “too constitutional and conciliatory an 
organization, not sufficiently dedicated to the overthrow of the 
Government by force and violence.” Perhaps most extraordinary, 
though, were Oppenheimer’s remarks when asked to explain his 
comment to de Silva that Peters’s past had been filled with 
incident that pointed toward “direct action.” As grounds for 
believing Peters to be prone to such action, Oppenheimer cited: 


Incidents in Germany where he [Peters] fought street battles 
against the National Socialists on account of Communists; 
being placed in a concentration camp; escaping by guile. It 
seemed to me those were past incidents not pointing to 
temperance. 


The implied suggestion seemed to be that being placed in a 
concentration camp and then escaping from it were evidence of 
some sort of character flaw in Peters. When asked how he knew 
Peters had been in the German Communist Party, Oppenheimer 
replied: “It was well known. Among other things, he told me.” 

These remarks about Peters not only go beyond what 
Oppenheimer had said to de Silva, but also go way beyond what 
was required of him on this occasion. When one tries to explain 
why he was prepared to say so many damaging things about a 
man who had been his student and friend, the only thing that 
comes to mind is that he thought that, if he gave the appearance 
of candor, his bland evasions about his other students, about 
Chevalier and about Frank would be more likely to be accepted. 
He must also have believed (though this would have required 
extraordinary naivete in the circumstances) that, because this was 
a closed, executive session with no reporters present, what he 
said would never be made public. At the hearing there were some 
signs that, if Oppenheimer’s aim had been to charm the 
committee into trusting him, then he had been successful. The 
committee members did not probe him about these other people, 
and yet seemed delighted by his testimony. At the end of the 


session, all six members of the panel came down to shake his 
hand, and one of them, the future President Richard Nixon, made 
a short speech: 


Before we adjourn, I would like to say—and I am sure this is 
the sense of all who are here—I have noted for some time the 
work done by Dr. Oppenheimer and I think we all have been 
tremendously impressed with him and are mighty happy we 
have him in the position he has in our program. 


Bernard Peters, who was at this time an assistant professor at 
the University of Rochester, was called before the committee the 
very next day, but was not faced with Oppenheimer’s allegations. 
Instead, in a session that lasted a mere twenty minutes and was 
presumably an attempt to get him to perjure himself, he was 
given the opportunity (which he took) to deny that he had been a 
member of the Communist Party, either in Germany or in the U.S. 
On his way back to Rochester, Peters visited Oppenheimer at 
Princeton and asked him what he had told HUAC. Oppenheimer 
replied: “God guided their questions so that I did not say 
anything derogatory.” 

A week later, however, both Oppenheimer and Peters received 
a very nasty shock. On June 15, 1949, a Rochester newspaper, 
the Times-Union, had on its front page the headline “Dr. 
Oppenheimer once termed Peters ‘quite Red,’ ” beneath which 
was a full account of what Oppenheimer had said about Peters, 
both to de Silva and to HUAC. Clearly someone (the chief suspect 
is surely Velde, the FBI man on the committee) had leaked this 
information to the newspaper. 

On the day this newspaper article was published, Peters was in 
Idaho Springs, Colorado, attending a conference on cosmic rays. 
Also there were Hans Bethe, Ed Condon and Frank Oppenheimer. 
Victor Weisskopf had intended to be there, but on the way had 
stopped to visit David Hawkins, who lived in Boulder, Colorado, 
and was enjoying himself so much that he decided to skip the 
conference and stay in Boulder. Weisskopf, however, read the 
article, and—like Bethe, Condon, Frank and Peters himself—was 
appalled by it. All five of them wrote to Oppenheimer expressing 
their anger and disappointment. 

In his letter, Weisskopf mentioned that he did not actually like 


Peters very much, “because of his intransigence and his lack of 
humour and human understanding,” but, he told Oppenheimer: 
“If Peters loses his job because of the statement about his political 
leanings made by you... we are all losing something that is 
irreparable. Namely confidence in you.” Here, Weisskopf had put 
his finger on the central point, and, one suspects, the main 
purpose of leaking the testimony: not to ruin Peters, but to 
undermine the respect Oppenheimer enjoyed among his fellow 
scientists. 

Condon’s letter also made an excellent point. He had, he said, 
“lost a good deal of sleep trying to figure out how you could have 
talked this way about a man whom you have known so long, and 
of whom you know so well how good a physicist and good a 
citizen he is”: 


One is tempted to feel that you are so foolish as to think that 
you can buy immunity for yourself by turning informer. I hope 
this is not true. You know very well that once these people 
decide to go into your own dossier and make it public that it 
will make these “revelations” that you have made so far look 
pretty tame. 


Bethe’s letter, meanwhile, was concerned with what could be 
done practically to limit the damage to Peters’s career. He urged 
Oppenheimer to write to the president of Rochester University 
correcting the impression that Peters was a dangerous subversive. 

Peters himself, accompanied by Frank (the pair were working 
on a joint project analyzing cosmic rays), went to see 
Oppenheimer personally. It was, he reported to Weisskopf, 
“rather dismal.” Oppenheimer confirmed that he had indeed said 
the things attributed to him, but that it had been a “terrible 
mistake” on his part. At first, Oppenheimer had refused to write a 
public retraction of his testimony, but Weisskopf’s letter changed 
his mind about that, and he wrote a partial retraction, which he 
sent to a different Rochester newspaper and which Peters, 
sending Weisskopf a copy of it, called “a not very successful piece 
of double-talk.” Oppenheimer, Peters added, “was obviously 
scared to tears of the hearings but that is hardly an explanation.” 
His letter concludes: “I found it a rather sad experience to see a 
man whom I regarded very highly in such a state of moral 


despair.” Similar feelings were expressed by the other young 
physicists who had so revered Oppenheimer at Berkeley. “I think 
mostly,” Lomanitz said, speaking for them all, “we came to feel 
sad personally about the man’s weaknesses, and also very sorry 
that he was not able to give any kind of leadership needed during 
very bad times.” 

As it happened, the incident did not ruin Peters’s career. 
Displaying a moral steadfastness that was all too rare during 
these troubled times, Alan Valentine, the president of the 
University of Rochester, not only refused to fire Peters, but 
promoted him to full professor. The University of Minnesota 
showed no such resoluteness, however, and fired Weinberg after 
he had been charged with perjury, even though (because the 
evidence obtained from the wiretap in Nelson’s house was not 
produced) he was acquitted. A similar fate befell Bohm and 
Lomanitz, both of whom lost their academic jobs. 

On June 14, 1949, the day before the Rochester Times-Union 
broke the story of Oppenheimer’s testimony against Peters, it was 
Frank’s turn to be summoned before HUAC. Frank was at that 
point in the worst position of all of them, since he had gone on 
record as denying that he had ever been a member of the 
Communist Party. Two years earlier, on the basis, obviously, of 
leaked FBI documents, the Washington Times-Herald had 
published a front-page story with the headline “U.S. Atom 
Scientist’s Brother Exposed as Communist Who Worked on A- 
Bomb.” The newspaper emphasized that “the official report on 
Frank Oppenheimer in no way reflects on the loyalty or the 
ability of his brother, Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” but claimed 
(correctly) to have evidence that Frank was “a card-carrying 
member of the Communist Party.” 

When, the day after this story was published, Frank was asked 
to comment on it, he made a fundamental error. Instead of saying 
“no comment,” he rather foolishly said he had never been a 
Communist Party member, a lie he repeated to the authorities at 
the University of Minnesota. Now, at his HUAC hearing in June 
1949, Frank decided to tell the truth and admitted that he and 
Jackie had been members of the Communist Party for three and a 
half years, beginning in 1937. Despite repeated requests to name 
other members, Frank refused to do so. Prior to testifying before 
HUAG, he had been to see J. W. Buchta, the head of the physics 


department at Minnesota, to tell him that he had, indeed, been a 
member of the Communist Party, and handed him a letter of 
resignation “just in case”’—the assumption being that this was a 
mere courtesy and that his resignation would not be acted upon. 
Within hours of giving his testimony, however, while he was still 
in Washington, Frank heard from newspaper reporters that the 
University of Minnesota had accepted his resignation. A week 
later, more than fifty physicists, including Hans Bethe, signed a 
joint letter, sent from the Idaho Springs conference in Colorado, 
asking the president of the university, James Morrill, to change 
his mind and reinstate Frank. Edward Teller wrote a separate 
letter, saying that, although he had “never agreed with Frank 
Oppenheimer on politics,” he thought he was a very good 
physicist. “I always liked him,” Teller added, and besides, he told 
Morrill, he strongly believed in “the freedom to make mistakes.” 
One person who was conspicuous in not offering vociferous 
public support for Frank was his brother. “Jackie was absolutely 
furious,” a friend of Frank has said, “and that was causing a lot of 
pain in that family.” 

Despite the pleas of Frank’s fellow physicists, Morrill refused to 
let Frank keep his job. In desperation, Frank turned to his old 
friend and colleague Ernest Lawrence at Berkeley. The last time 
he had seen Lawrence, on a trip to Berkeley from Minnesota, 
Lawrence had put his arm round him and said: “Come back any 
time you want to.” Now, however, Lawrence would have nothing 
to do with him. “Frank Oppenheimer is no longer welcome in this 
laboratory,” read a telegram from the Rad Lab. “What is going 
on?” Frank wrote to Lawrence. “Who has changed, you or I? 
Have I betrayed my country or your lab? Of course not. I have 
done nothing.” Finding it impossible to get a university job, Frank 
bought a ranch in Colorado and, much to his brother’s disdain, 
would work as a rancher for the next ten years. 

By the end of June 1949, then, leaked FBI documents had 
severely weakened the esteem in which Oppenheimer was held 
by his fellow scientists, had wrecked the careers of several of his 
ex-students, and had all but destroyed the closest and most 
important emotional relationship of his life: that with his brother. 
In the same month Oppenheimer himself took a major step 
toward his own ruin when he made an implacable enemy of a 
man who, on more than one account, was in a position to do him 


great harm. 

That man was Lewis Strauss, who was both a member of the 
AEC and a trustee of the Institute for Advanced Study. Within a 
few years he would be chairman of both the AEC and the 
institute’s board of trustees. He was a vain man who craved 
above all admiration and respect. Oppenheimer felt neither 
admiration nor respect for Strauss and made no secret of it. Two 
years earlier, Strauss had felt slighted by Oppenheimer, when 
Oppenheimer gave evidence to the AEC concerning the possible 
military uses of radioactive isotopes. Such isotopes were a by- 
product of the nuclear reactors at, for example, Oak Ridge and 
Hanford, which fell under the administration of the AEC, and it 
had been U.S. policy to allow the isotopes to be sent abroad to 
friendly countries to be used in scientific research. In the spring 
of 1947, Strauss attempted to reverse that policy on the grounds 
that the isotopes might be used for military purposes. When asked 
for his opinion on the matter, Oppenheimer simply dismissed 
Strauss’s concerns as not worthy of serious attention, and, much 
to his chagrin, Strauss found himself outvoted on the issue by 
four to one. 

Now, in June 1949, Strauss, who had never accepted that he 
was wrong about the possible military application of isotopes, 
had another chance to reverse the policy. This time the occasion 
was not a closed session of a small committee in an out-of-the- 
way Office, but a full Congressional hearing, with cameras and 
reporters present, held in the huge Caucus Room of the Senate. 
The hearing was before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 
which had been set up in 1946 to “oversee” the AEC and had the 
power, if necessary, to veto AEC decisions. In 1949, the chairman 
of the Joint Committee was Brien McMahon, who had become an 
enthusiastic advocate of the policy of building huge stockpiles of 
atomic bombs. Also on the committee was the right-wing 
Republican senator Bourke Hickenlooper, who had a fierce 
distrust of the AEC and of Oppenheimer in particular. The general 
purpose of the hearings now under way was to investigate 
Hickenlooper’s allegations that the AEC was guilty of “incredible 
mismanagement.” Strauss, whose political views were in general 
close to Hickenlooper’s, had succeeded in enlisting the senator as 
an ally in his campaign to stop the export of radioactive isotopes, 
the practice of which was now examined as an example of the 


alleged mismanagement of the AEC. On June 9, Strauss had 
testified before the Joint Committee that isotopes might, indeed, 
have some military value and that therefore he was against their 
export. Hickenlooper agreed. When the U.S. provided other 
nations with isotopes, he said, it was embarking on a program 
“inimical to our national defense.” 

This was the context in which Oppenheimer gave his very 
public, and subsequently heavily reported, demolition of Strauss’s 
position. Oppenheimer himself, of course, was not without 
vanity, especially about his legendary ability to make fools of 
others. Jeremy Bernstein remembers that at physics seminars at 
the institute, Oppenheimer “sat in the front row, and if he made 
what he thought was a witty comment he would look around to 
make sure that we had all taken it in.” He liked an audience, and 
this hearing provided him with a large and attentive one. 

The specific issue at hand was whether the U.S. should, as they 
had been requested, provide Norway with an isotope of iron, 
Fe-59, to use in the monitoring of the manufacture of molten 
steel. Strauss had discovered that one of the members of the 
Norwegian research team was a communist, which, in his eyes 
and Hickenlooper’s, made all the more pressing the question of 
whether Fe-59 could have any conceivable military use. When 
called upon as a witness, Oppenheimer made it clear that his 
purpose was not only to refute Strauss’s view, but to subject it to 
lacerating ridicule. “No one,” he said, “can force me to say that 
you cannot use these isotopes for atomic energy.” 


You can use a shovel for atomic energy; in fact you do. You can 
use a bottle of beer for atomic energy. In fact, you do. But to 
get some perspective, the fact is that during the war and after 
the war these materials have played no significant part, and in 
my knowledge, no part at all. 


As Philip Stern, who was there at the time, has noted: “Even to 
an observer who had no background on the issues and 
personalities involved, it was clear that Oppenheimer was making 
a fool of someone.” 

The AEC lawyer Joe Volpe was sitting next to Oppenheimer 
and, looking over to where Strauss was sitting, saw Strauss’s eyes 
narrowing, his jaws working and color rising in his face. From 


that point on, he said, he kept “one eye on Oppenheimer and the 
committee and one eye on Strauss.” Rubbing salt into the wound, 
Oppenheimer continued: “My own rating of the importance of 
isotopes in this broad sense is that they are far less important 
than electronic devices, but far more important than, let us say, 
vitamins, somewhere in between.” The official record of the 
meeting records at this point: “[laughter].” When Oppenheimer 
stepped down, he said to Volpe: “Well, Joe, how did I do?” “Too 
well, Robert,” Volpe replied. “Much too well.” Years later, David 
Lilienthal, recalling the sight of Strauss at the end of 
Oppenheimer’s testimony, remarked: “There was a look of hatred 
there that you don’t see very often in a man’s face.” 

A few months later the cover of Life magazine carried a 
photograph of Oppenheimer that Abraham Pais has described as 
“the best picture of him I know.” Looking extraordinarily self- 
confident and strikingly handsome, he is staring straight at the 
camera, intense but relaxed, with his head resting on his right 
hand, while in his left hand burns a cigarette. Inside the 
magazine there is another arresting image of him, standing in 
front of a blackboard, upon which are written impressively 
unintelligible symbols. The caption to the photograph explains: 
“Equations at top of the board describe processes of meson 
production in cosmic ray explosions. Those below pertain to 
certain interactions in quantum field theory.” 

The Life profile covers much the same ground as the previous 
year’s Time magazine piece, but in both content and tone it is 
interestingly and significantly different. The emphasis in Time had 
been on Oppenheimer as a leader—of physicists, of the institute 
and of humanity. It delved fairly deeply into his politics, both the 
radical views of his past and his later campaigns for international 
control of atomic energy, and hardly at all into his achievements 
in science, not one of which, in fact, was mentioned. In these 
respects the Life piece could not have been more different. It does 
not mention his radical past at all, and talks about his postwar 
involvement in politics as if it had been something imposed upon 
him against his will (“although he tried to immerse himself again 
in academic duties at California and Cal Tech, the demands made 
on him by various branches of the government were so numerous 
that he found himself spending much of his time in the air 
between the West Coast and Washington”). 


In the Life article, the emphasis was instead firmly on 
Oppenheimer as a scientist, and not just one who had done good 
work in the past, but a practicing physicist at the top of his game, 
whose work was at the cutting edge of his field: particle physics. 
Indeed, one would almost get the impression from this article that 
Oppenheimer had retired from politics to concentrate on physics. 
The article quotes Oppenheimer as saying that those physicists 
who, during the war, were “off doing the devil’s work making 
armaments and whatnot—things that have nothing to do with 
physics” were now “back at their real work—the sober, modest, 
consecrated task of penetrating the unknown.” 

The article then goes on to describe in some detail both 
Oppenheimer’s own contributions to physics, concentrating in 
particular on the Oppenheimer-Phillips effect and his role in the 
development of positron and meson theory, and the present state 
of physics. Rather oddly, the author, Lincoln Barnett, does not 
mention the QED revolution that had just taken place, or 
Oppenheimer’s midwifery role in that revolution. The article 
does, however, give a good idea of what issues were dominating 
physics in the summer of 1949, by which time the QED 
revolution was complete, and physicists had turned their 
attention away from quantum electrodynamics and toward the 
attempt to understand elementary particles. 

This was a field in which everything was unclear and, 
seemingly, getting a little bit more unclear with every discovery, 
and the article conveys well the confused state of particle physics 
during this time, emphasizing in particular the alarming growth 
in the number of elementary particles that were being discovered. 
Where previously there had been three—the electron, the proton 
and the neutron—there were now fifteen.o2 These included some 
that most people had by this time got used to, such as the photon, 
the neutrino and the positron, and also some recently discovered 
exotica such as the pi-meson (in positive, negative and neutral 
forms), the mu-meson (likewise) and the tau-meson (the heavy 
meson, soon to be renamed the K-meson or kaon). Nearly half a 
page of this article is devoted to a table, grouping these fifteen 
particles into five categories: nucleons, electrons, mesons, 
massless particles and “probable particles.” 

“Almost every month has surprises for us in the findings about 
these particles,” Oppenheimer is quoted as saying. Indeed, “what 


we are forced to call elementary particles retain neither 
permanence nor identity.” For example, protons and neutrons 
might really be composites: “each of these may have some kind of 
bare substructure in the center and around it, bound closely to it, 
a cloud of mesons.” His hope was that “what is at the moment 
just a picture of chaos will ultimately reveal again that deep 
harmony and order which one has always found in the physical 
world when one has pushed hard, and which is very beautiful 
indeed.” 

The impression is given that this revelation of deep harmony 
would come, if it came at all, from people working at the 
institute, “the world’s foremost center of elementary particle 
research.” In particular, the article suggests, it might come from 
Oppenheimer himself, who, having before the war “devoted most 
of his investigative efforts to the study of mesons, their role in the 
atomic world and their possible relation to nuclear force,” was 
now working “in close partnership with Yukawa whom he 
recently brought to the Institute,” in a renewed attempt to solve 
those questions—questions that constituted “the deepest and most 
urgent challenge to physics at the present time.” 

In fact, almost all of this is a fantasy. It is as if Oppenheimer 
had bewitched the Life writer into accepting as fact what was 
merely wishful thinking on Oppenheimer’s part. Oppenheimer 
may have wanted to work with Yukawa on meson theory— 
indeed, that was surely the reason he invited Yukawa to the 
institute—but the two of them never collaborated on a single 
piece of work, and by the time this Life article was published, 
October 1949, Yukawa had left the institute for a professorship at 
Columbia. Nor was it true that the Institute for Advanced Study 
was “the world’s foremost center of elementary particle 
research.” There were in 1949 just a handful of particle physicists 
at the institute, only one of whom was doing important original 
work in the subject, namely Abraham Pais, who, curiously, is not 
mentioned in this article. Oppenheimer does not mention, for 
example, that less than two years earlier Pais had made an 
important and, as it turned out, lasting contribution to the 
taxonomy of the rapidly proliferating elementary particles, when 
he introduced the term “lepton” to characterize particles like 
electrons and positrons (and, it would soon be realized, mu- 
mesons) that are not subject to the strong nuclear force. However, 


while there is no sign of Pais in this article, the influence of 
Yukawa is apparent in almost everything Oppenheimer is quoted 
as saying, much of which strongly echoes things noted by Yukawa 
in a survey article that he published in July 1949 called “Models 
and Methods in the Meson Theory.” 

Finally, and most significantly, it is not true that Oppenheimer 
was at this time making important contributions to particle 
physics. Indeed, this article was published at precisely the time 
when he effectively ceased to be an active research scientist 
altogether. In January 1949 he had published a short paragraph 
in Reviews of Modern Physics as part of a discussion on the 
disintegration and nuclear absorption of mesons, but this was to 
be his last-ever publication in physics.cz He continued to be an 
avid follower of cutting-edge research, and could be relied upon 
to summarize the important work in more or less any given area 
of the subject, but he himself did not make a single original 
contribution to particle physics—or indeed to any branch of the 
subject—from January 1949 till the day he died. Nor did he 
provide the kind of leadership in particle physics that he had 
provided in QED with his running of the Shelter Island, Pocono 
and Oldstone conferences. After Oldstone, it was decided to end 
that particular series and to put in its place a series that 
concentrated solely on particle physics. These were organized not 
by Oppenheimer, but by Robert Marshak at the University of 
Rochester. It was at places like Rochester, Columbia, Chicago and 
Berkeley that most of the leading work in particle physics would 
be done in the 1950s; places, that is, with large experimental- 
physics departments and, crucially, large particle accelerators. 
The institute had neither—as the Life article was at pains to 
stress, it had no laboratory of any sort. 

One way of reading this article is to see it as a response by 
Oppenheimer to the attacks upon him and other left-wing 
physicists by the FBI and HUAC, as his way of saying that he was 
happy to withdraw from the fight, to give up politics and return 
to pure research. But as he did not, in fact, return to pure 
research or give up politics (he did not, for example, resign his 
chairmanship of the GAC), perhaps the best way to read the 
article is as an insight into what Oppenheimer, in the autumn of 
1949, wished his life was like: dominated by fundamental 
research (“Of his manifold activities, however, the one that gives 


him the fullest measure of satisfaction, the one he considers his 
real calling is exploration”) at the very center of progress in 
theoretical physics, and in the company of other people absorbed 
in the struggle to understand the nature of physical matter. 

Actually, what dominated his life at this point, and would (as 
he well knew) dominate it for the foreseeable future, was the fact 
that a month earlier irrefutable evidence had been obtained that 
the Soviet Union had exploded its own atomic bomb. This fact is 
mentioned in the Life article, but in a way that seeks to downplay 
its importance. From the perspective of the physicists who took 
part in the “devil’s work making armaments,” the article says 
blithely, “the news that Russia has at last produced an atomic 
bomb comes as no great surprise, nor does it appear in the 
aftermath of this revelation that their endeavors will now be 
diverted as they were by the recent war.” This, like so much of 
the article, was wishful thinking. As chairman of the General 
Advisory Committee, it fell to Oppenheimer to advise the AEC, 
and therefore the U.S. government, on how to respond to the 
news that the Soviet Union had its own atomic bombs. This was 
such a heavy burden that it does not take much imagination to 
see why Oppenheimer would wish to pretend that it did not exist. 

The evidence for the Soviet bomb consisted of tiny samples of 
fission products, isotopes of cerium and yttrium (Ce-141 and 
Y-91), which had been detected on September 3, 1949, in 
rainwater collected and analyzed by the U.S. Navy and in the air 
by an air-force reconnaissance plane flying over Japan. On 
September 19, a group of experts that included Oppenheimer 
concluded that, with very little doubt, the radioactive traces came 
from a bomb exploded by the Soviet Union on August 29. The 
following day, President Truman was informed (his first reaction 
was to refuse to believe it, so convinced was he of the inferiority 
of Soviet science and technology), and three days later, 
September 23, Truman publicly announced: “We have evidence 
that within recent weeks an atomic explosion occurred in the 
USSR.” 

That evening Oppenheimer received a phone call from a very 
worried Edward Teller. “What shall we do? What shall I do?” 
Teller asked Oppenheimer. Teller was at that point dividing his 
time between Chicago, where he worked on theoretical physics, 
and Los Alamos, where he worked on what had been his pet 


project for many years: the Super, the hydrogen bomb. “Just go 
back to Los Alamos and keep working,” Oppenheimer told him. 
Then, after a long pause, during which Teller was clearly waiting 
for some additional response, Oppenheimer added: “Keep your 
shirt on.” 

To Teller it seemed obvious that the best—indeed, the only 
rational—response to the fact that the Soviet Union now had the 
atomic bomb was an accelerated program to develop the Super. 
For surely, he reasoned, if the Soviets had worked out how to 
build a fission bomb, they would also have realized that a much 
more powerful fusion bomb was at least a theoretical possibility, 
and therefore it was essential to the protection of the United 
States that it get a hydrogen bomb before the Soviets. Similar 
thoughts had occurred to Lewis Strauss in Washington and to 
Alvarez and Lawrence in Berkeley, and it was not long before the 
four of them united in a campaign to persuade the President to 
authorize such an accelerated program. At the very time that 
Oppenheimer was telling Life magazine that the news about the 
Russian bomb would not mean that the endeavors of physicists 
“will now be diverted as they were by the recent war,” three of 
the most respected physicists in the country were plotting with 
the man whose fierce hatred Oppenheimer had just aroused, to 
ensure that the endeavors of physicists were indeed so diverted. 

The plotters moved quickly. On October 5, Lawrence phoned 
Strauss, as a result of which Strauss wrote a memo to his fellow 
AEC members calling for a crash program to develop the 
hydrogen bomb, using words that carried an ironic echo of 
Oppenheimer’s. “We should now,” he wrote, “make an intensive 
effort to get ahead with the Super. By intensive effort, I am 
thinking of a commitment in talent and money comparable, if 
necessary, to that which produced the first atomic bomb. That is 
the way to stay ahead.” Lilienthal responded to this memo by 
asking Oppenheimer to arrange a special meeting of the GAC in 
order to advise the AEC on what to do about the Soviet bomb. 
Oppenheimer duly arranged the meeting, but, because of the busy 
schedules of the various eminent scientists on the committee, the 
earliest date on which he could get everybody together was 
October 29. 

In the intervening three weeks, intensive lobbying was 
undertaken on behalf of the idea that a crash program for the 


Super was the correct response to the Soviet bomb. On October 6, 
Alvarez and Lawrence flew out to Washington from Berkeley, 
making an overnight stop at Los Alamos to confer with Teller and 
others about the current state of research into the feasibility of 
the Super. Teller’s view (not widely shared among physicists at 
this time) was that “it was highly probable that we could produce 
a fusion weapon.” “In the present situation,” Lawrence delighted 
Teller by responding, “there is no question but that you must go 
ahead.” Lawrence and Alvarez then proceeded to Washington, 
where they used all of Lawrence’s considerable influence to meet 
as many high-ranking officials as they could. These included 
members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, advisors to 
the Defense Department, and anybody else who might have the 
ear of the President. They also met each of the AEC 
commissioners, attempting to undermine what they considered 
the baleful influence of Oppenheimer. One result of their efforts 
was the appearance of General Hoyt Vandenberg, the Chief of 
Staff of the fairly recently established U.S. Air Force,o4 before the 
Joint Committee on October 14, when he stated: “Having the 
Super weapon would place the United States in the superior 
position that it had enjoyed up to the end of September by having 
exclusive possession of the weapon.” Satisfied with their work, 
Alvarez and Lawrence then returned to Berkeley. 

At about the same time, Teller set off on his own lobbying trip, 
stopping first in Chicago, where he hoped to enlist Fermi to be 
the head of the new crash program. Fermi, however, flatly 
refused even to consider it. Teller went next to Cornell, where he 
found Bethe more sympathetic. Bethe promised Teller that he 
would be willing to return to Los Alamos to work on the Super. 
While Teller was at Cornell, Bethe got a call from Oppenheimer, 
asking him to come to Princeton. When Bethe said that Teller 
happened to be there, Oppenheimer extended the invitation to 
him. On October 21, then, Bethe and Teller went to 
Oppenheimer’s office at the institute, where Oppenheimer 
showed them a letter he had just received from Conant, 
expressing vehement hostility to the Super, which, Conant said, 
would be built “over my dead body.”65 Oppenheimer did not 
express his own opinion, but Bethe says: “Probably Oppenheimer 
wanted to influence us against the development of the hydrogen 
bomb and didn’t want to do it in his own words, so he used 


Conant’s letter instead.” 

A letter that Oppenheimer wrote to Conant that day suggests 
that Bethe might not have been right about that. The view that 
Oppenheimer expresses to Conant is that the AEC had no 
alternative but to embark on a crash program to develop the 
hydrogen bomb, and therefore the GAC had no alternative but to 
recommend such a program, not because the bomb was a good 
idea, scientifically or militarily, but because the political climate 
made any other course of action impossible. It has to be 
remembered that at this point Teller did not (despite what he told 
Lawrence) have a workable design of a hydrogen bomb, or any 
clear idea of how such a workable design might be arrived at. 
Nobody doubted that fusion was, in principle, possible, or that, if 
a way could be devised of fusing the nuclei of hydrogen (or, more 
likely, one of its isotopes, deuterium or tritium), enormous 
amounts of energy could be released. Neither did anyone doubt 
that if a fusion bomb could be built, its power would be colossal, 
measured in megatons, not kilotons, of TNT. The problem that 
had yet to be solved, however, was how the massively high 
temperatures required to initiate the fusion process could be 
created in a device that could, conceivably, be delivered 
successfully by an airplane or even a boat. 

“On the technical side,” Oppenheimer told Conant, the Super 
was “a weapon of unknown design, cost, deliverability, and 
military value.” But, he added, “a very great change has taken 
place in the climate of opinion,” brought about partly by the fact 
that “two experienced promoters have been at work, i.e., Ernest 
Lawrence and Edward Teller.” As a result, the Joint Congressional 
Committee, “having tried to find something to chew on ever since 
September 23rd, has at last found its answer: We must have a 
Super and we must have it fast.” Thus, Oppenheimer concluded: 
“Tt would be folly to oppose the exploration of this weapon,” even 
though “I am not sure the miserable thing will work, nor that it 
can be gotten to a target except by ox cart.” Moreover: 


It seems likely to me even further to worsen the unbalance of 
our present war plans. What does worry me is that this thing 
appears to have caught the imagination, both of the 
congressional and military people, as the answer to the 
problems posed by the Russian advance... that we become 


committed to it as the way to save the country and the peace 
seems to me full of dangers. 


As the date for the fateful meeting approached, Lawrence asked 
Robert Serber to go to Washington to present his proposal to 
build heavy-water reactors as part of the program to investigate 
fusion. Serber had been at Berkeley since 1946, and had taken 
over Oppenheimer’s graduate courses. On the subject of the 
Super, his sympathies were with Oppenheimer, having earlier 
studied Teller’s design for a fusion bomb and identified its flaws. 
“T told Ernest that the Super wouldn’t work,” Serber later wrote, 
“that Edward didn’t know how to build a thermonuclear bomb.” 
He nevertheless agreed to go and present Lawrence’s proposals 
for the reactors, which, he thought, might be useful even if a 
fusion bomb could not be made to work. Serber arrived in 
Princeton the day before the meeting and stayed overnight with 
the Oppenheimers. Oppenheimer told Serber that Conant was 
very much against developing the Super, and showed him 
Conant’s letter, which Serber remembers as saying “that the 
United States should not build such a weapon. It said that if the 
Russians did so and used it against us, we could very well 
retaliate with our stockpile of atomic weapons.” “I was 
astonished,” Serber writes. “The East was evidently a completely 
different world from California. I had no idea that people like 
Conant and Oppenheimer would harbour any such ideas. At 
Berkeley they would have been unthinkable.” 

Actually, as Oppenheimer had indicated in his letter to Conant, 
the idea that the United States should not go ahead with an 
accelerated program to build the Super was only very slightly 
more thinkable in the East than in Berkeley, and yet the GAC, 
after its meeting on October 28-29, 1949 (“perhaps the most 
important one in its history,” as Pais writes), ended up endorsing 
just that idea and recommending it to the AEC. It has often (most 
insistently by Teller) been supposed that, in advising the AEC 
against a crash program to develop the Super, the GAC was 
bowing to the will of Oppenheimer. In fact, it would be truer to 
say that Oppenheimer was bending to the will of Conant, for the 
view that came out of the meeting was a good deal closer to 
Conant’s pre-meeting view than it was to Oppenheimer’s. 

Prior to the meeting, Glenn Seaborg had written to excuse 


himself from it on the grounds that he would be in Sweden that 
weekend, giving a series of lectures on the transuranic elements, 
having been invited by the Royal Academy of Sciences. “The clear 
implication,” he said later, “was that they were looking me over 
for the Nobel Prize, so I wasn’t about to miss the trip.” On the 
meeting to discuss the Super, Seaborg recalled: “I expressed my 
opinion in a letter to Oppie. I said that the idea of another 
horribly destructive weapon was disheartening, but that we had 
no choice but to develop the Super because the Soviet Union 
certainly would.” In fact what Seaborg wrote was a good deal 
more verbose and less clear than his later paraphrasing would 
suggest: 


Although I deplore the prospect of our country putting a 
tremendous effort into this, I must confess that I have been 
unable to come to the conclusion that we should not ... My 
present feeling would perhaps be best summarized by saying 
that I would have to hear some good arguments before I could 
take on sufficient courage to recommend not going towards 
such a program. 


James Conant could not attend the meeting until the second 
day. The remaining members of the committee—Oliver Buckley, 
Lee DuBridge, Enrico Fermi, John Manley, Isidor Rabi, Cyril 
Smith and Oppenheimer himself—were all there on the first 
morning, which was to be devoted to a series of talks from 
experts on various aspects of the matter in hand. 

The first to give evidence was George Kennan, the political 
scientist and historian. Having served under both George 
Marshall and his successor as Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, 
Kennan was, by this time, one of the most influential advisors on 
foreign policy, particularly with regard to Soviet affairs. On this 
occasion, he may have had a decisive effect on the development 
of the meeting by introducing a thought that had not, it seems, 
previously occurred to anyone else present. This was that the 
Soviet Union, given that its economy and industry were still in 
ruins after the devastation of the war, might not want to embark 
on an expensive arms race and might be willing to negotiate an 
agreement that ensured that neither side developed the hydrogen 
bomb. That thought certainly seems to have shaped much of what 


followed. 

After Kennan came Bethe, who reported on the present state of 
research on the Super, emphasizing the technical problems that 
had yet to be solved. Then Serber did what he had been asked to 
do by Lawrence, which was basically a sales pitch, urging the 
committee to commission the Berkeley Rad Lab to build reactors 
that would increase the production of plutonium and tritium. 
After he had delivered this pitch, Serber did not fly back to 
Berkeley, but stayed overnight, returning with Oppenheimer the 
next morning to the AEC’s offices. “I met Luis [Alvarez] in the 
lobby of the AEC building,” Serber remembers, “and we watched 
as the GAC members assembled, and later were impressed by the 
constellations of stars on the shoulders of the Joint Chiefs and 
other high-ranking officers going by to testify.” 

Among those Joint Chiefs were General Omar Bradley of the 
army and General Lauris Norstad of the air force, neither of 
whom seems to have given much thought to the military purpose 
of having a hydrogen bomb. Both said there was no choice but to 
build the Super, but when asked what advantages it might have 
over a stockpile of atomic bombs, Norstad was silent and Bradley 
replied: “mostly psychological.” 

At the lunch break Oppenheimer went with Alvarez and Serber 
to a nearby restaurant, where Serber was surprised and Alvarez 
was appalled to be told that the mood of the meeting was 
swinging away from a recommendation for a crash program. As 
Alvarez later remembered his lunchtime conversation with 
Oppenheimer: 


He said that he did not think the United States should build the 
hydrogen bomb, and the main reason he gave for this, if my 
memory serves me correctly, and I think it does, was that if we 
built a hydrogen bomb, the Russians would build a hydrogen 
bomb, whereas if we did not build a hydrogen bomb, then the 
Russians would not build a hydrogen bomb. 


After lunch, an angry and disappointed Alvarez set off back to 
Berkeley, convinced, as he later put it, that “the program we were 
planning to start was not one that the top man in the scientific 
development of the AEC wanted to have done.” In his diary at the 
time, he noted that he had had an “interesting talk with Oppie,” 


in which he saw, however, some “pretty foggy thinking.” 

That afternoon the GAC members, together with four of the 
five AEC commissioners, talked through all the issues involved. 
Before he arrived at the meeting, Rabi had believed both that (as 
Lilienthal summarized Rabi’s views in his diary) the “decision to 
go ahead will be made; only question is who will be willing to 
join in it” and that the crash program was indeed the answer to 
the Russian atomic bomb. Fermi had been of the opinion that 
(again, in Lilienthal’s words) “one must explore it and do it and 
that doesn’t foreclose the question: should it be made use of?,” 
while Oppenheimer had believed, as he said in his letter to 
Conant, that it would be folly to resist the crash program. Apart 
from these two, all the other GAC members present at this 
meeting had arrived believing, for a mixture of technical, 
strategic and moral reasons, that it would be wrong to develop 
the hydrogen bomb, even if some of them believed (as 
Oppenheimer did) that the decision to build the bomb was, for 
political reasons, unavoidable. By the end of the afternoon 
session, however, this political pessimism had been overcome and 
the GAC members had reached a unanimous decision not to 
recommend a crash program, with Rabi and Fermi—perhaps 
having Kennan’s testimony in mind—believing it was important 
to stress that this should be conditional on getting an international 
agreement not to pursue research on the Super. At the end of the 
meeing Oppenheimer suggested that they spend the evening 
writing reports and reconvene the next morning. 

Three reports were written that evening. Manley and 
Oppenheimer wrote the main report, which was signed by all 
eight attending committee members. Part One of this report 
recommended an increase in the production of reactors, isotope- 
separation plants and atomic bombs, particularly “an 
intensification of efforts to make atomic weapons available for 
tactical purposes.” This last recommendation shows how far 
Oppenheimer’s thinking had changed since the end of the war, 
being, as it is, the exact opposite of his earlier Bohr-inspired view. 
At the center of that earlier view was the thought that atomic 
bombs were not simply a new, more deadly weapon; they were a 
radically different kind of weapon, so powerful that the (rational) 
fear of using them might put an end to war itself. Now 
Oppenheimer was advocating atomic bombs as tactical devices, 


treating them precisely as just another weapon. 

This change in attitude seems to have been prompted by two 
things: 1. the heavy burden of having led a project that resulted 
in the deaths of tens of thousands of Japanese civilians,6s and 2. 
his disillusionment following the breakdown of talks to negotiate 
international control of atomic weapons. He no longer believed in 
the notion of a bomb too big to use (if he did, the Super was, 
surely, just that), and he had no wish to be instrumental in the 
creation of a bomb that could kill civilians on a scale many times 
greater than the bomb that had been unleashed on Hiroshima. An 
atomic bomb designed to be used as a tactical weapon, against 
soldiers rather than civilians, was, for him, a lesser evil than a 
hydrogen bomb that was many times too big to be used in such a 
way and could only be used for the mass slaughter of civilians. 

Part Two of the main report spells this reasoning out. It takes a 
fairly optimistic view of the chances of overcoming the technical 
problems in the way of developing the Super: “We believe that an 
imaginative and concerted attack on the problem has a better 
than even chance of producing the weapon within five years.” 
But it then addresses the question of why anyone would want to 
develop such a weapon. Given that “it has generally been 
estimated that the weapon would have an explosive effect some 
hundreds of times that of present fission bombs,” one had to face 
the question of what might be involved in actually using this 
weapon: 


It is clear that the use of this weapon would bring about the 
destruction of innumerable human lives; it is not a weapon that 
can be used exclusively for the destruction of material 
installations of military or semi-military purposes. Its use 
therefore carries much further than the atomic bomb itself the 
policy of exterminating civilian populations. 


Part Three of the report then provides the committee’s response 
to the question put to it: would it recommend a crash program to 
develop the Super? Here Oppenheimer and Manley were careful 
to spell out where there was unanimity and where there was not: 


Although the members of the Advisory Committee are not 
unanimous in their proposals as to what should be done with 


regard to the Super bomb, there are certain elements of 
unanimity among us. We all hope that by one means or 
another, the development of these weapons can be avoided. We 
are all reluctant to see the United States take the initiative in 
precipitating this development. We are all agreed that it would 
be wrong at the present moment to commit ourselves to an all- 
out effort towards its development. 

We are somewhat divided as to the nature of the 
commitment not to develop the weapon. The majority feel that 
this should be an unqualified commitment. 

Others feel that it should be made conditional on the 
response of the Soviet government to a proposal to renounce 
such development. 


Appended to this main report were the two other reports. The 
first, written by Conant and DuBridge, and signed by those two 
plus Buckley, Oppenheimer, Rowe and Smith, spoke of the Super 
as a “weapon of genocide.” Moving slightly away from the issue 
of whether a crash program should be initiated, this “majority 
report” (as it came to be called) committed itself unequivocally to 
the recommendation that no program of any sort to build this 
weapon should be pursued: “We believe a super bomb should 
never be produced.” That the Russians might build a Super 
should not frighten the U.S. into building one, the report insisted, 
since: “Should they use the weapon against us, reprisals by our 
large stock of atomic bombs would be comparatively effective to 
the use of a super.” Finally, Conant and DuBridge wrote: “In 
determining not to proceed to develop the super bomb, we see a 
unique opportunity of providing by example some limitations on 
the totality of war and thus limiting the fear and arousing the 
hopes of mankind.” 

The second appendix, the “minority report,” written and signed 
by Fermi and Rabi, describes the Super as “necessarily an evil 
thing considered in any light” and argues that it would therefore 
be wrong for the U.S. to initiate a program of building such a 
bomb without first inviting “the nations of the world to join us in 
a solemn pledge not to proceed.” When questioned about this at 
Oppenheimer’s security hearing, Fermi said that his view was 
that, if it turned out not to be possible to get an international 
agreement to outlaw research into the Super, then the U‘S. 


“should with considerable regret, go ahead.” Of this view, 
however, there is no trace in the report drawn up by him and 
Rabi. 

The GAC recommendations were not reported in the press and 
could not be, as they remained classified information. The main 
report had recommended that “enough be declassified about the 
super bomb so that a public statement of policy can be made at 
this time,” but, for the moment, public discussion of the Super 
was illegal. Edward Teller, however, was not a man to be 
deflected from his purpose by such niceties, and he made it his 
business to find out what the GAC had advised. First, he spoke to 
Fermi, who, Teller wrote to his friend Maria Mayer, “did not tell 
me what the General Advisory Committee proposed,” but “He did 
tell me what his own ideas are. He said: ‘You and I and Truman 
and Stalin would be happy if further great developments were 
impossible. So, why do we not make an agreement to refrain from 
such development?’ ” 

Teller added: “I have never been so frightened as I am now 
when I hear his argument of compromise.” Hearing Fermi’s views 
produced in Teller the same despondency that listening to 
Oppenheimer had produced in Alvarez. “Washington,” Teller told 
Mayer, “will try every substitute rather than decide to make an 
all-out effort ... What I saw in Washington makes it quite clear 
that there are big forces working for compromise and for delay.” 
On the other hand: “There are also forces which work for action.” 

Teller got a glimpse of how powerful these latter forces were 
when he was summoned to Brien McMahon’s office in 
Washington. “Before I could say anything,” Teller records in his 
memoirs, “McMahon said, ‘Have you heard about the GAC 
report? It just makes me sick.’ ” McMahon then introduced Teller 
to William Borden, his aide. “If you can’t reach me, talk to Bill,” 
McMahon told Teller. “He has my complete confidence.” As 
Teller quickly discovered, Borden was a man after his own heart. 
In fact, he was possibly the only person of influence in 
Washington who was more frightened of the Soviet Union than 
Teller himself was. In 1946, Borden had published a book called 
There Will Be No Time: The Revolution in Strategy, in which he 
argued that, unless the U.S. and the Soviet Union united “into a 
single sovereignty” (which, of course, he considered extremely 
unlikely), then war between the two was inevitable. Impressed by 


the German V-2 rockets that had attacked London in 1944 and by 
the awesome power of the Hiroshima bomb, Borden predicted 
that future wars would be fought by rockets tipped with nuclear 
watheads. It followed, he thought, that the U.S. should equip 
itself with the largest, most powerful nuclear arsenal it possibly 
could. In January 1949, after McMahon had _ replaced 
Hickenlooper as chairman of the Joint Committee on Atomic 
Energy, he appointed Borden as the committee’s executive 
director. After his meeting with McMahon and Borden, Teller 
must have realized that, with men like this in positions of power, 
the “big forces working for compromise and for delay” were not 
going to have it all their own way. 

Throughout November 1949 a great and acrimonious battle 
took place in Washington over the H-bomb, the two sides 
seemingly evenly matched and the outcome unpredictable. 
Oppenheimer and Rabi had both believed it to be inevitable that 
the views of Teller and the Joint Committee would prevail, but, 
in adding their signatures to the GAC report, they had made such 
an outcome rather less certain. Another setback for Teller came 
when he received a phone call from Hans Bethe saying that he 
would not, after all, be prepared to join Teller’s proposed H-bomb 
project. Teller, as was his wont, saw in the decision the malignant 
influence of Oppenheimer, but, just as he was wrong to believe 
that it had been Oppenheimer who had swung opinion at the 
GAC meeting, so he was wrong again on this occasion. What had 
dissuaded Bethe from working on the hydrogen bomb was not 
Oppenheimer, but a conversation Bethe had had in Princeton 
with Victor Weisskopf and George Placzek. “Weisskopf vividly 
described to me a war with hydrogen bombs,” Bethe later said, 
“what it would mean to destroy a whole city like New York with 
one bomb and how hydrogen bombs would change the military 
balance by making the attack still more powerful and the defense 
still less powerful.” A few days after this conversation, he told 
Teller he would not join the project: “He was disappointed. I felt 
relieved.” 

Another blow to Teller’s position came on November 9, when 
the AEC met to consider what course of action they should 
recommend to the President in the light of the GAC report. The 
result was a three-to-two majority in favor of the GAC view: Pike 
and Smyth siding with Lilienthal in opposing the accelerated 


Super program, and Gordon Dean supporting Strauss, who, of 
course, was strongly in favor of such a program. More hope for 
the GAC position came later that day, when the AEC 
recommendations were presented by Lilienthal to the President. 
According to John Manley, Lilienthal, after seeing the President, 
“came back feeling happy” because Truman had said “that he was 
not going to be blitzed into this thing by the military 
establishment.” 

On the other hand, the Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, who 
had in the past seen eye-to-eye with both Oppenheimer and 
Lilienthal, was unpersuaded by the GAC’s arguments, particularly 
those in the “majority report,” which, though they had been 
written by Conant, Acheson asked Oppenheimer to defend. “You 
know,” Acheson told Gordon Arneson, “I listened as carefully as I 
knew how, but I don’t understand what ‘Oppie’ was trying to say. 
How can you persuade a paranoid adversary to disarm ‘by 
example?’ ” Acheson had recently been appointed by President 
Truman onto a three-man special committee to consider the 
hydrogen-bomb question, the other members of which were 
David Lilienthal and the Defense Secretary, Louis Johnson, who 
was firmly convinced of the need for the United States to acquire 
the Super as quickly as possible. Meanwhile, Borden drafted a 
long letter to be sent to Truman on McMahon’s behalf, outlining 
in urgent tones the case for an immediate crash program. “If we 
let Russia get the super first,” the letter insisted, “catastrophe 
becomes all but certain—whereas, if we get it first, there exists a 
chance of saving ourselves.” 

On December 2-3, 1949, the GAC reconvened to consider the 
issue again, but, Oppenheimer reported to the AEC, none of them 
wished to change the views they had expressed in October. Lewis 
Strauss, however, was not going to rely on Oppenheimer to 
convey his opinion. Instead, he wrote directly to the President, 
telling him: “I believe that the United States must be as 
completely armed as any possible enemy.” 


From this, it follows that I believe it unwise to renounce, 
unilaterally, any weapon which an enemy can reasonably be 
expected to possess. I recommend that the President direct the 
Atomic Energy Commission to proceed with the development 
of the thermonuclear bomb as the highest priority subject only 


to the judgment of the Department of Defense as to its value as 
a weapon, and of the advice of the Department of State as to 
the diplomatic consequences of its unilateral renunciation of its 
possession. 


As Strauss knew very well, the Secretaries of Defense and State 
were at one with him on this question. 

More decisive than Strauss’s letter was a memo sent to 
Secretary Johnson by the Joint Chiefs of Staff on January 13, 
1950, arguing that the Super “would improve our defense in the 
broadest sense, as a potential offensive weapon, a_ possible 
deterrent to war, a potential retaliatory weapon, as well as a 
defensive weapon against enemy forces.” The emphasis of the 
scientists in their GAC reports on the fearsome power of the 
Super may have backfired, since it allowed the Joint Chiefs to 
point out that it would be preferable “that such a possibility be at 
the will and control of the United States rather than of an 
enemy.” 

Without showing it first to the special committee, Johnson 
forwarded this memo to the President, who remarked that it 
“made a lot of sense.” On January 31, 1950, the special 
committee met the President to give its advice to go ahead with 
the Super, but by then Truman had already decided to do just 
that. When Lilienthal expressed his own opposition to the 
committee’s recommendation, Truman cut him short. “What the 
Hell are we waiting for?” he said. “Let’s get on with it.” That day, 
Truman announced to the world that he had directed the AEC “to 
continue its work on all forms of atomic weapons, including the 
so-called hydrogen or super-bomb.” 

Rabi was furious, not so much that the decision had been taken 
against GAC advice, or even that it had been taken without any 
attempt to negotiate with the Soviet Union, as he and Fermi had 
recommended. What angered him, he later said, was that, in 
making this announcement, Truman had “alerted the world that 
we were going to make a hydrogen bomb at a time when we 
didn’t even know how to make one.” This, Rabi thought, was one 
of the worst things the President could have done: “I never 
forgave Truman.” 

As it happened, that day was Lewis Strauss’s birthday, and to 
mark what was now, for him, a double celebration, he held a 


party to which all GAC members were invited. At the party 
Strauss walked over to Oppenheimer to introduce his son and his 
son’s new wife. To Strauss’s mortification, Oppenheimer did not 
even bother to turn around; he simply extended a hand over his 
shoulder. Later, at the same party, Oppenheimer was spotted by a 
New York Times reporter, standing alone. “You don’t look 
jubilant,” the reporter said, to which, after a long pause, 
Oppenheimer replied: “This is the plague of Thebes.” Abraham 
Pais has taken this characteristically gnomic remark to refer to a 
legion of soldiers from Thebes, the “10,000 knights,” who, after 
refusing to fight the Christians they had been ordered by the 
emperor to attack, were slaughtered. It seems much more likely, 
however (as the philosopher and science historian Robert Crease 
points out in a footnote to Pais’s account), that Oppenheimer was 
referring to the plague that, in Oedipus Rex, is sent by the gods to 
punish Thebes for the crime of harboring the killer of Laius. The 
idea, surely, is that the President’s order to develop the hydrogen 
bomb was a punishment inflicted upon the scientists who 
developed the atomic bomb, for the “sin” of allowing themselves 
to be used as weaponeers. 

From any point of view, the U.S. program to develop the 
hydrogen bomb had got off to a very bad start. Of the fourteen 
people whose job it now was to pursue that program—the five 
AEC commissioners and the nine members of the GAC—eleven of 
them had voted against it. Of the other three, one, Seaborg, had 
abstained, and only one, Strauss, had any real enthusiasm for the 
project. At the same time the people who had lobbied hard for 
the program had no direct responsibility for or control over its 
implementation. None of the scientists strongly in favor of it— 
Lawrence, Teller and Alvarez—were members of either the AEC 
or the GAC. Moreover, thanks to the McMahon Act, the control of 
atomic energy was in civilian hands, and consequently none of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, whose views had been so influential in 
establishing the program, could play the role that General Groves 
had played in seeing the Manhattan Project through to a 
successful conclusion. 

The result was a perpetual struggle between those who actually 
wanted to see a hydrogen bomb produced and those whose job it 
was to produce it. Perhaps what should have happened is the 
mass resignation of all those members of the AEC and GAC who 


had voted against the program, and their replacement with 
people eager to push the project through. Lilienthal had already 
announced his imminent retirement, letting it be known that he 
would leave when the issue of the Super had finally been resolved 
(he left in April 1950). Many of the others, including 
Oppenheimer and Rabi, were tempted to resign, but were talked 
out of it by Lilienthal. The AEC and GAC, after all, had 
responsibility for all aspects of atomic energy, not just weapons, 
and their responsibility for nuclear weapons was not confined to, 
or even concentrated on, the development of the hydrogen bomb. 
Overseeing the design, production and stockpiling of atomic 
bombs was at this time as important as, if not more important 
than, implementing the President’s demand for a hydrogen-bomb 
program. One reason for staying, therefore, was to ensure that the 
hydrogen program did not dominate all other aspects of atomic- 
energy development. 

Another reason was to ensure that there remained people in 
influential positions who were able and willing to think about the 
hydrogen bomb in something other than what Oppenheimer later 
dismissively referred to as “prudential and game-theoretical 
terms.” Bethe had changed his mind about joining Teller’s 
program after Weisskopf had spelled out to him “what it would 
mean to destroy a whole city like New York with one bomb,” and 
that imaginative realization of the scale of the horror that such a 
powerful bomb might cause is present throughout the GAC 
reports. Most of the scientists who wrote those reports had 
worked on the Manhattan Project and knew what it felt like to 
have created a weapon capable of killing tens of thousands of 
people in an instant. The moral responsibility for creating a 
weapon a hundred, even a thousand, times more powerful than 
the Hiroshima bomb was something they wanted about as much 
as the people of Thebes wanted the plague. This, not disloyalty, 
was surely the explanation for some of the hyperbole (the talk, 
for example, of genocide) in those reports, and for their apparent 
acceptance of the shoddy thinking criticized by, among others, 
Alvarez and Acheson. The idea that the Soviet Union might 
follow the moral example of the United States if it chose not to 
develop the hydrogen bomb was not subversion, but rather 
wishful thinking. 

That the other side in this struggle—Strauss, Borden, Teller, 


McMahon, and so on—so often saw subversion where there was, 
in fact, only wishful thinking, or even sometimes well-reasoned 
and justified moral scruples, is also understandable, for the 
decision to go ahead with the hydrogen bomb coincided with a 
series of shocking revelations about the extent of subversion in 
the Manhattan Project. On the basis of the Venona transcripts, the 
U.S. authorities had identified Fuchs as a spy back in September 
1949. The same transcripts told them that there had been at least 
one other spy working at Los Alamos with access to highly 
classified documents relating to the atomic bomb. Within a few 
months the trail that began with Fuchs led first to Harry Gold, 
who was arrested in March 1950, and then, in successive months 
beginning in June, to David Greenglass, Julius Rosenberg and 
Ethel Rosenberg. 

On February 9, 1950, just a few days after Fuchs’s confession, 
Senator Joseph McCarthy launched the era—and the paranoia— 
named after him, when, in a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia, 
he claimed to have “here in my hand” a list of 205 people “that 
were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of 
the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and 
shaping policy in the State Department.” In subsequent speeches 
by McCarthy the number of people on his list would vary, 
sometimes to as low as fifty-seven, but the basic idea that the U.S. 
establishment had been penetrated by a “fifth column” intent on 
destroying it would be a pervasive force in American politics for 
years to come. 

The President was not told about Fuchs until after he had 
confessed on January 24, but J. Edgar Hoover had told Strauss 
both about Fuchs and about the other, as-yet-unidentified spy, in 
October. Strauss did not inform either his fellow commissioners 
on the AEC or the members of the GAC about this until after 
Fuchs’s confession. In the meantime he gave much thought to the 
identity of the other spy, his top suspect being Oppenheimer. To 
Hoover, Strauss remarked that the furor over Fuchs “will make a 
good many men who are in the same profession as Fuchs very 
careful of what they say publicly.” 

Actually, those in the same profession as Fuchs (assuming that 
Strauss meant physics rather than espionage) were among the 
least troubled by the revelation that Fuchs had given information 
about the atomic bomb to the Soviets, since, as they had been 


saying for years, they never took seriously the idea that the 
science and technology behind the bomb could possibly be kept 
secret. As for the fact that Fuchs had had access at every stage to 
Teller’s work on the hydrogen bomb, this worried Oppenheimer 
still less. In fact, he told the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 
on February 27, 1950, it would be a good thing if Fuchs had 
passed on to the Soviets Teller’s H-bomb design, since that would 
set them back a few years, as Teller’s bomb stood no chance of 
working. 

In March 1950 the editor of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
Eugene Rabinowitch, decided to devote almost the entire issue to 
the H-bomb. The special issue begins with a report of President 
Truman’s announcement of the accelerated program to build the 
H-bomb, and an account of how the project to build such a bomb, 
which had supposedly been a state secret, first became public. 
The first public acknowledgment that such a program existed was 
made by the senator from Colorado, Edwin Johnson (a member of 
the Joint Committee), in a television debate broadcast on 
November 1, 1949. The debate was on the subject “Is there too 
much secrecy in our atomic program?” and Johnson was there to 
argue the case that there was not enough secrecy. In the course of 
making his argument, however, Johnson revealed several state 
secrets. “Our scientists,” he said: 


already have created a bomb that has six times the 
effectiveness of the bomb that was dropped on Nagasaki and 
they’re not satisfied at all; they want one that has a thousand 
times the effect of that terrible bomb that was dropped on 
Nagasaki that snuffed out the lives of 50,000 people just like 
that. And that’s the secret, that’s the big secret that the 
scientists in America are so anxious to divulge to the whole 
scientific world. 


This “naive and monumental indiscretion,” Rabinowitch tells 
his readers, has allowed him to do what he has wanted to do for 
years, which is to use his magazine to discuss the “grave moral 
implications” that have to be considered when thinking about the 
decision to develop the hydrogen bomb. 

Inside the issue is an impassioned statement, signed by twelve 
prominent physicists, including Hans Bethe, Sam Allison, Ken 


Bainbridge, Charles Lauritsen and Victor Weisskopf, urging the 
U.S. government to “make a solemn declaration that we shall 
never use this bomb first.” The use of this bomb, the physicists 
say, “would be a betrayal of all standards of morality.” There can 
only be one justification for developing this bomb, they conclude, 
“and that is to prevent its use.” 

A short statement by Oppenheimer is printed in the magazine, 
taken from his contribution to a television debate hosted by 
Eleanor Roosevelt broadcast on February 12, 1950, in which he 
says: 


There is grave danger for us that these decisions have been 
taken on the basis of facts held secret. This is not because the 
men who must contribute to the decisions, or must make them, 
are lacking in wisdom; it is because wisdom itself cannot 
flourish, nor even truth be determined, without the give and 
take of debate and criticism. The relevant facts could be of 
little use to an enemy, yet they are indispensable for an 
understanding of questions of policy. 


Also taking part in the television program was Hans Bethe, 
who, because he was not a member of either the GAC or the AEC, 
was free to speak a little more candidly than Oppenheimer and 
used that freedom to echo the plea that he was to sign in the 
Bulletin. “Hydrogen bombs,” he said in the program, “can only 
mean a wholesale destruction of civilian populations,” and so it 
was important that the U.S. pledged that it would never be the 
first to use such bombs. Oppenheimer was not in a position to 
make such a statement or to sign such a plea, but, Bethe wrote to 
Weisskopf after the television program: “I had a long talk with 
Oppie, who agreed very much with what we had done and were 
doing. He emphasized the necessity of keeping the issue alive and 
I very much agree with him.” 

In the issue of the Bulletin devoted to the hydrogen bomb, space 
was given to Teller for a rallying cry to physicists to get “Back to 
the Laboratories!” The tone and the message of Teller’s piece 
were the very opposite of those Oppenheimer had tried to convey 
in his Life profile of October 1949, and it is probably no 
coincidence that, when choosing a topic in theoretical physics to 
stand for the self-indulgence of not getting involved in building 


the H-bomb, Teller chose the area most associated with 
Oppenheimer. “Our scientific community,” Teller writes, “has 
been out on a honeymoon with mesons. The holiday is over. 
Hydrogen bombs will not produce themselves.” The rest of the 
special issue of the magazine, filled as it is with scientists 
reflecting on the horror of the H-bomb, goes some way toward 
explaining why this rallying cry fell on deaf ears. 

One of the few first-rate physicists to respond to Teller’s call 
was John Wheeler. “In my mind,” Wheeler says in his 
autobiography, “I was answering a call to national service.” He 
considered it urgent that the U.S. react to the Soviet bomb with 
“a priority program to develop a thermonuclear weapon before 
the Soviets did.” Given this attitude, it “was a_ great 
disappointment to me that so few of my colleagues shared my 
view that a national scientific mobilization was called for.” 
Oppenheimer, he had heard, had remarked: “Let Teller and 
Wheeler go ahead. Let them fall on their faces.” Oppenheimer’s 
own attitude at this time Wheeler sums up as: 


... the hydrogen bomb can’t be done, or if it can be done it 
will take too long, or if it can be done and doesn’t take too 
long, it will require too large a fraction of the nation’s scientific 
manpower, or if it doesn’t require too large a fraction of the 
nation’s labor force, it will be too massive to deliver, or if it is 
deliverable, we oughtn’t to make it. 


On February 17, Teller had written to Oppenheimer from Los 
Alamos, asking him to join the project. “Things have advanced to 
a desperate urgency here,” he told him, “and I should be most 
anxious indeed if you could come and help us.” Oppenheimer was 
not to be persuaded. He might be chairman of the advisory panel 
to the U.S. body charged with implementing the policy of pushing 
ahead with the hydrogen bomb, but, such were the complications 
of those times, it did not follow that he himself would be 
prepared to work on the project. 

While Teller was having trouble persuading his fellow scientists 
to work on the H-bomb, the urgency of beating the Soviets to it 
was deeply felt by politicians. On March 10, Truman issued an 
order to the AEC for the thermonuclear weapons program to be 
“regarded as a matter of the highest urgency”; specifically, the 


production of such weapons was to receive greater priority than 
the stockpiling of atomic weapons. Truman’s order set a goal of 
producing ten thermonuclear bombs a year. 

In April 1950, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists published an 
article by Bethe, who was, after all, the world’s greatest authority 
on thermonuclear processes, which contained a timely reminder 
that certain basic scientific problems needed to be solved before 
hydrogen bombs could be built, and that it was not at this point 
at all clear that those problems would be solved: 


Whether the temperatures required to start a thermonuclear 
reaction between heavy hydrogen nuclei, even under the most 
favourable conditions, can be achieved on earth is a major 
problem in the development of the fusion bomb. To find a way 
of detonating such bombs will require much research and 
considerable time. 


Talking of producing ten H-bombs a year, the subtext went, 
looked a little premature. It was as if, in 1939, before anyone 
knew whether an atomic bomb could possibly be built, the U.S. 
President had publicly announced a crash program to build one, 
and then in 1944, before any tests had been carried out, the 
President had ordered Groves to pursue a goal of producing ten 
implosion bombs a year. The rest of Bethe’s article concentrated 
on the moral questions raised by the H-bomb, as did an article 
published in the May issue of the Bulletin by Robert Bacher. The 
following month, however, something happened to change 
Bethe’s mind: communist North Korea invaded South Korea. 

Back in February, Bethe had written to Norris Bradbury, 
Oppenheimer’s successor as director of Los Alamos, explaining 
why he would not work on the hydrogen bomb. Even though it 
was, after Truman’s announcement, national policy to develop 
the H-bomb, Bethe told Bradbury: “I still believe that it is morally 
wrong and unwise for our national security to develop this 
weapon.” Nevertheless, he concluded this letter by saying: “In 
case of war, I would obviously reconsider my position.” True to 
his word, after the Korean War broke out, he decided, after all, to 
join Teller at Los Alamos to work on the H-bomb. 

By the time Bethe joined the H-bomb project, Teller had 
succeeded in recruiting some extremely able people, including 


John von Neumann, Stanislaw Ulam and John Wheeler, all of 
whom were delighted by the arrival of Bethe. “With his 
wonderful virtuosity in mathematical physics,” Ulam wrote, “and 
with his ability to solve analytical problems of nuclear physics, he 
helped significantly.” The Los Alamos team was at that time in 
need of all the help they could get, since they had still not solved 
their main problem: how to create the enormously high 
temperatures needed to initiate the fusion process. 

Bethe had not gone to Los Alamos hoping to solve the problem, 
but rather to prove that it could not be solved. The best possible 
outcome, he believed, would be that a hydrogen bomb turned out 
to be against the laws of physics. Indeed, in the summer of 1950 
there was some reason to believe that the Super could not be 
made. For instance, it had been demonstrated mathematically 
that Teller’s design—what became known as the “classical 
Super”—would not work. In March 1950, Ulam and his friend 
and colleague Cornelius Everett had presented Teller with the 
results of a long and tedious set of calculations they had 
performed, which gave the classical Super very little hope of 
initiating fusion. Teller, Ulam recalls, “was not easily reconciled 
to our results. I learned that the bad news drove him once to tears 
of frustration.” Things got worse, from Teller’s point of view, 
when von Neumann reported that he had done the same set of 
calculations on his new computer in Princeton and the results 
tallied with those of Ulam and Everett. One day, when Ulam was 
visiting von Neumann at Princeton, they called on Oppenheimer, 
who had heard about these mathematical results and, according 
to Ulam, “seemed rather glad to learn of the difficulties.” Despite 
everything, Teller, von Neumann and Ulam still believed that 
they could solve the initiation problem and that an H-bomb could 
be built. They scheduled for the following year a series of 
important experiments called the Greenhouse Tests. These would 
not test a bomb—they were still a very long way from having a 
bomb to test—but would have the more limited goal of trying to 
achieve the initiation of the fusion process. 

Oppenheimer—no doubt because, like Bethe, he hoped an H- 
bomb could not be built—was convinced that the technical 
problems were insoluble, or, anyway, that it would take a long 
time to solve them. Much of what he said and did in these years, 
including the things that struck his opponents as evidence of 


disloyalty, was based on that conviction. One example is the work 
that he did, starting in the autumn of 1950, for something called 
the Long Range Objectives Panel. This was a committee set up by 
Robert LeBaron, the Deputy Secretary of Defense for atomic- 
energy matters and chairman of the Military Liaison Committee 
(whose job it was to liaise between the AEC and the military). Its 
purpose was to examine and report on the long-term role that 
nuclear weapons might play in foreign policy and in the 
formation of military tactics and strategy. Also on the panel were 
fellow H-bomb skeptics Robert Bacher and Charles Lauritsen, and 
several enthusiasts for the H-bomb, including Luis Alvarez, 
General Nichols of the army and General Wilson of the air force. 

Both Alvarez and Wilson remember being shocked during the 
discussions of this panel at Oppenheimer’s attitude toward the 
hydrogen bomb. Alvarez remembers Oppenheimer saying: “We 
all agree that the hydrogen bomb program should be stopped, but 
if we were to stop it or to suggest that it be stopped, this would 
cause so much disruption at Los Alamos and in other laboratories 
where they are doing instrumentation work that I feel that we 
should let it go on, and it will die a natural death with the 
coming tests.” When those tests failed, Alvarez remembers 
Oppenheimer saying, that “will be the natural time to chop the 
hydrogen-bomb program off.” Much less specifically, Wilson 
remembers: 


The panel contained some conservative statements on the 
possibility or the feasibility of an early production of a 
thermonuclear weapon. These reservations were made on 
technical grounds. They were simply not challengeable by the 
military. They did, however, cause some concern in the 
military. 


So concerned was General Wilson about what he saw of 
Oppenheimer during these panel meetings that “I felt compelled 
to go to the Director of Intelligence to express my concern over 
what I felt was a pattern of action that was simply not helpful to 
national defense.” 

The panel’s report, written by Oppenheimer and delivered in 
February 1951, emphasized—as Oppenheimer’s GAC report of the 
previous October had emphasized—the importance of tactical 


atomic weapons, which, it was claimed, were (as opposed to 
hydrogen bombs) theoretically sound, made efficient use of fissile 
material and were militarily more effective, both offensively and 
defensively. The feasibility of hydrogen bombs, the report pointed 
out, had not yet been demonstrated, and so the H-bomb program 
had to be seen, despite the President’s public announcement of a 
crash program and his urgent command to the AEC to make that 
program its top priority, as a long-term project. “In fact,” 
Oppenheimer wrote, “we believe that only a timely recognition of 
the long range character of the thermonuclear program will tend 
to make available for the basic studies of the fission weapon 
program the resources of the Los Alamos Laboratory.” 

These words may have been written by Oppenheimer, but the 
report containing them was signed by all members of the panel, 
leading, some months later, to an enraged Teller demanding of 
Alvarez: “Luis, how could you have ever signed that report, 
feeling the way you do about hydrogen bombs?” When Alvarez 
replied that he thought it was a harmless statement about the 
importance of small atomic bombs, Teller told him: 


You go back and read that report and you will see that it 
essentially says that the hydrogen bomb program is interfering 
with the small weapons program, and it has caused me no end 
of trouble at Los Alamos. It is being used against our program. 
It is slowing it down and it could easily kill it. 


At about the same time as the Long Range Objectives Panel 
report was delivered, Oppenheimer published in the Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists an article entitled “Comments on the Military 
Value of the Atom,” which, subject to the restraints of official 
secrecy, made available to the public the thinking that had gone 
into the report. “To the first impression that the atomic weapon 
was a decisive, an absolute military power,” he begins, “there 
was a reaction: it is another weapon, it is ‘just another weapon.’ ” 
Without once mentioning the hydrogen bomb, Oppenheimer then 
seeks in this article to undermine the entire thinking behind 
strategic bombing (thereby undermining the only conceivable use 
the hydrogen bomb might have). When we think of the atomic 
bomb, Oppenheimer writes, we think “of the specific use that was 
made of it against Hiroshima and Nagasaki”: 


We think of it as an instrument of strategic bombing, for the 
destruction of lives and of plants, principally in cities. It is the 
decisive, even if perhaps not the final, step in a development 
that may have started at Guernica, that was characterized by 
the blitz against London, by the British raids on Hamburg, by 
our fire raids on Tokyo, and by Hiroshima. 


As against this conception of the military use of atomic bombs, 
Oppenheimer rather cleverly quotes from a statement given in 
1949 by Admiral Ralph Ofstie, in which he expresses the opinion 
that “strategic air warfare, as practiced in the past and as 
proposed in the future, is militarily unsound and of limited effect, 
and is morally wrong, and is decidedly harmful to the stability of 
the postwar world.” These views, Oppenheimer points out, were 
expressed before the Korean War, and now, because of that war: 
“Much of what was clear to Admiral Ofstie then has become clear 
to all of us today.” He then goes on to suggest that using atomic 
bombs against military rather than civilian targets, though 
certainly not as desirable as the avoidance of war itself, was at 
least preferable to “the extreme form of the atom bomb as a 
strategic weapon.” The article ends with an account of 
Oppenheimer’s meeting with Nehru, India’s Prime Minister, 
during the latter’s visit to the United States in May 1950. When 
Oppenheimer took the opportunity to ask Nehru whether he had 
found any appreciation during his time in the States of the Hindu 
notion of control, or restraint, Nehru replied: “I cannot believe 
that any great people would be without it.” The article ends with 
Oppenheimer’s declaration: “I believe the American people are a 
great people.” 

In opposing the very concept of strategic bombing, 
Oppenheimer was setting his face against the prevailing trend of 
U.S. military thinking and exposing himself to the wrath of some 
of the most powerful people in the U.S. A few months after the 
publication of this article he was given a chance to dig himself 
deeper into that hole when he was invited to join a research 
program called “Project Vista.” This was a project that had grown 
out of exactly the kind of thinking that Oppenheimer had 
recommended in his Bulletin article. In September 1950, the 
much-decorated and very popular U.S. Army general James Gavin 
was charged with the task of investigating “the possible tactical 


employment of nuclear weapons.” This was three months into the 
Korean War, and the clear implication was that General Gavin 
would identify some way of using tactical atomic weapons in the 
Korean conflict. Gathering together a group of experts, among 
whom was Charles Lauritsen, Gavin and his group went to Korea 
to review the situation. On their return to the States, Lauritsen 
suggested forming a “study group of top scientists and military 
men” to look into the possibility of using nuclear rockets to 
provide tactical air support to the troops on the ground. 

At the same time Lee DuBridge had been approached by the air 
force to consider the possibility of using the scientific expertise at 
Caltech to address both strategic and tactical problems faced by 
airmen. After discussing this with some of his colleagues, 
including Lauritsen, the “Caltech group,” as DuBridge put it in a 
letter to Willie Fowler, “expressed the feeling that it was not 
qualified or greatly interested in the strategic air problem, but 
that the tactical air problem, particularly the problem of close 
support of ground troops, was more nearly in line with our 
interests, and the group agreed to give the matter further 
thought.” 

The result was an extraordinarily lucrative contract for Caltech: 
in return for a fee of $600,000, Caltech would conduct a nine- 
month research project, lasting from April to December 1951, to 
look into the problems of tactical warfare, both on the ground 
and in the air. Though the contract was with the army, all three 
services would be involved. Willie Fowler was appointed director 
of the project, and the base of operations was to be the Vista del 
Arroyo Hotel in Pasadena. 

Although it grew out of the Korean conflict, Project Vista 
concentrated more and more of its attention on Europe, 
particularly after the beginning of what would turn out to be long 
and drawn-out armistice negotiations with the North Koreans in 
July 1951. What the scientists involved in Project Vista hoped to 
achieve was to divert U.S. military thinking away from strategic 
bombing and toward the use of atomic weapons to provide 
tactical support. “All of us,” Fowler recalled, “were rather 
opposed to strategic bombing, that is, to a complete dependence 
on SAC [Strategic Air Command] and were determined to 
acquaint the DOD [Department of Defense] with the fact that 
there were other ways of defending Europe.” 


Oppenheimer was invited to join Project Vista in July 1951, 
and from then until its final report was written in the New Year 
of 1952 he played an increasingly influential role in its thinking. 
He ended up writing one chapter of the report himself and had a 
hand in drafting several others, including the introduction. With 
regard to the defense of Western Europe, the report argued that 
the annihilation of Russian cities by strategic bombing was 
something Europeans feared rather than welcomed, because of 
the danger of provoking retaliatory attacks on their cities. “On the 
other hand,” the report insisted, “if we plan also to use our air 
power (including strategic, tactical, and Naval units) to destroy 
the march of Russian armies, we can win the confidence of the 
NATO nations.” 

Such thinking was, of course, anathema to the Strategic Air 
Command and also to the air force generally. When a preliminary 
version of the report was presented at Caltech toward the end of 
1951, it produced an “explosion” from the air force, which saw in 
it not just ill-considered advice, but dangerous subversion—an 
attempt to undermine the only arm of the military that stood any 
hope of defeating, or even of containing, the Soviet Union. Air- 
force generals became seriously alarmed when members of the 
Vista team—DuBridge, Lauritsen and Oppenheimer—went to 
Europe to discuss their report with NATO top brass, including 
General Eisenhower, the Supreme Commander, and General 
Norstad, who was by this time Eisenhower’s Air Deputy and 
Commander-in-Chief of the Allied Air Forces. Norstad was not as 
horrified by the report as his air-force colleagues back in the U.S. 
had been, but he did suggest to DuBridge, Lauritsen and 
Oppenheimer that they get rid of any suggestion that strategic 
bombing and the tactical use of atomic weapons were somehow 
incompatible. 

Encouraged by this relatively warm reaction, the authors of the 
report returned to Caltech to work on the final version, which 
was finished by February 1952. Because of the horrified reaction 
of the air force, however, the report was suppressed almost as 
soon as it was delivered. Thomas Finletter, the Secretary of the 
air force, ordered all copies to be sent to his office in Washington, 
where most of them were destroyed and the remaining few 
hidden under lock and key. Shortly before that, Finletter and 
General Vandenberg, Chief of Staff of the air force, issued orders 


that Oppenheimer was no longer to be used as a consultant in any 
further studies relating to the air force and that classified air- 
force documents were, despite his security clearance, to be kept 
away from him. As far as the air force was concerned, what 
Project Vista showed was that Oppenheimer could not be trusted. 

The reason for this was not just the attitude that Oppenheimer, 
and the report he had helped to write, expressed about strategic 
bombing. It was also what was said and, perhaps more 
importantly, what was not said, in the report about the hydrogen 
bomb. In a report that touched upon (even if it did not 
concentrate on) the uses of strategic bombing, one might have 
expected some discussion of the Super. In fact there are only 
allusions to, and implied rebuffs of, this promised new weapon. 
“We have found no great new weapons—and we believe we can 
get along with those we have,” the report says (in the chapter 
written by Oppenheimer). The report also committed itself to the 
view that, for strategic bombing, a yield of between one and fifty 
kilotons was ideal, with no use at all envisaged for bombs in the 
megaton range. The implication was that even if the H-bomb 
could be built, it would have no role to play in the defense of 
Europe. 

This was all the more troubling to the air-force leaders because, 
as they well knew, during the time that Project Vista was being 
conceived and then carried out (from the end of 1950 to the 
beginning of 1952), the prospects for overcoming the technical 
problems in the way of developing the hydrogen bomb improved 
dramatically. The lowest point for the Super program was 
probably the spring and early summer of 1950, when the 
calculations of Ulam and Everett, and then von Neumann, 
showed that Teller’s “classical Super” design would not work. 
Soon after that, however, Bethe and Fermi arrived at Los Alamos 
and genuine progress started being made. 

Crucial to the overall success of the project would be the 
“Greenhouse” series of tests that had been scheduled for May 
1951, and which Oppenheimer and many others assumed would 
fail. Four tests were planned, but the crucial one, scheduled for 
May 9, 1951, was the third, code-named “George.” What George 
would test was not a bomb, but a device that Teller had designed 
called the “Cylinder.” The idea, in the words of one of its 
planners, was to use an atomic explosion “to send material down 


a tube and cause a thermonuclear reaction of small magnitude in 
deuterium.” The design called for the atomic explosion to take 
the form of a bomb with a yield of 500 kilotons of TNT (about 
thirty-five times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb), which 
would then ignite a fusion reaction in a tiny amount (less than 
one ounce) of deuterium and tritium. It was, says the Princeton 
physicist Robert Jastrow, “like using a blast furnace to light a 
match.” Where the Cylinder differed from the classical Super was 
that the fusion between the deuterium and the tritium was to be 
initiated not by a flow of high-energy neutrons, but by radiation, 
in the form of X-rays, traveling from the atomic explosion 
through a pipe. As it turned out, though no one knew this when 
the design for the Cylinder was completed in October 1950, this 
idea of using X-rays was to prove a turning point for the whole 
program. 

Just after the design of the Cylinder was finalized, 
Oppenheimer organized a visit of the GAC to Los Alamos to 
inspect progress. This was mainly for the benefit of new 
members, the most notable of whom was the chemist Willard 
Libby, a future Nobel laureate who was an enthusiastic proponent 
of the H-bomb program. Also taking part in this visit was Gordon 
Dean, who, after Lilienthal’s departure, was now chairman of the 
AEC. In his report of the visit Oppenheimer announced himself to 
be impressed by the “new and elaborate instrumentation” 
developed for the Greenhouse tests, particularly with the new 
information that might be gained through the investigation of 
“the flow of radiation from fission weapons into materials of 
varying density.” Such information, he acknowledged, “will be 
relevant to many thermonuclear models.” No one, however, 
believed that the George test would demonstrate the feasibility of 
a hydrogen bomb. 

Thanks primarily to Stanislaw Ulam, this was very soon to 
change. In December 1950, Ulam had the idea that has since 
become known as “super-compression,” but which Ulam called 
“hydrodynamic lensing.” This was not, initially, anything to do 
with hydrogen bombs; it was a new atomic-bomb design, 
motivated by the desire to make more efficient use of fissionable 
material such as uranium and plutonium. The central idea was to 
use the energy from one atomic bomb to compress a small piece 
of fissionable material, thereby creating a second, more powerful 


explosion. This sounds less efficient, since two pieces of 
fissionable material are being used instead of one. However, the 
energy created by the first explosion is so great that it can be 
used to implode a much smaller lump of, say, plutonium than 
would otherwise be needed, making it, in fact, much more 
efficient. 

In the New Year of 1951, it occurred to Ulam how this basic 
design might be applied to the problem of igniting fusion. His 
wife, Francoise, has remembered how one day at about noon she 
found Ulam “staring intensely out of a window in our living room 
with a very strange expression on his face.” “Peering unseeing 
into the garden, he said, ‘I found a way to make it work.’ ‘What 
work?’ I asked. ‘The Super,’ he replied. ‘It is a totally different 
scheme, and it will change the course of history.’ ” 

Ulam’s new H-bomb design called for an atomic “primary” to 
set off a fusion “secondary,” using very high-energy neutrons. 
When he described it to Teller, however, Teller—perhaps with 
the Cylinder design in mind—saw that Ulam’s design could be 
improved by using the radiation, rather than the neutron flow, 
from the primary to compress a piece of fusible material. This is 
what became known as the “Ulam-Teller” design, which, as both 
men realized in January 1951, was a very considerable 
improvement on the “classical Super.” “From then on,” Ulam 
says, “pessimism gave way to hope.” “Edward is full of 
enthusiasm about these possibilities,” Ulam wrote to von 
Neumann in February 1951, adding skittishly: “This is perhaps an 
indication they will not work.” Hans Bethe, meanwhile, was 
extremely impressed: “The new concept was to me, who had been 
rather closely associated with the program, about as surprising as 
the discovery of fission had been to physicists in 1939.” 

In a series of papers written in February and March 1951, 
several refinements were added to the Ulam-Teller design, one of 
which was to place a rod of plutonium—a “spark plug”—inside 
the fusible material and another of which was to surround the 
fusible material with a uranium tamper. Together, these two 
refinements considerably increased the anticipated yield of the 
bomb, the explosion of which was now a three-stage process: 
1.an implosive fission reaction in the “primary” produces 
radiation of extraordinarily high energy, which compresses the 
fusible material, causing a fission reaction in the plutonium 


“spark plug” at its center; 2. this raises the temperature high 
enough—and, crucially, quickly enough—to bring about a fusion 
reaction in the fusible material; 3. this, in turn, causes a fission 
reaction in the surrounding uranium. As Jeremy Bernstein 
summarizes the process: “The sequence is fission-fusion-fission, 
with most of the energy from a hydrogen bomb actually coming 
from fission.” 

The final report explaining this device, credited to both Teller 
and Ulam, was entitled “On Heterocatalytic Detonations I: 
Hydrodynamic Lenses and Radiation Mirrors,” and dated March 
9, 1951. In the light of this new design, the George test, held on 
May 9, acquired a new significance, promising as it did to provide 
experimental data on radiation implosion. The location chosen 
for the Greenhouse tests was the Eniwetok Atoll, on the 
northwest end of the Marshall Islands in the Pacific: 8,500 men 
were flown out there to carry out the extensive and elaborate 
preparations for the tests. The scientific observers included, apart 
from Teller, Ernest Lawrence and Gordon Dean. 

The explosion of the Cylinder certainly produced an impressive 
blast. The yield was measured at 225 kilotons—not quite the 500 
kilotons originally envisaged, but, even so, at least fifteen times 
more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb—and the fireball it 
produced was estimated to be 1,800 feet high. Whether fusion 
had taken place, however, could not be known until certain 
measurements had been carried out. While waiting for the results 
of those measurements, Teller went swimming with Lawrence. 
“When I came out of the water to stand on the white sands of the 
beach,” Teller later remembered, “I told Lawrence that I thought 
the experiment had been a failure. He thought otherwise, and bet 
me five dollars.” The next day, the results showed that Lawrence 
had won the bet. The world’s first man-made fusion reaction had 
taken place. That tiny amount of deuterium and tritium—less 
than one ounce—had yielded twenty-five kilotons of explosive 
energy, twice the force that had destroyed Hiroshima. 

Oppenheimer’s prediction that the test would be a disaster and 
would mark the point at which the hydrogen-bomb project was 
abandoned could not have been more wrong. As urged by Gordon 
Dean, Oppenheimer convened a meeting of the GAC to discuss 
the improved prospects for the Super at Princeton on June 16-17. 
Teller, naturally, was invited. The agenda for the meeting 


envisaged a discussion first of the results obtained from the 
Greenhouse tests, moving on to theoretical results concerning the 
classical Super, before finally considering the Ulam-Teller design. 
Teller, however, had no patience for that, and interrupted the 
first presentation to talk about the promise of this novel design. 
As he explained the new concept, all the scientists present, 
including Oppenheimer, could see its potential and _ it 
immediately won the backing of the GAC. “The outcome of the 
meeting,” Oppenheimer later said, “was an agreed program and a 
fixing of priorities and effort both for Los Alamos and for other 
aspects of the Commission’s work. This program has been an 
outstanding success.” 

When asked to explain why his reaction to the Ulam-Teller 
design differed so markedly from his 1949 reaction to the 
classical Super, Oppenheimer said: 


It is my judgment in these things that when you see something 
that is technically sweet, you go ahead and do it and you argue 
about what to do about it only after you have had your 
technical success. That is the way it was with the atomic bomb. 
I do not think anybody opposed making it; there were some 
debates about what to do with it after it was made. I cannot 
very well imagine if we had known in late 1949 what we got to 
know by early 1951 that the tone of our report would have 
been the same. 


This is not entirely convincing. The technical problems of the 
classical Super certainly played a part in the GAC’s 
recommendation in 1949 not to pursue a crash program, but 
what seemed more decisive were the moral considerations raised 
and urged by Conant. The moral issues raised by this new design 
were exactly the same as those raised by the old design. If 
anything, the fact that the new design stood a better chance of 
working would seem to make those moral issues more pressing. 
Moreover, as Oppenheimer later said, though from a technical 
point of view he could consider the hydrogen-bomb design “a 
sweet and lovely and beautiful job,” he “still thought it was a 
dreadful weapon.” 

As even Teller acknowledged, however, the attitude of 
Oppenheimer, the GAC and the AEC changed after this meeting of 


June 1951. Now the AEC got fully behind the program and gave 
it all the resources it needed. In September 1951, with the AEC’s 
backing, the thermonuclear division at Los Alamos began making 
preparations for a full test of the Ulam-Teller bomb, and on 
November 1, 1952, scarcely more than a year later, that test 
(code-named “Mike”) was duly carried out and was a stunning 
success, the bomb exploding with an awe-inspiring yield of ten 
megatons (about 700 Hiroshima bombs). 

Thus, less than three years after President Truman’s 
announcement of its existence, the AEC had brought the crash 
program to build a hydrogen bomb to a successful conclusion. 
Why then had Teller and others complained so bitterly that 
Oppenheimer was delaying the development of the bomb? There 
simply was no delay. The bomb was, on the contrary, developed 
with remarkable speed and the program to construct it managed 
with exactly the kind of scientific and administrative skill that 
had been so admired in the Manhattan Project. It all went 
surprisingly smoothly. 

To understand the complaints and the bitterness, one has to 
understand the role that Edward Teller played in the construction 
of the world’s first hydrogen bomb, and, in particular, how 
surprisingly small that role was. The bomb that was exploded in 
the “Mike” test of November 1952 was built to the Ulam-Teller 
design, but that, more or less, was Teller’s only contribution to it. 
To Teller’s great chagrin, in September 1951, when Los Alamos 
began in earnest its program of building a hydrogen bomb, the 
man appointed by Norris Bradbury to serve as director of that 
program was not Teller himself, but Marshall Holloway, a 
graduate of Cornell, who had been at Los Alamos since 1943. 
During the Crossroads tests Holloway had been deputy scientific 
director, and had then been appointed leader of the Los Alamos 
Weapons Division. Despite filling these senior positions, he was a 
strangely obscure figure. When he died, a memorial tribute ended 
with the words: “In spite of the remarkable success of the ‘Mike’ 
operation, Marshall remained almost anonymous except to his 
colleagues.” 

Teller disliked Holloway even before he was chosen to lead 
Teller’s pet project. In his memoir Teller writes: 


Somewhat negative in his approach to life in general, Holloway 


had not cooperated on any project pertaining to the Super. 
Bradbury could not have appointed anyone who would have 
slowed the work on the program more effectively, nor anyone 
with whom I would have found it more frustrating to work. 


Within a week of Holloway’s appointment as director Teller 
walked out of Los Alamos and left the project altogether. Despite 
losing his most brilliant physicist, Bradbury was unrepentant. 
Great scientist though he was, Teller was no manager. He was too 
impetuous, too fiery and too unpopular. “If ’'d given him control 
of the program,” Bradbury later said, “I’d have half my division 
leaders quit.” 

So, when Los Alamos was finally doing what Teller had wanted 
it to do for years—actually building a hydrogen bomb—Teller 
himself was back in Chicago, nursing his wounded pride. To 
begin with, he spent his time on some interesting theoretical 
work, calculating the blast effects of hydrogen bombs. It had been 
assumed by Oppenheimer, Conant and others on the GAC that 
there was no limit to the destructiveness of the hydrogen bomb, 
one thing that, they argued, “makes its very existence and the 
knowledge of its construction a danger to humanity as a whole.” 
Teller’s calculations showed this was not true. As they got more 
powerful, hydrogen bombs did not, in fact, get more destructive. 
A 100-megaton bomb, for example, would not have ten times the 
destructive power of a ten-megaton bomb. Indeed, it would 
hardly be any more destructive. Both would blow, in Teller’s 
words, “a chunk of the atmosphere, weighing perhaps a billion 
tons,” into the air. The bigger bomb, however, would not destroy 
a bigger “chunk”; it would, rather, blow the same-sized chunk 
into the air at three times the speed. 

Interesting though such calculations were, Teller hankered after 
laboratory work, and, in particular, weapon-laboratory work. He 
could, of course, have returned to Los Alamos, where his 
expertise could have been put to practical use. Bradbury had 
made it clear that he would be welcome there as a scientist, if not 
as a director. Another ex-colleague at Los Alamos has said: “A lot 
of us were really teed-off at Edward, because if he would have sat 
down and applied himself to the job, it would of course have 
gone faster.” What Teller did instead was to use the considerable 
amounts of spare time he now had on his hands to campaign for 


the establishment of a second weapons laboratory that would act 
as a rival to Los Alamos. 

As Los Alamos was at that time making excellent progress 
toward completing the program it had been asked to undertake, 
the case for a second, competing laboratory was hard to make. 
Teller’s ostensible reason was that the pace of progress at Los 
Alamos was too slow and needed competition to speed it up. This 
might have appeared quite a strong argument in 1950, but, from 
the autumn of 1951 onward, the speed and efficiency of progress 
at Los Alamos undermined it completely. 

Among the members of the GAC and the AEC there was little 
enthusiasm for a second laboratory, the general view being that 
expressed by Oppenheimer in a letter to Gordon Dean in October 
1951: such a thing was “neither necessary nor in any real sense 
feasible.” There were, however, two important dissenters. The 
first was Thomas Murray, who had been on the AEC since March 
1950, when both Lewis Strauss and David Lilienthal resigned 
from it, and who quickly allied himself with those who believed 
that progress on the H-bomb program was proceeding too slowly. 
Murray had been convinced since the June 1951 meeting in 
Princeton that a new laboratory, dedicated to developing the 
Super, was necessary. The other exception was Willard Libby, a 
close friend of Teller’s, who tried and failed to convince the GAC 
of the need for a second laboratory in October 1951. 

On December 13, 1951, Teller came to Washington to present 
his case for a second laboratory to the GAC in person. Teller 
believes that the argument he presented that day was “among the 
very best I have ever made.” He was, he says, “constrained, 
logical and polite.” He was not, however, convincing. All those 
present, except Libby and Murray (who, though not a member of 
the GAC, had been invited to attend), remained unpersuaded. 

Also in Washington at that time was Ernest Lawrence, who by 
this stage was firmly in the pro-Teller and anti-Oppenheimer 
camp, so much so that Robert Serber—having been told by Rabi, 
“You have to choose between Ernest and Oppie”—had felt 
compelled to leave Berkeley out of loyalty to Oppenheimer. From 
the summer of 1951 onward, Serber was a colleague of Rabi’s at 
Columbia. After the GAC meeting of December 1951, Murray met 
Lawrence, who made it clear that he supported Teller’s campaign 
for a second laboratory and that he would be happy to work with 


Teller to establish one. In early February 1952, Teller visited 
Lawrence at Berkeley and the two of them drove out to 
Livermore, a site about thirty miles east of Berkeley owned by the 
University of California, upon which Lawrence had built a large 
particle accelerator called the MTA. Livermore, Lawrence told 
Teller, would be the ideal place for the proposed second 
laboratory. 

With such enthusiastic support from one of the most successful 
scientific promoters of all time, the prospects for the second 
laboratory were now looking very good, in spite of the fact that 
the AEC and the GAC continued throughout the winter of 1951-2 
to reject the idea. What Teller and Lawrence had shown in 1949, 
however, was that, with the right kind of political support, it was 
possible to impose a policy upon the AEC, rather than wait for 
that policy to be recommended by the GAC. It was a lesson that 
Teller had learned very well. 

What helped Teller enormously was that he was able to exploit 
the reputation Los Alamos still had as “Oppie’s lab,” and the 
considerable reserves of bad feeling that by then existed toward 
Oppenheimer himself among U.S. policy-makers. The list of 
people whom Teller successfully recruited to his campaign for a 
second laboratory during the first half of 1952 reads like a roll 
call of all those powerful men whose suspicion and hatred 
Oppenheimer had aroused during the previous two or three years. 
Moreover, in exploiting that suspicion and hatred, Teller served 
to raise them to new levels. 

Chief among those powerful haters of Oppenheimer, of course, 
was Lewis Strauss, whom Teller describes in his memoir as “a 
courteous man with a deep-seated sense of decency,” and who 
was the first person in Washington to whom Teller went for 
support. Strauss promised to do whatever he could to help, and 
indeed went much further. “Strauss told me,” Teller later 
revealed, “he loved me like a_ brother-in-law.” Another 
enthusiastic recruit to Teller’s campaign was David Griggs, a 
geophysicist at UCLA, who had for years acted as a consultant for 
the air force and who, in September 1951, was appointed the air 
force’s chief scientist. “I think it would be fair to say,” Teller later 
wrote, “that without Dave Griggs, Lawrence Livermore 
Laboratory [the name given to Teller’s second weapons 
laboratory] would not have come into existence. He introduced 


me to many influential people and succeeded in developing a lot 
of friends for the idea.” 

David Griggs, along with Lewis Strauss, William Borden and 
Thomas Finletter, was one of the few people who actually 
believed that Oppenheimer might be working for the Soviet 
Union. Teller, despite his personal and professional animosities 
toward Oppenheimer, believed no such thing, but that such 
beliefs were held by people of influence was certainly a factor in 
his favor in setting up his proposed second laboratory, and he did 
nothing to challenge them. On the contrary, he went out of his 
way to encourage them. In April 1952, an FBI report said that 
sometime earlier Teller had, in response to questions about Philip 
Morrison, told an FBI agent that Morrison “has the reputation 
among physicists of being extremely far to the left.” Then, though 
he had not been asked about Oppenheimer, Teller added: 
“Oppenheimer, Robert Serber and Morrison are considered the 
three most extreme leftists among physicists,” and that “most of 
Oppenheimer’s students at Berkeley had absorbed Oppenheimer’s 
leftist views.” 

In May 1952, Teller gave two interviews to the FBI, one on the 
10th and another on the 27th, in which Oppenheimer was the 
main topic. Teller’s main charge was that Oppenheimer “delayed 
or attempted to delay or hinder the development of the H-bomb,” 
which he said could have been completed by 1951 if it had not 
been for Oppenheimer’s opposition. In fact, at the very time this 
interview was being conducted, the Los Alamos program— 
recommended by Oppenheimer and abandoned by Teller—had 
just succeeded in developing the world’s first H-bomb, ready for 
testing five months later. Teller also told the FBI agent that, 
though he himself did not believe Oppenheimer to be disloyal, “a 
lot of people believe Oppenheimer opposed the development of 
the H-bomb on ‘direct orders from Moscow.’ ” Perhaps Teller’s 
most damaging comment about Oppenheimer, however, was his 
remark that he “would do most anything” to get Oppenheimer off 
the GAC. Coming from the man widely regarded as the U-S.’s 
greatest authority on hydrogen bombs, this was a powerful 
statement. 

As Teller would have known perfectly well, his new friend 
“Dave” Griggs was one of those people who _ thought 
Oppenheimer was acting on orders from Moscow. Griggs was an 


air-force man through and through, and, like many U.S. Air Force 
men, had been appalled at the views expressed by Oppenheimer 
in the Project Vista report, which, he seemed to think, could only 
be explained by assuming that Oppenheimer was deliberately 
trying to undermine the military strength of the U.S. At 
Oppenheimer’s security hearing in 1954, Griggs stated 
unequivocally: “I want to say, and I can’t emphasize too strongly, 
that Dr. Oppenheimer is the only one of my_ scientific 
acquaintances about whom I have ever felt there was a serious 
question as to their loyalty.” When asked about his support for 
Teller’s idea of a second weapons laboratory, Griggs said: “We 
felt at the time we are speaking of, namely, late 1951 and early 
1952, the effort on this [hydrogen bomb] program was not as 
great as the circumstances required under the President’s 
directive.” Again it is worth emphasizing that the dates specified 
by Griggs, “late 1951 and early 1952,” coincide precisely with the 
period when the “effort on this program” was at its very greatest. 

One of the most important ways in which Griggs helped Teller 
to realize his ambitions of establishing a second laboratory was 
by introducing him to Thomas Finletter, the Secretary of the air 
force. Finletter became so convinced of the need for a second 
laboratory to rival Los Alamos that he stated that, if the AEC was 
not prepared to establish one, then the air force would. Step by 
step, then, Teller’s campaign was moving upward through the 
ranks of the American political hierarchy. What Teller himself 
regarded as the “crucial interview” came when, on Finletter’s 
recommendation, the Secretary of Defense, Robert Lovett, agreed 
to meet him. After their meeting Lovett wrote to the AEC 
recommending a second laboratory. By April 1952, it was clear 
that the AEC would have to give way to the political tide Teller 
had created, and after two more months of particularly intensive 
campaigning—both for the laboratory and against Oppenheimer 
—on June 9, 1952, Gordon Dean finally wrote to the University 
of California on behalf of the AEC, asking them to approve the 
establishment of a new weapons laboratory at Livermore. The 
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory opened on September 2, 1952. 
Teller had won. 

The price of Teller’s victory—a price that he, Lawrence, 
Strauss, Griggs and Finletter were only too willing, indeed 
pleased, to pay—was the ruin of Oppenheimer’s reputation in 


Washington. When Teller began his campaign in the autumn of 
1951, Oppenheimer was still a respected and influential figure in 
Washington; by the time that campaign ended a year later, 
Oppenheimer was, from a political point of view, more or less a 
spent force. 

During that year the private whispering about Oppenheimer 
that had been going on for years became louder and more 
insistent and the public attacks on him became more common 
and more vicious. It is as if the campaign to establish the 
Livermore Laboratory and the campaign to oust Oppenheimer 
from the GAC and blacken his political reputation became 
merged into a single political movement. Those who supported 
the second laboratory were, to a man, those most vocal in their 
disapproval of Oppenheimer. When Thomas Murray visited 
Berkeley, for example, Lawrence told him at some length how 
disillusioned he had become with Oppenheimer and how opposed 
he was to Oppenheimer’s continued membership of the GAC. Two 
weeks later, Kenneth Pitzer, who had been director of research 
for the AEC from 1949 until his resignation in 1952, gave a 
speech to the American Chemical Society that, in the spirit of 
Teller and Strauss, blamed the GAC for the slow progress of the 
H-bomb program. Afterward he told the FBI that he “now is 
doubtful as to the loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer.” 

During May 1952, as the campaign for Livermore reached its 
climax, so too did the attacks on Oppenheimer. On May 9, 
Oppenheimer had lunch with Conant and DuBridge, the three of 
them gloomily aware of which way the political winds were 
blowing. That night Conant recorded in his diary: “Some of the 
‘boys’ have their axe out for the three of us on the GAC of AEC. 
Claim we have ‘dragged our heels’ on H bomb. Dirty words about 
Oppie!” Ten days later this sense of a concerted attack on 
Oppenheimer was felt by Gordon Dean, who reported in his diary 
that at the annual meeting of the American Physical Society, he 
had heard much “vitriolic talk” about Oppenheimer, “notably 
from some of the University of California contingent.” 

It was during this month, May 1952, that Teller gave his 
interviews to the FBI, telling them that he would do anything to 
get Oppenheimer off the GAC and handing them gossip that some 
people believed Oppenheimer to be taking his orders from 
Moscow. At the end of the month, Hoover sent transcripts of 


those interviews, together with transcripts of interviews with 
Pitzer and Libby, to the Justice Department, the White House and 
the AEC. 

Oppenheimer, of course, knew what was afoot, and a meeting 
he had with David Griggs on May 23 shows how much the 
campaign against him was unsettling him. The origin of this 
meeting lay in a lunch Griggs had attended during the annual 
meeting of the National Academy of Sciences. Over lunch, Griggs 
had met DuBridge and Rabi and expressed the view that the GAC 
was not doing enough to push through the accelerated H-bomb 
program ordered by the President. Rabi told him that if he could 
read the minutes of the GAC meetings, he would see that this was 
not true and suggested that he ask Oppenheimer to show him the 
minutes. 

So the next time he was in Princeton, which was May 23, 
Griggs called on Oppenheimer. “I didn’t really expect that I 
would be allowed to read the minutes of the General Advisory 
Committee,” Griggs later said, “and it turned out that this was not 
offered by Dr. Oppenheimer.” The two spoke for about an hour, 
during which Oppenheimer, referring in particular to the 
Princeton meeting of June 1951, attempted to convince Griggs 
that the GAC was fully committed to the H-bomb project. The 
conversation took a somewhat uncomfortable turn when Griggs 
moved on to the subject of a bit of tittle-tattle about Thomas 
Finletter. A story was going around that Finletter, at a meeting 
with the Secretary of Defense, had been heard to remark that if 
the U.S. had a certain number of hydrogen bombs it could rule 
the world. Griggs was concerned about this story circulating, 
because it “suggested that we had irresponsible warmongers at 
the head of the Air Force at that time.” He therefore asked 
Oppenheimer if he himself had been spreading the story and, if 
so, what grounds he had for thinking it true. Oppenheimer 
replied that he had heard this story from an unimpeachable 
source and dismissed Griggs’s vehement insistence that it was 
false. 

The discussion got even more tense when Oppenheimer asked 
Griggs if he thought he, Oppenheimer, was pro-Russian or just 
confused. “As near as I can recall,” Griggs said, “I responded that 
I wished I knew.” Oppenheimer then asked Griggs whether he 
had impugned his loyalty to high officials in the Defense 


Department, “and I believe I responded simply, yes, or something 
like that.” The meeting ended with Oppenheimer calling Griggs a 
“paranoid.” 

Four days later, Bethe went to see Griggs in order to lighten the 
increasingly tense atmosphere between the air force and some of 
America’s leading atomic scientists. Bethe later recalled that the 
occasion was surprisingly pleasant: 


Dr Griggs had been very much an exponent of the view that 
Los Alamos was not doing its job right and very much an 
exponent of the view that thermonuclear weapons and only the 
biggest thermonuclear weapons should be the main part of the 
weapons arsenal of the United States. I had very much 
disagreed with this, with both of these points, and so I 
expected that we would have really a very unpleasant fight on 
this matter. We didn’t. 


On all the issues that divided Griggs and Oppenheimer—the 
alleged need for a second weapons laboratory, the importance of 
strategic bombing, the hydrogen bomb, the value of openness 
versus the need for secrecy, and so on—Bethe’s sympathies were, 
in every case, with Oppenheimer, and yet Griggs clearly did not 
regard Bethe as a dangerous subversive, nor did he appear to 
dislike him. Why the difference? 

The answer seems to be twofold. First, Griggs seems to have 
thought that Oppenheimer was not just—as, presumably, he 
believed Bethe to be—expressing a series of misguided opinions; 
rather, his opinions were part of a “pattern of behavior” (a phrase 
used often by Oppenheimer’s detractors at this time) that 
identified him as someone working actively against U-S. interests. 
Second, on a personal level, Oppenheimer seems to have aroused 
in Griggs something close to hatred. Leona Libby, Willard Libby’s 
wife, describes their friend “Dave” Griggs in glowing terms: “a 
pillar of honesty, a fine scientist, a strong servant of the military 
and of the weapons laboratories, very careful to think clearly, and 
devastatingly outspoken.” He was, she says, “strongly built, with 
blue eyes that could become very cold and fierce when he 
encountered bad science, hypocrisy, or other unpleasantness.” 
Recounting some of the details of Griggs’s testimony against 
Oppenheimer at the security hearing, Leona Libby writes: “I 


remember how his blue eyes blazed coldly when he felt strongly 
on an issue, as he surely did on this one.” 

Though Oppenheimer, when he felt so inclined and the 
occasion demanded it, was capable of charming almost anyone, 
he seemed to go out of his way during this period to antagonize 
and offend his political opponents. Having twice publicly 
humiliated Lewis Strauss, and having offended Griggs by calling 
him “paranoid,” Oppenheimer, a few weeks after this latter 
incident, seemed determined to antagonize one of the most 
powerful people in the U.S. military establishment: Thomas 
Finletter. The occasion was a lunch that Finletter’s aides, William 
Burden and Garrison Norton, had arranged in the hope that 
meeting face-to-face would help Oppenheimer and Finletter 
overcome some of their disagreements. Griggs was also invited, 
and a few days before the meeting provided Finletter with an 
“eyes only” memo, describing in detail his own recent encounter 
with Oppenheimer. The lunch was, one of its participants later 
recalled, one of the most uncomfortable events at which he had 
ever been present. Oppenheimer arrived late and was steadfastly 
unresponsive to any attempt to engage him in conversation. His 
manner seemed to suggest contempt for everyone in the room, 
and, as soon as the meal was over, he turned his back on his 
fellow diners and walked away. After Oppenheimer had gone, 
Finletter laughed and said to his aides: “I don’t think you fellows 
have convinced me I should feel any more positively about Dr. 
Oppenheimer.” 

Oppenheimer’s term as a member of the GAC was coming to an 
end in the summer of 1952. There is some uncertainty about 
whether he wanted to renew his position on the committee or 
whether, like Conant and DuBridge (whose membership in the 
GAC was also coming to an end), he was looking forward to 
freeing himself from the pressures and unpleasantness that 
surrounded U.S. nuclear politics at this time. On June 14, 1952, 
Conant wrote in his diary with evident delight: “Lee DuBridge 
and I are through as members of the GAC!! 10% years of almost 
continuous official conversations with a bad business now 
threatening to become really bad!!” Two days earlier 
Oppenheimer had told Dean that he, too, would not be seeking 
reappointment after his term came to an end, but in his case there 
is no indication that he was delighted to leave. 


On the contrary, there are signs that Oppenheimer’s resignation 
was forced upon him, or, at the very least, that it was made clear 
to him that he would not be reappointed even if he wished to be. 
By the time Oppenheimer told Dean he no longer wished to serve 
on the GAC there was a formidable campaign against his 
reappointment. In April 1952, Kenneth Pitzer had told the FBI 
that one of the reasons he alerted them to his suspicions about 
Oppenheimer was that, as an FBI memo puts it, “he is very much 
concerned about the above at the present time inasmuch as it is 
his opinion that J. Robert Oppenheimer is now ‘making a play’ to 
be reappointed.” The following month, Willard Libby let it be 
known to the FBI that he, too, “believed it would be extremely 
wise not to reappoint Oppenheimer to the General Advisory 
Committee.” In the light of these views, together with those of 
Teller, Strauss, Griggs, Finletter, Borden and_ others, 
Oppenheimer’s chances of being reappointed were extremely 
slim. Indeed, Brien McMahon told the FBI at the end of May that 
he “is personally going to talk to the President,” to tell him that 
he had “worked out a plan whereby Oppenheimer would take the 
initiative and decline to serve another term by an exchange of 
letters and everybody will be happy.” 

The exchange of letters in question was read out at 
Oppenheimer’s security hearing. It included one from Gordon 
Dean to Oppenheimer, thanking him for his “magnificent” 
contribution to “the Commission and the country,” and another, 
ostensibly from President Truman, but in fact drafted by Dean, 
expressing the President’s “deep sense of personal regret” that 
Oppenheimer had chosen to step down from the GAC and his 
gratitude for the “lasting and immensely valuable contribution to 
the national security and to atomic energy progress in this 
Nation” that Oppenheimer had made. 

More surprising than Oppenheimer’s decision not to seek 
reappointment as a member of the GAC was his appointment by 
Dean on a one-year contract as a consultant to the AEC. Since this 
made it necessary to extend Oppenheimer’s security clearance for 
another year, it meant that the campaign by his many enemies to 
separate him from the military secrets of the U.S. would continue. 
It is natural to assume that this appointment was part of the deal 
mentioned by McMahon to get Oppenheimer off the GAC. 
Whether this was so, or whether Oppenheimer was persuaded 


against his own inclinations to stay as a consultant, the fact that 
he accepted the position shows on his part a desire, or anyway a 
willingness, to stay in the line of fire and to keep on fighting a 
series of battles that, he surely knew by this time, he had no 
chance of winning. 

Griggs, Strauss and others thought that the explanation for this 
willingness to continue the fight was that Oppenheimer was 
determined to maintain access to military secrets so that he could 
betray them to the Soviet Union. However, despite all the efforts 
of the FBI and Oppenheimer’s political enemies, not a shred of 
evidence for this suspicion emerged, unless, like Griggs and 
Strauss, one regards Oppenheimer’s political views and the advice 
he gave to government departments as evidence of disloyalty, in 
which case one has to explain why the many people who shared 
those views—Bethe, Rabi, Conant, DuBridge, and numerous 
others—were not also regarded as potential security risks. The 
explanation offered for this by many of Oppenheimer’s enemies is 
that he exerted some kind of mysterious control over these people 
in order to get them to accept obviously muddleheaded political 
opinions. The idea that men with the intellectual power and 
strength of character of Bethe, Conant and Rabi could possibly be 
controlled in this way is so ludicrous that one has to regard this 
“explanation” as a reductio ad absurdum of the whole view, and 
one is forced to offer a different explanation as to why 
Oppenheimer would subject himself to the constant attacks upon 
him that accompanied his involvement in political questions. 

In the immediate postwar period that explanation might well 
have been the appeal of the prestige, glamour and intoxicating 
sense of importance that went with being on close terms with 
America’s political leaders—being able, for example, to call the 
Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense by their first 
names. But by 1952, when Oppenheimer was disliked, or at the 
very least held in suspicion by nearly every person in high office 
in Washington, this explanation fails. Fortunately, another 
explanation is lying to hand, forcing itself upon one as the simple 
and obvious truth: Oppenheimer continued to act as a consultant 
to government projects, thereby exposing himself to all sorts of 
exhausting conflicts and crushing unpleasantness, precisely 
because of his love of, and loyalty to, his country. He did it for the 
same reason that he underwent the extreme rigors of leading Los 


Alamos: because he felt that it was, using the word that underpins 
the morality of the Bhagavad Gita, his duty to do it. 

In July 1952, immediately after his decision to leave the GAC 
and to accept the one-year consultancy appointment, 
Oppenheimer was involved in a project that was regarded by 
David Griggs—as he emphasized in his 1954 testimony against 
Oppenheimer—as further evidence of his disloyalty, but which is 
much more naturally seen as an expression of his patriotism and 
his desire to see America well protected against the possibility of 
nuclear attack. That project was a summer school at the Lincoln 
Laboratory, organized by Jerrold Zacharias, the laboratory’s 
associate director. 

The Lincoln Laboratory was then a fairly new establishment, 
having been set up as the result of a study, to which 
Oppenheimer had contributed, called “Project Charles.” The aim 
of Project Charles had been to investigate the feasibility of 
building an air-defense system to protect the United States 
against nuclear attack from the Soviet Union. The conclusion 
reached was that such a system was feasible, which led to the 
launch in 1951 of “Project Lincoln,” a huge program, funded by 
the air force to the tune of $20 million, charged with the task of 
making such a system a reality. The Lincoln Laboratory, which 
was housed on the grounds of MIT and then on a purpose-built 
site about fifteen miles northwest of Boston, opened in September 
1951 with Francis Wheeler Loomis as its first director. After a 
year—by which time the laboratory was employing more than 
1,000 people—Loomis handed over to Albert G. Hill, who, like 
Loomis, had spent the war working on radar at MIT’s radiation 
laboratory. 

Indeed, the reason the Lincoln Laboratory had originally been 
based at MIT was to make use of the considerable expertise on 
radar that had been developed there during the war by scientists 
such as Loomis, Hill and, most notably, Oppenheimer’s friend 
Isidor Rabi. For radar was at the very heart of the Lincoln Project, 
its guiding concept—soon to acquire the acronym SAGE (“Semi- 
Automatic Ground Environment”)—being to build a network of 
radars designed to provide early warning of air attacks. The data 
from these radars would be tracked by a series of computers that 
would then be used to guide weapons to destroy the enemy 
aircraft before they were able to drop their bombs. 


The idea of the summer school at the Lincoln Laboratory 
emerged from discussions that Jerrold Zacharias had with 
another friend of Oppenheimer’s, Charlie Lauritsen, in the spring 
of 1952. As Zacharias later recalled, he and Lauritsen were 
concerned about the “technical, military, and economic 
questions” that arose from the program of providing America 
with air defense against nuclear attack, and “decided that we 
should talk this over with certain others whom we knew very 
well.” First they talked to Albert Hill, who was then the associate 
director of Lincoln Laboratory, and then: “We decided we would 
talk it over with Dr. Oppenheimer and Dr. Rabi.” 

The summer school started on July 1, 1952, and lasted for 
about two months, with Oppenheimer, Lauritsen and Rabi 
participating on a part-time basis at the beginning and at the end. 
One of the tasks of the summer school was to consider how and 
where the U.S. was vulnerable to Soviet air attack. They decided 
the greatest vulnerability came from the possibility that Soviet 
bombers might approach the United States by flying directly over 
the North Pole, and so they recommended what became known as 
the “DEW (Distant Early Warning) line.” This was a line of thirty- 
five radar stations, stretching right across the northernmost tip of 
the North American continent, from Alaska in the west to 
Greenland in the east, which would give between three and six 
hours’ warning of any attack from the north. This advice was 
passed on to the air force by Zacharias in September 1952 and 
was acted upon straightaway, so that by the end of that year 
work was under way to construct the radar stations. 

The air force and the Department of Defense were very pleased 
with the advice they received from the summer school and with 
the work done by the Lincoln Project, both of which, it was 
generally agreed, had considerably strengthened the U.S. air- 
defense system. And yet, if all you knew about the summer school 
was the description David Griggs gave of it in his evidence at 
Oppenheimer’s security hearing, you would think it was not a 
well-received study acting on behalf of the U.S. Air Force, but a 
subversive communist plot. Lending considerable credence to 
Oppenheimer’s description of him as “paranoid,” Griggs talked of 
a semi-secret group of four with the name “ZORC” (the letters 
standing for Zacharias, Oppenheimer, Rabi and Charles 
Lauritsen), dedicated to undermining U.S. Strategic Air Command 


under the guise of developing an air-defense system. Some of the 
people involved in the summer school had told him, Griggs said, 
that “in order to achieve world peace,” it was necessary “not only 
to strengthen the Air Defense of the continental United States, but 
also to give up something, and the thing that was recommended 
that we give up was the Strategic Air Command.” 

The suggestion that the U.S. should give up its Strategic Air 
Command upset him, Griggs continued, because he did not think 
the members of the summer school had “the background nor 
were charged with the responsibility of considering in any detail 
or considering at all the fact of the activities of the Strategic Air 
Command.” “I felt that for any group to make such 
recommendations it was necessary that they know as much about 
the Strategic Air Command and the general strategic picture as 
they knew about the Air Defense Command.” 

This anxiety, however, was completely misplaced, since the 
summer school did not, in fact, recommend the abolition of 
Strategic Air Command, as Griggs would later admit in an 
exchange with Oppenheimer’s lawyers that makes clear how 
bizarre his earlier statements were: 


Griccs. I should say what I don’t believe I did say this morning, 
that I believe that as a result of the Lincoln summer study 
our air defense is materially improved. 

Q. Was that the main object of the Lincoln summer study, to 
find ways to improve our air defense? 

Griaes. Yes, sir. 

Q. And did the Lincoln study ever recommend the giving-up of 
any part of our strategic air power? 

Grices. No, not to my knowledge. 


Griggs’s mention of “world peace” possibly indicates a 
confusion on his part between the discussions that took place 
during the Lincoln summer school and the meetings of another 
committee in which Oppenheimer was participating during this 
period, namely the Department of State’s Disarmament Panel. 
This was a panel of consultants appointed by Dean Acheson to 
advise the government in connection with the work of the United 
Nations Disarmament Commission. Besides Oppenheimer, the 
other members of the panel, announced on April 28, 1952, 


included Vannevar Bush and Allen W. Dulles, the deputy director 
of the CIA. 

At their inaugural meeting the panel voted Oppenheimer as its 
chairman. The dominant voice, however, was that of Vannevar 
Bush, who, while serving on the panel, became convinced of the 
view that Fermi and Rabi had proposed in their “minority report” 
in October 1949: namely that the U.S. should attempt to 
negotiate with the USSR a ban on testing (and, therefore, on 
successfully developing) thermonuclear bombs. At the second 
meeting of the Disarmament Panel, held on May 6, 1952, Bush 
raised the possibility of a test ban, which he argued, as Fermi and 
Rabi had argued three years earlier, “would not require 
inspection and control,” since an H-bomb explosion would be so 
easy to detect. Led by Bush, and encouraged from the chair by 
Oppenheimer, the Disarmament Panel thus moved in a direction 
that had been unforeseen by Acheson and, from the point of view 
of Washington’s political and military establishment, was entirely 
unwelcome. 

By the end of the summer of 1952, the panel was convinced not 
only of the wisdom of a negotiated test ban, but also of the 
desirability of postponing the Mike test, scheduled for 
November 1. In a paper submitted to the President in September, 
the panel urged Truman to cancel the test in order to keep alive 
the possibility of negotiating a test ban with the Soviet Union. 
The test was, the panel argued, a “point of no return,” since, 
afterward, the Soviet Union would surely regard any proposal to 
ban thermonuclear testing as motivated simply by the U.S.’s 
desire to stay ahead in the race. Also, the panel suggested, the 
testing of such a powerful bomb would alienate other countries 
besides the Soviet Union, convincing them that the U.S. “is 
irrevocably committed to a strategy of destroying its enemies by 
indiscriminate means and at whatever cost.” 

As well as arguing for a postponement on the grounds of 
international relations, the panel stressed its belief that the test 
was fatally ill timed because it coincided with the presidential 
election, the polling day for which would be November 4, just 
three days after the test was scheduled to take place. Indeed, the 
panel’s report was entitled “The Timing of the Thermonuclear 
Test.” It was widely (and, as it turned out, correctly) expected 
that the Democrats would lose the election, which meant that the 


test would take place just when the U.S. was exchanging one 
administration for another—surely not the best time for the 
country to be crossing a “point of no return.” 

By the summer of 1952, it was more or less clear that the next 
U.S. government would be a Republican one, led by General 
Eisenhower, which was, if anything, less likely than Truman’s 
administration to be receptive to the ideas of the Disarmament 
Panel. For some years a “draft Eisenhower” campaign, with the 
slogan “I like Ike,” had been urging Eisenhower to stand and 
marshaling the considerable popular support that he enjoyed 
throughout the country. Meanwhile Truman, who was becoming 
less and less popular, made it clear that he would not seek 
reelection. After Eisenhower fought his first primary in March 
1952, winning a landslide victory, there was little doubt that he 
would be the Republican candidate, or that he would beat 
whoever the Democrats chose as their candidate, which, in July 
1952, turned out to be Adlai Stevenson. 

In a campaign speech to the American Legion on August 25, 
1952, Eisenhower declared that the U.S. had need of security 
forces “whose destructive and retaliatory power is so great that it 
causes nightmares in the Kremlin whenever they think of 
attacking us.” This commitment to exactly the kind of policy 
against which Oppenheimer had been warning for years was 
made even more explicit in the public statements of John Foster 
Dulles (the brother of Allen W. Dulles, Oppenheimer’s colleague 
on the Disarmament Panel), who was Eisenhower’s Secretary of 
State-elect. In a speech he gave in November 1951, Dulles asked 
rhetorically why the Soviet Union had not attacked Germany or 
Japan, and answered: 


The most reasonable explanation is that the rulers of Russia 
knew that if they indulged in this open aggression in any area 
of vital concern to the United States or which by treaty we 
were bound to defend, their sources and means of power would 
have been visited with incredible means of destruction. Thus 
the free world has been getting the security of deterrent 
striking power. 


In an article that he published in Life magazine called “A Policy 
of Boldness,” Dulles gave what became regarded as the classic 


statement of the doctrine of “massive retaliation.” How, Dulles 
asked, was the U.S. to defend the “free world” against Soviet 
aggression? To attempt to match the Red Army “man for man, 
gun for gun and tank for tank” would, he urged, “mean real 
strength nowhere and bankruptcy everywhere”: 


There is one solution and only one: that is for the free world to 
develop the will and organize the means to retaliate instantly 
against open aggression by Red armies, so that, if it occurred 
anywhere, we could and would strike back where it hurts, by 
means of our choosing. 


The policy Dulles recommended in this article called upon the 
creation “of means to hit with shattering effectiveness the sources 
of power and lines of communication of the Sovietized world.” 
“Today,” he wrote, “atomic power, coupled with strategic air and 
sea power, provides the community of free nations with vast new 
possibilities of organizing a community power to stop open 
aggression before it starts and reduce, to vanishing point, the risk 
of general war.” 

In 1952, the American general public was extremely receptive 
to such views for three reasons: 1. the fear of communism and of 
Soviet expansionism made the American people open to the idea 
that something had to be done to deter the Soviets from further 
acts of aggression; 2. the prolonged, costly and indecisive Korean 
War had made Americans wary of engaging with communist 
armies on the ground; and 3. there was widespread support for 
reducing government spending. The policy of “massive 
retaliation” was successfully sold as a way of meeting all three of 
these objectives: deterring Soviet aggression in a way that did not 
involve either the deaths of U.S. soldiers or the expense of 
maintaining an army and a navy that could conceivably match 
the armies of the Soviet Union and China. In the context of such 
thinking, the development of thermonuclear bombs—the ultimate 
deterrence—seemed to make a good deal of sense. 

The members of the Disarmament Panel, then, were politically 
isolated, with few allies among Truman’s Democrats and even 
fewer among Eisenhower’s Republicans. This did not deter them 
from trying as hard as they could to prevent the U.S. from making 
what they considered to be the potentially catastrophic mistake of 


going ahead with the Mike test. One very powerful—and, as it 
turned out, prescient—reason they gave for not going ahead was 
that the fallout from the test would provide the Soviet Union with 
valuable clues about the Ulam-Teller design. Despite the strength 
of this argument, by the autumn of 1952 practically the only 
person in the whole of the U.S.’s security establishment— 
comprising the GAC, the AEC, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Joint 
Committee on Atomic Energy, the Departments of State and of 
Defense—sympathetic to a ban on H-bomb tests was Isidor Rabi, 
Oppenheimer’s successor as chair of the GAC. Most other 
members of those committees, departments and advisory bodies 
were not only opposed to the idea of a ban, but deeply suspicious 
of it. 

When on October9 the National Security Council met to 
discuss the Disarmament Panel’s paper, there was no support at 
all for its recommendation of a test ban. Indeed, Robert Lovett, 
the Secretary of Defense, clearly felt uncomfortable about even 
discussing such a suggestion. It made him feel vulnerable. The 
minutes of the meeting record that Lovett “felt that any such idea 
should be immediately put out of mind and that any papers that 
might exist on the subject should be destroyed.” Such was the 
shadow cast by Joseph McCarthy during this period. 

Even the more limited proposal that the Mike test be postponed 
until after the presidential election failed to gain many adherents, 
despite being supported by some members of the GAC and AEC. 
Truman himself, though he would not publicly and officially 
change the date, let it be known to the AEC that he “would 
certainly be pleased if technical reasons cause a postponement.” 
One of the commissioners, Eugene Zuckert, was duly sent out to 
Eniwetok to see if any such technical reasons could be found. 
None could, and so, on October 30, the National Security Council 
gave its approval to the series of “Ivy” tests of which Mike was a 
part. 

A day later, at 7:15am. local time on the morning of 
November 1 (still October 31 in the U.S.), the first Ulam-Teller 
hydrogen bomb to be tested exploded on the tiny island of 
Elugelab (less than a mile long, with an area considerably smaller 
than a square mile), at the northernmost tip of the Eniwetok 
Atoll. A few millionths of a second later, the island of Elugelab no 
longer existed; it had been completely vaporized by a blast that 


was measured at ten megatons, 800-1,000 times more powerful 
than the Hiroshima bomb. The fireball from the blast was three 
miles wide, producing heat that, even thirty miles away, felt as if 
someone had opened a hot oven. The blast lifted into the air some 
eighty million tons of earth and seabed that would be deposited 
as fallout all over the world. Several thousand people were there, 
all of them stunned by the enormity of the explosion. “You would 
swear that the whole world was on fire,” wrote one of them to his 
wife. 

One person who was not there was Edward Teller, despite the 
fact that, although he had refused to have anything to do with 
the Los Alamos team that organized and carried out the Mike test, 
he was still regarded as the “father of the H-bomb.” At the time 
the bomb went off Teller was in Berkeley, where a seismograph 
had been set up to monitor the seismic wave that would be 
produced by the explosion. The sound waves took twenty minutes 
to travel from Eniwetok to the California coast, but even so Teller 
was able to estimate the yield of the bomb before anyone at Los 
Alamos had heard anything. With a not entirely appropriate sense 
of paternal pride (the Mike test bomb was, after all, as much 
Marshall Holloway’s “baby” as it was his), Teller sent a telegram 
to his former colleagues, announcing: “It’s a boy.” 

A week after the Mike test, this sense of triumph was notably 
absent among the group of scientists, including Oppenheimer, 
that constituted the Science Advisory Committee to the Office of 
Defense Mobilization. Among them was Lee DuBridge, who was 
strongly inclined to resign from the committee on the grounds 
that, as the decision to go ahead with the Mike test showed, the 
government had no intention of listening to its scientific advisors. 
DuBridge was persuaded to stay, but he was hardly reassured 
when another member of the committee, the president of MIT, 
James R. Killian, leaned over to him and whispered: “Some 
people in the Air Force are going to be after Oppenheimer and 
we've got to know about it and be ready for it.” 

The device that obliterated the island of Elugelab was not a 
deliverable bomb. This is because it used as its fusion-fuel liquid 
deuterium, which boils at 23.5 degrees Kelvin (minus-250 
degrees Celsius). This meant that heavy and unwieldy cryogenic 
equipment—twenty tons of it—had to be used to maintain the 
deuterium at below this extremely low temperature. This, in turn, 


meant that the “bomb” weighed more than eighty tons, about 
twenty times more than the “Little Boy” fission bomb and much 
too heavy to be considered a practical weapon. No one doubted, 
however, that if the Ulam-Teller design worked with liquid 
deuterium, it would also work with lithium-6, which is a solid 
metal, perfectly suited for a practical, deliverable bomb. 

The Mike test could indeed, then, be seen as, in William 
Borden’s phrase, the “thermonuclear Trinity.” Nevertheless, 
through its very success, it confirmed something that 
Oppenheimer and his dwindling (and increasingly isolated) band 
of political supporters had been saying for the previous four 
years: with a yield of ten megatons, the H-bomb was, surely, too 
big to be considered as a military weapon. Who could imagine 
actually using a bomb powerful enough to destroy completely, in 
a single moment, a large city like London or New York? This 
thought seems not to have diminished the sense of triumph felt 
by those responsible for the H-bomb’s development. For Teller, 
particularly, even though he had not been part of the Los Alamos 
team responsible for the Mike test, this was a moment of 
celebration. Having received a detailed report of the test results, 
he decided to go to Princeton to keep his friend John Wheeler up 
to date and to thank him for the support he had given him at a 
time when Teller had felt shunned by other scientists with 
experience of nuclear armaments. 

While Teller was at Princeton, Oppenheimer invited him over 
for a drink at Olden Manor, an occasion remembered by Teller in 
his memoir in the following extraordinary anecdote: 


As we sat in his living room, Oppenheimer commented that 
now we knew the test device worked, we should find a way to 
use it to bring the Korean War to a successful conclusion. I was 
astounded and asked how that could be done. Oppie explained 
that we should build a duplicate device somewhere in Korea 
and force the communist troops to concentrate nearby so that 
the detonation of the device would wipe them all out. 


Then, after he had returned to Chicago, Teller received a phone 
call from Oppenheimer, who asked if he remembered their 
conversation in Princeton: “I assured him that I did. He then 
explained that he just wanted me to know that he had found a 


way to get his suggestion to President Elect Eisenhower.” Teller, 
who “had not thought of the hydrogen bomb as designed for 
battlefield use, except possibly in an extreme crisis,” naturally 
recorded that he “could not understand Oppenheimer’s behavior.” 

The most obvious explanation, surely, is that Oppenheimer was 
pulling Teller’s leg, teasing him about the military uselessness of 
his newborn “boy.” Given that it was too big to transport (as 
Teller himself cheerfully concedes, the Mike device “was so huge 
and clumsy that a hundred oxcarts would barely get it to a 
target!”), it would have to be assembled on the spot where it was 
to be used, and, assuming that its purpose was to attack a military 
target and not to kill millions of civilians in a large city, then the 
scenario described by Oppenheimer to Teller was the only 
conceivable way in which it could be used. Of course, given the 
possibility of using lithium-6 as a fuel, an H-bomb could be made 
that was not vulnerable to exactly this kind of ridicule (if that is 
what it was), but, as we have seen, Oppenheimer did not think a 
transportable H-bomb was a practical military weapon either. 

In the aftermath of the Mike test, Oppenheimer was evidently 
in a provocative frame of mind. The final report of the 
Disarmament Panel, which was delivered to Dean Acheson in 
January 1953, just before Acheson gave way to his Republican 
counterpart, John Foster Dulles, contained several 
recommendations that to Acheson would have been seen as 
misguided, but to Dulles would have been complete anathema. 
While Dulles had made clear his adherence to the policy of 
massive retaliation, the report recommended reducing “our 
commitment to the use of nuclear weapons.” The five main 
proposals of the report were: 1.a policy of greater “candor” 
about nuclear weapons with regard to the American people; 
2. better communication with the U.S.’s allies regarding nuclear 
matters; 3. greater priority and attention to air-defense systems; 
4. withdrawal from the fruitless UN disarmament discussions; 
5. better communications with the Soviet Union. Eisenhower was 
initially surprisingly sympathetic to these proposals, but in the 
month he received them, his first month in office, he took a step 
that would more or less ensure that this report had no impact 
whatsoever on U.S. policy: he appointed Lewis Strauss as his 
atomic-energy advisor. 

Both Strauss and Eisenhower were present when, on February 


17, 1953, Oppenheimer gave a lecture in New York to the 
Council on Foreign Relations that was an abridged, and 
somewhat censored, version of the Disarmament Panel’s report. 
The talk, entitled “Atomic Weapons and American Policy,” is 
notable for the directness of its style and tone—Oppenheimer, for 
once, abandoning his usual allusiveness in favor of plain 
speaking. He later said about himself and his colleagues on the 
Disarmament Panel that in the course of their work they “became 
very vividly and painfully aware of what an unregulated arms 
race would lead to in the course of years,” and it is this awareness 
and a determination to communicate it that, above everything 
else, pervade this talk. 

Oppenheimer begins with the thwarted hope, following “the 
bright light of the first atomic explosion,” that “this might mark, 
not merely the end of a great and terrible war, but the end of 
such wars for mankind.” Again, as he had done many times 
previously, he pins the blame for the thwarting of that hope 
firmly on the Soviet Union: “Openness, friendliness and 
cooperation did not seem to be what the Soviet government most 
prized on this earth.” Once that hope was dashed, Oppenheimer 
goes on, the “Free World” took refuge behind the “shield” of 
nuclear bombs. “The rule for the atom was: ‘Let us stay ahead. 
Let us be sure that we are ahead of the enemy.’ ” However, 
according to Oppenheimer, this rule is no longer sufficient, 
because of the nature of the arms race that it has led to. At this 
point, Oppenheimer makes clear, his mission to communicate the 
perils of that arms race runs aground because of the secrecy to 
which he is opposed, but to which he is nevertheless bound. “It is 
easy to say ‘Let us look at the arms race.’ I must tell about it 
without communicating anything. I must reveal its nature 
without revealing anything; and this I propose to do.” 

Oppenheimer could not, for example, mention the hydrogen 
bomb, nor did he feel able to mention two of the Disarmament 
Panel’s five recommendations (those to do with withdrawing 
from UN discussions and establishing better communication with 
the Soviet Union). This left him with the task of putting the case 
publicly for the other three recommendations, concentrating in 
particular on the first: the need for greater candor. 

“Tt is my opinion,” Oppenheimer told his audience, “that we 
should all know—not precisely, but quantitatively and, above all, 


authoritatively—where we stand in these matters.” For, he said, 
his experience was that when the facts of the matter were 
brought to the attention of “any responsible group,” the result 
was “a great sense of anxiety and somberness.” He estimated the 
Soviet Union to be about four years behind the U.S. in the 
development and stockpiling of more and more powerful nuclear 
weapons, but this was “likely to be small comfort” when it was 
realized that “our twenty-thousandth bomb ... will not in any 
deep strategic sense offset their two-thousandth.” Such was the 
terrifying nature of this arms race. 

One reason Oppenheimer gave for greater candor was the 
importance of allowing the public to reflect, in an informed way, 
on the security policies that were being pursued in their name, 
but the details of which they were not allowed to know. Rather 
bravely, in the face of the political winds then blowing, 
Oppenheimer gave as an example of such a questionable policy 
the plan to use nuclear weapons and “a rather rigid commitment 
to their use in a very massive, initial, unremitting strategic 
assault on the enemy.” This fresh attack on the doctrine of 
massive retaliation, of course, would have been duly noted by 
Strauss, Griggs, Borden and the rest of the military establishment. 

“The prevailing view,” Oppenheimer said, “is that we are 
probably faced with a long period of cold war in which conflict, 
tension and armaments are to be with us.” 


The trouble then is just this: During this period the atomic 
clocks7 ticks faster and faster; we may anticipate a state of 
affairs in which two Great Powers will each be in a position to 
put an end to the civilization and life of the other, though not 
without risking its own. We may be likened to two scorpions in 
a bottle, each capable of killing the other, but only at the risk 
of his own life. 


In such a situation, Oppenheimer insisted: “We need strength to 
be able to ask whether our plans for the use of the atom are, all 
things considered, right or wrong.” And this is where the need for 
openness and candor makes itself clear, since: “We do not operate 
well when the important facts, the essential conditions, which 
limit and determine our choice are unknown. We do not operate 
well when they are known, in secrecy and fear, only to a few 


”? 


men. 

In a startling display of his own candor, Oppenheimer went on 
to give some examples of the foolishness of trusting these “few 
men.” The first was Truman: “It must be disturbing that an ex- 
President of the United States, who has been briefed on what we 
know about the Soviet atomic capability, can publicly call in 
doubt all conclusions from the evidence.” The allusion here is to a 
statement Truman made to the press on January 26, in which he 
said: “I am not convinced Russia has the bomb. I am not 
convinced the Russians have the know-how to put the 
complicated mechanism together to make an A-bomb work. I am 
not convinced they have the bomb.” 

Oppenheimer’s next two examples were clearly identifiable as 
General Groves and Arthur Compton: 


It must be shocking when this doubt, so recently expressed, is 
compounded by two men, one of them a most distinguished 
scientist, who headed one of the great projects of the 
Manhattan District during the war, and one of them a brilliant 
officer, who was in over-all charge of the Manhattan District. 


Compton, when asked about Truman’s skepticism about the 
bomb, had delighted the President by saying that in his view it 
was “problematical” that the Soviets had the bomb, while Groves 
had told the press that the fact that there had been a nuclear 
explosion in Russia “does not prove that they have the bomb in 
workable form.” 

Oppenheimer then went on to cite a less readily identifiable 
“high officer of the Air Defense Command” who had said “only a 
few months ago, in a most serious discussion of measures for the 
continental defense of the United States,” that it was “not really 
our policy to attempt to protect this country, for that is so big a 
job that it would interfere with our retaliatory capabilities.” 
“Such follies,” Oppenheimer added caustically, “can occur only 
when even the men who know the facts can find no one to talk to 
about them, when the facts are too secret for discussion, and thus 
for thought.” 

Having dealt with the need for candor at some length, 
Oppenheimer covered his next two points—the need for greater 
cooperation with allies and the importance of improving air- 


defense systems—much more briefly. He ended on a portentous 
note: “We need to be clear that there will not be many great 
atomic wars for us, nor for our institutions. It is important that 
there not be one.” 

It was an uncompromising and courageous speech. Somewhat 
surprisingly there was, initially at least, some sign that 
Oppenheimer’s views might have an impact on the new 
administration. Eisenhower, impressed by the Disarmament 
Panel’s report, and now by this speech, for the next few months 
encouraged the development of what became known as 
“Operation andor.” The fact that Eisenhower seemed 
sympathetic to Oppenheimer’s views, however, seemed to Lewis 
Strauss and his allies only to make it more urgent and more 
important to combat, and finally to destroy once and for all, 
Oppenheimer’s influence on American policy. 

In the May issue of Fortune magazine appeared an article that 
contained the most sustained and direct assault yet on 
Oppenheimer’s reputation. It was entitled “The Hidden Struggle 
for the H-bomb: The Story of Dr. Oppenheimer’s Persistent 
Campaign to Reverse U.S. Military Strategy,” and began 
dramatically: “A life and death struggle over national military 
policy has developed between a highly influential group of 
American scientists and the military.” The “prime mover” among 
these scientists was identified as Oppenheimer, and the central 
issue at stake the tenability of the doctrine of massive retaliation. 
Oppenheimer, the article stated, had “no confidence in the 
military’s assumption that SAC [Strategic Air Command] as a 
weapon of mass destruction is a real deterrent to Soviet action,” 
and was asking the U.S. “to throw away its strongest weapon for 
defense.” 

The article was published anonymously, but was in fact written 
by Charles Murphy, a reserve officer in the U.S. Air Force and the 
author of a regular column in Fortune called “Defense and 
Strategy.” Just as Murphy’s column invariably presented the air- 
force view and reflected close communication with people at the 
very top of the air force, so this article on Oppenheimer reflected 
at every turn the views of Griggs, Finletter and Strauss. The May 
issue of Fortune would have gone on sale sometime in April, 
which means that the article was most likely written in March, 
soon after Oppenheimer delivered his confrontational speech in 


New York, so it seems natural to assume that its publication 
represented the rising of Strauss and the air force to what they 
saw as Oppenheimer’s public provocation. David Lilienthal 
described the Fortune piece as “another nasty and obviously 
inspired article attacking Robert Oppenheimer in a snide way.” 

Lilienthal, surely rightly, saw the hand of Strauss at work in 
Murphy’s attack on Oppenheimer, but at times it was the hand of 
Griggs that was most evident. Take, for example, this retelling of 
Griggs’s paranoid version of the Lincoln summer school: under 
the byline “ZORC Takes Up the Fight,” Murphy wrote: 


A test of Teller’s thermonuclear device was scheduled for late 
1952 at Eniwetok. Oppenheimer tried to stop the test. In April 
1952, Secretary Acheson appointed him to the State 
Department Disarmament Committee of which he became 
chairman. Here was generated a proposal that the President 
should announce that the United States had decided on 
humanitarian grounds not to bring the weapon to final test and 
that it would regard the detonation of a similar device by any 
other power as an act of war. 

Mr. Truman was not persuaded. That project cost 
Oppenheimer his place on the General Advisory Committee. 
When his term expired that summer he was not reappointed. 
Neither were DuBridge nor Conant who supported him 
throughout. Now came a shift in tactics. At a meeting of 
scientists in Washington that spring there formed around 
Oppenheimer a group calling themselves ZORC, Z for Jerrold 
R. Zacharias, an MIT physicist; O for Oppenheimer; R for Rabi; 
and C for Charles Lauritsen. 


The previous slur campaigns against Oppenheimer had been 
more or less confined to the secluded corridors of power. This 
Fortune article was the first shot in a public campaign against him, 
the beginning of a concerted effort to bring the disputes between 
Oppenheimer and the U.S. military establishment out into the 
open. One predictable consequence was that Oppenheimer’s case 
came to the attention of Joseph McCarthy. On May 11, an FBI 
memo written by assistant director L. B. Nichols records that 
McCarthy’s aide, Roy Cohn, had called him to ask what he 
thought about the McCarthy committee (the Senate Permanent 


Subcommittee on Investigations, to give it its official name) 
“calling in Oppenheimer and launching an_ investigation.” 
Nichols, the memo records, told Cohn “not to be precipitous.” 
The next day, Cohn and McCarthy visited J. Edgar Hoover to 
discuss the possibility of investigating Oppenheimer. In an 
internal FBI memo, Hoover explained how he had put McCarthy 
off by telling him that “a great deal of preliminary spade work” 
would need to be undertaken before going public with an 
investigation of someone as eminent and influential as 
Oppenheimer. Strauss, with whom Hoover was working closely 
with regard to Oppenheimer, subsequently wrote to Senator 
Robert Taft, asking him to block any attempt by McCarthy to 
investigate Oppenheimer. “The McCarthy committee is not the 
place for such an investigation,” Strauss wrote, “and the present 
is not the time.” Strauss was determined to strip Oppenheimer of 
his security clearance and did not want his carefully laid plans 
ruined by the far less meticulous operations of the senator from 
Wisconsin. 

Oppenheimer’s one-year contract as a consultant to the AEC 
was due to expire at the end of June 1953, and Strauss was very 
concerned to see that it was not renewed. In this he had a 
powerful ally in the FBI, the surviving files of which record what 
amounts to a conspiracy to oust Oppenheimer from government. 
On May 25, another assistant director, D.M. Ladd, wrote to 
Hoover to tell him that “Admiral Strauss” had been to see him 
because he is “still concerned about the activities of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer.” In particular, Ladd wrote, Strauss was concerned 
to see that Oppenheimer had an appointment to see President 
Eisenhower that week. “The Admiral was wondering whether 
there was any objection to his briefing President Eisenhower very 
generally with reference to Oppenheimer’s background when he, 
Strauss, sees the President at 3:30 this afternoon.” Ladd had told 
Strauss that the Bureau “certainly had no objection to his briefing 
the President,” and that, of course, he was welcome to use 
Oppenheimer’s FBI file for that briefing. 

That afternoon, at his meeting with the President, Strauss was 
invited to become the next chairman of the AEC. Having provided 
Eisenhower with a “briefing” about Oppenheimer’s background, 
Strauss replied that he “could not do the job at the AEC if 
Oppenheimer was connected in any way with the program.” Two 


days later, when Oppenheimer arrived for his appointment at the 
White House, he, in turn, gave the President a briefing, this time 
about Operation Candor. In the light of his earlier conversation 
with Strauss, however, Eisenhower’s enthusiasm—both for 
Operation Candor and for Oppenheimer—was on the wane, and, 
sometime after Oppenheimer had left, Eisenhower told his aide 
C.D. Jackson (who happened to be the publisher of Fortune 
magazine) that he “did not completely trust” Oppenheimer. 

In his war against Oppenheimer, Strauss was winning. He did 
not have it all his own way, though. It was still, officially, 
government policy to pursue (or at least to investigate the 
viability of pursuing) both Operation Candor and the other 
recommendations of the Disarmament Panel, which is why on 
June 5 it was decided, despite Strauss’s vigorously and repeatedly 
expressed objections, to renew Oppenheimer’s consultancy 
contract with the AEC for another year. He would thus have 
security clearance and, potentially, some influence on U.S. atomic 
policy until June 30, 1954. The day that decision was taken, say 
the authors of a long and detailed history of the AEC, “was 
perhaps the most fateful date in Robert Oppenheimer’s life.” 
Their remark is based on an observation of Lewis Strauss, who 
pointed out: “It was this contract which involved the AEC in the 
clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer and which required that the 
Commission, rather than some other agency of the Government, 
be made responsible to hear and resolve the charges against 
him.” 

Despite what he had said to Eisenhower, Strauss did accept the 
chairmanship of the AEC even though Oppenheimer was still 
connected with it. According to an FBI memo, Strauss 
“reluctantly agreed to accept the post of chairman of the Atomic 
Energy Commission effective July 1, 1953,” but only after the 
President had “drafted” him “against his wishes”: 


Strauss was advised that the Bureau desired to work closely 
with him in his new duties with the AEC. He commented that 
the only bright part in his taking over these new difficult duties 
was the fact that the FBI had been most cooperative with him 
and he felt he could rely on the Director and the Bureau in 
matters of mutual interest. 


Within a week of taking up his duties as chairman Strauss 
ordered the removal from Oppenheimer’s office at Princeton of 
all classified AEC documents, ostensibly to save the expense of 
hiring a security guard to protect them. 

Meanwhile, in an effort to keep the recommendations of the 
Disarmament Panel alive, Oppenheimer had his New York 
lecture, “Atomic Weapons and American Policy,” published in 
two separate places in the summer of 1953. It appeared in the 
July issues of both Foreign Affairs and the Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, the journals being chosen, no doubt, in order to 
maximize the exposure of his views to both politicians and 
scientists. What the appearance of the Fortune article in May 
signaled, however, was that Strauss was winning his war against 
Oppenheimer among the media as well as among the politicians, 
for the owner and editor-in-chief of Fortune was Henry Luce, who 
was also owner and editor-in-chief of both Time and Life. The 
days of those two latter magazines carrying long, admiring 
profiles of Oppenheimer were over. 

Indeed, on the occasion of Strauss’s appointment as chair of the 
AEC, Time published an admiring, albeit short, profile of him. 
Under the heading “Dissenter’s Return,” the piece made clear 
where the magazine’s sympathies now lay in the battle between 
Strauss and Oppenheimer: 


To Dissenter Strauss, more than any other man, the U.S. owes 
its possession of the hydrogen bomb. In 1950, after a long fight 
against the combined forces of prestige-heavy atomic scientists 
such as Dr. Robert Oppenheimer and all other Atomic Energy 
commissioners save Gordon Dean, Strauss persuaded Harry 
Truman that the U.S. should proceed with construction of the 
H-bomb. 

Weary of his constant battle with the other commissioners, 
Strauss resigned from the AEC in 1950, and returned to New 
York to become financial adviser to the Rockefellers. Last 
week, as he prepared to move back into the AEC building, 
Lewis Strauss was hailed by Democrats and Republicans alike 
as one of the President’s best appointments. 


Oppenheimer’s campaign for openness, disarmament and 
dialogue with the Soviet Union received a devastating setback in 


August 1953, when it was announced that the Soviets had tested 
their first hydrogen bomb. Nicknamed “Joe 4,” the Soviet device, 
having a yield of “only” 400 kilotons, was a puny thing compared 
to the ten-megaton Mike blast, but, in other respects, it was 
possible to argue that the Soviets were ahead in the arms race. 
For Joe 4 used lithium-6 deuteride as its fuel, which meant that, 
unlike Mike, it was a deployable bomb. On the other hand, its 
basic design was crude compared to the technical “sweetness” of 
the Ulam-Teller bomb, and some comfort could be taken from the 
fact that, until the Soviets discovered what Ulam and Teller had 
discovered—namely that radiation, rather than neutrons, should 
be used to bring about the fusion reaction—they would not be 
able to develop a “true” H-bomb—that is, one with a yield in the 
megaton range. However, whatever comfort this provided was 
dispelled by the realization that it was only a matter of time 
before the Soviet scientists discovered the principle of the Ulam- 
Teller design, and the sheer fear induced by the brute fact that 
the Soviet Union had the H-bomb. Those who had argued that the 
U.S. should develop the Super quickly before the Soviets got 
there, it now seemed, had had their view confirmed. 

In the wake of the news of the Soviet H-bomb, the chances of 
Oppenheimer getting a sympathetic hearing for Operation Candor 
shrank to almost zero. The September 7 edition of Life magazine 
carried an editorial discussing Oppenheimer’s “Atomic Weapons 
and American Policy,” which it characterized as presenting “the 
opposition to present U.S. policy.” What was meant by “present 
U.S. policy,” it seems, was massive retaliation: 


We have supposed the only major deterrent to atomic 
aggression is our ability to hit back even harder—to apply 
swift and terrible retribution. But this policy Dr. Oppenheimer 
implies is a spur or a goad to the Soviet Union. As an 
alternative, Dr. Oppenheimer calls for a heroic effort to 
improve our atomic defenses ... 

His argument is an echo of an old line of appeasement for 
which there is in the world a curious lingering nostalgia ... no 
purely defensive effort, however mighty, can ever deter an 
aggressor bent on atomic attack. 

This would seem to leave us no choice at all but steadily to 
build our air fleets and our atomic stockpiles. Any change in 


accent or emphasis that detracts from our power to hit back 
weakens our hand in the world. 


A month later, following Eisenhower’s statement that, in light 
of the fact that “the Soviets now have the capability of atomic 
attack on us,” the U.S. did not intend “to disclose the details of 
our strength in atomic weapons of any sort,” the Life editorial 
declared: 


First, it can be inferred, hopefully, that we have heard the end 
of “Operation Candor.” That half-baked phrase, implying that 
the public have hitherto been deceived, had two versions. One, 
recommended by J. Robert Oppenheimer, would have 
disclosed military secrets, such as the size of our atomic 
stockpile, which Chairman Strauss says would be much more 
meaningful to Soviet strategists than to American opinion. This 
Eisenhower has decided against. 


Two weeks later the cover of Time magazine featured none 
other than “U.S. Atom Boss Lewis Strauss.” The article 
accompanying the front cover began with a description of the 
“radioactive air mass from Siberia” that indicated the Russians 
had exploded a thermonuclear bomb. “To a quiet, courtly 
Virginian of deep religious faith and independent character,” the 
article went on, “the cloud was a vindication of a rather lonely 
fight.” 


Had it not been for Strauss’s personal convictions about 
Russian intentions, back in late 1949, the U.S. might have had 
no thermonuclear superbomb of its own. Conceivably, the new 
Russian bomb could have been hurled on the world as an 
unchallengeable ultimatum, could by this week have changed 
the political balance of power around the world. 


At the end of October 1953, the commitment of the U/S. 
government to a policy of massive retaliation was made official 
when the President gave his approval to the policies outlined in 
the National Security Council policy document NSC 162/2. The 
“primary threat to the security, free institutions, and fundamental 
values of the United States,” the document says, is posed by the 
Soviet Union. Stalin may have died, and there may continue to be 


in the short term some uncertainty about who will replace him, 
but: “The Soviet leaders can be expected to continue to base their 
policy on the conviction of irreconcilable hostility between the 
bloc and the non-communist world.” 

In addition: “The capability of the USSR to attack the United 
States with atomic weapons had been continuously growing and 
will be materially enhanced by hydrogen weapons.” Air defense 
will be useful, “but will not eliminate the chance of a crippling 
blow.” In the face of the Soviet threat, the policy document 
declares, the security of the United States requires the 
development and maintenance of “a strong military posture, with 
emphasis on the capability of inflicting massive retaliatory 
damage by offensive striking power.” The ideas that 
Oppenheimer had spent the last four years arguing against were 
now explicitly embodied in U.S. policy. Meanwhile, those who 
considered Oppenheimer to be not simply mistaken, but actually 
treasonous, were moving in for the kill. 


62 Within the next two decades this would grow to more than 200. 

63 In 1950, in an unprecedented and unrepeated foray into biology, he 
published a short, cowritten article entitled “Internal Conversion in the 
Photosynthetic Mechanism of Blue Green Algae.” 

64 It is a surprise to many, particularly in the UK (whose Royal Air Force was 
established in 1918), that the U.S. Air Force only became a separate branch of 
the U.S. military as late as September 1947. Before that the air service had 
been part of the army. 

65 That phrase was remembered by Teller. Whatever else was in the letter is 
lost to history, since, rather oddly, it does not survive among the many boxes 
of correspondence that Oppenheimer diligently filed and preserved. Conant’s 
biographer, James G. Hershberg, has speculated—plausibly, to my mind—that 
Conant asked Oppenheimer to destroy it. 

66 This burden seems also to have influenced other members of the GAC. 
Conant, for example, said at the meeting that he felt he was “seeing the same 
film, and a punk one, for the second time,” while Rowe remarked: “We built 
one Frankenstein.” 

67 Though this talk is not generally allusive, this mention of an atomic clock is 
an allusion. It alludes to the “doomsday clock” that appeared on every cover of 
the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists from June 1947 onward. The closer the clock 
is to midnight, the closer the threat of global nuclear war. The February 1953 
issue of the Bulletin showed the clock at two minutes to midnight, the closest it 
had ever been. 


Falsus in unoe6s 


illiam Borden’s time as executive 
director of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy finished at the 


end of May 1953. A week or two before he left, while he still had 
security clearance, he was given Oppenheimer’s AEC security file 
by Strauss in order to make a close study of it. After he left the 
committee he no longer had any kind of government job, and 
should therefore have given the file back. However, quite 
illegally, Strauss let him keep it for a further three months. Ever 
since Strauss had been told that Klaus Fuchs had not acted alone, 
that there had been another Soviet spy at Los Alamos, he had 
suspected that Oppenheimer was that second spy, and he was 
hoping that Borden would be able to substantiate that claim 
sufficiently well for a solid case to be made for stripping 
Oppenheimer of his security clearance. 

As he studied the FBI file, Borden became obsessed with the 
details of the case, which, he came to believe, pointed to the 
conclusion that Oppenheimer was indeed a Soviet agent. In the 
autumn of 1953 Borden prepared his own summary of the 
evidence, which, at just three and a half pages, was much shorter 
than the various FBI summaries and, Borden believed, much 
clearer. On November 7, he sent his summary to J. Edgar Hoover, 
telling him: “The purpose of this letter is to state my own 
exhaustively considered opinion, based upon years of study of the 
available classified evidence, that more probably than not 
J. Robert Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union.” His 
summary organizes the evidence into four groups, though it is not 
entirely clear what the organizing principle is. The first group 
lists all the evidence that Oppenheimer—through his friends, his 
colleagues, his brother, his wife and his “mistress” (Jean Tatlock) 


—had close links with the Communist Party. The second group 
consists mostly of things that have little or no bearing on the 
question of whether or not he was a Soviet agent (for example, 
“In April 1942 his name was formally submitted for security 
clearance”), except the last, which accuses Oppenheimer of 
having lied to Groves and the FBI. The third group is mostly 
about the sharp difference between Oppenheimer’s attitudes to 
the atomic and hydrogen bombs before the war (when he was 
enthusiastic about them) and after the war (when his enthusiasm 
for them evaporated). And the fourth group concerns 
Oppenheimer’s alleged use of his influence in the postwar period 
to retard U.S. defense projects, most notably the development of 
the hydrogen bomb. 

None of this, of course, amounted to evidence that 
Oppenheimer had acted as a Soviet agent, and nor was any of it 
news to Hoover. Perhaps for that reason Hoover waited nearly 
three weeks before doing anything with Borden’s letter. During 
that time, suspicions about Oppenheimer were being raised all 
over Washington and beyond. On November 12, the Evening Star 
newspaper ran a story under the heading “FBI Report on Vast Spy 
Ring Shocked U.S. Leaders in 1945,” which contained the 
statement: “A top atomic scientist was a Communist and had been 
approached to furnish atomic bomb secrets from the Manhattan 
Project to the Soviet Consulate in San Francisco through 
professors at the University of California.” As an FBI memo of 
November 18 concedes, this information came from a 1945 
summary of Soviet espionage in the United States that the FBI 
had leaked to HUAC. “In addition,” the memo says, “it appears 
members of the press have been informed of the material 
appearing in the summary.” 

Around the same time, Borden sent versions of his letter to 
various members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, who 
in turn showed it to the Republican senator Bourke B. 
Hickenlooper, a man known as a fervent anti-communist. 
Evidently Borden was anxious that his letter be acted upon. The 
pressure on Hoover to do something with Borden’s letter mounted 
when, on November 24, Joseph McCarthy—whose interest in 
Oppenheimer was by this time well known—delivered a speech, 
broadcast on both radio and television, in which he accused the 
Eisenhower administration of “whining, | whimpering 


appeasement” in its dealings with communists. Three days later, 
Hoover distributed copies of Borden’s letter to the President, 
Attorney General Herbert Brownell, Defense Secretary Charles 
Wilson and Lewis Strauss. On December 3, Eisenhower ordered 
that a “blank wall” be constructed separating Oppenheimer from 
atomic secrets. From that day on, Oppenheimer’s security 
clearance was suspended. 

Oppenheimer himself had been in London since early 
November and was blithely unaware of Borden’s letter to Hoover 
and the chain of events it had set off. The suspension of 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance was for the moment kept 
secret, not only from the press, but also from Oppenheimer 
himself, who, the FBI believed, might flee to the Soviet Union if 
he knew what was happening in Washington. Oppenheimer had 
gone to London in order to give the Reith Lectures, a series of six 
talks sponsored each year by the BBC. To be chosen as a Reith 
Lecturer was a great honor, and Oppenheimer attracted a good 
deal of publicity. A photograph in the Sunday Express on 
November 15, 1953, shows the forty-nine-year-old wandering 
alone through London’s Mayfair district, wearing an expensive- 
looking three-piece suit and his famous pork-pie hat, with a 
cigarette in his left hand. The accompanying text, ironically, 
concentrates on his freedom: “He moves about as a free man. 
Free, that is, from the hordes of G-men who dogged his steps 
when he went to France and Germany in 1951.” In fact, his every 
step was being watched by the FBI. 

The following week, Oppenheimer was the subject of an 
admiring profile in The Observer, which unwittingly contained 
some phrases that would have struck an ominous note back in 
Washington: 


He is said to have done more than anyone to make 
Congressmen understand the implications of nuclear fission. 
Like most of his colleagues, he was appalled by the destructive 
power which had been unleashed, and his first reaction was to 
suppose that the atom bomb made future wars unthinkable and 
national sovereignty obsolete. He was an early advocate of 
sharing the secrets with Russia, and of jointly controlling the 
manufacture of bombs...In public and private he has 
constantly opposed the United States policy of extreme secrecy 


in atomic matters. 


As for the Reith Lectures themselves, they were generally 
regarded by their British audience as something of a 
disappointment. As The Economist put it: “Something different 
was expected from the man who had engineered the mightiest 
scientific experiment in history.” The advertised aim of the 
lectures, the overall title of which was “Science and the Common 
Understanding,” was to examine “what there is new in atomic 
physics that is relevant, helpful and inspiriting for men to know,” 
but this promised more novelty than Oppenheimer delivered. The 
disappointment was “at finding that the ideas expressed are, on 
the whole, familiar ones.” What Oppenheimer had to say turned 
out to be “an oft-told tale.” By “new in atomic physics” 
Oppenheimer seemed to mean “atomic physics as it was thirty 
years ago,” since his focus was on the “heroic period” of quantum 
physics in the 1920s, and even then he spent a long time getting 
there. His first lecture was on Newton, his second on Rutherford 
and his third on Bohr and the “old” quantum theory. Only in the 
fourth lecture did he get on to the wave-particle duality at the 
heart of quantum mechanics, together with the notion that was 
always at the heart of his thinking: complementarity. The fifth 
lecture attempts to show how the notion of complementarity can 
be applied outside physics, to an understanding of human nature 
and society, for example; and the sixth lecture rounds the whole 
thing off with a series of more or less empty platitudes, such as 
the following, which is the concluding sentence: 


For us as for all men, change and eternity, specialization and 
unity, instrument and final purpose, community and individual 
man alone, complementary each to the other, both require and 
define our bonds and our freedom. 


Rarely have so many words been used to say so little. The 
contrast, both in style and content, with “Atomic Weapons and 
American Policy” could not be greater. There, he had something 
urgent to say that he wanted to communicate as clearly as 
possible; here, in the Reith Lectures, his wordy and obscure style 
seems designed to disguise the fact that he really has nothing to 
say. Robert Crease’s damning phrase about Oppenheimer’s public 


lectures—that they are “rhetorically evocative and conceptually 
stagnant”—is in general somewhat unfair, but about the Reith 
Lectures it is devastatingly accurate. 

Only twice does Oppenheimer’s style free itself from the 
verbose torpor that characterizes the lectures as a whole. The first 
time is in the second lecture, when he takes a digression from 
Rutherford to talk about more recent developments, describing 
how “the story of sub-nuclear matter began to unfold and 
ramify”: 


A whole new family of hitherto unknown, and, for the most 
part, unrecognised and unexpected objects began to emerge 
from the nuclear encounters. The first of these were the various 
mesons, some charged and some uncharged, about ten times 
lighter than the proton and some hundreds of times heavier 
than the electron. In the last years there have appeared in 
increasing variety objects heavier than the mesons, other 
objects heavier even than protons, whose names are still being 
changed from month to month, by solemn conferences. 
Physicists call them vaguely, and rather helplessly, “the new 
particles.” They are without exception unstable, as in the 
neutron. They disintegrate after a time which varies from one 
millionth to less than a billionth of a second into other lighter 
components. Some of these components are in turn unfamiliar 
to physics and are themselves in turn unstable. We do not 
know how to give a clear meaning to this question. We do not 
know why they have the mass and charge they do, or anything 
much about them. They are the greatest puzzle in today’s 
physics. 


If only, one can imagine the British audiences thinking, he had 
chosen this as his subject. 

The second time the lectures come to life is when Oppenheimer 
touches on the question of whether there will ever be a scientific 
explanation of consciousness. “It seems rather unlikely,” he says, 
“that we shall be able to describe in physio-chemical terms the 
physiological phenomena which accompany a conscious thought 
or sentiment, or will.” 


Today the outcome is uncertain. Whatever the outcome, we 


know that, should an understanding of the physical correlate of 
elements of consciousness indeed be available, it will not be 
the appropriate description for the thinking man himself, for 
the clarification of his thoughts, the resolution of his will, or 
the delight of his eye and mind at works of beauty. Indeed an 
understanding of the complementary nature of conscious life 
and its physical interpretation appears to me a lasting element 
in human understanding and a proper formulation of the 
historic views called psycho-physical parallelism. 


When the lectures were over, Oppenheimer and Kitty went first 
to Copenhagen to see Bohr and then to Paris, where, with 
security officers watching their every step, they called on the 
person who, of all the people in the world, Oppenheimer should 
not have been seen visiting at this time: Haakon Chevalier. 
Chevalier had been living in Paris for three years, working as a 
translator. “It was a happy reunion,” Chevalier later remembered. 
The next day, he took Oppenheimer to meet André Malraux and 
listened “to an extraordinary dialogue between these two men, so 
different in mind and temperament, but each supreme in his 
field.” The conversation got on to Einstein, and Oppenheimer 
shocked both Malraux and Chevalier by remarking: “It is very sad 
for us who are close to Einstein and have such enormous respect 
for his early contribution, to have to say that for the past twenty- 
five years Einstein has done no science.” 

Oppenheimer and Kitty returned from Europe on December 13, 
1953. Waiting for Oppenheimer was an urgent message to call 
Strauss as soon as he could. When Oppenheimer called him the 
next day, Strauss told him “it might be a good idea” for them to 
meet in the next day or two. Having been told by the FBI that 
they needed more time to examine Borden’s letter, however, 
Strauss got in touch with Oppenheimer and put off their meeting 
till December 21. This gave Strauss time to consult others on how 
to deal with Oppenheimer. At a high-level meeting at the Oval 
Office on December 18, involving Vice President Nixon and Allen 
Dulles of the CIA, it was decided to present Oppenheimer with 
the charges against him and offer him two possible responses: he 
could either resign as an AEC consultant or he could appeal 
against the suspension of his security clearance in front of a panel 
appointed by Strauss. 


When Oppenheimer arrived at Strauss’s office on the afternoon 
of December 21, he was met by both Strauss and General Kenneth 
Nichols, the recently appointed general manager of the AEC. 
Nichols had known Oppenheimer ever since the early days of the 
Manhattan Project and had developed an antipathy toward him 
almost as strong as Strauss’s. After a few pleasantries about the 
recent sudden death of Deak Parsons, Strauss told Oppenheimer 
that, in the light of a presidential order of April 27, 1953, 
requiring the reevaluation of all individuals about whom there 
was “derogatory information” in their files, his security clearance 
had been suspended. It seems strange that Oppenheimer did not 
point out, upon hearing this, that his most recent reappointment 
as a consultant in June 1953 had occurred after this presidential 
order and so was presumably in accordance with its 
requirements, but he was evidently too shocked to think clearly. 
In any case he possibly did not have time to react in this way 
before Strauss followed up this shock with an even worse one. A 
letter had been drafted, Strauss told Oppenheimer, listing all the 
charges against him. The letter, which ran to eight pages, was 
then handed to Oppenheimer. 

Written, but not yet signed, by General Nichols, the letter 
consisted of yet another summary of Oppenheimer’s FBI file, 
running once more over the list of communist front organizations 
to which he had belonged in the 1930s and ’40s, the number of 
communists among his family and friends, his opposition to the 
hydrogen bomb and, above all, the Chevalier Affair and 
Oppenheimer’s delay in reporting it, all of which, the letter 
alleged, “raise questions as to your veracity, conduct and even 
your loyalty.” “Accordingly,” the letter continued, “your 
employment on Atomic Energy Commission work and your 
eligibility for access to restricted data are hereby suspended, 
effective immediately.” Finally, the letter informed Oppenheimer 
that, if he wanted to contest these charges and the suspension of 
his security clearance, he had the “privilege” of appearing before 
an AEC personal security board. Strauss gave Oppenheimer as 
little leeway as possible in responding to this letter, allowing him 
only until the following day to decide whether or not to take up 
his “privilege” and refusing his request for a copy of the letter. It 
seems that Strauss and Nichols hoped Oppenheimer would resign, 
in which case the as-yet-unsigned letter could be destroyed and 


forgotten about. 

Obviously shaken by the turn of events, Oppenheimer, after 
leaving Strauss’s office, went to see Joe Volpe, the former AEC 
lawyer, the two of them being joined soon afterward by 
Oppenheimer’s own lawyer, Herb Marks. Unknown to them, their 
conversation was recorded by hidden microphones installed at 
Strauss’s request. At the end of the evening Oppenheimer took the 
train back to Princeton to talk it over with Kitty. Shortly after 
noon the next day, he received a call from Nichols, telling him he 
had just three more hours to reach a decision. An hour later, 
Oppenheimer called back to tell Nichols that he would give his 
decision in person the following morning. 

That afternoon Oppenheimer and Kitty traveled to Washington, 
where, together with Marks and Volpe, they drafted a letter 
rejecting the idea that he should resign, on the grounds that such 
an action “would mean that I accept and concur in the view that I 
am not fit to serve this government that I have served now for 
some twelve years. This I cannot do.” Rather than implicitly 
concede his guilt, he would subject himself to the ordeal of a 
security hearing. In the meantime, his access to restricted 
documents would remain suspended, as was forcibly brought 
home to him two days _ later—Christmas Eve—when 
representatives of the AEC arrived in Princeton with a letter 
telling Oppenheimer that he was “hereby directed to deliver” all 
remaining AEC documents in his possession. The same day, he 
received the letter from General Nichols that he had looked 
through in Strauss’s office. This time it was signed. 

On January 1, 1954, in accordance with the wishes of Strauss, 
the telephones in Oppenheimer’s home and Princeton office were 
tapped and he himself was put under close surveillance, followed 
wherever he went. When the FBI agent in Newark found himself 
listening to conversations between Oppenheimer and his lawyers, 
he contacted Hoover’s office expressing concern about the 
legality and propriety of the procedure, “in view of the fact that it 
might disclose attorney-client relations.” As disclosing attorney— 
client relations was precisely the point of the surveillance (Strauss 
was reported to have commented to an FBI agent that “the 
Bureau’s technical coverage on Oppenheimer at Princeton had 
been most helpful to the AEC in that they were aware beforehand 
of the moves he was contemplating”), the agent was reassured 


that it was all right, that such surveillance was necessary to alert 
the authorities to any plans Oppenheimer might have to flee the 
country. 

In the New Year of 1954, Oppenheimer, advised by both Marks 
and Volpe, considered who should represent him at the hearing. 
Volpe thought he needed a trial lawyer, someone with experience 
of the cut and thrust of the courtroom. Marks, on the other hand, 
influenced partly by the fact that the hearing was, officially at 
any rate, not actually a trial, but rather an inquiry, thought 
Oppenheimer needed someone eminent and _ distinguished, 
instead of a tough courtroom fighter. So it was that the genteel 
Lloyd Garrison was chosen. Garrison lacked courtroom 
experience, but was from a distinguished family and was an 
extremely educated man. In his spare time he read philosophy 
and Greek literature. 

“The fact that this clearance has been suspended is presently 
classified information,” Nichols had emphasized in a letter 
circulated to the army, navy, air force and AEC installations. 
Nevertheless, news of it began to spread around Washington in 
early January. On January 2, Rabi, in his role as chairman of the 
GAC, went to see Strauss to tell him that he hoped the security 
board would “whitewash Oppenheimer,” a suggestion that 
Strauss dismissed out of hand. Not long afterward Vannevar Bush 
told Strauss that news of Oppenheimer’s suspension and 
forthcoming hearing was “all over town.” 

On January 25, Oppenheimer went to Rochester to attend the 
fourth in the series of conferences there on high-energy physics. 
The conference lasted three days and concentrated mainly on the 
properties of the unstable “new particles” that Oppenheimer had 
described in his Reith Lectures as “the greatest puzzle in today’s 
physics.” One important recent development in this field much 
discussed during the conference was the classification of some of 
those particles into two categories: hyperons, which are heavier 
than neutrons (an example is the Lambda hyperon, which decays 
into a proton and a negatively charged pi-meson), and K- 
particles, which are intermediate in mass between a proton and a 
pi-meson. What Oppenheimer had described a few years earlier 
as the “particle zoo” was showing no signs of becoming either 
less puzzling or less interesting. 

Oppenheimer not only took part in the discussion of this 


conference, but also chaired its opening session on “Nucleon- 
Nucleon Scattering and Polarization.” According to Jeremy 
Bernstein, Oppenheimer even played a “leading role” at the 
conference, though he adds: “I don’t know how closely he had 
been following the physics.” Those taking notes at the conference 
were, Bernstein says, at pains “to record Oppenheimer’s often 
Delphic remarks.” When he reread those remarks, one thing that 
struck Bernstein was “just how gratuitously nasty Oppenheimer 
could be when he thought his time was being wasted”: 


My thesis adviser, the late Abraham Klein, who was then a 
young, very junior faculty member at Harvard, gave one of the 
lectures. He came to a problem and inquired if it was safe to 
assume that everyone was familiar with it. The notes read: 
“Oppenheimer remarked that it was not safe to assume that 
everybody was familiar with this, but it was also not safe to 
assume that this is any reason for discussing it.” 


Abraham Pais was there, too, and also reread the notes taken at 
the conference. What struck him was “how unusually quiet 
Robert had been at that time.” 

Neither Pais nor Bernstein knew about the suspension of 
Oppenheimer’s clearance and his imminent security hearing, 
though there were several there who did, among them Edward 
Teller. “I’m sorry to hear about your trouble,” Teller told 
Oppenheimer when they met between sessions. “I suppose, I 
hope, that you don’t think that anything I did has sinister 
implications?” Oppenheimer replied. When Teller assured him 
that he did not, Oppenheimer asked him if he would speak to his 
new attorney, Garrison. At this point Oppenheimer knew nothing 
about Teller’s meetings with FBI agents, and Teller knew nothing 
about the Chevalier Affair. When Teller met Garrison (and 
Marks), therefore, the issue that figured most in_ their 
conversation was the hydrogen bomb, in connection with which 
Teller was able to assure them that, though he and Oppenheimer 
disagreed, he did not think Oppenheimer was disloyal. After his 
meeting with Oppenheimer’s lawyers, Teller later said, he left 
with the determination that “I would testify that Oppenheimer 
was a loyal citizen.” Garrison, however, decided that Teller’s 
dislike of Oppenheimer was so intense and so obvious “that I 


finally concluded not to call him as a witness.” 

By this time Strauss had chosen his own lawyer to represent the 
AEC at the hearing. The man in question was Roger Robb, who 
had a reputation as one of Washington’s toughest trial lawyers. 
Almost immediately Robb was granted an “emergency Q 
clearance,” which enabled him to immerse himself in 
Oppenheimer’s FBI files, as a result of which he became 
convinced that “Oppenheimer was a Communist and a Russian 
sympathizer.” Having read through the FBI material, Robb flew 
out to California to meet some of the scientists—Teller, Alvarez, 
Lawrence, Pitzer and Wendell Latimer—who were on record as 
having doubts about Oppenheimer’s loyalty. However, the 
strategy he was developing would in fact focus less on 
Oppenheimer’s alleged disloyalty, which, Robb knew, would be 
difficult (if not impossible) to prove, than on his “veracity,” 
legitimate doubts about which would be very easy to 
demonstrate: all one had to do was to draw the hearing’s 
attention again and again to the Chevalier Affair and to 
Oppenheimer’s documented lies on the subject. He intended to 
mention the affair as early as possible at the hearing. “My 
theory,” he later said, “was that if I could shake Oppenheimer at 
the beginning, he would be apt to be more communicative 
thereafter.” 

Garrison, meanwhile, was unable to study the FBI file since he 
did not have clearance. In January he applied for clearance on 
behalf of himself and his two colleagues, Herb Marks and Sam 
Silverman. When the AEC replied that they were willing to clear 
Garrison but not Marks and Silverman, Garrison responded by 
withdrawing his application for clearance. It was a fatal error, 
Garrison’s justification for which reveals a fundamental 
misunderstanding of what he and Oppenheimer were up against. 
“We thought,” Garrison said: 


that if we had clearance, the Personal Security Board might 
more readily be drawn into an examination of the technical 
pros and cons of proceeding with H-bomb development and 
with other aspects of defense related to it. They could thereby 
lose the main point, which is that if Dr. Oppenheimer’s motives 
were honorable, his technical recommendations were 
irrelevant. 


From the start, Garrison’s defense of Oppenheimer took the 
“whole man” approach, which sought to rise above the “dredging 
up of all these little incidents from his past” by relying on the 
testimony of “men of the highest integrity and reputation,” who 
would vouch that Oppenheimer—considered, as it were, in the 
round—could be entrusted with atomic secrets. If he had known 
what Robb’s strategy was going to be, Garrison would have 
realized that this “whole man” approach was useless, and that the 
possibility of “an examination of the technical pros and cons of 
proceeding with H-bomb development” was the least of his 
worries. 

For, although Borden in his letter to Hoover makes much of 
Oppenheimer’s postwar doubts about the hydrogen bomb, and 
despite the fact that it was Oppenheimer’s attitude to the 
hydrogen bomb that had aroused the suspicion and hostility of 
most of the people Robb would call upon to testify against 
Oppenheimer—Griggs, Teller, Alvarez, and so on—it was never 
Robb’s intention to rest his case on those doubts. Indeed, 
concentrating on Oppenheimer’s views about the hydrogen bomb 
might be counterproductive; it might give the impression that 
Oppenheimer was being attacked for his opinions, which might 
arouse sympathy for him. 

No, Robb’s case against Oppenheimer would center squarely 
upon the Chevalier Affair as a cast-iron demonstration of 
Oppenheimer’s lack of veracity. There was an obvious drawback 
to this approach, which was that Oppenheimer had been cleared 
several times after it had been known that he had delayed 
reporting the Chevalier Affair and that he had lied about it. 
However, between them, Strauss and Robb developed a way of 
overcoming this drawback, based on the claim that, since 
Oppenheimer had been cleared, the rules for granting and 
maintaining security clearance had been changed. 

This is why the letter from Nichols mentions Executive Order 
10450 of April 27, 1953, which, the letter claims, “requires the 
suspension of employment of any individual where there exists 
information indicating that his employment may not be clearly 
consistent with the interests of the national security.” The issues 
at stake here have been discussed very illuminatingly in print by 
Harold Green, who was a legal officer with the AEC at the time of 
the suspension of Oppenheimer’s clearance and who, in fact, 


drafted the letter that was signed by Nichols. In an article he 
published in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists in 1977 entitled 
“The Oppenheimer Case: A Study in the Abuse of Law,” Green 
emphasizes the importance of what he describes as “the 
ideological struggle over the concept of security” that was being 
fought at the time of Oppenheimer’s suspension. 

The struggle was between upholders of two different concepts 
of security: the “Caesar’s wife” concept and the “whole man” 
concept. The phrase “Caesar’s wife” comes from the motto 
“Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion,” which dates from the 
time that Julius Caesar’s second wife, Pompeia, was suspected of 
adultery. Caesar divorced her, not because he believed her to be 
guilty, but merely because the question of her guilt had been 
raised. “My wife,” he famously declared, “ought not even to be 
under suspicion.” 

The “Caesar’s wife” concept of security, in Green’s words, held 
that “if there was any significant derogatory information at all 
that might be true, clearance should not be granted; and there 
was no need to waste time and money in trying to find out 
whether or not the information was true.” The “whole man” 
approach, on the other hand, held that “it was unfair to those 
enmeshed in the security net and to the atomic energy program 
itself to deny security clearance merely on the basis of derogatory 
information without giving the individual an opportunity to set 
the record straight and without considering favorable information 
that might outweigh the blemishes, as well as the importance of 
the individual to the nuclear program.” 

Among the upholders of the “Caesar’s wife” concept were 
J. Edgar Hoover and Lewis Strauss, but, despite this, it was the 
“whole man” concept that prevailed at the AEC, which is how 
Oppenheimer “and others with blemished backgrounds” (in 
Green’s words) were granted clearance. Executive Order 10450, 
however, was, according to Green, “widely interpreted as 
requiring agencies to use the ‘Caesar’s wife’ approach.” The AEC, 
though, was an exception to this requirement, as was made 
explicitly clear in a letter to the AEC from the Deputy Attorney 
General, William P. Rogers, dated June 8, 1953, in which he 
reassured the AEC that, as its preexisting security program 
“exceeds the minimum standards of Executive Order 10450,” no 
change was required in the AEC’s approach to security. In other 


words, the claim that the rules had changed since Oppenheimer 
had previously been cleared was spurious. There was no 
requirement on Strauss and Nichols to apply to Oppenheimer the 
“Caesar’s wife” concept of security that was widely believed to be 
embodied in Executive Order 10450. 

When it came to choosing the members of the Security Board, 
Strauss and the lawyer acting on his behalf, William Mitchell, 
ignored Harold Green’s advice to go for people with experience of 
AEC Personal Security Boards and instead selected people on the 
basis that their hostility to Oppenheimer could more or less be 
assumed. Indeed, says Green: “My knowledge that a ‘hanging 
jury’ was being chosen was one of the reasons that I asked to be 
relieved of any further role in the case.” (The other reason was 
his shocked disapproval of the tactic of bugging Oppenheimer’s 
conversations with his defense team and then making those 
conversations available to Robb.) The first man to be selected for 
the board, and the man chosen to chair it, was Gordon Gray, the 
politically conservative president of the University of South 
Carolina. The other two members were the equally conservative 
Thomas Morgan, chairman of the Sperry Corporation, and Ward 
Evans, a retired chemistry professor, who had served on AEC 
security panels before and had a record of repeatedly voting to 
deny clearance. 

During the first two months of 1954, Oppenheimer, Garrison 
and Marks worked on their “whole man” defense, which had two 
main strands. The first was an autobiography written by 
Oppenheimer that would serve as his reply to Nichols’s letter, 
arguing that the derogatory information listed in this letter 
“cannot be fairly understood except in the context of my life and 
my work.” Second, Garrison would call a series of eminent 
witnesses to vouch for Oppenheimer’s character and loyalty. The 
list of witnesses assembled for this purpose was indeed 
impressive, including as it did ten present or former members of 
the GAC, five former AEC commissioners, two Nobel Prize— 
winning physicists and a third who would win it some years later, 
two Los Alamos security officers and the head of the Manhattan 
Project himself, General Groves. The list of witnesses on the other 
side was much less impressive, consisting of four scientists from 
the University of California, two air-force officers, an air-force 
scientist, one security officer and William Borden. 


Apart from the security officer, Boris Pash, all the witnesses in 
the anti-Oppenheimer camp were restricted to giving testimony 
that related to the postwar period—concerning Oppenheimer’s 
alleged retardation of the hydrogen-bomb project, his attempts to 
undermine the policy of massive retaliation, his opposition to the 
Livermore laboratory and so on—none of which had a very large 
role to play in Robb’s strategy. Besides the reasons detailed above 
for not giving prominence to Oppenheimer’s opposition to the 
hydrogen bomb, a new and powerful reason for not doing so was 
provided on March 1, 1954, when the Bravo test at Bikini Atoll 
seemed to provide a vivid and lethal demonstration that 
Oppenheimer and Conant had been right all along: a hydrogen 
bomb was simply too powerful to be considered as a weapon of 
war. 

The device tested at Bikini, under the supervision of Los 
Alamos rather than the new Livermore laboratory, was a Ulam- 
Teller design H-bomb, using enriched lithium as its fuel. Like the 
Soviet device tested the previous August, this was a usable bomb, 
but, like the Mike blast of November 1952, its yield was 
measured in megatons rather than kilotons. Indeed, at fifteen 
megatons, its yield was more than twice what had been 
predicted, and to this day it remains the largest explosive ever 
detonated by the United States. It was this test that alerted the 
world in dramatic fashion to the awe-inspiring power of the H- 
bomb, and, in particular, to the dangers of radioactive fallout. 

More than seventy miles away from Bikini at the time of the 
blast, a Japanese fishing boat, the Fukuryu Maru (“Lucky 
Dragon”), was trawling for tuna when its crew reported seeing 
“flashes of fire, as bright as the sun itself, rising to the sky.” Six 
minutes later they heard the sound of the explosion, “like the 
sound of many thunders rolled into one.” Then they saw a cloud 
rise in the sky, and about two or three hours later a fine white 
ash began to fall. Within a few days the entire crew of twenty- 
three fishermen was feeling unwell, and when they arrived back 
in Tokyo they were diagnosed with severe radiation sickness. In 
September, one of them was to die of the radiation poisoning. 
Already in March, six months earlier, Life magazine was reporting 
the incident under the heading “First Casualties of the H-Bomb”: 
“The scientists had warned of the power of the hydrogen bomb, 
but in abstract language that did not fully register with 


Americans until last week when fantastic news came filtering 
across the Pacific.” A subsequent editorial asked: “Is the strategy 
of retaliation as realistic as it seemed before March 1?” Clearly, 
this was not a good time to advance an argument based on the 
assumption that the H-bomb was self-evidently a good thing that 
made the United States safe, or to suggest that to doubt the 
wisdom of the policy of massive retaliation was evidence of being 
dangerously disloyal. 

The day after the Bravo test, Garrison and Marks went to see 
Strauss to offer a deal that would make the security hearing 
unnecessary: if Strauss and Nichols would withdraw the letter of 
charges and restore Oppenheimer’s clearance, Oppenheimer 
would resign his consultancy. Strauss, having rigged the process 
to the point where he could hardly lose, was having none of it. 
What they had proposed, he told Garrison and Marks, was “out of 
the question.” Either Oppenheimer offered his resignation now, 
or the hearing would go ahead. 

So, on March 4, Oppenheimer put the finishing touches to his 
long autobiographical letter to Nichols, in which he formally 
requested a hearing. After detailing his involvement in 
communist front organizations in the 1930s, his personal 
connections with communists, his work at Los Alamos and his 
postwar work as a government advisor, Oppenheimer’s letter 
ended: 


In preparing this letter, I have reviewed two decades of my life. 
I have recalled instances where I acted unwisely. What I have 
hoped was, not that I could wholly avoid error, but that I 
might learn from it. What I have learned has, I think, made me 
more fit to serve my country. 


The letter was delivered to the AEC the next day, and shortly 
thereafter a date for the hearing was announced: April 12, 1954. 

The hearing was to last three and a half grueling weeks, during 
which events in Oppenheimer’s past were subjected to 
excruciatingly intense scrutiny. Because of this, and because 
Oppenheimer had chosen to reply to the original charges with an 
autobiography, the hearings were sometimes regarded as laying 
bare his life. He himself, however, always reacted strongly 
against this notion. He said toward the end of his life: “The 


records printed in so many hundred pages of fine print in 1954. 
My big year, I’ve heard people say, and my life story complete in 
those records. But it isn’t so. Almost nothing that was important 
to me came out there, almost nothing that meant anything to me 
is in those records.” 

He also reacted angrily to the suggestion that the hearing was a 
“tragedy.” It was, he said, much more of a farce. He had a point. 
There were indeed several farcical features to the proceedings. 
For example, because his counsel never received the emergency 
clearance that had been granted to Robb, whenever—as 
happened frequently—Robb read from classified documents, 
Garrison and Marks had to leave the room. Moreover, because 
Robb had access to documents that Garrison had never seen, and 
could never see, and as he had foreknowledge of everything 
Garrison and Marks planned to do, whereas they had no 
knowledge at all of what he intended to do, the element of 
surprise was always on his side. There was, in addition, the 
farcical situation that Oppenheimer’s side had prepared their 
defense in ignorance of the rules of the game. They thought they 
had to show that, considered as a whole, Oppenheimer was a 
loyal citizen of the United States and a valuable person to consult 
on atomic matters, not that he was, as Caesar’s wife should have 
been, above suspicion. 

The first day of the hearing, Monday, April 12, was taken up 
mainly by the reading out first of Nichols’s letter to Oppenheimer 
and then of Oppenheimer’s long, autobiographical reply, at the 
end of which the chairman, Gordon Gray, reminded everyone 
that “this proceeding is an inquiry and not in the nature of a 
trial.” During the second day, Oppenheimer, prompted by gentle 
questions from Garrison, gave a detailed account of his work with 
the GAC and the development of his views on the hydrogen 
bomb. When Robb had a chance to cross-examine Oppenheimer 
on the third day, April 14, he revealed that his interests lay 
elsewhere. Throughout the morning he fired questions at 
Oppenheimer, not about the hydrogen bomb, but about his 
connections with communists, with Frank, Lomanitz, Bohm and 
Peters; then, at the end of the morning, just before lunch, he 
moved in for the kill. “Doctor,” he began: 


on this page of your letter of March 4, 1954, you speak of what 


for convenience I will call the Eltenton-Chevalier incident. 
Would you please, sir, tell the board as accurately as you can, 
and in as much detail as you can, exactly what Chevalier said 
to you, and you said to Chevalier, on the occasion that you 
mention on this page of your answer? 


Oppenheimer then offered the following account: 


One day, and I believe you have the time fixed better than I do, 
in the winter of 1942-3, Haakon Chevalier came to our home. 
It was, I believe, for dinner, but possibly for a drink. When I 
went out into the pantry, Chevalier followed me or came with 
me to help me. He said, “I saw George Eltenton recently.” 
Maybe he asked me if I remembered him. That Eltenton had 
told him that he had a method, he had means of getting 
technical information to Soviet scientists. He didn’t describe 
the means. I thought I said, “But that is treason,” but I am not 
sure. I said anyway something, “This is a terrible thing to do.” 
Chevalier said or expressed complete agreement. That was the 
end of it. It was a very brief conversation. 


After lunch, Robb, following a few more questions about 
Lomanitz, returned to the “Eltenton-Chevalier incident,” asking 
Oppenheimer about his initial approach to Lieutenant Johnson in 
Berkeley, in which he told Johnson that Eltenton was a man to 
watch. When he was asked by Johnson how he knew Eltenton to 
be involved in suspicious activities, Oppenheimer volunteered to 
the hearing, “I invented a cock-and-bull story.” Robb, however, 
refused to pick up on this straightaway; he wanted the story to 
unfold at his pace. Ignoring, for the moment, Oppenheimer’s 
ready confession of having lied, Robb led him slowly through the 
order of events. The day after Oppenheimer had spoken to 
Johnson, Robb established, he spoke to Boris Pash: 


Ross. Did you tell Pash the truth about this thing? 

OPPENHEIMER. No. 

Ross. You lied to him? 

OPPENHEIMER. Yes. 

Ross. What did you tell Pash that was not true? 

OpPENHEIMER. That Eltenton had attempted to approach members 
of the project, three members of the project, through 


intermediaries. 

Ross. What else did you tell him that wasn’t true? 

OppENHEIMER. That is all I really remember. 

Ross. That is all? Did you tell Pash that Eltenton had attempted 
to approach three members of the project? 

OppENHEIMER. Through intermediaries. 

Ross. Intermediaries? 

OppENHEIMER. Through an intermediary. 

Ross. So that we may be clear, did you discuss with or disclose 
to Pash the identity of Chevalier? 

OPPENHEIMER. No. 

Ross. Let us refer, then, for the time being, to Chevalier as X. 

OppENHEIMER. All right. 

Ross. Did you tell Pash that X had approached three persons on 
the project? 

OpPENHEIMER. I am not clear whether I said there were three Xs 
or that X approached three people. 

Ross. Didn’t you say that X had approached three people? 

OppENHEIMER. Probably. 

Ross. Why did you do that, Doctor? 

OppENHEIMER. Because I was an idiot. 

Ross. Is that your only explanation, Doctor? 

OpPENHEIMER. I was reluctant to mention Chevalier. 

Ross. Yes. 

OppENHEIMER. No doubt somewhat reluctant to mention myself. 

Ross. Yes. But why would you tell him that Chevalier had gone 
to three people? 

OppENHEIMER. I have no explanation for that except the one 
already offered. 


To make matters worse for Oppenheimer, Robb then took him 
through all the details of his conversation with Pash, highlighting 
each one of his false and unnecessary elaborations on his story 
about Eltenton—his mention of a contact at the Soviet consulate, 
of the possibility of microfilming documents, of there being two 
people working at Los Alamos who had been approached, and so 
on—all of which Robb got Oppenheimer to admit were not true. 
“Isn’t it a fair statement today, Dr. Oppenheimer,” Robb summed 
up, “that according to your testimony now you told not one lie to 
Colonel Pash, but a whole fabrication and tissue of lies?” “Right,” 


Oppenheimer replied. From that moment onward his “veracity” 
lay in ruins. 

But Robb was still not finished. Turning to Oppenheimer’s 
secret rendezvous with Jean Tatlock in 1943, Robb had another 
damaging confession (previously quoted) to wring out of him: 


Ross. You spent the night with her, didn’t you? 

OPPENHEIMER. YeS. 

Ross. That is when you were working on a secret war project? 

OPPENHEIMER. YeS. 

Ross. Did you think that consistent with good security? 

OPPENHEIMER. It was, as a matter of fact. Not a word—it was not 
good practice.«69 


Though there were another three weeks of the hearing to go, 
the decision was never in doubt after this merciless exposure by 
Robb of Oppenheimer’s repeated dishonesty and of his poor 
judgment. On the evening after this exchange, when Robb got 
home, he told his wife: “I’ve just seen a man destroy himself on 
the witness stand.” 

Now, it did not matter how many people Garrison produced to 
vouch for Oppenheimer’s loyalty, or how eminent they were. All 
Robb had to do was tell the witness about the Chevalier Affair 
and ask, for example, whether they would have reported the 
incident sooner than Oppenheimer had done, or whether they 
considered what Oppenheimer had said about the affair to be 
indicative of an honest and reliable character, or some other 
variation on that theme. Oppenheimer had lied, and he had lied 
several times, and he had admitted that he had lied several times, 
after which Robb’s task was simply to keep reminding the hearing 
of these palpable facts. 

The appearance of Groves on the fourth day should have 
provided an important boost to Oppenheimer’s camp, but Robb 
was able to undermine all the supportive things Groves had to say 
about Oppenheimer with one simple question: “General, in the 
light of your experience with security matters and in the light of 
your knowledge of the file pertaining to Dr. Oppenheimer, would 
you clear Dr. Oppenheimer today?” To which Groves felt obliged 
to tell the truth, which was: “I would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer 
today if I were a member of the Commission.” 


The following day, John Lansdale, by this time a practicing 
lawyer no longer in the army, appeared for Oppenheimer and 
showed himself ready, able and willing to stand up to Robb. 
When Robb drew attention to the fact that the other security 
officers at Los Alamos, including Peer de Silva, were more 
suspicious of Oppenheimer than Lansdale, he tried further to 
maintain that their view was somehow more authoritative than 
Lansdale’s. To this, Lansdale reacted firmly and combatively: 


Ross. He [de Silva] was certainly more of a professional than 
you were, wasn’t he, Colonel? 

LanspDALE. In what field? 

Ross. The field he was working in, security. 

LANSDALE. No. 

Ross. No? 

LANSDALE. No. 

Ross. He was a graduate of West Point, wasn’t he? 

LANSDALE. Certainly. I am a graduate of VMI [Virginia Military 
Institute], too. You want to fight about that? 


Robb was, however, able to nullify Lansdale’s support for 
Oppenheimer in one crucial exchange. Prompted by Garrison, 
Lansdale stated that, in spite of the Chevalier Affair, he still 
maintained his belief in Oppenheimer’s general truthfulness: “I 
don’t believe that he lied to us except about this one incident— 
my general impression is that his veracity is good. I don’t know of 
any other incident.” Robb’s response to this was as effective as it 
was cunning: 


Ross. Colonel Lansdale, as a lawyer are you familiar with the 
legal maxim, “Falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus”? 

LansDALE. Yes, I am. Like all legal maxims, it is a generalization, 
and not of particular significance when applied to specifics. 

Ross. When you are trying a jury case and the veracity of a 
witness is in question, do you request the court to give an 
instruction on that subject? 

LansDALE. Oh, certainly; don’t you? 

Ross. Certainly, I want to know what you do. 

LanspALE. The instruction usually is that the jury may, but does 
not have to, take that as an indication, and the judgment is 


to be exercised in the particular case. 

Ross. And when you are trying a jury case and you examine a 
witness on the opposite side and you demonstrate that he has 
lied, don’t you argue to the jury from that that they should 
disregard his evidence? 

LanspaLe. You are speaking now as to what I as an advocate do? 

Ross. Yes. 

LanspDALE. It depends on circumstances; usually I do. 

Ross. Sure. Any lawyer worth his salt would. 


The following week saw a procession of pro-Oppenheimer 
witnesses: Gordon Dean, Hans Bethe, George Kennan, James 
Conant, Enrico Fermi, David Lilienthal, Isidor Rabi, Norris 
Bradbury, Hartley Rowe, Lee DuBridge and Vannevar Bush. By 
this time, however, a pattern had been established that rendered 
their testimony all but useless: first, they would be led by 
Garrison or Marks through their avowals of Oppenheimer’s 
loyalty and truthfulness, then Robb would use the Chevalier 
Affair to reestablish Oppenheimer’s lack of truthfulness. So 
established did this pattern become that, sometimes, the members 
of the board would raise the matter of the Chevalier Affair, as it 
were, on Robb’s behalf. When Conant appeared, for example, it 
was Ward Evans who asked him: “Dr. Conant, if you had been 
approached by someone for security information, wouldn’t you 
have reported it just as quickly as you could?” To which, of 
course, Conant had to reply: “I think I would have, yes.” Perhaps 
feeling that Evans had not done it properly, Robb then added: 
“When you did report it, Doctor, you would have told the whole 
truth about it?” “I hope so,” replied Conant. “I am sure you 
would,” concluded Robb. 

The hero of the second week was Rabi, who took the 
opportunity to express his feelings about the hearing. “I never hid 
my opinion from Mr. Strauss that I thought that this whole 
proceeding was a most unfortunate one,” Rabi said. 


That the suspension of the clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer was a 
very unfortunate thing and should not have been done. In 
other words, there he was; he is a consultant, and if you don’t 
want to consult the guy, you don’t consult him, period. Why 
you have to then proceed to suspend clearance and go through 


all this sort of thing, he is only there when called, and that is 
all there was to it. So it didn’t seem to me the sort of thing that 
called for this kind of proceeding at all against a man who had 
accomplished what Dr. Oppenheimer has accomplished. There 
is a real positive record, the way I expressed it to a friend of 
mine. We have an A-bomb and a whole series of it, and what 
more do you want, mermaids? This is just a tremendous 
achievement. If the end of that road is this kind of hearing, 
which can’t help but be humiliating, I thought it was a pretty 
bad show. I still think so. 


While the hearing was going on, it was reported and 
commented upon in the newspapers, often with the assumption 
that McCarthy had something to do with it. “McCarthy has few 
partisans and enjoys little prestige in the Deep South,” 
commented The Southeast, “and the Oppenheimer ouster has done 
little, if anything, to raise his stock.” During Oppenheimer’s 
security hearing, in fact, McCarthy’s “stock” sank to an all-time 
low, owing to his unwise decision to take on the U.S. Army. For 
five weeks, beginning on April 22, 1954, the entire country was 
gripped by the televised Army-McCarthy hearings, which marked 
the beginning of the end of McCarthyism. 

Not that the media lost interest in the Oppenheimer case. On 
April 26, the first day of the third week of the Oppenheimer 
hearing, Life magazine carried a story about it, which began with 
the following vivid and evocative description of Oppenheimer’s 
arrival at the hearing: 


Silently and impassively, a thin, thoughtful man wearing a 
porkpie hat and accompanied by a policeman and three 
lawyers walked with hurried step last week through the shabby 
backdoor courtyard of a Washington office building. 


The article was noncommittal in its sympathies, but was clear 
about one thing: “Whatever the truth of the charges and whatever 
the outcome of the inquiry, the situation which involved one of 
the nation’s most brilliant scientific minds was in itself a national 
tragedy.” 

The third week of the hearing saw the appearance of the anti- 
Oppenheimer witnesses, though none of them did anything like 


as much damage to his case as he himself had done on the third 
day. Wendell Latimer, a professor of chemistry at Berkeley with a 
long-standing dislike of Oppenheimer, testified to Oppenheimer’s 
“astounding” ability to influence people and his use of that ability 
to persuade young physicists to become pacifists and dissuade 
them from joining the H-bomb program. General Wilson from the 
air force testified to Oppenheimer’s opposition to strategic 
bombing as being “not helpful to national defense.” Kenneth 
Pitzer, another chemistry professor at Berkeley with a grudge 
against Oppenheimer, talked without any great authority or 
conviction about Oppenheimer’s opposition to the hydrogen 
bomb, and David Griggs cast doubt on Oppenheimer’s loyalty on 
the grounds of the “pattern” of his postwar activities, which 
seemed to Griggs to point to a desire to undermine the defense of 
the U.S. 

The two most significant witnesses called by Robb were Luis 
Alvarez and Edward Teller, both of whom spoke rather 
cautiously. Alvarez was careful to stress that what he had to say 
did nothing to impugn Oppenheimer’s loyalty and indeed did 
very little other than provide, in his own words, “corroborative 
testimony” to the fact that Oppenheimer was opposed to the 
development of the hydrogen bomb. Teller, too, stated: “I have 
always assumed, and I now assume that he [Oppenheimer] is 
loyal to the United States.” When asked a slightly different 
question, however—namely, whether he thought Oppenheimer 
was a “security risk”—Teller answered: 


In a great number of cases I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer act— 
understood that Dr. Oppenheimer acted—in a way which for 
me was exceedingly hard to understand. I thoroughly disagreed 
with him in numerous issues and his actions frankly appeared 
to me confused and complicated. To this extent, I feel that I 
would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands 
which I understand better, and therefore trust more. In this 
very limited sense, I would like to express a feeling that I 
would feel personally more secure if public matters would rest 
in other hands. 


When he was asked by Gordon Gray, “Do you feel that it would 
endanger the common defense and security to grant clearance to 


Dr. Oppenheimer?” Teller replied: 


I believe, and that is merely a question of belief and there is no 
expertness, no real information behind it, that Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s character is such that he would not knowingly 
and willingly do anything that is designed to endanger the 
safety of this country. To the extent, therefore, that your 
question is directed toward intent, I would say I do not see any 
reason to deny clearance. If it is a question of wisdom and 
judgment, as demonstrated by actions since 1945, then I would 
say one would be wiser not to grant clearance. 


Apart from these two statements from Teller, which, though 
tentatively expressed, were, in the context of the hearing, 
extremely powerful, there was very little in the testimony from 
Robb’s chosen witnesses that would do the Oppenheimer case 
much damage. Right to the end Robb scored more blows against 
Oppenheimer in cross-examining Garrison’s witnesses than he did 
in examining his own. The last pro-Oppenheimer witness was 
John McCloy, the chairman of Chase National Bank, who had got 
to know Oppenheimer when they served together on a Soviet-U.S. 
relations study group. After McCloy had expressed his opinion 
that Oppenheimer was emphatically not a security risk, Robb 
developed the following variation on his reliably effective ruse of 
mentioning, or alluding to, the Chevalier Affair at every turn: 


Ross. As far as you know, Mr. McCloy, do you have any 
employee of your bank who has been for any considerable 
period of time on terms of rather intimate and friendly 
association with thieves and safecrackers? 

McCioy. No, I don’t know of anyone. 

Ross. I would like to ask you a few hypothetical questions, if I 
might, sir. Suppose you had a branch bank manager, and a 
friend of his came to him one day and said, “I have some 
friends and contacts who are thinking about coming to your 
bank to rob it. I would like to talk to you about maybe 
leaving the vault open some night so they could do it,” and 
your branch manager rejected the suggestion. Would you 
expect that branch manager to report the incident? 

McCiovy. Yes. 


Ross. If he didn’t report it, would you be disturbed about it? 

McCioy. Yes. 

Ross. Let us go a little bit further. Supposing the branch bank 
manager waited six or eight months to report it, would you 
be rather concerned about why he had not done it before? 

McCioy. Yes. 

Ross. Suppose when he did report it, he said this friend of 
mine, a good friend of mine, I am sure he was innocent, and 
therefore I won’t tell you who he is. Would you be concerned 
about that? Would you urge him to tell you? 

McCioy. I would certainly urge him to tell me for the security 
of the bank. 

Ross. Now, supposing your branch bank manager, in telling 
you the story of his conversations with his friend, said, “My 
friend told me that these people that he knows that want to 
rob the bank told him that they had a pretty good plan. They 
had some tear gas and guns and they had a car arranged for 
the getaway, and had everything all fixed up,” would you 
conclude from that it was a pretty well-defined plot? 

McCiovy. Yes. 

Ross. Now, supposing some years later this branch manager 
told you, “Mr. McCloy, I told you that my friend and his 
friends had a scheme all set up as I have told you, with tear 
gas and guns and getaway car, but that was a lot of bunk. It 
just wasn’t true. I told you a false story about my friend.” 
Would you be a bit puzzled as to why he would tell you such 
a false story about his friend? 

McChoy. Yes; I think I would be. 

Ross. That is all. 


From the chair, Gordon Gray evidently found this analogy too 
attractive to leave alone and was tempted to contribute his own 
elaboration: 


Gray. Mr. McCloy, following Mr. Robb’s hypothetical question 
for the moment, let us go further than his assumption. Let us 
say that ultimately you did get from your branch manager 
the name of the individual who had approached him with 
respect to leaving the vault open, and suppose further that 
your branch manager was sent by you on an inspection trip 


of some of your foreign branches, and suppose further that 
you learned that while he was in London he looked up the 
man who had made the approach to him some years before, 
would this be a source of concern to you? 

McCioy. Yes; I think it would. It is certainly something worthy 
of investigation, yes. 


The last two witnesses, Boris Pash and William Borden, were 
the two most convinced of Oppenheimer’s disloyalty. When asked 
whether he would consider Oppenheimer a security risk, Pash 
was unequivocal: “Yes, I would.” Borden, meanwhile, stood by 
his judgment that “more probably than not” Oppenheimer was an 
agent of the Soviet Union, to which Gray felt obliged to point out: 


I would say to you that the board has no evidence before it 
that Dr. Oppenheimer volunteered espionage information to 
the Soviets or complied with a request for such information; 
that he has been functioning as an espionage agent or that he 
has since acted under Soviet directive. 


In the light of this statement from Gray, Garrison chose not to 
cross-examine Borden. 

The hearing ended on Thursday, May 6, with a summary 
statement from Garrison, in which he reiterated his “whole man” 
approach. “In the Commission’s own view of the matter,” he said: 


it is the man himself that is to be considered, commonsense to 
be exercised in judging the evidence, and that it is appropriate 
to consider in the final reckoning the fact that our long-range 
success in the field of atomic energy depends in large part on 
our ability to attract into the program men of character and 
vision with a wide variety of talents and viewpoints. 


He conceded that Oppenheimer took a good deal of 
understanding: “But this man bears the closest kind of 
examination of what he really is, and what he stands for, and 
what he means to the country. It is that effort of comprehension 
of him that I urge upon you.” 

After Garrison had finished his summation the hearing was 
brought to a close, and the three members of the board, Gray, 
Morgan and Evans, were given a ten-day break before returning 


to Washington on May 17 to consider their findings. 

In the meantime, Oppenheimer and Kitty returned to Olden 
Manor, where FBI microphones continued to record their every 
conversation. On May 7, Oppenheimer was reported to have told 
a friend despairingly that “he will never be through with the 
situation,” since “all the evil of the times” was wrapped up in it. 
Exhausted from the hearing and nervously awaiting the result, he 
was described a few days later as “very depressed at the present 
time and has been ill-tempered with his wife.” 

On May 27, after considering the evidence put before it, the 
three-member board presented its findings to General Nichols. On 
the question of whether Oppenheimer’s clearance should be 
reinstated, the board was split, with Gray and Morgan 
recommending that it should not, and Evans recommending that 
it should. The majority report, signed by Gray and Morgan, 
repeatedly emphasizes that none of them doubted Oppenheimer’s 
loyalty to his country. “We have,” they state, “come to a clear 
conclusion, which should be reassuring to the people of this 
country, that he is a loyal citizen.” 

On the other hand, they add: “We have, however, been unable 
to arrive at the conclusion that it would be clearly consistent with 
the security interests of the United States to reinstate Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s clearance, and, therefore, do not so recommend.” 
They give four reasons for this recommendation. The first is “that 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s continuing conduct and associations have 
reflected a serious disregard for the requirements of the security 
system,” by which they seem to mean Oppenheimer’s “current 
associations with Dr. Chevalier,” to which, they say, they attach 
“a high degree of significance.” The second is that Oppenheimer 
had shown “a susceptibility to influence.” What they seem to 
have in mind here is Oppenheimer’s willingness to write letters 
on behalf of Lomanitz and Peters after he had been urged to do so 
by Ed Condon. Their third reason is the most controversial. “We 
find,” they write, “his conduct in the hydrogen-bomb program 
sufficiently disturbing as to raise a doubt as to whether his future 
participation, if characterized by the same attitudes in a 
Government program relating to the national defense, would be 
clearly consistent with the best interests of security.” What they 
mean by this is not entirely clear, but it seemed to many— 
particularly to many scientists—to amount to saying that 


Oppenheimer was to be judged on the basis of his beliefs, which 
was a very dangerous path to tread. Their fourth and final reason 
for denying Oppenheimer clearance is that he had been “less than 
candid in several instances in his testimony before this Board.” In 
their report, Gray and Morgan do not elaborate or support this, 
but its basis seems to be their conviction that Oppenheimer had 
lied to the hearing about the Chevalier Affair. 

In his minority report, Ward Evans, noting that all three 
members of the panel were agreed that Oppenheimer was loyal to 
his country, recommended the reinstatement of Oppenheimer’s 
clearance on several grounds. First: “To deny him clearance now 
for what he was cleared for in 1947, when we must know he is 
less of a security risk now than he was then, seems to be hardly 
the procedure to be adopted in a free country.” Second, 
Oppenheimer “did not hinder the development of the H-bomb 
and there is absolutely nothing in the testimony to show that he 
did.” And, finally: “His witnesses are a considerable segment of 
the scientific backbone of our Nation and they endorse him.” At 
the end of his report, Evans adds, in the manner of a man 
protesting too much: “I would like to add that this opinion was 
written before the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists came out with 
its statement concerning the Oppenheimer case.” 

The May 1954 issue of the Bulletin was a special issue, largely 
devoted to the Oppenheimer case, in which, after printing 
Nichols’s letter to Oppenheimer, and Oppenheimer’s reply to it, 
the editors published a collection of statements they had received 
during the first week of the hearing from notable scientists. 
Included in the collection are statements from Samuel Allison, 
Harold Urey, F.W. Loomis, Linus Pauling, Julian Schwinger, 
Albert Einstein and Victor Weisskopf, several of whom pointed 
out the injustice and the danger involved in declaring a man a 
security risk because, when asked for his opinion, he says 
something the government of the day does not want to hear. The 
Bulletin also published a statement condemning the suspension of 
Oppenheimer’s clearance by the executive committee of the 
Federation of American Scientists, and a petition signed by 
twenty-seven physicists at the University of Illinois disputing the 
charges brought against Oppenheimer and stating their collective 
wish, as people “closely associated with Dr. J. Robert 
Oppenheimer,” to reassure the public that “there can be no 


reasonable doubt of his loyalty.” It was very clear from this issue 
of the Bulletin that the scientists who had testified against 
Oppenheimer—Alvarez, Latimer, Pitzer and Teller—belonged to a 
very small minority, and evidently not one that Ward Evans was 
particularly keen to join. 

On May 28, the findings of the board, including Ward’s 
minority report, were sent by Nichols to Oppenheimer. A few 
days later, Garrison responded to those findings on 
Oppenheimer’s behalf. He began by noting that the 
recommendation not to reinstate Oppenheimer’s clearance 
“stands in such contrast with the Board’s findings regarding Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty and discretion as to raise doubts about the 
process of reasoning by which the conclusion was arrived at.” 
Garrison also complained that, despite what Oppenheimer had 
said in his autobiographical letter to Nichols, the findings of the 
board were not “considered in the context of Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
life as a whole.” 

Garrison assumed that Nichols would forward the board’s 
findings to the AEC, together with a recommendation based upon 
them. In fact, in submitting the board’s findings to the AEC, 
Nichols also submitted his own recommendations, which, while 
loosely based upon the recommendations of the board, differed 
significantly in content and in emphasis. For example, the general 
tone of Nichols’s memo is a good deal less friendly to 
Oppenheimer, and, unlike both the majority and the minority 
reports, he does not repeatedly stress Oppenheimer’s loyalty to 
his country, confining himself simply to the statement: “The 
record contains no direct evidence that Dr. Oppenheimer gave 
secrets to a foreign nation or that he is disloyal to the United 
States.” Neither does Nichols endorse the majority report’s 
suggestion that Oppenheimer’s “disturbing” conduct during the 
hydrogen-bomb program offered a reason not to reinstate his 
clearance. On the contrary, Nichols is very careful to emphasize 
that his finding against Oppenheimer “is not based on Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s opinions,” and that “the evidence establishes no 
sinister motives on the part of Dr. Oppenheimer in his attitude on 
the hydrogen bomb, either before or after the President’s 
decision.” 

In the memo, Nichols is at pains to make clear that his 
recommendation not to reinstate Oppenheimer’s clearance is 


based squarely on the consideration of Oppenheimer’s veracity. In 
connection with this, Nichols gives far more weight to the 
“Chevalier incident” than the board had done. It is this, above all 
else, Nichols’s memo suggests, that establishes that Oppenheimer 
is not to be trusted. After all: 


if his present story is true then he admits he committed a 
felony in 1943. On the other hand, as Dr. Oppenheimer 
admitted on cross-examination, if the story Dr. Oppenheimer 
told Colonel Pash was true, it not only showed that Chevalier 
was involved in a criminal espionage conspiracy, but also 
reflected seriously on Dr. Oppenheimer himself. 


Nichols is very clear which version of the story he thinks is 
true: 


..it is difficult to conclude that the detailed and 
circumstantial account given by Dr. Oppenheimer to Colonel 
Pash was false and that the story now told by Dr. Oppenheimer 
is an honest one. Dr. Oppenheimer’s story in 1943 was most 
damaging to Chevalier. If Chevalier was Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
friend and Dr. Oppenheimer, as he now says, believed 
Chevalier to be innocent and wanted to protect him, why then 
would he tell such a complicated false story to Colonel Pash? 
This story showed that Chevalier was not innocent, but on the 
contrary was deeply involved in an espionage conspiracy. By 
the same token, why would Dr. Oppenheimer tell a false story 
to Colonel Pash which showed that he himself was not 
blameless? Is it reasonable to believe a man will deliberately 
tell a lie that seriously reflects upon himself and his friend, 
when he knows that the truth will show them both to be 
innocent? 


In thus emphasizing the importance of the Chevalier Affair, 
Nichols was reflecting more accurately than the board members 
had done the case that had been presented by Robb at the 
hearing and also the views of Lewis Strauss. He was, moreover, 
closing the gap that Garrison had mentioned between the board’s 
recommendations and its comments on Oppenheimer’s loyalty 
and discretion. What had been murky in the panel’s majority 
report was made abundantly clear in Nichols’s memo: the reason 


for recommending that Oppenheimer’s clearance should not be 
reinstated was first and foremost that he had been shown to be a 
liar on a matter of national security. 

If Nichols thought he could bury the admiring comments about 
Oppenheimer’s character, loyalty and service to the country that 
had been made in the panel’s reports, he was shown to be 
mistaken on June 1, 1954, when Garrison leaked the text of those 
reports to the press. In retaliation, Strauss took a somewhat 
desperate step. Despite the fact that the witnesses at the hearing 
had been promised that their testimony would be treated in 
confidence, Strauss persuaded the AEC to publish the entire 
proceedings. On June 15, before the AEC had even announced its 
decision in the Oppenheimer case, the transcript, entitled In the 
Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer, was released in book form to the 
press, and the following day it was available to the general 
public. 

Two weeks later, the AEC finally announced its decision. By a 
vote of four to one, the commissioners voted not to reinstate 
Oppenheimer’s clearance. The majority report, signed by Strauss, 
Campbell and Zuckert, followed the lines of Nichols’s letter, in 
emphasizing that the reasons for denying clearance to 
Oppenheimer rested not on his opinions, or on any alleged 
disloyalty, but rather on his “associations” with communists and, 
above all, on the flaws in his character demonstrated by the 
“whole fabrication and tissue of lies” that he had, by his own 
admission, told Pash about the Chevalier incident. Commissioner 
Murray also voted to deny Oppenheimer clearance, but his 
reasons were rather different and so he wrote his own report, in 
which he did not shy away from accusing Oppenheimer of 
disloyalty. In an echo of the split among the panel members, the 
only commissioner to vote for the reinstatement of 
Oppenheimer’s clearance was also the only scientist on the AEC, 
namely Henry DeWolf Smyth, who, in his own report, wrote that 
he agreed with the Gray board that Oppenheimer was 
“completely loyal” and that “I do not believe he is a security 
risk.” The Chevalier incident, Smyth conceded, was 
“inexcusable,” but “that was 11 years ago; there is no subsequent 
act even faintly similar.” 

The AEC announced its decision not to reinstate Oppenheimer’s 
clearance on June 29. The following day, Oppenheimer’s one- 


year contract as a consultant to the AEC was due to expire 
anyway. In effect, what had been achieved by a hearing lasting 
three and a half weeks, followed by several more weeks of 
deliberation, was that Oppenheimer’s employment as an AEC 
consultant came to an end a day earlier than originally 
contracted. 


68 The title is an allusion to the Latin phrase falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, 
which means “false in one, false in all.” In law the phrase is used to indicate 
that, if a witness has been shown to lie once, then his or her entire testimony 
cannot be trusted. 
69 See footnote 49. 


An Open Book? 


aakon Chevalier first learned of his 
leading role in the Oppenheimer case on April 13, 1954, when 


the New York Times published Nichols’s letter to Oppenheimer 
listing the charges against him, together with Oppenheimer’s 
autobiographical reply. Chevalier found Nichols’s letter 
“repulsive,” but Oppenheimer’s reply “even more distressing,” 
because, with its talk of “intermediaries” between Eltenton and 
scientists working on the bomb, it seemed to paint a picture of 
something much more elaborate than the simple and short 
conversation that Chevalier remembered. 

Then, on June 16, just after the AEC published the entire 
transcript of the hearings, Chevalier, still living in Paris, saw a 
headline in the Paris-Presse that read: “Oppie confesse: ‘J’étais un 
idiot.’ ” When he bought a copy of the paper, Chevalier saw that 
it contained extracts from the transcript, including the exchange 
between Robb and Oppenheimer during which Oppenheimer 
admitted to having told a “tissue of lies.” Reading it made 
Chevalier realize what, or rather who, had been the source of the 
story that had dogged him all those years: 


The one who had invented that highly damaging story about 
me was none other than my own friend, Oppenheimer, himself. 
It was unbelievable. It made no sense—but there it was, in 
black and white. More than ten years before, he had fabricated 
a story which had wrought havoc with my life and my career, 
and during all those years he had continued to give every show 
of an unaltered friendship. Why? What had ever led him to do 
this? 


On June 28, Time magazine ran a long article on the 


Oppenheimer case, reporting on the board’s findings, but not yet 
on the AEC’s decision, which was announced the following day. 
“In the list of witnesses against J. Robert Oppenheimer,” the 
piece said, “the most effective was J. Robert Oppenheimer 
himself. His testimony showed that he had lied repeatedly in the 
past about important security matters.” “The most telling 
example of Oppenheimer’s past capacity for untruths was drawn 
out in cross-examination about his relationships with his good 
friend Haakon Chevalier.” 

The rest of the article is taken up mostly with the testimony of 
the anti-Oppenheimer witnesses, such as Alvarez, Griggs, Latimer 
and Teller, and it ends with an account of Robb’s cross- 
examination of the banker John McCloy. It concludes: “The 
majority of Gordon Gray’s security committee wound up feeling 
about Oppenheimer the way McCloy felt about Roger Robb’s 
hypothetical bank manager.” 

On July 7, Chevalier wrote to Oppenheimer: 


Dear Robert, 

I have been shattered by the revelations in the June 28th 
issue of Time Magazine. 

I need not tell you what this means to me—the light it casts 
on the past, the implications for the present and the future. 

Before making any decisions, which must in the nature of the 
case be irrevocable, I would like to hear directly what you 
have to say. And I suspend, as best I can, any final judgment. 
But I must hear soon. 

Haakon 


Oppenheimer’s reply was dated July 12, and read: 


Dear Haakon, 

Your letter of July 7th has just come. In answer I am sending 
to you by airmail today a set of documents. These will tell you 
all that I have to tell. 

These documents are public, and they are the whole of the 
public record. Some I made public myself: General Nichols’s 
letter of December 23rd, my answer of March 4th, the report of 
the Gray Board, and the letters and arguments of counsel. The 
transcript was made public by the Atomic Energy Commission. 


There are substantial deletions. These have mostly to do with 
military or technical matters. 

With every good wish, 

Robert Oppenheimer 


When Chevalier read the whole transcript, he was struck by 
how unfamiliar the Oppenheimer that emerged from the hearings 
seemed: “This was not the Oppenheimer I knew.” 


The Oppenheimer I knew was brilliant, incisive, measured, 
resourceful, imaginative, challenging, always in command of 
the situation, and everything he said had the unmistakable 
stamp of his personality. The Oppenheimer of the Transcript is 
completely depersonalized ... Not once in the course of the 
whole three-week hearing does he come out with a statement 
that reflects his inner self—his ideals, his purpose, his sense of 
destiny. 


On July 27, Chevalier wrote again to Oppenheimer, “hoping— 
without believing—that in a burst of confidence he might reveal 
something that would in some measure justify the inexplicable 
violation of friendship.” After telling Oppenheimer that the 
documents he had received failed to explain what he felt needed 
explaining, Chevalier went on: 


For the subjective observer—myself—the picture is this: I have 
regarded you as my very dear friend for upward of 15 years. I 
have loved you as I have loved no other man. I placed in you 
an absolute trust. I would have defended you to the death 
against malice or slander. Now I learn that eleven years ago, 
according to your own admission, you wove an elaborate fabric 
of lies about me of the most gravely compromising nature. 
During all these years you continued to show me the signs of 
an unaltered friendship. In 1948, after my interview with the 
FBI, I told you, in the garden on Eagle Hill, of my being grilled 
about those three scientists I was supposed to have 
approached. You gave me no indication that you knew of what 
was involved. 

During all these years that story, without my knowing it, has 
hounded me, plagued and blocked me and played untold havoc 
with my career and my life. With what today looks like the 


most consummate cynicism, you wrote me on February 24th 
1950, “As you know, I have been deeply disturbed by the 
threat to your career which these ugly stories could 
constitute”—referring to stories that were as fairy tales 
compared to the ones you had already put into the record 
seven years before. 

...I do not subscribe to the naiveté theory, nor to the 
“idiocy” theory. I believe that that story, and the consciousness 
of it that you have carried about with you for eleven years, and 
your awareness of what it was doing to me, represent for you 
something rational and coherent, that hangs together and 
makes sense, and that you can explain and perhaps in a 
measure justify. 

Before I finally make up my mind about the several matters 
involved in all this I am asking you, as perhaps the last act of 
friendship, to explain what the mind conceived and to what the 
heart consented. 


It seems somehow typical of the nightmare in which Chevalier 
now found himself that this deeply personal letter, crying out for 
an intimate, emotional response, should have been opened and 
read not by Oppenheimer himself, but by his secretary, Katharine 
Russell, who, after making several copies of it, sent it to Lloyd 
Garrison, who in turn wrote to Chevalier explaining that 
Oppenheimer and his family were away on the Virgin Islands, “on 
a desperately needed rest.” “I appreciate the fact that it calls for a 
personal response by Dr. Oppenheimer,” Garrison told Chevalier, 
but “I am taking the liberty of referring you to a few passages 
from them [the transcripts] which you may not have noticed and 
which seem relevant to the subject-matter of your letter.” Copies 
of the letter were sent to Herb Marks, Katharine Russell and 
Oppenheimer himself, to whom Garrison wrote that he hoped 
“that this might suffice to hold the fort until you get back.” 

On August 5, Chevalier replied to Garrison, telling him: “There 
is much in this whole case that is strange and baffling.” 


One extraordinary thing about this case is that, since I seem to 
occupy such an important role in it, no one has seen fit to ask 
me to contribute my two-bits’ worth. It is, to me, a striking 
weakness in your defense of Oppenheimer as his attorneys that 


you made no attempt to use me as an asset rather than a 
liability, and throughout the hearings allowed me and my 
name to hover somewhere backstage as a vague and 
disreputable ghost. 

... All the passages in the record that you refer to I had 
read. I have, in fact, gone through it quite thoroughly. But I am 
afraid neither you, nor the Board, nor the Commission, went 
into me quite thoroughly enough. 


On September 3, 1954, Chevalier finally had a response from 
Oppenheimer himself to the letter he had sent on July 27. The 
response was, however, rather disappointing. “It is not nearly as 
clear to me as it appears to be to you,” Oppenheimer wrote, “how 
much, in the past, at present, or in the future the shadow of my 
cock and bull story lies over you.” “In December of 1943, when I 
first mentioned your name I thought the story dismissed. I had 
supposed that for a long time it had been recognized for the 
fabrication that it was.” 

“This letter,” Chevalier writes in his memoir, “seems to have 
been his final word.” He did not reply directly to it. Rather, 
having decided that “I must make my side of the story public,” 
Chevalier chose instead to write an open letter to Oppenheimer to 
be published in the Nation. He sent the piece to the magazine on 
September 26, but two months later it remained unpublished. The 
French magazine France-Observateur was more enthusiastic and 
published it on December 2 with a headline on its front cover 
announcing: “Un document exclusif: Robert Oppenheimer, 
pourquoi avez-vous menti? par Haakon Chevalier.”70 Having thus 
been scooped, the Nation declined to publish the letter. 

Worried that Oppenheimer would thus read his open letter “in 
a truncated and perhaps distorted form,” Chevalier wrote to 
Oppenheimer on December 13, telling him: 


I have no doubts about your intentions. But the effect of your 
words and acts has been incalculably disastrous (whether it is 
clear to you or not) both to me and to yourself. You have, I 
hope, found out how hard it is to untell a lie. 

... This is not a trivial mistake, a casual error of judgment. It 
is something weighty, monstrous and calamitous borne in 
knowledge and conscience for years, during which time it was 


breeding its poisonous mischief. 


“Do what we may,” Chevalier told Oppenheimer, “by your 
unfathomable folly, you and I are linked together in a cloudy 
legend, which nothing, no fact, no explanation, no truth will ever 
unmake or unravel.” He also warned Oppenheimer that he was 
hard at work on a novel designed to resolve the worries and 
problems Oppenheimer had caused him: “I hope to finish it in the 
spring. It is entitled The Man Who Would Be God.” 

Oppenheimer did not reply to this letter and spent the rest of 
his life determined to free himself from the “cloudy legend” to 
which Chevalier continued to feel inextricably linked. He did not 
speak to or about Chevalier again and, both privately and 
publicly, said as little as he could about the security hearing that 
had attached so much importance to that legend. 

Meanwhile, the world at large continued to be fascinated by 
the “Oppenheimer case” and everything associated with it. Life 
magazine on September 6, 1954, carried a long profile of Edward 
Teller, heralded on the front cover with the words: “Dr. Teller 
who stood up to Oppenheimer and achieved H-Bomb for U.S.” 
Inside the story was headed “Dr. Edward Teller’s Magnificent 
Obsession,” and portrayed Teller as the man without whom the 
H-bomb would never have been made. “In that event,” it said, 
quoting Eisenhower, “Soviet power would today be on the march 
in every quarter of the globe.” The article devoted several 
paragraphs to Teller’s testimony against Oppenheimer, 
representing it as something that Teller did with a heavy heart, 
but felt obliged to do because of his loyalty to the U.S. 

As was made clear on the first page of the article, it was based 
largely on a book that came out at about the same time called The 
Hydrogen Bomb, written by two Time-Life reporters called James 
Shepley and Clay Blair. “This book,” said Gordon Dean, reviewing 
it for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, “is in one sense a sort of 
‘Valentine’ presented to Dr. Edward Teller—but it has blood 
stains upon it—the blood of Dr. Norris Bradbury, director of the 
Los Alamos weapons laboratory, the entire staff of that 
laboratory, Dr. Oppenheimer, and many others.” What Shepley 
and Blair presented was the story of the hydrogen bomb as seen 
by Lewis Strauss and Edward Teller, a story of noble persistence 
triumphing—for the good of the United States and the entire Free 


World—over perverse, and possibly sinister, prevarication. “These 
two boys have done a serious disservice,” thundered Dean. “Their 
book may very well do what the Communists would love to do— 
undermine the atomic energy program of this country.” Isidor 
Rabi, meanwhile, dismissed the book as “a sophomoric science- 
fiction tale, to be taken seriously only by a psychiatrist.” 

In the October 1954 edition of Harper’s Magazine appeared an 
article by Joseph and Stewart Alsop that was a kind of mirror- 
image of the Shepley-Blair book, presenting the Oppenheimer 
case as a struggle between good and evil, but this time 
Oppenheimer was the hero and Strauss the villain. In an echo of 
Emile Zola’s famous article, “J’Accuse,” published in 1898 in 
defense of the wrongfully condemned Jewish artillery officer 
Alfred Dreyfus, the Alsops called their essay “We Accuse!’ 


We accuse the Atomic Energy Commission in particular, and 
the American government in general, of a shocking miscarriage 
of justice in the case of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 

We accuse Oppenheimer’s chief judge, the chairman of the 
Atomic Energy Commission, Admiral Lewis Strauss and certain 
of Oppenheimer’s accusers, of venting the bitterness of old 
disputes through the security system of this country. 

And we accuse the security system itself as being subject to 
this kind of ugliness, and as inherently repugnant in its present 
standards and procedures to every high tradition of the 
American past. 


Both the Shepley-Blair book and the Alsops’ article gave rise to 
heated controversies that kept the Oppenheimer case in the 
newspapers and magazines of both the U.S. and the world beyond 
it for the next few years. 

One person who showed no inclination whatever to take part in 
those controversies was Oppenheimer himself. When, 
immediately after the AEC announced its decision, he was asked 
for his reaction, he gave a studiedly bland answer that would 
remain his final word on the subject for many years: 


Dr. Henry D. Smyth’s fair and considered statement, made with 
full knowledge of the facts, says what needs to be said. Without 
commenting on the security system which has brought all this 


about, I do have a further word to say. Our country is fortunate 
in its scientists, in their high skill, and their devotion. I know 
that they will work faithfully to preserve and strengthen this 
country. I hope that the fruit of their work will be used with 
humanity, with wisdom and with courage. I know that their 
counsel when sought will be given honestly and freely. I hope 
it will be heard. 


To another reporter shortly afterward Oppenheimer said that 
he was looking forward to returning to a “cloistered life.” 

If Strauss had had his way, the “cloistered life” of the Institute 
for Advanced Study would have been closed to Oppenheimer. In 
July 1954, Strauss told an FBI agent that he and the Board of 
Trustees had decided to delay a decision about Oppenheimer’s 
position as director of the institute until the autumn, since, if 
Oppenheimer were to be asked to resign straightaway, it would 
look like “a direct result of personal vindictiveness” on Strauss’s 
part. When the Board met in October, however, it was clear to 
Strauss that there was so much support for Oppenheimer among 
the Trustees there was no point pushing for his resignation. He 
therefore switched tactics and, with a show of “magnanimity,” 
urged the Board to reappoint Oppenheimer, which they did. 

“So far as I was concerned,” Freeman Dyson has written, 
Oppenheimer “was a better director after his public humiliation 
than he had been before. He spent less time in Washington and 
more time at the institute ... He was able to get back to doing 
what he liked best—reading, thinking and talking about physics.” 
Dyson is here choosing his words carefully: Oppenheimer got 
back to reading, thinking and talking about physics, but not to 
writing it. He wrote a lot of popular lectures on physics during 
these years, but he did not return to being an active research 
physicist. Back in the summer of 1952, he had written to Frank: 
“Physics is complicated and wondersome, and much too hard for 
me except as a spectator; it will have to get easy again one of 
these days, but perhaps not soon.” 

As a spectator, Oppenheimer was unusually well informed, and 
at the institute he had some excellent people to keep him up to 
date with the latest research. The one who was intellectually 
closest to him was Abraham Pais, whose work centered on what 
Oppenheimer regarded as the most interesting part of the subject: 


particle physics. In the early 1950s, Pais had done some 
pioneering and important work attempting to find order in what 
Oppenheimer referred to as the “particle zoo.” Oppenheimer was 
not exactly a collaborator on this work, but, for an observer, he 
was very close to it, even making the odd contribution here and 
there. For example, Pais’s paper at the second Rochester 
Conference in January 1952 had a title provided by Oppenheimer 
—“An Ordering Principle for Megalomorphian Zoology”—and, 
when this was turned into an article for the Physical Review, a 
footnote acknowledged: “J. R. Oppenheimer, discussion remark at 
the Rochester Conference.” 

In 1954, Pais began a fruitful collaboration with Murray Gell- 
Mann, a brilliant young physicist who had spent a year at the 
institute in 1951 before accepting a position at Chicago as an 
instructor. Pais and Gell-Mann made an important contribution to 
fundamental particle theory when they introduced a new 
quantum number to which Gell-Mann gave the name 
“strangeness.” Oppenheimer kept a close eye on_ this 
development, but did not contribute to it. At the end of 1954, 
Pais left the institute for a year to take a sabbatical at Columbia. 

Freeman Dyson was still at the institute, but he and 
Oppenheimer never became close, either personally or 
intellectually. “I disappointed him by not becoming a deep 
thinker,” Dyson has said. 


When I came to Oppenheimer asking for guidance, he said: 
“Follow your own destiny.” I did so, and the results did not 
altogether please him. I followed my destiny into pure 
mathematics, into nuclear engineering, into space technology 
and astronomy, solving problems that he rightly considered 
remote from the mainstream of physics. 


The same “difference of temperament,” Dyson recalls, also 
appeared in their discussions about the School of Physics at the 
institute: “He liked to concentrate new appointments in 
fundamental particle physics; I liked to invite people in a wide 
variety of specialities.” 

Two people they did agree on, however, were the Chinese 
physicists Chen Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee. Yang came to the 
institute in 1949, after taking his Ph.D. in Chicago under Edward 


Teller. In 1950, he was awarded a five-year institute membership, 
and when that came to an end he was made a full professor. Lee 
had also taken his Ph.D. at Chicago, which is where he and Yang 
met. In 1951, after a year at Berkeley, Lee came to the institute 
on a two-year membership, during which time he and Yang 
became close collaborators, a partnership that continued after he 
left the institute for Columbia in 1953. Oppenheimer did not 
work closely with Yang and Lee, nor was he particularly close to 
them personally, but he did take great pride in their 
achievements. By the mid-1950s, Yang, in collaboration with Lee, 
was the greatest physicist of which the institute could boast. As 
Dyson puts it, he and Oppenheimer “rejoiced together as we 
watched them grow over our heads and into great scientific 
leaders.” 

Just a month after Oppenheimer’s reappointment as director, 
Ed Murrow, the television journalist who fronted the program See 
It Now, came to Princeton with his producer Fred Friendly to 
discuss the possibility of devoting an episode of their program to 
the institute. What they had in mind was a general introduction 
to the place where, in Murrow’s words, “you find a Nobel Prize 
winner every time you open a door,” featuring interviews with 
Oppenheimer, Einstein, Bohr (who happened to be visiting at the 
time) and whoever else they could find. As it turned out, Einstein 
refused to be involved, and though Bohr agreed to be 
interviewed, he seemed incapable of saying anything that would 
be intelligible to a general audience. This left Oppenheimer, who 
gave a mesmerizing performance, talking about his childhood, 
the institute, quantum physics, but not the security hearing, about 
which neither Murrow nor Oppenheimer said a single word 
during three hours of filming. 

On their way back to New York it was clear to Murrow and 
Friendly that what they had recorded in Princeton was not a 
program about the institute (“There isn’t one foot of usable film 
in all that stuff we did with Bohr and all the others,” Murrow said 
to Friendly), but a first-rate interview with Oppenheimer. He 
needed a great deal of persuading to allow the program to go 
ahead on this new basis, but Murrow was so convinced of the 
quality of the interview, and that it could not possibly do 
anything but good for both Oppenheimer and the institute, that 
he finally gave his consent. 


The program went out on January 4, 1955, and fully lived up 
to Murrow’s expectations. It was hugely popular, offering as it did 
a glimpse of Oppenheimer that was many times more interesting 
and engaging than the saint depicted by the Alsops or the sinner 
condemned by Shepley and Blair. The charisma that had 
enchanted Born in the 1920s, Oppenheimer’s graduate students in 
the 1930s and Groves and the Los Alamos team in the 1940s had 
finally been captured on film and made available for everyone to 
see. Key to the charm of the program was that Oppenheimer was 
relaxed in Murrow’s company, both of them smoking heavily and 
each clearly trusting and admiring the other. Not that 
Oppenheimer’s performance was entirely without artifice. Pais 
recalls that on the day of the filming he and Rabi “tiptoed into 
Robert’s office and sat silently in a corner, watching the 
proceedings. When it was over and Murrow had left, Rabi turned 
to Oppenheimer and said: ‘Robert, you’re a ham.’ ” 

The conversation, as broadcast, began with Oppenheimer 
talking about the institute and some of its members, including the 
mathematician Hassler Whitney and the psychologist Jean Piaget. 
“And Professor Einstein is still here too, isn’t he?” Murrow says. 
“Oh, indeed he is,” replies Oppenheimer with a smile. “He’s one 
of the most lovable of men.” Turning to the subject of 
Oppenheimer himself, Murrow asks: “Well, sir, apart from 
running the institute, what do you do here?” “I do two kinds of 
things,” Oppenheimer replies: 


One is to write about what I think I know, hoping that it will 
be understandable in general, and one is to try to understand 
physics and talk and work with the physicists and 
sometimes ... try to have an idea that may be helpful. 


“The part I really get excited about,” he continued, “is just what 
is called particle physics or atomic physics in its modern sense.” 
He then goes up to his blackboard and gives a mini-lecture on 
physics. 

Turning from physics to politics, Oppenheimer is asked about 
the dangers of secrecy and replies: “The trouble with secrecy isn’t 
that it doesn’t give the public a sense of participation. The trouble 
with secrecy is that it denies to the government itself the wisdom 
and resources of the whole community.” In any case, he insists, 


“there aren’t secrets about the world of nature. There are secrets 
about the thoughts and intentions of men. Sometimes they are 
secret because a man doesn’t like to know what he’s up to if he 
can avoid it.” 

Though there was no mention of the security hearing or of the 
suspension of Oppenheimer’s clearance, the Murrow program 
achieved precisely what Lloyd Garrison had hoped to achieve at 
the hearing: it presented the public with the “whole man,” and, in 
doing so, put the charges against him in perspective. The press 
reviews of the program were uniformly enthusiastic, most critics 
being captivated by, as the New York Times put it, Oppenheimer’s 
“lean, almost ascetic face and his frequent poetic turn of phrase.” 
Friendly and Murrow received 2,500 letters in response to the 
program, only thirty-five of which were critical of Oppenheimer, 
an “approval rating” of more than 98 percent. 

After his appearance on See It Now, Oppenheimer was no 
longer the “controversial figure” he had been six months earlier: 
he was a celebrity. Wherever he went, the press followed and 
crowds gathered. On January 31 to February 2, Oppenheimer 
attended the fifth Rochester Conference, at which he chaired a 
session on K-mesons, his presence prompting one journalist to 
describe him with what Robert Marshak has called a “brilliant 
non sequitur”: “Dr. Oppenheimer, who is the world’s greatest 
nuclear theorist despite Federal withdrawal of his top security 
clearance ...” 

When Oppenheimer gave public lectures now, the audiences 
were huge. In April 1955, he was invited to give the Condon 
Lectures at Oregon State University. His subject was “The Sub- 
Nuclear Zoo: The Constitution of Matter,” and he attracted 2,500 
listeners, most of whom, as a newspaper report of the time put it, 
“didn’t know a meson from a melon.” The Eugene Register-Guard 
reported that the audience for the first of these lectures “was 
several hundred larger than the previous peak crowd.” “Listeners 
sat on the floor, stood in the hallways, and filled the coffee bar 
and a lounge downstairs where the scientist’s voice was carried 
by the public address system.” “Not one in 50 could really 
understand what he was talking about,” the reporter estimated. 
“So why did they stay?” His answer was: “The great nuclear 
physicist turned out to be a very appealing, human guy.” 


They also saw a man so obviously in love with his work. As he 
warmed up to his subject and talked about protons and 
neutrons and the other creatures of his sub-nuclear zoo, he 
became quite excited. The audience, not knowing what he was 
talking about, became excited too. 


It was on this trip out west that Oppenheimer learned (from a 
newspaper reporter) of the death of the only physicist whose 
fame and popularity exceeded his own. “For all scientists and 
most men,” Oppenheimer said on hearing the news, “this is a day 
of mourning. Einstein was one of the greats of all ages.” 

Before returning to Princeton, Oppenheimer went to Iowa State 
College to give the first John Franklin Carlson Lecture. Frank 
Carlson, who had done his Ph.D. under Oppenheimer at Berkeley 
and had published a joint paper with him, had been a professor of 
physics at Iowa State from 1946 to 1954, when he committed 
suicide. Oppenheimer’s memorial lecture, the text of which was 
published in Physics Today, was entitled “Electron Theory: 
Description and Analogy.” It began with an eloquent and heartfelt 
tribute to Carlson: 


It is a very special sort of privilege to give this lecture in honor 
and in memory of Carlson who was, for many of us, both a 
friend and a colleague ... 

Carlson was a student of mine in Berkeley. To those in this 
audience who are graduate students, I would recall the 
earnestness, the intensity, almost the terror with which he 
underwent the rites of initiation in a great science, and the 
seriousness with which he met it. In those days, he used to say, 
“T have only one wish, and that is to be a good physicist.” I 
think he lived to see that wish abundantly fulfilled. 


In recalling Carlson, one feels that Oppenheimer was also 
articulating an ideal to which he himself had aspired all his life: 


He loved the history of science; he was interested in 
philosophy and in literature. He was concerned and sensitive to 
all human problems, and yet very balanced and unfanatic, a 
real scholar, one of the most modest of men, a man with a 
great gift for teaching ...He was loyalty itself and great 
friendliness, and he was very funny. He had a wonderful sense 


of humor which softened the sobriety, the depth, and the sense 
of pathos and tragedy with which he looked at human affairs. 
He exemplified and, with a kind of steadfastness which none of 
us will forget, he established that being a scientist is 
harmonious with and continuous with being a man. 


The lecture then dealt—at a level that was no doubt somewhat 
beyond most of the 1,200 people crammed into the hall—with 
the history of electron theory, from Newton, via Heisenberg, to 
the new quantum electrodynamics developed by Schwinger and 
Feynman a few years earlier. This last Oppenheimer attempted to 
summarize as follows: 


And physicists then said, “Good, we will give up this attempt. 
We cannot calculate the mass of the electron. It would be 
meaningless anyway in a theory in which there are no other 
particles, because we could give meaning only to its ratio to 
the mass of something else. We would like to calculate the 
charge; we would like to calculate that number one in a 
thousand; but we will give that up too. These things we will 
measure; then everything else will be given by the theory in a 
finite way.” So they said; and this is what is called the 
renormalization program. 


Along the way, Oppenheimer managed to fit in a description of 
the work that he and Carlson had done together. He also—and 
this was characteristic of the talks he gave in this period—hinted 
at an imminent breakthrough: 


It is clear that we are in for one of the very difficult, probably 
very heroic, and at least thoroughly unpredictable revolutions 
in physical understanding and physical theory. One of the great 
times in physics lies ahead; it is certainly something that will 
often make us remember how much we miss the guidance and 
the companionship that Carlson could have given us had he 
lived. 


Oppenheimer’s sense that a fundamental breakthrough was 
imminent was in part based on his sense that there was 
something provisional about QED, that, as he put it in his Carlson 
lecture, “electrodynamics cannot be the whole story.” Though, to 


a general audience, this gave the impression that Oppenheimer 
was at the very cutting edge of contemporary physics, to 
physicists it was reminiscent of Einstein’s refusal to accept 
quantum mechanics. Oppenheimer showed no sense of being 
aware of this. In January 1956, he published in Reviews of Modern 
Physics a handsome appreciation of Einstein’s work, which, 
however, having described the great advances Einstein made 
during “two golden decades early in this century,” lingered on 
Einstein’s increasing isolation from the mainstream of physicists 
during the last twenty-five years of his life and his devotion to a 
research program that “did not arouse the hope or indeed the 
active interest of many physicists.” 

At about the same time Oppenheimer wrote a tribute on the 
occasion of Bohr’s seventieth birthday that was, by comparison 
with his tribute to Einstein, completely unequivocal in its 
admiration and praise. 


His great discoveries, the firmness, subtlety and depth of his 
understanding, his philosophical courage, and his warm and 
broad human interests, have been an inspiriting example to 
generations of scientists. Just in these last years, he has taken a 
heroic part in furthering international cooperation in science, 
and in defining and upholding the ideal of an open world. If 
our civilizations are to have a future worthy of their great past, 
his example will have an enduring and ever-growing influence. 


Much of Oppenheimer’s time during these years was spent 
giving public lectures to large audiences, often to commemorate a 
death or an anniversary. On February 2, 1956, he gave an address 
to the American Institute of Physics on the occasion of its twenty- 
fifth anniversary. The talk, published in Physics Today, was 
entitled “Physics Tonight,” and sought to give an impression of 
the “wonderfully diverse and varied set of enterprises” in which 
physicists were involved. To illustrate this diversity he discussed 
three examples; one each of, respectively, the physicist as 
discoverer, the physicist as citizen and the physicist as teacher. 
Predictably, under the heading of “physicist as discoverer,” he 
discussed “what is called in the trade particle physics,” drawing 
attention to its chaotic state in what he assumed was a transient 
stage of its development. “In some ways,” he said, with what 


almost seems like nostalgia, “this field may remind us of the 
quantum theory of atoms as it was in the earlier years of this 
century; but we have not found that single key to the new physics 
that Planck discovered at the turn of the century, nor anything 
analogous to Bohr’s postulates.” He was, however, confident that 
“physics tonight” could look forward to a bright new morning: 


Surely past experience, especially in relativity and atomic 
mechanics, has shown that at a new level of explanation some 
simple notions previously taken for granted as inevitable had 
to be abandoned as no longer applicable. 

... Always in the past there has been an explanation of 
immense sweep and simplicity, and in it vast detail has been 
comprehended as necessary. Do we have the faith that this is 
inevitably true of man and nature? Do we even have the 
confidence that we shall have the wit to discover it? For some 
odd reason, the answer to both questions is yes. 


Turning to the physicist as teacher, Oppenheimer’s advice was 
a little vague, if not completely vacuous. “We must make more 
humane what we tell the young physicist, and must seek ways to 
make more robust and more detailed what we tell the man of art 
or letters or affairs, if we are to contribute to the integrity of our 
common cultural life.” What he means by this, or, indeed, 
whether it means anything at all, seems to be open to question. 

Equally opaque are his comments on the physicist as citizen, 
which seem designed to point out only a lack of clarity: 


Despite the “peace of mutual terror,” despite “deterrence” and 
“retaliation,” despite the growing apparent commitment to the 
thesis that global or total war has become “unthinkable,” the 
full import of the new situation is surely not clear today. 


The specific issues that Oppenheimer listed in “Physics 
Tonight” as “the special problems that at the moment seem most 
pressing of solution” were not ones readily comprehensible to a 
general audience and reflected the fact that on this occasion he 
was talking to fellow physicists. In Oppenheimer’s words, those 
issues were “the relation of the T-meson [tau-meson] and the 0- 
meson [theta-meson]; why the antiproton interacts with such a 
large cross section with nuclei; whether we can understand the 


scattering of pions in S states.” In fact, these were exactly the 
issues that dominated the sixth Rochester Conference, which was 
held on April 3-7, 1956. It was, says Pais, “a historic meeting, for 
several reasons.” For one thing, it was the first Rochester meeting 
at which Soviet scientists participated—an extraordinary gesture 
given that in the summer of 1956 there was no sign of a thawing 
in the Cold War; quite the opposite, in fact. It was also the first 
meeting at which the participants had a chance to discuss the 
issues that Oppenheimer mentioned in “Physics Tonight,” issues 
that raised, as Oppenheimer implied, fundamental questions. 

On the second day Oppenheimer gave a public address to an 
overflow audience on his favorite topic, the “sub-nuclear zoo,” 
drawing particular attention to one of the puzzles he had 
mentioned in his Physics Today article, and the fundamental 
question that it raised. The puzzle was that two heavy mesons, 
the tau-meson and the theta-meson, seemed to have identical 
masses and identical lifetimes, yet opposite parities. The notion of 
“parity” can be understood in terms of a mirror-image. If you 
look in the mirror, left becomes right and right becomes left; or, 
to put it another way, spatial coordinates have been “flipped.” If 
they are then flipped again, they go back to how they were, 
which is called a “rotation.” A rotation has a parity of 1, a flip 
has a parity of —1. 

Returning to tau-mesons and theta-mesons, these particles 
puzzled physicists because there seemed to be fairly compelling 
grounds for believing that they were, in fact, the same particle, 
and equally compelling grounds for thinking they were not. The 
reason for thinking they were the same particle was simply that 
they had exactly the same mass and exactly the same lifetime, 
which, if they were different particles, would be an amazing 
coincidence. On the other hand, they seemed to be different with 
respect to what happened to them when they underwent beta 
decay. As explained earlier, when a neutron undergoes beta 
decay, it emits an electron and a neutrino, and what remains is a 
proton. Another way of saying this is that its beta-decay products 
are a proton, an electron and a neutrino. The tau-meson and the 
theta-meson have different beta-decay products. 

That a single particle can decay in two different ways would 
not be particularly puzzling, but what did puzzle scientists was 
that, if these two were the same particle, then what they thought 


was a fundamental law of nature—the conservation of parity— 
would in this case not be upheld. When a tau-meson undergoes 
beta decay, it produces three pions (as the “Yukawa particle” 
ended up being called), two positive and one negative. The theta- 
meson, on the other hand, decays into two pions, one positive, 
the other neutral. A pion has a parity of —1 (a flip), which means 
that a tau-meson has a parity of 1 (three flips, one for each of its 
pions), and the theta-meson —1 (two flips, or a rotation, so 
ending up the same). Assuming the law of the conservation of 
parity, therefore, the tau-meson and the theta-meson had to be, 
despite appearances, different particles. 

It was in connection with this puzzle that Oppenheimer uttered 
two remarks that were savored by those present as being 
comically characteristic of him, in that they combined apparent 
profundity with utter unintelligibility. The first of these was: “The 
t-meson will have either domestic or foreign complications. It 
will not be simple on both fronts.” The second was: “Perhaps 
some oscillation between learning from the past and being 
surprised by the future of this tau-theta dilemma is the only way 
to mediate the battle.” Both remarks were repeated again and 
again by the delegates at the conference, who delighted in their 
ambiguity and the fact that, as Robert Crease has said, they 
“hinted at a rising wave of possibly revolutionary physics without 
advancing the problem.” In order to make sense of the 
experimental findings regarding the tau- and theta-mesons, the 
theorists had either to say that the two were—despite having the 
same mass and the same lifetime—different particles, or else they 
had to say that a principle that had been assumed to be a 
fundamental law of physics—the conservation of parity—was 
actually no such thing. On the way back from Rochester, Yang 
and Pais bet John Wheeler a dollar that the two were different 
particles. As it turned out, Yang had put himself into a win-win 
situation here, since he was soon to be involved in an attempt to 
prove that parity had been violated. If he succeeded, he would 
lose the bet and owe Wheeler a dollar; he would, however, also 
have made a Nobel Prize-winning contribution to physics. 

Two months after the sixth Rochester Conference, Yang sent 
Oppenheimer an article that he and Lee had written, in which 
they made a bold suggestion. What they suggested was that, 
though parity conservation had been _ experimentally 


demonstrated with regard to strong interactions, such as those 
between nucleons, there was no such experimental data with 
regard to weak interactions, such as those associated with beta- 
decay. As the tau-meson was distinguished from the theta-meson 
by means of their beta-decay products, then, suggested Yang and 
Lee, if it turns out that the law of parity conservation does not 
hold in weak interactions, there would be nothing to prevent one 
from concluding that they were in fact the same particle. They 
also suggested some possible experiments that might settle the 
issue. When this article was published in the October 1956 issue 
of the Physical Review, the authors thanked Oppenheimer, among 
others, for “interesting discussions and comments.” In fact, 
Oppenheimer’s comment was to suggest—as if their proposal 
were not bold enough—that fundamental conceptions of space 
and time might have to change in order to make sense of the tau- 
theta puzzle. 

One possible experiment suggested by Yang and Lee was to 
look for violations of parity in beta decay in the release of 
electrons from a radioactive substance such as cobalt-60. Another 
possible experiment was to look for violations of parity in the 
decays of pions and muons, other examples of weak interactions. 
A team of experimentalists led by Chien Shiung Wu at Columbia 
took up the challenge laid down by Yang and Lee, and by the end 
of 1956 had demonstrated beyond all doubt that they were right: 
the conservation of parity did not hold for weak interactions. The 
tau-theta puzzle had been solved: they were the same particle. 
Wheeler won his dollar, and Yang and Lee were awarded the 
1957 Nobel Prize in physics. 

In January 1957, shortly after the results came in, Yang cabled 
Oppenheimer, who was then in the Virgin Islands, to tell him: 
“Wu’s experiment yielding large symmetry.” Oppenheimer 
replied: “Walked through door. Greetings.” The allusion in 
Oppenheimer’s telegram is explained in Yang’s Nobel Prize 
speech, in which he said: 


The situation that the physicist found himself in at that time 
has been likened to a man in a dark room groping for an 
outlet. He is aware of the fact that in some direction there must 
be a door which would lead him out of his predicament. But in 
which direction? 


The excitement generated by the breakthrough of Yang and Lee 
was reminiscent of that which accompanied the breakthroughs of 
the 1920s and ’30s. On January 16, 1957, the New York Times 
had it as its front-page story under the heading: “Basic concept in 
physics is reported upset in tests. Conservation of parity in 
nuclear theory challenged by scientists at Columbia and Princeton 
Institute.” The excitement was shared by Oppenheimer, who 
declared: “No one today knows where this discovery will 
lead ... something has been found whose meaning only the future 
will reveal.” 

In the spring of 1957, Oppenheimer—now fifty-three—gave the 
William James Lectures at Harvard, an annual series of talks 
somewhat akin in terms of prestige to the BBC’s Reith Lectures. 
Oppenheimer’s overall title was “The Hope of Order.” Among 
those present was Jeremy Bernstein, who remembers: 


It was an occasion. At Sanders Theater, the largest lecture 
venue on the campus, its twelve hundred seats were filled and 
another eight hundred people could listen on speakers in the 
so-called New Lecture Hall. The lecture attracted not only the 
university community but people from all over Boston. Seated 
in front of me were two of those wonderfully elegant ancient 
Boston ladies with blue hair. 


Bernstein was at this time coming to the end of a two-year 
appointment and had applied to the institute for a fellowship. He 
was, he recalls, “truly amazed—and absolutely thrilled—when I 
received a letter of acceptance ...not long after this letter 
arrived, there was Oppenheimer giving a lecture at Harvard”: 


Nothing that has been written about his charisma as a public 
lecturer has been exaggerated. It was a mixture of phrasing 
that was both elegant and somewhat obscure. You were not 
quite sure what he meant, but you were sure that it was 
profound and that it was your fault that you didn’t see why. 


After the lecture, Bernstein decided to go onto the stage to 
introduce himself. To begin with, Oppenheimer “looked at me 
with what I distinctly remember as icy hostility,” but when 
Bernstein told him that he would be joining the institute that 
autumn, “his demeanor completely changed”: 


It was like a sunrise. He told me who would be there—an 
incredible list. He ended by saying that Lee and Yang were 
going to be there and that they would teach us about 
parity ... Then Oppenheimer said, with a broad smile, “We’re 
going to have a ball!” I will never forget that. It made it clear 
to me why he had been such a fantastic director at Los Alamos. 


The lectures were never published, but the accounts of them 
that appeared in the Harvard Crimson indicate that they covered 
the same ground as the 1953 Reith Lectures. When interviewed 
by the local television station, Oppenheimer remarked: “I believe 
in the popularization of science. I don’t think I do it terribly well. 
But we must know that it is as impossible as it is essential. It has 
those two inescapable sides, I think.” 

One senses that, as he spent more of his time popularizing 
physics, he felt himself increasingly removed from the cutting 
edge of the subject. When Bernstein arrived at the institute in the 
autumn of 1957, he was surprised to be told, immediately upon 
telling the secretary who he was, that Oppenheimer wanted to 
see him right away. As soon as he walked into Oppenheimer’s 
office, he recalls, Oppenheimer greeted him: “What is new and 
firm in physics?” While Bernstein was wondering how to reply, 
the phone rang. “It’s Kitty,” Oppenheimer told him after hanging 
up. “She has been drinking again.” 

The Princeton physicist Sam Treiman remembers that every 
Tuesday Oppenheimer hosted a lunch in his office for a group of 
six or so physicists, including Yang, Pais, Dyson and Treiman 
himself. Oppenheimer, he recalls, “attached great importance to 
the lunches, often calling me a day in advance to remind.” 
Treiman was not so convinced about the scientific value of these 
meetings, in which, he says, the participants “overdrank the 
sherry, and just rambled on about current developments in 
physics ... The conversation was never highly technical. It had 
more to do with who’s in, who’s out, what are the best bet, etc.” 

On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the 
world’s first earth-orbiting artificial satellite. The response in the 
United States was a frightened shock that the Soviets were, in this 
technology if not in others, actually ahead. Influenced, no doubt, 
by his positive experience of the Ed Murrow show, Oppenheimer 
agreed to be interviewed on the subject by Howard K. Smith for a 


CBS News program called Where We Stand. Much to 
Oppenheimer’s chagrin, his interview was never aired. 
Oppenheimer seemed to believe that this was because he had 
been too controversial, though the vice president of CBS News, 
Sig Mickelson, told him that it was because “there was other 
material which was more useful to the central theme of the 
program than your interview.” A transcript of the interview 
preserved in Oppenheimer’s papers would seem to bear Mickelson 
out. For most of the time Oppenheimer was discussing very 
general defects in the U.S. educational system. When he was 
asked about the attempt to catch up with the Russians on satellite 
development, his response was short, bland and uninformative: 
“We wouldn’t like to have this a Russian monopoly, we would 
like to be good at it.” 

More interesting was a talk that he gave in April 1958 to the 
International Press Institute in Washington under the title “The 
Tree of Knowledge,” which was published later in the year in 
Harper’s Magazine. Oppenheimer’s central theme in this talk was 
the huge growth in the volume of scientific knowledge and its 
increasing specialization. “Today,” he said, “it is not only that our 
kings do not know mathematics, but our philosophers do not 
know mathematics and—to go a_ step further—our 
mathematicians do not know mathematics.” Expanding on what 
he said earlier about the impossibility of popularizing science, he 
told his audience that “it is almost impossible to explain what the 
fundamental principle of relativity is about, and this is even more 
true of the quantum theory”: 


And as for the recent discovery—the very gay and wonderful 
discovery for which Dr. Yang and Dr. Lee were awarded the 
Nobel Prize—that nature has a preference for right-handed or 
left-handed screws in certain situations and is not indifferent to 
the handedness of the screw—to explain this is, I believe, quite 
beyond my capacity. And I have never heard anyone do it ina 
way that could be called an enrichment of culture. 


Soon after this Oppenheimer left for Europe, where, as well as 
giving talks in Paris and Copenhagen, he attended the twelfth 
Solvay Congress in Brussels, which that year was on the theme of 
“Structure and Evolution of the Universe.” Pais was also there, 


presenting a review of recent work on weak interactions, as was 
Richard Feynman, whom Pais remembers “trying to explain 
quantum mechanics to Queen Fabiola.” 

This visit to Europe was something of a watershed in the 
Oppenheimers’ relationships with their son and daughter, who at 
that time were, respectively, seventeen and thirteen years old. 
Relations within the Oppenheimer family had been difficult ever 
since the children were born. For reasons both external and 
internal, Kitty and Robert were not ideal parents. Pat Sherr has 
remarked on how impatient Kitty was with Peter when he was 
little, adding that in her view, Kitty had “no intuitive 
understanding of the children.” It is a view shared by Abraham 
Pais, who recalled: “To an outsider like me, Oppenheimer’s 
family life looked like hell on earth. The worst of it all was that 
inevitably the two children had to suffer.” 

Relations between Peter and his parents went from bad to 
worse when it became clear that he had not inherited his father’s 
academic ability. He was sensitive and intelligent, but he did not 
excel at school. The Oppenheimers’ friends remember Kitty 
nagging Peter relentlessly, both about his poor academic 
performance and, when he began to get a little pudgy, about his 
weight. He responded by retreating into himself, becoming, as 
Serber once put it, “a shadow ... trying not to be noticed.” 

Shortly before the Oppenheimers left for Europe in 1958, Peter 
received the bad news that his application to study at Princeton 
had been rejected. As a consequence, the Oppenheimers decided 
that, though Toni would come with them to Europe, Peter would 
be left behind. If the memories of Oppenheimer’s secretary at the 
time, Verna Hobson, are correct, the decision seems to have been 
Kitty’s rather than Robert’s. “There came a time,” Hobson 
recalled, “when Robert had to choose between Peter—of whom 
he was very fond—and Kitty. She made it so it had to be one or 
the other, and because of the compact he had made with God or 
with himself, he chose Kitty.” 

In the summer of 1958, in what looks like an effort to 
overcome the kind of specialization that he had identified and 
lamented in “The Tree of Knowledge,” Oppenheimer published a 
long, detailed and thoughtful review of A Study of Thinking by 
Jerome Bruner. His conclusion was that, “Even the lay reader will 
recognize in this book some fresh and solid steps toward an 


understanding of characteristic traits of man’s rational behavior.” 
But: “He will also see that the psychological sciences have a very 
long way indeed to go.” He was evidently on a mission to bridge 
the gaps created by specialization. On July 5, 1958, he published 
a piece in the Saturday Evening Post under the title “The Mystery 
of Matter,” which, while attempting to explain particle physics to 
the general public, also tried to explain why—having argued 
several times that such a thing was impossible—he thought it 
worthwhile making the attempt. “All of us in our years of 
learning,” he wrote: 


many if not most of us throughout our lives, need some 
apprenticeship in the specialized traditions, which will make us 
better able to understand one another, and clearer as to the 
extent to which we do not. This will not be easy. To me it 
seems necessary for the coherence of our culture, and for our 
future as a free civilization. 


Whether Oppenheimer was successful in explaining physicists 
and psychologists to each other, and both to the general public, 
the cumulative effect of his appearances on television, his popular 
articles and his public speeches was, bit by bit, to repair the 
damage done to his reputation by the security hearing. The tide 
of opinion was swinging in his favor. Joseph McCarthy died in 
May 1957, but the movement associated with his name had been 
dying for some time before that. Oppenheimer’s tormentor, Lewis 
Strauss, too, had become an unpopular figure. In the summer of 
1958, Strauss was replaced as chairman of the AEC by John 
McCone, who, prompted by congressional calls to reevaluate the 
Oppenheimer case, asked the AEC lawyer, Loren K. Olson, to take 
a fresh look at the files. What Olson found was “a punitive, 
personal abuse of the judicial system.” The path was now clear 
for Oppenheimer to reenter public service. However, he showed 
no signs of wanting to go back down that path. 

Meanwhile, Strauss was about to face exactly the kind of public 
humiliation that he had inflicted on Oppenheimer. Shortly after 
leaving the AEC, Strauss was chosen by Eisenhower to be his new 
Secretary of Commerce. First, however, he had to submit himself 
to questioning by the Senate Committee on Interstate and Foreign 
Commerce. The hearings, which began in April 1959, are 


described by Strauss’s biographer in a way that carries a very 
strong echo: 


Day after weary day for the next four weeks Strauss heard 
himself reviled, as his attackers combed through his career for 
evidence against him. Committee members, other senators, 
scientists, even columnists accused Strauss of misconduct. 


Strauss himself described the “nightmarish quality of the 
proceedings.” “It was now clear,” Strauss wrote, “that this was to 
be not a hearing so much as an inquisition, with the attorney for 
the prosecution brought in by the chief judge.” Oppenheimer was 
too gentlemanly to point out the obvious parallels, but some of 
his friends were not. Bernice Brode, an old friend from the Los 
Alamos days, for example, attended the Strauss hearings and 
wrote to Oppenheimer to say that, in an “unchristianly spirit” she 
was enjoying Strauss’s “every squirm and anguish.” “It’s a lovely 
show ... Having a wonderful time—wish you were here.” On June 
19, 1959, the Senate voted against Strauss’s appointment as 
Secretary of Commerce, the first cabinet nominee to be rejected 
since 1925. Strauss’s political career was over. 

In the autumn of 1959, The Man Who Would Be God, 
Chevalier’s fictionalized account of his relationship with 
Oppenheimer, finally came out and flopped badly. It attracted 
almost nothing but hostile reviews in the press and aroused very 
little interest among the general public. Chevalier himself was too 
obscure, and Oppenheimer by this time too popular, for there to 
be much demand for an attack upon him by an embittered former 
friend. 

How far Oppenheimer had come politically since his days as a 
“fellow traveler” with Chevalier was demonstrated in the summer 
of 1959, by his participation in a conference sponsored by the 
Congress for Cultural Freedom. The conference took place in 
Rheinfelden, on the border between Switzerland and Germany, 
and among the other participants were Stephen Spender, 
Raymond Aron, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. and Nicolas Nabokov— 
just the sort of wide-ranging intellectuals who had been 
Oppenheimer’s ideal since his days as an undergraduate at 
Harvard. In his talk, Oppenheimer confessed to being “profoundly 
in anguish over the fact that no ethical discourse of any nobility 


or weight has been addressed to the problem of the atomic 
weapons.” “What are we to make,” he asked, “of a civilization 
which has always regarded ethics as an essential part of human 
life ... [but] which has not been able to talk about killing almost 
everybody except in prudential and game-theoretical terms?” 

In October 1959, Oppenheimer published an article on “The 
Role of the Big Accelerators” in IBM’s house magazine, Think, in 
which he provided a wonderfully clear explanation of what 
accelerators were and why physicists needed them in order to 
study the properties of fundamental particles. Protons, neutrons 
and electrons, he conceded, can readily be studied because they 
are so abundant in ordinary matter: 


But these three particles are only three of the approximately 
thirty whose existence has been revealed by the collision of 
cosmic rays with nuclear matter. What fraction they are of 
those that we will later come to recognize is not known. We 
may have the full count; we may be very, very far from it. 
These other particles are not to be found in a free state in 
ordinary matter. They have one or another or both of two 
properties: Some, the majority, are unstable, decaying like 
radioactive nuclei typically in less than a millionth of a second; 
even the neutron is unstable, but it lasts a convenient 1,000 
seconds; or, if they are not unstable in free space, they are at 
once destroyed when they interact with matter. To discover 
these, and to study them, they must be made. 


The occasion for this article was the announcement that the 
President’s Science Advisory Committee had recommended an 
increase in annual expenditure for particle accelerators from $59 
million to $100 million. It also recommended that, separately to 
this budget, the federal government foot the bill for a new 
electron accelerator at Stanford that would, all by itself, cost 
$100 million. Oppenheimer defended these recommendations, 
but was careful to make clear that, in his mind, the justification 
for the expense did not rest on any anticipated technological or 
practical developments. He was, he said, certain that “the same 
men who wish to find out more about the atomic world will 
enrich our technology as well as our knowledge,” but: 


It is important the support for their work should probably not 
rest too heavily or exclusively on this argument. There is some 
merit in knowledge for its own sake, and some virtue in the 
getting of it. We can use more of both. 


The real importance of accelerators was that they might allow 
progress to be made on “the ancient question of the constitution 
of matter.” And perhaps even “beyond this question to a new 
description of happenings in space and time.” Again, 
Oppenheimer looked forward to a_ big, fundamental 
breakthrough. “We have the sense,” he wrote, “of being in the 
neighborhood of one of those great changes in the description of 
nature, of which relativity and quantum theory are two recent 
examples.” 

In his contribution to a BBC Panorama program on “The 
1960s,” which was broadcast on January 4, 1960, Oppenheimer 
went even further. Asked to predict what the coming decade 
might bring, he said: 


We may learn—I think the chance is good—something almost 
definitive about matter, the nature of matter and its order. This 
may be part of the present effort. We will learn of the birth, 
life, death of stars and galaxies, and about space. 


But, above all, he hoped, we would learn “something about 
ourselves,” and that “we will begin to re-knit human culture, and 
by the insight and the wonder of the world of nature, as science 
has revealed it, into relevance and meaning for the intellectual 
life, the spiritual life of man.” 

His hope of “re-knitting human culture” motivated much of 
what he did in his last few years, including his involvement in the 
Congress of Cultural Freedom, the tenth anniversary of which was 
celebrated in Berlin, the original home of the Congress, in the 
summer of 1960. Oppenheimer was delighted to give the opening 
speech of the anniversary conference, in which he spoke of the 
threats to, and hopes of, progress. The greatest threat he 
identified was that of nuclear annihilation: “If this next great war 
occurs, none of us can count on having enough living to bury our 
dead.” Citing, as was his custom, “that beautiful poem,” the 
Bhagavad Gita, he asked whether we could be comforted by 


Vishnu’s words to Prince Arjuna, in which Vishnu (in the form of 
Krishna) attempts to allay Arjuna’s anxieties about killing his 
fellow human beings by convincing him of the unreality of 
suffering and urging him to adopt an attitude of “freedom from 
the chains of attachment.” Perhaps to the surprise of those in his 
audience who knew him, Oppenheimer answered negatively: 


If I cannot be comforted by Vishnu’s argument to Arjuna, it is 
because I am too much a Jew, much too much a Christian, 
much too much a European, far too much an American. For I 
believe in the meaningfulness of human history, and of our role 
in it, and above all of our responsibility to it. 


There had been progress, Oppenheimer insisted, “not merely in 
man’s understanding, but in the conditions of man’s life, in his 
civility, in the nobility of his institutions and his freedom,” and 
science had played a large role in that progress. However, in the 
process, “we have so largely lost the ability to talk with one 
another,” and this is why the “re-knitting” was so urgent and so 
important. 

In September 1960, Oppenheimer and Kitty spent three weeks 
in Japan as a guest of the Japan Committee for Intellectual 
Interchange. On his arrival in Tokyo, Oppenheimer took part in 
what one newspaper described as a “terribly ill-planned” press 
conference, at which he was asked the question he had no doubt 
been expecting, and to which he seemed to have planned his 
answer: did he regret making the bomb? “I do not regret that I 
had something to do with the technical success of the atomic 
bomb,” he replied. “It isn’t that I don’t feel bad; it is that I don’t 
feel worse tonight than I did last night.” Fearing a negative 
reaction and bad publicity, the Committee for Intellectual 
Interchange had kept Hiroshima off Oppenheimer’s itinerary. 
They probably need not have worried; wherever Oppenheimer 
went, he was met with large and appreciative audiences. From 
the surviving typescripts and the press reports one can see that, 
with one glaring and interesting exception, his talks repeated the 
themes of the public lectures he had given elsewhere. 

The exception was his participation in a discussion organized 
by the Society of Science and Man, a group of professors from 
various disciplines that met in Tokyo every month “to discuss 


various problems concerning the relationship between science 
and technology on the one hand and man and society on the 
other.” The discussion, billed as “An Afternoon with Professor 
Oppenheimer,” was not broadcast or published, but survives in a 
typed transcript that was presumably circulated among the 
participants, a copy of which was among Oppenheimer’s private 
papers. His contributions to this discussion are remarkable for 
their tone, the courtly, evasive and elaborate style that he often 
used when speaking in public giving way to the blunt and 
abrasive directness of a man determined to speak his mind. 

Some of the opinions thus expressed are surprising. C. P. 
Snow’s famous essay, “The Two Cultures,” for example, the 
central message of which (that our society is becoming polarized 
into two groups: those who understand science but not art, and 
those who understand art but not science) one might have 
expected Oppenheimer to applaud, is dismissed by him as 
exhibiting nothing but “triviality and childishness.” Most of the 
other opinions he expresses are not so much surprising in 
themselves as for the vehemence with which they are expressed. 
England is “a small society because of its inherent snobbery,” 
whose leading elite “go to the same colleges, they meet at the 
same clubs and they frequent each other and read the same 
things.” English philosophers are “out of touch with science, they 
are out of touch with politics, they are out of touch with history. 
And what they are in touch with is themselves.” As for 
advertisers, they: 


fill the air, the newspapers, the magazines, the TV screen and 
the very atmosphere with incredible and vulgar lies. Everybody 
knows this. It creates a background against which excellence 
withers and it is my great hope that you will be spared and will 
help spare your country from this pestilence. 


The discussion ends with Oppenheimer’s venomous telling of 
an anecdote about John Foster Dulles, the late U.S. Secretary of 
State, who had died just four months earlier. When Dulles met 
the Indian physicist Homi J. Bhabha, Oppenheimer said, Bhabha 
told Dulles that his impression of Russian science was rather 
favorable, to which Dulles replied: “That does not surprise me. 
After all they are a materialist and godless civilization, whereas 


we are religious and spiritual.” “Well,” concluded Oppenheimer, 
“as long as a leading politician with the destiny of the world in 
part in his hands can talk such blasphemous rubbish, we are not 
making good contact with politicians.” 

Oppenheimer and Kitty got back home to find the U.S. in the 
middle of one of the most intense and momentous presidential 
elections of the twentieth century, in which the Republican Vice 
President, Richard Nixon, faced the charismatic young-looking 
Democrat, John F. Kennedy.71 The Oppenheimers got back in 
time to watch three of the four televised debates, in which, it is 
generally agreed, Kennedy outshone his rival. The election was 
held on November 8 and, by the slenderest of margins, Kennedy 
won. 

For the first year of Kennedy’s term of office, the change in 
administration had very little effect on Oppenheimer. As before, 
he gave public talks, attended to institute business and spent 
vacations on the island of St. John in the Virgin Islands. The 
Oppenheimer family had been going to the Virgin Islands in the 
spring, summer and winter breaks since 1954, and by 1960 they 
had their own beach house there. Their immediate neighbors on 
the island were Bob Gibney and his wife, Nancy. Bob Gibney had 
been editor of The New Republic and Nancy had worked on Vogue, 
and both were initially impressed by their new neighbors. The 
more they got to know the Oppenheimers, however, the less they 
liked them, and from about 1960 onward the two families lived 
in a constant state of feuding with each other. 

The other islanders were friendlier; some of them found Kitty 
alarming, especially when she was drunk, but most of them 
remembered Oppenheimer himself with warmth and admiration, 
and all of them, except the Gibneys, were happy to accept the 
annual invitation to the Oppenheimers’ New Year’s Eve party, 
which would arrive without fail in September. When the children 
were small, they both accompanied their parents to St. John two 
or three times a year, but, on reaching adulthood, Peter stayed 
away, preferring to spend his holidays in New Mexico. Toni, on 
the other hand, loved everything about the island: its music, its 
people, its beaches and its relaxed way of life. All three— 
Oppenheimer, Kitty and Toni—acquired reputations as expert 
sailors and they would go off sailing for days at a time. 

In January 1962, after spending Christmas on St. John as usual, 


and hosting their customary New Year’s Eve beach party, the 
Oppenheimers left for Canada, where Robert had been invited to 
give the Whidden Lectures at McMaster University. The purpose 
of these lectures, in the words of the then-principal of University 
College, McMaster, “is to help students cross the barriers 
separating the academic departments of a modern university.” 
The three lectures—“Space and Time,” “Atom and Field” and 
“War and the Nations’—cover ground that was pretty well 
trodden by Oppenheimer by this time, but, presumably because 
they were aimed at students rather than at the general public, the 
ground was covered in greater depth and Oppenheimer was less 
inhibited in using mathematical expressions. In 1964, they were 
published as a small book with the puzzling and inaccurate title 
The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for Physicists. 

Soon after he arrived back in Princeton, Oppenheimer received 
a letter dated February1 from The Christian Century, a 
nondenominational magazine, asking him to “jot down—almost 
on impulse” a list of up to ten books “that most shaped your 
attitudes in your vocation and philosophy of life.” The list he sent 
them was as follows: 


1. Les Fleurs du mal 

2. Bhagavad Gita 

3. Riemann’s Gesammelte mathematische Werke 
4. Theaetetus 

5. L’Education sentimentale 

6. Divina Commedia 

7. Bhartrihari’s Three Hundred Poems 

8. “The Waste Land” 

9. Faraday’s notebooks 

10. Hamlet 


As an exercise in polymathic showing off, the list is peerless. In 
just ten titles Oppenheimer has managed to include works of 
drama, fiction, poetry, mathematics, physics and Hinduism, 
written in a total of no fewer than six languages: Sanskrit, Greek, 
Italian, French, German and English. Moreover, in leaving out, in 
most cases, the author’s name, Oppenheimer is making rather 
large assumptions about the readers of The Christian Century: that 
they would know that Les Fleurs du mal is a collection of poems 


by Charles Baudelaire, that the Theaetetus is a dialogue by Plato, 
that L’Education sentimentale and Divina Commedia were works by, 
respectively, Flaubert and Dante, and, most obscure of all, that by 
“Bhartrihari’s Three hundred poems” he meant the S‘atakatraya, 
which are usually translated as “The Three Centuries,” but which 
Oppenheimer’s old friend Arthur Ryder translated as “Women’s 
Eyes.” The letter inviting Oppenheimer to take part in this feature 
had said that the lists “should inform, intrigue, and possibly 
inspire our readers.” Well, they were probably intrigued at least. 

On April 29, 1962, President Kennedy hosted a formal 
reception and dinner at the White House for forty-nine American 
Nobel Prize—-winners plus additional guests, among whom was 
Oppenheimer. The company included scientists such as Linus 
Pauling and Glenn Seaborg (but not, significantly, Edward 
Teller), and writers like Robert Frost and Pearl Buck. It was, said 
Kennedy, “the most extraordinary collection of talent, of human 
knowledge, that has ever been gathered together at the White 
House, with the possible exception of when Thomas Jefferson 
dined alone.” After dinner, Seaborg took Oppenheimer aside and 
told him that there was a good chance of reinstating his security 
clearance. All Oppenheimer had to do was submit himself once 
more to a security-board hearing. Would he do that? The answer 
was swift and final: “Not on your life.” 

In September 1962, Oppenheimer was one of three speakers at 
the dedication of the Niels Bohr Library of the History of Physics 
at the American Institute of Physics in New York. The other two 
speakers were Richard Courant, professor at New York 
University, and George Uhlenbeck from Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
Less than two months later, on November 18, Bohr died at the 
age of seventy-seven. For the next Year Book of the American 
Philosophical Society Oppenheimer wrote a long and detailed, but 
emotionally restrained, biographical memoir of Bohr. Reading it, 
one would never imagine that he was here writing about the man 
he revered above all others. 

Oppenheimer gave so many public talks during this time, many 
of them subsequently published as magazine articles, that, 
inevitably, their quality varied and he increasingly began to 
repeat himself. In the October 1962 edition of Encounter, the in- 
house magazine of the Congress for Cultural Freedom, he 
published an article called “Science and Culture,” which seems to 


be little more than a rehashing of thoughts that he had published 
many times before. Slightly more inspired, if only for its title, was 
a talk he gave at the National Book Awards in New York on 
March 12, 1963. The title, of which he was very proud, was “The 
Added Cubit,” an allusion to the Sermon on the Mount as given in 
St. Matthew, in which Jesus, in the context of exhorting his 
followers to “Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or 
what ye shall drink”—that is, to trust God to provide these things 
—says: “Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto 
his stature?” 

Before giving the lecture, Oppenheimer stopped off at 
Columbia and, while there, asked everyone what his title meant, 
and where it came from. No one knew. Jeremy Bernstein had 
recently joined the faculty at Columbia, and a colleague called 
him to tell him about Oppenheimer’s triumphant exposure of the 
physicists’ ignorance of the Bible, whereupon Bernstein, being 
curious, phoned his friend Robert Merton, who immediately 
identified the relevant passage from St. Matthew. Then, Bernstein 
recalls: 


I went to midtown Manhattan to the Hotel Algonquin to meet 
some New Yorker colleagues.72 As I was passing the elevator, 
out walked the Oppenheimers. When he saw me he said: “Your 
father is a rabbi—you should know this.” He had the wrong 
testament for my father, but I gave Merton’s answer with no 
explanation. He looked at me very strangely. 


It is hard to see quite why Oppenheimer was so proud of this 
title, but proud he was. He even ended the talk with an example 
of the amusement he derived from the failure of people to 
identify its source: 


Let me end with an anecdote. Three weeks ago a high officer of 
the National Book Committee asked me for a title for this talk. 
I did not have one then but I promised to call back shortly and 
give the title you have heard. He protested that my title was 
quite puzzling and uninformative. I said it had a history. He 
seemed puzzled and I quoted St. Matthew. Then he said, “From 
what book is that?” The National Book Committee still has a 
lot to do.73 


Oppenheimer’s theme in this talk is that, contrary to what 
Jesus says in the Sermon on the Mount, we should “take thought” 
and not place our trust in fate, or God, or our leaders. “By taking 
thought of our often grim responsibility,” Oppenheimer told his 
audience, “by knowing something of our profound and 
omnipresent imperfection, we may help our children’s children to 
a world less cruel, perhaps less unjust, less likely to end in a 
catastrophe beyond words. We may even find our way to put an 
end to the orgy, the killing and the brutality that is war.” 

The “imperfection” of mankind had by this time become one of 
Oppenheimer’s favorite themes, though it is here given a new 
intensity. In our secularized age, he says, we have lost something 
that can be found in the great religions and is “a truth whose 
recognition seems to me essential to the very possibility of a 
permanently peaceful world, and to be indispensable also in our 
dealings with people with radically different history and culture 
and tradition”: 


It is the knowledge of the inwardness of evil, and an awareness 
that in our dealings with this we are very close to the center of 
life. It is true of us as a people that we tend to see all devils as 
foreigners; it is true of us ourselves, most of us, who are not 
artists, that in our public life, and to a distressing extent our 
private life as well, we reflect and project and externalize what 
we cannot bear to see within us. When we are blind to the evil 
in ourselves, we dehumanize ourselves, and we deprive 
ourselves not only of our own destiny, but of any possibility of 
dealing with the evil in others. 


This, fundamentally, is why the arts are important, since “it is 
almost wholly through the arts that we have a living reminder of 
the terror, of the nobility of what we can be, and what we are.” 

At the institute Oppenheimer had to deal not so much with evil 
as with pettiness and squabbling. Several senior members of the 
institute—including, most vehemently, the mathematicians Deane 
Montgomery and André Weil—did not like the way it was going 
under Oppenheimer’s leadership. They thought he brought too 
many physicists, psychologists, poets and sociologists to the 
institute, and not enough mathematicians. “He was out to 
humiliate mathematicians,” said Weil: 


Oppenheimer was a wholly frustrated personality, and _ his 
amusement was to make people quarrel with each other. I’ve 
seen him do it. He loved to have people at the Institute quarrel 
with each other. He was frustrated essentially because he 
wanted to be Niels Bohr or Albert Einstein, and he knew he 
wasn’t. 


Robert Crease tells a story that illustrates something about both 
the bitchiness of academic life and the kind of sniping at 
Oppenheimer that went on during this time: 


Once in the 1950s, during the oral part of the physics 
qualifying exam at the University of Wisconsin, a student was 
asked what J. Robert Oppenheimer had contributed to physics. 
“I don’t know,” the student answered—and was informed that 
was the correct answer. 


Sniping at a more personal level went on too, with Deane 
Montgomery referring to the Oppenheimers’ home, Olden Manor, 
as “Bourbon Manor.” 

George Kennan in his Memoirs writes that it was a “source of 
profound bewilderment and disappointment” to Oppenheimer 
that he was unable to bring the disciplines of mathematics and 
history together at the institute, that he “remained so largely 
alone in his ability to bridge in a single inner world those wholly 
disparate workings of the human intellect.” Mathematicians and 
historians would not even sit together in the cafeteria. In place of 
interdisciplinary harmony there was a constant and fierce rivalry 
between the mathematicians and the exponents of other 
disciplines. 

The squabbling became particularly intense whenever the 
question of new appointments came up, the hardest-fought and 
most unpleasant battle occurring in the academic year 1962-3. 
“The faculty meetings became so acrimonious,” recalls Yang, “I 
was afraid to go unless I had to.” Abraham Pais remembers that 
early in 1963 he decided to leave the institute: “It started to dawn 
on me that I had better move on.” One reason was that he was 
worried about becoming complacent and wanted some fresh 
challenges, but a contributing factor in his decision to leave was, 
he wrote, that “just about then, Oppenheimer was in trouble 


again with the faculty because of his vacillations in regard to two 
new faculty appointments in mathematics, which had taken days 
of mediation on my part, whereafter I said to myself: No more.” 

The dispute began when the mathematicians started pushing 
for the appointment of John Milnor, a mathematician at 
Princeton University, as a permanent member of the institute. 
Oppenheimer turned the request down, whereupon the 
mathematicians presented two further nominations. Oppenheimer 
proposed postponing these appointments, but was overruled by 
the trustees at the mathematicians’ request, whereupon Pais 
wrote to Oppenheimer, announcing his resignation. 

In April 1963, in the middle of this dispute, it was publicly 
announced that Oppenheimer would be the next recipient of the 
AEC’s Enrico Fermi Award. This was an award for outstanding 
achievement in the nuclear field that had been established soon 
after Fermi’s death at the end of 1954. It was awarded 
posthumously to Fermi, and then in successive years to von 
Neumann, Lawrence, Wigner, Seaborg, Bethe and _ Teller. 
Oppenheimer had known that he had been nominated for the 
award since the White House dinner in April 1962, when 
Seaborg, who had been appointed by Kennedy as the new 
chairman of the AEC, took him aside and told him. Seaborg had 
been mainly responsible for ensuring that the award went to 
Oppenheimer, intending it to be a public recognition by the AEC 
that it had done him an injustice by its decision to strip him of his 
clearance and that it regarded him as someone to honor rather 
than to hold in suspicion. Seaborg says that, having made the 
decision to award the prize to Oppenheimer, he called Strauss to 
invite him to lunch, where he told him the news: “He looked as if 
I’d leaned over the table and punched him.” 

The decision was reported in the June edition of Physics Today, 
which reproduced the AEC’s announcement and the biographical 
sketch of Oppenheimer that they released alongside it. The 
biographical sketch ended with an appendix giving details of nine 
of Oppenheimer’s most important articles. Rather oddly, what is 
now regarded as his greatest scientific achievement—the paper 
on gravitational collapse that he wrote with Snyder—is not 
mentioned. The presentation ceremony, Physics Today reported, 
would take place in December 1963. 

In the meantime, in the summer of 1963, Oppenheimer helped 


to organize an odd little conference that became the first in an 
annual series at Seven Springs Farm, Mount Kisco, New York. The 
conferences were held on the estate of Agnes Meyer, the widow 
of Eugene Meyer, who, before his death in 1959, had been the 
owner of the Washington Post. Participation was by invitation only 
and the number of invitees was restricted to fifteen, in order to 
“maintain intimacy of discussion.” Those invited comprised a 
diverse collection, united only by their broad sympathy with the 
ideals of the Congress for Cultural Freedom. In 1963, the 
attendees included the Princeton scholar Julian Boyd, the Oxford 
philosopher Stuart Hampshire, the poet Robert Lowell, the 
architect Wallace K. Harrison, the psychiatrist Morris Carstairs, 
the physicist George Kistiakowsky, as well as Oppenheimer’s 
friends George Kennan74 and Nicolas Nabokov. 

The event provided Oppenheimer with the opportunity to give 
a different kind of talk from the public lectures he had been 
delivering to hundreds, and sometimes thousands, of people 
during the previous decade. For one thing, he could, while 
speaking, mention the members of his audience by name, often 
using familiar versions of their names. Harrison was “Wally,” 
Nabokov was “Nico,” and Kistiakowsky “Kisty.” His talk 
expounded Bohr’s notion of “complementarity,” in a way that he 
had expounded in public many, many times before, except that, 
in extending it beyond physics, he applied it not only to the 
understanding of politics and society, but also to an 
understanding of oneself. This led him into an intimate, almost 
confessional passage, of a kind very rarely to be found in any of 
his other recorded utterances, whether private or public: 


Up to now, and even more in the days of my almost infinitely 
prolonged adolescence, I hardly took any action, hardly did 
anything, or failed to do anything, whether it was a paper on 
physics, or a lecture, or how I read a book, how I talked to a 
friend, how I loved, that did not arouse in me a very great 
sense of revulsion and of wrong. It turned out to be impossible, 
I will not say to live with myself, because I think there is no 
problem there, but for me to live with anybody else, without 
understanding that what I saw was only one part of the truth. 
And in an attempt to break out and be a reasonable man, I had 
to realize that my own worries about what I did were valid and 


were important, but that they were not the whole story, that 
there must be a complementary way of looking at them, 
because other people did not see them as I did. And I needed 
what they saw, needed them. 


Never before had Oppenheimer tried so hard to reveal his inner 
self, as if he were determined to, so to speak, stand naked before 
these like-minded souls. In his mind, he told his audience, a 
recurring theme of the conference had been “a recognition of and 
a protest against, the elements of smugness, falsity, self- 
satisfaction and unction in our times, our societies and our lives, 
against the hypocritical.” In that sense, he said, the conference 
participants had something important in common with the Beat 
movement in poetry, which “is surely not without artistic portent, 
but which is essentially, if 1 know the people and what they do, a 
kind of brutal protest against what they feel to be false in the 
description of the world which their elders have given them and 
in which they live.” 

On November 21, 1963, the White House issued an 
announcement that the Fermi Prize would be presented by the 
President himself to Oppenheimer on December 2. The following 
day, the announcement was reported in the newspapers. That 
afternoon, in Dallas, Texas, President Kennedy was assassinated. 

So it was that the presentation was made by President Johnson. 
“IT know every person in the room grieves with me that the late 
President could not give this award as he anticipated,” Johnson 
said. “I take great pleasure and pride that I substitute for him.” 
He then handed Oppenheimer the citation, the gold medal and a 
check for $50,000. Oppenheimer’s short acceptance speech 
concentrated on “this great enterprise of our time, testing 
whether men can both preserve and enlarge life, liberty and the 
pursuit of happiness, and live without war as the great arbiter of 
history”: 


In this enterprise, no one bears a greater responsibility than the 
President of the United States. I think it just possible, Mr. 
President, that it has taken some charity and some courage for 
you to make this award today. That would seem to me a good 
augury for all our futures. 


At the reception afterward Oppenheimer was photographed 
shaking Edward Teller’s hand, with Kitty standing beside him, 
looking at Teller with icy contempt. “I enjoyed what you had to 
say,” said Teller. “I’m so very glad you came,” replied 
Oppenheimer. 

Another chance for America’s scientific establishment to honor 
Oppenheimer presented itself the following April, on the occasion 
of his sixtieth birthday. It was duly taken, but in a curiously 
unenthusiastic way. Oppenheimer’s colleagues at the institute, 
Dyson, Pais, Stromgren and Yang, undertook to edit a special 
issue of Reviews of Modern Physics dedicated to him. However, 
Robert Crease records that they had difficulty persuading people 
to contribute. Dyson wrote to forty leading physicists, many of 
whom, it seems, refused to contribute. Max Born did contribute, 
but only a short and rather halfhearted “Message,” rather than a 
proper article. Those who did contribute included Leonard Schiff, 
David Hawkins, Phil Morrison, Cyril Smith, Willie Fowler, Robert 
Christy, Eugene Wigner, Julian Schwinger, Abraham Pais, Robert 
Serber and Kenneth Case. It was an impressive list, but more 
impressive was the list of people one would have expected to 
contribute, but who were not there: Isidor Rabi, Victor Weisskopf, 
Robert Bacher, Samuel Allison, Ed Condon, F. W. Loomis, Hans 
Bethe, Charles Lauritsen, and so on. 

One of the most interesting articles in this Festschrift is a long 
and detailed study by Willie Fowler of “Massive Stars, Relativist 
Polytropes, and Gravitational Radiation,” which is one of the first 
published papers to recognize the importance of Oppenheimer’s 
work in this area. It begins by quoting from Oppenheimer’s 
papers on the subject and remarking: “It is a tribute to Robert 
Oppenheimer’s genius that these are the few statements about 
massive stars accepted as true today.” 

This special issue of Reviews of Modern Physics was printed on 
April 22, 1964, the very day of Oppenheimer’s sixtieth birthday. 
According to the weekly letter that Dyson wrote home to his 
parents, the first copy “was rushed down from New York hot 
from the press,” just in time for the party they had arranged for 
Oppenheimer at the Strémgrens’ house. “Oppenheimer,” Dyson 
wrote, “seemed to be genuinely surprised and greatly moved. It 
was the first time I have ever seen him at a loss for a suitable 
speech. He just said ‘Thank you’ rather incoherently and sat 


down.” 

The next day, Oppenheimer flew across the United States to 
Berkeley, where he delivered a lecture on the life and work of 
Niels Bohr to an audience of 12,500. “I am very pleased to be 
back home,” he told the massive crowd that had come to hear 
him. “I lived here a long time and to those of you to whom a 
choice is offered, don’t go away.” After Berkeley, Oppenheimer 
gave talks at Caltech, UCLA and, finally, on May 18, at Los 
Alamos. Everywhere he went he lectured on Bohr, emphasizing 
again and again the social, political and personal importance of 
Bohr’s notion of complementarity. 

In September 1964, at the Rencontres Internationales de 
Genéve, Oppenheimer gave a talk entitled “L’Intime et le 
Commun” (“The Intimate and the Open”), in which he touched 
again upon the themes of his 1963 Mount Kisco talk, urging that 
the openness espoused by Bohr should be expanded to include the 
private as well as the public. Referring to his security hearing, 
which by this time was ten years in the past, he said: 


... when the proceedings were published, many said that my 
life had become an open book. That was not really true. Most 
of what meant most to me never appeared in those hearings. 
Perhaps much was not known; certainly much was not 
relevant. I did have occasion then to think of what it might 
have been like to be an open book. I have come to the 
conclusion that if in fact privacy is an accidental blessing, and 
can be taken from you, if it is worth anyone’s trouble, for a few 
dollars, and a few hours, it may still not be such a bad way to 
live. 


He was speaking here, of course, as someone who for many 
years had lived with the awareness that his phones were being 
tapped, his rooms bugged and his every movement followed and 
monitored. One might have expected him to be especially 
protective of his privacy, and indeed for most of his life he was. 
During these last years, however, he seemed to be striving for a 
very personal kind of openness, an important element of which 
was the recognition and acceptance of the evil in oneself: 


We most of all should try to be experts in the worst about 


ourselves: we should not be astonished to find some evil there, 
that we find so very readily abroad and in all others. We 
should not, as Rousseau tried to, comfort ourselves that it is the 
responsibility and the fault of others, that we are just naturally 
good; nor should we let Calvin persuade us that despite our 
obvious duty we are without any power, however small and 
limited, to deal with what we find of evil in ourselves. In this 
knowledge, of ourselves, of our profession, of our country—our 
often beloved country—of our civilization itself, there is scope 
for what we most need: self knowledge, courage, humor, and 
some charity. These are the great gifts that our tradition makes 
to us, to prepare us for how to live tomorrow. 


He chose a related theme when, on September 27, 1964, he 
was invited to speak at the inauguration of the University of 
Peace, an institution founded by the Dominican friar Father Pire, 
who had won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958 for his work with 
refugees. What Oppenheimer emphasized on this occasion was 
the need to overcome pride, linking that theme to the danger of 
nuclear weapons in the following way: 


Today we live... with the arms race promising death to 
hundreds of millions, with massive retaliation, as it is called, 
and with its more sophisticated, better educated young 
brother, deterrence, and with cold wars. They are less inhuman 
than war itself, and let us not forget it, but they are not very 
human either. Yet by casting doubt, by recognizing the nearly 
ultimate evil of general war in this age, they question all war; 
they question our national sense of self-righteousness. They 
limit and often mark our pride, and our pride in our power, 
and in the legitimacy of violence, and our resort to it, or of 
hate itself as a welcome element of Man’s destiny. 


Hearing and reading passages like this, it was natural to imagine 
that Oppenheimer was here confessing and apologizing for his 
“sin” in having been responsible for the deaths of tens of 
thousands of people. But, as he said over and over again, he did 
not regret his work at Los Alamos, nor did he think he and his 
colleagues had done something unjustifiable in building the 
bomb. When he said that physicists had “known sin,” the sin he 


had in mind was not murder, but pride. 

One person who misunderstood Oppenheimer on this crucial 
point was the German playwright Heinar Kipphardt, who wrote a 
play based on the 1954 hearings called In the Matter of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer. The play, first performed in Germany in January 
1964, took much of its dialogue from the transcript, but added to 
it additional material, such as Oppenheimer’s postwar comment 
that physicists had known sin and some lines of Kipphardt’s own. 
It was these last that were the main source of the problem. At the 
end of the play, Kipphardt’s Oppenheimer delivers a soliloquy in 
which he expresses regret for what he and his colleagues had 
done: 


I begin to wonder whether we were not perhaps traitors to the 
spirit of science when we handed over the results of our 
research to the military ... We have spent years of our lives in 
developing ever sweeter means of destruction, we have been 
doing the work of the military and I feel in my very bones that 
this was wrong ... I will never work on war projects again. We 
have been doing the work of the Devil. 


Oppenheimer read the play in August 1964 and was horrified 
by it. Though the portrayal of him was clearly intended to be 
sympathetic, the sympathy was, from his point of view, 
misplaced, since it was based on misrepresenting his views. On 
October 12, 1964, he wrote to Kipphardt, complaining that “You 
make me say things which I did not and do not believe.” 


Even this September in Geneva, during a conference of the 
Rencontres de Genéve, I was asked by the Canon van Kamp 
whether now, knowing the results, I would again do what I did 
during the war: participate in a responsible way in the making 
of atomic weapons. To this I answered yes. When a voice in the 
audience angrily asked “Even after Hiroshima?” I repeated my 


yes. 


“Tt seems to me,” he added, “you may well have forgotten 
Guernica, Dachau, Coventry, Belsen, Warsaw, Dresden, Tokyo. I 
have not. I think that if you find it necessary so to misread and 
misrepresent your principal character, you should perhaps write 
about someone else.” He finished by warning Kipphardt of legal 


action “against you and the producers of your play.” 

Meanwhile, the play was proving popular with audiences and 
gaining favorable reviews, not only in Germany, but also in the 
U.S. Oppenheimer did not carry out his threat to sue Kipphardt, 
but he did express his feelings to the press. “The whole damn 
thing was a farce,” he told the Washington Post, “and these people 
are trying to make a tragedy out of it.” On November 11, 1964, 
he issued a press statement on the subject, which identified a 
problem that perhaps upset him even more than the 
misrepresentation of his own views. Kipphardt, he pointed out, 
“makes me say that Bohr disapproved of the work at Los Alamos 
because it would make science subservient to the military.” As he 
had spent the last eighteen months giving lecture after lecture on 
Bohr in which he had said that Bohr had given everyone at Los 
Alamos fresh hope and a revived sense of purpose, he could not 
let this go uncontested. He had, he insisted, “never said such a 
thing”; Bohr “understood and welcomed what we were doing.” 

When the play was performed in Paris at the end of 1964, the 
French director, Jean Vilar, heeded Oppenheimer’s protests, 
removed the lines that had offended him and created a version 
that was faithful to the transcript and the historical facts. The 
result was that critics scorned it for being too literal, Kipphardt 
himself complained that his play had been thus rendered 
toothless, and audiences stayed away. 

In February 1965, Oppenheimer went one step further with 
regard to a proposed performance of the play at the Aldwych 
Theatre in London and successfully had it canceled. “I have not 
been for this play,” Oppenheimer wrote to the London producer, 
John Roberts. “I have not wished to have it produced in Berlin, or 
in Paris, or anywhere else. I would hope that it would not be 
produced in England, or in this country.” The lines added by 
Kipphardt, Oppenheimer said revealingly, “seem to me, in fact, 
rather ‘anti-American.’ ” A few weeks later, Roberts received a 
letter from Oppenheimer’s lawyers, threatening to “restrain the 
production of the play as an unlawful invasion of privacy.” By the 
same means, in October 1965, a proposed production in New 
York was also scrapped. 

Why was Oppenheimer so opposed to the play? Some have 
suggested that he did not want to have all the unpleasantness of 
the hearing revived, replayed and regurgitated; others that, 


having won the Fermi Prize, he wanted to get his security 
clearance back and therefore did not want to be represented as a 
man in opposition to the government. But perhaps his twin 
descriptions of the hearing as a “farce” and the play as “anti- 
American” provide the real answer: whether it came in the form 
of an accusation from Lewis Strauss or as admiring flattery from 
Heinar Kipphardt, Oppenheimer was determined to resist the idea 
that he was opposed to his own country, because his deep love of 
America was one of the strongest passions he had. Einstein 
captured this well when, on being told that, against his advice, 
Oppenheimer had submitted himself to a security hearing 
(Einstein had advised Oppenheimer to tell the officials they were 
fools and then to go home), he said: “The trouble with 
Oppenheimer is that he loves a woman who doesn’t love him— 
the United States government.” 

Another unwelcome threat to his reputation came in the 
summer of 1964 in the form of a letter from Haakon Chevalier. 
The letter came out of the blue. Oppenheimer had had nothing to 
do with Chevalier since the end of 1954, and the publication in 
1959 of The Man Who Would Be God did nothing to tempt him to 
resume contact or to think warmly about his old friend and 
comrade. Chevalier was writing to tell Oppenheimer that, after 
publishing his fictionalized account of their relationship, he had 
been urged by a number of people (including, he claimed, Niels 
Bohr) to write “the true story of my involvement with you” in a 
nonfictional way. “The reason I am writing to you,” Chevalier 
told Oppenheimer, “is that an important part of the story 
concerns your and my membership in the same unit of the CP 
from 1938 to 1942.” 


I should like to deal with this in its proper perspective, telling 
the facts as I remember them. As this is one of the things in 
your life which, in my opinion, you have least to be ashamed 
of, and as your commitment, attested among other things by 
your “Reports to our Colleagues,” which today make 
impressive reading, was a deep and genuine one, I consider 
that it would be a grave omission not to give it its due 
prominence. 


Oppenheimer’s reply, dated August 7, 1964, was firm and 


somewhat icy: 


Dear Haakon, 

Your letter came while I was away from Princeton; hence 
this small delay in my answering. I am glad that you wrote to 
me. Your letter asks whether I would have any objections. 
Indeed I do. What you say of yourself I find surprising. Surely 
in one respect what you say of me is not true. I have never 
been a member of the Communist Party, and thus have never 
been a member of a Communist Party unit. I, of course, have 
always known this. I thought you did too. 


The following March, Lloyd Garrison phoned Oppenheimer to 
discuss what to do about Chevalier’s book. Notes of the 
conversation, presumably written by Oppenheimer, survive and 
record what he told Garrison: “Had letter from Chevalier, 
obscure, slightly blackmailing. Took it to Joe Volpe. Brief answer. 
No further correspondence.” They decided not to try and block 
the book, for fear of giving it free publicity. In the event, that 
proved wise. The book, entitled Oppenheimer: The Story of a 
Friendship, was published in the summer of 1965. It did not state 
that Oppenheimer had been a member of a Communist Party cell. 
Nor did it sell any better or get reviewed any more favorably than 
The Man Who Would Be God. 

Oppenheimer was by this time a weary man, aged beyond his 
years. On April 15, 1965, a few days before his sixty-first 
birthday, he wrote to the institute’s Board of Trustees, telling 
them that he intended to retire, not from the faculty, but from the 
directorship, at the end of June 1966. Two days after his 
birthday, on April 24, 1965, the institute announced this decision 
and also that Oppenheimer’s plans for his forthcoming time as a 
nondirectorial professor of physics would include, in 
Oppenheimer’s words, “physics, of course, which is in a most 
dramatic and hopeful stage, and to seek an understanding, both 
historical and philosophical, of what the sciences have brought to 
human life.” When, in May 1965, the New York Times Magazine 
ran a feature on the institute, they reported that few people 
mourned Oppenheimer’s passing and that there was, on the 
contrary, “a general feeling that his resignation as director is best 
for him and best for the Institute.” 


The summer of 1965 was marked by two _ significant 
anniversaries that kept Oppenheimer in the public eye: the 
twentieth anniversary of the Trinity test on July 16 and the 
twentieth anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima on August 6. 
In interviews with Newsweek, the New York Herald Tribune, the 
Washington Post and CBS Evening News with Walter Cronkite, 
Oppenheimer took the opportunity yet again to say that he did 
not regret working on the bomb. Asked on CBS whether he had a 
“bad conscience” about the bomb, he replied: 


Well, I don’t want to speak for others because we’re all 
different. I think when you play a meaningful part in bringing 
about the death of over 100,000 people and the injury of a 
comparable number, you naturally don’t think of that as—with 
ease. I believe we had a great cause to do this. But I do not 
think that our consciences should be entirely easy, at stepping 
out of the part of studying nature, learning the truth about it, 
to change the course of human history. Long ago I said once 
that, in a crude sense which no vulgarity and no humor could 
quite erase, the physicist had known sin, and I didn’t mean by 
that the deaths that were caused as a result of our work. I 
meant that we had known the sin of pride. We had turned to 
affect, in what proved to be a major way, the course of man’s 
history. We had the pride of thinking we knew what was good 
for man, and I do think it had left a mark on many of those 
who were responsibly engaged. This is not the natural business 
of the scientist. 


Oppenheimer gave far fewer public speeches in 1965 than in 
previous years and those he did give were markedly different. In 
place of the intimate, confessional tone of his Mount Kisco lecture 
and the emphasis on the personal, on acknowledging the evil in 
oneself, of his Geneva talk, one finds—in accordance with what 
he had announced as his new research topics—an interest in the 
history and philosophy of science. Not that his talks of this year 
can be regarded as a contribution to the academic disciplines of 
the history and philosophy of science (they are far too informal 
for that), but, in “Physics and Man’s Understanding,” given at the 
bicentennial celebrations of the Smithsonian Institution, and in 
“To Live with Ourselves,” given at the 1965 U.S. Army National 


Junior Science and Humanities Symposium, there is certainly a 
more detailed, more focused concentration on the history of 
science than in his previous talks. 

The detail is particularly evident, and particularly telling, in 
“To Live with Ourselves,” in which Oppenheimer gives examples, 
taken from history and from his own life, of what scientific 
discovery is like, his thesis being that “the life of the scientist is, 
along with the life of the poet, soldier, prophet and artist, deeply 
relevant to man’s understanding of his situation and his view of 
his destiny.” His first detailed example is from his own life, from 
the time when, in 1935, he and Frank took some time off to go 
riding in New Mexico. There, Oppenheimer told his audience, he 
received a letter from Milton White (then a graduate student at 
Berkeley), describing some experiments he had _ recently 
performed, which demonstrated, for the first time, the existence 
of the nuclear forces that act between protons. “This was,” 
Oppenheimer said, “one of the many times when the question, 
‘how hard is matter?’ got a new, fresh answer.” He then discussed 
Rutherford’s discovery of the nucleus, Hahan and Strassman’s 
discovery of fission, Anderson’s discovery of the positron, 
Einstein’s discovery of relativity, and others. The moral he draws 
from these examples is: “when the discovery has any of the 
qualities of the great ones, it has to reach back into a solid 
framework of experience and understanding and a great tradition; 
it has to mean something.” 

In “Physics and Man’s Understanding” Oppenheimer posed an 
interesting question: why did the great scientific achievements of 
Copernicus, Galileo and Newton have such an impact on our 
culture at large, while those of Einstein, Bohr and Heisenberg had 
a comparatively small impact? His answer was as follows: 


[The] new discoveries which liberated physics have all rested 
on the correction of some common view which was, in fact, 
demonstrably in error; they have all rested on a view which 
could not be reconciled with the experience of physics. The 
shock of discovering this error, and the glory of being free of it, 
have meant much to the practitioners. Five centuries ago the 
errors that physics and astronomy and mathematics were 
beginning to reveal were errors common to the thought, the 
doctrine, the very form and hope of European culture. When 


they were revealed, the thought of Europe was altered. The 
errors relativity and quantum theory have corrected were 
physicists’ errors, shared a little, of course, by our colleagues in 
related subjects. 


Oppenheimer offers as a “vivid example” of this Lee and Yang’s 
discovery of the nonconservation of parity. “The error which this 
corrected was limited to a very small part of mankind.” It is an 
interesting thesis, but it is rather underdeveloped in this paper, 
and, unfortunately, Oppenheimer never returned to it. 

At the end of 1965, Oppenheimer gave a talk on Einstein at a 
UNESCO meeting in Paris that was evidently an attempt to place 
Einstein and his work into the historical and philosophical 
scheme he had outlined in the papers discussed above. That is, 
though he acknowledged that Einstein was a great and original 
thinker, he wanted to show that, in accordance with the views 
expressed in “To Live with Ourselves,” Einstein’s discoveries 
“meant something” only in the context of a great tradition. So 
Oppenheimer briefly went through Einstein’s great contributions 
to physics, showing how they related to the traditions of: first, 
thermodynamics; second, Maxwell’s field equations; and third, 
the philosophical tradition associated with the Principle of 
Sufficient Reason. In the last twenty-five years of Einstein’s life, 
however, said Oppenheimer, “his tradition in a certain sense 
failed him”: 


He did not like the elements of indeterminacy. He did not like 
the abandonment of continuity or of causality. These were 
things that he had grown up with, saved by him, and 
enormously enlarged; and to see them lost, even though he had 
put the dagger in the hand of their assassin by his own work, 
was very hard on him. 


The talk was controversial, largely because it was 
misunderstood and partly because Oppenheimer chose to make 
the above perfectly reasonable point by talking of dispelling the 
“clouds of myth” that surrounded Einstein. He meant the myth 
that saw Einstein as an individual genius operating in isolation 
from the tradition of physics. He made life difficult for himself, 
however, by appearing to be snobbish. Einstein, he said, “was 


almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without 
worldliness. I think that in England people would have said that 
he did not have much ‘background,’ and in America that he 
lacked ‘education.’ ” This was a compliment, though it did not 
look like one, especially as Oppenheimer seemed so determined, 
in other small areas, to bring Einstein down to size, pointing out, 
for example, that “he was not that good a violinist,” and also that 
his famous letter to Roosevelt “had very little effect.” 

After giving this UNESCO talk, Oppenheimer left for St. John, 
where he and Kitty celebrated Christmas and New Year in the 
usual style. In January 1966, they returned to the States and 
Oppenheimer attended the annual meeting of the American 
Physical Society, where he gave a historical lecture on “Thirty 
Years of Mesons.” After running through the story of the meson, 
from Yukawa’s first prediction to Lee and Yang’s discovery of 
nonconservation of parity, Oppenheimer concluded: 


It seems to me that we are in for a far greater novelty than the 
discovery of “more fundamental” particles. It is not one of the 
privileges, as it is assuredly not one of the virtues, of senility to 
make predictions. I make only one. I think that we are unlikely 
to live again through such a ten-year joke as mistaking the mu 
mesons for Yukawa’s particles. I do not think that could have 
happened if it had not been for World War II. That too, I hope, 
is not so likely to recur. 


Oppenheimer at this time was still not sixty-two years old, but 
he looked much older. “You see the old man,” one physicist is 
said to have remarked at a party given during the conference, 
“he’s dying.” But he added: “I wouldn’t cross him!’ 

At the beginning of February 1966, Oppenheimer was 
diagnosed with throat cancer and started to receive radiation 
treatment. He spent much of March in the hospital. At the end of 
the month, Dyson wrote to his parents that he was only now 
“finding out how lonely the Oppenheimers really are in spite of 
their huge numbers of ‘friends.’ ... These are the last two weeks 
of Robert’s radiation treatment, and in this time he must know 
whether it is life or death.” 


I have been over three times to talk with Robert and Kitty. 


Kitty believes, perhaps rightly, that I can help Robert to keep 
alive by keeping alive his interest in physics. She feels 
desperately that he needs to be convinced that he is still 
needed in the community of physicists. On the other hand, I 
find that Robert is just so physically tired from the radiation 
that my instinct is to hold his hand in silence rather than 
burden him with particles and equations. 


The radiation treatment finished in April, and by June he was 
able to travel. He went to Mount Kisco to attend one last meeting 
of the group that he had helped to set up. On June 21, the New 
York Times carried the headline “Dr. Oppenheimer Plans History 
of Physics After His Retirement,” under which, however, was a 
short piece not about Oppenheimer’s proposed book, but about 
his illness and his forthcoming retirement. It quoted 
Oppenheimer as saying that he would be giving his “hideously 
complete” archive to the Library of Congress, “if anyone cares to 
look at it.” At the end of June, Oppenheimer ceased being 
director of the institute, and he and Kitty moved out of Olden 
Manor and into a much smaller house that had been the Yangs’ 
home. 

After a last trip to St. John, the Oppenheimers returned to their 
new home in the autumn of 1966. In November, Oppenheimer 
gave his final public lecture, entitled “A Time in Need.” If the talk 
seemed a little lackluster and somewhat platitudinous, this was 
hardly surprising; it was obvious by this time that he did not have 
long to live. He had, he said privately, “no confidence at all of 
enjoying good health in the future.” 

The Oppenheimers spent Christmas in Princeton that year for 
the first time in a decade. By this time the cancer was spreading 
and Oppenheimer was declining rapidly. In January 1967, he 
attended one last meeting of the Tuesday lunch group, at which 
he gave Treiman an earnest piece of advice: “Sam, don’t smoke.” 
The following month, on February 15, he attended his last faculty 
meeting. “Poor Oppenheimer is coming close to his end,” wrote 
Dyson to his parents. 


He insisted on coming to this faculty meeting but he can hardly 
speak any more. We were all very polite and told him how glad 
we were that he came; but really it is a torture for everybody 


to watch him sit there speechless and suffering. His doctors 
have now given him up and we can only hope for a quick end. 


The effort of attending the meeting exhausted Oppenheimer, 
and, when he got back home, he went to bed. He stayed there for 
most of the following three days, getting up only to receive 
visitors. One of these was the journalist Louis Fischer, whose life 
of Lenin Oppenheimer had admired. “He looked extremely thin,” 
Fischer wrote to a friend, “his hair was sparse and white, and his 
lips were dry and cracked.” Conversation was difficult because 
Oppenheimer “mumbled so badly that I suppose I understood 
about one word out of five.” “I have a strong impression,” Fischer 
added, “that he knew his mind was failing and that he probably 
wanted to die.” The next day, Francis Fergusson came, but stayed 
only a very short while because Oppenheimer was so frail. “I 
walked him into his bedroom,” Fergusson said in an interview 
years later, “and there I left him.” The following evening, at 
10:40 p.m. on Saturday, February 18, 1967, Oppenheimer died in 
his sleep. 

A week later, February 25, a memorial service was held in 
Alexander Hall on the Princeton campus. On a bitterly cold 
afternoon, 600 mourners gathered to hear brief eulogies from 
Hans Bethe, Henry DeWolf Smyth and George Kennan. Bethe 
gave a summary of Oppenheimer’s contributions to science and 
politics, after which Smyth, who had been the only AEC member 
to have voted in favor of reinstating Oppenheimer’s security 
clearance, spoke about the shame he felt on America’s behalf 
because of the security hearing: “It was a horrible period in 
American history, and we paid horribly for it.” The same point 
was made more emphatically and more eloquently by Kennan, 
who remarked: “The truth is that the U.S. Government never had 
a servant more devoted at heart than this one.” He also recalled 
how, shortly after the 1954 hearing, he had asked Oppenheimer 
why he had not left the United States. “Damn it,” Oppenheimer 
replied, “I happen to love this country.” Soon after the service, 
Kitty took Oppenheimer’s ashes to St. John and scattered them in 
the sea. 

Kitty herself survived for just five more years, most of which 
she spent living with Charlotte and Robert Serber. Serber, alone 
among Oppenheimer’s friends, was devoted to Kitty. In the 


summer of 1972, Kitty bought an elegant fifty-two-foot ketch, 
which she called Moonraker and in which she and Serber planned 
to travel around the world. After setting sail from Fort Lauderdale 
in Forida, their plan was to cruise for a while in the Caribbean, 
before going through the Panama Canal on their way to Japan via 
the Galapagos Islands and Tahiti. When they reached Cristobal, at 
the Atlantic end of the Panama Canal, however, Kitty became 
very ill and was admitted to a hospital in Panama City, where she 
died of an embolism on October 27. Five years later, Toni 
Oppenheimer, who had, throughout her life, been subject to 
bouts of depression, committed suicide at her home on St. John. 
Her second marriage had recently ended in divorce. Her brother 
Peter lived first in Perro Caliente and then in Santa Fe, where he 
worked as a contractor and carpenter. He is still alive, but recoils 
from anything connected with his famous father. 

Oppenheimer loved Kitty, Toni and Peter, but he was never 
able to be the reliably affectionate husband or father they needed 
him to be. The problems he had as a child forming close bonds 
with other people had remained with him throughout his life. He 
had wanted those close bonds very much, but had not known 
how to create them. Similarly, and relatedly, he did not know 
how to open up to other people. In the last few years of his life, 
as we have seen, he had tried hard to overcome this trait, to 
reveal his inner self and become an “open book.” But the book 
remained closed. What he called his “hideously complete” 
collection of private papers is impressively massive, but in those 
296 boxes of letters, drafts and manuscripts there is remarkably 
little that gives away anything of an intimate nature. There is an 
abundance of material that testifies to his many-faceted brilliance 
—the “bright shining splinters” that Rabi described him as being 
made of—but little that shows Oppenheimer sharing ordinary 
emotions with his fellow human beings. 

This aspect of his personality was touched on by George 
Kennan in his contribution to the memorial service. 
Oppenheimer, Kennan said, was “a man who had a deep yearning 
for friendship, for companionship, for the warmth and richness of 
human communication”: 


The arrogance which to many appeared to be a part of his 
personality masked in reality an overpowering desire to bestow 


and receive affection. Neither circumstances nor at times the 
asperities of his own temperament permitted the gratification 
of this need in a measure remotely approaching its intensity. 


Of the three people who spoke at the service, Kennan knew 
Oppenheimer the best by a long way. Indeed, many of 
Oppenheimer’s friends felt that the memorial service had been 
hurriedly arranged and had not served its purpose well. A chance 
to do it better came in April 1967, when the American Physical 
Society organized its own memorial service. The speakers on this 
occasion included many of those whom one might have expected 
to speak at Princeton, each one allocated an aspect of 
Oppenheimer’s life about which they had special knowledge. 
Robert Serber spoke on “The Early Years,” Weisskopf on “The Los 
Alamos Years,” Pais on “The Princeton Period” and Glenn 
Seaborg on “Public Service and Human Contributions.” When the 
speeches were published as a book, Rabi wrote a short but 
illuminating introduction, which, in trying to convey the nature 
of Oppenheimer’s complex character, emphasized his spirituality. 
“In Oppenheimer,” Rabi remarked, “the element of earthiness was 
feeble.” 


Yet it was essentially this spiritual quality, this refinement as 
expressed in speech and manner, that was the basis of his 
charisma. He never expressed himself completely. He always 
left a feeling that there were depths of sensibility and insight 
not yet revealed. These may be the qualities of the born leader 
who seems to have reserves of uncommitted strength. 


The feebleness in Oppenheimer of the “element of earthiness,” 
the sense one has of him being almost disembodied, is connected 
with his enigmatic elusiveness and his inability to make ordinary 
close contact with the people around him. But it also, Rabi 
perceptively suggests, was what made him so fascinating and 
therefore enabled Oppenheimer to become the great man he 
showed himself to be. 


70 “An exclusive document: Robert Oppenheimer, why did you lie? By Haakon 
Chevalier.” 

71 At forty-three years old Kennedy was, in fact, only a few years younger than 
Nixon, who was then forty-seven. 


72 Bernstein had by this time started writing regularly for the New Yorker. 

73 Inexplicably, when this talk was published in Encounter, the last line was 
changed to: “Readers and writers still have a lot to do,” which removes the 
sting—and most of the humor—from it. 

74 After they had found themselves on the same side on many political 
questions during the late 1940s, Oppenheimer and Kennan had become friends. 
At Oppenheimer’s invitation, Kennan had spent eighteen months as a scholar at 
the Institute for Advanced Study during the years 1950-2, and joined the 
faculty as a permanent member in 1956, after which the friendship between 
them became much closer. 


Notes and References 


In the notes below Oppenheimer is referred to as “JRO”; his 
archive of papers, deposited at the Library of Congress, as “JRO 
papers, LOC”; Smith and Weiner (1980) as “S & W”; Bird and 
Sherwin (2005) as “B&S”; United States Atomic Energy 
Commission, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of 
Hearing before Personnel Security Board as “ITMO”; and 
Oppenheimer’s co-correspondents, family members, biographers 
and interviewers as follows: 


AE Albert Einstein 

AIP American Institute of Physics 
(see list of interviews) 

AKS Alice Kimball Smith 

CA Carl Anderson 

CW Charles Weiner 

ECK Edwin C. Kemble 

EOL Ernest O. Lawrence 

ET Edward Teller 

EUC Ed Condon 

FF Francis Fergusson 

FO Frank Oppenheimer 

GU George Uhlenbeck 

HC Haakon Chevalier 

HWS Herbert W. Smith 

IIR Isidor Isaac Rabi 

JBC James B. Conant 

JE John Edsall 

JEH J. Edgar Hoover 

JW Jeffries Wyman 

KDN Major General Kenneth D. 
Nichols 

LRG Leslie R. Groves 

MB Max Born 


MJS Martin J. Sherwin 


NB Niels Bohr 


PAMD Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac 
PE Paul Ehrenfest 

PH Paul Horgan 

PWB Percy W. Bridgman 

REP Raymond E. Priestley 

TSK Thomas S. Kuhn 

WP Wolfgang Pauli 


Dates are given in the British (rather than the American) style, so 
that, for example, 1.2.1964 means February 1, 1964, not January 
2, 1964. 


Preface 
1. “Oppie did his physics”: Kelly (2006), 136 
2. highly derivative: compare Pais (2006) Chapter 6 with 


Robert Serber’s article, “Particle physics in the 1930s: a view 
from Berkeley,” in Brown and Hoddeson (1983), 206-21 


PART ONE: 1904-1926 


1. “Amerika, du hast es besser”: Oppenheimer’s German Jewish 
Background 


1. “a man who”: Rigden (1987), 231 

. “never got to be”: ibid., 229 

. “tried to act”: ibid., 228 

. “you carried on”: Bernstein (2004), 3 

. “I understood his problem”: ibid. 

. “These are my people”: Rigden (1987), 229 
. Rabi was a “Polish Jew”: see Rigden (1987) 


. In New York: what follows is based on the accounts of the 
history of the Jewish community in New York given in 
Barkai (1994), Cohen (1984), Diner (1992), Gay (1965), 
Klingenstein (1991), Kosak (2000), Mauch & Salmons 
(2003), Raphael (1983), Ribalow (1965) and Sorin (1992). 


9. Haskalah: see Barkai (1994), Cohen (1984), Diner (1992) 
and Pulzer (1992) 


10. “Amerika, du hast es besser”: see Goethes Werke, Weimar: 
Hermann Bahlau, Volume 1, 137, quoted in Cohen (1984), 


ON ADH BW WN 


17. In full, the poem reads: 


Amerika, du hast es besser 

Als unser Kontinent, das alte, 
Hast keine verfallene Schlosser 
Und keine Basalte. 

Dich stort nicht im Innern, 

Zu lebendiger Zeit, 

Unniitzes Erinnern 

Und vergeblicher Streit. 


Benutzt die Gegenwart mit Gltick! 

Und wenn nun eure Kinder dichten, 

Bewahre sie ein gut Geschick 

Vor Ritter-, Rauber- und Gespenstergeschichten. 


An English translation, published in Fraser’s Magazine in May 
1831, reads: 


America, thou hast it better 
Than our ancient hemisphere; 
Thou hast no falling castles, 
Nor basalt, as here. 

Thy children, they know not, 
Their youthful prime to mar, 
Vain retrospection, 

Nor ineffective war. 


Fortune wait on thy glorious spring! 

And, when in time thy poets sing, 

May some good genius guard them all 

From Baron, Robber, Knight, and Ghost traditional. 


See Melz (1949) and Riley (1952) 
11. beginning in the 1820s: see Diner (1992) 
12. “the beautiful ground”: quoted in Barkai (1994), 5 
13. “Third Migration”: see Sorin (1992) 
14. their first reaction: ibid., 50 
15. “the privileges and duties”: ibid., 87 


16. 
i7, 
18. 
19; 
20). 
21. 
oe, 


23. 


24. 


2. 
26. 


eM 
28. 
oo, 
30. 
ok 
SZ: 
oo 
34. 
30 
36. 
ods 
38. 


ou, 
40. 
41. 
42. 


“These uptowners”: ibid., 86 

August Schonberg: Birmingham (1967), 24-5 

Joseph Seligman: ibid., 132 

Joseph Seligman’s children: ibid. 

Robert Anderson: see Lawson and Lawson (1911) 

his birth certificate: see Bernstein (2004), 12, footnote 4 


“As appears”: Percy Bridgman in a letter of recommendation 
to Ernest Rutherford, June 24, 1925. See S & W, 77 


“an unsuccessful small businessman”: JRO, interview with 
TSK, 18.11.1963. See S & W, 3 


his son, Julius: the following account of Julius, his uncles 
and his siblings relies on that given in Cassidy (2005), 
Chapter 1 


“Our Crowd”: see Birmingham (1967) 


“Our crowd here”: Sachs (1927), 219, quoted in Birmingham 
(1967), 256 


in December 1862: see Cohen (1984), 148-53 
“how thin”: Cohen (1984), 149 

Max Lilienthal: see Barkai (1994), 122 

On January 3, 1863: ibid. 

“becoming more Americanized”: Birmingham (1967), 116 
“the first gentile”: ibid., 118 

“The Bank”: ibid., 119: italics in the original 
“Seligman Affair”: ibid., Chapter 18 

The comic weekly Puck: quoted in ibid., 145 
“Gentile and Jew”: ibid., 145-6 

“Hebrews need not apply”: ibid., 147 


“The Jews and Coney Island”: reprinted in Raphael (1983), 
260-3 


“We cannot bring”: ibid., 261 

“was to have”: Birmingham (1967), 147-8 

Felix Adler: see Neumann (1951), Radest (1969) 
“The Judaism of the Future”: see Radest (1969), 17 


43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 


De 


m2. 
53. 
54. 
Sion 
56. 
57. 


oes 
ao, 
60. 


61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 


“was not given”: ibid. 

in 1876, Adler gave a talk: ibid., 27 
“We propose”: ibid., 27-8 

“Adler’s proposal”: ibid., 28 
February 1877: ibid., 45 

“The Sunday Meeting”: ibid., 46 
“Ethical Culture seemed”: ibid., 47 


In 1874-5: Cassidy (2005), 5. Cassidy reports that Solomon 
alone is listed, and later (23) he says that Sigmund was still 
in Europe at this time. As he points out himself (page 5, 
footnote 11), however, Sigmund’s death certificate gives his 
year of immigration into the United States as 1869, so I am 
inclined to think that the company listed in the New York 
City Directory for 1874-5 actually included both brothers. 


they appear: see Cassidy (2005), 23. Since Sigmund had 
been in America since 1869, I am inclined to believe that he 
and Solomon were both founder members of the Society. 


funeral service: see Birmingham (1967), 149 

In 1887: ibid., 258 

“our good Jews”: ibid. 

“the first recognizably”: ibid. 

Solomon and Sigmund Rothfeld: Cassidy (2005), 6 


“Race Prejudice at Summer Resorts”: reprinted in Raphael 
(1983), 263-70 


“Only within”: ibid., 263 
“In seeking reasons”: ibid., 265 


The American Jew: parts of it are reprinted in Raphael 
(1983), 270-8 


“the book that”: ibid., 259 
“their hooked noses”: ibid., 271 
“long coats”: ibid. 

“Let the Jews”: ibid., 276 

“The Jew must go!”: ibid., 278 
he is listed: Cassidy (2005), 23 


67. 


68. 
69. 
70. 
ak 
res 
To 
74. 


79: 
70s 


FT. 


78. 


7. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
ol, 
92. 
23, 


“New York’s leading Jewish banker”: see Birmingham 
(1967), 230 


“not a personal matter”: ibid., 239 

“His bitterness”: ibid., 240 

It moved its office: Cassidy (2005), 9 

younger brother Emil: Cassidy (2005), 4 and 9 
In 1900: ibid., 9 

In 1903: ibid. 


Ella Friedman: what follows is based on the accounts given 


in Cassidy (2005), 10-11, and B & S, 10-11 
According to her son: see Thorpe (2006), 21 


her family tree: see http://americanjewisharchives.org/pdfs/ 


stern_p021.pdf 


mentioned several times: see Morais (1894), 104, 105, 193, 


250 


“a gentle, exquisite”: see Life magazine, October 10, 1949, 


124 

When a girlfriend: Goodchild (1980), 22 

Both suggestions: see, e.g., Cassidy (2005), 11 

“spent his free hours”: B & S, 10 

“proper gentlemen”: Goodchild (1980), 10 

“there are special occasions”: Adler (1886), 85-6 
Upon Sigmund’s death: Cassidy (2005), 9 

the men who succeeded Felix Adler: Radest (1969), 95 
“In the old days”: ibid., 136 

“supremely enviable”: Adler (1915), 165 

“I would urge”: ibid., 167: italics in the original 

“plea to the wealthy”: ibid., 172 

“The habit”: Adler (1886), 97 

“haven’t enough physical courage”: Sachs (1927), 219 
a society that set up: see Neumann (1951), 19ff. 


“Two things fill”: the famous opening sentence of the 
conclusion of Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason 


94. 
95. 


96. 
07. 
98. 
99, 
100. 


“The moral law”: Adler (1886), 33, 60 


“act only”: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1997), 31 


“The rule reads”: Adler (1933), 147 
“high endeavor”: Adler (1886), 15 
“Truly disinterestedness”: ibid. 
“The pursuit of the artist”: ibid. 
“the Ideal”: ibid., 89 


2. Childhood 


de 


“My life”: Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 70 


2. “an unctuous”: ibid. 
3. 
4. “a hearty”: FF, interview with MJS, 8.6.1979, quoted B & S, 


“Not religion as a duty”: Adler (1886), 97 


13 


. A friend later recalled: HWS, interview with CW, 1.8.1974, 


quoted B & S, 27 


. “a woman who”: B & S, 13 
. “a general distrust”: FO, interview with CW, 9.2.1973, 


quoted Cassidy (2005), 16 


. Lewis Frank Oppenheimer: see Bernstein (2004), 6 
. “a mournful person”: PH, interview with AKS, 14.4.1976, 


quoted S & W, 2 


. “I think my father”: JRO, interview with TSK, 18.11.1963, 


quoted S & W, 5 


. “Just as I do”: Michelmore (1969), 4. A slightly different 


version of the story is given in Royal (1969), 19. Neither 
gives a source for the story. 


. “‘T repaid”: Royal (1969), 16 
. he met Benjamin Oppenheimer: JRO, interview with TSK, 


18.11.1963, quoted S & W, 3 


. in October 1910: Cassidy (2005), 29 
. in 1878: see Cassidy (2005), 33 
. “a broad and generous education”: Friess (1981), 100 


17. 
18. 
19, 
20. 
ZA, 
ox. 
2 
24. 
2D. 
26. 
27. 


28. 
29. 
30. 
3 
32. 
aoe 
34. 
35; 
36. 
or. 
oo: 
ae 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 


in 1890: see Schweber (2000), 49 

only 10 percent: ibid. 

“We all did”: B& S, 25 

“The school is to be”: Cassidy (2005), 36 
“To larger truths”: Adler (1886), 178 
“spiritual fetters”: ibid. 

“All over this land”: ibid., 178-9 

in 1908: see Radest (1969), 94 

“The American ideal”: see Adler (1915), 73 
Four times a year: see Cassidy (2005), 40-1 


fabulously wealthy Guggenheim family: see Birmingham 
(1967), 271-5 


“like a gentleman”: ibid., 274 

“light complexion”: ibid., 272 

“would not have surmised”: ibid., 273 

He once remarked: see Bethe (1997), 176 
“He was still a little boy”: S & W, 7 

“rather gauche”: B & S, 22 

“a great need”: ibid. 

“Ask me a question in Latin”: ibid. 

“so far ahead”: Cassidy (2005), 44 

mostly A— and B+: ibid., 43 

“When I was ten”: S & W, 3 

New York Mineralogical Club: see B & S, 14-15 
an expanded version: see Adler (1915) 
“Many of our fellow-citizens”: ibid., 58 
“Public opinion”: ibid., 58-9 

“The German ideal”: ibid., 63 

“The national ideal”: ibid., 68 

“is that of the uncommon quality”: ibid., 73 
“only a symptom”: ibid., 5 

“If we wish”: ibid. 


48. 
49. 


50. 
ok 


52 
de 
54. 
0: 
56. 
a7: 


58. 
oo. 
60. 
61. 


62. 
63. 
64. 
GD, 
66. 
O7;, 
68. 
69. 
70, 
rhs 
es 
im 
74. 
7D5 
76. 


“The time will come”: quoted in Radest (1969), 191-2 


“high opinion”: New York Times, January 31, 1916, quoted 
in Cassidy (2005), 49 


“Anything German”: ibid., 183 

“the duty of every high school chap”: Inklings, June 3, 1917, 
quoted Cassidy (2005), 53 

“In discussing the war”: Cassidy (2005), 55 

“There is no room.” Inklings, June 4, 1918, ibid. 

“he swallowed Adler”: S & W, 3 

“In Flanders’ fields”: see Cassidy (2005), 60 

“From conversations”: Bernstein (2004), 11 


feelings of guilt: see the remark quoted earlier (p. 26) from 
Royal (1969), 16 


“business vulgarity”: Thorpe (2006), 27 
“pronounced oedipal attitude”: ibid. 
“T often felt”: Royal (1969), 22 


The other boys: the main source for this story is Royal 
(1969), 21-3 


“They, as it were”: ibid., 23 

“T don’t know”: ibid. 

“We talked as we walked”: ibid., 21 

“longed to demonstrate”: Eliot (1965), 178 

“Tt was said”; ibid., 172 

“no spark”: ibid. 

“From that hour”: ibid., 173 

“Lydgate’s conceit”: ibid., 179 

“to some extent”: Royal (1969), 22 

“He was an intellectual snob”: ibid. 

“bright and sensitive”: ibid., 21 

“did not prepare me”: Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 70 
“never heard a murmur”: B & S, 27 

“the most important element”: Cassidy (2005), 20 
The Light: see ibid. 41 


TT. 
78. 


72. 
80. 
ol, 
82. 
83. 
84. 
So. 
86. 


87. 
88. 
69. 
90. 
v1. 


o2, 
93. 
94. 
23; 
96. 


“some of our dough boys”: ibid. 


Hans and Ernest Courant and Robert Lazarus: for more on 
the Courants and Lazarus, see the 2005 “Science Issue” of 
the Ethical Culture School magazine, ECF Reporter, at: 
http://www.ecfs.org/files/ecfreporter_winter2005.pdf, 
especially pages 10-12. 


“It is almost forty-five years”: Royal (1969), 23 

“He was so brilliant”: Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 70 
“A very exciting experience”: ibid. 

“We must have spent”: S & W, 4 

his headmaster: Goodchild (1980), 12 

had to be rescued: Royal (1969), 25 

Cherry Grove: ibid., 24 


Francis Fergusson: for more on Fergusson, see the 
Introduction to Fergusson (1998) 


“It was a blowy day”: B & S, 24 

“He is to this day”: S & W, 7 

La Glorieta: see Gish (1988), especially Chapter 2 
Franz Huning: see Huning (1973) 


was interviewed in the 1930s: see Janet Smith’s interview 
with Clara Fergusson, dated September 14, 1936, at: http:// 
Icweb2.loc.gov/wpa/20040609.html 


Sampson Noland Ferguson: see Gish (1988), Chapter 3 
“who at that time”: S & W, 7 

“very, very kind”: ibid., 5 

“a long prospecting trip”: ibid., 7 

he was fond of saying: see, e.g., Pharr Davis (1969), 25 


3. First Love: New Mexico 


i. 
ahs 
a 
4. 


“you can’t be an outsider”: Sachs (1927), 219 
“Gilbert”: ibid., 220 
Paul Horgan: see Gish (1995) 


Horgan would later find fame: Horgan won both the Pulitzer 
and Bancroft Prizes for his two-volume study of the 


22. 


. “polymaths,” “this pygmy triumvirate, 


American Southwest, Great River: The Rio Grande in North 
American History (1954), and won the Pulitzer again in 1976 
for Lamy of Santa Fe, a biography of John Baptist Lamy, the 
émigré French clergyman who was the model for Willa 
Cather’s central character in Death Comes for the Archbishop. 
He is also well known as the author of several critically and 
commercially successful novels, including The Fault of Angels 
(1933), A Distant Trumpet (1960) and Things as They Are 
(1964). 


29 66 


this great troika”: 
S&W, 8 


. Oppenheimer startled Herbert Smith: B & S, 25 

. Smith wondered: see Cassidy (2005), 62 

. “someone disparaged the Jews”: ibid. 

. “He looked at me sharply”: S & W, 9 

. “The Southwest can never”: Erna Fergusson (1946), 18-19 
. “Such a country”: ibid., 14 

. “Maybe everyone”: Horgan (1942), quoted in Gish (1995), 


12 


. “He was the most intelligent man”: S & W, 8 

. “exquisite manners”: ibid., 9 

. He later confided: ibid., 40 

. Manuel Chaves: see Simmons (1973) 

. Amado Chaves: see Simmons (1968) 

. pursued a career as a lawyer: see Twitchell (2007), 508-12 
. “all the time”: B & S, 26 

. “For the first time”: S & W, 10 

. “Lake Katherine”: the story that Oppenheimer named this 


lake after Katherine Page is mentioned many times in local 
literature (see, e.g., http://mtnviewranch-cowles.com/ 
page_7.htm, which is a history of a “dude ranch” similar to 
the one owned by the Chaveses). I do not know of an 
authoritative source for this story, but neither do I see any 
reason to doubt it. 


“Thank God I won”: B & S, 26 


23. “He had become less shy”: S & W, 8 


4. Harvard 


1. “The summer hotel”: Abbot Lawrence Lowell to William 
Earnest Hocking, May 19, 1922, quoted in Karabel (2005), 
88 


. “WASP flight”: see Karabel (2005), 86-7 
. “Hebrews”: ibid., 90 

. a faculty meeting on May 23, 1922: ibid. 
. “take into account”: ibid. 

. “a radical departure”: ibid., 92 

. “to consider principles”: ibid., 93 

. “the primary object”: ibid. 


WO ANA WT BW WN 


. an illuminating exchange: see Raphael (1993), 292-7 


— 
=) 


. “and other eminent Jews”: ibid., 293 
. “Students of the Jewish faith”: ibid., 293-4 
. “a rapidly growing anti-Semitic feeling”: ibid., 294 


a 
WON -— 


. “Carrying your suggestion”: ibid., 296 

. “We want”: ibid., 297 

. “To be an American”: Feingold (1995), 17 
. the dean’s office: see Karabel (2005), 94 

. Starting in the autumn of 1922: ibid. 

. “What change”: ibid. 

. “religious preference”: ibid. 

. On April 7, 1923: ibid., 100 

. “far removed”: ibid., 95 


WNN PRP RPP RP ke 
Nor OO AN AD UH Bf 


. “no departure”: ibid., 101 

. 25 percent: ibid., 105 

. “They are ... going”: ibid., 109 

. “not a negligible fact”: Palevsky (2000), 103 
. “Shylock”: S & W, 13 

. “misanthropy”: ibid., 31 

. “the benign Lowell”: ibid., 13 


NONNNNDN ND 
CON WD UW BW 


29. 
30. 
oh 
32. 
9 
34. 


35: 
36. 
37. 
38. 
ou, 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50, 
a 
a2. 
33; 
54. 
sien 
D0. 
ais 
58. 
ae 


“Harvard has so far”: ibid. 

“T wanted not to be involved”: Thorpe (2006), 30 

“a little bit possessive”: ibid., 32 

“a sort of feeling”: ibid., 33 

Black introduced him: see ibid., 31, and Cassidy (2005), 71 


John Edsall: for more on Edsall’s life and work, see Doty 
(2005) and Edsall (2003) 


The Gad-Fly: see Cassidy (2005), 72 

“to sting people”: Plato, Apology, section 30e 
“Among the collegiate herd”: Cassidy (2005), 72 
“T don’t know”: ibid. 

“asinine pomposity”: S & W, 15 

He has recalled: ibid., 33 

“a little bit precious”: Thorpe (2006), 34 

“I was very fond of music”: S & W, 33-4 
“Youre the only physicist”: ibid., 34 
“Category Phoenix”: Ellanby (1952) 

“Chain Reaction”: Ellanby (1956) 

Races and People: Boyd and Asimov (1955) 
Boyd and Asimov argued: ibid., Chapter 2 
“the closest friends”: S & W, 45 

later letters to Horgan: see, e.g., ibid., 40-41 
Prescott Street: ibid., 12 

doubtful that he ever met Fergusson: ibid., 44 
“Boyd, as you charitably predicted”: ibid., 57 
“seen something of Robert”: ibid., 16 

“a little science club”: ibid. 

“get professors”: ibid. 

“an aberrant Cambridge Puritan”: ibid. 

In his first year: ibid., 14 

“a wonderful man”: ibid. 

“quiet futility”: ibid., 15 


60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
GS. 
66. 
Gr. 
68. 
69. 
70) 
ree 
Jes 
Fm 
74. 
pen 
76. 
ais 
78. 
72. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
SD. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 


90. 


“is not an educational institution”: Cassidy (2005), 74-5 
he applied twice: see S & W, 15 

but was rejected: ibid., 57 

“T contend”: Karabel (2005), 121 
“bookworms”: ibid. 

“fondness of”: ibid. 

a formula: ibid. 

“I am again”: S & W, 18 

“a disgusting and doddering syphilitic”: ibid., 19 
“T shall send you my story”: ibid., 20 
“received another inspiration”: ibid., 24 
“Here are the masterpieces”: ibid., 25 
“imitation of Katherine Mansfield”: ibid., 27 
“artificiality of emotional situation”: ibid. 
“conscious”: ibid. 

“T should not have the hardihood”: ibid. 
“nothing but admiration”: ibid., 52 

“T am overwhelmed”: ibid., 55 

“skill with people”: ibid. 

“T find it hard to swallow”: ibid., 56 

“I suppose”: ibid. 

“T find these awful people”: ibid., 57 

“the whole tone”: Bernstein (2004), 16 
“Scandal”: Cather (1920), 169-98 

“While he was still”: ibid., 186-7 

“His business associates”: ibid., 187 

“that used to belong”: ibid., 191 

“She and I are in the same boat”: ibid., 198 
a huge biography: Horgan (1976) 


“Willa Cather’s Incalculable Distance”: Horgan (1988), 79- 


92 
“a true artist of prose”: ibid., 90 


ol. 

o2. 

ke 

94. 

oD. 

96. 

oy. 

98. 

99. 
100. 
101. 
12. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
LO9. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
TY. 
114. 
LTS. 
116. 
Li? 
118. 
Lie, 
120. 
121. 
122. 


“Doesn’t A Lost Lady remind you”: S & W, 51 
“represents civilization in the West”: Randall (1960), 176 
“The Old West”: Cather (1923) 

“scintillated more”: S & W, 22 

“Are you again”: ibid., 19 

“insanely jealous”: ibid., 22 

“But oh, beloved”: ibid., 32 

“Please”: ibid., 33 

“hear about your adventures”: ibid., 67 

“the classic confectionery”: ibid. 

remarked many years later: ibid., 68 
“similarly satisfying”: ibid., 32 

“searched the plant”: ibid. 

“Only one wretch”: ibid., 32-3 

“The job and people”: ibid., 33 

“Paul [Horgan] has been with me”: ibid., 35 
“It was my first taste”: ibid., 34 

He recalls: ibid., 36 

“And toward the end”: ibid., 38 

Horgan himself: ibid., 37 

Boyd was impressed: see ibid., 34 and 37 
Bernheim, on the other hand: ibid. 

“... we would go out”: ibid., 36-7 
“salt-encrusted”: ibid., 28 

“But really, maestro”: ibid., 35 

“more elementary”: Jeans (1908), v 

“The present book”: ibid. 

“what I liked in chemistry”: S & W, 45 

“I can’t emphasize strongly enough”: ibid., 45-6 
wrote to Edwin C. Kemble: ibid., 28-9 
“partial list”: ibid., 29 

his inaugural lecture: Lewis (1914) 


122. 
124. 
125, 
126. 
127. 
128. 
129, 


130. 


i Be 9 
132, 
132. 
134. 


135. 
136. 
137. 
138. 
139. 
140. 
141. 


“any man”: ibid., 6 

“Mr. Oppenheimer”: S & W, 29 

“Years later”: ibid. 

“the textbook bible”: Kevles (1995), 160 

a telegram: see S & W, 39 

a great variety of courses: see ibid., 45 

“T’m sorry to contradict you”: various versions of this story 
have appeared in print over the years, beginning with that 
in Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 71, and continuing 
with: Royal (1969), 29-30, Michelmore (1969), 13, 
Goodchild (1980), 16, and B & S, 34. My version combines 
the Royal and Time accounts. The various versions are all 
substantially the same, except that, in the Michelmore/ 
Goodchild accounts, Oppenheimer places the temple “fifty, a 
hundred years earlier.” Oppenheimer’s view that the temple 
was built before 400 bc receives some support from modern 
scholarship, which dates it to 430-420 bc (see Cerchiai et al. 
[2004], 276). 


Jeffries Wyman: for more on Wyman’s life and work, see 
Alberty et al. (2003), Gill (1987) and Simoni et al. (2002) 


“Francis was full of talk”: see Thorpe (2006), 29 
“Jeffries too”: S & W, 39 
“was a little precious”: ibid. 


as Boyd had: see ibid., 33-4, where Boyd is quoted as saying 
that the chief thing he and Oppenheimer did not have in 
common was a love of music; while Boyd was “very fond of 
music,” he considered Oppenheimer to be “totally 
amusical.” 


“completely blind”: ibid., 39 

“found social adjustment very difficult”: ibid., 61 
“We were good friends”: ibid. 

“He wasn’t a comfortable person”: ibid., 44 

“he was pretty careful”: ibid., 45 

he later said: Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 71 
“IT am working very hard now”: S & W, 51 


142. 
143. 


144. 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
LS1. 
152. 
153. 
154. 
133. 
156. 
157. 
158. 


159. 


160. 
161. 


162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 


“Generously, you ask what I do”: ibid., 54 


“The whole tone”: Bernstein (2004), 16—see also page 68 
above 


“We were all too much in love”: S & W, 60 
“ravishing creature”: ibid., 69 

have dinner at Locke-Ober’s: Michelmore (1969), 15 
Boyd also remembers: S & W, 60-1 

And Bernheim recalls: ibid. 

trips to Cape Ann: ibid., 25 

“ramshackle cottage”: ibid., 24 
“mythological landscape”: ibid., 25 

“Even in the last stages”: ibid., 60 

“For me”: ibid., 62 

Oppenheimer discovered: ibid., 65 

“T cannot decide”: ibid., 67 

“I am taking a course”: ibid. 

“It is almost forty years ago”: ibid., 71 


In addition: for a list of courses Oppenheimer took during 
his final year, see ibid., 68 


George Birkhoff: for a brief account of Birkhoff’s life and 
work, see Dool (2003) 


“because he’d been working on it”: S & W, 69 


“one of the world’s greatest academic anti-Semites”: see 
Siegmund-Schultze (2009), 225 


“He is Jewish”: Thorpe (2006), 35 

“I found Bridgman”: S & W, 69 

“a certificate”: ibid., 70 

he wrote to Francis Fergusson: ibid., 72-3 
“frantic, bad and graded A”: ibid., 70 

two Bs: ibid., 73-4 

“got plastered”: ibid., 74 


5. Cambridge 


14. 


45. 
16. 
1, 


. “You will tell me”: S & W, 73 

. “your ability”: ibid., 86 

. “sailing and recuperating”: ibid., 73 

. “to see about laboratory facilities”: ibid., 79 


“The Parents”: ibid., 80 


. “immense, huge, pounding rain”: ibid., 81 
. “near the center”: ibid., 75 
. Rutherford: for more on Rutherford’s life, see Eve (1939), 


Birks (1962), Wilson (1983) and Campbell (1999). For a 
shorter summary account, see Cropper (2001), Chapter 21. 
For the original expression of Rutherford’s planetary model 
of the atom, see Rutherford (1911). Popular accounts of that 
model are available in Bizony (2007), Part Two, Gamow 
(1965), “Chap. 10%,” Gamow (1985), Chapter II, Gamow 
(1988), Chapter VII, and Gribbin (1984), Chapter 2. 


. the Cavendish Laboratory: see Crowther (1974), Larsen 


(1962) and Thomson (1964) 


. J. J. Thomson: see Thomson (1964a and 1964b) 
. in 1897 he discovered: see Thomson (1897) 
. Niels Bohr: for Bohr’s life and work, see Moore (1967), Pais 


(1991) and Rozental (1967) 


. the “Rutherford-Bohr model”: first put forward in Bohr 


(1913), reprinted in Bohr (1981). Many popularizations of 
this model have appeared in print over the last hundred 
years or so. Among the ones I have consulted are: Bizony 
(2007), Part Two, Gamow (1965), “Chap. 10%,” Gamow 
(1985), Chapter II, Gamow (1988), Chapter VII, Gribbin 
(1984), Chapter 4, Hoffmann (1959), Chapter V, and Kumar 
(2009), Chapter 3. Technically more sophisticated accounts 
can be found in Mills (1994), Chapter 12, and Treiman 
(1999), Chapter 3. 


the “Bohr-Sommerfeld model”: for an accessible account of 
this, see Kumar (2009), 112-15 


“that brief excursion”: FF to JRO, 25.4.1925, S & W, 73 
“perfectly prodigious”: ibid., 77 
“excellent applicants”: see JRO to PWB, 29.8.1925, ibid., 82 


18. 
19, 
20. 


21, 


ae 


2s 
24. 
PAN 
26. 
ots 


28. 
29, 


30. 


1 


32. 


ook 


34. 
oo: 
20; 
37. 
38. 
a2. 
40. 
41. 


Antarctic Adventure: Priestley (1914) 

Breaking the Hindenburg Line: Priestley (1919) 

“should like to be admitted”: JRO to REP, 30.8.1925, S & W, 
82-3 

“as soon as it seems advisable”: JRO to REP, 16.9.1925, 
ibid., 84-5 

“knows everyone at Oxford”: JRO to HWS, 11.12.1925, 
ibid., 90 

meetings at Pontigny: see Smith (2000), 100-1 

“To be invited to Pontigny”: ibid., 101 

“rather Russian account”: S & W, 86 

“T do not think”: JRO to FF, 1.11.1925, ibid. 


“some terrible complications”: JRO to FF, 15.11.1925, ibid., 
88 


“The Two Cultures”: Snow (1959) 


Sir Arthur Shipley: see the obituary in the British Medical 
Journal, October 1, 1927, 615 


“miserable hole”: JRO, interview with TSK, 18.11.1963, 
S & W, 89 


“IT am having a pretty bad time”: JRO to FF, 1.11.1925, ibid., 
87 


a curious document: see B & S, 41 and 44-5. The document 
is now in the Sherwin Collection, attached to an interview 
with FF by AKS, dated April 21, 1976. 


“was completely at a loss”: FF in interview with MJS, 
18.6.1979, quoted B & S, 41 and 47 


“seemed more self-confident”: ibid., 41 

“first class case of depression”: ibid., 44 

“He found himself”: ibid. 

“Fortunately”: ibid. 

“tried to put them together”: ibid., 45 

“ridiculously unworthy”: ibid. 

“did a very good and chiefly rhetorical imitation”: ibid. 
“There they lay”: ibid. 


42. 
43. 


44. 
45. 


46. 
47. 


48. 


49. 


50. 
3% 
D2. 
Do 
54. 


Do: 


56. 


“The academic standard”: JRO to FF, 1.11.1925, S & W, 87 


Patrick Blackett: see Hore (2003), Lovell (1976) and Nye 
(2004) 


“a young Oedipus”: I. A. Richards, quoted in Nye (2004), 25 


his most important contributions: see Crowther (1974), 
Chapter 16 


Blackett’s remarkable photographs: ibid., 214 


Nobel Prize: Franck’s acceptance speech, with the rather 
unenticing title “Transformations of kinetic energy of free 
electrons into excitation energy of atoms by impacts,” can 
be found on the Nobelprize.org. website: at http:// 
nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1925/franck- 
lecture.html 


Max Born: for Born’s life, see Born (1978) and Greenspan 
(2005) 


“handsomest, gayest, happiest pair”: I. A. Richards, quoted 
in Nye (2004), 28 


collection of essays: Wright (1933) 

“The Craft of Experimental Physics”: ibid., 67-96 
“is a Jack-of-All-Trades”: ibid., 67 

“The point is”: Goodchild (1980), 17 


Rutherford himself: see Pais (1986), 367. Rutherford told 
the story to Paul Dirac, who then repeated it to Pais. Dirac, 
Pais adds, “witnessed a similar occurrence later in 
Gottingen.” 

“felt so miserable”: JW in an interview with CW, 28.5.1975, 
quoted B & S, 43 


an attempt to murder his tutor: the story of the poisoned 
apple has been told many times in many different versions, 
all of them (directly or indirectly) based on accounts given 
by Oppenheimer to his friends. Denise Royal, basing her 
account on that of an unnamed “informant” (presumably 
Jeffries Wyman), says that in the Christmas vacation of 
1925, Oppenheimer went with Wyman to Corsica and, near 
the end of the holiday, turned down Wyman’s suggestion 
that they travel to Rome to meet Fergusson and Koenig, 


saying, with a twinkle in his eye, that he had to get back to 
Cambridge because he had left a poisoned apple on 
Blackett’s table. This, Royal says, “was Robert’s whimsical 
way of saying he had some work to do for Blackett” (Royal 
[1969], 36). 

Essentially the same story (based on the interview CW 
conducted with JW in 1975) is told in Smith and Weiner, 
though they correct some of the details, placing the Corsican 
holiday in the spring vacation, rather than at Christmas, and 
mentioning that Edsall was also included in the trip. “To this 
day,” they say, “Edsall and Wyman are not sure about the 
poisoned-apple story; at the time they assumed it was an 
hallucination on Robert’s part” (S & W, 93). “Metaphoric 
interpretations,” they insist, “should not be excluded” 
(ibid.). Goodchild repeats Smith and Weiner’s version of the 
story, and does not even entertain the idea that there 
actually was a poisoned apple. It was, he thinks, either an 
“elaborate metaphor” or a hallucination (Goodchild [1980], 
18). 

Bernstein, partly because he believes that Oppenheimer 
“must have scarcely known Blackett,” is inclined to attribute 
the story to “the mythmaking Oppenheimer indulged in for 
most of his life, sometimes with disastrous consequences for 
himself and others” (Bernstein [2004], 21). 

My account follows that of Bird and Sherwin, who make 
crucial use of the recollections of Francis Fergusson, given in 
an interview that Sherwin conducted with Fergusson in 
1979. Remembering a confession that Oppenheimer had 
made to him at the end of 1925 (so some months before the 
holiday in Corsica), Fergusson told Sherwin: “He 
[Oppenheimer] had kind of poisoned the head steward. It 
seemed incredible, but that was what he said. And he had 
actually used cyanide or something somewhere. And 
fortunately the tutor discovered it. Of course there was hell 
to pay with Cambridge” (B & S, 46). 

Charles Thorpe mentions Bird and Sherwin’s account, but, 
for a reason he does not make explicit, is inclined not to 
believe it, thinking it “more likely” that the episode was a 
“fantasy” on Oppenheimer’s part, born out of the jealousy he 
felt for Blackett (see Thorpe [2006], 38). 


57. 


58. 


ao. 


60. 


61. 


62. 


63. 
64. 


65. 
66. 


67. 
68. 


69. 
70. 
7k 


ees 


Lo: 


74. 


“Blackett was brilliant and handsome”: JE in his interview 
with CW, 16.7.1975, quoted in Thorpe (2006), 39 

his interview with Martin Sherwin: conducted 18.6.1979, 
quoted in B & S, 46 

His father negotiated an agreement: HWS interviewed by 
CW, 1.8.1974, quoted in B & S, 46 

“I saw him standing on the corner”: FF interviewed by AKS, 
21.4.1976, S & W, 94 

“He looked crazy”: FF interviewed by MJS, 18.6.1979, 
B&S, 46 

“said that the guy was too stupid”: FF interviewed by AKS, 
21.4.1976, S & W, 94 

“I was on the point”: Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 71 
“My reaction was dismay”: FF interviewed by MJS, 
18.6.1979, B & S, 47 

“began to get very queer”: ibid. 

Oppenheimer’s behavior in Paris: ibid. In his interview with 
AKS, Fergusson told her that Oppenheimer had been to see a 
prostitute, but had been unable to “get to first base” with 
her: “nothing would click” (quoted in B & S, 608). 

“one of his ambiguous moods”: B & S, 47 

“T leaned over to pick up a book”: ibid., the source for which 
is Fergusson’s “Account of the Adventures of Robert 
Oppenheimer in Europe” and his interview with Sherwin of 
18.6.1979. The same incident is described in S & W, 91, the 
source for which is FF’s 1976 interviews with AKS. 

“You should have”: JRO to FF, 23.1.1926, S & W, 91 

“the awful fact of excellence”: ibid., 92 

he insisted: for an account of these negotiations, see 
Crowther (1974), Chapter 14 

“thought my experiments quite good”: JRO to FF, 
15.11.1925, S & W, 87 

“what happened with beams of electrons”: JRO in interview 
with TSK, 18.11.1963, quoted ibid., 88 

“which can give an indication”: JRO to REP, 16.9.1925, 
ibid., 84 


79: 


76. 
77: 


78. 


72. 


80. 


81. 


82. 


83. 


84. 
85. 
86. 


87. 


88. 
So. 
90. 


ol, 


a2. 


“the miseries of evaporating beryllium”: JRO in interview 
with TSK, 18.11.1963, quoted ibid., 88 


“The business in the laboratory”: ibid. 

“there was a tremendous inner turmoil”: JE interview with 
CW, 16.7.1975, ibid., 92 

“the most profound revolution”: Weinberg (193), 51, quoted 
in Kumar (2009), 153 

“certainly some good physicists”: JRO to FF, 15.11.1925, 
S&W, 88 

Kapitza Club: the account of Peter Kapitza and the club 
named after him is based on those given in Farmelo (2009), 
Kragh (1990), Mehra and Rechenberg (1982e) and Nye 
(2004) 

Paul Dirac: see Farmelo (2009), Kragh (1990) and Mehra 
and Rechenberg (1982e) 

“not easily understood”: JRO interview with TSK, 
18.11.1963, quoted S & W, 96 

“Quantum Theory (Recent Developments)”: see Dirac 
(1995), xvii-xviii, and Kragh (1990), 30 

“Dirac gave us”: see Kragh (1990), 30 

“a generous-spirited man”: Farmelo (2009), 53 

a series of three short papers: see Comptes rendus (Paris), 
Volume 177 (1923), 507-10, 548-50, 630-2 

Einstein’s Nobel Prize-winning suggestion: “Uber einen die 
Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden 
heuristischen Gesichtspunkt” [‘On a Heuristic Viewpoint 
Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light’], 
Annalen der Physik, 17 (6), 132-48 

a series of experiments: see Compton (1923) 

an English version of de Broglie’s articles: de Broglie (1924) 
“He has lifted a corner”: Abragam (1988), 30, quoted Kumar 
(2008), 150 

“brimful of talk and enthusiasm”: Lovell (1975), 10, quoted 
Nye (2004), 46 

Paul Dirac gave a paper: see Kragh (1990), 31 


oc, 


94. 


OD, 


06. 


oF, 


98. 


a9. 
100. 
101. 
102. 


103. 
104. 


105. 


106. 
107. 


108. 


109. 


110. 


Werner Heisenberg: the best biography of Heisenberg I 
know, and the source for much of my information about 
him, is Cassidy (1992). I have also learned much from 
Cassidy (2009), Powers (1994) and Rose (1998). 


“Quantum Theoretical Reinterpretation”: see Heisenberg 
(1925) for the original German publication; for an English 
translation, see Waerden (1968), 261-76 


“What do you think of this?”: Farmelo (2009), 83 


“The Fundamental Equations”: see Dirac (1925), and 
Waerden (1968), 307-20 


a paper that they wrote together in September: see Born and 
Jordan (1925). For an English translation, see Waerden 
(1968), 277-306 


“On Quantum Mechanics II”: Born, Heisenberg and Jordan 
(1926), Waerden (1968), 321-86 


Dirac’s second paper: Dirac (1926), Waerden (1968), 417-27 
a paper to the Del Squared V Club: see Cassidy (2005), 98 
“My regret”: JRO to FF, 7.3.1926, S & W, 92 

“and I remember thinking”: FF interview with MJS, 
18.6.1979, quoted B & S, 49 

If he could take a break: see JRO to FF, 7.3.1926, S & W, 93 
“Quantization as a Problem of Proper Values”: Schrodinger 
(1926a). For a summary of Schrédinger’s theory in English, 
see Schrodinger (1926e); for an English translation of the 
original article, see Schrodinger (1982), 1-12 


“wave mechanics”: or, as his 1926e summary translation has 
it, “undulatory” mechanics 


three further landmark papers: Schrodinger (1926a-d) 


“like an eager child”: Planck to Schrédinger, 2.4.1926, 
quoted Moore (1989), 209, and Kumar (2009), 209 


“the idea of your work”: Einstein to Schrodinger, 16.4.1926, 
quoted Moore (1989), 209, and Kumar (2009), 209 


“deepest form of the quantum laws”: quoted in Cassidy 
(2009), 150 


“passionately eager”: Edsall (2003), 14 


111. 
5 lee 
Its. 


114. 


115. 
116. 
di? 
118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
i232. 


124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 
128. 


129. 


130. 


131. 


132. 


“intensely articulate”: ibid. 
“No, no. Dostoevsky is superior”: see Michelmore (1969), 18 


“The kind of person that I admire most”: JE in interview 
with CW, 16.7.1975, quoted S & W, 93. See Michelmore 
(1969), 18, for a slightly different version of the same 
recollected remark. 


a misunderstanding between Edsall and the Corsican police: 
Michelmore (1969), 18. Michelmore gives no source, but 
presumably he was told the story by Edsall. 


“what began for me in Corsica”: Pharr Davis (1969), 20 
“a great and lasting part”: ibid., 19 

“You see, don’t you”: ibid. 

“You ask whether I will tell you”: ibid., 20 

“a European girl”: ibid., 19 

“one of the great experiences”: Chevalier (1965), 34 
quoting from memory: ibid. 

“Perhaps she would not”: ibid., 35 


“We most of all”: JRO, speech at Seven Springs Farm, Mount 
Kisco, New York, summer 1963. Full text in the 
Oppenheimer Papers, Library of Congress; extract quoted in 
Goodchild (1980), 278, where, however, it is mistakenly 
dated “summer of 1964.” 


“felt much kinder”: Royal (1969), 36 

“passing through a great emotional crisis”: B & S, 50 

“T can’t bear to speak of it”: ibid. 

“Well, perhaps”: ibid. 

“On the Quantum Theory of Vibration-Rotation Bands”: 
Oppenheimer (1926a) 


“That was a mess”: JRO in interview with TSK, 18.11.1963, 
quoted Pais (2006), 10 


“we went out on the river”: JRO in interview with TSK, 
18.11.1963, quoted S & W, 96 


“very warm person”: GU in interview with CW, 8.1.1977, 
quoted S & W, 97 


“realized then”: JRO in interview with TSK, 18.11.1963, 


133, 


134. 
Eos. 


136. 


127. 


138. 


132. 


140. 


141. 


142. 


143. 


144. 
145. 


146. 
147. 


quoted S & W, 97 


“T’m in difficulties”: JRO in interview with TSK, 18.11.1963, 
quoted S & W, 96 


“I forgot about beryllium”: ibid. 

“T thought it put a rather useful glare”: JRO in interview 
with TSK, 18.11.1963, quoted B & S, 54 

Edsall remembers: JE interview with CW, 16.7.1975, quoted 
S & W, 93 

“T am indebted to Mr J.T. Edsahl”: Oppenheimer (1926b), 
424 

“On the Quantum Theory of the Problem of the Two 
Bodies”: Oppenheimer (1926b) 

Max Born: for biographical information on Born, I have 
relied mainly on Born (1978) and Greenspan (2005) 

“Zur Quantenmechanik der Stossvorgange”: Born (1926a). 
An English translation has appeared in Wheeler and Zurek 
(1983), 52-61. 

longer, more polished and refined paper: Born (1926b). 
English translation in Ludwig (1968), 206-30 

“On the Quantum Mechanics of Collisions of Atoms and 
Electrons”: see Mehra and Rechenberg (1982e), 215, and 
Mehra and Rechenberg (1987), 760 

“God does not play dice”: AE to MB, 26.12.1926, Born 
(1971) 

Jeremy Bernstein has speculated: see Bernstein (2005) 
“Physical Aspects of Quantum Mechanics”: Born (1927), 
reprinted in Born (1956), 6-13 

“particularly interested”: JRO to REP, 18.8.1926, S & W, 98 
“had very great misgivings”: JRO interview with TSK, 
18.11.1963, quoted S & W, 97 


PART TWO: 1926-1941 


6. Gottingen 


i. 


“conscious of his superiority”: Born (1978), 229 


2. “I was never very good”: ibid., 234 


. “much mathematical power”: Bridgman to Rutherford, 


24.6.1925, quoted S&W, 77 


. “bitter, sullen ... discontent and angry”: JRO interview with 


TSK, 20.11.1963, quoted S & W, 103 


. one of the very first branches: see Madden and Miihlberger 


(2007), Chapter 7 


. Achim Gercke: ibid. 
. Charlotte Riefenstahl: the story of Oppenheimer’s meeting 


with Riefenstahl has been retold many times, but its original 
telling (presumably based on an interview with Riefenstahl 
herself) is in Michelmore (1969), 22-3. 


. “had the typical bitterness”: JRO interview with TSK, 


20.11.1963, quoted S & W, 103 


. “The Americans”: Born (1978), 228 

. “All right”: Michelmore (1969), 21 

. “Trouble is”: ibid., 20 

. “He and Born became very close friends”: Edward Condon, 


“Autobiography Notes,” Condon Papers, American Physical 
Society, Philadelphia, quoted Schweber (2000), 63-4 


. Karl T. Compton: see Compton (1956) 
. “when he was a member”: ibid., 125 
. He is reported: Margaret Compton in interview with AKS, 


3.4.1976, quoted S & W, 103-4 


. “There are about 20 American physicists”: JRO to FF, 


14.11.1926, S & W, 100 


. “another problem”: JRO to ECK, 27.11.1926, S & W, 102 
. In Born’s seminar: see Born (1978), 229, and Greenspan 


(2005), 144 


. “I felt as if’: Elsasser (1978), 53 
. “I was a little afraid of Oppenheimer”: Born (1978), 229 
. one day, Born arrived: ibid. See also Greenspan (2005), 144—- 


5 


. “This plot worked”: Born (1978), 229 
. “As far as I can learn”: K.T. Compton to Augustus 


Trowbridge, 6.12.1926, quoted Cassidy (2005), 115 


24. 


29: 


26. 
ar. 
28. 
29. 


30. 
al; 


32. 


33. 
34. 


oot 


36. 


Sf. 


38. 
oe 


40. 
41. 


“T would like to point out”: MB to Augustus Trowbridge, 
26.12.1926, quoted ibid. 


“Zur Quantentheorie kontinuierlicher Spektren”: 
Oppenheimer (1927a) 

“quite important”: Pais (2006), 10 

“unexplored territory”: ibid. 

“You ought to tackle”: Dalitz and Peierls (1986), 147 
“The Development of Quantum Mechanics”: Dirac (1978), 
1-20 

“It was very easy”: ibid., 7 

“The most exciting time”: JRO interview with TSK, 
20.11.1963, quoted Pais (2006), 10 


“Oppenheimer indicates”: PAMD interview with TSK, 
14.5.1963, quoted Pais (2006), 10. The entire interview is 
available online at: http://www.aip.org/history/ 
ohilist/4575_1.html 

“T am especially happy”: Dirac (1971), 10 

“T don’t see”: there are many versions of this story in print, 
starting with Royal (1969), 38. The version I have used is 
from Farmelo (2009), 121. He gives Bernstein (2004) as his 
source, but in fact his version is slightly different from 
Bernstein’s, and, in my opinion, slightly better. 

where he had been since September 1926: for an account of 
Dirac at Copenhagen, see Farmelo (2009), Chapter Eight 
“quite excellent”: MB to W. S. Stratton, 27.2.1927, quoted 
S & W, 103 

“There are three young geniuses”: Earle Kennard to R.C. 
Gibbs, 3.3.1927, quoted Kevles (1995), 217 

“Great ideas”: Sopka (1980), 159 

“On the Intuitive Content”: Heisenberg (1927), translated 
into English (under the title “The Physical Content of 
Quantum Kinetics and Mechanics”), Wheeler and Zurek 
(1983), 62-84 

“My own feeling”: JRO to GU, 12.3.1927, S & W, 106 

two papers: Oppenheimer (1927b and 1927c) 


42. 
43. 


44. 


45. 
46. 


47. 


48. 


49. 


a 
SL, 
52. 
shes 


54. 


So: 


56. 


57. 


58. 


a 


60. 
61. 


“IT am very glad”: JRO to GU, 12.3.1927, S & W, 106 


“From what I hear”: PWB to JRO, 3.4.1927, quoted S & W, 
105 


“T’m glad that is over”: Michelmore (1969), 23. A slightly 
different version is given in B & S, 66. 


“Economic circumstances”: B & S, 66 


“My soul”: MB to PE, 7.8.1927, quoted Greenspan (2005), 
146 


“presence destroyed”: MB to PE, 7.10.1928, quoted 
Greenspan (2005), 153 


“Through his manner”: MB to PE, 16.7.1927, quoted 
Greenspan (2005), 146 


“Zur Quantentheorie der Molekeln”: Oppenheimer and Born 
(1927) 


“why molecules were molecules”: B & S, 65 

“I thought this was about right”: ibid. 

“T didn’t like it”: ibid., 66 

“Oppenheimer is turning out”: ECK to Theodore Lyman, 
9.6.1927, quoted S & W, 107 

“In the sense”: JRO, interview with TSK, 20.11.1963, quoted 
S& W, 98 

“ruined my young people”: MB to PE, 7.10.1928, quoted 
Greenspan (2005), 153 

“Oppenheimer, who was with me”: MB to PE, 16.7.1927, 
quoted Greenspan (2005), 146 

“Your information”: MB to PE, 7.8.1927, quoted Greenspan 
(2005), 146 

“The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of 
Atomic Theory”: Bohr (1928) 

“On or about December 1910”: the remark is from Woolf’s 
essay, “Mr Bennett and Mrs Brown,” see Woolf (1992), 70 
“conference will be devoted”: see Kumar (2009), 255 

The congress ran: what follows is based on the account of 
the Solvay Congress given in Kumar (2009), Chapter 11, 
253-80. 


62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 


66. 


67. 


68. 


69. 
70. 


7A. 


“We consider”: ibid., 258 

“towering over everybody”: ibid., 275 

“T am satisfied”: ibid., 276 

“My brother and I”: FO, interview with AKS, 14.4.1976, 
quoted S & W, 108 

“He’s too much”: Michelmore (1969), 23 


“We were not highly regarded”: IIR, interview with TSK, 
8.12.1963, AIP, available at: http://www.aip.org/history/ 
ohilist/4836.html 


“There are no physicists in America”: Raymond T. Birge to 
John Van Vleck, 10.3.1927, quoted Schweber (1986), 55-6 


“We all got”: quoted Goodchild (1980), 22 


Else Uhlenbeck later recalled: interview with AKS, 
20.4.1976, quoted S & W, 107 


Charlotte stayed: see Michelmore (1969), 24-5 


7. Postdoctoral Fellow 


ay 


2 


HI, 


“Three Notes on the Quantum Theory of Aperiodic Effects”: 
Oppenheimer (1928a) 

the polarization of impact radiation: see Oppenheimer 
(1927d) 


. the capture of electrons by alpha particles: see Oppenheimer 


(1928b) 


. “very best felicitations”: JRO to PAMD, 28.11.1927, S & W, 


108 


. “Details of the theory”: Oppenheimer (1928c), 262 
. “a thin high-strung postdoctoral fellow”: Morse (1977), 87, 


quoted S & W, 109-10 


. “Crossing”: Hound and Horn: A Harvard Miscellany, 1 (4), 


335, June 1928, quoted S & W, 110 


. “own dry, sterile intellectuality”: Royal (1969), 43 
. “very much the man”: JRO to ECK, 16.2.1928, S & W, 111 
10. 


Linus Pauling: the chief source for what follows is Hager 
(1995) 


the definitive textbook: Pauling (1939) 


ed 


ig. 
14. 


15; 


16: 


17, 
18. 
12. 


20. 
21, 


22. 


22. 
24. 


20. 
26. 
or, 


28, 
29. 
30. 
oh 


32. 
33. 
34. 
30. 


“was then still stuck on crystals”: JRO, interview with TSK, 
18.11.1963, quoted S & W, 112 


“tryst to Mexico”: Hager (1995), 152 


“Poems by J. Robert Oppenheimer 1928”: see Cassidy 
(2005), 125 


“may possibly be of use to you”: JRO to FO, March 1928, 
S&W, 113 


Helen Campbell: see Helen C. Allison, interview with AKS, 
7.12.1976, S & W, 113 


“many invitations”: JRO to KDN, 4.3.1954, ITMO, 7 
“I am trying to decide”: JRO to FO, March 1928, S & W, 113 


“TI thought Id like to go to Berkeley”: JRO, interview with 
TSK, 20.11.1963, quoted S & W, 114 


April 10, 1928: see S & W, 114 


“like to be able to accept”: JRO to Theodore Lyman, 
21.4.1928, S & W, 114 


Oppenheimer wrote again: JRO to Theodore Lyman, 
7.5.1928, S & W, 115 


“the Ramsauer fiasco”: JRO to ECK, 16.2.1928, S & W, 111 


“try to learn a little physics there”: JRO to Elmer Hall, 
7.3.1928, quoted Cassidy (2005), 122 


“revealed to him”: Pais (2006), 15 
on April 26, 1928: see Cassidy (2005), 123 


“several doctors”: JRO to International Education Board, 
2.8.1928, S & W, 117 


Frank, asked many years later: S & W, 117 
“If you are out here”: JRO to FO, March 1928, S & W, 113 
in 1928 they sold the Riverside Drive: Cassidy (2005), 123 


“Like it?”: Michelmore (1969), 27. A contemporaneous, but 
slightly different, version is told in Royal (1969), 44 


Francis Fergusson visited them: see Michelmore (1969), 27 
“It now seems certain”: JRO to RFB, 25.8.1928, S & W, 118 
“slight sinus infection”: Cassidy (2005), 125 

they had an accident: see B & S, 73, and Cole (2009), 39 


Ko 


te 
38. 
a9. 


40. 


41. 


42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 


46. 


47. 


48. 
49. 


DU. 


9B 


D2. 
os 


54. 
DO: 


56. 
57. 


“sipping from a bottle”: FO to Denise Royal, 25.2.1967, 
quoted B & S, 73 


“His way of being alive”: Klein (1981), 3 
“He was not merely”: Einstein (1950), 236 


“to distrust”: Weisskopf (1972), 2-3, quoted Klein (1981), 
11 


“If you intend”: PE to JRO, 5.7.1928, quoted Klein (1981), 
12 


“T thought of him”: JRO, interview with TSK, 20.11.1963, 
quoted S & W, 121 


“T don’t think”: ibid. 
“T think that”: ibid. 
“There was not a great deal of life”: ibid. 


“T absolutely do not know”: see the Ehrenfest biography at: 
http://www. gap-system.org/~history/Biographies/ 
Ehrenfest.html and Pais (1991) 

“None of us”: JRO to GU, autumn 1933, S & W, 168 


“spoiled this period”: JRO, interview with TSK, 20.11.1963, 
quoted S & W, 121 


“Bohr is Allah”: see Enz (2002), 36 


“a lamentable ignorance”: JRO to FO, 30.12.1928, S & W, 
119-21 


“at the suggestion of Ehrenfest”: JRO to IEB, 3.1.1929, 
S&W, 122 


“a very ingenious physicist”: PE to W.E. Tisdale (secretary of 
the IEB), 12.1.1929, quoted S & W, 122 


“passionately preoccupied”: see page 155 above 


“that Bohr with his largeness and vagueness”: JRO, 
interview with TSK, 20.11.1963, quoted S & W, 121 


“a wise judgement”: Pais (2006), 16 


“about a physicist”: PE to WP, 26.11.1928, Pauli (1979), 
477, quoted Pais (2006), 16 


Dr. W. J. Robbins: see S & W, 123 
“The luggage”: JRO to W.J. Robbins, 4.2.1929, S & W, 123 


58. 


Lie 3 


60. 
61. 


62. 
63. 
64. 


65. 
66. 


67. 


68. 
69. 


70. 
ra D 
ies 
Fide 


74. 
7D3 
76. 


Ze; 


both Oppenheimer and Pauli were in Leipzig: that 
Oppenheimer was in Leipzig is confirmed by Rabi, in Rabi et 
al. (1969), 4. He dates his meeting Oppenheimer in Leipzig 
to “late in 1928,” but, given that Oppenheimer was still in 
Leiden on January 23, 1929 (the date of his letter to the IEB, 
quoted on page 160), it must have been shortly after this. 
For confirmation that Pauli was in Leipzig at this time, see 
Cassidy (1992), 285. 


Heisenberg had been at Leipzig since 1927: what follows is 
based on the account given in Cassidy (1992), Chapter 14 


“Dirac equation”: see Dirac (1928) 


“On the Quantum Dynamics of Wave Fields”: Heisenberg 
and Pauli (1929); see also Cassidy (1992), 285 


“interests changed”: see Rabi et al. (1969), 12 
“T first met him in Leipzig”: Rigden (1987), 218 


“What we needed were the leaders”: IIR, interview with 
TSK, 8.12.1963, quoted Rigden (1987), 63 


“I got to know him quite well”: Rigden (1987), 218 


“The time with Ehrenfest”: JRO, interview with TSK, 
20.11.1963, quoted S & W, 126 


“You know, what Mr. Einstein said is not so stupid!”: see 
Peierls (1985), 46 


“T do not mind”: ibid., 47 


“not even wrong”: the oldest and most authoritative source 
for this story seems to be Peierls (1960), 186 


“His ideas”: Michelmore (1969), 28 
“nim-nim-nim-man”: ibid. 
“Pauli once remarked”: Rabi et al. (1969), 5 


“T believe”: WP to PE, 15.2.1929, Pauli (1979), 486, quoted 
Pais (2006), 17 


“rather short”: Peierls (1985), 44 
“worked very hard”: Rabi et al. (1969), 5 


“Using flawless methods”: WP to Sommerfeld, 16.5.1929, 
Pauli (1979), 500, quoted Pais (2006), 18 


“a continuation”: WP to NB, 17.7.1929, Pauli (1979), 512, 


78. 


72, 


80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
65. 
86. 


quoted Pais (2006), 18 


“Note on the Theory of the Interaction of Field and Matter”: 
Oppenheimer (1930a) 


“First and foremost”: Dr. Robbins to JRO, 30.4.1929, quoted 
S & W, 127 


“fairly certain”: JRO to Robbins, 14.5.1929, S & W, 128 
“In the spring of 1929”: ITMO, 7 

“I was particularly impressed”: see Royal (1969), 45 
“the intensity”: ibid. 

“house and six acres”: JRO to FO, 6.5.1929, S & W, 126 
“We'd get sort of drunk”: see B & S, 81 


“Tt made me a little envious”: JRO to FO, 7.9.1929, S & W, 
132 


8. An American School of Theoretical Physics 


1. 


2. 
2. 


“T didn’t start to make a school”: JRO, interview with TSK, 
20.11.1963, quoted S & W, 131 

“the greatest school”: Bethe (1997), 184 

Condon has given vivid accounts: see EUC, interview with 
CW, 17.10.1967, AIP. Text available online at: http:// 
www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4997_1.html. This interview is 
the source of most of what follows regarding the history of 
physics at Berkeley. See also Childs (1968) and Dahl (2006). 


. Ernest Lawrence: my information about Lawrence comes 


mainly from Childs (1968), Pharr Davis (1969) and Heilbron 
and Seidel (1990) 


. “Ernest is making a mistake”: Pharr Davis (1969), 12 
. lecture to the Royal Society: Rutherford (1928) 


“I’m going to be famous”: Halpern (2010), 90 


. 80,000 volts: Rhodes (1988), 148 
. “unbelievable vitality”: Childs (1968), 143 
. “The more intimately”: Harold F. Cherniss, interview with 


MJS, 23.5.1979, quoted B & S, 93 


. “His mere physical appearance”: ibid. 
. “It tasted like sweepings”: Pharr Davis (1969), 24 


ad, 
14. 
15. 


16. 


vs 
18. 


19, 


20. 


ZA, 


22, 


Pade 
24. 


20. 


26. 
Zi, 


28. 
29; 


30. 


oh, 


32. 


33. 
34. 


“We passed a hot-dog stand”: ibid. 
“T have been pretty busy”: JRO to FO, 7.9.1929, S & W, 133 


“the refractory problem”: JRO to FO, 14.10.1929, S & W, 
135 


“young wives falling for Robert”: Helen C. Allison, interview 
with AKS, 7.12.1976, quoted B & S, 92 


“T can’t think”: JRO to FO, 14.10.1929, S & W, 135 


“very rarely”: JRO, interview with TSK, 20.11.1963, quoted 
S&W, 131 


“IT think from all I hear”: ibid. 
“T found myself”: ibid., quoted Pais (2006), 20 


“Almost immediately”: Birge, Raymond T., History of the 
Physics Department, University of California, Berkeley, 
quoted Cassidy (2005), 154 


“I’m going so slowly”: quoted Royal (1969), 54, and (slightly 
differently) Michelmore (1969), 30 


“Since we couldn’t understand”: Goodchild (1980), 25 


“In Pasadena”: JRO, interview with TSK, 20.11.1963, quoted 
S&W, 131 


“T didn’t know”: CA, interviewed by Harriett Lyle, 
January 9-February 8,1979, Caltech Archives 


“Robert, I didn’t understand”: ibid. 


“We had a delightful evening”: Julius Oppenheimer to FO, 
11.3.1930, S & W, 137 


“From time to time”: JRO to FO, 14.10.1929 


“a dare-devil”: Helen Campbell Allison to AKS, quoted 
B&S, 91 


“It is not easy”: JRO to FO, 12.3.1930 


Melba Phillips: see interview with Melba Phillips by 
Katherine Russell Sopka, December 5, 1977, AIP, and 
Neuenschwander and Watkins (2008) 


“Relativistic Theory of the Photoelectric Effect”: 
Oppenheimer and Hall (1931) 


“very reliable individual”: see B & S, 367 
“the character of”: see Cassidy (2005), 151 


He 


36. 
ots 
ee 8 
ae 


40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 


44. 


45. 


46. 


47. 


48. 


49. 


50. 


ol. 
D2. 
53. 
54. 
DD: 


“physics was good”: Serber (1983), 206, quoted Pais (1999), 
106. It is also quoted Pais (2006), 25, but there Pais gives 
the wrong source, mistakenly claiming that the remark is to 
be found in Serber’s contribution to Rabi et al. (1969). 


“carelessness”: Pais (2006), 25 
“The error was his”: ibid. 
“fundamental barrier”: Serber (1983) 


“On the Theory of Electrons and Protons”: Oppenheimer 
(1930b) 


“a new kind of particle”: Dirac (1931), 60 
“are not to be considered”: see Farmelo (2009), 195 
already been used by Rutherford: see Rutherford (1920) 


The problem that Pauli sought to solve: for good historical 
accounts of this problem, see Franklin (2004) and Pais 
(1986), 309-16. 


Bohr, among others: see Bohr, Kramers and Slater (1924) 
and also Bohr (1932) 


“desperate way out”: WP to Lise Meitner and Hans Geiger, 
1.12.1930, quoted Franklin (2004), 70 


“To wit”: WP, letter to physicists at Tiibingen, 14.12.1930, 
quoted Franklin (2004), 71, and Pais (1986), 315 


“that foolish child”: WP to Max Delbriick, 6.10.1958, quoted 
Franklin (2004), 70, and Pais (1986), 314 


he wrote to Frank: JRO to FO, 10.8.1931, S & W, 142-3 


the Old Testament character: see the first book of Samuel, 
Chapter 4, Verse 21: “And she named the child Ichabod, 
saying, The glory is departed from Israel” 


“Waring”: see The Poems of Browning Volume Two, 1841-— 
1846, edited by John Woolford and Daniel Karlin, Harlow: 
Longman (1991), 143-54 


Summer-school participants remember: see S & W, 141 

“T am afraid”: JRO to FO, 10.8.1931, S & W, 142 

“Mother critically ill”: Royal (1969), 61 

“He had a terribly desolate look”: ibid., 62 

a short notice: Oppenheimer and Carlson (1931). The issue 


56. 
are 


58. 
oo. 
60. 


61. 
62. 


63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 


69. 
70, 
7s; 
ye 


Ios 
74. 
fo: 


of Physical Review in which it appeared was published on 
November 1, 1931. The notice is dated October 9, 1931, 
which was three days after Oppenheimer would have 
received the telegram from his father telling him that his 
mother was critically ill, and three days before he arrived in 
New York (so quite possibly on the day he left California). 
For an interesting and accessible discussion of 
Oppenheimer’s work with Carlson on cosmic rays and 


? (74 


Pauli’s “magnetic neutron,” see Brown (1978). 
“birth cries”: see, e.g., Time, 1 July 1932 


“published very shortly”: Oppenheimer and Carlson (1931), 
1788 


“T found my mother”: JRO to EOL, 12.10.1931, S & W, 144 
“sweet message”: JRO to EOL, 16.10.1931, S & W, 145 


“T am the loneliest man”: HWS, interview with CW, 
1.8.1974, quoted S & W, 145 


“T feel pretty awful”: JRO to EOL, 12.10.1931, S & W, 144 


“You must let me know”: JRO to EOL, 16.10.1931, S & W, 
145 


Time magazine: Time, 1 February 1932 

“comforting words”: JRO to EOL, 3.1.1932, S & W, 147 
“Millikan loathed Oppenheimer”: Pharr Davis (1969), 50 
“Millikan just left his name”: ibid. 

“A Hydrogen Isotope of Mass 2”: Urey et al. (1932) 


“hydrogen atom of nuclear physics”: quoted Kevles (1995), 
226 


“the possible existence”: Rutherford (1920), 392 
“Possible Existence of a Neutron”: Chadwick (1932a) 
“dialogue passed into Cavendish tradition”: Snow (1982), 85 


His inspiration: what follows is based on the account of the 
discovery of the neutron given in Brown (1997), Chapter 6. 


“The difficulties disappear”: Chadwick (1932a) 
“The Existence of a Neutron”: Chadwick (1932b) 


“The Impacts of Fast Electrons and Magnetic Neutrons”: 
Oppenheimer and Carlson (1932) 


7: 


77, 
78. 
79, 
80. 
ol, 
82. 
83. 
84. 
So. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
ol. 


92. 


93. 


94. 


95. 


96. 


v7. 


98. 


95, 
100. 


experimental evidence for the existence of neutrons: see 
ibid., 764 

“a hypothetical elementary neutral particle”: ibid., 763 
“not much greater”: ibid., 764 

“One may, however”: ibid. 

“there is no experimental evidence”: ibid., 792 

a witty pastiche: see Gamow (1985), 165-218 

“Mrs. Ann Arbor’s Speakeasy”: ibid., 190 

“and says, with pride”: ibid., 213 

“In our seminars”: Pharr Davis (1969), 49 

“sat afraid”: ibid., 48 

“I wrote the figure”: ibid., 40 

“We were busy”: ibid. 

“are setting about”: ibid., 41 

Rutherford had known: see Rutherford (1927) 

appeared in print twice: see Gamow (1928a and 1928b) 


an article by Edward Condon and Ronald Gurney: Gurney 
and Condon (1928) 


Shortly before it was published: what follows is based on the 
account given in Cathcart (2004). 


publish an account of their work: see Cockcroft and Walton 
(1930) 


“What we require”: quoted Cathcart (2004), 173 


“T have just been”: Joseph Boyce to John Cockcroft, 
8.1.1932, quoted Weiner (1972), 40-2, and Cathcart (2004), 
216-17 


“stop messing about”: Cathcart (2004), 223 


write up their experiment for Nature: see Cockcroft and 
Walton (1932) 


“We know”: Ernest Walton to Winifred Wilson, 17.4.1932, 
quoted Cathcart (2004), 238 


“The Structure of Atomic Nuclei”: Rutherford (1932) 


“science’s greatest discovery”: this and the other newspaper 
reports mentioned are quoted Cathcart (2004), 246-9 


101. 
102. 
103. 


104. 


103, 


106. 


107. 
108. 


LOY. 


110. 
wit. 
112. 


113. 
114. 
11S, 


116. 


117. 
118. 


Bertrand Russell mentioned it: see Russell (1923), 11 

Wings over Europe: see Cathcart (2004), 249-50 
“moonshine”: Rutherford, speech to the British Association 
for the Advancement of Science, September 11, 1933, 
reported in The Times newspaper, 12 September 1933 

Leo Szilard: see Lanouette (1992), Chapter 10 

“The Atom Is Giving Up Its Mighty Secrets”: quoted Cathcart 
(2004), 253 


“Cockcroft and Walton have disintegrated the lithium atom”: 
quoted Pharr Davis (1969), 43. See also Cathcart (2004), 
254 


“Many of the characters”: Farmelo (2009), 211 

Anderson had started his research: the account that follows 
is based largely on Anderson (1961) and the interview of 
Anderson by Harriett Lyle, January 9-February 8, 1979, 
Caltech Archives. 


“talked to Oppenheimer quite a bit”: Anderson, interview by 
Harriett Lyle, January 9-February 8, 1979, Caltech 
Archives. 

“It beggars belief”: Farmelo (2009), 213 

“Tell us, Dirac”: quoted ibid., 206 

he told Heisenberg: this account was given by Heisenberg to 
Oskar Klein, who then repeated it to Kuhn and Heilbron in 
their AIP interview with him. See Oskar Klein, interview 
with TSK and John L. Heilbron, Session IV, 28.2.1963. See 
also Farmelo (2009), 206 

“Tt seems necessary”: Anderson (1932), 239 

fully worked out follow-up article: Anderson (1933) 

“It is surprising to me”: Anderson, interview by Harriett 
Lyle, January 9-February 8, 1979, Caltech Archives 
“Anderson’s positively charged electrons”: JRO to FO, 
autumn 1932, S & W, 159 

“T was quite intimate”: Nye (2004), 50 

“gone nuts”: Anderson, interview by Harriett Lyle, 

January 9-February 8, 1979, Caltech Archives 


LS. 
120. 
121; 


122. 
123. 
124. 
126. 
126. 
127. 
128. 
129. 
130. 


131; 


132: 


133. 
134. 
135. 


136. 
137. 
138. 
Iee. 


140. 


141. 


142. 
143. 


“Greatest Atom Discovery”: quoted Farmelo (2009), 223 
“a little house”: JRO to FO, 10.8.1931, S & W, 143 


“is very much pleased”: JRO to FO, c. January 1932, S & W, 
151 


“looks well”: ibid. 

“after 1am gone”: ibid., 152 

“I am meeting lots of Robert’s friends”: ibid., 153 
“paradise”: see Brian (1996), 207 

a millionairess: ibid., 216 

“T have urged him”: JRO to FO, 12.3.1932, S & W, 154 
“Only if things”: ibid. 

“The theoretical physics”: JRO to FO, 7.10.1933, S & W, 163 


he responded to an appeal: JRO to Theodore von Karman, 
c. March 1934, S & W, 173 


“Tell me”: Nedelsky, interview with AKS, 7.12.1976, quoted 
S&W, 195 


a serious study of ancient Hindu literature: in considering 
Oppenheimer’s interest in Hinduism, I have learned much 
from Hijiya (2000). 


“T am learning Sanskrit”: JRO to FO, 10.8.1931, S & W, 143 
“a friend half divine”: Ryder (1939), xxxviii 


“Ryder felt and thought”: Time magazine, November 8, 
1948, 75 


he alludes very briefly: S & W, 151 
“the Cakuntala”: ibid., 159 
a year later: JRO to FO, 7.10.1933, S & W, 165 


“the precious Meghaduta”: JRO to FO, 4.6.1934, S & W, 
1880 


“The Cloud Messenger”: see Thomas Clark, Meghaduta, the 
Cloud Messenger: Poem of Kalidasa (1882), Whitefish, 
Montana: Kessinger (2009) 


“Garuda”: JRO to FO, 7.10.1933, S & W, 164 
“that delectatio contemplationis”: S & W, 151 
the extended disquisition on the notion of discipline: JRO to 


144. 
145. 


146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 


151. 
132. 
153. 
154. 


155. 


156. 


157. 


158. 
152. 
160. 


161, 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 


FO, 12.3.1932, S & W, 155 
“T believe”: ibid., 156 
“teachers, fathers and sons”: The Bhagavad Gita, translated 


by Juan Mascaro, London: Penguin (1962), Chapter 1, Verse 
34 


“evil of destruction”: ibid., 1.39 

“Set thy heart”: ibid., 2.47 

“freedom from the chains of attachment”: ibid., 13.9-13.11 
“Any work”: ibid., 14.16 


“would have been a much better physicist”: quoted Rigden 
(1987), 228 


“The Jewish tradition”: ibid. 
“why men of Oppenheimer’s gifts”: Rabi et al. (1969), 7 
“The work is fine”: JRO to FO, autumn, 1932, S & W, 159 


“It won’t be any trouble”: Nedelsky, interview with AKS, 
7.12.1976, quoted S & W, 149 


Wendell Furry: what follows draws on the information 
provided in Furry’s interview with Charles Weiner in 
Copenhagen, August 9, 1971, for the AIP: http:// 
www.aip.org/history/ohilist/24324.html 


“The state of theoretical physics”: Milton S. Plesset, 
interviewed by Carol Bugé, December 8, 1981, Caltech 
Archives 


“On the Production of the Positive Electron”: Oppenheimer 
and Plesset (1933) 


“The experimental discovery”: ibid., 53 
“fundamental observation”: Pais (2006), 27 


“fast electrons and positives”: Oppenheimer and Plesset 
(1933), 55 


“Their final formula”: Pais (2006), 27 

“T fancy”: quoted Schweber (200), 68 

“profound thanks”: Oppenheimer and Plesset (1933), 55 
Oppenheimer wrote to Bohr: S & W, 161-2 

“swarming”: Milton S. Plesset, interviewed by Carol Bugé, 


December 8, 1981, Caltech Archives 
166. “a lot of discussion”: ibid. 
167. “pudgy-faced”: Farmelo (2009), 230 
168. “What you have said”: quoted ibid., 231 
169. a four-page letter: ibid., 232 
170. he wrote to Frank: JRO to FO, 7.10.1933, S & W, 162-5 
171. “work with pairs”: ibid., S & W, 164 
172. “has definitely established”: ibid., S & W, 165 


173. “Lawrence’s first European recognition”: quoted Pharr Davis 
(1969), 56 


174. “Lawrence left the conference”: ibid., 57 
175. “one of Lawrence’s saddest experiences”: ibid. 
176. “The formalism”: JRO to GU, autumn 1933, S & W, 168 


177. “The Production of Positives by Nuclear Gamma Rays”: 
Oppenheimer and Nedelsky (1933) 


178. Three months later: see Physical Review, 45, 136 (1934) 


179. “On the Theory of the Electron and the Positive”: 
Oppenheimer and Furry (1934a) 


180. “it was a common sight”: Michelmore (1969), 37-8 
181. the Boston meeting: see S & W, 169 


182. “A short while ago”: quoted Mehra and Rechenberg (2001), 
915 


183. “I do not know”: JRO to FO, 7.1.1934, S & W, 171 
184. a letter to the editor: Oppenheimer and Furry (1934b) 
185. another letter: Oppenheimer and Furry (1934c) 

186. “from Dirac”: JRO to GU, c. March 1934, S & W, 175 
187. “Where is the nearest post office?”: Serber (1998), 36 
188. “golden creative streak”: Farmelo (2009), 234 

189. “A refusal”: quoted ibid., 235 

190. “He is not interested”: quoted ibid., 239 

191. “Thirty-One-Year-Old Professor”: see ibid., 240 


192. “Forgetful Prof”: the newspaper page in question is 
reproduced in Kelly (2006), 129 


193. 
194. 
19s, 


196. 
197. 
198. 


199. 
200. 


201. 
202. 


203. 
204. 
205. 
206. 


207. 
208. 
209, 
210. 
211; 
212. 
PAB 


214. 


25, 
216. 
217: 


“Like all geniuses”: quoted ibid., 128 
“I never saw”: ibid. 


“disentangling the still existing miseries”: JRO to FO, 
4.6.1934, S & W, 181 


“Garuda does ninety-five”: ibid., 182 
demonstrating his car’s speed: see ibid., 183 


“that the American part of you”: JRO to GU, autumn 1934, 
S & W, 187 


“T have such a feeling”: ibid., 188 


Robert Serber: most of what I say about Serber comes from 
Serber (1998) and the three AIP interviews listed in the 
Bibliography, dated 1967, 1983 and 1996. 


“When I arrived”: Rabi et al. (1969), 17 


“The word had gotten around”: Serber, interviewed by 
Charles Weiner and Gloria Lubkin at Columbia University, 
February 10, 1967, AIP 


“naturally”: Lamb, in Brown and Hoddeson (1983), 313 
“Oppenheimer’s office”: ibid., 314 
“His group”: Rabi et al. (1969), 18 


a mother hen fussing over her chickens: see Pharr Davis 
(1969), 79 


The first evening: see S & W, 186 

“was a bachelor then”: Rabi et al. (1969), 18 

“Many of his students”: ibid., 19 

Lauritsen: what follows is based largely on Holbrow (2003) 
a short paper: Oppenheimer and Lauritsen (1934) 

Felix Bloch: see Hofstadter (1994) 


“a rather sturdy indigenous effort”: quoted Kevles (1995), 
283 


“One of us”: Felix Bloch, interviewed by Charles Weiner, 
Stanford University, California, August 15, 1968, AIP 


“a fish place”: ibid. 
“These were post-depression days”: Rabi et al. (1969), 19 
“Bloch grew expansive”: Serber (1998), 31 


218. 


Aly, 
220. 
eel; 
222, 
gad 


224. 
Zao 
226. 


rae 


228. 


“There were no jobs”: Melba Phillips, interviewed by 
Katherine Russell Sopka, December 5, 1977, AIP 


Running through the door: see Pharr Davis (1969), 58 
“Click ... click ... click”: ibid. 

“Tt was a wonderful time”: ibid., 59 

“Transmutation”: quoted ibid., 63 


Oppenheimer’s joint paper with Melba Phillips: 
Oppenheimer and Phillips (1935) 


“an outline”: JRO to EOL, c. spring 1935, S & W, 193 
“Oppenheimer’s lectures”: Brown and Hoddeson (1983), 313 
“T never found nuclear physics so beautiful”: quoted Pharr 
Davis (1969), 78 

found love in Princeton: see Farmelo (2009), Chapter 
Nineteen 

“Princeton is a madhouse”: JRO to FO, 11.1.1935, S & W, 
190 


9. Unstable Cores 


i 


CON DO Ul 


Frank: for biographical information on Frank Oppenheimer, 
the main sources are Cole (2009) and the interview with 
Judith R. Goodstein, November 16, 1984, Caltech Archives 


. “I remember once”: Frank Oppenheimer, interview with 


Judith R. Goodstein, November 16, 1984, Caltech Archives 


. “To inject bigotry”: Graham (2005), 199 
. “When I went to Hopkins”: Frank Oppenheimer, interview 


with Judith R. Goodstein, November 16, 1984, Caltech 
Archives 


. “In Italy”: ibid. 

. “How did he end up”: Graham (2006), 5 

. “In the last months”: ibid., 12 

. the McCarthy period: for a detailed account of Melba 


Phillips’s experience of McCarthyism, see Neuenschwander 
and Watkins (2008), 329-38, 355-9. 


. “when I stopped”: Melba Phillips, draft for a eulogy for 


Frank Oppenheimer, 1985, quoted Neuenschwander and 
Watkins (2008), 309-10 


. “We were not political in any overt way”: quoted ibid., 311 
. “the grim news”: ibid. 

. “We were sitting”: Serber (1998), 31 

. amajor event: see Nelson (1988), Chapters 4 and 5 

. When the question was put directly to him: see ITMO, 277 
. “He tried”: quoted Goodchild (1980), 34 

. “My brother Frank”: ITMO, 9 

. “occasionally perhaps”: ibid., 101 

. “defection”: Michelmore (1969), 47 

. “worked fairly well”: ITMO, 101 

. “Are the Formulae for the Absorption of High Energy 


Radiations Valid?”: Oppenheimer (1934) 


. “Such clarity”: ibid., 45 
. “made it possible”: ibid., 44 


oo, 
24. 


oN 


26. 
Zi 


28. 
29. 


30. 
1 
32, 
33. 


34. 


20 
36. 


37. 
38. 
oe 
40. 
41. 
42. 


43. 
44. 
45. 


“possible to do justice”: ibid., 45 


“On the Interaction of Elementary Particles I”: Yukawa 
(1935) 


at the summit of Pikes Peak: for a detailed (and 
entertaining) account of this, see Anderson, interview with 
Harriett Lyle, January 9-February 8, 1979, Caltech 
Archives. 


scholarly account: Anderson and Neddermeyer (1936) 


fight with Heisenberg: what follows draws heavily on the 
account of the matter given in Cassidy (1992), Chapter 18. 


a paper that he published in June 1936: Heisenberg (1936) 


“On Multiplicative Showers”: Oppenheimer and Carlson 
(1937) 


“It would seem”: ibid., 221 
“another cosmic ray component”: ibid., 231 
“the presence”: Anderson and Neddermeyer (1937), 884 


a short report: see Street and Stevenson, “Penetrating 
Corpuscular Component of the Cosmic Radiation,” Physical 
Review, 51, 1005 (1937) 


“a very conscious purpose”: Brown and Hoddeson (1983), 
212 


“the possibility”: Oppenheimer and Serber (1937) 


“The point of view”: Oppenheimer, Serber et al. (1937), 
1038 


“optimistic”: quoted Cassidy (1992), 376 

“it is important”: ibid., 406 

“The Limits of Applicability”: see ibid., 407 
“According to Heisenberg’s recollection”: ibid., 412 
“smouldering fury”: ITMO, 8 


“Your closeness”: Alfred Stern to JRO, 14.10.1966, quoted 
S&W, 202 


“It is big here”: Michelmore (1969), 58 
“what the depression was doing to my students”: ITMO, 8 
“to understand”: ibid. 


46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 


ol 


SL 
D2. 
eS 


54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
38. 
oe. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 


67. 
68. 
69. 
70, 


“I began”: ibid. 
“T liked”: ibid. 
“The matter”: ibid., 9 


More than 3,000 U.S. citizens: Gerassi (1986), 3. For 
information about U.S. volunteers in the Spanish Civil War, I 
have also made use of Richardson (1982). 


when he astonished a friend: see Chevalier (1965), 16, 
where he quotes from a notebook entry he made dated 
20.7.1937: “E. told me of Oppenheimer having last summer 
gone East, taking with him all three volumes of Marx’s 
Kapital and reading them through cover to cover on the 
train.” He does not say who “E.” is. 


complete works of Lenin: ibid. 
“Beginning in late 1936”: ITMO, 8 


Jean Tatlock: my main source of information about Jean 
Tatlock is B & S, particularly Chapter Eight 


“active member”: JRO FBI file, quoted B & S, 104 
“the spring of 1936”: ITMO, 8 

“on again, off again”: ibid. 

“never seemed”: ibid. 

“quite composed”: quoted B & S, 114 

“these terrible depressions”: ibid. 

he twice proposed to her: see B & S, 153 

“No more flowers”: Michelmore (1969), 49 

“Tell him to go away”: ibid. 

“disappeared for weeks”: quoted Goodchild (1980), 35 
“had probably belonged”: ITMO, 3 

“half-jocular overstatement”: ibid., 9 


“We clipped it out”: FO, interview with Judith R. Goodstein, 
November 16, 1984, Caltech Archives 


“quite upset”: ITMO, 186 

“the only thing”: ibid., 101 

“The meeting”: ibid., 102 

“It’s really hard to imagine”: FO, interview with Judith R. 


71, 
72 
res 
74. 


reek 
76. 
Td: 
73, 
72. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
35. 
86. 


87. 
88. 


89. 


90, 


o1, 


o2. 
pes 
94. 
95. 
96. 


Goodstein, November 16, 1984, Caltech Archives 

“they were scared”: ibid. 

He said: ITMO, 183 

“He made it clear”: ITMO, 9, quoted back to him, ITMO, 184 


between $100 and $300: for this and the financial details 
that follow, see ITMO, 184-5 


Robert A. Brady: see Dowd (1994) 
“had enthusiasm”: ITMO, 158 

“It was a very inappropriate thing”: ibid. 
one to Mildred Edie: S & W, 205 
two to Brady: ibid., note 54 
“Local 349”: Chevalier (1965), 23 
“For four years”: ibid. 

“In bursts”: ibid., 23-4 
“invariably lively”: ibid., 24 
“thousands of dollars”: ibid., 25 
“miserable thing”: ITMO, 156 


Chevalier has described privately: HC to JRO, 23.7.1964, 
JRO papers, LOC, Box 200 


“We had decided”: Chevalier (1965), 19 


“story ...” of: HC to JRO, 23.7.1964, JRO papers, LOC, Box 
200 


“T have never been a member”: JRO to HC, 7.8.1964, JRO 
papers, LOC, Box 200 


“T had originally planned”: quoted Herken (2002), 341, note 
46 


the website: http://www. brotherhoodofthebomb.com/ 
bhbsource/documents.html 


in private correspondence: see Herken (2002), 31 
When Chevalier was asked: see B & S, 138 
“Look”: ITMO, 116-17 

“might well”: ibid., 10 

“This was the era”: ibid., 8 


oT. 
98. 
99. 
100. 
101. 


102. 


103. 


104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
1153, 
114. 


LIS. 


116. 


“T never was a member”: ibid., 10 
“that Communists stood”: ibid., 115 
“... it seems clear”: ibid. 
“dialectical materialism”: ibid. 


a political tract: Report to Our Colleagues, February 20, 1940. 
A second tract with the same title, dated April 6, 1940, was 
also said by Chevalier to have been written by 
Oppenheimer. These documents are discussed in Chevalier 
(1965), 35-6, Herken (2002), 50-2, and B & S, 144-6. The 
full text of the first of these reports is available on Herken’s 
website at: http://www.brotherhoodofthebomb.com/ 
bhbsource/document4.html 


the American Communist Party: for the history of the 
Communist Party of the United States I have made much use 
of Fried (1997a) and Isserman (1993). See also Haynes 
(1996), Klehr et al. (1995) and Lewy (1990) 


its internal structure was reorganized: see Isserman (1993), 
Chapter 1 


“wanted to be”: ibid., 9 

“The Communists began”: ibid., 3 

“Communism Is Twentieth Century Americanism”: ibid., 9 
“A significant proportion”: ibid., 10 

“What Is Communism?”: Fried (1997a), 250-4 

“The truth is”: ibid., 250-3: italics in the original 

“the talk that I heard”: ITMO, 10 

in the summer of 1938: ibid. 

“a land of purge and terror”: ibid. 

“It’s worse than you can imagine”: Michelmore (1969), 57-8 


“These conversations”: Weisskopf, interviewed by MJS, 
23.3.1979, quoted B & S, 148 

“is fine”: Felix Bloch to IIR, 2.11.1938, quoted Schweber 
(2000), 108 

“Alone in North America”: see “In Memoriam: George 
Michael Volkoff,” at: http://www.cap.ca/pic/ 
Archives/56.5(2000)/volkoff-Sept00.html 


di. 


118. 


119, 
120. 
121. 
122. 


123. 
124. 
125. 


126. 


127, 


128. 
i2%. 
130. 


1h. 
132. 
133. 
134. 
123. 


136. 
127. 
138. 
139. 
140. 


Supernovae: helpful introductory accounts of this topic can 
be found in Asimov (1977), Luminet (1992) and Shipman 
(1976). 


appeared in ad 1054: see Luminet (1992), 87-90, and 
Shipman (1976), 44-8 


“cessation of its existence”: Baade and Zwicky (1934b), 76 
“the super-nova process”: ibid., 77 
Hans Bethe’s work: Bethe (1939) 


Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar: Luminet (1992), 75, 
Shipman (1976), 39 


“Stars and Nuclei”: Cassidy (2005), 174 
“The Source of Stellar Energy”: ibid. 


“nuclear transformations”: see “Minutes of the San Diego 
Meeting, June 22-24, 1938,” Physical Review, 54, 235-43 
(1938) 


“On the Stability of Stellar Neutron Cores”: Oppenheimer 
and Serber (1938) 


“On Massive Neutron Cores”: Oppenheimer and Volkoff 
(1938) 


The present estimate: see Bernstein (2004), 47 
“I remember”: quoted Thorne (1994), 195 


“the question of what happens”: Oppenheimer and Volkoff 
(1938), 380 


“There would seem to be”: ibid., 380-1 
“require serious consideration”: ibid., 381 
“one of the great papers”: Bernstein (2004), 48 
“the best mathematician”: Serber (1998), 48 


“On Continued Gravitational Contraction”: Oppenheimer 
and Snyder (1939) 


“When all thermonuclear sources”: ibid., 455 

“The results”: JRO to GU, 5.2.1939, S & W, 209 

“The star thus”: Oppenheimer and Snyder (1939), 456 
the discovery in 1967: see Shipman (1976), 51-7 
Wheeler tried to talk to him: see Bernstein (2004), 50 


10. Fission 


i. 


It began: there are many, many published accounts of the 
discovery of fission. Among the best and most interesting are 
those in: Frisch (1980), Jungk (1960), Kevles (1995), 
Rhodes (1988) and Sime (1996). 


. December 19, 1938: see Sime (1996), 233 
. “the emission”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 248 
. “But it’s impossible”: Frisch, interviewed by Charles Weiner, 


American Institute of Physics, New York City, May 3, 1967, 
AIP 


. “consider it perhaps possible”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 261 
. John Archibald Wheeler: see Wheeler (2000), Chapter 1, for 


a firsthand account of these events 


. “We didn’t make long-distance calls”: Luis Alvarez, 


interviewed by Charles Weiner and Barry Richman, 
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, February 15, 1967, AIP 


. “I remember exactly”: ibid. 

. “I played it”: ibid. 

. “You must come to Berkeley”: Royal (1969), 76 

. “I do not recall”: Rabi et al. (1969), 49 

. “The U business”: JRO to Fowler, c. 28.1.1939, S & W, 207- 


8 


. “I remember very vaguely”: William A. Fowler, interviewed 


by Charles Weiner, Caltech, June 8, 1972, Session II 


. “I think it really not too improbable”: JRO to GU, 5.2.1939, 


S & W, 209 


. “Oppie would write”: Serber (1998), 57 

. “a scrappy little man”: Michelmore (1969), 51 

. “had originally started”: ibid. 

. “New York Jews”: Pharr Davis (1969), 81 

. “One Jew in the department”: see Serber (1998), 50 

. Peters: see the obituary in Current Science, 64 (8), April 25, 


1993 


. “a person as crazy as you”: B & S, 167 


ed 
os 
24. 


Zs 
26. 
Zi, 
28. 
29. 
30. 
oh 
SZ. 
a 
34. 
35: 
36. 
oF. 


38. 


39. 


40. 


41. 


42. 
43. 


“On the basis of the data”: ibid., 168 
“there was on the blackboard”: Rhodes (1988), 274-5 


“Oppie gave some lectures”: William A. Fowler, interviewed 
by Charles Weiner, Caltech, June 8, 1972, Session II 


The theory: see Bohr and Wheeler (1939) 

“It was an exciting time”: Wheeler (2000), 21 
“Bombs and reactors”: ibid., 23 

“Now listen”: Rhodes (1988), 284 

an initial paper: Bohr (1939) 

“the number of neutrons”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 291 
“That night”: ibid., 292 

“Couldn’t you”: Laura Fermi (1961), 164 

“Tt can never be done”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 294 
two papers: see Joliot et al. (1939a and 1939b) 
“Fermi was adamant”: Rhodes (1998), 296 
German government imposed a ban: ibid. 


On July 12, 1939: Lanouette (1994), 198. Rhodes (1988), 
304, gives the date as July 16. As far as I know, there is no 
conclusive evidence either way. Lanouette concedes that the 
date “has long been in dispute” (518), but claims that his 
account “represents the latest assessment of the evidence” 
(517). 

on August 2: Lanouette (1994), 201. Rhodes (1988), 307, 
says that this second visit took place “probably on Sunday, 
July 30.” 


“it may become possible”: Einstein to Roosevelt, 2.8.1939. 
The letter is reproduced in full in Lanouette (1994), 205-6, 
and in Stoff et al. (1991), 18-19. 


October 11, 1939: Lanouette (1994), 209, Rhodes (1988), 
313. On this date they are in perfect agreement. See also 
Jungk (1960), 106 


“What you are after”: Jungk (1960), 107. The many 
retellings of this exchange seem to be based on Jungk’s. 


a very thorough review: see Turner (1940) 
“Although less than a year”: ibid., 1 


44. 
45. 


46. 
47. 
48. 


49. 
30, 
aL 


me. 


oo 
54. 
55. 
50; 


O75 


58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
Gr. 


68. 


“The more familiar”: Segré (1993), 134 


“Lawrence was a tremendous influence”: quoted Pharr Davis 
(1969), 84 


“the disagreeable fact”: Heilbron and Seidel (1990), 472 
“the cyclotron man”: quoted Pharr Davis (1969), 69 


“For obvious reasons”: EOL, circulated letter to scientists, 
7.2.1939, quoted Hodes et al. (1985), 24 


his next machine: see Pharr Davis (1969), 88 
Segre reports: see Segré (1993), 151 


“for the invention”: see http://www.nobelprize.org/ 
nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1939/lawrence.html 


When the award was presented: see Pharr Davis (1969), 88- 
93, and Heilbron and Seidel (1990), 485-93 


“unforeseen difficulties”: Heilbron and Seidel (1990), 482 
“synchrocyclotron”: see Pharr Davis (1969), 251 
“Talking politics”: Segré (1993), 139 


“You have been having a very anxious time”: quoted Pharr 
Davis (1969), 85 


“T still think war is going to be avoided”: quoted VanDeMark 
(2003), 57 


“... was considered a demigod”: Segré (1993), 138 
“Oppenheimer and his group”: ibid., 138-9 
“Oppenheimer and most of his acolytes”: ibid., 138 
“great Fascist”: ibid., 139 

“a wonderful contribution”: quoted Isserman (1993), 34 
“changing opinion”: ITMO, 10 

“did not mean”: ibid. 

“Tt was in the fall of 1939”: Chevalier (1965), 31-2 

“T know Charlie”: S & W, 211 


“took special pride in it”: for Griffiths’s memoir and 
Oppenheimer’s Report, see the documents collected by Gregg 
Herken at: http://www.brotherhoodofthebomb.com/ 
bhbsource/documents.html 


“Keep America Out”: Isserman (1993), 43 


69. 
70, 
ahs 
72s 
ren 
74. 
70s 
76. 
ree 
73, 
72. 
80. 
81. 
82. 


83. 
84. 


85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
69. 
90. 
v1 
OZ. 
3. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 


“There has never been”: quoted Herken (2002), 32 
“Europe is in the throes of a war”: quoted ibid., 31-2 
“The time will come”: quoted above, on page 32 
“for some reason”: Chevalier (1965), 36 

“This is a time”: quoted Schweber (2000), 108 
“the first occasion”: ibid. 

“The Communists”: Isserman (1993), 64-5 
Isserman provides telling quotations: ibid., 65 
“Will not Hitler”: ibid., 66 

“subject to foreign control”: ibid., 68 

“the very acceptance”: ibid., 69 

“It is time now”: S & W, 213 

“fell in love with Robert”: Goodchild (1980), 39 


At the time: for Kitty’s life before she met Oppenheimer, the 
fullest sources are Michelmore (1969), Goodchild (1980) 
and, especially, B & S. 


“an impossible marriage”: quoted B & S, 161 


She had been born: the source for most of what follows is 
B & S, Chapter Eleven. 


“prince of a small principality”: B & S, 155 

“T fell in love”: ibid., 156 

“These were days of poverty”: Goodchild (1980), 38 
“Because of Joe’s insistence”: ibid. 

“As time went on”: ibid. 

“She literally collapsed”: B & S, 160 

“we met a very attractive girl”: Serber (1998), 51 
“Kitty might come alone”: ibid., 59 

“looking very aristocratic”: ibid., 59-60 

“a bitch”: B & S, 163 

“Kitty was a schemer”: Goodchild (1980), 39 
“the most despicable female”: Pais (1997), 242 


Steve Nelson: the main source of information about Nelson’s 
life is Nelson et al. (1981). Additional material is contained 


98. 

oo. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 


107. 


108. 
109. 
110. 
dit. 


112. 
Li. 
114. 
TiS: 
116. 


7. 


118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 


in B & S, which draws on an interview with Nelson, 
conducted by MJS, 17.6.1981. Herken (2002) contains 
further information drawn from FBI files. 


Oppenheimer was the featured speaker: B & S, 162 

“I’m going to marry”: ibid. 

Hoover had written to the Secretary: Isserman (1993), 89 
this led the FBI to Chevalier’s house: see B & S, 137 
Asked about this meeting in 1946: ITMO, 10 

again in 1950: ibid. 

he remembered it in some detail: ibid., 139 

“to acquaint the interested gentry”: ibid., 140 


“the big shot”: “Synopsis of Facts,” 28.3.1981, paper 
originating case, filed by R. E. Meyer, JRO (consulted at the 
Library of Congress) 


“persons to be considered”: memo from San Francisco FBI 
office to Hoover, 28.3.1981, JRO FBI file 


“I may be out of job”: S & W, 216 

“It was on our way”: Chevalier (1965), 41 

“we sat up”: ibid., 42 

“even now”: JRO to Edwin and Ruth Uehling, 17.5.1941, 
S& W, 216 

“T think we'll go to war”: ibid., 217 

“T expect”: ibid. 

“You are going”: S & W, 216 

“theories of mesotron field”: ibid., 217 


the historian of science, Silvan Schweber: see Schweber 
(2008), 31, 152-3 


“but we are all agreed”: JRO to F. Wheeler Loomis, 
13.5.1940, S & W, 211 


“a good physicist”: ibid., 212 
“asked Schiff searching questions”: Kelly (2006), 132 
“On more than a few occasions”: ibid., 133 


Julian Schwinger: for Schwinger’s life, see Mehra and Milton 
(2000) and the series of articles by Mehra, Milton and 


Rembiesa (Mehra et al. [1999a—e]). For an outline of his 
contributions to science, see Milton (2008), and for a 
detailed account of his work on QED, see Schweber (1994). 


122. “were wondering”: ibid. 


123. “thought Oppenheimer was a more interesting physicist”: 
Schweber (1994), 288 


124. “Oppenheimer was the name”: Mehra et al. (1999c), 932 
125. “was overwhelming”: ibid., 934 

126. “I spoke to Oppenheimer”: ibid., 934-5 

127. “At the early stage”: ibid., 934 

128. “After all”: ibid., 935 


129. a joint letter to the editor: Oppenheimer and Schwinger 
(1939) 


130. “Schiff was then”: Mehra et al. (1999c), 935-6 

131. “He wrote that letter”: ibid., 936 

132. “means no more”: ibid., 937 

133. “history might have developed differently”: ibid., 938 
134. “I feel Oppie”: Kelly (2006), 136 


135. “The Production of Soft Secondaries by Mesotrons”: 
Oppenheimer, Serber and Snyder (1939) 


136. “the problem”: ibid., 75 
137. “everybody at Berkeley”: Mehra et al. (1999c), 941 
138. “On the Spin of the Mesotron”: Oppenheimer (1941) 


139. “On the Interaction of Mesotrons and Nuclei”: Oppenheimer 
and Schwinger (1941) 


140. “adequate technically”: Mehra et al. (1999c), 957 

141. “T still did not quite know”: ibid., 962 

142. “very much insisted”: ibid., 963 

143. “became more and more superficial”: ibid. 

144. “could pull it off”: ibid., 964 

145. he published a formula: Peierls (1939) 

146. “One day in February or March”: Peierls (1985), 153-4 
147. “Even if”: ibid., 154 


148 


149. 
150. 
LS. 
152. 
153. 


154. 
150: 
156. 


157. 
158. 
1359. 
160. 
161. 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 


169 
170 


PAR 


11. 
1 


2 


. a two-part report: the report in full is printed as Appendix I 
in Serber (1992) 


“What is impressive”: Bernstein (2004), 69 

“Once assembled”: Serber (1992), 86 

“T am convinced”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 325 

“electrified by the possibility”: ibid., 330 

“source of power in submarines”: quoted Schweber (2008), 
331, note 29 

“met niels”: see Rhodes (1988), 340 

£5 million: ibid., 343 

“the most extraordinary experience”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 


357. For a detailed account of Conant’s visit to Britain, see 
Hershberg (1993), Chapter 8. 


“introduced the subject”: Rhodes (1988), 359 
“this was entirely”: quoted Hershberg (1993), 146 
“light a fire”: Rhodes (1988), 360 

“a very good idea”: ibid., 362 

“an energetic but dispassionate review”: ibid. 
May 17, 1941: ibid., 365 

invited Charles Lauritsen: ibid., 368 

“that the destructive effect”: ibid., 369 

“a major push”: ibid. 

“If Congress knew”: ibid., 372 

“amazed and distressed”: ibid. 

“I thought”: ibid., 373 

. joined by Oppenheimer: see Herken (2002), 40 
. “But that’s terrible”: Michelmore (1969), 66 


T THREE: 1941-1945 
In on the Secret 


. “gossip among nuclear physicists”: Rhodes (1988), 373 
. “Oliphant’s behavior”: Herken (2002), 40 


3. Through Cairncross, for example: see West (2004), 10-18 


CON OF vl 


. “Venona” project: see Haynes and Klehr (2000) and 


Romerstein and Breindel (2001) 


. “involuntary conference”: Rhodes (1988), 376 

. “Ernest”: ibid. 

. policy group: ibid., 378 

. “Oppenheimer has important new ideas”: quoted Herken 


(2002), 42 


. “a great deal of confidence”: ibid. 
. “reliable confidential informant”: Romerstein and Breindel 


(2001), 264 


. “him”: ibid., 265 

. Oppenheimer had contacted Folkoff: ibid. 

. “I think surely”: S & W, 215 

. “All of a sudden”: Martin Kamen, interview with MJS, 


18.1.1979, quoted B & S, 178 


. “not without envy”: ITMO, 11 
. “guarantees not the right to a belief”: S & W, 219 
. The meeting opened: for the details of the meeting, see 


Rhodes (1988), 382-3 


. 100 pounds: ibid., 382 
. Urey told Compton: see Compton (1956), 54 
. Their paper: “Radioactive Element 93,” Physical Review, 57, 


1185-6 (1940) 


. to the disgust of James Chadwick: see Brown (1997), 206 
. made a conclusive identification of element 94: on the 


“secret discovery” of plutonium, see Seaborg (2001), 
Chapter Seven. 


. which he put at about 220 pounds: Rhodes (1988), 382 

. “some hundreds of millions of dollars”: Compton (1956), 57 
. “lest the government”: ibid. 

. “always been rather proud”: ibid. 

. “a fission bomb”: ibid., 59. See also Rhodes (1988), 386 

. “I don’t want you to join it”: Childs (1968), 319 

. ‘Thad hoped”: JRO to EOL, 12.11.1941, S & W, 220 


30. 


on: 
32, 
Joe 
34. 
oo: 


36. 


ots 
oo, 
zB 
40. 
41. 


42. 
43. 


44. 


45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
9 
a2. 
oo. 
54. 
55. 
56. 


the two had lunch the next day: Schecter and Schecter 
(2002), 47-8. See also Sudoplatov (1994), 174-5 


“one of the leaders”: ibid., 50 

“learn the chemistry”: Compton (1956), 77 

“The period”: ibid., 79 

“You'll never get a chain reaction going here”: ibid., 81 


“represent, in the opinion of this office”: Agent Pieper to 
J. Edgar Hoover, 26.1.1942, JRO FBI file 


“follow proper procedure”: Hoover to Pieper, 15.4.1942, 
JRO FBI file 


“Whoever gets this first”: quoted Hershberg (1993), 158 
“Oh! ... Oh! ...”: ibid. 

March 9, 1942: see Rhodes (1988), 405 

“New and compelling reasons”: S & W, 223 


“the desirability”: EOL to JBC, 26.3.1942, quoted Herken 
(2002), 51 


“nervously chain-smoking”: Herken (2002), 54 


“Uranium was never mentioned”: Lomanitz, interview with 
Gregg Herken, 1996, quoted Herken (2002), 348, note 141 


The 184-inch Calutron was switched on: see Herken (2002), 
60 


“a few weeks after Pearl Harbor”: Serber (1998), 65 
“There, alone in that rural setting”: ibid. 

he did not do until May: see Rhodes (1988), 410 
“Breit was always frightened”: Goodchild (1980), 48 
“Breit was a terrible choice”: Pharr Davis (1969), 124 
“Compton, who had”: ibid., 125 

“T do not believe”: Rhodes (1988), 410 

On April 28, 1942: see Herken (2002), 347, note 116 
“T went down”: Serber (1998), 67-8 

May 23, 1942: Rhodes (1988), 406 

On June 17: ibid. 

“T didn’t take up”: Serber (1998), 68 


are 
58. 
258 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
G7. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71, 
72. 
7a 
74. 
rien 
70, 
7h 
78. 
7. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85, 
86. 
87. 
88. 


“provided, of course”: ibid. 

“luminaries”: S & W, 227 

“Separating isotopes”: Bernstein (1981), 70 
“tremendous stacks of graphite”: ibid., 71 

“T then”: ibid. 

by Fermi: see Teller (2001), 157 

“heavy hydrogen”: quoted Rhodes (1988), 416 
“We had a compartment”: Bernstein (1981), 72 
According to one account: see Goodchild (1980), 51 
“Everybody agreed”: Serber (1998), 71 

“The theory of the fission bomb”: Rhodes (1988), 417 
“a detonation wave”: Serber (1998), 71 

“everybody forgot”: ibid. 

“At one point”: ibid. 

“found something”: Compton (1956), 127 

“could not be passed”: ibid., 128 

“Oppenheimer’s team”: ibid. 

“some unjustified assumptions”: Rhodes (1988), 419 
“but then”: ibid., 418 

“The conference”: Serber (1998), 72 

“As Chairman”: Goodchild (1980), 52-3 

“A spirit of spontaneity”: Rhodes (1988), 419 

“The intellectual experience”: Bethe (1997), 187-8 
“would require”: Rhodes (1988), 420 

“We have become convinced”: ibid., 421 

“nothing should stand in the way”: ibid., 424 

“the biggest sonovabitch”: ibid., 426 

“The Secretary of War”: Groves (1962), 3 

“it will win the war”: ibid., 4 

On his first day in command: Rhodes (1988), 427 
The next day: ibid. 

“That would be the equivalent”: Groueff (1967), 34 


89. 
90. 
91, 
o2. 
o3, 
94. 
95. 
96. 


97. 
98. 
99, 


100. 
101; 
102. 
105. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
Nee 
114. 
LYS. 


LI. 
ys 
118. 


“Well, actually”: ibid., 39 

Oppenheimer’s first meeting with Groves: Groves (1962), 61 
“He was always”: Chevalier (1965), 21 

“discussed at some length”: Groves (1962), 61 

“In later summer”: ITMO, 12 

“T discussed with him”: ibid. 

squeezed into a tiny compartment: see Norris (2002), 241 


“convinced of the necessity”: JRO to John H. Manley, 
12.10.1942, S & W, 231 


“T let myself”: Badash et al. (1980), 24 

“T can’t tell you”: ibid., 25 

“the question of site”: JRO to John H. Manley, 6.11.1942, 
S & W, 236 

“It is a lovely spot”: ibid. 

“anything about the developments”: ibid., 237 
On November 16: S & W, 238 

“This will never do”: Badash et al. (1980), 15 
“As soon as Groves saw it”: ibid. 

Gregg Herken: Herken (2002), 71 

his formal letter: see S & W, 249 

“neither Bush, Conant nor I”: Groves (1962), 61 
“no one”: ibid. 

“had had”: ibid., 62 

“the prestige”: ibid. 

“background”: ibid., 63 

“which was not yet,: ibid. 

“it became apparent”: ibid. 

“had a fatal weakness”: Stern (1971), 40 


“the men we are after”: JRO to LRG, 2.11.1943, JRO papers, 
LOC 


“T was supposed”: Badash et al. (1980), 28 
“So I dug out some maps”: ibid., 29 
“whether, if Oppenheimer”: ibid., 28 


11g, 
120. 
121. 


122. 
123. 
124. 
126. 
126. 


127. 
128. 
129. 
130. 
131, 


132. 


133. 


134. 
133. 
136. 


127. 
138. 


139. 


140. 


141. 


“I bugged Oppie”: ibid., 30 

“Oppie practically threw”: ibid. 

divided the lab into four main sections: Hawkins (1946), 
Chapters V, VI, VII and VIII 

the Experimental Division: ibid., Chapter VI 

several reasons: see Rigden (1987), 152 

“the sound of”: Anderson (1974), 44 

“The Italian navigator”: Compton (1956), 144 


150,000 workers: these figures are taken from Hales (1997), 
163 


“New workers”: ibid., 131 

He persuaded: ibid., 167 

a letter he wrote to Hans and Rose Bethe: S & W, 243-6 
“is in the great effort”: ibid., 245 


a long letter of February 25, 1943: reproduced in full as 
Appendix 1 in Hawkins (1946), 311-15 


“the fatherly advisor to Oppie”: Bethe, interview with 
Rigden (Rigden [1987], 154) 


was caught on the FBI microphones: Goodchild (1980), 66- 
7, Herken (2002), 72 


“Look, what if”: B & S, 188 
Chevalier’s side of the story: see Chevalier (1965), 52-5 


“Haakon was one hundred percent”: Barbara Chevalier’s 
diary, 14.7.1984, see the extracts published on Gregg 
Herken’s website: http://www.brotherhoodofthebomb.com/ 
bhbsource/documents.html 

“means of getting technical information”: ITMO, 130 


“no chance”: “synopsis of facts,” 12.2.1954, JRO, FBI file, 
quoted B & S, 199 


Bernard Peters had told him: see Romerstein and Breindel 
(2001), 270 


“I just want to say goodbye”: Nelson, interview with MJS, 
17.6.1981, quoted B & S, 194 


“T think now”: B & S, 189 


12. Los Alamos 1: Security 


NnoaBWwWN 


. “Bulldozers moved in”: quoted Conant (2005), 62 

. “two or three fellows”: Serber (1998), 75 

. “a toy one-lane suspension bridge”: ibid. 

. “Cost and construction time”: Badesh (1980), 29 

. “That was my introduction”: ibid., 31 

. explicitly ordered by Major General Strong: Groves (1962), 


138 


. “would next be reading”: interview with Pash, 15.3.1954, 


JRO FBI file, quoted Thorpe (2006), 208 


. “Yes I did”: ITMO, 823 

. The conversation: see B & S, 188-90, Herken (2002), 96-7 
. “a little bit scared”: Herken (2002), 97 

. “preferably that”: ibid. 

. “very much worried”: ibid., 96 

. “changed a bit”: B & S, 189 

. “To my sorrow”: ibid. 

. “a great deal of concern” : ITMO, 260 

. “General Groves’s view”: ibid. 

. on April 5, 1943: Groves (1962), 138 

. some counterintelligence: what follows is based on the 


accounts given in Herken (2002), 98-99, Haynes and Klehr 
(2000), 230-2, and Romerstein and Breindel (2001), 257-9. 


. “Jesus”: Herken (2002), 98 

. “very helpful”: ITMO, 262 

. “The scientists”: ibid. 

. “Oppie”: Serber (1998), 77-8 

. “dragooned”: ibid., 78 

. “We propose”: JRO to LRG, 30.4.1943, S & W, 256 

. “Do you know”: Serber (1998), 79 

. “that I think”: JRO to WP, 20.5.1943, S & W, 257-8 
. In his reply: WP to JRO, 19.6.1943, S & W, 259 

. “Los Alamos from Below”: Feynman (1992), 107-36 


29. 


a. 
ah, 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
ou, 


40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 


48. 
49. 


50. 
SL 
52. 
ae 
54. 
55. 
56. 
7s 


“job lot”: Edward U. Condon, interviewed by Charles Weiner 
in Boulder, Colorado, April 27, 1968, AIP 


“And so”: Feynman (1992), 110 

“Please inform your wife”: ibid., 117 

“until the sergeant”: ibid., 118 

“neutral”: Teller (2001), 170 

“seemed about”: ibid. 

“had confused that strange language”: ibid. 
“major responsibility”: Groves (1962), 154 
“Condon was not a happy choice”: ibid. 
“the very heart of security”: ibid., 140 


“The thing that upsets me most”: EUC to JRO, April 1943, 
printed in full in Groves (1962), 429-32 (quotation 429) 


“The considerations”: Groves (1962), 156 
“The object”: Serber (1992), 3 

“After a couple of minutes”: ibid., 4 
“more exact diffusion theory”: ibid., 27 
“To improve”: ibid., 32-3 

“Several kinds of damage”: ibid., 33 
“overlooked”: ibid., 34 


who suggested it at the Berkeley conference: ibid., xxxii, 59; 
see also Serber (1998), 72 


“Serber is looking into it”: Serber (1992), 59 


a major ten-day conference: Hawkins (1946), 9, Hoddeson et 
al. (1993), 75-8 


produced a report on December 4: Hoddeson, 36 

a second Lewis committee: ibid., 69 

a planning board: ibid., 68-9 

“be more far-sighted”: ibid., 69 

“the original concept”: ibid. 

“so that”: Christman (1998), 107 

“I was plunged”: ibid., 108 

“understanding of the interplay”: Groves (1962), 160 


58. 
29, 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 


65. 


66. 
67. 


68. 
69. 
70. 
ak 
72 


ren 
74. 
7x 
70. 
Tae 
78. 
79, 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 


84. 


“produce the nuclear guts”: Christman (1998), 110 

“pulled together”: ibid., 130 

“every month’s delay”: Cave Brown (1977), 342 

“All science stopped”: Feynman (1992), 108 

“Every day”: ibid., 112 

“No, no”: ibid. 

“It had been planned”: Bacher, interviewed by Finn Aaserud 


at the California Institute of Technology, February 13, 1986, 
AIP 


resulted in the identification of Weinberg: Herken (2002), 
100-11, B& S, 192 


his request was refused: see ITMO, 13, 119 


he was drafted into the army: Lomanitz, interviewed by 
Shawn Mullet, July 29, 2001, AIP 


was quickly fired: Herken (2002), 109-10 

a visit to his ex-lover, Jean: see B & S, 231-5 
“She had indicated”: ITMO, 154 

“Because she was”: ibid. 


What transpired: what follows is based on the account given 
inB&S, 232 


“Q. You have no reason”: ITMO, 154 

“may be connected”: B & S, 233 

a memo to Lansdale: see ITMO, 821-3 
“Consequently”: ITMO, 822 

“My working definition”: ITMO, 266 

“Mrs. Oppenheimer”: ibid. 

“T formed the conviction”: ibid. 

“believed to be”: B & S, 234 

“because of his known interest”: ibid., 234-5 
“In accordance”: Groves (1962), 63 


Bacher told him: Bacher, interview with AKS, 16.3.1978, 
quoted S & W, 261 


“T am sure”: President Roosevelt to JRO, 29.6.1943, quoted 


85. 


86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 


90, 
91, 
a2, 


oS. 
94. 


95. 
96. 
97. 
98, 
a9. 


100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 


110 
111 


S & W, 260 


S & W, 260 

received from General Groves: S & W, 262-3 
on July 27: Goodchild (1980), 91 

Three days later: ibid., and Herken (2002), 110 


Hawaii, July 29, 2001, AIP 
“Oh, there has to be a mistake”: ibid. 
“Ernest Lawrence yelled”: ITMO, 268 


“very serious mistake”: JRO to Col Marshall, 31.7.1943, 
ITMO, 123 


“Have requested”: ibid., 133 


Lomanitz gave an interview: Lomanitz, interviewed by 
Shawn Mullet in Hawaii, July 29, 2001, AIP 


a full report: see ITMO, 275-6 
“he had been guilty”: ibid., 276 
“he must forego”: ibid. 

“That makes me mad”: ibid. 
“THe] stated that”: ibid. 

. “Oppenheimer gave”: ibid. 

. “On the whole”: ibid. 


. FBI agents watched: Herken (2002), 110, Sibley (2004), 145 


. “California trouble”: see Herken (2002), 106 

. Oppenheimer went to see Groves: B & S, 238 
. on August 25, 1943: ITMO, 136-7, B & S, 238 
. “With the approval”: ITMO, 128 

. “framed”: ibid., 876 

. “I persuaded him”: ibid., 880 


. “I remember”: Lomanitz, interviewed by Shawn Mullet in 
Hawaii, July 29, 2001, AIP 


. “These two fellows”: ITMO., 883 
. “if they were violating”: ibid. 


“You would be glad to know”: JRO to Roosevelt, 9.7.1943, 


“It was really”: Lomanitz, interviewed by Shawn Mullet in 


112. 
ITS, 
114. 
115. 
116. 
ny. 
118. 
LT. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123, 
124. 
125. 
126. 
Ley. 
128. 
i2Zo. 
130. 
131; 
132. 
133. 
134. 
13s. 
136. 
137. 
138. 
Ise. 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 


dinner in Berkeley with Robert Bacher: Herken (2002), 107 
“cock and bull story”: ITMO, 137 

“placed a certain responsibility”: ibid., 285 
“Mr. Johnson”: ibid. 

“I was rather uncertain”: ibid. 

“That is not the particular interest I have”: ibid., 286 
“T think that is true”: ibid. 

“Could you give me”: ibid., 287 

“were always”: ibid. 

“He has probably”: ibid., 288 

“TI mean”: ibid., 289 

“T have known”: ibid., 290 

“T was an idiot”: ibid., 137 

“T think it would be a mistake”: ibid., 292 
“Tt’s a member of the faculty”: ibid. 

“They were contacted”: ibid., 295 

“And then”: ibid. 

“and we may not”: ibid. 

“have a feeling”: ibid. 

“We certainly would”: ibid., 850 

“we are going to have to spend”: ibid. 

“We will be hot under the collar”: ibid., 860 
“T think that I would be”: ibid., 851 

“T feel responsible”: ibid. 

like a bloodhound: ibid., 866 

On August 27: B & S, 233 

“determining the identities”: ibid. 

“the part played by J.R. Oppenheimer”: ibid., 273-4 
“The writer”: ibid., 274 

“has allowed”: ibid. 

“Until alerted”: ibid., 275 

that “Oppenheimer”: ibid. 


144. “This Office”: ibid., 273 

145. On September 3: see Herken (2002), 108-9 
146. “without intent of flattery”: ITMO, 871 
147. “I want you to know”: ibid., 885 

148. “I thought I might”: ibid., 871 

149. “They know”: ibid., 872 

150. “We don’t want to”: ibid., 873 

151. “I’ve thought about it”: ibid., 875 

152. “Who do you know”: ibid. 

153. “I think it possible”: ibid., 876 

154. “How about Haakon Chevalier?”: ibid., 877 
155. “we’ve got the case”: ibid., 879 

156. “Don’t think”: ibid., 885 

157. “I know that he was in Germany”: ibid., 883 
158. “It is essential”: ibid., 815 

159. “very unsatisfactory”: ibid., 277 

160. “Oppenheimer’s attitude”: ibid. 

161. “who now appears”: ibid. 


162. “Look”: Lomanitz, interviewed by Shawn Mullet in Hawaii, 
July 29, 2001, AIP 


163. “firm conviction”: Herken (2002), 110 

164. “he didn’t believe”: ibid. 

165. Oppenheimer refused to take the call: ibid., 358, note 57 

166. “will continue to be loyal”: see B & S, 247 

167. “tedious project”: ITMO, 815 

168. “suddenly”: Stern (1971), 55-6 

169. “God’s help to us”: see http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/ 
index.php? 
pid = 72459&st = Thanksgiving&st1 = #axzz1X2POs3f1 

170. “Possible identity”: ITMO, 819 

171. December 12 : Stern (1971), 65 

172. “advised him”: B & S, 247 

173. sent telegrams: see Stern (1971), 66-7 


174. 
173. 
L7o 
177. 
178. 


17S. 
180. 
181. 
182. 


183. 


184. 
185. 
186. 
Ley. 


188. 
Lg, 
190. 
ToL. 
192. 
195. 
194. 
95. 
196. 
197. 
198. 
199. 


“other than [the] three original attempts”: ibid., 67 
“the information was”: ITMO, 263 

“Yes, but”: ibid., 167 

“When I did identify Chevalier”: ITMO, 889 


The answer seems to be: based on B & S, 514-9, Herken 
(2002), 270-1 


“I remember distinctly”: ITMO, 264 
“Nothing could be clearer”: ibid., 264-5 
“finally stated”: B & S, 248 


“Are you still in this world?”: HC to JRO, c. November 1943, 
Chevalier folder, Box 26, JRO papers, LOC 


“T can’t tell you”: HC to JRO, 3.12.1943, Chevalier folder, 
Box 26, JRO papers, LOC 


“His face was somber”: Chevalier (1965), 58 
“The last thing”: ibid. 
“When I got to his office”: Serber (1998), 86 


Jean’s body: what follows is based on the account give in 
B & S, Chapter Eighteen. 


“disgusted with everything”: B & S, 250 

claims in an unpublished manuscript: B & S, 252 and 637 
“went on”: B & S, 637 

“De Silva is not”: ibid. 

“Conversation with J.R. Oppenheimer”: ITMO, 150 
“During the course of the conversation”: ibid. 

“T think”: ibid., 121 

His unconvincing answer: ibid., 122 

“Just look at him”: Stern (1971), 123 

Oppenheimer was understandably skeptical: ITMO, 119 
“engaged in earnest conversation”: ibid., 150 

“.,. just as he was preparing to leave”: ibid., 149 


13. Los Alamos 2: Implosion 


iF 


the Quebec Agreement: Stoff et al. (1991), 46-7, and online 
at: http://avalon.law.yale.edu/wwii/q002.asp 


2. 
24. 


. the only physicist: Bethe, interview with Richard Rhodes, 


5.3.1993, quoted Rhodes (1996), 259 


. invited by Rudolf Peierls: Peierls (1985), 163 
. aregular informant: see Herken (2002), 89, Rhodes (1995), 


57 


. the German authorities had informed the British: see Paul 


Reynolds, “How atom spy slipped security net,” BBC News 
online at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/3046255.stm 


. “bears a good personal reputation”: Daphne Bosanquet, 


quoted ibid. 


. “As he [Fuchs] has been”: ibid. 
. “He is rather safer in America”: Major Garrett of MI5, 


quoted ibid. 


. On February 5, 1944: see West (2004), 59 

. “We were desperately afraid”: Peierls (1985), 168 

. “and we have no record”: ibid. 

. “were in their normal places”: ibid., 169 

. “did seem to be”: ibid. 

. On August 21, 1943: Rhodes (1988), 511 

. “It is not necessary”: ibid., 512 

. a letter written by Heisenberg: see Jungk (1960), 100-1 
. “whether it was right”: ibid., 101 

. “Do you really think”: ibid. 

. “Bohr was shocked”: ibid. 

. “Personally”: NB to Heisenberg, undated, but c. 1957. For 


the full text of this and other documents relating to the 
Bohr-Heisenberg meeting, see http://nba.nbi.dk/papers/ 
docs/d01tra.htm 


. “less to tell”: Oppenheimer, lecture on Bohr, 1964, 


typescript in JRO papers, LOC 


. “and an opportunity”: see Brown (1997), 242, where the 


letter is given in full 
“to help resist”: quoted Rozental (1967), 194 
“T have to the best of my judgment”: ibid. 


AGM 
26. 
ar. 
28. 


29, 


30. 
oh 
oes 
ao 


34. 


hom 


36. 
ors 


38. 
ao} 
40. 


41. 
42. 


43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 


“T shall make an effort”: quoted Brown (1997), 243 
“In view”: see Rose (1998), 157 
Jeremy Bernstein has suggested: see Bernstein (2003) 


the Nazi atomic project: for more on this, see Bernstein 
(2001), Powers (1994) and Rose (1998) 


a series of Allied attacks: see Baggott (2009), 117-19, 132- 
6, 215-17, Powers (1994), 195-213, and Rhodes (1988), 
455-7 


Heisenberg gave a lecture: Bernstein (2003), 256 
Thomas Powers believes: Powers (1994), 246 
on October 5, 1943: Baggott (2009), 213 


They arrived in New York on December 6: Powers (1994), 
240 


“It was clearly”: Bethe, interview with Jeremy Bernstein, 
quoted Bernstein (1981), 77 


“would be a quite useless military weapon”: JRO to LRG, 
1.1.1944, from the files of Robert Serber, quoted Bernstein 
(2003), 249 


“since it has been”: S & W, 270 


“Bohr at Los Alamos was marvelous”: JRO, “Niels Bohr 
Lecture 3,” 11 (1963), JRO papers, LOC 


“was to bring about”: Hawkins (1946), 28-9 
“They didn’t need my help”: Rhodes (1988), 525 


“a conservative, dour and remarkably sweet man”: JRO, 
“Niels Bohr Lecture 3,” 8 (1963), JRO papers, LOC 


While he was in Washington: Rhodes (1988), 525 


Bohr now believed: what follows is based on Frankfurter’s 
summary of the views Bohr expressed to him, quoted 
Rhodes (1988), 526 


“shared the hope”: quoted ibid. 

“worried him to death”: ibid. 

“this devastating weapon”: quoted ibid., 528 
“On no account”: ibid. 

“where everything”: ibid., 529 


48. 
49. 
e108 
ah 
me. 


hos 
54. 
55. 
56. 
Si. 


58. 
oo. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
G7, 
68. 
69, 
70. 
71, 
72 
vos 


74. 


“It was perfectly absurd”: ibid., 530 
“T did not like the man”: ibid. 

“the suggestion”: ibid., 537 

“The President and I”: ibid. 


“This was not funny”: JRO, “Niels Bohr Lecture 3,” 14 
(1963), JRO papers, LOC 


Colonel Pash was able to enter Rome: Powers (1994), 304 
able to interrogate: ibid., 358 

in November 1944: ibid., 366-73 

“disagreeable shock”: Rotblat (1985), 18 


“You realise of course”: Rotblat, interview with Powers, 
20.5.1988, quoted Powers (1994), 473. The same story is 
told in Rotblat (1985), but without direct quotation. 


“Until then”: Rotblat (1985), 18 

“I believe your people”: Pharr Davis (1969), 181 
“the most exclusive club”: ibid., 184 

“T found a spirit of Athens”: ibid., 185 

“By the grace of God”: ibid. 

“worked at physics”: ibid., 183 

“Oppenheimer could understand everything”: ibid., 182 
“He could understand anything”: ibid., 

“the neutron number”: Hawkins (1946), 71 

“the time between fissions”: ibid. 

“extremely unlikely”: ibid. 

“You see”: Rhodes (1988), 500 

“dead in the water”: ibid., 492 

What Seaborg pointed out: see Rhodes (1988), 548 
“frustrations”: Christman (1998), 143 


published a book: Atom Bombs: The Top Secret Inside Story of 
Little Boy and Fat Man by John Coster-Mullen, self-published 
(2006) 


Coster-Mullen’s hobby was model-making: see David 
Samuels, “Atomic John,” New Yorker, December 15, 2008, 


79: 


76. 
77s 
78. 
io 
80. 
et. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
S7. 
88. 
Sa. 


90. 
v1. 


92. 
oo. 


94. 
oS; 
96. 


o7 
98. 
99. 


100 


http://www.newyorker.com/ 
reporting/2008/12/15/081215fa_fact_samuels 


Oppenheimer broke the news: see Hoddeson et al. (1993), 
240 


“Do you think”: ibid. 

“went just as white”: ibid. 

a team of just eight people: ibid., 7 

“Tt seems to me”: Christman (1998), 126 

“in about the manner”: Hoddeson et al. (1993), 87-8 
“an occasional visit”: ibid., 131 

“woke everybody up”: ibid. 

“Why didn’t you tell me”: ibid. 

Oppenheimer gave reasons: ibid., 134 

“there is less danger”: ibid. 

“both Groves and Conant”: ibid., 135 

“partly”: ibid., 137 

“The situation is a mess”: Christman (1998), 137 


When he eventually joined Los Alamos: see Hoddeson et al. 
(1993), 139 


Apparently, the hope was: see ibid., 419, footnote 4 


“prime objective”: JRO to LRG, 25.3.1944, quoted Herken 
(2002), 116 


“At that time”: Peierls (1985), 187 


“into the technical aspects”: JRO to LRG, 14.2.1944, S & W, 
272 


Teller was appointed: Hoddeson et al. (1993), 157 
“the great and increased urgency”: ibid., 160 


“Hydrodynamics of Implosion, Super”: see Hawkins (1946), 
84 


“The next morning”: Teller (2001), 175 
“IT want you”: ibid., 177 

“seemed far too difficult”: ibid. 

. “as physicists”: ibid., 176 


101. 
102. 
103. 


104. 
105, 
106. 
107. 


108. 
109. 
110. 
wit: 
112. 
113. 
114. 


115: 
116. 
LT, 
11s. 


119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 


124. 


125. 
126. 
127. 


“IT much prefer”: ibid., 177 
“T was a little hurt”: ibid. 


“greatest urgency”: JRO to LRG, 1.5.1944, quoted White 
(2001), 218 


on June 3, 1944: Hoddeson et al. (1993), 162 
“There is an element of comfort”: Peierls (1985), 200 
major breakthrough: see Hoddeson et al. (1993), 163-9 


“a completely untried and undeveloped method”: Hawkins 
(1946), 91 


“not a single experimental result”: ibid., 143 

“fascination with organizational charts”: Ulam (1991), 156 
Christy suggested: Hoddeson et al. (1993), 307-8 

“RaLa method”: ibid., 268-71 

“They were kids”: Goodchild (1980), 119 

“We had reveille at six”: ibid. 


Greenglass had studied mechanical engineering: Schecter 
(2002), 175-9 


“the inexcusable Greenglass case”: ITMO, 261, 262 

“He is certainly”: ibid., 278 

“in any way”: ibid., 280 

Theodore Hall: most of my information concerning Hall 
comes from Albright and Kunstel (1997) 

When his mother asked: Albright and Kunstel (1997), 35 
“We were turning out”: ibid., 120 

“Tt seemed to me”: ibid., 90 

“Now we have our bomb”: Hoddeson et al. (1993), 271 


met Harry Gold in Boston: see Albright and Kunstel (1997), 
123, and Rhodes (1996), 152-5 


he simply denied everything: Albright and Kunstel (1997), 
Chapters 24-5 


“in essence”: ibid., 289 
“She didn’t get along very well”: Goodchild (1980), 127 
“one of the few people”: Conant (2005), 180 


128. “very bewitching”: ibid., 181 

129. “Everybody was aware of it”: ibid. 

130. “I was young”: ibid., 182 

131. “It was known”: Goodchild (1980), 128 

132. “would go off on a shopping trip”: ibid. 

133. left Los Alamos for Pittsburgh: see B & S, 263 
134. “It was all very strange”: ibid., 264 

135. “Of course not”: ibid. 


136. “X-2 Development, Engineering, Tests”: see Hawkins (1946), 
240 


137. “Trinity Project”: ibid., 241 

138. “Why I chose the name”: JRO to LRG, 20.10.1962, quoted 
S & W, 290 

139. Lieutenant H. C. Bush: see Szasz (1984), 37-8 

140. Groves announced: see Hoddeson et al. (1993), 312 

141. “spoke very quietly”: S & W, 287 

142. “We have been living”: ibid., 288 

143. dress rehearsal: Hoddeson et al. (1993), 360-2 

144. “it was recognized”: Groves (1962), 264 

145. Oppenheimer hosted: S & W, 291 


146. The minutes of these meetings: see Stoff et al. (1991), 97- 
103 


147. “From the psychological point of view”: ibid., 100 
148. “is a good radar target”: ibid. 

149. “obtaining the greatest psychological effect”: ibid., 102 
150. the minutes reveal: ibid., 105-20 

151. “expressed the view”: ibid., 106 

152. “It might be wise”: ibid., 112 

153. “effect of the bombing”: ibid., 117 

154. “several strikes”: ibid. 

155. figure of 20,000: ibid., 122 

156. “After much discussion”: ibid., 117 

157. “the ancient capital of Japan”: Groves (1962), 273 


158. “and had been”: ibid., 274 
159. “On the other hand”: ibid., 275 
160. “There was”: ibid. 


161. Robert Wilson remembers: see interview with Wilson in 
Palevsky (2000), Chapter 5, especially 135-7 


162. “Handling of Undesirable Scientists”: Stoff et al. (1991), 118 
163. “stated that”: ibid. 


164. the political and social implications of the bomb: for 
Szilard’s attempts to stop the U.S. from using the atom 
bombs, see Baggott (2009), Chapter 15, Rhodes (1988), 
Chapter 18, and Lanouette (1994), Chapter 18. 


165. “general demeanor”: Lanouette (1994), 266 

166. “The atomic bomb is shit”: ibid. 

167. “Don’t you think”: ibid., 266-7 

168. the Franck Report: reproduced in full in Stoff et al. (1991), 
140-7 


169. June 12, 1945: see Compton to Stimson, 12.6.1945, ibid., 
138-9 


170. “international agreement”: ibid., 143 

171. “the eyes”: ibid., 144 

172. “Nuclear bombs”: ibid., 146 

173. “If the United States”: ibid. 

174. a memo dated June 16, 1945: ibid., 149-50 
175. “It is clear”: ibid., 150 

176. “opportunity of saving”: ibid. 

177. “We find ourselves”: ibid. 


178. “the weapon”: R. Gordon Arenson, memo to George L. 
Harrison, 25.6.1945, ibid., 157 


179. “there would be considerable advantage”: see George L. 
Harrison, memo to Stimson, 26.6.1945, ibid., 160 


180. “I understand”: Lanouette (1994), 269 

181. “to rule that”: ibid., 175 

182. “However small”: ibid., 270, Teller (2001), 204-5 
183. “The fact that”: Teller (2001), 205 


184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191. 
192. 
193. 
194. 
195. 
196. 
197. 
198. 
199, 
200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 


204. 


205. 
206. 
207. 
208. 
209, 


210. 
211. 
212. 
213. 


“made good sense to me”: ibid. 

“in a way”: ibid., 206 

“What do they know”: ibid. 

“our political leaders”: ibid. 

“Of course”: Lanouette (1994), 271 

opinion poll: see Stoff et al. (1991), 173 

Truman made the decision: see Rhodes (1988), 651 
“Proposed Program for Japan”: Stoff et al. (1991), 168-70 
“giving them a warning”: ibid., 168 

“Japan is not”: ibid., 169 

“we should add”: ibid., 170 

“This hour”: Groves (1962), 293 

“set the example”: ibid. 

“South 10,000”: see Szasz (1984), 31 

“Every five or ten minutes”: Groves (1962), 294 
Samuel Allison started the countdown: Szasz (1984), 82 
“T never realized”: ibid. 

“My first impression”: Groves (1962), 296 

“These plans”: ibid., 297-8 

“We knew the world”: The Day After Trinity (1980), directed 
by John H. Else, KTEH television 


“T am all-powerful Time”: Bhagavad Gita, Penguin Classics 
(1962), 92 


the famous translation: see Arnold (1993) 
“Death am I”: Ryder (2004), 88 

“Dr. Oppenheimer”: Groves (1962), 436-7 
“Some people”: Szasz (1984), 90 


“T think we just said”: The Day After Trinity (1980), directed 
by John H. Else, KTEH television 


“A loud cry filled the air”: B & S, 309 
“Our first feeling”: Szasz (1984), 91 
“He seemed shrunken”: ibid. 
“thrilled”: ibid., 90 


214. 


PARES 
216. 
PAWS 
218. 
219. 
a2. 
221, 
eee: 
222. 
224. 
ee 
226. 
2A. 
228. 
229. 
230. 


“T’ll never forget his walk”: Goodchild (1980), 163, B & S, 
308 


“The war is over”: Norris (2002), 405 

a betting pool: see Rhodes (1988), 656 

“My God”: Szasz (1984), 85 

“remotely located”: ibid. 

“Operated on this morning”: Stoff et al. (1991), 183 
“Doctor Groves”: Szasz (1984), 145 

“tremendously pepped up”: ibid., 146 

“For the first time in history”: Stoff et al. (1991), 188 
“deposited its dust”: ibid., 189 

“awesome roar”: ibid., 191 

“The feeling”: ibid., 192 

“Herculean project”: ibid. 

“a nation”: ibid., 195 

“beginning to feel”: ibid. 

“They were immensely pleased”: ibid., 203-4 
“unanimous in thinking”: ibid., 205 


14. Los Alamos 3: Heavy with Misgiving 


Oo AN ADH BWwN FP 


= 
= © 


a 
N 


. “now with our new weapon”: Stoff et al. (1991), 211-12 

. “I casually mentioned”: Truman (1955), 416 

. “will deliver”: Groves (1962), 308 

. Potsdam Declaration: Stoff et al. (1991), 215-6 

. “The prodigious land, sea and air forces”: ibid., 215 

. “would stand”: ibid., 225 

. Radio Tokyo: ibid. 

. “Mokusatsu”: see Alperovitz (1996), Chapter 32 

. “They’re going to take this thing”: Pharr Davis (1969), 240 
. “Oh God”: Conant (2005), 318 

. “I just keep thinking”: ibid., 323. A slightly different version 


of the same recollection is in B & S, 314. 


. Spaatz cabled Washington: Rhodes (1988), 696 


13. 
14. 
15: 
16. 
U7. 


18. 
19, 
20. 
21. 
ae 
23. 
24. 


20. 
26. 
eae 
28. 
29, 
30. 
Si; 
Sv 


aos 
34. 
30s 
36. 
oF. 
oes 
oo 
40. 
41. 


“Hiroshima should be given first priority”: ibid. 
Farrell reported to Groves: ibid., 699 

called a briefing: see Christman (1998), 1-2 
“shorten the war”: Rhodes (1988), 701 


Enola Gay set off from Tinian: the account of the Hiroshima 
raid that follows is based on those given in Christman 
(1998), Gordin (2007), Rhodes (1988) and Serber (1998). 


“Fellows”: Rhodes (1988), 710 

“We turned back”: ibid. 

“a pot”: ibid., 711 

“I was trying”: ibid. 

“T just could not understand”: ibid., 717 
a long article: see Hersey (1989) 


“in the conviction”: New Yorker, August 31, 1946, quoted 
DeGroot (2005), 109 


“He drove the boat”: Hersey (1989), 45 

“Many of them”: Rhodes (1988), 718 

“a woman with her jaw missing”: ibid., 721 

“people with their bowels and brains coming out”: ibid. 
“dead child”: DeGroot (2005), 88 

“that Hiroshima had disappeared”: Rhodes (1988), 728 
the official estimate: ibid. 


the best estimate: see http://www.atomicarchive.com/Docs/ 
MED/med_chp10.shtml, from which my figures were taken 


“Deak to Farrell”: Christman (1998), 193 

to find a cable: Groves (1962), 319 

he went out to play tennis: ibid., 320 

“The hours went by”: ibid., 321 

“T went to sleep”: ibid., 322-3 

It arrived in triumph: see Christman (1998), 194 
“additional information”: Groves (1962), 323 
“felt this strike”: ibid. 

“I was eating lunch”: Truman (1955), 421 


42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
OL, 
a 
33; 
54. 
oo. 
56. 
Dis 
58. 
Do. 
60. 


61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
Gd. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
7k 
72. 


“Sixteen hours ago”: Donovan (1996), 97 
“the achievement”: ibid., 98 

“the Japanese”: Cohen (1983), 22 

“Hahn was completely shattered”: Bernstein (2001), 115 
“T don’t believe a word”: ibid., 116 

“ten tons”: ibid., 117 

“Here is the news”: ibid., 357 

“By God’s mercy”: ibid., 361 

“We were unable”: ibid., 121 

“T am thankful”: ibid., 122 

“T was asked”: ibid., 124 

“You are probably”: Chevalier (1965), ix 
“had often discussed”: Groves (1962), 342 
“With the success”: Rhodes (1988), 738 
On August 8: ibid., 736 

“after about August 3”: see page 460 
“Young man”: Groves (1962), 344 

arrived at Kokura: Rhodes (1988), 740 


The best estimate: see http://www.atomicarchive.com/ 
Docs/MED/med_chp10.shtml 


about 70,000: Rhodes (1988), 740 

ordered him off the plane: Serber (1998), 113 
“The only picture”: ibid., 114 

“You have known”: ibid., 112 

“our entire organization”: Groves (1962), 353 
reported to General Marshall: Rhodes (1988), 743 
“for by that time”: Groves (1962), 346 

“any demand”: Rhodes (1988), 742 

“the most cruel”: Stoff et al. (1991), 244 
“massacring”: ibid. 

“said the thought”: ibid., 245 

“From the moment”: ibid., 247 


rey 
74. 
ries 
76. 
fd, 
78. 
79, 
80. 
81. 
eZ. 
eo. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 


88. 
2G, 
90. 
ol, 
o2, 


93. 
94. 
93, 
96. 
oT 
98. 


99. 


100. 


“T cannot endure”: Rhodes (1988), 744 

“the enemy”: ibid., 745 

“Seldom, if ever”: quoted Hunner (2004), 77 
“Let me tell you”: Serber (1998), 115 

“Hey, Oppie”: Michelmore (1969), 113 
“There’s surprisingly little excitement”: Serber (1998), 114 
“A whole damn bunch”: Goodchild (1980), 169 
“Few of us”: Frisch (1980), 177 

“nervous wreck”: Herken (2002), 139 

when Lawrence came to Los Alamos: ibid., 140 
“There is every reason”: Hunner (2004), 82 
“revulsion”: Smith (1965), 77 

“The reasons”: Conant (2005), 330 

“He smoked constantly”: ibid., 333 


“We believe”: JRO to Stimson, 17.8.1945, Stoff et al. (1991), 
255,S & W, 294 


“had an opportunity”: JRO to EOL, 30.8.1945, S & W, 301 
“felt reluctant”: ibid. 

“Could all this be printed out”: Smyth (1989), ix 

“Rather”: ibid. 

“T had the fairly clear impression”: JRO to EOL, 30.8.1945, 
S & W, 301 

“Secretary Byrnes”: Stoff et al. (1991), 256 

“T can understand now”: Chevalier (1965), x 

“The thing had to be done”: B & S, 319 

“You will believe”: JRO to HWS, 26.8.1945, S & W, 297 

“in an earnest”: JRO to Bernheim, 27.8.1945, S & W, 297-8 
“You will understand”: JRO to Deutsch, 24.8.1945, S & W, 
295 

a long letter to Charles Lauritsen: JRO to Lauritsen, 

c. 27.8.1945, S & W, 298-300 

“a real instrument”: JRO to Marcelle Bier, 31.8.1945, S & W, 
303 


101. 


1@2. 
103. 
104. 
105, 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 


1 


112. 
113. 
114. 
115: 
116. 
Li? 
118. 
LV. 
120, 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 
126. 


“tickling the dragon’s tail”: see Hoddeson et al. (1993), 346- 
8, and Malenfant (2005) 


suffered an accident: see Hunner (2004), 84-5 

“T think it’s good propaganda”: Stoff et al. (1991), 258 
“T’ll be delayed”: Serber (1998), 114 

“The most striking impression”: ibid., 123 
“callousness”: ibid., 125 

“The ruins”: ibid., 135 

a press conference: see Norris (2002), 439-40 

“No one”: Hunner (2004), 114-5 


origins of this organization: I am dependent here on the 
information provided in Piccard (1965). It is more usual to 
say that ALAS was formed on August 30, 1945, but, using 
contemporary sources and ALAS’s own archive of 
documents, Piccard gives a fuller and more detailed account 
that traces the origins back to the spring of 1945. 


“the international control”: from an anonymous note in the 
ALAS files, dated October 24, 1945, quoted Piccard (1965), 
252 


a document: reproduced in full ibid., Appendix A 
“In the event”: ibid., 259 

“The development of the atomic bomb”: ibid. 
“You will probably recognize”: S & W, 304 

“Mr. Harrison points out”: Piccard (1965), 260 
“If this bill passes”: Lanouette (1994), 286 

“felt that he had”: Rhodes (1996), 241 

“T must confess”: Smith (1965), 140 
“frightening”: Lanouette (1994), 287 

“Mention to a Senator’s secretary”: ibid., 288 

“Tt was a declaration”: Wilson (1996), 353 

“not necessarily”: ibid. 

“The scientific background”: Piccard (1965), 261 
“one of the best speeches”: Conant (2005), 346 
“Tt is our hope”: S & W, 310 


127. “The peoples of this world”: ibid., 311 


PART FOUR: 1945-1967 


15. The Insider Scientist 


BRwWN FB 


Oo ON AD UI 


11 


16. 
ive 
18. 
19. 


20), 
oh 
22. 


2S. 


. “He’d better be careful”: Conant (2005), 351 

. “The woods”: ibid. 

. “There were always people”: ibid., 352 

. “somewhat academic”: Hearings on Science Legislation (S. 


1297 and related bills): Hearings before a subcommittee of the 
Committee on military affairs, United States Senate, Seventy- 
Ninth Congress, first session, Washington D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office (1945), 300 


. “a plea”: ibid., 301 

. “If the so-called secret”: ibid., 322 
. “no technical difficulty”: ibid., 325 
. “The two”: ibid., 321 

. “The Johnson bill”: ibid., 308 

10, 


“oblique attack”: quoted Smith (1965), 154 


. “the coolest reception”: Thorpe (2006), 176 
E22. 
13. 
14. 
15. 


“Oppie’s suggestions”: ibid. 
a dinner: see Lanouette (1994), 290 
“T never saw a man”: Wallace (1973), 496-7 


May opened proceedings at 10 a.m.: see Lanouette (1994), 
290-3 


“patient consideration”: ibid., 291 
a “masterpiece”: ibid., 292 
“He talked”: ibid., 293 


“The bill”: Hearings on Science Legislation, 127, quoted 
Thorpe (2006), 172 


“To the congressmen”: Lanouette (1994), 293 
“T think it is a matter”: quoted Thorpe (2006), 173 


“an enormous technological development”: Hearings on 
Science Legislation, 300, quoted Thorpe (2006), 174 


“a plea for leaving”: ibid., 301, quoted Thorpe (2006), 174 


24. 
2s 
26. 
Zi, 
28. 
20. 
30. 
oh 
32. 
ao 
34. 
35, 
36. 
or. 
os 
ao. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 


46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
SU, 


aL: 
D2. 
53. 


“T don’t want to see”: B & S, 332 

“The first thing”: ibid., 331 

“Perhaps”: ibid. 

“never”: ibid. 

“sacred trust”: see Piccard (1965), 257 
“T saw him”: Pharr Davis (1969), 260 
“Mr. President”: B & S, 332 

“T told him”: ibid. 

“cry-baby scientist”: ibid. 

“Don’t worry”: ibid. 

“Years later”: S & W, 315 

“But when you”: ibid., 317 

“the almost unanimous resistance”: ibid. 
“the views suggested”: ibid., 324 
“insistent tone”: ibid. 

“say that no bombs be made”: ibid., 322 
“If some of you”: ibid., 315 

“I would like”: JRO to JBC, 29.9.1945, S & W, 308 
he wrote to William Houston: S & W, 308 
“T did actually”: ITMO, 35 

“T was sort of reluctant”: ibid. 


seized and destroyed five cyclotrons: see Groves (1962), 
Chapter 27, 367-72 


“Oppenheimer and I”: Bernstein (2004), 100 
“walked back and forth”: Lilienthal (1964), 13 
“an extraordinary personage”: ibid., 14 
“worth living a lifetime”: B & S, 340 


“All the participants”: Acheson (1969), 153, quoted B & S, 
340 


“knew more”: Groves (1962), 411 
“had little or no knowledge”: ibid. 
“Everybody genuflected”: Goodchild (1980), 178 


54. 
QD: 
56. 
57. 


58. 
39, 
60. 
61. 
62. 


63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 


70. 


7A, 


hie 
7a: 
74. 
Zo 
76. 
Tis 
78. 


7a. 


“The way it worked”: ITMO, 37 
On February 2: see ibid. 
“we did not feel”: Groves (1962), 412 


“It would nevertheless”: for Churchill’s Fulton speech in full, 
see http://www. historyguide.org/europe/churchill.html 


“That was the day”: Pharr Davis (1969), 259 

“a workable plan”: Acheson (1969), 154 

“interpreter of military policy”: Herken (2002), 166 
“for the purpose”: JEH to Clark, 26.4.1946, JRO FBI file 


“Are you there, dear?”: FBI San Francisco office to JEH, 
14.5.1946, JRO FBI file 


“At this point”: ibid. 

first met early in April: see Meyrowitz (1990), 263 

“Mark my words”: Pharr Davis (1969), 261 

In another: “Atomic Explosives,” Oppenheimer (1955), 3-17 
“world government”: ibid., 13 

“renunciation”: ibid. 

“has from day to day”: “Justification for continuation of 


technical or microphone surveillance,” FBI San Francisco 
Office, 12.7.1946, JRO FBI file 


“the United States’ top military secret”: Bern to Patterson, 
3.6.1946, JRO FBI file 


“would place us”: Gregory C. Bern to Robert P. Patterson, 
Secretary of War, 3.6.1946, JRO FBI file 


“that the United States”: Miller (1976), 244-5 

On that advice: see Norris (2002), 483 

“Mr. Baruch told me”: ITMO, 40 

At the meeting: B & S, 344-6 

“Baruch Plan”: see Dupuy and Hammerman (1973), 302 
their own proposal: ibid., 308, see also Gromyko (1947) 
“the Oppenheimers”: H. B. Fletcher, FBI San Francisco Office 
to JEH, 11.6.1946, JRO FBI file 


a phone conversation: H. B. Fletcher, FBI San Francisco 
Office to JEH, 13.6.1946, JRO FBI file 


80. an unsuccessful attempt: H. B. Fletcher, FBI San Francisco 
Office to JEH, 18.6.1946, JRO FBI file 


81. on June 26: Chevalier (1965), 61, says “early June,” but 
Chevalier’s FBI file shows June 26 as the correct date—see 
Herken (2002), 161 


82. “in monosyllables”: Chevalier (1965), 63 

83. “I have here”: ibid., 64 

84. “dropped by my house”: B & S, 357 

85. “I approached no one”: ibid. 

86. “I cannot tell you why”: B & S, 356 

87. “Give it back to the Indians”: Teller (2001), 219 


88. “Operation Crossroads”: see Weisgall (1994), from where my 
information about these tests primarily comes. 


89. “If an atomic bomb”: ibid., 98 
90. “the appropriateness”: ibid., 99 


91. White: “I also have another quotation”: H. B. Fletcher, FBI 
San Francisco Office to JEH, 11.6.1946, JRO FBI file 


92. “Naval vessels”: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists of Chicago, 1 
(5), February 15, 1946, 12 


93. just what happened: what follows is derived mainly from 
Weisgall (1994) 


94. “Dressed in all the trappings”: The Economist, Volume 151, 
1946, 9 


95. “not so much”: Rhodes (1996), 262 
96. “common blackmail”: ibid. 
97. “is in deep despair”: Lilienthal (1964), 69 
98. “will be construed by us”: ibid., 70 
99. “paced up and down”: ibid. 
100. “He is really”: ibid., 69 
101. “for the last four years”: S & W, 289 


102. “Cosmic Rays: Report of Recent Progress, 1936-1941”: 
Oppenheimer (1944) 


103. “The situation”: Oppenheimer (1944), 31 
104. “Reaction of Radiation”: Oppenheimer and Bethe (1946) 


105. 


106. 


107. 


108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
Tis, 


116. 
L7, 


118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 


122. 
123. 
124. 
125, 
126. 
127. 
128. 
129. 


130. 


“T think”: Donald Menzel to JRO, 15.7.1946, JRO papers, 
LOC 


“T would like”: JRO to Donald Menzel, 8.8.1946, JRO 
papers, LOC 

“There are certainly”: Menzel to JRO, August 1946, JRO 
papers, LOC 

“He is not greatly cultivated”: B & S, 362 

“a kind of house-rewarming”: Chevalier (1965), 69 
“had been asked”: ibid. 

“was obviously”: ibid. 

“T had to report”: ibid. 

“gave no answer”: ibid., 70 

“Opje let loose”: ibid. 


Oppenheimer himself was interviewed: see Herken (2002), 
161-2 


“Dr. Oppenheimer has requested”: Pais (2006), 80 


about whom Oppenheimer had written to Birge: S & W, 
268-9 


“in every way”: ibid., 268 
Six months later: JRO to Birge, 26.5.1944, S & W, 275-6 
“T shall of course”: S & W, 284-5 


“Would you like to come to Berkeley?”: Mehra et al. 
(1999e), 1137 


“T still said no”: ibid. 

“Turn around”: Pais (1997), 186 
“Oppenheimer spoke”: ibid., 221 

“As I stood waiting”: ibid., 221-2 
“Let’s walk”: ibid., 222 

“TI have just”: ibid., 224 

“quite long conversations”: ITMO, 327 


“You will note”: JEH to General Harry H. Vaughan, 
28.2.1947, JRO FBI file 


“Well, if anyone were to print this stuff”: Stern (1971), 103 


131, 
122. 
133. 
134. 
139: 
136. 
137. 


138. 
139. 
140. 
141. 
142. 


143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
151. 
152. 
152. 
154. 


“visibly shaken”: ibid. 

Oppenheimer had told him: see ITMO, 27 
On March 11: Herken (2002), 179 

“He wanted me to be quite clear”: ITMO, 41 
to hear Oppenheimer say: ibid., 344 

On August 11: Herken (2002), 180 


Shelter Island Conference: my main sources of information 
about this conference are Pais (1986), Chapter 18, Schweber 
(1986b), Schweber (1994) and Schwinger (1986). A good, 
accessible account of the conference can be found in Baggott 
(2011). 


“would be remembered”: Schweber (1994), 156 
“There have been many conferences”: ibid. 
Weisskopf’s outline: ibid., 179-81 
Oppenheimer’s outline: ibid., 181-3 


a nontechnical lecture: “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary 
Problem,” Oppenheimer (1955), 21-41 


“of the two or three”: ibid., 30 

“would not dare”: Brown and Hoddeson (1983), 222 
“Twenty-three”: quoted Schweber (1994), 172-3 

“it was immediately evident”: ibid., 173 

“As the conference went on”: ibid. 

“T had heard Oppenheimer speak”: Pais (2006), 112 
“unexpectedly fruitful”: Schweber (1994), 174 

“the most successful conference”: ibid., 175 

“Don’t worry”: ibid., 174 

“T hardly see him any more”: Chevalier (1965), 79 
“George thinks this”: ibid., 80 

“Oppenheimer became a symbol”: Kevles (1995), 377 


16. The Booming Years 


I; 


“This is an unreal place”: Pais (1997), 248-9 


2. Life magazine ran an article: Life, December 29, 1947, 53-9 


3. 


“devastating projection”: ibid., 53 


. “The Multiple Production”: Oppenheimer, Lewis and 


Wouthuysen (1948) 


. “Note on the Stimulated Decay”: Oppenheimer, Epstein and 


Finkelstein (1948) 


. small conference in Copenhagen: see Pais (1997), 233-4 
. “It was”: ibid., 234 
. “did not have time”: Mehra and Rechenberg (2001), 1044. 


See also Schweber (1994), 317 


. “The importance of Schwinger’s calculation”: Schweber 


(1994), 318 


. “Physics in the Contemporary World”: Oppenheimer (1955), 


81-102 


. “temporarily disastrous effect”: ibid., 83 
. “demands of”: ibid. 

. “It has”: ibid., 83-4 

. “Almost every month”: ibid., 84-5 

. “A newly vigorous”: ibid., 85-6 

. “the increasing understanding”: ibid., 86 
. “It is the prevailing view”: ibid. 

. “In some sort of crude sense”: ibid., 88 

. “God is great!”: Schweber (1994), 318 

. “I have heard”: ibid. 

. “As he proceeded”: Pais (1997), 251 

. “The great event”: Schweber (1994), 320 
. “I was not showing off”: Mehra and Rechenberg (2001), 


1048 


. “‘T heard later”: ibid. 

. December 10, 1947: Schweber (1994), 176 
. “Now it does not matter”: Pais (2006), 115 
. “a major tour de force”: ibid. 

. “I was not invited”: Dyson (1979), 55 

. “had a new theory”: ibid. 

. “Dick tried to tell”: ibid. 


1 
32. 
= 


34. 
he 
36. 
a7 
38. 


oo. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
a 
SL 
ne. 
os 
54. 


55. 


56. 
57. 
58. 


“the speed”: Pais (2006), 115 
“The Pocono conference”: Schwinger (1986), 414 


“got together in the hallway”: Mehra and Rechenberg 
(2001), 1059 


“Grateful for your letter”: see Schwinger (2008), 40 
“Just because”: Schweber (1994), 198 

“remarkable work”: Physical Review (1948), 74, 225 
“The reason”: Schweber (1994), 201 


“whole idea”: Barton (1968), 66. On the history of Physics 
Today, see also Weiner (1973). 


“to present”: Barton (1968) 
“Out of it all”: Engineering and Science Monthly, July 1948, 7 
“hard to disbelieve”: Oppenheimer (1949b), 181 

“the developments”: ibid. 

“To me that was very important”: Schweber (1994), 502 
“where love had drawn him”: ibid., 452 

“I knew”: Dyson (1979), 64 

“Yesterday”: Schweber (1994), 335 

“a marvel”: Dyson (1979), 66 

“was a cut diamond”: ibid. 

“understood Schwinger’s theory”: ibid. 

“As we were droning across Nebraska”: ibid., 67 

“to teach”: ibid., 68 

“five days”: Kaiser (2005), 74 

“announcing the triumph”: ibid. 


“In the middle of the conference”: Rudolf Peierls, 
interviewed by Charles Weiner in Seattle, Washington, 
August 13, 1969, AIP 


“there is the phrase”: JRO to FO, 28.9.1948, quoted B & S, 
391, and (slightly more fully) Michelmore (1969), 145-6 


“more powerful methods”: Schwinger (1958), 148 
“closed”: ibid., 154 
“The atmosphere”: quoted Gleick (1994), 266 


Oe. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
6D. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
va F 
72. 
ie 
74. 
Tok 


76. 
aT, 


78. 
7a. 
80. 
81. 


SZ. 
a3, 


84. 
85. 
86. 


“unreceptive to new ideas”: Dyson (1979), 73 
“but it came as a shock”: ibid. 

“The old guard”: Mehra and Rechenberg (2001), 1071 
“I might have thought”: Kragh (1990), 184 
“Recent work by Lamb”: Dirac (1951), 291 

is on record: see Kragh (1990), 183 

“I disagree”: Schweber (1994), 522 

“As a result”: ibid. 

“I have been observing”: Dyson (1979), 73 
“we had our fiercest public battle”: ibid. 
“about some calculations”: ibid., 74 

“Nolo Contendere”: ibid. 

“It’s a grim prospect”: Schweber (1994), 527 
“Certainly”: ibid. 

“Well”: ibid., 551 

“T am really”: Schweber (1994), 550 


“What we don’t understand”: Time magazine, November 8, 
1948, 70 


“IT woke up”: ibid., 76 

“to follow in detail”: JRO to FO, 28.9.1948, quoted B & S, 
391 

“where I saw an opportunity”: B & S, 393 

“intellectual hotel”: Time magazine, November 8, 1948, 76 
“despairing the life”: ibid. 

“Suppose you could”: New York Times, April 18, 1948, 
quoted Pais (2006), 89 

“prim and shy”: Dyson (1979), 71 


“was dying to have conversations”: Pais (2006), 87. See also 
Pais (1997), 236, where he is merely “eager” to have 
conversations with Eliot. 


“This is a nice elevator”: Pais (2006), 87 
“felt lonely and homesick”: Ackroyd (1985), 288 
“Newspapermen”: Dyson (1979), 72 


87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 


91. 
OZ, 


23, 
94. 
9D: 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99, 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 


“T invited Eliot here”: ibid. 

“One piece of news”: Lee (2009), 158 

“beautiful theory”: Schweber (1994), 550 

“Oppenheimer gave a presidential address”: Dyson (1979), 
74-5 

“when I really knew”: Schweber (1994), 456 


“What about Case’s Theorem?”: Mehra and Rechenberg 
(2001), 1092. See also ibid., 455 


“That was the moment”: ibid., 456 

“But what about Slotnick’s calculation?”: ibid. 
“T had fun with that”: ibid. 

“We will start work”: Pais (2006), 117 

“We had lovely weather”: Schweber (1994), 552 
“Feynman’s show”: Pais (2006), 117 

“began its rapid”: ibid. 

“a real sense”: Schweber (1994), 178 

“is known”: Feynman (1990), 3 

“At the present time”: ibid., 7 

“We physicists”: ibid., 8 


17. Massive Retaliation 


akBhwWN 


. “The Open Mind”: Oppenheimer (1955), 45-57 

. “We need to remember”: ibid., 54 

. “appear to commit us”: ibid., 53 

. “they would need them”: ibid., 56 

. “More & more physicists”: Time magazine, November 8, 


1948, 70 


. his appearance before HUAC: see Stern (1971), 118-22, 


B & S, 394-6, and ITMO, 210-16. Schweber (2000), 118-30, 
has an excellent account both of the hearing and of its 
repercussions. 


. “Mr. Chairman”: B & S, 396 
. “a dangerous man and quite Red”: ibid., 395 
. “violently denounced”: ibid. 


a0. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15: 


16. 


17. 
18. 
19, 
20. 
PAD 
oe) 
23. 
24. 
P ASN 


26. 


a, 
28. 
20, 
30. 
ol 
oo 
ao. 
34. 


re 


“too constitutional”: Stern (1971), 120 

“Incidents in Germany”: ITMO, 211 

“Tt was well known”: ibid. 

“Before we adjourn”: Stern (1971), 122 

called before the committee the very next day: ibid., 123 


“God guided their questions”: ibid., 124. See also ITMO, 
213, where Oppenheimer is asked twice whether he said 
this. The first time he denies it, the second time he says he 
does not remember saying it. 


a Rochester newspaper: the story is reproduced in full in 
Schweber (2000), 119-20. 


“because of his intransigence”: ibid., 123 

“If Peters loses his job”: ibid., 123-4 

“lost a good deal of sleep”: ibid., 125 

Bethe’s letter: ibid. 

“rather dismal”: ibid., 127 

“a not very successful piece”: ibid. 

“IT think mostly”: Michelmore (1969), 156 
Frank’s turn: Stern (1971), 130-2, B & S, 402-5 


front-page story: the front page in question is reproduced in 
Goodchild (1969), 187 


said he had never been a Communist Party member: see 
ibid., 188 

he had been to see J. W. Buchta: Cole (2009), 91 

more than fifty physicists: ibid., 92 

“never agreed with Frank”: ibid., 93 

“Jackie was absolutely furious”: ibid., 95 

“Come back”: ibid., 85 

“Frank Oppenheimer is no longer welcome”: ibid. 
“What is going on?”: B & S, 403-4 

simply dismissed Strauss’s concerns: Stern (1971), 114, 128. 
See also B & S, 164, and Rhodes (1996), 311 
“incredible mismanagement”: Rhodes (1996), 359 


36. 
a7. 
38. 
ae 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50, 
aL 
ne 
= 8 
54. 
aos 
56. 
a 
58. 
sh 
60. 
61. 
62. 


DS. 
64. 
65. 


“inimical to our national defense”: Pais (2006), 165 

“sat in the front row”: Bernstein (2004), 108 

The specific issue at hand: see ibid., 107 

“No one”: Stern (1971), 129 

“Even to an observer”: ibid. 

“one eye on Oppenheimer”: ibid. 

“My own rating”: ibid., 129-30 

“Well, Joe”: ibid., 130 

“There was a look of hatred”: ibid. 

the cover of Life magazine: Life, October 10, 1949 

“the best picture”: Pais (2006), 141 

“Equations at top of the board”: Life, October 10, 1949, 120 
“although he tried”: ibid., 134 

“off doing the devil’s work”: ibid., 121 

“Almost every month”: ibid., 122 

“what we are forced to call”: ibid., 123 

“what is at the moment”: ibid., 123-4 

“devoted most of his investigative efforts”: ibid., 132 

“the world’s foremost center”: ibid., 121 

introduced the term “lepton”: see Pais (1986), 450 
“Models and Methods in the Meson Theory”: Yukawa (1949) 
a short paragraph: Oppenheimer (1949a) 

a short, cowritten article: Oppenheimer and Arnold (1950) 
“Of his manifold activities”: Life, October 10, 1949, 138 
“the news that Russia has at last”: ibid., 121 

The evidence for the Soviet bomb: Rhodes (1996), 368-74 


“We have evidence”: see “The Russian Explosion: Mr. 
Truman’s Announcement,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
Vol. V, No. 10, October 1949, 261 


“What shall we do?”: Goodchild (1980), 197 
“We should now”: Strauss (1962), 216-7 
“it was highly probable”: Teller (2001), 281 


66. 
OF, 
68. 
69. 
70, 
Th 
yes 


res 
74. 
Ta 
76. 
V7. 
78. 
79, 
80. 
81. 


82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 


88. 
89. 
90, 
ol. 
oF, 
a3. 
94. 
oD, 


“In the present situation”: ibid. 

“Having the Super weapon”: ITMO, 683 

Teller set off: see Teller (2001), 283 

“over my dead body”: ibid. 

Hershberg, has speculated: ibid., 875 

“Probably Oppenheimer wanted”: Hershberg (1993), 472 


“On the technical side”: JRO to JBC, 21.10.1949, JRO 
papers, LOC, reprinted in full in ITMO, 242-3 


“T told Ernest”: Serber (1998), 168 

“that the United States”: ibid., 169 

“perhaps the most important one”: Pais (2006), 173 
“The clear implication”: Seaborg (2001), 142 

“I expressed my opinion”: ibid. 

“Although I deplore”: ITMO, 238 

George Kennan: ibid., 358-9 

“T met Luis”: Serber (1998), 169-70 


“mostly psychological”: Lilienthal (1964), 581, also Rhodes 
(1996), 397-8 


“He said that he did not think”: ITMO, 785 
“the program”: ibid. 

“interesting talk”: Herken (2002), 207 
“decision to go ahead”: Lilienthal (1964), 581 
“one must explore it”: ibid. 


Three reports: all three are published in full as the Appendix 
to York (1976), 150-68. 


“an intensification”: ibid., 152 

“seeing the same film”: Lilienthal (1964), 581 

“We believe”: York (1976), 154 

“it has generally been estimated”: ibid., 155 

“Tt is clear”: York (1976), 155 

“Although”: ibid., 155-6 

“weapon of genocide”: ibid., 157 

“We believe a super bomb should never be produced”: ibid. 


96. 

oF. 

98. 

so 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
LOD. 
110. 
Lit. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 
Ty, 
118. 
119, 
120. 
121. 
122. 
Lag, 


124. 


“Should they use”: ibid. 

“In determining”: ibid. 

“necessarily an evil thing”: ibid., 158 

“the nations of the world”: ibid., 159 

“should with considerable regret”: ITMO, 395 
“enough be declassified”: York (1976), 156 

“did not tell me”: Teller (2001), 283-4 
“Washington”: ibid., 284 

“There are also forces”: ibid., 285 

“Before I could say anything”: ibid., 286 

“into a single sovereignty”: Borden (1946), 41 
“Weisskopf vividly described to me”: Bernstein (1981), 93 
“He was disappointed”: ibid., 94 

the AEC met: see Rhodes (1996), 404 

“came back feeling happy”: ibid. 

“You know”: ibid., 405 

“If we let Russia get the super first”: Bundy (1988), 211 
“T believe”: Strauss (1962), 219 

“would improve our defense”: Rhodes (1996), 406 
“made a lot of sense”: ibid., 407 

“What the Hell are we waiting for?”: ibid. 

“to continue its work”: ibid. 

“alerted the world”: Bernstein (2004), 121 

“I never forgave Truman”: ibid. 

Oppenheimer did not even bother: Pfau (1984), 123 
“You don’t look jubilant”: Goodchild (1980), 204 
Abraham Pais has taken: Pais (2006), 177 


“prudential and game-theoretical terms”: Pharr Davis 
(1968), 330. The remark comes from a talk Oppenheimer 
gave in 1959 to the Congress for Cultural Freedom. See 
Chapter 19 below, page 671 


a series of shocking revelations: see, e.g., Rhodes (1996), 
Chapter 21, Sibley (2004), Chapter Five, and West (2004), 


125. 


126. 
127. 
128. 


129, 
130. 
131; 
132. 
133. 
134. 
128, 


136. 
La? 
138. 
Log. 
140. 
141. 


142. 
143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
151. 


Chapters VII and VIII 


McCarthy launched the era: on McCarthyism, see Fried 
(1997b), Haynes (1996), Morgan (2003), Rovere (1996), 
Schrecker (1994) and Schrecker (1998) 


“here in my hand”: Rovere (1996), 125 
“will make a good many men”: Rhodes (1996), 412 


senator from Colorado, Edwin Johnson: see Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, VI (3), March 1950, 66 


“Our scientists”: ibid. 

“naive and monumental indiscretion”: ibid., 67 

“make a solemn declaration”: ibid., 75 

“There is grave danger”: ibid. Cf. Schweber (2000), 160 
“Hydrogen bombs”: Schweber (2000), 161 

“T had a long talk with Oppie”: McMillan (2005), 68 


“Back to the Laboratories!”: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
VI (3), March 1950, 71-2 


“Our scientific community”: ibid., 72 

“In my mind”: Wheeler (2000), 199 

“was a great disappointment”: ibid., 199-200 
“Let Teller and Wheeler go ahead”: ibid., 200 
“.,. the hydrogen bomb can’t be done”: ibid. 


“Things have advanced”: ET to JRO, 17.2.1950, JRO papers, 
LOC 


“regarded as a matter”: Rhodes (1996), 421 

an article by Bethe: Bethe (1950) 

“Whether the temperatures required”: ibid., 101 

“T still believe”: Schweber (2000), 163 

“In case of war”: ibid., 164 

“With his wonderful virtuosity”: Ulam (1991), 216 
“was not easily reconciled”: ibid. 

“seemed rather glad”: ibid., 217 

“We all agree”: ITMO, 788 

“The panel contained”: ibid., 684 


152. 


153. 
154. 
155. 


156. 
157. 
158. 
159. 
160. 
161. 
162. 


163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 


169. 
170. 
Tl: 


172. 
Ly: 
174. 
175. 
176. 
77: 
178. 
Lo, 


“In fact”: Hewlett and Duncan (1969), 531. See also Libby 
(1979), 312, and Goodchild (1980), 208 


“Luis, how could you”: ITMO, 788 
“You go back”: ibid., 789 


“Comments on the Military Value of the Atom”: 
Oppenheimer (1951) 


“To the first impression”: ibid., 43 
“of the specific use”: ibid., 44 
“strategic air warfare”: ibid. 
“Much of what was clear”: ibid. 
“the extreme form”: ibid., 45 

“T cannot believe”: ibid., 45 


“Project Vista”: see Elliot (1986), upon which my account is 
based 


“the possible tactical employment”: ibid., 164 
“study group”: ibid. 

“expressed the feeling”: ibid. 

fee of $600,000: ibid., 167 

“All of us”: ibid., 169 


“On the other hand”: Vista Report, Vol. 1, 3, quoted ibid., 
170 


“explosion”: ibid., 174 
Oppenheimer was no longer to be used: York (1976), 139 


“We have found no great new weapons”: McCray (2004), 
361 


a yield of between one and fifty kilotons: Elliot (1986), 172 
“to send material down a tube”: Rhodes (1996), 457 

“like using a blast furnace”: ibid. 

“new and elaborate instrumentation”: ibid., 460 

“staring intensely”: ibid., 463 

“From then on”: ibid., 467 

“Edward is full of enthusiasm”: ibid. 

“The new concept”: ibid., 468 


180. 
181. 


182. 


183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 


11. 


192. 
193. 
194. 


195. 
196. 


197. 


198. 
199. 
200. 
201. 
202. 


In a series of papers: see ibid., 467-70 


“The sequence is fission-fusion-fission”: Bernstein (2004), 
126 


“On Heterocatalytic Detonations”: Rhodes (1996), 467-8, 
also McMillan (2005), 102-3 


225 kilotons: Rhodes (1996), 474 

“When I came out of the water”: ibid. 

yielded twenty-five kilotons: ibid. 

The agenda for the meeting: ibid., 475 

“The outcome”: ITMO, 20 

“It is my judgment”: ibid., 81 

“a sweet and lovely and beautiful job”: ibid., 229 


code-named “Mike”: for a detailed account of the Mike test, 
see Rhodes (1996), Chapter 24. 


“In spite of the remarkable success”: Memorial Tributes: 
National Academy of Engineering, Volume 6, The National 
Academies Press, 1993, 73-6 (quotation, 76) 


“Somewhat negative”: Teller (2001), 327 
“If ’'d given him control”: Rhodes (1996), 479 


“makes its very existence”: York (1976). The words are in 
the minority report written by Rabi and Fermi, but the 
general report makes similar points, and there is no doubt 
that the sentiments expressed by Rabi and Fermi were 
widely shared among the members of the GAC. 


“a chunk of the atmosphere”: Teller (2001), 332 


“A lot of us were really teed-off at Edward”: Rhodes (1996), 
479 


“neither necessary”: Oppenheimer to Dean, 13.10.1951, JRO 
papers, LOC 

“among the very best”: Teller (2001), 335 

“You have to choose”: Serber (1998), 172 

“a courteous man”: Teller (2001), 333 

“Strauss told me”: ibid., 334 

“T think it would be fair to say”: ibid., 336 


203. 
204. 
205. 
206. 
207. 
208. 
209, 
210. 
211. 
212. 
PAGS 


214. 


21S, 
216, 
217. 
a1. 
219, 
220. 
221. 
2a2. 
Zed: 
224. 
220; 
226. 
227. 
228. 


Zee: 


“has the reputation”: Schweber (2000), 147 

“delayed or attempted to delay”: B & S, 443 

“a lot of people believe”: ibid. 

“would do most anything”: Rhodes (1996), 537 

“IT want to say”: ITMO, 748 

“We felt at the time”: ibid., 746 

“crucial interview”: Teller (2001), 338 

on June 9, 1952: Herken (2002), 254 

When Thomas Murray visited Berkeley: Herken (2002), 249 
gave a speech: ibid. 


“now is doubtful”: FBI San Francisco office to JEH, 5.4.1952, 
JRO FBI file 


“Some of the ‘boys’ have their axe out”: Hershberg (1993), 
600. Herken (2002), 250, quotes the same diary entry, 
worded slightly differently. I am assuming that, of the two, 
Hershberg is the more accustomed to Conant’s handwriting. 


“vitriolic talk”: Herken (2002), 249 

Hoover sent transcripts of those interviews: ibid. 

“I didn’t really expect”: ITMO, 752 

“suggested that we had”: ibid., 753 

“As near as I can recall”: ibid., 754 

“and I believe”: ibid. 

“paranoid”: ibid. 

“Dr Griggs had been”: ibid., 339 

“a pillar of honesty”: Libby (1979), 307 

“strongly built”: ibid. 

“T remember”: ibid., 311 

“T don’t think you fellows”: Stern (1971), 190 

“Lee DuBridge and I are through”: Hershberg (1993), 601 
“he is very much concerned”: FBI San Francisco office to 
JEH, 5.4.1952, JRO FBI file 

“believed it would be extremely wise”: FBI report by L. Hoyt 
McGuire, Chicago office, 9.5.1952, JRO FBI file 


2a. 
Jol: 
aan. 
god 
234. 
Doo: 
236. 
Pn 
238. 
209. 
240. 


241. 


242. 
243. 
244. 


245. 
246. 
247. 
248. 
249. 
200, 
mols 
20: 
aD. 


254. 
20D. 
Za0. 
ADTs 


“worked out a plan”: Goodchild (1980), 213 
“magnificent”: ITMO, 96 

“deep sense of personal regret”: ibid. 

“lasting and immensely valuable”: ibid., 97 

“technical, military, and economic questions”: ITMO, 598 
“We decided we would”: ibid. 

“ZORC”: ibid., 750 

“in order to achieve world peace”: ibid., 749 

“the background”: ibid., 750 

“Griggs. I should say”: ibid., 763 


announced on April 28, 1952: see Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, June 1952, 133. For a detailed account of this 
panel, see Bernstein (1989). 


“would not require inspection and control”: Bernstein 
(1989), 141 


“point of no return”: ibid., 143 
“is irrevocably committed”: ibid., 143-4 


“whose destructive and retaliatory power”: quoted Wells 
(1981), 41 


“The most reasonable explanation”: ibid., 42 
“man for man”: Life, May 19, 1952, 151 

“of means to hit”: ibid. 

“Today”: ibid., 152 

the fallout from the test: see Bernstein (1989), 143 
on October 9: ibid., 148 

“felt that any such idea”: ibid., 148-9 

“would certainly be pleased”: Rhodes (1996), 498 


the first Ulam-Teller hydrogen bomb: the description that 
follows is based on that given in Rhodes (1996), Chapter 24. 


“You would swear”: ibid., 508 

“It’s a boy”: ibid., 511 

“Some people in the Air Force”: B & S, 451 
“As we sat”: Teller (2001), 352 


258. 
2o5, 
260. 
eel, 
262. 
263. 


264. 
265. 
266. 
267. 
268. 
A69. 
270. 
afl, 
a7 2. 
ofS: 
274. 
Page 
276. 
a Ts 


2/8, 
279. 


280. 
201, 


282. 
ete M 


284. 
285. 


“T assured him”: ibid., 353 

“had not thought”: ibid. 

“was so huge”: ibid. 

“our commitment”: Bernstein (1989), 154 

five main proposals: ibid. 

“Atomic Weapons and American Policy”: Oppenheimer 
(1955), 61-77 

“became very vividly and painfully aware”: ITMO, 95 
“the bright light”: Oppenheimer (1955), 61 
“Openness”: ibid., 62 

“The rule for the atom”: ibid., 63 

“It is easy to say”: ibid. 

“It is my opinion”: ibid., 65 

“likely to be small comfort”: ibid. 

“our twenty-thousandth bomb”: ibid., 66 

“a rather rigid commitment”: ibid. 

“The prevailing view”: ibid., 68 

“We need strength”: ibid., 69 

“We do not operate well”: ibid., 70 

“It must be disturbing”: ibid. 


“T am not convinced”: see “The Soviet Bombs: Mr Truman’s 
Doubts,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 1953, 43-5 


“It must be shocking”: Oppenheimer (1955), 70-1 


“problematical”: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March 1953, 
43 


“does not prove”: ibid. 


“high officer of the Air Defense Command”: Oppenheimer 
(1955), 71 


“We need to be clear”: ibid., 77 


“The Hidden Struggle for the H-bomb”: Fortune, May 1953, 
109, 110, 230 


“A life and death struggle”: ibid., 109 
“no confidence”: ibid. 


286. 


287. 
288. 


289. 


290). 
291, 
292. 


293. 


294. 
295. 
296. 
BOTs 


298. 
299: 
300. 


301. 
30d. 
303. 


304. 
305. 
306. 


“another nasty and obviously inspired article”: quoted Stern 
(1971), 201 


“ZORC Takes Up the Fight”: Fortune, May 1953, 110 


“calling in Oppenheimer”: L. B. Nichols to Tolson, 
11.5.1953, JRO FBI file 


Cohn and McCarthy visited J. Edgar Hoover: JEH, memo 
dated 19.5.1953, JRO FBI file 


“a great deal of preliminary spade work”: ibid. 

“The McCarthy committee”: McMillan (2005), 170 

“still concerned”: D. M. Ladd to JEH, 25.5.1953, JRO FBI 
file 

“could not do the job”: D. M. Ladd to A. H. Belmont, 
5.6.1953, JRO FBI file 

“did not completely trust”: B & S, 467 

“was perhaps”: Hewlett and Holl (1989), 53 

“It was this contract”: ibid. 


“reluctantly agreed”: D. M. Ladd to A. H. Belmont, 5.6.1953, 
JRO FBI file 


“Dissenter’s Return”: Time, July 6, 1953 
“Joe 4”: see Rhodes (1996), 524-5 


“the opposition to present U.S. policy”: Life, September 7, 
1953, 32 


Eisenhower’s statement: Life, October 19, 1953, 38 
“U.S. Atom Boss Lewis Strauss”: Time, September 21, 1953 


NSC 162/2: the entire document is available online at: 
http://www. fas.org/irp/offdocs/nsc-hst/nsc-162-2.pdf 


“primary threat”: NSC 162/2, 1 
“The capability of the USSR”: ibid., 2 
“a strong military posture”: ibid., 5 


18. Falsus in uno 


ds 
2s 


given Oppenheimer’s AEC security file: see B & S, 473 
“The purpose of this letter”: Pais (2006), 199 


3. “In April 1942”: ibid. 


. “FBI Report on Vast Spy Ring”: quoted in memo from W. A. 


Branigan to A. H. Belmont, 18.11.1953, JRO FBI file 


. “In addition”: ibid. 

. “whining, whimpering appeasement”: Reeves (1997), 530 

. “He moves about”: Sunday Express, November 15, 1953 

. “He is said”: The Observer, November 22, 1953 

. “Something different”: The Economist, January 1, 1955 

. “what there is new”: Oppenheimer (1954), dust-jacket blurb 
. “at finding”: The Economist, January 1, 1955 

. “For us as for all men”: ibid., 98 

. “rhetorically evocative”: Pais (2006), 286 

. “the story of sub-nuclear matter”: Oppenheimer (1954), 32- 


3 


. “It seems rather unlikely”: ibid., 81 

. “It was a happy reunion”: Chevalier (1965), 86 

. “to an extraordinary dialogue”: ibid., 88 

. “It is very sad”: ibid. 

. “it might be a good idea”: B & S, 481 

. “raise questions”: ITMO, 6 

. “Accordingly”: ibid. 

. Went to see Joe Volpe: B & S, 483 

. “would mean that I accept”: ITMO, 22 

. “hereby directed”: Stern (1971), 236 

. “in view of the fact”: Hewlett and Holl (1989), 81 

. “the Bureau’s technical coverage”: Goodchild (1980), 227 
. “The fact”: Pais (2006), 204 

. “whitewash Oppenheimer”: Goodchild (1980), 229 
. “all over town”: B & S, 490 

. chaired its opening session: Bernstein (2004), 94 

. “leading role”: ibid. 

. “to record”: ibid. 

. “My thesis adviser”: ibid., 94-5 


34. 
30; 
36. 
a 
os 
oe 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
a 
2B 
De. 
se 
54. 
Dok 
56. 
af. 
5138 
sie 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
GD; 


“how unusually quiet”: Pais (2006), 122 

“I’m sorry to hear”: Life, December 13, 1963, 94 
“T suppose, I hope”: Goodchild (1980), 229 

“T would testify”: Teller (2001), 374 

“that I finally concluded”: Stern (1971), 516 
“Oppenheimer was a Communist”: Goodchild (1980), 230 
“My theory”: ibid., 231 

“We thought”: ibid. 

“dredging up”: ibid., 229 

“requires the suspension”: ITMO, 3 

“the ideological struggle”: Green (1977), 14 
“My wife”: Plutarch, Life of Caesar, 10.6 

‘Gf there was any”: Green (1977), 14-15 

“it was unfair”: ibid., 15 

“and others”: ibid. 

“widely interpreted”: ibid. 

“exceeds the minimum standards”: quoted ibid. 
“My knowledge”: ibid., 60 

“cannot be fairly understood”: ITMO, 7 
“flashes of fire”: Life, March 29, 1954, 17 

“like the sound”: ibid., 19 

“First Casualties of the H-Bomb”: ibid., 17 

“Is the strategy of retaliation”: Life, April 12, 1954, 38 
“out of the question”: B & S, 496 

“In preparing this letter”: ITMO, 20 

“The records printed”: Pharr Davis (1969), 19 
more of a farce: Pais (2006), 268 

“this proceeding”: ITMO, 20 

‘Doctor”: ibid., 129 

“One day”: ibid., 130 

“T invented a cock-and-bull story”: ibid., 137 
“Robb. Did you tell Pash the truth”: ibid. 


66. 
OF, 
68. 
69. 
70. 
7A; 


72 
72s 
74. 
Ta 
76. 
ee 
78. 
79, 
80. 
81. 
SZ. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
V1. 
OZ. 
oo. 
94. 
95. 
96. 


“Isn’t it a fair statement”: ibid., 149 

“Robb. You spent the night with her, didn’t you?”: ibid., 154 
“T’ve just seen”: Goodchild (1980), 242 

“General”: ITMO, 171 

“T would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer”: ibid. 

“Robb. He [de Silva] was certainly more of a professional”: 
ibid., 272 

“T don’t believe”: ibid., 280 

“Robb. Colonel Lansdale”: ibid. 

“Dr. Conant, if you had been approached”: ibid., 393 
“When you did report it”: ibid., 394 

“I never hid my opinion”: ibid., 468 

“McCarthy has few partisans”: Pais (2006), 219 
“Silently and impassively”: Life, April 26, 1954, 35 
“Whatever the truth of the charges”: ibid., 38 
“astounding”: ITMO, 660 

“not helpful to national defense”: ibid., 684 
“corroborative testimony”: ibid., 802 

“T have always assumed”: ibid., 710 

“In a great number of cases”: ibid. 

“Do you feel”: ibid., 726 

“Robb. As far as you know”: ibid., 737 

“Gray. Mr. McCloy”: ibid., 739 

“Yes, I would”: ibid., 823 

“IT would say to you”: ibid., 839 

“In the Commission’s own view”: ibid., 973 

“But this man”: ibid., 990 

“he will never be through”: B & S, 538 

“very depressed”: ibid. 

“We have”: Polenberg (2002), 362 

“We have, however”: ibid. 

“that Dr. Oppenheimer’s continuing conduct”: ibid. 


oT. 
98. 
99, 
100. 
101. 
Le, 
105. 
104. 


105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 


“a susceptibility”: ibid. 

“We find”: ibid. 

“less than candid”: ibid. 

“To deny him clearance now”: ibid., 364 
“did not hinder”: ibid., 365 

“His witnesses”: ibid. 

“T would like to add”: ibid. 


“closely associated”: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, May 
1954, 191 


“stands in such contrast”: Polenberg (2002), 366 
“considered in the context”: ibid., 370 

“The record contains no direct evidence”: ibid., 372 
“is not based”: ibid., 375 

“the evidence establishes”: ibid., 376 

“if his present story is true”: ibid., 373 

“... it is difficult to conclude”: ibid. 

“completely loyal”: ibid., 389 

“inexcusable”: ibid., 391 


19. An Open Book? 


ee 
wo = © 


OANA KRWDNY HE 


. “repulsive”: Chevalier (1965), 89 
. “Oppie confesse: ‘J’étais un idiot.’ ”: ibid., 97-8 
. “The one who had invented”: ibid., 100-1 


“In the list of witnesses”: Time, June 28, 1954 
“The majority”: ibid. 


. “Dear Robert”: Chevalier (1965), 102 

. “Dear Haakon”: JRO to HC, 12.7.1954, JRO papers, LOC 

. “This was not”: Chevalier (1965), 105-6 

. “hoping—without believing”: ibid., 106 

. “For the subjective observer”: ibid., 107 

. “on a desperately needed rest”: ibid., 108 

. “I appreciate the fact”: Lloyd Garrison to HC, 3.8.1954, JRO 


papers, LOC 


ig. 


14. 


1S: 


16. 
17. 
18. 


19; 
20. 
21, 
Ze: 
23. 


24. 
PAN 


26. 
ois 


28. 


20. 
30. 


Si, 
32. 
oe 
34. 
oo 


“that this might suffice”: Lloyd Garrison to JRO, 3.8.1954, 
JRO papers, LOC 

“There is much”: HC to Lloyd Garrison, 5.8.1954, JRO 
papers, LOC 

“Tt is not nearly as clear”: JRO to HC, 3.9.1954, JRO papers, 
LOC 


“This letter”: Chevalier (1965), 108 

“T must”: ibid., 109 

“Un document exclusif”: France-Observateur, December 2, 
1954, 16-18 

“in a truncated”: Chevalier (1965), 109 

“T have no doubts”: ibid., 110 

“Do what we may”: ibid., 111 

“T hope to finish it in the spring”: ibid. 

a long profile of Edward Teller: “Dr. Edward Teller’s 
Magnificent Obsession,” Life, September 6, 1954, 60-74 
“In that event”: ibid., 61 


“This book”: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, November 1954, 
357 


“These two boys”: ibid., 362 


“a sophomoric science-fiction tale”: Atomic Scientists Journal, 
4, 1954, 253 


an article by Joseph and Stewart Alsop: “We Accuse!” 
Harper’s Magazine, October 1954, 25-45 


“We accuse”: ibid. 


“Dr Henry D. Smyth’s fair and considered statement”: Pais 
(2006), 256 


“cloistered life”: ibid., 272 

“a direct result”: Goodchild (1980), 266 

“So far as I was concerned”: Dyson (1979), 76 
“Physics is complicated”: Thorpe (2006), 254 


“An Ordering Principle”: see Proceedings of the Second 
Rochester Conference, University of Rochester Report 
NYO-3046, 87 


36. 


oT. 
38. 
8 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 


44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
ou. 
3 
oe 
aie 
54. 
La aN 


56. 
57. 
58. 


29, 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 


turned into an article: see Pais, A., “Some Remarks on the V- 


Particles,” Physical Review, 86 (5) (1952), 663-71 

“J. R. Oppenheimer”: ibid., 664 

“strangeness”: see Pais (1997), 336-8 

“T disappointed him”: Dyson (1979), 76 

“When I came to Oppenheimer”: ibid., 77 

“difference of temperament”: ibid. 

“rejoiced together”: ibid. 

See It Now: for an extended account of the making of this 


program and of its reception, see Wolverton (2008), 
Chapters 1, 2 and 3. 


“you find a Nobel Prize winner”: quoted ibid., 16 
“There isn’t one foot”: ibid., 20 

“tiptoed into Robert’s office”: Pais (1997), 330 

“And Professor Einstein”: Wolverton (2008), 31 

“Well, sir”: ibid., 35 

“The trouble with secrecy”: ibid., 38 

“there aren’t secrets”: ibid., 39 

“lean, almost ascetic face”: quoted ibid., 46 

2,500 letters: ibid., 51 

“brilliant non sequitur”: Marshak (1970), 94 

“didn’t know a meson”: quoted in Wolverton (2008), 75 
“was several hundred larger”: Eugene Register-Guard, April 
21, 1955, copy in JRO papers, LOC 

“Not one in 50”: ibid. 

“For all scientists”: quoted in Wolverton (2008), 61 


“It is a very special sort of privilege”: Oppenheimer (1957), 
12 


“He loved the history of science”: ibid. 

“And physicists then said”: ibid., 19 

“It is clear”: ibid., 20 

“electrodynamics cannot be”: ibid., 19 

“two golden decades”: Oppenheimer (1956a), 1 


64. 
6D. 


66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
ve F 
res 
Pade 
74. 
7d: 
76. 
77. 
78. 


79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
eS. 
84. 
85, 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 


ol, 
of, 


“did not arouse the hope”: ibid., 2 

“His great discoveries”: typescript dated 30.9.1955 in JRO 
papers, LOC 

“wonderfully diverse”: Oppenheimer (1956b), 10 
“what is called in the trade”: ibid. 

“In some ways”: ibid. 

“Surely past experience”: ibid., 12 

“We must make more humane”: ibid., 13 

“Despite the ‘peace of mutual terror’ ”: ibid. 

“the special problems”: ibid., 10 

“a historic meeting”: Pais (1997), 351 

“The T-meson”: Pais (1997), 351, and Pais (2006), 281 
“Perhaps some oscillation”: Marshak (1970), 95 
“hinted at a rising wave”: Pais (2006), 282 

Yang and Pais bet John Wheeler: Pais (197), 351 


this article was published: “Question of Parity Conservation 
in Weak Interactions,” Physical Review, 104 (1), October 
1956, 254-8 


Oppenheimer’s comment: see Pais (2006), 282 
“Wu’s experiment”: ibid. 

“Walked through door”: ibid., 283 

“The situation”: Yang (1964), 398 

“Basic concept in physics”: quoted Pais (1997), 358 
“No one today”: Pais (2006), 283 

“It was an occasion”: Bernstein (2004), 171-2 
“truly amazed”: ibid., 174 

“Nothing that has been written”: ibid. 

“looked at me”: ibid. 

“his demeanor”: ibid., 175 


“TI believe in the popularization of science”: Wolverton 
(2008), 91 


“What is new”: Bernstein (2004), 187 
“attached great importance”: Pais (2006), 279 


oS, 
94. 


95. 
96. 
a7, 
98. 
oo. 


100. 
101. 


102. 


103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 


110. 
114; 
112. 
Lt3. 
114. 


TIS: 
116. 


“there was other material”: Wolverton (2008), 129 


“We wouldn’t like to have this”: typewritten transcript, 
headed “Oppenheimer interview,” JRO papers, LOC 


“Today”: Oppenheimer (1958a), 55 

“it is almost impossible”: ibid., 57 
“And as for the recent discovery”: ibid. 
“trying to explain”: Pais (1997), 380 


“no intuitive understanding”: interview with MJS, 
20.2.1979, quoted B & S, 263 and 413 


“To an outsider”: Pais (1997), 243 


“a shadow”: interview with MJS, 11.3.1982, quoted B & S, 
565 


“There came a time”: interview with MJS, 31.7.1979, quoted 
B&S, 565 


“Even the lay reader”: Oppenheimer (1958b), 481 
“All of us”: Oppenheimer (1958c) 

“a punitive, personal abuse”: Wolverton (2008), 150 
“Day after weary day”: Pfau (1984), 230 
“nightmarish quality”: quoted Wolverton (2008), 160 
“Tt was now clear”: ibid., 161 


“unchristianly spirit”: Bernice Brode to JRO, undated, 
quoted Wolverton (2008), 161 


“profoundly in anguish”: Oppenheimer (1960), 22 
“But these three particles”: Oppenheimer (1959), 11 
“the same men”: ibid. 

“the ancient question”: ibid. 


“We may learn”: typed transcript of program recorded 
December 1959, JRO papers, LOC 

“If this next great war occurs”: Oppenheimer (1984), 118 
“that beautiful poem”: “Speech at Opening Session of 
Conference on Progress in Freedom,” Tenth Anniversary 
Conference, June 1960, typescript, JRO papers, LOC. The 
printed version—Oppenheimer (1984), 117-20—omits these 
words. 


} Wes 
118. 
LT. 


120. 
121. 
122. 


123. 


124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 
128. 


125: 


130. 


LS. 


132. 


133. 


134. 


135. 


136. 
127, 


“If I cannot be comforted”: Oppenheimer (1984), 120 
“not merely”: ibid. 


“we have so largely lost”: “Speech at Opening Session of 
Conference on Progress in Freedom,” typescript, 4. Omitted 
from the printed version. 


“terribly ill-planned”: Wolverton (2008), 179 
“T do not regret”: Goodchild (1980), 274 


“to discuss various problems”: Society of Science and Man, 
“Prospectus,” July 1958, typescript in JRO papers, LOC 


“triviality and childishness”: “An Afternoon with Professor 
Oppenheimer,” 2, JRO papers, LOC 

“a small society”: ibid., 4 

“out of touch with science”: ibid., 12 

“fill the air”: ibid., 13 

“That does not surprise me”: ibid., 20 

the island of St. John in the Virgin Islands: a detailed 
account of the Oppenheimers’ time in the Virgin Islands is 
given in B & S, Chapter 39, from which my account is taken. 
“is to help students”: Oppenheimer (1964), v 

“jot down”: Martin E. Marty to JRO, 1.2.1962, JRO papers, 
LOC 

The list he sent them: copy in the JRO papers, LOC, on 
which a handwritten note says that it was mailed on 
9.2.1962 

“the most extraordinary collection of talent”: quoted 
Wolverton (2008), 195 

“Not on your life”: Goodchild (1980), 275 

one of three speakers: “Talk at the Dedication of the Niels 
Bohr Library of the History of Physics,” 26.9.1962, 4, JRO 
papers, LOC 

“Science and Culture”: Encounter, Vol. 19, No. 4, October 
1962, 3-10, reprinted in Oppenheimer (1984), 123-38 

“T went to midtown Manhattan”: Bernstein (2004), 196 
“Let me end with an anecdote”: “The Added Cubit,” 
typescript, 6, JRO papers, LOC 


138. “Readers and writers”: Encounter, August 1963, 47 

139. “By taking thought”: ibid. 

140. “a truth”: ibid., 46 

141. “it is almost wholly through the arts”: ibid. 

142. “He was out”: Regis (1989), 152 

143. “Once in the 1950s”: Pais (2006), 278 

144. “Bourbon Manor”: Regis (1989), 151 

145. “source of profound bewilderment”: quoted Pais (2006), 278 
146. “The faculty meetings”: ibid., 277 

147. “It started to dawn”: Pais (1997), 385 

148. “just about then”: ibid. 

149. “He looked”: Seaborg (2001), 225 

150. The decision was reported: Physics Today, June 1963, 21-3 


151. “maintain intimacy of discussion”: Agnes Meyer, letter of 
invitation, 27.2.1963, quoted Thorpe (2006), 274 


152. “Up to now”: untitled typescript of JRO’s talk at Seven 
Springs Farm, June 1963, JRO papers, LOC—quotation on 
page 5 

153. “a recognition of”: ibid., 6 

154. “is surely not”: ibid. 

155. “I know every person”: quoted Wolverton (2008), 221 


156. “this great enterprise”: typescript of JRO’s acceptance 
speech, undated, JRO papers, LOC 


157. “I enjoyed what you had to say”: “Brotherly Spirit,” 
Newsweek, 16.12.1963, quoted Wolverton (2008), 222 


158. special issue: Reviews of Modern Physics, 36 (2), April 1964 
159. Robert Crease records: Pais (2006), 296 


160. “Message”: Reviews of Modern Physics, 36 (2), April 1964, 
509 


161. “Massive Stars, Relativist Polytropes, and Gravitational 
Radiation”: ibid., 545-5 
162. “It is a tribute”: ibid., 545 


163. “was rushed down”: Dyson, letter to his parents, 25.4.1964, 
quoted Pais (2006), 296 


164. 


165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 


169. 


170. 


17. 


172; 


L72. 


174. 


173. 
176. 
ives 
178. 
17. 


180. 


181. 


182. 


183. 


“I am very pleased”: San Francisco Examiner, April 24, 1964, 
quoted Wolverton (2008), 226 


“L’Intime et le Commun”: Oppenheimer (1984), 157-66 
“when the proceedings were published”: ibid., 165 
“We most of all should try”: ibid., 165-6 


“Today we live”: “The Fraternal Dialogue,” Supplement to 
the bulletin From Heart to Heart, No. 15, November 1964, 2 


“I begin to wonder”: Heinar Kipphardt, In the Matter of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Play Freely Adapted, on the Basis of 
the Documents, London: Methuen (1967), 106 


“You make me say things”: JRO to Heinar Kipphardt, 
12.10.1964, JRO papers, LOC 


“The whole damn thing”: Washington Post, 13.11.1964, A18, 
quoted Pais (2006), 268 


“makes me say”: JRO, statement to the press, 11.11.1964, 
JRO papers, LOC, quoted Wolverton (2008), 237 


When the play was performed in Paris: see Wolverton 
(2008), 238-9 


“T have not been for this play”: JRO to John Roberts, 
22.2.1965, quoted ibid., 240-1 


“restrain the production”: ibid., 241 

“The trouble with Oppenheimer”: see Serber (1998), 183-4 
“the true story”: HC to JRO, 23.7.1964, JRO papers, LOC 
“Dear Haakon”: JRO to HC, 7.8.1964, JRO papers, LOC 


“Had letter from Chevalier”: notes of telephone 
conversation, 18.3.1965, JRO papers, LOC 

“physics, of course”: New York Times, April 25, 1965, quoted 
Pais (2006), 297 

“a general feeling”: New York Times Magazine, May 15, 1966, 
quoted Wolverton (2008), 271 

“Well, I don’t want to speak for others”: typescript of 
interview with Martin Agronsky for CBS Evening News with 
Walter Cronkite, 5.8.1965, JRO papers, LOC 

“Physics and Man’s Understanding”: Oppenheimer (1984), 
181-9 


184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 


Te, 
192. 
195. 
194. 
195, 
196. 
1g? 


19S. 


199. 
200. 
201, 
202. 


203. 
204. 
205. 
206. 
207. 
208. 
209. 


“To Live with Ourselves”: ibid., 169-79 

“the life of the scientist”: ibid., 170 

“This was”: ibid., 170-1 

“when the discovery”: ibid., 178 

“[The] new discoveries which liberated physics”: ibid., 185 
“The error which this corrected”: ibid. 


a talk on Einstein: delivered at UNESCO House in Paris on 
December 13, 1965, published as “On Albert Einstein,” New 
York Review of Books, March 17, 1966, 4-5, available online 
at: http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1966/ 
mar/17/on-albert-einstein/?page = 1 


“his tradition”: ibid., 4 

“clouds of myth”: ibid. 

“was almost wholly without sophistication”: ibid., 5 
“Thirty Years of Mesons”: Oppenheimer (1966) 

“It seems to me”: ibid., 58 

“You see the old man”: Pais (2006), 300 


“finding out”: Dyson, letter to his parents, 30.3.1966, quoted 
Pais (2006), 301 


“Dr. Oppenheimer Plans History of Physics”: New York 
Times, June 21, 1966, 46, copy in JRO papers, LOC 


“A Time in Need”: Oppenheimer (1984), 191-2 
“no confidence”: Pais (2006), 303 
“Sam, don’t smoke”: ibid., 304 


“Poor Oppenheimer”: Dyson to his parents, 16.2.1967, 
quoted Pais (2006), 304-5 


“He looked extremely thin”: B & S, 587 

“T walked him”: ibid. 

“It was a horrible period”: Pais (2006), 305 
“The truth is”: ibid., 306 

“Damn it”: ibid. 

“a man who had”: ibid. 

“In Oppenheimer”: Rabi et al. (1969), 8 


Bibliography 


Abragam, A., “Louis Victor Pierre Raymond de Broglie,” 
Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, 34, 22-4, 
London: Royal Society (1988) 

Acheson, Dean, Present at the Creation: My Years in the State 
Department, New York: Norton (1969) 

Ackroyd, Peter, T. S. Eliot, London: Abacus (1985) 

Adam, Ian, “Character and Destiny in George Eliot’s Fiction,” 
Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 20, No. 2, 127-43 (Sep. 1965) 

Adler, Felix, Creed and Deed: A Series of Discourse, New York: 
Putnam (1886) 

— “The Problem of Unsectarian Moral Instruction,” International 
Journal of Ethics, Vol. 2, No. 1, 11-19 (Oct. 1891) 

—“The Relation of Ethical Culture to Religion and Philosophy,” 
International Journal of Ethics, Vol. 4, No. 3, 335-47 (Apr. 1894) 

—“ The Moral Value of Silence,” International Journal of Ethics, 
Vol. 8, No. 3, 345-57 (Apr. 1898) 

—“The Parting of the Ways in the Foreign Policy of the United 
States,” International Journal of Ethics, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1-12 (Oct. 
1898) 

—“A Critique of Kant’s Ethics,” Mind, New Series, Vol. 11, No. 
42, 162-95 (Apr. 1902) 

—“ The Problem of Teleology,” International Journal of Ethics, 
Vol. 14, No. 3, 265-80 (Apr. 1904) 

—“ The Moral Ideal,” International Journal of Ethics, Vol. 20, No. 
4, 387-94 (Jul. 1910) 

—“The Relation of the Moral Ideal to Reality,” International 
Journal of Ethics, Vol. 22, No. 1, 1-18 (Oct. 1911) 

—The World Crisis and Its Meaning, New York: D. Appleton & 
Co. (1915) 

—“The Ethical Problem,” The Philosophical Review, Vol. 38, No. 
2, 105-24 (Mar. 1929) 

— An Ethical Philosophy of Life, London: D. Appleton-Century 
(1933) 

Al-Khalili, Quantum: A Guide for the Perplexed, London: 


Weidenfeld and Nicolson (2004) 

Alberty, Robert A. and Cera, Enrico Di, Jeffries Wyman 1901- 
1995: A Biographical Memoir, National Academy of Sciences 
Biographical Memoirs 83, Washington DC: National Academies 
Press (2003) 

Albright, Joseph and Kunstel, Marcia, Bombshell: The Secret Story 
of America’s Unknown Spy Conspiracy, New York: Times Books 
(1997) 

Alperovitz, Gar, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, New York: 
Vintage (1996) 

Anderson, Carl D., “The Apparent Existence of Easily Deflectable 
Positives,” Science, 76, 239-40 (1932) 

—“ The Positive Electron,” Physical Review, 43, 491-4 (1933) 

—“Early Work on the Positron and Muon,” American Journal of 
Physics, Vol. 29, Issue 12, 825-30 (1961) 

Anderson, Carl D. and Neddermeyer, Seth H., “Cloud Chamber 
Observations of Cosmic Rays at 4300 Meters and Near Sea 
Level,” Physical Review, 50, 263-71 (1936) 

—“ Note on the Nature of Cosmic Ray Particles,” Physical 
Review, 51, 884-6 (1937) 

Anderson, Herbert L., “ ‘All in Our Time’: Fermi, Szilard and 
Trinity,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 30 (8), 40-7 (1974) 

Arnold, Sir Edwin, Bhagavadgita, New York: Dover (1993) 

Asimov, Isaac, The Collapsing Universe, London: Hutchinson 
(1977) 

Baade, W. and Zwicky, F., “On Super-Novae,” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science, 20, 254-9 (1934a) 

—“Remarks on Super-Novae and Cosmic Rays,” Physical 
Review, 46, 76-7 (1934b) 

Badash, Lawrence, Hirschfelder, Joseph O. and Broida, Herbert P. 
(eds.), Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 1943-45, Dordrecht: Reidel 
(1980) 

Baggott, Jim, Atomic. The First War of Physics and the Secret 
History of the Atom Bomb: 1939-49, London: Icon Books (2009) 

—The Quantum Story: A History in 40 Moments, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press (2011) 

Ball, Philip, The Elements: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press (2004) 

Barkai, Avraham, Branching Out: German-Jewish Immigration to the 
United States, 1820-1914, New York: Holmes & Meier (1994) 


Barton, Henry A., “Twenty Years of Physics Today: The Early 
Years,” Physics Today, 66-8 (May 1968) 

Barut, Asim O., Merwe, Alwyn van der and Odabasi, Halis (eds.), 
Selected Popular Writings of E.U. Condon, New York: Springer- 
Verlag (1991) 

Bernstein, Barton J., “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, Vol. 12, No. 2, 195- 
252 (1982) 

—“ Crossing the Rubicon: A Missed Opportunity to Stop the H- 
Bomb?,” International Security, Vol. 14, No. 2, 132-60 (1989) 

Bernstein, Jeremy, Hans Bethe: Prophet of Energy, New York: 
Dutton (1981) 

— Hitler’s Uranium Club: The Secret Recordings at Farm Hall, New 
York: Copernicus Books (2001) 

—“The Drawing or Why History Is Not Mathematics,” Physics in 
Perspective, 5, 243-61 (2003) 

— Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma, Chicago: Ivan R. Dee 
(2004) 

— “Max Born and the Quantum Theory,” American Journal of 
Physics, 73 (11), 999-1008 (2005) 

—Plutonium: A History of the World’s Most Dangerous Element, 
Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press (2007) 

Bethe, H. A., “Energy production in stars,” Physical Review, 55, 
434-56 (1939) 

—“ The Hydrogen Bomb,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, VI (4), 
99-104, 125 (1950) 

——“J. Robert Oppenheimer: A Biographical Memoir,” 
Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences Volume 
71, 175-219, Washington D.C.: National Academies Press 
(1997) 

Bird, Kai and Sherwin, Martin J. [B & S], American Prometheus: 
The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer, New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf (2005) 

Birkhoff, George, Aesthetic Measure, Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press (1933) 

Birks, J. B., Rutherford at Manchester, London: Heywood & Co. 
(1962) 

Birmingham, Stephen, “Our Crowd”: The Great Jewish Families of 
New York, New York: Harper & Row (1967) 

Bizony, Piers, Atom, Cambridge: Icon Books (2007) 


Blackett, P. M. S., “The Craft of Experimental Physics,” in Wright 
(1933), 67-96 

Bohr, Niels, “On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules,” 
Philosophical Magazine, 26, 1-25, 476-502, 857-75 (1913) 

—“The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of 
Atomic Theory,” Nature, 121, 580-90 (1928) 

—“Faraday Lecture: Chemistry and the Quantum Theory of 
Atomic Constitution,” Journal of the Chemical Society, 135, 349- 
84 (1932) 

—“ Resonance in Uranium and Thorium Disintegrations and the 
Phenomenon of Nuclear Fission,” Physical Review, 55, 418-19 
(1939) 

— Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, New York: Wiley 
(1958) 

— Collected Works, edited by L. Rosenfeld: 

Volume 1. Early Work (1905-1911), edited by J. Rud Nielson, 

Amsterdam: North Holland (1972) 

Volume 2. Work on Atomic Physics (1912-1917), edited by 

Ulrich Hoyer, Amsterdam: North Holland (1981) 

Volume 3. The Correspondence Principle, edited by J. Rud 

Nielson, Amsterdam: North Holland (1976) 

Volume 4. The Periodic Table (1920-1923), edited by J. Rud 

Nielson, Amsterdam: North Holland (1977) 

Volume 5. The Emergence of Quantum Mechanics, edited by Klaus 

Stolzenburg, Amsterdam: North Holland (1984) 

Volume 6. Foundations of Quantum Physics I, edited by Jorgen 

Kalckar, Amsterdam: North Holland (1985) 

Volume 7. Foundations of Quantum Physics II, edited by Jorgen 

Kalckar, Amsterdam: Elsevier (1996) [published out of 

sequence] 

Volume 8. The Penetration of Charged Particles through Matter, 

edited by Jens Thorson, Amsterdam: North Holland (1987) 

Volume 9. Nuclear Physics (1929-1952), edited by Sir Rudolf 

Peierls, Amsterdam: North Holland (1986) 

Bohr, Niels, Kramers, H. A., and Slater, J. C., “The Quantum 
Theory of Radiation,” Philosophical Magazine, 47, 785-802 
(1924) 

Bohr, Niels and Wheeler, John Archibald, “The Mechanism of 
Nuclear Fission,” Physical Review, 56, 426-50 (1939) 

Borden, William Liscum, There Will Be No Time, New York: 


Macmillan (1946) 

Born, Max, “Zur Quantenmechanik der Sto&vorgange,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Physik, 37 (12), 863-7 (1926a) 

—‘“Quantenmechanik der Sto&vorgange,” Zeitschrift fiir 
Physik, 38 (11-12), 803-27, (1926b) 

—“ Physical Aspects of Quantum Mechanics,” Nature, Vol. 
119, 354-7 (1927) 

—The Restless Universe, London: Blackie & Son (1935) 

—Physics in My Generation: A Selection of Papers, London: 
Pergamon (1956) 

—tThe Born-Einstein Letters, London: Macmillan (1971) 

——My Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate, London: Taylor & 
Francis (1978) 

— Atomic Physics, New York: Dover (1989) 

Born, Max, Heisenberg, Werner and Jordan, Pascual, “Zur 
Quantenmechanik II,” Zeitschrift flir Physik, 35, 557-615 
(1926) 

Born, Max and Jordan, Pascual, “Zur Quantenmechanik,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Physik, 34, 858-88 (1925) 

Boyd, William C., Genetics and the Races of Man, Oxford: 
Blackwell (1950) 

Boyd, William C. and Asimov, Isaac, Races and People, New 
York: Abelard-Schuman (1955) 

Brian, Denis, Einstein: A Life, New York: Wiley (1996) 

Broglie, Louis de, “A Tentative Theory of Light Quanta,” The 
Philosophical Magazine, 446-58 (1924) 

Brown, Andrew, The Neutron and the Bomb: A Biography of Sir 
James Chadwick, Oxford: Oxford University Press (1997) 
Brown, Laurie M., “The Idea of the Neutrino,” Physics Today, 

31, 23-8 (1978) 

Brown, Laurie M. and Hoddeson, Lillian (eds.), The Birth of 
Particle Physics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
(1983) 

Brown, Stephen G., “The Curse of the ‘Little Phrase’: Swann 
and the Sorrows of the Sapphic Sublime,” College Literature, 
30.4 (Fall 2003) 

Bundy, McGeorge, Danger and Survival: Choices About the Bomb 
in the First Fifty Years, New York: Random House (1988) 
Campbell, J., Rutherford: Scientist Supreme, Christchurch: AAS 

Publications (1999) 


Cashman, Sean Dennis, America in the Gilded Age: From the 
Death of Lincoln to the Rise of Theodore Roosevelt, New York: 
New York University Press (1984) 

Cassidy, David C., Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner 
Heisenberg, New York: W.H. Freeman & Co. (1992) 

—— J. Robert Oppenheimer and the American Century, New York: 
Pi Press (2005) 

—Beyond Uncertainty: Heisenberg, Quantum Physics and the 
Bomb, New York: Bellevue Literary Press (2009) 

Cathcart, Brian, The Fly in the Cathedral: How a Small Group of 
Cambridge Scientists Won the Race to Split the Atom, London: 
Viking (2004) 

Cather, Willa, Youth and the Bright Medusa, New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf (1920) 

—A Lost Lady, New York: Alfred A. Knopf (1923) 

—Death Comes for the Archbishop, New York: Alfred A. Knopf 
(1927) 

Cave Brown, Anthony, The Secret History of the Atomic Bomb, 
New York: Dial Press (1977) 

Cerchiai, Luca, Jannelli, Lorena and Longo, Fausto, The Greek 
Cities of Magna Graecia and Sicily, Los Angeles: Getty 
Publications (2004) 

Chadwick, James, “Possible Existence of a Neutron,” Nature, 
129, 312 (1932a) 

—“The Existence of a Neutron,” Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London Series A, Vol. 136, No. 830, 692-708 
(1932b) 

Chevalier, Haakon, Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship, New 
York: George Braziller (1965) 

Childs, Herbert, An American Genius: The Life of Ernest Orlando 
Lawrence, New York: Dutton (1968) 

Christman, Al, Target Hiroshima: Deak Parsons and the Creation 
of the Atomic Bomb, Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute 
Press (1998) 

Cockcroft, John and Walton, Ernest, “Experiments with High 
Velocity Positive Ions,” Proceedings of the Royal Society Series 
A, Vol. 129, 477-89 (1930) 

— ‘Disintegration of Lithium by Swift Protons,” Nature, Vol. 
129, 649 (1932) 

Cohen, Naomi W., Encounter with Emancipation: The German 


Jews in the United States 1830-1914, Philadelphia: The Jewish 
Publication Society of America (1984) 

Cohen, S. T., The Truth about the Neutron Bomb, New York: 
Morrow (1983) 

Cole, K. C., Something Incredibly Wonderful Happens: Frank 
Oppenheimer and the world he made up, Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin (2009) 

Compton, Arthur H., “A Quantum Theory of the Scattering of 
X-Rays by Light Elements,” Physical Review, 21 (5), 483-502 
(1923) 

— Atomic Quest: A Personal Narrative, London: Oxford 
University Press (1956) 

Conant, Jennet, 109 East Palace: Robert Oppenheimer and the 
Secret City of Los Alamos, New York: Simon & Schuster (2005) 

Coughlan, C. D., Dodd, J. E. and Gripaios, B. M., The Ideas of 
Particle Physics: An Introduction for Scientists, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press (2006) 

Cropper, William H., Great Physicists: The Life and Times of 
Leading Physicists from Galileo to Hawking, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press (2001) 

Crowther, James Arnold, Molecular Physics, Philadelphia: P. 
Blackiston’s Son & Co. (1914, 1st edition; 1923, 3rd edition) 

Crowther, J. G., The Cavendish Laboratory: 1874-1974, London: 
Macmillan (1974) 

Dahl, Per F., “The Physical Tourist: Berkeley and Its Physics 
Heritage,” Physics in Perspective, 8, 90-101 (2006) 

Dalitz, R. H. and Peierls, Rudolf, “Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac,” 
Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, 32, 138- 
85 (1986) 

DeGroot, Gerard J., The Bomb: A History of Hell on Earth, 
London: Pimlico (2005) 

Diner, Hasia R., A Time for Gathering: The Second Migration 
1820-1880 (The Jewish People in America, Vol. 2), Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press (1992) 

Dirac, Paul, “The Fundamental Equations of Quantum 
Mechanics,” Proceedings of the Royal Society Series A, Vol. 
109, No. 752, 642-53 (1925) 

—‘“Quantum Mechanics and a Preliminary Investigation of 
the Hydrogen Atom,” Proceedings of the Royal Society Series A, 
Vol. 110, No. 755, 561-79 (1926) 


—“The Quantum Theory of the Electron,” Proceedings of the 
Royal Society Series A, Vol. 117, No. 778, 610-24 (1928) 

—“Quantised Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field,” 
Proceedings of the Royal Society Series A, Vol. 133, No. 821, 
60-72 (1931) 

—“A New Classical Theory of Electrons,” Proceedings of the 
Royal Society Series A, Vol. 209, No. 1098, 291-6 (1951) 

—The Development of Quantum Theory: J. Robert Oppenheimer 
Memorial Prize acceptance speech, London: Gordon and Breach 
(1971) 

——Directions in Physics: Lectures delivered during a visit to 
Australia and New Zealand August/September 1975, New York: 
Wiley (1978) 

—“The Origin of Quantum Field Theory,” in Brown and 
Hoddeson (1983), 39-55 

—The Collected Works of P. A. M. Dirac 1924-1948, edited by 
R. H. Dalitz, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1995) 

Donovan, Robert J., The Words of Harry S. Truman, New York: 
Newmarket Press (1996) 

Dool, Huug van den, “George David Birkhoff (1884-1944): 
Dutch-American Mathematician Extraordinaire,” Proceedings 
of 14th Biennial AADAS Conference, The Dutch in Urban 
America, edited by R. Swierenga, D. Sinnema and H. 
Krabbendam, Amsterdam: The Joint Archives of Holland, 76— 
93 (2003) 

Doty, Paul, “John T. Edsall: 3 November 1902-12 June 2002,” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 149, 
No. 1, 89-92 (March 2005) 

Dowd, Doug, “Against Decadence: The Work of Robert A. Brady 
(1901-63),” Journal of Economic Issues, Vol. XXVIII, No. 4, 
1031-61 (1994) 

Dupuy, Trevor Nevitt and Hammerman, Gary M., A 
Documentary History of Arms Control and Disarmament, 
Washington D.C.: T.N. Dupuy Associates (1973) 

Dyson, Freeman, Disturbing the Universe, New York: Basic Books 
(1979) 

Edsall, John T., “Some personal history and reflections from the 
life of a Biochemist,” Biophysical Chemistry, 100, 9-28 (2003) 

Edwards, Rebecca, New Spirits: Americans in the Gilded Age 
1865-1905, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2006) 


Einstein, Albert, Out of My Later Years, London: Thames and 
Hudson (1950) 

Eliot, George, Middlemarch, Harmondsworth: Penguin, (1965) 

Ellanby, Boyd [William C. Boyd], “Category Phoenix,” Galaxy 
Science Fiction, Vol. 4, No. 2, 4-44 (May 1952) 

—“Chain Reaction,” Galaxy Science Fiction, Vol.12, No. 5, 
128-43 (Sep. 1956) 

Elliot, David C., “Project Vista and Nuclear Weapons in 
Europe,” International Security, Vol. 11, No. 1, 163-83 (1986) 

Elsasser, Walter M., Memoirs of a Physicist in the Atomic Age, 
London: Adam Hilger Ltd./Science History Publications 
(1978) 

Enz, Charles P., No Time to Be Brief: A Scientific Biography of 
Wolfgang Pauli, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2002) 

Ermarth, Elizabeth, “Incarnations: George Eliot’s Conception of 
‘Undeviating Law,’ ” Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 29, No. 
3, 273-86 (Dec. 1974) 

Eve, Arthur S., Rutherford: Being the Life and Letters of the Rt. 
Hon. Lord Rutherford, O.M., Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press (1939) 

Farmelo, Graham, The Strangest Man: The Hidden Life of Paul 
Dirac, Quantum Genius, London: Faber (2009) 

Feingold, Henry L., A Time for Searching: Entering the 
Mainstream, 1920-1945, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press (1995) 

Fergusson, Erna, Our South West, New York: Alfred A. Knopf 
(1946) 

— New Mexico: A pageant of three peoples, Albuquerque: 
University of New Mexico Press (1973) 

—Dancing Gods: Indian Ceremonials of New Mexico and 
Arizona, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 
(1988) 

— Mexican Cookbook, Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press (1999) 

Fergusson, Francis, The Idea of a Theater, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press (1949) 

—Sallies of the Mind, edited by John McCormick and George 
Core, New Brunswick: Transaction (1998) 

Fergusson, Harvey, The Blood of the Conquerors, New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf (1921) 


— Wolf Song, New York: Alfred A. Knopf (1927) 

— In Those Days: An Impression of Change, New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf (1929) 

— Rio Grande, New York: Alfred A. Knopf (1933) 

— Home in the West: An Inquiry Into My Origins, New York: 
Duell, Sloan and Pearce (1944) 

—The Conquest of Don Pedro, New York: William Morrow 
(1954) 

Fergusson, Harvey Butler, New Mexico in 1910: Letters and 
Addresses Relating to the Constitution, Farmington Hills, 
Michigan: Gale (2010) 

Fermi, Laura, Atoms in the Family: My Life with Enrico Fermi, 
Chicago: Chicago University Press (1961) 

Feynman, Richard P., QED: The Strange Theory of Light and 
Matter, London: Penguin (1990) 

— “Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!” Adventures of a 
Curious Character as told to Ralph Leighton, London: Vintage 
(1992) 

Franklin, Allan, Are There Really Neutrinos? An Evidential 
History, Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press (2004) 

Fried, Albert, Communism in America: A History in Documents, 
New York: Columbia University Press (1997a) 

— McCarthyism : The Great American Red Scare: A 
Documentary History, New York: Oxford University Press 
(1997b) 

Friess, H. L., Felix Adler and Ethical Culture: Memories and 
Studies, New York: Columbia University Press (1981) 

Frisch, Otto, What Little I Remember, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press (1980) 

Gamow, George, “Zur Quantentheorie des Atomkernes,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Physik, Vol. 51, No. 3, 204-12 (1928a) 

—“The Quantum Theory of Nuclear Disintegration,” Nature, 
122, 805-6 (1928b) 

— Mr. Tomkins in Paperback, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press (1965) 

— Thirty Years that Shook Physics: The Story of Quantum 
Theory, New York: Dover (1985) 

—The Great Physicists from Galileo to Einstein, New York: 
Dover (1988) 

Gay, Ruth, Jews in America, New York: Basic Books (1965) 


Gerassi, John, The Premature Antifascists: North American 
Volunteers in the Spanish Civil War 1936-39: An Oral History, 
New York: Praeger (1986) 

Gerstle, Gary, “Theodore Roosevelt and the Divided Character 
of American Nationalism,” The Journal of American History, 
Vol. 86, No. 3, The Nation and Beyond: Transnational 
Perspectives on United States History: A Special Issue, 1280- 
1307 (Dec. 1999) 

Gibbs, Josiah Willard, “On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous 
Substances,” Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts 
and Sciences, Vol. III, 198-248, 343-524 (1874-8) 

Gill, Stanley, “Conversations with Jeffries Wyman,” Annual 
Review of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, 16, 1-23 
(1987) 

Ginger, Ray, Age of Excess: The United States from 1877 to 1914, 
London: Collier Macmillan (1975) 

Gish, Robert, “Paul Horgan,” in A Literary History of the 
American West, Fort Worth: Texas Christian University Press, 
574-86 (1987) 

—Frontier’s End: The Life and Literature of Harvey Fergusson, 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press (1988) 

— Nueva Granada: Paul Horgan and the Southwest, Texas: A & 
M University Press (1995) 

— Beautiful Swift Fox: Erna Fergusson and the Modern 
Southwest, Texas: A & M University Press (1996) 

Gleick, James, Genius: Richard Feynman and Modern Physics, 
London: Abacus (1994) 

Goodchild, Peter, J. Robert Oppenheimer: “Shatterer of Worlds,” 
London: BBC (1980) 

——FEdward Teller: The Real Dr. Strangelove, London: Weidenfeld 
& Nicolson (2004) 

Goodstein, Judith, “A Conversation with Hans Bethe,” Physics 
in Perspective, I, 253-81 (1999) 

Gordin, Michael D., Five Days in August: How World War II 
Became a Nuclear War, Princeton: Princeton University Press 
(2007) 

Graham, Frank, Al Smith American: An Informal Biography, 
Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger (2005) 

Graham, Loren R., Moscow Stories, Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press (2006) 


Green, Harold P., “The Oppenheimer Case: A Study in the 
Abuse of Law,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 33 (7), 12-16, 
56-61 (Sep. 1977) 

Greenspan, Nancy Thorndike, The End of the Certain World: The 
Life and Science of Max Born, London: Wiley (2005) 

Gribbin, John, In Search of Schrédinger’s Cat, London: Corgi 
(1984) 

Gromyko, Andrei A., “Soviet Proposals for Atomic Energy 
Control,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 3 (8), 219-20 
(1947) 

Groueff, Stephane, Manhattan Project: The Untold Story of the 
Making of the Atomic Bomb, New York: Little Brown (1967) 

Groves, Leslie R., Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the 
Manhattan Project, New York: Da Capo (1962) 

Gurney, Ronald W. and Condon, Edward U., “Wave Mechanics 
and Radioactive Disintegration,” Nature, 122, 439 (1928) 

Hager, Thomas, Force of Nature: The Life of Linus Paul, New 
York: Simon and Schuster (1995) 

Hales, Peter Bacon, Atomic Spaces: Living on the Manhattan 
Project, Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press 
(1997) 

Halpern, Paul, Collider: The Search for the World’s Smallest 
Particles, Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley (2010) 

Harrington, Fred H., “The Anti-Imperialist Movement in the 
United States, 1898-1900,” The Mississippi Valley Historical 
Review, Vol. 22, No. 2, 211-30 (Sep., 1935) 

Hawkins, David, Manhattan District History. Project Y: The Los 
Alamos Project, unpublished, commissioned by the Los 
Alamos Scientific Laboratory for “special distribution” (1946) 

Haynes, John Earl, Red Scare or Menace? American Communism 
and Anticommunism in the Cold War Era, Chicago: Ivan R. Dee 
(1996) 

Haynes, John Earl and Klehr, Harvey, Venona: Decoding Soviet 
Espionage in America, New Haven: Yale Note Bene (2000) 

Heilbron, J. L. and Seidel, Robert W., Lawrence and His 
Laboratory: A History of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 
Volume I, Berkeley: University of California Press (1990) 

Heisenberg, Werner, “Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung 
kinematischer und mechanischer Beziehungen,” Zeitschrift fiir 
Physik, 33, 879-93 (1925) 


—“Uber den anschulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen 
Kinematik und Mechanik,” Zeitschrift fiir Physik, 43, 172-98 
(1927) 

—“Zur Theorie der ‘Schauer’ in der Hohenstrahlung,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Physik, 101, 533-40 (1936) 

—Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations, London: 
Allen & Unwin (1971) 

Heisenberg, Werner and Pauli, Wolfgang, “Zur 
Quantendynamik der Wellenfelder,” Zeitschrift fiir Physik, 56, 
1-61 (1929) 

—“Zur Quantentheorie der Wellenfelder II,” Zeitschrift fiir 
Physik, 59, 168-90 (1930) 

Hendry, John, The Creation of Quantum Mechanics and the Bohr- 
Pauli Dialogue, Dordrecht: Reidel (1984) 

Herken, Gregg, Brotherhood of the Bomb: The Tangled Lives and 
Loyalties of Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward 
Teller, New York: Henry Holt & Co. (2002) 

Hersey, John, Hiroshima, New York: Vintage (1989) 

Hershberg, James G., James B. Conant: Harvard to Hiroshima 
and the Making of the Nuclear Age, Stanford: Stanford 
University Press (1993) 

Hewlett, Richard G. and Duncan, Francis, Atomic Shield, 1947- 
1952: History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, 
Volume II, University Park: Pennsylvania State University 
Press (1969) 

Hewlett, Richard G. and Holl, Jack M., Atoms for Peace and 
War, 1953-1961: Eisenhower and the Atomic Energy 
Commission (History of the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission, Volume III), Berkeley: University of California 
Press (1989) 

Hijiya, James A., “The Gita of Robert Oppenheimer,” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 144 (2), 
123-67 (2000) 

Hoddeson, Lillian et al., Critical Assembly: A Technical History of 
Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 1943-1945, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1993) 

Hodes, Elizabeth, Tiddens, Adolph and Badash, Lawrence, 
“Nuclear Fission: Reaction to the Discovery in 1939,” Institute 
on Global Conflict and Cooperation Research Paper I, 
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Association (1985) 


Hoffmann, Banesh, The Strange Story of the Quantum, New York: 
Dover (1959) 

Hofstadter, Robert, “Felix Bloch 1905-1983: A Biographical 
Memoir,” Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of 
Sciences, Washington DC: National Academies Press (1994) 

Hohoff, Tay, A Ministry to Man: The Life of John Lovejoy Elliott, 
New York: Harper (1959) 

Holbrow, Charles H., “In Appreciation. Charles C. Lauritsen: A 
Reasonable Man in an Unreasonable World,” Physics in 
Perspective, 5, 419-72 (2003) 

Hore, Peter (ed.), Patrick Blackett: Sailor, Scientist, and Socialist, 
London: F. Cass (2003) 

Horgan, Paul, The Fault of Angels, New York: Harper (1933) 

—The Common Heart, New York: Harper & Brothers (1942) 

— Great River: The Rio Grande in North American History, New 
York: Rinehart (1954) 

—A Distant Trumpet, New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy 
(1960) 

—Things as They Are, New York: Farrar, Straus & Co. (1964) 

—Lamy of Santa Fe, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux 
(1976) 

— Of America East & West: Selections from the Writings of Paul 
Horgan, New York: Farrar Straus and Giroux (1985) 

— Under the Sangre de Cristo, Flagstaff, Arizona: Northland 
Publishing (1987) 

—A Certain Climate: Essays in History, Arts, and Letters, 
Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press (1988) 

Hughes, Jeff, The Manhattan Project: Big Science and the Atom 
Bomb, Cambridge: Icon Books (2002) 

Huning, Franz, Trader on the Santa Fe Trail: The Memoirs of 
Franz Huning, Albuquerque, University of Albuquerque Press 
(1973) 

Hunner, Jon, Inventing Los Alamos: The Growth of an Atomic 
Community, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press (2004) 

—— J. Robert Oppenheimer, the Cold War, and the Atomic West, 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press (2009) 

Isserman, Maurice, Which Side Were You On? The American 
Communist Party during the Second World War, Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press (1993) 

Jeans, J. H., The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and 


Magnetism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1908) 

—The Universe around Us, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press (1929) 

—The Mysterious Universe, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press (1930) 

—Physics and Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press (1942) 

Jenkins, Philip, A History of the United States, Basingstoke: 
Palgrave (2003) 

Joliot, F., von Halba, H. and Kowarski, L., “Liberation of 
Neutrons in the Nuclear Explosion of Uranium,” Nature, 143, 
470 (1939a) 

—‘“Number of Neutrons Liberated in the Nuclear Fission of 
Uranium,” Nature, 143, 680 (1939b) 

Jungk, Robert, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns: A Personal 
History of the Atomic Scientists, London: Penguin (1960) 

Kaiser, David, Drawing Theories Apart: The Dispersion of Feynman 
Diagrams in Postwar Physics, Chicago: Chicago University 
Press (2005) 

Karabel, Jerome, The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission 
and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, New York: 
Houghton Mifflin Company (2005) 

Kelly, Cynthia C. (ed.), Oppenheimer and the Manhattan Project: 
Insights into J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Father of the Atomic 
Bomb,” Hackensack, New Jersey: World Scientific (2006) 

Kevles, Daniel J., The Physicists: The History of a Scientific 
Community in Modern America, Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press (1995) 

Klehr, Harvey, Haynes, John Earl and Firsov, Fridrikh 
Igorevich, The Secret World of American Communism, New 
Haven: Yale University Press (1995) 

Klein, Martin J., Paul Ehrenfest, Amsterdam: North Holland 
Pub. Co. (1970) 

—“Not by Discoveries Alone: The Centennial of Paul 
Ehrenfest,” Physica, 106A, 3-14 (1981) 

Klingenstein, Susanne, Jews in the American Academy 1900- 
1940: The Dynamics of Intellectual Assimilation, New Haven: 
Yale University Press (1991) 

Kosak, Hadassa, Cultures of Opposition: Jewish Immigrant 
Workers, New York City, 1881-1905, New York: State 


University of New York Press (2000) 

Kragh, Helge, Dirac: A Scientific Biography, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press (1990) 

— Quantum Generations: A History of Physics in the Twentieth 
Century, Princeton: Princeton University Press (1999) 

Kraus, Joe, “How the Melting Pot Stirred America: The 
Reception of Zangwill’s Play and Theater’s Role in the 
American Assimilation Experience,” MELUS, Vol. 24, No. 3, 
Varieties of Ethnic Criticism, 3-19 (Autumn 1999) 

Kumar, Manit, Quantum: Einstein, Bohr and the Great Debate 
about the Nature of Reality, London: Icon Books (2009) 

Lamb, Willis E., “The Fine Structure of Hydrogen,” in Brown 
and Hoddeson (1983), 311-28 

Lankevich, George J., American Metropolis: A History of New 
York City, New York: New York University Press (1998) 

Lanouette, William, Genius in the Shadows: A Biography of Leo 
Szilard, Chicago: Chicago University Press (1994) 

Larsen, Egon, The Cavendish Laboratory: Nursery of Genius, 
London: Edmund Ward (1962) 

Lawton, Eliza and Lawson, Eba, Major Robert Anderson and Fort 
Sumter, 1861, New York: Knickerbocker Press (1911) 

Lee, Sabine, Sir Rudolf Peierls: Selected Private and Scientific 
Correspondence Volume 2, London: World Scientific 
Publishing (2009) 

Lee, Sabine and Brown, Gerry E., “Hans Albrecht Bethe 2 July 
1906-6 March 2005,” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the 
Royal Society, 53, 1-20 (2007) 

Levine, George, “Determinism and Responsibility in the Works 
of George Eliot,” PMLA, Vol. 77, No. 3, 268-79 (Jun. 1962), 

Lewis, Gilbert Newton and Randall, Merle, Thermodynamics and 
the Free Energy of Chemical Substances, New York: McGraw- 
Hill (1923) 

Lewis, William C. McC., Physical Chemistry and Scientific 
Thought: An Inaugural Lecture delivered at the University of 
Liverpool on Friday, 16 January 1914, Liverpool: Liverpool 
University Press (1914) 

——A System of Physical Chemistry (published in the series, 
Textbooks of Physical Chemistry, edited by Sir William 
Ramsay), London and New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 
Volume I: Considerations Based Upon the Kinetic Theory (1918, 


2nd edition; 1920, 3rd edition), Volume II: Thermodynamics 
(1919, 2nd edition; 1920, 3rd edition), Volume III: Quantum 
Theory (1920, 2nd edition; 1921, 3rd edition) 

Lewy, Giinter, The Cause that Failed: Communism in American 
Political Life, New York: Oxford University Press (1990) 

Libby, Leona Marshall, The Uranium People, New York: Crane 
Russak (1979) 

Lilienthal, David E., The Journals of David E. Lilienthal, Volume 
2: The Atomic Energy Years, 1945-1950, New York: Harper & 
Row (1964) 

Lovell, Bernard, “Patrick Maynard Stuart Blackett, Baron 
Blackett, of Chelsea,” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the 
Royal Society, 21, 1-115, London: Royal Society (1975), 
published separately as P. M. S. Blackett: A Biographical 
Memoir, London: The Royal Society (1976) 

Ludwig, Gunther (ed.), Wave Mechanics, New York: Pergamon 
(1968) 

Luminet, Jean-Pierre, Black Holes, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press (1992) 

McCarthy, Patrick J., “Lydgate, ‘The New, Young Surgeon’ of 
Middlemarch,” Studies in English Literature, 1500-1900, Vol. 
10, No. 4: Nineteenth Century, 805-16 (Autumn 1970) 

McCray, W. Patrick, “Project Vista, Caltech, and the dilemmas 
of Lee DuBridge,” Historical Studies in the Physical and 
Biological Sciences, Vol. 34, No. 2, 339-70 (2004) 

McMillan, Priscilla J., The Ruin of J. Robert Oppenheimer and the 
Birth of the Modern Arms Race, New York: Viking (2005) 

Madden, Paul and Miihlberger, Detlef, The Nazi Party: The 
Anatomy of a People’s Party, Bern: Peter Lang (2007) 

Malenfant, Richard E., Experiments with the Dragon Machine, Los 
Alamos: National Laboratory (2005) 

Mansell, Darrel, Jr., “George Eliot’s Conception of Tragedy,” 
Nineteenth-Century Fiction, Vol. 22, No. 2, 155-71 (Sep. 1967) 

Marsden, E., “The Rutherford Memorial Lecture, 1954: 
Rutherford—His Life and Work, 1871-1937,” Proceedings of 
the Royal Society A, 283-305 (1954) 

Marshak, Robert E., “The Rochester Conferences: The Rise of 
International Cooperation in High Energy Physics,” Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists, XXVI (6), 92-8 (1970) 

Mauch, Christof and Salmons, Joseph (eds.), German-Jewish 


Identities in America, Madison: Max Kade Institute for 
German-American Studies (2003) 

Maxwell, James Clerk, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press (1873) 

Mehra, Jagdish and Milton, Kimball A., Climbing the Mountain: 
The Scientific Biography of Julian Schwinger, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press (2000) 

Mehra, Jagdish, Milton, Kimball A. and Rembiesa, Peter, “The 
Young Julian Schwinger I. A New York City Childhood,” 
Foundations of Physics, Vol. 29, No. 5, 767-86 (1999a) 

—“The Young Julian Schwinger II. Julian Schwinger at 
Columbia University,” Foundations of Physics, Vol. 29, No. 5, 
787-817 (1999b) 

—“The Young Julian Schwinger III. Schwinger Goes to 
Berkeley,” Foundations of Physics, Vol. 29, No. 6, 931-66 
(1999c) 

—“The Young Julian Schwinger IV. During the Second World 
War,” Foundations of Physics, Vol. 29, No. 6, 967-1010 
(1999d) 

—“The Young Julian Schwinger. V. Winding Up at the 
Radiation Lab, Going to Harvard, and Marriage,” Foundations 
of Physics, Vol. 29, No. 7, 1119-62 (1999e) 

Mehra, Jagdish and Rechenberg, Helmut, The Historical 
Development of Quantum Theory: 

Volume 1, Parts 1 and 2: The Quantum Theory of Planck, Einstein, 

Bohr and Sommerfeld: Its Foundation and the Rise of Its Difficulties 

1900-1925, Berlin: Springer (1982a and 1982b) 

Volume 2: The Discovery of Quantum Mechanics, Berlin: Springer 

(1982c) 

Volume 3: The Formulation of Matrix Mechanics and _Its 

Modifications 1925-1926, Berlin: Springer (1982d) 

Volume 4, Part 1: The Fundamental Equations of Quantum 

Mechanics 1925-1926, and Part 2: The Reception of the New 

Quantum Mechanics 1925-1926, Berlin: Springer (1982e) 

Volume 5, Parts 1 and 2: Erwin Schrédinger and the Rise of Wave 

Mechanics, Berlin: Springer (1987) 

Volume 6, Part 1: The Completion of Quantum Mechanics 1926- 

1941, Berlin: Springer (2000) 

Volume 6, Part 2: The Completion of Quantum Mechanics 1926- 

1941, Berlin: Springer (2001) 


Melz, Christian F., “Goethe and America,” College English, Vol. 
10, No. 8 425-31 (May 1949) 

Meyrowitz, Elliott L., Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons: The 
Relevance of International Law, New York: Transnational 
(1990) 

Michelmore, Peter, The Swift Years: The Robert Oppenheimer 
Story, New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. (1969) 

Miller, Merle, Plain Speaking: An Oral Biography of Harry S. 
Truman, London: Coronet (1976) 

Mills, Robert, Space, Time and Quanta: An Introduction to 
Contemporary Physics, New York: W.H. Freeman and 
Company (1994) 

Milton, Kimball A., “In Appreciation. Julian Schwinger: From 
Nuclear Physics and Quantum Electrodynamics to Source 
Theory and Beyond,” Physics in Perspective, 9, 70-114 (2007) 

Moore, Ruth, Niels Bohr: The Man and the Scientist, London: 
Hodder & Stoughton (1967) 

Moore, Walter, Schrddinger: Life and Thought, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press (1989) 

Morais, Henry Samuel, The Jews of Philadelphia: Their History 
from the Earliest Settlements to the Present Time, Philadelphia: 
The Levytype Company (1894) 

Morgan, H. Wayne, Unity and Culture: The United States, 1877- 
1900, London: Allen Lane (1971) 

Morgan, Ted, McCarthyism in Twentieth Century America, New 
York: Random House (2003) 

Morse, Philip M., In at the Beginning: A Physicist’s Life, 
Cambridge: MIT Press (1977) 

Nelson, Bruce, Workers on the Waterfront: Seamen, 
Longshoremen, and Unionism in the 1930s, Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press (1988) 

Nelson, Steve, Barrett, James R. and Ruck, Rob, Steve Nelson, 
American Radical, Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press 
(1981) 

Neuenschwander, Dwight E. and Watkins, Sallie A., “In 
Appreciation. Professional and Personal Coherence: The Life 
and Work of Melba Newell Phillips,” Physics in Perspective, 
10, 295-364 (2008) 

Neumann, Henry, Spokesmen for Ethical Religion, Boston: Beacon 
Press (1951) 


Norris, Robert S., Racing for the Bomb: General Leslie R. Groves, 
the Manhattan Project’s Indispensable Man, South Royalton, 
Vermont: Steerforth Press (2002) 

Nye, Mary Jo, Blackett: Physics, War, and Politics in the Twentieth 
Century, Cambridge: Harvard University Press (2004) 

— “Blackett as Scientific Leader: Physics, War and Politics in 
the Twentieth Century,” lecture given at Imperial College, 
London, 26 January 2005, full text at: http:// 
www3.imperial.ac.uk/physics/about/history/blackett_nye/ 
lecture 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, “On the Quantum Theory of 
Vibration-Rotation Bands,” Proceedings of the Cambridge 
Philosophical Society, 23, 327-35 (1926a) 

—“On the Quantum Theory of the Problem of the Two 
Bodies,” Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 23, 
422-31 (1926b) 

—“Quantum Theory and Intensity Distribution in Continuous 
Spectra,” Nature, 118, 771 (1926c) 

—“Quantentheorie des kontinuierlichen 
Absorptionsspektrums,” Naturwissenschaften, 14, 1282 
(1926d) 

—“Zur Quantentheorie kontinuierlicher Spektren,” Zeitschrift 
fiir Physik, 41, 268-93 (1927 a) 

—“Zur Quantenmechanik der Richtungsentartung,” Zeitschrift 
fiir Physik, 43, 27-46 (1927b) 

—“Bermerkung zur Zerstreuung der a-Teilchen,” Zeitschrift 
fiir Physik, 43, 413-5 (1927c) 

—“On the Quantum Theory of the Polarization of Impact 
Radiation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
13, 800-5 (1927d) 

—“Three Notes on the Quantum Theory of Aperiodic 
Effects,” Physical Review, 31, 66-81 (1928a) 

—“On the Quantum Theory of the Capture of Electrons,” 
Physical Review, 31, 349-56 (1928b) 

—“On the Quantum Theory of the Ramsauer Effect,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 14, 261-2 
(1928c) 

—“On the Quantum Theory of Field Currents,” Physical 
Review, 31, 914 (1928d) 

—“On the Quantum Theory of the Autoelectric Field 


Currents,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 14, 
363-5 (1928e) 

—“Uber die Strahlung der freien Elektronen im 
Coulombfeld,” Zeitschrift flir Physik, 55, 725-37 (1929) 

—“ Note on the Theory of the Interaction of Field and 
Matter,” Physical Review, 35, 461-77 (1930a) 

—“On the Theory of Electrons and Protons,” Physical Review, 
35, 562-3 (1930b) 

— “Are the Formulae for the Absorption of High Energy 
Radiations Valid?,” Physical Review, 47, 44-52 (1934) 

—“Cosmic Rays: Report of Recent Progress, 1936-1941,” 
Science in the University, Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 23-38 (1944) 

—“Electron Theory: Report to the Solvay Congress for 
Physics at Brussels, Belgium, September 27 to October 2, 
1948,” in Schwinger (1958), 145-55 (1948) 

— ‘Discussion on the Disintegration and Nuclear Absorption 
of Mesons: Remarks on p-decay,” Reviews of Modern Physics, 
21 (1), 34-5 (1949a) 

—“Concluding Remarks to Cosmic-Ray Symposium,” Reviews 
of Modern Physics, 21 (1), 181-3 (1949b) 

—“Comments on the Military Value of the Atom,” Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists, VII (2), 43-5 (1951) 

—“Atomic Weapons and American Policy,” Foreign Affairs, 31 
(4), 525-35 (July 1953), also Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
IX (96), 202-5 (July 1953) 

— Science and the Common Understanding, New York: Simon & 
Schuster (1954) 

—The Open Mind, New York: Simon & Schuster (1955) 

—“Einstein,” Reviews of Modern Physics, 28 (1), 1—2 
(January 1956 = 1956a) 

—“Physics Tonight,” Physics Today, 10-13 (July 1956 = 
1956b) 

—“Electron Theory: Description and Analogy,” Physics Today 
12-20 (July 1957) 

—“ The Tree of Knowledge,” Harper’s Magazine, 55-60 
(October 1958 = 1958a) 

—“A Study of Thinking,” The Sewanee Review, 46, 481-90 
(1958b) 

—“The Mystery of Matter,” Saturday Evening Post (5 July 


1958 = 1958c) 

—“ The Role of the Big Accelerators,” Think 8-11 (October 
1959) 

—“TIn the Keeping of Unreason,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, XVI (1), 18-22 (1960) 

—“Niels Henrik David Bohr,” Year Book of the American 
Philosophical Society, 107-17 (1963) 

—The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for Physicists, London: 
Oxford University Press (1964) 

—“ Thirty Years of Mesons,” Physics Today, 51-8 (November 
1966) 

— Uncommon Sense, Boston: Birkhauser (1984) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Arnold, W., “Internal Conversion 
in the Photosynthetic Mechanism of Blue Green Algae,” 
Journal of General Physiology, 33, 423-5 (1950) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Bethe, Hans, “Reaction of 
Radiation on Electron Scattering and Heitler’s Theory of 
Radiation Damping,” Physical Review, 70, 451-8 (1946) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Born, Max, “Zur Quantentheorie 
der Molekeln,” Annalen der Physik, 84, 457-84 (1927) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Carlson, J. F., “On the Range of 
Fast Electrons and Neutrons,” Physical Review, 38, 1787-8 
(1931) 

—“ The Impacts of Fast Electrons and Magnetic Neutrons,” 
Physical Review, 39, 763-92 (1932) 

—“On Multiplicative Showers,” Physical Review, 51, 220-31 
(1937) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, Epstein, S. T. and Finkelstein, R. J., 
“Note on Stimulated Decay of Negative Mesons,” Physical 
Review, 73, 1140-1 (1948) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Furry, Wendell H., “On the Theory 
of the Electron and the Positive,” Physical Review, 45, 245-62 
(1934a) 

—“On the Theory of the Electron and the Positive,” Physical 
Review, 45, 343-4 (1934b) 

—“On the Limitations of the Theory of the Positron,” Physical 
Review, 45, 903-4 (1934c) 

—“On the Spin of the Mesotron,” Physical Review, 59, 462 
(1941) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Hall, Harvey, “Relativistic Theory 


of the Photoelectric Effect,” Physical Review, 38, 57-9 (1931) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Lauritsen, C. C., “On the 
Scattering of the Th C" y-Rays,” Physical Review, 46, 80-1 
(1934) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, Lewis, H. W. and Wouthuysen, S. A., 
“The Multiple Production of Mesons,” Physical Review, 73, 
127-40 (1948) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Nedelsky, Leo, “The Production of 
Positives by Nuclear Gamma Rays,” Physical Review, 44, 948- 
9 (1933) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Phillips, M., “Note on the 
Transmutation Function for Deuterons,” Physical Review, 48, 
500-2 (1935) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Plesset, Milton S., “On the 
Production of the Positive Electron,” Physical Review, 44, 53- 
5 (1933) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Schwinger, J. S., “On Pair 
Emission in the Proton Bombardment of Fluorine,” Physical 
Review, 56, 1066-7 (1939) 

—“On the Interaction of Mesotrons and Nuclei,” Physical 
Review, 60, 150-2 (1941) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Serber, R., “Note on the Nature of 
Cosmic-Ray Particles,” Physical Review, 51, 1113 (1937) 

—“On the Stability of Stellar Neutron Cores,” Physical 
Review, 54, 540 (1938) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, Serber, R., Nordheim, G. and 
Nordheim, L. W., “The Disintegration of High-Energy 
Protons,” Physical Review, 51, 1037-45 (1937) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, Serber, R. and Snyder, H., “The 
Production of Soft Secondaries by Mesotrons,” Physical 
Review, 57, 75-81 (1939) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Snyder, H., “On Continued 
Gravitational Contraction,” Physical Review, 56, 455-9 (1939) 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert and Volkoff, G. M., “On Massive 
Neutron Cores,” Physical Review, 55, 374-81 (1939) 

Pais, Abraham, “Subtle Is the Lord...”: The Science and the Life of 
Albert Einstein, Oxford: Oxford University Press (1982) 

— Inward Bound: Of Matter and Forces in the Physical World, 
Oxford: Clarendon (1986) 

— Niels Bohr’s Times, in Physics, Philosophy and Polity, Oxford: 


Oxford University Press (1991) 

—A Tale of Two Continents: A Physicist’s Life in a Turbulent 
World, Oxford: Oxford University Press (1997) 

—“In Memoriam: Robert Serber (1909-1997),” Physics in 
Perspective, 1, 105-10 (1999) 

—The Genius of Science: A Portrait Gallery, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press (2000) 

—( with supplemental material by Robert P. Crease), J. Robert 
Oppenheimer: A Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2006) 

Palevsky, Mary, Atomic Fragments: A Daughter’s Questions, 
Berkeley: University of California Press (2000) 

Pauli, Wolfgang, Scientific Correspondence with Bohr, Einstein, 
Heisenberg, a.O., Volume 1, 1919-1929, Berlin: Springer 
(1979) 

Pauling, Linus, The Nature of the Chemical Bond, Cornell: 
Cornell University Press (1939) 

Peierls, Rudolf, “Critical Conditions in Neutron Multiplication,” 
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 35, 610-5 
(1939) 

—“ Wolfgang Ernst Pauli, 1900-1958,” Biographical Memoirs 
of Fellows of the Royal Society, 5, 174-92 (1960) 

——Bird of Passage: Recollections of a Physicist, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press (1985) 

Pfau, Tichard, No Sacrifice Too Great: The Life of Lewis L. 
Strauss, Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia (1984) 

Pharr Davis, Nuel, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, Greenwich, 
Conn.: Fawcett Publications (1969) 

Philip, Michel, “The Hidden Onlooker,” Yale French Studies, No. 
34, Proust, 37-42 (1965) 

Piccard, Paul J., “Scientists and Public Policy: Los Alamos, 
August-November, 1945,” The Western Political Quarterly, 
Vol. 18, No. 2, 251-62 (1965) 

Pilkington, William T., “Harvey Fergusson,” in A Literary 
History of the American West, Fort Worth: Texas Christian 
University Press, 546-58 (1987) 

Polenberg, Richard (ed.), In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: 
The Security Clearance Hearing, Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press (2002) 

Polkinghorne, John, Quantum Theory: A Very Short Introduction, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press (2002) 


Powers, Thomas, Heisenberg’s War: The Secret History of the 
German Bomb, London: Penguin (1994) 

Priestley, Raymond E., Antarctic Adventure: Scott’s Northern 
Party, London: T. Fisher Unwin (1914) 

—Breaking the Hindenberg Line: The Story of the 46th (North 
Midland) Division, London: T. Fisher Unwin (1919) 

Pulzer, Peter, Jews and the German State: The Political History of 
a Minority, 1848-1933, Oxford: Blackwell (1992) 

Rabi, I. I. et al., Oppenheimer, New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons (1969) 

Radest, Howard B., Toward Common Ground: The Story of the 
Ethical Societies in the United States, New York: Frederick 
Ungar (1969) 

Randall, John Herman, The Landscape and the Looking Glass: 
Willa Cather’s Search for Value, New York: Houghton Mifflin 
(1960) 

Raphael, Marc Lee, Jews and Judaism in the United States: A 
Documentary History, New York: Behrman House (1983) 

Reeves, Thomas C., The Life and Times of Joe McCarthy, New 
York: Madison Books (1997) 

Regis, Ed, Who Got Einstein’s Office? Eccentricity and Genius at 
the Institute for Advanced Study, London: Penguin (1989) 

Rhodes, Richard, The Making of the Atom Bomb, London: 
Penguin (1988) 

—Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb, New York: 
Touchstone (1996) 

Ribalow, Harold U. (ed.), Autobiographies of American Jews, 
Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America 
(1965) 

Richardson, R. Dan, Comintern Army: The International Brigades 
and the Spanish Civil War, Lexington: University Press of 
Kentucky (1982) 

Ridley, B. K., Time, Space and Things, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press (1994) 

Rigden, John S., Rabi: Scientist and Citizen, New York: Basic 
Books (1987) 

Riley, Thomas A., “Goethe and Parker Cleaveland,” PMLA, Vol. 
67, No. 4, 350-74 (June 1952) 

Robertson, Peter, The Early Years: The Niels Bohr Institute 1921- 
1930, Copenhagen: Akademisk (1979) 


Romerstein, Herbert and Breindel, Eric, The Venona Secrets: 
Exposing Soviet Espionage and America’s Traitors, Washington 
D.C.: Regnery (2001) 

Roosevelt, Theodore, The Winning of the West: An Account of the 
Exploration and Settlement of Our Country from the Alleghanies 
to the Pacific (four volumes), New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons 
(1889-96) 

Rose, Paul Lawrence, Heisenberg and the Nazi Atomic Bomb 
Project: A Study in German Culture, Berkeley: University of 
California Press (1998) 

Rotblat, Joseph, “Leaving the Bomb Project,” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, 41 (7), 16-19 (1985) 

Rouzé, Michel, Robert Oppenheimer: The Man and His Theories, 
London: Souvenir Press (1964) 

Rovere, Richard Halworth, Senator Joe McCarthy, Berkeley: 
University of California Press (1996) 

Royal, Denise, The Story of J. Robert Oppenheimer, New York: St. 
Martin’s Press (1969) 

Rozental, Stefan (ed.), Niels Bohr: His Life and Work as Seen by 
His Friends and Colleagues, Amsterdam: North Holland (1967) 

Russell, Bertrand, The ABC of Atoms, London: Kegan Paul 
(1923) 

Rutherford, Ernest, “The scattering of a and & particles by 
matter and the structure of the atom,” Philosophical Magazine, 
21, 669-88 (1911) 

—“Bakerian Lecture. Nuclear Constitution of Atoms,” 
Proceedings of the Royal Society Series A, Vol. 97, 374-400 
(1920) 

—“The Structure of the Radioactive Atom and the Origin of 
the Alpha Rays,” Philosophical Magazine, 22, 580-605 (1927) 

—“ Address of the President,” Proceedings of the Royal Society 
Series A, Vol. 117, 300-16 (1928) 

—“ The Structure of Atomic Nuclei,” Proceedings of the Royal 
Society Series A, Vol. 136, 735-62 (1932) 

Ryder, Arthur W., Original Poems Together with Translations from 
the Sanskrit, Berkeley: University of California Press (1939) 

—The Bhagavad Gita 1929, Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger 
(2004) 

Sachs, Emanie, Red Damask: A Study of Nurture and Nature, New 
York: Harper & Brothers (1927) 


Schecter, Jerold and Leona, Sacred Secrets: How Soviet 
Intelligence Operations Changed American History, Washington 
D.C.: Brassey’s (2002) 

Schrecker, Ellen, The Age of McCarthyism: A Brief History with 
Documents, Boston: Bedford (1994) 

— Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press (1998) 

Schrodinger, Erwin, “Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem,” 
Annalen der Physik, 4 (79), 361-76, 489-527; 4 (80), 437-90; 
4 (81), 109-39 (1926a, 1926b, 1926c, 1926d) 

—“An Undulatory Theory of the Mechanics of Atoms and 
Molecules,” Physical Review, Vol. 28, No. 6, 1049-70 (1926e) 

— Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, Providence, Rhode 
Island: American Mathematical Society, 3rd edition (1982) 

Schweber, S. S., “The Empiricist Temper Regnant: Theoretical 
Physics in the United States 1920-1950,” Historical Studies in 
the Physical and Biological Sciences, 17, 1, 55-98, (1986a) 

—“Shelter Island, Pocono, and Oldstone: The Emergence of 
American Quantum Electrodynamics after World War II,” 
Osiris, 2nd Series, Vol. 2, 265-302 (1986b) 

—QED and the Men Who Made It, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press (1994) 

——TIn the Shadow of the Bomb: Bethe, Oppenheimer, and the 
Moral Responsibility of the Scientist, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press (2000) 

—Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius, 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press (2008) 

Schwinger, Julian (ed.), Selected Papers on Quantum 
Electrodynamics, New York: Dover (1958) 

— “Quantum Electrodynamics—An Individual View,” Journal 
de Physique, Colloque C8, Supplement 12 (43), 409-23 
(1982) 

—“Tomonaga Sin-Itiro: A Memorial—Two Shakers of 
Physics,” Lecture Notes in Physics, 746, 27-42 (2008) 

Seaborg, Glenn, Adventures in the Atomic Age: From Watts to 
Washington, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux (2001) 

Segré, Emilio, Enrico Fermi: Physicist, Chicago: Chicago 
University Press (1972) 

—A Mind Always in Motion: The Autobiography of Emilio Segré, 
Berkeley: University of California Press (1993) 


Serber, Robert, “Particle Physics in the 1930s: A View from 
Berkeley,” in Brown and Hoddeson (1983), 206-21 

—The Los Alamos Primer. The First Lectures on How to Build an 
Atomic Bomb, Berkeley: University of California Press (1992) 

—Peace and War: Reminiscences of a Life on the Frontiers of 
Science, New York: Columbia University Press (1998) 

Sherwin, Martin J., A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the 
Grand Alliance, New York: Vintage (1977) 

Shipman, Harry L., Black Holes, Quasars, & the Universe, Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin (1976) 

Sibley, Katherine A. S., Red Spies in America: Stolen Secrets and 
the Dawn of the Cold War, Lawrence: University of Kansas 
Press (2004) 

Siegmund-Schultze, Reinhard, Mathematicians Fleeing from Nazi 
Germany: Individual Fates and Global Impact, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press (2009) 

Sime, Ruth Lewin, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics, Berkeley: 
University of California Press (1996) 

Simmons, Marc, Two Southwesterners: Charles Lummis and 
Amado Chaves, Austin, Texas: San Marcos Press (1968) 

—The Little Lion of the Southwest: A Life of Manuel Antonio 
Chaves, Chicago: The Swallow Press (1973) 

Simoni, Robert D., Hill, Robert L. and Vaughan, Martha, 
“Protein Chemistry and the Development of Allosterism: 
Jeffries Wyman,” The Journal of Biological Chemistry, Vol. 
277, No. 46, 76-8 (Nov. 15, 2002) 

Smith, Alice Kimball, A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’ 
Movement in America, 1945-47, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press (1965) 

Smith, Alice Kimball and Weiner, Charles (eds.) [S & W], Robert 
Oppenheimer: Letters and Recollections, Stanford: Stanford 
University Press (1980) 

Smith, G. S., D. S. Mirsky: A Russian-English Life 1890-1939, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press (2000) 

Smyth, Henry DeWolf, Atomic Energy for Military Purposes: The 
Office Report on the Development of the Atomic Bomb Under the 
Auspices of the United States Government, 1940-1945, 
Stanford: Stanford University Press (1989) 

Snow, C. P., The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1959) 


—The Physicists, London: Macmillan (1982) 

Sommerfeld, Arnold, Atombau und Spektrallinien, Braunschweig: 
Friedrich Vieweg und Sohn (1919), translated as Atomic 
Structure and Spectral Lines, New York: Dutton (1923) 

Sopka, Katherine R., Quantum Physics in America 1920-1935, 
New York: Arno Press (1980) 

Sorin, Gerald, A Time for Building: The Third Migration 1880- 
1920, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press (1992) 

Stern, Philip M., The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial, 
London: Rupert Hart-Davis (1971) 

Stoff, Michael B., Fanton, Jonathan F. and Williams, R. Hal 
(eds.), The Manhattan Project: A Documentary Introduction to 
the Atomic Age, New York: McGraw-Hill (1991) 

Strauss, Lewis L., Men and Decisions, New York: Doubleday 
(1962) 

Sudoplatov, Pavel and Anatoli, Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an 
Unwanted Witness—A Soviet Spymaster, Boston: Little Brown 
(1994) 

Szasz, Ferenc Morton, The Day the Sun Rose Twice: The Story of 
the Trinity Site Nuclear Explosion July 16, 1945, Albuquerque: 
University of New Mexico Press (1984) 

Taylor, John, Black Holes: The End of the Universe?, London: 
Souvenir Press (1973) 

Teller, Edward, Memoirs: A Twentieth-Century Journey in Science 
and Politics, Oxford: Perseus (2001) 

Thomson, George Paget, J. J. Thomson and the Cavendish 
Laboratory in His day, London: Nelson (1964a) 

— J. J. Thomson: Discoverer of the Electron, London: Nelson 
(1964b) 

Thomson, J. J., “Cathode rays,” Philosophical Magazine, Vol. 44, 
293 (1897) 

Thorne, Kip, Black Holes and Time Warps, New York: Norton 
(1994) 

Thorpe, Charles, Oppenheimer: The Tragic Intellect, London: 
University of Chicago Press (2006) 

Tractenberg, Alan, The Incorporation of America: Culture & 
Society in the Gilded Age, New York: Hill & Wang (1982) 

Treiman, Sam, The Odd Quantum, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press (1999) 

Truman, Harry S., Years of Decision, New York: Doubleday 


(1955) 

Turner, Louis A., “Nuclear Fission,” Reviews of Modern Physics, 
12, 1-29 (1940) 

Twitchell, Ralph Emerson, The Leading Facts of New Mexican 
History, Vol. II, Santa Fe, New Mexico: Sunstone Press (2007) 

Ulam, S. M., Adventures of a Mathematician, Berkeley: 
University of California Press (1991) 

United States Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of Hearing before Personnel 
Security Board, Washington D.C., April 12, 1954 Through May 
6, 1954 [ITMO], Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing 
Office (1954) 

Urey, Harold, Brickwedde, F. G., and Murphy, G. N., “A 
Hydrogen Isotope of Mass 2,” Physical Review, 39, 164-5 
(1932) 

VanDeMark, Brian, Pandora’s Keeper: Nine Men and the Atomic 
Bomb, New York: Little, Brown (2003) 

Waerden, B. L. van der (ed.), Sources of Quantum Mechanics, 
New York: Dover (1968) 

Wallace, Henry A., The Price of Vision: The Diary of Henry A. 
Wallace, 1942-1946, Boston: Houghton Mifflin (1973) 

Weinberg, Steven, Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the 
Fundamental Laws of Nature, London: Hutchinson (1993) 

Weiner, Charles, “1932—Moving into the New Physics,” Physics 
Today, 25 (5), 40-2 (1972) 

—“ Physics Today and the Spirit of the Forties,” Physics 
Today, 23-8 (May 1973) 

Weisgall, Jonathan M., Operation Crossroads: The Atomic Tests at 
Bikini Atoll, Washington D.C.: Naval Institute Press (1994) 

Weisskopf, V. F., Physics in the Twentieth Century: Selected 
Essays, Cambridge: MIT Press (1972) 

Wells, Samuel F., “The Origins of Massive Retaliation,” Political 
Science Quarterly, Vol. 96, No. 1, 31- 52 (1981) 

West, Nigel, Mortal Crimes. The Greatest Theft in History: Soviet 
Penetration of the Manhattan Project, New York: Enigma Books 
(2004) 

Wheeler, John Archibald, Geons, Black Holes, and Quantum 
Foam: A Life in Physics, New York: Norton (2000) 

Wheeler, John Archibald and Zurek, Wajciech Hubert (eds.), 
Quantum Theory and Measurement, Princeton: Princeton 


University Press (1983) 

White, Michael, Rivals: Conflict as the Fuel of Science, London: 
Secker & Warburg (2001) 

Wilson, D., Rutherford: Simple Genius, London: Hodder & 
Stoughton (1983) 

Wilson, R. R., “Hiroshima: The Scientists” Social and Political 
Reaction,” Proceedings, American Philosophical Society, Vol. 
140, No. 3, 350-7 (1996) 

Wolverton, Mark, A Life in Twilight: The Final Years of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer, New York: St. Martin’s Press (2008) 

Woolf, Virginia, A Woman’s Essays. Selected Essays: Volume One, 
London: Penguin, 1992 

Wright, Harold (ed.), University Studies: Cambridge 1933, 
London: Nicholson and Watson (1933) 

Yang, Chen Ning, “The law of parity conservation and other 
symmetry laws of physics,” Nobel Lectures, Physics 1942- 
1962, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing Company (1964) 

York, Herbert F., The Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller and the 
Superbomb, San Francisco: W.H. Freeman (1976) 

Yukawa, Hideki, “On the Interaction of Elementary Particles I,” 
Proceedings of the Physical and Mathematical Society of Japan, 
17, 48-57 (1935) 

—“Models and Methods in the Meson Theory,” Reviews of 
Modern Physics, 21 (3), 474-9 (1949) 


INTERVIEWS 


American Institute of Physics (AIP) 


Luis Alvarez, interviewed by Charles Weiner and Barry Richman, 
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory (Feb. 15, 1967): http:// 
www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4483_2.html 

Robert Bacher, interviewed by Finn Aaserud at the California 
Institute of Technology (Feb. 13, 1986): http://www.aip.org/ 
history/ohilist/27979.html 

Felix Bloch, interviewed by Charles Weiner, Stanford University, 
California (Aug. 15, 1968): http://www.aip.org/history/ 
ohilist/4510.html 

Edward U. Condon, interviewed by Charles Weiner in Boulder, 
Colorado Oct. 17, 1967, April 27, 1968 and Sep. 11, 1973): 
http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4997_1.html 


William A. Fowler, interviewed by Charles Weiner, Caltech (June 
8, 1972), Sessions I-V: http://www.aip.org/history/ 
ohilist/4608_1.html 

Otto Frisch, interviewed by: 

1. Thomas S. Kuhn, Cavendish Laboratory (May 8, 1963): 1. 
http://www. aip.org/history/ohilist/4615.html 

2. Charles Weiner, American Institute of Physics, New York City 
(May 3, 1967): http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4616.html 

Wendell H. Furry, interviewed by Charles Weiner in Copenhagen 
(Aug. 9, 1971): http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/24324.html 

Oskar Klein, interviewed by Thomas S. Kuhn and John L. 
Heilbron in Copenhagen (Sep. 25, 1962-July 16, 1963): http:// 
www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4709_1.html 

Willis Lamb, interviewed by Dr. Joan Bromberg in Tucson, 
Arizona (March 7, 1985): http://www.aip.org/history/ 
ohilist/27491_1.html 

Rossi Lomanitz, interviewed by Shawn Mullet in Hawaii 
(July 26-Aug. 18, 2001): http://www.aip.org/history/ 
ohilist/24703_1.html 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, interviewed by Thomas S. Kuhn in 
Princeton (Nov. 18, 1963): not on line 

Rudolf Peierls, interviewed by Charles Weiner in Seattle, 
Washington (Aug. 11, 12 and 13, 1969): http://www.aip.org/ 
history/ohilist/4816_1.html 

Melba Phillips, interviewed by Katherine Russell Sopka (Dec. 5, 
1977): http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4821.html 

Robert Serber, interviewed by: 

1. Charles Weiner and Gloria Lubkin at Columbia University (Feb. 
10, 1967): http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4878.html 

2. Frederick Fellows at Columbia University (Dec. 19, 1983): 
http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4880.html 

3. Anne Fitzpatrick in New York City (Nov. 26, 1996): http:// 
www.aip.org/history/ohilist/25100.html 


Caltech Archives 

Carl Anderson, interviewed by Harriett Lyle (Jan. 9-Feb. 8, 
1979): http://oralhistories.library.caltech.edu/89/ 

William A. Fowler, interviewed by John Greenberg and Carol 
Bugé (May 3, 1983-—May 31, 1984, Oct. 3, 1986) 

Frank Oppenheimer, interviewed by Judith R. Goodstein (Nov. 


16, 1984) 
Milton S. Plesset, interviewed by Carol Bugé (Dec. 8, 1981) 


Index 


Abelson, Phil 10.1, 10.2, 11.1 
Acheson, Dean 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5, 17.1, 17.2 
and “Acheson-Lilienthal Plan” 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4 
appoints Disarmament Panel 17.1, 17.2 
Ackroyd, Peter: T. S. Eliot 16.1 
Addis, Thomas 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 11.1 
Adler, Felix 
and Ethical Culture Society 1.1, 1.2, 1.3n, 1.4, 1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 
2:3, 8.1 
publishes Creed and Deed 1.1, 1.2 
conducts Seligman’s funeral service 1.1, and the Oppenheimers’ 
wedding service 1.2 
and “moral law” 1.1, 2.1 
on Americanization of Jewish immigrants 2.1, 9.1 
and World War I 2.1, 2.2, 10.1 
Adler, Samuel 
Advisory Committee on Uranium 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 
AEC see Atomic Energy Commission 
Alamagordo: “Trinity” test site n 
ALAS see Association of Los Alamos Scientists 
Albuquerque 2.1, 2.2 
La Glorieta 2.1, 3.1 
Alien Registration Act (Smith Act) (1940) 
Allison, Helen (née Campbell) 7.1, 8.1 
Allison, Samuel K. 7.1, 8.1, 10.1, 11.1, 13.1, 14.1, 17.1, 18.1, 
19.1 
alpha decay n 
alpha particles 5.1n, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 10.1 
alpha radiation 5.1n, 8.1 
Alsop, Joseph and Stewart: “We Accuse!” 19.1, 19.2 
Alvarez, Luis W.: 
hears about nuclear fission 
and RO’s reaction 
his cyclotron results 


leaves Berkeley 
invents electric detonator 13.1, 13.2 
and Hiroshima bomb 14.1, 14.2 
sends letter to Japanese physicist 
lobbies for crash program to develop H-bomb 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
and RO’s attitude 17.1, 17.2 
at RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 19.1 
American Hebrew (newspaper) 1.1, 4.1 
American Institute of Physics 
RO’s address 
American Physical Society 6.1, 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 15.1, 
15.2, 16.1, 16.2, 17.1, 19.1 
Anderson, Carl D.: 
as RO’s student 
and discovery of the positron 8.1, 8.2 
researches cosmic rays 9.1, 9.2 
finds new particle 
at Caltech conference (1948) 
Anderson, Herbert 11.1, 14.1, 15.1 
Anderson, Sir John (later Lord Waverley) 13.1, 13.2 
Anderson, Robert 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 
summer schools 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 16.1 
Annalen der Physik 
anti-Semitism 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 4.1, 5.1, 10.1 
at Harvard 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 5.1 
Nazi Germany 6.1, 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 13.1 
Armijo, Manuel 2.1, 3.1 
Arneson, Gordon 
Aron, Raymond 
Asimov, Isaac: Races and People 4.1 
Association of Los Alamos Scientists (ALAS) 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 
15.1;.15.2 
Association of Oak Ridge Scientists 15.1, 15.2 
Astors, the 1.1, 1.2 
atom, splitting the (Cockcroft and Walton) 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 10.1 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) 15.1, 15.2 
and FBI suspicions of RO 
and Strauss 17.1, 17.2 
and H-bomb program 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6 


rejects idea of second laboratory 17.1, 17.2 

chaired by Strauss 17.1, 17.2 

and renewal of RO’s contract 

and RO’s security hearing ff. 

Seaborg as chairman 

see also General Advisory Committee 
Attlee, Clement 14.1, 15.1 
Aydelotte, Frank 


Baade, Walter 9.1, 9.2 
Bacher, Robert 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 13.1, 
13.2,,15.1,. 15.2, 17.1, 1722, 19.1 
Bainbridge, Kenneth 10.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 17.1 
Baltic, SS 
barium 10.1, 10.2, 11.1 
Barnard College, New York 
Barnes, Joe 
Barnett, Lincoln 
Barnett, Shirley 13.1, 14.1 
Baruch, Bernard 15.1, 15.2 
“Baruch Plan” 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
BBC: Reith Lectures (RO) 18.1, 18.2 
Panorama 
Beams, Jesse W. 
Beaufort, Lady Margaret 
Beck, Guido 
Beecher, Henry Ward: “Gentile and Jew” 
Belmont, August 
Benesch, A. A. 
Berkeley, University of 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 9.2, 10.1 
RO’s “school” 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 10.1, 
10.2 
Radiation Laboratory (“Rad Lab”) 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 
103, 11.4, 11.2, 11,35, 11,4, 11,5, 12:1, 12.2, 12,3, 124, 
12.5, 131 17, 12 
and CP 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
and security 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 
and FBI 12.1, 12.2 
Berlin, Gerald 
Bern, Gregory C. 


Bernfeld, Siegfried 
Bernheim, Frederick 2.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4n, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 5.1 
RO to 
Bernheim, Mary (née Hare) 5.1 
Bernstein, Jeremy fm1.1, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1n, 9.1, 10.1, 13.1, 17.1, 
17.2, 18.1, 19.1, 19.2 
Rabi to 
Berolzheimer, Emil 
beryllium 5.1, 8.1, 10.1, 11.1, 13.1 
beta decay 8.1n, 8.2, 9.1n, 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 19.1, 19.2 
Fermi’s theory 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
beta radiation 8.1, 9.1 
Bethe, Hans 8.1, 11.1 
astrophysics research 9.1, 11.1, 15.1 
works on nuclear fission 
hears Bohr’s announcement on nuclear fission 
meets RO 
comes to Berkeley 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
disagrees with Teller’s calculations 
at Los Alamos 11.1, 11.2, 12.1 
and Feynman 12.1, 12.2, 16.1 
fears Germany has new weapon 
sees Bohr’s drawing of reactor 
and implosion program 13.1, 13.2 
publishes paper with RO on electron scattering 
surprised by RO’s anti-Soviet views 
at Shelter Island Conference (1947) 
excited by Schwinger’s theory 
and Dyson 16.1, 16.2, 16.3 
praises Feynman’s theory 
appalled by RO’s disloyalty to Peters 
supports Frank Oppenheimer 
and H-bomb program 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 17.7, 
17.8 
and Griggs 
at RO’s hearing 
awarded Fermi Prize 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
speaks at RO’s memorial service 
awarded Nobel Prize (1967) 


on Fuchs 
on Lawrence 10.1, 10.2 
on RO 8.1, 10.1, 10.2, 13.1 
on Rabi 
Bethe, Rose 
Bhabha, Homi J. 
Bhagavad Gita 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 13.1, 13.2, 17.1, 19.1 
Bier, Marcy 
Bikini Atoll: 
bomb tests 15.1, 18.1 
Bird, K. and Sherwin, M.: American Prometheus 15.2 fm1.2 
Birge, Raymond T. 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 10.1 
RO’s letters to 15.1, 15.2 
Birkhoff, George 
Aesthetic Measure 
Birmingham, Stephen: “Our Crowd” 1.1, 1.2 
Birmingham University 10.1, 10.2, 16.1 
1948 conference 
Black, Algernon 4.1, 4.2 
“black holes” 9.1, 10.1, 10.2 
Blackett, Constanza (née Bayon; “Pat”) 5.1 
Blackett, Patrick (later Baron) 5.1, 5.2 
and Kapitza 
photographs nuclear transformation process 5.1, 10.1 
at Gottingen 5.1, 5.2 
and RO 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 
supports general strike 
writes “The Craft of Experimental Physics” 
and discovery of the positron 8.1, 8.2 
and Heisenberg 
wins Nobel Prize (1948) 
Blair, Clay see Shepley, James 
Bloch, Felix 7.1, 8.1, 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 10.2, 11.1 
on RO 
Blunt, Anthony 11.1, 13.1 
Bock, Frederick 
Bohm, David Joseph 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 
12.7;-12.8, 12.9, 17.1; 17.2, 18.1 
Bohr, Aage 13.1n, 13.2, 13.3 
Bohr, Niels 4.1, 5.1, 7.1 


works with Rutherford 
produces new model of atom 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 
becomes member of Royal Society 
and RO 5.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 
and Einstein 
announces “principle of complementarity” 
defends new quantum mechanics theory 
and Pauli’s work on beta radiation 
skeptical about Dirac’s theory 8.1, and Lawrence’s results 8.2 
discussions with RO at Caltech 
sent RO’s reformulation of Dirac’s theory 
and Frisch and Meitner’s paper on fission 
works out theory of fission with Wheeler 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
refuses to keep fission research secret 
convinced of impossibility of bomb 10.1, 13.1 
under surveillance 
meetings with Heisenberg and Jensen 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
leaves Denmark for Britain 13.1, 13.2 
at Los Alamos 13.1, 13.2 
on “complementarity” of atomic bombs 13.1, 15.1 
has disappointing meeting with Churchill 
Roosevelt sympathetic to his ideas 
at Institute for Advanced Study 
visited by the Oppenheimers in Copenhagen 
agrees to TV interview 
70th birthday tribute from RO 
and Chevalier 
death 
RO’s memoir of 
RO’s lectures on 19.1, 19.2 
Borden, William (Bill) 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6 
letter to Hoover 18.1, 18.2, 18.3 
and RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2 
Born, Heidi 
Born, Max 4.1, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2 
and Blackett 5.1, 5.2 
and Heisenberg 5.1, 5.2 
and Schrodinger’s wave theory 
delivers paper at Kapitza Club 
impressed by RO 


and Condon 6.1, 8.1, 8.2 
with RO at Gottingen 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7 
declines offer to work in U.S. 
at Como conference (1927) 
at Solvay Congress (1927) 
thrown out of Gottingen 
at Cambridge 
at Edinburgh 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
articles: 
“On Quantum Mechanics II” 
“On the Quantum Mechanics of Collisions of Atoms and 
Electrons” 5.1, 6.1 
“On the Quantum Theory of Molecules” (with RO) 
“Physical Aspects of Quantum Mechanics” 
Boyce, Joseph 
Boyd, Julian 
Boyd, William Clouser 4.1, 4.2n, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 7.1 
Bradbury, Norris 13.1, 13.2, 15.1, 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 18.1, 19.1 
Bradley, General Omar 
Brady, James 
Brady, Mildred Edie 
Brady, Robert A. 
RO to 
Bragg, William L. 
Brahe, Tycho: De Nova Stella 9.1 
Braithwaite, Richard 
Bransten, Louise 
Breit, Gregory 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 
Brickwedde, Ferdinand 
Bridges, Calvin 
Bridgman, Percy 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2 
Briggs, Lyman 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 11.1, 11.2 
British Association for the Advancement of Science 5.1, 6.1 
British University Mission 
Brode, Bernice 10.1, 19.1 
Brodeur, Arthur 
Broglie, Louis de 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2 
Browder, Earl 9.1, 10.1, 11.1 
“What Is Communism?” 


Brown, Frederick W. 
Brownell, Herbert, Attorney General 
Bruner, Jerome: A Study of Thinking 19.1 
Buchta, J. W. 
Buck, Pearl 
Buckley, Oliver 17.1, 17.2 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 15.1, 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4n, 17.5, 
18.1, 18.2, 19.1 
Burchett, Wilfred 
Burden, William 
Burgess, Guy 11.1, 13.1 
Bush, Lieutenant H. C. 
Bush, Vannevar: 
heads NDRC 
appoints reviewing committee 
and MAUD findings 10.1, 11.1, 11.2 
meets Oliphant 
recommends centrifuge plant to Roosevelt 
and S-1 report 
recommends Parsons for Los Alamos 
meeting with RO 14.1, 14.2 
and May-Johnson Bill 
on Acheson’s committee 
unconcerned about FBI file on RO 
publishes “Trends in American Science” 
on Disarmament Panel 
tells Strauss of RO’s clearance suspension 
at RO’s hearing 
Byrnes, James, Secretary of State 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 
15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5Cairncross, John 
Cairncross, John 11.1, 13.1 
Caltech (California Institute of Technology) 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 
8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 8.10, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 10.1, 
10.2, 10.3, 14.1,.15.1, 15.2, 16.1,.17.1; 17.2 
“Calutrons” 10.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 13.1, 13.2 
Calvert, Captain 
Cambridge University: 
Christ’s 4.1, 4.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 
King’s 
St, John’s 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 6.1, 7.1 


Kapitza Club 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 6.1 
V2V Club (“Del Squared V Club”) 5.1, 5.2 
see also Cavendish Laboratory 
“Cambridge Five” 11.1, 11.2, 13.1 
Cambridge Philosophical Society 
Proceedings 5.1, 5.2, 10.1, 15.1 
Camp Koenig, Lake Ontario 2.1, 2.2 
Campbell 
Cario, Dr. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 
Carlson, J. Franklin (Frank) 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 
9.1 
death and RO’s memorial lecture 
Carnegie Institution, Washington 
Caron, Robert 
Carstairs, Morris 
Case, Kenneth 16.1, 19.1 
Cassidy, David: J. Robert Oppenheimer ... fm1.3, 8.1, 9.1 
Cather, Willa 
Death Comes for the Archbishop 
A Lost Lady 
“Scandal” 
Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 
5.8, 5.9, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 84, 8.5, 9.1, 10.1 
Cayley, Arthur 
Chadwick, James 
discovers neutrons 5.1, 8.1 
at Royal Society meeting 
skeptical about Lawrence’s results 
wins Nobel Prize (1935) 
and possibility of atomic bomb 
disgusted by U.S. scientists’ lack of secrecy 11.1, 14.1, 14.2 
urges Bohr to leave Denmark for England 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
joins Manhattan Project 13.1, 13.2 
and Rotblat 
chain reactions 8.1, 10.1, 10.2 
first 
Chambers, Whittaker 
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan 
Chaplin, Charles 
Chaves, Amado 3.1, 4.1 


Chaves, Kate Nichols (née Foster) 3.1 
Chaves, Manuel 
Cherniss, Harold F. 8.1, 8.2, 16.1 
Cherwell, Lord (Frederick Lindemann) 10.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
Chevalier, Barbara 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 11.1 
Chevalier, Haakon 
meets RO 
joins CP unit with him 9.1, 10.1 
and Schneiderman 
and FBI surveillance 10.1, 11.1 
invited to Pasadena by Oppenheimers 
under suspicion 11.1, 12.1 
approached by Eltenton 11.1, 12.1 
farewell dinner with RO 
and RO’s statements 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4 
sends “SOS call” to RO 
continues to be under FBI surveillance 
writes to RO after Hiroshima 14.1, 14.2 
visits Oppenheimers 
interviewed by FBI 15.1, 15.2 
visited in Paris by RO 
and RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4 
and Nichols’ letter 18.1, 19.1 
asks RO for explanation 
his The Man Who Would Be God flops 19.1 
warns RO he is going to write the true story (Oppenheimer: The 
Story of a Friendship) 19.1 
on RO 5.1, 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 15.1, 15.2 
Chicago, University 6.1, 9.1, 11.1, 11.2 
“Met Lab” 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5, 11.6, 11.7, 12.1, 12.2, 
1. OA ASD, Ve. 2 3, Lol 
Christian Century, The (magazine) 
Christy, Robert 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 13.1, 19.1 
Church, Peggy Pond 
Churchill, Winston 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 11.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 
13.5; 13.6; 14.1, 15.4, 15.2, 17.1 
Clark, Tom C., Attorney General 12.1, 15.1, 15.2 
Cleveland, Grover, U.S. President 
Cockcroft, John 5.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 10.1, 10.2 
Cohn, Roy 


Columbia, University of (NYC) 1.1, 1.2, 8.1, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 
Lh, 11.2; 1$.1; 13.2, 13.3, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3; 19.1, 19.2 
Jewish students 4.1, 4.2 
Communist Party, U.S. 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7, 9.8, 10.1, 
10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8, 10.9, 10.10, 10.11, 
114, 11-3 115, 344: 121 
Como: International Physics Congress (1927) 
Comptes rendus (journal) 8.1, 8.2 
Compton, Arthur 5.1, 6.1, 6.2 
meets RO 
at Como conference 
at Solvay Congress (1927) 
disputes cosmic rays with Millikan 
heads Bush’s committee on atomic bomb 10.1, 11.1 
meetings with scientists 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 
disappointed in engineers 
reports on possibility of atom bomb 11.1, 11.2 
as member of S-1 
oversees construction of first nuclear reactor 11.1, 11.2 
at Chicago “Met Lab” 
and Breit 11.1, 11.2 
impressed by RO 
his recommendations approved by Roosevelt 
meeting with RO to discuss dangers of atomic bomb 
and Groves’s visit 
not told about Los Alamos 
watches first chain reaction 
discusses plutonium production with RO 
and Segré’s results 
as member of Scientific Advisory Panel 
attitude to use of bomb 
and May-Johnson Bill 
thinks Russian possession of bomb “problematical” 
Compton, Elias 
Compton, Karl T. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4 
Compton, William 
Conant, James: 
heads NDRC 10.1, 10.2 
and discussions on atomic bomb production 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 
11.2 


reprimands Lawrence for telling RO of bomb 
as chairman of S-1 11.1, 11.2 
puts Lansdale in charge of security at Berkeley 11.1, 12.1 
and RO 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5 
told by Compton of first chain reaction 
and implosion method 12.1, 13.1 
and Lewis committee 
and Trinity 
and May-Johnson Bill 
on Acheson’s committee 
on GAC 
unconcerned by FBI file on RO 
opposed to “Super” 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 17.7 
gives up serving on GAC 
at RO’s hearing 
Condon, Edward 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 
at Berkeley 8.1, 8.2 
at Gottingen 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 8.1, 8.2 
and RO 
leaves to work under Sommerfeld 
inspires Melba Phillips 
publishes article on “quantum tunneling” 
as associate director of Los Alamos 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4 
opposes May-Johnson Bill 14.1, 15.1 
appalled by RO’s article on Peters 
influences RO 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
Condon, Emilie 
Congress for Cultural Freedom 5.1, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
Encounter 19.1, 19.2n 
Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences: Transactions 4.1 
Consodine, Major William 
Conversi, Marcello 15.1, 16.1 
Copenhagen: Bohr’s institute 5.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 10.1 
Corben, Herbert 
Corbin, Austin 
Cornell University 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 8.1, 11.1, 15.1, 15.2, 16.1, 16.2, 
16.3 
cosmic rays 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 9.1, 9.2, 
10.1,,.10,2, 15.1, 15.2; 15.3, 16.1, 171, 19.1 


Coster-Mullen, John 
Coudert, Senator F. R. 
Council for Assisting Refugee Academics 
Courant, Ernest 
Courant, Hans 
Courant, Richard 6.1, 19.1 
Crease, Robert 17.1, 18.1, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
Critchfield, Charles 12.1, 13.1 
Crowther, James: Molecular Physics 4.1 
Curie, Iréne see Joliot-Curie, Iréne 
Curie, Marie 6.1, 7.1n 
Curtis, Howard J. 15.1, 15.2 
cyclotrons 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 11.1, 11.2, 
113,114 
Japanese 


Daghlian, Henry K. 14.1, 14.2 
Daily Herald 
Daily Mirror 
Daily Worker 10.1, 10.2 
Dallett, Joe 
Dancoff, Sidney 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 16.1, 16.2 
Darrow, Karl 
Darwin, Charles 
David, B. Edmund 
Davies, Watson 
Davis, Nuel Pharr: Lawrence & Oppenheimer 5.1, 5.2, 8.1, 11.1, 
13.1 
Dean, Gordon 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 17.7, 17.8, 17.9, 
18.1, 19.1 
de Silva, Captain Peer: 
suspects RO 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 18.1 
summarizes case against him 
told about Chevalier 
reports conversation with RO 12.1, 17.1, 17.2 
memo on RO and Bohm 12.1, 12.2 
Desjardins, Paul 
deuterium 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 13.1, 17.1, 
172, 172A 
deuterons 8.1, 9.1, 10.1 


Deutsch, Monroe: RO to 14.1, 15.1 
Didisheim, Jane (later Kayser) 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 4.1 
Diebner, Kurt 
Dirac, Margit (née Wigner) 8.1 
Dirac, Paul 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 8.1 
and de Broglie’s ideas 
and RO 5.1, 5.2, 6.1 
and Heisenberg’s theory 
publishes papers on quantum mechanics 
and Schrodinger’s theory 
submits Ph.D. thesis 
and RO’s first paper 5.1, 8.1 
at Gottingen 6.1, 6.2 
produces papers on “transformation theory” and QED 6.1, 7.1 
as Ehrenfest’s guest in Leiden 
at Solvay Congress (1927) 
on American physicists 
made fellow of St. John’s, Cambridge 
introduces “Dirac equation” 
and Anderson’s discovery of the positron 8.1, 8.2 
becomes Lucasian Professor of Mathematics 
helps Blackett and Occhialini 
disillusioned 
his theory investigated by Plesset and RO 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, and 
reformulated by RO and Furry 8.4 
and Ehrenfest’s suicide 
awarded Nobel Prize (1933) 5.1, 8.1 
at Institute for Advanced Study 8.1, 16.1, 16.2 
marriage 
opposed to Schwinger’s theory 
articles: 
“The Fundamental Equations of Quantum Mechanics” 
The Principles of Quantum Mechanics 8.1, 10.1 
“Quantum Mechanics” 
“Quantum Mechanics and a Preliminary Investigation of the 
Hydrogen Atom” 
“Theory of the Positron” 
“Dirac equation” 7.1, 8.1 
Donne, John 9.1, 13.1 
Doyle, Bernadette 12.1, 12.2 


Dresden, bombing of (1945) 
Du Bos, Charles 
DuBridge, Lee 15,1, 16.1, 17.1, 17.2, 17,3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 17.7, 
17.8, 17.9, 18.1 
Dudley, Colonel W. H. 
Duffield, Priscilla 
Dulles, Allen W. 17.1, 17.2, 18.1 
Dulles, John Foster 17.1, 17.2, 19.1 
“A Policy of Boldness” 
Dunning, John 
Dyson, Freeman: 
impresses RO and Pais 
on Schwinger 16.1, 16.2 
on Tomonaga 
obsessed with new QED 
at Ann Arbor summer school 
and Feynman 
publishes “The Radiation Theories of Tomonaga, Schwinger 
and Feynman” 8.1, 10.1, 16.1 
shocked by RO’s change of attitude towards Schwinger’s theory 
relations with RO 16.1, 16.2, 19.1, 19.2 
and Eliot 
chooses to work with Peierls 16.1, 16.2 
becoming “a Big Shot” 
attends American Physical Society annual meeting with RO 
at Pocono conference 
on RO 16.1, 19.1 
fails to win Nobel Prize 
edits special issue of Reviews of Modern Physics for RO’s 60th 
birthday 19.1 
and RO’s illness 
Dyson, George 


Eaton, Ralph 

Economist, The 15.1, 18.1 

Edsall, John 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 
Zul 

Eger, Clara (née Binswanger) 1.1 

Eger, David 

Ehrenfest, Paul 7.1, 8.1 


and RO 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7 
Born’s letters to 6.1, 6.2 
on Bohr 
Pauli to 
and Faust pastiche 8.1 
depression and suicide 7.1, 8.1, 8.2 
Ehrenfest, Wassik 
Einstein, Albert 
quantum theory of light (1905) 5.1, 5.2, 7.1 
as star of Solvay Congress (1911) 
and Pauli 7.1, 7.2 
supports de Broglie 
and Schrédinger 
and quantum mechanics debate 5.1, 6.1, 6.2 
on Ehrenfest 
visits Caltech 8.1, 8.2 
and RO 
and Flexner 
at Institute for Advanced Study 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 16.1, 19.1, 19.2 
angry with Birkhoff 
“completely cuckoo” 
alerts Belgians to importance of uranium 
his letter to Roosevelt 10.1, 11.1, 13.1, 19.1 
photographed with RO 
at Pais’s seminar 
criticized by RO 18.1, 19.1, 19.2 
and RO’s security hearing 18.1, 19.1 
refuses TV interview 
death 
Eisenhower, Dwight D., President 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 
17 6, 177,.17.8, 18:4, 19.1 
electrodynamics 
electromagnetic radiation 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1 
electrons 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 7.2, 
16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4, 16.5, 19.1 
Eliot, Charles 
Eliot, George 
Middlemarch 
Eliot, T. S. 5.1, 16.1 
The Criterion 


The Cocktail Party 
Ellanby, Boyd see Boyd, William 
Elliott, John 2.1, 2.2 
Eltenton, George 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7, 
12.8; 12:9; 12.10; T2511, 15.1; 15.2, 18.41, 18,2 
Engineering and Science Monthly 
Eniwetok Atoll, Marshall Islands 17.1, 17.2 
Epstein, Paul 
Epstein, Saul 
“Note on the Stimulated Decay of Negative Mesons” (with RO 
and Finkelstein) 
Ethical Culture School 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 
2.10; 2.11,.2.12;.3.1,; 4.4; 4.2 
Inklings (journal) 
The Light (play) 
Ethical Culture Society 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 2.1, 2.2, 
2.3, 4.1, 4.2 
Eugene Register-Guard 
Evans, Ward 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4 
Evening Star 
Everett, Cornelius 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
“exclusion principle” (Pauli) 


FAECT see Federation of Architects, Engineers, Chemists and 
Technicians 
Faraday, Michael 
Farmelo, Graham: The Strangest Man ... 8.1, 8.2 
Farrell, Brigadier General Thomas F. 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 
14.4 
“Fat Man” 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5, 13.6, see “Trinity Project” 
FBI: 
and CP members 9.1, 10.1 
starts investigating RO 10.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 
and Chevalier 
and Nelson 
ordered to close file on RO 
and Serbers 
informs Pash of Nelson-Weinberg conversation 12.1, 12.2 
and relationship with G-2 12.1, 12.2 
investigates scientists at Berkeley Rad Lab (“CINRAD”) 12.1, 


193 133 
taps Jean Tatlock’s phone 
and Lansdale 12.1, 12.2 
given Frank Oppenheimer’s name 
keeps Chevalier under close surveillance 
and Rotblat 
and Ted Hall 
surveillance of RO 8.1, 14.1, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5, 15.6 
interviews Chevalier 15.1, 15.2 
RO’s dossier sent to AEC 
and HUAC hearing 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 18.1 
and Teller 17.1, 17.2 
and Pitzer and Libby 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
continues to keep RO under surveillance 18.1, 18.2 
and RO’s hearing 
see also Hoover, J. Edgar 
Federation of Architects, Engineers, Chemists and Technicians 
(FAECT) 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4 
Feld, Bernard 
Ferguson, Sampson Noland 
Fergusson, Erna 2.1, 3.1, 4.1 
Our South West 2.1, 3.1 
Fergusson, Frances (née Keeley) 5.1 
Fergusson, Francis: 
family background 
friendship with RO 2.1, 2.2 
and Herbert Smith 
at Harvard 2.1, 4.1 
in “troika” with RO and Horgan 3.1, 4.1, 4.2 
and RO’s other friends at Harvard 4.1, 4.2 
sets up club 
receives Rhodes Scholarship for Oxford 4.1, 4.2 
critical of RO’s literary efforts 4.1, 4.2 
summers in New Mexico 4.1, 4.2 
encourages Wyman to befriend RO 
leaves for Oxford 
advised by Smith to help RO 
moves in elevated social circles 
on walking holiday with RO 
his “Account of the Adventures of RO in Europe” 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 


nearly strangled by RO 5.1, 5.2 
visits him at Cambridge 5.1, and at Perro Caliente 7.1 
invited to Institute by RO 
writes The Idea of a Theatre 16.1 
and Eliot 
last meeting with RO 
RO’s letters to and n, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 
5.1, 5.2, 5.5; 5.4, 5.5, 54, 5.7, 5.4, 5.9, 61, 6:2 
Fergusson, Harvey 2.1, 4.1, 4.2 
Fergusson, Harvey Butler 2.1, 2.2, 3.1 
Fergusson Act (1898) 
Fermi, Enrico: 
works with Bloch 8.1, and Segré 10.1, 10.2 
creates radioactive materials 
theory of beta decay 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
proposes name “neutrino” for Pauli’s neutron 
entertains Bohr in New York 
tries to warn government of dangers of chain reactions 
awarded Nobel Prize (1938) 
and work on nuclear reactor 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 11.2 
relocates to Chicago “Met Lab” 
opposed to secrecy 
builds reactor 11.1 and n, 13.1 
speaks to Teller of fusion bomb 
and Groves’ visit 
creates first chain reaction 
visits Los Alamos 
as member of Scientific Advisory Panel 
attitude to use of bomb 
and Trinity 
in favor of May-Johnson Bill 14.1, 15.1 
at Shelter Island Conference 
and Italian scientists 
opposes crash program for H-bomb 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
recommends U.S. negotiates with USSR 17.1, 17.2 
arrives at Los Alamos 
at RO hearing 
and posthumous award of Fermi Prize 
Fermi, Laura 
Feynman, Richard 12.1, 15.1 


contemptuous of security at Los Alamos 
as member of board 
on work at Los Alamos 12.1, 14.1 
presents “Feynman diagram” 15.1 and n, 16.1, 16.2 
and Schwinger 16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4, 16.5 
reformulates QED theory 8.1, 10.1, 15.1, 16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4 
and Dyson 16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4, 16.5, 16.6 
and RO 16.1, 16.2 
and Dirac 
theory praised by Bethe 
awarded Nobel prize (1965) 
at 12th Solvay Congress 
Finkelstein, Robert 
“Note on the Stimulated Decay of Negative Mesons” (with RO 
and Epstein) 
Finletter, Thomas 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 17.7 
Fischer, Louis 
fission, nuclear/fission bomb 10.1ff., 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 13.1, 
13. 2ff. 
Flanigan, Al 12.1, 12.2 
Flexner, Abraham 
Foldy, Leslie 
Folkoff, Isaac 9.1, 10.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
Foreign Affairs 
Fortune magazine 17.1, 17.2 
“The Hidden Struggle for the H-bomb” (Murphy) 
Forum magazine: “Race Prejudice at Summer Resorts” 
Fowler, Ralph 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 7.2 
report on RO 
Fowler, Willie 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 17.1, 19.1 
RO’s letters to 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 11.1 
France-Observateur 
Franck, James 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 8.1, 11.1, 11.2, 13.1, 13.2 
Franck Report 
Franco, General Francisco 9.1, 10.1 
Franfurter, Felix 13.1, 13.2 
Frankel, Stanley 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
Friedman, Cecilia (née Eger) 1.1 
Friedman, Louis 
Friedman, Max (Ken Manfred) 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 


17.1 
Friendly, Fred 19.1, 19.2 
Frisch, Otto 
works with Meitner on fission 10.1, 11.1, 13.1, 14.1, 14.2 
collaborates with Peierls on memorandum on Super-bomb 10.1, 
Lid, J2.1, 13.1, 13:2, 13.3 
Frost, Robert 
Fry, Roger 
Transformations 
Fuchs, Klaus 12.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 14.1, 17.1, 18.1 
Furry, Wendell 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 9.1, 13.1 
“On the Theory of the Electron and the Positive” (with RO) 
fusion/fusion bombs 9.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5, 17.1, 17.2, 
17.3, 17.4; 17.5; 17.6; 17.7, 17.8 


G-2 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4 
see also Pash, Lt. Colonel Boris 
GAC see General Advisory Committee 
Gad-Fly, The (Harvard journal) 
gamma radiation 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 12.1, 13.1 
Gamow, George 8.1, 10.1, 10.2 
Garrison, Lloyd 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5, 18.6, 18.7, 18.8, 
18.9, 18.10, 18.11, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
Gavin, General James M. 
Gell-Mann, Murray 
General Advisory Committee (to AEC) (GAC) 15.1, 15.2, 16.1, 
17.1, 17.2 
1949 meeting 
reports and recommendations 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
and Strauss 17.1, 17.2 
visits Los Alamos 
backs Ulam-Teller design 
and idea of second laboratory 17.1, 17.2 
and campaign to oust RO from 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, see security 
hearing under Oppenheimer, Robert 
General Strike (1926) 
Gercke, Achim 
Gerjuoy, Edward fm1.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
Giauque, William 
Gibbs, Josiah Willard: “On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous 


Substances” 
Gibney, Bob 
Gibney, Nancy 
Gide, André 
Goethe, Johann von: “Den Vereinigten Staaten” 
Gogh, Vincent van 
Gold, Harry 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 17.1 
Goldblatt, Lou 9.1, 9.2 
Goldman Sachs 
Goldmans, the 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 
Goppert, Maria 
Gottheil, Gustav 
Gottingen University 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2 
Goudsmit, Samuel 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 12.1, 12.2, 13.1, 15.1 
Graham, Captain Frank 
Graham, Loren R.: Moscow Stories 9.1 
Grant, General Ulysses 1.1, 17.1 
Gray, Gordon 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5, 19.1 
Green, Harold 
Greene, Priscilla 
Greenglass, David 13.1, 13.2, 17.1 
Greenglass, Ruth 
“Greenhouse” tests 17.1, 17.2 
Griffiths, Gordon 9.1, 9.2, 10.1 
Griffiths, Mary 
Griggs, David 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 17.7, 17.8, 17.9, 
18.1, 18.2, 19.1 
Groves, Colonel Leslie 
appointed to run Manhattan Project 11.1, 12.1 
visits major sites 
unimpressed by Lawrence 
won over by RO 
and choice of Los Alamos 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
appoints RO as director 11.1, 11.2 
chooses Lansdale to run security force 
and RO’s security clearance 12.1, 12.2 
derided by the scientists 
orders “compartmentalization” security policy 12.1, 12.2 
and Condon’s resignation 
and Parsons’ appointment 


and Pash and Lansdale’s views on RO 12.1, 12.2 
orders RO’s clearance 12.1, 12.2 
advises Truman that Rad Lab should be closed 
and RO’s refusal to name contact 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 
believes in RO’s loyalty 
gets Pash off RO’s case 
RO names Chevalier to 12.1, 12.2 
promises not to reveal Frank Oppenheimer’s name to FBI 
and Bohr 13.1, 13.2 
shocks Rotblat 
appalled by Segré’s results 
and implosion program 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5, 17.1 
and Special Engineering Detachment 
and “Trinity” 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
and bombing of Japan 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 
14.5, 14.6, 14.7 
and reports of radiation sickness 
and May-Johnson Bill 
presents RO with Army-Navy Award 
on Acheson’s committee 
and “Acheson-Lilienthal Plan” 15.1, 15.2 
vouches for RO’s loyalty 15.1, 17.1 
skeptical about Russian bomb 
testifies at RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2 
Guggenheim, Benjamin 
Guggenheim, William 
Guggenheims, the 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 
Gurney, Ronald 


Hahn, Otto 10.1, 14.1, 14.2 

Hale, George Ellery 

Hales, Peter Bacon: Atomic Spaces 11.1 

Hall, Elmer 8.1, 8.2 

RO to 

Hall, Harvey 8.1, 8.2 

Hall, Mary 

Hall, Theodore (“Ted”) 

Hampshire, Stuart 

Hanford, Washington 11.1n, 11.2, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 13.1, 15.1, 
ube za 


Harmon, Colonel J. M. 
Harper’s Magazine 19.1, 19.2 
Harrison, George 13.1, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3 
Harrison, Richard 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
Harrison, Wallace K. 
Harvard University 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 
Tits Bly S.2; 91, 9.2, 15,1 
Fogg Art Museum 
Jews 
Hound & Horn 
Standish Hall 
Liberal Club 
Harvard Crimson 
Harvey, William 
Hawking, Stephen 
Hawkins, David 4.1, 12.1, 12.2, 13.1, 13.2, 17.1, 18.1 
Hearst, William Randolph 
heavy water 
Heilbron, J. L. and Seidel, R. W.: Lawrence and His Laboratory 
10.1 
Heisenberg, Werner 5.1, 5.2 
and formulation of quantum mechanics 5.1, 5.2, 8.1 
and Schrodinger’s theory 
describes “uncertainty principle” 
visits Berkeley (1920s) 
at Leipzig 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 10.1 
at Como conference (1927) 
at Solvay Congress (1927) 
works with Pauli on QED 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 
on U.S. lecture tour 7.1, 7.2 
and rise of Nazi Party 
at Bohr’s institute 
skeptical about Lawrence’s results at Solvay Congress (1933) 
RO campaigns against his theory 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
marriage 
allowed to travel to Britain and U.S. 
has shouting match with RO 
stays in Nazi Germany 9.1, 10.1, 12.1, 13.1 
visits Bohr (1941) 13.1, 13.2 
and Nazi bomb project 


and news of Hiroshima 
articles: 
“The Limits of Applicability of the Present Quantum Theory” 
“On Quantum Mechanics II” 
“On the Intuitive Content of Quantum-theoretical Kinematics 
and Mechanics” 
“On the Quantum Dynamics of Wave Fields” (with Pauli) 
“Quantum Theoretical Reinterpretation of Kinematic and 
Mechanical Relations” 
Heitler, Walter 
Herken, Gregg: Brotherhood of the Bomb 9.1, 11.1, 11.2n 
Hersey, John: article on Hiroshima 
Hershberg, James G.: James B. Conant 17.1n 
Hertz, Gustav 
Hertz, Heinrich 
Hickenlooper, Senator Bourke B. 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 18.1 
Higinbotham, William 14.1, 14.2, 15.1 
Hilbert, David 
Hill, Albert G. 17.1, 17.2 
Hill, Archibald Vivian 
Hilton, Judge Henry 1.1, 1.2 
Hirohito, Emperor 
Hiroshima, bombing of 10.1, 11.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3n, 14.1, 14.2, 
14.3, 19.1 
Hiss, Alger 16.1, 17.1 
Hitler, Adolf 1.1, 8.1, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 13.1 
Hobson, Verna 
Holloway, Marshall 17.1, 17.2 
Hooper, Admiral Stanford C. 
Hoover, Herbert, President 9.1, 15.1 
Hoover, J. Edgar: 
and Schneiderman 
and surveillance on RO 
and Jean Tatlock 
keeps subordinates in the dark 
views on RO 
receives information from phone tapping 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
fails to have RO and Weinberg prosecuted 
sends dossier to AEC 
and Fuchs 


and Teller’s interviews 
puts McCarthy off investigating RO 
and Strauss 
receives Borden’s summary of evidence 
and “Caesar’s wife” concept 
Hopkins, F. Gowland 
Horgan, Paul 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 
SL, 13.1 
Horgan, Rosemary 
House Committee on Un-American Activities 
House of Representatives’ Committee on Un-American Activities 
(HUAC) 16.1, 17.1, 18.1 
Houston, William 7.1, 15.1 
HUAC see House of Representatives’ Committee on Un-American 
Activities 
Huning, Franz 2.1, 4.1 
Trader on the Santa Fe Trail 
Huxley, Aldous: Crome Yellow 4.1, 5.1 
hydrogen bomb (“Super”) 11.1, 11.2, 12.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 17.1, 
17.2 
“classical Super” 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 


IEB see International Education Board 
implosion 12.1, 12.2, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5, 14.1 
Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 12.1, 13.1 
RO offered directorship 15.1, 15.2 
Pais and 15.1, 15.2 
under RO 16.1, 16.2, 19.1 
Dyson’s fellowship 16.1, 16.2, 16.3 
and Strauss 17.1, 19.1 
and Yang and Lee 
RO’s lunches 
pettiness and squabbling 
Kennan joins n 
and RO’s retirement 19.1, 19.2 
International Education Board (IEB) 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 
12.1 
isotopes n 
artificial 
radioactive 
Isserman, Maurice 9.1, 10.1 
Ivanov, Peter 11.1, 11.2, 15.1 


Jackson, C. D. 
Jastrow, Robert 
Jeans, James 
The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism 
The Mysterious Universe 4.1, 13.1 
Physics and Philosophy 
The Universe Around Us 
Jensen, J. Hans D. 13.1, 13.2 
Jewett, Frank: RO to 
Jews 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1, 2.2 
see also anti-Semitism 
Johnson, Lt. Lyall 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7, 18.1 
Johnson, Senator Edwin 14.1, 17.1 
Johnson, Louis 
Johnson, Lyndon B., President 
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 
18.1, 18.2 
Joliot-Curie, Frédéric 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 13.1 


Joliot-Curie, Iréne (née Curie) 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 10.1 
Jordan, Pascual 5.1, 5.2n, 6.1 
“On Quantum Mechanics II” 
Judaism, Reform 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 
Jungk, Robert: Brighter Than a Thousand Suns 13.1 


Kamen, Martin 
Kant, Immanuel 
Kapitza, Peter 
Kaun, Alexander 
Keitel, Wilhelm 
Kellogg Radiation Laboratory 
Kemble, Edwin C. 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 8.1, 
ys Be | 
RO’s letters to 6.1, 7.1, 7.2 
Kennan, George 17.1, 17.2, 18.1, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4 
Kennard, Earle 
Kennedy, John F., President 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4 
Kennedy, Joseph 
Keynes, John Maynard 
Kheifetz, Gregory 11.1, 11.2 
Killian, James R. 
King, Admiral Ernest 
Kipphardt, Heinar: In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer 19.1 
Kistiakowsky, George 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5, 14.1, 19.1 
Klein, Abraham 
Klein, Martin: Paul Ehrenfest 7.1 
Klock, Augustus 2.1, 2.2 
Koenig, Fred 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 
Koenig, Dr. Otto 
Kohn, Robert D. 
Konopinski, Emil 
Korean War 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5 
Kramer, Victor 
Kramers, Hendrik 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
krypton 10.1, 11.1 
Ku Klux Klan 9.1, 9.2 
Kurnakov, Sergei 
Kusaka, Shuichi 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 


Ladd, D. M. 
Lamb, Willis E. 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 10.2, 15.1, 15.2 
“Lamb shift” 15.1, 16.1 
Lambert, Rudy 
Lamy, Archbishop Jean-Baptiste 
Landau, Lev 9.1, 9.2 
Langevin, Paul 
Lansdale, John: 
checks security at Berkeley 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
and Pash 
heads Manhattan Project security force 
his views on RO as security risk 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 
12.6 
on Kitty Oppenheimer 
on Lawrence and Lomanitz 
hopes to use RO’s vulnerability 
meeting with RO (1943) 
second interview with him 
summarizes RO’s train conversation with Groves 
insists on RO’s continued loyalty 
and Pash’s memo on RO’s unidentified contact 
reports to FBI RO’s naming of Chevalier 12.1, 12.2 
upset by Greenglass affair 13.1, 13.2 
at RO’s hearing 12.1, 12.2, 13.1, 18.1 
Larmor, Sir Joseph 
Latimer, Wendell 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 19.1 
Laurence, William L. 13.1, 14.1 
Lauritsen, Charles C. 
with RO at Caltech 8.1, 8.2 
at Kellogg Radiation Laboratory 
collaborates with RO 
and Frank Oppenheimer 
and discovery of fission 
and Soviet-German Pact 
RO and Kitty meet at his party 10.1, 10.2 
and MAUD Committee 10.1, 11.1 
RO’s letters to 14.1, 15.1 
signs statement to government on use of H-bomb 
on Long Range Objectives Panel 
and Project Vista 17.1, 17.2 


arranges Lincoln Laboratory summer school 
a member of “ZORC” 17.1, 17.2 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
Lawrence, Ernest 8.1, 8.2 
joins Birge and Loeb at Berkeley 
and Rutherford’s challenge 
builds cyclotron 
relations with RO 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5 
baffled by Heisenberg’s and Dirac’s theories 
builds larger cyclotrons 8.1, 8.2 
marriage 
pre-empted by Cockcroft and Walton 
humiliated at Solvay Congress (1933) 
his cyclotron used to make radioactive materials 8.1, 9.1 
dislikes RO’s students 
Segré’s view of 
Bethe’s view of 10.1, 10.2 
solely interested in cyclotron 10.1, 10.2 
successful lecture tours 
awarded Nobel Prize (1939) 8.1, 8.2, 10.1 
naivete about war 
and Dancoff 
exasperated by Briggs’s uranium committee 
and Oliphant’s revelation of bomb project to RO 10.1, 11.1 
and MAUD Committee findings 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
agrees to make fission bombs 
creates security nightmare 
takes on Frank Oppenheimer to build cyclotron 
wants RO included in Compton’s meeting 11.1, 11.2 
as member of S-1 committee 11.1, 11.2 
and RO’s politics 
proposes electromagnetic method for isotope separation 11.1, 
11.2 
bets against Chicago getting a chain reaction going 
collaborates with RO 
wants him to serve as member of S-1 
and “Calutrons” 11.1, 11.2, 13.1 
pushes for McMillan to head Los Alamos 
and Lomanitz 12.1, 12.2 
as member of Scientific Advisory Panel 13.1, 14.1 


views on use of bomb 13.1, 14.1 
will have nothing to do with Frank Oppenheimer 
campaigns for crash program for H-bomb 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
bets on success of Greenhouse tests 
anti-RO 
and establishment of second laboratory 17.1, 17.2 
suspects RO’s loyalty 
wins Fermi Award 
RO’s letters to 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 14.1, 15.1 
Lawrence, Mary (née Blumer) 8.1 
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory 17.1, 18.1 
Lazarus, Emma: poem on Statue of Liberty 
Lazarus, Robert 
LeBaron, Robert 
Lee, General Robert E. 
Lee, Tsung-Dao 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4, 19.5, 19.6 
Lehmann, Lloyd 11.1, 11.2, 12.1 
Lehmans, the 
Leiden University 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 8.1 
Leipzig University 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.1, 10.1, 13.1 
Lenard, Philipp 
Leprince-Ringuet, Louis 
“lepton” 
Lewis, E. P. 8.1, 8.2 
Lewis, Gilbert N. 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 
Thermodynamics (with Randall) 4.1, 8.1 
Lewis, Hal 
“The Multiple Production of Mesons” (with RO and 
Wouthuysen) 
Lewis, Roger 7.1, 9.1 
Lewis, Warren K.: committee 12.1, 12.2 
Lewis, William C. McC. 
A System of Physical Chemistry 4.1, 4.2, 4.3n, 4.4n, 5.1 
Libby, Leona 
Libby, Willard 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
Life magazine 16.1, 17.1, 17.2, 18.1 
article on RO 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
“Atomic Weapons and American Policy” 
article on RO hearing 
profile of Teller 


Lilienthal, David 
admires RO 
on RO’s despair 
as chairman of AEC 15.1, 15.2 
and Strauss 
asks RO to arrange GAC meeting after Soviet bomb 
summarizes Rabi’s views 
opposes Super program 
presents AEC recommendations to Truman 17.1, 17.2 
retires 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
and attack on RO 
at RO’s hearing 
see also Acheson, Dean 
Lilienthal, Max 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 
Lincoln, Abraham, President 1.1, 1.2 
Lincoln Laboratory see Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Lindemann, Frederick see Cherwell, Lord 
lithium 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 10.1, 10.2, 11.1 
lithium-6 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
“Little Boy” 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2, see Hiroshima, bombing of 
Livingston, Milton Stanley 8.1, 8.2 
Loeb, Leonard 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 10.1 
Lomanitz, Rossi: 
as CP member 11.1, 12.1, 12.2 
shown paper on Calutron by RO 
under FBI surveillance 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 
considers leaving Rad Lab n 
and RO 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 17.1, 18.1, 18.2 
all job offers withdrawn 
drafted into army 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 14.1 
subpoenaed by HUAC 
and RO’s disloyalty to Peters 
Loomis, Francis Wheeler 10.1, 17.1, 18.1, 19.1 
RO to 
Lorelei (yacht) 
Lorentz, H. A. 
Los Alamos laboratory: 
establishment 2.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 12.1, 13.1 
SED 
post-war tests 


Los Alamos Primer, The 12.1, 12.2, 13.1 

Los Alamos Ranch School 3.1, 11.1, 11.2, 12.1 

Lovett, Robert, Secretary of State for Defense 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 
17.4 

Lowell, Abbot Lawrence 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 5.1 

Lowell, Robert 

Luce, Henry 

Lyman, Theodore 


McAllister, Ward: Social Register 1.1 
McCarthy, Senator Joseph/McCarthyites 9.1, 9.2, 17.1, 17.2, 
17.3, 18.1, 18.2, 19.1 
McCloy, John 15.1, 18.1, 19.1 
McCone, John 
MaclInnes, Duncan 
McKibbin, Dorothy 12.1, 14.1 
Maclean, Donald 11.1, 13.1 
McMahon, Senator Brien 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 
17.5, 17.6 
McMahon Act 15.1, 15.2, 17.1 
McMaster University 
McMillan, Ed 8.1, 10.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.1, 12.2, 13.1 
Malina, Frank 
Malraux, André 
Manchester Guardian 
Manhattan Beach Company 
Manhattan Project 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 13.1, 13.2, 
13.3 
security, see G-2 and Groves, Colonel Leslie 
and the British 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
Hungarian scientists 
international knowledge of 14.1, 14.2, 14.3 
and AEC/GAC 15.1, 15.2, 17.1 
see also Los Alamos; “Trinity Project” 
Manley, John 11.1, 11.2, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 14.1, 14.2, 17.1, 
17.2,.17.3,. 17.4 
Mann, Wilfrid: Lawrence to 
Marks, Herbert 15.1, 16.1, 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5, 18.6, 
18.7, 19.1 
Marshak, Robert 15.1, 15.2, 16.1, 17.1, 19.1 


Marshall, Colonel James C. 11.1, 11.2 
Marshall, General George 13.1, 14.1, 14.2, 15.1, 15.2, 17.1 
“Marshall Plan” 
Martin, Ian 
Marx, Karl 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 6.1, 6.2, 6.3n, 12.1, 
1B 16, 174 172 
Lincoln Laboratory/Project Lincoln 
Lincoln summer school 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
MAUD Committee 10.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5 
Maxwell, James Clerk 5.1, 7.1, 7.2 
A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism 
May, Andrew 14.1, 15.1 
May, Kenneth 
May-Johnson Bill 14.1, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4, 15.5, 15.6 
Mayer, Maria: Teller to 
Mehra, Jagdish 
Meitner, Lise 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 11.1 
Mendell, Clarence 
Mendelssohn, Moses 
Menzel, Donald 
Merritt, Benjamin 
Merton, Robert 
mesons fm1.2, fm1.1, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 16.1, 16.2, 
17.1;.19.1,.19.2;. 19:3 
“mesotrons” 9.1, 10.1 
“Met Lab” see Chicago University 
Meyer, Agnes 
Meyer, Eugene 
Michelmore, Peter: The Swift Years 9.1 
Michigan, University of 6.1, 6.2, 10.1 
Mickelson, Sig 
“Mike” test 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
Miller, Merle 
Millikan, Robert A.: 
heads Caltech 
and rumors regarding RO 
and “cosmic rays” 8.1, 8.2, 9.1 
attacks RO and Carlson for discrediting his views 
and Anderson’s cosmic-ray research 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 9.1 


and Einstein 

and Bohr 

80th birthday 
Milnor, John 
Milton, John 
Minnesota, University of 17.1, 17.2 
Mirsky, Prince 
MIT see Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Mitchell, William 
Molotov, Vyacheslav 
Montgomery, Deane 
Morgan, Thomas 18.1, 18.2, 18.3 
Morgans, the 
Morgenthau, Henry 1.1, 10.1 
Morrell, Lady Ottoline 4.1, 5.1 
Morrill, James 
Morrison, Emily 
Morrison, Philip 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 

14.4, 14.5, 15.1, 17.1, 19.1 

Morse, Philip 
Mott, Nevill 13.1, 15.1 
Mott-Smith, L. M. 
Mount Kisco conferences 19.1, 19.2 
Mount Wilson Observatory 9.1, 9.2 
Muir, Robert 
Murphree, Eger V. 
Murphy, Charles: “The Hidden Struggle for the H-bomb” 
Murphy, G. N. 
Murray, Lieutenant James S. 
Murray, Thomas E. 17.1, 17.2, 18.1 
Murrow, Edward 14.1, 19.1 
Muzzey, David 


Nabokov, Nicolas 19.1, 19.2 

Nafe, John 15.1, 16.1 

Nagasaki, bombing of 11.1, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 14.5 
aftermath 14.1, 17.1 

Nation: Chevalier’s letter to RO 

National Academy of Sciences 15.1, 16.1, 17.1 
RO to 


Proceedings 7.1, 7.2 
National Defense Research Council (NDRC) 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
National Research Council, U.S. (NRC) 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 
7.4, 7.5, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
Nature 5.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 10.1, 10.2, 15.1 
Nazi Party 5.1n, 6.1, 6.2, 8.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
atomic weapons 12.1, 13.1, 13.2 
NDRC see National Defense Research Council 
Neddermeyer, Seth: 
collaborates with Anderson on cosmic rays 8.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 
9.4 
develops implosion concept 
on Los Alamos board 
heads Implosion Experimentation Group 12.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 
194,135 
sidelined by RO 
Nedelsky, Leo 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 9.1 
Nedelsky, Wenonah 
Nehru, Jawaharlal 
Nelson, Edward 15.1, 16.1 
Nelson, Eldred 10.1, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
Nelson, Margaret 
Nelson, Steve (né Stefan Mesarosh) 
with Dallet in Spain 
and Kitty Oppenheimer 10.1, 10.2 
rises in CP ranks 
meets RO 
and Folkoff 
under FBI surveillance 11.1, 11.2, 12.1 
last meeting with RO 
and Lehmann 11.1, 11.2, 12.1 
and Weinberg 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 15.1, 17.1, 
17.2 
neutrinos 8.1n, 8.2, 9.1 
neutron stars 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 10.1 
neutrons 5.1n, 5.2, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 19.1 
Pauli’s 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5 
Nevada, USS 
New Deal 9.1, 9.2, 10.1 
Newman, James 


New Mexico 2.1, 3.1ff., 5.1 
Newton, Isaac 5.1, 8.1 
New York: 
Jews 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 
Harmonie Club 
Union League Club 1.1, 1.2 
West 94th St. 1.1, 2.1 
Riverside Drive 2.1, 15.1 
New York Herald 
New York Herald Tribune 15.1, 15.2, 19.1 
New York Mineralogical Club 
New York Times 2.1, 4.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2, 
15.1, 16.1, 17.1, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4 
Magazine 
New Yorker 
Nichols, Lt. Colonel Kenneth D. 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.1, 13.1, 17.1, 
18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5, 18.6, 18.7, 19.1 
Nichols, L. B. 
Nixon, Richard 17.1, 18.1, 19.1 
NKVD 11.1, 12.1, 13.1, 13.2 
Nobel Prize winners 4.1, 4.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 
6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 7.2n, 7.3, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 9.1, 
10.1, 11.1, 13.1, 15.1, 16.1, 16.2, 17.1, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
Nordau, Max 
Nordheim, Gertrude 
Nordheim, Lothar 
Norstad, General Lauris 17.1, 17.2 
Norton, Garrison 
NRC see National Research Council, U.S. 


Oak Ridge, Tennessee 11.1, 11.2, 11.3n, 11.4, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 
124, 12.5,.12.6, 12.7, 13:1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5,.17.1 

Observer 

Occhialini, Giuseppe (Beppo) 8.1, 8.2, 9.1 

Ofstie, Admiral Ralph 

O’Keefe, Bernard 14.1, 14.2 

Oldstone conference (1949) 

Oliphant, Mark 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 

Olson, Loren K. 

Oppenheimer, Babette (née Rothfeld) 1.1 


Oppenheimer, Benjamin (grandfather) 1.1, 2.1, 2.2 
Oppenheimer, Ella (née Friedman; mother) 1.1 

has deformed hand 

wedding 

builds art collection 

and RO 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1, 6.1 

and death of second son 

attends Ethical Culture Society meetings 

and move to Riverside Drive 

as a Jew 4.1, 4.2 

in Europe en famille 2.1 

in New Mexico 

visits RO in Cambridge 5.1, 5.2 

takes him to France 

insists he see psychiatrist 

in New Mexico 

visits RO at Pasadena 

illness and death 8.1, 8.2 
Oppenheimer, Emil (uncle) 1.1, 1.2 
Oppenheimer, Francis (Frank; brother): 

birth 2.1, 2.2 

and RO 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 7.1 

on family trips 2.1, 5.1 

sails with RO 

at Riverside Drive 

crashes car 

at Perro Caliente 7.1, 8.1, 9.1 

advised about women by RO 

RO buys him a car 

at Johns Hopkins 8.1, 9.1, 9.2 

at American Physical Society meeting 

at Cambridge 8.1, 8.2 

at Caltech 9.1, 9.2 

political interests 

and Melba Phillips 

marriage 

joins CP 

organizes communist group at Caltech 

at Perro Caliente with RO and family 10.1, 10.2 

works with Bloch 


CP membership ruins career 
taken on by Lawrence to build cyclotron 
his name given to Groves by RO 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 
under surveillance 
at Los Alamos 
and first atomic explosion 
FBI dossier on 
at Caltech conference on cosmic rays (1948) 
and Weinberg 
RO refuses to answer questions about 
appalled by RO’s disloyalty to Peters 
summoned before HUAC 
dismissed by Minnesota University 
rejected by Lawrence 
becomes a rancher 
RO’s letters to 2.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 
8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 8.10, 8.11, 8.12, 8.13, 8.14, 9.1, 16.1, 16.2, 
17.1 
Oppenheimer, Hedwig (aunt) 
Oppenheimer, Jackie (née Quann; sister-in-law) 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 
10.1 ;.10.2,; 10.3;.13.1,. 17.1 
Oppenheimer, Judith (niece) 
Oppenheimer, Julius (father) 1.1, 4.1 
early life 1.1, 1.2 
marriage 1.1, 1.2 
career 
and Ethical Society 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2 
builds up art collection 
relations with RO 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 4.1 
buys yacht 
buys sloop for RO 2.1, 2.2 
arranges special tuition for him 
in Germany and New Mexico en famille 2.1, 5.1 
as a Jew 
visits RO at Cambridge 5.1, 5.2 
arranges psychiatric treatment for him 
takes him to France 
persuaded to lease Perro Caliente 
visits RO at Pasadena 
buys him a car 


and wife’s death 8.1, 8.2 
lives with RO 
death 
Oppenheimer, Katherine (“Kitty”; wife) (née Puening, formerly 
Harrison) 10.1 
meets RO 10.1, 10.2 
disliked by Jackie Oppenheimer 10.1, 13.1 
becomes pregnant 
divorce and marriage to RO 
and CP 10.1, 10.2 
and Peter’s birth 
and the Chevaliers 
influences RO 
Lansdale’s opinion of 
disliked and unhappy at Los Alamos 12.1, 13.1 
takes to drink 13.1, 19.1 
and daughter’s birth 
treatment of children 12.1, 13.1, 19.1 
with RO at Perro Caliente 
at Berkeley 
under FBI surveillance 15.1, 15.2 
sworn at by RO 
moves into Olden Manor, Princeton 
with RO in Copenhagen and Paris 
and RO’s resignation 
continues under surveillance 
with RO in Tokyo 
and family holidays in Virgin Islands 19.1, 19.2 
at RO’s Fermi Award reception 
and RO’s illness and death 19.1, 19.2 
Oppenheimer, Katherine (“Toni”; daughter) 13.1, 15.1, 15.2, 
19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4 
Oppenheimer, Lewis Frank 
Oppenheimer, Peter (son) 10.1, 10.2, 12.1, 13.1, 15.1, 15.2, 19.1, 
19.2, 19.3 
Oppenheimer, Robert 
1904-29 
German-Jewish background 1.1, 2.1 
parents see Oppenheimer, Ella and Julius 
birth 1.1, 2.1 


childhood 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 

schooling 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 

friendships 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, see also Fergusson, Francis 
interest in mineralogy 2.1, 2.2 

and Smith as father figure 2.1, 2.2, 3.1 
bullied 2.1, 2.2 

interest in science 

sailing adventures 

illness 2.1, 3.1 

in New Mexico 2.1, 3.1, 3.2 

friendship with Horgan 3.1, 4.1, 4.2 
interest in girls 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 

at Harvard 4.1, 4.2, 4.3 

and anti-Semitism 

friendships 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 

and Liberal Club 

literary efforts 

and Katherine Page 

takes holiday job in laboratory 

passionately interested in physics 
second-year courses 

intense study 4.1, 4.2 

final year and degree 4.1, 4.2 

opts for Cambridge 

in New Mexico 

rejected by Rutherford as research student 5.1, 5.2 
on walking holiday 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 
friendlessness and misery at Cambridge 
tutored by Blackett (q.v.) 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 
mental instability 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 

tries to poison Blackett 

as research student under Thomson 

interest grows in theoretical physics 5.1, 5.2 
introduced to Cambridge clubs 5.1, 5.2 
meets Dirac 5.1, and Ralph Fowler (qq.v.) 5.2 
and Schrodinger’s (q.v.) theory 5.1 

in Corsica 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 

reads Proust 

keen to return to Cambridge 

first publication 


meets Ehrenfest (q.v.) 5.1 

writes second paper on quantum mechanics 5.1, 6.1 
introduced to Bohr (q.v.) 5.1 

impresses Born (q.v.) 5.1, 5.2 

translates paper for him 

at Gottingen 5.1, 6.1, 6.2 

friendship with Charlotte Riefenstahl 6.1, 6.2 
meets Arthur and Karl Compton (qq.v.) 6.1 
disrupts Born’s lectures 

reputation grows 

Ph.D. thesis published 

researches quantum mechanics 6.1, 6.2 

and Uhlenbeck (q.v.) 6.1 

offered NRC fellowship 

collaborates on paper with Born 

leaves Gottingen with doctorate 

returns to U.S. 

homesickness 6.1, 7.1 

holidays with brother (see Oppenheimer, Frank) 
welcomes Uhlenbecks to U.S. 

at Harvard 

sends poem to Hound & Horn 7.1 

moves to Caltech 

and Pauling (q.v.) 7.1 

woos his wife 

offered posts 

at Ann Arbor summer school 

illness 

moves into Perro Caliente 

health improves 

injured in car car crash 

at Leiden with Ehrenfest 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 

at Utrecht with Kramers 

hears Heisenberg’s (q.v.) lecture 7.1, 7.2 
meets Rabi (q.v.) 7.1 

with Pauli at Leipzig 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 

continued bad health 

returns to U.S. 

envious of Frank and friends at Perro Caliente 
1929-41 


at Berkeley 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 

and Lawrence (q.v.) 8.1 

at Caltech 8.1, 8.2 

his students at Berkeley 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 

collaborates with Harvey Hall 

and insinuations of homosexuality 

obsession with Dirac’s theory 

and mother’s death 8.1, 8.2 

and Pauli’s discussions on “neutrons” at Ann Arbor 8.1, 8.2 
attacked by Millikan (q.v.) 8.1 

and discovery of isotopes 

collaborates with Carlson on neutrons 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 

keeps up with experimental developments 8.1, 8.2 

and “quantum tunneling” 

inexplicable behavior regarding Anderson’s research 8.1, 8.2 
his contributions to science 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 

his Berkeley house 

talks with Einstein (q.v.) 8.1 

and situation in Germany 8.1, 9.1, 9.2 

studies Hindu literature 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 

his research agenda 

works with Plesset 

and Ehrenfest’s death 

forgets Melba Phillips in car 

collaborates with Lauritsen 8.1, and Melba Phillips 8.2, 8.3, 9.1 
supports longshoremen’s strike 

and brother’s marriage 

interest in cosmic rays 9.1, 9.2 

and Yukawa’s article on particles 9.1, 9.2 

picks “theoretical fight” with Heisenberg (q.v.) 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
his political awakening 

arranges for aunt and cousin to settle in Berkeley 

and Spanish Civil War 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 

falls in love 

involvement with unions and CP 

meets Chevalier (q.v.) 9.1 

his work on astrophysics 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 

and discovery of nuclear fission 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 
misses Serber (q.v.) 10.1 

his students 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 


supports Roosevelt 

meets Katherine (Kitty) (q.v.) 10.1 

meets Steve Nelson (q.v.) 10.1 

and son’s birth, see Oppenheimer, Peter 

continues to support CP 

and the war 

and Schwinger’s (q.v.) arrival as research associate 10.1 

works on mesotrons 

first hears of atomic bomb project 

1941-45 

under FBI surveillance 11.1, 11.2 

his connections with CP 11.1, 11.2 

involvement with atomic-bomb program 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 
11.5, 11.6 

continues left-wing political activities 

collaborates with Lawrence on bomb project 

shows paper on Calutron to Lomanitz (q.v.) 11.1 

appointed consultant to S-1 committee 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 

applies for security clearance 

wants Bethe (q.v.) to be involved in bomb project 11.1 

as leader and facilitator 

meets Groves (q.v.) 11.1 

and establishment of Los Alamos 

as Director 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5, 13.1 

and “Chevalier Affair”, see also Chevalier, Haakon 

moves into Los Alamos 

under G-2 surveillance 12.1, 12.2, see de Silva, Captain Peer 
and Pash, Lt.-Colonel Boris 

employs Joseph Weinberg (q.v.) 12.1 

devises plans to spread false rumors about Los Alamos 

and security 12.1, 12.2 

and Condon’s (q.v.) resignation 12.1 

summarizes present state of knowledge 

as member of Lewis committee 

meets “Deak” Parsons (q.v.) 12.1 

insists on exchange of information between scientists 

and surveillance of his associates 

spends night with Jean Tatlock 

Lansdale’s (q.v.) opinion of 12.1 

granted clearance 


reassured by Roosevelt 

not entirely trusted 

tells Groves and Johnson about Eltenton 12.1, 12.2 

interviewed by Pash 

interviewed by Lansdale 

shows lack of loyalty to associates 

names Chevalier and Frank Oppenheimer 

and Jean Tatlock’s death 

betrays Bohm and Peters 

and Bohr’s visit to Los Alamos 

and design and building of atomic bomb 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 
13.5,.13,6,.13.7, 13.8, 13.9 

replaces Teller with Peierls (qq.v.) 13.1 

and completion of implosion bomb 13.1, 13.2 

and daughter’s birth, see Oppenheimer, Katherine 

chooses name for “Trinity Project” 

his memorial address for Roosevelt 

hosts Target Committee 

on Scientific Advisory Panel for post-war atomic policy 13.1, 
13.2 

opposes Szilard’s petition 

and Trinity test 13.1, 13.2, 14.1 

after bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 14.1, 14.2, 14.3 

his hopes for international cooperation dashed 

at Perro Caliente 

as emissary for Los Alamos scientists 

farewell speech 

1945-49 

supports May-Johnson Bill 14.1, 15.1 

gives evidence to Congress 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 and House 
Committee on Military Affairs 15.4, 15.5 

disheartening interview with Truman 

his speech to ALAS 

stays in Pasadena 

tries to influence U.S. policy 

plans with Rabi 

on Acheson committee 

proposes an international Atomic Development Authority 15.1, 
15.2; 15.3 

under FBI surveillance 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 


and Baruch Plan 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 

opposes Los Alamos Bikini Atoll tests 

returns to lecturing at Berkeley and Caltech 

publishes articles 

invited to discuss astrophysics with Menzel 

and creation of AEC 

and Strauss (q.v.) 15.1 

interviewed by FBI 

as member of GAC 

offered job of director of Institute for Advanced Study 15.1, 
152 

his interest in postdoctoral students, see Feynman, Richard, 
Julian Schwinger and Pais, Abraham 

voted chairman of GAC 15.1, 16.1 

disillusioned by Soviet Union 15.1, 15.2 

and renewed FBI surveillance 

his FBI file sent to AEC 

a moving force at Shelter Island Conference 

receives honorary degree at Harvard 

admires General Marshall 

moves into Olden Manor, Princeton 

attracts physicists and students to Institute 

in Life magazine 16.1 

publishes jointly with students 

excited by Schwinger’s calculations 16.1, 16.2 

lectures at MIT 

impressed by Dyson (q.v.) 16.1 

at Schwinger’s lecture 

organizes Pocono conference 

scathing about Feynman’s (q.v.) methods 16.1 

and Tomonaga 

his pivotal role 

at Caltech conference on cosmic rays 

at Birmingham conference 

reports on progress of QED at Solvay Congress (1948) 16.1, 
16.2 

attitude to QED changes 

Time magazine profile 16.1, 17.1 

worried about Hiss case 

New York Times interview 


invites Yukawa 

disappointed in T. S. Eliot 

as president of American Physical Society 
refutes Slotnick’s work 

organizes Oldstone conference 

his HUAC testimony (1949) 

makes enemy of Strauss 

Life magazine profile 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 

his last publication in physics 

1949-67 

and Soviet atomic bomb 

and debate over H-bomb program 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
writes GAC report 

tempted to resign from GAC 

skeptical that H-bombs can be made 17.1, 17.2 
opposes strategic bombing 

meets Nehru 

and Project Vista 17.1, 17.2 

and “Greenhouse” tests 

backs Ulam-Teller design 

opposes Teller’s second laboratory 

campaign against 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
resigns from GAC 

and “Lincoln Project” 

chairs Disarmament Panel 

favors negotiated test ban 17.1, 17.2 

and “Mike” test 17.1, 17.2 

and “Operation Candor” 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
further assaults on his reputation 17.1, 17.2 
and McCarthy 

battle with Strauss 

investigated by Borden 18.1, 18.2 

AEC clearance suspended 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4 
gives BBC Reith Lectures 18.1, 18.2 

Observer profile of 

under FBI surveillance 

given Nichols’s list of charges 18.1, 18.2 
chooses defense lawyers 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5 
at Rochester conference 

case against 


offers to resign 

writes autobiographical letter to Nichols 
security hearing 

awaits results 

clearance not reinstated 

and Chevalier (q.v.) 19.1 

books and articles 

and work on particle physics 

TV interview 

a celebrity 19.1, 19.2 

gives public lectures 

writes Bohr’s 70th birthday tribute 
addresses Rochester conference (1956) 
and Yang and Lee’s breakthrough 

gives William James Lectures at Harvard 
hosts Institute lunches 

interview on Sputnik I not broadcast 19.1 
at Solvay Congress (1958) 

relationship with son and daughter deteriorates 
reviews Bruner’s A Study of Thinking 19.1 
at Congress for Cultural Freedom conferences 19.1, 19.2 
on need for particle accelerators 

appears on Panorama 19.1 

in Japan 

in Virgin Islands 

lectures in Canada 

lists 10 influential books 

at Kennedy reception 

gives further talks 

and disputes at the Institute 

organizes Mount Kisco conference 
awarded Fermi Prize 19.1, 19.2 

60th birthday tribute 

further lectures 

and Kipphardt’s play 

and Chevalier’s Oppenheimer ... 19.1 
retires from Institute 

and 20th anniversary of Hiroshima 

final talks and lectures 

illness and death 


memorial service 

will 

appearance, character, views etc: 

on America 2.1, 6.1, 8.1, 9.1, 9.2 

appearance 1.1, 8.1, 13.1, 16.1, 17.1, 18.1 

on atomic bombs 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 
Tl 72, 73, VO, 19 

cars and reckless driving 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 

character and personality 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.2, 
4.3, 4.4, 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 
8.3, 10.1, 15.1, 18.1, 19.1 

see also Jewishness (below) 

on discipline 

on England 

interest in Hindu literature and religion 8.1, 13.1, 17.1, 19.1 

Jewishness 1.1, 1.2, 3.1, 8.1, 9.1 

literary interests 2.1, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1, 7.1, 8.1, 9.1, 13.1, 19.1, 
19.2 

mathematical carelessness 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 

politics 8.1, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 11.1, 
11.2, 11.3, 11.4 

on Soviet Union 9.1, 10.1, 13.1, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3, 15.4 

articles and papers: 

“Comments on the Military Value of the Atom” 

“Cosmic Rays: Report on Recent Progress, 1936-1941” 15.1 

“The Disintegration of High-Energy Protons” (with Serber and 
Nordheims) 

“The Impacts of Fast Electrons and Magnetic Neutrons” (with 
Carlson) 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 

“The Multiple Production of Mesons” (with H. Lewis and 
Wouthuysen) 

“The Mystery of Matter” 

“Note on the Nature of Cosmic-Ray Particles” (with Serber) 

“Note on the Stimulated Decay of Negative Mesons” (with 
Epstein and Finkelstein) 

“Note on the Theory of the Interaction of Field and Matter” 

“Note on the Transmutation Function for Deuterons” (with 
Phillips) 

“On the Interaction of Mesotrons and Nuclei” (with Schwinger) 

“On Continued Gravitational Contraction” (with Snyder) 9.1, 


10.1, 10.2, 19.1 

“On Massive Neutron Cores” (with Volkoff) 9.1, 9.2 

“On Multiplicative Showers” (with Carlson) 

“On the Production of the Positive Electron” (with Carlson) 

“On the Quantum Theory of Continuous Spectra” 

“On the Quantum Theory of Molecules” 

“On the Quantum Theory of the Problem of the Two Bodies” 
5.1,.9.2, 6.1 

“On the Quantum Theory of Vibration-Rotation Bands” 

“On the Radiation of Electrons in a Coulomb Field” 

“On the Spin of the Mesotron” 

“On the Stability of Stellar Neutron Cores” (with Serber) 

“On the Theory of the Electron and the Positive” (with Furry) 

“The Production of Positives by Nuclear Gamma Rays” (with 
Nedelsky) 

“The Production of Soft Secondaries by Mesotrons” (with 
Serber and Snyder) 

“Reaction of Radiation on Electron Scattering ...” (with Bethe) 

“Relativistic Theory of the Photoelectric Effect” 

Reports to our Colleagues 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 19.1 

“The Role of the Big Accelerators” 

“Science and Culture” 

“Three Notes on the Quantum Theory of Aperiodic Effects” 

lectures: 

“The Added Cubit” 

“Atom and Field” 

“Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem” 

“Atomic Weapons and American Policy” 17.1, 17.2, 18.1 

“Electron Theory ...” 

“The Intimate and the Open” 

“The Open Mind” 

“Physics and Man’s Understanding” 

“Physics in the Contemporary World” 

“Physics Tonight” 

Reith Lectures 18.1, 18.2 

“Space and Time” 

“Stars and Nuclei” 

“The Sub-Nuclear Zoo ...” 

“Thirty Years of Mesons” 

“A Time in Need” 


“To Live with Ourselves” 
“The Tree of Knowledge” 19.1, 19.2 
“War and the Nations” 
William James Lectures 
Osborn, Frederick 
Ostwald, Wilhelm 


Page, Katherine Chaves 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2, 10.1 
Page, Winthrop 
“pair production” 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 
Pais, Abraham 15.1, fm1.3 
meets RO 
joins him at Institute 15.1, 16.1, 16.2, 19.1, 19.2 
dislikes Kitty 
at Shelter Island Conference 15.1, 15.2 
hears Powell’s report on meson experiments 
and Einstein 
hears Schwinger’s lectures 16.1, 16.2 
impressed by Dyson 
at Pocono conference 16.1, 16.2 
on Feynman 16.1, 16.2 
meets T. S. Eliot 
praises RO photograph 
not mentioned in Life article 17.1 
on GAC meeting (1949) 
on RO at Strauss’s party 
on RO at 4th Rochester conference 
collaboration with Gell-Mann 
watches RO’s TV interview 
loses bet with Wheeler 
at 12th Solvay Congress 
leaves Institute 
edits special issue of Reviews of Modern Physics for RO’s 60th 
19.1 
speaks at RO’s memorial service 
on RO 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2 
on RO’s children 
Pancini, Ettore 15.1, 16.1 
Parsons, Martha 
Parsons, William (“Deak”) 11.1, 12.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 
14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 18.1 
particle accelerators 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 11.1, 17.1, 17.2, 19.1 
see also cyclotrons 
particle physics 
Pash, Lt. Colonel Boris 
suspects RO of espionage 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 


keeps him under surveillance 12.1, 12.2 
recommends he be refused clearance 
clashes with Lansdale 12.1, 12.2 
interviews RO (1943) 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 15.1, 18.1, 18.2 
continues to suspect him 12.1, 12.2 
urges Groves to investigate further 
orders train to be stopped 
continues to try and identify RO’s 
12:2 
sent on Alsos mission 12.1, 12.2, 13.1 
at RO’s security hearing 12.1, 12.2, 18.1, 18.2 
Patterson, Robert 11.1, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
Pauli, Wolfgang 6.1, 7.1 
at Como conference 6.1, 6.2 
on Bohr and Kramers 
agrees to work with RO 
collaborates with Heisenberg 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 
and RO 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.1 
his hypothetical particle (“neutron”) 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 9.1 
dismissive of RO/Furry theory 
on RO’s students 8.1, 10.1 
and Schwinger 
and RO’s scheme to mislead potential snoops 
Pauling, Ava Helen 
Pauling, Linus 7.1, 7.2n, 8.1, 18.1, 19.1 
Pegram, George 10.1, 11.1, 11.2 
Peierls, Rudolf 7.1, 10.1 
publishes paper on critical mass 
collaborates with Frisch on memorandum on “Super-bomb” 
10.1, V1.4, 12.1, 138A, 13:2 
and Fuchs 13.1, 13.2 
and German physicists 
discusses implosion with RO 13.1, 13.2n, 13.3 
leads Los Alamos implosion theory group 
organizes Birmingham conference (1948) 
and Dyson 16.1, 16.2 
Peng Huanwu 
Penney, William 
People’s World (newspaper) 10.1, 11.1 
Perro Caliente 7.1, 7.2, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 14.1 


(74 


unnamed professor” 12.1, 


Peters, Bernard 10.1, 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 17.1, 18.1, 18.2 

Peters, Hannah 

Philby, Kim 11.1, 13.1 

Phillips, Melba 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 9.1, 9.2 

Philosophical Magazine 

“photoelectric effect” 

photons 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2 

Physical Review 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 
8.10, 8.11, 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 11.1, 11.2, 
15.1, 15.2, 16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 19.1, 19.2 

Physics Today 16.1, 19.1, 19.2 

Piaget, Jean 

Picasso, Pablo 

Piccioni, Oreste 15.1, 16.1 

Pieper, Special Agent N. J. L. 

Pierce, George Washington 

Pike, Sumner T. 15.1, 17.1 

Pikes Peak, Rocky Mountains 

Pire, Father 

Pitzer, Kenneth 17.1, 17.2, 18.1, 18.2, 18.3 

Placzek, George 9.1, 17.1 

Planck, Max 5.1, 6.1, 8.1, 19.1 

Planck’s constant 4.1n, 5.1, 7.1 

Plaut, Joseph 

Plesset, Milton 8.1, 8.2 

plutonium 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 13.1, 13.2, 
13.3, 13.4,13.5 

reactor-produced 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 17.1 

Pocono Manor Conference (1948) 

Poincaré, Henri 

“Poisson brackets” 

Pollak, Inez 2.1, 4.1, 5.1, 7.1 

Pollak, Kitty 

polonium 5.1n, 8.1, 10.1, 13.1 

Pond, Ashley 

Pontigny, France: annual colloquia 

positrons 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7n, 15.1n, 16.1 

Potsdam Declaration (1945) 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4 

Powell, Cecil 15.1, 16.1, 16.2 

Powers, Thomas: Heisenberg’s War 13.1n 


Priestley, Raymond 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 
Antarctic Adventure 
Breaking the Hindenburg Line 
Princeton: Jews see also Institute for Advanced Study 
“Project Vista” 17.1, 17.2 
protons 
Proust, Marcel: A la recherche du temps perdu 5.1 
Puck (newspaper) 
Puening, Franz 
Puening, Kaethe (née Vissering) 10.1 
“pulsars” 
Purnell, Admiral William 14.1, 14.2 


QED see quantum electrodynamics 
quantum electrodynamics (QED) 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 17.1 
quantum mechanics 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 8.1 
and “uncertainty principle” 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 
and principle of complementarity 
Copenhagen Interpretation 
quantum theory 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 
“old quantum theory” 5.1, 8.1 
“quantum tunneling” 7.1, 8.1 
Quebec Agreement 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 


Rabi, Helen 
Rabi, Isidor 1.1, 1.2 
friendship with RO 
views on RO 1.1, 2.1, 4.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 8.1, 8.2, 13.1, 19.1 
on American scientists 6.1, 8.1 
and Schwinger 10.1, 15.1 
tells Fermi news of nuclear fission 
refuses post at Los Alamos 
advises RO 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
and Trinity bomb 
RO wants him at Caltech 
plans international policy for atomic energy with RO 
on GAC 
reports experimental results at Shelter Island Conference 15.1, 
15.2;.16.1 
excited by Schwinger’s theory 


offers Dyson position 
at GAC meeting 17.1, 17.2 
writes “minority” report 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
furious with Truman 
tempted to resign 
and Serber 
and Griggs 17.1, 17.2 
and Lincoln Project 
wants ban on H-bomb tests 
a member of ZORC 17.1, 17.2 
and RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2, 18.3 
dismissive of Shepley/Blair book 
watches RO’s TV interview 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
Radest, Howard B.: Toward Common Ground ... 15, 1.1, 2.1 
radiation: alpha and beta 
from atomic bombs 12.1, 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2, 15.1, 17.1, 
17.2, 18.1 
radiation sickness 14.1, 18.1 
Radin, Paul 
radioactivity 5.1, 5.2n, 8.1, 8.2 and n, 8.3, 10.1, 12.1n, 13.1 
radium 5.1n, 8.1, 10.1, 10.2, 13.1 
Rabinowitch, Eugene 
“RaLa” method 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
Ramsauer, Carl 
“Ramsauer effect” 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 
Ramsay, Sir William (ed.): Textbooks of Physical Chemistry 4.1n 
Ramseyer, Frank 
Randall, Merle: Thermodynamics (with G. Lewis) 4.1, 8.1 
Rarita, William 
Ray, Maud 
Raymond, Natalie 
Rea, Lt. Colonel 
reactors, nuclear 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5n, 11.6, 13.1, 13.2, 
7 
heavy water 13.1, 17.1 
Reviews of Modern Physics 10.1, 17.1, 19.1 
Reynold’s Illustrated News 
Rhine, Alice: “Race Prejudice at Summer Resorts” 
Rhodes, Richard 


The Making of the Atomic Bomb 
Rhodes Scholarships 4.1, 4.2 
Richards, I. A.: on Blackett 5.1, 5.2 
Riefenstahl, Charlotte 6.1, 6.2 
Rieff, Philip 
Ritter, Major T. H. 
Robb, Roger 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 18.5, 18.6, 18.7 
Robbins, Dr. W. J. 7.1, 7.2 
Roberts, John 
Rochester, George 
Rochester, University of 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5 
Rochester Conferences 18.1, 19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
Rochester Times-Union (newspaper) 17.1, 17.2 
Rockefeller Foundation 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 10.1 
see also International Education Board 
Rogers, William P. 
Roosevelt, Eleanor 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., President 
and Einstein’s warning letter 
sets up Advisory Committee on Uranium 10.1, 10.2 
and RO’s support 
and atomic-bomb program 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5 
sends RO letter of appreciation 
signs Quebec Agreement 
Thanksgiving Day proclamation (1943) 
and Bohr 13.1, 13.2 
agrees with Churchill not to share “secret” of atomic bomb 
and Szilard 
death 
see also New Deal 
Roosevelt, Theodore, President 2.1, 2.2 
Rosenberg, Ethel 13.1, 17.1 
Rosenberg, Julius 13.1, 17.1 
Rosenfeld, Léon 10.1, 10.2 
Rossi, Bruno Benedetto 13.1, 13.2, 15.1, 16.1 
Roswell: New Mexico Military Institute 3.1, 4.1 
Rotblat, Joseph 
Rothfeld, Sigmund 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4 
Rothfeld, Solomon 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4 
Rothfeld, Stern & Co. 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1 


Rowe, Hartley 15.1, 17.1n, 17.2, 18.1 

Royal, Denise: biog of RO 7.1, 7.2, 8.1 

Royal Society 5.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3 
Proceedings 5.1, 5.2, 8.1, 8.2 

Russell, Bertrand 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 
Principia Mathematica 
The ABC of Atoms 

Russell, Katharine 

Rutherford, Sir Ernest 4.1, 5.1, 9.1 
model of atom 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 8.1 
as director of Cavendish Laboratory 
predicts existence of “neutrons” 8.1, 8.2 
rejects RO’s application 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 
and Blackett’s photographs of nuclear transformation process 
and Kapitza 
introduces RO to Bohr 
at Como conference 
sees need for producing particles artificially 
and splitting of the atom by Cockcroft and Walton 
advises Dirac to accept Nobel Prize 

Ryder, Arthur 8.1, 8.2, 13.1, 19.1 


S-1 (“Section One”) committee 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 11.5, 11.6 
Sachs, Alexander 

Sachs, Emanie: Red Damask 1.1, 1.2, 3.1 
Sachs, Paul 2.1, 4.1 

Sachs, Samuel 

Sachs family 1.1, 1.2, 2.1 

Sagane, Ryokichi 

San Francisco Chronicle 8.1, 10.1 

San Francisco Examiner 

Santa Fe 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 

Saratoga: Grand Union Hotel 1.1, 1.2 
Saturday Evening Post 

Schecter, Jerold and Leona: Sacred Secrets 11.1 
Schein, Marcel 

Schiff, Jacob H. 1.1, 4.1 

Schiff, Leonard 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 19.1 
Schiffs, the 

Schlapp, Robert 


Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. 
Schneiderman, William 10.1, 11.1, 11.2 
Schrodinger, Erwin: wave mechanics theory 5.1, 5.2, 7.1, 8.1 
and quantum mechanics debate 6.1, 6.2 
awarded Nobel Prize (1933) 5.1, 8.1 
at Dublin 
Schweber, Silvan 10.1, 16.1 
Schwinger, Julian 
as RO’s research assistant 10.1, 10.2 
collaborates with him 10.1, 10.2 
and Dancoff 
works on mesotrons 
notes RO’s loss of creativity 
leaves Berkeley 
at Harvard 
at Shelter Island Conference 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
reformulates QED 8.1, 10.1, 15.1, 16.1, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4 
and RO’s hearing 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
awarded Nobel Prize (1965) 10.1, 16.1 
Science 8.1, 8.2, 10.1 
“scintillations” 
Seaborg, Glenn T. 10.1, 11.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 15.1, 17.1, 17.2, 
19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
See It Now (TV program) 
Segré, Emilio 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 
13.5 
Seligman, Alfred Lincoln 
Seligman, Edwin Robert Anderson 1.1, 1.2 
Seligman, George Washington 
Seligman, James 
Seligman, Jesse 1.1, 1.2 
Seligman, Joseph 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4 
Seligman, Theodore 
Seligman, William 1.1, 1.2 
Seligman & Co. 
Seligmans, the 1.1, 2.1 
Sengier, Edgar 
Serber, Charlotte 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 
13.1, 19.1 


Serber, Robert 8.1, 9.1 
on RO 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 12.1, 13.1 
invited by him to support longshoremen’s strike 
and Yukawa 
collaborates with RO 9.1, 9.2 
on Jean Tatlock 
on Snyder 
leaves Berkeley for Illinois University 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
relationship with RO 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
and discovery of fission 
invited to New Mexico 10.1, 10.2 
on Kitty Oppenheimer 
collaborates with RO and Snyder 
joins RO on atomic-bomb project 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 11.4 
arrives at Los Alamos 12.1, 12.2 
and RO’s security plan 
lectures on bomb 
collaborates with Tolman on implosion 12.1, 13.1, 13.2 
leads discussions 
plans scientific program 
a possible Communist 
and Jean Tatlock’s death 
at discussion of Bohr’s drawing 
and “RaLa method” of implosion 
and Trinity test 
sends letter to Japanese physicist 
and Japanese surrender 
in Japan 14.1, 14.2, 14.3 
and Teller’s “Super” 
agrees to present Lawrence’s proposals for reactors 17.1, 17.2 
surprised at GAC’s change of attitude to H-bomb program 
leaves Berkeley for Columbia 
considered “leftist” 
on Peter Oppenheimer 
contributes to RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
devotion to Kitty Oppenheimer 
speaks at RO’s memorial service 
death n 
Shelter Island Conference (1947) 13.1, 16.1, 16.2, 16.3 
Shepley, James and Blair, Clay: The Hydrogen Bomb 19.1, 19.2 


Sherr, Pat 13.1, 19.1 
Sherwin, Martin n 
Fergusson interview 
Shipley, Sir Arthur 
“showering” 
Silverman, Sam 
Simon, Franz 
Slater, John C. 
Slotnick, Murray 
Smith, Al 
Smith, Alice Kimball 14.1, 14.2, 15.1 
Smith, Cyril S. 11.1, 15.1, 17.1, 17.2, 19.1 
Smith, Herbert Winslow: 
relationship with RO 
views on RO 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 7.1 
and Fergusson 
travels to New Mexico with RO 2.1, 3.1 
encourages his writing 
dines with him 
advises Fergusson to be tactful with RO 5.1, 5.2 
with RO after mother’s death 
RO’s letters to 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 5.1 
Fergusson’s letters to 4.1, 4.2 
Smith, Howard K. 
Smith Act (1940) 10.1, 10.2 
Smyth, Henry DeWolf 14.1, 17.1, 18.1, 19.1, 19.2 
Sneath, Richard G. 
Snow, CG. P. 5.1, 5.2, 8.1n 
“The Two Cultures” 5.1, 19.1 
Snyder, Hartland 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
collaborates with RO 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 19.1, and with RO and 
Serber 297 
Social Register, New York 1.1 
Soddy, Frederick n 
Solvay, Ernest 
Solvay Congresses: 
1911 
1927 
1933 
1948 16.1, 16.2 


1958 

Somervell, General Brehon B. 

Sommerfeld, Arnold 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 9.1 
Atombau und Spektrallinien 4.1n, 5.1, 5.2, 8.1 
“Bohr-Sommerfeld model” 5.1, 8.1 

Sorin, Gerald 

Southeast, The 

Spaatz, General Carl 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4 

Spanish Civil War (1936-7) 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 10.1, 10.2, 

11.1 

Spender, Stephen 

Sproul, Robert 11.1, 15.1 

Sputnik I 

Stalin, Joseph 10.1, 10.2, 13.1, 13.2, 14.1 

Stern, Alfred 9.1, 9.2 

Stern, Hedwig (née Oppenheimer) 9.1 

Stern, J. H. 

Stern, Otto 

Stern, Philip 12.1, 17.1 

Stevenson, Adlai 

Stevenson, E. C. 

Stewart, Alexander 

Stewart (A. T.) & Company 

Stewart, Walter W. 

Stimson, Henry L. 12.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5, 13.6, 13.7, 

14.1, 14.2 
RO’s letter to 

Strachey, Lytton 

Strassmann, Fritz 

Stratton, S. W.: Born to 

Strauss, Lewis L. 
offers RO directorship of Institute for Advanced Study 
“shaken” by FBI’s revelations about RO 
RO makes an enemy of 
lobbies Truman to authorize H-bomb program 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 

17.4 
cold-shouldered by RO 
told about Fuchs 
suspects RO 17.1, 17.2 
resigns from AEC 


wants RO’s reputation ruined 17.1, 17.2 
opposed to his being reappointed to GAC 
at RO’s lecture to Council on Foreign Relations 17.1, 17.2 
and Murphy’s attack on RO 
winning war against RO 
accepts chairmanship of AEC 
Time profiles 17.1, 17.2 
and Borden 18.1, 18.2 
meeting with RO 
puts RO under close surveillance 
and Rabi 18.1, 18.2 
and RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4 
persuades AEC to publish proceedings 
and decision not to reinstate RO’s clearance 
and RO’s resignation as Institute director 
replaced as chairman of AEC 
public humiliation 
and RO’s Fermi Award 
Street, J. C. 
Stromgren, Bengt 
Strong, Major General 12.1, 12.2 
Sunday Express 8.1, 18.1 
“Super,” the see hydrogen bomb 
supernovae 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
Swann, William 
Sweeney, Major Charles W. 
Szilard, Leo: 
conceives idea of chain reactions 8.1, 10.1 
leaves Germany 
tries to warn U.S. government of dangers of fission 
alerts Einstein 
joins with him and Teller to write to President 
and start of U.S. bomb project 
investigates chain reactions 
and Oliphant 
at Columbia 11.1, 11.2 
at Chicago Met Lab 11.1, 11.2 
and Groves 11.1, 13.1 
worried about consequences of atomic bomb 
petitions Los Alamos scientists 


and May-Johnson Bill 
gives evidence to House Committee on Military Affairs 
on RO’s testimony 


Taft, Senator Robert 
Tamm, E. A. 12.1, 12.2 


Tanimoto, Rev. Kiyoshi 
Tatlock, Jean 9.1, 9.2,.10.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 13.1, 
18.1, 18.2 


Tatlock, John 9.1, 12.1 
Teachers’ Union 9.1, 9.2 
Teller, Edward 


hears about nuclear fission 

urges secrecy 

writes letter to Roosevelt with Einstein 

works on “Super” fission bomb 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 12.1, 13.1, 
1325 17d 

on RO 

on Berkeley 

offended at not being given Los Alamos post 11.1, 13.1 

impressed by Feynman 

and Groves 

on Los Alamos planning board 

concerned that Germans have atomic bomb 

and von Neumann’s visit 13.1, 13.2 

persuaded from signing Szilard’s petition by RO 

at Shelter Island Conference 

supports Frank Oppenheimer 

worried by Soviet bomb 

and debate over crash program for H-bomb 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 
17 A; 173, 17.6, 17.7 

and Fuchs 

his “classic Super” design shown not to work 17.1, 17.2 

and GAC report 17.1, 17.2 

designs “Cylinder” 

develops bomb with Ulam 

leaves Los Alamos for Chicago 

campaigns for rival laboratory 

and Strauss 

interviewed by FBI 


ruins RO’s reputation 17.1, 17.2 
monitors first Ulam-Teller bomb 
has extraordinary conversation with RO 
and RO’s hearing 18.1, 18.2, 18.3, 18.4, 19.1 
Life magazine profile 
and Yang 
excluded from Kennedy’s reception 
awarded Fermi Prize 
at RO’s award ceremony 
Temple Emanu-El, New York 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 
Thomas, J. Parnell 
Thompson, L. T. E. 
Thomson, G. P. 10.1, 10.2 
Thomson, J. J. 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 
Thornton, Robert 8.1, 8.2 
Tibbets, Colonel Paul 14.1, 14.2 
Timayenis, Telemachus: The American Jew 1.1 
Time magazine 2.1, 8.1, 10.1, 15.1, 17.1 
article on RO 16.1, 16.2, 17.1, 17.2 
articles on Strauss 17.1, 17.2 
article on Oppenheimer case 
Times, The 
Titanic 
Tizard, Henry 
Tokyo, fire-bombing of (1945) 
Tolman, Richard: 
works with G. N. Lewis 
and RO’s lecture on Dirac’s theory 
Millikan’s letter to 
friendship with RO 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 15.1 
and Einstein 
and Volkoff 
at Berkeley meeting on H-bomb 
suggests “implosion” concept 12.1, 13.1, 13.2 
responsible for ordnance 
collaborates on “Smyth Report” 
Tolman, Ruth 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 10.1, 15.1 
Tomonaga, Sin-Itiro 8.1, 10.1, 16.1, 16.2, 16.3 
“transformation theory” (Dirac) 6.1, 8.1 
Treiman, Sam 19.1, 19.2 


Trimethy (sloop) 2.1, 4.1, 4.2, 6.1 
“Trinity Project”/test 3.1n, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 14.1, 14.2, 
14.3, 14.4 
tritium 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 
Truman, Harry S., President: 
“pepped up” by Trinity test 
and Stimson 
at Potsdam Conference (1945) 13.1, 13.2 
tells Stalin about atomic bomb 
and Hiroshima 14.1, 14.2, 14.3 
returns to Washington 
orders bombing to stop 
and Japanese surrender 
orders secrecy about atomic bomb 
and ALAS statement urging international cooperation 
and May-Johnson Bill 
clashes with RO 15.1, 15.2 
his U.S.-centric view 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
rejects possibility of Soviet bomb 15.1, 17.1 
signs McMahon Bill 
chooses Lilienthal as AEC chairman 
and FBI suspicions of RO 
announces Truman Doctrine 
and news of Soviet bomb 
and U.S. H-bomb program 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 17.4, 17.5, 17.6, 
L777 
told about Fuchs 
“regrets” RO’s resignation from GAC 
does not seek re-election 
and postponement of “Mike” test 
Tsien, Hsue-Shen 
“Tube Alloys” project 11.1, 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.5, 13.6 
Tuck, James 13.1, 13.2, 13.3 
“tunneling” see “quantum tunneling” 
Turner, Louis 10.1, 11.1 


Uehling, Edwin 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 
Uhlenbeck, Else 6.1, 8.1, 8.2 
Uhlenbeck, George: 

identifies “spin” of electrons 5.1, 7.1 


and RO 5.1, 6.1 
accepts position at Michigan 6.1, 6.2 
welcomed to New York by RO 
at Ann Arbor summer school 6.1, 7.1 
and RO’s research on quantum mechanics 8.1, 8.2 
with him at Ann Arbor and Perro Caliente 
accepts Utrecht post 
returns to Michigan 
and news of nuclear fission 
at Shelter Island Conference 
speaks at dedication of Bohr Library (1962) 
RO’s letters to 6.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 10.1 
Ulam, Francoise 
Ulam, Stanislaw (Stan) 
collaborates with Teller on H-bomb design 17.1, 17.2, 17.3, 
17.4, 17.5, 18.1 
“uncertainty principle” (Heisenberg) 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 
University of Peace 
uranium 5.1, 10.1 
sources 2.1, 10.1, 11.1, 15.1, 15.2 
fission 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 12.1, 13.1 
critical mass 10.1, 11.1, 11.2 
chain reactions 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 
extraction of U-235 10.1, 11.1 
enriched 11.1, 11.2, 11.3 
bomb design 11.1, 11.2, 12.1, 13.1ff., see Little Boy 
Urey, Harold 8.1, 8.2, 11.1, 11.2 
and Birge 
discovers deuterium 8.1, 8.2 
hears news of nuclear fission 
gives advice on isotope separation 
on S-1 committee 11.1, 11.2 
reports on Beams’ research 
works on gaseous-diffusion 
and May-Johnson Bill 14.1, 15.1 
and RO hearing 
Utrecht, University of 7.1, 8.1 


“vacuum polarization” 
Valentine, Alan 


Vandenberg, General Hoyt 17.1, 17.2 
Vanderbilts, the 1.1, 1.2 
van Vleck, John H. 11.1, 11.2, 13.1, 15.1 
Vaughan, General Harry 
Veblen, Oswald 
Velde, Harold 17.1, 17.2 
Venona transcripts 11.1, 13.1, 13.2, 17.1 
Vilar, Jean 
Virgin Islands 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4, 19.5 
Vlaminck, Maurice de 
Volkoff, George 9.1, 9.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3 
“On Massive Neutron Cores” (with RO) 9.1, 9.2 
Volpe, Joseph 15.1, 17.1, 17.2, 18.1, 18.2, 19.1 
von Neumann, John 13.1, 13.2, andn, 13.3, 17.1, 17.2, 19.1 
Ulam to 
Voorhis Act (1940) 10.1, 10.2 


Waddington, C. H. 
Wall Street Crash (1929) 
Wallace, Henry A. 14.1, 15.1, 15.2 
Walton, Ernest 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 10.1 
Warburg, Felix 
Washburn, Mary Ellen 9.1, 12.1 
Washington Evening Star 
Washington Post 19.1, 19.2, 19.3 
Washington Times-Herald 17.1 
Waugh, Evelyn: Brideshead Revisited 6.1 
“wave mechanics” (Schrodinger) 5.1, 5.2, 6.1, 8.1 
Waymack, William T. 
Webb, Dr. Gerald B. 
Weil, André 
Weinbaum, Sidney 
Weinberg, Joseph (“Joe”) 
as RO’s student at Berkeley 10.1, 10.2, 11.1 
considered a security risk 
passes information to Nelson 
under FBI surveillance 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 
employed by RO 12.1, 12.2 
identified as “Joe” 
as part of “spy ring” 12.1, 12.2 


meeting with RO 12.1, 12.2 
promises to stay away from politics 
passes manuscript to Communist sympathizers 
and RO’s disloyalty 
hosts party for Lomanitz and Friedman 
suspected of being RO’s unnamed professor 
interviewed by FBI 
at Minnesota University 
subpoenaed by HUAC 
fired by University 
Weinberg, Steven 
Weisskopf, Victor 7.1, 8.1, 9.1 
and Ehrenfest 
and first atomic explosion 
on ALAS committee 14.1, 15.1 
at Shelter Island Conference 15.1, 15.2, 15.3 
joins RO on plane to Boston 
appalled by his treatment of Peters 
opposed to H-bomb 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 
supports RO 
and RO’s 60th birthday tribute 
speaks at his memorial service 
Weizsacker, Carl von 13.1, 13.2 
Wentzel, Gregor 
Western Consumers Union 
Weyl, Hermann 
Wheeler, John Archibald 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 13.1, 15.1, 16.1, 
16,2,.17.1, 17.2, 17,3; 191 
Where We Stand (TV program) 
White, Milton 
White, Steve 
“white dwarfs” 9.1, 9.2, 9.3 
Whitehead, A. N. 4.1, 4.2 
Whitney, Hassler 
Whitson, Lish 
Wiersma, E. C. 
Wigner, Eugene 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 11.1, 11.2, 11.3, 13.1, 
19,1, 19,2 
Williams, J. H. 
Williams, William Howell 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 


Wilson, Anne 14.1, 15.1, 15.2 
Wilson, Charles, Defense Secretary 
Wilson, General Donald 17.1, 18.1 
Wilson, Jane 
Wilson, Robert 11.1, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 13.1, 13.2, 14.1, 14.2 
Wings over Europe (Nichols and Browne) 
Wolff, Herbert 
Wood, John 
Woolf, Virginia 5.1, 6.1 
World War, First 2.1, 2.2, 5.1 
Worthington, Hood 
Wouthuysen, Sig 
“The Multiple Production of Mesons” (with RO and H. Lewis) 
Wu, Chien Shiung 
Wyman, Jeffries 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 
Wyman, Jeffries (grandfather) 


Yale University 

Jews 
Yang, Chen Ning 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4, 19.5, 19.6, 19.7 
Yukawa, Hideki 16.1, 17.1, 19.1 

new particle hypothesis 9.1, 9.2, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 15.1, 15.2, 16.1 


Zacharias, Jerrold 17.1, 17.2, 17.3 

Zangwill, Israel: The Melting Pot 1.1 

Zeitschrift fiir Physik 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 8.1 
Zeleny, John 8.1, 8.2 

“ZORC” 17.1, 17.2 

Zubilin, Vasily 

Zuckert, Eugene 17.1, 18.1 

Zwicky, Fritz 9.1, 9.2 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Ray Monk is professor of philosophy at the University of 
Southampton and the author of two previous biographies, Ludwig 
Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius, for which he was awarded the 
1991 Duff Cooper Prize for best work of nonfiction in English, 
and a two-volume biography of Bertrand Russell. He lives in 
England. 


The infant Oppenheimer with his mother, Ella. 


Oppenheimer in the arms of his father, Julius, whom he later described as “one of the most tolerant and human of 
men.” (photo credit ins 


Oppenheimer (right) at about ten, with a friend, pursuing one of his childhood passions: building with blocks. 


THE WORLD'S NUW YORK APARTMEN HOUSE ALBUM ve 


NO. 155 RIVERSIDE DRIVE. 


South Corner Eighty-cighth Street. 
The building located at the South comer of séth 
St. ant Riverscle Drive, known as No. 153 Riverside Deny 


a twelvesstory fireproof apartment house. It has two apart- 


ne of mine rocens, throe baths and thirteen 


Josets, and the other containiogg ten rece, three baths and 


There are two elevators, one foe service, and the other 


by the plans below. ‘The section in which the bouse is sinustes! 
sa 4 the fieest on the Driwe 


= Ss Ve 


Court 25 Feet Wide 


‘a Ge 


ut 
R 
di 
t 


12 
mal 
‘ 


155 Riverside Drive, Oppenheimer’s childhood home (the picture was taken in 1910, just a year before the 
Oppenheimer family moved there). (photo credit ins.4) 


“A little precious, and perhaps a little arrogant, but very interesting, full of ideas.” Oppenheimer at Harvard. 


William Boyd, one of the few close friends Oppenheimer had at Harvard. 


One of Oppenheimer’s best friends from New Mexico, the writer Paul Horgan. (photo credit ins.7) 


Frederick Bernheim, Oppenheimer’s friend and Harvard roommate. (photo credit ins.8) 


The Upper Pecos Valley, Oppenheimer’s favorite landscape, where “for the first time in his life,” according to 
Herbert Smith, who accompanied him on his first visit there in 1922, Oppenheimer “found himself loved, admired, 
sought after.” (photo 


The great Cambridge physicist Paul Dirac. (photo credit ins.11) 


Patrick Blackett, “a young Oedipus. Tall, slim, beautifully balanced and always looking better dressed than 
anyone.” (ph re ) 


Niels Bohr, the man whom Oppenheimer admired over all others, in 1922. (photo credit ins.13) 


Max Born (seated), Oppenheimer’s Ph.D. supervisor at Gottingen, in 1922. Behind him. (eft to right) are: William 
Osler, Niels Bohr, James Franck, and Oscar Klein. (photo cre 


Charlotte Riefenstahl (center). (photo credit ins.15) 


Werner Heisenberg in 1933, the year after he was awarded the Nobel Prize. 


Paul Ehrenfest in 1927. 


Oppenheimer on Lake Zurich with I. I. Rabi, H. M. Mott-Smith, and (smiling rather sinisterly at the camera) 
Wolfgang Pauli, 1929. (photo credit ins.18) 


> 


Oppenheimer in 1930 during his first year at Berkeley. (photo credit ins.19) 


Ernest Lawrence at Berkeley in the 1930s with one of the early cyclotrons. (p 


Oppenheimer’s wife, Kitty, who was almost universally disliked among his colleagues at Los Alamos and later at 
Princeton. (ph edit ins.22) 


Perro Caliente—“hot dog!” (photo credit ins.23) 


Haakon Chevalier, whose very brief, halfhearted, and unsuccessful attempt to contribute to Soviet espionage had 
deep and lasting consequences for Oppenheimer and himself. (photo credit ins.24) 


Frank Oppenheimer. (photo credit ins.25) 


Jean Tatlock, Oppenheimer’s fiancée and fellow traveler in 1930s radical politics. (photo credit ins.26) 


Steve Nelson, a leading figure in the U.S. Communist Party and in the attempts to provide the Soviet Union with 
the allies’ atomic secrets. (p C 


*¥ 
CALIFORNIA 
—% os 


Joe Weinberg, Rossi Lomanitz, David Bohm, and Max Friedman pose for a street photographer, a picture that 
would arouse the FBI’s interest in all four for many years after it was taken. e 


The staff of the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley sitting on the 60-inch cyclotron in 1939. Lawrence is in the front 
row, fourth from the left; Oppenheimer is in the top row at the back with a pipe in his mouth. (photo credit 


Julian Schwinger, who became Oppenheimer’s research assistant in 1940 and went on to develop quantum 
electrodynamics, win the Nobel Prize, and be recognized as one of America’s greatest-ever physicists. (photo credit 
ins.30) 


The young, brilliant, and mischievous Richard Feynman, who became Schwinger’s main rival for being the greatest 
physicist the United States has ever produced. 


The Los Alamos Ranch School, which became the site of the laboratory that produced the world’s first atomic 
bombs. (photo credit ins.32) 


11 tied ~ 2 
Se 
‘-e 


en 
- 


a ~~ 


The indomitable General Groves, whose fearsome power of will was an important factor in the success of the 
Manhattan Project. 


Enrico Fermi in Chicago in 1942, at a time when he was working on the project that would succeed in producing 
the world’s first fission chain reaction. (photo credit ins.34) 


The graphite pile at Stagg Field in Chicago, where, on December 2, 1942, Fermi and his team successfully 
produced a chain reaction, thereby showing that it was indeed possible to produce energy through nuclear fission. 


Hans Bethe in the 1940s. 


Klaus Fuchs. (photo credit ins.37) 


Edward Teller, 1956. (pho 


INCHES 


Typically unimpressive results of Seth Neddermeyer’s early attempts at implosion. 


The Nagasaki and Hiroshima bombs. (photo credit ins.40) 


Conventional 
explosive Gun barrel 


Hollow Uranium Cylinder 
"bullet" target 


The “Little Boy” design, as reverse engineered by John Coster-Mullen. (photo credit ins.41) 


Workers at Oak Ridge, Tennessee. Though they did not know it, what they were doing was controlling the isotope- 
separation plants that produced the enriched uranium that was used in the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima. (photo 


y VA 


Preparing the Trinity test, the world’s first experience of an atomic explosion (phc 


Preparing the Trinity test, the world’s first experience of an atomic explosion 


The Trinity explosion. “A few people laughed, a few people cried. Most people were silent. I remembered the line 
from the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad Gita: Vishnu is trying to persuade the prince that he should do his duty 
and to impress him takes on his multiarmed form and says: ‘Now I am become death, the destroyer of worlds.’ ” 


Oppenheimer and Groves at the Trinity test site. (photo credit ins.45) 


Oppenheimer and Kitty in Japan, 1960. 


The cover of the first issue of Physics Today, May 1948. Oppenheimer was by te time so famous he could be 
represented just by his hat. (photo cred: 8) 


Albert Einstein and Leo Szilard in 1946, recreating for the film Atomic Power the moment in 1939 when they 
drafted the famous letter to President Roosevelt that led to the creation of the Manhattan Project. (photo credit 


ins.49) 
eeruit Polystyrene 
FylnuM  Levitated Filled 
Urenium Weapon Case (¢.9. aluminum 
High Reflector Plutonium Shield Radiation “ae / 
Explosive Pit Channel Hohlraum / Radiation Case (¢.9. lead) 


Uranium Pusher/Temper 


Lithium-6 Deuteride 
Fusion Fuel 


Hollow Plutonium 
“Spark Plug” 


The “technically sweet” Ulam-Teller design of the hydrogen bomb. (photo credit ins.50) 


The “Mike” test in 1952, the first successful explosion of a fusion device, the force of which was 800 to 1,000 times 
more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb. 


Oppenheimer lectures Ed Murrow on physics during the making of the television program See It Now. 


Oppenheimer, Toni, and Peter at Olden Manor, Princeton. 


Lewis Strauss. (photo credit ins.55) 


Edward Teller congratulates Oppenheimer on his Fermi Prize award in 1964, attracting icy looks from Kitty. 


Lp kubeabebib ssn abodibdd bodbdd af 444) é 6! 
1D. bebidas a dd de | 


Oppenheimer giving a speech during his last visit to Los Alamos in 1964. (photo credit ins.57) 


Oppenheimer photographed for Life magazine, 1949. (photo credit ins.58) 


ALSO BY RAY MONK 


How to Read Wittgenstein 

Bertrand Russell: The Ghost of Madness, 1921-1970 
Bertrand Russell: The Spirit of Solitude, 1872-1921 
Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius 


