J. Robert 
Oppenheimer 


A LIFE 


ae 
Pell 
us * 


ABRAHAM PAIS 


with supplemental material by ROBERT P. CREASE 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
A Life 


ALSO BY ABRAHAM PAIS 


The Genius of Science: 
Ai Portrait Gallery of Twentieth-Century Physicists 


A Tale of Two Continents: 
A Physicist's Life in a Turbulent World 


Einstein Lived Here 
Niels Bobr's Times, in Physics, Philosophy, and Pokty 


Inward Bound: 


Of Matter and Forces in the Physical World 


Subtle Is the Lord: 
The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein 


Twentieth Century Physics I-III 
(eds. with Laurie K. Brown and Sir Brian Pippard) 


ALSO BY ROBERT P. CREASE 


The Prism and the Pendulum: 
The Ten Most Beautiful Experiments in Science 
Making Physics: 
A Biography of Brookhaven National Laboratory 
Peace and War: 
Reminiscences of a Life on the Frontiers of Science 
(with Robert Serber) 
The Play of Nature: 


Experimentation as Performance 


The Second Creation: 


Makers of the Revolution in Twentieth-Century Science 
(with Charles C. Mann) 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
A Life 


ABRAHAM Pals 


WITH SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL 
BY ROBERT P. CREASE 


OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 


2006 


OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that 
further Oxford University’s objective of excellence 
in research, scholarship, and education. 


Oxford New York 

Auckland Cape Town Dares Salaam HongKong Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 


With offices in 

Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 


Copyright © 2006 by Oxford University Press 


Published by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016 
www.oup.com 


Oxford isa registered trademark of Oxford University Press 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 

without the prior permission of Oxford University Press. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Pais, Abraham, 1918- 

J. Robert Oppenheimer : a life / Abraham Pais ; with supplemental material 
by Robert P. Crease. 

. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN-13: 978-0-19-516673-6 ISBN-10: 0-19-516673-6 
1. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967. 2. Atomic bomb—United States—History. 
3. Physicists—United States—Biography. I.Crease,RobertP. IL. Title. 
QC16.062P35 2005 530'.092—dce22 2005002173 


Robert P. Crease and Oxford University Press gratefully acknowledge permission granted for the use 
of material from the following sources: by Charles Weiner for Alice Kimball Smith and Charles 
Weiner, eds. Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and Recollections, originally published by Harvard 
University Press in 1980. Reissued in paperback with a new foreword by Stanford University 
Press in 1995; by Peter Goodchild, BBC books, and Watson, Little Ltd., for material from 
Peter Goodchild’s Robert Oppenheimer: Shattterer of Worlds (BBC Books, 1980); from Peace and War, 
by Robert Serber with Robert P. Crease (Columbia University Press, 1998) reprinted with 
permission of the publisher; by the Florida State University Libraries for material from an 
unpublished interview with Paul Dirac, May 14, 1963; by Olke Ublenbeck for permission to 
print material from an unpublished interview with George Uhlenbeck, March 30, 1962; and by 
Columbia University Oral History Office for permission to print material from an interview 
with I. I. Rabi, “Reminiscences of I. I. Rabi,” 11 January 1983. 


987654321 
Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper 


To my wife, Ida 


CONTENTS 


Foreword by Ida Nicolaisen iii 
Preface by Robert P. Crease xvii 


Introduction by Abraham Pais xi 


CHAPTER 1 


First Encounters 7 


CHAPTER 2 
Background: Early Years 4 


CHAPTER 3 


University Studies 8 


CHAPTER 4 


Postdoctoral Studies 74 
Harvard 14 
Caltech 14 
Leiden 715 
Zurich 17 


viii CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 5 
The California Professor as Teacher 20 


CHAPTER 6 


The California Professor as Researcher 24 
More on QED 24 
Cosmic Rays 26 
Electron-Positron Theory 28 
Nuclear Physics 29 
Shower Theory 29 
Mesons 30 
Astrophysics and Cosmology 37 


cuapten / 


Oppenheimer’s Opinion of His Own Teaching and Research in 
California 33 


CHAPTER 8 
Personal Life in the 1930s 34 


CHAPTER 9g 
“The Shatterer of Worlds” 39 


CHAPTER 1 0 


In Which Oppenheimer Enters the World Stage 45 


CHAPTER 1 1 


An Atomic Scientist’s Credo 49 


CHAPTER 1 2 


The Institute Prior to Oppenheimer’s Arrival 59 
The Flexner Years 69 
The Aydelotte Years 73 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 1 3 


In Which Oppenheimer Is Elected Director of the Institute and 
Chairman of the General Advisory Committee 77 


CHAPTER 1 4 


Oppenheimer’s Early Years as Institute Director 86 


CHAPTER 15 


Oppenheimer and the World of Physics: 1946-1954 96 
“The Great Charismatic Figure” 96 
Building Up Physics at the Institute 702 
F.J. Dyson 103 
C.N. Yang 704 
T. D. Lee 105 
Of Some Who Came and Some Who Went 106 
Hideki Yukawa 106 
Sin-itiro Tomonaga 106 
David Joseph Bohm 707 
John von Neumann 708 
Oswald Veblen 109 
Oppenheimer as Leader of Conferences 770 
Shelter Island, June 1947 170 
Pocono, March/April 1948 774 
Solvay, September/October 1948 7176 
Old Stone, April 1949 777 
Rochester I, December 1950 777 
Rochester II (January) and III (December) 1952 778 
IBM, April 1953 779 
A Book Review, October 1953 727 
Japan, September 1953 727 
Rochester IV, January 1954 122 


CHAPTER 1 6 


Further on Oppenheimer the Man 123 
Los Alamos Vignettes 123 
Robert Wilson 123 


x CONTENTS 


Hans Bethe 125 
Edward Teller 126 
Enrico Fermi 129 
Richard Feynman 730 
Luis Alvarez 730 
Robert Serber 730 
Niels Bohr 737 

Young Wives’ Tales 134 
Elsie McMillan 7134 
Bernice Brode 134 

Robert Oppenheimer 136 

More Personal Recollections 7139 


CHAPTER 1 7 


Atomic Politics in the Early Postwar Years 144 

1945-1946 144 
October 3, 1945 144 
August 1, 1946 7144 
October 1946 145 
December 1946 145 

The Acheson-Lilienthal Plan 7146 

The Baruch Plan 157 

1946 as the Highest Point of Oppenheimer’s Political 
Contributions 7155 

Oppenheimer’s Public Expressions on Atomic Policy: 
1947-1948 157 


CHAPTER 1 8 


Of the First Serious Enemies and of the First Russian A-Bomb 163 
In Which the First Clouds Appear 163 
The First Soviet A-Bomb 166 


CHAPTER 1 9 


Of the Superbomb and of Spy Stories 168 
Varia: 1947-1949 168 
Shall the United States Develop the Super? 177 
Emil Klaus Julius Fuchs et al. 777 


CONTENTS xi 


CHAPTER 20 


The New Super 7183 
The Teller-Ulam Invention 183 
Oppenheimer’s Views on the Super 787 
Oppenheimer’s Participation in Panels: 1950-1953 788 
The Long Range Objectives Panel 788 
Project Gabriel 189 
Project Charles 789 
Project Vista 189 
Project Lincoln 7190 
1952: Oppenheimer Leaves the General Advisory Committee 197 


CHAPTER 21 


Atomic Politics in the Early 1950s 793 
The Doctrine of Massive Retaliation 193 
Operation Candor 194 
The Opening Salvos of the Attackers 196 
May 1953 197 
June 5, 1953 7198 
June 20, 1953 7198 
July 3, 1953 198 
July 7, 1953 198 
July 1953 798 
August 1953 198 
August 20, 1953 198 
November 12, 1953 798 
November 1953 207 
November-December 1953 207 


CHAPTER 22 


In Which the Excrement Hits the Ventilator 202 
The Oppenheimer-Strauss Meeting, December 1953 202 
Eisenhower Erects a “Blank Wall” 204 
Preparations for the Hearings 208 
Oppenheimer and McCarthy 2/2 


xii == CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 23 


In Which the News of the Hearings Is Made Public 274 
How Einstein and I First Heard 274 
First Newspaper Comments 2/6 


Supplemental Material by Robert P. Crease 


CHAPTER 24 


“Open Book”: The Hearing in the Matter of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 227 
The Hearing: April 12-May 6, 1954 232 
Findings, Appeal, Decision: May 17-June 29 250 


CHAPTER 25 


No Final Judgment 259 
First Judgments 259 
Post-Mortems 264 
Cultural Judgments 265 
The Sense of Tragedy 268 


CHAPTER 26 


Insider in Exile 272 
Institute Director 273 
Science Impresario 278 
Speaker and Author 285 
St.John 292 
Rehabilitation and Retirement 295 


CHAPTER 2/ 


Cloaked Mountain Peak 300 


Notes 311 
Principal Sources Used 335 
Index 337 


FOREWORD 


In spring 2000, at our home in Copenhagen, my husband Abraham Pais 
presented me with the first copy of his new book, The Genius of Science, a 
series of essays on the great scientists of the twentieth century. Typical of 
Bram, as he was known to friends, there was no time to celebrate. Without 
further ado, he excused himself to return to his writing. He was already 
over twenty-chapters deep into his biography of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 
He completed the draft of one more chapter before he succumbed to a heart 
attack and subsequent complications on August 2. How he intended to com- 
plete the manuscript, we only know from notes. 

Bram began his second career, that of writing history of science, quite 
late in life. He did so asa scientist who for decades had been in the forefront 
of particle physics, taking part in seminal colloquia and seminars. He was a 
colleague of such distinguished scientists of the twentieth century as Albert 
Einstein, Paul Dirac, Niels Bohr, Wolfgang Pauli, Isidor Rabi, Tsung Dao 
Lee, Chen Ning Yang, Oskar Klein, John Von Neumann, George Uhlen- 
beck, Eugine Wigner and Mitchell Feigenbaum. His contributions to the 
history of physics, Imvard Boundand Twentieth Century Physics I-III (as contribu- 
tor and editor with Laurie Brown and Sir Brian Pippard), and his biogra- 
phies and essays on the men and women who gave birth to modern science, 
have been widely acknowledged. The American Physical Society and the 
American Institute of Physics have co-sponsored The Abraham Pais Prize, 
“for outstanding scholarly achievements in the history of physics,” awarded 
for the first time in April 2005, the World Year of Physics. 


xiv FOREWORD 


Over the years, Bram worked systematically on the intriguing life of Rob- 
ert Oppenheimer, his complex personality and scientific contributions, and, 
not least, the role he played in the history of the United States. Beginning in 
the early 1970s, Bram conducted interviews and collected material about the 
man and his work. Apart from keeping lists with abbreviated references to 
sources, Bram made no preliminary outlines, not even in the form of a table 
of contents. Having combed through relevant books, articles, scientific pa- 
pers, newspaper clippings, etc., and underlined excerpts of almost two full 
shelves of transcripts of the Oppenheimer hearings, Bram started head on by 
weaving a largely chronological tale to be intercepted with chapters on themes 
he found particularly important or illustrative of Oppenheimer and his time. 
One such unfinished chapter, not included in this book, dealt with Oppen- 
heimer’s handling of language, which Bram admired. In that respect, he 
was, in Bram’s judgment, “without peer among scientists.” 

Bram had a distinct, crisp style of writing with clear ideas of how and 
what he wanted to communicate to his readers. He read excessively— 
history, biography, novels—not only for subject matter but for the sheer 
pleasure of good writing. He was deeply interested in language, a passion he 
shared with Oppenheimer, not only as a simple means of communication 
but as a way of conveying information at a more profound level, as inti- 
mated in his essay on the history of science entitled, The Power of the Word, 
published in No Trath Except in the Details, edited by A. J. Knox and D. M. 
Siegel (1995). 

Bram wrote only a few hours a day, but those were concentrated ones. 
After a brisk walk in the morning, he would sit down with a cup of coffee 
and his beloved pipe in front of an open window, get his thoughts together 
and then write on. Any disturbance during that time was painful to Bram, 
almost physically so. He wrote only in longhand with his favorite Mont 
Blanc pen (computers were out of the question): Big, roundish letters across 
ruled yellow pads with paragraphs, footnotes and references meticulously 
in place as he proceeded. Though Bram claimed that he worked slowly and 
had to rewrite a good deal, most of his manuscripts, now in the Rockefeller 
Archive Center, reveal that in reality little was changed once his thoughts 
were committed to paper. What did consume his time, apart from the nor- 
mal addition of phrases and paragraphs, was the insertion of new notes. 
Bram stuck to asystem of consecutive numbering in the manuscript, implying 
that once a new note was added all subsequent ones had to be renumbered—all 
again in longhand. This system has been maintained in the printed edition for 
practical reasons. 


FOREWORD xv 


As the work progressed, Bram would share his analyses with me and 
give me chapters for comment. He told me of his decision, for instance, not 
to weave his account around the Los Alamos period because so many writ- 
ers, including eminent scientists who themselves had taken part in the Man- 
hattan Project, had already dealt with this subject in depth. 

When I reread Bram’s manuscript, I found it so close to completion that 
publication seemed possible. A devoted colleague of Bram, Dr. Frederick 
Seitz, a former president of Rockefeller University, and Jeffrey Robbins, a 
senior editor at Joseph Henry Press, kindly read the manuscript and sup- 
ported this conclusion. Oxford University Press, Bram’s main publisher, 
suggested expanding the manuscipt with supplementary chapters to com- 
plete the tale of Oppenheimer’s life. Dr. Robert Crease willingly accepted 
to write these and to review the draft manuscript. I wish to express my deep 
gratitude for the time and care with which he completed this task. 


In 1963, Bram joined Rockefeller University where he enjoyed ideal work- 
ing conditions and outstanding colleagues for almost four decades. The gen- 
erosity of this great institution has also been extended to me, granting me 
ample time and space to deal with Bram’s papers and manuscripts, for which 
I am deeply grateful. I am particularly indebted to Dr. Nicholas Khuri and 
Dr. Mitchell Feigenbaum at the Center for Studies in Physics and Biology 
for facilitating my work in every possible respect. I also wish to express 
appreciation to Jan Mair for her competent assistence in typing the manu- 
script as she did so many others of Bram’s over the years. 

Since 1986, Bram worked part of the year at the Niels Bohr Archive, 
Copenhagen University, Denmark. I wish to thank the director, Finn 
Aaserud, and other staff members for their kind support of Bram’s work. 

The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation generously lent its support to this project 
for which Bram, as well as I, have been most grateful. 

Good friends have offered invaluable assistence and advice. I am particu- 
larly grateful to Torsten Wiesel, the former president of Rockefeller Univer- 
sity, and his wife Jean Stein; to the writer Wendy Gimbel; to Paula Deitz, the 
editor of The Hudson Review, and to John Manger, who edited Bram’s first book, 
Subtle Is the Lord. Last but not least, I have had unwavering support from my 
dear stepson, Joshua Pais, in the completion of Bram’s last piece of writing. 


Ida Nicolaisen 

Senior researcher, 

Nordic Institute of Asian Studies, 
Copenhagen University 


PREFACE 


When Abraham Pais passed away, his manuscript on Oppenheimer was 
about three-quarters complete. It cut off on the morning of the first day of 
Oppenheimer’s hearing following the revocation of his security clearance. 
Pais’s widow, Ida Nicolaisen, and Kirk Jensen, an editor at Oxford University 
Press, asked me to add just enough material to flesh out the story into a com- 
plete biography, keeping my own contributions to a minimum and leaving Pais’s 
manuscript intact. I therefore composed short chapters on Oppenheimer’s hear- 
ing, on reactions to the hearing, on Oppenheimer’s life and work after trial, and 
on the year of his death. Wherever I could, I quoted from the notes Pais 
made after his conversations. I tried to steer the narrative toward material 
that Pais thought important, as indicated by markers or notes in the margins of 
books, and folders with his handwritten thoughts and notes from interviews— 
many on yellowing pages, some on the backs of pages which Pais, wearing 
his physicist’s hat, had scribbled equations. I tried to identify Pais’s citations 
of secondary sources, which were not always indicated in the draft manu- 
script. I noted certain places where, in preparing this ambitious and de- 
manding work, he had paraphrased the secondary literature he found most 
valuable, passages that he would no doubt have rewritten in the final ver- 
sion. I have attempted to locate and provide citations for each of these, 
though some cases may have escaped notice. I would like to thank historian 
Barton Bernstein for his inspiration and help in this effort. I would also like 
to thank Freeman Dyson for allowing me to read and quote from his corre- 
spondence; T. D. Lee, Silvan Schweber, and C. N. Yang for conversations 


xviii PREFACE 


about Oppenheimer. I worked on this book during part of my sabbatical 
from Stony Brook University while at the Dibner Institute for the History 
of Science and Technology, at MIT, and am indebted to its director, George 
E. Smith, and to other members of its staff for help of various kinds. 

In his autobiography, Pais observes that one of the major differences 
between writing a research paper and writing a book is the necessity of 
following, in the latter, the so-called “iceberg principle”: “just show the tip 
of the iceberg, yet convey—and this is a subtle task—that you are aware of 
much more that lies beneath the surface.” Under the circumstances, to best 
complete Pais’s trajectory I take the iceberg approach myself, being as spare 
as possible—even when this means not addressing topics that Pais himself 
clearly intended to discuss, such as Oppenheimer’s performance as Institute 
director, his relations with his children, and various topics in postwar phys- 
ics; and even when it means seeming to slight subjects of which one would 
anticipate more discussion in a contemporary biography of Oppenheimer, 
such as his left-wing associations. There is a kind of unfortunate, dismaying 
aptness that a biography of Oppenheimer should have to change course 
abruptly and end up in a different place than expected. 


Robert P. Crease 
New York, February 2005 


INTRODUCTION 


In 1991, after my biographies of Einstein and Niels Bohr had come out, and 
I had also published a book on the twentieth-century history of particles 
and fields, several friends urged me to do Oppenheimer next. That is a worth- 
while idea, I would invariably reply. 

That thought had in fact already occurred to me 20 years earlier, not 
long after Oppenheimer’s death, and well before I had begun writing the 
book just mentioned. Already then I had interviewed a number of persons, 
many long gone since, who had known Robert well: Ruth Cherniss, class- 
mate from the days he was a boy at the Ethical Culture School in New 
York City, and Harold, her husband, a close friend of his and mine, later a 
professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton; Francis Fergus- 
son, a lifelong friend of Robert’s; Frank Oppenheimer, his brother; Melba 
Phillips and Willis Lamb, students from the Berkeley years, later distin- 
guished colleagues; Henry Smyth and Lloyd Garrison, member of the 
Atomic Energy Commission and leading defense lawyer respectively, both 
from the days of the Oppenheimer hearings; Philip Stern, author of a fine 
book on the Oppenheimer case; Kay Russell and Verna Hobson, his secre- 
taries from the Princeton years; and Tsung Dao Lee, Isidor Rabi, Robert 
Serber, George Uhlenbeck, Frank Yang, physics colleagues and personal 
friends. I had made copious notes of those encounters. At that time I was 
still immersed in physics research, however, and was not yet prepared to 
devote efforts at historical writing. So I put those interview records aside in 
a safe place. 


XX INTRODUCTION 


Back to 1991. Having written my first three books, which were well 
received, I turned again, more seriously now, to the idea of writing about 
Oppenheimer. After considerable thought I decided against it, for two main 
reasons. 

First, I had competing projects in my mind, another book on Einstein, 
an autobiography. Secondly, and more importantly, I felt reluctance to take 
on Oppenheimer. I should explain why. When writing on Einstein and 
Bohr, I had not hesitated to mention points of disagreement with them. 
Yet, basically, personal experiences had left me with memories of two not 
just great scientists but also simple and good men. I could not then and still 
cannot say the same of Robert Oppenheimer. 

My reactions to him can be compared with the ways people react to 
New York City. There are those who just hate the city. They do not under- 
stand it. There are also those who just love it. They do not understand it 
either. I am convinced that the right attitude to New York is a love-hate 
relation. It is likewise with me in relation to Oppenheimer. I know of largely 
just love or hate responses among many who knew him—again, those may 
never understand him. Which goes to explain why, in 1991, I was not ready 
to write on Oppenheimer; previous experience had not yet taught me how 
to cope with the life story of a man for whom my feelings were ambivalent. 


The books I had contemplated in 1991 had come out by 1997, when the 
Oppenheimer project came to my mind once again, but now in a context I 
had not thought of before. For meanwhile I had conceived the idea of as- 
sembling in a book a series of word portraits of scientists I have known. 
Why not include Robert in such a collection? That would relieve me of the 
task of writing a more detailed biography of him. I could bypass topics I 
would rather not enter into. 

In the course of time I had assembled a substantial collection of books on 
Oppenheimer. I began my portrait project by taking off a month or so to 
reread those. As I plowed along, I discovered something I could have but 
never realized earlier: there did not exist a full-fledged Oppenheimer biog- 
raphy! The topics in those books, topics very. well treated in some cases, 
focused mainly on his leadership in the Los Alamos bomb project and/or 
on the Oppenheimer hearings of 1954. Here and there one also finds entries 
on his boyhood and his correspondence. Major topics that were either lack- 
ing or incompletely treated were his student years, his role in bringing 
modern physics to America in the 1930s, in my view the most important 


INTRODUCTION — xxi 


contribution of his life, his role as director of the Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton, an assessment of his scientific contributions and of his 
writings to general audiences. And so I found the answer to a question that 
had long been at the back of my mind. Could I possibly add something to 
the plethora of what had been written earlier? Yes, I could. I should write a 
biography, letting it all hang out. 

Now a new problem arose, however. Rough estimates showed that the 
length of such a biography would exceed by much the planned average 
length of the portraits, and therefore would throw that project off balance. 
Hence my final decision—do the portraits first and Oppenheimer later, sepa- 
rately. The portraits have come out in the new millennium under the title 
The Genius of Science. My Oppenheimer story now lies before you. 


My sources have been plentiful and include many personal experiences. For 
17 years we lived in each other’s orbit at the Princeton Institute, Oppen- 
heimer as director, I first as a member, later as a professor there. For most 
of those years the gardens of our homes bordered on each other. Far more 
importantly, in those times our relations were close. Furthermore, I have 
had ample opportunity to observe him in action asa leader of physics at the 
Institute. Regarding that place, I have added below a sketch of its little- 
known early history, as well as brief accounts of appointments Robert made. 
I have also been witness to his role as leader of numerous international 
conferences. 

Other sources include almost complete collections of his papers, both 
on scientific views and on general subjects, including his four books. Ex- 
tracts given in what follows from his writings for the general public will 
illustrate his mastery of language, on occasion perhaps exalted but never 
stooping to the use of sesquipedalian words. Then there are my inter- 
views and my extensive collection of clippings from newspapers and maga- 
zines. Finally, I have in my possession a copy of Oppenheimer’s FBI files, 
7,400 pages in all. (I know that number because I paid the FBI $740 for 
xeroxing, at 10 cents a page.) 

I have also profited, with gratitude, from others’ writings. The principal 
sources so used are acknowledged in a list at the end of this book, as well as 
in references in the course of what follows. Needless to say that errors are 
mine only. 


In the course of writing this book I have kept wondering whether this reliv- 
ing of parts of my past would affect my ambivalence about Robert. It has, 


xxii INTRODUCTION 


somewhat. More strongly than before I feel compassion for a man who 
could never find enough satisfaction with his signal achievements, who for- 
ever was compelled to reach for more. That, not the hearings, was his trag- 
edy, and caused him to have a wretched life. 


Abraham Pais 


“[I]I semblait immédiatement, 
infailliblement atteindre le point 

le plus sensible des consciences 
cultivées, surexciter le centre 

méme . . . ou réside ce qui ne peut 
pas souffrir de ne pas comprendre.” 


Paul Valéry, lettre sur Mallarmé, 
La Revue de Paris, 1* avril 1927. 


“[H]e seemed immediately, 
infallibly, to strike at the most 
sensitive of cultivated 
consciousness, to overstimulate the 
center itself... . where resides 

that which cannot suffer not to 
understand.” 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
A Life 


CHAPTER 1 


FIRST ENCOUNTERS 


On September 19, 1946, a week after I had arrived in the United States for 
the first time, a meeting of the American Physical Society began, held in the 
building of the Engineering Societies in Midtown Manhattan. From the 
minutes of that meeting: “Many guests from overseas were present . . . over 
a thousand people attended.”! I had been asked to give an invited paper’ at 
this gathering of physicists, the biggest I had ever seen. 

My friend Hans Kramers, Holland’s senior physicist at that time, was also 
there. I was sitting next to him at one of the sessions when I saw him scribble 
something on a slip of paper that he handed to me. It read (verbatim), “Turn 
around and pay your respects to Robert Oppenheimer.” I turned and there, 
right behind me, sat the great man who up to that moment had only been 
known to me from newspaper pictures. He grinned pleasantly and stretched 
out his hand, which I shook. Most remarkably—or so Ithought—he sat there 
in a short-sleeved open shirt. I felt I had entered a new civilization, where 
esteemed gentlemen appeared in public wearing neither jacket nor tie. 

I saw Oppenheimer again the next week, in Princeton, where both of us 
attended the meeting on “The Future of Nuclear Science,” part of events in 
celebration of Princeton University’s bicentennial year. After that confer- 
ence I stayed on in Princeton, to start a one-year fellowship at the Institute 
for Advanced Study (called the Institute hereafter). 


On Friday, January 31, 1947, I took a train from Princeton to New York in 
order to attend a session of an American Physical Society meeting at Columbia 


2 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


University. That afternoon Oppenheimer was to give an invited paper on me- 
sons, in the McMillin Theatre. 

Oppenheimer spoke before a packed house. He was a rhetor rather than 
a speaker. Then, as on numerous later occasions, I was struck by his priestly 
style. It was, one might say, as if he were aiming at initiating his audience 
into Nature’s divine mysteries. 

After the conclusion of his lectures I went to say hello to him. He greeted 
me and then said that he urgently needed to talk to me. Would I please give 
him a few moments until he could disengage himself from the crowd. As I 
stood waiting, I tried to play back what he had just told, and recall my 
thought, What the hell have I retained from his talk? I had been intrigued, 
nay moved, by his words, but now found myself unable to reconstruct 
anything of substance. I would now say that this was not just a matter of 
stupidity from my side. 

After a few minutes, Oppenheimer came up to me and said, let’s walk 
down Broadway and find a bar; and so we did. After having settled down, he 
explained why he wanted to see me. He had been offered the directorship of 
the Institute—which was unexpected news to me. He continued by saying 
that this news was confidential and urged me to keep open the possibility of 
remaining longer at the Institute and, in any case, not to make a move until 
he called me with firm news on whether or not he would accept the Institute 
position, a decision he expected shortly. Being anyway in an undecided frame 
of mind, I had nothing to lose by agreeing to his suggestion. 

Weeks passed without any word from Oppenheimer. I became restless, 
my discontent with the Institute grew. (I had applied there hoping to work 
with Pauli, who, however, had left for Zurich just before I had arrived.) 
Then, one afternoon in early April, the telephone rang. I picked up. An 
operator asked if I was Dr. Pais. Yes, I was. She said, Hold the line, Profes- 
sor Oppenheimer is calling long distance from California. 

In order to appreciate my reaction, you should know that, up till that mo- 
ment, I had never in my young life received any long-distance call whatsoever. 
And here the great Oppenheimer was calling, all the way from California! 

I remember verbatim not only what Oppenheimer said after he came on 
the line but also the way he said it, priestly, solemn, “This is Robert 
Oppenheimer. I have just accepted the directorship of the Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study, and I desperately hope that you will be there next year, so 
that we can begin building up theoretical physics there.” 

Desperately, no less. What could I say? I said yes, of course. The man was 
such a consummate kingmaker. A week later, Oppenheimer called me up 


FIRST ENCOUNTERS 3 


again, this time from Los Alamos, confirming his earlier communication 
and adding further details. 
My fate for the next 16 years was sealed. 


I knew Oppenheimer from 1946 until 1967, the year of his death. This 
essay is built around my impressions of him through those years of per- 
sonal contacts, on interviews I have conducted with others who knew him 
well at one time or another, on his own writings, and on the voluminous 
literature about him, which includes a few very good books. These last 
have been useful to me for a sketch of his younger years, my next topic. 


Much has been written about Oppenheimer’s role in the War years as well 
as about his later turbulent life, to which I shall also have something to add 
hereafter. I do not think that physics research and teaching is the only road 
to salvation, but do believe that none of his contributions deserves higher 
praise and will longer endure than what he did for the growth of American 
physics in the decade before the Second World War. Popular writings about 
him justly portray Oppenheimer as a world figure because of his director- 
ship of the atomic bomb project and as a tragic hero because of events in his 
postwar life. Nowhere does one read there of his leadership as a pure scien- 
tist, however. It is one of my aims to set that matter straight in this essay. I 
shall write of his major role as teacher of quantum field theory, which caused 
this subject to spread all over the United States, as well as of his own scien- 
tific contributions, many of them brilliant. I shall not refrain, however, 
from noting the many errors he made in his calculations. 


CHAPTER 2 


BACKGROUND: EARLY YEARS 


Ben Oppenheimer, Robert’s grandfather, was a peasant farmer and grain 
merchant from Hanau, in the German state Hessen, near Frankfurt. “He 
was an unsuccessful businessman, born in a hovel, really, in an almost me- 
dieval German village, with a taste for scholarship. . . . It was clear that one 
of the great joys for him in life was reading but he had probably hardly 
been to school. He knew that I was interested in architecture and so he gave 
me . . . an encyclopedia of architecture which I still have.”* That happened 
when at age seven Robert visited Ben in Germany. “He gave me also a 
mineral collection . . . a box with maybe two dozen samples.”* That trig- 
gered his hobby for mineralogy, which was to last for years. 

In 1888, Robert’s father Julius, then a young man of 17, emigrated to 
New York. At that time he had very little means and barely spoke English, 
but steadily worked himself up to become a prosperous textile importer 
with a good command of the language. He was widely read and developed a 
good taste for the arts. In due course he acquired paintings by Van Gogh 
(three of these), Renoir, Vuillard, and Derain, which at that time could be 
bought for relatively little money. 

In 1903 Julius married Ella Friedman, like him of European-Jewish de- 
scent. Her family had lived for generations in the Baltimore-Philadelphia 
region. She was an accomplished painter who taught for a while at Hunter 
College. Her right arm was always covered with a long sleeve and a glove. 
“She was born without a right hand; the glove contained a primitive pros- 
thetic device, a spring between the artificial thumb and forefinger.”* 


BACKGROUND: EARLY YEARS 5 


On April 22, 1904, Robert, their first child, was born in their residence 
on West 94th Street. He had one brother, Frank (1912-1985), who also 
became a physicist. (Another brother died in infancy.) The household in- 
cluded grandmother Friedman and two servants. Those who knew them at 
that time speak of a united family, hospitable people, not concerned with 
making an impression.* 

Robert was still very young when the family moved to a large, richly 
furnished apartment on the eleventh floor of 155 Riverside Drive, near 88th 
Street, facing the Hudson River. He spent his boyhood and youth there in 
an atmosphere that “was like Ibsen’s Rosmersholm, that aristocratic estate where 
voices and passions were always subdued, and where children never cried— 
and when they grew up never laughed.”* Oppenheimer himself has remem- 
bered: “I-think my father was one of the most tolerant and human of men. 
His idea of what to do for people was to let them find out what they wanted. 
... I think my mother especially was dissatisfied with the limited interest I 
had in play and in people of my own age, and I don’t know over what years 
but I know she kept trying to get me to be more like other boys, but with 
indifferent success.”” On another occasion he said, “[I became] an abnor- 
mally repulsive good little boy [with] no normal healthy way to be a bas- 
tard.”® A friend from his youth has “thought his parents had handled their 
precocious son very well. They knew they had a changeling in Robert, and 
a sometimes moody one at that. They did not allow this fact to dominate 
the household but tried instead to create an environment in which indepen- 
dence and talent could flourish.” 

Robert’s parents had rejected orthodox Jewish society. This may in part 
explain why he never spoke of himself as a Jew. I recall a discussion with 
Isidor Rabi in which we both concluded that it might have been much 
better for him if he had been freer in regard to his Jewish descent. 

In September 1911, Robert entered the second grade of the Ethical Cul- 
ture School on Central Park West near 63rd Street, where he would con- 
tinue until graduating from the high school division in February 1921. “It is 
characteristic that I do not remember any of my classmates.”'° In those 
years he did not participate in any sports. He was driven everywhere, at- 
tended by servants, and in school would not even use stairs, always prefer- 
ring to wait for an elevator. “When I was 10 or 12 years old, minerals, 
writing poems, and building blocks were the three themes I did. ... I was a 
member of the Mineralogical Club very early [at age 11, by far the youngest 
member].”* In his youth he was indifferent to music (he was bored by early 
piano lessons), which, later, he enjoyed intensely, however. 


6 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Rabi has written: “My wife, who was in some classes with him, remem- 
bers him as brilliant and as being so recognized by the whole school. From 
conversations with him I have the impression that his own regard for the 
school was not affectionate. Too great a dose of ethical culture can often 
sour the budding intellectual who would prefer a more profound approach 
to human relations and man’s place in the universe.”"! 

But Oppenheimer benefited much from those school years: a Greek 
teacher helped him read Homer and Plato in the original, an English teacher 
introduced him to T. S. Eliot, Chekhov, Katherine Mansfield, establishing 
his lifelong tastes in literature. But the most important influence was his 
science teacher: 


I think the most important change came in my junior year in high school... . The 
teacher of physics and chemistry was marvellous; I got so excited that after the 
first year, which was physics, I arranged to spend the summer working with him 
setting up equipment for the following year and I would then take chemistry and 
would do both. We must have spent five days a week together; once in a while we 
would even go off on a mineral-hunting junket as a reward for this. I got inter- 
ested then in electrolytes and conduction; I didn’t know anything about it but I 
did fiddle with a few experiments [although] I don’t remember what they were. 
I loved chemistry so deeply that I automatically now respond when people want 
to know how to interest people in science by saying, “Teach them elementary 
chemistry.’ Compared to physics, it starts right in the heart of things and very 
soon you have that connection between what you see and a really very sweeping 
set of ideas which could exist in physics but is very much less likely to be acces- 
sible. I know that I had a great sense of indebtedness to him.* 


His contemporaries saw a physically awkward boy, bushy hair worn 
long, who blushed easily and seemed different and absorbed.* A school friend 
has remembered: “He was physically . . . rather undeveloped, not in the 
way he behaved but the way he went about, the way he walked, the way he 
sat. There was something strangely childish about him. . . . He was abrupt 
when he came out of his shyness but with all that a very polite sort of 
voice.” Another has recalled that he “had bouts of melancholy, deep, deep 
depressions as a youngster. ... He would seem to be incommunicado emo- 
tionally for a day or two at a time.” “He hardly ever laughed. . . . These 
traits so firmly set him apart from his contemporaries that at summer camp 
when he was fourteen, he was taunted mercilessly. The harassment culmi- 
nated in his being locked naked in an icehouse over night.”"* These various 
comments by schoolmates show a blend of compassion and irritation if not 
anger. Such disparate responses would follow Oppenheimer all his life. 


About the time Robert had graduated from high school, with straight A’s, 
his father presented him with a 28-foot sloop that hisson baptized Trimethy, 


BACKGROUND: EARLY YEARS 7 


after trimethylene dioxide, a colorless liquid that smells like pickled her- 
ring. The boat was moored in Bay Shore, Long Island, where the family 
had a summer house (and a 40-foot yacht), and Oppenheimer and his small 
brother would sail all over the area. He “developed a taste for danger. He 
was no nonchalant daredevil—somehow he needed to challenge some sus- 
pected weakness within himself.” 

Robert had been admitted to Harvard, but “I didn’t get to go to Harvard 
immediately.” During a trip to Europe the following summer “I went off 
on a long prospecting trip into the old mines, Joachimsthal [in Bohemia], 
and I came down with a heavy, almost fatal case of trench dysentery... . I 
was sick abed—in Europe, actually, at the time.”* His dysentery gave rise to 
a bout of colitis, leading to ongoing digestive problems. He spent a year 
recuperating, first at home in New York, then, in the summer of 1922 ona 
trip to the West. 

Time spent in New Mexico’s Pecos Valley, in the Sangre de Cristo moun- 
tains northeast of Santa Fe, opened a new world for him. He became an 
enthusiastic, expert, fearless horseman, developing a natural ability with 
horses. His first ride across the Rio Grande and up to the Los Alamos Ranch 
school on the Parajito plateau would determine the site of the wartime labo- 
ratory that, 20 years later, was to become part of the Oppenheimer legend. 


CHAPTER 3 


UNIVERSITY STUDIES 


In September 1922 Oppenheimer entered Harvard College, majoring in 
chemistry. In high school he had been called Bob. Now he became Robert. 
“At Harvard I did a great deal; the maximum number of courses you could 
take was six but I audited two or three more in my third year . . . the free 
availability of the whole library ... got me reading very widely... . Ialmost 
became alive.”* His scientific courses were a mix of theory and experiment. 
He applied himself diligently to his laboratory work, but got more and 
more drawn to theory. As is not uncommon, his interests began to move 
toward physics, particularly influenced by courses given by the great ex- 
perimental physicist Percy Bridgman (1882-1961) and by personal discus- 
sions with him on physics and philosophy. “I must have started physics in 
a major way.”* He petitioned the physics department to take graduate 
courses, adding a list of books he had read. (This list is reproduced in ref. 5, 
p. 29.) “I can quote a story—it may be apocryphal—that, when the faculty 
met to consider this request, [one member] said: ‘Obviously he is a liar, but 
he should get a Ph.D. for knowing their titles.’”* 

His reading of current journals revealed to Oppenheimer that in those 
years, the early twenties, physical theory was in a state of intense ferment. 
Harvard was not the best place for experiencing those intellectual tensions. 
“For Harvard in ’24 and ’25 [it] was not true [that there existed] an aware- 
ness of the theoretical picture on a grand scale.” 

Having completed his undergraduate studies in three years instead of the 
standard four, Oppenheimer received the A.B. degree summa cum laude in 


UNIVERSITY STUDIES 9 


chemistry in 1925, at age 21. In those years, Robert diverted himself by 
writing short stories. 

In spite of his growing interest in theory, Oppenheimer was not yet 
quite prepared to abandon his active interests in experiment, as witness his 
choice of place for post-graduate studies. “I don’t know why I picked Cam- 
bridge [England], but I wanted to go to Rutherford’s laboratory.”* 


In September 1925 Oppenheimer was admitted to Christ College, Cam- 
bridge University, and presented himself to Sir Ernest Rutherford (1871- 
1937), at that time the world’s most renowned experimental physicist. “But 
Rutherford wouldn’t have me. My credentials were peculiar and not im- 
pressive.”* He was sent instead to the laboratory of Sir Joseph John Thomson 
(1856-1940), another famous physicist, who by then was well past his prime, 
however. He worked there until September 1926, but in the meantime “I 
went to the theoretical seminars and then I really began to read the contem- 
porary journals. . . . I was still, in the bad sense of the word, a student.”* 
That brought him face to face with Heisenberg’s paper announcing the 
discovery of quantum mechanics, received the preceding July 25 by the 
German journal Zeitschrift fiir Physik. That article marks the birth of a new era 
in theoretical physics, the end of the quantum paradoxes that had plagued 
the century’s first quarter. “I didn’t learn about quantum mechanics until I 
got to Europe. . . . I remember not liking it. . . . I think I was interested in 
what the hell the electrons were doing. . . . I didn’t like the looseness of the 
relation between the waves and events.”* Nevertheless, Heisenberg’s paper 
greatly aroused Oppenheimer’s interest. 

Of great importance to Robert were his meetings in Cambridge with lead- 
ing theorists. His recollection about his first encounter with Niels Bohr is 
characteristic for both men. “When Rutherford introduced me to Bohr, he 
asked me what I was working on. I told him and he said, ‘How is it going?” I 
said ‘I’m in difficulties.’ He said ‘Are the difficulties mathematical or physi- 
cal?’ I said ‘I don’t know.’ He said ‘That’s bad.’”* Other first encounters: with 
another Cambridge student, the not-quite-two-years-older Paul Dirac (1902- 
1984), who had just completed a seminal paper on the principles of quantum 
mechanics (“He was not easily understood, not concerned with being under- 
stood. I thought he was absolutely grand”)*; with James Chadwick (1891- 
1974); with Ralph Fowler (1889-1944); with Paul Ehrenfest (1880-1933), (“who 
had been extraordinarily warm and friendly”)*; with George Uhlenbeck (1900- 
1988); with Max Born (1882-1970), the leader of the theory group in 
Goettingen; all of them actively engaged in the analysis of the new mechanics. 


10 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


The result of all this was Oppenheimer’s first two research papers” ever, 
written in Cambridge, submitted in May and July 1926 respectively, and 
dealing with issues in quantum mechanics—what else? “That was a mess, 
that first paper [on molecular spectra],” he has said.* The second paper dealt 
with transitions to continuum states in hydrogenic atoms. With these pa- 
pers, Oppenheimer ranks among the first to use quantum mechanics for 
solving problems that had been unmanageable before. These papers “made 
Born ask me to come to Goettingen. . . . [At that time] I had very great 
misgivings about myself on all fronts, but I clearly was going to do theoreti- 
cal physics if I could. I did.” 

In September 1926, Oppenheimer settled in Goettingen for a stay that was 
to last until the summer of 1927. This period was to be quite important for 
his personal and professional growth, and proved to be quite productive; he 
published five papers. One of these, jointly with Born,” dealing with the 
quantum theory of molecules, contains the “Born-Oppenheimer method,” a 
famous paper, still the basis of any treatment of molecules, in which they 
handle the problem with the help of an expansion in terms of the fourth root 
of the electron—nucleus mass ratio. Also quite important was his work, by 
himself, on the theory of continuous spectra, wnexplored territory at that time.?! He 
developed a method for normalizing eigenfunctions in the continuous spec- 
trum, calculated various transition probabilities, the photoelectric effect for 
hydrogen and for X-rays. Nowadays the opacity of hydrogen in the sun, 
calculated with the help of his theory, is a main ingredient for understanding 
stellar interiors. For this work he received the Ph.D. in the spring of 1927, 
“with distinction,” in an uncommonly short time of preparation, two years. 

In Goettingen “I got to be quite a friend with [John] von Neumann. ... 
He had a mind which was in some ways not like any I have ever known. ... 
The most exciting time I had in Goettingen and perhaps the most exciting 
time in my life was when Dirac arrived and gave me the proofs of his paper 
on the quantum theory of radiation,”” the first paper ever on quantum 
electrodynamics. When during an interview, Dirac once was asked, “Oppen- 
heimer indicates that, when he was in Goettingen, he thinks you saw as 
much or more of him than anyone else there,” he replied, “That is so. We 
sometimes went for long walks together, although I had many walks alone.”™ 

Also in Goettingen, Oppenheimer made the first personal acquaintance 
with Heisenberg and Pauli. He has characterized his stay there like this: “I 
find the work hard, thank God, and almost pleasant. . . .”*> Much later, he 
recalled, “I was part of a little community of people,”” unlike his earlier 
Harvard and Cambridge days. 


UNIVERSITY STUDIES 11 


From the Goettingen days dates the first documented evidence (I know 
of) of a character trait of Oppenheimer that was to cause him much trouble, 
especially in his later life: his extreme arrogance. Born has remembered: 
“He was a man of great talent, and he was conscious of his superiority in a 
way which was embarrassing and led to trouble. In my ordinary seminar 
on quantum mechanics, he used to interrupt the speaker, whoever it was, 
not excluding myself, and to step to the blackboard, taking the chalk and 
declaring: ‘This can be done much better in the following manner. ...’ I felt 
that the other members did not like these perpetual interruptions and cor- 
rections.” Born has also recalled how, after having finished a paper of his 
own, “I gave it to Oppenheimer in order for him to check the involved 
calculations. He brought it back and said: ‘I couldn’t find any mistake—did 
you really do this all alone?’”** Edward Condon (1902-1974), another young 
American then in Goettingen, has said, “Trouble is that Oppie is so quick 
on the trigger intellectually, he puts the other guy at a disadvantage. And, 
dammit, he is always right, or right enough.”” 


During his short stay at the Cavendish, Oppenheimer had been disturbed 
and miserable. I have no firsthand knowledge of what caused this, nor do I 
know whether these moods had already manifested themselves at earlier times. 
There are sufficient indications, however, utterances by acquaintances who 
knew him then, to indicate that these emotional problems were serious. 

I do not know either what had caused these difficulties, but find significant 
a comment by a friend who had “sensed [O.’s] disappointment that he was 
not two or three years older and ready to participate [in physics] on an ad- 
vanced level.” At that time, when physics was roaring forward, an age dif- 
ference of just a few years meant a difference of a generation. Heisenberg, 
Dirac, and Pauli, founders of the new mechanics, were only two to four years 
older than Oppenheimer when they had ushered in the new era of quantum 
mechanics. It is no criticism of those who started next that they did not con- 
tribute in equal measure. I should stress at this point that in my opinion 
Oppenheimer’s scientific contributions between 1925 and 1940 were very 
substantial indeed, nothing to be ashamed of, quite the contrary. All that 
said, I can well understand that a brilliant and ambitious young man would 
feel that by just a few years he had missed his chance for immortality. 

To come back to Robert’s problems, already in his Cambridge years his 
American friend Francis Fergusson (1904-1986), himself an Oxford student, 
had “realized how emotionally upset Robert had become.”” In a letter to 


12 ‘J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


him (F.) we find these lines: “Your [F.’s] . . . social adaptivity [is] likely to 
make him[O.] despair. .. . I’m afraid he’d merely cease to think his own life 
worth living.””” Fergusson became 


alerted to Robert’s abnormal emotional condition by a bizarre incident dur- 
ing their holiday reunion in Paris. In the course of one of their customary 
exchanges about intellectual and personal matters, Robert suddenly leapt upon 
Fergusson with the clear intention of strangling him. As tall as Robert and 
more solidly built, Francis had easily warded off the attack, but this uncharac- 
teristic display of violence, combined with Robert’s despair over his inept 
performance in the laboratory and confidences about unsatisfactory sexual 
ventures, convinced Francis that his friend was seriously troubled. Robert was 
immediately contrite.”* 


Some years after Oppenheimer’s death I asked Fergusson (whom I knew 
rather well) about this incident. He confirmed it but was not inclined to 
elaborate. (He did tell me that Oppenheimer visited prostitutes in London.) 
In those later years I once asked Dirac whether he had noted any unusual 
behavior in the Cambridge period. All he replied was that in 1925 or 1926 
Rutherford had once asked him that very same question. Another instance of 
erratic behavior: once, while sitting in a cafe in Goettingen, with some young 
couples, Oppenheimer suddenly crept under the tables and started barking 
like a dog. (Told by Walter Heitler [1904-1981], another Goettingen postdoc, 
to my late friend Res Jost [1918-1990], who in turn told it to me.) That be- 
havior brings to mind the lines by the poet John Dryden (1631-1670): 


Great wits are sure to madness near allied, 
And thin partitions do their bounds divide. 


While in Europe, Oppenheimer sought help of at least two psychiatrists: 


In June of 1926 [he told an acquaintance] that he had dementia praecox [now 
called schizophrenia] and that his psychiatrist had dismissed him because in a 
case like this further analysis would do more harm than good. . . . In the late 
spring or early summer of 1926... [Fergusson met Robert] outside the office of 
a Harley Street psychiatrist. The occasion made a lasting impression on Fergusson. 
“I [saw him] standing on the corner, waiting for me, with his hat on one side of 
his head, looking absolutely weird. I joined him . . . and he walked with terrific 
speed; when he walked his feet turned out . . . and he sort of leaned forward, 
traveled at a terrific clip. I asked him how it had been. He said . . . that the guy 
was too stupid to follow him and that he knew more about his troubles than the 
[doctor] did, which was probably true.”” 


In the years I knew Oppenheimer I had plenty of opportunity to note that 
he could act in unusual ways, but have never observed anything like the be- 
havior related above, nor to my knowledge has anyone else in later times. 


UNIVERSITY STUDIES 13 


In the summer of 1926, following his psychiatric interlude, Oppenheimer 
and two friends went hiking in Corsica—just the break he needed. On that 
holiday he met a girl who became his first serious love. 

“On their last night in Corsica, Oppenheimer became quite agitated, 
saying he must return to Cambridge at once. The reason which he gave 
later in the evening, when he had relaxed somewhat, was that he had left a 
poisoned apple on Patrick Blackett’s desk and must return to make sure 
that Blackett was all right. Was this some elaborate metaphor that Oppen- 
heimer had constructed or was it hallucination? Neither [friend] could ever 
be sure.”*” [Some historians think that this may simply refer to a dubious 
paper that Oppenheimer had left on Blackett’s desk.—RPC] 

Following his Corsica trip, Oppenheimer started his Goettingen period, 
just described. 


CHAPTER 4 


POSTDOCTORAL STUDIES 


Harvard 


In mid-July 1927, Oppenheimer sailed again for the United States, where a 
National Research Council Fellowship was awaiting him. That autumn he 
went back to Harvard. A graduate student, who attended his colloquium 
there on the Born-Oppenheimer paper, has recalled: “I never could figure 
out whether his sibylline declarations were just a form of one-upmanship 
or whether he really did see a lot more in the theory than I did. Some of 
both, I finally decided.”*! While at Harvard he produced three interesting 
papers, one” on the polarization of light excited by electronic impact on 
atoms, another” on a further elaboration of his work on continuous spec- 
tra, and a third™ on the quantum mechanics of electron capture. 


Caltech 


In the beginning of 1928, Robert moved on to the California Institute of 
Technology in Pasadena. There he made his perhaps most original contribu- 
tion, his theory of field emission, she first example of a quantum effect due to barrier 
penetration, antedating by several months the explanation of radioactive alpha 
decay. “Any external electric field, no matter how weak, will in time dissoci- 
ate an atom.”*> In Pasadena we see the first evidence of a feature later to be so 
prominent in his work, close collaboration with experimentalists. 

While in California he began receiving more job offers, and among those 
he declined was one from Harvard, being more tempted by two other pro- 


POSTDOCTORAL STUDIES 15 


posals. “I visited Berkeley and I thought I’d like to go to Berkeley because it 
was a desert. There was no theoretical physics and I thought it would be 
nice to try to start something. I also thought it would be dangerous because 
I'd be too far out of touch so I kept the connection with Caltech. . . . [liked 
it enough to want to come back and enough to feel that it was a place where 
I would be checked if I got too far off base and where I would learn of 
things that might not be adequately reflected in the published literature.”” 
He convinced Berkeley to release him in time to teach in the spring semes- 
ter at Caltech. So it came about that Oppenheimer was soon to hold con- 
current assistant professorships on the West Coast. In 1931 he was promoted 
to associate professor, in 1936 to full professor, at both places. 

Robert’s experience at Caltech in 1928 revealed to him his deficiencies in 
mathematics, and he secured a Fellowship of the International Education 
Board to return to Europe for another year, delaying assumption of his 
California posts. By that summer he was diagnosed with tuberculosis, how- 
ever, and for relief he went to the New Mexico mountains. 

On that trip he also visited friends with whom, one day, he went on a 
horseback ride to the high country. There he fell in love with a property, 
a cabin built of trunks and adobe, surrounded by 160 acres of pasture. It 
was for rent. “Hot dog,” Robert exclaimed, leased the place, later bought 
it, and acquired several saddle horses. He called his own horse Crisis (!) 
and the property Perro Caliente, which is Spanish for hot dog. The cabin— 
Robert called it the ranch—had a large porch, two rooms downstairs, two 
bedrooms upstairs, and initially lacked sanitary facilities. It became the 
base for expeditions over the whole area, and a vacation spot for his fam- 
ily for the rest of his life. It was at the end of a sloping meadow of wild 
grass and flowers and offered a spectacular view of the Sangre de Cristo 
mountains. 

At the end of the long summer Oppenheimer’s tuberculosis was under 
control. He was now ready to take off again for Europe. 


Leiden 


Robert went first to Leiden, to work with Ehrenfest, “because he had asked 
me to [they had met earlier in Cambridge, as mentioned] and I was a great 


admirer of his. . . . I thought I would learn something from him and I 
certainly did. ... There was not a great deal of life in physics in Leiden at 
that time. I think Ehrenfest was depressed. . . . I gave a seminar or two in 


Dutch. I don’t think it was very good Dutch but it was appreciated. . . . 


16 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


there were some younger students whom I worked with... . Then I went 
for a month to Utrecht where Kramers was.” 
From Uhlenbeck’s recollections: “I stayed in Leiden for about a month 


with Oppenheimer. . . . Robert was one of the leaders there among the 
younger students. . . . He was very difficult to understand but very quick, 
and with a whole group of admirers. . . . He was really a kind of oracle. He 
knew very much. . . . Oppenheimer and Ehrenfest got along very well. 


They liked each other very much. Ehrenfest didn’t understand Oppenheimer 
at all well but he at least was willing to try. He was very patient.”* 

In Leiden Oppenheimer received the nickname Oppie, sometimes writ- 
ten Opje, the Dutch diminutive of his name. “Oppie” is the slightly more 
vulgar version of Opje, also Dutch. Some kept calling him that all his life. I 
always called him Robert. 

While in Leiden, Robert had an affair with a woman called Suus (Dutch 
for Susan). In 1946 Hendrick Casimir wrote to him that she was in financial 
trouble. From Robert’s reply to him: “I am sending you a check for $300 
and I wish that you would give it to Suus [with] warm greetings. ...I do not 
think that I should send money again in the future. It would be an arrange- 
ment that in the end would surely prove to be disturbing and unhealthy for 
all of us.”3¢ 

Robert’s plan to go from Leiden to Copenhagen did not materialize be- 
cause of “Ehrenfest’s certainty that Bohr with his largeness and vagueness 
was not the medium I needed but that I needed someone who was a profes- 
sional calculating physicist and that Pauli would be right for me,”” a wise 
judgment with far-reaching consequences for Robert’s career. Accordingly, 
Ehrenfest sent one of his marvelous epistles” to Pauli: 

[I write] about a physicist (a good one though), namely Oppenheimer. The poor 

devil is with us in Leiden . . . under the pressure of my schoolmasterly character. 

He has always very witty ideas. ... But then the great misery starts that I cannot 

grasp anything that cannot be “visualized.” And, although he then with imper- 

turbable calm and kindness tries to meet my wishes, the result is that I bother 
more than help him. He does not think of complaining. . . . I am really con- 
vinced that, for the full development of his (great) scientific talent, Oppenheimer 
still needs “RECHTZEITIG a bisserl (!) LIEBEVOLL zurechtgepriigelt werden 
sollte” [timely and a bit lovingly to be beaten in shape (Ehrenfest’s capitals)]. He 
thoroughly deserves this kindness since he is a quite rare and decent fellow. ... 


Therefore I would like it very much if he can come to you after Leiden. This 
idea appeals very much to him. 


And so Oppenheimer spent his concluding time of postdoctoral studies 
in Zurich, from June to July 1929. What he learned there was to be decisive 
for his further research. 


POSTDOCTORAL STUDIES 17 


A postscript to the Ehrenfest period. “Ehrenfest was in Ann Arbor [sum- 
mer 1930] and there was this question: how to prove that if you have compos- 
ite particles of which each component has the Fermi statistics, then the 
compound particle could have Bose statistics if composed of an even number— 
how do you prove that? . .. Then Ehrenfest went to the West Coast. There 
he was again very much together with Oppenheimer. And then they wrote 
this paper® which is an always quoted paper, because it is the ‘proof’ of the 
theory. . . . It was completely written by Oppenheimer.”* 


Zurich 


Pauli to Ehrenfest: 


I believe that Oppenheimer is quite comfortable in Zurich, that he can work 
well here, and that scientifically it will still be possible to pull many good things 
out of him. His strength is that he has many and good ideas, and has much 
imagination. His weakness is that he is much too quickly satisfied with poorly 
based statements, that he does not answer his own often quite interesting ques- 
tions for lack of perseverance and thoroughness, and that he leaves his problems 
in a half-digested stage of conjecture, belief or disbelief. I definitely believe, how- 
ever, that all this may much improve by energetic persuasion, he is of good will 
and not stubborn. Unfortunately, he has a very bad trait: he confronts me with 
a rather unconditional belief in authority and considers all I say as final and 
definitive truth. I do know the origins of this need for others’ authority. They 
should solve his problems and answer his questions, so that he need not do so 
himself. I do not know how to make him give that up.” 


Pauli’s attitude toward Oppenheimer may be described as one of respect 
for his brilliance tempered with criticism for his technical abilities. He said 
in those days that Robert’s ideas were always very interesting but his calcu- 
lations were always wrong. Then and occasionally later Pauli would refer 
to him as the “nim-nim-nim man,” imitating with glee Oppenheimer’s 
mumbling interspersions of his otherwise eloquent diction, a habit of his 
familiar to all who knew him for some time. 

From Rabi’s recollections: 


My longest period of close personal interaction with Oppenheimer came in the 
spring of 1929 when he and I were both in Zurich at Pauli’s Institute. Oppen- 
heimer worked very hard that spring but had a gift of concealing his assiduous 
application with an air of easy nonchalance. Actually, he was engaged in a very 
difficult calculation of the opacity of surfaces of stars to their internal radiation, 
an important constant in the theoretical construction of stellar models. He spoke 
little of these problems and seemed to be much more interested in literature, 
especially the Hindu classics and the more esoteric Western writers. Pauli once 
remarked to me that Oppenheimer seemed to treat physics as an avocation and 


18 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


psychoanalysis as a vocation. As I shared many of his interests, I found him a 
delightful and fascinating companion. Even at that time his presence conveyed a 
sense of excitement and heightened awareness."! 


Pauli’s hope that it might be possible “to pull good things” out of Oppen- 
heimer proved to be quite justified. Robert soon completed a paper on the 
radiation of electrons in a Coulomb field, about which Pauli wrote ap- 
provingly to Sommerfeld: “Using flawless methods he has calculated ev- 
erything one can desire.” Then “Pauli told me a little of his work with 
Heisenberg, and I showed, I guess, more than a little interest in it.””? Out of 
this interest grew Oppenheimer’s involvement with quantum field theory, 
the main focus of his later scientific career. 

For that purpose the timing of Robert’s arrival in Zurich was perfect. In 
March 1929, Heisenberg and Pauli had completed part one of their joint 
work on quantum electrodynamics (QED),® after which they went right 
away to work on part two.*? Thus Oppenheimer had the great good for- 
tune to enter practical QED on the ground floor. (His later reference to the 
Heisenberg Pauli papers as “a monstrous boo-boo”” is rather excessive, even 
with the hindsight of the advances due to renormalization.) Using this young 
new theory he went to work on the self-energy problem, to this day one of 
the most intractable issues in fundamental physics, making an important 
discovery: a new source of self-energy, a typical quantum effect without 
classical counterpart. He further observed that self-energy effects cause infi- 
nite displacements of atomic energy levels. The hope was that light fre- 
quencies (that is, energy-level differences) would remain finite, even though 
the energies had infinite shifts, but this did not turn out to be the case. The 
way in which the shifts differ for states of different energy was not under- 
stood until nearly 20 years later. Oppenheimer did observe that the leading 
divergent terms were equal for states of the same energy and pointed out 
that the applicability of the theory to the fine-structure splitting could be 
ascribed to this circumstance. 

Pauli thought well of this effort, which was “a continuation of the work 
of Heisenberg and myself on QED.”* Heisenberg suggested a three-man 
publication.* Oppenheimer has remembered, “The part of it I got into was 
something it was at first thought the three of us should publish together; 
then Paulithought he might publish it together with me, and then it seemed 
better . . . to let this be a separate publication.”” A separate paper it be- 
came,** published after he had returned to the United States in July 1929, at 
age 25. 


POSTDOCTORAL STUDIES 19 


Robert’s postdoc years were now for good behind him. It had been a 
richly productive period for him, rich also in new experiences. “I would 
think that the [subsequent] transition was rather from that of a person who 
had been learning and also explaining in European centers and in Harvard 
and Caltech to someone who couldn’t much any longer learn from masters 
but could learn from the literature and from what he did himself; one who 
had a lot of explaining to do because there was no one else. . . . I would 
think that the big change was that I wasn’t an apprentice any longer and I 
had decided where to make my bed... . I hardly left California until the 
war... I had really made a bed that I was content to be in.””? He would not 
return to Europe until 19 years later. 


CHAPTER 5 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR 
AS TEACHER 


If ever there was a period during which Robert was happy, those were his 
California years of the 1930s, I would think. It was the time in which he 
single-handedly created, in Bethe’s words, “the greatest school of theoreti- 
cal physics that the United States has ever known... . More than any other 
man he was responsible for raising American theoretical physics from a 
provincial adjunct of Europe to world leadership. . .. The majority of the 
best American theoretical physicists who grew up in those years [the 1930s] 
were trained by Oppenheimer at one stage of their lives.”"° It was also the 
time in which he made important research contributions, to quantum elec- 
trodynamics, nuclear physics, and astrophysics. I shall first sketch his role 
as teacher, thereafter his further research. 


I found myself entirely in Berkeley and almost entirely at Caltech as the only 
one who understood what this [the recent developments in physics] was all about, 
and the gift which my high school teacher of English had noted for explaining 
technical things came into action. I didn’t start to make a school; I didn’t start to 
look for students. I started really as a propagator of the theory which I loved, 
about which I continued to learn more, and which was not well understood but 
which was very rich. The pattern was not that of someone who takes on a 
course and teaches students preparing for a variety of careers but of explaining 
first to faculty, staff, and colleagues and then to anyone who would listen, what 
this was about, what had been learned, what the unsolved problems were. 

I think from all I hear [that] I was a very difficult lecturer, I started as a 
lecturer who made things very difficult. I had some help; I remember Pauling’s 
advice, almost certainly in ’28. He said, “When you want to give a seminar or 
lecture, decide what it is you want to talk about and then find some agreeable 
subject of contemplation not remotely related to your lecture and then inter- 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR AS TEACHER 21 


rupt that from time to time to say a few words.” So you can see how bad it must 
have been. In Pasadena I taught all right, but it was never an important part of 
the Caltech curriculum except conceivably that first year in the spring of ’30 
when I was there a long time and where I probably gave a pretty good “course of 
sprouts” in quantum theory. 

In Berkeley I gave what was normally a graduate course and in practice usu- 
ally a second year graduate course which had not been given before on quantum 
theory and quantum mechanics and which varied in content but was always all 
right for someone who had some background in classical physics and preferably 
at least a qualitative introduction to atomic theory, though it didn’t too much 
matter. I usually gave a seminar on one other aspect of theoretical physics, typi- 
cally statistical mechanics and relativity, both things that I loved very much. 
But these were all with people who didn’t have to learn these things [but] wanted 
to. ... [It] was very rarely and only in quite different contexts that I ever worked 
with undergraduates. I think they didn’t think I'd be any good for them and it 
didn’t occur to me to ask to teach freshman physics or anything like that. 

You live in the department and if it’s a growing and active department as 
Berkeley got to be and as Caltech was, there are problems that arise because 
people are doing experiments. I found this a very great source of stimulation 
and pleasure and I think actually the beginnings of collaboration with graduate 
students came very early, but the students weren’t very good and I picked rather 
exotic problems. It wasn’t really until the positron [in 1932] and more or less 
the full shape of the relativistic débacle, [when] the clues of cosmic rays came 
into the picture, that the collaboration with students began to take a more effec- 
tive turn.” 


In 1928 Ernest Lawrence (1901-1958) had been appointed associate pro- 
fessor in Berkeley. In 1930 he constructed the first two models of what 
became known as cyclotrons. Under his direction these accelerators were 
improved, their energies increased, and their results became ever more im- 
portant for Oppenheimer’s work. In the early years the relations between 
the two men were quite cordial. 

In 1934, Robert Serber arrived in Berkeley as postdoctoral research assis- 
tant to Oppenheimer. He became Oppenheimer’s closest confidant in the 
Berkeley years. He has left us an eloquent account of Oppenheimer the teacher. 


By the time of my arrival in Berkeley, Oppie’s course in quantum mechanics 
was well established. Oppie was quick, impatient, and had a sharp tongue. In 
the earliest days of his teaching he was reputed to have terrorized the students. 
Now, after five years of experience, he had mellowed—if his earlier students 
were to be believed. His course was an inspirational as well as an educational 
achievement. He transmitted to his students a feeling of the beauty of the logical 
structure of physics and an excitement in the development of science. Almost 
everyone listened to the course more than once, and Oppie occasionally had 
difficulty in preventing students from coming a third time. One Russian woman 
attempted to come a fourth time, and defeated Oppie’s efforts to dissuade her 
by going on a hunger strike. [His students] carried [the course], each in his own 
version, to many campuses. 


22 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Oppie’s way of working with his research students was also original. His 
group would consist of eight or ten graduate students and about a half dozen 
postdoctoral fellows. He would meet the group once a day in his office. A little 
before the appointed time its members would straggle in and dispose themselves 
on the tables and about the walls. Oppie would come in and discuss with one 
after another the status of the student’s research problem, while the others lis- 
tened and offered comments. All were exposed to a broad range of topics. 
Oppenheimer was interested in everything, and one subject after another was 
introduced and coexisted with all the others. In an afternoon we might discuss 
electrodynamics, cosmic rays, astrophysics, and nuclear physics. 


Elsewhere, Serber recalled: 


Oppie’s relations with his students were not confined to office and classroom. 
He was a bachelor then, and a part of his social life was intertwined with ours. 
Often we worked late and continued the discussion through dinner and then 
later at his apartment on Shasta Road. When we tired of our problems, or cleaned 
up the point at issue, the talk would turn to art, music, literature, and politics. If 
the work was going badly we might give up and go to a movie. Sometimes we 
took a night off and had a Mexican dinner in Oakland or went to a good restau- 
rant in San Francisco. In the early days this meant taking the Berkeley ferry and 
a ride across the bay. The ferries back to Berkeley didn’t run very often late at 
night, and this required passing the time waiting for them at the bars and night- 
clubs near the ferry dock. Frequently we missed several ferries. Ed McMillan [1907- 
1991, a later Nobel laureate] was often our companion in these adventures. 

We held regular joint seminars with Felix Bloch (1905-1983, another future 
Nobel laureate] and his students from Stanford. Afterward, Oppie would fre- 
quently treat the whole entourage to dinner at Jack’s in San Francisco. These 
were postdepression days, and students were poor. The world of good food and 
good wines and gracious living was far from the experience of many of them, 
and Oppie was introducing them to an unfamiliar way of life. We acquired 
something of his tastes. We went to concerts together and listened to chamber 
music, Oppie and Arnold Nordsieck [1911-1971, a postdoc] read Plato in the 
original Greek. There were many evening parties where we drank and talked 
and danced until late, and where, when Oppie was supplying the food, the nov- 
ices suffered from the hot chili that social example required them to eat. 

During this time Oppie was a professor at both Berkeley and Caltech (where 
his name metamorphized into Robert). The arrangement was made possible be- 
cause the Berkeley spring semester ended early in April, and Robert could then 
teach the spring quarter in Pasadena. Many of his students made the annual trek 
with him. Some things were easier in those days. We thought nothing of giving up 
our houses or apartments in Berkeley, confident that we could find a garden apart- 
ment in Pasadena for twenty-five dollars a month. We didn’t own more than 
could be packed in the back of a car. In Pasadena, in addition to being exposed to 
new information on physics, we led an active social life. The Tolmans [Richard, 
1906-1948, and his wife Ruth] were good friends, and we had very warm relations 
with Charlie Lauritsen and his group. Willy Fowler (1911-1995, yet another fu- 
ture Nobel laureate] was a graduate student then, and Tommy Lauritsen was still 
in high school. We spent many evenings at the Mexican restaurants on Olvera 
Street and many nights partying in Charlie Lauritsen’s garden. . . . 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR AS TEACHER 23 


One feature of the times which contrasts with present customs was the rela- 
tively little personal contact we had with the outer world of physics. The meet- 
ings we went to were the West Coast meetings of the American Physical Society. 
The first conference I can recall was a Cosmic Ray Symposium in Chicago to 
which Oppie and I drove from his New Mexico ranch in the early summer of 
1939. We had a few visitors, however. Niels Bohr, Dirac, and Pauli made short 
visits to Berkeley or Pasadena, and I met Victor Weisskopf [1908-2002], Hans 
Bethe [1906-2005], George Placzek [1905-1955], George Gamow [1904-1968] 
and Walter Elsasser [1904-1991] at the ranch. 

Many facets of Oppenheimer’s character contributed to his greatness as a 
teacher: his great capacity as a physicist, his wide intellectual interests, his aston- 
ishing quickness of mind, his great gift for expression, his sensitive perception, 
his social presence, which made him the center of every gathering. His students 
emulated him as best they could. They copied his gestures, his mannerisms, his 
intonations. He truly influenced their lives.” 


Serber’s account” also includes a list of Oppenheimer’s prewar students, 
among whom we find still another future Nobel laureate: Willis Lamb 
(1913-), who has recalled: “Oppenheimer’s Berkeley office was room 219, 
LeConte Hall. As were many of his students, I was given a small table in the 
room. Oppenheimer had no desk, but only a table in the middle of the 
room, heavily strewn with papers. One wall was entirely covered by a black- 
board and hardly ever erased. One set of open shelves had reprints of 
Oppenheimer’s publications.”*? 


CHAPTER 6 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR 
AS RESEARCHER 


A list of Oppenheimer’s physics publications" shows 73 entries in all, of 
which 51 stem from his California years, 1929-1942. His oeuvre in that 
period ranges over topics in quantum field theory, particle physics, theory 
of cosmic radiations, nuclear physics, and cosmology. In preparing a survey 
of that work I have been greatly helped by the writings of Robert Serber,*”° 
who, as said, himself came to Berkeley in 1934 as research associate.*! 


More on QED 


We have already met one of Oppenheimer’s California papers, the one be- 

gun in Zurich, in which he had shown that QED leads to infinite linear 

shifts in atomic spectra.” From the conclusion of that paper: 
We have treated these difficulties in some detail, because they show that the 
present theory will not be applicable to any problem where relativistic effects 
are important, where, that is, we cannot be guided throughout by the limiting 
case c —> cc, The theory can thus not be applied to a discussion of the structure 
of the nuclei. It appears improbable that the difficulties discussed in this work 
will be soluble without an adequate theory of the masses of the electron and the 
proton; nor is it certain that such a theory will be possible on the basis of the 
special theory of relativity.” 


Here we meet for the first but not the last time Robert’s conviction— 
which in fact never changed during the 1930s—that QED was wrong, not 
only in its infinities but also in its finite predictions. As Serber has com- 
mented, “This view colored our work. . .. He could hardly write a paper 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR AS RESEARCHER 25 


without a lament. ... A naive faith might have made us more resolute in 
trying to understand the real problems of QED.”* 

In the same issue of the Physical Review—which dates from 1930— 
Oppenheimer noted a difficulty with Dirac’s theory of the electrons. It was 
a time of great confusion: this theory dictates that electrons can be in states 
of negative energy—inadmissible. Dirac had suggested (1929) that these states 
should all be occupied, and that a hole in that distribution should be a pro- 
ton. Oppenheimer was the first to point out that that cannot be, since it 
would allow for the process 


proton + electron > two photons 


so that a hydrogen atom would spontaneously and rapidly annihilate into 
radiation. 

The identification of holes with particles is fine, but why protons? Dirac 
later remarked, “At that time everyone felt pretty sure that the electrons 
and the protons were the only elementary particles in Nature.”» 

Now hear this. In his paper on Dirac’s hole theory,” Oppenheimer re- 
marked that the difficulties disappear if one makes “the assumption of two 
independent elementary particles of opposite charge and dissimilar mass 
[electrons and protons] and retains the hypothesis that the reason why no 
transitions to states of negative energy occur either for electron or for pro- 
ton is that all such states are occupied.” Here Oppenheimer was the first to 
predict implicitly the existence of the positron (explicitly predicted by Dirac 
in 1931 (discovered in 1932), and of the antiproton (discovered in 1955)! 

In a sequel to his paper Oppenheimer gave a detailed calculation of the 
(alleged) hydrogen-atom disintegration. His result was correct, apart froma 
missing factor (21)‘. 

Oppenheimer’s carelessness was more serious in his next paper, the rela- 
tivistic theory of the photoelectric effect.** With this work Robert began 
publishing together with his young co-workers. The theoretical prediction 
appeared to be 25 times larger than the experimental result. “We see here 
another breakdown with present electromagnetic theory.” Robert now 
believed that the theory was already wrong at energies of order mc”, m = 
electron mass. The error was his, however; the theoretical answer was off 
by a factor of 44/3. In Serber’s words: “[Oppenheimer’s] physics was good, 
but his arithmetic awful.” 

In 1931 Robert attempted to get a first-order differential equation for 
light, in some ways similar to the Dirac equation for the electron.* He 
failed, but in the process recognized the fundamental difference between 


26 ~=—s J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


particles of spin one-half and of integral spin, an insight that was to lead to 
the theory of the relations between spin and statistics. 


Cosmic Rays 


Oppenheimer’s active interest in cosmic ray physics also began in 1931, as 
the result of his association with the Caltech experimenters. In an effort to 
understand the great penetrating powers of these rays he, together with his 
student Frank Carlson (1899-1954), wrote two papers on the properties of 
fast electrons and “magnetic neutrons,” the first” presented in December 
1931, the second* in July 1932. 

That work was done at a time when nuclear physics was in a state of 
maximal confusion. Nuclear spins and statistics exhibited paradoxical prop- 
erties.” So did B-spectra that, in December 1930, had led Pauli to pro- 
pose® a new particle that he then called a neutron and that we now call a 
neutrino. Initially Pauli erroneously believed that nuclei are built up of 
protons, electrons, and “his” neutrons. The “magnetic neutron” in the 
Oppenheimer-Carlson paper refers to the Pauli neutron, which Oppen- 
heimer had heard Pauli report on at the 1931 Ann Arbor summer school. 

Our “neutron” was announced in a paper submitted* in February 1932— 
after the first and before the second of the Oppenheimer-Carlson publica- 
tions. Their work needs to be seen against the background of this confused 
situation. This is what they wrote on these matters. They first refer to the 
“third element in the building of nuclei”—Pauli’s neutrons—which, Pauli 
thought, could solve dors “the anomalous spin and statistics paradoxes and 
the apparent failure of the conservation of energy in beta-particle disinte- 
gration.” Then they go on: “One may, however, assume that the neutron 
has a mass very close to that of the proton... . Such neutrons would help 
explain the anomalous spin and statistics of nuclei, although they would 
throw no light on beta-ray disintegrations. The experimental evidence on 
the penetrating beryllium radiation suggests that neutrons of nearly pro- 
tonic mass do exist [the data that led to ‘our’ neutron].” ... To my knowl- 
edge this is the first time that it is stated in the literature that the neutron 
saves spin and statistics and that energy conservation in B-decay is a sepa- 
rate issue. 

Now to the cosmic rays. Carlson and Oppenheimer calculated the ion- 
ization loss of electrons in close collisions and also the loss of the “magnetic 
neutrons,” supposed to have a magnetic moment comparable to the proton’s. 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR AS RESEARCHER 27 


They found that the latter was in better agreement with cosmic-ray data at 
high energies and therefore suggested that “magnetic neutrons” were the 
primary component of cosmic rays. “No latitude effect shows that primary 
cosmic rays are neutral.”** A latitude effect ad been reported already in 
1927 but was not believed in California in 1931. In 1932 Carlson and Oppen- 
heimer wrote a follow-up paper,” in which they gave up on “magnetic neu- 
trons” that, they now said, would not produce the observed cloud-chamber 
tracks. 

Meanwhile, Carl Anderson (1905-1991) from Caltech had announced 
his discovery of the positron.® In 1933 Oppenheimer and Milton Spinoza 
Plessett (1908-1991) were the first to calculate the production of electron- 
positron pairs near threshold and at high energies. “If we allow gamma rays 
of [sufficient] energy to fall upon a nucleus, we should expect pairs to ap- 
pear.” This effect, they note, can be seen as a photoelectric absorption of 
the y by an electron in the filled negative energy states, the nucleus picking 
up some recoil momentum. Their final formula was wrong, as usual, as 
others rapidly noted.® 

Oppenheimer and Plessett correctly remarked that their results indicated 
serious disagreements with the mass absorption law of cosmic rays. “One is 
tempted to see in this discrepancy a failure of the theory when applied to 
radiation whose wave-length is of the order of e?/mc? which marks the limit 
of applicability of classical electron theory.” Thus doubts moved from 
2mc* to 137 mc?. 

There is another major new idea in this paper, the shower mechanism: 


High energy electrons passing through matter > photons > 
pairs — more photons — more pairs... 


that, they say, “demands detailed study.” The remark on showers was no 
more than a throw-away at the end of their paper—but was all the same a 
fundamental observation. 

This work was followed by a paper by Leo Nedelsky (1903-), and Oppen- 
heimer on the internal absorption of nuclear gamma rays that convert into 
electron-positron pairs. An erratum” records that a factor 1/3 in their 
final formula is missing—the only occasion I have seen in which Oppen- 
heimer himself published one of his errors. 

On December 28, 1933, the first symposium on the positron was held at 
an American Physical Society meeting. Uhlenbeck, Anderson, and 
Oppenheimer were the speakers. “This proved to be a session of great inter- 


est and importance and the attendance was about five hundred.” 


28 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 
Electron-Positron Theory 


The quantization of the electron wave field goes back to 1927, but the prac- 
tice of using this technique for describing electron-positron systems began 
in 1934, where it is used to this day. Among the pioneers of this method we 
find Oppenheimer and his research associate Wendell Furry (1907-1984). 
They showed that the theory was symmetrical in electrons and positrons 
and could be formulated without reference to a filled negative sea. Accord- 
ing to this theory an electromagnetic field can momentarily produce an 
electron-positron pair out of the vacuum. Since the field pushes electrons 
and positrons in opposite directions, this produces a polarization of the 
vacuum just like the polarization of a dielectric medium, and as a conse- 
quence the Maxwell field equations needed to be modified. A point charge, 
for instance, no longer produces a pure Coulomb field that falls off with the 
inverse square of the distance. At distances less than the Compton wave- 
length of the electron, 2.4 x 10° centimeters, there would be appreciable 
corrections to this law. They said (incorrectly) that the remaining finite 
vacuum polarization effects would not be observable in atoms because they 
are not larger than the shifts “which arise from our ignorance of the reac- 
tion of the electron to its own radiation field”; however, it should be pos- 
sible to see them in proton-proton scattering. The paper gave the correct 
formula for the modification of the Coulomb field at short distances. They 
also said that Lawrence had just returned from Brussels and had shown 
them Dirac’s report to the Solvay congress on vacuum polarization and 
charge renormalization (which was published in 1934).” This work led to 
two important papers by Oppenheimer’s research associates: one by Serber, 
who generalized the Oppenheimer-Furry results to time-dependent exter- 
nal sources,’! and one by Edwin Uehling (1901-1985), who gave the explicit 
results for vacuum polarization effects in a hydrogen atom.” 

The Furry-Oppenheimer paper contains another of Robert’s laments, 
this one concerning the new infinities diagnosed to occur due to vacuum 
polarization: “The difficulties are of such a character that they are appar- 
ently not to be overcome merely by modifying the electromagnetic field of 
an electron within small distances but require here a more profound change 
in our notions of space and time.” It needs also to be noted that their discus: 
sion of particle position, momentum and spin in terms of quantum field 
theory is incorrect, as was noted years later.” 

Electron-positron theory remained Oppenheimer’s main research inter- 
est during 1934-35. He treated annihilation radiation of positrons absorbed 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR AS RESEARCHER 29 


in matter,” field fluctuations due to pair creation,” and internal conversion 
by pair production of the radiation emitted in the impact of charged par- 
ticles on matter.” In a paper on the absorption of cosmic-ray electrons” he 
again pointed out the shower mechanism, which would lead to rapid degra- 
dation of high-energy particles. He concluded that either the formulae were 
wrong or that there was some other and less absorbable component. This 
could not be the proton: equal numbers of positives and negatives were 
seen, few slow protons and no corresponding antiprotons were seen, and 
the distribution of recoil electrons was wrong for protons. But, having ar- 
gued himself into a correct conclusion (i.e., “some other and less absorbable 
component”), Oppenheimer did not stick with it; he made a tortured ar- 
gument that if the correct theory were nonlinear, the presence of high- 
frequency components could damp low-frequency effects. 


Nuclear Physics 


Oppenheimer’s first paper on nuclear physics dates from 1933, when he 
had calculated the energy dependence of the nuclear reaction produced by 
bombarding lithium with protons.” His most important contribution in 
this area (1935) is the “Oppenheimer-Phillips process,” in which a deuteron, 
entering a heavy nucleus, is split into proton plus neutron, one of these 
particles being retained by the nucleus while the other is re-emitted.” “Af- 
ter the War, this process became an important tool in the study of nuclear 
energy levels and their properties.”"° 

Further contributions to nuclear physics: with Serber, on nuclear level- 
densities on the basis of Bohr’s liquid drop model;® a paper with the in- 
triguing title “The disintegration of high-energy protons”! 
noted that in collisions protons may transfer a considerable fraction of their 
energy to positrons + neutrinos; a discussion of the nuclear photoeffect at 
high energies;” sharp resonance effects in transmutations of light nuclei;® 
an analysis of boron plus proton reactions, in which the first example of an 
isotopic spin selection rule is given.**#* 


in which it is 


Shower Theory 


Meanwhile Oppenheimer had turned to electron-positron showers, a sub- 
ject he had broached earlier in passing. In June 1936 he announced the first 
results at an American Physical Society meeting.*® More details of this im- 
portant problem were given shortly afterward in an elegant paper with 


30 ~=—sJ. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Carlson.* Their theory of cascades, a wonderful problem in fundamental 
interactions combined with statistical considerations, clarified satisfactorily 
the nature of what became known as the soft component of cosmic rays. 
Here we encounter Robert in an assertive mood, no more wailing about the 
breakdown of theory. The formalism was improved by Oppenheimer’s stu- 
dent Hartland Snyder® (1913-1962), and the analysis of experiments by 
Serber.® 

There was another, “hard” component, for which Dirac’s electron- 
positron appeared to fail. Here Carlson and Oppenheimer came with a dar- 
ing and, in the event, correct proposal, the need for an as-yet-unknown 
kind of particle: “One can conclude, either that the theoretical estimates of 
the probability of these processes are inapplicable in the domain of cosmic- 
ray energies, or that the actual penetration of these rays has to be ascribed 
to the presence of a component other than electrons and photons. The sec- 
ond alternative is necessarily radical; for cloud chamber and counter experi- 
ments show that particles with the same charge as the negative electron 
belong to the penetrating component of radiation; and if these are not elec- 
trons, they are particles not previously known to physics.”® 

At about that same time, Heisenberg had come forth with a quite differ- 
ent proposal: shower particles are generated in a single act of plural produc- 
tion.” When he heard of the cascade theory he at once conceded™ that its 
authors had a point, but noted that rarer showers might still leave room for 
his explosions, an idea that continued to intrigue him several more years. I 
well recall discussions at early postwar conferences on the issue “plural ver- 
sus multiple production.” 


In May 1937 the first announcements were made of observations of mesons 
in cosmic rays.?! One month later, Oppenheimer and Serber suggested” 
that these particles were those suggested® by Hideki Yukawa (1907-1981) 
to explain nuclear forces. Serber has recalled, “Although Yukawa’s paper 
appeared in 1935, we had never seen a reference to it and knew of it only 
because Yukawa had sent Oppenheimer a reprint. One purpose of our let- 
ter was to bring it to attention.” Their letter was in fact the first instance 
in which Yukawa’s idea is mentioned in a Western publication. In this let- 
ter they noted that the new particles are not primary cosmic rays but are 
produced by y rays in nuclear collisions (and by pair production) in the 
upper atmosphere and are the “hard,” penetrating component. Also, the 


THE CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR AS RESEARCHER = 31 


production of showers at sea level and below is due to knock-on electrons 
from the penetrating component. They calculated the production rate, which 
was about right. They were not unmindful of the paradox between nuclear 
interaction and penetrating component. I take this last comment to mean 
that they had an inkling that the meson experimentally discovered in 1937, 
now called the muon, was in fact 70¢ Yukawa’s meson, now known as the 
pion, which was experimentally discovered in 1947." 

In 1939, Oppenheimer, Snyder, and Serber returned to the question of 
showers produced by the hard component. At that time the cosmic-ray 
mesons were believed to have spin 1 but if so, the authors noted, mesons 
radiate too rapidly.% More detailed studies by Robert Christy (1916-) and 
Shuichi Kusaka (1916-1947), Oppenheimer students, confirmed this con- 
clusion.” Whereupon Oppenheimer concluded in 1941 that the mesons had 
to be pseudoscalar*®—correct for pions as it happened. In another remarkable 
paper of that year, Oppenheimer and Christy suggested” that the soft com- 
ponent at high altitude could be explained by assuming that, in addition to 
the penetrating mesons, there were roughly equal numbers of neutral me- 
sons that decay rapidly into electrons and positrons. Oppenheimer’s pa- 
per'® of 1948 on the role of the 1° (well before the discovery of that particle) 
in the generation of the soft component was a natural sequel to this earlier 
work. Back to 1941, in that year he published a speculative paper on a pos- 
sible small neutrino rest mass.’™ 

Finally, I note that the intensive work in meson theory by the Berkeley 
group in 1940-41 also included the work of Oppenheimer and Julian 


Schwinger!” 


(with whom he had earlier published a paper on electron- 
positron production’) on the strong coupling theory for charged scalar 
and neutral pseudoscalar mesons, in which they calculated scattering cross- 
sections and predicted nucleon isobars. These efforts continued until inter- 


rupted by World War IL 


Astrophysics and Cosmology 


Oppenheimer’s connections at Pasadena with the staff of the Mt. Wilson 
Observatory and with Richard Tolman led to his interest in astrophysics 
and general relativity. Principally as an exercise in nuclear physics, he and 
Serber decided the study the relative influence on nuclear and gravitational 
forces in neutron stars.!“ One of their aims was to improve the estimate 
made by Lev Davidovich Landau (1908-1968) for the limiting mass above 
which an ordinary star becomes a neutron star. (Landau discussed a model 


32. ~—s J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


in which this mass is = 0.001 © [the symbol means one solar mass]. He also 
suggested that every star has an interior neutron core.'® Their work at- 
tracted the attention of Richard Chase Tolman. As a result of discussions 
between Tolman and Oppenheimer and his co-workers, there appeared in 
1939 a pair of papers, one by Tolman on static solutions of Einstein’s field 
equations for fluid spheres,'™ and one, directly following it, by Oppenheimer 
and George Volkoff (1914-2000), entitled “On massive neutron cores.”!” 
In this paper, the foundations are laid for a general relativistic theory of stel- 
lar structure. The model discussed is a static spherical star consisting of an 
ideal Fermi gas of neutrons. The authors found that the star is stable as long 
as its mass < 1/2 ©. (The present best value for a free-neutron gas is = 0.7 © 
and is called the Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit.)!°* Half a year later, the paper 
“On continued gravitational attraction” by Oppenheimer and Hartland 
Snyder came out.'” The first line of its abstract reads, “When all thermo- 
nuclear sources of energy are exhausted, a sufficiently heavy star will col- 
lapse; [a contraction follows which] will continue indefinitely.” Thus began 
the physics of black holes, the name for the ultimate collapsed state pro- 
posed by John Archibald Wheeler at a conference held in the fall of 1967 at 
the Goddard Institute of Space Studies in New York.” At that time, pul- 
sars had just been discovered and neutron stars and black holes were no 
longer considered “exotic objects [that] remained a textbook curiosity... . 
Cooperative efforts of radio and optical astronomers [had begun] to reveal 
a great many strange new things in the sky.”"! 


CHAPTER 7 


OPPENHEIMER’S OPINION 
OF HIS OWN TEACHING AND 
RESEARCH IN CALIFORNIA 


When in 1963 Oppenheimer, then director of the Princeton Institute, was 
asked whether he missed his earlier successful teaching activities, he replied, 
“I think that the charm went out of teaching after the great change of the 
war because I did teach at Caltech and Berkeley and for one thing I was 
always called away and distracted because I was thinking about other things, 
but actually I don’t think I ever taught well after the war. I have a feeling 
that what my job was was to get a part of the next generation brought up 
and that job was done when I came here.”” 

Also in the early 1960s, I once asked Robert which he considered to be 
his most creative physics papers. I remember two aspects of his reply. First, 
that he found his work on electron-positron theory to be his principal con- 
tribution. Secondly, that he did not mention at all his highly important 
work on cosmology. 

In my opinion, Robert would have been entitled to look back with much 
satisfaction on his contributions to physical theory, covering papers, quite 
a few seminal, on QED, cosmic rays, particularly shower theory, electron- 
positron theory, meson theory, and cosmology—never mind that he had 
made mistakes, as I have mentioned. Satisfaction with self was not given 
him, however. 


CHAPTER 8 


PERSONAL LIFE IN THE 1930s 


I turn to the great changes in Robert’s life in the 1930s other than those in 
science. 

Visits to California by Robert’s parents came to an end when his mother 
became gravely ill with leukemia. Now it was his turn to visit them in New 
York. To a friend he wrote, “I found my mother terribly low, almost be- 
yond hope. . . . She is unbelievably sweet.”' She died in October 1931. 
Toward her end, Robert had said to another friend, “Iam the loneliest man 
in the world.”! Yet, years later, his brother Frank “was surprised to hear 
Robert confess that he had had difficulty in finding things to talk about 
with his mother and that his attentions were what he supposed were ex- 
pected from an affectionate son rather than a sign of deep understanding 
between them.”'"* His father continued to visit him often in California. He 
was very popular with Robert’s friends. In September 1937 he died of a 
heart attack. “We had an intimate and close relationship until his death. ... A 
little later, when I came into an inheritance, I made a will leaving this to the 
University of California for fellowships to graduate students.”"* All through 
the thirties “I spent some weeks each summer with my brother Frank at 
our ranch in New Mexico. There was a strong bond of affection between 
us,”"5 as is also seen from the voluminous correspondence between the two.° 
The brothers would also often receive friends at their ranch. 

My friends, both in Pasadena and in Berkeley, were mostly faculty people, sci- 


entists, classicists, and artists. I studied and read Sanskrit with Arthur Rider. I 
read very widely, mostly classics, novels, plays, and poetry; and I read some- 


PERSONAL LIFEINTHE 1930s 35 


thing of other parts of science. I was not interested in and did not read about 
economics or politics. I was almost wholly divorced from the contemporary 
scene in this country. I never read a newspaper or a current magazine like Time 
or Harper’; I had no radio, no telephone; I learned of the stock market crash in 
the fall of 1929 only long after the event; the first time I ever voted was in the 
presidential election of 1936. To many of my friends, my indifference to contem- 
porary affairs seemed bizarre, and they often chided me with being too much of a 
highbrow. I was interested in man and his experience; I was deeply interested in 
my science; but I had no understanding of the relations of man to his society.' 


There are many Oppenheimer stories of those years, one that achieved 
wide notoriety. It involved him and Melba Phillips (1907-2004), his first 
doctoral student. 

According to the story, the Berkeley police found Melba sound asleep in a car in 

the Berkeley hills. When they awakened her, she said Oppie had driven her up 

there, and she had no idea what had become of him. After a search, they found 
him asleep in his room at the Faculty Club, having apparently walked home 
and—forgetting all about his girl and his car—gone to bed. The story was picked 
up by the world press as a classic in the genre of absent-minded-professor tales; 

Oppie’s brother, Frank, saw it in the Cambridge, England, papers. Oppie was 

still a little defensive about it. His version was that he had told Melba that he 


was going to walk home and that she should drive the car back, but that she 
dozed off and hadn’t heard him." 


Other stories: There were those about Robert’s eating habits—apparently 
his Spartan indifference to what and how much he ate sometimes left his 
guests hungry, that were punctuated by a gourmet’s delight in special dishes, 
focusing on excessively hot dishes. His fast driving was legendary. His car 
at that time was a Packard roadster named Geryda, after the Sanskrit mes- 
senger of the gods: “On one occasion in the early 1930s he crashed the car 
while racing the coast train near Los Angeles. His passenger . . . though not 
seriously injured . .. was knocked unconscious, and Oppenheimer thought 
at first that she was dead. [His father] gave her a Cezanne drawing and a 
small Vlaminck painting by way of apology.”!” 

“When Oppenheimer went to Pasadena during the Berkeley term, at the 
last moment he sometimes asked Nedelsky to lecture for him. ‘It won’t be 
any trouble,’ said Oppenheimer on one such occasion, ‘it’s all in a book.’ 
Finding that the book was in Dutch, which he could not read, Nedelsky 
demurred. ‘But it’s such easy Dutch,’ said Oppenheimer.” 

My favorite story of that time is one told by Uhlenbeck’s wife, who has 
recalled “what fun it was to be with Robert at this period of his life and 
what crazy situations he could get into. ‘How do you manage to make 
things so complicated?’ she once asked. ‘It’s a gift,’ Robert replied.”!”” 


36 =—s J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In the 1930s there arose in Robert a new awareness of the world around 

him. In his own words: 
Beginning in late 1936, my interests began to change. These changes did not 
alter my earlier friendships, my relations to my students, or my devotion to 
physics; but they added something new. I can discern in retrospect more than 
one reason for these changes. I had had a continuing, smoldering fury about the 
treatment of Jews in Germany. I had relatives there, and was later to help in 
extricating them and bringing them to this country. I saw what the Depression 
was doing to my students. Often they could get no jobs, or jobs which were 
wholly inadequate. And through them, I began to understand how deeply po- 
litical and economic events could affect men’s lives. I began to feel the need to 
participate more fully in the life of the community. But I had no framework of 
political conviction or experience to give me perspective in these matters." 


In the spring of 1936 Oppenheimer met Jean Tatlock, who was then in 
her midtwenties, working for her doctorate in psychiatry at Stanford. Her 
father was a professor of medieval literature at Berkeley and well known 
locally for his right-wing views. His daughter had become increasingly in- 
volved in left-wing activities, and, by the time she met Robert, was an ac- 
tive member of the Communist Party, and introduced him to her left-wing 
friends. She was dark haired, tall and slender, with green eyes, a combina- 
tion of beauty and intelligence that Oppenheimer found irresistible. “We 
were at least twice close enough to marriage to consider ourselves engaged,” 
Robert has recalled,'> but each time marriage was imminent it was Jean 
who shied away. Much of the problem stemmed from her severe bouts of 
depression. “At times of crisis in her relationship with Oppenheimer,” 
Robert Serber recalls, “she disappeared for weeks, months sometimes, and 
then would taunt Robert mercilessly. She would taunt him about who she 
had been with and what they had been doing. She seemed determined to 
hurt him, perhaps because she knew Robert loved her so much.” In Janu- 
ary 1944, she committed suicide. 

A few days later, Serber’s wife came into her husband’s office in Los 
Alamos with a telegram from a Berkeley friend, saying that Jean had com- 
mitted suicide. She asked him to break the news to Robert. “When I got to 
his office I saw by his face that he had already heard. He was deeply 
grieved,” 120 


Robert has written: 


I should not give the impression that it was wholly because of Jean Tatlock that 
I made left-wing friends, or felt sympathy for causes which hitherto would have 
seemed so remote from me, like the Loyalist cause in Spain, and the organiza- 


PERSONAL LIFE INTHE1930s 37 


tion of migratory workers. I have mentioned some of the other contributing 
causes. I liked the new sense of companionship, and at the time felt that I was 
coming to be a part of the life of my time and country. ... 

This was the era of what the Communists then called the United Front, in 
which they joined with many non-Communist groups in support of humanitar- 
ian objectives. Many of these objectives engaged my interest. I contributed to 
the strike fund of one of the major strikes of Bridges’ union; I subscribed to the 
People’s World; 1 contributed to the various committees and organizations which 
were intended to help the Spanish Loyalist cause. I was invited to help establish 
the teacher’s union, which included faculty and teaching assistants at the uni- 
versity, and school teachers of the East Bay. I was elected recording secretary. 
My connection with the teacher’s union continued until some time in 1941, 
when we disbanded our chapters. . . . 

The matter which most engaged my sympathies and interests was the war in 
Spain. This was not a matter of understanding and informed convictions. I had 
never been to Spain; I knew a little of its literature; I knew nothing of its history 
or politics or contemporary problems. But like a great many other Americans I 
was emotionally committed to the Loyalist cause. I contributed to various orga- 
nizations for Spanish relief. I went to, and helped with, many parties, bazaars, 
and the like. Even when the war in Spain was manifestly lost, these activities 
continued. The end of the war and the defeat of the Loyalists caused me great 
sorrow. ... 

I went to a big Spanish relief party the night before Pearl Harbor; and the 
next day, as we heard the news of the outbreak of war, I decided that I had had 
about enough of the Spanish cause, and that there were other and more pressing 
crises in the world. ... 

I never was a member of the Communist Party. I never accepted Communist 
dogma or theory; in fact it never made sense to me.!#! 


Oppenheimer had several short affairs after parting with Tatlock. Then, 
in August 1939 he met Katherine (“Kitty”) Puening (1910-1972) at a 
colleague’s garden party in Pasadena. Serber, who was also at that party, has 
told me of that encounter. When Robert came in, Kitty took one look at 
him, then determinedly steered toward him, never to let go thereafter. 

Kitty was born in Germany. She has said that she was a niece of Field 
Marshall Wilhelm Keitel (1882-1946). At age two she and her parents moved 
to Pittsburgh. At the time she first met Robert she was married to Stuart 
Harrison, who was studying for an M.D. degree. A previous husband had 
been an active Communist. This had caused her to join the Party, which 
she left for good in 1936. 

According to those who knew her, Kitty engineered a visit to Robert’s 
ranch. From the ranch, the two went on an overnight visit to nearby friends 
of Robert. “The next day, after they returned, [their hostess] came trotting 
up to the ranch house and presented Kitty with her nightgown, which had 
been found under Robert’s pillow.”!* 


38 =—s J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In the fall of 1940 Kitty established residence in Reno, Nevada, where 
on November 1 she obtained a divorce and married Robert, husband num- 
ber four. 

Jackie Oppenheimer, wife of Frank (they had married in 1936) has said: 
“Kitty was a schemer. If Kitty wanted anything she would always get it. I 
remember one time when she got it into her head to do a Ph.D. and the way 
she cosied up to this poor little Dean of the biological sciences was shame- 
ful. She never did the Ph.D. It was just another of her whims. She was a 
phoney. All her political convictions were phoney, all her ideas were bor- 
rowed. Honestly, she’s one of the few really evil people I’ve known in my 
life.”!25 Later I was to agree with that opinion. 


In May 1941 Kitty gave birth to their first child, Peter, who was nicknamed 
Pronto, from the speed of his arrival after the marriage. Robert has recalled 
what happened next: 


In August 1941, I bought [a house at number 1] Eagle Hill at Berkeley for my 
wife, which was the first home we had of our own. We settled down to live in it 
with our new baby. We had a good many friends, but little leisure. My wife was 
working in biology at the university. Many of the men I had known went off to 
work on radar and other aspects of military research. I was not without envy of 
them; but it was not until my first connection with the rudimentary atomic- 
energy enterprise that I began to see any way in which I could be of direct use.'° 


CHAPTER 9 


“THE SHATTERER OF WORLDS” 


On January 6, 1939, it was announced” by Otto Hahn (1879-1968) and 
Fritz Strassmann (1902-1980) that they had made a discovery that must be 
called staggering. Among the byproducts of neutron-uranium collisions they 
had identified three isotopes of barium, which have nuclear charge roughly 
half that of uranium! Up till that time nuclear reactions never had produced 
changes in nuclear charge larger than two units. It was the first observation 
of nuclear fission. (The first explanation, and the name “fission,” came from 
Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch.) 

Glenn Seaborg (1912-1999) has remembered “a seminar [in Berkeley] in 
January 1939 when [fission was] excitedly discussed. I do not recall ever 
seeing Oppie so stimulated and so full of ideas. . . . [It was] his first encoun- 
ter with the phenomena that was to play such an important role in shaping 
the future course of events in his life.”!28 A letter by Robert to a colleague, 
starting with “The U business is unbelievable,” is also bubbling with ideas 
about this novel branch of nuclear physics. Later he has written, “Ever 
since the discovery of nuclear fission, the possibility of powerful explosives 
based on it had been very much on my mind, as it had on that of many 
other physicists.”!° 

When in 1941 Lawrence began work in Berkeley on separating the ura- 
nium isotope 235, Oppenheimer and a group of his students worked di- 
rectly with him. In June of that year the United States Office of Scientific 
Research and Development (OSRD) was established for the purpose of co- 
ordinating scientific-military projects. In December came Pearl Harbor and 


40 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


the United States’ entry into World War II. In January 1942 Oppenheimer 
was made responsible for fast-neutron research in Berkeley, part of OSRD’s 
Section S-1 on uranium work. Soon thereafter Robert acquired regular sec- 
retarial help and began keeping files of official correspondence. In May he 
was appointed director of S-1. In the summer of 1942 he organized a session 
in Berkeley to explore theoretical aspects of nuclear explosions, for which 
he was now directly responsible. “After these studies there was little doubt 
that a potentially world-shattering undertaking lay ahead.” ° So got under- 
way what was then assumed to be a race with Germany to develop a fission 
weapon. 

Enter Leslie Richard Groves (1896-1970). 

Early in 1942 Colonel Groves was in charge of all Army construction, 
including that of the Pentagon. On September 17, 1942, he was ordered to 
drop everything else and devote himself to Project Y, the code name for the 
atomic bomb work. Feeling that physicists could best be awed by military 
rank, he put off meeting them for a few days until a promised promotion to 
brigadier general came through. 

Right away a difficult question arose: who should be the scientific head 
of the project? Consulting physicists, Robert’s name continued to be men- 
tioned. However, according to Groves, “Oppenheimer had two major 
disadvantages—he had almost no administrative experience of any kind, and 
he was not a Nobel Prize winner.”"? The first reservation was true, the 
second was irrelevant, as Groves himself admitted later. 

Thetwo men met forthe first time in Berkeley in October 1942. Groves 
started to fire questions at Robert which he answered to his [G.’s] satisfac- 
tion. When Groves congratulated him on being intelligible about the bomb, 
Oppenheimer made the reply that he made to everybody in those days. 
“There are no experts,” he said absently. “The field is too new.”’* Groves 
liked that and so, from the very beginning, the two of them got along, 
though there would be occasional moments of friction later on. 

Groves has written: 

In a few weeks it became apparent that we were not going to find a better man; 

so Oppenheimer was asked to undertake the task. 

But there was still a snag. His background included much that was not to our 
liking by any means. The security organization, which was not yet under my 
complete control, was unwilling to clear him because of certain of his associa- 
tions, particularly in the past. I was thoroughly familiar with everything that 
had been reported about Oppenheimer. As always in security matters of such 


importance, I had read all the available original evidence; I did not depend upon 
the conclusions of the security officers. 


“THE SHATTERER OF WORLDS” 41 


Finally, because I felt that his potential value outweighed any security risk, 
and to remove the matter from further discussion, I personally wrote and signed 
the following instructions to the District Engineer on July 20, 1943: 


In accordance with my verbal directions of July 15, itis desired that 
clearance be issued for the employment of Julius Robert Oppenheimer 
without delay, irrespective of the information which you have con- 
cerning Mr. Oppenheimer. He is absolutely essential to the project. 


I have never felt that it was a mistake to have selected andcleared Oppenheimer 
for his wartime post. He accomplished his assigned mission and he did it well.!* 


Meanwhile Oppenheimer had discussed with Groves the need for an 
atomic bomb laboratory. 


There had been some thought of making this laboratory a part of Oak Ridge. For 
a time there was support for making it a Military Establishment in which key 
personnel would be commissioned as officers; and in preparation for this course I 
once went to the Presidio to take the initial steps toward obtaining a commission. 
After a good deal of discussion with the personnel who would be needed at Los 
Alamos and with General Groves and his advisurs, it was decided that the labora- 
tory should, at least initially, be a civilian establishment in a military post. While 
this consideration was going on, I had showed General Groves Los Alamos; and 
he almost immediately took steps to acquire the site. . . . 

The last months of 1942 and early 1943 had hardly hours enough to get Los 
Alamosestablished. The real problem had to do with getting to Los Alamos the 
men who would make a success of the undertaking. For this we needed to un- 
derstand as clearly as we then could what our technical program would be, what 
men we would need, what facilities, what organization, what plan. ... We had 
to recruit at a time when the country was fully engaged in war and almost every 
competent scientist was already involved in the military effort. 

The primary burden of this fell on me. To recruit staff I travelled all over the 
country talking with people who had been working on one or another aspect of 
the atomic-energy enterprise, and people in radar work, for example, and un- 
derwater sound, telling them about the job, the place that we were going to, and 
enlisting their enthusiasm.’ 


On March 15, 1943, Oppenheimer and a few of his staff arrived in Los 
Alamos. In the official history of the laboratory it has been recorded: 


The Los Alamos site, together with a large surrounding area, was established as 
a military reservation. The community, fenced and guarded, was made an army 
post. The laboratory, in turn, was built within an inner fenced and guarded 
area, called “Technical Area.” Both the military and technical administrations 
were responsible to Major General L. R. Groves, who had overall executive 
responsibility for the work. . .. Oppenheimer, as Scientific Director, was also 
responsible to General Groves . . . [He] was responsible for security policy and 
administration.”!6 


Los Alamos participants included a group of British physicists. An an- 
ecdote: Groves once remarked about them, “These Britishers are odd. At 
four o’clock in the afternoon they don’t drink Coca Cola. They drink ‘ea! 


42 ‘J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Quite understandably, a few months after starting this colossal enter- 
prise, Oppenheimer 


was undergoing a real crisis in self-confidence. The heady experience of creating 
a new laboratory and pulling together the disparate parts of the scientific work 
had been stimulating and euphoric. Then came a reaction. On several occasions 
in the early summer of 1943 [a friend] found Oppenheimer depressed by the 
magnitude and complexity of the director’s task. He told [the friend] he could 
not go through with it, but [his friend’s] advice was simple: Oppenheimer had 
no alternative, for no one else could do the job.” 


In 1944 Robert’s second child was born in Los Alamos, Katherine, called 
Toni by everyone. 


Without exception, all those who participated in the work at Los Alamos 
speak with great admiration and high praise of Oppenheimer’s leadership 
of the atomic bomb project. I myself was not there, having lived in Holland 
until well after the two bombs on Japan were dropped. I shall give two 
samples of opinions of friends of mine who themselves have played leading 
roles in the enterprise. 

By Weisskopf: 


[Oppenheimer] did not direct from the head office. He was intellectually and 
even physically present at each significant step; he was present in the laboratory 
or in the seminar rooms when a new effect was measured, when a new idea was 
conceived. It was not that he contributed so many ideas or suggestions; he did so 
sometimes, but his main influence came from his continuous and intense pres- 
ence, which produced a sense of direct participation in all of us. It created that 
unique atmosphere of enthusiasm and challenge that pervaded the place through- 
out its time. I remember vividly the sessions of the co-ordinating council, a 
regular meeting of all group leaders where progress and failures were reviewed 
and future plans were discussed. The discussions covered everything: physics, 
technology, organization, administration, secrecy regulations and our relations 
to the Army. 

It was most impressive to see Oppie handle that mixture of international 
scientific prima donnas, engineers, and army officers, forging them into an en- 
thusiastically productive crowd. The project was not without tensions and clashes 
between personalities, but he dealt with these problems with a light hand, and 
he knew how to exploit conflicts in a productive way. I remember the weekly 
colloquium. ... Oppenheimer insisted on having these regular colloquia against 
the opposition of the security-minded people, who wanted each man only to 
know his part of the work. He knew that each one must know the whole thing 
if he was to be creative. 


By Bethe: 


Los Alamos might have succeeded without him, but certainly only with much 
greater strain, less enthusiasm, and less speed. As it was, it was an unforgettable 


“THE SHATTERER OF WORLDS” 43 


experience for all the members of the laboratory. There were other wartime 
laboratories of high achievement. . . . But I have never observed in any one of 
these other groups quite the spirit of belonging together, quite the urge to remi- 
nisce about the days of the laboratory, quite the feeling that this was really the 
great time of their lives. 

That this was true of Los Alamos was mainly due to Oppenheimer. He was 
a leader. It was clear to all of us, whenever he spoke, that he knew everything 
that was important to know about the technical problems of the laboratory, 
and he somehow had it well organized in his head. But he was not domineering, 
he never dictated what should be done. He brought out the best in all of us, like 
a good host with his guests. And because he clearly did his job very well, in a 
manner all could see, we all strove to do our job as best we could. 

One of the factors contributing to the success of the laboratory was its demo- 
cratic organization. ... Everybody in the laboratory felt a part of the whole and 
felt that he should contribute to the success of the program. Very often a prob- 
lem discussed would intrigue a scientist in a completely different branch of the 
laboratory, and he would come up with an unexpected solution. 

This free interchange of ideas was entirely contrary to the organization of 
the Manhattan District as a whole. . .. Oppenheimer had to fight hard for free 
discussion among all qualified members of the laboratory. But the free flow of 
information and discussion, together with Oppenheimer’s personality, kept 
morale at its highest throughout the war.'” 


The first atomic bomb explosion occurred in 1945. The place: a corner of 
Alamogordo Air Force Base, baptized Trinity by Oppenheimer, situated in 
the desolate area aptly called Jornado del Muerto, some 300 miles south of 
Los Alamos. The time: July 16, at 5:30 aM. The purpose: to test if such 
gadgets would work and if so what their yield would be. The test object: 
Fat Man, a five-kilogram plutonium bomb and its very bulky detonating 
mechanism, an implosion device, the whole encased in a five-foot-wide, nine- 
and-a-half-foot-long container, sprouting incongruous tail fins at the nar- 
row end. (A model can be viewed at the Los Alamos Museum.) 

I shall not try to describe the intense labors by many at Los Alamos, 
with its downs and ups, which climaxed at Trinity since, as said, I was far 
away from that scene, and also because a quite detailed official account”* 
and a superb history of these efforts have meanwhile been published. In- 
stead I shall confine myself to a few comments on Robert while he was 
present at the test. “Physicists gathered around Oppenheimer to bandy a 
dreary new word of the twentieth century—/a//out. . . . [He] was the only 
one wearing a coat. Too emaciated to sweat, he had kept on his familiar 
sloppy tweed suit, which now fitted him like a tent. . . . [According to a 
colleague] Oppenheimer . . . struck me as keyed up to the last degree of 
strain and tension. . . . Oppenheimer’s face was tense and dreamy— 


44 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


withdrawn—until the moment that it was lit by reflections from the sand. 
Then it relaxed visibly.”"! 

What he and his colleagues saw at that moment must count among the 
most spectacular events in the history of the world. “Without a sound, the 
sun was shining; or so it looked.” For a few seconds there was silence 
then a thunderous roar. 

“A few people laughed, a few people cried, most people were silent,” 
Oppenheimer recalled. “There floated through my mind a line from the 
Bhagavad-Gita in which Krishna is trying to persuade the Prince that he 
should do his duty: ‘I am become death, the shatterer of worlds.” Typical 
Robert, too exalted for my taste. I like ever so much better what Ken 
Bainbridge (1904-1996), the official test leader, said to Oppenheimer when, 
flushed with the success of the test, he came over to Robert, “Now we’re all 
sons of bitches!” Also typical was the immediate reaction by Groves, “This 
is the end of traditional warfare!” 

Some ten years later, Robert reflected like this about Trinity: 

It was a success. I believe that in the eyes of the War Department, and other 

knowledgeable people, it was as early a success as they had thought possible, 

given all the circumstances, and rather a greater one. There were many indica- 
tions from the secretary of war and General Groves, and many others, that 
official opinion was one of satisfaction with what had been accomplished. At 
the time, it was hard for us in Los Alamos not to share that satisfaction, and 
hard for me not to accept the conclusion that I had managed the enterprise well 
and played a key part in its success. But it needs to be stated that many others 
contributed the decisive ideas and carried out the work which led to this success 


and that my role was that of understanding, encouraging, suggesting and decid- 
ing. It was the very opposite of a one-man show.'* 


I conclude this account of Trinity with a recollection of Rabi, who was 
also there, retold by Davis, which sets the tone of what is to follow. 


“The experience was hard to describe,” he says, “I haven’t got over it yet. It was 
awful, ominous, personally threatening. I couldn’t tell why.” Dawn found him 
still in reverie as he watched the blockhouse party approaching from a long way 
off across the sand. Oppenheimer parked too far away for Rabi to see his face, 
but something in his bearing brought Rabi’s gooseflesh back again. He moved 
like a confident stranger, darkly glittering, at ease, in tune with the thing. “I'll 
never forget his walk,” says Rabi. “I’ll never forget the way he stepped out of 
the car.” 


CHAPTER 1 0 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER 
ENTERS THE WORLD STAGE 


On April 12, 1945, President Roosevelt died. Three days later Oppenheimer 
scheduled a Sunday morning memorial service in Los Alamos, where “Oppie 
spoke very quietly for two or three minutes out of his heart and ours. It was 
Robert Oppenheimer at his best: ‘When, three days ago, the world had 
word ...many wept who are unaccustomed to tears, many men and women, 
little enough accustomed to prayer, prayed to God.”!” 

In the early hours of May 7, 1945, General Eisenhower dictated the fol- 
lowing telegram to the combined chiefs of staff of United States military 
forces: “The mission of this Allied force was fulfilled at 0241, local time.” 
The war in Europe was over. 

It was therefore obvious that atomic weapons, not yet even tested that 
day, would be deployed against Japan, if used at all. On May 9, a committee 
appointed by President Truman to study this issue, known as the Interim 
Committee on Atomic Energy, held its first meeting. On May 31, Oppen- 
heimer was in Washington to start a new phase of his career: statesman of 
science. 

“I welcomed the opportunity ... to serve, along with [Arthur] Compton, 
Lawrence, and Fermi, on an advisory Scientific Panel to [the] Interim Com- 
mittee.”*° On that May 31, the Committee met in full dress together with 
the Scientific Panel. From the notes of that meeting we learn that it was 
decided not to give the Japanese advance warnings if atomic weapons were 
to be dropped.'* On June 16 the Panel made recommendations on the im- 
mediate use of atomic weapons.” Writing for the Panel, Oppenheimer said: 


46 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


The opinions of our scientific colleagues on the initial use of these weapons are 
not unanimous: they range from the proposal of a purely technical demonstration 
to that of the military application best designed to induce surrender. Those who 
advocate a purely technical demonstration would wish to outlaw the use of atomic 
weapons, and have feared that if we use the weapons now our position in future 
negotiation will be prejudiced. Others emphasize the opportunity of saving Ameri- 
can lives by immediate military use, and we believe that such use will improve the 
international prospects, in that they are more concerned with the prevention of 
war than with the elimination of this specific weapon. We find ourselves closer to 
these latter views; we can propose no technical demonstration likely to bring an 
end to the war; we see no acceptable alternates to direct military use.” 


As he was later to recall, “We didn’t know beans about the military situ- 
ation in Japan. We didn’t know whether they could be caused to surrender 
by other means or whether the invasion was really inevitable. But in the 
backs of our minds was the notion that the invasion was inevitable because 
we had been told that.”"* 

On August 6, 1945, at 8:16:02 local time, an atomic bomb exploded over 
Hiroshima at a height of about 1,800 feet, with a yield of 12,500 tons TNT. 
It was a uranium bomb, nicknamed Little Boy. 

“Back at Los Alamos, Oppenheimer read the message flashed [to him] 
fifteen minutes after the drop, and called the whole staff of the laboratory 
together in one of the camp auditoria. ‘He entered that meeting like a prize 
fighter [recalls one scientist]. As he walked through the hall there were 
cheers and shouts and applause all round and he acknowledged them with 
the fighters’ salute—clasping his hands together above his head as he came 
to the podium.’”!° 

On August 9 at 11:02 AM a Fat Man exploded over Nagasaki with a force 
estimated at 22,000 tons TNT. Two days earlier, 6 million leaflets had been 
dropped over 47 Japanese cities with populations exceeding 100,000 in which 
the Japanese were urged to petition the emperor to end the war. On August 
10, the Japanese conditional surrender offer reached Washington. 

I recall a discussion with Rabi, many years after these events, in which I 
said that I could understand the dropping of the first bomb but that the 
second one seemed criminal to me. Rabi replied that I clearly did not under- 
stand the military mind. After having produced two distinct kinds of weap- 
ons at enormous cost, he said, it was inconceivable that the military would 
not try out both with at least one shot. Whereupon I said that his point was 
well taken but did not change my mind. 


The work of the Scientific Panel was by no means done after war’s end. 
Their next assignment was to consider further planning regarding atomic 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER ENTERS THE WORLD STAGE 47 


weapons. Already on August 16 we find Oppenheimer back in Washing- 
ton, carrying a report on these matters to Secretary of War Harry Stimson 
(1867-1950). It is a wise and far-seeing document. I quote from its covering 
letter.'>! 


TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR 
August 17, 1945 
Dear Mr. Secretary: 


The Interim Committee has asked us to report in some detail on the scope 
and program of future work in the field of atomic energy. One important phase 
of this work is the development of weapons; and since this is the problem which 
has dominated our war time activities, it is natural that in this field our ideas 
should be most definite and clear, and that we should be most confident of 
answering adequately the questions put to us by the committee. In examining 
these questions we have, however, come on certain quite general conclusions, 
whose implications for national policy would seem to be both more immediate 
and more profound than those of the detailed technical recommendations to be 
submitted. ... 


1. Weare convinced that weapons quantitatively and qualitatively far more effec- 
tive than now available will result from further work on these problems... . 

2. We have been unable to devise or propose effective military countermea- 
sures for atomic weapons. .. . It is our firm opinion that no military counter- 
measures will be found which will be adequately effective in preventing the 
delivery of atomic weapons. ... 

3. Weare not only unable to outline a program that would assure to this nation 
for the next decades hegemony in the field of atomic weapons; we are equally 
unable to insure that such hegemony, if achieved, could protect us from the 
most terrible destruction. 

4. The development, in the years to come, of more effective atomic weapons, 
would appear to be a most natural element in any national policy of main- 
taining our military forces at great strength; nevertheless we have grave doubts 
that this further development can contribute essentially or permanently to 
the prevention of war. We believe that the safety of this nation—as opposed 
to its ability to inflict damage on an enemy power—cannot lie wholly or 
even primarily in its scientific or technical prowess. It can be based only on 
making future wars impossible. It is our unanimous and urgent recommen- 
dation to you that .. . all steps be taken, all necessary international arrange- 
ments be made, to this one end. 


Very sincerely, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 
For the Panel 


Some time later, Oppenheimer sat in a barber shop with Stimson shortly 
before the latter left office. The two talked about the bomb: “At the end the 
old man rose from the chair and turned to Oppenheimer, ‘Now it is in 
your hands,’ he said.” 


48 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


These few words summarize succinctly yet eloquently Robert’s mete- 
oric rise to influence in the corridors of power. His fame had spread far and 
wide. Rabi has said, “After the war Oppenheimer was hailed in print and 
talk as the great humanist, sage and wizard of the scientific world. His name 
carried magic. When he showed up in San Francisco, crowds gathered on 
the pavement around him.”! Already on August 7, the day after Hiroshima, 
we find in the New York Times the first mention of Oppenheimer as the direc- 
tor of the scientific aspects of the atomic bomb project. The article is ac- 
companied by the first picture ever of Robert in the world press, in which 
he looks quite haggard. On August 8 the Times quoted an associate of Robert, 
“Oppie is smart . . . he’s the smartest of the lot in everything.” 

In March 1946, Robert Patterson, Stimson’s successor, presented 
Oppenheimer with the United States Medal for Merit. The accompanying 
citation praised him for “his great scientific experience and ability, his inex- 
haustible energy, his rare capacity as an organizer and executive, his initia- 
tive and resourcefulness, and his unswerving devotion to duty.” 


On October 16, 1945, General Groves presented the Los Alamos Laboratory 
with a certificate of appreciation from the secretary of war. Robert’s brief 
acceptance speech is a masterpiece of his elegant use of the English language: 


It is with appreciation and gratitude that I accept from you this scroll for the 
Los Alamos Laboratory, for the men and women whose work and whose hearts 
have made it. It is our hope that in the years to come we may look at this scroll, 
and all that it signifies, with pride. 

Today that pride must be tempered with profound concern. If atomic bombs 
are to be added as new weapons to the arsenals of the warring world, or to the 
arsenals of nations preparing for war, then the time will come when mankind 
will curse the names of Los Alamos and Hiroshima. 

The peoples of this world must unite or they will perish. This war that has 
ravaged so much of the earth has written these words. The atomic bomb has 
spelled them out for all men to understand. Other men have spoken them, in 
other times, of other wars, of other weapons. They have not prevailed. There 
are some, misled by a false sense of human history, who hold that they will not 
prevail today. It is not for us to believe that. By our works we are committed, 
committed to a world united, before this common peril, in law, and in 
humanity. 


The next day Oppenheimer’s successor as director took over. 


CHAPTER 1 1 


AN ATOMIC SCIENTIST’S CREDO 


On November 2, 1945, Robert gave his farewell speech to Los Alamos, 
long remembered by the packed audience of some 500 members of the As- 
sociation of Los Alamos Scientists. That address might well have been en- 
titled “An Atomic Scientist’s Credo.” It shows how, only three months 
after the fateful atomic bombing of Japan, Oppenheimer, the man who, 
one may assume, knew more about both the technological and the political 
consequences of the new weapons than anyone else, had already a clear 
view of what he called “the fix we are in,” to wit, the insuperable difficulties 
attendant on atomic arms control, the central issue of what soon would 
become known as the Cold War, which was to last for the next 40 years. I 
find this address so important that I reproduce it here in full: 


I am grateful to the Executive Committee for this chance to talk to you. I should 
like to talk tonight—if some of you have long memories perhaps you will regard 
it as justified—as a fellow scientist, and at least as a fellow worrier about the fix 
we are in. I do not have anything very radical to say, or anything that will strike 
most of you with a great flash of enlightenment. I don’t have anything to say 
that will be of an immense encouragement. In some ways I would have liked to 
talk to you at an earlier date—but I couldn’t talk to you as a Director. I could 
not talk, and will not tonight talk, too much about the practical political prob- 
lems which are involved. There is one good reason for that—I don’t know very 
much about practical politics. And there is another reason, which has to some 
extent restrained me in the past. As you know, some of us have been asked to be 
technical advisors to the Secretary of War, and through him to the President. In 
the course of this we have naturally discussed things that were on our minds and 
have been made, often very willingly, the recipient of confidences; it is not 
possible to speak in detail about what Mr. A thinks and Mr. B doesn’t think, or 


50 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


what is going to happen next week, without violating these confidences. I don’t 
think that’s important. I think there are issues which are quite simple and quite 
deep, and which involve us as a group of scientists—involve us more, perhaps 
than any other group in the world. I think that it can only help to look a little at 
what our situation is—at what has happened to us—and that this must give us 
some honesty, some insight, which will be a source of strength in what may be 
the not-too-easy days ahead. I would like to take it as deep and serious as I know 
how, and then perhaps we come to more immediate questions in the course of 
the discussion later. I want anyone who feels like it to ask me a question and if 
I can’t answer it, as will often be the case, I will just have to say so. 

What has happened to us—it is really rather major, it is so major that I think 
in some ways one returns to the greatest developments of the twentieth cen- 
tury, to the discovery of relativity, and to the whole development of atomic 
theory and its interpretation in terms of complementarity, for analogy. These 
things, as you know, forced us to reconsider the relations between science and 
common sense. They forced on us the recognition that the fact that we were in 
the habit of talking a certain language and using certain concepts did not neces- 
sarily imply that there was anything in the real world to correspond to these. 
They forced us to be prepared for the inadequacy of the ways in which human 
beings attempted to deal with reality, for that reality. In some ways I think 
these virtues, which scientists quite reluctantly were forced to learn by the na- 
ture of the world they were studying, may be useful even today in preparing us 
for somewhat more radical views of what the issues are than would be natural 
or easy for people who had not been through this experience. 

But the real impact of the creation of the atomic bomb and atomic weapons— 
to understand that one has to look further back, look, I think, to the times 
when physical science was growing in the days of the Renaissance, and when 
the threat that science offered was felt so deeply throughout the Christian world. 
The analogy is, of course, not perfect. You may even wish to think of the days 
in the last century when the theories of evolution seemed a threat to the values 
by which men lived. The analogy is not perfect because there is nothing in 
atomic weapons—there is certainly nothing that we have done here or in the 
physics or chemistry that immediately preceded our work here—in which any 
revolutionary ideas were involved. I don’t think that the conceptions of nuclear 
fission have strained any man’s attempts to understand them, and I don’t feel 
that any of us have really learned in a deep sense very much from following this 
up. It is in a quite different way. It is not an idea—it is a development and a 
reality—but it has in common with the early days of physical science the fact 
that the very existence of science is threatened, and its value is threatened. This 
is the point that I would like to speak a little about. 

I think that it hardly needs to be said why the impact is so strong. There are 
three reasons: one is the extraordinary speed with which things which were 
right on the frontier of science were translated into terms where they affected 
many living people, and potentially all people. Another is the fact, quite acci- 
dental in many ways, and connected with that speed, that scientists themselves 
played such a large part, not merely in providing the foundation for atomic 
weapons, but in actually making them. In this we are certainly closer to it than 
any other group. The third is that the thing we made—partly because of the 
technical nature of the problem, partly because we worked hard, partly because 


AN ATOMIC SCIENTIST’S CREDO 51 


we had good breaks—really arrived in the world with such a shattering reality 
and suddenness that there was no opportunity for the edges to be worn off. 

In considering what the situation of science is, it may be helpful to think a 
little of what people said and felt of their motives in coming into this job. One 
always has to worry that what people say of their motives is not adequate. Many 
people said different things, and most of them, I think, had some validity. There 
was in the first place the great concern that our enemy might develop these 
weapons before we did, and the feeling—at least, in the early days, the very 
strong feeling—that without atomic weapons it might be very difficult, it might 
be an impossible, it might be an incredibly long thing to win the war. These 
things wore off a little as it became clear that the war would be won in any case. 
Some people, I think, were motivated by curiosity, and rightly so; and some by 
a sense of adventure, and rightly so. Others had more political arguments and 
said, “Well, we know that atomic weapons are in principle possible, and it is not 
right that the threat of their unrealized possibility should hang over the world. 
It is right that the world shoula know what can be done in their field and deal 
with it.” And the people added to that that it was a time when all over the world 
men would be particularly ripe and open for dealing with this problem because 
of the immediacy of the evils of war, because of the universal cry from everyone 
that one could not go through this thing again, even a war without atomic bombs. 
And there was finally, and I think rightly, the feeling that there was probably 
no place in the world where the development of atomic weapons would have a 
better chance of leading to a reasonable solution, and a smaller chance of leading 
to disaster, than within the United States. I believe all these things that people 
said are true, and I think I said them all myself at one time or another. 

But when you come right down to it the reason that we did this job is be- 
cause it was an organic necessity. If you are a scientist you cannot stop such a 
thing. If you are a scientist you believe that it is good to find out how the world 
works; that it is good to find out what the realities are; that it is good to turn 
over to mankind at large the greatest possible power to control the world and to 
deal with it according to its lights and its values. 

There has been a lot of talk about the evil of secrecy, of concealment, of 
control, of security. Some of that talk has been on a rather low plane, limited 
really to saying that it is difficult or inconvenient to work in a world where you 
are not free to do what you want. I think that the talk has been justified, and 
that the almost unanimous resistance of scientists to the imposition of control 
and secrecy is a justified position, but I think that the reason for it may lie a 
little deeper. I think that it comes from the fact that secrecy strikes at the very 
root of what science is, and what it is for. It is not possible to be a scientist unless 
you believe that it is good to learn. It is not good to be a scientist, and it is not 
possible, unless you think that it is of the highest value to share your knowl- 
edge, to share it with anyone who is interested. It is not possible to be a scientist 
unless you believe that the knowledge of the world, and the power which this 
gives, is a thing which is of intrinsic value to humanity, and that you are using it 
to help in the spread of knowledge, and are willing to take the consequences. 
And, therefore, I think that this resistance which we feel and see all around us to 
anything which is an attempt to treat science of the future as though it were 
rather a dangerous thing, a thing that must be watched and managed, is resisted 
not because of its inconvenience—I think we are in a position where we must be 


52 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


willing to take any inconvenience—but resisted because it is based on a philoso- 
phy incompatible with that by which we live, and have learned to live in the past. 

There are many people who try to wiggle out of this. They say the real 
importance of atomic energy does not lie in the weapons that have been made; 
the real importance lies in all the great benefits which atomic energy, which the 
various radiations, will bring to mankind. There may be some truth in this. Iam 
sure that there is truth in it, because there has never in the past been a new field 
opened up where the real fruits of it have not been invisible at the beginning. I 
have a very high confidence that the fruits—the so-called peacetime applications— 
of atomic energy will have in them all that we think, and more. There are oth- 
ers who try to escape the immediacy of this situation by saying that, after all, 
war has always been very terrible; after all, weapons have always gotten worse 
and worse; that this is just another weapon and it doesn’t create a great change; 
that they are not so bad; bombings have been bad in this war and this is not a 
change in that—it just adds a little to the effectiveness of bombing; that some 
sort of protection will be found. I think that these efforts to diffuse and weaken 
the nature of the crisis make it only more dangerous. I think it is for us to accept 
it as a very grave crisis, to realize that these atomic weapons which we have 
started to make are very terrible, that they involve a change, that they are not 
just a slight modification: to accept this, and to accept with it the necessity for 
those transformations in the world which will make it possible to integrate 
these developments into human life. 

As scientists I think we have perhaps a little greater ability to accept change, 
and accept radical change, because of our experiences in the pursuit of science. 
And that may help us—that, and the fact that we have lived with it—to be of 
some use in understanding these problems. 

It is clear to me that wars have changed. It is clear to me that if these first 
bombs—the bomb that was dropped on Nagasaki—that if these can destroy ten 
square miles, then that is really quite something. It is clear to me that they are 
going to be very cheap if anyone wants to make them; it is clear to me that this 
is a Situation where a quantitative change, and a change in which the advantage 
of aggression compared to defense—of attack compared to defense—is shifted, 
where this quantitative change has all the character of a change in quality, of a 
change in the nature of the world. I know that whereas wars have become intol- 
erable, and the question would have been raised and would have been pursued 
after this war, more ardently than after the last, of whether there was not some 
method by which they could be averted. But I think the advent of the atomic 
bomb and the facts which will get around that they are not too hard to make— 
that they will be universal if people wish to make them universal, that they will 
not constitute a real drain on the economy of any strong nation, and that their 
power of destruction will grow and is already incomparably greater than that of 
any other weapon—I think these things create a new situation, so new that there 
is some danger, even some danger in believing, that what we have is a new 
argument for arrangements, for hopes, that existed before this development took 
place. By that I mean that much as I like to hear advocates of a world federation, 
or advocates of a United Nations organization, who have been talking of these 
things for years—much as I like to hear them say that here is a new argument, I 
think that they are in part missing the point, because the point is not that atomic 
weapons constitute a new argument. There have always been good arguments. 


AN ATOMIC SCIENTIST’S CREDO 53 


The point is that atomic weapons constitute also a field, a new field, and a new 
opportunity for realizing pre-conditions. I think that when people talk of the fact 
that this is not only a great peril, but a great hope, this is what they should mean. 
I do not think they should mean the unknown, though sure, value of industrial 
and scientific virtues of atomic energy, but rather the simple fact that in this field, 
because it is a threat, because it is a peril, and because it has certain special charac- 
teristics, to which I will return, there exists a possibility of realizing, of beginning 
to realize, those changes which are needed if there is to be any peace. 

Those are very far-reaching changes. They are changes in the relations be- 
tween nations, not only in spirit, not only in law, but also in conception and 
feeling. I don’t know which of these is prior; they must all work together, and 
only the gradual interaction of one on the other can make a reality. I don’t agree 
with those who say the first step is to have a structure of international law. I 
don’t agree with those who say the only thing is to have friendly feelings. All of 
these things will be involved. I think it is true to say that atomic weapons are a 
peril which affect everyone in the world, and in that sense a completely com- 
mon problem, as common a problem as it was for the Allies to defeat the Nazis. 
I think that in order to handle this common problem there must be a complete 
sense of community responsibility. I do not think that one may expect that 
people will contribute to the solution of the problem until they are aware of 
their ability to take part in the solution. I think that it is a field in which the 
implementation of such a common responsibility has certain decisive advan- 
tages. It is a new field, in which the position of vested interests in various parts 
of the world is very much less serious than in others. It is serious in this coun- 
try, and that is one of our problems. It is a new field, in which the role of science 
has been so great that it is to my mind hardly thinkable that the international 
traditions of science, and the fraternity of scientists, should not play a construc- 
tive part. It is a new field, in which just the novelty and the special characteris- 
tics of the technical operations should enable one to establish a community of 
interest which might almost be regarded as a pilot plant for a new type of inter- 
national collaboration. I speak of it as a pilot plant because it is quite clear that 
the control of atomic weapons cannot be in itself the unique end of such opera- 
tion. The only unique end can be a world that is united, and a world in which 
war will not occur. But those things don’t happen overnight, and in this field it 
would seem that one could get started, and get started without meeting those 
insuperable obstacles which history has so often placed in the way of any effort 
of cooperation. Now, this is not an easy thing, and the point I want to make, the 
one point I want to hammer home, is what an enormous change in spirit is 
involved. There are things which we hold very dear, and I think rightly hold 
very dear; I would say that the word democracy perhaps stood for some of them 
as well as any other word. There are many parts of the world in which there is 
no democracy. There are other things which we hold dear, and which we rightly 
should. And when I speak of a new spirit in international affairs I mean that 
even to these deepest of things which we cherish, and for which Americans have 
been willing to die—and certainly most of us would be willing to die—even in 
these deepest things, we realize that. there is something more profound than 
that; namely, the common bond with other men everywhere. It is only if you 
do that that this makes sense; because if you approach the problem and say, “We 
know what is right and we would like to use the atomic bomb to persuade you 


54 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


to agree with us,” then you are in a very weak position and you will not suc- 
ceed, because under those conditions you will not succeed in delegating respon- 
sibility for the survival of men. It is a purely unilateral statement; you will find 
yourselves attempting by force of arms to prevent a disaster. 

I want to express the utmost sympathy with the people who have to grapple 
with this problem and in the strongest terms to urge you not to underestimate 
its difficulty. I can think of an analogy, and I hope it is not a completely good 
analogy: in the days in the first half of the nineteenth century there were many 
people, mostly in the North, but some in the South, who thought that there 
was no evil on earth more degrading than human slavery, and nothing that they 
would more willingly devote their lives to than its eradication. Always when I 
was young I wondered why it was that when Lincoln was President he did not 
declare that the war against the South, when it broke out, was a war that slavery 
should be abolished, that this was the central point, the rallying point, of that 
war. Lincoln was severely criticized by many of the Abolitionists as you know, 
by many then called radicals, because he seemed to be waging a war which did 
not hit the thing that was most important. But Lincoln realized, and I have only 
in the last months come to appreciate the depth and wisdom of it, that beyond 
the issue of slavery was the issue of the community of the people. of the country, 
and the issue of the Union. I hope that today this will not be an issue calling for 
war; but I wanted to remind you that in order to preserve the Union Lincoln 
had to subordinate the immediate problem of the eradication of slavery, and 
trust—and I think if he had had his way it would have gone so—to the conflict of 
these ideas in a united people to eradicate it. 

These are somewhat general remarks and it may be appropriate to say one or 
two things that are a little more programmatic, that are not quite so hard to get 
one’s hands on. That is, what sort of agreement between nations would be a 
reasonable start. I don’t know the answer to this, and I am very sure that no a 
priori answer should be given, that it is something that is going to take constant 
working out. But I think it is a thing where it will not hurt to have some reason- 
ably concrete proposal. And I would go a step further and say of even such 
questions as the great question of secrecy—which perplexes scientists and other 
people—that even this was not a suitable subject for unilateral action. If atomic 
energy is to be treated as an international problem, as I think it must be, if it is to 
be treated on the basis of an international responsibility and an international com- 
mon concern, the problems of secrecy are also international problems. I don’t 
mean by that that our present classifications and our present, in many cases inevi- 
tably ridiculous, procedures should be maintained. I mean that the fundamental 
problem of how to treat this peril ought not to be treated unilaterally by the 
United States, or by the United States in conjunction with Great Britain. 

The first thing I would say about any proposals is that they ought to be 
regarded as interim proposals, and that whenever they are made it be under- 
stood and agreed that within a year or two years—whatever seems a reasonable 
time—they will be reconsidered and the problems which have arisen, and the 
new developments which have occurred, will cause a rewriting. I think the only 
point is that there should be a few things in these proposals which will work in 
the right direction, and that the things should be accepted without forcing all of 
the changes, which we know must ultimately occur, upon people who will not 
be ready for them. This is anyone’s guess, but it would seem to me that if you 


AN ATOMIC SCIENTIST’S CREDO 55 


took these four points, it might work: first, that we are dealing with an interim 
solution, so recognized. Second, that the nations participating in the arrange- 
ment would have a joint atomic energy commission, operating under the most 
broad directives from the different states, but with a power which only they 
had, and which was not subject to review by the heads of State, to go ahead with 
those constructive applications of atomic energy which we would all like to see 
developed—energy sources, and the innumerable research tools which are im- 
mediate possibilities. Third, that there would be not merely the possibility of 
exchange of scientists and students; that very, very concrete machinery more or 
less forcing such exchange should be established, so that we would be quite sure 
that the fraternity of scientists would be strengthened and that the bonds on 
which so much of the future depends would have some reinforcement and some 
scope. And fourth, I would say that no bombs be made. I don’t know whether 
these proposals are good ones, and I think that anyone in this group would have 
his own proposals. But I mention them as very simple things, which I don’t 
believe solve the problem, and which I want to make clear are not the ultimate 
or even a touch of the ultimate, but which I think ought to be started right 
away; which I believe—though I know very little of this—may very well be 
acceptable to any of the nations that wish to become partners with us in this 
great undertaking. 

One of the questions which you will want to hear more about, and which I 
can only partly hope to succeed in answering, is to what extent such views— 
essentially the view that the life of science is threatened, the life of the world is 
threatened, and that only [by] a profound revision of what it is that constitutes 
a thing worth fighting for and a thing worth living for can this crisis be met—to 
what extent these views are held by other men. They are certainly not held 
universally by scientists; but I think they are in agreement with all of the ex- 
pressed opinions of this group, and I know that many of my friends here see 
pretty much eye to eye. I would speak especially of Bohr, who was here so 
much during the difficult days, who had many discussions with us, and who 
helped us reach the conclusion that [it was] not only a desirable solution, but 
that it was the unique solution, that there were no other alternatives. 

I would say that among scientists there are certain centrifugal tendencies 
which seem to mea little dangerous, but not very. One of them is the attempt to 
try, in this imperiled world, in which the very function of science is threatened, 
to make convenient arrangements for the continuance of science, and to pay 
very little attention to the preconditions which give sense to it. Another is the 
tendency to say we must have a free science and a strong science, because this 
will make us a strong nation and enable us to fight better wars. It seems to me 
that this is a profound mistake, and I don’t like to hear it. The third is even 
odder, and it is to say, “Oh give the bombs to the United Nations for police 
purposes, and let us get back to physics and chemistry.” I think none of these 
are really held very widely, but they show that there are people who are desper- 
ately trying to avoid what I think is the most difficult problem. One must ex- 
pect these false solutions, and overeasy solutions, and these are three which pop 
up from time to time. 

As far as I can tell in the world outside there are many people just as quick to 
see the gravity of the situation, and to understand it in terms not so different 
from those I have tried to outline. It is not only among scientists that there are 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


wise people and foolish people. I have had occasion in the last few months to 
meet people who have to do with the Government—the legislative branches, 
the administrative branches, and even the judicial branches, and I have found 
many in whom an understanding of what this problem is, and of the general 
lines along which it can be solved, is very clear. I would especially mention the 
former Secretary of War, Mr. Stimson, who, perhaps as much as any man, seemed 
to appreciate how hopeless and how impractical it was to attack this problem 
ona superficial level, and whose devotion to the development of atomic weap- 
ons was in large measure governed by his understanding of the hope that lay in 
it that there would be a new world. I know this is a surprise, because most 
people think that the War Department has as its unique function the making of 
war. The Secretary of War has other functions. 

I think this is another question of importance: that is, what views will be 
held on these matters in other countries. I think it is important to realize that 
even those who are well informed in this country have been slow to understand, 
slow to believe that the bombs would work, and then slow to understand that 
their working would present such profound problems. We have certain inter- 
ests in playing up the bomb, not only we here locally, but all over the country, 
because we made them, and our pride is involved. I think that in other lands it 
may be even more difficult for an appreciation of the magnitude of the thing to 
take hold. For this reason, I’m not surethat the greatest opportunities for progress 
do not lie somewhat further in the future than I had for a long time thought. 

There have been two or three official statements by the President which 
defined, as nearly as their in some measure inevitable contradictions made pos- 
sible, the official policy of the Government. And I think that one must not be 
entirely discouraged by the fact that there are contradictions, because the con- 
tradictions show that the problem is being understood as a difficult one, is tem- 
porarily being regarded as an insoluble one. Certainly you will notice, especially 
in the message to Congress, many indications of a sympathy with, and an under- 
standing of, the views which this group holds, and which I have discussed briefly 
tonight. I think all of us were encouraged at the phrase “too revolutionary to 
consider in the framework of old ideas.” That’s about what we all think. I think 
all of us were encouraged by the sense of urgency that was frequently and em- 
phatically stressed. I think all of us must be encouraged by the recognition, the 
official recognition by the Government of the importance—of the overriding 
importance—of the free exchange of scientific ideas and scientific information 
between all countries of the world. It would certainly be ridiculous to regard 
this as a final end, but I think that it would also be a very dangerous thing not to 
realize that it is a precondition. I am myself somewhat discouraged by the limi- 
tation of the objective to the elimination of atomic weapons, and I have seen 
many articles—probably you have, too—in which this is interpreted as follows: 
“Let us get international agreement to outlaw atomic weapons and then let us 
go back to having a good, clean war.” This is certainly not a very good way of 
looking at it. I think, to say it again, that if one solves the problems presented by 
the atomic bomb, one will have made a pilot plant for solution of the problem 
of ending war. 

But what is surely the thing which must have troubled you, and which 
troubled me, in the official statements was the insistent note of unilateral re- 
sponsibility for the handling of atomic weapons. However good the motives of 


AN ATOMIC SCIENTIST’S CREDO 57 


this country are—I am not going to argue with the President’s description of 
what the motives and the aims are—we are 140 million people, and there are 
two billion people living on earth. We must understand that whatever our com- 
mitments to our own views and ideas, and however confident we are that in the 
course of time they will tend to prevail, our absolute—our completely absolute— 
commitment to them, in denial of the views and ideas of other people, cannot 
be the basis of any kind of agreement. 

As I have said, I had for a long time the feeling of the most extreme urgency, 
and I think maybe there was something right about that. There was a period 
immediately after the first use of the bomb when it seemed most natural that a 
clear statement of policy, and the initial steps of implementing it, should have 
been made; and it would be wrong for me not to admit that something may 
have been lost, and that there may be tragedy in that loss. But I think the plain 
fact is that in the actual world, and with the actual people in it, it has taken time, 
and it may take longer, to understand what this is all about. And I am not sure, 
as I have said before, that in other lands it won’t take longer than it does in this 
country. As it is now, our only course is to see what we can do to bring about an 
understanding on a level deep enough to make a solution practicable, and to do 
that without undue delay. 

One may think that the views suggested in the President’s Navy Day speech 
are not entirely encouraging, that many men who are more versed than we in the 
practical art of statesmanship have seen more hope in a radical view, which may at 
first sight seem visionary, than in an approach on a more conventional level. 

I don’t have very much more to say. There are a few things which scientists 
perhaps should remember, that I don’t think I need to remind us of; but I will, 
anyway. One is that they are very often called upon to give technical informa- 
tion in one way or another, and I think one cannot be too careful to be honest. 
And it is very difficult, not because one tells lies, but because so often questions 
are put in a form which makes it very hard to give an answer which is not 
misleading. I think we will be in a very weak position unless we maintain at its 
highest the scrupulousness which is traditional for us in sticking to the truth, 
and in distinguishing between what we know to be true from what we hope 
may be true. 

The second thing I think it right to speak of is this: it is everywhere felt that 
the fraternity between us and scientists in other countries may be one of the 
most helpful things for the future; yet it is apparent that even in this country 
not all of us who are scientists are in agreement. There is no harm in that; such 
disagreement is healthy. But we must not lose the sense of fraternity because of 
it; we must not lose our fundamental confidence in our fellow scientists. 

I think that we have no hope at all if we yield in our belief in the value of 
science, in the good that it can be to the world to know about reality, about 
nature, to attain a gradually greater and greater control of nature, to learn, to 
teach, to understand. I think that if we lose our faith in this we stop being 
scientists, we sell out our heritage, we lose what we have most of value for this 
time of crisis. 

But there is another thing: we are not only scientists; we are men, too. We 
cannot forget our dependence on our fellow men. I mean not only our material 
dependence, without which no science would be possible, and without which 
we could not work; I mean also our deep moral dependence, in that the value of 


58 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


science must lie in the world of men, that all our roots lie there. These are the 
strongest bonds in the world, stronger than those even that bind us to one an- 
other, these are the deepest bonds—that bind us to our fellow men. 


Some days after his farewell speech, the Oppenheimers left for Pasadena. 
“In November 1945, I resumed my teaching at the California Institute of 
Technology, with an intention and hope, never realized, that this should be 
a full-time undertaking. The consultation about postwar matters which had 
already begun continued, and I was asked over and over both by the Execu- 
tive and the Congress for advice on atomic energy. I had a feeling of deep 
responsibility, interest, and concern for many of the problems with which 
the development of atomic energy confronted our country.”! 

I shall have much more to say about Robert’s advisory activities regard- 
ing atomic energy but shall turn first to what happened next in his aca- 
demic life. 


CHAPTER 1 2 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO 
OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 


In the early 1950s, Oppenheimer, then director of the Institute, commis- 
sioned Mrs. Beatrice Stern (1895-1987) to write the Institute’s early his- 
tory. During 1955-1957 she interviewed a number of people, including me. 
In 1964 she had completed a 700-page typed manuscript, “A History of the 
Institute for Advanced Study, 1930-1950,” which has never appeared in 
print because Robert felt that some of the material was too personal to be 
made public. I understand why he thought so but have never considered it 
a reasonable position, particularly because that document is well written 
and contains quite valuable information on the origins and early years of 
one of the most important American institutions of higher learning. Since 
I find this material so interesting—I own a copy of the manuscript—I thought 
it would be fitting to use it for giving at this point a few glimpses of the 
Institute’s history up to the time that Oppenheimer took over as director. 
I shall go easy on personal matters, which would cause no raised eyebrows 
any way, since the persons involved are all deceased by now. I may also note 
that in 1980 the Institute has published a book, 4 Community of Scholars, pub- 
lished by Princeton University Press. 

I now turn to explaining how the Institute came to owe its origins and 
immediate renown to a bizarre confluence of factors: generous philanthropy, 
the Wall Street crash of 1929, and the rise of Nazism in the early 1930s. 


In the autumn of 1929, two elderly residents of South Orange, New Jersey, 
near Newark, were quietly searching for a philanthropy worthy to be endowed 


60 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


with their ample fortune. One was Louis Bamberger (1855-1944), a lifelong 
bachelor, the other his sister Julie Carrie Fuld (1864-1944), the childless 
widow of Felix Fuld (1868-1929). Both were natives of Baltimore; their 
parents were German Jews of Bavarian origin. In 1929 they were living on 
the 30-acre Fuld Estate in South Orange. , 

Louis was a modest and quiet man. Almost shy in manner, he gave an 
impression that was belied by his shrewd, quick mind and the firmness of 
his decisions. He attended Baltimore public schools until age 14, when he 
went to work as a clerk and errand boy in a dry goods store, working him- 
self up steadily. In 1892 he was ready to start his own business, in Newark. 
The firm, run in partnership with Felix Fuld, a personal friend, and a native 
of Frankfurt-am-Main who had come to America at age 14, was named L. 
Bamberger and Company. It grew into New Jersey’s largest retail business 
and one of the nation’s largest department stores. Under Bamberger’s direc- 
tion the store pioneered in modern retailing techniques and was among the 
first to provide such conveniences as a restaurant and customer parking. 
Always interested in the welfare of his employees, Louis provided a fully 
staffed educational department for their benefit. 

‘In 1927 the firm issued $10 million worth of 6.5 per cent preferred stock, 
of which the original partners held $2 million, allowing senior employees 
to purchase shares on the installment plan. The borrowing financed an ex- 
pansion of the store to afford more than one million square feet of floor 
space. With the growth of L. Bamberger and Company the area around it 
became one of the most prosperous in the city. 

Mr. Bamberger and the Fulds came to be known as wise and generous 
contributors to civic programs for the health and welfare of their fellow 
citizens, as well as for their cultural development. Aside from regular sup- 
port of community charities, they gave the city a delightful Art Museum 
and many olyets d’art.'°> Mr. Bamberger was a trustee of the New Jersey His- 
torical Association, to which he gave a building. Mrs. Fuld, a shy woman, 
avoiding publicity, frequently seeking anonymity in making her donations, 
is credited with bringing to Newark its first chamber music ensemble. The 
two were also patrons of Jewish organizations. 


On January 20, 1929, Felix Fuld died. The next day the flags on Newark’s 
public buildings were flown at half staff, the first time such a tribute was 
paid there to a private citizen. On January 22, he was memorialized in a 
New York Times editorial, where it was estimated that his contributions to 
public charity had totaled more than 2.5 million. 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 61 


Mr. Bamberger and Mrs. Fuld realized that they could now no longer 
carry the burdens of the business. The following summer they decided to 
sell the store to R. H. Macy & Co. and to devote their time and fortune to 
philanthropy. The sale was consummated in early September. They re- 
ceived $11 million in cash plus 69,210 shares of Macy’s stock, which on 
September 4 reached a high of $255.50 a share on the New York Stock 
Exchange. 

Six weeks later, on October 29, the stock market crashed. On Novem- 
ber 13 the Macy shares had fallen to $110; by June 1932 they had sunk to 
$17. Whatever the Bambergers did with their shares, they still had $11 mil- 
lion in the bank. 

These events marked the beginning of a tragic period in world history, 
yet in those very same years they led to the founding of an institution that 
would leave its glorious mark on the world of thought and learning. 


From the outset Louis and Carrie wanted to direct their philanthropy to- 
ward the support for higher learning. Their initial inclination was to estab- 
lish and endow a medical school either in Newark or on the Fuld Estate. 
Because they knew that men and women of Jewish extraction were dis- 
criminated against by existing medical schools in the selection of staff and 
students, they preferred preferential treatment of Jews in both groups. 

However, they needed assurances that such a project was feasible and 
could be realized with the means they intended to devote to it. Upon con- 
fidential consultations they learned that one individual was recurrently 
mentioned as the outstanding authority in medical education: Dr. Abraham 
Flexner (1866-1959). 

Flexner has been characterized as brilliant, imaginative, intense, and in- 
defatigable, a man of great energy and strong convictions, animated by high 
ideals. He began his career by teaching Greek at a high school in his native 
Louisville. In 1905 he left that city, intending with the zeal of a true re- 
former to work in national education administration.'* In 1908 he pub- 
lished a small, bold book!’ decidedly critical of the American college 
system, whereupon he was commissioned by the Carnegie Foundation 
for the Advancement of Teaching to survey the quality of medical col- 
leges in the United States and Canada. In 1910 the Foundation published 
their Bulletin No. 4, which became known as the Flexner Report.'** It exposed 
American medicine as a shallow enterprise and made its author interna- 
tionally renowned. Eighteen years later, the New York Times editorialized 
as follows about this report: 


62 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


It dealt fearlessly, trenchantly and discerningly with the standards, methods and 
personnel of the existing American medical schools, mercilessly castigating all 
that was sordid and unwholesome, and holding up to view the ideals toward 
which they should aspire. This knight errant, whose lance was at the command 
of those ideals, was anathematized by some who suffered from his criticisms, 
(but according to others] it is now generally recognized that the thorough ven- 
tilation of the subject by the report was most timely, and that Mr. Flexner’s 
investigations and recommendations were weighty contributions to the progress 
of educational reform. ... 

... His knight-errantry has not been confined to the field of medical educa- 
tion. He has tilted not only against diploma mills but also against the opium 
traffic. He has dared to say what he thinks about the movies, motors and jazz. 
He has spoken out plainly about education in high places—attacking certain 
traditional methods and disciplines, but condemning also the introduction of 
new courses wholly devoid of educational values just for the sake of adding to 
numbers or gratifying a vulgar demand. He has had the temerity even to raise 
the question whether we Americans really value education in spite of the amount 
we spend for it. He has a bright record of achievement to his credit, and though 
he has approached the time of official retirement, it is to be hoped that there 
will be an epilogue, for he is a wholesome challenging force in the world.'” 


That epilogue became his central role in the founding of the Institute for 
Advanced Study. 


The first contact between Flexner and representatives of Bamberger took 
place in December 1929. It became immediately evident that Flexner disap- 
proved of the proposed medical school. Such a school, he said, should be a 
graduate school in a strong university, administered by the trustees of the 
whole institution. It must offer opportunities for training in the medical 
sciences. It must moreover own or control and operate a good hospital 
where its clinical staff could devote their full time to teaching at the bed- 
side, to the care of patients, and to research. Newark was too close to New 
York with its several great medical schools to offer effective competition 
for staff or students. It possessed neither a university nor an available hospi- 
tal. If these failings were not enough to dispose of the idea, Flexner said his 
experience had convinced him that men and women of the Jewish faith or 
origin were not being discriminated against, and that none but the highest 
professional standards should ever be applied in selecting the staff and stu- 
dents in any institution of learning. There was no ground for discrimina- 
tion by other criteria, he maintained. 

At the time of that meeting, Flexner was finishing a book that came out 
in 1930.'° In its first chapter, entitled: “The Idea of a Modern University,” 
already at hand, he revealed his plan for a “society of scholars,” and pleaded 
for “creative activity, productive and critical inquiry . .. minds which can 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 63 


both specialize and generalize.” He suggested to the Bambergers that no 
better use of the money could be made in the public interest than through 
the endowment of such an institution as it described. His visitors, deeply 
impressed with his vision and his fervor, departed with a copy in hand, 
promising to read it and to refer it to their principals. 

Mr. Bamberger and Mrs. Fuld were interested. Promptly they invited 
their advisors and Dr. Flexner to dine with them. They recognized in Flexner 
an authority in medical education that caused them quickly to relinquish 
their own idea, for it seems that most of the discussion thereafter was de- 
voted to consideration of various applications of Flexner’s Idea. He had much 
in his favor; he was an able advocate, well informed, and convincing. To 
them he must have been even more than that, with the prestige derived 
from his connection with the General Education Board, and his well- 
publicized management of the Rockefeller money for medical education. 
Indeed, there seemed to be little difficulty in persuading them to abandon 
their intention to benefit preferentially the people of any particular race or 
religion. When they separated, it was with plans to continue their discus- 
sions at lunch on Saturdays at the Biltmore Hotel. 

Thus the origins of the Institute can be traced to an extraordinary set of 
circumstances: philanthropists wishing to establish a medical school con- 
tact America’s leading expert on the subject, who dissuades them from their 
plans and guides them to his own concept of a society of scholars. 


Flexner has left in the files of the Institute for Advanced Study copies of 
three separate plans, each differing in important respects from the others, 
and all sequestered in an envelope bearing in his handwriting the legend 
“Legal Papers. Working Papers, Formation of the Institute.” I select from 
these documents those items that have become central to the Institute’s 
style of operation. 

Its teachers were to be men and women of the “highest calibre;” they were 
to specialize as teachers “in the subjects in which they have achieved unusual 
proficiency.” They would have “unlimited opportunity to continue study 
and enlarge their knowledge,” and would teach only students selected be- 
cause of “their qualifications and adeptness.” The entire atmosphere would 
be such as to develop “great specialists in particular fields of the arts and sci- 
ences.” No regard was to be given to race or creed in operating the institu- 
tion. It should be established in the vicinity of Newark, “upon lands which 
one may convey or devise to it for the purpose or failing which, upon such 
lands as it may acquire. . .. As conditions in the realm of advanced instruction 


64 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


and research improve, it is our desire that the trustees of this institution ad- 
vance the ideals of the institution so that it may at all times be distinguished 
for quality and at no time by consideration of numbers.” These plans appear 
to have been almost wholly acceptable to Mr. Bamberger and his sister, as is 
seen by their memorandum dated January 20, 1930, also found in the “Legal 
Papers” envelope. 

Early in 1930 the plan began to take shape. Flexner to the Bambergers: 

The Institute will be neither a current university nor a research institution. ... 

It may be pictured as a wedge between the two—a small university in which a 


limited amount of teaching and a liberal amount of research are both to be 
found. It should be small, its staff and students should be few, the administra- 


tion should be inconspicuous. . . . I should, one by one . . . create a series of 
schools—in mathematics, in economy, in history, etc. . . . [The faculty will] 
know their own minds. .. . No organizer can do more than furnish conditions 


favorable to the restless prowling of an enlightened and informed human spirit. 


A draft by the Bambergers, dated April 23, 1930 (again in the “Legal 
Papers”), starts out as follows: “To (naming proposed Trustees): We are 
asking you to serve with us as Trustees of an Institute of Higher Learning 
or Advanced Studies to the endowment of which we propose ultimately to 
devote our residual estate—the proposed Institute to be situated in the State 
of New Jersey in grateful recognition of the opportunities which we have 
enjoyed in this community.” 

I name here only one of the founding Trustees since, as we shall see, his 
path will cross on a variety of occasions with Oppenheimer. Lewis 
Lichtenstein Strauss (1869-1974) (he pronounced his name “Straws,” as they 
did back in Virginia, from where he hailed), who at that time was the presi- 
dent of the Bamberger Corporation, also trustee of New York University 
and the New York Public Library. 

On May 20, 1930, the certificate of incorporation of the Institute was 
signed. Its complete text is found in Bu//etin No. 1, published in December 
1930 by the Institute, the address for which was given as 100 East 42nd 
Street, New York. An initial donation of $5 million was made. Louis 
Bamberger became the first president of the Board of Trustees, Mrs. Fuld 
the first vice president, Flexner the first director. On June 6, the founders 
addressed a letter to the Trustees that said in part: 

It is fundamental in our purpose, and our express desire, that in the appoint- 

ments to the staff and faculty, as well as in the admission of workers and stu- 

dents, no account shall be taken, directly or indirectly, of race, religion, or sex. 


We feel strongly that the spirit characteristic of America at its noblest, above 
all, the pursuit of higher learning, cannot admit of any conditions as to person- 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 65 


nel other than those designed to promote the objects for which this institution 
is established, and particularly with no regard whatever to accidents of race, 
creed or sex. 


The New York Times generously reported these events, quoting the entire 
Letter of the Founders to the Trustees, and giving additional details. The 
founders and the director were commended for the deliberateness with which 
this unique institution was to be developed. It would be the first and only 
one of its kind in the country. When Dr. Flexner returned from Europe he 
“would undertake to enlist outstanding teachers in their respective fields as 
members of the faculty.” The Institute would be coeducational, accepting 
on an equal footing people of all races and creeds meeting its high standards. 
The laudable purpose to establish an institution exclusively post-graduate 
in its activities was warmly approved. 

The story continued: “At the Bamberger offices it was said that tempo- 
rary quarters . . . could be obtained without using any of the $5 million 
endowment. It was also explained that the initial endowment would be 
augmented from time to time to provide for such expansion as might be- 
come necessary. For the present no medical department will be operated, 
but it is expected that such a department may be added eventually.”!*! 

Four months later another Times item appeared with the headlines: “Dr. 
Flexner says Bamberger new Institute bans collegiate ideas/University will 
be without rules/ Athletics also banned,” and reported that it will be “some- 
where in or near New Jersey.”'” 

During the first half of 1931, Flexner elicited advice from leading schol- 
ars in America and Europe. This resulted in a confidential memorandum to 
the trustees, dated September 26, 1931. It is an excellent document, in which 
one finds the main outline of what the Institute was to become all about. I 
quote from this long memorandum: 

I have in mind the evolution that in the process of centuries has taken place at 

All Souls College, Oxford, where, as in the proposed Institute, there are no 

undergraduate students, and where advanced students and the older Fellows live 

under ideal conditions, whether for their individual work or for collaboration 
and cooperation. No one planned all this. It grew up because scholars were left 
free to work out their own salvation.... 

The decision not to begin with the physical or biological sciences has be- 
come stronger; they are already better done than other subjects; moreover, they 
are creating problems with which universities are not now dealing competently 
... they are not at the very foundation of modern science. That foundation is 
mathematics; and it happens that mathematics is not a subject in which at present 


many American universities are eminent. Mathematics is the severest of all dis- 
ciplines, antecedent, on the one hand, to science, on the other, to philosophy 


66 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


and economics and thus to other social disciplines. With all its abstractness and 
indifference both pure and applied scientific and philosophic progress of recent 
years has been closely bound up with new types and methods of sheer math- 
ematical thinking... . 

Beyond these two schools [mathematics and economics], I do not now look, 
though it is obvious how readily history and other schools—literature, music, 
or science—can be added when money, men, and ideas are available. 

A contributory pension scheme should be open to all connected with the 
Institute. It does not help the clarity or concentration of a man’s thinking, if he 
is oppressed by the fear of a needy or precarious old age, if on retirement his 
scale of living, already none too lavish, has to be suddenly reduced, if his wife is 
compelled to forego domestic help, if his children are deprived of liberal educa- 
tional opportunities. . . . Surely the nation which has built palaces for libraries, 
laboratories, and students will not permanently ignore the professor who is in 
truth the University itself... . 

The Institute for Advanced Study needs no press. . . .I favor a strict policy in 
respect to publication . .. Publicity need not be sought: if the Institute succeeds, 
the real problem will be how to avoid or restrict it.... 

We shall find ourselves dealing with men and women, not with angels or 
super-men. Difficulties will arise; disappointments will occur. But we shall be 
helped, not harmed, by the high level at which we have pledged ourselves to act. 
In any case, unless we attempted something much higher than is now attained, 
there would be little reason to attempt anything at all. 


Next Flexner turned to the recruitment of faculty. For that purpose he 
went in January 1932 on a visit to the California Institute of Technology, 
invited by Robert Millikan. That institution was of particular interest to 
him for his present purposes. It had started out in 1891 as Throop College, 
and had only recently been modernized under its new name with a much- 
expanded prominent faculty—just what Flexner was after. 

By Flexner’s own account, it was serendipitous that there in Pasadena he 
met, for the first time, Albert Einstein, who was a guest professor that win- 
ter term. Flexner of course used the opportunity to consult with the great 
man on his projects. When they met again, in Oxford in the spring of 1932, 
he asked Einstein if he might be interested in joining the Institute himself. 
During a third encounter the next June, this time in Einstein’s summer 
house in Caputh, near Berlin, Einstein expressed enthusiasm about coming 
and requested an annual salary of $3,000. “He asked . . . could I live on 
less?”'® Formal negotiations began at once. In October 1932 the appoint- 
ment was approved, with an annual salary of $15,000.’ Einstein regarded 
Flexner’s offer as a “sign from heaven” that he should prepare to migrate to 
America. He made his definitive move in October 1933. Also that au- 
tumn the appointment was made of the mathematician Oswald Veblen 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 67 


(1880-1960)—the nephew of the social scientist Thorstein Veblen (1857- 
1929)—who had been on Princeton University’s faculty since 1905. 

There was no ceremony as the Institute opened at the beginning of 
October 1933, days before Einstein’s arrival. From that time on through 
1938 its official address was 20 Nassau Street, Princeton. The Institute 
was open year-round but term times were short—from mid-September to 
mid-December, and from late January to late April. And so it has remained. 

It may be noted that in 1931 the New Jersey State Board of Education 
had granted the Institute the authority to issue the Ph.D. degree—an au- 
thority that the Institute never has made use of. 

Meanwhile a committee with the directive to choose a site for Institute 
buildings had been constituted. It had already begun its deliberations in 
December 1931. The founders had expressed the desire to house the Insti- 
tute in Newark, preferably on the Fuld Estate. This idea was abandoned 
after outside advisers had opposed the idea. In 1935 a consensus developed 
to buy the Olden Farm in Princeton—265 acres of field, woodland, and 
meadows. Olden Manor, the old colonial house on the farm, would eventu- 
ally become the director’s home. In 1938 construction was put in the hands 
of the Hegemann-Harris firm of New York at an estimated cost of $312,000. 
By the time Fuld Hall, the main building (‘named to commemorate both 
Mrs. Fuld and her late husband”'), was completed, the total cost (includ- 
ing furnishings) had come to $520,000. The top floor of the Hall housed a 
cafeteria and a board room. The Bambergers provided additional funds, and 
by 1952 their total gifts had risen to $16 million, including the $9 million 
Bamberger had left as a residual estate upon his death in 1944. 

Twelve more professorial appointments were made in the 1930s. They 
were, in mathematics (year of appointment and country of birth in paren- 
theses): James Alexander (1933, U.S.) (1888-1971); Marston Morse (1935, 
U.S.) (1892-1977); John von Neumann (1933, Hungary) (1903-1957); and 
Herman Weyl (1933, Germany) (1885-1955). In economics: David Mitrany 
(1933, Romania) (1888-1975); Winfried Riefler (1935, U.S.) (1897-1974); 
Walter Stewart (1938, U.S.) (1885-1958); and Robert Warren (1939, U.S.) 
(1891-1956). Also Edward Earle (1934, U.S.) (1894-1954) in political his- 
tory; Erwin Panofsky (1935, Germany) (1892-1968) in history of art; Hetty 
Goldman (1935, U.S.) (1881-1972) in archeology; and Elias Lowe (1936, 
U.S.) (1879-1969) in paleography. Hitler’s contributions to this elite group 
will be obvious. Thus came into being the Institute’s initial three schools: 
of mathematics, including physics; of economics and politics; and of hu- 
manistic studies. 


68 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Additional temporary appointments of junior people were made from 
the start. Through 1935 Institute Bu/etins listed them as “workers,” ini- 
tially all in the school of mathematics. The Bu//erin for 1934 lists 23: 6 from 
Europe, 17 from the United States. Beginning in 1936 they were called 
“members.” Academic year 1935-1936 saw the arrival of the first 
nonmathematics members. By 1938, members from 18 foreign countries 
had been in attendance. Furthermore, scientists of high distinction were 
invited to come; in physics: Dirac (in academic year 1934-1935), Pauli 
(1935-1936; he also spent the war years in Princeton, from 1940-1946), 
Niels Bohr, and I. I. Rabi (both for part of 1938-1939). Where did all these 
people find working space? 

Arrangements were made with the University to rent space for the math- 
ematicians and physicists in Fine Hall, the gracious old mathematics build- 
ing (now Jones Hall). Humanists found their quarters in McCormick Hall. 
The Institute bought a large old residence at 69 Alexander Street and re- 
modeled it for use as offices, where they installed the economists. (The house 
was sold during the war.) 

Until late 1939 there were almost no meetings of the faculty as a whole— 
Flexner did not approve of them. Beginning on October 8, 1935, the School 
of Mathematics faculty did meet on its own, however, and Veblen became 
the powerful though unofficial leader of that group. It may be noted that he 
led opposition to Einstein, for example refusing to lend funds for an assis- 
tant. The reason was presumably the mathematicians’ insistence on keep- 
ing mathematics “pure” (more about that later). Einstein’s lack of success in 
forrnulating a unified field theory and his critical position toward quantum 
theory may also have been contributing factors. 

Aided by his appointment to the Board of Trustees, Veblen became the 
power broker of the faculty, often at odds with the director. He made himself 
responsible for many business affairs and played a role in the selection of new 
faculty members. His colleagues were complaisant with his control as long as 
they got what they needed—which was not always the case. And so, since its 
early years, the Institute has served as an apt example of the dictum that 
academic politics is such a big thing because its problems are so small. 

One last item concludes my brief account of the Institute’s beginnings: 
the acquisition of the Gest Oriental Library. In 1937 the Institute purchased 
the Gest collection, assisted by a grant of $62,500 from the Rockefeller Foun- 
dation,’ with the understanding that it was to be administered as part of 
the Princeton University Library. The collection was initially installed at 
20 Nassau Street, but in 1948 it was moved into the Firestone Library. It is 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 69 


now on permanent loan in the library of the Gest Institute in the top floor 
of Palmer Hall. 

The Gest collection is matchless among all Chinese collections outside 
of China and Japan. It contains books printed well before the appearance of 
the Gutenberg Bible (book shops have been recorded in China as early as 
the first century AD), and a large collection of manuscript volumes, the old- 
est of which dates from the sixth century and is a copy of chapters from a 
Buddhist suéra. The library contains some 700 books from the Sung (960- 
1279), 1,700 from the Yiian (1279-1368), and 24,000 from the Ming (1368- 
1644) dynasties. By 1965 the Gest collection comprised 190,000 books, of 
which over 100,000 are stitched volumes (ts’é).' 


In 1939, the year of completion of Fuld Hall, Flexner resigned as director, 
no doubt worn out by quarrels with his faculty. He was succeeded by Frank 
Aydelotte (1880-1956), president of Swarthmore College, who, on Novem- 
ber 24, 1939, called the first full faculty meeting held in Fuld Hall. It was 
fitting that the first order of business would deal with a resolution of thanks 
from faculty and trustees to Dr. Flexner. 

The main contribution of Aydelotte was the introduction in 1944 of 
Institute fellows, mainly recent postdocs appointed for one or two years. 
No further professorial appointments were made during his tenure. That 
was the situation when Robert Oppenheimer arrived on the scene. 

As I reflect on Oppenheimer’s appointment to Institute director, I won- 
der again, as I have done before, whether he would have accepted that posi- 
tion had he known what a hornet’s nest he would get into. A few glances 
back may explain that state of affairs. 


The Flexner Years 


On February 10, 1936, Flexner had called the whole faculty together—a 
rare event at that time—to discuss his proposal to appoint an associate direc- 
tor. The background for this idea lay in his choice of Frank Aydelotte (1880- 
1956), president of Swarthmore College, Institute trustee since 1930, as his 
successor. Already in 1933 he had written to Bamberger: “I feel that I have 
in him [A.] an ‘understudy’ whom you and Mrs. Fuld were rightly anxious 
that I procure.”'® Shortly before talking to the faculty, Flexner had already 
informed the Board of Trustees of this idea, whereupon that body adopted 
a resolution that stated in part: “The Director is hereby authorized to submit 


70 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


to the annual meeting of the Board a nomination for the post of Associate 
Director.”"”° 

At the February meeting with the faculty, Flexner explained the resolu- 
tions recently passed by the trustees. The faculty insisted, however, that in 
its opinion the idea of an associate director was not feasible.'”! 

As far as I know, that point in question marked the beginning of ever- 
growing discord between Flexner and the faculty, with Veblen as the self- 
anointed spokesman for the opposition. At the roots of dissension lay the 
power play between the founders, the trustees, the director and the faculty. 
Specific issues included new faculty appointments, allocations of space and 
of funds, financing of homes and of pensions for professors, and the rela- 
tions between the Institute and Princeton University. I shall pass by a de- 
scription, given by Mrs. Stern, of what transpired the next few years—not a 
pleasant story—and move onto 1939. In that year Flexner published a much- 
quoted article: “The usefulness of useless knowledge,”'”? in which he pointed 
out that American universities were, it is true, developing, so that seekers 
after a Ph.D. degree could obtain admirable opportunities; but nowhere, 
except for the Institute, did there exist the untrammeled facilities for easy- 
going and informal work between men who had passed the Ph.D. degree 
stage, had given promise of unusual ability, and who needed now the infor- 
mal contact with the masters. 

Early that same year, Veblen had decided that the director must go; and 
any way to get him to discredit himself was useful to that purpose. To 
strike him where he was vulnerable was good tactics even if it was also bad 
taste and poor ethics. Flexner was well aware of Veblen’s overwhelming 
interest in managing the disposal of rooms within Fuld Hall, the Institute’s 
new home, and determined that the other schools should receive justice in 
the apportionment of space for their professors and members. 

Veblen now started a campaign in the faculty for Flexner’s retirement. 
That he was was able to put Professor Einstein in the forefront of the cam- 
paign in the faculty was a masterful achievement. For Einstein was known 
as one who had been indifferent throughout his academic career to aca- 
demic politics and administrative matters. His position among all the fac- 
ulty members was very high; his probity, his independence of thought and 
judgment, his signal achievements, and his prestige made Veblen’s triumph 
indeed a great one. But Einstein did not engage in intrigue. He felt, how- 
ever, as did others in the faculty, that great as had been the director’s contri- 
bution to education and the advancement of knowledge, he was now tired 
and spent, incapable of further leadership in Institute affairs. 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 71 


When the trustees were informed of the prevailing mood, its chairman 
wrote to Flexner: “I confess that I look forward with dismay to your sepa- 
rating yourself from the Institute. You have, in fact, been the Institute. It 
owes everything except financial support to your vision and your wisdom 
and your executive direction.” Whatever were Flexner’s intentions in 1939, 
he wanted to receive appointment for the next year.”* The Board did reap- 
point the director. There appears to have been no discussion.’ 

The ceremonious laying of Fuld Hall’s cornerstone took place on May 
22, 1939. The founders did not attend. It is not clear whether that was due 
to Mrs. Fuld’s earlier accident that had caused her to be briefly hospital- 
ized. The president of Princeton University gave a brief speech. Thereafter, 
Miss Lavinia Bamberger, a sprightly sister of the founders, wielding a silver 
trowel, sealed the cornerstone, speaking the conventional words: “I declare 
this stone to be well and truly laid.” 

Dr. Flexner did not speak. Available photographs indicate that there was 
nothing in the way of a rostrum or speakers’ platform outside the bleak and 
untidy early stages of construction. They also show the director standing 
alone within the scaffolding amid the bricks and mortar and other para- 
phernalia of construction, looking bitterly unhappy and discouraged, as 
though he doubted the reality of the spiritual and intellectual edifice of 
which the building was to be the outward symbol. 

Meanwhile, Professors Earle and Einstein had told some of the trustees 
that the welfare of the Institute made it necessary that Flexner now retire. 
Whereupon in late May these trustees told the director that they felt he 
must do so. Flexner decided, however, to do nothing for the present.’ 
This impasse precipitated conflict and intrigue that endured throughout 
the summer. Veblen accused Flexner of having imperiled the solvency of 
the Institute. In a letter sent in June, Earle “expressed [to Flexner] my alarm 
... for your openly expressed contempt for fellow-members of the Faculty, 
sometimes taking the form of personal abuse. . . . It has not been pleasant 
for me to tell you these things, and it has not been pleasant for you to hear 
them... . All of this proceeds from one who still would make every 
decision primarily from the point of view of what is best for you and for 
the great reputation which you have built up over the years. Always 
affectionately. . . .”"”” Earle also wrote to Aydelotte that 11, perhaps 12, of 
the 16 professors would likely vote their lack of confidence in the director.” 

Finally, at a trustee meeting in October, Flexner did announce his retire- 
ment. He said that he had not changed his mind as to the impracticability of 
faculty government but added that “insofar as experience has proved me 


72 ~—s«J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


wrong, my successor should do differently.””° The trustees accepted the 
resignation, whereupon Flexner and Aydelotte left the room. After the Board 
approved Aydelotte, the two men returned, and Aydelotte accepted the 
position. Flexner had prepared the minutes up to the moment the two men 
had stepped out. The new director did so for the rest of the meeting. 

By then the two men had known each other for 35 years, beginning in 
Louisville, where young Aydelotte taught English at the school where 
Flexner taught Greek. At that time Aydelotte was the disciple, Flexner the 
respected master. As time went by their relation grew into a warm friend- 
ship, as witness for example the telegram Aydelotte sent to Flexner after his 
appointment to Institute director: “Look forward with humility and en- 
thusiasm to the task of carrying out the great dream of foundations [you 
have] laid.”!®° 

At that time Flexner wrote to Aydelotte: “I had a long talk with Veblen. 
. .. He said things not one of which was true. . . . I do not believe that he is 
wilfully dishonest but he is a queer duck with what [one professor calls] a 
twisted mind.”'#! 

In January 1940 a Joint Trustee and Faculty Resolution was offered which 
starts as follows: “The Trustees and Faculty of the Institute for Advanced 
Study take the occasion of Dr. Flexner’s retirement to record in this joint 
resolution their sense of permanent indebtedness to him. The character of 
the Institute has been determined by his faith in the role of the creative 


scholar in society.”!* 


After having garnered from archives my account of Flexner’s last years at 
the Institute, I turned to his autobiography in order to see what retrospec- 
tive comments he himself might have made on that period that must have 
been difficult for him. All I found were two phrases on the last page of that 
book, heavy with meaning: 

The Institute was conceived as a paradise 

for scholars, and such it really is. But not 


all men—not all gifted men—know how to 
live in paradise.'® 


He may have been difficult to get along with at times—I never knew 
him—but he should be remembered with gratitude as a man of high ideals, 
without whom there might never have been an Institute. 

I did know Veblen, Flexner’s main protagonist, with whom I got along 
very well. I remember the time he took me to lunch in the Nassau Club, 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 73 


when he told me how, after his retirement (in 1950) he planned to read all 
the books for which he had not found the time in earlier years. 

On March 11, 1944, Louis Bamberger died in his sleep just before his 
ninetieth birthday. From a commemorative editorial: “He wielded his great 
power with a delicacy and restraint which marked all his actions, and his 
humility and self-effacing spirit made him appear to be unconscious of his 
eminence.” 


Speaking for the Institute, Dr. Aydelotte told the press: 


A native shrewdness and knowledge of human nature . . . enabled him to form 
sound opinions of men connected with higher scholarship as well as of men of 
business. He and his sister, Mrs. Fuld, saw instantly the merit of Dr. Abraham 
Flexner’s proposal for an institute devoted to advanced research beyond the 
doctor’s degree. .. . Without pretending to any broad knowledge of education 
and scholarship Mr. Bamberger sensed the fact that emphasis upon excellence 
rather than upon size was the greatest need of higher studies in the United States. 
He made himself one of the great benefactors of American scholarship not merely 
by the amount of money he gave but still more, I should say, by his selection of 
the purposes to which his generosity was devoted.'® 


Four months later, on July 18, Carrie Fuld followed her brother in death. 
She left her residual estate, estimated at $2 million, to the Institute." 
Aydelotte has written about the founders: 

Mr. Bamberger and Mrs. Fuld sought no recognition for themselves. They left 

to the Trustees and the Faculty the task of determining the fields of work and 

the educational policies of the institution which they founded. They wished 
only to make it as useful as possible to higher learning in America. Their self- 

lessness, their public spirit, their complete absence of vanity and prejudice are a 

lesson to every Trustee and to every individual who may benefit by their gener- 

osity. They made no speeches to Trustees, Faculty or Members, but by their 


acts they have laid upon everyone connected with the Institute the injunction 
“Establish thou the work of our hands.”!®” 


The Aydelotte Years 


Aydelotte’s main contribution was the introduction in 1944 of Institute 
fellows, mainly recent postdocs appointed for one or two years. No further 
professorial appointments were made during his tenure. 

The new director was known among his associates as generous and un- 
derstanding, warm and kind. These qualities were deeply appreciated by 
the faculty. Einstein once remarked to Aydelotte’s son that it was rare “to 
find someone who is devoted and independent without vanity—rare to find 
a man of capacity without vanity.” 


74 ~—«J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Veblen’s relations with Aydelotte were cordial and warm, as they had 
never been with Flexner, who inclined to lecture him, while Aydelotte 
sought his advice. Already, in preparing for his first Board meeting, the 
new director asked Veblen for comments on his plans." 

The next few years were peaceful at the Institute. One reason for this 
was, oddly, the Second World War: 


For some time before [Pearl Harbor], various members of the Faculty had already 
been called upon for national service—defense work as it was then called. With 
the coming of the war the members of our staff began to be greatly in demand for 
such service and the Trustees adopted a generous policy of releasing members of 
the Faculty for important war work for which they possessed special qualifica- 
tions. The requirements of military secrecy make it impossible as yet to tell in 
detail the story of the war work of the members of our Faculty, but when that 
story can be told, it will be an extremely interesting and creditable one. 

The war has made heavy demands likewise upon our temporary members. 
Mathematicians and physicists have been needed for teaching and for war re- 
search. Economists have been called upon for various types of government ser- 
vice and the members of the School of Humanistic Studies have been able to 
make interesting and important contributions to the war effort in connection 
with the invasion of North Africa, Sicily, Italy and Greece, and in the preserva- 
tion of cultural monuments. 

Nevertheless, in the intervals of war work, scholarly research has progressed 
steadily.'*” 


In late 1944 the calm came to an end, however, when tensions arose 
between Flexner and his successor, who had bitterly disappointed him by 
not following some of his policies. Flexner was particularly aggrieved by 
the power Veblen had assumed in the first three and a half years of 
Aydelotte’s administration. Matters came to a head when Flexner heard of 
Aydelotte’s intention to retire at age 65. That focused his rage against the 
director for what he regarded as a dereliction of duty. 

The effect was tragic. Aydelotte, as had Flexner earlier, suddenly found 
himself not in the position of one who folds his tent and departs with dig- 
nity and honor, but on trial, forced to defend his reputation and his admin- 
istration. The sunny extrovert disappeared; a brooding, bitter introspective 
man took his place. His many penciled notes show that he suffered tor- 
ments, listing possible causes for Flexner’s disaffection, and concluding that 
his old friend had connived to cause his downfall. He was entirely unwill- 
ing to accept that. With the “permission of the Committee on Policy,” he 
decided to tell the faculty of his intention to retire, feeling that in the new 
circumstances the faculty would support him. 

And so at a social luncheon of the faculty on November 6, Aydelotte 
mentioned casually that he had told the Committee on Policy that he in- 


THE INSTITUTE PRIOR TO OPPENHEIMER’S ARRIVAL 75 


tended to retire on June 30, 1946, in accord with the retirement policy for 
professors. He lingered at the meeting long enough to know that his news 
created consternation and confusion. 

The faculty did not like the idea of Aydelotte’s retirement either, as is seen 
by a letter from Veblen to the Policy Committee sent off a few days later: 


I was requested by the Professors to report the consensus of opinion to the 
Trustees. The consensus was that it is not in the interest of the Institute that Dr. 
Aydelotte should retire when he reaches the age of sixty-five. The discussion 
began with expressions of personal regard which must have been most gratify- 
ing to Dr. Aydelotte. The essential point brought out by the further discussion 
was, however, the strong feeling that the present Director knows how to work 
with scholars. As a result there exists in the Institute a spirit of harmony and 
effective cooperation which has been reflected in substantial achievements in 
the past five years. .. . The general opinion was that the Faculty did not wish 
him to retire at the age of sixty-five.” 


Aydelotte’s reaction: “Endorsement of the Faculty meant more to me 
than Trustees’. Would like to retire but would not let Faculty down.”!! 
The upshot of the commotion was the trustees’ decision that Aydelotte 
should retire at age 67. In January 1945 a committee was appointed to nomi- 


nate the next director.!” 


From the Institute Bulletin for 1945-1956: 


The housing shortage in Princeton is even more acute than in most university 
towns and has been for many years. It has been created partly by the recent 
advent of research groups connected with the Institute for Advanced Study and 
the laboratories of the Radio Corporation of America. The difficulty of housing 
our members has now become so great that the Trustees were faced this summer 
with the necessity of doing something to meet it or, as an alternative, curtailing 
the activities of the Institute. We have been so fortunate as to be able to pur- 
chase from the Federal Public Housing Authority eleven buildings containing 
roomy and comfortable apartments for thirty-eight families. During the sum- 
mer these buildings are being transported from their present location in Mineville, 
New York, and are being erected in the square bounded by Cook and Goodman 
Roads between Springdale Avenue and Olden Lane.’ 


They were cut into panels, shipped from Mineville, New York, to 
Princeton, reassembled and erected where the present housing project stands, 
and were occupied during the spring semester in 1947. Intrinsically and aes- 
thetically they were no bargain. Yet they had plumbing fixtures and other 
things which did not become available in the consumers’ market for some 
time. Even with the 38 units, the Institute continued to rent rooms and apart- 
ments in the Borough and Township where it was possible to do so, until 
new housing was provided and became available in 1958. The neighbors on 


76 «= J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Newlin Road vocally opposed the new rustic cottages, and the Institute miti- 
gated the effect by careful placing and screening shrubs. This housing was 
largely replaced to make way for a new modern project in 1958. 

As a logical sequence to the theoretical work which he has been doing for 
some years on the mathematical and logical problems involved in very high- 
speed electronic computing, John von Neumann has begun this year the con- 
struction of an all-purpose computer. This project is supported partly by the 
Institute and partly by the Army Bureau of Ordnance, the Radio Corporation 
of America and Princeton University. A building to house the computer is now 
under construction. When finished the computer will be devoted to theoretical 
work in mathematics such as the solution of non-linear differential equations 
and the theory of meteorology rather than to practical problems.'” 


The formal dedication of the computer did not occur until June 10, 1952." 


The Aydelotte episode was Flexner’s last involvement with Institute af- 
fairs. Upon his retirement as Institute director he devoted his final years to 
reading and writing. In 1940 he published his autobiography.” In 1942 his 
book Funds and Foundations came out, a subject on which he was expert. In 
1943, partly in fond recollection of his association, first as a student and 
later as a close friend of the first president of Johns Hopkins University, he 
published The Biography of President Daniel G. Gilman. On September 21, 1959, 
he died at age 92 in his retirement home in Falls Church, Virginia. Funeral 
services and burial were held in his native Louisville. 

Flexner was one of the twentieth century’s most influential personalities 
in the promotion of America’s higher education, not only because of his 
role in the founding of the Institute but also because of his critique, men- 
tioned earlier,'** of medical education in the United States, an exposé so 
damning that nearly half of its medical schools had to shut down. His later 
remark on that activity may serve as a fitting epitaph: “I struck from the 
shoulder, naming names and places.”! 


CHAPTER 1 3 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER IS 
ELECTED DIRECTOR OF THE 
INSTITUTE AND CHAIRMAN 
OF THE GENERAL ADVISORY 
COMMITTEE 


In October 1945, the chairman of the Trustee Committee on selection wrote 
his first letter to the members of the faculty, reading in part: 


At the first meeting of the Committee I was instructed to ask members of the 
Institute’s Faculty to suggest persons who should be considered for the director- 
ship. We desire that all members of the Faculty shall be heard on the subject. It 
is left to the Faculty to decide in what way these suggestions shall be arrived at: 
the Committee is equally ready to consider one letter from the Faculty as a 
whole, or individual letters from each member . .. or communications based on 
any procedures between those two extremes. ... 

During the period of its deliberations the Committee will be glad to confer 
with individual members of the Faculty, or with a committee representing the 
Faculty as a whole. . . .!% 


In November 1945, Aydelotte appointed a Faculty Committee on Suc- 
cession consisting of Professors Alexander, Earle, and Panofsky. In Febru- 
ary 1946 these three addressed a letter’” to the faculty listing seven candidates 
who had been suggested to it, to which they added two more names shortly 
afterward. Two on this list are of particular interest: Robert Oppenheimer 
and Lewis Strauss. It may be noted that Oppenheimer had earlier been con- 
sidered for a chair in the School of Mathematics, but no action had been 
taken.' 

As mentioned before, Strauss had been one of the early Institute trustees. He 
was reelected to the Board in 1945 and to its chairmanship in 1946. He had been 
called from his partnership at Kuhn Loeb & Company to active service in the 
Navy Department in 1941 with the rank of lieutenant commander. He was 


78 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


then 45 years of age. Assigned to the Bureau of Ordnance, where his business 
experience made him useful, he was soon selected by James Forrestal (1892- 
1949), then undersecretary, to be one of his several personal assistants. He ac- 
companied his chief to the office of the secretary when Mr. Forrestal was 
promoted in 1944. He left the Navy early in 1946 with the honorary rank of 
rear admiral and returned to New York, with a desire to enter public service. 
He had ample means, and did not need to return to the financial district. 

We have now reached the point where Oppenheimer’s and Strauss’s paths 
cross—with, eventually, disastrous consequences for both men, as we shall 
see. This part of the narrative does not start in Princeton, however, but in 
Washington. 


On October 3, 1945, President Truman sent a message to Congress, re- 
questing the establishment of a commission to control the production and 
use of atomic power in the United States. This led Edwin Johnson (1884- 
1970), senator from Colorado, and Andrew May (1875-1959), congressman 
from Kentucky, to introduce a bill that month that did not bar military 
officers from serving either as administrators or as members of a supervis- 
ing committee on atomic energy. That feature led many atomic scientists to 
oppose this bill. 

Oppenheimer later recalled that on October 18, “at the request of Secre- 
tary Patterson, I testified before the House Committee on Military Affairs 
in support of the May-Johnson Bill, which I endorsed as an interim means 
of bringing about without delay the much-needed transition from the war- 
time administration of the Manhattan Project to postwar management of 
the atomic energy enterprise.”’” At that time he also urged a worldwide 
curb on atomic weapons. “Asked if it was a fair estimate that an atomic raid 
on the U.S. would kill 40 million people, he replied ‘I am afraid it is.’”*” 

Already a few days earlier, 400 scientists had protested against the May- 
Johnson Bill that Oppenheimer had endorsed.”! “[I]n so many ways 
Oppenheimer was behaving true to character. He had expected total loy- 
alty and trust when he was teaching and the same when running Los Alamos. 
Yet again he wanted to do things his way and he was expecting the same 
level of trust, but now he was operating inside the hard world of American 
politics and such an approach was certain to be a difficult one.”*” 

In November, Robert was in Pasadena to participate in a meeting of a 
declassification committee set up by Groves.” (At this writing [1999] all 
nontechnical material about Los Alamos 1943-1945 has been declassified, 
but the Los Alamos Technical Series is still largely secret.) Then, on De- 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER IS ELECTED DIRECTOR AND CHAIRMAN 79 


cember 20, Brien McMahon (1903-1953), senator from Connecticut, intro- 
duced a bill alternative to May-Johnson, this one excluding the military 
from any real voice in developing atomic energy.”® “In December 1945, 
and later, I appeared at Senator McMahon’s request in sessions of his Spe- 
cial Committee on Atomic Energy.”!” The upshot was that May-Johnson 
was shelved and that, on August J, 1946, Truman signed the McMahon Bill 
into law as the Atomic Energy Act of 1946.7” 

In October 1946, President Truman announced the appointment of 
Strauss to the newly established United States Atomic Energy Commission 
(AEC).”” In December the president appointed Oppenheimer to a six-year 
term as member of the General Advisory Committee (GAC) of the AEC.”® 
His colleagues on the GAC elected him as their chairman. Obviously these 
were positions that would put great demands on these men’s time. At any 
rate, by the end of 1946 no decision on the succession at the Institute had 
yet been made, even though by then it had been publicly announced that 
effective October 16, 1947, Aydelotte would retire as Institute director.” 

Now back to the Institute. 


When in September 1946 I began my first day at the Institute with a call on 
the director, it was Aydelotte whom I met. He turned out to be an amiable 
man in his midsixties. I remember practically nothing about him, except 
that he had unusually large ears. It was also Aydelotte who offered me a 
year’s extension of my fellowship at the Institute.”" 

After February 1946, when the faculty had been informed of the list of 
candidates for the directorship,'” there followed a period of consultation. 
Sample, Veblen to Strauss: “Oppenheimer seems to me to have so many of 
the qualifications that I would have very little misgiving about the future of 
the Institute if he were chosen. Von Neumann is not as favorable to 
Oppenheimer as I am, though he has great admiration for him as a scientist. 
The general opinion among the Faculty is that Oppenheimer would be 
very welcome as a colleague.”*!! This letter is also of interest because it con- 
tains a suggestion that had been bandied about among the faculty for some 
time since: to consider the advantages that might accrue to the Institute 
should it be administered by the trustees and the faculty with no director at 
all. “It might be wise to experiment with the continuation of the type of 
administration which has been in effect during Aydelotte’s absence; namely, 
to vest the functions of the Director in the hands of a ‘standing committee.’ 
This method of administration seems to usto have been very satisfactory.”?!! 
Nothing came of that. 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In November 1946 Strauss was elected chairman of the Search Commit- 


ee.”? In early 1947 the Committee finally took action. 


Before calling a meeting of the Trustees’ Committee, Admiral Strauss commu- 
nicated with Professor Edward Mead Earle, Chairman of the Faculty Commit- 
tee on the directorship, and received from him a list of suggestions of possible 
candidates. This list was then supplemented by additional names suggested by 
members of the Board and from outside sources. At a meeting on January 24, 
1947, the Committee on the Directorship approved a slate of five names, all of 
whom were known to be acceptable to the Faculty of the Institute. 

By unanimous vote, the . .. Committee authorized Admiral Strauss to ap- 
proach first Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer of the University of California. Admi- 
ral Strauss took the matter up informally with Dr. Oppenheimer,”" and is now 
happy to report to the Trustees that Dr. Oppenheimer has expressed his will- 
ingness to accept the position of Director of the Institute for Advanced Study 
should the Trustees decide to offer it to him. In that event, Admiral Strauss 
reported that Dr. Oppenheimer has requested that in addition to administrative 
duties, he be permitted to devote some of his time to teaching in order that he 
may remain in direct contact with young scholars. 

After the circulation of a short biographical sketch of Dr. Oppenheimer, the 
meeting was thrown open to questions and discussion. Supplementing the bio- 
graphical material presented to the Trustees, Admiral Strauss stated that Dr. 
Oppenheimer had been named to the Joint Research and Development Board 
of the Army and Navy and had also been elected Chairman of the General 
Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission. It is understood that 
Dr. Oppenheimer will continue these duties should he be elected Director of 
the Institute. Although Dr. Oppenheimer is primarily a theoretical physicist, 
he has had sound training as a classicist and is known to be deeply interested in 
humanistic studies. 

There was some discussion of Dr. Oppenheimer’s request that he be permitted 
to devote some of his time to teaching and it was pointed out that the Institute’s 
present policy of opening all lectures and seminars to graduate students at Princeton 
University would probably give Dr. Oppenheimer the contact with young schol- 
ars which he desired. In this connection, Admiral Strauss told the Board that he 
had given the names of the five candidates to President Dodds of Princeton Uni- 
versity and that Dodds had expressed the opinion that any one of these individu- 
als would be an ornament to the Princeton community. 

Since there were no further questions, it was moved by Admiral Strauss, 
seconded and unanimously carried that Professor J. Robert Oppenheimer be 
appointed Director of the Institute for Advanced Study to succeed Dr. Aydelotte 
on his retirement, with the understanding that his duties and responsibilities 
will be the same as those of the present Director, and that he shall receive the 
same emoluments. It is expected that Dr. Oppenheimer will come into resi- 
dence before the retirement of Dr. Aydelotte and during that period his status 
will be that of Director-Elect. 

The Chairman then presented for discussion the question of ways and means 
of publicly announcing this decision. . . . It was finally agreed that Admiral 
Strauss as Chairman of the Committee should extend a formal invitation to Dr. 
Oppenheimer, get his formal acceptance and then consult him about his wishes 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER IS ELECTED DIRECTOR AND CHAIRMAN ‘81 


concerning the form and timing of the announcement. Admiral Strauss and the 
Chairman of the Board will then prepare an announcement on behalf of the 
Institute to be released to the press.?!* 


The School of Mathematics was very pleased with the choice for the new 
director, as can be seen from a memorandum?" prepared in 1945 by men no 
less than Einstein and Weyl, when Oppenheimer was under consideration 
for a professorship: 


The School of Mathematics is of the unanimous opinion that theoretical phys- 
ics not only should continue to form a part of its scientific activities, but should 
even be reinforced... 

Since about 1930 the center of gravity of Oppenheimer’s work has shifted to 
nuclear physics. He has studied the genetic relationship between the several 
elementary particles and radiation, for instance the perturbation of the process 
of radiation by generation of electron-positron pairs. Perhaps his most original 
ideas are contained in his papers on the decomposition of deuterons by impact, 
and on the multiplicative showers of particles which are such a surprising fea- 
ture in cosmic radiation. 

Everywhere, and in particular in his latter work, he shows considerable 
strength in pursuing a theory into its last consequences, those consequences 
which are decisive for the whole theoretical foundation. It is characteristic of 
Oppenheimer that so many of his papers are written in collaboration with other 
physicists. 

During the war he has done excellent administrative work under formidable 
political and objective difficulties, and without losing any part of his scientific 
insight and integrity. 

Oppenheimer has been a very great influence in the United States in spread- 
ing the knowledge of quantum mechanics. He has an enormous capacity for 
influencing young people, and has founded the largest school of theoretical phys- 
ics in this country. His interests are broad; he surrounds himself with a brilliant 
social circle, and his students are very enthusiastic about him. It may be that he 
is somewhat too dominant, and his students tend to be smaller editions of 
Oppenheimer.” 


Oppenheimer himself has recalled his reactions to the Princeton offer: 


I came [to the Institute at Princeton] in the late summer, I think, of 1947. I had 
been a professor at California Institute of Technology and at the University of 
California at Berkeley. In late 1946, perhaps, or early 1947, the present Chair- 
man of the Atomic Energy Commission [Mr. Strauss] was chairman of the nomi- 
nating committee to seek a new director to succeed Dr. Aydelotte at the Institute, 
and he offered me the job, stating that the Trustees and the Faculty desired this. 

I did not accept at once. I like California very much, and my job there, but I 
had ... not spent very much time in California. Also, the opportunity to be in 
a small center of scholarship across the board was very attractive to me. Before 
I accepted the job, and a number of conversations took place, I told Mr. Strauss 
there was derogatory information about me. In the course of the confirmation 
hearings, on Mr. Lilienthal especially, and the rest of the Commissioners, I be- 
lieve Mr. [J. Edgar] Hoover (1895-1972) sent my file to the Commission, and 


82 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Mr. Strauss told me that he had examined it rather carefully. I asked him whether 
this seemed in any way an argument against my accepting this job, and he said 
no, on the contrary—any way no.7!* 


Oppenheimer must have accepted around April 1, for a few days later 
Aydelotte wrote to him that he “was delighted to get the good news by 
telephone from Admiral Strauss.”?”” On April 17 the news appeared in lead- 
ing New York and Philadelphia papers. 

Driving across the bridge from San Francisco to Oakland one night in 
April, Oppenheimer first heard on his car radio that he had been appointed 
the Institute’s new director. “Well,” he said to his wife, “I guess that settles it.” 

A month earlier, an Institute trustee had visited the Oppenheimers in 
Berkeley. From his diary: 

The Oppenheimers have a beautiful house up in the Berkeley hills overlooking 
the Bay. Mrs. Oppenheimer is an energetic woman of about thirty who is pas- 
sionately fond of gardening, and their two and one-half acres are planted in 
profusion with every conceivable shrub and flower, most of which she tends 
herself. They returned from Los Alamos to Berkeley a year ago expecting to 
settle down to a quiet existence teaching theoretical physics. But the demands of 
the State Department and the Atomic Energy Commission on Oppenheimer’s 
time have been incessant. Last week he was in Washington helping Mr. Truman 
with his speech on Greece. He has been deeply involved in the Lilienthal confir- 
mation controversy, and his advice on using atomic energy for commercial power 
is being constantly sought. In physical appearance, he is slender with rather 
slight features, but he has a piercing and imperturbable eye, and a quickness in 
repartee that gives him great force, and he would immediately command respect 
in any company. He is only forty-three years of age, and despite his preoccupa- 
tion with atomic physics, he has kept up his Latin and Greek, is widely read in 
general history, and he collects pictures. He is altogether a most extraordinary 
combination of science and the humanities.” 


Some years later a faculty member was asked what his and his colleagues’ 
impressions were on hearing the news. He replied: “Hell, this is a mecca for 
intellectuals and we were reading in the New York Times every day that 
Oppenheimer was the greatest intellectual in the world. Of course we wanted 
him—then.”® 

From the Institute’s records: Inthe faculty meeting of April 21, Aydelotte 
announced that Oppenheimer would take up provisional residence in 
Princeton in July. Von Neumann proposed, and the faculty accepted, that 
Pais be given a five-year membership with annual salary of $6,000—tripling 
my earlier stipend. 

On May 5, Aydelotte and Oppenheimer are both present at the faculty 
meeting, the latter as director-elect. It is announced that the trustees have 
approved Pais’s five-year appointment. 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER IS ELECTED DIRECTOR AND CHAIRMAN = 83 


From my diary, May 27: Lunch with the Oppenheimers and Trustee 
Herbert Maass (1878-1957) and his wife, at the Aydelottes. It was my first 
meeting with Oppenheimer’s wife, Kitty, a vivacious, petite brunette. Maass 
tells a story. When Einstein arrived in Princeton, Maass took care of his lug- 
gage. A bit later he received an upset telephone call from Mrs. Einstein: some- 
thing valuable got lost—five pounds of green peas for Einstein’s favorite soup. 

In mid-July of an unusually hot and humid summer, Oppenheimer, his 
wife, his son Peter, and his daughter Toni arrived in Princeton to settle. 

Among my personal papers I found a printed announcement which reads: 
“The Trustees and Faculty of the Institute for Advanced Study cordially 
invite you to meet Dr. and Mrs. Robert Oppenheimer in the common room 
of Fuld Hall on Thursday, October ninth from four-thirty to six-thirty.” 

On December 8, Oppenheimer, now director, presided for the first time 
over a faculty meeting. 


Why would the Oppenheimers leave their beautiful Berkeley home, situated 
in one of America’s best climates? I think they came to Princeton not just 
because of the intellectual appeal of the Institute, but also because of the near- 
ness to Washington, the center of world power to which Oppenheimer felt 
so strongly drawn. It was to prove unfortunate but true that he relished be- 
longing to America’s center of temporal power. If he knew that politics is a 
saprogenic profession, he did not behave accordingly. 

It was Robert’s hunger for dominance that made him accept, as we have 
now seen, not one but two positions in which he could exercise power. 
First, he was elected chairman of the GAC; next, to director of the Insti- 
tute. I believe that his life would have been easier if he had declined the 
Institute position because of the demands as GAC Chairman—or if he had 
resigned from the GAC because his Institute directorship would have given 
him enough to fill his needs. That second option would have avoided his 
placing himself at loggerheads with extremely powerful and vindictive men 
who would silence his voice. 

I shall come back later to that ugly treatment of his, which, however, 
Robert could have avoided had he not been so extremely arrogant. 

At the root of that tragic story lies the “derogatory information” to which 
Oppenheimer had alluded to Strauss,” as mentioned earlier. To conclude 
this chapter I mention how that information was handled in 1947. 

Under the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, Oppenheimer 
had to undergo an examination of his security status by the Atomic Energy 


84 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Commission before becoming chairman of the General Advisory Commit- 
tee. In February of 1947, the Commission cleared him because they knew a 
great deal about him, he had been appointed by President Truman, and 
they “had no occasion to raise any question.””? However, on Saturday, 
March 8, 1947, a special messenger from the FBI appeared at the Washing- 
ton offices of the AEC carrying a letter and a document for the Commission’s 
chairman, David Lilienthal. The document was from the FBI’s director, J. 
Edgar Hoover, and was a summary of the files “relative to Julius Robert 
Oppenheimer . . . and his brother Frank Friedman Oppenheimer.” In the 
accompanying letter, Hoover pressed for a further inquiry into 
Oppenheimer’s associations and background. Thus, the entire question of 
security clearance was opened again. On March 11, the general manager of 
the AEC reported that a detailed analysis of the FBI summary was being 
prepared by the Commission’s security staff, and that written views on 
Oppenheimer’s reliability were to be sought from Dr. Vannevar Bush (1890- 
1974), chairman of the Joint Research and Development Board, General 
Leslie R. Groves, commander of the Manhattan District, and Dr. James B. 
Conant (1893-1978), president of Harvard University.?”” 

Secretary of War Patterson, concurring with Dr. Bush’s endorsement, wrote 
to the commission that he had “received a most favorable impression” of 
Oppenheimer’s “ability, judgment, character, and devotion to duty,” and that 
he had “confidence in his character and loyalty to the United States.” Gen- 
eral Groves wrote that he had “reviewed Dr. Oppenheimer’s complete record 
personally,” and after “careful study” had decided that Oppenheimer “was 
fundamentally a loyal American citizen. .. .” Groves felt that due to his over- 
all value to the Manhattan Project, “I ordered accordingly that he be cleared. 
... Since then, I have learned many things amplifying that record but noth- 
ing which, if known at that time, would have changed my decision.”™! Fi- 
nally, Dr. Conant wrote to the Commission: 

I can say without hesitation that there can be absolutely no question of Dr. 

Oppenheimer’s loyalty. Furthermore, I can state categorically that, in my opin- 

ion, his attitude about the future course of the United States Government in mat- 

ters of high policy is in accordance with the soundest American tradition. . . . I 

base this statement on what I consider intimate knowledge of the workings of 


his mind. . . .a more loyal and sound American citizen can not be found in the 
whole United States.”” 


Commission chairman David Lilienthal went to see J. Edgar Hoover on 
March 25, with representatives of both the AEC and FBI, to discuss the 
case. All agreed that Oppenheimer had moved away from his left-wing as- 


IN WHICH OPPENHEIMER IS ELECTED DIRECTOR AND CHAIRMAN = 85 


sociations of the 1936 to 1942 period, whereupon, with no objections from 
the White House, and after examining the FBI materials, the AEC commis- 
sioners unanimously reaffirmed their clearance of Oppenheimer, since the 
new FBI reports “contained no information which would warrant recon- 
sideration of the commission’s decision.” Again in 1950, when Gordon 
Dean (1905-1958) replaced Lilienthal as head of the AEC, Dean went through 
the FBI file and cleared Oppenheimer “without a shadow of a reservation.” 
Dean read all new additions to the file until June of 1953, still feeling “no 


reservations.”2!9 


From now until 1954 Robert’s engagements oscillate between Princeton 
and Washington. I need to split these activities in two rather than follow 
their almost parallel timelines. I begin with Princeton. 


CHAPTER 1 4 


OPPENHEIMER’S EARLY YEARS AS 
INSTITUTE DIRECTOR 


Soon after the director-elect had settled in his Institute office, as had his 
new secretary—her name was Eleanor Leary, she had been secretary of Su- 
preme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter (1882-1965), a friend of Robert—he 
had his first enlightening contacts with the faculty, when he and Aydelotte 
watched Veblen wrest a room from the School of Economics for a math- 
ematics professor. When Oppenheimer mentioned the possibility of sup- 
planting the School secretaries and their helpers with a stenographic pool, 
he quickly reversed his field when he realized that academicians become as 
pleasantly inured to the custodial care of a good secretary as do business- 
men and bureaucrats.” 

Further enlightenment about the real nature of his new position—and 
the retiring director shared his chagrin—came in that faculty meeting when 
he referred to the Institute for Advanced Study as “an educational institu- 
tion.” Professors Alexander and Einstein protested that if they had thought 
of it as an educational institution they would not have come to it; it was a 
research organization. Aydelotte was as surprised as was Oppenheimer. The 
word educational was relegated to silence until the new director could study 
the founding documents and the laws under which the Institute had been 
incorporated. Those were the first examples for Robert to see how great 
men can devote themselves to piddling matters. 

In December 1947, Oppenheimer, now director, opened his first report 
to the Trustees with the observation that he was beginning “to get a feeling 
for how things are at the Institute.” The minutes continued: 


OPPENHEIMER’S EARLY YEARS AS INSTITUTE DIRECTOR 87 


The Director said he found the School of Mathematics a healthy and flourishing 
concern. With the very generous help already given to physics, he expressed the 
hope that that too will flourish. 

But in the other schools, perhaps because of a certain insularity in their ef- 
forts, the Director felt there are troubles. Very eminent scholars feel that their 
work is not appreciated; no one seems able to answer the question of why what 
is going on. The Director saw no solution in blanket rules. He expressed doubt 
that all members of the School of Economics were in any strict sense interested 
in or qualified for “advanced study.” And in the case of the School of Humanis- 
tic Studies there are obviously areas of great fruitfulness beyond the Hellenistic 
studies in which the Institute is already committed. 

There are many fields, in the Director’s opinion, in which a beginning could 
be made. He pointed to two main classifications of effort: (1) the application of 
scientific methods to fields in which there is really pioneering, and (2) the en- 
couraging of work by men to whom experience in the creative arts has brought 
deep insight. . . . [He] outlined no specific program for such efforts. His sugges- 
tion was that there be opportunity for exploring new fields outside and beyond 
the specific areas of the schools, which in some cases have narrow interests. For 
this purpose he asked that there be members who are not members of the schools. 

To accomplish his plan, he asked the Trustees to establish a General Fund of 
$120,000 on a five-year basis. This should be used for stipends, memberships 
and work not at present part of the activities pursued at the Institute. He sug- 
gested an Advisory Committee for the use of the Fund. He expressed the hope 
that in this way the Institute may carry out its functions in a more experimental 
way; and thus a coordinate community of scholars may be created.” 


The Board approved his plan, and appropriated from surplus $20,000 to 
be used during the next year. It was to be known as the Director’s Fund. It 
was a bold and beautiful plan, and promised to enable the director to break 
the mold in which the young Institute for Advanced Study was already 
firmly set. 


To the best of my recollection, the first person to come to the Institute 
with support from the Director’s Fund was the poet Thomas Stearns Eliot 
(1888-1965), who was at the Institute for most of the fall term of 1948. I had 
read and liked some of his poetry, none more than his O/d Possum’s Book of 
Practical Cats, the basis for Cats, one of the greatest musicals of the 1980s. 
Naturally, I was dying to have conversations with Eliot but refrained from 
approaching him, less out of shyness than from an ingrained sense not to 
bother him with trivia. Yet we had one talk. One day, stepping into the 
Fuld Hall elevator on my way to the lunch room I found one person al- 
ready in there: Eliot. I smiled politely then pushed the button. Then he 
spoke, saying, “This is a nice elevator.” I replied, saying, “Yes, this is a nice 
elevator.” That was all the conversation with Eliot I ever had. 


88 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


While in Princeton, Eliot completed work on his play The Cocktail Party. 
Oppenheimer once said to me he thought that was the worst thing he (E.) 
ever wrote. While at the Institute, Eliot received word of his award of the 
Nobel Prize for Literature for 1948 “for having enriched modern poetry 
with his pioneering work.” He left the Institute for Stockholm a few weeks 
before the end of term. It was Robert’s hope to appoint Eliot for a five-year 
term as member; the faculty was opposed. He never returned. 

Another of Robert’s invitees was his friend Francis Fergusson, a literary 
critic and writer, who became cofounder of a series of seminars on literary 
criticism, named for the Princeton dean Christian Gauss (1878-1951), still 
held at the University. 

In the autumn of 1950 George Frost Kennan (1904-2005) arrived at the 
Institute for the academic year, also supported by the Director’s Fund. He 
was the author of a famous anonymous article (signed “Mr. X”) which stated 
the policy of containment regarding the Soviet Union.” He was on leave 
from the State Department in order to study and write on American for- 
eign policy of the past 50 years. The appointment went through in spite of 
serious criticism from the mathematics faculty, which did not consider the 
man to be a sufficiently pure scholar. In the event, Kennan stayed for five 
years, supported by liberal grants from the Ford Foundation. His studies 
were interrupted during 1952, when he served as United States Ambassador 
to the Court of Joseph Stalin. 

Kennan and I developed friendly relations when we found out that we 
both played the guitar. Every now and then after lunch we would repair to 
my office, where I had brought one of my guitars. We would play in turn 
and sing, he Russian folk songs, I those from the West. He was a gentle 
man, a bit shy, I believe, but warmed up by music. 

I conclude my account of the early uses of the Director’s Fund by men- 
tioning two psychologists. The first, who stayed through academic 1951- 
53, was David Levy (1892-1977), a noted psychiatrist who specialized in the 
relations between infant and mother. He told me how he made his prelimi- 
nary diagnosis during the first visit of the pair. He would say to the mother: 
“What a fine baby you have.” The motherly mother would reply, “Thank 
you,” looking at the same time lovingly at the child. If, however, she would 
say “thank you” and look at Levy, then there might be problems. At his 
invitation I once went with him to his clinic in New York, where I could 
observe such interviews while sitting in an adjoining room and looking 
through a one-way transparent window. It was illuminating. 


OPPENHEIMER’S EARLY YEARS AS INSTITUTE DIRECTOR 89 


With the second psychologist (1951-52), Jerome (“Jerry”) Bruner (1915-), 
a professor of cognitive psychology, I had numerous discussions on his 
methods of testing. After one of these, he suggested that I visit his labora- 
tory at Harvard to take tests myself—which I did. I was set down before a 
lit, opaque glass screen. Jerry pressed a button that caused a picture to ap- 
pear on the screen for a fraction of a second. Whereafter he asked me to 
describe what I had seen. Then he showed the same picture again for double 
the time, asking me to report whether I had seen further details. We went 
through a sequence of such pictures. Afterward Jerry told me that I was the 
fastest person he had ever tested. Of pleasant conversations with other 
Director’s Fund visitors I remember those with the psychologist George 
Miller (1920-), who also became one of my squash partners, and with the 
linguist Noam Chomsky (1928-). 

The Institute’s professors found little pleasure (nor did I) and little pride in 
the accomplishments of Arnold Toynbee (1889-1975), who during 1947-1953 
was occasionally at the Institute on a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation. 

The freedom the promise of the Director’s Fund offered was to suffer 
from the reporting of an interview that Robert gave to the New York Time?” 
in which he expressed too openly, perhaps, his own hopes. He was quoted 
as saying: “First, we expect to invite people who have experience outside 
the academic field—in business or politics, for example. Second, we [intend 
to] explore areas which have hitherto not been regarded as subject for scien- 
tific investigation.” 

The reporter continued his own account as follows: 

Suppose you could use this fund to invite as your salaried house-guests the world’s 

greatest scholars, scientists and creative artists—your favorite poet, the author 

of the book that interested you so much, the European physicist with whom 
you would like to mull over some speculations about the nature of the universe. 

That’s precisely the set-up that Oppenheimer enjoys. He can indulge every 
interest and curiosity, because his interests and curiosities correspond with the 


whole range of science and culture, and that coincides in turn with the scope of 
the Institute. 


Though there was no appearance of a reaction at the time, there could be 
little doubt that neither the faculty nor the trustees were of the same mind 
as the director was thus reported to be. Did he intend to reduce the faculty? 
Had he unlimited power to bring whom he would to the Institute, accord- 
ing to his intellectual whim? Could he call in nonacademic persons? Had he 
presumed to say that the “interests and curiosities” of the Institute’s faculty 
corresponded with the whole range of science and culture? It is unlikely he 
thought so, even as a potential; as for the faculty as it existed, they were 


90 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


highly specialized scholars and scientists, only truly at home in their area of 
expertise. Robert might have taken the precaution to submit the article to 
them before publication. I consider it a token of his arrogance that he did 
not do so. 

A second indiscretion followed half a year later when he gave an inter- 
view to a reporter of Time magazine.” It is the first time that (as we Ameri- 
cans say) Oppenheimer made the cover of that November issue, showing 
his picture against a background of a blackboard filled with formulae (which, 
incidentally, are not his but mine). I quote from the article: “Oppenheimer 
likes to tell about a Bible study group in Germany that had begun with 
Genesis and doggedly plowed clear through to Fxekie/. Asked an impressed 
visitor: ‘Don’t you find Exe&ie/ terribly difficult?’ Replied one Bible stu- 
dent: ‘Yes—but what we don’t understand, we explain to each other.’”” That 
reply, one of Robert’s favorites, later often used by others as well, is also 
used as caption to his Time cover picture. 

Other comments from the interview: Einstein was “a landmark but not 
a beacon” to modern physicists—correct but gratuitously cutting; the Insti- 
tute was a place where men could “sit and think,” but could only be sure of 
the sitting. Also, 


“I regard it as a very open question whether the Institute is an important place, 
and whether my coming will be of benefit.” By last week, he had answered the 
first half of the question to his own satisfaction. 

His first visit to Europe in 20 years had helped do the trick. Attending scien- 
tific conferences in Brussels and Birmingham, Oppenheimer had learned how 
despairing the life of the intellect had become in postwar Europe. Viewed from 
Princeton, the Institute might have its shortcomings; viewed from Europe, it 
had something of the special glow of a monastery in the Dark Ages. 

Director Oppenheimer preferred to think of the Institute as an “intellectual 
hotel”—a place for transient thinkers to rest, recover and refresh themselves 
before continuing on their way. He wanted an international clientele at his 
Grand Hotel. Expatriate and exiled scholars have always been welcome at the 
Institute, but Oppenheimer had something different in mind: a continuous world 
traffic in ideas. For such foreign scholars as Denmark’s Bohr and Britain’s Dirac 
and Toynbee, Oppenheimer hoped to work out periodic repeat performances, 
so that they would never wholly lose touch either with the U.S. or with home 
base. Said Oppenheimer: “The best way to send information is to wrap it up in 
a person.” 

The guest list at Oppie’s hotel this year will also include Historian Arnold 
Toynbee, Poet T. S. Eliot, Legal Philosopher Max Radin—and a literary critic, a 
bureaucrat and an airlines executive. There was no telling who might turn up 
next: maybe a psychologist, a Prime Minister, a composer or a painter. 
Oppenheimer was just working up courage: “If a man is a full professor at 
Harvard, he may be a fool, but he’s a respectable fool. In the world of action, 
criteria for acceptability are more confused.” 


OPPENHEIMER’S EARLY YEARS AS INSTITUTE DIRECTOR 91 


The characterization of the Institute as an “intellectual hotel” was 
likely to wound the sensibilities of the faculty. That itdid was shown when 
the director was constrained to refuse an interview with a reporter from the 
Saturday Evening Post in 1949, and with another from Cod/ers in 1950, on the 
ground that the faculty opposed further publicity. Mrs. Leary corresponded 
for Dr. Oppenheimer and said that the faculty believes there had been too 
much publicity about the Institute. 

Robert’s last position before coming to Princeton had been director of the 
Los Alamos Laboratory, where some 6,000 people had been doing his bid- 
ding. Now, in Princeton, he was lording it over just about 100 persons. As is 
clear from the preceding, he had not yet learned that running a small-sized 
show demands delicate procedures of a characteristically distinct nature. 


I turn next to the changes in the faculty largely wrought by Oppenheimer 
during his early years at the Institute. As to the three economists on the 
faculty, after some discussion (occasionally heated), one resigned, the other 
two retired. In 1949 the schools of humanistic studies and of economics and 
politics were merged into one, with the new name School of Historical 
Studies.” 

New faculty appointments were made. In 1947 the archeologist Homer 
Thompson (1906-2000) joined. He was especially renowned for his dig in 
the Agora, ancient Athens’ marketplace, which he had discovered by fol- 
lowing the footsteps of Pausanias (2nd century AD). This Greek traveler 
and geographer had recorded in Book I (of ten) of his “Description of 
Greece” the position of the marble stele that marks the entry to the Agora— 
rediscovered by Thompson by searching at the indicated place. The excava- 
tion of the Agora became Thompson’s main life’s work, assisted by his wife 
Dorothy and an able staff, headquartered at the Amerikaniki Skoli (American 
School of Archeology) in Athens, also for part of many years the home of 
the Thompsons themselves. 

In 1948 Harold Cherniss (1904-1987) was appointed to the faculty. He 
was America’s foremost expert on Plato and Aristotle. We became very 
good friends. I think with gratitude of my many visits to his office, where I 
was always welcome, and where we discussed all kinds of topics, including 
his and my work. I also had friendly relations with other new professors, 
Ernst Kantorowicz (1895-1963), a medieval historian, and Sir Ernest 
Llewellyn Woodward (1890-1971), a modern historian, both appointed in 
1951; and with Kurt Gédel (1906-1978), the great logician (1953). 

At about that time a new rank was introduced: permanent member, with 
indefinite tenure but not a professorship. The first appointed to this category 


92 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


was the mathematician Deane Montgomery (1909-1992)(in 1948), whom 
Veblen was grooming as his successor in leading the faculty. The next per- 
manent members were the mathematician Atle Selberg (1917-) and yours 
truly, both in 1949. According to the faculty minutes of April 19, 1949, 
“The Director proposed to change the present status of Dr. Pais by a) con- 
verting his $6,000 annual grant to $8,000 annual salary, b) giving Dr. P. 
permanent status rather than the present five-year tenure. On motion, sec- 
onded and carried, the appointment as recorded was approved.” From the 
letter Oppenheimer sent me the next day: “Your appointment . . . will now 
be, if you care to accept it, a permanent appointment extending to the age 
of 65. ... Whatever the future may have in store for physics, for you or for 
the Institute, one thing needs now to be recorded. That is my own deep 
sense of gratitude and that of all your other colleagues that you have elected 
at this time to continue your work with us here.”?”° 

Before Oppenheimer’s arrival, mathematicians had formed the strongest 
group at the Institute; this remained so during his tenure. A few numbers: 
between 1948 and 1953, there were some 300 mathematicians at the Insti- 
tute, whose work produced more than 500 papers in learned journals of 
mathematics.””! 

The growth of the faculty and also of the number of temporary members 
demanded more funds for salaries, for fellowships, and for additional space: 
$400,000 for the erection of three modest buildings providing 60 additional 
offices, several seminar rooms, and freeing of space allowing the library in 
Fuld Hall to expand. Furthermore, the Institute contributed $500,000 to- 
ward the construction of the new Firestone Library at the University. 

All these growing expenses were covered in part by increases in grants 
from foundations and government contracts, from $82,000 in 1947 to 
$181,000 in 1952. In addition, the income from the well-managed portfolio 
showed sizable growth, from $643,000 in 1948 to $848,000 in 1951. At the 
annual trustee meeting in 1949, the director expressed his appreciation to 
the trustee’s Treasurer, and also announced the establishment of the Einstein 
Award, a gift of the Rosa and Lewis Strauss Memorial Fund in honor of the 
famous professor on his 70th birthday. Every three years $15,000 was to be 
given for outstanding contributions to mathematics and/or physics. I was 
present at the first award ceremony, when Einstein himself handed over 
the checks. To Julian Schwinger (1918-1995), one recipient, he said: “You 
have deserved it;” to Kurt Godel, the other one: “You do not need it.” 

It would have greatly helped if the principal endowment could have been 
increased. Robert, however, considered it infra dig to engage in such plebeian 


OPPENMEIMER'’S EARLY YEARS AS WISTITUTE DIRECTOR $3 


activities as fundraising—which caused murmurs of disapproval from the 
faculty. As von Neumann once said to me, rich Jews would have crept on 
their knees and with open purses from New York to Princeton if only 
Oppenheimer would have asked them to contribute to the Institute's funds. 

Among government contracts was one entered with the New York of- 
fice of the Atomic Energy Commission, by which some of the research 
fellows came to the Institute for their work. The director and the faculty 
were suddenly confronted with a policy issue when Congress passed an 
appropriation bill with a rider providing that all such fellows must be cleared 
by the Commission after full investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investi- 
gation. The policy was repugnant to most scientists. Those who had testi- 
fied at recent hearings were frank to say that anv such restriction would 
have an adverse effect on students and voung postdoctoral workers who 
might not want to have their families and friends disturbed by such inquir- 
ies, and might turn away from scientific careers that the government wanted 
as a matter of policy to facilitate. 

The director promptly consulted the faculty, and informed the New York 
office of the Atomic Energy Commission that the Institute would not in 
future administer any such funds. He said in part: “In view of the nonsecret 
nature of our work and of the traditions of the Institute for Advanced Studv, 
we should be unwilling to make any appointments to membership in the 
Institute conditional upon an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Inves- 
tigation. We shall therefore make no further grants-in-aid, the funds for 
which would be derived from subjects contract. .. . I need hardly add that 
unless a new basis for the support of basic, unclassified work in the sciences 
can be developed, the Institute will be unwilling to renew the contract.”=* 


I conclude my account of Oppenheimer’s activities as director in the early 
vears by mentioning two more professorial appointments. 

In the autumn of 1950 Robert took the first step toward mv own promo- 
tion to full professor, when he sent a written statement to the School of 
Mathematics professors. Forty vears later I obtained a copv. It reads in part: 


The record of Dr. Pais’ work in the last decade is almost a history of the eftorts 
to clarify our understanding of basic atomic theorv and the nature of the el- 
ementary particles. Pais first proposed the compensation theories of elementary 
particles, and much ot his work has been devoted to exploring the success and 
limitations of these theories, and indicating the radical character of the revisions 
which will be needed betore they can successfully describe the sub-atomic world. 
Pais has made important contributions to nuclear theory and to electrodvnam- 
ics. He is one of the few voung theoretical physicists w ho within the last decade 


have enriched our understanding of physics. 


94 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In January 1951 I received the following letter from Oppenheimer: “It 
gives me great pleasure to inform you that on the unanimous vote of the 
Faculty and the Board of Trustees of the Institute for Advanced Study you 
have been appointed a Professor . . . of physics. . . . This step is taken in 
appreciation of your past work, in high hopes for your work of the future, 
and with the full recognition of the value which your counsel will be in 
guiding the Institute’s policies.” On July 1, I became the Institute’s third 
professor of physics, after Einstein and Oppenheimer. On October 9, 1951, 
Selberg, Montgomery, and I were present for the first time as regular mem- 
bers at a faculty meeting—too late to meet Einstein there. He had ceased 
attending in 1949. 

Next to attending faculty meetings and pursuing science, I set myself a 
third, self-appointed task: the care and nursing of temporary junior physics 
members. These young people had come from their respective universities as 
the golden boys or girls, the best of the local crops. Now they found them- 
selves in the company of similar golden kids from elsewhere. That, combined 
with the Institute’s decompressed atmosphere—do what you like—was noth- 
ing less than a culture shock, as I knew so well from my own initial experi- 
ences. The result was what I came to call the November Depression, which 
almost invariably occurred after the excitement of arrival had worn off. It 
was during this time that I felt I had to keep a protective eye on the newcom- 
ers. I would drop in, ask them what they were doing and how it was going, 
tell them it takes some time to adjust to new surroundings, stress that this is 
avery peculiar place, that it takes time to get going here, and that they would 
be just fine in a while. That was the kind of support Oppenheimer was con- 
genitally incapable of providing; nor did he try. 

A fair number took this wisdom to heart and got their act together. 
Many of those have since risen to full professorships all over the world. 
Looking back on my Institute years, it is perhaps my greatest satisfaction to 
have helped the youngsters along in the beginning. There were also some 
who could not take it, who collapsed mentally. On rare occasions, one or 
two of these would simply pack up and vanish. As all of us know, starting 
a career is rarely easy. 

I turn to the last of the early professorial appointments in the Oppen- 
heimer years. It brings me to March 1955, at which time I was teaching at 
Columbia University, on leave from the Institute. There I got a phone call 
from Robert. He had recently put up George Kennan for a permanent In- 
stitute professorship in diplomatic history but had hit upon strong resis- 
tance from the mathematics faculty. He asked me for help in a forthcoming 


OPPENHEIMER’S EARLY YEARS AS INSTITUTE DIRECTOR 95 


faculty meeting at which the matter would come up for formal discussion. 
Strictly, he had no right to do so, since I was on leave, but he sounded so 
desperate that I said I would come. It was an unpleasant meeting, the oppo- 
sition tearing hard into the proposal on the grounds that Kennan’s publica- 
tions to date could not be called scholarly contributions. Things got rather 
nasty; I did not say much but afterward told Robert that I would talk pri- 
vately with the mathematicians, who considered me reasonably unbiased. I 
tried to calm them down. 

The matter ended the following November, when the appointment was 
approved with a vote of 13 for and 5 mathematicians against. This contre- 
temps marked the beginning of a lasting hostility of the mathematics group 
toward Oppenheimer. As to Kennan, his appointment has proved to be 
fully justified. The books he wrote while at the Institute have received wide 
acclaim and numerous high honors. 

In the next chapter I shall mention further appointments in physics. 


CHAPTER 15 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD 
OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 


“Nineteen forty-six was the first year of peace.... The year was marked by 
the widespread if delayed publication of results of the key war projects in 
physics, and above all, by the return to their old laboratories of hundreds of 
war-experienced physicists, brimful of information about what had been 
done, and confident in their understanding of whole fields of technique 
which had been vague general possibilities in 1940. . . . Physicists went 
back, a little rusty, to the problems of the days before the war. Most of 
those problems were still there, for not much fundamental progress had 
been made during the War years. But gone was the reluctance to do big 
things, gone the sometimes valuable, sometimes hampering isolation of the 
research worker. ... [One may hope that in] the years ahead the best of the 
old spirit will come to employ the great new tools which are the legacy of 
war.”?? So wrote a physicist in 1947. Elsewhere I have written** how right 
after war’s end physics took a sharp turn, rather than continuing on earlier 
trodden paths, how there was an almost abrupt sense of novelty, in regard 
to instrumentation, new styles of cooperative experimental venture, dis- 
coveries of new forms of matter, and evolution of new theoretical methods. 


“The Great Charismatic Figure” 


During the war, which had of course interrupted Oppenheimer’s research 
activities, he published only one physics paper,’® a report on progress in 


cosmic-ray physics during 1936-1941. His total postwar scientific production 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 97 


was minimal as well: one paper on electrodynamics,’ three on meson phys- 
ics, '°?37238 and one, his last, a digression into biophysics.”” This limited re- 
search activity was the price he had to pay not only for having become an 
administrator but, far more importantly, for having become a much-sought- 
after consultant on matters of national policy. In spite of all these activities he 
did continue to write copiously in the postwar years, however, but—as we 
shall see later—in areas other than pure science, publishing about 120 papers 
on general subjects. 

At this point I single out one of his papers, which straddles physics and 
broader topics. It is the eulogy that Robert wrote after Einstein’s death in 
1955—in 1939 he had also given a radio address on the occasion of Einstein’s 
sixtieth birthday“'—from which I quote: 


With the death of Albert Einstein in April of 1955, physicists lost their greatest 
colleague. For two golden decades early in this century, the history of Einstein’s 
discoveries is inseparable from the history of physics. 

Einstein started with the nineteenth-century developments of statistical me- 
chanics and of electromagnetic theory as his inheritance. In the first year of his 
fully mature work, his paper on Brownian movement enlarged and defined sta- 
tistical theory, and led to those insights into fluctuations which were to play so 
great a part in Einstein’s contributions to quantum theory. In a second great 
paper he formulated with full incisiveness the hypothesis of light quanta, and 
irrevocably changed our understanding of physical processes on the atomic scale. 
In a third paper he made the special theory of relativity. . 

From then on, for the next decade, Einstein was to be preoccupied with the 
problems of inertia, of mass, of acceleration, and of gravity. He discovered first 
the identity of mass and energy, which was to be verified in detail only some 
twenty-five years later, and was to provide the basis for such fateful develop- 
ments for man’s whole history during and since the Second World War. He 
began to understand the import of the precise equality of inertial and gravita- 
tional mass, and to see in this the foundation for a geometrical theory of gravita- 
tion. He sought to preserve the logically necessary general covariance of the 
equations of physics, until this long effort was crowned with the discovery of 
the general theory of relativity and the field equations. He was almost at once 
able to define three crucial experiments, accessible through existing observa- 
tional techniques, by which the novel implications of his theory could be com- 
pared with experience. In the forty years that have elapsed these have remained 
the principal and, with one exception, the only connections between the gen- 
eral theory and experience. The exception lies in the field of cosmology, where 
Einstein himself was the first to see wholly new approaches opened by the theory 
of relativity. More than any other great advance in physics, the general theory 
of relativity is the work of one man. Without him, it might have lain long 
undiscovered. 

During this whole period Einstein was very close to the rapidly evolving 
quantum theory of atomic phenomena. He reverted to the use of statistical ar- 
guments, and to the logical meaning of fluctuations, to discover the laws of 
emission and absorption of radiation, and to establish the connection between 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


the waves of de Broglie and the statistical laws proposed by Bose from the de- 
scription of light quanta. As this period drew to a close with the discovery in 
1925 of the quantum mechanics, and its more and more definite formulation, 
especially by Bohr, Einstein’s role was to change. He found himself from the 
first disturbed and unsatisfied by the statistical and acausal character of the new 
mechanics, to the discovery of which he had made such great contributions. 

In a long period of brilliant discussion and analysis, especially with Ehrenfest 
and with Bohr, he attempted again and again to show that the new mechanics, 
for all its vast agreement with experience, contained logical errors and inconsis- 
tencies. Yet, as example after example, upon analysis, only confirmed the har- 
mony and consistency of the quantum theory, he was led to accept this; but to it 
he always coupled his unaltered conviction that this should not be the ultimate 
description of the atomic world, and that in an ultimate description acausal and 
statistical features must be eliminated. 

Thus, for the last decades of his life he did not share in full the convictions or 
the interests of the great majority of his colleagues. Instead, with increasing single- 
mindedness, he turned his attention to the discovery of what would for him have 
been a basic and satisfying account of the atomic nature of matter. This was the 
program of the unified field. Here he sought to generalize the matter-free field 
equations of general relativity so that they might also account for electromagnetic 
phenomena. He sought equations whose solutions would correspond to local ag- 
gregations of mass and charge, and whose behavior would resemble the atomic 
world so well described by quantum theory. He was hard at work on this pro- 
gram until his death. It was a program that did not arouse the hope or indeed the 
active interest of many physicists; yet his knowledge of their work, and his judg- 
ment of it, remained firm and masterful; and he was never deceived by any of the 
proposed causal reinterpretations of atomic physics. 

When the weather was good enough, Einstein would walk home from work. 
One day not long ago he said to me, “When it has once been given you to do 
something rather reasonable, forever afterward your work and life are a little 
strange.” It had indeed been given him to do something reasonable. His pres- 
ence among us stayed us from the worst folly, and touched those who knew 
him with the light of magnanimity. 


It is true that Oppenheimer’s postwar scientific output was not particu- 


larly memorable. Until practically the day he died he remained intensely 


interested in physics, however, keeping track of new developments. Espe- 


cially during the first decade following the war, he became one of the world’s 
leading directors—in the original meaning of the word—of physics, address- 


ing audiences in but also far beyond, Princeton. I give two samples. 


First, from his Richtmyer lecture’ in 1947 (never published; Iowna mim- 


eographed copy): 


As the preoccupations of the war years abate, we are able to take stock of our- 
selves and our work. It would be a picture altered by the late years: a picture of 
intense activity, of classrooms crowded as never before, of great machines 
abuilding by the score to give us radiations of high energy, of contradictions, 
puzzles and questions as deep and presently obscure as any that have ever faced 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 99 


physics, of unprecedented demands for our cooperation in the solution of prac- 
tical problems of decisive importance to our country and the world, of overrid- 
ing if often inarticulate concern that our works may never again be needed for 
the destruction of war.... 

In the field of fundamental understanding, the situation must be regarded as 
woeful when judged by the classic standards of physics. We are a long way from 
the simplicity and universality of Newtonian mechanics, or of electrodynamics, 
or of quantum theory. No one has an understanding even remotely comparable 
to our understanding of electron dynamics of the interactions which manifest 
themselves in nuclear phenomena, the strong but by no means simple forces 
between nucleons, the spectacularly weak coupling between electrons and 
nucleons. . . . It may be that, long before these questions are answered, others 
will have replaced them; today they are part of the challenge of the atomic world. 

There is a vast field of endeavor in putting to effective practical advantage 
the discoveries in connection with the release of atomic energy. This is a diffi- 
cult and demanding field, full of interest on its own, and to which many of us 
will be committed in the years to come. But I think that the problems here lie 
rather far from fundamental physics, and that the important problems are prob- 
ably not in the field of nuclear physics at all. . 

Contemporary atomic physics, the physics of the great accelerators, the reac- 
tors, even in large part the cosmic rays, is, very much more than ever before, 
three things: it is the physics of teams, it is expensive physics, it is prized as vital 
to armament. These things have become so much more pronounced than they 
were two decades ago that they have made some changes in our ways of life. 

We have seen the beginnings of an attempt to establish, precisely in the field 
of atomic physics and its applications, that cooperation between peoples and 
that order among nations that is our one hope of lasting peace. Many of us, over 
the past years, have in all ways that were appropriately open to us attempted to 
contribute to this effort, for which in the nature of things the government and 
people of the United States have borne the greatest responsibility. It is not proper, 
nor is it possible, for me to give a valid appraisal of the measure of success of 
these past efforts. It is perhaps proper to give renewed expression to what has 
been so eloquently said before: to the ultimate success we, as a fraternity, are 
dedicated. ... 

It will not be very long before these words that I have spoken today will 
seem like very trivial physics and very poorly inspired prophesy. There are rich 
days ahead for physics; we may hope, I think, to be living in one of the heroic 
ages of physical science, where as in the past a vast new field of experience has 
taught us its new lesson and its new order. 


Second, in 1950, Sccentific American devoted an issue to “The Age of Sci- 
ence: 1900-1950.” It contains contributions by ten prominent scientists, 
chosen from a variety of branches of science. It was fitting that Oppenheimer 
should write its general introduction.” As Rabi has written: 


For the first half of this century the scientific community of the United States, 
and more especially the physicists, did not lack for strong and respected leader- 
ship. ... This leadership was generally accepted by the physicists, by the press 
and by the public at large. By 1946, with the end of the war and the retirement 


100 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


from activity of the older leadership, this mantle naturally fell on the shoulders 
of Robert Oppenheimer. Although other eminent scientists exerted strong in- 
fluences, ... Oppenheimer’s leadership was recognized more universally, both 
at home and abroad, even though he held no high position and was not the 
recipient of extraordinary scientific honors. 

This rise to public eminence and recognition was quite sudden and was not 
presaged by events preceding the war. At that time Oppenheimer’s reputation 
and influence were centered around the small and close circle of physicists. As 
the wartime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory, he was bound to receive 
important public attention, but there were other directors of great laboratories, 
and other physicists, who shared equal esteem but did not become objects of 
such general interest. Oppenheimer, after Einstein, emerged as the great charismatic figure of 
the scientific world" (my italics). 


I quote next from Oppenheimer’s Scientific American paper: 


[All ten reports] tell of a period of unparalleled advance of understanding, of 
new experience, new insight and new mastery. Indeed, for some of the sciences— 
for biochemistry, for physics, for genetics—the half-century now closing has 
been a time of splendor: of great men and great discoveries, of a real revolution 
in our knowledge of the world. For all it has been a time of extraordinary vital- 
ity and progress, extending and enriching what we know about the world, and 
unearthing, for every question answered, a host of new questions. Few of the 
authors, schooled by the surprises and wonders unfolded in the history of the 
last 50 years, hazard much of a preview of the history of the half-century to 
come; yet all speak with confidence of a future that will be worthy of a great 
past.... 

All the reports are pervaded, though necessarily and properly with varying 
emphasis, by this sense of the dual role of science. The purpose and the fruits of 
science are discovery and understanding. Yet equally, though in a quite differ- 
ent sense, its purpose and its fruits are a vast extension of human resources, of 
man’s power to control and alter the environment in which he lives, works, 
suffers and perishes... . 

One cannot read these 10 reports . . . without being sensible of a darker 
shadow, quite outside this serene and active workshop of the human spirit, and 
yet somehow touching it. Scientific progress, which has so profoundly altered 
both the material and the spiritual quality of our civilization, is not the sole 
root of its present grave crisis. But few men can be doubtful of its decisive part. 
Hand in hand, the growth of science and of the practical arts has produced, is 
increasingly producing, an unparalleled revolution in human resources, resources 
that in some part have altered, and in far greater part can alter, the material 
condition of man’s life. . . . 

The order that characterizes the relations of one part of science with another is 
not primarily an hierarchal order. It is true that there have been attempts to sketch 
out possible hierarchies, designating, let us say, physics as more abstract than biol- 
ogy, or astronomy as more quantitative than anthropology. But it is doubtful 
whether such schemes have contributed much either to the growth of science or 
to its general understanding; certainly they do not describe at all the benign and 
tolerant symbiosis in which the sciences have flourished and nourished one an- 
other. Tolerance, open-mindedness and confidence in the resolution of conflict 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 101 


by further inquiry—these constitute the liberalism of the sciences in their rela- 
tions with one another. These relations are rooted in many things, but not least in 
mutual respect and in a total, a deliberate candor. ... 

Harmony, even in science itself, is being destroyed or threatened in vast ar- 
eas of the world today. Terror, orthodox recantation, hierarchy, secrecy—these 
words are full of grim omens for science and for liberty. A society which as a 
matter of principle invokes the measures for which these words stand betrays, 
whatever its protestations, science and the tradition that has nourished it. A 
society which invokes these measures (in the name of man’s welfare, in fear or 
in folly) is in danger of death. 

Increasingly, in these days of growing crisis, men have talked with earnest 
desperation of the application of scientific method to new areas, to problems of 
man’s behavior and to human society. None of us knows or can foresee what 
progress individual genius and common effort may make possible in our under- 
standing of these problems in the decades to come. Yet if the history of other 
sciences is a good guide, progress will come in only fitful and wayward response 
to man’s needs, and will wait upon his insight, his patience and his invention. 


Several aspects in these two contributions strike me as unusual. While 
having science as their main theme, they both blend that subject with re- 
flections on the world at large, as for example in the Richtmyer lecture, 
where in one sentence Robert moves from unsolved problems in physics to 
“problems of decisive importance to our country and the world”; likewise 
in the Scientific American article: “[T]he growth of science . . . has produced... 
an unparalleled revolution . . . that . . . can alter the material conditions of 
man’s life.” I would suppose that those mixtures reflect on the time they 
were spoken or written, the beginning of the Cold War, but perhaps even 
more on Oppenheimer’s dual role as leader in science and GAC adviser in 
political matters. 

Note in particular how Robert writes of “the environment in which 
[man] lives, works, suffers, and perishes”; of “these days . . . [in which] men 
have talked with earnest desperation”; and especially of “a darker shadow, . .. 
outside this serene and active workshop of the human spirit and yet .. . 
touching it.” Here he reveals, I believe, some of the “darker shadow” 
that has resided in his forever troubled soul. There is melodrama in such 
language—which we shall encounter time and again in what follows. 

I now return to the Princeton scene. 


Prominent physicists had visited the Institute long before Oppenheimer 
arrived. Niels Bohr had been there in 1938-39, Dirac in 1934-35 and fall of 
1946; Kramers in the spring of 1947, just before Robert’s arrival; Pauli in 
1935-36 and the entire war period, 1940-46. All these men returned for 
visits during Oppenheimer’s tenure, Bohr in the spring terms of 1948, 1950, 
1953, and the fall of 1954; Dirac in academic 1947-48, 1958-59, 1962-63; 


102. J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Kramers in the fall of 1951; Pauli in academic 1949-50 and the spring of 
1954 and 1956. Oppenheimer’s presence obviously added to their desire to 
come to Princeton; their presence obviously added to the allure of physics 
at the Institute. 


Building Up Physics at the Institute 


Upon Oppenheimer’s arrival, a function and quality of the Institute devel- 
oped that had not been there before, however. It became a center for theo- 
retical physics, in fact during the next decade the world’s premier mecca for 
theoretical physicists, who came flocking as temporary members. 

Oppenheimer’s outstanding talent for assembling the right people and 
stimulating them to great effort was the decisive factor, just as it had been at 
Los Alamos. Regular periods of residence for eminent physicists have con- 
tinued to play an important role in the life of the Institute, but from the 
very start Oppenheimer brought to physics at the Institute a new emphasis 
on youth. In fact, on his arrival in Princeton, five research associates from 
Berkeley came with him as the first temporary physics members in the new 
style.” This is characteristic for the continuity as well as for the transition 
in Oppenheimer’s activities. 

Oppenheimer’s main role as physicist now turned into directing the re- 
search of these youngsters rather than being a teacher in the conventional 
sense, for there is no such teaching at the Institute. To be sure, we had our 
seminars. They were lively—sometimes very lively. Robert’s sharp insights 
played a major part in making them so. Yet his main contribution to the 
work and the style of the Institute was not merely the conducting of a semi- 
nar. His influence was far more important, more subtle perhaps, but no less 
inspiriting. He could convey to young men a sense of extraordinary relevance 
of the physics of their day and give them a sense of their participation in a 
great adventure. He could define and thereby enhance their dedication, by 
words such as these: “People who practice science, who try to learn, believe 
that knowledge is good. They have a sense of guilt when they do not try to 
acquire it. This keeps them busy. . . . It seems hard to live any other way than 
thinking that it was better to know something than not to know it; and that 
the more you know the better, provided you know it honestly.”** To an 
unusual degree, Oppenheimer possessed the ability to instill such attitudes in 
the young physicists around him, to urge them not to let up. 

Robert’s predilections for young men was also manifest in his choices 
for appointments to Institute professors of physics. I introduce these next. 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 103 
F. J. Dyson (1923-) 


On January 29, 1948, Robert Oppenheimer and I took a train from Princeton 
to New York to attend the 1948 winter meeting of the American Physical 
Society, held that year at Columbia University. Our main interest was the 
session on quantum electrodynamics, the hottest topic in physics at that time. 

One of the speakers”> was a youngster from Cornell, where he had been 
working with Bethe and Feynman. As he proceeded, we nodded to each 
other: that kid is smart. His name was Freeman Dyson (1923-). He looked 
a bit unusual: stiff white collar, and light blue eyes that would stare pierc- 
ingly at you. I recall my first impression: that fellow must be an eccentric, 
an opinion which I have never changed. 

It is not so simple, however, to define what one means by eccentricity. 
In my yiew eccentrics are people with a strong sense of personal liberty, 
strong individuals whose actions never include acting, who have strange 
inclinations of their own that they are not afraid to express and on which 
they refuse to compromise. 

Britain has perhaps produced more eccentrics than any other nation. No 
two of them are alike, of course. Think of Dame Edith Sitwell (1887-1964) 
or of Joshua Norton,* who emigrated to California, where in 1859 he 
proclaimed himself emperor of the United States, regularly attended the 
State Senate sessions, where a seat was always reserved for him, and where 
on his death in San Francisco huge crowds paid their last respects to their 
beloved monarch. 

To get back to 1948, I seem to remember that Oppenheimer and I spoke 
with Dyson after his talk and invited him to spend one year at the Institute 
for Advanced Study, an offer which he accepted. In 1953 he returned to the 
Institute as a full professor. From that time dates my friendship with him, 
which lasts to this day. Freeman has remained at the Institute ever since, 
presently in the state of grace called emeritus. In 1957 he became a United 
States citizen. 

Dyson was born in England, in 1923. His father, Sir George Dyson (1883- 
1964), was a composer of choral and orchestral music, and for 25 years the 
director of London’s Royal College of Music. His mother was a lawyer by 
profession. He was educated first at Winchester College, then at the Uni- 
versity of Cambridge. He takes pride in never having received a Ph.D. From 
1943-45 he served as civilian at the Operational Research Center, RAF 
Bomber Command. 

When in 1947 he arrived at Cornell he had, in his words, “a good math- 
ematical background and little knowledge of physics.” His first ten 


104 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


publications were in fact all pure mathematics. He could not have found 
better teachers than Bethe, solid contributor to many branches of physics, 
and Feynman, only five years older than he, who was in the process of 
developing a reformulation of quantum mechanics that nobody but he him- 
self could understand at that time. In 1989, Dyson called Feynman “half 
genius, half buffoon,”™* but had realized at once that Feynman was a great 
scientist. Dyson’s first physics contributions, fundamental and technically 
hard, were to establish the links between Feynman’s formulation and the 
earlier one of quantum electrodynamics.” That work established him at 
once as one of the leading physicists of my generation. It had also been the 
subject of his January 1948 talk, when I had first seen him.” 

Freeman has continued to make fine contributions to science, in quan- 
tum-field theory, in statistical physics, and other areas of physics, in math- 
ematics, astronomy, and space technology. He has called his work at General 
Dynamics on Project Orion, the design for a nuclear-fueled spaceship, ulti- 
mately abandoned, his happiest days in science, presumably, I would guess, 
because Peter Pan was one of his favorite characters in his youthful readings. 

Dyson has also published a number of books’*” 4°? about science ad- 
dressed to general audiences, fascinating in content and elegant in style. In 
those writings Dyson treats us to physics, engineering, genetics, the origins 
of life, extraterrestrial intelligence, science and religion, and moral issues 
related to science and politics. My own favorite is his autobiography,” in 
which I particularly admire his unsparing self-revelation, such as: “I was, 
and have always been, a problem solver rather than a creator of ideas.”**’ 
When in 1960 he published an article in Foreign Affair?® arguing against a 
test ban on atomic weapons, he later called that piece “an attempt to salvage 
an untenable position with spurious emotional claptrap.”*’ Be it noted that 
he is coauthor of a report that influenced President Clinton to endorse in 
1995 the concept of a comprehensive test ban. 


C. N. Yang (1922-) 


Chen Ning Yang (all his friends call him Frank) was born in 1922 in China, 
in Hofei, in the province of Anhwei. He is the oldest of five children of 
Ko-Chuen Yang, professor of mathematics (Ph.D., Chicago 1928) at the 
Southwest Associated University in Kunming, one of the best Chinese uni- 
versities, later professor at Fudan University in Shanghai. Frank and his 
family had to endure the devastating war in China (1937-1945). “In 1940 
the house that my family rented in Kunming received a direct hit . . . [but] 
no member of the family was wounded . . . the family survived intact—lean, 
very lean, but healthy.” 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 105 


Frank started his university studies at the Southwest Associated Univer- 
sity. Later he went to Tsinghua University in the same city, where he re- 
ceived the M.Sc. degree in 1944.25” 

In August 1945 Yang left for the United States. “There being no commer- 
cial passenger traffic between China and the United States at that time, I had 
to wait several months in Calcutta for a berth in a troop transport. I finally 
reached New York in late November and went to Chicago around Christ- 
mas. January 1946 saw me enrolled as a graduate student at the University of 
Chicago,” where Fermi’s oeuvre and style made a lasting impression on 
him.” In Chicago he received his Ph.D. in 1948 under Edward Teller (1908- 
2003) with a thesis on angular distributions in nuclear reactions.” 

Already in his thesis we find Yang engaged on a program of obtaining 
physical information that is largely independent of a detailed dynamical 
description but where extensive use is made of the invariance properties of 
the problem in hand. In a similar vein are his investigations on the parity” 
of the 1° meson and on the reflection properties of fermion fields.”°! Those 
papers were written at the Institute, which Frank had joined as a temporary 
member soon after having gotten his doctorate. 

Early in 1950, five-year Institute memberships were voted”? for Frank 
and for Georg Placzek (1905-1955), another physicist, who had worked on 
atomic bomb projects at Chalk River, Canada, and Los Alamos. In 1952, 
the School of Mathematics legislated” that, while Dr. Yang might some 
day become a professor, Dr. Placzek could not, “unless circumstances now 
unanticipated intervene.” 

In 1952 Yang contracted the celebrated Ising disease, but unlike many of 
his fellow patients he pulled through by being able to compute the sponta- 
neous magnetization of the two dimensional lattice.?*7°* In 1956 he was 
promoted to full professor. Placzek did not make the grade. He left the 
Institute in 1955, and died later that year in Switzerland. I believe it was a 
suicide. Whether or not that was the case, it seems to me that to effectively 
dispose of a long-term membership as a stepping stone to a professorship is 
a grave if not an evil mistake. 


T. D. Lee (1926-) 


Tsung Dao Lee (T. D. to his friends) was born in 1926 in Shanghai, the 
third of six children. His father, Tsing Kong Lee, was an agriculturalist. As 
Frank had done, Lee began his studies at the Southwest Associated Univer- 
sity. The two men first met in 1945, when Lee was a student and Yang a 
high-school teacher in Kunming. 


106 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


T.D., like Frank, went to Chicago. It was there that, in 1946, their friend- 
ship started. Lee got his Ph.D. in 1950 under Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) for 
his work on the hydrogen content of white dwarfs.” His first papers” deal 
with astrophysical problems and with the theory of turbulence. 

In 1950 Lee went to Berkeley as a lecturer. In the fall of 1951 Lee started 
a two-year period of membership at the Institute. From that time, Lee and 
Yang collaborated intimately and steadily for many years. Incidentally, their 
first joint paper, together with Rosenbluth, deals with weak interactions.” 
In 1953 Lee went to Columbia, where he became a full professor in 1956. 

At Columbia, Lee published, in collaboration with others, on such sub- 
jects as II-nucleon scattering” and multiple meson production,” and on 
polaron problems.”” Of particular interest is his work”! on the “Lee model,” 
a rigorously soluble model of a field theory. 

Lee was still at Columbia when the celebrated Lee-Yang paper?” on 
parity-nonconservation was written (to which I shall return later). In 1960 
he was appointed Institute professor. 

This completes the introduction of the four young Institute physics pro- 
fessors, known in their time as the four musketeers. 


Of Some Who Came and Some Who Went 


I mention next, briefly, some of the other principal scientists who were at 
the Institute in the early postwar years, a few of whom who died during 
that period. 


Hideki Yukawa (1907-1981) 


Hideki Yukawa was a one-year Institute member in academic 1948-49 who, 
later in 1949, would receive Japan’s first Nobel Prize “for having foreseen 
the existence of mesons in the course of his theoretical works concerning 
nuclear forces.” He was a friendly but shy man, as was particularly notice- 
able when he gave seminars. Not only did he speak softly, but he would 
also turn his back to the audience and address the blackboard, pure torture 
for his listeners. 


Sin-itiro Tomonaga (1906-1979) 


Sin-itiro Tomonaga came to the Institute in the fall of 1949 fora year’s stay. 
I remember him as soft-spoken, serene, ascetic in appearance, and as the 
most profound of all the Japanese physicists I have known. In 1965 he shared 
the Nobel Prize with Schwinger and Feynman “for their fundamental contri- 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 107 


butions in the domain of quantum electrodynamics which carry profound 
consequences for the physics of elementary particles.” I was pleased to note 
that in his Nobel lecture”’ he included reference to my early work on QED. 


David Joseph Bohm (1917-1992) 


David Joseph Bohm and Oppenheimer crossed paths first in Berkeley, later 
(1947-1951) in Princeton, though he was never an Institute member. My 
mention here of Bohm is meant to serve as a prelude to the high drama 
involving Oppenheimer, to which I shall turn later. 

When in 1941 Bohm, then a graduate student, arrived in Berkeley, 
Oppenheimer suggested that he should make proton-deuteron scattering the 
main topic of his thesis. He made significant progress with this work, which 
was written up, but never published because it was immediately classified. He 
was awarded his Ph.D. at Berkeley in 1943, apparently without writing a 
thesis, because the papers containing the work had also been classified. 

When in 1943 Oppenheimer left for Los Alamos, he wanted Bohm to go 
with him, but was unable to get clearance. The official reason for the refusal 
was that he had many relatives in Europe. Indeed, 19 of his family eventu- 
ally perished in the Nazi gas chambers. Meanwhile Bohm had joined the 
Communist Party in 1942, which he left nine months later, disillusioned by 
the petty squabbling and maneuvering among its members. 

When after the war Oppenheimer returned to Berkeley, Bohm worked 
again with him for half a year, on questions of principle in quantum me- 
chanics and QED. John Wheeler, who was visiting Berkeley at that time, 
became very interested in the work Bohm was doing and offered him a job 
at Princeton University. In 1947 Bohm became an assistant professor at 
Princeton at the same time as Oppenheimer became head of the Institute. 

While at Princeton, Bohm became embroiled with the House Commit- 
tee on Un-American Activities. In 1948 he was subpoenaed to testify before 
that Committee. In this context Bohm’s brief membership in the Commu- 
nist party presented a problem. At that period in United States politics, to 
admit being a one-time member was regarded as a crime. Therefore the 
possibility of self-incrimination became dramatically real. Bohm took legal 
advice and although he wanted to plead the First Amendment, he was ad- 
vised to plead the Fifth, which he did. For a time nothing happened and it 
seemed as if everything was dying down, but with the outbreak of the Ko- 
rean War, a hostile anti-communist attitude re-emerged. 

In the summer of 1949 Bohm was subpoenaed for a second time, but now 
to appear before a grand jury. He did not testify, again pleading the Fifth 


108 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Amendment. In November a United States Marshall arrested him at his of- 
fice for contempt of court. He was taken to Trenton but released on bail of 
$1,500. The next day he had a letter from the University suspending him 
from his duties, and was requested not to enter the University buildings again. 
His pay continued, as he was working on a short fixed-term contract. 

In June 1950 he was called for trial in Washington. After giving testimony, 
but still pleading the Fifth, he was acquitted. Fortunately for Bohm, in the 
spring of 1950 the Supreme Court had agreed that it was acceptable to plead the 
Fifth in such cases and it was this ruling that ensured Bohm’s final acquittal. 

In all of this sorry saga Bohm was never accused of any misdemeanor 
against the State. Indeed, Bohm had no access to sensitive information, since 
he had remained at Berkeley and was not part of the team working for 
Oppenheimer at Los Alamos. 

Bohm’s contract at Princeton expired in June 1951 and, although he had 
the unanimous support of the Physics Department, the contract was not 
renewed. He was now in an invidious position and could not get a perma- 
nent position in the United States. He did get a temporary job in a small 
industrial laboratory in Florida, but a university post seemed out of the 
question. Einstein, who had had several discussions with Bohm on basic 
issues in quantum mechanics, discussed his situation with Oppenheimer 
with the view to offering to appoint Bohm as his research assistant, but that 
was opposed by Oppenheimer. 

Here ends the story of the interactions between Bohm and Oppenheimer 
and starts the period—not described here”’*—of Bohm’s worldwide peregri- 
nations, from Brazil to Israel to Bristol to Birkbeck College in London, 
where he spent the last 30 years of his life. 

Finally, I note what Oppenheimer said later about Bohm’s short flirta- 
tion with the Communist Party: “Oppenheimer stated . . . that somehow 
he did not believe that Bohm’s temperament and personality were those of 
a dangerous person and implied that his dangerousness lay in the possibility 
of his being influenced by others.”2”° I knew Bohm personally and regard it 
out of the question that he could in any way have endangered the security 
of the United States. 


John von Neumann (1903-1957) 


John von Neumann was sworn in as Commissioner of the U.S. Atomic 
Energy Commission on March 15, 1955, and took a leave of absence from 
the Institute at that time. My own reaction to this move was puzzlement— 
but then Johnny had always been easily impressed by officialdom. Perhaps 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 109 


his virulent anti-Soviet position also played a role. I remember how shocked 
I was when once, in 1947, Johnny calmly said to me that the best way to 
handle the budding Cold War conflict would be to atom bomb the Soviet 
Union—that was before the Russians had their own bomb. 

Five months after having received his AEC appointment, von Neumann 
was operated on for a small cancerous growth in his clavicle. He seemed to 
recover fully, but soon after became increasingly ill from a rapidly spreading 
cancer. In April 1956 he was taken to Washington’s Walter Reed Hospital. 

To ease his deeply disturbed spirits, Johnny sought guidance from a Catho- 
lic priest, Father Anselm Strittmatter, who, beginning in the spring of 1956, 
began to see him regularly. I was shocked when I heard this later. He had 
been completely agnostic for as long as I had known him. As far as I could 
see this act did not agree with the attitudes and thoughts he had harbored 
for nearly all his life. 

On February 8, 1957, Johnny died in the Hospital, at age 53. On a sunny 
but freezing morning later that February, I went to the cemetery on 
Witherspoon Street in Princeton, to attend the burial of Johnny in a brief 
Catholic ceremony. Father Strittmatter said a short prayer, followed by a 
brief eulogy by Admiral Strauss. 

Thus came to an end the life of a Jewish wunderkind from Hungary. 


Oswald Veblen (1880-1960) 


Oswald Veblen retired as Institute professor in 1950. Two years earlier he 
had spoken rare words of commendation about the “scientific work going 
on in physics [at the Institute] . . . in the joint Princeton-Columbia-Institute 
weekly seminars, which have been extraordinarily popular and stimulat- 
ing.””” After his retirement he remained active behind the scene in Insti- 
tute politics, however, as for example in the opposition to Kennan’s 
appointment. I collect a few more personal recollections of him. 

Veblen had been present at a lecture on quantum field theory I had given 
at the Institute, in October 1946. So were Bohr, Dirac, Weyl, von Neumann, 
Wheeler, and Alfred North Whitehead (1861-1947), the renowned math- 
ematician from Harvard, who had deep interests in the foundations of phys- 
ics, and who was on a short visit. Some audience. 

Once Veblen invited me for lunch at the Nassau Club. During the meal he 
asked me about my scientific education. I told him that it had serious gaps, 
especially in mathematics, due to years of isolation during the war. Veblen 
was not moved. It is an advantage, he said, to be left alone for some time, 
because that frees the mind for its own pursuits. I have remembered that. 


110 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


One day in early 1947, Veblen asked my help in a delicate matter. He 
had received an indignant letter from the eminent Soviet theoretical physi- 
cist Vladimir Fock (1898-1974), in which it was alleged that a paper by a 
young member of the Institute that had come out in the November 1946 
issue of the Physical Review had been plagiarized from an article by him.?” 
Veblen asked me please to check that, which I did. My finding astonished 
me. The article was indeed a word-for-word translation of Fock’s paper. I 
told Veblen, who took care of it. I do not recall the outcome of the case. 

A propos mathematics. One day Veblen asked me to give him my opin- 
ion about a physics manuscript by a young mathematician. I took it with 
me, sat down, and began to read. The first sentence began something like, 
Consider a Banach space. I got scared and said to myself, I must get out of 
here. I had never even heard of a Banach space. I returned the paper to 
Veblen, telling him I was ashamed to confess that it went over my head. 
Not to worry, he replied. 

A conversation about Einstein. Veblen clearly did not feel like discuss- 
ing the great man’s current research but made an interesting remark about 
Einstein’s famous letter of August 1939 to Roosevelt, in which he drew the 
president’s attention to the feasibility of atomic weapons. Veblen told me 
that earlier in 1939 he had received a visit from Leo Szilard (1898-1964) and 
Eugene Wigner, who wanted to ask his counsel on how to approach the 
president regarding the possibility of producing atomic bombs. Veblen sug- 
gested they involve Einstein, which they did, and that in turn led to the 
mentioned letter. 

Another remark by Veblen that I recall: he told me that for many years 
he noted down titles of books he wanted to read, but not until his retire- 
ment; currently he was too busy with mathematics and administration. He 
cannot have read them all because, sadly, he turned blind in his late years. 
He died in 1960. 

Veblen was a stout champion of the Institute all his years. His Norwe- 
gian descent was manifest in the often tough ways he could handle those 
who differed in opinion with him. But I have always liked him. 


Oppenheimer as Leader of Conferences: 1947-1954 


Shelter Island, June 1947 


The Manhansett Indians called their 7,700-acre island, tucked between Long 
Island’s North and South Forks, “Manhansack-aha-quash-awamock,” which 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 111 


means island sheltered by islands. They made their living by fishing. It had 
been British property, sold in 1651 to Barbados sugar merchants who saw 
Shelter Island’s oak as ideal for making barrels. (The island was then heavily 
wooded, as was most of Long Island at that time.) They paid 1,600 pounds 
of sugar for the island, which later changed hands many times. It is now a 
favorite resort area.?’8 

From June 1 to 3, 1947, 21 physicists, one chemist, and one mathemati- 
cian gathered at Shelter Island for a “Conference on the Foundations of 
Quantum Mechanics,” sponsored and financed by the National Academy 
of Sciences. (Among those invited who did not attend was Einstein, who 
had declined for reasons of health.)?” 

On the afternoon of Sunday, June 1, nearly all conferees met at the 
American Institute of Physics, then located at 55 East 55th Street, New 
York. There we boarded a bus that would take us to Greenport on Long 
Island’s North Fork. We anticipated that it would be a rather lengthy trip 
along the Old Montauk Road with its many stoplights. Neither the Long 
Island Expressway nor the Sunrise Highway existed as yet. 

Unexpectedly the ride went much faster than we had thought. As we 
entered Nassau County, the bus was stopped by a police trooper on a mo- 
torcycle who stuck his head in and asked: “Are you the scientists?” Yes, we 
were the scientists. “Follow me,” he said to the driver, escorting us to the 
tune of sirens, passing unhindered through red lights, until we came to 
Suffolk County, where other troopers took over. We had no clue as to 
what this meant and speculated about scientific security, which in those 
days tended to take bizarre forms. All was cleared up after a fine dinner, 
oysters and steaks, was served to us in Greenport and our host, the presi- 
dent of the local Chamber of Commerce, rose to give a short speech. He 
told us that, during the war, he had been a marine in the Pacific, and that he 
might well not have been alive had it not been for the atomic bomb. Not 
only the dinner but also the police escort had been tokens of his personal 
gratitude for what “the scientists” had meant in his life. After our meal, we 
were taken by ferry to Shelter Island, where another siren-shrieking police 
escort delivered us to the Ram’s Head Inn, where we would stay the follow- 
ing days and hold our meeting. We had the place all to ourselves; the Inn, 
located on a western cove of the Island, had been opened ahead of its sum- 
mer schedule to accommodate us. 

In later years, one finds comments in letters by and interviews with par- 
ticipants to the effect that the Shelter Island Conference may well have 


112 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


been the most important event of its kind in their entire scientific career; 
this is also my opinion. A newspaperman who covered the proceedings put 
it like this: 


Twenty-three of the country’s best known theoretical physicists—the men who 
made the atomic bomb—gathered today in a rural inn to begin three days of 
discussion and study, during which they hope to straighten out a few of the 
difficulties that beset modern physics. 

It is doubtful if there has ever been a conference quite like this one. . . . The 
conference is taking place with almost complete informality, aided by the fact 
that the scientists have the inn all to themselves and feel that there is no one to 
mind if they take off their coats and get to work.” 


The official chairman of the meeting was Karl Darrow (1891-1982). As 
he noted in his diaries, however, “As the conference went on, the ascen- 
dancy of Oppenheimer became more evident—the analysis (often caustic) 
of nearly every argument, that magnificent English never marred by hesita- 
tion or groping for words (I never heard ‘catharsis’ used in a discourse on 
[physics], or the clever word ‘mesoniferous’ which is probably O’s inven- 
tion), the dry humor, the perpetually-recurring comment that one idea or 
another (incl. some of his own) was certainly wrong, and the respect with 
which he was heard.”?#! 

My own recollections confirm this. I had heard Oppenheimer speak be- 
fore but had never yet seen him in action directing a group of physicists 
during their scientific deliberations. At that he was simply masterful, inter- 
rupting with leading questions (at physics gatherings interruptions are stan- 
dard procedure), summarizing the main points just discussed, and suggesting 
how to proceed from there. 

Oppenheimer’s stature as a leader among men at that time was recog- 
nized not only by scientists, as the following story may illustrate. 

After Shelter Island Oppenheimer had to go to Harvard, where he was to re- 

ceive an honorary degree. Arrangements had been made to fly him and a few 

colleagues by seaplane from Shelter Island to Boston. However, bad weather 
forced the plane to come down at the New London Coast Guard Station, which 
is not open to civilian aircraft. The pilot was very worried since they were not 
supposed to land there. They were met by a naval officer who was clearly furi- 
ous and ready to read them the riot act. As they opened up and jumped out, 

Oppenheimer told his very nervous pilot, “Don’t worry.” Hand outstretched, 

he introduced himself to the ranting and raging officer with the statement: “My 

name is Oppenheimer.” The bewildered officer queried: “The Oppenheimer?” 

To which came the reply: “An Oppenheimer!” After an “official” welcome in 

the officers’ club, they were driven—with a military escort—to the New Lon- 

don railway station, where they boarded a train for Boston.” 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 113 


Some time before the meeting, Darrow had asked Kramers, Oppenheimer, 
and Weisskopf to act as discussion leaders and to prepare abstracts for that 
purpose. These were distributed ahead of time to the participants. I have at 
hand a hectographed copy of Oppenheimer’s abstract, entitled: “The founda- 
tions of quantum mechanics, outline of topics for discussion.” It reads in full: 


It was long ago pointed out by Nordheim that there is an apparent difficulty in 
reconciling on the basis of usual quantum mechanic formalism the high rate of 
production of mesons in the upper atmosphere with the small interactions which 
these mesons subsequently manifest in traversing matter. To date no completely 
satisfactory understanding of this discrepancy exists, nor is it clear to what ex- 
tent it indicates a breakdown in the customary formalism of quantum mechan- 
ics. It would appear profitable to discuss this and related questions in some detail. 

We might start this discussion by an outline of the current status of theories 
of multiple production. Some illuminating suggestions about these phenomena 
can be worked out in a semi-quantitative way, for instance on the basis of the 
neutral pseudoscalar theory of meson couplings. The suggested results appear to 
agree reasonably well as to energy dependence of multiplication, energy and 
angle distribution with the experimental evidence, which is admittedly sketchy. 
However, no reasonable formulation of theories along this line will satisfacto- 
rily account for the smallness of the subsequent interaction of mesons with 
nuclear matter. Similar difficulties appear when one attempts to make a theory 
involving couplings of meson pairs to nuclear matter. There are two reasons for 
these apparent difficulties. One is that in all current theory there is a formal 
correspondence between the creation of a particle and the absorption of an anti- 
particle. The other is that multiple processes are in these theories attributable to 
the higher order effects of coupling terms which are of quite low order, first or 
second, in the meson wave fields. The question that we should attempt to an- 
swer is whether, perhaps along the lines of an S matrix formulation, both these 
conditions must be abandoned to accord with the experimental facts. 

It would be desirable to review the experimental situation with an eye to 
seeing how unambiguous current interpretations are. 

The calculation of the multiple production of mesons is in some ways an 
extension of the treatment given by Bloch and Nordsieck of the radiation of 
electrons during scattering. The difficulties of a complete description of these 
phenomena appear in exaggerated form in the problem of meson production. It 
would therefore be profitable to review the present status of the theory of radia- 
tion reaction and of certain recent suggestions for improving the theory. 


This is not the place to recapitulate the very important new physics re- 
ported at Shelter Island; that I have done elsewhere.” Let me note here 
only that the main news concerned experimental evidence for deviations 
from the predictions of the Dirac theory of the electron for the fine struc- 
ture (“Lamb shift”) and the hyperfine structure in the atomic spectrum of 
hydrogen; and reports of new puzzlements in meson physics*°—both 
topics close to Oppenheimer’s prewar interests. 


114 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Oppenheimer’s comment on the meeting, written” on the last day of the 
conference, summarizes fittingly, I think, the responses of all participants: 
“The three days were a joy to us and perhaps unexpectedly fruitful... . [We] 
came away a good deal more certain of the directions in which progress 
may lie.” 


The news of the Lamb shift may well have caused Robert to think back 
wistfully to his first paper (1930) on QED,* in which he had been the very 
first to point out that QED effects cause shifts of light frequencies as com- 
pared with the standard theory of that time—which is at the root of the 
Lamb shift. In that early paper an infinite shift had been diagnosed—one of 
the troubles of QED in the 1930s. The effect observed in 1947 had been 
finite, of course. I could not make that observation while at Shelter Island 
(nor did anyone else do so), because I did not know of that early 
Oppenheimer paper at that time. Now, half a century later, I do know it. 
Ignorance of history is a privilege of youth. 


Three months after Shelter Island, I attended a conference in Denmark that 
also produced exciting news.” (Robert did not come there.) In Shelter Is- 
land it had been conjectured” that the meson puzzles could be explained if 
there were ‘wo kinds of mesons. In Copenhagen I learned that these two 
kinds (now called m and p, the latter not now called a meson) had actually 
been found, in fact that this result had already been published in the May 
24, 1947, issue of Nature,”*” before Shelter Island! None of us knew of that at 
our meeting. 

Shortly after my return, Oppenheimer asked me to give a seminar on 
the Copenhagen meeting. I did so; it took place in the Institute’s Common 
Room. A special seminar room was almost but not completely finished, in 
a new building still known as “Building D.” I had been talking for maybe 
one minute, when in came Einstein and sat down. For a very brief moment 
I was tongue-tied. I experienced a sense of unreality at having to lecture to 
the century’s greatest scientist. It passed, and I went on with an enthusiastic 
account of the Copenhagen results. I may note that it was the only occasion 
in all my Institute years that I saw Einstein present at a physics seminar 
given by someone other than himself. 


Pocono, March/April 1948 


Shelter Island provided the initial stimulus for the postwar developments in 
quantum-field theory: relativistically invariant computational methods and 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 115 


renormalization theory. Already, five days after our conference, Bethe wrote 
to Oppenheimer”* that he had obtained a theoretical estimate for the Lamb 
shift “in excellent agreement with experiment.”” While his calculation was 
manifestly incomplete, it showed that, without doubt, the shift was a higher 
order QED effect. The first “clean” result of the new era was Schwinger’s 
evaluation of the electron’s anomalous magnetic moment (December 1947).” 
Thus began the new era of QED, in which all the troubles of the 1930s 
regarding infinities were bypassed (not eliminated) by new calculational 
methods, known as the renormalization program.”! 

By winter 1948, so much had recently happened in physics that another 
conference in Shelter Island style was called for. Oppenheimer had heard 
that there was a hotel in the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania that might 
be suitable for holding such a meeting. One morning he and I took off in 
his car (a blue Cadillac convertible) to check out the place, which indeed 
turned out to serve the purpose. On March 30 and April 1, 1948, the meet- 
ing came to be held in Pocono Manor. Many of the Shelter Island partici- 
pants returned; newcomers included Bohr, Dirac, and Fermi. 

There exists no printed version of the proceedings, but I have lying be- 
fore me a dittoed copy of notes (dated April 2) taken at the meeting by John 
Wheeler. It is a 100-page document recording contributions by 15 speakers 
(including one by yours truly). 

Forty pages are devoted to a marathon talk by Schwinger, on QED of 
course, given on the first morning. It was a major tour de force in which he 
unveiled a detailed new calculus for dealing with renormalization. It strained 
the absorption capacity of his audience, which explains an inadvertent re- 
mark by Rabi that first afternoon: “Yesterday Enrico [Fermi] said . . .” 
Schwinger’s lecture led to this comment by Oppenheimer: “Now it does 
not matter anymore whether things are infinite”; and this one by Rabi: 
“What the hell should I measure now?” 

The next longest (12 pages) entry is by Feynman. It is his first version of 
the “space-time approach” to quantum field theory applied to renormalization. 
Already at the final session of Shelter Island he had tried to explain to us his 
alternative formulation which he had begun working on before the new QED 
effects had been unveiled at that earlier conference. Darrow had recorded in 
his diary about that talk: “Feynman [spoke] with a clear voice, great rush of 
words and illustrative gestures sometimes ebullient.””” At that time no one 
could follow what he was talking about. This time, the speed with which 
Feynman could reproduce results also found by Schwinger convinced us that 
he was on to something—but still nobody could follow his argument. 


116 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


On April 5, a few days after we were back, Oppenheimer sent off a letter 
to all conference members. I quote from my copy: 

When I returned from the Pocono Conference, I found a letter from Tomonaga 

which seemed to me of such interest to us all that I am sending you a copy of it. 


Just because we were able to hear Schwinger’s beautiful report, we may be bet- 
ter able to appreciate this independent development. From that letter: 


I have taken the liberty of sending you copies of several papers and 
notes concerning the reaction of radiation field in scattering processes 
and related problems, which my collaborators and I have been investi- 
gating for last six months. I should be much obliged if you would be so 
kind to look them over. I should like to take this occasion to relate the 
circumstances of their formation and the reason why I have made up 
my mind to send you these manuscripts. 


What had happened was this. Around the same time, a similar develop- 
ment had been reaching maturity in Japan. Tomonaga of the University 
of Education in Tokyo (predecessor of today’s University of Tsukuba) 
was leading his collaborators there and at the University of Tokyo in an 
effort to tackle the problem of renormalizability, without the benefit of 
direct experimental support such as the Lamb shift. Already in 1946 he 
had published a paper (in English) on a completely covariant formulation 
of QED,” whereupon he and co-workers applied this method to renor- 
malization of scattering processes.” The news of the Lamb shift was first 
brought to Japan through the science columns of Newsweek magazine, Sep- 
tember 29, 1947, issue. The Tomonaga group at once began systematic 
calculations of this effect,”* achieving results that agreed with those found 
by Americans. 

Oppenheimer at once called Tomonaga, suggesting that he promptly 
publish a summary of his findings in the Physica/ Review, which he did,” and 
inviting him to the Institute, to which he came. 


Solvay, September/October 1948 


From September 27 to October 2, 1948, the 8th Solvay conference was 
held at the University of Brussels, devoted this time to “Elementary Par- 
ticles.” Oppenheimer was assigned the task to report?” on progress in 
QED. In his historical introduction he now did refer to his early paper* 
on the shifts of light frequencies that I mentioned previously, and also to 
my review (1948) of the theory.” Among very recent developments he 
mentioned the first attempts to apply renormalization to meson field 
theory, which did not work well. “Despite these discouragements, it would 
seem premature to evaluate the prospects without further evidence.””” 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 117 


Discussants of the paper included Dirac, who then and later expressed 
dislike of the renormalization approach; Bohr, “I must deeply sympathize 
with the approach by Oppenheimer”; and Pauli, who expressed disagree- 
ment with Dirac’s remarks. 

I also note that, as far as I know, Solvay 8 was the first international 
conference in which mention is made—very briefly—of new, heavier me- 
sons, then believed to have mass of about 800m (m = electron mass). I 
shall come back later to these new particles. 


Old Stone, April 1949 


I have before me a letter from Robert, dated March 17, 1949, addressed to 
all members of Pocono. It reads: 


Arrarrgements are now completed for our conference. The National Academy 
of Science has agreed again to sponsor our meeting; Oldstone-on-the-Hudson 
[an inn 60 km north of New York City] has been reserved for the nights of 
Sunday, April 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th; we will start work on Monday 
morning and should have four full days together. You may come as late as you 
wish on Sunday evening. R.O. 


It was the sequel to Pocono. 

By the time of Old Stone, interests of theorists had largely shifted to the 
physics of m-mesons, which had just been found to be copiously produced 
by the Berkeley accelerator known as a synchrocyclotron. QED remained 
a major item on the agenda, however, and this time it was Feynman’s show. 
He had meanwhile worked out his methods systematically, and had sent in 
his first paper on that subject a few days before Old Stone. Feynman’s 
version, simpler and far easier to apply than Schwinger’s, now began its 
rapid and never-waning rise in popularity. It was also Dyson’s show, in 
particular because he had managed to build the bridge between Schwinger’s 
and Feynman’s approaches.” 

The third main theme at Old Stone was the application of renormalization 
methods to meson theories of nuclear forces, which looked very bad. In 
fact, fundamental advances in the field theory of nuclear forces would not 
emerge until the 1970s. 

My last recollection of Old Stone concerns my participation in an evening 
poker game. Others who joined were von Neumann, who played anxiously, 
Oppenheimer, very cautiously, and Teller, flamboyantly. 


Rochester |, December 1950 


After the Old Stone meeting, Oppenheimer decided that the original pur- 
pose, to assess the current status and the prospects for further developments, 


118 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


had been accomplished. Thereupon Robert Marshak (1916-1992), recently 
appointed chairman of the Physics Department in the University of Roches- 
ter (New York State), took a new initiative, to the lasting benefit of the high 
energy physics community. It was his belief that profitable meetings of the 
kind just ended should be continued but should be more international in 
scope and have a better mix of experimentalists and theorists, especially in 
view of rapid developments in accelerator physics. The result was a series of 
seven annual conferences, beginning in 1950, with ever-growing attendance, 
all held in Rochester, New York, with financial support from local industry. 
During Rochester I, the 1950 meeting, the subject of quantum electrodynam- 
ics did not even come up (although Feynman was there). After these first 
seven conferences, the meetings continued in later years but were most often 
held in different places, in different countries. Nonetheless, they have for 
years later continued to be called Rochester Conferences. 

Since no published record exists for Rochester I, it may be of some use to 
state that it was a one-day meeting held on December 16, 1950, with an 
attendance of about 50; that it consisted of morning, afternoon, and evening 
sessions chaired respectively by Pais, Oppenheimer, and Bethe, and that 
the topics discussed were accelerator results on the interaction of pions and 
nucleons with matter, notably the recently discovered neutral meson (n°),*! 
muon physics, and cosmic ray physics. During the meeting, Oppenheimer 
suggested a discussion on the new mesons, but nothing came of that. Iam 
grateful to the late Robert Marshak for having made available to me an 
unedited transcript of that meeting. 


Rochester Il (January) and Ili (December) 1952 


Attendance at Rochester I had been about 50. Rochester II (January 11-12, 
1952) saw a doubling of the number of participants. Later ones in this series 
of meetings have seen ever-growing numbers of those present. John 
Polkinghorne (1930-) has given an excellent account of the first 20 of these 
meetings;*” from II on there exist records. 

I noted earlier that in 1948, at Solvay 8, there was brief mention of new 
particles. At Rochester II these were the “hottest item on the agenda.”°>° At 
that meeting I made the first proposals for a theoretical understanding of 
these new objects “with the slightly proprietary encouragement of Oppen- 
heimer. . . . [Pais’s] idea of associated production was a capital one, as was 
the general intuition that the new particles were going to require new selec- 
tion rules. . .. He received magisterial endorsement from Oppenheimer.” I 
am not responsible for the title of my paper as it appears in the proceedings: 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 119 


“An ordering principle for megalomorphian zoology.” That fickle title was 
the creation of Oppenheimer, who, by the way, was also the inventor of 
the term “megalopolis.”>* 

1952 is the only year in which two Rochester conferences took place, III 
on December 18-20. The only Oppenheimer remark of that meeting per- 
haps worth recording here was a comment on a contribution presented by 
a young man: “It is not completely clear from his papers, it is not com- 
pletely clear to him and not completely clear to anyone.” 


IBM, April 1953 


On April 7, the IBM electronic data processing machine was publicly shown 
for the first time. At that ceremony, Robert gave the opening address,” 
which he began as follows: 


When I was asked to talk, I had the impression that the phone had rung in the 
wrong office at the Institute, and I said, “Haven’t you got the wrong number? 
Don’t you want to talk to Dr. von Neumann down the hall?” “No,” I was told, 
“He really knows too much about this subject.” 

So it was clear to me that my task was limited. Iam to talk about the mean- 
ing of the computers in research, in new understanding of the world; I am not to 
talk about the immense prospect of their contributions to the defense program, 
of their contributions to industry, of their contributions to the solution of prac- 
tical problems. 


I give excerpts from this elegant talk. 


More than two millennia ago, computation was playing a very remarkable part 
in the life of Babylonia. There had been developed a most sophisticated and 
refined mathematical treatment of the raw data on lunar eclipses, purely as a 
mathematical problem without any mechanical model, without anything that 
we could call celestial mechanics. The problem the chaps had was to predict the 
next lunar eclipse and the next one after that, into the future. They learned the 
art of numbers so well that these same methods were still in successful use in 
India in the last century; and this, remember, was without any notion of the 
laws of motion; it was just from a study of the numbers themselves. . . . 

The use of computation to extend understanding is [therefore] not new. It 
characterizes the whole of the scientific life in the last centuries. But there is 
something new about the high-speed computer. I want to oversimplify and al- 
most parody what this is about by stressing one element of it. The high-speed 
computer, in certain areas, is a sort of substitute for experiment. It enables us to 
find out the connection between things in places where we have not the power 
(and I hope my examples will illustrate why) to make those deliberate, con- 
trolled changes in the state of affairs which are the normal way that we try to 
disentangle things. 

I think I can illustrate by taking three examples: 

The first is the perpetual problem of the weather. How does the atmosphere 
act? And this, as everyone knows, is a complex problem in strongly non-linear 


120 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


hydrodynamics. Great progress is being made in using rough information about 
the state of the atmosphere today to know something about the state of the atmo- 
sphere tomorrow—and that this will be of practical importance I need hardly add. 

What will come out of it, too, is that after the accumulation of experience, 
which in this case is not to take weather readings so much as to do calculations, 
and check them occasionally against weather readings to see whether you got the 
point of that particular situation, a new kind of order and simplicity will emerge, 
because we will know what makes a difference, we will know what is important, 
we will know what is trivial, we will know (even though I think it in this case 
unlikely), whether we have forgotten some very deep or surprisingly new point. 

A second example, that is even more striking, is this: We from time to time 
get messages of immense stellar explosions which may have taken place some 
hundred million years ago. It is hard to do experiments with those things. No 
one can go back a hundred million years, and no one wishes to go out a hundred 
million years into space in order to learn what effect mankind, if he then sur- 
vives, will see two hundred million years from now. And yet it is of great inter- 
est and excitement, and a challenge to man’s imagination, to try to figure out 
what causes these great events. This is also a deeply non-linear problem, in all 
likelihood a problem where the fundamental laws are known, a problem where 
the mathematical unscrambling will be the payoff. 

The third example is a more modest thing, but also in its way striking, and 
that has to do with the state of affairs, not in an exploding star, but in an atomic 
explosion. Here I think a whole new tradition of the use of computers and of 
computational methods has been built up. And even today, when there have 
been a large number of atomic explosions, the inside of an exploding bomb is 
not a cozy place to observe; a great deal of the normal experimentation is fore- 
closed by that and by the cost and cumbersomeness of the effort. Initially, there 
was a much stronger argument, in that we did not have enough stuff to make an 
explosion. Then the important proving grounds of atomic bombs were the pa- 
per proving grounds in which one tries to see what ought to be going on. It is a 
rare, though not an unheard of event, that what happens in Nevada and in the 
Pacific tells us something important and new, that had not been found in this 
immense prior effort at understanding. This has set, I think, one of the highest 
standards of analysis that has ever appeared in what we could call a generalized 
sort of engineering. 

In all of these efforts, one hopes for a lot. One hopes, first of all, out of the 
wealth of experience to get a simple view of what is at first quite a complicated 
phenomenon. One hopes that mathematics will eventually catch up in its full 
analytic powers with the experience that the computers give. One hopes to find 
out what the important elements of the problem are, and whether models work. 
And one hopes, above all, to find out if one has been a fool and left out the 
mainspring of the phenomena one has tried to investigate. . . . 

It seems clear to me that in the statistical problems of genetics and of popula- 
tion studies, as in studies of economic models, experiment is also going to be a 
very costly and perhaps a prohibitive thing; thus I would expect that in these 
fields, too, the availability of computers could be of unmeasured value. 

This is a new tool. It is a new tool, as was the microscope. It is a new tool, as 
are the tracers, the radioactive tracers, which have so recently become available 
to all branches of science. It is, as such a tool, a monument to man’s reason, in 


OPPENHEIMER AND THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: 1946-1954 121 


two ways: to its limitation, because without experience, without massive expe- 
rience, we never get the point; to its power, because once we have experience, 
knowledge cannot regress, science can never be retrograde. It is a tribute to deep 
modesty, and to the mind’s high splendor. 


A Book Review, October 1953 


As best I know, this is the first book review Robert published.** The book, 
by Gordon Dean (1905-1958), then Chairman of the United States Atomic 
Energy Commission, gives a survey of the American atomic energy pro- 
gram to date.* I only give the review’s opening lines, to illustrate 
Oppenheimer’s knack for working sophisticated literary allusions into 
writing about scientific matters. “The atom, like all that touches us deeply, 
has its Stephen Dedalus as well as its Bloom, its lovers of Shiva and its 
devotees of Vishnu.” It is not very clear to me what these words are meant 
to convey. Perhaps it will be to you. 


Japan, September 1953 


This entry does not deal with Oppenheimer’s presence but with his absence. 

On September 13 I arrived in Tokyo, to attend the first postwar confer- 
ence in Japan in which foreign scientists, some 60 of them, were to partici- 
pate. Two Japanese colleagues fetched me from the airport. In the taxi to 
my hotel they informed me that our meeting was treated as an event of 
national importance. I was told that, some days earlier, lectures for the gen- 
eral public had been arranged to explain what the meetings would be about, 
and that people had started queing up at 7:00 aM to get in at 1:00 pM; also 
that a leading Japanese physicist had conducted two months of prior brief- 
ings with reporters of the Asahi press. 

The two men delivered me to my hotel, saying that they would collect 
me from there in an hour to bring me to a banquet for foreign participants 
of the conference, courtesy of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Indus- 
try. I went to my room to wash up. While doing so I listened to the radio, 
catching what was apparently a news program. I was astonished to hear 
several times the words Oppenheimer sam and even more so to hear Pais san. 
When the two men returned to collect me, I asked if they could please 
explain what that was about. They informed me that at the last minute 
Oppenheimer had canceled his plan to attend and chair the scientific open- 
ing session, and that I had been chosen to replace him. 

I knew what Robert’s change of plans was about. Shortly before departing 
from Princeton, Robert had told me in strict confidence that he had been 
informed that trouble was brewing for him in Washington in connection 


122 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


with his role in the atomic energy program. That trouble was to erupt into 
the open eight months thereafter, as I shall later recount in detail. 

After the conference meetings,*° held in Tokyo and Kyoto, we were 
taken to excursions which included a visit to Hiroshima. American confer- 
ence members (myself included) had felt quite uncomfortable regarding how 
we would be received there. Those worries turned out to be unfounded. 
Officials as well as men in the street treated us in most friendly and courte- 
ous ways—even though their city was still largely in ruins at the time of our 
visit. I wonder how Oppenheimer would have felt had he been able to join 
us there. 


Rochester IV, January 1954 


Oppenheimer presided over the opening session, held on Monday, January 
25. it was the first of these meetings to be reported in Physics Today." I too 
had been at the conference but only now, reading through its entire pro- 
ceedings, did I realize how unusually quiet Robert had been at that time. 
The only comment I found made by him came after a young theoretician 
remarked that a certain theory gives nonsense: “Not nonsense, you get an 
answer different from experiment. (Laughter.)”>” 

It is quite probable that Oppenheimer’s near silence at Rochester IV was 
caused by his being severely distracted because of the official charges filed 
against him the previous month, December 1953, by the AEC. 


CHAPTER 1 6 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER 
THE MAN 


Los Alamos Vignettes 


In chapter 9 I referred to Bethe and Weisskopf for an account of Oppen- 
heimer’s role as leader of the Los Alamos enterprise. As repeatedly stated, 
since I had not been there myself, I do not feel competent to form a per- 
sonal judgment of that role. I am further constrained because reminiscences 
by others on science at Los Alamos are of course restricted by rules on 
classified information as they existed at the time those recollections were 
written down. That last restriction does not, however, apply to the numer- 
ous reminiscences of Oppenheimer’s personality, not only by physicists 
but also by others. Moreover, I am in a position to confront those readily 
with my own memories of the years immediately after the war. What fol- 
lows next is therefore an excerpt of others’ observations of Oppenheimer 
the man in Los Alamos. 


Robert Wilson 


Robert Wilson (1914-2000) has stated about meetings held in Berkeley in 
preparation of Los Alamos: 


[At one meeting] Rabi and Bacher (and perhaps others) had managed to talk 
Oppy out of his determination to have everyone in the new lab inducted into 
the army. Before that, as Oppy and I had traveled about the country on various 
missions connected with the Los Alamos project, we had argued fiercely about 
his suggestion of our becoming soldiers in uniform. 


124 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


I argued the impracticality of scientists taking arbitrary orders from above—all 
the orders from above that I had seen for the past year had seemed a bit nonsensi- 
cal. Nor are scientists at their best in unquestioningly following orders. I won- 
dered if we could function at all in those circumstances. But Oppy would get a 
faraway look in his eyes and tell me that this war was different from any war ever 
fought before: it was a war about the principles of freedom and it was being fought 
by a “people’s army,” and we all belonged right in there with the “people.” Now 
I can be as idealistic as the next guy, but I thought that he had a screw loose 
somewhere when he talked like that. I couldn’t budge him on the subject, so I was 
relieved when the reason of others, stronger than I, prevailed. . . . 

I nagged at Oppy all day about his indecisiveness. We insisted that decisions 
had to be made, that people had to know what to do, when to come to Los 
Alamos, that priorities had to be established, that we had to come to a realistic 
understanding of where we stood with the army people. We wanted a little 
organization, we wanted to know who was to be in charge of what, not just 
vague talk about the scientific problems nor the even vaguer ideas about democ- 
racy. There were immediate problems to be faced, and from our point of view 
Oppy was not facing up to them.... 

Typically, the day’s technical discussion drifted into the evening’s socialities. 
The driest of dry martinis mixed by the hand of the master, sophisticated 
guests, gourmet food (but on the scant side), an amorphous buzz of conversa- 
tion, smoke, alcohol—all these were the inevitable ingredients of an evening at 
the Oppenheimers. . . . 

I was soon caught up by the Oppenheimer charisma, became a loyal and 
devoted lieutenant, a confidant, a friend (at least, until the postwar era when his 
personality seemed to change). Oppenheimer stretched me. His style, the poetic 
vision of what we were doing, of life, of a relationship to people, inflamed me. 
In his presence, I became more intelligent, more vocal, more intense, more pre- 
scient, more poetic myself. Although normally a slow reader, when he handed 
me a letter I would glance at it and hand it back prepared to discuss the nuances 
of it minutely. Now it is true, in retrospect, that there was a certain element of 
self-delusion in all that, and that once out of his presence the bright things that 
had been said were difficult to reconstruct or remember. Nor, as I left, could I 
quite decide what it was we had agreed to do. No matter, the tone had been 
established. I would know how to invent what it was that had to be done. ... 

Not all the problems to be worked out in setting up a laboratory and the 
village around it involved matters of high policy. A few hundred very individu- 
alistic people were soon living on the [Los Alamos] site, and very real problems 
concerning day to day needs of life became important too. At first Oppy tried 
to deal with these himself. Surprisingly to me, he was remarkably good at it, but 
the nature of the problems was such that Solomon himself would have had to 
choose only between a number of bad possibilities. Oppenheimer had more 
important matters to attend to, and for this reason he appointed a Town Coun- 
cil to take care of these knotty civil problems.>” 


Another, vital, group of problems concerned health hazards. 


Life was not safe for those who worked in the Tech Area or at one of the remote 
sites. High explosives could detonate unexpectedly or cause skin rashes. High 
voltages, large currents, and toxic chemicals were commonly encountered in 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN 125 


routine work. During the war, with its continual atmosphere of crisis, there 
was little time to worry about contaminated waste. Certainly Oppenheimer 
and his staff practiced safety and were concerned about the health of all employ- 
ees. However, there was not a full understanding of the effects of contaminated 
waste or the ability to know fully how to treat such waste. Radiation from the 
... accelerators, or radioactive substances was another danger. Plutonium and 
polonium emitted ionizing radiation, and uranium was a chemical poison. How- 
ever, during the first year little fissionable material existed at Los Alamos. 
Aware of the danger from radiation, Oppenheimer . . . [created a Health 
Group, which] consisted mainly of hematology technicians who recorded radia- 
tion exposures and monitored potentially dangerous areas. The group was also 
responsible during 1943 for defining safe exposures to radiation hazards and 
establishing safe operating procedures. Keeping track of individual exposure 
proved difficult, for no one knew the size of a dangerous dose, how much radia- 
tion had been absorbed, or how to tell if a large dose had been absorbed.>* 


Oppenheimer had expected that he could continue to look after the theo- 
retical work in Los Alamos as well as direct the laboratory. After a few 
months he was convinced that the theoretical work needed a separate head, 
and Bethe was chosen. 


To the world outside physics, Oppenheimer is best known as the director of the 
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory during the war. I had the good fortune to 
Participate in an activity preparatory to the work at Los Alamos. In the summer 
of 1942, a small group met under Oppenheimer’s leadership to discuss theoreti- 
cal methods of assembling an atomic weapon. By that time it was very likely 
that Fermi’s atomic pile would work, that Dupont would build a production 
reactor, and that useful quantities of plutonium would be produced. The separa- 
tion of uranium-235 by the electromagnetic method, although extremely expen- 
sive, also seemed very likely to succeed: separation by gaseous diffusion was less 
certain. In any case, the committee in charge of the uranium project considered 
it advisable to begin a serious study of the assembly of a weapon. It turned out 
to be accurate timing. Some members of our group, under the leadership of 
Serber, did calculations on the actual subject of our study, the neatron diffusion 
in an atomic bomb and the energy yield obtainable from it. The rest of us, 
especially Teller, Oppenheimer, and I, indulged ourselves in a far-off project— 
namely, the question of whether and how an atomic bomb could be used to 
trigger an H-bomb. Grim as the subject was, it was a most interesting enterprise. 
We were forever inventing new tricks, finding ways to calculate, and rejecting 
most of the tricks on the basis of the calculations. It was one of the best scien- 
tific collaborations I have ever experienced.>* 


Bethe recalled elsewhere: 


[Oppenheimer] understood immediately when he heard anything, and fitted it 
into the general scheme of things and drew the right conclusions. There was just 
nobody else in that laboratory who came even close to him in his knowledge. 


126 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


There was human warmth as well. Everybody certainly had the impression that 
Oppenheimer cared what each particular person was doing. In talking to some- 
one he made it clear that that person’s work was important for the success of the 
whole project. I don’t remember any occasion at Los Alamos in which he was 
nasty to any person, whereas before and after the war he was often that way. At 
Los Alamos he didn’t make anybody feel inferior, not anybody.** 


Edward Teller 


Edward Teller first met Oppenheimer in 1937. The meeting, Teller says, 
was “painful but characteristic. On the evening I was to talk at a Berkeley 
colloquium, he took me out to a Mexican restaurant for dinner. I didn’t 
have the practice in speaking that I’ve had since, and I was already a little 
nervous. The plates were so hot, and the spices were so hot—as you might 
suspect if you knew Oppenheimer—and his personality was so overpower- 
ing, that I lost my voice.”>"” 

Teller traveled to Berkeley, together with Bethe, to participate in the 
summer study (1942) that preceded Los Alamos. Bethe has remembered: 
“We had a compartment on the train to California, so we could talk freely. 
... Teller told me that the fission bomb was all well and good and, essen- 
tially, was now a sure thing. In reality, the work had hardly begun. Teller 
likes to jump to conclusions. He said that what we really should think 
about was the possibility of igniting deuterium as a fission weapon—the 
hydrogen bomb.”?"* Teller had studied two thermonuclear reactions that 
fuse deuterium to heavier nuclei with release of binding energy. In Berkeley 
“the senior men turned their collective brilliance to fusion. They had not 
yet bothered to name generic bombs of uranium and plutonium. But from 
the pre-anthropic darkness where ideas abide in nonexistence until minds 
imagine them into the light, the new bomb emerged already chased with 
the technocratic euphemism of art deco slang: the Super, they named it.”*!” 

During the Berkeley summer study the two men had begun what an- 
other participant judged a “mental love affair.” Teller “liked and respected 
Oppie enormously. He kept wanting to talk about him with others who 
knew him, kept bringing up his name in conversation.” Bethe has ob- 
served then and later that despite their many outward differences, Teller 
and Oppenheimer were, 

fundamentally . . . very similar. Teller had an extremely quick understanding of 

things, so did Oppenheimer. . . . They were also somewhat alike in that their 

actual production, their scientific publications, did not measure up in any way 


to their capacity. I think Teller’s mental capacity is very high, and so was 
Oppenheimer’s but, on the other hand, their papers, while they included some 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN 127 


very good ones, never reached really the top standards. Neither of them ever 
came up to the Nobel Prize level. I think you just cannot get to that level unless 
you are somewhat introverted.>?! 


In the late summer of 1942, Oppenheimer became quite dubious about 
the idea of a Super, as is seen from his letter to Teller: “The suggestions that 
you make have by now for us [O. and Bethe] a pretty fantastic sound. . . . 
We are satisfied, however, with the uranium [bomb].”>” 

Teller, not dismayed, requested and received permission to head a group 
in Los Alamos’ Theory Division for study of his hydrogen bomb idea, bet- 
ter called his obsession. 


The thermonuclear bomb seemed then a hopeful possibility not too much be- 
yond the . . . bombs from uranium and plutonium. Making it his particular 
province, Teller became a familiar figure at the liquid-deuterium or cryogenics 
plant, Laboratory Y. Physicists there vividly remember the way his gentle smile 
illuminated the place, especially during coffee breaks. Watching him stir the 
entire group’s sugar ration into his coffee cup, they wondered how a man could 
be so genuinely friendly and at the same time so ruthlessly self-absorbed. . . . 

During the continuing thermonuclear discussions [one participant recalled] I 
remember Teller’s getting up to make a speech. He started out by saying he 
would give only qualitative factors. But when he warmed up, he laid out a few 
calculations which showed he had actually forgotten the factor of C?, the veloc- 
ity of light. I suppose that for a profusely inventive man any sort of figures 
could sometimes seem like a straitjacket. 

Oppenheimer looked musingly at the blackboard as though it had opened a 
new philosophical concept for him. He seemed to be pondering what sort of 
reasoning could operate with an error of a million per cent. “This idea of deal- 
ing only in qualitative factors makes an interesting approach,” he said, “but 
should we go so far as to treat the velocity of light as unity?” . . . [The partici- 
pant] could not tell whether Oppenheimer meant to make [a joke], but the 
rustle in the audience showed he had done so. Teller [reacted with] a convulsive 
start and a whitened face.>” 


Teller himself has written: 


One of the first buildings constructed at Los Alamos was designed to handle 
thermonuclear materials. Several of the gifted scientists recruited to work at the 
Los Alamos Laboratory signed on only because they were intrigued by the ther- 
monuclear possibilities. 

The thermonuclear objectives of Los Alamos, however, were sidetracked 
during the laboratory’s first year for two compelling reasons: Successful con- 
struction of an atomic bomb proved to be somewhat more difficult than anyone 
had expected, and it became obvious to me that our thermonuclear discussions 
of the summer before had been incomplete—so incomplete that the new theo- 
retical questions I raised seemed unanswerable, and realization of a thermonuclear 
explosion seemed most doubtful. The Los Alamos Laboratory, justifiably, gave 
the highest priority to the field with the greatest promise of early success. Nearly 


128 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


all of the laboratory’s theoretical physicists turned their full attention to the 
atomic bomb project. No matter how difficult it might be, we knew we had to 
produce an atomic bomb before our enemies could do it. Work on thermo- 
nuclear reactions was all but suspended.* 


Teller was aware of the urgency of the work on the uranium bomb. In 
1943 he and Bethe had sent the following memorandum to Oppenheimer: 


Recent reports both through the newspapers and through secret service, have 
given indications that the Germans may be in possession of a powerful new 
weapon which is expected to be ready between November and January. There 
seems to be a considerable probability that this new weapon is tubealloy [code 
name for uranium]. It is not necessary to describe the probable consequences 
which would result if this proves to be the case. 

It is: possible that the Germans will have, by the end of this year, enough 
material accumulated to make a large number of gadgets which they will release 
at the same time on England, Russia and this country. In this case there would 
be little hope for any counter-action. However, it is also possible that they will 
have a production, let us say, of two gadgets a month. This would place Britain 
in an extremely serious position but there would be hope for counter-action 
from our side before the war is lost, provided our own tubealloy program is 
drastically accelerated in the next few weeks.>* 


Teller again: 


Despite the urgency of the situation, Oppenheimer during those years of struggle 
with atomic questions did not lose sight of the more distant possibilities. He 
urged me to continue exploring the thermonuclear field, even though it was 
beyond the immediate aim of the laboratory. This was not easy advice for him 
to give or for me to take. It is hard to work apart from others in a scientific 
community, especially when most people are working toward a goal of the highest 
interest and urgency. Oppenheimer, Fermi, and many of the most prominent 
men in the laboratory, however, continued to say that the work at Los Alamos 
would not be complete as long as the feasibility of a thermonuclear bomb re- 
mained in doubt. But until atomic success was verified at Alamogordo on July 
16, 1945, the thermonuclear program was eclipsed by our country’s vital need 
for an atomic bomb. 

After Alamogordo, some of the best scientific minds in the laboratory were 
applied to thermonuclear problems. Fermi and Bethe were among those who 
associated themselves with the thermonuclear effort that had been dormant for 
so long. But their association ended in a few short weeks, before anything could 
be accomplished. Hiroshima, coming only three weeks after the Alamogordo 
test, filled many associates with a moral repugnance for weapons work. Fermi, 
Bethe, and dozens of others left Los Alamos. Even Oppenheimer, who had sup- 
ported and urged the thermonuclear effort for years, turned his back on the 
project. Publicly he announced: “The physicists have known sin.” Privately, on 
the day of Hiroshima, he came to my Los Alamos office for a long talk. He told 
me that we would not develop a hydrogen bomb. Before Nagasaki, before the 
war was over, Oppenheimer made it clear to me that he would have nothing 
further to do with thermonuclear work.** 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN) 129 


Teller did make an important contribution to thermonuclear physics 
before the war was over, however, to wit to the basic theory of thermo- 
nuclear reactions in the atmosphere. He was coauthor of a report that showed 
that no danger existed that a thermonuclear test would set the atmosphere 
on fire. This report, LA-602, was circulated in August 1946; it was secret 
until February 1973, when it was declassified. 

In 1983, long after Oppenheimer’s death, Teller has written: 


Throughout the war years, Oppie knew in detail what was going on in every part 
of the Laboratory. He was incredibly quick and perceptive in analyzing human as 
wellas technical problems. Of the more than ten thousand people who eventually 
came to work at Los Alamos, Oppie knew several hundred intimately, by which 
I mean that he knew what their relationships with one another were and what 
made them tick. He knew how to organize, cajole, humor, soothe feelings—how 
to lead powerfully without seeming to do so. He was an exemplar of dedication, a 
hero who never lost his humanness. Disappointing him somehow carried with it 
a sense of wrongdoing. Los Alamos’ amazing success grew out of the brilliance, 
enthusiasm and charisma with which Oppenheimer led it.>” 


He could have saved himself misery if he had spoken in this vein at the 
Oppenheimer hearings in 1954 (to which I shall turn later). 


Enrico Fermi 


In the summer of 1944, when Fermi (1901-1954) became a permanent resi- 
dent of the mesa, Oppenheimer, who wanted to give him an official title, 
made him an associate director of the laboratory and created a new divi- 
sion, F Division, that he placed under Fermi’s direct jurisdiction. The gen- 
eral responsibility of F Division was to investigate problems that did not fit 
into the work of other divisions.” He remained in Los Alamos through 
December 1945. 


Out of curiosity in 1940, while visiting Berkeley to deliver a lecture, Enrico 
Fermi attended a seminar one of Oppenheimer’s protégés led in the master’s 
style. [Afterward he joked], “I am getting rusty and old. I cannot follow the 
highbrow theory developed by Oppenheimer’s pupils anymore. I went to their 
seminar and was depressed by my inability to understand them. Only the last 
sentence cheered me up: it was, ‘and this is Fermi’s theory of beta decay.” 


Fermi, superb experimentalist that he was, contributed valuably to the pro- 
gram of experimental studies, defining with clarity problems that needed to be 
examined. For him the war work was duty, however, and the eager conviction he 
found in Los Alamos puzzled him. “After he had sat in on one of his first confer- 
ences here,” Oppenheimer recalls, “he turned to me and said, ‘I believe your people 
actually wantto make a bomb.’ I remember his voice sounded surprised.”>”” 


130 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 
Richard Feynman 


Feynman (1918-1988) notes: 


We were recruited . . . by Oppenheimer and other people, and he was very 
patient. He paid attention to everybody’s problems. He worried about my wife 
who had TB, and whether there would be a hospital out here, and everything. It 
was the first time I met him in such a personal way; he was a wonderful man.*” 


Luis Alvarez 


Luis Alvarez (1911-1988) was at Los Alamos in 1944-45. From his auto- 
biography: 
Lawrence strongly supported Robert’s appointment as director of Los Alamos in 
1943, when some of Robert’s closest friends were skeptical. “He couldn’t run a 
hamburger stand,” I heard one of them say. I was certainly surprised to learn of 


the appointment, but after working at Los Alamos later in the war I came to feel 
enormous admiration for the way Robert handled that terribly difficult job.>”! 


Elsewhere, Alvarez recalled: 


Not long after I began working at Los Alamos, Robert Oppenheimer, obvi- 
ously pleased to see me finally on his staff, assigned me to his steering commit- 
tee, which governed the laboratory. It was composed of division heads and others 
like myself who had wide experience in war projects. Remembering the un- 
worldly and long-haired prewar Robert, I was surprised to see the extent to 
which he had developed into an excellent laboratory director and a marvelous 
leader of men. His haircut almost as short as a military officer’s, he ran an orga- 
nization of thousands, including some of the best theoretical and experimental 
physicists and engineers in the world. The laboratory’s fantastic morale could 
be traced directly to the personal quality of Robert’s guidance.*” 


Robert Serber 


Around Christmas 1941, just after Pearl Harbor, Serber (1909-1997) received 
a call from Oppenheimer, who wanted to come to Urbana (where Serber 
held a University post) to discuss a delicate matter. On a walk in the corn 
fields Robert told him that he would be appointed head of the atomic bomb 
project and asked Serber to be his assistant. So it came about that Serber and 
his wife were the first after Oppenheimer to be recruited for Los Alamos. 
From his autobiography: “We weren’t allowed to take any papers home 
or even to talk about our work outside the technical area. This policy, while 
largely dictated by security concerns, I think had another effect as well: it 
encouraged an active social life on the mesa. There were lots of dinner parties, 
dorm dances, and weekends in the beautiful country around Los Alamos.” 
From later in the memoir: “on the day Paris was liberated, in August of 
1944, Rabi happened to be around, and he and Viki Weisskopf decided the 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN 131 


event wasn’t being properly celebrated. They marched around the residen- 
tial area bellowing the Marseillaise, inviting everyone to join the parade 
and it turned into a sort of holiday.”** 


Niels Bohr 


On the evening of September 29, 1943, two German freighters docked in 
the port of Copenhagen for the purpose of transporting Danish Jews to 
Germany. Danish authorities had been forewarned. So it came to pass that 
earlier that same day, Bohr (1885-1962)—who was half-Jewish—fled Den- 
mark to Sweden. On October 4 he was flown from there to England, where 
he joined the British atomic bomb effort.>* 

Serber has recalled: 


Late in December 1943, Niels Bohr and his son Aage arrived in Los Alamos 
bearing the aliases Nicholas and James Baker, and promptly became Uncle Nick 
and Jim. There was a story that just before coming to Los Alamos, in a Wash- 
ington hotel, Bohr entered an elevator and found himself face to face with a 
woman he knew as the wife of the Austrian physicist Hans von Halban. He 
said, “Good evening, Mrs. von Halban.” She answered, “I’m not Mrs. von Halban 
now; I’m Mrs. Placzek. Good evening, Professor Bohr.” And Bohr replied, “I’m 
not Professor Bohr now; I’m Mr. Baker.” Elsa Placzek’s new husband was the 
Bohemian physicist George Placzek, who had visited the ranch one summer 
and was now a member of the British Mission to Los Alamos. 

On the last day of December 1943, a secretary stuck her head in my door (the 
offices had no phones) and said Oppie would like me to come to his office. 
When I entered, Niels and Aage Bohr, Bethe, Teller, and Victor Weisskopf were 
already there. Oppie handed me a scrap of paper that looked as if it had been 
carelessly ripped from a note pad. It bore a sketch, and he asked me what I 
thought the sketch represented. After a minute I handed it back and said it 
looked like a heavy water moderated nuclear reactor [a so-called pile]. He then 
told me that Bohr had gotten it from Heisenberg [who had given it to him 
during a visit—much discussed since—to Copenhagen]. The question was whether 
it could be interpreted as a weapon. The Los Alamos experts gathered in that 
room all agreed it was useless as an explosive, and Bethe and Teller left to write 
a report to that effect for Groves, with whom Bohr, himself no expert, had 
previously raised the question. On New Year’s Day, Oppie wrote Groves an 
account of our meeting and enclosed the Bethe-Teller memorandum.” 


The letter read: 
Dear General Groves: 


I am enclosing a memorandum written by Bethe and Teller after the confer- 
ence yesterday. Present at the conference were the Bakers, Bethe, Teller, Tolman, 
Weisskopf, Serber, Bacher, and, for a small part of the time as you know, Oppen- 
heimer. The calculations referred to and described in the accompanying memo- 
randum were carried out by Bethe and Teller, but the fundamental physics was 


132. J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


quite fully discussed and the results and methods have been understood and 
agreed to by Baker. 

I believe that it would be appropriate to emphasize that the completely negative 
findings [my italics] reported in the accompanying memorandum apply to the 
arrangement of materials suggested by Baker and take into account all the physical 
elements which appeared important to him. No complete assurance can be given 
that with a new idea or a new arrangement, something along these lines might 
not work. It is, however, true that many of us have given thought to the matter 
in the past, and that neither then nor now has any possibility suggested itself 
which had the least promise. The purpose of the enclosed memorandum is to 
give you a formal assurance, together with the reasons therefore, that the ar- 
rangement suggested to you by Baker would be a quite useless military weapon. 


Very sincerely yours, 
J. R. Oppenheimer*”® 


The accompanying memorandum begins as follows: “EXPLOSION OF 
AN INHOMOGENEOUS URANIUM-HEAVY WATER PILE. We pro- 
pose to show that the explosion of an inhomogeneous pile will liberate 
energies which are probably smaller, and certainly not much larger, than 
those obtainable by the explosion of an equal mass of TNT.”>” 

“It was clearly a drawing of a reactor,” Bethe recalled after the war, “but 
when we saw it our conclusion was that these Germans were totally crazy— 
did they want to throw a reactor down on London?” 

Bohr’s first visit to “Y” (code symbol for Los Alamos) lasted only a few 
weeks. Robert made sure that his contribution was a matter of record. On 
January 17 he wrote to Groves: 


Dr. Baker has left today and I think it appropriate to report to you briefly on 
his visit. 


1. On the technical side Dr. Baker concerned himself primarily with the corre- 
lation and interpretation of the many new data on nuclear fission and related 
topics which have been obtained by this project. He left with us a brief re- 
port on the theoretical understanding of these data. It has been the point of 
view of this laboratory that in matters of such great importance, and where 
theories were involved which were new and unproven, all important quanti- 
ties would have to be determined by experimental measurement, and I be- 
lieve this policy was and is sound. Nevertheless, the advantage of some 
theoretical insight into the phenomena is very great indeed in that it enables 
us to evaluate experiments critically, to determine the relative priority of 
experiments, and in general to reduce the amount of futile discussion and 
waste motion. For all these reasons the work that Baker did for us should 
prove of very great value in the months to come. Baker concerned himself 
very little with the engineering problems of our program although he is of 
course aware of their importance and their difficulty. 

2. By arrangement with Chadwick and me, Baker is to remain on the British 
payroll and all his expenses are to be paid by the British. A change in this 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN = 133 


arrangement will only be made if you or Dr. Chadwick see strong reasons to 
alter it. 

3. I should like in a formal way to express my hope that Baker’s collaboration 
with this project will continue, since it has been of great help to us and is 
likely to be so throughout the year. 

4. By word and deed Dr. Baker has done everything he could to support this 
project and to indicate that he is sympathetic not only with its purposes and 
general method of procedure, but with the policies and achievements of the 
project’s overall direction. I should like to make it quite clear that the effect 
of his presence on the morale of those with whom he came in contact was 
always positive and always helpful, and that I see every reason to anticipate 
that this will be true in the future.**! 


Groves, too, was sympathetic to Bohr’s influence. “An urgent appeal 
from Oppenheimer to the General has resulted in the latter agreeing that 
Bohr can go back again to Y when he wishes to. Oppenheimer’s hope is 
that Bohr will pay more and more frequent visits to Y, and ultimately settle 
down there.”>” So it came about that Bohr peddled back and forth between 
England and the United States, though he never settled at “Y.” 

Bohr’s presence at Y contributed only marginally tothe weapons project. 
“They didn’t need my help in making the atom bomb,” he later told a 
friend.** He did follow the bomb work with “the deepest admiration . . . 
for the magnificent endeavor carried on here in Y, with the greatest zeal 
and ingenuity,”>“ however, while correspondence with Oppenheimer shows 
that “I have thought about various aspects of nuclear problems.” Bohr’s 
main concerns, from 1943 on, were the political implications of the new 
weapons. Oppenheimer has said later, “Bohr at Los Alamos was marvelous. 
... He took a very lively technical interest. . . . But his real function, I think 
for almost all of us, was not the technical one.”> He and Bohr spent hours 
discussing Bohr’s conviction that the successful development of an atomic 
weapon would require a radical change in international relations and that 
Britain and the United States must make a generous offer to share its con- 
trol if they hoped to avoid a disastrous arms race. Lecturing in 1963 on 
“Niels Bohr and his Times,” Oppenheimer recalled, “He made the enter- 
prise seem hopeful. . . . [he spoke of] his own high hope that the outcome 
would be good, that the objectivity, the cooperation of the sciences, would 
play a helpful part, [all this was something] we all wanted to believe.”>* 

Bohr’s views deeply influenced Oppenheimer and a few others to whom 
he talked at Los Alamos. They became gospel to most Los Alamos scientists 
as soon as the successful test of July 16, 1945, relieved the pressure of work 
and freed them psychologically to ponder its meaning. 


134 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


To conclude this Bohr vignette, I recount a story told by Oppenheimer. 
One day in the spring of 1950 Bohr, known for his mumbling speech, called 
on Secretary of State Dean Acheson (1893-1971) to discuss with him the 
contents of an open letter dealing with his political ideas concerning the 
atom that he planned to submit to the United Nations. The meeting began 
at, say, two o’clock, with Bohr doing the talking. At about 2:30, Acheson 
spoke to Bohr something like this, “Professor Bohr, there are three things I 
must tell you at this time. First, whether I like it or not, I shall have to leave 
you at three for my next appointment. Secondly, I am deeply interested in 
your ideas. Thirdly, up till now I have not understood one word you have 
said.” Whereupon, the story goes, Bohr got so enraged that he waxed elo- 
quent for the remainder of the appointment. 


Young Wives’ Tales 


Elsie McMillan (1913-1997) 


Returning from the commissary one day I found a soldier standing guard at my 
door. He saluted me and said, “Good afternoon, Mrs. Oppenheimer, the baby 
you left in the bedroom is quite all right.” I replied, “Thank you very much, but 
I am not Mrs. Oppenheimer and I didn’t leave a baby in my house.” He said, 
“My God, I’m guarding the wrong house!” (We were next door neighbors.) 
Very shortly after that a fence went up around the Oppenheimers’ home. The 
guards then had to patrol around the fence, and Kitty Oppenheimer and I felt 
very sorry for them because in winter at Los Alamos we had very dry cold 
weather; cold enough for icicles to reach from the roof of our one-story house 
to the ground. Kitty and I would sneak out and leave thermos bottles and sand- 
wiches for the guards. 

Los Alamos had a small hospital with only two bedrooms, a waiting room, a 
pharmacy, and an operating room which at first could not be used because we 
did not have the proper anesthetic for the altitude. . . . 

At the guard gate, we all showed our passes, though of course we didn’t need 
one for our two month old baby. On one occasion, so the story goes, Oppy 
came up to the gate and went whizzing through. He had a lot on his mind and 
just went full speed ahead; when the guard shouted at him he didn’t pay any 
attention. Finally, when his tires were shot at, Robert backed up and pulled 
down his window and handed a crisp dollar bill to the guard saying, sorry sir” 


Bernice Brode (1901-1989) 


The strangest feature of all to us was the security. We were quite literally fenced 
in by a tall barbed wire barricade surrounding the entire site and patrolled along 
the outside by armed MPs. In our first weeks we heard shots but never knew 
why. Actually we felt cozy and safe, free from robbers and mountain bears. We 
never locked our doors. In our second year, extra MPs were sent to guard the 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN 135 


homes of the Oppenheimers and Parsons, making round-the-clock patrols. No 
one, not even the families themselves, could go in without a pass. If they had 
forgotten their pass, they had a hard time getting in. Some of the practical house- 
wives cooked up a scheme to use these MPs as babysitters in the immediate 
neighborhood. What could be safer than a man with a gun guarding the pre- 
cious small-fry? The children were sure to be impressed and behave accordingly. 
Martha Parsons never hired a babysitter as long as the MPs remained around 
her house, and Kitty Oppenheimer once got real service when the guard came 
to the front door of the house she was visiting to tell her that little Peter was 
crying. Soon after, the sergeant in charge put his foot down, no more babysitting 
for his crack MPs! a group that was specially picked for duty at the number-one 
government project. The patrol outside the fence soon ceased except for an oc- 
casional mounted patrol. There was little temptation to conquer the fence and 
no one tried, except dogs and children, to dig holes underneath it. Rather the 
fence became a symbol. We felt protected and very important, and tended to act 
accordingly, griping at everything, including our fenced-in condition. Although 
we could leave the mesa at will with a pass, we did have to keep within the 
boundaries roughly defined by Albuquerque, Cuba, Las Vegas and Lamy, all in 
New Mexico. We would go to Mesa Verde, Denver, Carlsbad Caverns or El 
Paso, with special permission. We could not talk to strangers or friends on trips 
and it was common knowledge that we were being watched by the Army G-2 
and the FBI. In general, we were not allowed to send children to camp or away 
to school. If they were already in school they could not come up for vacations. 
Our driver’s licenses had numbers instead of names and were not signed. All 
our occupations were listed “Engineers” and our addresses as Post Office Box 
1663, Santa Fe. With gas rationing in effect, most of the traffic between Lamy 
and Santa Fe and Taos was ours. All in all it looked more than mysterious to the 
state police when we happened to be caught for a traffic violation. One day on 
the Taos road a caravan of Army cars carrying a group of Nobel Prize winners 
and Deans of science, all traveling under false names, was flagged down. When 
the officer asked the names of the occupants, each refused as politely as possible 
to give it. “Tell that to the judge,” retorted the police as he wrote out the sum- 
mons, determined to teach the almighty Army a lesson. “I’m sorry, officer,” 
ventured one of the men, “we can’t appear either.” Finally the Army driver 
soothed the irate officer with the promise to take the summons to his com- 
manding officer, who would look after it. And it took this commanding officer 
and the governor of New Mexico to come to an understanding about this. 

After Oppenheimer’s daughter Toni was born, the sign “Oppenheimer” was 
placed over baby Tony’s crib and people filed by in the corridor of Los Alamos 
hospital for days to view the boss’s baby girl. General Groves complained about 
the rapid increase in the population which immediately increased the housing 
problem and eventually would increase the school troubles. Rumor had it that 
the General ordered the commanding officer to do something about it. It is not 
clear what, if anything, was ever done. Our population was young and vigorous 
and the babies were free, so what could the General expect? . . . 

We were all cut down to size at Los Alamos and it was sometimes a sobering 
experience. Even Oppenheimer abandoned his former pattern of living. I re- 
member the old days in Berkeley, when he would not accept a class before eleven 
in the morning so he could feel free to stay up late for parties, music, or ideas. 


136 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


But at Los Alamos, when the whistle blew at 7:30—we had a factory whistle— 
Oppy would be on his way to T and hardly anyone could beat him to it. When 
Sam Allison [1900-1965] came to the site from Chicago he shared Oppy’s office 
for some time. Sam said his one ambition was to be sitting at his desk when 
Oppy opened the door.” 


Robert Oppenheimer 


In his early years Oppenheimer felt inferior himself, had always felt for the 
actions of his life, as he confessed many years afterward, “a very great sense 
of revulsion and of wrong.” At Los Alamos for the first time he seems to 
have found alleviation of that loathing. He may have discovered there a 
process:of self-analysis that served him more comprehensively later in his 
life: “In an attempt to break out and be a reasonable man, I had to realize 
that my own worries about what I did were valid and were important, but 
that they were not the whole story, that there must be a complementary 
way of looking at them, because other people did not see them as I did. And 
I needed what they saw, and needed them.”*” Certainly he found the more 
traditional alleviation of losing himself in work. 

Whatever his burden of morale and work in those years, Oppenheimer 
also carried his full share of private pain. He was kept under constant sur- 
veillance, his movements monitored and his rooms and telephones bugged; 
strangers observed his most intimate hours. His home life cannot have been 
happy. Kitty responded to the stress of living at isolated Los Alamos by 
drinking heavily. Eventually Martha Parsons, a daughter of Admiral Wil- 
liam “Deke” Parsons, director of the Los Alamos Ordnance Division, took 
over the duties of social leadership on the Hill. Army security officers 
hounded the director of the central laboratory of the nation’s most impor- 
tant secret war project mercilessly; at least one of them, Peer de Silva, was 
convinced Oppenheimer was a Soviet spy. They interrogated him frequently, 
fishing for the names of people he knew or believed to be members of the 
Communist Party, hoping to trip him up. He invented circumstances and 
volunteered the names of friends to protect his own, indiscretions that would 
return in time to haunt him. 

One example of the indignities Robert had to submit to: during the first 
Los Alamos summer he heard from Jean Tatlock, the unhappy woman he 
had loved before he met his wife. Loyally, even though she had been and still 
might be a Communist and he knew himself to be spied upon, he went to 
her; an FBI document coldly summarizes a security man’s peepshow version 
of that meeting: “On June 14, 1943, Oppenheimer traveled via Key Railway 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN = 137 


from Berkeley to San Francisco on the evening of June 14, 1943, where he 
was met by Jean Tatlock who kissed him. They dined at the Xochimilcho 
Cafe, 787 Broadway, San Francisco, then proceeded at 10:50 pM to 1405 Mont- 
gomery Street and entered a top floor apartment. Subsequently, the lights 
were extinguished and Oppenheimer was not observed until 8:30 aM the next 
day when he and Jean Tatlock left the building together.”**° 

The following letter by Groves to Robert shows that his life in Los Alamos 
was a kind of privileged prison: 


In view of the nature of the work on which you are engaged, the knowledge of 
it which is possessed by you and the dependence which rests upon you for its 
successful accomplishment, it seems necessary to ask you to take certain special 
precautions with respect to your personal safety. 

It is fequested that: 

(a) You refrain from flying in airplanes of any description; the time saved is 
not worth the risk. (If emergency demands their use my prior consent 
should be requested.) 

(b) You refrain from driving an automobile for any appreciable distance 
(above a few miles) and from being without suitable protection on any 
lonely road, such as the road from Los Alamos to Santa Fe. On such 
trips you should be accompanied by a competent, able bodied, armed 
guard. There is no objection to the guard serving as chauffeur. 

(c) Your cars be driven with due regard to safety and that in driving about 
town a guard of some kind should be used, particularly during the hours 
of darkness. The cost of such guard is a proper charge against the United 
States. 

I realize that these precautions may be personally burdensome and that they 

may appear to you to be unduly restrictive but I am asking you to bear with 
them until our work is successfully completed. 


Nevertheless, at Los Alamos, Robert often went out of his way to make 
others feel privileged as well. 


[Robert] seemed to understand the uprooted feeling that afflicted newcomers, 
many of whom had left homes as pleasant as the Oppenheimers’ own house in 
Berkeley. Dismayed by lack of privacy and recurrent milk, water, and power 
shortages, they were somewhat appeased by the knowledge that it was 
Oppenheimer who had included fireplaces and large closets in the original house 
plans. He no longer came to dinner bearing bouquets of flowers, the gesture for 
which he was famous among Berkeley hostesses, but he gave both employed 
and nonworking wives a sense that their presence and participation in the col- 
lective enterprise was important. He shared the anxiety over a rash of illnesses 
that afflicted the mesa as families from all over the country pooled regional 
germs and adjusted to local food and water and to the 7,300 foot altitude. When 
anxiety reached a peak in the autumn of 1943 with the death of a young chem- 
ist, wife of a group leader, from an unidentified form of paralysis, it was some- 
what reassuring to know that Oppenheimer himself had been the first to visit 
the bereaved husband.*” 


138 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Finally, two letters from Robert’s private correspondence during the 
Los Alamos years. 

In July 1943 he received a letter from President Roosevelt that said in 
part: “Whatever the enemy may be planning, American science will be equal 
to the challenge. With this thought in mind, I send this note of apprecia- 
tion.”*>> Oppenheimer replied: 


Dear Mr. President: 


Thank you for your generous letter of June 29th. You would be glad to 
know how greatly your good words of reassurance were appreciated by us. There 
will be many times in the months ahead when we shall remember them. 

It is perhaps appropriate that I should in turn transmit to you the assurance 
that we as a group and as individual Americans are profoundly aware of our 
responsibility for the security of our project as well as for its rapid and effective 
completion. It is a great source of encouragement to us that we have in this your 
support and understanding. 

Very sincerely yours, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


In September 1945, Einstein wrote to Robert, telling him that it was 
“unthinkable that we can achieve peace without a genuine supranational 
organization to govern international relations.”**° Robert replied: 


Dear Dr. Einstein: 


Thank you for your good letter of September 29th. I am in complete agree- 
ment with the views expressed by you. ... 

If I say “general agreement” I mean only this: the history of this nation up 
through the Civil War shows how difficult the establishment of a federal au- 
thority can be when there are profound differences in the structure and values 
of the societies it attempts to integrate. ... 

The statements attributed by you to me are not mine; nor, as a matter of fact, 
have I ever seen them. I have known, of course, of the existence of such views, 
and have attempted where possible to point out their inadequacies. These views 
do not correspond to the advice which I, or my immediate colleagues, have 
given to the government of the United States. We have been concerned rather 
with the problem of initiating those negotiations which might establish confi- 
dence and form the basis for a real unity. We have, I believe, from the first 
recognized the essentially political character of this problem, and regarded the 
development of the atomic bomb as of incidental, but perhaps decisive, impor- 
tance in two respects: 

1) Focusing more sharply the attention of the public on the dangers of inter- 
national anarchy (and in particular on the dangers of competitive arma- 
ment between two all-powerful nations). 

2) Providing a new and specific point of discussion where agreement might 
be less difficult to achieve. 

... Very many of my associates at Los Alamos are profoundly concerned 

with these problems and would be grateful for help. 


With every warm good wish, 
J. R. Oppenheimer** 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN’ 139 
More Personal Recollections 


In all my life I have never known a personality more complex than Robert 
Oppenheimer. That explains, I think, why different people reacted to him 
in such extremely varied ways. I have known those who worshipped him and 
those who hated his guts. As said earlier, my own reactions to him were 
ambivalent. There have been times when I felt genuine affection for him, 
others when I felt compassion if not pity, still others when he deeply an- 
gered me by his conduct. 

Word portraits of people are by their very nature subjective. This is not 
the first time I attempt such a sketch but never more than in the case of 
Oppenheimer have I felt the need to forewarn that far be it from me to 
claim to have all the qualifications for understanding this man, so gifted, so 
tortured, so sweet, so cruel. 

It will be evident that an understanding in depth of the man will at least 
demand knowledge of his early years and family relations. I have spent 
many untold hours in private conversations with Robert in which, how- 
ever, he never even alluded to his youth. Indeed, all those whose lives have 
been affected by having known him had to be aware of Robert’s uncom- 
monly strong, protective sense of privacy that was sometimes taken for 
inner aloofness. In his writings I have found only a single reference of a 
personal nature, when he tells how, some time in the 1920s, Dirac had taken 
him “to task with characteristic gentleness. I understand [Dirac had said] 
that you are writing poetry as well as working at physics. I do not see how 
you can do both. In science we say something that no one knew before in a 
way that everybody can understand. Whereas in poetry . . .”°°” 


Oppenheimer’s talents were manifest in the way he led the Institute’s phys- 
ics seminars. Also his shortcomings. He angered me by his arrogance if not 
cruelty when a youngster failed to clarify or missed a point, cutting him 
down with unnecessarily biting comments. There have been one or two 
occasions where I had to console one of them who afterward came sobbing 
into my office. 

Nor, in the beginning, was I myself spared such treatments. It may have 
taken about a year until this came to an end, when I was able to muster the 
courage to say to him something like this: “Robert, I want you to know 
that I won’t take any longer your unwarranted behavior.” The outcome of 
this brief conversation was astonishing. Never, in all the many years there- 
after when I was in close contact with him, did he again expose me to his 


140 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


rough stuff. I have also noticed a few other cases of Robert changing his 

tune when someone else let Aim have it. 
It is fitting to record next the impressions of a (then) young man. Polking- 

horne has written: 
I have to confess that I never really cared for Robert Oppenheimer. He had 
clearly been an inspiring teacher in his prewar days at Berkeley. By the time I 
first met him he was battered by his treatment at the hands of the AEC over 
security matters. The need to retain his authority and standing in another sphere 
was doubtless part of the reason for his mandarin manner. Perhaps there was 
also a further cause. When he gave the Reith Lectures on the BBC the Observer 
newspaper published a profile of him. I recall its saying the Oppenheimer’s 
secret sorrow was that he had not made a fundamental discovery in physics. By 
the very highest standards—and Oppenheimer would never have deigned to apply 
to himself standards less than these—that was true. I think he had that secret 
sorrow and that it drove him to attempt always to assert a superiority over 
those ordinary physicists with whom he came in contact. My most frequent 
encounters with him were a few years later when I spent a semester as a visitor 
at the Institute for Advanced study at Princeton. . . . I came to feel that his 
gnomic way of speaking, with its stream of epigrams, phrased to be maximally 
striking but minimally clarifying, was a device to put the listener at a disadvan- 
tage. He was a most uncomfortable man to be with.>8 


In all, my most cherished recollections of Oppenheimer are the untold 
number of hours we spent together, mostly in his office, talking about phys- 
ics, politics, literature, or what have you. As is familiar to all who knew 
him and as can also clearly be seen in his more reflective writings, it is an 
integral part of the Oppenheimer style that he had more than a touch of the 
poet. He was a master of the language. 

For many of us it was a joy to hear him discuss or paraphrase a subject, 
especially if the subject was somewhat familiar, for Oppenheimer’s discourse 
was not for beginners. But to some his style was alien. It is too simple to say 
that Oppenheimer polarized his surroundings, but it is true that the reac- 
tions he evoked were never bland. 

Never in all our discussions would I raise a question about classified sub- 
jects nor would he ever volunteer such information. I should note here that 
just outside his office there stood safes containing top secret documents, in 
front of which sat guards on 24-hour duty, each discreetly carrying a re- 
volver. Also, as Robert told me, he knew that his phone was tapped and 
held it probable that his office was bugged. 

From my discussions with Oppenheimer I have come away with great 
admiration for his talents of verbal expression, his mastery of the English 
language. I learned new turns of phrase from him. One trivial example I 
remember: at one point he said that something was “inspiriting.” I knew of 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN 141 


course the word inspiring but had never heard “inspiriting” before. After- 
ward I went to a dictionary, looked it up—and adopted it myself for occa- 
sional use. 

I came to Robert whenever I had finished a piece of physics research. 
Every time I told him that I had found something new he at once briefly bit 
his nails. I have my own interpretation of this involuntary gesture, which I 
shall spare the reader since I cannot prove that I am right. Then I would go 
to the blackboard in his office, sketch what I had done, then sit down and 
listen as he eloquently played back what I had told, emphasize the strong 
points and note the weak ones. It was always a masterful summary. I real- 
ized quickly, however, that I should never discuss with him—as physicists 
often do.with each other—the satus of unfinished work that was causing 
me problems. That would only lead to confusion rather than clarification. 

In private conversations Robert had uncommon powers of persuasion. I 
recall meeting a distinguished Institute faculty member one day, as he came 
out of Oppenheimer’s office, shaking his head. I asked what was up. Some- 
thing odd had just happened to him, he replied. “I had gone to see 
Oppenheimer regarding a certain issue on which I held firm opinions. As I 
left I found that I had agreed with the opposite point of view... .” 

In those early years I knew him, Robert was strikingly handsome, as can 
best be seen from his photograph on the cover of Life magazine of October 
10, 1949. That is the best picture of him I know—ever so much better than 
the ones taken later where he looks like a martyr. He wore expensive suits 
(never sports jackets) that looked sloppy on his haggard frame. 

No martyrdom was yet in evidence in the years I now write of. In fact, the 
man was ablaze with power, as I particularly noticed when, in my presence, 
his secretary would knock on his door and say, “Dr. Oppenheimer, Senator 
Arthur Vandenberg (1884-1951) [Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee] is calling”; or “General Marshall is on the line.” (I of course stepped 
out during such phone conversations.) Such calls electrified him. 

I noted earlier that Oppenheimer was a very private person, not given to 
showing his feeling. I have witnessed a few occasions, however, of him do- 
ing just that. 

Some time in 1949 I gave my first big party, in my Dickinson Street 
apartment. Robert and Kitty were among my guests. At one point I said, 
“Everybody sit on the floor, we are going to sing folk songs.” Robert sat 
down too, his air of hauteur clearly indicating that he thought this was an 
absurd situation for him to be in. I got out my guitar and started playing 
and singing. A while later I happened to look at Robert. I was touched to 


142 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


see that his attitude of superiority was gone; instead, he now looked like a 
man of feeling, hungry for simple comradeship. 

Another occasion. I had gone to the Garden Theatre, one of Princeton’s 
two movie houses, to see La Grande Illusion, that marvelous movie about 
comradeship among men during the First World War. As I walked toward 
the exit after the show, I saw Robert and Kitty sitting in a back row. I could 
see that he had wept. 

One last instance. One day I had organized a craps game in my apart- 
ment. When I saw Robert that afternoon I said to him, “Please join us this 
evening for the game, it will be an all-male affair.” Whereupon he made a 
characteristic gesture. He pressed his upper arms against his body, holding 
both elbows with his hands, then said, “But I am not all male.” 

I cannot forget that response. Already then I was convinced that strong 
latent homosexuality was an important ingredient in Robert’s emotional 
makeup, though, as stated earlier, there was no evidence whatsoever for 
active homosexual behavior from his side. 


Robert properly considered it part of his obligations as director to invite 
new members to his house for afternoon cocktails. These poor people were 
not prepared for what was awaiting them. Robert would have concocted a 
pitcher of viciously strong martinis. I have seen members stumbling dead 
drunk out of the house. (One faculty member had renamed the director’s 
house Bourbon Manor.) I never accepted such drinks, having always found 
the cocktail hour a barbaric custom. 

Robert himself would join in the drinking. He invariably held his liquor 
well. Not so Kitty, who was an alcoholic as long as I knew her. Off and on 
Robert invited me for dinner at home, just with the family. One summer 
evening, after drinks, Kitty appeared with a bow! of vichyssoise from which 
she served us. It was delicious. After having finished our soup, Robert and 
Kitty indulged in a rather extravagant exchange about its superb quality. Fine, 
I said to myself, now let’s get on with the dinner. But nothing else came, that 
soup was the dinner. I waited for a civilized period, then thanked my hosts 
and drove to town, starving, where I treated myself to two hamburgers. 

I have caught glimpses of Robert’s reactions to Kitty’s drinking. On sev- 
eral occasions when he and I were talking in his office, I saw her staggering 
drunkenly toward the door of the office that gave out directly to the lawn. 
When Robert noticed her, all he would say to me was, “Don’t go away.” 
Those were moments when I hurt for him. It seems he did all he could to 
overlook those habits of hers. 


FURTHER ON OPPENHEIMER THE MAN 143 


Quite independently from her drinking I have found Kitty the most despi- 
cable female I have ever known, because of her cruelty. I shall give just one 
minor example. Every spring a dance evening was held at the Institute. At the 
end of one such occasion I went to Kitty, the hostess, to thank her. When I 
approached, she was talking to an Institute secretary. This is what I heard her 
say, “Mrs. T., for your next evening dress you should choose blue instead of 
the pink youare now wearing. Pink does not suit you at all.” It caused me to 
tremble with rage but I said nothing. I just thanked her for the evening. 

To an outsider like me, Oppenheimer’s family life looked like hell on 
earth. The worst of it all was that inevitably the two children had to suffer. 
I have seen how Kitty and Peter did not get along well, and was not sur- 
prised when Peter left home for good in his late teens and broke all contact 
with his mother. Toni, the daughter, poor dear Toni, ended by taking her 
own life. 


I conclude this chapter with an assessment by Rabi, who had known 
Oppenheimer since his stay in Zurich, and who had witnessed his Berkeley, 
Los Alamos, and Princeton years. His short characterization of Robert, the 
best I have seen, sheds incidental light on my earlier remark that Oppenheimer 
was unable to derive contentment from his notable and varied achievements: 


One often wonders why men of Oppenheimer’s gifts do not discover everything 
worth discovering, why important problems are still left to solve. With the vast 
intellectual arsenal at his disposal there were important questions in physics in 
which Oppenheimer worked diligently, where he was very often on the track of 
the solutions, and where his taste in the selection of the questions was impeccable, 
and yet as in the case of quantum electrodynamics the definite solutions came 
from others. In pondering this subject it seems to me that in some respects 
Oppenheimer was overeducated in those fields which lie outside the scientific 
tradition, such as his interest in religion, in the Hindu religion in particular, which 
resulted in a feeling for the mystery of the universe that surrounded him almost 
like a fog. He saw physics clearly, looking toward what had already been done, 
but at the border he tended to feel that there was much more of the mysterious 
and novel than there actually was. He was insufficiently confident of the power of 
the intellectual tools he already possessed and did not drive his thought to the 
very end because he felt instinctively that new ideas and new methods were neces- 
sary to go further than he and his students had already gone. Some may call it a 
lack of faith, but in my opinion it was more a turning away from the hard, crude 
methods of theoretical physics into a mystical realm of broad intuition. .. . 

In Oppenheimer the element of earthiness was feeble. Yet it was essentially 
this spiritual quality, this refinement as expressed in speech and manner, that 
was the basis of his charisma. He never expressed himself completely. He al- 
ways left a feeling that there were depths of sensibility and insight not yet re- 
vealed. These may be the qualities of the born leader who seems to have reserves 
of uncommitted strength.” 


CHAPTER 1 7 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE 
EARLY POSTWAR YEARS 


The release of atomic energy constitutes a new force too revolutionary to 
consider in the framework of old ideas. 


President Truman in his message to 
Congress of October 3, 1945 


1945-1946 


Here and there in the preceding I have recorded snippets of Oppenheimer’s 
opinions and activities regarding political aspects of atomic energy: his first 
correspondence with the secretary of war and his reply on accepting the 
certificate of appreciation for the work in Los Alamos, from the secretary 
of war; his credo; and his involvement with the May-Johnson and the 
McMahon proposals, as well as his appointment to the GAC. I recall a few 
dates mentioned earlier. 


October 3, 1945 


Truman’s message in which he requested the establishment of the AEC. 
Note that in his policy statement he mentioned not only this domestic 
issue but also managed to fuse it with international aspects. The latter would 
turn into a long inconclusive meander. 


August 1, 1946 


Truman signs the Atomic Energy Act into law. 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS 145 
October 1946 
Lewis Strauss is appointed member of the AEC. 
December 1946 


Oppenheimer is appointed to the General Advisory Committee of the AEC. 
Well before joining that body he had begun to express opinions on policy 
matters, however. 

Already, while at Los Alamos, Robert had been one of the first to recog- 
nize that a nuclear detection system should be established and so recom- 
mended while he was still with the Manhattan District.** Shortly after 
Truman’s October 1945 address, he wrote an article” that may be consid- 
ered a response to the president’s message, in which he (O.) stated that 
atomic weapons “call for and by their existence will help to create radical 
and profound changes in the politics of the world.” 

About those weapons he wrote: 


The interior of an exploding fission bomb is, so far as we know, a place without 
parallel elsewhere. It is hotter than the center of the sun; it is filled with matter 
that does not normally occur in nature and with radiations—neutrons, gamma 
rays, fission fragments, electrons—of an intensity without precedent in human 
experience. The pressures are a thousand billion times atmospheric pressure. In 
the crudest, simplest sense, it is quite true that in atomic weapons man has cre- 
ated novelty. ... 

[I]t will cost enormously less to destroy a square mile with atomic weapons 
than with any weapons hitherto known to warfare. My own estimate is that the 
advent of such weapons will reduce the cost, certainly by more than a factor of 
ten, more probably by a factor of a hundred. In this respect only biological 
warfare would seem to offer competition for the evil that a dollar can do... 
Ton for equivalent ton, atomic explosives are vastly cheaper than ordinary ex- 
plosives . . . Costs might be several hundred times less, possibly a thousand 
times less. . . . [T]he power of destruction that has come into man’s hands has in 
fact been qualitatively altered by atomic weapons.* 


The main message in Oppenheimer’s brief article deals with his views on 
how this alteration will profoundly influence the world of politics and how 
this in turn will inevitably affect the role in which science and its practitio- 
ners will play in the world at large. 


In these problems a common approach, in which national interests can play 
only a limitedly constructive part, will be necessary if a solution is to be found 
at all. Such an approach has been characteristic of science in the past. In its 
application to the problems of international relations there is novelty .. . 

The injection of the spirit of the scientists into this problem of atomic weap- 
ons, in which it has been clear from the first that purely national ideas of wel- 
fare and security would doubtless prove inadequate, has been recognized, if not 


146 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


clearly understood, by statesmen as well as by scientists. The emphasis that has 
been given—in the statements of the President and in the agreed declaration of 
the heads of state of Britain, Canada, and the United States—to the importance 
of the reestablishment of the international fraternity and freedom of science is 
an evidence of this recognition. ... 

The vastly increased powers of destruction that atomic weapons give us have 
brought with them a profound change in the balance between national and in- 
ternational interests. The common interest of all in the prevention of atomic 
warfare would seem immensely to overshadow any purely national interest, 
whether of welfare or of security. At the same time it would seem of most 
doubtful value in any long term to rely on purely national methods of defense 
for insuring security. ... The true security of this nation, as of any other, will be 
found, if at all, only in the collective efforts of all. 

It is even now clear that such efforts will not be successful if they are made 
only as a supplement, or secondary insurance, to a national defense. In fact it is 
clear that such collective efforts will require, and do today require, a very real 
renunciation of the steps by which in the past national security has been sought. 
It is clear that in a very real sense the past patterns of national security are 
inconsistent with the attainment of security on the only level where it can now, 
in the atomic age, be effective. It may be that in times to come it will be by this 
that atomic weapons are most remembered. It is in this that they will come to 
seem “too revolutionary to consider in the framework of old ideas.” 


In these lines I recognize the influence on Robert of his long conversa- 
tions with Bohr in Los Alamos on international aspects of atomic policy. (I 
know of Bohr’s thoughts on these matters from my own talks with him.) 
Oppenheimer had in fact asked Bohr’s permission (which was given) to 
quote his “classic statement of the feelings with which scientists approach 
the new situation.”*”’ Incidentally, Oppenheimer had been the first Ameri- 
can scientist whom Bohr had contacted after his escape from Denmark. 


The Acheson-Lilienthal Plan 


The natural sciences have fundamentally extended the range of questions 
about which man has to make decisions. 


Oppenheimer?® 


The year 1946 marks the beginnings of serious efforts toward atomic policy, 
both national and worldwide. All these early attempts have turned out to 
be fruitless. Now, with the advantage of hindsight, one can clearly see how 
inevitable these failures had to be. That, however, does not diminish their 
interest as part of the Oppenheimer saga, rather on the contrary, it seems to 
me. Let us see what came to pass. 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS = 147 


In January 1946 the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted a 
resolution calling for the establishment of the United Nations Atomic En- 
ergy Commission (UNAEC). Part of its charge: “The Commission shall 
make specific proposals for extending between all nations the exchange of 
basic scientific information for peaceful purposes.” They should also see to 
it that atomic energy should be confined to peaceful purposes, eliminating 
atomic weapons from national armaments, and effectively safeguarding com- 
plying states. 

The UNAEC organized a scientific and technical subcommittee. The 
Dutch physicist Hans Kramers, friend of Oppenheimer as well as of myself, 
was elected its chairman (which explains why Kramers was in New York in 
1946, where he introduced me to Oppenheimer). 


Meanwhile, earlier that January, Dean Gooderman Acheson (1893-1971), 
then undersecretary of state, had been asked to chair a committee to formu- 
late United States atomic policy that should guide future American repre- 
sentatives at the United Nations. It was an excellent choice. Acheson was a 
man with a sharp mind, who disbelieved in his own omniscience and had 
an experienced respect for both committee process and staff support. Mem- 
bers of his committee were Vannevar Bush, James Conant (1893-1978), lead- 
ing statesman of science, John J. McCloy (1895-1989), assistant secretary of 
war from 1941-1945, and, of course, General Groves. Typically, Acheson 
objected; he had not a clue of atomic matters but was reassured when told 
that most of his committee members knew a lot.°*” 

Acheson chose as his assistant Herbert S. Marks (1907-1960), a young 
lawyer who had understood the urgency of the problem better than most 
nonscientists. It was Marks who made the decisive suggestion that the com- 
mittee Byrnes had appointed was too grand to work the problem through 
for itself. Let there be a board of consultants with the necessary time and 
technical skills, and let its chairman be David Lilienthal (1899-1981), then 
the chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority, where Marks had worked 
for him. Lilienthal had made the TVA a symbol of effective public enter- 
prise; at 45 he was able, articulate, energetic, optimistic, ambitious, and 
decent. Oppenheimer, then still at the University of California, agreed to 
serve on this advisory panel. 

Lilienthal has remembered how on January 22, 1946, he met Oppenheimer: 

Late in the evening we went out to the Shoreham (Hotel, in Washington] and saw 


Oppenheimer, who had just come in by plane from California. First time I had seen 
him. The setting was curious, too: a newly decorated room, very fancy, with a bed 


148 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


inthe room, eight feet wide, and the atmosphere hardly that of a physics laboratory 
or an atom bomb assembly plant. We had a couple of drinks. He walked back and 
forth, making funny “hugh” sounds between sentences or phrases as he paced the 
room, looking at the floor—a mannerism quite strange. Very articulate.” 


From the AEC history: 


The work of education [of the Acheson committee] began Monday morning, 
January 28, in quarters the OSRD had arranged—the loft-like top floor of the 
American Trucking Association Building across Sixteenth Street. . .. There for 
two days... Oppenheimer put his colleagues through a short course in nuclear 
physics. . . . [I]t was the first time the panelists had been exposed to the physicist’s 
extraordinarily fluent, lucid speech. Starting with the most basic concepts, he told 
how plutonium was produced and how the neutron bombardment of thorium 
offered the prospect of deriving important quantities of the fissionable isotope 
U-233. He described the various isotope-separation processes and what it took 
to build a reactor. . . . He explained the physics and ordnance of the uranium 
and plutonium bombs, observing that the effort required here was relatively 
small. It was the fissionable material itself that demanded heroic exertions.” 


Already on the evening of the first day, Lilienthal wrote in his diary: 


No fairy tale that I read in utter rapture and enchantment as a child, no spy 
mystery, no “horror” story, can remotely compare with the scientific recital I 
listened to for six or seven hours today. Seated in a prosaic office . . . I heard 
more of the complete story of the atomic bomb, past, present, and immediate 
future, than any but a few men have yet heard. It was told well, technically, 
dispassionately, but interspersed with stories of the decisions that had to be 
made, the utter simplicity and yet fantastic complexity of the peering into the 
laws of nature that is the essence of this utterly bizarre and, literally, incredible 
business. There were things that have never been even hinted at that are accom- 
plished, or virtually accomplished, facts, that change the whole thesis of our 
inquiry, and of the course of the world in this generation.” 


How adulatory Lilienthal was of Oppenheimer is seen from a letter by 
him: “He is worth living a lifetime just to know that mankind has been able 
to produce such a being. We may have to wait another hundred years for 
the second one to come off the line.”°”* Groves, who found himself at odds 
with the Lilienthal-Oppenheimer axis, was to view their relationship through 
jaundiced eyes. “Everybody genuflected,” he complained. “Lilienthal got so 
bad he would consult Oppie on what tie to wear in the morning.”>”! 

On January 31, Oppenheimer revealed his own thoughts. 


For some time, the outlines of an international control agency had been taking 
shape in his mind. He had not revealed his thinking at the first meetings of the 
consultants. It was better, he judged, to wait until his associates possessed the 
fundamental information necessary to understand his plan. Now he enthusiasti- 
cally sketched a vision of an international agency that would have important 
developmental functions.” 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS 149 


His starting point was that an exclusively negatively defined control, 
decoupled from controlled research and development, would cause great 
difficulties. He compared such a kind of control with an international policy 
authority that goes after lawbreakers by means of a “cops and robbers” 
scheme. It seemed clear to him that in such a procedure the robbers would 
always have the advantage because they would always know more than the 
cops. “I fear that the cops will never know about new methods—only the 
robbers will.”>” 

Therefore, he continued, it is essential to merge development and control 
in one committee, also because there was pitiably little to inspect outside the 
United States, Great Britain, and Canada. Furthermore, there are areas like 
tracer studies for medical and biological purposes that do not need to be con- 
trolled. Domains to be supervised, he argued, are research, development, and 
use of uranium and of atomic explosives. He also emphasized that possible 
conflicts regarding development of atomic energy for industrial purposes need 
to be supervised by an authority with technical competence. 

Oppenheimer’s ideas found immediate resonance. During February the 
Board of Consultants set about “working hard as the very devil on the atomic 
bomb report.””* There was agreement to present an informative document 
to the Acheson Committee that should not settle on one specific control 
plan—that should be left to the parent committee. The result was the so- 
called “Acheson-Lilienthal report,” though it was largely the work of Oppen- 
heimer himself. Its core idea: “International control implies an acceptance 
from the outset of the fact that our monopoly cannot last. . . . It is essential 
that a workable system of safeguards remove from individual nations or 
their citizens the legal right to engage in certain well-defined activities in 
respect to atomic energy which we believe will be generally agreed to be 
intrinsically dangerous because they are or could be made steps in a produc- 
tion of atomic bombs.” 

On March 7 the Acheson and Lilienthal committees met at Dumbarton 
Oaks in Georgetown for the presentation of the report. Lilienthal announced, 
“This, gentlemen, is our recommendation of a plan for security in a world of 
atomic energy.”*” The report was received seriously and positively. 

So far so good. 

But two days earlier the Cold War had begun. 


On March 5, Winston Churchill (1874-1965) gave a speech at Westminster 
College, in Fulton, Missouri, after receiving an honorary degree. With typical 
oratorical skills, Churchill introduced the phrase “Iron Curtain” to describe 


150 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


the division between Western powers and the area controlled by the Soviet 
Union. As such the speech marks the onset of the Cold War. A few lines 
from this address: 


From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic an iron curtain has de- 
scended across the Continent. . . . In a great number of countries, far from the 
Russian frontiers and throughout the world, Communist fifth columns are es- 
tablished and work in complete unity and absolute obedience to the directions 
they receive from the Communist center. . . . [They] constitute a growing chal- 
lenge and peril to Christian civilization. . . . From what I have seen of our 
Russian friends and allies during the war, I am convinced that there is nothing 
they admire so much as strength, and there is nothing for which they have less 
respect than weakness, especially military weakness. 


I have always admired, perhaps revered, Churchill for his acts and even 
more for his words during the Second World War. I was shaken, however, 
when I first read his Fulton speech. Not that what he said was wrong but 
his language appeared to me to be politically tactless and tasteless. Nor was 
he the only one to harbor such opinions at that time. For example, four 
days after this speech, Lilienthal wrote of “the constant fear of a long, bitter 
period of antagonism and strain and perhaps war with the Russians”>”’—but 
that was in his private diary. Churchill could at least have waited until the 
United Nations had come forth with a policy statement. 

Meanwhile much more serious news had become public. Lilienthal again, 
in his diary: “In the meantime, the situation in respect to a rational dealing 
with the problem has been deteriorating, though it is by no means hope- 
less. I refer to the announcement of Russian spies and what not issuing 
from Canada.””* This is what happened. 


Saturday, February 16, brought news from Ottawa of the arrest of twenty-two 
persons in an investigation of the disclosure of secret information, reportedly 
about atomic energy, to unauthorized persons, including members of a foreign 
mission. Although Canadian officials at first denied that atomic energy data 
were involved, it was clear by Tuesday that some “bomb secrets” had reached 
the Soviet embassy. The news stunned Washington. To those who had come to 
think of the “secret” as the nation’s most valuable possession, the reports repre- 
sented a threat to American security. For others, the evidence of Russian per- 
fidy shattered the hopes for international peace and understanding. .. . 

[On February 21] General Groves explained [to a Congressional committee] 
what had not yet been released to the press, that Alan Nunn May [1911-2003], 
a British physicist assigned to the Canadian atomic energy project, had trans- 
mitted to Soviet agents some information about the American effort. During 
three visits to the Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory in 1944, May had seen 
most of the research and development work at the laboratory, learned some- 
thing of the design, construction, and operation of the Hanford piles, and 
received very limited information about the production of fissionable materi- 
als and weapons.” 3# 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS = 1511 


On March 17, the Acheson committee approved the Acheson-Lilienthal plan. 
That evening Acheson handed a copy to Secretary of State James (“Jimmy”) 
Byrnes (1879-1972), accompanied by a covering letter signed by all members. 
The plan was made public on March 28. Two days later, Oppenheimer sent a 
copy to Bohr, along with a letter**! in which he told that even in their gloomy 
moments they did not succeed quite in thinking how difficult it would get to 
be. “This report is not all it should be. . . . For what is good in it, it should be 
dedicated to you.” Bohr replied,**? “to give expression for the deep pleasure it 
was to read this report. . .. From page to page I recognized your broad views 
and refined power of expression.” 
American physicists tended to be less sanguine about Oppenheimer at 
that time. When they met him they felt, 
that he was no longer quite one of them. Some were no doubt susceptible to the 
glamour that now surrounded him, but it was his best friends, in particular, 
who grew cold towards him. One of Oppenheimer’s former favorite pupils re- 
lates, “When Oppie started talking about Dean Acheson as simply ‘Dean,’ and 
actually referred to General Marshall, as merely ‘George,’ I knew that we did 
not move in the same circles any more and that we had come to the parting of 
the ways. I think that his sudden fame and the new position he now occupied 


had gone to his head so much that he began to consider himself God Almighty, 
able to put the whole world to rights.”>” 


The Baruch Plan 


On the evening of March 17, when Acheson had come to see Byrnes, he 
could not suspect what job message was awaiting him: he was told that the 
day before, the 75-year-old financier Bernard Baruch (1870-1965) had been 
appointed as United States spokesman at the United Nations on the inter- 
national control of atomic energy. Acheson protested vehemently but in 
vain against this choice.** Lilienthal in his diary: “When I read this news 
last night, I was quite sick. We need a man who is young, vigorous, not 
vain, and whom the Russians would feel isn’t out simply to put them in a 
hole, not really caring about international cooperation. Baruch has none of 
these qualifications.”**> Years later Oppenheimer said, “That was the day I 
gave up hope, but that was not the day for me to say so publicly.”* 


Searching for scientific advisers, Baruch first fell back on the Acheson com- 
mittee. Groves accepted, Bush and Conant declined. Bush told Baruch to 
his face that he was used to working in “higher echelons” and did not relish 


152 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


his group of “Wall Streeters.”*** Because of Oppenheimer’s feelings about 
Baruch, Acheson took him to see Truman. “Hesitant and cheerless, he 
seemed so different from his reputation that Truman wanted to know what 
was the matter. ‘I feel we have blood on our hands,’ Oppenheimer mumbled. 
‘Never mind,’ said Truman, ‘it’ll all come out in the wash’... . ‘When will 
the Russians be able to build the bomb?’ asked Truman. ‘I don’t know,’ 
said Oppenheimer. ‘I know.’ ‘When?’ ‘Never.’”*? Truman found Oppen- 
heimer’s statements offensive. Later he said to Acheson: “Don’t you bring 
that fellow around again. After all, all he did was make the bomb. I’m the 
guy who fired it off.”>” 

In the event, Oppenheimer also declined to serve as Baruch’s adviser, 
though he and Acheson’s camp bickered with Baruch and his supporters 
for weeks. 


On May 16, 1946—before Baruch first addressed the United Nations— 
Oppenheimer delivered a lecture on “Atomic Explosives” before the George 
Westinghouse Centennial Forum in Pittsburgh. His talk was meant “to add 
a few comments which may help to supplement the [Acheson-Lilienthal] 
report that was made public.” Parts of his address follow: 


In this proposal we attempted to meet, and to put into a constructive context, 
two sets of facts, both long recognized, and commonly regarded as contributing 
to the difficulty, if not to the insolubility, of the problem. 

The first of these facts is that the science, the technology, the industrial de- 
velopment involved in the so-called beneficial uses of atomic energy appear to 
be inextricably intertwined with those involved in making atomic weapons. ... 

The heart of our proposal was the recommendation of an International Atomic 
Development Authority, entrusted with the research, development, and exploi- 
tation of the peaceful applications of atomic energy, with the elimination from 
national armaments of atomic weapons, and with the studies and researches and 
controls that must be directed toward that end. 


Among peaceful applications he mentioned: 


There has even been a little talk of possible beneficent applications of atomic 
explosives, such as the blasting of polar ice or the possible control of major 
natural phenomena such as tornados, earthquakes, eruptions. There is enough 
energy in atomic explosives to give these vague suggestions an air of plausibility; 
even the weapons so far used release an energy about one thousandth of that in 
the San Francisco earthquake. But of course the forces produced by an atomic 
explosion have a very different sort of order from those involved in the great 
natural phenomena of quakes and of tornadoes; and the radiation and radioac- 
tivities that accompany any major atomic explosion must at least complicate its 
application to benign purposes. If men are ever to speak of the benefits of atomic 
energy, I think these applications will at most play a very small part in what 
they have in mind. ... 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS = 153 


The same raw material, uranium, is needed for the use of atomic energy for 
power as for atomic bombs. . . . Thus a mere prohibition on the activities of 
nations in the field of atomic energy sufficiently incisive to inspire confidence 
that, if enforced, it would prevent rapid conversion to atomic armament, would 
at the same time close this field to the exploitation of any of its benefits. This fact, 
which further technical developments appear unlikely to invalidate, has long been 
regarded as an almost decisive difficulty on the path of international control. It 
might have appeared so to us, too, if there had not been a greater one. For even if 
the course of development of atomic energy for peace were entirely distinct from 
its development for war, even if it were universally agreed that there were no 
peaceful applications of atomic energy worthy of interest or of effort, we should 
still be faced with the fact that there exists in the world today no machinery for 
making effective a prohibition against the national development of atomic arma- 
ments. . . [This is] the second of the great difficulties [mentioned before] . . 

What relation does the proposal of an International Atomic Development 
Authority, entrusted with a far-reaching monopoly of atomic energy—what re- 
lation does this proposal of ours have to do with these questions? It proposes 
that in the field of atomic energy there be set up a world government, that in 
this field there be renunciation of national sovereignty, that in this field there 
be no legal veto power, that in this field there be international law. How is this 
possible, in a world of sovereign nations? There are only two ways in which this 
ever can be possible: one is conquest, that destroys sovereignty; and the other is 
the partial renunciation of that sovereignty. What is here proposed is such a 
partial renunciation, sufficient, but not more than sufficient, for an Atomic 
Development Authority to come into being, to exercise its functions of devel- 
opment, exploitation and control, to enable it to live and grow and to protect 
the world against the use of atomic weapons and provide it with the benefits of 
atomic energy. 

Whatever else happens, there is likely to be a discussion of the control of 
atomic energy in the United Nations Commission set up for that purpose... 

If any great note of confidence or gaiety has invested these brief words, it 
would be a distortion of the spirit in which I should have wished to speak to 
you. No thoughtful man can look to the future with any complete assurance 
that the world will not again be ravaged by war, by a total war in which atomic 
weapons contribute their part to the ultimate wreck and attrition of this our 
Western civilization. My own view is that the development of these weapons 
can make, if wisely handled, the problem of preventing war, not. more hopeless, 
but more hopeful, than it would otherwise have been, and that this is so not 
merely because it intensifies the urgency of our hopes, but because it provides 
new and healthy avenues of approach. 


On the morning of June 14, 1946, Baruch led the United States delegation 
intothe hastily converted gymnasium of Hunter College in the Bronx where 
the first meeting of the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission was 
taking place. 

Oppenheimer sat with other members of the United States section and 
sadly watched as the battle lines of self-interest were drawn up with the 
Russians. His vision, which he believed had the irresistible appeal of sanity, 
he saw crushed there. 


154 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In his opening remarks, General Secretary Trygve Lie (1896-1968) found 
it of particular significance that the earlier director of Los Alamos was 
present, the man “who built the bomb and then tried to find ways to get it 
under control.”>”! 

A little after 11 am, Baruch stepped to the rostrum. “We are here to make 
a choice between the quick and the dead, that is our business,” he began. 
The Baruch plan included much of the Acheson-Lilienthal plan but differed 
from it on four essential points. First, he demanded total disarmament, not 
just control over atomic weapons. Secondly, he anticipated prompt punish- 
ment for certain violations of the proposals. Thirdly, the ownership of the 
atomic authority should remain in private hands. Lastly, the most impor- 
tant difference with Acheson-Lilienthal, and Baruch’s most controversial 
new point, “It might as well be admitted here and now that the subject goes 
straight to the veto power contained in the U.N. Charter so far as it relates 
to the field of atomic energy. . . . There must be no veto [regarding atomic 
issues].” As a closing remark Baruch dramatically paraphrased Abraham 
Lincoln (1809-1865): “We shall nobly save, or meanly lose, the last best 
hope of earth. The way is plain, peaceful, generous, just—a way which, if 
followed, the world will forever applaud.”*” 

Lilienthal has recalled Oppenheimer’s immediate reaction to the Baruch 
plan: “Met J.R. O. last night, just in from New York; talked until 1:30 this 
morning. He is really a tragic figure; with all his great attractiveness, bril- 
liance of mind. As I left him he looked so sad: ‘I am ready to go anywhere 
and do anything, but Iam bankrupt of further ideas. And I find that physics 
and the teaching of physics, which is my life, now seems irrelevant.’ It was 
this last that really wrung my heart. Here is the making of great drama; 
indeed, this 7s great drama.” 

The Russian response also came rapidly. On June 19, Andrey Gromyko 
(1909-1989), permanent representative on the Security Council, announced 
that he wanted a flat prohibition on the possession, production and use of 
atomic weapons, and stated that the Soviet Union would never accept any 
change in the veto. Later he would add that his country could not accept 
the Baruch plan “either as a whole or in their separate parts.” 


On July 1, 1946, two weeks and two days after Baruch’s speech, a United 
States fleet was riding at anchor in the lagoon of Bikini Atoll in the Pacific. 
On the skydeck of the U.S.S. Appalachia military experts, congressmen, for- 
eign observers, and a group of accredited journalists were awaiting the test 
shot, named Able, of an atomic bomb, the first postwar shot of its kind. At 
9 aM a B29 bomber dropped the weapon. The pyrotechnics were spectacu- 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS = 155 


lar, the blast less than expected—which, perhaps, may explain a fine pun of 
that time: It doesn’t Bikini difference Atoll. A second shot (July 25), named 
Baker, exploded underwater and was more visible and more impressive. 

The timing of these events was bizarre, to put it mildly. Here was the United 
States testing the atomic bomb with one hand and seeking its control with the 
other. Actually, the timing was set by the need to act before scientists returned 
to their university posts and while Congress was still in session.” 

Be it noted that, the preceding May, Oppenheimer had written to Truman 
to express his reservations about the usefulness of these tests and to record 
his refusal to help with their preparation; also that he served on the 
president’s evaluation committee for Operation Crossroads.*” 

On October 19, 1946, Robert Oppenheimer met with Secretary of Com- 
merce Henry Wallace. Wallace’s diary states: “I never saw a man in such 
an extremely nervous state as Oppenheimer. He seemed to feel that the 
destruction of the entire human race was :mminent. . . . He wanted to 
know if I thought it would [be] any good for him to see the President. I 
said yes. ... He says that Secretary Byrnes’ attitude on the bomb has been 
very bad. It seems that Secretary Byrnes has felt that we could use the bomb 
as a pistol to get what we wanted in international diplomacy. Oppenheimer 
believes that that method will not work. .. .”% 

Within weeks the Baruch plan was gravely ill, and in less than six months 
it was dead. 

By December Baruch had run out of patience and forced a vote. The language of 

the resolution was moderated in deference to other friendly delegations, but in 

essence it endorsed the American position. Gromyko remained adamant. The 
resolution was passed by a vote of 10 to 0, the Russians and Poles abstaining. To 

Baruch the vote was a resounding endorsement. But to him and to his govern- 

ment it was also the end of the road for any real hope that the plan would be 

accepted. Baruch resigned in early January, and there is no record that from that 


day forward anyone near the top of the Truman administration had any hope, 
or made any effort, for agreement.>” 


Desultory discussions on atomic matters continued throughout 1947 and 
1948 but with steadily decreasing expectations. On May 17, 1948, the 
UNAEC recommended the suspension of its own activities. 


1946 as the Highest Point of Oppenheimer’s 
Political Contributions 


By the end of 1946 a chapter in international postwar atomic politics had 
come to its conclusion. For Oppenheimer it marked the year of his most 


156 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


important political contributions—even though these failed to have the de- 

sired effect. 
In 1954 he reflected on why the Russians could not accept the Acheson- 

Lilienthal plan: 
It would have meant that the Russian Government gave up control over things 
going on involving their citizens on their territory. It would have permitted 
free intercourse between Russian nationals and people of the rest of the world. 
It would have meant that there could be no Iron Curtain. . . . I think that any 
attempt at that time to establish control along these lines would, if accepted by 
the Soviets, have so altered their whole system and so altered their whole rela- 
tions with the Western World that the threat which has been building up year 
after year since could not have existed. I think that no one at that time could 
with much confidence believe that they would accept these proposals. I think it 
was important to put them forward, and it was also important not to express 
too much doubt that they might be accepted.” 


Oppenheimer reminisced again about 1946 shortly before his death: the 
negotiations should have been handled under other assumptions than were 
made then, since at that time the United States was the only atomic power. 
The Soviet distrust should have been understandable. The Russians believed 
that the American plan had no other purposes than securing its monopoly 
and building more bombs as long as we considered that necessary, while 
Russia should make public its uranium stock and should put its use of the 
ore in the hands of the international control authority. 

These reflections of Oppenheimer do much to explain why the Cold 
War started in 1946. It should not be forgotten, however, that American 
attitudes also constituted a major contributing factor. “The concept that 
the United States was ahead and could stay ahead by keeping its know-how 
to itself took deep root in this year . . . [as did] the tensions between the fear 
of the atom and reliance upon its protection. That tension reappears in 
every judgment that political leaders have made. In 1946 it was what finally 
divided a Baruch from an Oppenheimer.” 


In view of Oppenheimer’s obvious despair at that time, one should wonder 
why, late in 1946, he did not retire from the enervations of the political 
scene. The reasons are complex. First, he could not find any more appeal in 
continuing research and conventional teaching because of the interruptions 
caused by the war. Secondly, he continued to believe in his powers to con- 
vince others of his views and continued to rely on his abilities to influence 
events because of his insider position. In 1948 he wrote to Bohr of his hopes 
to remain “of [political] use,”*! that is, that he could continue to sway events 
as adviser to political bodies. Thirdly, and most importantly, I believe, was 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS = 157 


the fact that he was emotionally drawn to the political game, like a mos- 
quito is drawn to the killing flame. Yet all his later political activities pale 
by comparison to his 1946 work on the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, which 
might well have carried his name also. And so, in December 1946, after the 
failure of the Baruch plan, he accepted membership in the GAC—where he 
failed in his efforts to give priority to the development of reactors for peace- 
ful purposes over continuing weapons production. 

Onand on his political efforts went. From 1947 to 1952 he was chairman 
of the Committee on Atomic Energy of the Joint Research and Develop- 
ment Board, overseeing research on techniques for detecting nuclear explo- 
sions. He served on the panel that evaluated and confirmed the report by 
early scientific-detection experts that the Soviets had broken the United States 
monopoly on nuclear weapons by testing a device of their own on August 29, 
1949. Serving ina similar capacity, he endorsed the 1951 findings of the United 
States detection system that the Soviets had conducted their second and 
third nuclear tests. He was a member of the Naval Research Advisory 
Committee from 1949 to 1952 and the Science Advisory Committee, Of- 
fice of Defense Mobilization, from 1951 to 1954. He served on the secretary 
of state’s Panel on Disarmament in 1952 and 1953. And this enumeration of 
his services is probably only part of these kinds of contributions. 

As chairman of the GAC he argued for proposals that the AEC would 
play a leading role in fundamental nuclear research, advocating that the 
Commission support such work in universities and other institutions, thus 
helping to initiate the enormous growth of science resulting from govern- 
ment-university cooperation. He was a strong advocate for making funda- 
mental scientific information available to scientists at home and abroad for 
use in basic research. 

In June 1947, Lilienthal wrote about a meeting between the GAC and 
the AEC, to which he had meanwhile been appointed chairman: “Robert 
Oppenheimer summarized the committee’s views on questions we submit- 
ted to them for their opinion, in an hour’s statement that was as brilliant, 
lively, and accurate a statement as I believe I have ever heard. He is pure 
genius. Even these great brains joined in the amazement and delight we all 
felt with this wonderful piece.”*” 


Oppenheimer’s Public Expressions on 
Atomic Policy: 1947-1948 


With the sad outcome of the United Nations’ deliberations behind him, 
Oppenheimer began efforts to explain to general audiences what, in his 


158 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


view, were the problems and prospects in the field of atomic policy. I men- 
tion next some of his opinions dating from 1947-48, as recorded in three 
articles. The main theme of the first is international security; of the second, 
peaceful applications of atomic energy; of the third, a historical perspective. 

The first is from a lecture given on September 17, 1947, in Washington 
to a group of officers in the armed services, the Foreign Service and the 
State Department: , 


There are three planes on which we have more or less explicitly asserted that we 
would like to achieve security: One is international control; this is the official 
policy of the United States. It is a very far-reaching control which would elimi- 
nate the rivalry between nations in this field, which would prevent the surrepti- 
tious arming of one nation against another, which would provide some cushion 
of time before atomic attack, and presumably therefore before any attack with 
weapons of mass destruction, and which would go a long way toward removing 
atomic energy at least as a source of conflict between the powers. . 

Second, there is the path of technical superiority, which has a dual purpose. 
By this superiority I mean that we should always be in the forefront as far as 
ideas, management and development are concerned—we should as much as pos- 
sible avoid being taken by surprise as far as technical development goes, we 
should know our business and have an active and flourishing group of people 
working in the field of atomic energy. This has a dual function—on the one 
hand of giving us the opportunity of maintaining a freedom of maneuver in this 
field which we would entirely lose if we were outstripped or surprised by some 
‘foreign effort, and in the second place, it is regarded—and I think rightly regarded— 
as a strong deterrent to aggression against us. 

The third plane is the plane of actual strength, which in this field—and this 
field is clearly not separate from others—has itself a number of elements which 
need to be spelled out. It means among other things effective, maximumlly effec- 
tive, defense against probable methods of delivery of atomic weapons, proper 
and necessary dispersion for survival in the event of attack, proper schemes for 
the necessary and probably extremely difficult effort of mobilization; it means 
having effective and ready means of retaliation; it means a detailed strategic co- 
ordination for the use of our atomic facilities... . 

You may think it strange that I have included the achievement of interna- 
tional control as one of the things to keep in mind in planning atomic activities. 
This I think . . . is the only way in which this country can have a security 
comparable to that which it had in the years before the war. It is the only way in 
which we will be able to live with bad governments, with new discoveries, with 
irresponsible governments such as are likely to arise in the next hundred years, 
without living in fairly constant fear of the surprise use of these weapons, and 
their surprise development. . . . The whole notion of international control pre- 
supposes a certain confidence, a confidence which may not be inconsistent with 
carrying a gun when you sit down to play poker, but at least is consistent with 
sitting down to play poker.... 

To those who would say that this is no time to be thinking of long-term things, 
or that it is sheer madness, with the “world as it is” to dream about international 
control, or again to those others who say that there is no security except in inter- 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS 159 


national control and that any other precautions are useless, I would quite pro- 
foundly disagree; to them I should like to tell a final story. It is a story of Confucius. 

One day in a clearing in the forest, Confucius came upon a woman in deep 
mourning, racked by sorrow. He learned that her son had just been eaten by a 
tiger; and he attempted to console her, to make clear how unavailing her tears 
would be, to restore her composure. He left, but had barely reentered the forest, 
when the renewed sounds of weeping recalled him. “That is not all,” the woman 
said. “You see, my husband was eaten here a year ago by this same tiger.” Again 
Confucius attempted to console her and again he left only to hear renewed weep- 
ing. “Is that not all?” “Oh, no,” she said. “The year before that my father too 
was eaten by the tiger.” Confucius thought for a moment, and then said: “This 
would not seem to be a very salutary neighborhood. Why don’t you leave it?” 
The woman wrung her hands. “I know,” she said. “I know; but, you see, the 
government is so excellent.” 


From a second article, “Travelling to a land we cannot see,” originally 
published in early 1948: 


[I]n the summer of 1945... it became fully apparent that atomic weapons and 
the large-scale release of atomic energy were not only realizable, but were about 
to be realized. Even at that time a good deal of thought had gone into what 
subsequently came to be known as the peaceful use of atomic energy. .. . It was 
clear to us that the forms and methods by which mankind might in the future 
hope to protect itself against the dangers of unlimited atomic warfare would be 
decisively influenced just by the answer to the question “Is there any good in 
the atom?” From the first, it has been clear that the answer to this question 
would have a certain subtlety. The answer would be “yes,” and emphatically 
“yes,” but it would be a “yes” unconvincing, conditional, and temporizing com- 
pared to the categorical affirmative of the atomic bomb itself. . . . 

Only two classes of peaceful applications of atomic energy were then appar- 
ent. To the best of my knowledge, only two are apparent today. One is the 
development of a new source of power; the other is a family of new instruments 
of research, investigation, technology and therapy. 

Of the former, it was clear two years ago, and it is clear today, that although 
the generation of useful power from atomic sources would assuredly be a soluble 
problem and would under favorable circumstances make decisive progress within 
a decade, the question of the usefulness of this power, the scale on which it 
could be made available, and the costs and general economic values, would take 
a long time to answer.... 

[N]o honest evaluation of the prospects of power in 1945 could fail to recog- 
nize the necessity of intensive development and exploration. Equally, no honest 
evaluation could give assurances as to the ultimate outcome beyond those general 
assurances which the history of our technology justifies. Certainly no evaluation 
at that time, nor for that matter today, could justify regarding atomic power as an 
immediate economic aid to a devastated and fuel- hungry world, nor give its devel- 
opment the urgency which the control of atomic armaments would be sure to 
have once the nature and ferocity of the weapons had been made clear to all. 

With regard to the use of tracer materials, of radioactive species, and of radia- 
tions for science, the practical arts, for technology and medicine, we were in a 
better position to judge what might come. The use of tracer materials was not 


160 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


new. The last decade—the 1930’s—had seen increasingly varied and effective 
applications of them. The use of radiation for the study of the properties of 
matter, for diagnosis, and for therapy was likewise not new. Several decades of 
hopeful and bitter experiences gave us some notion of the power and limitations 
of these tools. What was held in store by the development of atomic reactors 
and of new methods for the handling of radioactive materials and the separation 
of isotopes, was a much greater variety and a vastly greater quantity of tracer 
materials, and a far higher intensity of radiation, than had been available in the 
past. That this would be a stimulus to physical and biological study was clear; that 
its value would in the first instance depend on the skillful development of chemi- 
cal, physical, and biological techniques, and that this development even under the 
circumstances would be a gradual and continuing one, we knew as well. 

Thus, our picture of the peaceful uses of atomic energy was neither trivial 
nor heroic: on the one hand, many years, perhaps many decades, of development— 
largely engineering development—with the purpose of providing new sources 
of power; on the other hand, a new arsenal of instruments for the exploration of 
the physical and biological world, and in time, for their further control, to be 
added to the always growing arsenal of what scientists and engineers have had 
available. 

Three other matters were clear at that time. On the one hand, the develop- 
ment of atomic power could not be separated from technological development 
essential for and largely sufficient for the manufacture of atomic weapons. On 
the other hand, neither the development of power nor the effective and wide- 
spread use of the new tools of research and technology could prosper fully with- 
out a very considerable openness and candor with regard to the technical 
realities—an openness and candor difficult to reconcile with the traditional re- 
quirements of military security about the development of weapons of war. To 
these general considerations we should add again: although the peaceful use of 
atomic energy might well challenge the interest of technical people, and appear 
as an inspiration to statesmen concerned with the welfare of mankind, it could 
not make a direct appeal to the weary, hungry, almost desperate peoples of a 
war-ravaged world. Such an appeal, if made, could hardly be made in honesty. 


In this article, Oppenheimer also reiterated his views on the politics of 
atomic armament. These I shall not quote here in extenso; only the con- 
cluding remarks will be reproduced here. In these one finds his characteris- 
tic blend of despair and hope. 


The view sketched above of the international aspects of the problems of atomic 
energy is a history of high, if not provably unreasonable hope, and of failure. .. . 
It is necessarily denied to us in these days to see at what time, to what immediate 
ends, in what context, and in what manner of world, we may return again to the 
great issues touched on by the international control of atomic energy. Yet even 
in the history of recent failure, we may recognize elements that bear more gen- 
erally on the health of our civilization. We may discern the essential harmony, 
in a world where science has extended and deepened our understanding of the 
common sources of power for evil and power for good, of restraining the one 
and of fostering the other. This is seed we take with us, travelling to a land we 
cannot see, to plant in new soil. 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY POSTWAR YEARS 161 


Thirdly, from the address “The open mind” given on December 11, 
1948, before the joint session of the Rochester Association of the United 
Nations and the Rochester Foreign Policy Association: 


We have a natural sympathy for extending to foreign affairs what we have come 
to learn so well in our political life at home: that an indispensable, perhaps in 
some ways ¢he indispensable, element in giving meaning to the dignity of man, 
and in making possible the taking of decision on the basis of honest conviction, 
is the openness of men’s minds, and the openness of whatever media there are 
for communion between men, free of restraint, free of repression, and free even 
of that most pervasive of all restraints, that of status and of hierarchy. 

In the days of the founding of this republic, in all of the eighteenth century 
which was formative for the growth and the explicit formulation of our politi- 
cal ideals, politics and science were of a piece. The hope that this might in some 
sense again be so, was stirred to new life by the development of atomic energy. 
In this it has throughout been decisive that openness, openness in the first in- 
stance with regard to technical problems and to the actual undertakings under- 
way in various parts of the world, was the one single essential precondition for 
a measure of security in the atomic age. Here we met in uniquely comprehen- 
sible form the alternatives of common understanding, or of the practices of 
secrecy and of force.... 

We need to start with the admission that we see no clear course before us that 
would persuade the governments of the world to join with us in creating a more 
and more open world, and thus to establish the foundation on which persuasion 
might so largely replace coercion in determining human affairs. We ourselves 
have acknowledged this grim prospect, and responded by adopting some of 
the very measures that we had hoped might be universally renounced. With 
misgivings—and there ought to be misgivings—we are rearming, arming atomi- 
cally, as in other fields. With deep misgivings, we are keeping secret not only 
those elements of our military plans, but those elements of our technical in- 
formation and policy, a knowledge of which would render us more subject to 
enemy coercion and less effective in exercising our own.... 

When the time is run, and the future become history, it will be clear how 
little of it we today foresaw or could foresee. How then can we preserve hope 
and sensitiveness which could enable us to take advantage of all that it has in 
store? Our problem is not only to face the somber and the grim elements of the 
future, but to keep them from obscuring it... . 

In that other agony, the Civil War, where the foundations of our govern- 
ment were proved and reaffirmed, it was Lincoln who again and again struck 
true the balance between power and reason. By 1863, the war and the blockade 
had deepened the attrition of the South. They had also stopped the supplies of 
cotton to the English mills. Early that year Lincoln wrote a letter to the work- 
ing men of Manchester. He wrote: 


. It is not always in the power of governments to enlarge or restrict 
the scope of moral results which follow the politics that they may deem 
it necessary for the public safety from time to time to adopt. 

I have understood well that the duty of self-preservation rests solely 
with the American people; but I have at the same time been aware that 


162 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


favor or disfavor of foreign nations might have a material influence in 
enlarging or prolonging the struggle with disloyal men in which the 
country is engaged. A fair examination of history has served to autho- 
rize a belief that the past actions and influences of the United States 
were generally regarded as having been beneficial toward mankind. I 
have, therefore, reckoned upon the forbearance of nations. ... 


Fifteen months later, a year before Lincoln’s death, the battle had turned. He 
could say: 


... When the war began, three years ago, neither party, nor any man, 
expected it would last till now. Each looked for the end in some way, 
long ere today. Neither did any anticipate that domestic slavery would 
be much affected by the war. But here we are; the war has not ended, 
and slavery has been much affected—how much needs not now to be 
recounted. ... 


But we can see the past, though we may not claim to have directed 
it; and seeing it, in this case, we feel more hopeful and confident for 
the future. ... 


It is in our hands to see that the hope of the future is not lost, because we 
were too sure that we knew the answers, too sure that there was no hope. 


CHAPTER 1 § 


OF THE FIRST SERIOUS 
ENEMIES AND OF THE FIRST 
RUSSIAN A-BOMB 


In Which the First Clouds Appear 


Oppenheimer had emerged from the war as an American hero. In 1945 he 
had been considered for nomination to a California Congress seat.” In 
1946 the War Department had called him “a man of boundless energy, rare 
common sense, great personal charm, and possessing tremendous organiza- 
tional abilities.”** In a White House press release (also from 1946), he was 
described as “an outstanding theoretical physicist with the broadest insight 
into all the problems in the development of atomic energy . . . a very help- 
ful citizen .. . [who had the confidence] of the armed services.”** President 
Truman wrote of him: “More than any other man, Oppenheimer is to be 
credited with the achievement of the completed bomb.”*”” 

Robert had paid a price for his glory, however. A friend from that time 
described him as “probably the most famous man in the world today .. . 
[but looking] more emaciated . . . [with] drawn and tired features . . . [and 
whose] emotional resources and nervous system had been strained almost 
to the breaking point.”*? Another friend has also described his looks, “His 
hair cut like a monk’s, skin-tight.”*!! That was what fame had cost him. 
Tides were about to turn, however. 

Small signs on the far horizon can be harbingers of a heavy thunder- 
storm. So it went in Oppenheimer’s postwar years. The first clouds ap- 
peared in 1947. The storm broke loose over him in 1954. In those years 
several irreconcilable issues were to place him at loggerheads with some 
extremely powerful and vindictive men who would silence his voice. 


164 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Early in 1947 American scientists began appealing to the AEC to permit 
distribution of isotopes to European colleagues. The GAC (headed, it will 
be remembered, by Oppenheimer at that time) heartily concurred, noting 
that it would have the effect abroad of restoring confidence in American 
science. On May 31, 1947, Oppenheimer made a presentation of this issue 
before the AEC that was highly praised by Lilienthal.*” The majority of 
the AEC members were in favor of the proposal but one dissented: Lewis 
Strauss, who opined that distribution of isotopes abroad would be a breach 
of security. Nor did he believe that doing so would bring goodwill abroad. 
By a vote of four to one the Commission decided to send a positive recom- 
mendation to the State Department.‘ 


In June 1949, Oppenheimer appeared before the House Committee on 
Unamerican Activities (HUAC). When asked about the political back- 
grounds of some of his Berkeley students, his answers were protective, with 
one exception. When queried about Bernard Peters (1910-1993), also an ex- 
student, “whom he had years ago described to the security officer at Los 
Alamos as ‘quite a Red’ and a ‘crazy person,’ he did not back away from 
these remarks but instead underwrote them firmly. In so doing, he was to 
anger a sizeable section of the scientific community” (including me).‘%* 

The Committee members went on to inquire about the Communist Party 
membership of Robert’s brother Frank. Audaciously, he asked them to 
withdraw the question. Astoundingly, they did. 

A week later, on June 13, Oppenheimer testified before the Joint Com- 
mittee on Atomic Energy (JCAE). This committee was investigating the 
charge by one of its members, Senator Bourke Hickenlooper (1896-1971), 
that the AEC was guilty of “incredible mismanagement.” Robert was now 
about to enter a political battle whose scope he could not have foreseen. 

The year before, the secretary of defense had started cost-cutting mea- 
sures in the three armed services, which now competed against each other 
for funding. They felt threatened by the actions of Lilienthal, the GAC— 
and Oppenheimer. That was the background against which Congress initi- 
ated an investigation, headed by Hickenlooper, to look into alleged waste 
of money on certain AEC projects. One key. issue involved the export of 
radioactive isotopes to foreign researchers, an issue of particular importance 
to the paranoid Strauss. 

Strauss had an ally in Hickenlooper, who was united with him in his 
Opposition to isotope exports. On June 9, Strauss testified before the JCAE 
that the export of isotopes to the allies might be of some military value and, 


OF THE FIRST SERIOUS ENEMIES AND OF THE FIRST RUSSIAN A-BOMB = 165 


therefore, he was against their export.*"® Four days later, Senator Hicken- 
looper announced before the Joint Committee that “when we furnish iso- 
topes” to other nations “we are embarking on a program which I believe is 
. . . inimical to our national defense. . . .”*"” Later that day, Oppenheimer 
testified before the committee on the same subject, and demolished the ar- 
guments of both Strauss and Hickenlooper,** in the process humiliating 
the former. 

David Lilienthal watched as Oppenheimer “dismissed” Strauss’s objec- 
tions “with a swift rapier thrust, just passing it off as not really worthy of 
much consideration. . . .” Oppenheimer had “made fun” of Strauss’s oppo- 
sition, and Gordon Dean remembered “the terrible look on Lewis’s face.”*"? 

An examination of the correspondence between Strauss and Oppenheimer 
reveals that until this incident Strauss wrote to Oppenheimer frequently, 
and as “Dear Robert.” After 1949, there was just one letter from Strauss, 
and it began with “Dear Dr. Oppenheimer.”*° 

June 1949 had been a bad month for Oppenheimer. He had angered col- 
leagues because of the Peters affair, and by his notorious arrogance had 
made his first serious enemies.*! 


A few addenda. 
Richard Rhodes remarks: 


More elementally than political differences, Strauss seems to have been repelled 
by what he characterized as Oppenheimer’s immorality. When Edward Teller, 
some years later, wanted to write that Oppenheimer had been “magnificent,” 
Strauss rebuked him waspishly: “Is a man magnificent who is what JRO was by 
his own admission in respect to his veracity and personal morals? (Did Ernest 
Lawrence ever tell you what he did in the Tolman household?) Some other 
word maybe, Edward, but not magnificent.”*” 


Strauss was referring to the affair Oppenheimer had with Ruth Tolman, 
the wife of Caltech senior physicist Richard Tolman. Tolman was not only 
one of Oppenheimer’s closest colleagues, but when Tolman was part of 
Conant’s team at OSRD during the war, responsible for atomic energy mat- 
ters, Oppenheimer always stayed at the Tolman house when in Washington. 

Rhodes also notes: “Oppenheimer’s friend Joseph Alsop, the influential 
journalist and columnist, would write of Strauss a few years later*” that he 
was a ‘natty, energetic, ambitious, and intelligent man’ who was ‘all pliabil- 
ity’ with his ‘chiefs’ but who ‘likes no argument’ from ‘equals and subordi- 
nates... . One of his fellow commissioners has said of him, “If you disagree 
with Lewis about anything, he assumes you’re just a fool at first. But if you 


166 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


go on disagreeing with him, he concludes you must be a traitor.”’ With 
such a man as Strauss, Alsop concludes, ‘Oppenheimer was fated from the 
first to get on badly.’”*? 

In 1947 Oppenheimer’s troubles had not yet reached the general public, 
however, which continued to be treated to tidbits of the famous man. A 
sample from Life magazine in December 1947: 

The new director has a sharp, selective mind, aud his friends sometimes feel that 

he wins arguments too quickly. He and his family live in an 18-room, white 

colonial house near Fuld Hall, and Oppenheimer stops work at about 6:30 ev- 

ery evening to go home and play with his children, Peter, 6, and Katherine, 3. 

On Sundays he and his wife, who was a biologist, take the children out to hunt 

four-leaf clovers. Mrs. Oppenheimer, whose thinking is also direct, keeps her 

children from cluttering the house with four-leaf clovers by making them eat all 
they find right on the spot.‘ 


The First Soviet A-Bomb 


When Oppenheimer returned to Princeton in September 1949, he was 
greeted with the news that the Soviets had exploded an atomic bomb. This 
is what happened. 

On September 3, a teletype alerted the headquarters of the Air Force’s 
Long Range Detection System that a WB-29 weather reconnaissance plane 
on routine patrol from Japan to Alaska had picked up some measurable 
radioactivity. A filter paper, exposed for three hours at 18,000 feet over the 
North Pacific east of the Kamchatka Peninsula, had produced slightly more 
than the number of radioactive counts per minute necessary to constitute 
an official “alert.” Another test revealed fission fragments. 

As one example of scientists’ reactions, this is what Rabi said in 1954: “I 
was astonished that it came that soon. I will tell youthis was a peculiar kind 
of psychology. If you had asked anybody in 1944 or 1945 when would the 
Russians have it, it would have been 5 years. But every year that went by 
you kept on saying 5 years.”4 

Back to September 1949. A committee of outstanding physicists was ap- 
pointed to examine the evidence, joined on the 19th by Oppenheimer. Their 
findings: the hundreds of samples collected across a broad portion of the 
northern hemisphere showed good correlation in the composition and age 
of the fission products, and their wide dispersal led to the conclusion that 
they had come from a single, large fission reaction. It was still not possible 
to fix the exact time and location of the detonation, nor to determine con- 
clusively the composition of the device, but there was no reluctance on the 


OF THE FIRST SERIOUS ENEMIES AND OF THE FIRST RUSSIAN A-BOMB 167 


part of the panel to accept the conclusion in Oppenheimer’s draft that the 
observed phenomena were “consistent with the view that the origin of the 
fission products was the explosion of an atomic bomb” on August 29.‘” 

Teller later said, “This answer worried me even more than the Russian 
explosion.”*° 

I add brief remarks on the history of the Russian A-bomb. 

Moscow News (an English weekly written in Moscow) of April 12, 1988, 
contains the first publication in full of a letter to Stalin written in April 1942 
by Georgy Flerov. Before the war Flerov, later director of a laboratory at the 
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, had discovered the spontane- 
ous fission of uranium-235, together with Konstantin Petrzhak. Flerov wrote 
his letter, addressed “Dear Iosif Vissarionovich.” After having noted that re- 
cent physics journals from the United States, Britain, and Germany contained 
no reference whatever to fission, he had correctly inferred that scientists in 
those countries were up to something. He pleaded with Stalin to take an 
initiative “concerning the feasibility of the uranium problem.”*! 

Stalin did not take action until mid-August 1945, however—after 
Hiroshima. In a meeting with leading politicians and scientists, he said, “A 
single demand of you, comrades—provide us with atomic weapons in the 
shortest possible time. You know that Hiroshima has shaken the whole 
world. The equilibrium has been destroyed [ravnovesie narushilos}. Provide the 
bomb—it will remove a great danger from us.”*” 


CHAPTER 1 !) 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND 
OF SPY STORIES 


Varia: 1947-1949 


In this section I record a variety of topics from the years 1947 to 1949 that 
led up to October 1949, the time that marks the beginning of Oppenheimer’s 
serious involvement with the issue: shall the United States build a super, a 
hydrogen bomb, or shall it not? 

Already before the Russians had exploded their first A-bomb, Oppenheimer 
had become known for his hard-headedness and strongly anti-Soviet attitude, 
a viewpoint that resulted from his reactions to repeated Soviet obstruction of 
the internationalization of atomic control and disarmament under United 
Nations’ auspices. Speaking to those scientists who were content with the 
United States’ superiority in atomic weapons, Oppenheimer said: “No Gov- 
ernment can adequately meet its responsibilities for defense if it rests content 
with wartime results of this project [Los Alamos].”*? He had warned the 
administration in 1944 of Soviet designs in the Far East, and disagreed with 
those scientists who felt that the international control of the atom would 
bring complete security. His attitude toward Soviet obstruction of the inter- 
national control of atomic energy at the United Nations evolved from a mild 
distrust to a deep resentment.** He even went so far as to advise the Truman 
administration to abandon the United Nations’ negotiations on atomic en- 
ergy control because of the Soviet refusal to adopt the Baruch Plan.** As a 
consultant to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission during 1946 
and 1947, Oppenheimer warned of possible Soviet attempts to secure vital 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 169 


information, and attributed the failure of international control to “the pro- 
grammatic hostility and institutionalized secretiveness” of the Soviets, as well 
as their frequent use of the term: “No!”** 

While the Soviet Union’s intransigence became more obvious to many 
Americans, and the future prospects of Soviet atomic capabilities became 
more manifest, Oppenheimer called for an effective defense against attack 
and for a “ready means of retaliation.” Regarding the available United States 
supply of atomic weapons, he said that we “cannot sit on it, however ad- 
equate, with any total assurance of superiority in this field,” and warned 
how “dangerous complacency could be with regard to work in this field.”*” 
In 1948, he wrote, “Whatever our hopes for the future, we must surely be 
prepared, both in planning and in the development of weapons, and insofar 
as possible in our ‘force in being,’ for more than one kind of conflict.”** 

Meeting Teller at a party right after the war, Oppenheimer had said to 
him, “We have done a wonderful job here [at Los Alamos] and it will be 
many years before anyone can improve on our work in any way.”*” This 
perhaps indicates that in 1949 he, too, was surprised at the speed with which 
the Russians had managed to make their first test bomb. 

On June 12, 1946, “Report of Conference on the Super” was issued as a 
classified document. (A heavily censored version was declassified in 1971.) 
The conference was attended by three members of the British team at Los 
Alamos.“! One of these was the German-born theoretical physicist Emil 
Klaus Fuchs (1911-1988), known in Los Alamos as “penny-in-the-slot- 
Fuchs,” because he only spoke when spoken to.” 

From November 14-17, 1947, a conference of United States, British, and 
Canadian scientists and officials was held in Washington, for the purpose of 
establishing a common declassification policy. Those attending included 
Oppenheimer, Fuchs, and Donald McLean (1913-1983), a representative of 
the British Embassy in Washington.“ Shortly afterward I met Fuchs, for 
the only time, as he stepped out of Oppenheimer’s Princeton office. 

In 1947, the struggle began to establish air power as the preponderant 
force in military planning. But throughout 1947 and 1948, Oppenheimer’s 
advocacy of a balanced force concept, combining conventional forces with 
air retaliatory strength, still met with agreement by Defense Secretary James 
Forrestal (1892-1949), who stated that “we can not rest our security on any 
one arm, weapon, or plan.”“5 However, with the establishment of Presi- 
dent Truman’s Air Policy Committee on January 13, 1947, a concerted 
effort was made to increase our nuclear air power capabilities. The result- 
ant report gave great encouragement to the advocates of air power. 


170 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In 1948, a battle erupted between the Air Force andthe Navy over which 
service was to be invested with the job of strategic bombing. The Navy 
tried to promote the idea of a super carrier for the task, while the Air Force 
insisted that the B-36 bomber was the answer. Air Force chief of staff Gen- 
eral Carl Spaatz (1891-1974) demanded that the control of atomic weapons 
be assigned to his office. Secretary Forrestal agreed, but warned: “I do not 
believe that air power alone can win a war.”*” The Air Force did win the 
battle through its persistence. 

So intense was the struggle over the B-36 that Forrestal remarked that 
there were “fundamental psychoses” surrounding the use of air power, es- 
pecially the “psychosis of the Air Force that the Navy is trying to encroach 
upon the strategic air prerogatives of the Air Force.”“* He expressed his 
concern over “one of the real difficulties” that was “becoming more mani- 
fest every day: the gap in the Air Force of wise and experienced leadership 
in the upper ranks. Ten or even five years from now they will be all right 
... but for the immediate future they have a problem.”“’ The Air Force 
had tended to argue that they had the strategic answers from the begin- 
ning,*® and this attitude was to cause Robert Oppenheimer serious trouble. 
Following the creation in 1947 of the Air Force as a separate branch of the 
military establishment, its top brass had got hold of Oppenheimer’s FBI 
file and “started telling its contents to any officer or civilian employee who 
might conceivably ever come into contact with him.”*! 

The Strategic Air Command (SAC), established in 1948, evolved into the 
principal nuclear retaliatory United States striking force. Curtis LeMay 
(1906-1990), one of the toughest American generals, became its commander. 
He purportedly said, after learning of the feasibility of the H-bomb: “Give 
me more bombs; give me more powerful bombs; then stand out of my way, 
Moscow.” When an Air Force colonel read a report to LeMay on the plen- 
tifulness of atomic bombs, LeMay said: “That’s stupid. It’s crazy. He [the 
colonel] ought to be locked in a box and dropped to the bottom of the sea.” 
LeMay’s face had turned beet red.*” 

Even after it was proven that an unlimited number of atomic bombs 
could be made available to the Air Force—by late 1949 the United States 
had a stockpile of about 200 A-bombs**°—LeMay still did not concede that 
some bombs should be given to the Tactical Air Command; “instead, he 
tripled his own requirements.”*** LeMay apparently believed that all fis- 
sionable material “by right” belonged to SAC, because he thought that there 
was no such thing as enough.“> LeMay once told a visitor that SAC was a 
“wonderful and complex and beautiful instrument,” and it was a “solemn 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 171 


responsibility to tamper with the tuning of this instrument.“ Oppenheimer’s 
activities within the Defense Department would be viewed by the Air Force 
as a deliberate tampering with the effectiveness of its strategic air arm.” 

It is well to remember that the Russian A-bomb was not the only scary 
news at that time. Other sensational, seemingly inexplicable tidings had 
further contributed to bring America into a state of terrible uncertainty. In 
February 1948, the Communist coup in Czechoslovakia had succeeded. On 
June 24, 1948, the Russians had started their blockade of Berlin (lifted July 
1949). In the 1948 presidential elections, anti-Communism became a central 
political issue. On January 25, 1949, Alger Hiss (1904-1996), a high State 
Department official, was sentenced to five years in prison for perjury. On 
October 1, 1949, a week after Truman’s public announcement of the Rus- 
sian A-bomb, the People’s Republic of China was officially inaugurated, 
becoming the most populated Communist nation in the world, with 500 
million people, one fifth of the world’s population. 

“There was no panic in the (U.S. in late 1949, but] the fears and tensions 
of the Cold War were greatly amplified.”** 


Shall the United States Develop the Super? 


In early October 1949 the AEC called for a special meeting of the GAC, to 
be held as soon as possible. They requested advice on the question whether 
or not they should immediately initiate an all-out effort to develop the Su- 
per and what its military worth would be in relation to fission weapons. 
On October 21, a week before that GAC meeting, Oppenheimer sent a 
letter*” to James Conant, a fellow GAC member, which reads in part: 


On the technical side, as far as I can tell, the super is not very different from 
what it was when we first spoke of it more than 7 years ago: a weapon of un- 
known design, cost, deliverability and military value. But a very great change 
has taken place in the climate of opinion. On the one hand, two experienced 
promoters have been at work, i.e., Ernest Lawrence and Edward Teller. The 
project has long been dear to Teller’s heart; and Ernest has convinced himself 
that we must learn from Operation Joe that the Russians will soon do the super, 
and that we had better beat them to it... . Ernest spoke to . . . some at least of 
the joint chiefs. The joint congressional committee, having tried to find some- 
thing tangible to chew on ever since September 23rd, has at last found its an- 
swer. We must havea super, and we must have it fast. A subcommittee is heading 
west to investigate this problem at Los Alamos and in Berkeley. The joint chiefs 
appear informally to have decided to give the development of the super overrid- 
ing priority, though no formal request has come through. The climate of opin- 
ion among the competent physicists also shows signs of shifting. . . . 


172 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


What concerns me is really not the technical problem. I am not sure the 
miserable thing will work, nor that it can be gotten to a target except by ox cart. 
It seems likely to me even further to worsen the unbalance of our present war 
plans. What does worry me is that this thing appears to have caught the imagi- 
nation, both of the congressional and of military people, as the answer to the 
problem posed by the Russian advance. It would be folly to oppose the explora- 
tion of this weapon. We have always known it had to be done; and it does have 
to be done, though it appears to be singularly proof against any form of experi- 
mental approach. But that we became committed to it as the way to save the 
country and the peace appears to me full of dangers. 


In explanation of this letter, note that as early as September 1945, the 
Scientific Panel to the Interim Committee of the War Department reported 
that “the very feasibility of a super bomb does not appear now, on theoreti- 
cal grounds, as certain as the fission bomb appeared certain, on theoretical 
grounds, when the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory was started.”* In- 
deed, it was not until June 1951 that a feasible approach to the production 
of the hydrogen bomb was perfected, revealed at Oppenheimer’s Princeton 
office on June 16-17, 1951.‘ (I shall come back shortly to this crucial ad- 
vance.) Until that time all Teller’s efforts, begun in 1942, had led absolutely 
nowhere. In those years Teller’s work had been based on the idea that the 
essential ingredients for the bomb, deuterium and tritium, had to be kept 
under pressure at more than 400 degrees below zero to remain in their liquid 
state.” Nor could this kind of bomb be loaded easily into an aircraft— 
which explains Robert’s picturesque allusion to an ox cart. He understood 
that the bomb was a weapon of unknown design, cost, deliverability, and 
military value, as things stood in 1949. Moreover, if a crash program were 
to be undertaken on an H-bomb, the manufacture of tritium and pluto- 
nium needed for the bomb would have to be drained from the existing 
fission bomb program, along with the already limited supply of neutrons, 
manpower, and funds. 

Robert’s critique of the status in 1949 of hydrogen bomb construction 
was entirely justified. It was not the only reason why he was anti-Super at 
that time, however. Alvarez, another pro-Super physicist, has recalled what 
Oppenheimer had said to him a week after the letter to Conant: “He said 
that he did not think the United States should build the hydrogen bomb, 
and the main reason that he gave for this if my memory serves me cor- 
rectly, and I think it does, was that if we built a hydrogen bomb, then the 
Russians would build a hydrogen bomb, whereas if we did not build a hy- 
drogen bomb, then the Russians would not build a hydrogen bomb.” 


In those first months of its existence, the General Advisory Committee was a 
very real revitalizing force for the whole atomic energy programme. It revived 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 173 


the reactors at Hanford, which had burned out and stopped producing pluto- 
nium. At Oak Ridge the immensely costly electromagnetic separation plants 
which had served a valuable function in the wartime race against time were shut 
down. Los Alamos was relieved of its routine production line work so that the 
physicists there could concentrate on the sophistication of the bomb design. 
Two new laboratories, at Brookhaven and Argonne, joined Los Alamos in this 
basic research and under the watchful eye of the GAC grew in size and prestige 
to match Los Alamos. 

For physics at least, the period under Oppenheimer and his Committee was 
something of an age of enlightenment. There was money, there was equipment, 
and there was an atmosphere of expansionism. . . .“ 


How Oppenheimer actually ran this committee was, in the years ahead, to 
become an important question particularly as many of their decisions were to 
be the center of controversy. In essence, the critics and victims of the Commit- 
tee believed that Oppenheimer manipulated it to his own ends but, from within, 
this seemed to be anything but the case. 


He was not an original [Isidor Rabi said]. Most of the real ideas came 
from others but he could open doors and present them. Give 
Oppenheimer the glimmering of an ideaand he’d present it most beau- 
tifully. Far from bending us to his viewpoint, he took other people’s 
views, absolutely. Then he’d make them more acceptable, more clear, 
more persuasive and this sort of thing made him a wonderful front. 


There was a good deal of talk about how he had swayed or hypno- 
tized or improperly influenced the General Advisory Committee, says 
John Manley. I was there and I knew he didn’t do any such thing. I 
can’t imagine any nine people who’d be more insistent on each mak- 
ing up his own mind for himself. What happened was that he at all 
times had the national interest at heart and never did anything or wanted 

‘todo anything except in the national interest as he sawit, and they could 
tell this as well as I could. 


Nobody was ever to disagree about the sincerity of Oppenheimer’s actions, 
but there were to be many who would question his interpretation of the “na- 
tional interest.” [Probably his oft-quoted remark: “In some sort of crude sense 
which no vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement can quite extinguish, the physi- 
cists have known sin; and this is a knowledge which they cannot lose” may 
not have sat well with the military.) Over the next few years Oppenheimer was 
going to learn the hard way the price of having an independent mind in the 
political world." 


The GAC special meeting, perhaps the most important one in its history, 
began at 2 pM on October 28, 1949—four days after the cornerstone for the 
U.N. building in New York had been laid. Its report, almost entirely de- 
classified, became public in 1974. It consists of three parts,‘ following a 
letter of transmittal by Oppenheimer, all of it drafted and edited on Octo- 
ber 30 in a matter of a few hours. 


174 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


The first part deals with what may be called—such is the speed of history— 
conventional, fission-type atomic weapons. It says in part: “We are not satis- 
fied that the present scale [of production of fissionable material] represents 
either the maximum or the optimum scale. . . . The GAC recommends [to 
the AEC] an intensification of efforts to make atomic weapons available for 
tactical purposes.” 

This statement is of particular interest since it shows that the suggestion 
often made, that Oppenheimer was opposed to nuclear weapons of any 
kind, is incorrect. He did believe in the need for such weapons as long as 
there did not exist an international agreement on atomic arms control. 

From part two, dealing with the Super: 


It is notable that there appears to be no experimental approach short of actual 
test which will substantially add to our conviction that a given model will or 
will not work, and it is also notable that because of the unsymmetric and ex- 
tremely unfamiliar conditions obtaining, some considerable doubt will surely 
remain as to the soundness of theoretical anticipation. Thus, we are faced with a 
development which cannot be carried to the point of conviction without the 
actual construction and demonstration of the essential elements of the weapon 
in question. This does not mean that further theoretical studies would be with- 
out avail. It does mean that they could not be decisive. A final point that needs 
to be stressed is that many tests may be required before a workable model has 
been evolved or before it has been established beyond reasonable doubt that no 
such model can be evolved. Although we are not able to give a specific probabil- 
ity rating for any given model, we believe that an imaginative and concerted 
attack on the problem has a better than even chance of producing the weapon 
within five years. 


Given the fact that, at the time of that GAC meeting, the concepts about 
the Super were still in the “ox-cart” stage, this is a very positive statement. 
It contradicts what would be said a few years later about Oppenheimer, 
cosigner of this statement: that he painted a falsely gloomy picture of the 
possibilities of producing the Super. 

Part two continues with estimates of the Super’s effects: 


A second characteristic of the super bomb is that once the problem of initiation 
has been solved, there is no limit to the explosive power of the bomb itself 
except that imposed by requirements of delivery. .. . Taking into account the 
probable limitations of carriers likely to be available for the delivery of such a 
weapon, it has generally been estimated that the weapon would have an explo- 
sive effect some hundreds of times that of present fission bombs. This would 
correspond to a damage area of the order of hundreds of square miles, to ther- 
mal radiation effects extending over a comparable area, and to very grave con- 
tamination problems which can easily be made more acute, and may possibly be 
rendered less acute, by surrounding the deuterium with uranium or other mate- 
rial. It needs to be borne in mind that for delivery by ship, submarine or other 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 175 


such carrier, the limitations here outlined no longer apply and that the weapon 
is from a technical point of view without limitations with regard to the damage 
that it can inflict. 

It is clear that the use of this weapon would bring about the destruction of 
innumerable human lives; it is not a weapon which can be used exclusively for 
the destruction of material installations of military or semi-military purposes. 
Its use therefore carries much further than the atomic bomb itself the policy of 
exterminating civilian populations. . . . It is clearly impossible with the vague- 
ness of design and the uncertainty of performance as we have them at present to 
give anything like a cost estimate of the super. If one uses the strict criteria of 
damage area per dollar and if one accepts the limitations on air carrier capacity 
likely to obtain in the years immediately ahead, it appears uncertain to us whether 
the super will be cheaper or more expensive than the fission bombs. 


Part three deals with the heart of the matter: Should the Super be developed? 


Although the members of the Advisory Committee are not unanimous in their 
proposals as to what should be done with regard to the super bomb, there are 
certain elements of unanimity among us. We all hope that by one means or 
another, the development of these weapons can be avoided. We are all reluctant 
to see the United States take the initiative in precipitating this development. We 
are all agreed that it would be wrong at the present moment to commit our- 
selves to an all-out effort toward its development. 

We are somewhat divided as to the nature of the commitment not to develop 
the weapon. The majority feel that this should be an unqualified commitment. 
Others feel that it should be made conditional on the response of the Soviet 
government to a proposal to renounce such development. The Committee rec- 
ommends that enough be declassified about the super bomb so that a public 
statement of policy can be made at this time. 


Two addenda follow. From the first, signed by five of the GAC mem- 
bers, including Oppenheimer: 


We have been asked by the Commission whether or not they should immedi- 
ately initiate an “all-out” effort to develop a weapon whose energy release is 100 
to 1000 times greater and whose destructive power in terms of area of damage is 
20 to 100 times greater than those of the present atomic bomb. We recommend 
strongly against such action. 

We base our recommendation on our belief that the extreme dangers to man- 
kind inherent in the proposal wholly outweigh any military advantage that could 
come from this development. Let it be clearly realized that this is a super weapon; 
it is in a totally different category from an atomic bomb. The reason for devel- 
oping such super bombs would be to have the capacity to devastate a vast area 
with a single bomb. Its use would involve a decision to slaughter a vast number 
of civilians. We are alarmed as to the possible global effects of the radioactivity 
generated by the explosion of a few super bombs of conceivable magnitude. If 
super bombs will work at all, there is no inherent limit in the destructive power 
that may be attained with them. Therefore, a super bomb might become a weapon 
of genocide. . .. 


176 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


The existence of such a weapon in our armory would have far-reaching ef- 
fects on world opinion: reasonable people the world over would realize that the 
existence of a weapon of this type whose power of destruction is essentially 
unlimited represents a threat to the future of the human race which is intoler- 
able. Thus we believe that the psychological effect of the weapon in our hands 
would be adverse to our interest. 

We believe a super bomb should never be produced. Mankind would be far 
better off no to have a demonstration of the feasibility of such a weapon until 
the present climate of world opinion changes... . 

In determining not to proceed to develop the super bomb, we see a unique 
opportunity of providing by example some limitations on the totality of war 
and thus of limiting the fear and arousing the hopes of mankind. .. . 


The second addendum, signed by Fermi and Rabi, is even more strongly 
worded. It says in part: 


By its very nature it cannot be confined to a military objective but becomes a 
weapon which in practical effect is almost one of genocide. 

It is clear that the use of such a weapon cannot be justified on any ethical 
ground which gives a human being a certain individuality and dignity even if he 
happens to be a resident of an enemy country. 

The fact that no limits exist to the destructiveness of this weapon makes its 
very existence and the knowledge of its construction a danger to humanity as a 
whole. It is necessarily an evil thing considered in any light. . . . 


On December 2-3 the GAC reconvened to review the question of the 
Super once more. Oppenheimer reported to the AEC that no member of 
the GAC wished to change his opinions expressed in the earlier meetings. 
The AEC members’ views were mixed. Chairman Lilienthal agreed with the 
GAC conclusions,‘”! but Strauss was pro Super, as he expressed in a letter to 
Truman: 


I believe that the United States must be as completely armed as any possible 
enemy. From this, it follows that I believe it unwise to renounce, unilaterally, 
any weapon which an enemy can reasonably be expected to possess. I recommend 
that the President direct the Atomic Energy Commission to proceed with the 
development of the thermonuclear bomb, at highest priority subject only to 
the judgment of the Department of Defense as to its value as a weapon, and of 
the advice of the Department of State as to the diplomatic consequences of its 
unilateral renunciation or its possession.‘ 


The final AEC vote was 3 to 2 against. 

Most physicists were against. I have already mentioned the principal ones 
who were pro Super. To those I should add Von Neumann, whose efforts 
consisted mainly in “talking [the] ear off”? Oppenheimer.*” 


On the afternoon of January 31, 1950, President Truman publicly announced 
his decision to go ahead with the development of the hydrogen bomb: 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 177 


It is part of my responsibility as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces to see 
to it that our country is able to defend itself against any possible aggressor. 
Accordingly, I have directed the Atomic Energy Commission to continue its 
work on all forms of atomic weapons, including the so-called hydrogen or 
super-bomb. Like all other work in the field of atomic weapons, it is being and 
will be carried forward on a basis consistent with the over-all objectives of our 
program for peace and security. 

This we shall continue to do until a satisfactory plan for international con- 
trol of atomic energy is achieved. We shall also continue to examine all those 
factors that affect our program for peace and this country’s security.‘”4 


Later that day, a newspaper columnist spotted Oppenheimer standing 
alone and morose on the sidelines of a party. “You don’t look jubilant,” he 
said to him. After a long pause Oppenheimer replied: “This is the plague of 
Thebes.”*7* 

I didn’t know what that oracular statement meant, so I looked for it in 
an encyclopedia. I believe that this is what Robert had in mind: in 302 aD a 
legion of soldiers from Egyptian Thebes was sent by Emperor Maximianus 
to fight the Christians in Gaul. The legion refused to fight and was slaugh- 
tered near St. Maurice in Canton Wallis. June 22, “the day of the 10,000 
knights” is the day held in sacred memory of that event. Very Robert.* 

Some consequences of the Truman decision: 

The Air Force framed an alliance with Senator Hickenlooper to oust 
Lilienthal because he had opposed the Super. Lilienthal resigned of his own 
accord in 1950, however. He was succeeded by Gordon Dean, who, in turn, 
was followed in 1953 by Strauss.‘ 

The Air Force chief of staff appointed Vannevar Bush over Oppenheimer as 
chairman of an Air Force committee to study the uses of the H-bomb, because 
he “lacked trust in Robert Oppenheimer,”*” since he (O.) refused to place ex- 
clusive reliance for U.S. defense on the deterrent effect of the H-bomb. 

In 1952, Teller got his own weapons laboratory at Livermore, fifty miles 
inland from Berkeley. 


Emil Klaus Julius Fuchs et al. 


From Lilienthal’s journal, February 2, 1950: “The roof fell in today, you 
might say... . The news... will be out tomorrow when [Klaus Fuchs] is 
arraigned in London. . . . [A]s the President is reported to have said to [an 
aide], tie on your hat.” From the entry of February 3: 


*One wonders, however, whether Oppenheimer was not simply referring to the 
plague that afflicts Thebes in Oedipus. RPC 


178 =J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


I got to the office at about 9. . . to find an agitated bunch. The word was on the 
radio, the British had it at twelve o’clock their time . . . six o’clock ours. I was as 
calm as I can remember being; insisted we put into the statement the strongest 
language about what Fuchs knew and was part of: “a wide area of the most vital 
weapons information,” including Fuchs’s attendance at a 1947 declassification 
conference [mentioned earlier] with the British. 

The Joint Committee had set a meeting for 10:30, with a good attendance. . . . 
When called on, I told the story in terms of what he [Fuchs] knew, emphasized 
this was no periphery guy, or a courier, or a dumb spy, but a scientist who knew 
most of the weapons stuff because he had helped work out many of the most 
difficult of the problems. I poured it on: there wasn’t a bright light in the whole 
picture. This had a good, sobering effect. They were most courteous, . . . asked 
what advice I had. I said, “This is bad; but let’s not panic the country; keep your 
shirt on, don’t wallow in it. And let’s hope this won’t so disturb the Los Alamos 
outfit, or investigations so harass everyone that the new super program is held up.”*” 


The news about Fuchs had actually reached the United States a week be- 
fore Lilienthal heard of it. Already on January 27 a Counselor of the British 
Embassy had informed the undersecretary of state of the affair.*” The presi- 
dent did not learn of Fuch’s espionage until February 1,*° the day after he had 
made his hydrogen bomb announcement, which explains Strauss’s flattery of 
the President. “The recent word from the FBI .. . only fortifies the wisdom 
of your decision.”**! The congressional JCAE members recognized the seri- 
ousness of the perfidy but did not indulge in recrimination. A year later they 
reported, a bit too dramatically: “Fuchs alone has influenced the safety of 
more people and accomplished greater damage than any other spy not only 
in the history of the United States but in the history of nations.”*? 

I next sketch briefly Fuchs’s life*” up till the time of his confession at age 38. 


Fuchs was born in 1911 in a Rhine valley village south of Frankfurt, and 
brought up in a poor, strictly pious Quaker home. He saw tragedy in his 
early years: the suicide of his mother, and of his elder sister, a Communist, 
who jumped in front of a train when she was about to be arrested by Nazis. 
He studied physics and mathematics at the Universities of Leipzig, then 
Kiel, where he joined the Communist Party. 

After the burning of the Reichstag in 1933, he went underground, then 
fled to Paris. “I was sent out by the Party.”*** From there he found his way 
to Edinburgh, where “he did some excellent work in the electron theory of 
metals.”**° In May 1940 he was interned on the Isle of Man as an enemy 
alien, and from there was shipped to a Canadian army camp. During all 
that time he had “complete confidence in Russian policy.”*° Intercession 
by friends made possible his return to England in December 1940. In 1941 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 179 


he started atomic bomb work in Birmingham, directed by Rudolf Peierls 
(1907-1995). 

“When I learned of the purpose of the work I decided to inform Rus- 
sia,”*8° and made contact with a secretary of the Russian embassy in Lon- 
don. In August 1942 he became a British citizen. 

In December 1943 Fuchs arrived in New York as a member of a British 
team of scientists engaged in atomic bomb work. Before leaving England 
his Russian connection had told him when and where in New York to meet 
with a new contact person, code named Raymond. His real name was Harry 
Gold (1910-1972), born Heinrich Golodnitsky, in Switzerland, who had 
become a naturalized American citizen. He was a middleman who reported 
to a Soviet supervisor. Gold met with Fuchs a number of times before Fuchs 
left for Los Alamos in late 1944. In subsequent contact with Gold he in- 
formed him of the design and method of construction of the plutonium 
bomb and of the implosion device used for its explosion. He also told him 
of the Trinity test a month before the event. In Albuquerque, near Los 
Alamos, Gold also contacted another American, David Greenglass (1922-), 
who handed him the drawings of the implosion lens which he had stolen 
from Los Alamos, for which Gold gave him five hundred dollars. It should 
be noted that Fuchs always waved aside Gold’s offers of money. His spying 
was motivated by idealism. 

During their last meeting, on September 19, 1945, Fuchs gave Gold vital 
information on the two bombs exploded over Japan, their size and content 
and how they were detonated. They did not meet again. On June 16, 1946, 
Fuchs left Los Alamos for good. A few weeks later he arrived at Harwell to 
take up his position as head of the theory section. He was the only scientist 
there deeply involved with atomic weapons. 

In early 1947 Fuchs felt the draw to Moscow again and once more made 
Russian contacts, to whom he was able to give details about British pluto- 
nium production. 

After Truman’s announcement of the Russian A-bomb, U.S. intelligence 
had already begun to explore the possibility that espionage had contributed 
to the timely Soviet success. Intercepts of KGB messages led the FBI to 
conclude that Fuchs was the prime suspect, on whom they opened a case 
file**” on September 22, 1949—the day before Truman had announced the 
news of the Russian bomb. After carefully considering the FBI informa- 
tion, Prime Minister Atlee authorized a circumspect interrogation, for which, 
curiously enough, Fuchs himself provided a convenient pretext. 


180 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In mid-October Fuchs approached the security officer at Harwell for 
advice on a personal problem. Could his father get into difficulty because 
he had accepted a professorship in theology at the University of Leipzig, in 
the Russian Zone? In the course of that discussion the officer asked him if 
he had not passed information to a Soviet official in New York. “I don’t 
think so,” said Fuchs, with a look of surprise. Whereupon he was told that 
there existed information showing that he was guilty of espionage on be- 
half of the Soviet Union. Fuchs persisted in denying this several times, until 
January 13, 1950, when he told the officer that he had decided to confess. 
On February 2 he was formally arrested in London, after having pleaded 
guilty of espionage in Birmingham, New York, Boston, and Harwell. His 
confession also included information about the Super, about which he, 
jointly with Von Neumann, had in 1946 produced a top-secret “Disclosure 
of Invention,” or patent. He was arraigned on February 3. 

The news made headlines throughout the world. Publicly Oppenheimer 
said of the physicists: “We were a pretty glum bunch.”* I remember what 
Oppenheimer privately said to me that week: “I hope that Fuchs will have 
told the Russians all we know about the Super, because that will set them 
back several years.” I could of course not ask at that time what Robert 
meant by that. Now I know: Fuchs’s only knowledge, at that time, was the 
“ox-cart” model. 


Six days later, on February 9, Joseph McCarthy (1908-1957), the junior 
Senator from Wisconsin, gave aspeech in Wheeling, West Virginia, in which 
he claimed to have a list of 205 Communists who worked in the U.S. State 
Department. So began the dark days of McCarthyism. 


One day in February 1950 Fuchs stood trial in Old Bailey, before Lord 
Goddard, the lord chief justice, who pronounced: “The maximum sentence 
which Parliament has ordained for [your] crime is fourteen years imprison- 
ment, and that is the sentence I pass upon you.” The trial had lasted exactly 
one hour and twenty minutes. 

On February 12, 1951, Fuchs was deprived of his British nationality. On 
June 22, 1959, he was released from Wakefield prison, having served nine 
years. On the same day he was placed on a Polish airliner for East Berlin, 
where, on arrival he said in a press conference that he would “work for the 
new society.” He was granted East German citizenship and appointed 
Deputy Director, later Director, of the East German Institute for Nuclear 
Physics at Rossendorf near Dresden. He died in 1988. 


OF THE SUPERBOMB AND OF SPY STORIES 181 


In concluding this spy story, I note what happened to some others of 
those involved. 

On May 23, 1950, Harry Gold was arrested in Philadelphia. Fuchs posi- 
tively identified him on the day after Gold’s arrest and after he (G.) had 
signed his confession. On December 9 he was brought up for sentencing 
and was convicted to 30 years in prison, the maximum admissible sentence. 
He was released on parole in 1965. He had been awarded the Order of the 
Red Star of the USSR, which entitled him to free bus rides in Moscow, 
where he never went. 

David Greenglass was arrested in New York on June 16, after Gold had 
identified him the preceding June 4 from a photograph. On the front page 
of the June 24 New York Times one will find a picture of Greenglass being 
escorted in handcuffs from a New York court. On April 6, 1951, he was 
sentenced to 15 years in prison but was released in 1960. 

In passing his sentence the judge had said to Greenglass: “You repented 
and you brought to justice those who enlisted you in this cause.” What this 
loathsome man had managed to do was to give testimony about having told 
Julius (1918-1953) and Ethel Rosenberg (1915-1953) scientific secrets of 
which he in fact had no inkling. This was a main contributory cause of the 
arrests of Julius, on July 17, 1950, and of Ethel, the following August 11. 

This is what happened in the next few years. 

On June 7, 1951, the press reported that Donald Maclean, one of the 
“Cambridge five,” and conversant with secret atomic matters, had defected 
to the Soviet Union. On March 5, 1953, the New York Times reported the 
deaths of Stalin and, the next day, that the Tennessee legislature had adopted 
this resolution: “Whereas Josef Stalin is dead, long live America”—a typical 
sample of Cold War silliness. 

On June 19, 1953, the Rosenbergs, Julius and Ethel, convicted of atomic 
espionage, went to Sing Sing’s electric chair. Whatever they were guilty of, 
their execution was a blemish on the United States. 


In September 1943 the Security Officer at Los Alamos had written to his 
superior in San Francisco: “The writer wishes to go on record as saying that 
J. R. Oppenheimer is playing a key part in the attempt of the Soviet Union 
to secure, by espionage, highly secret information which is vital to the So- 
viet Union.” This totally unfounded allegation—about which more later— 
explains why I felt the need to add the present section on espionage. It is 
meant to give a sense of the climate of intense suspicion which would soon 
develop around Oppenheimer. 


182. J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Finally, a personal note. Some time in mid-1950 I received a letter from 
Peierls, sent from Birmingham, in which he offered me the position of head 
of the theory division, vacant after Fuchs’s arrest. I replied that I felt much 
honored by his offer but had to decline. One reason was that it would require 
me to become a British subject. The other was that I had never been involved 
with projects related to atomic weapons and did not wish to do so now. 


CHAPTER 20 


THE NEW SUPER 


The Teller-Ulam Invention 


Stanislaw Marcius Ulam (1909-1984), a brilliant Polish-born mathemati- 
cian, was a staff member at Los Alamos from 1943 until 1967. In the begin- 
ning of that period, he had been working primarily, without major success, 
on devising schemes for a workable hydrogen bomb. Then, in January 1951, 
his wife remembered: “Engraved on my memory is the day when I found 
him at noon staring intensely out of a window in our Santa Fe living room 
with a very strange expression on his face. Peering unseeing into the gar- 
den, he said, ‘I found a way to make it work.’ ‘What work?’ I asked. ‘The 
Super,” he replied. ‘It is a totally different scheme, and it will change the 
course of history.’”*° Not even Teller had anticipated Ulam’s idea. Years 
later, Bethe has written: “The new concept was to me, who had been rather 
closely associated with the program, about as surprising as the discovery of 
fission had been to physicists in 1939.”*! 


As we learn from a report*” on work at Los Alamos on thermonuclear weap- 
ons in the years 1946-1950, in the months that followed Truman’s January 
1950 directive that work on the Super should proceed, the prospect of actu- 
ally being able to build a hydrogen bomb became less and less likely. Ulam 
had undertaken calculations of the amount of tritium that would be needed 
for ignition of the classical Super. The results were spectacular and discourag- 
ing: the amount needed was estimated to be enormous. In the summer of 


184 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


1950 more detailed and thorough calculations by other members of the Los 
Alamos Theoretical Division confirmed Ulam’s estimates. This meant that 
the cost of the Super program would be prohibitive. Also in the summer of 
1950, Fermi and Ulam calculated that liquid deuterium probably would not 
burn—that is, there would probably be no self-sustaining and propagating 
reaction. Barring surprises, therefore, the theoretical work to 1950 indicated 
that every important assumption regarding the viability of the classical Super 
was wrong. If success was to come, it would have to be accomplished by 
other means. 

By 1951 one important and, in the event, very useful idea had been put 
forward, however. It had been realized by then that a salt-like compound of 
a lithium isotope and deuterium, lithium six deuteride (Li*H), could serve 
as a fuel alternative to liquid deuterium. That variant came to be known as 
the “dry bomb.” Lithium, a soft, silvery-white metal, atomic number 3, was 
already in use in the American bomb program in the form of lithium fluo- 
ride slugs, which were irradiated in the Hanford reactors to produce tri- 
tium, superheavy hydrogen (symbol T). Lithium in a bomb would pick up 
neutrons (n) from the reaction 


D+D- He? + n + 3.27 MeV 


where D = deuterium, heavy hydrogen, and 1 MeV is an energy unit (mil- 
lion electron volts), 6.25 x 10'2 MeV = 1 joule. The neutrons collide with 
lithium to yield 


Lif + n> He* + T + 4.78 MeV, 
and the principal fusion reaction follows: 
D + T > He* + n + 17.5 MeV. 


The advantage of using lithium in a thermonuclear device would be at 
least twofold: it would generate tritium at hand, reducing or eliminating 
the need for incorporating expensive reactor-bred tritium into the design; 
and it was a solid at room temperature and did not require maintaining 
within a bomb temperatures at several hundred degrees below zero (with 
all the elaborate bottling and insulating that would entail) as liquid deute- 
rium did—no more ox-cart! 


Turning now to Ulam’s major idea of January 1951, I should note first of all 
that details of that development remain classified and therefore not known 
to me, since I have no access to classified information. Qualitative aspects 


THE NEW SUPER 185 


have been widely disseminated, however, and can in fact be found by visit- 
ing the Internet. I can therefore convey at least some highlights. 

In December 1950, Ulam had made a proposal for a new fission weapon, 
entirely independently of the thermonuclear program. His suggestion was 
to use the hydrodynamic, mechanical shock of an ordinary fission bomb to 
compress to a very high density a second fissile core, the idea behind this 
two-stage fission device being that fissionable materials could be used more 
economically this way. 

Ulam’s breakthrough of January 1951 was to use a similar two-stage pro- 
cedure for compressing and igniting a thermonuclear bomb. He recognized 
that the burning of thermonuclear fuel would be more efficient if a high 
density were achieved throughout the fuel prior to raising its temperature, 
rather than the classical Super approach of just raising the temperature of 
uncompressed liquid deuterium to the point, it was hoped, when it would 
sustain thermonuclear burning. In Ulam’s way a relatively small fission 
explosion can ignite an arbitrarily large amount of thermonuclear fuel. 

Ulam has recalled Teller’s reaction when he went to tell him of his new 
idea: “For the first half hour [he] did not want to accept the new possibility 
[but] after a few hours he enthusiastically took up the suggestion ... when 
he found a parallel version to what I had said, perhaps more convenient.”*” 
Teller’s alternative, a good idea, was to use electromagnetic radiation coming 
from the primary, rather than the mechanical shock it produces (from gen- 
erated neutrons) to compress the thermonuclear secondary. The advantages 
of radiation over mechanical shock are that it works faster and gives longer 
sustained compression. 

The resultant scheme, staging, implosive fuel compression before igni- 
tion, has become basic for all hydrogen bombs which have subsequently 
been built. It is variously known as the Teller-Ulam invention, also as the 
New Super. 

Afterward Teller would variously deny, acknowledge and claim credit for Ulam’s 

contribution. Ulam would consistently acknowledge Teller’s part but quietly 

insist upon his own. Others . . . confirm, as [Lothar] Nordheim [1899-1985] 

wrote in 1954 to the New York Times, that “a general principle was formulated by 

Dr. Stanislaw Ulam in collaboration with Teller, who shortly afterward gave it 

its technically practical form. . . .” [Teller] came to dislike being called “the 

father of the H-bomb,” but asserted his paternity in 1954... : “It is true that Iam 
the father in [the] biological sense that I performed a necessary function and let 
nature take its course.” Bethe sifts the evidence the other way... . “I used to say 


that Ulam was the father of the hydrogen bomb and Edward was the mother, 
because he carried the baby for quite a while.”*% 


186 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


When the GAC met in March 1951, it was felt that “much more work was 
needed to see whether the new member of the thermonuclear family would 
survive. "48 

Concerning that further work, Teller has remarked: “We needed a sig- 
nificant test [which had] to play the role of a pilot plant.”*”? About the first 
of these tests, the George shot, part of the Greenhouse series, fired on May 
9, 1951, it was been poetically written: “The largest fission explosion to 
date [about 200 kilotons] succeeded in igniting the first small thermonuclear 
flame ever to burn on earth.”5° That flame was generated by a small DT 
capsule, weighing less than an ounce, which yielded 25 kilotons—twice the 
force released over Hiroshima. 

The first test of a large thermonuclear device took place on November 1, 
1952. It was the Mike shot in the Ivy series, executed on Eniwetok atoll in 
the Pacific. Its main objective was to verify the Teller-Ulam configuration. 
Yield: 10.4 megatons, 1,000 times as large as the Hiroshima bomb. It cre- 
ated a fireball more than 3 miles across (Hiroshima: 0.1 miles), erased the 
entire atoll, lifted 80 million tons of solid material in the air, would have 
obliterated all of the five New York boroughs. It was still an “ox-cart” de- 
vice, using liquid deuterium. One reason for this was that it was much easier 
for theorists to calculate the burning of deuterium than the complex chain- 
like process involved in the explosion of LiD. 

On March 1, 1954, the first large American hydrogen bomb was exploded 
during operation Castle, Bravo shot. Previous tests had operated with de- 
vices not, as with Bravo, with bombs adaptable for delivery by aircraft. 
(That device weighed 23,500 pounds and could fit into a B-47.) It was the 
first time that LiD fuel was used. Bravo’s yield was 15 megatons, the biggest 
weapon ever exploded by the United States, 1,000 times as large as the 
Hiroshima bomb. With the Bravo shot, the feasibility of lightweight solid- 
fuel thermonuclear weapons was proved. Vast quantities of tritium would 
not be needed after all. 

Meanwhile, on August 8, 1953, Georgiy Malenkov (1901-1979), succes- 
sor to Stalin (who had died in 1953), had announced in a major speech be- 
fore the Supreme Soviet that “the United States of America has long ceased 
to have a monopoly in the matter of the production of atomic bombs” and 
added spectacularly, “The United States has no monopoly in the produc- 
tion of the hydrogen bomb either.” Four days after that statement, the 
Russians indeed exploded a hydrogen test device, not a true H-bomb, named 
Joe 4 in the United States, with a yield comparable to Mike. On November 
23, 1955, a true Soviet thermonuclear was dropped from an aircraft in a test. 
The Cold War had heated up considerably. 


THE NEW SUPER’ 187 


As will be seen in the next chapter, the Super played a major role in the 
drama of the Oppenheimer hearings. The present brief account of that 
weapon’s history is meant to provide the necessary background for those 
later events. The following concluding comments of this section have noth- 
ing to do with Oppenheimer, however. They are here included to round 
off this book’s tale of atomic weapons. 

The British exploded their first Super in 1957 (what follows happened 
after Oppenheimer’s death), the Chinese in 1967, the French in 1968. 

By 1997 the United States had produced (the following in round num- 
bers) 70,000 nuclear weapons of 70 major types. By then there were 9,600 
weapons of 10 major types in the U.S. arsenal, which is officially named 
“Enduring Stockpile.” 

The U.S. Senate ratified the START II treaty on nuclear weapons in 
1997; the Russian Duma followed suit three years later, in 2000. After sign- 
ing, the United States began to reduce its nuclear stockpile, with further 
reductions to come in subsequent years. 

The Atmospheric Test Ban Treaty, signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963, 
halted all further atmospheric tests by both superpowers. 

On March 31, 1976, the Soviet Union and the United States agreed to 
limit the maximum yield of underground tests to 150 kilotons. 

With the signing of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in September 
1996, the United States, along with the other nuclear powers, made a legal 
commitment never to test nuclear devices again. It remains to be seen whether 
this treaty will ever go into full force because of opposition by rogue nations. 


Oppenheimer’s Views on the Super 


In 1944, while still directing the completion of the A-bomb, Oppenheimer 
wrote to a colleague: “I should like to put in writing . . . the recommenda- 
tion that the subject of initiating violent thermonuclear reactions be pur- 
sued with vigor and diligence, and promptly.” I have already mentioned a 
few of his postwar thoughts on that subject, his letter to Conant*” and the 
addendum to the October 1949 GAC report which he cosigned.*” Both 
these comments were critical and negative—not surprising because they date 
back to the years when efforts at building hydrogen bombs were still fol- 
lowing the wrong track. Opinions changed to cautious optimism after the 
Teller-Ulam invention, as is seen from the record** of the GAC meeting 
held in May 1951, and turned quite positive after the Greenhouse test the 
following May. 


188 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In June 1951, the new design idea and the calculations supporting it were 
presented to a wider group in a meeting held in Oppenheimer’s office at the 
Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.‘ In attendance were members 
of the AEC and of the GAC, plus Teller and other staff and consultants of 
the Los Alamos laboratory. It was immediately recognized by this wider 
audience that the new idea was the way to go. About that meeting, Robert 
has later written: “The outcome of the meeting, which lasted for 2 or 3 
days, was an agreed program and a fixing of priorities and effort [regarding 
the Super]. This program has been an outstanding success.”** Teiler has 
recalled of that meeting, “Dr. Oppenheimer warmly supported this new 
approach ... and... made a statement to the effect that if anything of this 
kind had been suggested right away [i.e., at the time of the 1949 H-bomb 
debate] he would never have opposed it.”5° Oppenheimer himself remem- 
bered, “The program we had in 1949 was a tortured thing that you could 
well argue did not make a great deal of technical sense. It was therefore 
possible to argue also that you did not want it even if you could have it. The 
program in 1951 was technically so sweet that you could not argue about 
that. The issues became purely the military, the political and the humane 
problem(s) of what you were going to do about it once you had it.”*” 

Regarding the humane problems, ever since 1949? Robert has unalter- 
ably expressed himself against the use of the Super. When asked in 1954: 
“At what time did your strong moral convictions develop with respect to 
the hydrogen bomb?”, he replied, “When it became clear to me that we 
would send to use any weapon we had*® . . . even [though] from a technical 
point of view it was a sweet and lovely and beautiful job, I have still thought 
it was a dreadful weapon.”>” 


Oppenheimer’s Participation in Panels: 1950-1953 


In the years 1950-1953 a series of special study projects were instituted. 
These owed their origins largely to the Korean War, which had broken out 
in June 1950. I give a brief survey of those panels in which Oppenheimer 
took part, either as member or as consultant. 


The Long Range Objectives Panel 


The Long Range Objectives Panel was established in late 1950 to reexamine 
the relation of nuclear weapons to foreign policy and military strategy. This 
panel was chaired by Oppenheimer, who himself invited Alvarez to join, so 
as to give balance to views on the Super. Army and Air Force generals also 


THE NEW SUPER 189 


participated. The committee’s report cited the Korean War as evidence for 
the fact that limited wars were possible and also noted that general war 
with Russia could happen.>!° 


Project Gabriel 


Project Gabriel, begun in early 1951, deals withthe number of nuclear weap- 
ons that can be detonated without causing health hazards. In the spring of 
1952, Oppenheimer wrote its draft report.>"! 


Project Charles 


Project Charles, also started in 1951, a study of the feasibility of a continen- 
tal air defense system, in which Oppenheimer participated. This study re- 
sulted in the establishment of Project East River, which was undertaken to 
examine civil defense problems, including the effects of biological, chemi- 
cal, and radiological warfare on civilian population centers. Oppenheimer 
served on this project, too, and helped formulate a memorandum, dated 
April 12, 1952, which urged the necessity of building an air defense system 
that provided a one-hour warning against atomic attacks on U.S. urban 


centers.°!2 


Project Vista 


United States air support in Korea had been notoriously inefficient. Fear of 
similar wars in the future provoked thinking within the military on the use 
of tactical nuclear weapons. Oppenheimer urged further “development of 
weapons systems so that one can use atomic bombs [and] can deliver them 
in more than one way, and so that one can make them for a variety of 
targets and uses and situations.” 

Thoughts like these led to Project Vista, set up in January 1951 at Cal 
Tech, to study ground and tactical warfare. Oppenheimer was one of the 
Participating scientists. The resulting report proposed improvements in 
communications, tactical missiles, tank killers, intelligence handling sys- 
tems, anti-submarine devices, troop carrier aircraft, tactical nuclear and non- 
nuclear weapons which could be delivered accurately in any weather, 
interceptors, and support aircraft. Part of the draft report was written by 
Oppenheimer.*'**"5 The report urged holding SAC in reserve during the 
initial phases of war, and splitting up the atomic arsenal among the three 
armed services.*5 

Reactions to the report were intense. One Air Force general wrote to 
Oppenheimer: “Your recommendations . . . have impressed me always in 


190 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


their wisdom.”*!¢ Most responses were strongly negative, however: “Later 
attacks on Oppenheimer . . . seem to have grown out of his association with 
Project Vista.”>” Air Force Secretary Thomas Finletter (1893—1980) gave 
direct orders not to use Oppenheimer as a consultant in any further studies 
and to keep classified Air Force information away from him.>* He and 
most Air Force generals were enraged by the suggestion to assign a second- 
ary role to SAC and to share atomic weapons with the Army and Navy. 

The Research and Development Board of the Defense Department, con- 
sisting of Oppenheimer and a few other distinguished scientists, took their 
Vista recommendations to General Eisenhower, NATO commander in 
Europe. On December 4, 1951, the scientists met with Eisenhower; the 
general was impressed with their recommendations. He favored publishing 
portions of the Vista Report, and approved of the scientists’ additional sug- 
gestions that atomic weapons combined with amphibious operations should 
be used in Korea, that military people who knew atomic weapons should 
be brought into SHAPE (Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe), 
and that restrictions on our allies, in connection with plans to use atomic 
weapons, should be loosened.*” 

On December 6, Oppenheimer and the other scientists presented a memo- 
randum to nine officers at Air Force headquarters in Europe. After his re- 
turn to Washington, he urged the secretary of defense to send technicians 
who were expert in the use of tactical nuclear weapons to Europe, and to 
include the allies in the formulation of war plans.*!? Oppenheimer further 
suggested that the United States maintain its ground strength and tactical 
forces in Europe, but underplay the use of long-range bombers to avoid 
alienating the Russians, who resented U.S. air base encirclement.>” 

The visit to Eisenhower “marked the beginning of an attack by certain 
people identified with strategic air operations,” who were “motivated by 
fear that if a program for tactical use of atomic weapons was adopted this 
would mean that money essential for strategic air would be diverted to 
other purposes.”>”” 

It is quite evident that Oppenheimer’s role in Vista enforced the Air 
Force’s resentment of his advice and created several new enemies for him. 


Project Lincoln 


Project Lincoln, the culmination of Charlesand East River, was established in 
early 1952 at MIT, with a staff of 1,600 people, including 350 scientists, and 
with an annual budget of $20 million. Oppenheimer was one of the senior 
physicists who participated. 


THE NEW SUPER 191 


In August 1952, a Project Lincoln memorandum urged the immediate 
expansion of the air defense system, including the establishment of early 
warning radar stations along the arctic circle and throughout Canada, elec- 
tronic processing equipment, and a network of missile and jet interceptor 
batteries around urban population centers and military installations. Air 
Force and Defense Department representatives were on hand during the 
next two days to examine the proposals. Initial estimates of the cost of the 
proposal’s implementation reached $50 billion.*”° Since the very inception 
of the Lincoln Project, Air Force Secretary Finletter had asked his chief 
scientist, David Griggs, to “keep an eye” on the project and to “report to 
him” any “net loss” to the Air Force in its findings.*?! The Air Force appar- 
ently feared that if the Lincoln air defense proposals were enacted, they 
would divert vital funds from SAC. Nevertheless, in the last few months of 
the Truman administration, the pleas of the Lincoln Project scientists be- 
gan to be acknowledged.>” 


Throughout 1952, journalists Joseph and Stewart Alsop criticized the over- 
dependence of the nation’s defense on the retaliatory power of the Strategic 
Air Command, at the expense of an effective air defense system,” raising 
concern that the articles by the Alsops were “similar to” the Lincoln Sum- 
mer Study Group conclusions, in recommending a “Maginot Line type of 
concept in which we depend on air defense rather than on our retaliatory 
capability.”54 Joseph Alsop met frequently with Oppenheimer throughout 
1952, and in December, the Alsops gained access to the Summer Study Group 
summary conclusions.*” 

As the result of Oppenheimer’s participation in Linco/n, he made more 
powerful enemies within the Air Force who viewed his activities and ad- 
vice with extreme suspicion and resentment. Their strong feelings were 
motivated by a genuine belief that Oppenheimer’s proposals would jeopar- 
dize essential appropriations for SAC. 


1952: Oppenheimer Leaves the General Advisory Committee 


In the summer of 1952, Oppenheimer announced that he would not accept 
reappointment to the GAC. On September 17, he received the following 
letter:> 


Dear Dr. Oppenheimer: Having in mind your strong desire, which you ex- 
Pp g y trong you 

pressed to me last month, to complete your service on the General Advisory 

Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission with the expiration of your 


192 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


present term, I note with a deep sense of personal regret that this time is now 
upon us. 

As Chairman of this important committee since its inception, you may take 
great pride in the fact that you have made a lasting and immensely valuable 
contribution to the national security and to atomic energy progress in this Na- 
tion. It is a source of real regret to me that the full story of the remarkable 
progress that has been made in atomic energy during these past 6 years, and in 
which you have played so large a role, cannot be publicly disclosed, for it would 
serve as the finest possible tribute to the contribution you have made. 

I shall always be personally grateful for the time and energy you have so 
unselfishly devoted to the work of the General Advisory Committee, for the 
conscientious and rewarding way in which you have brought your great talents 
to bear upon the scientific problems of atomic energy development and for the 
notable part you have played in securing for the atomic energy program the 
understanding cooperation of the scientific community. 

As director of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory during World War II, 
and as chairman of the General Advisory Committee for the past 6 years, you 
have served your country long and well, and I am gratified by the knowledge 
that your wise counsel will continue to be available to the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission on a consultant basis. 

I wish you every future success in your important scientific endeavors. 


Very sincerely yours, 
Harry Truman 


Two months before receiving this gracious letter, Robert had written to 
his brother, “By August 1 my six years on the Gen. Advisory Committee 
are over; they have seemed long. Physics is complicated & wondersome & 
much too hard for me except as a spectator; it will have to get easy again 
one of these days, but perhaps not soon.”52 


CHAPTER 21 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE 
EARLY 1950S 


The Doctrine of Massive Retaliation 


Throughout most of the Truman administration, military leaders had been 
reluctant to have an air defense system worked out in any detail. The Vista 
proposal for a secondary role of SAC had been considered too controver- 
sial, as had the Linco/n proposals for air defense. It was not until January 
1953, when the Republican Eisenhower administration took over, that a 
definite defense policy was enacted, named “The New Look,” sanctioned 
by newly elected Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

The new government was run like a business enterprise, droves of busi- 
nessmen joined the Cabinet. The administration’s balanced budget propo- 
nents decided against a continental air defense system, and opted instead for 
an Air Force equipped with hydrogen bombs, which would involve fewer 
expenditures and was cheaper to maintain than a large standing Army and 
Navy. Accordingly, Eisenhower ordered the Pentagon to assume that if the 
United States got into war it would be fought with nuclear weapons and that 
priority in budgetary funds be given to the Air Force. So came into being 
“massive retaliation” as the central doctrine and so was SAC established as 
the most significant force in military planning.*”” In his State of the Union 
Message of January 1954, Eisenhower recognized air power doctrine as offi- 
cial U.S. policy. The American people were assured that SAC, rather than a 
continental air defense system, would protect them from atomic attack, 
that in fact air retaliatory power was to be the only response to communist 


194 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


aggression.** Vice President Richard Nixon put it like this: “Rather than let 
the Communists nibble us to death all over the world in little wars we would 
rely in the future primarily on our massive mobile retaliatory power.”>” 

Other voices ranged from caution to severe criticism, however. In 1954 
the Air Force Chief of Staff conceded that “one grand-scale atomic blow by 
the Soviets on our industrial and population centers could be decisive if al- 
lowed to be conducted without interference.”>*° Fortune Magazine, though al- 
lied with the Air Force in requesting more funds for SAC, estimated that in a 
surprise attack on the United States, only 15 to 20 percent of the attacking 
Soviet bombers could be shot down in daylight, and only 1 percent at night.>*! 

Various Democrats sharply attacked the administration’s overreliance 
on airpower. Ex-Secretary of State Acheson called the policy “a fraud upon 
the words and upon the facts.” Adlai Stevenson wondered: “Are we leaving 
ourselves the grim choice of inaction or thermonuclear holocaust? Are we, 
indeed, inviting Moscow and Peiping [Beijing] to nibble us to death?”* 

Even Eisenhower himself had reservations: “What should we do if So- 
viet political aggression, as in Czechoslovakia, successfully chips away ex- 
posed portions of the free world? . . . Such an eventuality would be just as 
bad for us as if the area had been captured by force. To my mind, this is the 
case where the theory of ‘retaliation’ falls down.”*? 


Operation Candor 


No concept could be more alien to the proposal for a continental defense 
system, laid down in the report on Project Lincoln (see the preceding chapter), 
than massive retaliation. Several scientists, deeply disturbed by the 
government’s ideas, decided to launch a crusade for their views on conti- 
nental defense, and chose Oppenheimer as their principal spokesman. 

Robert accepted, though he understood his vulnerability to attack in 
taking such a position. As early as December 1951, when his visit to Eisen- 
hower to promote the Vista Project proposals provoked attacks against him, 
he wrote: “I could propose . . . concentration upon a vast expansion of U.S. 
national military forces, and my judgment or my narrow military mind 
might be impugned in some quarters, but my loyalty and patriotism would 
go unquestioned.”** In December 1952, he left several proposals for air 
defense with Eisenhower, then president-elect, including summaries of Projects 
Charles, East River, Lincoln, and Vista. 

In January 1953, the State Department’s Disarmament Committee, which 
Oppenheimer chaired, presented its report to the Eisenhower administra- 
tion. Two of the committee’s five recommendations included a demand for 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY 1950s 195 


public candor and a continental defense system. The report initiated the 
campaign known as Operation Candor, which urged the administration to 
present to the American people the facts of the destructive power of nuclear 
weapons, the approximate relative sizes of the nuclear stockpiles of the 
United States and the U.S.S.R., and the nature and results of nuclear war- 
fare.>> The committee believed that if these general facts were made avail- 
able to the American public, then the need for a continental defense system 
would become immediately apparent. 

Oppenheimer, feeling a sense of urgency about the adoption of an air 
defense system, spoke before the Council on Foreign Relations in New 
York City on February 17, 1953. He warned that “our twenty-thousandth 
bomb” would “not in any deep strategic sense offset” the Soviet Union’s 
“two-thousandth” atomic bomb, and criticized the U.S. war plan as “a rather 
rigid commitment” to the use of nuclear weapons “in a very massive, initial, 
unremitting strategic assault on the enemy,” with “relatively little done to 
secure our defense against the atom.” He also warned against overdoing 
secrecy: “[The nation does] not operate weli when the important facts, the 
essential conditions which limit and determine our choice are unknown, 
[or] are known, in secrecy and fear, only to a few men. . . . Follies can occur 
... whenever the men who know the facts can find no one to talk to about 
them, when the facts are too secret for discussion, and thus for thought.” 

On the following May 22, Oppenheimer met with the president to dis- 
cuss Operation Candor.**° Eisenhower invited him to present his views on the 
National Security Council (NSC) meeting of May 27. At that gathering he 
“had everybody spellbound—except the President, who thanked him very 
much for what he had to say, but waited until he had left the room before 
[deciding] what should and should not be done.”>*” 

On June 19, with the NSC still split over what to recommend, Oppen- 
heimer published his February 17 address in Foreign Affairs. On the same day 
the New York Times and the Washington Post came out with summaries of the 
article. In July it was reprinted in full in the Busletin of the Atomic Scientists > In 
an interview, Robert said: “If this issue of candor were cleared up . . . the 
people of the United States would not be talked out of reasonable defense 
measures. . . . [Eisenhower] is the only person to transcend the racket or 
noise, mostly consisting of lies, that have been built up about this subject of 
the strategic situation of the atom.”*****° Scientist allies supported his cru- 
sade for candor. For example, one wrote that the United States “had ac- 
quired a ‘glass jaw’ because of its vulnerability to atomic attack.”** 


196 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


In July 1953, Oppenheimer summarized his own view of the interna- 
tional tensions, using an analogy that would long outlive him: “The atomic 
clock ticks faster and faster. We may anticipate a state of affairs in which 
two great powers will each be in a position to put an end to the civilization 
and life of the other, though not without risking its own. We may be lik- 
ened to two scorpions in a bottle, each capable of killing the other, but only 
at the risk of his own life. ... This prospect does not make for serenity.” 


To the Air Force, anyone identified with Operation Candor “quickly became 
highly vulnerable not only to criticism but to smear.”* Oppenheimer was 
the obvious choice for main target. In 1953 he was at the peak of his influ- 
ence, holding five government posts, and having access to information on 
the atomic stockpile, U.S. strategic and tactical airforces and intelligence 
estimates of Soviet air power.** Within the Air Force “vindictive elements 
. . . Set Out to eliminate [him] as the leader of a defense philosophy which 
they conceived as inimical to theirs.”> It was not sufficient to eliminate 
him from his consultant’s posts. He had to be destroyed. The time was ripe 
for men who former President Truman has called “crude and sinister” and 


“witch hunters.”*° 


The Opening Salvos of the Attackers 


I have mentioned earlier that in 1949 Oppenheimer had made powerful 
enemies. Yet during the next following years this did not lead to any ac- 
tions of consequence against him. Those began in 1953, the first year of the 
Republican administration under Eisenhower, also the year when witch 
hunts on alleged communists in government began in earnest. 

This sad story began with the unveiling of presidential executive order 
10450, on April 27, 1953.” Under its terms, a government employee had 
not only to be adjudged “loyal” in order to serve his country; his back- 
ground had to be such that his employment by the government was “clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.” For most federal agen- 
cies, new and broader screening criteria were put into effect. Security offic- 
ers were given wider authority to screen out job-holders and applicants 
with “derogatory information” in their dossiers. All federal agencies, in- 
cluding such nonsensitive departments as Agriculture and Interior, were 
given the power summarily to suspend suspected “security risks,” a power 
formerly reserved to agencies having a connection with national defense. 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY 1950s 197 


The cases of some 19,000 civil servants whose “full field” investigations had 
turned up “derogatory information,” but who had been cleared under the 
old Truman loyalty program, were to be “readjudicated” under the new, 
more severe screening standards. 


May 1953 


Fortune Magazine publishes an anonymous article entitled: “The Hidden 
Struggle for the H-bomb.” The subheading describes it as “The Story of Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s persistent campaign to reverse U.S. military strategy.”>* 
As the public learns only months later, its author is Charles Murphy, who 
served as an Air Force reserve officer with Secretary Finletter. 

Murphy’s article begins dramatically: “A life-and-death struggle over na- 
tional military policy has developed between a highly influential group of 
American scientists and the military.” This dispute involved disagreements 
with Air Force officials over the role of airpower in nuclear war. The “prime 
mover among the scientists,” always according to Murphy, was Oppenheimer, 
who had “no confidence in the military’s assumption that SAC as a weapon 
of mass destruction is a real deterrent to Soviet action” .. . and who was 
asking the United States “to throw away its strongest weapon for defense.” 

The article, rife with insinuations and oversimplifications, closes with 
Murphy’s conclusion that scientists should have no voice in defense plan- 
ning: “There [is] a serious question of the propriety of scientists to settle 
such grave national issues alone, inasmuch as they bear no responsibility 
for the successful execution of war plans.” 

Reactions to the article are intense. Examples: Lilienthal calls the Fortune 
piece “another nasty and obviously inspired article attacking Robert Op- 
penheimer in a snide way. . .. Even a gossip columnist signs his gossip, and 
takes personal responsibility.”*’ Admiral Parsons finds the article replete 
with “fantastic distortions [that show] how unhealthy it is to have most of 
the reading public unable to project such an article against the facts [and 
worries about] the anti-intellectualism of recent months. . . . We might be 
at the eye of the hurricane.”>*° 


June 5, 1953 


Oppenheimer’s consultant’s contract with the AEC is extended for one year 
beyond its June 30 expiration date. “That June 5 was perhaps the most fateful 
date in Robert Oppenheimer’s life.”>>! As Strauss wrote later: “It was this 
contract which involved the AEC in the clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer and 


198 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


which required that the Commission, rather than some other agency of 
the Government, be made responsible to hear and resolve the charges 
against him.”>*? 


June 20, 1953 


The Department of Defense implements Reorganization Plan Number 6, 
which effects, among other changes, the dissolution of that Department’s 
Research and Development Board, of which Oppenheimer was a member. 
A year later Defense Secretary Charles (“Engine”) Wilson was asked in an 
interview why he dropped Oppenheimer at that time. He replied: “We 
dropped the whole board. That was a real smooth way of doing that one 
[referring to O.] as far as the Defense Department was concerned.”>° 


July 3, 1953 
Strauss becomes the third chairman of the AEC. 


July 7, 1953 


Strauss initiates steps to organize the removal of all classified documents in 
Oppenheimer’s Princeton files.** Seven months earlier, the AEC had re- 
moved some 32 linear feet of paper from Oppenheimer’s vault, leaving only 
material immediately relevant to his work as consultant. 


July 1953 


Oppenheimer publishes his thoughts on Operation Candor,*” and lectures 
in Brazil to members of the National Research Council, speaking of the 
beauty of physics and its promise to humanity. 


August 1953 


Murphy responds to Oppenheimer’s article on Candor with another ar- 
ticle in Fortune, entitled: “The atom and the balance of power,” signed this 
time,*> and more temperate and accurate than his previous one. It includes 
one picture, a portrait of Strauss (with whom Murphy had been in touch 
for some time) with the caption: “Strauss believes in keeping a tight lid on 
information about atomic weapons.” 


August 20, 1953 


It is made public that the Soviets have exploded their first thermonuclear 
device. 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY 1950s 199 
November 12, 1953 


A registered letter addressed to J. Edgar Hoover (1895-1972), director of the 
FBI, is received at the FBI offices in Washington; copies are received by the 
members of the JCAE. The letter was written by William Liscum Borden, 
former staff director of that Joint Committee, who knew Senator McCarthy** 
and Lewis Strauss.*” The key phrases of this letter are these: “The purpose 
of this letter is to state my own exhaustively considered opinion, based 
upon years of study of the available classified evidence, that more probably 
than not J. Robert Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union. . . . For 
some years he has been in a position to compromise more vital and detailed 
information affecting the national defense and security than any other indi- 
vidual in the United States.”>* 

On what evidence did Borden base his grave charge? Where had he ob- 
tained that evidence? His information came from the government’s massive 
investigative dossier on Oppenheimer. This file, a four-and-a-half foot stack 
of reports, had been amassed in the course of eleven years’ minute surveil- 
lance of the scientist’s life, private as well as public. Oppenheimer’s tele- 
phone had been tapped. His office and home had been bugged. His mail had 
been opened. Even so intimate an event as a night spent with a former 
fiancée had not escaped the watchful eyes of government agents.*? 

Borden listed, in four categories, the evidence for his charges: 

1. The evidence indicating that— 

(a) He was contributing substantial monthly sums to the Communist Party; 

(b) His ties with communism had survived the Nazi-Soviet Pact and the 
Soviet attack upon Finland; 

(c) His wife and younger brother were Communists; 

(d) He had no close friends except Communists; 

(e) He had at least one Communist mistress; 

(f) He belonged only to Communist organizations, apart from professional 
affiliations; 

(g) The people whom he recruited into the early wartime Berkeley atomic 
project were exclusively Communists; 

(h) He had been instrumental in securing recruits for the Communist Party; 
and 

(i) He was in frequent contact with Soviet espionage agents. 


2. The evidence indicating that— 

(a) In May 1942, he either stopped contributing funds to the Communist 
Part or else made his contributions through a new channel not yet dis- 
covered; 

(b) In April 1942 his name was formally submitted for security clearance; 

(c) He himself was aware at the time that his name had been so submitted; 
and 


200 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


(d) He thereafter repeatedly gave false information to General Groves, 
the Manhattan District, and the FBI concerning the 1939-April 1942 
period. 


. The evidence indicating that— 


(a) He was responsible for employing a number of Communists, some of 
them nontechnical, at wartime Los Alamos; 

(b) He selected one such individual to write the official Los Alamos history; 

(c) He was a vigorous supporter of the H-bomb program until August 6, 
1945 (Hiroshima), on which day he personally urged each senior indi- 
vidual working in this field to desist; and 

(d) He was an enthusiastic sponsor of the A-bomb program until the war 
ended, when he immediately and outspokenly advocated that the Los 
Alamos Laboratory be disbanded. 


. The evidence indicating that: 


(a) He was remarkably instrumental in influencing the military authorities 
’ and the Atomic Energy Commission essentially to suspend H-bomb de- 
velopment from mid-1946 through January 31, 1950. 

(b) He has worked tirelessly, from January 31, 1950, onward, to retard the 
United States H-bomb program; 

(c) He has used his potent influence against every postwar effort directed at 
obtaining larger supplies of uranium raw material; and 

(e) He has used his potent influence against every major postwar effort to- 
ward atomic power development, including the nuclear-powered sub- 
marine and aircraft programs as well as industrial power projects. 


From such evidence, considered in detail, the following conclusions are justified: 


1. 


Between 1929 and mid-1942, more probably than not, J. Robert Oppenheimer 
was a sufficiently hardened Communist that he either volunteered espionage 
information to the Soviets or complied with a request for such information. 
(This includes the possibility that when he singled out the weapons aspect of 
atomic development as his personal specialty, he was acting under Soviet 
instructions.) 


. More probably than not, he has since been functioning as an espionage agent; 


and 


. More probably than not, he has since acted under a Soviet directive in influ- 


encing United States military, atomic energy, intelligence, and diplomatic 
policy. 


It is to be noted that these conclusions correlate with information furnished 


by Klaus Fuchs, indicating that the Soviets had acquired an agent in Berkeley 
who informed them about electromagnetic separation research, during 1942 or 
earlier. 


This letter contains several falsehoods (notably items 1(i), 4 (b, e). Other- 
wise it contained no substantial evidence that had not long been known and 
accepted in official circles. Yet, as we shall see shortly, it suddenly prompted 
the government to move against Oppenheimer. 


ATOMIC POLITICS IN THE EARLY 1950s 201 
November 1953 


McCarthy discloses that a Harvard physics professor (whom he later iden- 
tified as Wendell Furry, an earlier collaborator of Oppenheimer®) had 
pleaded the Fifth Amendment in refusing to answer questions about his 
previous communist connections and activities. Since Professor Furry’s ac- 
tions affected Harvard’s reputation, this matter was of concern to Robert 
Oppenheimer, as chairman of the Harvard physics department’s “Visiting 
Committee.” To various of Furry’s colleagues, he expressed “rather strong 
feelings about the fact that Furry had been for really a. . . long time a 
member of the Communist Party.” To some, including Furry himself, he 
vigorously deplored the physicist’s invoking the Fifth Amendment.>* 


November—December 1953 


Robert and Kitty were in Europe at the time the Borden letter arrived at 
the FBI. They visited Copenhagen briefly, also Paris, where they dined 
with Haakon Chevalier, a friend of Robert from Berkeley days (about whom 
more later). The main purpose of this trip was Robert’s delivery of the 
Reith lectures, a series of six, broadcast by the BBC. He was received enthu- 
siastically, although he was told that some thought him “hopelessly ob- 
scure.” Some listeners seemed to be more taken with the eloquence of his 
delivery than the contents of his speech. Robert himself regarded them as 
one of the most important presentations of his life.5* 

When in December the Oppenheimers returned to the United States, 
Robert found an urgent message to call Lewis Strauss as soon as possible. 
Grave trouble was awaiting him. I knew from him that he had been expect- 
ing that for some time (see end of Chapter 15) but did not know what the 
details were. 


CHAPTER 22 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT 
HITS THE VENTILATOR 


The Oppenheimer-Strauss Meeting: December 1953 


Replying to Strauss’s message, Robert agreed to meet with him at 3:30 PM 
December 21 at Strauss’s office in AEC headquarters, where the two men 
were joined by Kenneth Nichols, the Commission’s general manager. 

In that meeting, Strauss handed Robert an eight-page letter written by 
Nichols which contained references to his associates as far back as the 1930s, 
his contributions to leftwing causes, his brother’s and wife’s membership 
in the Communist Party, and, most startling, the charge that he had tried to 
stop or delay the development of the hydrogen bomb. It ended with the 
statement that the AEC was to suspend Robert’s clearance. I quote from 
the letter: 


It was reported that in 1945 you expressed the view that “there is a reasonable 
possibility that it [the hydrogen bomb] can be made,” but that the feasibility of 
the hydrogen bomb did not appear, on theoretical grounds, when the Los Alamos 
Laboratory was started; and that in the autumn of 1949 the General Advisory 
Committee expressed the view that “an imaginative and concerted attack on the 
problem has a better than even chance of producing the weapon within 5 years.” 
It was further reported that in the autumn of 1949, and subsequently, you strongly 
opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb; (1) on moral grounds, (2) by 
claiming that it was not feasible, (3) by claiming that there were insufficient 
facilities and scientific personnel to carry on the development, and (4) that it 
was not politically desirable. It was further reported that even after it was deter- 
mined, as a matter of national policy, to proceed with development of a hydro- 
gen bomb, you continued to oppose the project and declined to cooperate fully 
in the project. It was further reported that you departed from your proper role 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT HITS THE VENTILATOR 203 


as an adviser to the Commission by causing the distribution separately and in 
private, to top personnel at Los Alamos of the majority and minority reports of 
the General Advisory Committee on development of the hydrogen bomb for 
the purpose of trying to turn such top personnel against the development of the 
hydrogen bomb. It was further reported that you were instrumental in persuad- 
ing other outstanding scientists not to work on the hydrogen-bomb project, and 
that the opposition to the hydrogen bomb, of which you are the most experi- 
enced, most powerful, and most effective member, has definitely slowed down 
its development. 

In view of your access to highly sensitive classified information, and in view 
of these allegations which, until disproved, raise questions as to your veracity, 
conduct and even your loyalty, the Commission has no other recourse, in dis- 
charge of its obligations to protect the common defense and security, but to 
suspend your clearance until the matter has been resolved. Accordingly, your 
employment on Atomic Energy Commission work and your eligibility for ac- 
cess to restricted data are hereby suspended, effective immediately, pending fi- 
nal determination of this matter. 


The letter stated further that “to assist in the resolution of this matter, 
you have the privilege of appearing before an Atomic Energy Commission 
personnel security board.” Strauss added verbally that this would be an in- 
camera hearing before an independent three-man board, also that, alterna- 
tively, Oppenheimer could at once request that his consultant’s contract be 
terminated—which would close the matter then and there. 

Robert was stunned. 

He had been granted security clearances in 1943, 1947, 1950, and as late 
as a few months earlier, on June 5, 1953, when all derogatory information 
against him, stated in the Nichols letter, had been known in government 
circles—including his position regarding the hydrogen bomb. As he was to 
say to a newspaper reporter, only a few months later: “There is a story 
behind my story. If a reporter digs deep enough he will find that it is a 
bigger story than my suspension.”> Later, looking back on that day, he 
said: “It was like Pearl Harbor—on a small scale. Given the circumstances 
and the spirit of the times, one knew that something like this was possible 
and even probable, but still it was a shock when it came.” 

When Robert asked how much time he had to think the matter over, 
Strauss replied that he could only give him until the next day to make up 
his mind. When he asked if he could take a copy of Nichols’s letter with 
him, Strauss refused on the grounds that it would be unwise to circulate the 
unsigned letter. Oppenheimer did receive a copy of the letter, sent to 
Princeton, dated December 23,*°—two days after the session with Strauss, 
which lasted only half an hour. During that short meeting Strauss, who has 
recorded his own recollections of that encounter,** did not mention the 


204 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Borden letter to him. Also on December 23, Nichols sent a confidential 
letter to all American Army, Navy, Air Force and AEC installations which 
read: “The clearance of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer for access to Restricted 
Data and other classified information has been suspended. The ac that this 
clearance has been suspended is presently classified information.”>” 

Shortly after noon the next day Nichols called Oppenheimer in Princeton 
to ask whether he had reached a decision. Oppenheimer had not had time 
to recover from the blow of the previous day’s meeting, much less give very 
much thought to the decision, but Nichols insisted upon an answer that 
afternoon. From Oppenheimer’s point of view, it was one thing to resign 
under pressure when one’s services were no longer wanted or needed, but 
quite another to be forced out by the security system, sacrificing both in- 
tegrity and honor while leaving the charges unchallenged. He decided to 
accept the Commission’s statement of charges with all the risks and uncer- 
tainties it entailed. 

Even before Oppenheimer accepted the statement of charges, Strauss 
inquired whether the FBI could set up a “full-time surveillance” of Oppen- 
heimer, which would have required agents to monitor Oppenheimer’s every 
movement and contact around the clock. Hoover objected that such an 
operation would be too costly in manpower and money, but he did order 
the FBI office in Newark, New Jersey, to maintain a “spot check” on 
Oppenheimer. This meant assigning two agents to follow Oppenheimer 
and members of his family when they left his residence and to observe visi- 
tors. Hoover also authorized taps on Oppenheimer’s home and office tele- 
phones; these were installed on January 1, 1954. The Newark office reported 
that the taps made the spot check quite efficient and permitted the FBI to 
plan surveillance operations when Oppenheimer indicated that he planned 
travel outside the Princeton area.’ 


Eisenhower Erects a “Blank Wall” 


As noted, Robert was unaware of the Borden letter at the December 21 meet- 
ing with Strauss, nor could he know of the impact of that letter on the high- 
est levels of government, which I shall relate next. He would undoubtedly 
have been aware, however, of a public statement which forcefully demon- 
strated the political climate of the times: In his January 7, 1954, State of the 
Union Message, Mr. Eisenhower told Congress that the new and more strin- 
gent security-screening standards he had promulgated in the preceding April 
had brought about the dismissal of more than 2,200 federal employees.” 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT HITS THE VENTILATOR 205 


Now to the aftermath of the Borden letter.*”” After receiving that letter, 
FBI Director Hoover had Oppenheimer’s file data compiled into a sum- 
mary report, which was completed on November 18. Nine days later, 
Hoover sent Strauss a copy of Borden’s letter and the new FBI summary 
report, “supplementing information previously furnished to you concern- 
ing Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer. . . .” Hoover pointed out to Strauss that 
“the accusations made by Mr. Borden concerning Dr. Oppenheimer have 
previously been investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. . . .”5” 
However, according to JCCAE member Senator Clinton P. Anderson (1895- 
1975), Strauss “insisted that opposition to the weapon [H-bomb] was evi- 
dence of disloyalty to the country.” Strauss “now proposed to treat” Borden’s 
charges “as something new and spectacular.”*” 

The 67-page FBI summary report contained eight parts, dealing succes- 
sively with Oppenheimer’s private life and nongovernment career through 
1947; the various Communist Front groups to which he contributed money 
from 1938 to 1942; interviews about his activities before he joined the 
Manhattan Project with people who “described O. as having radical or 
liberal views but none considered him disloyal to the United States”; his 
relations with Haakon Chevalier, to which I shall turn later; a report by 
two paid FBI informants who stated that he had been present at a Com- 
munist Party meeting in Berkeley, in July 1941, the FBI inquiry conclud- 
ing that “in July 1941 O. was not in California”; O.’s comments on alleged 
Communist Party members employed at Los Alamos; and interviews with 
26 O. associates at Los Alamos, who “all advised that O.’s loyalty to the 
United States is unquestioned.” 

All information mentioned thus far was known to the AEC and the 
JCCAE when Robert was cleared in 1947 and 1950. The last (21) pages of 
the report introduced a new element, however, by examining his advice 
and views on defense issues, the central theme being Oppenheimer’s alleged 
role in the development of the hydrogen bomb, the only issue that was 
raised after these earlier clearances. 

On April 4, 1952, “a prominent scientist,” who wished to remain anony- 
mous, told the FBI that he “previously had the utmost confidence in the 
loyalty” of Oppenheimer, but “he is now doubtful. . . .” He stated that 
Oppenheimer “had opposed the development of the H-bomb,” had “at- 
tempted to influence” others “to oppose it,” and had been “impeding the 
progress of the work on the H-bomb” as GAC chairman. The scientist 
“could not specifically recall the names of the individuals whom Oppen- 
heimer had persuaded not to work on the H-bomb.” Another unnamed 


206 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


scientist felt that “it would be extremely wise not to reappoint” Oppenheimer 
to the AEC. This view “was not based on security reasons but was based on 
his belief that Oppenheimer lacked the necessary enthusiasm for the [H- 
bomb] program.” Four scientists, however, told the FBI that they had never 
been approached by anyone trying to influence them not to work on the 
H-bomb. According to these scientists, Oppenheimer had “done absolutely 
nothing to in any way impede the program.” 

By far the longest and most damaging testimony given to the FBI was 
that of Edward Teller. Teller stated that, as early as 1945, “Oppenheimer 
recommended that all work on the H-bomb and the Los Alamos Project be 
discontinued.” Oppenheimer, according to Teller, “delayed, or attempted 
to delay the development of the H-bomb. . . .” To Teller, Oppenheimer 
should have “gotten behind the program or resigned his position on the 
General Advisory Committee.” He felt that “opposition to the H-bomb 
definitely slowed down its development,” and kept the United States from 
amassing an H-bomb stockpile. Teller viewed Oppenheimer as “the most 
experienced, the most powerful, and the most effective member of the op- 
position.” He concluded that Oppenheimer did not have “any disloyal 
thoughts or influences,” but expressed his “personal hope that Dr. Oppenheimer 
would be relieved of his responsibilities... connected with military preparedness” (my ital- 
ics) because of his “record of having given mistaken advice in past years.” 

On November 30, Hoover sent copies of the Borden letter and the FBI 
report to Strauss and to the president. Presidential adviser C. D. Jackson 
has recalled that Hoover also sent copies “to one additional person, the last 
person I would have selected, namely, Engine Charlie Wilson.” Jackson 
characterized Defense Secretary Wilson as a “simple valve-in-head charac- 
ter,” who “practically exploded with terror” when he received the Borden 
letter. Wilson “clapped on his hat, and rushed to the White House to see 
the President, clamoring for action,” and “requesting permission to notify 
all defense installations that J. Robert Oppenheimer’s clearances” be “with- 
drawn and that he was the next thing to a spy, etc.”*”° 

On December 3 Eisenhower called for a meeting in his office to consider 
Oppenheimer’s status. Among those present-were Strauss, Attorney Gen- 
eral Herbert Brownell (1904-1996), and Defense Secretary Wilson (1890- 
1961). In their discussion, the Borden letter was not a crucial consideration, 
because Eisenhower recalled that the letter “didn’t have anything new that 
we could see.” To Eisenhower, there was “never a question of Oppenheimer 
being a ‘Soviet agent,’ nor was disloyalty raised in my hearing, in the ac- 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT HITS THE VENTILATOR 207 


cusations.” The one piece of evidence that was seriously considered was the 
FBI summary report of November 18. 

Strauss considered opposition to the development of the H-bomb as 
“evidence of disloyalty to the country.” The AEC chairman possessed 
“virtually the unlimited confidence of President Eisenhower. . . .”°” By 
not emphasizing that he had been one of the AEC commissioners who 
cleared Oppenheimer on essentially the same evidence in 1947 and 1950, 
Strauss misled the president, and made Oppenheimer “a hostage to politi- 
cal expediency. . . .”5”4 

The president was against Operation Candor, and did “not intend to 
disclose the details of our strength in atomic weapons of any sort. . . .”°” 
Eisenhower remembered the May 27 NSC meeting at which Oppenheimer 
urged greater candor in telling the public about atomic weapons. He “did 
not conrpletely trust” the physicist, and “just didn’t feel comfortable with 
Oppenheimer,” who supposedly had “almost hypnotic power over small 
groups.” Although the president never considered Oppenheimer to be a 
“Soviet agent,” or disloyal, he did think that “too many very great secrets 
would be available to him, if we renewed his clearance.” Eisenhower “just 
wouldn’t do it.” He was also informed that security officers wanted 
Oppenheimer’s case reviewed. 

Whereupon Eisenhower “decided that no matter what anyone’s personal 
feelings or beliefs” about Oppenheimer’s “guilt or innocence, or whether 
he was or was not a security risk,” a “‘blank wall’ would have to be erected 
between Oppenheimer and atomic data until such time as it would be pos- 
sible to dig into the situation.”*”® The administration had concluded the 
first major step in completely removing a dissident civilian adviser who had 
expressed heretical views on defense policy. Oppenheimer had been suc- 
cessfully attacked for being the ‘strong protagonist’ for air defense and can- 
dor. Since he was out of the country, Strauss decided on December 4 to stall 
the implementation of the “blank wall” until Oppenheimer returned. 

Later, when the president’s “blank wall” order became public, the Wash- 
ington Post's cartoonist, Herblock, depicted Eisenhower and Strauss sepa- 
rated by a wall from Oppenheimer, the scientist who had created so many 
of the secrets he was now supposedly being denied—all observed by a puzzled 
Uncle Sam wondering “Who’s Being Walled Off From What?”5” 

This concludes my account of events preceding Robert’s meeting with 
Strauss on December 21, 1953. I turn next to what happened shortly after 
that day. 


208 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 
Preparations for the Hearings 


On December 22 Oppenheimer wrote to Strauss regarding the option he 

(S.) had proposed: resign immediately. The main part of his reply follows; it 

is dated December 22: 
Dear Lewis ... You put to me as a possibly desirable alternative that I request 
termination of my contract as a consultant to the Commission, and thereby 
avoid an explicit consideration of the charges on which the Commission’s ac- 
tion would otherwise be based. I was told that if I did not do this within a day, 
I would receive a letter notifying me of the suspension of my clearance and of 
the charges against me, and I was shown a draft of that letter. 

I have thought most earnestly of the alternative suggested. Under the cir- 
cumstances this course of action would mean that I accept and concur in the 
view that Iam not fit to serve this Government, that I have now served for some 
12 years. This I cannot do. .. . Faithfully yours.5* 


About a week later, the AEC Commissioners agreed unanimously to 
institute the regular procedures of the Commission to determine the verac- 
ity or falsity of the charges. These “regular procedures” were the Personnel 
Security Boards appointed by the general manager to inquire into an 
employee’s suitability for one of the various grades of security clearance.**! 

Oppenheimer now set about to obtain competent legal assistance in his 
confrontation with the Commission. To this end he and Kitty consulted, in 
late December, with Herbert Marks (1907-1960) and Joseph Volpe, both 
erstwhile general counsels for the AEC, both on good terms with him. 
(Marks’s wife Anne had served as Robert’s personal assistant and secretary 
at Los Alamos.) Far from complacent about his situation, Oppenheimer 
would have been even more concerned had he known that Strauss and 
Nichols were privy to his every move in selecting counsel. When the FBI 
agent in Newark first began to pick up conversations about legal matters, 
he called his supervisors in Washington to ask whether the tap should be 
continued “in view of the fact that it might disclose attorney-client rela- 
tions.” He was assured that the tap was appropriate because Oppenheimer 
was involved in a security case, not a criminal action; moreover, the FBI’s 
chief concern, the agent was informed, was to learn immediately of any 
indication that Oppenheimer was planning to flee the country. Under the 
circumstances the surveillance was “warranted.”5 

A recollection by an AEC official shows the extraordinary length to 
which those buggings went: “There was a detailed account of what tran- 
spired in his conversation with Volpe. How they got to know about it, I 
don’t know, presumably by some form of bugging, but whether they had 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT HITS THE VENTILATOR 209 


something planted in anticipation that he would go there or whether they 
had equipment which enabled them to bug it instantaneously or what I 
don’t know. Anyway, then there was a similar thing when he left Volpe’s 
office and went to Herb Marks’s office—there was a similar account of that 
conversation. ”** An FBI memo dated February 2 stated: “We do feel that 
Strauss should be again cautioned concerning the use of the information we 
furnish him which was obtained from the technical surveillance because if 
information should leak from AEC that the Bureau has such coverage, 
Oppenheimer and his attorneys will undoubtedly use it for propaganda 
purposes.” 

It took Oppenheimer almost two weeks, with Marks’s help, to assemble 
his legal staff. His chief counsel would be Lloyd Kirkham Garrison (1897- 
1991), of the New York firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton, and Garri- 
son, whom Oppenheimer knew as a member of the board of trustees of the 
Princeton Institute. He has been described as Lincolnesque in appearance 
and mild of manner, who liked reading philosophy and birdwatching. 
Garrison’s early impressions of Oppenheimer: 

From the beginning he had a quality of desperation about him—in his appear- 

ance and in his manners. I think we all felt oppressed by the atmosphere of the 

time but Oppenheimer particularly so. . . . 1 found him enigmatic, fascinating of 
course, with those most beautiful blue eyes, but he was hard to be intimate 
with. We saw so much of each other that it was always a little surprising to me 
that we didn’t have any of that feeling of comradeship you might have expected 


from sharing an ordeal of this sort. Cold is too strong a word, he wasn’t cold but 
he kept his distance.*® 


Meanwhile the AEC had decided that an outside attorney should handle 
the case for the Commission. On the advice of the Department of Justice, 
Strauss chose for this assignment Roger Robb, who had a private law prac- 
tice in Washington and had prosecutorial experience as an assistant U.S. 
attorney. The contrast between the leading attorneys was striking: Robb, 
tough conservative, at home in the rough-and-tumble atmosphere of the 
courtroom; Garrison, mild-mannered, almost saintly, a comparative stranger 
to the merciless world of adversary courtroom proceedings. 

The AEC requested an “emergency Q clearance” for Robb, which he re- 
ceived in eight days, unusually fast. Garrison first broached the matter of sis 
clearance on January 18, at a meeting with Strauss and Nichols. After further 
deliberation he decided to forgo clearance, reasoning that nonclearance might 
minimize the amount of secret material included in the hearing material that 
might inhibit whatever appeal to the courts might later be necessary. On 
further reflection Garrison became so troubled that on March 26 he renewed 


210 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


his request for clearance, but was now told that this was not possible before 
the hearing had ended. What Robb had gotten in eight days, Garrison could 
not get in eight weeks. Moreover, the AEC had failed to respond to a single 
of the 19 questions posed by Marks on February 12. 

Thus did the hearings develop into a lopsided contest between the 
Commission’s fully documented version and Oppenheimer’s ability to re- 
call in detail events that had occurred a decade or more earlier.>* 

One final item showing the AEC’s prejudices. Garrison was advised that 
the members of the hearing board would spend a full week before the hear- 
ings studying the investigative materials and talking with Robb. When Gar- 
rison asked to be accorded the same privileges as Robb, the Commission 
rejected this suggestion.*” 

On February 15 a special meeting was held of the trustees of the Institute 
for Advanced Study. There was only one item on the agenda: the Institute’s 
director wished to advise the trustees of the charges leveled against him by 
the United States Government, and to proffer his resignation. 

The board voted unanimously to voice its complete confidence in its 
director and to refuse any consideration of his resignation. 

Of the 15 members of the board, two were absent that day: Harold F. 
Linder and Lewis L. Strauss.** 

James Reston, of the New York Times, had wind of the story as early as 
January and had persistently sought the facts ffom Oppenheimer. Days 
before the hearing was due to open, Reston insisted the story could not 
hold much longer, so Garrison turned over the full texts of the Nichols and 
Oppenheimer letters to the reporter. Reston held off publishing, until April 
13, the day after the hearing had opened, when the article was picked up by 
every agency, newspaper, and radio station across the nation. 


On June 12, 1954, Nichols sent a letter to the AEC members, from which I 
quote: “On December 23, 1953, Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer was notified 
that his security clearance had been suspended, and informed of his right to 
a hearing under AEC procedures. By telegram dated January 29, 1954, Dr. 
Oppenheimer requested that he be afforded a hearing and on March 4, 1954, 
after requesting and receiving three extensions of time, he submitted his 
answer to my letter of December 23, 1954.”5” 

I quote next from Oppenheimer’s March 4 letter: 

Dear General Nichols: This is in answer to your letter of December 23, 1953, in 


which the question is raised whether my continued employment as a consultant 
on Atomic Energy Commission work “will endanger the common defense and 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT HITS THE VENTILATOR 211 


security and whether such continued employment is clearly consistent with the 
interests of the national security.” 

Though of course I would have no desire to retain an advisory position if my 
advice were not needed, I cannot ignore the question you have raised, nor ac- 
cept the suggestion that I am unfit for public service. 

The items of so-called derogatory information set forth in your letter cannot 
be fairly understood except in the context of my life and my work. This answer 
is in the form of asummary account of relevant aspects of my life in more or less 
chronological order, in the course of which I shall comment on the specific 
items in your letter. Through this answer, and through the hearings before the 
personnel security board, which I hereby request, I hope to prove a full basis 
upon which the questions posed by your letter may be resolved.*” 


The letter continues with a long, detailed resumé of his activities in the 
prewar period, the war years, and the postwar period (all described in the 
preceding), and ends as follows: “In preparing this letter, I have reviewed 
two decades of my life. I have recalled instances where I acted unwisely. 
What I have hoped was, not that I could wholly avoid error, but that I 
might learn from it. What I have learned has, I think, made me more fit to 
serve my country.”>”! 

In response to Oppenheimer’s request for a hearing, the AEC established 
a three-member Personnel Security Board (PSB). President Eisenhower chose 
Gordon Gray as the chairman, and the Commission picked Ward V. Evans 
and Thomas A. Morgan. Gray had served as secretary of the Army in the 
Truman administration, and was the president of the University of North 
Carolina. Evans was achemistry professor at Loyola University, and Morgan 
was a businessman and the former president of the Sperry Gyroscope Com- 
pany. The opening date for the hearing was set at April 12, 1954. 

On April 5, Robb briefed the PSB on the file data, and continued to brief 
them for the rest of that week. The three-man panel read through over 
3,000 pages of material derived from AEC, FBI, and Manhattan Engineer- 
ing District records. The information contained testimony and Air Force 
documents relating to Oppenheimer’s position on the H-bomb, tactical 
nuclear weapons, air defense, and government candor. Oppenheimer’s at- 
torneys were never shown this material or given the opportunity to pro- 
vide the board with a balanced perspective. 


Years later, in 1963, a reporter wrote: “Long before the hearing itself started, 
almost from the week his clearance was revoked, Oppenheimer says, he 
had no ‘real hope of other than the actual outcome—once a thing like that 
has been started, they can’t zot go through with it to the end; and they 
couldn’t let me win.’”*” 


212 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 
Oppenheimer and McCarthy 


At the 1952 Republican convention, Senator McCarthy received an ova- 
tion when he called for a “rough” anti-communist drive.” After the Republi- 
can victory, he was promoted from ranking minority member of the Senate’s 
Investigation Committee to chairman, with broad powers—including the 
choice of those to be investigated. 

Robert was an obvious McCarthy target. Already in 1952 he (McC.) had 
called on Edgar Hoover to discuss the possibility of starting an investiga- 
tion of Oppenheimer, hinting at bipartisan support for such a move.*” 
McCarthy in fact came close to the Oppenheimer issue when, a week be- 
fore the hearings were about to begin, he said in a nationally televised speech: 
“If there were no Communists in our government, why did we delay for 
eighteen: months—delay our research on the hydrogen bomb, even though 
our intelligence agencies were reporting, day after day, that the Russians 
were feverishly pushing their development on the hydrogen bomb? Our 
nation may well die because of that eighteen-month delay. And I ask who 
caused it? Was it loyal Americans—or was it traitors in our government?””> 
This charge met with bipartisan rebuttal.>” 

The day after the hearing opened he told a reporter: “Oppenheimer’s 


suspension was long overdue—it should have taken place years ago. .. . I 
think it took considerable courage to suspend the so-called untouchable 
scientist—Oppenheimer. . . . I gave Strauss credit for that.”5* 


Both the White House and the AEC were wary and enervated by 
McCarthy’s exploitation of the Oppenheimer case. 

Strauss was scared that McCarthy was waiting in the wings. To Senator 
Anderson’s astonishment, Strauss said at a JCCAE meeting that “he would 
have to turn the [O.] file over to McCarthy [who] would have to be molli- 
fied.”>*” Eisenhower, who loathed McCarthy and wanted to discredit him, 
was afraid that the senator might raise the accusation against Oppenheimer. 
I could even imagine (but for this I have no proof whatsoever) that Robert’s 
decision otto resign may have been influenced in part by the fear that in 
that case the Senator from Wisconsin would be after him. 

Why did McCarthy in fact nor get into the act, in a case that he would 
have considered juicy? 

Senator McCarthy assigned one of his staff members to work on “the 
Oppenheimer case” for a time, but the senator refrained from any probe of 
Oppenheimer or the H-bomb program because, he later recalled, he had 
“assurances from top Administration officials that this matter would be gone into in 


IN WHICH THE EXCREMENT HITS THE VENTILATOR 213 


detail” (my italics). Congressional employees intimate with these affairs were 
given to understand that the principal “top Administration official” respon- 
sible for saving Robert Oppenheimer from a McCarthy investigation was 
the vice president of the United States, Richard M. Nixon. “We decided we 
were not the committee to go into it. It was not a matter for open hearings, 
[since] it definitely involved security. . . . we got some pretty high assur- 
ances that it would not be neglected.” 

The Oppenheimer hearings started when McCarthy’s influence was at 
its peak. His decline began ten days later, on April 22, 1954, when Senate 
hearings began concerning McCarthy’s accusations directed against the U.S. 
Army for coddling an alleged communist sympathizer. The following De- 
cember 2, he was formally censured by the Senate for conduct “contrary to 
Senate traditions.” Thereafter he never regained power. He died in 1957. 


CHAPTER 23 


IN WHICH THE NEWS OF THE 
HEARINGS IS MADE PUBLIC 


How Einstein and | First Heard 


In the New York Herald Tribune edition of Sunday, April 11, 1954, there ap- 
peared a column by Joseph Alsop (1910-1989) and his younger brother 
Stewart (1914-1974), entitled “Next McCarthy target: the leading physi- 
cists.” The next morning, the Christian Science Monitor published an article 
with a similar heading: “Senator stalks A-Scientists.” 

The Alsop column began by stating that the junior senator from Wis- 
consin was “getting ready to play his ace in the hole. ... McCarthy will, of 
course, carefully time his ace-in-the-hole in order to smother the smell of 
the McCarthy-Army mess.” The authors write of the “truly monumental 
naiveté about political matters” shown in their youth by some physicists, 
referring in particular to “one extremely distinguished American physicist, 
who made great contributions to the American atomic program, [who] is 
known in his younger years to have committed acts of political folly un- 
worthy of a five-year old child. He is certainly not alone.” That one, of 
course, was Robert, whom the Alsop brothers knew and liked well. I may 
note, first, that I did not read that Alsop column on the day it came out, 
being a New York Times and not a Herald Tribune reader; secondly, that the 
quoted columnists were apparently unaware that, already at the time of 
their writing, it had been decided that McCarthy would not play a direct 
role in the Oppenheimer affair. 


IN WHICH THE NEWS OF THE HEARINGS IS MADE PUBLIC 215 


On the evening of that same Sunday I was working in my office at the 
Institute when, at about 10 o’clock, my phone rang. A long distance opera- 
tor from Washington, D.C., asked to speak to Dr. Oppenheimer. (I should 
explain that this call reached me because the Institute switchboard was closed 
on Sundays, and I had one of the few direct outside lines.) I replied that 
Oppenheimer was out of town; I knew, in fact, that he was in Washington 
that day. The operator asked next to be connected with Dr. Einstein. I told 
her that Einstein was not at the office and that his home number was un- 
listed. Whereupon the operator told me that her party wished to speak to 
me. The person who came on the line introduced himself as Henry Raymont, 
director of the Washington Bureau of the United Press. He told me that the 
Oppenheimer case would be all over the papers on Tuesday morning. He 
was eager for a statement by Einstein as soon as possible. 

I realized that pandemonium on Mercer Street the next morning might 
be avoided by a brief statement that evening and so said that I would talk it 
over with Einstein and would call back in any event. I drove to 112 Mercer 
Street and rang the bell; Helen Dukas, Einstein’s secretary, let me in. I apolo- 
gized for appearing at such a late hour and said it would be good if I could 
talk briefly with the professor, who meanwhile had appeared at the top of 
the stairs in his bathrobe and asked, “Was ist los?” (“What is going on?”) He 
came down and so did his stepdaughter Margot. After I told him the reason 
for my call, Einstein burst out laughing. I was a bit taken aback and asked 
him what was so funny. He said the problem was simple. All Oppenheimer 
needed to do, he said, was go to Washington, tell the officials that they were 
fools, and then go home. On further discussion, we decided that a brief 
statement was called for. We drew it up, and Einstein read it over the phone 
to the UP director in Washington.** 

That done, Mr. Raymont asked Einstein what he thought the impact of 
the coming events would be on the scientific community. Listening in on 
this conversation on another phone, I heard Einstein take a deep breath. 
Before he could begin to talk, I broke in, saying that it was best that Einstein’s 
statement should do for the moment, and that further comments could 
wait. My reason for doing so was that I could easily imagine Einstein mak- 
ing remarks on the fools in Washington, like he had done to me—which to 
me did not appear at all apposite at that time. Raymont reacted by thanking 
both Einstein and me. End of conversation. 

And so it came about that it was I who first informed Einstein of the 
upcoming Oppenheimer hearings. That evening was also the first time that I 
myself heard that news. Earlier remarks by Robert had given me intimations 
that something was brewing, but not before had I known what was now 


216 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


about to happen. I should further note most of the details of what led up to 
the hearings, described in the preceding, have become clear to me only in the 
course of preparing this book, about half a century, after the event. 

I conclude this account of Einstein’s early awareness of the Oppenheimer 
case with a few further remarks. 

Shortly after the news broke, statements from a number of outstanding 
scientists were published. Einstein’s contribution was limited to a single 
sentence: “The systematic and widespread attempt to destroy mutual trust 
and confidence constitutes the severest possible blow against society.”>” 

During the same period, Einstein replied to a correspondent in New 
York who had written him about the Oppenheimer case: “It is best not to 
be too excited. Fear and stupidity have generally been the origin of most 
human actions. We can only continue to strive for honesty and indepen- 
dence of thought.” 

Was Einstein’s initial response—to tell Washington officials that they 
were fools and then go home—correct? Of course it was, even though his 
suggestion would not and could not be followed. I remember once attend- 
ing a seminar by Bertrand de Jouvenel in which he singled out the main 
characteristic of a political problem: it has no answer, only a compromise. 
Nothing was more alien to Einstein than to settle any issue by compro- 
mise, in his life or in his science. He often spoke out on political problems, 
always steering to their answer. Such statements have often been called na- 
ive. In my view, Einstein was not only not naive but highly aware of the 
nature of man’s sorrows and his follies. His utterances on political matters 
did not always address the immediately practicable, and I do not think that 
on the whole they were very influential. However, he knowingly and gladly 
paid the price of sanity. Oppenheimer’s description, “There was always 
with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn,”™ 
shows the writer’s talent for almost understanding everything. 

Finally, the day after the evening’s events just described, Helen Dukas 
was preparing lunch when she saw cars in front of the house and cameras 
being unloaded. In her apron (she told me), she ran out of the house to 
warn Einstein, who was on his way home. When he arrived at the front 
door, he declined to talk to reporters. 


First Newspaper Comments 


When Mr. Raymont called me that Sunday evening, he told me not just 
that the news would be in the next Tuesday papers but also that the New 


IN WHICH THE NEWS OF THE HEARINGS IS MADE PUBLIC 217 


York Times would carry 17 columns in their April 13 edition—a number I 
noted in my diary. I do not know for certain how he had obtained such 
detailed information but have a good guess. 

As already mentioned, James Reston of the Times had been aware for 
some time that something was brewing. He had been in touch with 
Oppenheimer and Garrison. The latter had spoken with Lilienthal, who 
already in January had written in his diary: “So it will be all over the place. 
Surprising that it hasn’t before this.” 

True to his promise, Reston held off publishing until the hearings had 
started. One finds his article in the Times edition of April 13, beginning on 
the front page, followed by four full pages inside—17 columns in all, as I 
had been told. It will be clear that Raymont’s information must have come 
from someone on the Times staff; also that the article had been typeset 
over the weekend but held until after the hearing had opened on Monday, 
April 13. 

On the most prominent position of the Times front page one will find a 
two-column picture of a meditative Oppeiheimer in his Princeton study, 
under the headlines: “Dr. Oppenheimer suspended by A.E.C. in security 
review; scientist defends record; hearings started; access to secret data de- 
nied nuclear expert—red ties alleged.” 

Reston wrote in his article: “In view of the fact that the Times was in 
possession of most of the facts, Dr. Oppenheimer made the statement of 
charges and his reply available to the Times so that the record of the case 
could be written from the actual documents.” Thus one finds in the article 
the full texts of the December 23, 1953, letter by Nichols to Oppenheimer, 
and of the lengthy March 4, 1954, reply by Robert (which Reston had ob- 
tained the previous April 9.) 

The Times news was picked up by newspapers worldwide. The first of 
these was probably the New York Daily News, which on the afternoon of 
that same April 13 came out with one of its superheavy headlines: 
“Oppenheimer A-bomb chief suspended; U.S. Board studies charges of 
scientist’s commie ties.” 

I select from my vast collection of newspaper clippings some representa- 
tive comments from other papers. 

The Washington Post, April 14, front page headline: “Ike bars atomic se- 
crets from Dr. Oppenheimer.” From its editorial (page 14): “If men are to 
be accused of disloyalty for the honest and open expressions of opinions 
which later come to be considered mistaken, then only sycophants can sur- 
vive in government.” 


218 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


The New York Post, April 14, editorial: 


He [O.] is a man blessed by fortune with every endowment and tortured by 


fortune with every mischance. .. . After the war he became the symbol of the 
newly-canonized nuclear physicist, young and intense and quite beyond the 
comprehension of the ordinary. ... A man accepts the challenge of alchemy, he 


labors and helps make gold out of dross; and, when he has finished, men hate 
him in his triumph as they would have forgotten. him in his failure. 


The New York Herald Tribune, April 13: 


The fact that Dr. Oppenheimer has been charged on security grounds has 
been known in the higher circles of the scientific community for weeks. The 
reaction in these circles, in which, of course, Dr. Oppenheimer is intimately 
known, is significant. A committee has been formed . . . to raise money for Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s defense. The response has so far been remarkable—the most 
distinguished scientists in the country, including rivals who have by no means 
always seen eye to eye with Dr. Oppenheimer, have been eager to contribute. 


Same paper, editorial, April 16: 


The action of President Eisenhower in suspending, during re-investigation, 
the security clearance of the great nuclear scientist, Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, 
who has done as much as any man in the world to give America the atomic 
bomb, is reassuring to the whole nation. It shows that the Administration is 
resolving all borderline doubts on the side of prudent safety. 

It shows that there isn’t a smitch of oh-there-can’t-be-anything-wrong-here 
thinking in the executive handling of security decisions. 

It shows that the Administration does not need to be harassed by Congress 
to do its own job under orderly and fair procedures. 

It shows that the Administration is not lightly accepting past clearances as 
any substitute for its own responsibility when, even as in Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
earlier clearance, it had the participation of the President’s trusted chairman of 
the Atomic Energy Commission, Lewis L. Strauss, who shared Mr. Eisenhower’s 
view that both old and some new questions concerning Dr. Oppenheimer must 
be restudied. 


New York World Telegram, April 16: 


Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer is discouraging his fellow scientists from de- 
manding that the loyalty charges against him be aired publicly, it was learned 
today. , 

Many colleagues and friends of the physicist are opposed to the present se- 
cret hearings before a special security board of the Atomic Energy Commission. 

They would like to see a public investigation—preferably before the House- 
Senate Atomic Energy Commission—so the nation would be able to weigh the 
charges of procommunism against Dr. Oppenheimer’s record in development 
of the atomic bomb. 


IN WHICH THE NEWS OF THE HEARINGS IS MADE PUBLIC 219 


Fears Blurring of Issues. 

But an informed source revealed Dr. Oppenheimer does not favor this course. 
He fears it might develop into a sensational trial in which the issues could be- 
come blurred. 


The New York Times of April 18 contains reports by regional correspon- 
dents on the reaction in their respective areas. 
Excerpts follow. 


New England 


Most editorials called for caution pending the shedding of further light. Dr. 
Oppenheimer personally was termed an “uneducated intellectual,” and was char- 
acterized as being politically naive. 


Mid-Atlantic States 


After the initial shock, residents of this area took a wait-and-see attitude in 
the case of Dr. Oppenheimer. There was a general feeling that it was better to 
have the allegations produced in full, along with Dr. Oppenheimer’s reply, than 
to have them the subject of rumor and possible misinterpretation. Many, how- 
ever, found it hard to understand why the A.E.C. had waited so long to start a 
full investigation. 


The Southeast 


The general feeling of the man in the street is that President Eisenhower 
acted wisely in suspending Dr. Oppenheimer. However, the consensus seems to 
be that in view of the fact it was known that he had associated with Commu- 
nists in the past, further action in the case is hardly required. 

McCarthy has few partisans and enjoys little prestige in the Deep South, and 
the Oppenheimer ouster has done little, if anything, to raise his stock. 


The Midwest 


Calling Dr. Oppenheimer a “political innocent,” the Eisenhower-supporting 
Chicago Daily News said: “The Oppenheimer files have been hashed over repeatedly, 
and it will take new evidence to carry much weight. Unless that is forthcoming, 
we would think the statute of limitations had run on pre-war political follies.” 

The incident did nothing to raise Senator McCarthy’s stock among the pub- 
lic as a whole, but it gave satisfaction to the proclaimers of the Wisconsinite’s 
“infallibility.” 


The Southwest 


Texans appear to have adopted an attitude of “wait and see” regarding the 
allegations against Dr. Oppenheimer. 


220 =~ J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Even some of the pro-McCarthy newspapers have adopted a cautious ap- 
proach to the disclosures. One of these is the Houston Chronicle, which observed 
that the Oppenheimer case “should be handled soberly, intelligently and with- 
out political flamboyance.” 

On the whole the Administration has been credited with acting wisely in 
suspending Dr. Oppenheimer until the facts in the case can be proved. 


The Mountain States 


Reaction to suspension of Dr. Oppenheimer and investigation of charges 
against him ranged from sharp incredulity to “I told you so” attitudes in this area. 

Fully 50 percent of persons queried on the Oppenheimer case feel “McCarthy 
opened this up” through his television appearance charging an eighteen-month 
delay in H-bomb development. There seems no doubt the Senator’s backing has 
been strengthened by the airing of the charges against Dr. Oppenheimer about 
his past associations and H-bomb attitude. 


Pacific Coast 


The Oppenheimer case was greeted editorially in this region with some ap- 
plause for the scientist for electing to combat the charges against him, with 
some demand for a factual inquiry without smear or whitewash; with some 
appeal to the public to withhold judgment until the investigation was complete 
and a decision rendered. 

In spite of editorial appeals for caution in judgment, there appeared to be a 
tendency for “headline readers” to prejudge the case without giving Dr. 
Oppenheimer even a slight advantage. 

Incidentally, the whole subject was greeted with silence by most of Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s former Berkeley colleagues. Sideliners on the California cam- 
pus analyzed the prevailing attitude as: “What of value could we contribute by 
sticking our necks out?” 


New York Times, April 30. Under the heading: “Oppenheimer case divides 
physicists,” 


Colleagues of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer in the American Physical Society, 
are divided in their views as to whether the war-time scientific director of the 
atomic bomb project should have been subjected to a hearing on his being a 
possible security risk. 

The existence of diametrically opposing views among his own colleagues 
was revealed here today at the opening of the annual meeting of the American 
Physical Society, of which Dr. Oppenheim is a past president, and at a meet- 
ing tonight under the auspices of the Washington Chapter, Federation of 
American Scientists. 

Questioning of representative physicists from various parts of the country 
brought to light the existence of three distinct points of view: those who believe 
that Dr. Oppenheimer will be cleared and reinstated; those who expect an unfa- 


IN WHICH THE NEWS OF THE HEARINGS IS MADE PUBLIC 221 


vorable decision, finding him to be a “security risk”; and those who actually 
believe that his opposition to the hydrogen bomb must be taken as “proof” of 
disloyalty. 

There is still another group that does not question his loyalty, and does not 
even hold that he is in any way a security risk; while at the same time it regards 
his suspension as an adviser to the Atomic Energy Commission pending the 
outcome of the hearing, was fully justified. 

As a leading scientist expressed it: “We dismiss generals if they make mis- 
takes, and sometimes even court-martial them. Why should scientists who give 
bad advice not be given the same treatment?” 


Same paper, same day, heading: 


President praises Oppenheimer, but says inquiry was required. 

President Eisenhower expressed today his admiration and respect for the pro- 
fessional attainments of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer. However, the President 
said the allegations against the scientist as a security risk made necessary the new 
investigation of him. 

The President took personal responsibility for the Administration decision 
to raise—in the words of the Atomic Energy Commission—a “blank wall” be- 
tween Dr. Oppenheimer and the secret information he helped to unlock as di- 
rector of the research team that built the first atomic bomb. The scientist has 
been suspended as an adviser to the commission. 

It was the proper responsibility of the Executive branch to investigate the 
allegations against Dr. Oppenheimer, President Eisenhower said, as he disclaimed 
in answer to a question at his news conference any attempt to interfere with the 
investigative function of Congress. 

The President then volunteered that he had known Dr. Oppenheimer and 
had certainly admired and respected the scientist’s very great professional and 
technical attainments. But this was the kind of thing that must be gone through 
with, he said. 

President Eisenhower was asked whether the re-examination of the allega- 
tions against Dr. Oppenheimer by a special commission panel had been started 
to avoid a public hearing in the Congress. 

The reply by the President was that he was not trying to interfere with the 
proper execution of Congress’ duties. As he had said many times, the Presi- 
dent added, such investigations fell squarely on the shoulders of the Executive 
Branch. 

He had acted on that responsibility when the case was brought to him, he said. 


Later, in April, national magazines began to devote articles to the case. 
Time Magazine, April 26, begins with a quote from Oppenheimer, taken 
from an interview dating from 1948: 


You have no idea how repugnant this is—to go over my life. It is impossible 
to be completely candid. It’s an art and it takes technique, and you have to learn 


222 ~—~J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


it. If you’ve lived a life that isn’t free and open with people, it’s almost impos- 
sible to unsnar] it, to unravel the ball of twine. 


It continues with excepts from Oppenheimer’s March 4 letter to Nichols. 


Oppenheimer’s letter shone with literary brilliance; the strength of his per- 
sonality leaped out from the page. It was especially moving to men and women 
in the same age bracket as Oppenheimer (he is 50). Many men ten years older 
or ten years younger did not fully understand him. His letter was an account 
of a strange period of history, the decades 1920-1950—not so much of their 
strange events but of even stranger states of mind. His story was an extreme 
example of what had happened in that period to a large body of the world’s 
intellectuals. 


About his student years: 


He.decided that physics was his first interest, but he did not enter into that 
austere and noble priesthood, as some did, without exposure to the world of 
ideas that lay beyond and around it. At Harvard, the youth who had already 
met Sophocles, and who was later to be bewildered and surprised by the evil in 
the world, discovered Dante and pored over French literature. 


About the case: 


That he opposes [Eisenhower’s] policy does not mean that Oppenheimer is 
disloyal. Indeed, the Vice President of the U.S., Richard Nixon, last week went 
out of his way to express his belief in Oppenheimer’s loyalty. But Oppenheimer’s 
kind of politics and his peculiar power arouse violent antagonism. 

A sense of moral responsibility concerning war is not limited to atomic sci- 
entists. Most generals have that sense and so do most nonscientific civilians at 
the top layers of Government. They do not feel it as “a sense of sin.” Most of 
them have borne this sense of responsibility as citizens, soldiers, or officials for 
many years. This fact does not make them more right or more loyal than 
Oppenheimer. Or less so. 

It is possible—and for thousands of years men have known this—to develop 
pride out of a sense of guilt. Many of the military and civilian officials whom 
Oppenheimer opposed sensed in him an arrogant desire to take into his own 
hands the destiny of society. Perhaps they were wrong to think this of him. 
Even if they were right, disloyalty may not be the relevant accusation. How- 
ever he came to his present ordeal, J. Robert Oppenheimer’s life is a bitter par- 
able of a bitter time. 


Life Magazine, April 26, carried an article headlined: “U.S. ponders a 
scientist’s past,” which started out as follows. 
Silently and impassively, a thin, thoughtful man wearing a porkpie hat and 


accompanied by a policeman and three lawyers walked with hurried step last 
week through the shabby back door courtyard of a Washington office building. 


IN WHICH THE NEWS OF THE HEARINGS IS MADE PUBLIC 223 


The almost furtive entrance gave the scene an appropriate air of mystery, for 
the secret questioning of the man was of profound national importance. The 
porkpie hat identified the man as J. Robert Oppenheimer. .. . 

Whatever the truth of the charges and whatever the outcome of the inquiry, 
the situation which involved one of the nation’s most brilliant scientific minds 
was in itself a national tragedy. 


With these lines we enter the scene of the hearings. 


SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL 
BY ROBERT P. CREASE 


CHAPTER 24 


“OPEN BOOK”: THE HEARING 
IN THE MATTER OF 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


The chief puzzle surrounding Robert Oppenheimer’s security clearance 
hearing is why it had not happened earlier. 

Despite Truman’s approval of the Super project in 1950, its supporters 
had neither forgiven nor forgotten Oppenheimer’s opposition. As Cold 
War anxieties rose, many key H-bomb supporters had grown increasingly 
anxious about his continued influence on atomic weapons development. 
Oppenheimer was neither the only eminent scientist to oppose the Super 
nor the only one to do so on moral grounds: in 1949, Compton, Conant, 
Fermi, and Rabi, among others, had signed on to documents that articu- 
lated powerful practical and moral objections to the Super’s development. 
But this did not cause its proponents to question the integrity of these scien- 
tists, nor to fear that they were spies. Oppenheimer was different. No one 
else with that much access and influence had that much of a leftwing past. No 
one else with that much of a leftwing past had that much access and influence. 
Oppenheimer’s opposition to the Super’s development coupled with his past 
leftwing activities to magnify the suspicion and determination of his adver- 
saries. Their fear of each intensified their fear of the other. 

Oppenheimer thus became the largest object in the cross-hairs of nuclear 
weapons proponents such as Lewis Strauss and anti-communist crusaders 
such as FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover. 

It was not that Oppenheimer continued to harbor any leftist leanings; 
indeed, he had become known as anti-Soviet after witnessing Soviet intran- 
sigence toward international control of atomic energy in reaction to the 


228 ~=—«J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Acheson-Lilienthal plan. Rather, his increased vulnerability was due to the 
more intense scrutiny his previous activities, and his steps to conceal them, 
attracted in the new hypersensitive Cold War climate. Oppenheimer thus 
experienced his earlier “leftwanderings,” in Lawrence’s words, and his 
coverups thereof, to be an increasingly burdensome albatross. Political con- 
troversies can reach athreshold at which key individuals or institutions are 
pushed into a “fishbow]” phase, when every aspect of their present and past 
behavior becomes exhaustively scrutinized, and every potentially damning 
thing is examined from the most damning angle possible. This was about to 
happen to J. Robert Oppenheimer. His fishbowl would be exceptionally 
transparent, given over a dozen years of FBI and Army Intelligence gather- 
ing on him with interviews and informants, personal surveillance and wire- 
taps. And in the aftermath of the trial, the contents of that fishbowl would 
become unusually public. His life, Garrison would remark at the end of the 
hearing, would become an “open book.” 

Why it took so long for his powerful enemies to act has to do with what 
Stanford historian Barton Bernstein has called Oppenheimer’s “exception- 
alism,” or special protection within the Truman administration, in which 
he had high friends.! Foremost among these was Acheson, Oppenheimer’s 
new Groves, who stood ready to save Oppenheimer from his missteps. 
Moreover, the fishbowling still had failed to produce gold-plated evidence 
of either Communist Party membership or perjury. Lacking hard evidence, 
Oppenheimer’s opponents dared not move against someone with that high 
a public profile and political reputation. Failure would risk retaliation, and 
permanent delegitimization of the cause. 

In 1953, with Eisenhower’s ascension to the presidency, this began to 
change. That June 5, Oppenheimer’s consultancy contract with AEC was 
extended by one year, to June 30, 1954. A month later, another fateful event: 
Lewis Strauss, still determined to reduce Oppenheimer’s power, became 
chairman of the AEC. In August, yet another: the Soviet Union exploded 
its first H-bomb. These events—and in particular the last, which would be 
alluded to in the coming hearing in language such as “the current crisis” and 
“the present crisis”—generated a new sense of power and urgency among 
Oppenheimer’s antagonists. Some, including Senator Joseph McCarthy, were 
eager to investigate Oppenheimer right away. Strauss and Hoover demurred, 
fearing to make a martyr of Oppenheimer and alienate the physics commu- 
nity, whose support they thought essential for the looming nuclear arms 
race. Better to ease Oppenheimer out by working behind the scenes. This 
had been the tactic, for instance, that they had used just a few months pre- 


“OPEN BOOK” 229 


viously to ease out Carroll Wilson as the general manager of the AEC. 
Strauss was also reluctant to press for an investigation, for he was politi- 
cally sophisticated enough to realize the possibility of a backlash that could 
destroy him. 

But a series of events conspired to frustrate this scheme. Chief among 
them was the Borden letter. Though nearly all its charges were old, except 
those concerning Oppenheimer’s opposition to the Super development, it 
came on the heels of the Presidential Order of April 1953 tightening secu- 
rity requirements. Furthermore, Eisenhower was worried that any appear- 
ance of indulging Oppenheimer would leave his administration vulnerable 
to a flank attack by Senator Joseph McCarthy. When word of Borden’s 
letter reached Eisenhower, who by now was convinced that Oppenheimer 
was “at least a liar,”? the President directed Strauss to establish, for the time 
being, a “blank wall” between Oppenheimer and atomic data. Certain of 
Strauss’s advisers wanted to solve the problem by simply canceling 
Oppenheimer’s consultancy contract, fearing a “test of strength” with the 
Commission, but Nichols and General Counsel William Mitchell argued 
for termination of the security clearance. Strauss, emboldened by the new, 
less tolerant climate, agreed.> But he still hoped that Oppenheimer would 
resign, and at the December 21 meeting at which he and Nichols informed 
Oppenheimer of the suspension of his clearance, they made clear their pref- 
erence for resignation rather than a hearing. 

Oppenheimer could have accepted that suggestion and spared himself an 
experience that would surely be grueling and humiliating at best. But 
Oppenheimer by now was deeply attached to his power and influence. He 
was confident of his ability to prevail over those who were less intellectu- 
ally quick than he was; which is to say, over everyone else. Finally, not 
only was he accustomed to regard himself as essentially a public custody (as 
one of his high school teachers once remarked), so were other influential 
scientific leaders, who despite the controversies and occasional betrayals of 
previous years still vested him with leadership. Weisskopf wrote him be- 
fore the trial: “Somehow Fate has chosen you as the one who has to bear 
the heaviest load in this struggle. I know that you are suffering from this, 
and any man would in view of such enormous strain. On the other hand, I 
would not know of any better man to bear this load. As a matter of fact, if 
I had to choose whom to select for the man who has to take this on, I could 
not but choose you. Who else in this country could represent better than 
you the spirit and the philosophy of all that for which we are living.” 


230 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


To have accepted the judgment without a fight was not in keeping with a 
public custody. Hence Oppenheimer’s letter, on March 4, requesting a hear- 
ing on his security clearance suspension. This required the AEC to empanel a 
Personnel Security Board (PSB), to conduct a hearing and make a recommen- 
dation to the five AEC commissioners.* By 1954, several scientists—mostly 
physicists and chemists involved in atomic research—had undergone such 
hearings. A tried and true, and generally successful, defense strategy was to 
bring in prominent friends to testify to your character and ability, and to 
be impressive yourself. Oppenheimer was well positioned to do this. He 
selected the prestigious Lloyd Garrison, whose ancestors included the fa- 
mous abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, as his chief counsel. The two 
then put together what historian Gregg Herken has called a “strategy of 
notables,”* a list of scientists and administrators to testify on Oppenheimer’s 
behalf, all of whom had worked with Oppenheimer. Of the 31 who would 
ultimately testify, 10 were former and present members of the GAC, five 
former AEC commissioners (including the two former chairmen prior to 
Strauss), three present or future Nobel laureates, two security officers at 
Los Alamos, and General Groves himself. Oppenheimer and Garrison had 
little reason to suppose that this lineup—representing, in effect, the intellec- 
tual establishment of the day—plus Oppenheimer’s inimitable performance, 
would not suffice to prevail at the hearing. Said one reassuring colleague: 
“Just give them the standard JRO.”’ 

But Strauss, now forced into a confrontation, knew his adversary only too 
well, and feared Oppenheimer’s power and influence. No doubt his determi- 
nation was reinforced by the stark personal clash: Strauss, from a poor back- 
ground and unashamed to profess himself a religious Jew, versus Oppenheimer, 
born into wealth, highly educated, and having all but denied his Jewish heri- 
tage. Strauss, too, was smarting over many insults, that much-cited congres- 
sional hearing over the isotope issue merely a synecdoche for many others. 
Strauss set about to make sure that this would be no standard PSB. 

As the AEC chairman, Strauss skillfully wielded his power and influence 
with the agency’s General Manager Nichols to oversee selection of the PSB 
members. On January 1, 1954, with the attorney general’s approval, Strauss 
had Oppenheimer put under surveillance, to include wiretaps on home and 
office telephones, and then extended the surveillance to opening his mail.® 
Even Oppenheimer’s movements and conversations were reported, meaning 
that the AEC counsel had advance knowledge of every step taken by Oppen- 
heimer and his lawyers. 


“OPEN BOOK” 231 


The fact that it was a hearing appeared to be in Oppenheimer’s favor, for 
it suggested that the AEC’s counsel would face more constraints, and his 
less, than in a civil trial. But Strauss and his allies would exploit ambiguities 
in the process to put him at a decided disadvantage. There was no shared 
understanding, from beginning to end, of terms such as “security risk” and 
“loyalty.” (For “loyalty,” as Oppenheimer had written three years previ- 
ously, in response to a former associate who was appealing for help with his 
own clearance hearing, “is a hard thing to document.”) There were differ- 
ent understandings, too, of the criteria by which to evaluate someone: the 
“zero tolerance” or “Caesar’s wife” standard, according to which even the 
slightest risk was unacceptable; and the “whole man” standard, in which a 
person’s entire record—good and bad—would be evaluated, the relative value 
of the person to the program counted, and “calculated risks” acceptable.’ 
The presence of these different understandings made it unclear what Oppen- 
heimer had to do to defend himself. 

Moreover, Strauss took other steps to make sure this would be no stan- 
dard PSB hearing. Wanting to encourage more of a prosecutorial atmosphere 
than at other PSB hearings, he went outside the AEC’s staff to recruit as the 
agency’s chief counsel Roger Robb, who had extensive trial experience as an 
assistant U.S. attorney. Robb’s powers were vastly extended and enhanced, 
while Garrison’s were restricted. Robb was given clearance, Garrison was 
not. Robb refused to supply advance notice of his witnesses, while Garrison 
gave advance notice of his. Robb received transcripts of each day’s proceed- 
ings immediately, Garrison several days later. Robb had the PSB supplied 
with transcripts of the secret wiretaps made of Oppenheimer and with 3,000 
pages of material from AEC, FBI, and MED records—with the contents of 
the fishbowl, which tilted the Board against Oppenheimer before the hearing 
began—while Oppenheimer and his attorneys were denied access. Oppen- 
heimer was even denied access to documents he had helped write. 

In violation of the AEC’s own security clearance procedures,” Robb 
was able to consult with the Gray panel, was in fact treated as the panel’s 
(rather than the AEC’s) counsel, and sometimes shared meals with panel 
members. Robb was also allowed to work closely with the FBI in gathering 
information and preparing for the trial. Throughout spring 1954, the FBI 
pursued every available lead to squirrel up evidence of Oppenheimer’s con- 
tradictions and false statements. Meanwhile, Strauss, Robb and the other 
AEC counsel recruited and interviewed witnesses. This was unprecedented. 
Their work was so promising that when Rabi and Wigner each tried to 


232 ~=s«J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


broker a compromise in which Oppenheimer would resign his contract in 
return for withdrawal of the charges, Strauss was confident enough to refuse. 

Robb still had to prepare carefully. Winning this case, Robb told people, 
was “most important to him,” and he “did not intend to give up without a 
strong fight.” Oppenheimer’s by-now familiar persona was “a master at 
innuendo and evasive answers,” as one FBI report put it.” Robb armed 
himself against this persona, set traps for it, even lay in wait for it, through- 
out the four weeks of the hearing. He was equipped with documents and 
transcripts that Oppenheimer could not consult—some he did not even know 
about—which Robb would spring on Oppenheimer and his notables. It was 
not an inquiry, not an attempt to seek information: Robb and the AEC 
already had virtually all the information they wanted, and what they still 
needed they knew they could not get from Oppenheimer. Rather, it was a 
set-up: Robb set out to display Oppenheimer’s already fully documented 
mistakes in the worst possible light, to exhibit all the contradictions in 
previous testimony, and maximize the threat that this posed. When asked 
whether Oppenheimer had not demonstrated himself to be too clever and 
agile to fall into the standard prosecutorial traps, Robb replied, “Maybe so, 
but then he’s not been cross-examined by me before.” 

The standard JRO would be all but helpless against this PSB. 


The Hearing: April 12—May 6, 1954 


The hearing opened on April 12, 1954, in Room 2022 of a drab, two-story 
AEC building in Washington, D.C. It was conducted as a confidential hear- 
ing, and participants were assured their words would remain secret. Today, 
mountains of material exist on this episode, which has inspired books (in- 
cluding one by Philip M. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial, devoted 
mainly to the trial itself), articles, commentaries, reviews, plays, and mov- 
ies. The transcript was published shortly after the hearing, then republished 
a year and a half later with an introduction and supplementary material, 
and recently reissued in an abridged version. It is not fun reading: there are 
no citations of Sanskrit or Greek, no sudden disclosures of deep truths, no 
dagger-like verbal thrusts, no brutal putdowns. Oppenheimer, indeed, comes 
off startlingly poorly, often confused, clumsy, and lacking a knowledge of 
his own motives. 

Why? “He wasa wonderful actor, in a sense,” Rabi once said. “He could 
assume the character that was expected of him in the milieu in which he 
was. Always overdoing it, to some degree . . . a lot of his life was playing a 


“OPEN BOOK” 233 


role.”'* But this was a different milieu. Robb would run the hearing like a 
trial where the details were of the essence—who said what to whom and 
when—and he would take all the time in the world to get these details on 
the table, to display them as fully as possible, and to review them more than 
once. Knowing that his adversaries had fishbowled him, but not knowing 
exactly what they had seen, Oppenheimer had to speak extremely—and 
abnormally—cautiously lest he compound the damage he had created in 
episodes that already littered his past. It would be easy for an experienced 
criminal prosecutor to trap him in contradictions and apparent misstate- 
ments. Moreover, Oppenheimer was best when dramatizing himself in front 
of a receptive audience. His self-dramatization would be utterly ineffective 
before an audience with no incentive to be seduced. Being the supplicant 
was not a role he had any experience playing. 

Gray opened the hearing on Day One by reading into the record Nichols’s 
letter of the previous December, mentioning the requirement in the Atomic 
Energy Act of 1946 charging the commissioners to determine the “character, 
associations, and loyalty” of the individuals who work for the commission, 
and referring specifically to Section 10 of the Act referring to the require- 
ment that AEC employees not endanger “the common defense and security,” 
as well as the Executive Order of the previous April requiring that an 
individual’s employment be suspended if information existsthat employment 
would “not be clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.” 
When Gray finished reading Nichols’s letter, he read Oppenheimer’s reply. 
Garrison then made an opening statement. After the lunch break, 
Oppenheimer took the stand and Garrison led him through questioning and 
read more documents into the record. The first notable, Mervin J. Kelly, 
president of the Bell Telephone Laboratory, showed up on Day Two, fol- 
lowed by more Oppenheimer. The flavor of the event, however, did not 
begin until Day Three, when Robb began to question Oppenheimer for the 
first time. Stern describes the contrast between them aptly, if a bit hyperboli- 
cally: “Oppenheimer’s career had been devoted largely to the laboratory and 
the classroom, Robb’s to the courtroom. Robb’s professional skill lay in toe- 
to-toe combat, Oppenheimer’s in intellectuality and soft persuasiveness. 
Oppenheimer was often preoccupied with the distant past and future; Robb, 
in his career, dealt mainly with the here-and-now. The gulf between the two 
was epitomized on two occasions that day: when Oppenheimer made refer- 
ences to Friedrich Engels and Niels Bohr, Robb in both instances was obliged 
to ask, “Who?” Now their lives had intersected: the consummate intellectual 


was face to face with the master cross-examiner.”'® 


234 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


The encounter, however, was not taking place on level ground, for the 
rules of the game were all in favor of the cross-examiner. Oppenheimer’s 
strength was to grasp the essence of a situation quickly, before anyone else, 
even if that meant omitting a few details. Again and again, Robb would in 
effect test Oppenheimer’s unaided memory, leading him into contradic- 
tions with documents and (sometimes secret) transcripts which Robb would 
spring on Oppenheimer, Garrison, and the notables. Again and again, Robb 
would insinuate that these contradictions were more deliberate, extensive, 
and sinister than they actually were. He would do the same with 
Oppenheimer’s witnesses, and would not hesitate to treat some of the most 
eminent scientists and governmental leaders “after the manner of a county 
prosecutor cornering a petty thief.”” 

The aim would be to make Oppenheimer appear a continued risk to the 
“national security.” To Strauss and his allies, Oppenheimer’s opposition to 
the Super had made him a risk; without that opposition, the trial would not 
have happened. But Oppenheimer’s opposition to the Super looked un- 
comfortably like a policy difference. The risk would therefore have to be 
anchored in some of Oppenheimer’s leftwanderings. Though these were in 
the past, they were made to look more threatening through highlighting 
what Strauss would call Oppenheimer’s “falsehoods, evasions, and misrep- 
resentations.” This, plus an appeal to the zero tolerance criterion, would 
justify not reinstating his clearance. 

In an interview that third day of the hearing, Defense Secretary Charles 
E. Wilson likened Oppenheimer to a bank teller with a criminal record. It 
was an excellent analogy for understanding the AEC counsel’s strategy. 
For a few people, simply having a criminal record (leftist past) would be 
sufficient to disqualify a person from handling money (military secrets). 
What would be far more convincing to a much broader audience, however, 
would be to point out implausibilities and inconsistencies in the bank teller’s 
current explanations of that record, suggest that the criminal tendencies per- 
sist into the present—or at least some uncertainty about the matter—and 
argue that zero tolerance of such tendencies was the only prudent course. 
Thus Oppenheimer’s hearing would turn on more than the fact that his 
actions in the 1930s, when the Soviet Union was a United States ally and 
leftist causes had one kind of niche in academic life, could be made to ap- 
pear quite differently in the 1950s, when leftist causes could be made to 
seem much more threatening, with the Soviet Union a mortal enemy and 
in possession of potentially world-destroying weapons. Rather, it was that 
his falsehoods, evasions, and misrepresentations could be made to appear as 


“OPEN BOOK” 235 


manifesting an ongoing character weakness that posed a continued risk in 
using him as an adviser privy to military secrets. No risk however small, it 
would be argued, was worth taking on a matter as important as national 
security in a time of peril. 

At the beginning of that encounter on Day Three, Robb set about elicit- 
ing Oppenheimer’s unaided recollections of his previous actions and claims 
concerning several Communist Party members, including Rudy Lambert 
and three former Oppenheimer students, Giovanni Lomanitz, Bernard Pe- 
ters, and Joseph Weinberg. Robb was laying traps. Regarding Lambert, the 
trap would turn on whether Oppenheimer had lied when he claimed, in 
1943, not to know what Lambert looked like; regarding Lomanitz and 
Weinberg, whether Oppenheimer had known that these former students of 
his were communists when he sought to have them employed in the Man- 
hattan Project; regarding Peters, the trap concerned an embarrassing epi- 
sode in which Oppenheimer told a HUAC committee meeting that this 
former student had communist leanings, then appeared to disavow this tes- 
timony after it became public. Later, on the basis of documents and wire- 
taps already in Robb’s possession, Robb would demonstrate that 
Oppenheimer’s statements were incorrect, and imply duplicity. Robb was 
in no hurry to spring the traps—only to make sure they were well set. And 
Oppenheimer had given him plenty of material to work with. 

Late in the afternoon, Robb brought up the subject of Oppenheimer’s 
June 1943 rendezvous with Jean Tatlock. By this time, Oppenheimer clearly 
sensed how thoroughly Robb was apprised of his activities, and Robb’s 
exacting and relentless examination, coupled with uncertainty about just 
how much Robb knew—not to mention the anxiety of discussing this inti- 
mate event in court in his wife’s presence—made the ordinarily confident 
and eloquent Oppenheimer stumble. 

Q. You spent the night with her, didn’t you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That is when you were working on a secret war project? 

A. Yes. 


Q. Did you think that consistent with good security? 
A. It was, as a matter of fact. Not a word—it was not good practice." 


But Robb’s main coup that day concerned the so-called “Chevalier incident.” 
Haakon Chevalier was a leftist French professor who, in the 1930s, was at 
the center of a well-organized political discussion circle at Berkeley in which 
Oppenheimer participated. At the hearing, Oppenheimer called it a discus- 
sion group. Chevalier called it as a “secret unit” of the Communist Party 
whose members for safety reasons did not have open party membership. 


236 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Documents that have surfaced recently in the Soviet archives and discussed 
by Gregg Herken in his book, Brotherhood of the Bomb, reinforce the impres- 
sion that Soviet contacts viewed this group as a secret unit, and Oppen- 
heimer as an unlisted party member in it.!? (These documents do not show 
any evidence of him spying.) On the one hand, as Herken notes and as a 
careful reading suggests, the documents are full of overinflated claims by 
the agents who sent them. The agents were anxious to impress their bosses, 
especially by as important a figure as Oppenheimer (whom they called the 
“big shot”), and were known to grossly exaggerate contacts and activities. 
The documents do not prove that Oppenheimer was a Communist Party 
member. And if the criterion for Communist Party membership is the ex- 
istence of a membership card bearing one’s name, one may say with almost 
complete confidence that such proof does not exist. On the other hand, 
Party membership was not always clear, intentionally or not. Bart Bernstein 
once proposed the following criterion for Party membership: if one joined 
a group all of whose other members sought they were thereby members of 
the Communist Party. By this admittedly but deliberately vague criterion 
the evidence leans toward the legitimacy of calling Oppenheimer a party 
member. Ironically, the FBI’s efforts to look for black and white evidence 
of something inherently murky nearly made Oppenheimer look entirely 
innocent of the charge that he was a communist, for a membership card 
was the one thing he did not have. 

The “incident” occurred sometime in the winter of 1942-1943; thus, af- 
ter Robert had been chosen to head the Los Alamos laboratory but before 
it actually opened. Chevalier and his wife Barbara came to dinner with Rob- 
ert and Kitty at their Eagle Hill home. At one point, Barbara and Kitty 
were playing a duet on the piano and Robert went into the pantry to mix 
drinks; Haakon followed him and a discussion ensued in which Haakon 
told Robert that their mutual friend George C. Eltenton had a means of 
getting technical information to the Soviets, an apparent invitation to pass 
on secrets, which Robert refused. 

At first, Oppenheimer kept this episode to himself. Months later, he 
mentioned it to Army intelligence but refused to divulge the name of the 
person contacting him. In the following years, he told several different ver- 
sions of the episode, and at the hearing would say that his earliest had been 
“a cock-and-bull story”: 

Version number 1 (August 26, 1943, Berkeley), told to security officer Boris Pash: 


Oppenheimer says that Eltenton had approached three members of the Manhat- 
tan Project through intermediaries, but does not mention Chevalier. 


“OPEN BOOK” 237 


Version number 2 (Dec. 12, 1943, Los Alamos), told to General Groves: 
Oppenheimer says the intermediary is Chevalier, and that Frank Oppenheimer 
was the one contacted. 


Version number 3 (April 14, 1954), told at the hearing in response to Robb’s ques- 
tioning: Oppenheimer says that Chevalier said that Eltenton had “means of 
getting technical information to Soviet scientists,” and “I thought I said, ‘But 
that is treason,’ but I am not sure.” 


Version number 4 (after the hearing), which Kitty and Robert told Oppenheimer’s 
secretary Verna Hobson as the “real” story, who later relayed it to Pais:* 


HC came in. K saw that something was up. She didn’t want R to be alone with 
HC and so went in the kitchen too. When HC spoke up, it was Kim who said 
that would be treason. R never let on to that, in order to protect K. 


Added Hobson: 


R relied on Kitty for practical & political judgment. After HC meeting in the 
kitchen R told K of his intent to tell the “original” cock & bull story to the 
security people. K said that nvn’ do.! 


At the hearing, Robb elicited Oppenheimer’s version of the story, his 
confession that the earliest version had been a “cock-and-bull story,” then 
dwelt on it some more: 

Q. Did you tell Pash the truth about this thing? 

A. No. 

Q. You lied to him? 

A. Yes... 

Q. Didn’t you say that X had approached three people? 

A. Probably. 

Q. Why did you do that, Doctor? 


A. Because I was an idiot.” 


Robb had what he wanted: Oppenheimer’s frank admission to having 
lied. This was a key part of the convicted bank teller strategy, for it invited 
the question: If he had lied once, why not again? But Oppenheimer had also 
stumbled badly after Robb’s request for an explanation. Oppenheimer might 
have said something to the following effect: “I was trving to protect a dear 
friend, and was then prideful and arrogant enough to think that I could get 
away with it.” This would have nung true, bolstered perception of his integ- 
rity, and countered the convicted bank teller strategy. Instead, Oppenheimer 
produced another evasion. It was one thing to call onself an idiot in infor- 
mal company as a brush-off to change the subject, and another to do so ina 
legal context where one’s character was the issue. 

Later that evening, Robb told his wife, “I’ve just seen a man destroy 
himself.» But back in the hearing room, he relentlessly hammered away 
at Oppenheimer, dwelling on and dramatizing the lie. 


238 «= J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Q. Isn’t it a fair statement today, Dr. Oppenheimer, that according to your tes- 
timony now you told not one lie to Colonel Pash, but a whole fabrication and 
tissue of lies? 

A. Right. 

Q. In great circumstantial detail, is that correct? 

A. Right. 


Oppenheimer’s evasions did not bother some people in physics circles; 
for Rabi, indeed, they manifested Oppenheimer’s childlike streak. “He could 
tell sort of stories like that, in this harmless kind of way,” Rabi once said, 
referring to the Chevalier incident. “I didn’t take a very strong view of that 
because I found it somewhat endearing that he had clay feet.”* But hard- 
liners like Strauss did not find Oppenheimer’s clay feet endearing; a clay- 
footed man was the very definition of someone whom they wanted out of 
classified circles. Over the next three weeks of the hearing, Robb would 
repeatedly use Oppenheimer’s admission about the Chevalier incident to de- 
flate not only Oppenheimer, but nearly all of the notables who came to 
deliver encomiums on his behalf. Robb would point again and again to those 
clay feet, asking how one could be sure they had hardened up; and even if 
they had hardened up whether there wasn’t a danger that they might re- 
turn; and whether Oppenheimer’s lameness in accounting for them didn’t 
show that he still had them. 

For instance, the Chevalier incident loomed in the background during 
the testimony of the first pro-Oppenheimer witness, General Leslie R. 
Groves. Strauss met with Groves before the trial, and passed on to Robb 
suggestions as to what questions to ask, and what Groves’s answers would 
be. Under Garrison’s questioning, Groves painted a flattering portrait of 
Oppenheimer, calling him a hard worker—“he worked harder at times than 
I wanted him to, because I was afraid he would break down under it.” Then 
came Robb’s questioning: 

Q. General, in the light of your experience with security matters and in the 


light of your knowledge of the file pertaining to Dr. Oppenheimer, would you 
clear Dr. Oppenheimer today? 


Groves first gave his interpretation of the provision of the Atomic Energy 
Act requirement that persons with access to restricted data should not “en- 
danger the common defense or security,” and that its investigations should 
include “character, associations, and loyalty,” then added, “In this case I 
refer particularly to associations and not to the associations as they exist 
today but the past record of the associations. I would not clear Dr. 
Oppenheimer today if I were a member of the Commission on the basis of 
this interpretation.” 


“OPEN BOOK” 239 


Later that day, Oppenheimer returned to the stand. Robb questioned 
him further about his associations, and sprang his traps about Lambert, 
Lomanitz, Peters, and Weinberg. The results illustrated the core of the con- 
victed bank teller strategy, and clearly made an impression on Gray. For 
the next day, Friday, Gray asked Oppenheimer whether he had not been 
caught in a conflict between “loyalty to an individual,” that is, to his friends, 
and “a broader obligation,” that is, to his country, and how he would handle 
this conflict in the future. In the case of at least Peters, Gray seems to have 
found Oppenheimer’s reply evasive. 

Pro-Oppenheimer witnesses who appeared on Friday included former 
AEC Commissioner T. Keith Glennan, former MIT president Karl T. 
Compton, and John Landsdale, Jr. Landsdale was an important witness, as 
the former head of Security and Intelligence for the Manhattan District, 
and one to whom Oppenheimer had told the earliest version of the Cheva- 
lier “cock-and-bull” story. But Robb skillfully used the incident to blunt 
Landsdale’s positive judgment of Oppenheimer. 


Q. Colonel Landsdale, as a lawyer are you familiar with the legal maxim, “Falsus 
in uno, falsus in omnibus”? 

A. Yes; I am. Like all legal maxims, it is a generalization, and not of particular 
significance when applied to specifics. 

Q. When you are trying a jury case and the veracity of a witness is in question, 
do you request the court to give an instruction on that subject? 

A. Oh, certainly; don’t you? 

Q. Certainly, I want to know that you do. 

A. The instruction usually is that the jury may, but does not have to, take that 
as an indication, and the judgment is to be exercised in the particular case. 

Q. And when you are trying a jury case and you examine a witness on the oppo- 
site side and you demonstrate that he has lied, don’t you argue to the jury from 
that that they should disregard his evidence? 

A. You are speaking now as to what I as an advocate do? 

Q. Yes. 

A. It depends on circumstances; usually I do. 

Q. Sure. Any lawyer worth his salt would. 

A. Particularly if it is my belief. 

Q. Yes, sir. 

Robb That is all. 


Landsdale, however, was one of the few witnesses who could spar effec- 
tively with Robb. After Landsdale testified that the Chevalier incident was 
the only time that he knew of Oppenheimer lying to him, and that 
Oppenheimer’s “veracity is good,” and Robb pointed out that Los Alamos 
security officer Peer de Silva had a considerably harsher view of Oppen- 
heimer’s veracity than Landsdale’s, the two had the following exchange: 


240 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Q.He [de Silva] was a professional; was he not? 

A. Oh, yes... we were all professionals. 

Q. He was certainly more of a professional than you were; wasn’t he, Colonel? 
A. In what field? 

Q. The field he was working in, security. 

A. No. 

Q. No? 

A. No. 

Q. He was a graduate of West Point; wasn’t he? 

A. Certainly. I am a graduate of VMI, too. You want to fight about that?” 


It was one of the few times a witness succeeded in making Robb back 
down. It was also a demonstration of a might-have-been; how a more expe- 
rienced prosecutorial lawyer might have handled Robb. Garrison, a gentle- 
man accustomed to civil battles in appellate courts before important judges, 
was the wrong person for the kind of battle being pressed. 

In 1979, Pais met the 81-year-old Garrison at his Park Avenue law office, 
finding him “friendly and courteous... a gentleman, strong but not tough” 
whose “light blue eyes can be friendly but also hard.” In an hour and a half 
long meeting, Pais “did much talking for the purpose of drawing him out.” 
but was generally unsuccessful, with Garrison often citing “the lawyer- 
client aspect of his relationship with RO,” the fact that he still felt “that the 
episode was a very painful one” and that “when it was over he wanted to 
make a clean break with it and cease involvement.” Pais did get Garrison to 
speak about how, once each day’s hearings were over, he and Oppenheimer 
would go to the house of Garrison’s law partner Randolph Paul, where 
Oppenheimer and Kitty were staying, and talk about the day’s events. (For 
a while, the children were sent to Rochester, New York, in the care of 
Louis Hemplemann, who had been the pediatrician at Los Alamos, and his 
wife.) In these and other social settings after the trial, Garrison told Pais, no 
closeness developed between the two men. On one trip together, probably 
between Princeton and New York, Garrison tried to engage Oppenheimer 
on something other than the hearings—on “the mysterious forces in the 
universe”—but Oppenheimer did not respond.” Pais noted to himself after 
the interview, “My impression is that he had deep feelings for the cause of 
justice and also for RO as a person. Yet that in the course of the events he 
(G.) had looked into abysses he would rather forget from now on. His prin- 
cipal comment on the hearings was: ‘They slayed him—inch by inch.’”* 

It would have taken remarkable foresight for Garrison to have prepared 
for the kind of warfare taking place in Room 2022. Assuming the hearing to 
be fair, he went out of his way at first to avoid challenges that might offend 
the judges and thus wound up failing to protect his client properly. Even if 


“OPEN BOOK” 241 


he had known just how rigged the hearing was, Garrison would not neces- 
sarily have been successful, for Oppenheimer had mined his own terrain. 
Still, Landsdale’s cross-examination revealed how someone who was less a 
gentleman, who was strong and tough, might have contested every one of 
those inches. 

At the end of Week One, Robb and Strauss were thrilled. Robb thanked 
FBI agent Bates for the “thoroughness and promptness with which the FBI 
had answered each and every request.” Strauss told Bates that he was “most 
happy” with the way that the hearings were going and remarked that “if 
this case is won it is primarily due to the excellent job the FBI has done,” 
expressing appreciation for the “close cooperation” between the AEC and 
the FBI in preparing for the case.” 

Most of Week T wo was devoted to more Oppenheimer notables: former 
AEC chairman Gordon Dean, Institute member and government adviser 
George Kennan, former AEC chairman Lilienthal, former Harvard Uni- 
versity President Conant, Nobel laureate Enrico Fermi, former AEC Com- 
missioner Sumner T. Pike, future Nobel laureate Norman Ramsey, Nobel 
laureate and GAC Chairman I. I. Rabi, Los Alamos lab director Norris 
Bradbury, MIT chemistry department chairman Walter Whitman, former 
GAC member Hartley Rowe, Caltech president Lee DuBridge, General 
Electric administrator Harry Winne, and the wartime director of the Of- 
fice of Scientific Research and Development Vannevar Bush. (A few other 
pro-Oppenheimer notables, including John J. McCloy, Robert Bacher, and 
John von Neumann, would appear in third week, as would Kitty Oppen- 
heimer.) Several said they shared Oppenheimer’s thinking on the hydrogen 
bomb; Conant, for instance, remarked that if one took the view that oppo- 
sition to it made one ineligible for atomic energy work then that would 
apply to him, for “I opposed it strongly, as strongly as anybody else on that 
committee.” Others argued that loyalty was best judged, not by applying 
rules, but by those who knew and worked alongside a person. Kennan said 
of Oppenheimer’s previous associations with the likes of Chevalier: “I sup- 
pose most of us have had friends or associates whom we have come to re- 
gard as misguided in the course of time, and I don’t like to think that people 
in senior capacity in Government should not be permitted or conceded 
maturity of judgment to know when they can see such a person or when 
they can’t. If they come to you sometimes, I think it is impossible for you 
to turn them away abruptly or in a cruel way, simply because you are afraid 
of association with them, so long as what they are asking of you is nothing 
that affects your government work.” 


242 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Kennan added that this was a matter of “Christian charity.” Of course, 
others saw more arrogance than charity in Oppenheimer’s cavalier associa- 
tions. As Rabi said later, “[H]e had such complete confidence in his reputa- 
tion and integrity and accomplishment that he felt he could . . . go and sup 
with Stalin.”>! 

But Robb repeatedly and effectively used the Chevalier strategy to blunt 
the force of their judgments. At times, the tactics were dirtier. Documents 
had been secretly removed from Lilienthal’s files, meaning that the former 
AEC chairman did not see these documents while preparing for his testi- 
mony in Oppenheimer’s favor, leaving him vulnerable to an ambush by Robb. 

There were a few dramatic moments, including the appearance of L. I. 
Rabi. Rabi was as sharp-tongued as Oppenheimer, more politically savvy, 
and unafraid to talk back. He had nothing to hide, and was liked by Presi- 
dent Eisenhower. Rabi was even more cantankerous than usual, having spent 
the previous evening over a pitcher of martinis with AEC Commissioner 
Pike, having assumed that he would be testifying in the afternoon as sched- 
uled, but having been rudely awakened by an early-morning call saying 
that he had to testify right away and would not have time to sleep it off. 
“[Oppenheimer] is a consultant, and if you don’t want to consult the guy, 
you don’t consult him, period. Why you have to then proceed to suspend 
clearance and go through all this sort of thing, he is only there when called, 
and that is all there was to it. So it didn’t seem to me the sort of thing that 
called for this kind of proceeding at all against a man who had accomplished 
what Dr. Oppenheimer has accomplished. There is a real positive record. 
... We have an A-bomb .. . and what more do you want, mermaids?” 

This last became a famous quip often cited in physics circles for years 
afterwards in bitter remembrance. “I don’t think it [the remark] was from 
the resources of a classical education,” Rabi would recall years later. “[I]t 
was a disrespectful remark to make under those circumstances. . . . 1 was so 
annoyed, so angry with them, with those people sitting in judgment of a 
man who was so much better than any of them. .. .”” 

One of the few moments of insight that occurred during the testimony 
was provided by John von Neumann who in 1949 had been a strong H-bomb 
supporter. When Robb raised the Chevalier episode, von Neumann said, 

Look, you have to view the performance and the character of a man as a whole. 

This episode, if true, would make me think that the course of the year 1943 or 

in 1942 and 1943, he was not emotionally and intellectually prepared to handle 

this kind of a job; that he subsequently learned how to handle it, and handled it 


very well, I know. I would say that all of us in the war years, and by all of us I 
mean all people in scientific technical occupations, got suddenly in contact with 


“OPEN BOOK” 243 


a universe we had not known before. I mean this peculiar problem of security, 
the fact that people who looked all right might be conspirators and might be 
spies. They are all things which do not enter one’s normal experience in ordi- 
nary times. While we are now, most of us, quite prepared to discover such things 
in our entourage, we were not prepared to discover these things in 1943. So I 
must say that this had on anyone a shock effect, and any one of us may have 
behaved foolishly and ineffectively and untruthfully, so this condition is some- 
thing ten years later, I would not consider too serious. This would affect me the 
same way as if I would suddenly hear about somebody that he has had some 
extraordinary escapade in his adolescence. I know that neither of us were ado- 
lescents at that time, but of course we were all little children with respect to the 
situation which had developed, namely, that we suddenly were dealing with 
something with which one could blow up the world. Furthermore, we were 
involved in a triangular war with two of our enemies had done suddenly the 
nice thing of fighting each other. But after all, they were still enemies. This was 
avery peculiar situation. None of us had been educated or conditioned to exist 
in this situation, and we had to make our rationalization and our code of con- 
duct as we went along. For some people it took 2 months, for some 2 years, and 
for some 1 year. I am quite sure that all of us by now have developed the neces- 
sary code of ethics and the necessary resistance.” 


The first anti-Oppenheimer witnesses appeared on Week Three. It was 
unprecedented for witnesses against a subject to appear at a hearing. Strauss 
and Robb had arranged for eight: four University of California scientists 
who had worked on the Manhattan Project (Luis Alvarez, Wendell Latimer, 
Kenneth Pitzer, and Edward Teller), two individuals from the Air Force 
(General Roscoe Wilson and David Griggs), Pash, and William Borden. 
Strauss and Robb had sought more, including the influential physicist and 
Nobel laureate Ernest Lawrence, who initially agreed but, fearful of an- 
tagonizing Oppenheimer’s powerful friends, withdrew at the last minute, 
citing an attack of ulcerative colitis—probably a classic example of a psy- 
chosomatic illness brought on by stress. Several witnesses mentioned that 
their appearance was not voluntary, but that they were appearing under 
orders of others—including, in one case, AEC General Manager Nichols 
himself. The testimony of these witnesses (except for Pash) was mainly de- 
voted to Oppenheimer’s positions on the hydrogen bomb and various other 
national defense programs with a nuclear component, such as the Vista 
Project and the Strategic Air Command. Several witnesses admitted that 
they had been direct and virulent opponents of Oppenheimer on various 
policy matters, with Griggs even confessing that he “may not be fully ca- 
pable of objectivity” on such issues.** One remarkable piece of Griggs’s 
testimony was his claim to having seen Zacharias write the acronym 
“ZORC?’ on a blackboard at a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Board in 
Cambridge, which allegedly stood for the first initials of four scientists 


244 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


(Zacharias, Oppenheimer, Rabi, and Charlie Lauritsen) who were trying to 
make an argument against the need for offensive nuclear weapons. 

Edward Teller appeared on Wednesday April 28. Like Oppenheimer, 
Teller was a controversial and contradictory figure who inspired deep pas- 
sions. He has been called “the most politically influential scientist of the 
twentieth century.”*> Yet he was the antithesis.of the conventional image 
of the paragon scientist. He was prickly and sensitive. He had a famously 
selective memory, especially when it came to contributions by others. He 
regarded his weapons work as a duty. He often used political considerations 
to trump technical objections to his favorite projects. But in Lawrence’s 
absence, Teller was key to the anti-Oppenheimer forces, as the only scien- 
tist among their witnesses of Oppenheimer’s scientific caliber. 

Having been fortunate enough to have escaped Nazi Germany, Teller 
wrote in his Memoirs, “I had the obligation to do whatever I could to protect 
freedom.” But he often interpreted “protect” to mean stigmatizing colleagues 
who insufficiently shared his political enthusiasms. Philip Morrison, Robert 
Serber, and Steven Weinberg were among the eminent U.S. physicists whose 
careers Teller denounced or otherwise tried to harm careers in retaliation 
for their political views. 

Before Los Alamos, “there was great love between Teller and Oppen- 
heimer.”** The love continued for some months after the laboratory opened, 
with Oppenheimer having individual meetings with Teller once a week— 
highly unusual for the busy director. Oppenheimer clearly appreciated both 
Teller’s contributions and his prickliness.” The love soon soured. In his 
Memoirs, Teller claims to pinpoint the moment “that the relationship be- 
tween us changed” to a remark Oppenheimer made at the beginning of the 
Manhattan Project to the effect that, while scientists have to cooperate with 
the likes of Groves, “the time is coming when we will have to do things 
differently and resist the military.”* This is unconvincing, an example of 
Teller’s penchant for zealously interpreting off-hand remarks by associates 
as policy statements. More plausible sources of Teller’s animosity are the fact 
that Oppenheimer appointed Bethe head of the Theoretical Division rather 
than Teller, and Oppenheimer’s insistence during the Manhattan Project that 
the scientists focus on the matter at hand rather than Teller’s pet project, a 
thermonuclear bomb—a resentment which, after the war, matured into open 
hostility with Oppenheimer’s opposition to the Super. 

In Memoirs, Teller writes that he arrived in Washington for the hearing 
prepared to say that Oppenheimer should be cleared, but changed his mind 
when Robb showed him portions of the transcript of the hearing thus far.” 


“OPEN BOOK” 245 


This is one of many points of variance between Teller’s words and the his- 
torical record. Teller was instrumental in providing Nichols and Strauss 
with harmful information against Oppenheimer; in Nichols’s letter to 
Oppenheimer of December 23, detailing the allegations against him, exten- 
sive excerpts from Teller’s FBI interview (based on what was said to be a 
“prominent scientist”) show up in three of the four paragraphs concerning 
his alleged opposition to the Super. In March 1954, Teller told Robb “that 
Oppenheimer has given a great deal of bad advice in the matter of the H- 
bomb, and that in the future his advice should not be taken and he should 
never have any more influence” and that “he hoped Oppenheimer’s clear- 
ance would not be lifted.”* In his testimony Teller went on at length about 
Oppenheimer’s lack of contributions to and support for the hydrogen bomb 
project. But by far the most dramatic, and often-cited, of Teller’s statements 
was the following: “I would like to see the vital interests of this country in 
hands which I understand better, and therefore trust more.” 

Few people, it is safe to say, understood Oppenheimer—Fermi, for in- 
stance, on his deathbed after a visit from Teller told Yang that “I always 
understood Edward, but I did not always understand Oppenheimer.”*! But 
Oppenheimer inspired in Teller a particular aversion. Surely the most sig- 
nificant clue to this is Teller’s mention, in Memoirs, of his childhood fear of 
the dark. Oppenheimer, one of the most enigmatic historical figures of the 
twentieth century, had a profound and intense dark side. He surely must 
have terrified Teller, a man with no tolerance for mystery, no sympathy 
for the ambiguous aspects of human nature. 

Teller’s testimony, while not decisive, was the psychological coup de 
grace of the prosecution. It was only the most spectacular play of a game 
whose rules were stacked against Oppenheimer. Teller, coached by Robb, 
was the perfect player: authoritative, sincere, and able to insinuate effec- 
tively what he could not state truthfully. The Oppenheimer trial would 
cast a long shadow over Teller’s life and career—acquaintances describe him 
often returning obsessively to Oppenheimer in extended conversations— 
which he neither would, nor should, ever escape. 

Week Three ended with the appearance of William Borden, the final 
anti-Oppenheimer witness. Over Oppenheimer’s attorneys’ objections, he 
proceeded to read his letter of November 7, 1953, that had triggered the 
hearing, which accused Oppenheimer of being “more probably than not... 
an agent of the Soviet Union.” It was the first Oppenheimer or Garrison 
knew of this letter, though—against any rudimentary notion of fairness— 
the Board had been in possession of it all along. After a few perfunctory 
questions by Robb, the hearing adjourned for the weekend. 


246 =J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Week Four began with Garrison announcing that Borden would not be 
cross-examined. Over the weekend, Oppenheimer’s attorneys had argued 
whether to do so, but finally decided that, in view of an assurance Gray had 
made that the Board had “no evidence” for the principal allegations of the 
letter, cross-examining Borden would be counter-productive and draw yet 
more attention to Oppenheimer’s vulnerabilities: Borden thus stepped down 
from the witness stand without testifying, his letter seemingly discounted 
by both sides. “It was as if the match that had ignited the fire had been 
snuffed out,” remarks Stern. “Yet the fire burned on.”” 

“That is all the testimony we have to offer, Mr. Chairman,” Robb said. 
Gray then made a crucial remark to Garrison. Much of the testimony had 
dwelt on matters that Nichols had not mentioned in his December 23, 1953, 
letter, such as Oppenheimer’s actions with respect to Vista and the Strate- 
gic Air Command. Gray now said these issues had become “material to the 
matters under consideration by this board,” indicating an expansion of the 
scope of the hearings to matters of policy. Yet Garrison did not object, 
ceding yet more territory he might have contested. 

Gray then called Oppenheimer back for more questioning. He wasted 
no time in broaching Oppenheimer’s biggest vulnerability: “I want now to 
go back to the so-called Chevalier incident.” Reminding Oppenheimer of 
its various versions, Gray asked how one could tell which story was the 
fabrication and which the truth. Oppenheimer’s rambling and unenlighten- 
ing reply showed weariness and even touches of resignation. “Now, when 
you ask for a more persuasive argument as to why I did this than that I was 
an idiot, I am going to have more trouble being understandable. I think I 
was impelled by 2 or 3 concerns at that time. One was the feeling that I 
must get across the fact that if there was, as Landsdale indicated, trouble at 
the Radiation Laboratory, Eltenton was the guy that might very well be 
involved and it was serious. Whether I embroidered the story in order to 
underline that seriousness or whether I embroidered it to make it more 
tolerable that I would not tell the simple facts, namely, Chevalier had talked 
to me about it, I don’t know. . . . [I]t was a matter of conflict for me... . I 
wish I could explain to you better why I falsified and fabricated.” 

Oppenheimer was followed, the next day, by Vannevar Bush, whom 
Oppenheimer’s attorneys had called back to rebut an allegation that cast 
doubt on President Truman’s confidence in Oppenheimer. Kitty Oppen- 
heimer was recalled. Zacharias—the “Z” in ZORC—and Lincoln Labora- 
tory director Albert Hill each appeared to counter Griggs’s story about 
that episode. Then, on Wednesday, Oppenheimer himself returned. In the 


“OPEN BOOK” 247 


cross-examination, Robb posed a stunning question. “Doctor,” he said, “do 
you think now that perhaps you went beyond the scope of your proper 
function as a scientist in undertaking to counsel in matters of military strat- 
egy and tactics?” Robb was challenging, in effect, not only Oppenheimer’s 
authority to address social issues such as military policy, but that of any 
scientist. This challenge went unanswered. 

As the lunch recess drew near, and the time for Garrison’s summation, 
Gray brought up a point relating to the Chevalier episode, and remarked, 
“I think Dr. Oppenheimer’s counsel ought to know that the board consid- 
ers that an important item.” Gray then agreed to Garrison’s request to post- 
pone continuation of the hearing until the next morning to allow him more 
time to prepare. 

Shortly after the hearing recommenced on its final day, May 6, 1954, Gar- 
rison stood up to make his summary. At last he was in his element, in an 
appellate role, able to make a sustained case for his client, free of the haggles 
over technicalities that had consumed and bloodied him for three and a half 
weeks. And though he spoke from hurriedly-assernbled notes, he rose to the 
occasion with an eloquent, two-hour long speech. The legal framework in 
which the charges raised by General Nichols have to be evaluated, Garrison 
said, is provided by two documents, the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 and 
Executive Order 10450. The first speaks of dangers to “the common defense 
and security,” the second to “the interests of the national security.” The “ba- 
sic question” of the case of J. Robert Oppenheimer, Garrison said, “is whether 
in the handling of restricted data he is to be trusted. That, it seems to me, is 
what confronts this board, that bare, blunt question.” 

In deciding that issue, Garrison continued, the relevant guidelines speak 
of “character, associations, and loyalty.” “Certainly loyalty is the paramount 
consideration. If a man is loyal, if in his heart he loves his country and 
would not knowingly or willingly do anything to injure its security, then 
associations and character become relatively unimportart.” He then 
shrewdly produced an AEC decision in the 1948 security clearance hearing 
of Frank Graham, who, like Gray, had been president of the University of 
North Carolina. Though Graham “has been associated at times with indi- 
viduals or organizations influenced by motives or views of Communist deri- 
vation,” the AEC decision read, it must be recognized “that it is the man 
himself the Commission is actually concerned with, that the associations 
are only evidentiary, and that commonsense must be exercised in judging 
their significance.” 

In judging the man himself, Garrison said, in returning to “the basic acid 
question” before the board, “the most impelling single fact . . . is that for 


248 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


more than a decade Dr. Oppenheimer has created and has shared secrets of 
the atomic energy program and has held them inviolable . . . for more than 
a decade Dr. Oppenheimer has been trusted, and . . . he has not failed that 
trust. That in my judgment is the most persuasive evidence that you could 
possibly have.” 

What, then, is behind this case against him? Two items stand out, Garri- 
son said: Oppenheimer’s 1949 opposition to the H-bomb development, and 
his “leftwing associations and related incidents through 1943.” The short 
response to the first, Garrison said, is that it involves “simply an honest 
difference of opinion”; to the second, that the essentials were known to 
General Groves and to the AEC itself when it cleared him in 1947. In his 
lengthier response to the first, Garrison pointed out how absurdly Machia- 
vellian a portrait Oppenheimer’s opponents had painted. Could it really be 
true, Garrison asked, that Oppenheimer’s advice, “unlike that of every other 
member of the GAC, was motivated by a sinister purpose to injure the 
United States of America, and to help our enemy,” adding that “the mere 
utterance of that proposition is somehow shocking to me.” Even 
Oppenheimer’s fiercest critics questioned his wisdom, not his loyalty. Given 
all his efforts on behalf of the U.S. defense and nuclear weapons program, 
“it is fantastic to suppose that . . . he should be harboring a motive to de- 
stroy his own country in favor of Russia.” Whatever evidence for a “pat- 
tern of opposition” to this program has, indeed, fallen apart. “This whole 
H-bomb controversy, all of the rest of these things, Vista, Lincoln, and all 
the rest of them, that we have been talking about, except as indicating an 
affirmative attitude, as I believe, toward the strengthening of the United 
States, have nothing to do with the question of Dr. Oppenheimer’s clear- 
ance unless you are willing to believe .. . the unthinkable thought . . . that 
in spite of everything he had done to help this country from 1945 on, he 
suddenly somehow became a sinister agent of a foreign power.” 

Turning to his lengthy answer to the second item, the question of 
Oppenheimer’s leftwing associations, Garrison said he would address the 
Chevalier incident in some detail because of the importance that Gray him- 
self had given it. 

Now, this whole Chevalier incident has, I am convinced, assumed undue impor- 

tance, and must be judged in perspective. It has been so extensively analyzed 

here in cross-examination, in the reading of transcripts of interviews of 11 years 
ago, the hearing of a recording, Colonel Pash’s presence here, it is almost as if 


this whole Chevalier case brought into this room here at 16'* and Constitution 
Avenue in 1954 had happened yesterday in the setting of today, and that we are 


“OPEN BOOK” 249 


judging a man for something that has happened almost in our presence. I get 
that illusion of a foreshortening of time here which to me is a grisly matter and 
very, very misleading. This happened in 1943. It happened in a wholly different 
atmosphere from that of today. Russia was our so-called gallant ally. The whole 
attitude toward Russia, toward persons who were sympathetic with Russia, ev- 
erything was different from what obtains today. I think you must beware above 
everything of judging by today’s standards things that happened in a different 
time and era. 


Garrison reminded the board of the judgments of Groves and Landsdale, 
who by virtue of their perspective in time and place were able to trust 
Oppenheimer even after the Chevalier incident. Garrison also elaborated 
at length Oppenheimer’s AEC clearance hearing of 1947. He appealed to 
the depth and thoroughness with which Oppenheimer’s witnesses knew 
him, and to the intangible nature of trust, which Garrison saw as lying at 
the core’of security: “Every one of these men who has appeared here have 
been men who have worked with Dr. Oppenheimer, who have seen him 
on the job and off the job, who have formed judgments about character 
which is the way human beings do judge one another. How do we learn to 
trust one another except by knowing each other? How can we define the 
elements of that trust except to say, ‘I know that man,’ ‘I have worked with 
that man?’ That is what it comes down to. How else can you express it? 
These men have known him and have worked with him, and have lived 
with him.” 

Garrison reminded the board of the high estimation that these men had 
of Oppenheimer. Then he turned back to how the board might go about 
evaluating “the acid question” of trust: 

Here he is now with his life in one sense in your hands, and you are asked to say 

whether if he continues to have access to restricted data he may injure the United 

States of America, and make improper use of that. For over a decade that he has 

had this position of sharing in the atomic energy information, never a sugges- 

tion of an improper use of data. His life has been an open book. . . . I beg of you, 
as I wind up now my conclusion, to take the straightforward commonsense 
judgment that the Commission took in the case of R. Graham, and look at the 
whole man. “It must be recognized that it is the man himself that the Commis- 
sion is actually concerned with. Associations are only evidentiary, and 
commonsense must be exercised in judging their significance.” There is the whole 
thing in a nutshell. . . . The thing that I would most urge you not to do, in 
addition to not bringing 1943 into 1954, is to get chopped up into little compart- 
ments of categories that will give to this case a perfectly artificial flavor of judg- 
ment, that you will treat it in the round and the large with the most careful 


consideration of the evidence, and then treat it as men would treat a problem of 
human nature, which can’t be cut up into little pieces. 


250 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Reaching his conclusion, Garrison said, 


There is more than Dr. Oppenheimer on trial in this room. I use the word 
“trial” advisedly. The Government of the United States is here on trial also. Our 
whole security process is on trial here, and is in your keeping as is his life—the 
two things together. There is an anxiety abroad in this country, and I think lam 
at liberty to say this to you, because after all, we are all Americans, we are all 
citizens, and we are all interested here in doing what is in the public interest, 
and what is best for our country. There is an anxiety abroad that these security 
procedures will be applied artificially, rigidly, like some monolithic kind of a 
machine that will result in the destruction of men of great gifts and of great 
usefulness to the country by the application of rigid and mechanical tests. America 
must not devour her own children, Mr. Chairman and members of this board. 
If we are to be strong, powerful, electric, and vital, we must not devour the best 
and the most gifted of our citizens in some mechanical application of security 
procedures and mechanisms. 


Observing that Oppenheimer was “a very complicated man .. . a gifted 
man... unique, sole, not conventional, not quite like anybody else that 
ever was or ever will be,” he urged them “to exercise the greatest effort of 
comprehension” in judging “the whole man.” “I am confident . . . that when 
you have done all this, you will answer the blunt and ugly question whether 
he is fit to be trusted with restricted data, in the affirmative. I believe, mem- 
bers of the board, that in doing so you will most deeply serve the interests 
of the United States of America, which all of us love and want to protect 
and further. That I am sure of, and I am sure that is where the upshot of this 
case must be. Thank you very much.” 

Garrison’s speech—moments of it, anyway—are the only moving and 
eloquent part of the proceedings. But it was delivered to the wrong audi- 
ence, and it motivated nothing in the way of response or discussion. Gray 
spent a few moments reviewing what would come next: the Board would 
send its findings to Nichols, who would write to Oppenheimer, who in the 
event of a negative finding could appeal to the five AEC commissioners. 
Gray then declared, “We are now in recess.” And so, on May 6, the nine- 
teenth day of the hearing, the Gray panel adjourned and its three members 
took a break, returning to their homes. 


Findings, Appeal, Decision: May 17-June 29 


The Gray panel members reconvened on May 17. Gray and Morgan voted 
not to reinstate Oppenheimer’s clearance, while Evans dissented. The panel 
members then wrote up their findings for Nichols.” 


“OPEN BOOK” 251 


Aware that this document, dated May 27, would become public and fuel 
a controversy already swirling about the trial, Gray and Morgan reassured 
“the people of our country” of its fairness. Noting that policies and actions 
“taken in the interests of national security” can potentially “pose a threat to 
our ideals,” they nodded to Garrison in saying that “this case puts the secu- 
rity system of the United States on trial.” Not to worry, it passed with 
flying colors. The hearing, they wrote, was conducted “in calmness, in fair- 
ness, in disregard of public clamor and private pressures, and with dignity.” 
More: “We believe that it has been demonstrated that the Government can 
search its own soul and the soul of an individual whose relationship to his 
Government is in question with full protection of the rights and interests of 
both,” that is, “within the frameworks of the traditional and inviolable prin- 
ciples of American justice.” No mention was made of the numerous differ- 
ences between the procedures of Oppenheimer’s hearing and those of an 
ordinary civil trial, or between Oppenheimer’s hearing and any other PSB 
hearing thus far, or even between Oppenheimer’s hearing and a hearing con- 
ducted according to the AEC’s own regulations governing such procedures. 

How had they proceeded? Gray and Morgan again alluded to Garrison 
and his appeal to use the “whole man” criterion when they said they had 
not considered the matter “a fragmented one either in terms of specific 
criteria or in terms of any period in Dr. Oppenheimer’s life, or . . . loyalty, 
character, and associations separately.” Tellingly, though, they described 
their task as to address “the whole question”—by which they meant, na- 
tional security. This allowed them to reject (with a meaningless qualifica- 
tion) the “whole man” approach in favor of zero tolerance: “There can be 
no tampering with the national security, which in times of peril must be 
absolute, and without concessions for reasons of admiration, gratitude, re- 
ward, sympathy, or charity. Any doubts whatsoever must be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” 

Of which they had plenty. At pains to prevent Oppenheimer’s martyr- 
dom, Gray and Morgan raked over the specifics. They sprinkled the letter 
with references to Oppenheimer’s “deep devotion to his country,” twice 
said he was “a loyal citizen,” and remarked that he “seems to have had a 
high degree of discretion reflecting an unusual ability to keep to himself 
vital secrets.” Nevertheless, they carefully recited every one of Nichols’s 24 
allegations, with evidence to show that, with a single exception, all were 
true or substantially so. That one—#17, involving Oppenheimer’s alleged 
appearance, in the summer of 1941, at a Communist Party meeting at his 
house at 10 Kenilworth Court in Berkeley—was “inconclusive.” Moreover, 


252 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


they added concerns not mentioned in Nichols’s letter, in particular a meet- 
ing between Oppenheimer and Chevalier as recently as December 1953. 

Oppenheimer, they decided, was vulnerable to the zero tolerance strategy 
in four different respects: in his present inability to account satisfactorily for 
his past duplicities, coverups, and evasions; in his current associations with 
supposedly risky individuals notably Chevalier; in his alleged “susceptibility 
to influence;” and in his opposition to the Super. This last continued to have 
special status. While it had been the driving force behind the hearing, and had 
some potential of manifesting Oppenheimer’s supposed weakness toward 
national security, it had to be delicately handled lest the hearing appear to be 
punishment for a policy difference. Thus Gray and Morgan worded their 
discussion of it carefully. They said that the Board was “unable to make a 
categorical finding” concerning whether Oppenheimer had slowed down its 
development, and did “not find that Dr. Oppenheimer urged other scientists 
not to work on the program” as Teller had claimed. Still, “enthusiastic sup- 
port on his part would perhaps have encouraged other leading scientists to 
work on the program,” and his leading role in the opposition “did delay the 
initiation of concerted effort which led to the development of a thermonuclear 
weapon.” This wording invited much sarcasm and ridicule among Oppen- 
heimer’s supporters, many of whom wondered aloud whether national secu- 
rity was really safer in the hands of an enthusiast such as Teller, who was 
known to champion politically attractive but technically unfeasible systems— 
high-tech Maginot lines. 

Gray and Morgan therefore concluded that Oppenheimer’s “continuing 
conduct and associations have reflected a serious disregard for the require- 
ments of the security system,” he exhibited “a susceptibility to influence 
which could have serious implications for the security interests of the coun- 
try,” his conduct with respect to the Super program was “sufficiently dis- 
turbing as to raise a doubt as to whether his future participation ... would 
be clearly consistent with the best interests of security,” and he “has been 
less than candid in several instances in his testimony before this Board.” 

Evans’s dissent was a surprise. Before the hearing, he had had a reputa- 
tion for voting against clearances. During it, his interventions had been 
tame and noncommittal, though at one dinner his anti-Semitic tirade had 
troubled Gray, who worried about discredit to the Board should Evans’s 
attitude leak out. At the end of the hearing, Gray contained his surprise on 
receiving a draft of Evans’s conclusion, but noted that it was badly written. 
Again fearing discredit should the Board’s one document favorable to 
Oppenheimer be poorly written, Gray asked Robb to improve it. Robb did 


“OPEN BOOK” 253 


so, but not too much. Evans’s minority report is still clumsy and pedes- 
trian, agrees with much of the majority opinion, skirts arguing with the 
rest, and its most memorable sentence—“I personally think that our failure 
to clear Dr. Oppenheimer will be a black mark on the escutcheon of our 
country”—is an embarrassing cliché, though it was often quoted by Oppen- 
heimer allies. 

After receiving a copy of the Board’s letter to Nichols, Garrison com- 
posed a sharply worded letter of rebuttal. On June 12, Nichols sent his own 
even more sharply worded recommendation to the five AEC commission- 
ers, without showing it to Oppenheimer or Garrison. Security was all- 
important given the current crisis involving “the horrible prospects of 
hydrogen bomb warfare if all-out war should be forced upon us.” Nichols 
invoked the zero tolerance principle, writing that it was not sufficient to find 
a person loyal, for “substantial deficiency in any one of the three factors— 
character, associations, or loyalty” may be found to “endanger the common 
defense or security.” 

And he found deficiencies galore in Oppenheimer’s record. Regarding 
character: the Chevalier episode shows that Oppenheimer is “not reliable 
or trustworthy,” that he is guilty of “deliberate misrepresentations and fal- 
sifications,” that his conduct is “dishonest” and “criminal.” Regarding asso- 
ciations: his record shows that he “was deeply and consciously involved 
with hardened and militant Communists at a time when he was a man of 
mature judgment . . .a Communist in every respect except for the fact that 
he did not carry a party card.” Next to these findings, and the framework in 
which Nichols was considering them, it mattered little that he wrote that 
the record shows “no direct evidence” that Oppenheimer “is disloyal to the 
United States.” Nichols, like Gray and Morgan, carefully added a section 
clearly labeled “Finding of Security Risk Is Not Based on Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
Opinions,” saying that while he found “no sinister motives” in Oppen- 
heimer’s attitude toward the hydrogen bomb, his lack of “enthusiastic sup- 
port” was “disturbing.” Therefore “Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance should 
not be reinstated.” 

By the time Nichols sent his recommendation to the commissioners, an 
ironic deadline loomed: on June 30, Oppenheimer’s 1-year contract as an 
AEC consultant would expire and the entire issue would become moot. 
The five Commissioners—Strauss, Joseph Campbell, Thomas E. Murray, 
Eugene Zuckert, and Henry DeWolf Smyth—knew it would not only be 
absurd, but invite ridicule, to permit the proceedings to overstep that date, 


254 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


and worked furiously to complete their work. On June 29, they announced 
that they had voted, 4-1, against restoring Oppenheimer’s clearance. 

They released their decision in a document that had a majority opinion, 
three concurring opinions, and a dissent (Smyth’s). The authors of the ma- 
jority opinion, like Nichols, pointed out that disloyalty was “only one” 
basis for disqualification for employment by the AEC, the other two being 
“substantial defects of character and imprudent and dangerous associations.” 
And they had found not only that his “falsehoods, evasions, and misrepre- 
sentations” pointed to “fundamental defects” in Oppenheimer’s character, 
but also that, even after the war, he has had “persistent and continuing 
association with Communists.” 

Smyth wrote a direct and thoughtful reply: “With respect to the alleged 
disregard of the security system, I would suggest that the system itself is 
nothing to worship. It is a necessary means to an end. Its sole purpose, apart 
from the prevention of sabotage, is to protect secrets. If a man protects the 
secrets he has in his hands and his head, he has shown essential regard for 
the security system.” 

Smyth added: “In my opinion the conclusion drawn by the majority 
from the evidence is so extreme as to endanger the security system.”“ 

It is tempting to cite the various criteria that the Commissioners said 
they used to make their decision, to point out contradictions between these 
and criteria invoked by Gray and Nichols at different times throughout the 
proceedings, and then say that this demonstrates the unfair handicap Garri- 
son had in trying to defend Oppenheimer. This would miss the point: shift- 
ing criteria of “loyalty” and “risk” shed only partial light on the mismatch 
between the inquiry and the result, for one needs to appreciate what Bart 
Bernstein calls the “deeper politics” of the hearing “that helps explain the 
final results.”** A more important clue is found in the way that the AEC’s 
decision and the various concurring opinions therein, like the Board’s find- 
ings and the general manager’s recommendation, protest too much in 
downplaying the role of Oppenheimer’s opposition to the hydrogen bomb. 
This issue had occupied a large part, perhaps a fifth, of the hearing. And notes 
and letters by Strauss and others during and after the hearing—including 
one from Bradbury to Strauss warning of the reaction in the scientific com- 
munity to a finding that this opposition had hurt Oppenheimer—reveal the 
continuing sensitivity and even fear of overplaying Oppenheimer’s opposi- 
tion to the Super program lest it provoke a backlash in the scientific com- 
munity that would hurt the weapons program. 


“OPEN BOOK” 255 


Eisenhower was pleased, and the day the decision was released called 
Strauss to congratulate him on his actions in the matter, which had pre- 
vented McCarthy from becoming involved—indicating the deeper politics 
that had worried the president. 

The FBI continued, even intensified, its surveillance and investigations 
during the hearing and its immediate aftermath. “[I]n view of the impor- 
tance of this case in the public eye and its importance to other agencies, we 
must be doubly alert to cover every possible aspect with whatever addi- 
tional investigation is necessary.” The FBI files reveal frenzied attempts 
to investigate whether Zacharias wrote “ZORC” on the blackboard, whether 
Oppenheimer had on his recent trip to Paris contacted the science attaché 
at the U.S. embassy on behalf of Chevalier, whether the nickname “Opje” 
had any “special significance” (upon noting that Chevalier had addressed 
Oppenheimer that way),”4” and whether there was any proof that Oppen- 
heimer was really present at 10 Kenilworth Court in the summer of 1941. 

Strauss and the FBI considered pursuing further legal action against 
Oppenheimer, probably to involve the Kenilworth Court episode, but ulti- 
mately dropped it. They had solved their Oppenheimer problem. 
Oppenheimer was not only out of government circles, but in a way that 
put a substantial dent in the claim to martyrdom and headed off rebellion 
in the scientific community. This was due to several factors: to the release 
of the transcript, which showed that Oppenheimer was no saint; to 
Eisenhower’s Atoms for Peace initiative, which meant that one could do 
atomic energy work without becoming an accomplice of the defense estab- 
lishment; and to the fact that Oppenheimer had, after all, been more states- 
man than physicist for the past dozen years. The American Physical Society 
grumbled, saying it was “deeply disturbed” by the case, and predicted that 
the decision “will have an adverse effect upon the utilization of scientists in 
the Government,”** but not much more came of it. For Strauss and his 
allies, the hearing had succeeded beyond their wildest dreams. 

On Wednesday April 14, the day after the hearing became public, IAS 
Board chairman Herbert Maass announced that Oppenheimer would re- 
main director. But Pais and some other IAS faculty members, worried, be- 
gan circulating a draft of a formal statement of support. This was thought 
urgent, for Strauss was a member of the board, and formally at least 
Oppenheimer’s directorship had to be renewed annually. The draft came 
to have what Pais would call an “involved” history as its authors attempted 
to satisfy some faculty members who wanted the statement strengthened 
and others who wanted it weakened.” Eventually, everyone agreed, and 


256 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


the 26 permanent members and professors emeriti of the Institute issued 
the following statement: “Dr. Oppenheimer has performed for this coun- 
try services of another kind, more indirect and less conspicuous but never- 
theless, we believe, of great significance. For seven years now he has with 
inspired devotion directed the work at the Institute for Advanced Study, 
for which he has proved himself singularly well suited by the unique com- 
bination of his personality, his broad scientific interests and his acute schol- 
arship. We are proud to give public expression at this time to our loyal 
appreciation of the many benefits that we all derive from our association 
with him in this capacity.” 

The fears were not groundless. In July 1954, the Chairman of the Board 
of Trustees called Strauss saying that he intended to call a special meeting of 
the Board of Trustees for that month “and if Oppenheimer would not sub- 
mit his resignation, it would be requested.”*° Fearing that the action might 
be interpreted as vindictiveness on his part, Strauss convinced him to put 
off the meeting to early fall.*' By the time that meeting eventually took 
place, Strauss was anxious to appear magnanimous and in favor of Oppen- 
heimer’s reconfirmation as director. 

A passionate, ambitious man, Oppenheimer was surely deeply wounded 
by being stripped of his ability to influence power. One FBI entry: “Oppen- 
heimer is reported to be very depressed at the present time and has been ill- 
tempered with his wife.”*? But he revealed nothing of that in his public 
statements. “He had a talent for self-dramatization,” Dyson wrote, “an abil- 
ity to project to his audience an image larger than life, to bestride the world 
as if it were a stage.”*? Post-hearing, the role Oppenheimer discovered him- 
self playing changed. He was more aware than ever that he bore what James 
Baldwin, in another context, called “the burden of representation” —that 
his statements were not those of just another scientist, but political or social 
statements that were more than about him, and addressed to a historical 
audience. Oppenheimer’s first public reaction to the hearing, June 29, was 
what one would expect of a public custody: he refused comment. “Dr. Henry 
D. Smyth’s fair and considered statement, made with full knowledge of the 
facts, says what needs to be said. Without commenting on the security sys- 
tem which has brought all this about, I do have a further word to say. Our 
country is fortunate in its scientists, in their high skill, and their devotion. 
I know that they will work faithfully to preserve and strengthen this coun- 
try. I hope that the fruit of their work will be used with humanity, with 
wisdom and with courage. I know that their counsel when sought will be 
given honestly and freely. I hope that it will be heard.” 


“OPEN BOOK” 257 


This set the tone for Oppenheimer’s later comments. He made only brief, 
offhand remarks about the hearing, and in those seemed to be all but de- 
tached from it. He once described the hearing as a train wreck, as if he were 
only one passenger and had not helped build the rails or run the train. On 
another occasion he denied a reporter’s suggestion that he was a tragic fig- 
ure, saying the tragic sense came from the “chorus,” or those around him— 
again, that he was not a protagonist. On still another occasion he told a 
reporter there was a story behind the story. There surely was, but he him- 
self had been a key player in it. Reporters repeatedly pressed him for per- 
sonal thoughts about what he had undergone, in vain. In mid-December 
1954, Oppenheimer recorded an interview on Edward Murrow’s television 
program, “See It Now.” He was neither asked about, nor spoke about, the 
recent hearing only a half year before. 

One senses that Oppenheimer’s refusal to talk in the confessional mode 
was deliberate. It was as if he was aware of his forthcoming historical role as 
a martyr, that he was as an actor on the world stage, that all he had to do 
was to step back and let it this story unfold, and that the confessional mode 
was unnecessary to this role and could only sully it. This made him less 
prone to the petty animosities, defensiveness, and score-settling that perme- 
ate, say, Teller’s autobiography. Oppenheimer was always addressing, in 
the words of his Los Alamos farewell address, “what has happened to us,” 
and never “what has happened to me”—thus the unsettling serenity, the 
disturbing selflessness, in his public comments thenceforth. 

One of the few times he said more than a few sentences about the hear- 
ing occurred near the end of his life, in 1964, in Geneva. At the end of a 
talk, he suddenly seemed to veer toward the personal. A decade ago, he told 
his listeners, the Atomic Energy Commission held a lengthy hearing on his 
trustworthiness, and the transcript was published, leading many to say his 
life had become an open book. “That was not really true. Most of what 
meant most to me never appeared in those hearings. Perhaps much was not 
known: certainly much was not relevant.” Nevertheless, he continued, the 
experience prompted him to imagine what it would be like for one’s life to 
be an open book: “I have come to the conclusion that if in fact privacy is an 
accidental blessing, and can betaken from you, if it is worth anyone’strouble, 
for a few dollars, and a few hours, it [having one’s life an open book] may 
still not be such a bad way to live. We most of all should try to be experts in 
the worst about ourselves; we should not be astonished to find some evil 
there, that we find so readily abroad and in all others. We should not, as 
Rousseau tried to, comfort ourselves that it is the responsibility and the 


258 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


fault of others, that we are just naturally good; nor should we let Calvin 
persuade us that despite our obvious duty we are without any power, how- 
ever small and limited, to deal with what we find of evil in ourselves.” And 
when we do, he continued, we should neither fall prey to the temptation to 
blame that evil on others, nor to imagine ourselves helpless to combat it. 
This was vintage Oppenheimer—a brief and opaque personal reference, 
a loose appeal to learned thinkers, a leap to a perspective so grand that he 
the puny participant becomes of no real significance, a total absence of re- 
flection about his own role in the events he had just touched on, a trace of 
melodrama and sentimentality—all this topped off with an optimism that 
rings just a little false, as befits a statement issued by a public custody. 


“We seem to be finished with this horror, pro tem at least,” Kitty wrote at 
the beginning of July, 1954. It had been a strain on the entire family. Dur- 
ing the hearing, Toni had answered the telephone and held off reporters at 
the house. Kitty had been plagued with bouts of pancreatitis. She also had 
concerns about the health and welfare of her parents, “Franz” and “Mutti,” 
who lived in a small town in Pennsylvania, about a hour’s drive from 
Princeton. Franz was a “short, bald, bespectacled, gentle figure,” while Mutti, 
preferred to be treated as a “grand dame.”** Everyone hoped to get away 
quickly, though Robert’s commitments kept him around for several weeks. 
Kitty sat about planning a six-week vacation in the Virgin Islands. She con- 
tacted Ted Dale and family, a friend in the U.S. Virgin Islands who owned a 
hotel, the Comanche, where the Oppenheimers had occasionally stayed, and 
a boat by the same name which they had occasionally chartered. “Everyone 
in the family is thinking of the Caribbean, which means the Comanche. 
Could we charter the Comanche for about three weeks?”*” 

The aftermath of the hearing generated numerous temptations for 
Oppenheimer to postpone the vacation, and he also worried about rumors 
that he would flee the country, but felt that since the Virgin Islands were 
USS. territory he could travel there without causing too much disturbance. 
Still, as a precaution, on July 17 he sent a letter to Hoover mentioning his 
plan to leave “with my family for St. Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands for a 
three or four week period of rest and sailing.”** But he was annoyed when 
Kitty wired information about the planned charter, aware that the commu- 
nication would certainly be picked up by the FBI—it was, of course—and 
possibly deny him what modicum of privacy he was seeking to retain.” 

The Comanche turned out to need repair, but another boat was found. 
And on 19 July the family left for the Virgin Islands. 


CHAPTER 25 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 


After the verdict, Oppenheimer later told a reporter, one option was to 
seek to show “that what was put out as a final judgment about me wasn’t she 
final judgment.”! 

At this he succeeded without much trying. Different judgments about 
the Oppenheimer hearing began circulating as soon as it got under way. 
These judgments came from reporters, scientists, academics, government 
officials, and the public; they were embodied in telegrams, letters, speeches, 
articles, editorials, books, poems, plays, movies, and public debates and 
controversies. 


First Judgments 


The spinning of the Oppenheimer hearing started even before it began, 
when Garrison and Oppenheimer gave New York Times reporter James Reston 
a copy of the letter of charges and a reply three days before the hearing. On 
Monday, on the hearing’s first day, Garrison called Reston to say he could 
break the news. Kitty called Kay Russell to contact the Hemplemanns to 
prepare the children.? On Tuesday, Reston’s story appeared on the front 
page of the New York Times; the Alsop brothers also wrote about the story in 
the Herald Tribune. 

The AEC responded with a press release portraying Strauss as handling 
the Oppenheimer case responsibly. By the next day, other administration 
officials and congressmen weighed in on the suspension of Oppenheimer’s 


260 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


clearance, including Senator McCarthy (“long overdue”). Thus began a media 
battle that Strauss and his allies waged with as much dedication as they did 
the trial itself. For the moment, both sides worked around the barrier posed 
by the hearing’s confidentiality. 

The first week of the hearing, Oppenheimer’s home, the Institute, and 
Garrison’s law office were deluged with telegrams of support from friends 
and strangers. 

ALL OF US IN PRINCETON TODAY WANT TO EXPRESS OUR 

ADMIRATION FOR YOUR CONDUCT IN THIS ORDEAL. BOTH AS 

YOUR COLLEAGUES AND AS YOUR FRIENDS WE ASSURE YOU 


THAT NOW AS EVER YOU HAVE OUR FIRM CONFIDENCE, OUR 
DEEP DEVOTION, AND OUR STAUNCH LOYALTY. 


HAROLD CHERNISS, BRAM PAIS, FREEMAN DYSON, 
KURT GODEL, MARSTON MORSE, ATLE SELBERG, 
ERNST KANTORWICZ, ERWIN PANOFSKY 


ILLEGITIMI NON CONUNDUM EST 
[Don’t let the bastards get you down] 


LJ KAHN 


HAVE DEEP RESPECT FOR YOUR STAND. SINCEREST REGARDS 
AND GOOD WISHES FROM 


DESER EDEN GIESEY NEWTON SIEGERT THIRRING 
COEASTER DYSON KINOSHITA NAMBU SHEPHERDSON 
SACHS GAFFNEY LOWE 


I AM SO ASHAMED OF MY COUNTRY THAT I DON’T KNOW 
WHAT TO DO 
JONATHAN ANDERSON 405 WEST 46 ST NYC 


100 MILLION AMERICANS DEPLORE CHARGES AGAINST YOU BY 
CHEAP CONNIVING POLITICOS IN WHITE HOUSE. STAND YOUR 
GROUND NO MATTER WHAT COST AND TAKE TO OFFENSIVE 
THESE MEN ARE BASICALLY COWARDS AND YOU KNOW HOW 
TO HIT THEM 

LOUIS ALTER 


UTTERLY SHOCKED AND DISTRESSED AT THE NEWS STOP WE 
ARE SURE ALL INTELLECTUALS WILL BE PROUD TO BACK UP 
YOUR COURAGEOUS STAND 


CHIH LI AND FRANK [Yang} 


Most of these telegrams, sent by friends who revered and trusted Oppen- 
heimer, assumed that of course he would prevail. The few worriers included 
Rabi, who knew enough about the government and the AEC to fear it, and 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 261 


Ruth Tolman, who knew Oppenheimer as a man who concealed poten- 
tially damaging secrets. 

The spinning intensified after the Gray panel released its findings to 
Nichols on Thursday, May 27. Garrison gave a copy of the decision, Evans’s 
dissent, and his own rebuttal to Reston, who reported the news in a front 
page story the next Wednesday, June 2. Later that week, annoyed by re- 
marks in the Times, Strauss called Reston to pitch his side of the story, and 
the result was a Reston article on Monday, June 7 much more favorable to 
Strauss and less to Oppenheimer. This elicited more leaks: Oppenheimer 
released his December 22 letter to Strauss; Nichols released a letter he had 
sent the previous week to Garrison; and “both sides began peeling away at 
the concealing cover of secrecy” that hitherto had cloaked so much of what 
was happening.‘ Reporting the story began to depend on who leaked what 
to whoni and with what slant. Time complained that leaks by “handout” 
were distorting coverage.° 

Telegrams to Oppenheimer continued to express disbelief, but confidence 
that he would eventually triumph. 

THIS IS DISILLUSION BUT ROBERT AND KITTY IT MAY NOT 

HURT YOU STOP UNDERSTAND YOU APPEAL AND AM GLAD 

YOU DO THIS MADNESS CANNOT LAST ALL MY BEST WISHES 


ACCOMPANY YOU BOTH 
BRAM® 


On June 11, AEC Commissioner Zuckert accidently left a sheaf of docu- 
ments about the hearing on a train. Fearing they would soon make the 
front page of the New York Times, Strauss prepared to release the entire tran- 
script. Though the documents turned up safe and sound, in the lost-and- 
found at Boston’s South Station, Strauss became convinced that releasing 
the transcript would help him and damage Oppenheimer. He persuaded 
the other commissioners to go along, despite the assurances of confidential- 
ity given to all witnesses. The transcript—over half a million words and 992 
pages—was cleansed of material potentially damaging to national security 
and published in the astoundingly short time of two days. It was ready at 6 
PM on June 15, and sent to reporters (and to every member of Congress), 
with the proviso that no stories appear for 18 hours, to give journalists time 
to read and digest. But right-wing radio commentator Fulton Lewis, a cli- 
ent of Roger Robb, broke the embargo by using the material on his pro- 
gram less than an hour after receiving it, evidently aided by a “cheat sheet” 
guiding him to select passages in the transcript prepared by Strauss’s allies, 
and other news services felt forced to follow suit.’ 


262 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Two weeks later came the Commission’s ruling: 


OPPENHEIMER LOSES APPEAL TO A.E.C., 4 TO 1 
—New York Times, June 30, 1954. 


Most editorials, even some in ordinarily liberal publications, supported 
the decision. This reflected the increasingly edgy Cold War climate, Oppen- 
heimer’s own flawed performance in the transcript, and Strauss’s clever 
management of information about the hearing. Though publication of 
the transcript appeared to have lifted the “concealing cover of secrecy,” 
this was far from the case; deeper concealments remained. From the tran- 
script alone it was impossible to see the extent to which the hearing had 
been handicapped against Oppenheimer; or what Bernstein has called the 
“deeper politics” that had motivated it; or the perversity with which the 
Chevalier episode had been used. And even if one did know of such things, 
the transcript only made more complex the identity of J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer, and the meaning of the event. The Washington Post said of the tran- 
script, “It is about the length of the Bible, has a plot more intricate than 
Gone With the Wind and has half as many characters as War and Peace... . It 
reflects on the troubled social and political world about us perhaps more 
deeply and disturbingly than any other book published during the cold 
war.... It is quite possibly the raw material for dozens of future dramatists, 
novelists and social philosophers.”* Yet what was one to make of that raw 
material? 

The AEC, meanwhile, published a booklet of the “Texts of Principal 
Documents and Letters” of the Oppenheimer case, heavily laden with the 
documents unfavorable to Oppenheimer and light on favorable ones. 
Garrison’s request that such documents be included were rebuffed.’ 

Across the Atlantic, Chevalier read of the hearing for the first time, and 
turned against Oppenheimer (“He’d have to be a saint not to,” Rabi once 
noted") in his characteristic histrionic way. “I have been shattered by the 
revelations,” the novelist wrote in one ominous message, demanding that 
Oppenheimer respond."' A few weeks later, he wrote that “I have loved 
you as I have loved no other man,” adding that Oppenheimer’s words have 
“hounded me, plagued and blocked me and played untold havoc with my 
career and my life.” Oppenheimer replied that “I have never done any- 
thing or said anything or taken any step with the intent to hurt you or to 
make things difficult for you,” and expressed skepticism that “my cock and 
bull story” had really cast a shadow over Chevalier, saying that “I had sup- 
posed that for a long time it had been recognized for the fabrication that it 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 263 


was.” A few months later Chevalier wrote again still more operatically, 
referring to how “incalculably disastrous,” and “monstrous and calamitous” 
Oppenheimer’s words had been: “[Y]ou and I are linked together in a cloudy 
legend, which nothing, no fact, no explanation, no truth will ever unmake 
or unravel . . . you are so close to me that despite the immensities that 
separate us, I somehow regard you as almost a part of myself.”" 

That October, more judgments about the Oppenheimer affair were ig- 
nited by two publications which saw it from opposite poles. One was The 
Hydrogen Bomb, a book by Time-Life writers James Shepley and Clay Blair, 
Jr., which portrayed Teller and Strauss as heros in the quest to make the 
hydrogen bomb, and Oppenheimer as an obstructionist. The book stirred 
more reexaminations of the hydrogen bomb episode. The other controver- 
sial publication was “We Accuse,” a lengthy cover story in Harper’ by col- 
umnists Joseph and Stewart Alsop, likewise a good-versus-evil polemic that 
cast the same characters in opposite roles. 

The Alsops had known Oppenheimer for years, had covered nuclear 
issues for the Saturday Evening Post, were strongly anti-Soviet, and were con- 
cerned about McCarthy’s rise and influence at the time the hearing began. 
“The Oppenheimer affair represented the kind of issue the Alsop brothers 
liked best,” writes their biographer, “a powerfully symbolic and nationally 
significant controversy given to interpretation in terms of good and evil.” 
After learning of the PSB’s recommendation, in fact, the voluble Joseph 
dashed off an angry letter to Gray, condemning his “foolish and ignoble act.” 
The letter triggered an equally angry reply from Gray, and the episode made 
the Washington gossip rounds.’ The Alsops devoted many columns to the 
Oppenheimer affair, but felt that the matter was so complex as to demand a 
longer venue. When the Strauss-friendly Post turned them down, the Alsops 
approached Harper’, submitting a lengthy, 21-page polemic that they had to 
battle to get past the magazine’s lawyers. “We accuse the Atomic Energy 
Commission and the American government of a shocking miscarriage of jus- 
tice in the case of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” the Alsops wrote, “We accuse 
the security system itself as inherently repugnant to high traditions of the 
American past.” “The AEC, by its decision in the Oppenheimer case, has 
dishonored and disgraced the high traditions of American freedom.” 

The polemical title invoked the Dreyfus affair, adapting Emile Zola’s of 
his famous book thereabout, and was one of the earliest sustained attempts to 
interpret the Oppenheimer case by drawing a historical analogue. The ar- 
ticle, and the book which sprang of it, sparked its own controversy and new 
reexaminations of the hearing. One of the AEC’s lawyers at the hearing, 


264 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


C. A. Rolander, Jr., drew up an extensive rebuttal sent to hundreds of editors 
and reporters in what the New York Times noted was a rare example of a gov- 
ernment agency actively seeking to influence a book’s reception. U.S. News ¢ 
World Report allowed the Alsops a reply. And so the judgments multiplied. 


Post-Mortems 


The discrepancy between Oppenheimer’s immense charisma and power 
prior to the hearing, and his pallid and crumbling performance at it, seemed 
to demand explanation and to make post-mortems irresistible. 

Well before the hearings had opened, Rabi had urged Oppenheimer to 
write an autobiographical article for the Saturday Evening Post, sensing that a 
“tell-all” piece would serve to innoculate him from any suspicions that the 
growing Cold War intolerance would cast on his past leftist associations. 
Oppenheimer would come across as a “common man,” and thenceforth be 
untouchable. But Oppenheimer’s was not the “common man” style; he was 
not a confessional speaker and had little appreciation for the value and im- 
pact of American popular opinion. “[H]e didn’t have the political under- 
standing of the nature of [the good that] an article in the Saturday Evening Post 
... would push him in the stream of American values.” Once the hearing 
was set in motion, “Oppenheimer’s big mistake was to consent to a secret 
panel. He should have wanted this out in the open, public . . . open hear- 
ings.”"” He would then have been playing to a different audience, one more 
sympathetic to him, and—at the time of the Army-McCarthy hearings— 
would have forced Robb to do the same, and play to a less sympathetic 
audience. 

Oppenheimer’s friend Charles Wyzanski had a similar thought after he 
learned of the impending hearing: 

[M]y proposal is that you forthwith publish in a medium of wide circulation 

(say the New York Times, or perhaps Life, or The Aflantic) a more than candid, a 

philosophical autobiographical account of your intellectual curiosity, your de- 

tailed conduct, your personal and family relations, your and their experiences, 
your record of patriotic contribution, and your understanding loyalty. This 
would be more than a psychoanalytic performance. Its literary equivalent might 
be Montaigne’s Essays. But it would be something far greater because it would 
be an unprecedented contribution to the political education of this country. 

The true “witness” this nation needs is not a recusant Communist but an inde- 

pendent citizen who can explain what it was like in the ‘30’s’ and ‘40’s’ to be a 

man of character and adventurousness seeking to learn the truth about one of 


the undeniably major forces of our time, and simultaneously to advance the 
welfare of mankind. 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 265 


But Wyzanski added a curious caveat. He remembered having encour- 
aged Alger Hiss, whom Wyzanski originally believed to be innocent of 
espionage charges, to bring a libel suit—and when Hiss did so, it led to the 
disclosure of the “pumpkin papers” used to establish Hiss’s guilt and pre- 
cipitate his downfall. Thus Wyzanski concluded cautiously, “[D]o not fol- 
low my advice unless there is no corner of your or your wife’s lives which 
you are unwilling to expose.”"* This struck at the matter more deeply than 
he knew. Oppenheimer had things to hide but did not know exactly what 
Robb knew of them. One has to fight cautiously in the dark. 

Oppenheimer’s secretary at the Institute, Verna Hobson, once made a 
remark critical of Robert’s approach during the hearings. “I fight as hard as 
I can in the best way I know,” he replied, sharply.” We have every reason 
to think this a true remark. 


Cultural Judgments 


Long after the hearing, Oppenheimer remained a lightning-rod for con- 
troversies, political and moral. In spring 1955, he was invited to the Uni- 
versity of Washington by a former student who was head of its physics 
department—but the university’s president, Henry Schmitz, refused, call- 
ing Oppenheimer’s presence not “in the best interests of the university.” 
The action sparked protests and Schmitz was hanged in effigy. The follow- 
ing year, when Oppenheimer appeared on campus at a conference, report- 
ers asked if he had any “special feelings” given Schmitz’s action the previous 
year. Oppenheimer, as usual, was conspicuously silent. “I am very glad to 
be at this conference at this place. Period.” In the fall of 1955, when Harvard 
University announced that Oppenheimer would be its William James lec- 
turer on ethics and philosophy for 1957, the action prompted castigating 
letters to Harvard’s board of overseers. 

Meanwhile, in a protest poem entitled, “Thou Shalt Not Kill” (1955), 
Kenneth Rexroth included “Oppenheimer the Million-Killer” among the 
leading scientists and writers who, the poet alleged, had created a brutal and 
murderous culture responsible for the death of Dylan Thomas. But also in 
1955, Oppenheimer received a more enthusiastic valuation from William 
Gaddis, a young, polymathic writer whose books are based around absurd, 
spiraling, cataclysmic events. Gaddis included with the letter a copy of his 
recent novel The Recognitions, at 956 pages nearly as long as the transcript of 
Oppenheimer’s hearing, which was about the loss and recovery of personal 
integrity, and the meaning of fraudulence from all angles. You must get fan 


266 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


mail and crank letters of all kinds, Gaddis wrote Oppenheimer, but few 
half a million words long.?! 

Outside the United States, judgments on Oppenheimer tended to be more 
uniformly favorable. In 1957, the French Government made Oppenheimer 
a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor. The official ceremony was held at the 
French Embassy on September 25. On conferring the honor, Cultural Coun- 
selor Edouard Morot-Sir noted “a certain spiritual kinship” between 
Oppenheimer and “French scientists and philosophers of the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries who placed their confidence and their hopes in 
science,” and pointedly spoke of his thinking as “one of the most generous 
and loyal of our time.” As usual, Oppenheimer was tight-lipped and re- 
fused comment when contacted by reporters: “A number of my colleagues 
have received such honors and I’ve heard about it only when I read their 
obituaries.”” 

The following week the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the world’s 
first artificial satellite. Sputnik’s regular winking overhead in the nighttime 
skies was taken as a stunning indication of the loss of U.S. superiority in 
missile technology and defense preparedness. In the ensuing soul-searching, 
part of the blame was laid to the declining influence of U.S. scientists in 
government circles. Oppenheimer’s absence from governmental circles was 
noted; editorials and petitions urged his reinstatement. Even former AEC 
Commissioner Murray, who had found Oppenheimer both a security risk 
and possibly disloyal, said that “I would not be at all displeased if he were 


24 The groundswell alarmed Strauss, causing him to reconsider 


reinstated. 
his intention to leave the AEC and retire to his farm, saying that he might 
not do so “if it would mean that the scientists would get their way as far as 
Oppenheimer is concerned.”* 

Yet the time was not yet ripe for a rehabilitation, and Oppenheimer 
remained an emotionally charged symbol. In 1958, when a school board in 
the famed planned community of Levittown, Pennsylvania, voted to name 
its new $3,000,000 school after Oppenheimer, protests erupted among PTA 
committees, veterans organizations, and political groups. Hundreds of people 
attended the next school board meeting and argued about the decision until 
3 am. The state and national American Legion protested the decision, and a 
local Republican organization called for an investigation of the (Democratic) 
school board. Why not name it after someone whose name evokes “unques- 
tioned admiration” and who represents “loyalty and inspiring leadership,” 
such as “Christopher Columbus, Washington, Abraham Lincoln, James 
Monroe, Patrick Henry, or Nathan Hale”? “If a person of scientific achieve- 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 267 


ment were sought, why didn’t they consider Admiral Lewis L. Strauss”??6 
Under heavy fire, the school board backed down and named it after 
Woodrow Wilson. When a reporter asked him how he felt, Oppenheimer 
said he had “no comment, no comment at all.””” 

In 1959, Chevalier published a thinly disguised roman 4 clef, The Man 
Who Would Be God. On the eve of the Second World War, physicist Sebastian 
Bloch belongs to a secret communist unit, though he carefully avoids the 
trappings of formal commitment. One of his best friends is Mark Ampter. 
But when Bloch begins work on a top-secret military project involving a 
nuclear bomb (“the Monster”) at a remote location (“Valhalla”), he dumps 
Ampter because only he, Bloch, sees deeply enough into things to play ... 
God.* The novel is poorly written and melodramatic. Nevertheless, a few 
of the fictional passages are uncanny in the way that, almost inadvertently, 
they ring truer than any nonfiction that anyone has yet produced about the 
episode, Chevalier himself included. Witness the following: 

In any case, if he had regarded himself as a communist—which was rather in the 
perspective of history than in the context of a specific time and place—he had 
not been a communist in the commonly accepted sense, and technically had in 
fact not been a communist at all. Only the other members of his unit supposed 
him to be an actual member like themselves (a cheap deception, it seemed to 
him now), and he knew that he could count on each and every one of them to 
keep that presumed knowledge absolutely secret. His position was, besides, a 
little special in that he had never paid any real dues, as had the others. The sums 
that he had handed over . . . sums too large, in any case, to be considered dues— 
had been by way of special contributions, and there was, he believed, no record 
of them of any kind. So far as his actual involvement with the party was con- 
cerned, therefore, he could consider himself reasonably safe.” 


Andin the following decade, German playwright Heinar Kipphardt wrote 
a play “freely adapted” from the transcript, which opened in Munich and 
Berlin in 1964. When Oppenheimer received a copy of the text he objected 
to Kipphardt’s portrayal of Bohr as opposed to the bomb project, and to a 
final speech in which Oppenheimer expressed regret: “We have spent years 
of our lives in developing ever sweeter means of destruction,” the Oppen- 
heimer character says, “we have been doing the work of the military, and I 
feel it in my very bones that this was wrong.” As Oppenheimer angrily 
wrote Kipphardt: “Even this September in Geneva, during a conference of 
the Rencontres de Genéve, I was asked by the Canon Van Kamp whether 
now, knowing the results, I would again do what I did during the war: 
Participate in a responsible way in the making of atomic weapons. To this I 
answered yes. When a voice in the audience angrily asked “Even after 


268 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Hiroshima?” I repeated my yes. . . . It seems to me that you may well have 
forgotten Guernica, Dachau, Coventry, Belsen, Warsaw, Dresden, Tokyo. I 
have not. I think that if you find it necessary so to misread and misrepresent 
your principal character, you should perhaps write about someone else.”>! 

Oppenheimer publicly condemned the play, and for a while considered 
suing Kipphardt.* “The whole damn thing was'a farce,” he told the Wash- 
ington Post, “and these people are trying to make a tragedy out of it.” 

One French producer, Jean Villars, stopped rehearsals on learning of 
Oppenheimer’s opposition to the play, contacted him, and worked with 
Oppenheimer on a version that was advertised as “cleaner and purer” than 
Kipphardt’s. It would open in Paris on January 1965. Now it was Kipphardt’s 
turn to be horrified; he claimed that it “pulls all the teeth out of my play” 
and turned it into the theatrical equivalent of a popular magazine article. 
Many reviewers agreed; Variety called it “more tract than play,” and cited 
the “generally pedestrian quality of the material.” 

By 1966, Kipphardt’s play had been performed in two dozen countries. 
Attempts were made to produce it in the United States—by David Merrick 
and Herbert Blau, among others—but abandoned after threats from 
Garrison’s law firm: “Mr. Oppenheimer does not want this play performed 
here under any circumstances.” Kipphardt’s play was performed in the 
United States only after Oppenheimer’s death. Gordon Davidson directed 
its American premiere in Los Angeles in May 1968.°” 


The Sense of Tragedy 


The attempt to make a bona fide drama of the Oppenheimer story was inevi- 
table. His remark that the hearing was more farce than tragedy was yet more 
dissembling; his life seemed to provoke comparisons with tragic protagonists. 
Years before the hearing, in 1946, Lilienthal had called Oppenheimer a “tragic 
figure.” Historian Richard Polenberg, who recently reedited and abridged 
the transcript of the hearing, noted that, aside from the numerous historical 
information it provided, “like a latter-day Greek tragedy, the transcript also 
offered insight into such timeless traits of human character as honor, forti- 
tude, and humility, and, sadly enough, their less admirable counterparts: treach- 
ery, timidity, and pride.”* Years after the hearing, at Oppenheimer’s memorial 
service, George Kennan noted “that strong element of tragedy” which all 
who knew Oppenheimer sensed in his situation. 

Historical figures to whom Oppenheimer has been compared include 
Xerxes, the Persian king who audaciously built a bridge of ships across the 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 269 


Hellespont; Galileo, the scientist who was tried and convicted by the church; 
Alfred Dreyfus, the French officer whose court-martial was incited by anti- 
Semitism; Warren Hastings, who was impeached while serving as the first 
Governor-General of India; and T. E. Lawrence, another man with a schol- 
arly background who turned revolutionary leader before meeting a polliti- 
cal downfall. 

Literary figures to whom Oppenheimer has been compared include Thom- 
as Becket, in Marder in the Cathedral, whose well-intentioned actions were un- 
dermined by arrogance and pride; Faust, who made a pact with the devil; 
Lear, who became more human in the end; and the Sorcerer’s Apprentice, 
who unleashed forces he could not control. 

Some writers, such as the Alsops, merely invoked a historical analogy, 
while others sought to elaborate these analogies in depth. These include 
Giorgio De Santillana, who compared Oppenheimer’s trial with that of the 
subversive and articulate Galileo. One similarity is that each scientist went 
into his hearing convinced that he would prevail over his less intelligent, 
more politically minded accusers, and was utterly shocked when he did 
not. Another similarity was that an important trigger in each case was the 
fear on the part of the accusers of the charisma of the accused. Santillana 
quotes the Fiorentine ambassador: “He reminded me that Galileo wrote 
exquisitely, and had a marvelous capacity for persuading people of what- 
ever he wanted to, and there was a danger that through his influence some 
fantastic opinion might take hold among those Fiorentine wits, which are 
too subtle and curious.”” 

In the Washington, D.C., of 1954, the “fantastic opinion” of which Oppen- 
heimer’s enemies were afraid was “that one does not immediately have to 
rush ahead to make any weapon that can conceivably be made.”* 

Another intriguing analogy was explored by Freeman Dyson, between 
Oppenheimer and M.F., the protagonist of Auden and Isherwood’s Fé, 
“a Hamlet-like figure compounded of arrogance, ambiguity and human 
tenderness . . . an intellectual polymath, expert in European Literature and 
Eastern philosophy” who, because of his gifts, is offered the chance to lead 
a politically imperative expedition up a difficult mountain peak, initially 
balks, eventually accepts, and dies at the summit.*! 

How illuminating are such analogies? Much about the Oppenheimer hear- 
ing indeed suggests the classic Greek formulation of tragedy in which a well- 
intentioned leader “of great reputation and good fortune,” as Aristotle says, is 
brought down by mistakes due to character—usually pride or aggressiveness— 
in a story involving reversal and recognition. While enemies assist in the 


270 ~=J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


downfall, the fault ultimately lies in the protagonists themselves—they trip 
themselves up by their own virtues, their personalities so powerful that 
only they are powerful enough to do themselves in. The Oppenheimer 
hearing even seems to reveal the deepest truth that we can learn from the 
tragic, what philosopher Dennis Schmidt refers to as the mutability of hu- 
man praxis: “We learn that things may well, without warning, convert into 
their opposite. We learn that what was once divine can, in a flash, become 
monstrous. . . . What becomes visible here is the expanse of the human 
condition—the possibilities belonging to praxis—an expanse so great that it 
is capable, at any given moment, of converting its situation into its other.”” 
The tragic figure, in the words of philosophers Jean-Vernant and Pierre 
Vidal-Naquet, “discovers himself to be enigmatic, without consistency, with- 
out any domain of his own or any fixed point of attachment, with no de- 
fined essence, oscillating between being the equal of the gods and the equal 
of nothing at all. His real greatness consists in the very thing that expresses 
his enigmatic nature: his questioning.”” 

While the tragic denouement of the Oppenheimer hearing does not in- 
volve the usual fate of tragic heroes—death—the reversal (conversion into the 
opposite) was surely thorough, complete, and extreme enough to qualify. 
The wildly successful and indispensable leader of the most advanced mili- 
tary project ever excluded from military service. The passionate architect 
of a scheme for world community banished from government circles. The 
man who loved his country labeled its scapegoat. 

The sheer variety of tragic heros to whom Oppenheimer is compared, 
however, suggests he does not fully resemble any. In his reaction to the 
hearing he seemed to lack that dimension of the tragic Aristotle called rec- 
ognition. The tragic protagonist is never mere victim, buffeted by events 
beyond his control, but fully embraces the world and takes personal re- 
sponsibility. Even while struggling against the world he acknowledges his 
own participation in it, and that he has no choice but to embrace that world. 
But Oppenheimer appeared unworldly, detached from events around him. 
Writer John Leonard noted this exasperating quality—“We pursue him, and 
he eludes us”—in a review of a collection of Oppenheimer’s letters and rec- 
ollections. “Even the jacket photograph of this handsome book from 
Harvard raises more questions than it answers. A dreamy Oppenheimer, as 
if doped or deliquescent, stares back at us, sad that we don’t know what he 
is tired of thinking about. His expression combines condescension and mis- 
adventure; we would never understand. We ask of him a few notations on 
sin. He replies with a machine that is noiseless, when it isn’t speaking San- 


NO FINAL JUDGMENT 271 


skrit. I am sure, after reading so many books on Oppenheimer, that we 
were stupid to deny him a security clearance, but I wonder whether he ever 
belonged to our world at all.” 

We are used to more worldly engagement from our tragic heros. 
Oppenheimer’s description of the hearing as a “train wreck” implies that he 
saw himself merely as a passenger who had nothing to do with building the 
rails or running the train. His remark that the tragic element of the hearing 
came not from his being a protagonist but from the “chorus,” or those 
around him, likewise repudiated his agency in the affair. His comment to a 
reporter of the existence of a story behind the story was surely true—but he 
himself was a key player in that story behind the story. Oppenheimer’s 
strength was his weakness—he spontaneously and instinctively reached out 
to seize hold of and dissect external problems, but without pausing to intro- 
spect. Stern remarks that, at the hearing, Oppenheimer revealed that “he 
had never come to a full understanding of his own behavior.” What’s 
untragic is that he seems to lack curiosity about that behavior, as if it were 
not part of who he was. The Oppenheimer story evokes tragedy without 
fulfillment because it involves reversal without recognition. 

Almost a decade after the hearing, when Oppenheimer went to the White 
House to receive the Enrico Fermi Award, given out by the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission according to the terms of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 
the New York Times stated that the honor “served to write finis” on the 
Oppenheimer controversy.” Hardly. The judgments have only multiplied 
and diversified. No end is in sight. 


CHAPTER 26 


INSIDER IN EXILE 


Shortly after the hearing, Oppenheimer told a reporter that he was looking 
forward to returning to the “cloistered life of abstract slants.”! Said by an 
ambitious man of expansive interests yearning to change—or at least impress— 
the world, who had been enjoying a life as a government insider and an 
internationally recognized celebrity, this was surely posturing. 

But a dextrous posture. Oppenheimer flourished as an insider—when 
handed a clearly defined mission with institutional support. This created a 
magnetic field, in Holton’s perceptive words, which served to line up the 
various fragments of his complex personality.? The Institute now provided 
him with the sole opportunity—however modest—that he had. Briefly, it 
appeared possible that Strauss, on the Board of Trustees, would seek to 
remove Oppenheimer. The threat never materialized—Strauss eventually 
would push through Oppenheimer’s reconfirmation to be on record as a 
magnanimous figure’ —but Oppenheimer was henceforth careful to keep 
to himself thoughts on controversial matters of government policy, and on 
his exile from government service. When Pais interviewed Garrison, the 
latter reported that at the first trustee meeting after the hearing, when 
Oppenheimer and Strauss next met, Garrison was impressed with the cor- 
rectness with which Oppenheimer treated Strauss.‘ Pais adds in his notes, 
“Iam myself also impressed with the fact that RO kept his physics interests 
going without reference to his problems, now that I look back.” 

Indeed, Oppenheimer now played the role of the good Institute soldier. 
“[H]e was a better director after his public humiliation than he had been 


INSIDER IN EXILE 273 


before,” writes Dyson.* Oppenheimer appeared in seminars more frequently. 
He continued to brutalize guest speakers. He generated new vigor in the 
physics program by expanding the number of faculty and bringing in youth- 
ful members on a temporary basis. He followed their work, digested what 
they were saying, and pushed them in productive directions. He thereby 
transformed the Institute into a leading center for physics. 
Pais: 
To be sure, we had our seminars. They were lively—sometimes very lively. And 
Oppenheimer’s sharp insights played a major part in making them so. Yet 
Oppenheimer’s main contribution to the work and the style of the institute was 
not merely the conducting of a seminar. His influence was far more important, 
more subtle perhaps but no less enspiriting. He could convey to young men a 
sense of extraordinary relevance of the physics of their day and give them a 
sense of their participation in a great adventure, as for example in the Richtmyer 
lecture: “There are rich days ahead for physics; we may hope, I think, to be 
living in one of the heroic ages of physical science, whereas, in the past, a vast 
new field of experience has taught us its new lessons and its new order.” He 
could define and thereby enhance their dedication, by words such as these: 
“People who practice science, who try to learn, believe that knowledge is good. 
They have a sense of guilt when they do not try to acquire it. This keeps them 
busy. ... It seems hard to live any other way than thinking that it was better to 
know something than not to know it; and that the more you know the better, 
provided you know it honestly.” To an unusual degree, Oppenheimer possessed 
the ability to instill such attitudes in the young physicists around him to urge 
them not to let up. He could be critical, sharply critical at times, of their efforts. 
But there was no greater satisfaction for him than to see such efforts bear fruit 
and then to tell others of the good work that someone had done.’ 


But as Paisknew from years of close proximity to the man, Oppenheimer 
also experienced dissatisfactions—both professional and personal, and some 
extremely painful—during his years as Institute director. 


Institute Director 


Oppenheimer had performed brilliantly as head of Berkeley’s theoretical 
physics group and as director of the Los Alamos laboratory. But these were 
unique leadership opportunities, for Oppenheimer had built up both com- 
munities virtually from scratch. Moreover, these communities had tightly 
focused missions: the excitement of prewar theoretical physics, and the ur- 
gency of the bomb project in an all-out war, provided the magnetic field 
strong enough to orient Oppenheimer’s leadership skills. At the Institute, 
the magnetic field was considerably weaker. Now he inherited a commu- 
nity with preexisting tensions and a less focused goal. He would be deeply 


274 ~—‘J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


disappointed by his failure to bring disciplines together, at his inability to 
even get the mathematicians and historians to join each other’s tables for 
lunch. 

Robert and Kitty lived at Olden Manor, the director’s mansion at the 
Institute. Even long-standing acquaintances were impressed and awed by 
the decor and atmosphere of the Oppenheimer household. A van Gogh 
painting of a sunset hung in the living room, and a Renoir portrait of a 
woman with a veil; a Diirer etching graced the study. Said Bethe: “A visit to 
the Oppenheimer’s was like a visit to the Royal Court.”* 

The Oppenheimers had only a few close personal friends at Princeton 
even among frequent physics associates such as Dyson, Pais, and Yang. This 
was unfortunate. Oppenheimer’s father figures Conant and Bohr were gone, 
and he might have benefited from intimate friends who feared not to point 
out his vulnerabilities. Rabi counted as a kindred spirit—“I was perhaps the 
only person in the world who spoke to him with complete honesty, to 
criticize him, and this was important to him”’—but he and Oppenheimer 
were not in regularenough contact. Another intimate was his brother Frank, 
whom Robert loved dearly and would have seen more of, but the mutual 
hostility of their respective wives—Jackie acted the role of the working 
class girl, Kitty that of an aristocrat—helped to keep them apart more than 
Robert would have wished. After the war, the two brothers did not corre- 
spond regularly until Robert’s very last years.'° 

Instead of friendships, Oppenheimer now often forged associations with 
princes of the cultural domain, latter-day versions of Haakon Chevalier. 
An example was composer Nicholas Nabokov, the Russian-born cousin of 
novelist Vladimir. Nabokov, whose ability as a composer was modest, was 
nevertheless well-connected, and as the first secretary-general of the Con- 
gress of Cultural Freedom—a bastion of liberal anti-communism—he orga- 
nized a series of cultural festivals designed to match and overpower a similar 
set sponsored by the Soviets. The sometimes impressionable Oppenheimer 
was dazzled by Nabokov’s flamboyance and his ability to introduce 
Oppenheimer to glamorous people in the arts, such as George Balanchine, 
and Oppenheimer once used the Director’s Fund to have Nabokov invited 
as a visitor to the Institute. 

As director, Oppenheimer leaned heavily on Verna Hobson, who became 
his secretary in the fall of 1953 and would stay on until nearly the end of his 
life. She found him remarkable: when she took dictation, “he would speak 
for about half an hour in fully constructed sentences, then say, ‘Let’s break 
for five minutes—I have to think,’ then go on.”"' But getting used to his 


INSIDER IN EXILE 275 


strange behavior took adjusting. She was often puzzled as to whether he was 
being complimentary or nasty—as when once, upon seeing her broken down 
in tears, he said, “Somebody must have been kind to you.”” Hobson orga- 
nized his calendar and was instructed to open all his correspondence, with 
the exception of letters from Ruth Tolman, Oppenheimer’s occasional clan- 
destine lover. “RO nearly always carried a few of her letters in his pocket.”” 

Hobson also had to help Robert navigate his often troubled relation- 
ship with Kitty. Robert and Kitty treated each other as equals and gave 
each other mutual criticism and support—and to that extent were good 
for each other—but were “always competing” in destructive ways, a friend 
remarked."* She was protective of his privacy, provided the much-needed 
buffer between himself and the world, and was short and sharp with those 
who wanted to pry into their lives. “KO tended to isolate RO,” Frank 
Oppenheimer told Pais. “FO thinks that RO may actually have liked that 
in view of too much pressure on him by outsiders.” In the often sti- 
flingly formal Princeton environment, mcreover. Kitty often acted in spon- 
taneous and genuinely thoughtful ways to help neighbors such as the 
Dysons. But Kitty, like Robert, not only hada sharp wit but could also be 
vicious; one acquaintance remarked that she had two personalities.'* It 
did not help that, about 1950, she suffered severe abdominal pains in what 
was diagnosed in 1958 as chronic pancreatitis, leading her to turn more 
heavily to alcohol and pills.” Kitty over-indulged in the former and at 
least once had to be hospitalized for overdosing on the latter, and these 
habits sometimes made her careless; Hobson told Pais that on at least two 
occasions fire broke out at home because of Kitty’s negligence.’® On an- 
other occasion, Kitty passed out as a limousine was waiting to take Robert 
and her to New York, where he was to give an address. Robert left by 
himself, but when Kitty came to she called the state police, who stopped 
Robert en route.’? On many occasions Hobson had to intercede on Rob- 
ert or Kitty’s behalf. She fielded the telephone call, which came during an 
IAS Board meeting, bringing the news of Kitty’s mother Mutti’s apparent 
suicide when she evidently jumped off a cruise ship. And as Kitty's father 
Franz lay dying at his home in Pennsylvania, Kitty, unable to face him, 
sent Hobson and another friend to visit—but by the time they arrived, 
Franz was in a coma.” 

Robert and Kitty, like Robert and Jean Tatlock, enjoyed being “miser- 
able together”; today, we would call them co-dependents. But while Robert’s 
relationship with Tatlock had been all but private, his with Kitty was high 
profile. Sometimes he had to control an impulse to lash out against her in 


276 =. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


public.?! Robert sometimes spoke “in frankness and in privacy” to Hobson 
about his difficulties, but then always returned to Kitty and told her about 
the conversation.” To some acquaintances, Robert’s strategy for coping 
with Kitty was to try to spoil her and make her comfortable: “That did not 
work well.”?? Robert tried to keep the worst of Kitty’s behavior quiet with 
the collaboration of Hobson, a few other friends, and certain maids and 
grounds people of the Institute. “We lived in conspiratorial ways,” Hobson 
told Pais.” 

Directing the Institute might seem to be a dream job for the polymathic 
physicist. It was small and required little administration. The principal duty 
of the director was to raise money and make appointments. But Oppen- 
heimer had made it clear at the time he was hired that he would not engage 
in fund-raising, and his early appointments were excellent. They included 
mathematicians Armand Borel, Deane Montgomery, Atle Selberg, and 
Andre Weil; physicists Pais, Dyson, Lee, and C. N. Yang. 

Oppenheimer, though, soon found the Institute directorship more frus- 
trating than anticipated. He did push through a new library at the Institute, 
designed by Wallace K. Harrison, whose other buildings included the U.N. 
building. But conflicts mounted with the mathematicians, who opposed in 
particular his attempts to expand the scope of the Institute in the social 
sciences and—in their view—to marginalize their role. While the physicists 
charitably coped with Oppenheimer’s autocratic behavior, fierce remarks 
and elliptical utterances, the mathematicians were less tolerant, some sus- 
pecting that he trafficked in ambiguity to suggest a nonexistent depth. The 
most vociferous opponents were Montgomery and Weil, two leading math- 
ematicians. Weil in particular was a formidable antagonist—of European 
Jewish origin, classically trained, familiar with Sanskrit, as brutal and sharp- 
tongued as Oppenheimer himself, and unafraid to direct that tongue against 
Oppenheimer. “Oppenheimer was a wholly frustrated personality,” Weil 
once remarked, adding that he would provoke faculty members into quar- 
reling for his own amusement. “He was frustrated essentially because he 
wanted to be Niels Bohr or Albert Einstein, and he knew he wasn’t.”* By 
1960, faculty meetings grew so acrimonious that even physicists found the 
atmosphere of the Institute poisoned. 

The fiercest battles arose over the director’s two chief duties: money and 
permanent appointments. While in the 1940s and early 1950s the Institute 
was well-endowed enough for large salaries, that began to change. When 
Jiirgen Moser, an important mathematician, turned down the Institute, the 
grousing mounted. After one heated meeting on salaries at which a math- 


INSIDER IN EXILE 277 


ematician had attacked Oppenheimer, Yang challenged him to state the 
reason for his hostility. The mathematician mentioned Oppenheimer’s fail- 
ure to raise more money. Yang reminded him of the agreement under which 
Oppenheimer had become director. The mathematician sighed, and said it 
recalled the story about the young man seeking to marry a beautiful young 
woman. “But I don’t cook!” the woman protested. “That doesn’t matter,” 
answered the young man, “I love you!” Ten years later, the mathematician 
said, it does matter. 

More hostility surrounded an attempt by the mathematicians to appoint 
John Milnor a permanent member. Milnor was then at Princeton, which 
created a problem for Oppenheimer. In the recollection of Leidesdorf and 
other Institute trustees, a “gentleman’s agreement” forbade the Institute from 
raiding-members of the Princeton faculty, which could disrupt cordial rela- 
tions between the two institutions.” Several of the mathematicians doubted 
the existence of anon-raiding agreement—there are no “bloodstained letters,” 
Oppenheimer had to admit—challenged in any case its wisdom, and demanded 
the freedom to appoint the finest scholars they could find. Oppenheimer 
argued vehemently against Milnor’s appointment, while the mathematicians 
replied in kind. “[H]e is a big boy,” Weil said of Milnor at one meeting, “he 
should be allowed to make his own decision.”” The physicists rallied as best 
they could behind Oppenheimer. But, recalled Yang, “The faculty meetings 
became so acrimonious, I was afraid to go unless I had to.” 

Oppenheimer prevailed. Milnor eventually would become a permanent 
member of the Institute, but only after leaving Princeton for a few years. 
Demoralized by failing to hire Milnor, several of the mathematicians thought 
about retreating into their own work or resigning entirely, even en masse. 
They then blindsided Oppenheimer by presenting two nominations rather 
than the expected one, and the action incited another controversy, this time 
about procedures for handling appointments. At a trustees meeting in April 
1963, Oppenheimer proposed postponing the appointments, but the trust- 
ees accepted the mathematicians’ request. 

Some of Oppenheimer’s allies who had stood loyally behind him now 
began to entertain thoughts of leaving. “I have decided to resign from my 
present position at the Institute,” Pais wrote in May 1963, explaining that 
he had long wanted to blend research with teaching. “The detailed timing 
of this move has been determined to a considerable extent by my desire not 
to leave until the recent faculty developments at the Institute would take a 
hopeful turn, as I now believe they have.” Oppenheimer himself soon 
began to think about stepping down as director. 


278 ~=sJ. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


“The greatest tragedy of Oppenheimer’s life,” wrote Silvan Schweber, 
“was not the ordeal he went through over the issue of his loyalty, but his 
failure to make the Institute for Advanced Study a true intellectual commu- 
nity.”°° George Kennan said of Oppenheimer: “His fondest dream had been, 
I think, one of a certain rich and harmonious fellowship of the mind. He 
had hoped to create this at the Institute for Advanced Study; and it did 
come into being, to a certain extent, within the individual disciplines. But 
very little of it could be created from discipline to discipline; and the fact 
that this was so—the fact that mathematicians and historians continued to 
seek their own tables at the cafeteria, and that he himself remained so largely 
alone in his ability to bridge in a single inner world these wholly disparate 
workings of the human intellect—this was for him, I am sure, a source of 
profound bewilderment and disappointment.””! 


Science Impresario 


Once in the 1950s, during the oral part of the physics qualifying exam at the 
University of Wisconsin, a student was asked what J. Robert Oppenheimer 
had contributed to physics. “I don’t know,” the student answered—and was 
informed that was the correct answer.” 

The remark was caustic and flip. Any physics student should have been 
able to cite at least the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the Oppenheimer- 
Phillips effect, and black holes. Nevertheless, the remark was true in spirit 
to Oppenheimer’s ambiguous legacy during the 1950s. 

The war had made Oppenheimer renowned as ¢/e physicist, not only 
among the public but also the physics community. The first issue of Physics 
Today, the flagship publication of the American Physical Society, was adorned 
with a cover of Oppenheimer’s trademark pork pie hat. Many physicists 
viewed him in effect as a statesman, able to present their case effectively in 
government circles and to the public, and viewed his exile from govern- 
ment circles as a serious blow. Late in 1954, when the first Atoms for Peace 
conference was being planned, Lewis Strauss asked Rabi who should be 
chairman. Rabi replied, “You killed Cock Robin.”» 

Oppenheimer had a unique kind of persona for a scientist in the public 
eye. He was no Feynman—that lusty and conspicuously crude Far Rockaway 
enfant terrible Jew who played the bongo drums and affixed his name to 
zany tell-all books. Oppenheimer was more elitist, an upper-class Manhattan- 
ite who knew Sanskrit, owned van Goghs, sailed yachts, and quoted the 
likes of Baudelaire, Rousseau, John Donne, and Pindar (in the original Greek) 


INSIDER IN EXILE 279 


in his popular addresses. Oppenheimer was hotly sought-after as a keynote 
speaker or conference raconteur of sessions presenting other people’s work, 
for he delivered brilliant summaries in which he mastered and explained 
complex situations, turned unforgettable phrases, and attracted reporters 
and idolaters. He was half-legendary, though also loathed and feared for the 
brutal way he treated people. One often heard barbs directed against him; 
he was “highly respected and cordially disliked,” a physicist once told me. 

Oppenheimer attempted to keep abreast of physics at the Institute semi- 
nars. Dyson provides a portrait of his behavior at these gatherings: 


I have been observing rather carefully his behavior during seminars. If one is say- 
ing, for the benefit of the rest of the audience, things that he knows already, he 
cannot resist hurrying one on to something else; then when one says things that 
he doesn’t know or immediately agrees with, he breaks in before the point is fully 
explained with acute and sometimes devastating criticisms, to which it is impos- 
sible to reply adequately even when he is wrong. If one watches him one can see 
that he is moving around nervously all the time, never stops smoking, and I be- 
lieve that his impatience is largely beyond his control. On Tuesday we had our 
fiercest public battle so far, when I criticized some unwarrantably pessimistic re- 
marks he had made about the Schwinger theory. He came down on me like a ton 
of bricks, and conclusively won the argument so far as the public was concerned. 
However, afterwards he was very friendly and even apologized to me™ 


But physics was difficult to keep on top of—especially for someone who, 
as Serber once remarked, “spread his intellectual energy too broadly.”* 
Every Tuesday, Oppenheimer hosted a working lunch in his office attended 
by a half-dozen or so regular physicists, including Dyson, Goldberger, Lee, 
Pais, Treiman, Yang, and sometimes a visitor. But his participation in the 
discussion grew less decisive. Gradually, the field was walking away from 
this erstwhile universalist. The Tuesday lunch meetings grew less technical. 
Recalls Treiman, “We starved on those sparse tuna salad sandwiches, over- 
drank the sherry, and just rambled on about current developments in phys- 
ics as seen by us, the University contingent. I was never clear why established 
[sic] these lunches or why we weren’t joined by one or two IAS members. 
The purpose was certainly notto gossip about the IAS people or assess their 
work. I guess Oppie just wanted to hear about the wider scene from some 
outsiders. He attached great importance to the lunches, often calling me a 
day in advance to remind. The conversation was never highly technical. It 
had more to do with who’s in, who’s out, what are the best bet, etc.” 

Another difficulty was generated by Oppenheimer’s gut instincts about 
how physics progressed. In Gottingen, he had been nurtured by an atmo- 
sphere of exciting and revolutionary physics in which Nature was experi- 
enced as something profoundly mysterious, and if you made bold guesses 


280 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


most times you failed but possibly you would discover something revolu- 
tionary. Oppenheimer had arrived at the tail end of this time of intense 
intellectual foment, led by the likes of Dirac, Pauli, and Heisenberg, and 
felt he had just missed out on his chance to participate—on his chance for 
immortality. He desired, so strongly as to beget a belief in the imminence 
in, another scientific revolution whose crest he could ride. 

This belief emerged, for instance, in his skepticism toward quantum elec- 
trodynamics. Oppenheimer had remained convinced through the 1930s that 
QED was not good enough, not deep enough, to penetrate the secrets of 
space, matter, and light—that there were indeed grounds for another revo- 
lution. He was “on the lookout for the breakdown” of QED, Serber said,” 
expecting it at mc’, then 137 mc’, then at some higher energy. Although 
after the war Oppenheimer was interested in renormalization theory—as 
evidenced by 1948d, his contributions to the Shelter Island conferences, 
and his recruitment of Dyson to the Institute—he remained skeptical. When 
Dyson presented his seminal work on renormalization theory —work all 
but universally recognized as tremendously important, which put the 
capstone on the renormalization program, and which vastly extended con- 
fidence in QED—Oppenheimer was severely critical and it took Bethe to 
open his eyes to the significance of Dyson’s achievement. 

With the renormalization program all but finished and continued mainly 
by specialists, the attention of nuclear physicists shifted to elementary par- 
ticles. And here, for a moment in the 1950s, it seemed as though the hoped- 
for revolution might be at hand—at least to Oppenheimer and the members 
of the older generation including Heisenberg, Pauli, and Dirac—thanks to a 
peculiar and unexpected property of so-called K or “strange” particles. As 
more and more such particles were discovered and studied in the 1950s, 
thanks to the operation of accelerators like Brookhaven’s Cosmostron and 
Berkeley’s Bevatron, they appeared to exhibit “degeneracies,” to be associ- 
ated in groups whose members had similar masses and lifetimes, as if they 
“belonged” together but some characteristics were preventing them from 
identity.°> Which were the right groups, and what was the meaning of the 
groupings? 

Oppenheimer’s participation in these developments illustrates much 
about his role in the physics community at the time: as a skillful synopsizer, 
as an inventor of vivid phrases, as a sometimes frustrating fashioner of enig- 
matic utterances, as a would-be revolutionary—and in general as an insider 
among insiders. At the fifth Rochester Conference (January 31-February 2, 
1955), for instance, Oppenheimer presided over a session which he began 


INSIDER IN EXILE 281 


by writing down a table of 11 particles in various decay products, over half of 
them K particles, and said that the main focus of the session would be to 
examine how to classify the puzzling array. “This year I think there is a new 
point which will come out, and that is, in addition to the charge degeneracy, 
there appear to be other degeneracies, or quasi-degeneracies which do have a 
connection with the theory of the stability of these particles.” Oppenheimer 
clearly had an intuition of the simplifying classifications to come. 

But by the next, sixth, Rochester conference (April 3-7, 1956), the puzzle 
had grown. On its second day, Oppenheimer gave a public address to an 
overflow audience, in the course of which he referred to the proliferation 
of the new particles as a “sub-nuclear zoo.” The phrase was enthusiastically 
picked up by reporters and repeated by conference participants throughout 
the conference. The zoo’s biggest problem involved two creatures called 
the tau and the theta. These two K particles exhibited a puzzling degen- 
eracy in that they seemed to be identical in all properties except parity, a 
fundamental conservation principle. Oppenheimer presided over the 
penultimate session, and in his opening remarks pointed to one of the main 
puzzles in particle theory. “There are the five objects K .K_.K KK... They 
have equal, or nearly equal, masses, and identical, or apparently identical 
lifetimes. One tries to discover whether in fact one is dealing with five, 
four, three, two or one particle. Difficult problems arise no matter what 
assumption is made. It is to this problem of the identity of the K particles 
that larger part of the present section is devoted.” Yang followed with a talk 
in which he noted that he would like to be able to say what we have learned 
about the subnuclear zoo, but that unfortunately “a clear picture does not 
exist.” More talks followed on the tau-theta puzzle. Oppenheimer then made 
one of his famous Delphic remarks: “The t meson will have either domestic 
or foreign complications. It will not be simple on both fronts.” 

The conference participants liked this remark as well, and without know- 
ing quite what to make of it repeated it in informal discussions. It, too, was 
classic Oppenheimer, who when addressing difficult problems often crafted 
enigmatic utterances that sounded insightful not because they added any- 
thing new, but because they allowed each listener to interpret them in the 
way he or she wanted to. His contrast between the domestic and foreign 
front, for instance, might refer to the contrast between the properties, such 
as mass, of the Tt particle and those of other particles; between strange and 
nonstrange particles; between field theoretic and non field theoretic ap- 
proaches; between normal and revolutionary science. No doubt Oppen- 
heimer did not intend any one of these meanings, but rather the ambiguity 


282 =~ J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


itself. And a few minutes later in the discussion he produced yet another 
cryptic remark: “Perhaps some oscillation between learning from the past 
and being surprised by the future of this [t-8 dilemma] is the only way to 
mediate the battle.” Again, the sentence hinted at a rising wave of possibly 
revolutionary physics without advancing the problem. 

A great physics puzzle tends to invite bold initiatives in different direc- 
tions—and in the aftermath all but the final one appear silly and misguided. 
The willingness of practitioners to appear silly and misguided is part and 
parcel of a vital and exciting field, and Yang and Lee took one of these 
routes. In June, Yang sent Oppenheimer the draft of a paper he and Lee had 
written, and were submitting to Physical Review, entitled “Is Parity Violated 
in Weak Interactions?” It pointed out that physicists did not, after all, know 
for sure whether parity was conserved in weak interactions. The great 
achievement of this paper was not that Yang and Lee had the courage to 
question a sacred cow—sacred cows are obvious and tempting targets for 
theoretical physicists—but rather that they recognized that it could be ques- 
tioned in the first place. Samuel Goudsmit, the editor of Physical Review, had 
only a stylistic objection, removing the question mark and rephrasing the 
title to maintain the dignity of his flagship journal. Oppenheimer’s com- 
ment on the draft had to do with content. He thought possibly that the 
mirror properties of space itself “could conceivably vary cosmologically.” 
He wanted to leave open the possibility, in short, that solving the puzzle 
would require altering fundamental conceptions of space and time.*! 

A team of physicists from Columbia and the National Bureau of Stan- 
dards, co-led by Columbia’s Chien-Shiung Wu, took up the challenge of- 
fered by the paper, and began a test for parity violation that involved 
measuring the relation between two numbers G and G’ which, if nonequal 
as expected, would mean that neutrinos had four components and could 
spin—or “screw,” in the terminology—either right or !eft; while if they were 
equal, neutrinos had only two components and spun or screwed only one 
way. (Goudsmit, again protecting his journal from contamination by popu- 
lar language, insisted on changing the terminology from “screw” to “hand- 
edness,” and delegated to the unflappable Serber the job of alerting the 
Chinese physicists to the special nuances of the former term in English, 
though usage persisted for a time out of habit.) 

In January 1957, when the results came in, Yang cabled Oppenheimer, 
who was vacationing at the Club Comanche in St. Croix: WU’S EXPERI- 
MENT YIELDING LARGE ASYMMETRY SHOWING G EQUAL TO 
G PRIME STOP. THEREFORE NEUTRINO IS A TWO COMPONENT 
WAVE FUNCTION STOP. IT IS A PURE SCREW. GREETINGS. FRANK 


INSIDER IN EXILE 283 


Oppenheimer cabled back: WALKED THROUGH DOOR. GREETINGS. 

The discovery of parity nonconservation thrilled many members of the 
older generation of physicists, who thought that it provided a glimpse of a 
new crack in the mystery of nature, hinting at the ultimate untenability of 
field theory and traditional assumptions about space and time—at another 
wave of revolutionary physics like that of the 1920s. Heisenberg wrote of 
Pauli, “Never before or afterward have I seen him so excited about phys- 
ics.”* Oppenheimer shared their excitement. “No one today knows where 
this discovery will lead . . . something has been found whose meaning only 
the future will reveal.” 

But parity nonconservation was soon shown to be easily incorporated 
into QED, once again extending its reach. In one discussion at the time, 
Yang remarked that physicists were like a group of people in a darkened 
room, who know there is a way out but do not know what it is. Oppen- 
heimer and other old-timers were hoping that when the light came back on, 
it would reveal them in an entirely differer: building. Instead, it turned out 
to reveal only the door. Once again, Oppenheimer was disappointed. The 
progress of particle physics had not taken the form of a revolutionary 
break with the existing theory but rather an extension of its depth and 
versatility. 

Oppenheimer exerted his greatest impact on physics during this time as 
an impresario—in the way he stayed on top of developments, spotting op- 
portunities in sometimes surprising directions, and initiating work on them 
by pushing the right people on them. This had been his forte since the 
1930s—as evidenced, for instance, by the Oppenheimer-Pnillips process and 
his work on what would become known as black holes. 

One example: Oppenheimer’s role in fostering the application of neu- 
tron activation to art and archaeological materials. By the mid-1950s, a few 
attempts had been made to use neutron activation as a noninvasive way to 
analyze the composition and origin of artifacts. Some Institute archeolo- 
gists, including Homer A. Thompson, discussed with Oppenheimer whether 
there was a possibility of developing neutron activation into a systematic 
tool. Oppenheimer thought it was possible that reactors could be used as a 
tool to carry out a detailed analysis of pottery, allowing the fingerprinting 
of trace elements in a way that would pinpoint the source of the clay. In fall 
1954, Oppenheimer telephoned Richard Dodson, an old friend who had 
worked at Los Alamos and was now chairman of the chemistry department 
at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The Brookhaven Graphite Research 
Reactor (BGRR) was the first built explicitly for peacetime research, and 


284 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


had excellent facilities for irradiating samples such as potsherds as well as 
much bigger objects, and Oppenheimer suggested that Brookhaven develop 
a program in archaeology. Oppenheimer invited Dodson and his wife to 
Olden Manor for the night, and during the stay presented Dodson with a 
bag of archaeological samples that Thompson and others had provided him. 
Dodson gave the samples to Brookhaven scientist Ed Sayre to irradiate and 
analyze for sodium and magnesium content. “The results, which were ex- 
pressed as ratios of *Mn:*Na, showed distinct differences between sherds 
from different sources, but similarities between sherds from the same re- 
gion. These were reported by Sayre and Dodson to a group made up of 
archaeologists, chemists, and Professor Oppenheimer at the Institute in 
March, 1956, and eventually published.” The work was so successful that 
the program blossomed, and Brookhaven became internationally known 
for its work on neutron activation and collaborated on important art pres- 
ervation projects involving frescos by Giotto and oil paintings by many 
artists, and involving research collaborations with institutions such as the 
Isabelle Gardiner museum in Boston and the Institute of Fine Arts at New 
York University. All the Rembrandts in the collection of the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art (except for those painted on wooden panels) eventually 
went to Brookhaven and were autoradiographed there to help determine 
their authenticity. 


Rabi liked to tell Oppenheimer that he read too much Indian philosophy 
and too little of the Talmud. This remark can be interpreted in several 
ways. One is that it refers to the way Indian philosophy is apocalyptic— 
things end in a great crash before beginning anew—while the Talmud’s 
message is different; that things were messy in the past, are messy now, and 
will continue to be messy in the future, even for those who are chosen. The 
prudent person therefore heeds the Talmud’s lessons on how to navigate 
wisely within one’s community. 

The remark points to a suggestive difference between Rabi’s career and 
Oppenheimer’s. While Rabi made great strides based on his conviction that 
quantum mechanics was fundamentally correct, and therefore he looked to 
elaborate and extend it, Oppenheimer was constrained by his conviction 
that the theory was fundamentally flawed, which encouraged him to look 
far ahead, perhaps too far. 

This may be one reason for Oppenheimer’s dissatisfaction with his sig- 
nal achievements. It may be a reason why, given his formidable reputation 
and talents, neither the University of Wisconsin student mentioned above 


INSIDER IN EXILE 285 


nor his examiner thought that the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, or 
the Oppenheimer-Phillips process, or black holes sounded correct, making 
“I don’t know” the right response. 


Speaker and Author 


After the hearing, Oppenheimer remained widely sought-after as a speaker 
and author on issues concerning science and society. He reveals high ambi- 
tions in these talks and addresses, many of the seeds of which can be found 
in his farewell speech to Los Alamos in 1945. There, he had remarked that 
“what has happened to us” is so major as to beg comparison in some ways 
with the discovery of relativity and the development of quantum mechan- 
ics in that they “forced us to reconsider the relations between science and 
common sense.” The development of the atomic bomb even invited com- 
parison to a much earlier time, “the days of the renaissance . . . when the 
threat that science offered was felt so deeply throughout the Christian world” 
that the existence and value of science were threatened. Oppenheimer’s 
hope clearly was that just as this threat ultimately had not undermined 
society and culture but improved it once properly integrated, so would the 
atomic bomb. Atomic weapons offered not only “a great peril, but a great 
hope,” in being so terrible that they might frighten human beings into es- 
tablishing “a community of interest” which might grow into “a pilot plant 
for a new type of international collaboration.” 

While Oppenheimer’s optimism about international collaboration faded 
after the failure of the 1946 Achenson-Lilienthal report, and about revised 
relations between science and common sense after the 1954 hearing, many 
themes involving the interaction between science and society persist in his 
later writings, several collections of which have been published. In his eu- 
logy to Oppenheimer, Pais noted that the talks and writings after the hear- 
ing focus “more and more on the fact that the relations between the modern 
sciences and the general culture of our time are not as intimate and fruitful 
today as they could be.” Pais continued: “What really preoccupied him was 
that the span of things the intelligent man can cope with is dangerously 
narrowing; that the relationships between common sense and specialized 
knowledge are in greater difficulty now than ever, because the rate of in- 
crease of that which is known is now greater than ever. Even to the scien- 
tist is it often difficult to appreciate the essentials of a neighboring discipline, 
not completely foreign but not quite his own, ‘even in physics we do not 
entirely succeed in spite of a passion for unity which is quite strong.’ Was it 


286 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


then his intent to explain isotopic spin to philosophers? No harm in trying, 
he thought, but ‘as for particle physics, what we are sure of today may not 
yet be ready to make its contribution to the common culture.’” 

Pais found that Oppenheimer’s essays broached three main themes. 


First, he addressed himself to what is loosely called the intellectual community. 
He wished to foster a common understanding primarily within this commu- 
nity. Second, as an example of what in his opinion could profitably be shared, 
he mentions the lesson of quantum theory which we call complementarity. He 
wished and in fact tried to explain this lesson to the biologist, the statesman and 
the artist because he believed that what to the physicist is a technique represents 
at the same time a general way of thinking that could be liberating to all. Third, 
he saw a two-fold duty for our educational system. In the face of increasing 
demands on education we should continue to stress that the cultural life of sci- 
ence lies almost entirely in the intimate view of the professional. At the same 
time, “no man should escape our universities without . . . some sense of the fact 
that not through his fault, but in the nature of things, he is going to be an 
ignorant man, and so is everyone else.” Of the great effort needed to achieve 
these aims he said the following: “I think [. . .] that, with the growing wealth of 
the world, and the possibility that it will not all be used to make new commit- 
tees, there may indeed be genuine leisure, and that a high commitment on this 
leisure is that we reknit the discourse and the understanding between the mem- 
bers of our community. [. . .] As a start, we must learn again, without contempt 
and with great patience, to talk to one another; and we must hear.”* 


But Pais was also aware of a strange property of Oppenheimer’s addresses: 
while evocative and impressive in style and delivery, they are also often 
prosaic in content. To be sure, most were delivered at public occasions for 
general audiences, occasions that call for wisdom, reflection, or edification 
without tears or sweat. At this, Oppenheimer succeeded brilliantly, and 
forged his own genre of public talk; if we find his contributions to this 
genre dissatisfying, it is only because we expected so much more from him. 
The talks tend to promise more depth and insight than they contain. They 
are both rhetorically evocative and conceptually stagnant.” 

Pais had experienced this already in his first encounter with Oppenheimer 
at the 1946 meeting of the American Physical Society in New York, when 
Pais described himself as “moved by [Oppenheimer’s] words” yet was after- 
ward “unable to reconstruct anything of substance”—which, Pais said he 
later realized “was not just a matter of stupidity from my side.” Pais jotted 
down on one page of his notes that “Bohr’s dictum never to express your- 
self more clearly than you think was to Robert an upper bound.” And on 
another, “O’s talent: to withhold a piece of information which then makes 
a statement elevated & mysterious while in fact there is not that much to 
it.”** Nor was Pais by any means the only contemporary to have trouble 


INSIDER IN EXILE 287 


with the essays. “I could follow the words but not the argument,” confided 
Ruth Tolman—perhaps Oppenheimer’s most sympathetic intimate audience— 
apropos of his Reith Lectures.” 

Oppenheimer’s strengths in these essays give rise to their weaknesses. As 
in his physics, one of his strengths was the ability to take stock of a situa- 
tion, to grasp it in all its complexity and articulate it in a way that preserves 
the intricacy. The correlative weakness—again as in his physics—was that 
he did this so well that it left him unable to propose a way forward, for to 
do so would involve a crass simplification, which would do an injustice to 
the intricacy of the situation that he so well mastered. His voice is simulta- 
neously oracular—fascinated by the meaning of a situation, the potential 
for novelty, and the possibility of revolution—and cautious and humble— 
impressed by what’s known, the obstacles in the way to progress, and the 
weight of tradition. Oppenheimer appears to characterize his voice, in one 
essay, as an attempt to have a style: style, he writes, is the means by which 
we do “justice to the implicit, the imponderable, and the unknown... . It is 
style which complements affirmation with limitation and humility.”© But 
the voice can be characterized, less charitably, as schizophrenic, and one 
FBI agent described it as Oppenheimer’s “typical ‘egotistically modest’ 
manner.” As a result, the essays end up being both stirring and insubstan- 
tial, dangling before us the prospect of a coming breakthrough and future 
harmony but ultimately leaving us empty-handed. Some typical examples 
of conclusions: 


e “In the discouragements of the day, good example must come to be 
our firmest ground for hope.” 

¢ “For all this it will clearly not be enough that we preserve the integ- 
rity of our communication and comprehension, either among us, or 
with our fellows, but it is the least that we can do.”® 

e “We, like all men, are among those who bring a little light to the vast 
unending darkness of man’s life and world. For us as for all men, 
change and eternity, specialization and unity, instrument and final 
purpose, community and individual man alone, complementary each 
to the other, both require and define our bonds and our freedom.”™ 


Oppenheimer’s knack for crafting messages that left listeners free to in- 
terpret in their own ways poses the serious danger of us reading into his 
essays more than is present. 

A second strength of these essays is that they forcefully articulate the 
insider perspective, of the professional scientist, in which progress consists 


288 «= J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


of the gradual absorption and integration of science and its methods into 
society, with tensions merely temporary or clouding a deeper harmony. 
Science is a prime example of community and of inquiry for society at large; 
a “special interest,” as he once put it, that was also in the general interest. 
“Science in being, research,” Oppenheimer writes in 1949, citing such vir- 
tues as openness, the absence of authority, and the willingness to doubt, 
“may be to the liberal education, not an accident, not an ancillary or sec- 
ondary or convenient thing to be held in balance—it may be the scripture 
itself.”5 

Consider one of his most striking images, the “house of science,” from 
his 1953 essay “An Open House.” 


It is a vast house indeed. It does not appear to have been built upon any plan but 
to have grown as a great city grows. There is no central chamber, no one corri- 
dor from which all others debouch. All about the periphery men are at work 
studying the vast reaches of space and the state of affairs billions of years ago; 
studying the intricate and subtle but wonderfully meet mechanisms by which 
life proliferates, alters, and endures; studying the reach of the mind and its ways 
of learning; digging deep into the atoms and the atoms within atoms and their 
unfathomed order. It is a house so vast that none of us know it, and even the 
most fortunate have seen most rooms only from the outside or by a fleeting 
passage, as in a king’s palace open to visitors. It is a house so vast that there is not 
and need not be complete concurrence on where its chambers stop and those of 
the neighboring mansions begin. . . . And even those who live here live else- 
where also, live in houses where the rooms are not labeled atomic theory or 
genetics or the internal constitution of the stars, but quite different names like 
power and production and evil and beauty and history and children and the 
word of God. We go in and out; even the most assiduous of us is not bound to 
this vast structure. One thing we find throughout the house: there are no locks; 
there are no shut doors; wherever we go there are the signs and usually the 
words of welcome. It is an open house, open to all comers.** 


Oppenheimer, in short, was a Comtean, who held science and its meth- 
ods to be exemplary for society at large. The activity in the house can and 
should guide the rest of life. But Oppenheimer was a modern-day Comtean 
with soul and sophistication; he never believed that one science could be 
reduced to another, nor sought to underestimate the complexity of the hu- 
man world. Indeed, in an influential address to the American Psychological 
Association, he argued that psychology should not be based on the model 
of the natural sciences, as many practitioners during those years were at- 
tempting to do.” After the 1954 hearing, some of Oppenheimer’s opti- 
mism dimmed. He came to recognize the gaps and fissures that separate the 
community of the scientist from wider society, and to compare to that ex- 
tent the loneliness of the scientist to that of the artist. He even speaks of 


INSIDER IN EXILE 289 


incompatibilities: the diversity of life, he said in 1954, is such that “there 
have always been modes of feeling that could not move the same heart; 
there have always been deeply held beliefs that could not be composed into 
a synthetic union.” Nevertheless, the underlying Comteanism persists. 
Oppenheimer frequently and skillfully wielded the metaphor of comple- 
mentarity to downplay these incompatibilities, and to suggest a more pro- 
found harmony. It is a good and evocative metaphor, though not a deep 
one. A conceptual patch, it expresses a faith that different experiences or 
situations that appear to be independent, mutually exclusive, and even con- 
flicting, ultimately belong together—without providing any hints of a blue- 
print to indicate how so. 

But the weakness is that he does not call this insider perspective into 
question: “The discoveries of science, the new rooms in this great house, 
have changed the way men think of things outside its walls.” Not even 
scientists, however, are born inside the “open house,” and though one may 
work there one does not live there. Oppenheimer does not inquire into 
how people travel from the inside back to the outside of the house, and 
whether any difficulties attend that trip. While in the later years he seems 
discouraged about the “community of interest and understanding” needed 
to meet the upcoming cultural and political challenges, he still assumes an 
underlying complementarity and does not explore or inquire into the dis- 
contents and tensions that have arisen. What would have been truly pro- 
found would have been to seek to articulate our discontent, rather than 
merely point to it. And Oppenheimer’s own experiences leading up to the 
hearing would have been an excellent starting point, because the hearing 
was a paradigmatic experience of the kind of disruption in the relation be- 
tween science and society he was alluding to. A curious, distressing, even 
ominous aspect of the later essays is his absence of reflection about an event 
that was not only the deepest thing to shake his soul, but one of the deepest 
things to shake up the relations between science and society. It was imper- 
sonal; it was still always “what has happened to us” not “what has happened 
to me.” Oppenheimer almost acts as though he were not a part of the world 
in which shat event took place, in shat part of the house. This is what gives 
his later essays such an unsettling serenity. 

Nevertheless, colleagues were inspired by Oppenheimer’s ability to ex- 
press the perspective of an insider of what he often called “the community of 
science” or “the intellectual community,” and knew how to make use of 
Oppenheimer’s special talent for giving voice to it. In November 1963, for 
instance, Brookhaven scientist Luke Yuan began worrying about the ability 


290 «J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


of politicians and the public to support the rapidly rising cost of new accelera- 
tors, and conceived the idea of publishing a book of essays by physicists on 
the goals and values of high-energy physics. The essays he secured comprise a 
fascinating picture of the views and values of high-energy physicists of the 
day. Some excerpts follow. Julian Schwinger: “The world view of the physi- 
cist sets the style of the technology and the culture of the society and gives 
direction to future progress.” Bethe: “I believe that particle physics deserves 
the greatest support among all branches of our science because it gives the 
most fundamental insights. . . . [T]his is indeed the most basic field of knowl- 
edge in the physical world.” Gerald Feinberg: “If we cut back on [high energy 
physics] for reasons of budgetary limitations or political squabbling, I think 
we will have seriously damaged the best single element we have contributed 
to human culture.” Pais: “A great society is ultimately known for the monu- 
ments it leaves for later generations. . . . [SJuch a machine, which is on the 
scale of a national effort, will without question be a source of inspiration for 
new science and a monument to our days.” Steven Weinberg: “(I]t would be 
fitting for scientists to think of themselves as members of an expedition sent 
to explore an unfamiliar but civilized commonwealth whose laws and cus- 
toms are dimly understood. However exciting and profitable it may be to 
establish themselves in the rich coastal cities of biochemistry and solid state 
physics, it would be tragic to cut off support to the parties already working 
their way up river, past the portages of particle physics and cosmology, to- 
ward the mysterious inland capital where the laws are made.” 

Yuan then asked Oppenheimer to compose “a general introduction set- 
ting forth the basic objectives of high energy physics and its implications. ”° 
Telling Oppenheimer that the project was “of extreme importance and ur- 
gency,” Yuan wrote, “At present there seems to be tremendous lack of un- 
derstanding of the objectives of high energy physics, not only among the 
general populace and Government officials, but also among the scientific 
community as a whole.” 

Oppenheimer obliged, superbly. “We do not understand the nature of 
matter, the lawsthat govern it, the language in which it should be described,” 
Oppenheimer wrote. Nor, he continued, are we likely to find enough clues 
within the energy range accessible to us; we need a much larger accelerator. 
One might well ask, therefore, what makes the search for a theory of mat- 
ter “important enough to warrant the effort, the expense, the public sup- 
port needed to enter the domain of much higher energy physics.” The 
answer, Oppenheimer said, is not only that the techniques of physics create 
spin-offs that benefit all science and technology, nor that they generally 
give rise to unanticipated but useful discoveries. 


INSIDER IN EXILE 291 


It is also this: the last centuries of science have been marked by an unabating 
struggle to describe and comprehend the nature of matter, its regularities, its 
laws, and the language that makes it intelligible. The successes in this struggle, 
from the Sixteenth Century until our own day, have inspired the whole scien- 
tific enterprise, and lightened the world of technology, and the whole of man’s 
life. They have informed the education and the devotion of young people. They 
have played an ineluctable part in the growth, the health, the spirit, and the 
nature of science. We are now, despite tempting and brilliant topical successes, 
deep in the agony of this struggle. This volume attests the conviction of those 
who are in it that, without further penetration into the realm of the very small, 
the agony may this time not end in a triumph of human reason. That is what is 
at stake; that is why this book is written. 


Whatever their shortcomings as excursions into philosophy, political 
science, or human culture, Oppenheimer’s talks were excellent in context, 
as general addresses by the head of a research institute, a situation in which 
style is more important than content. Even those who listened carefully 
enough to note their flaws, and to disagree with the occasionally dark tone, 
found them inspiring. One of the darkest notes is struck in Prospects in the 
Arts and Sciences, which was recorded in November 1954, and broadcast by 
the Columbia Broadcasting System on December 26, 1954. In it, Oppen- 
heimer considers what the world of the arts and sciences looks like. 


There are two ways of looking at it: One is the view of the traveler, going by 
horse or foot, from village to village to town, staying in each to talk with those 
who live there and to gather something of the quality of its life. This is the 
intimate view, partial, somewhat accidental, limited by the limited life and 
strength and curiosity of the traveler, but intimate and human, in a human 
compass. The other is the vast view, showing the earth with its fields and towns 
and valleys as they appear to a camera carried in a high-altitude rocket. In one 
sense this prospect will be more complete; one will see all branches of knowl- 
edge, one will see all the arts, one will see them as part of the vastness and 
complication of the whole of human life on earth. But one will miss a great deal; 
the beauty and warmth of human life will largely be gone from that prospect. 


But Oppenheimer seems almost overwhelmed by the view. “Yet never be- 
fore today have the diversity, the complexity, the richness so clearly defied 
hierarchical order and simplification; never before have we had to under- 
stand the complementary, mutually not compatible ways of life and recog- 
nize choice between them as the only course of freedom. Never before today 
has the integrity of the intimate, the detailed, the true art, the integrity of 
craftsmanship and the preservation of the familiar, of the humorous and 
the beautiful stood in more massive contrast to the vastness of life, the great- 
ness of the globe, the otherness of people, the otherness of ways, and the all- 
encompassing dark. ... This cannot be an easy life. We shall have a rugged 
time of it... .”” 


292 =~ J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


After reading this, Pais wrote to Oppenheimer applauding his convic- 
tion: “you leave no doubt about your view that one should be in the village 
and that too much bird’s eye viewing is dispiriting.” But Pais found too 
much of a tone of despair, and cited back to Oppenheimer the two follow- 
ing passages from Charles Morgan’s essay, “On Singleness of Mind,” which 
the play wright added as a preface to his play, The Flashing Stream. 

This singleness of mind, called by Jesus purity of heart, the genius of love, of 

science and of faith, resembles, in the confused landscape of experience, a flash- 

ing stream, “fierce and unswerving as the zeal of saints,” to which the few who 
see it commit themselves absolutely. They are called “fanatics,” and indeed they 
are not easily patient of those who would turn them aside; but, amid the confu- 
sions of policy, the adventure of being man and woman is continued in them. 
[A]single minded man, however simple his life or unspectacular his behaviour, 
slowly produces upon his associates an impression that he is inspired—or, to 
avoid a word that begets controversy—that his subconscious mind is continu- 
ously nourished and impregnated from sources not at once apparent to them or 
to him. Finding this to be so, he may say, simply, that God provides for him, or 
he may use another form of words with which to describe the renewals within 


himself: the effect is the same—that he is renewed, and, in his face, the youth of 
another world looks out from the age of this. 


Pais then told Oppenheimer, “And this is what I hope you will weave into 
your own writing. That single mindedness is the ultimate of strength we 
can reach, that it is totally different from the spirit of specialism while su- 
perficially its techniques seem not dissimilar and that the flying over the 
landscape is a good excursion every once in a while, as long as there is a full 
knowing of a necessarily limited number of makers. I know I say nothing 
you do not know. But I want it said, hard and with hope. You must use 
your talents to do this. As to myself, I have now other battles, but I hope 
that also for this my time may come.”®! 


St. John 


During the 1950s, the Oppenheimers began to take regular vacations at a 
remote island retreat, on St. John, in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The island had 
no telephone service nor paved roads, only narrow dirt trails that threaded 
up and down the steep hills, navigated by jeep, horseback, and foot. It was 
a spectacularly beautiful island, but to get there required island-hopping: fly 
to San Juan in Puerto Rico, take a smaller plane to Charlotte Amalie in St. 
Thomas, then take a car to the end of that island where a ferry—in the early 
days, only one a day—takes you to Cruz Bay on St. John. Everyone had the 
same address: Cruz Bay Post Office, St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands. The mail 


INSIDER IN EXILE 293 


was sorted about 10:30 every morning, and standing in the line that began 
to form half an hour earlier was an important social occasion. 

The island population then was about 800. Of these, about a tenth were 
“Continentals,” the pleasant euphemism for white-skinned island inhabit- 
ants, while “natives,” the now politically incorrect term for black islanders, 
comprised the rest. “Locals” referred to people of either color who stayed 
around a long time. Continental society was small and fairly segregated, 
and depended heavily on jeeps and alcohol; “Jeep Society” was the working 
title of one never-completed book about it. The Continentals hung out 
together, partied frequently, and dropped by each others’ houses on holi- 
days. For them, life was like one long reunion of distant cousins, not all of 
whom got along. Nobody cared who you were or what you did, as long as 
they felt.free to talk about it. 

In the mid-1950s, the Oppenheimers took several vacation excursions to 
the Caribbean, shunning the popular resorts for informal guest houses run 
by families—such as the Club Comanche in Christiansted on St. Croix, run 
by the Dale family, where Oppenheimer had received Yang’s telegram about 
parity violation. On St. John, the Oppenheimers’ favorite guest house was 
the Trunk Bay Estate, run by Paul Boulon and his mother Erva (short for 
Minerva) on the north shore of the island, about three miles east of Cruz 
Bay. “They have the finest beach in the Caribbean, and a small place, infor- 
mal, with wide views and plenty of wind,” Oppenheimer wrote an acquain- 
tance. “[T]he food is remarkable for the Caribbean and is good, because 
Mrs. Boulon has learned what to do with the native fauna and flora.” 

Trunk Bay was a wooden house with seven guest rooms, built about half- 
way up the hill. There was no electricity, just lantern light and a kerosene- 
powered refrigerator. Robert and Kitty normally stayed in “Chicago,” the 
most comfortable room which had a private terrace and bathroom and the 
most breeze, whence its name. Toni would stay in the long and narrow 
room next door nicknamed “Pullman.” Everyone ate breakfast and dinner 
together, and behaved like family. 

The intimacy of the environment made it next to impossible for the FBI 
to keep Oppenheimer discreetly under surveillance. In 1955, when AEC 
chairman Daniel Lilienthal stayed at Trunk Bay a month after Oppenheimer, 
he ran into people who complained about the FBI agents who showed up to 
ask him whom Oppenheimer had talked with, what he saw, and so forth. 
“They will hound that fellow as long as they can,” Lilienthal wrote in his 
journals.” Eventually, the FBI gave up. 

Attracted by the remoteness, the Oppenheimers grew interested in pur- 
chasing property in the Virgin Islands, and made inquiries about possible 


294 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


properties. But land, especially beach property, is scarce and precious on 
small islands, often a source of conflict, and at least one deal fell through. 
Finally, in 1957, the Oppenheimers sold a Van Gogh to purchase two small 
packets of beachfront property on St. John. The previous owners had been 
Robert and Nancy Gibney, eccentrics in their own way, known for occa- 
sionally chasing people off their property with shotguns. The Gibneys were 
inspired to part with a strip of their otherwise private beach by the new 
owner’s fame, but they lost more privacy than they bargained for. The 
Oppenheimers asked Wallace K. Harrison to design a cottage, and while it 
was under construction, in summer 1958, they camped out at the Gibneys’. 
It did not take long for the latter to regret their sale, as is clear from a 
humorous but mean-spirited profile of Kitty that Nancy later wrote, full of 
obviously inflated stories. The cottage consisted of one large open space 
and bedroom behind which was a tiny bathroom. It had running water 
thanks to a pump in a cistern and a pressure tank, and was electrified; that 
part of the island had just been wired via a power line had been brought 
across from St. Thomas. But the cottage had been built too close to the 
beach. The din made by a ground sea—the name for a type of swell in which 
the waves do not roll in but pick themselves up and drop themselves on the 
beach—was so loud as to make it virtually impossible to hear anything inside. 
The Oppenheimers now came to St. John more frequently: for much of 
the summer, and from Christmastime to New Year’s. It was the one chance 
that Robert and Kitty took to relax, and be comfortable, happy, and have a 
truly private life for an extended period of time. Robert rarely wore any- 
thing besides shorts and sandals, while Kitty took to the bold Marimakko 
dresses then popular. Her health seemed to improve at St. John, though she 
still had attacks and cynics still said she was sick when she wanted to be. 
The Oppenheimers quickly became a fixture of Continental life—insiders 
in a society of outsiders. They got along well with the island’s children, and 
Robert taught at least one Jocal youth to play darts on a makeshift board he 
drew himself. Rarely was there anyone at their home who was not a close 
friend. They were particularly close to the Denham family—Paul and Erva 
Boulon’s daughter, Erva, and her husband John Denham—with whom they 
were in nearly daily contact. Toni befriended Erva Denham’s daughter— 
also named Erva—and the two loved to ride horseback up and down the 
steep trails of the island. Erva Denham dropped in nearly every morning— 
often before the late-rising Robert and Kitty were up—to leave fresh papaya 
and other fruit. This was fortunate—and surely one reason why Kitty’s 
pancreatic attacks declined—for she and Robert rarely kept food at home. 
The Denhams and other regular visitors learned to bring their own food 


INSIDER IN EXILE 295 


even when invited for meals, out of concern for what, or even whether, 
food would be found. As at Princeton, parties at the Oppenheimers tended 
to be long on drinks and low on food. 

Even on St. John, though, the Oppenheimers stood out by an elegance 
that extended to the smallest possessions, from Kitty’s clothes to their jeep. 
While all the other Continentals had jeeps with steel bodies that eventually 
rusted, for instance, the Oppenheimers had a Land Rover, with an alumi- 
num body, the only one on St John. Years after Robert’s death, Kitty hada 
terrible accident coming back from a visit to a member of the Boulon fam- 
ily, losing control while coming down a steep hill on a dirt road that is still 
treacherous, fully paved, today. The Oppenheimers also had one of the best 
views on the island, for at the mouth of the bay a magnificent pillar of 
granite called Carvel Rock protruded above the water. 


Rehabilitation and Retirement 


In 1961, John F. Kennedy succeeded Eisenhower as president. During 
Kennedy’s administration, scientists and government officials alike—with 
national security adviser McGeorge Bundy, a longtime Oppenheimer ad- 
mirer, quietly campaigning—began to try to rehabilitate Oppenheimer. In 
1962, Kennedy invited Oppenheimer to the White House as a special guest 
in a dinner for Nobel Laureates. That same year, he received several nomi- 
nations for the prestigious Enrico Fermi Award, given out by the Atomic 
Energy Commission according to the terms of the Atomic Energy Act of 
1954. One of several letters of nomination came from four Institute mem- 
bers: Dyson, Lee, Pais, and Yang. In April 1963, Kennedy announced that 
Oppenheimer would indeed be that year’s Fermi award winner. Dean 
Acheson expressed the feelings of many physicists when he called it “the 
A.E.C.’s recantation.”® Lf called it an “unofficial rehabilitation.”® Teller 
sent Oppenheimer a note of congratulation: “I had been often tempted to 
say something to you. This is the first time I can do so with full conviction 
and knowing that I am doing the right thing.” Typically, the congenital 
one-upper could not help adding, “I enjoyed getting the Fermi prize last 
year.”*” Some speculated that this was a first step toward restoration of 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance. 

On November 22, the White House announced that Kennedy would 
hand Oppenheimer the award himself in a ceremony to take place on De- 
cember 2, the anniversary of the first self-sustained chain reaction. Later 
that November afternoon, President John F. Kennedy was assassinated. 


296 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Oppenheimer and Kennan were standing in the director’s office as the 
news, fragmentary at first, came over the radio of Kennedy’s death. Both he 
and Oppenheimer, Kennan recalled, felt that it meant that “the world we 
cared about had been grievously diminished, together with our own ability 
to be in any way useful to it.” Kennan continued, “For Oppenheimer, with 
his great imaginative insight, it was a dreadful blow; and I wonder if I am 
wrong when I ascribe to that moment, as I instinctively tend to do, the 
beginning of his own death.” 

A week anda half later, Oppenheimer received the award at the White House. 
It was signed by Kennedy but handed to Oppenheimer by Johnson. At the 
White House ceremony, accompanied by Kitty and their two children, 
Oppenheimer said to Johnson, “I think it just possible, Mr. President, that it 
has taken some charity and some courage for you to make this award today.” 

Afterward, Oppenheimer and his wife met the late president’s widow, 
who was still at the White House, packing her belongings. He told her that 
when he first wrote out his note of acceptance two weeks previously he had 
intended to say “some charity, some humor and some courage,” but that 
after Kennedy’s assassination Kitty had insisted that the reference to hu- 
mor should be omitted. The president’s widow reportedly replied, “Yes, 
you were right to put it in, and Kitty was right to take it out.”® 

The following April, in 1964, Robert Oppenheimer turned 60. To com- 
memorate the occasion, four Institute colleagues—Dyson, Pais, Stromgren, 
and Yang—sought to surprise him with a special issue of Reviews of Modern 
Physics dedicated to him.” Dyson wrote about 40 eminent physicists, but 
had difficulty persuading contributors.”! It was not simply that Oppenheimer 
lacked close friends who might be expected to leap at the occasion; he had 
also stepped on the toes of those who might have been expected to contribute 
to such an issue. Max Born, for instance, Oppenheimer’s former teacher, 
who felt overlooked in history to begin with, had particularly smarted when 
Oppenheimer had failed to mention him in the Reith lectures, and was still 
aggrieved.”? But Dyson ultimately persuaded the latter to write a short letter 
“of reminiscences and congratulations.” 

On April 24, Oppenheimer went to a party in his honor at the Strom- 
grens, where the surprise was to be the presentation of the special issue. Dyson 
wrote, in one of his weekly letters to his mother (The “Dyson Weekly”): 
“The first copy was rushed down from New York hot from the press the 
same day. Oppenheimer seemed to be genuinely surprised and greatly moved. 
It was the first time I have ever seen him at a loss for a suitable speech. He just 
said ‘Thank yow’ rather incoherently and sat down.”” 


INSIDER IN EXILE 297 


By early the next vear, Oppenheimer had been thinking about retiring 
as director of the Institute. According to the Institute bylaws, which man- 
dated that the director retire at the end of the fiscal vear in which that 
person reached 65, he still had several more vears. But he had several rea- 
sons in mind, which he ran past a few colleagues. The Institute “needs to 
expand into new fields and do new things,” he told Dyson, saving that this 
needed to be the work of a younger director; also, he added, Kitty was 
growing weary of entertaining. * Oppenheimer told Cherniss that he had 
held off retiring lest people think the mathematicians had driven him out, 
but that he wanted to retire before the current LAS chairman—Leidesdorf, 
who had one more vear to go—did, for an aggressive faction on the board of 
trustees wanted Lewis Strauss as the next director and Leidesdorf would 
prevent that. > Oppenheimer told Yang that he wanted to propose Yang as 
his successor, but Yang declined. Yang was supportive about the decision to 
resign, however, telling him that the timing was right, given Oppenheimer’s 
recent distinction in receiving the Fermi A ward, coupled with the fact that 
his difficulties with the Instirute mathematicians had quieted down. On April 
15, 1965, Oppenheimer informed Leidesdorf that he intended to resign as 
LAS director—but still remain on the facultyv—as of the end of June 1966. * 

Oppenheimer wanted to keep the decision secret until the April 24 
trustees meeting, not wanting to give the impression that the mathemati- 
cians had forced him out. He told Hobson that even if the dav before the 
board meeting the mathematicians somehow heard about it and claimed 
credit for ousting him he would stay on. While the meeting was in progress, 
however, the phone rang: the New York Times, which was checking a story 
they were running about Robert’s resignation. A trustee to whom Robert 
had confidentially mentioned his retirement, General Greenbaum, had 
leaked the news to a Times reporter. 

Oppenheimer told the Timex “There are some things that I have wanted 
to do: physics, of course, which is in a most dramatic and hopeful stage, and 
to seek and understanding, both historical and philosophical of what the 
human sciences have brought to human life. After 18 vears as director of 
the Institute I hope to turn to those questions. unencumbered by important 
problems of institute policy and administration.” * 

Meanwhile, Yang had also decided to leave. to become the Einstein Pro- 
fessor at the new State University of New York being built in Stony Brook, 
Long Island. The double blow worried several people at the Institute, in- 
cluding Dyson, about the future of the physics group at the Institute. * But 
Oppenheimer moved decisively to counter these fears, hiring two voung 


298 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


(under-30) and able physicists. “The danger that the place would simply 
evaporate seems to be removed,” Dyson wrote. “I am impressed with Oppen- 
heimer’s ability to do things fast.”®° 

In Paris, Oppenheimer gave a talk on Einstein at a UNESCO celebra- 
tion on December 13, 1965. The speech is honest and thoughtful, but also 
one of the few talks Oppenheimer gave where the words did not suit the 
occasion and deeply upset the Einstein family, among others. The occasion 
called for polite words about an icon. Oppenheimer did so, but also pointed 
out that in his later years Einstein had been working all by himself on what 
many considered to be a fruitless quest—something many people in the field 
had been saying for years, but never at a public occasion. Also unusually, 
Oppenheimer felt the criticism keenly. When Oppenheimer was then asked 
to speak when the first Einstein stamp was issued in Princeton, he declined, 
saying he did not feel well, and asked Yang to speak for him instead. 

In Paris, too, Oppenheimer learned that the French government-owned 
Administration des Monnaies et Medailles de Paris was striking a medal in 
his honor. The medal was to contain his portrait, with some meaningful 
symbol, to be chosen by Oppenheimer himself, on the reverse. Initially 
Oppenheimer suggested the word “Caritas.” It was revealing choice. Caritas 
represents the Greek agape, and comes into English as “charity,” as in St. 
Paul’s triad of fundamental Christian virtues: faith, hope, and charity. The 
word had also been mentioned by Kennan at the hearing as the kind of 
virtue exercised by those, like Oppenheimer, who exercised compassion 
towards misguided friends. 

But two weeks later, Oppenheimer wrote back insisting on using a for- 
mula instead: 


C (y) = +y*. 


This, too, was an intriguing choice. Many scientists, including Archimedes, 
Bernoulli, Boltzmann, and Fermat, requested that equations or discoveries 
be engraved on their tombstones, This equation expresses a basic relativis- 
tic field theoretic symmetry: the properties of a system composed of a num- 
ber of “elementary” particles and anti-particles can be related to that obtained 
by replacing each of the particles by their anti-particles, and each anti-particle 
by its corresponding particle. The equation would not normally be identified 
with Oppenheimer, though it is related to Oppenheimer’s 1930s work on 
Dirac’s theory. It entails that both electrons and positrons are an intimate 
part of the unified theory; that these polar opposites cannot be separated 
without breaking the symmetry. It is tempting to read it as partly a psycho- 


INSIDER IN EXILE 298 


logical choice—a symbol, proposed by a man with a complex and divided 
personality, of a unity which depends on the presence of polar opposites. 
The artist at the Monnaie added the formula but hesitated to remove the 
word and left the medal unstruck, hoping that on Oppenheimer’s next visit 
to Paris she could persuade him to let it stay.™ 
Shortly after his return from Paris, in December 1965, Robert and Kitty 
left for St. John. 


CHAPTER 27 


CLOAKED MOUNTAIN PEAK 


By the beginning of 1966, Robert Oppenheimer was looking thin and frail. 
Official records often pegged him at 6 feet tall and 100 lbs, though in later 
years he was shortened by an increasing stoop and the three figure weight 
had always been an upper bound. His face looked, one journalist wrote, like 
“that of amoon-man, with eyes that were like craters,” photographs of which 
were haunting and made one “pause and wince.”! Once, friends and colleagues 
had described Oppenheimer as attractive, beautiful—even angelic. Now he 
was haggard. After having compared pictures of him in 1945 and the present, 
a correspondent wrote, “Somebody has given you a terrible beating!”? 

Still, when the Oppenheimers returned from St. John on January 8, 
Robert promptly resumed his usual demanding schedule. He attended the 
week’s physics lunch, and left the following week for a conference at the 
Center for Theoretical Physics at the University of Miami in Coral Gables. 
Colleagues there found him still mentally bright and acerbic, still seeking 
to spot and punish weaknesses in others. At one cocktail party, a brash 
young theorist noticed Oppenheimer sitting uncharacteristically off by him- 
self, seemingly worn out. “You see the old man—he’s dying,” the theorist 
said to his conversational partners. “But I wouldn’t cross him!”? 

Over the holidays, Robert had developed a pronounced cough. At the 
beginning of February, Kitty insisted he see a doctor. A lump was discov- 
ered in his throat. The biopsy revealed cancer. 

The next “Dyson weekly” was full of unfortunate news, including some 
politics surrounding the selection of the Institute’s new director, Carl Kaysen, 


CLOAKED MOUNTAIN PEAK 301 


whose appointment had been announced on February 14. Then: “Yester- 
day [Feb. 16] came the worst bomb-shell of all. Oppenheimer has a throat 
cancer and is in New York having radiation treatment. The doctors say it is 
a very superficial thing, discovered early and with a very good chance of 
being cured. I do not know how much of this to believe... .”* A week later: 
“Last Sunday Kitty O. telephoned me very distraught, saying she did not 
believe the doctors were telling her the truth and asking me whether I could 
find her somebody who would.” 

Dyson put her in touch with Gertrud Szilard, a medical doctor whose 
husband, the physicist Leo Szilard, had been cured of bladder cancer thanks 
to radiation therapy (when Szilard died in 1964 it was of a heart attack). 
Gertrud calmed Kitty down by phone, and dropped in to visit a few days 
later. That helped prepare Kitty for Robert’s three-week hospitalization in 
March. During the stay in New York Hospital, which he grimly referred to 
as “Round 1,” he was able to talk on the phone and receive visitors. After- 
ward, he made frequent, sometimes daily, trips from Princeton by limou- 
sine to New York City for cobalt treatments. 

Dyson again: 

I am now finding out how lonely the Oppenheimers really are in spite of their 

huge numbers of “friends.” I feel oddly more sad in leaving them for these two 

weeks than in leaving Imme [Dyson’s wife] and the children. These are the last 
two weeks of Robert’s radiation treatment, and in this time he must know 
whether it is life or death. 

I have been over three times to talk with Robert and Kitty. Kitty believes, 
perhaps rightly, that I can help Robert to keep alive by keeping alive his interest 
in physics. She feels desperately that he needs to be convinced that he is still 
needed in the community of physicists. On the other hand, I find that Robert is 


just so physically tired from the radiation that my instinct is to hold his hand in 
silence rather than burden him with particles and equations.* 


The radiation therapy ended early in April. Doctors told Oppenheimer 
that the tumor had shrunk dramatically and was barely visible, and pre- 
dicted that it would either disappear entirely or could be removed with a 
minor operation. But his throat remained tender and dry.° He spent a few 
weeks recovering from the effects of the treatment, then began working 
half-days in his office and resuming his routines. 

By June, assisted by a cane, he was back traveling: on June 10-12 toa 
meeting of intellectuals he had helped organize in Mt. Kisco, New York, 
then flying on June 13 to Ohio for Toni’s graduation from Oberlin, then 
on June 14 back to Princeton for commencement exercises, at which he 
received an honorary degree. 


302 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


Robert Oppenheimer 
Doctor of Science, honoris causa 


Honored by three presidents of our country, he holds the nation’s 
supreme award for the advancement of the peaceful application of 
that awesome power in whose unleashing he was so instrumental. 
Combined with the austerity of mind of one of the foremost theoreti- 
cal physicists of his generation is great sensitivity of spirit and a per- 
sonal magnetism that has attracted to him many of the outstanding 
intelligences of the world. Physicist and sailor, philosopher and horse- 
man, linguist and cook, lover of fine wine and better poetry, he has 
added distinction to an already great institute and strengthened the 
Princeton community of learning.’ 


The next day, he was interviewed about his life and the current state of 
physics by Gerald Piel for Newsweek. Oppenheimer still believed in a com- 
ing revolution, saying there was “something cooking” in the way of a break- 
through, though “I do not know how far off it is... .” (“It seems to me that 
we are in for a far greater novelty than the discovery of ‘more fundamental’ 
particles,” he would write a few months later in Physics Today.)* He also men- 
tioned that he was working on a manuscript about the history of recent 
physics. In putting off the hordes of thrilled publishers who then contacted 
him he wrote back, “I have a long time and much work ahead.” 

At the end of June, Oppenheimer stepped down officially as director. The 
Oppenheimers moved out of Olden Manor into the house just vacated by the 
Yangs. The small, art deco home had been built for mathematician Hermann 
Wey] on Institute grounds in the 1930s, bought by the Institute after Weyl’s 
death in 1955, and used to house temporary members until Yang had moved 
in. Robert moved out of the director’s office, and lost Hobson’s assistance as 
his secretary. She had served with Robert as the director’s secretary since 
1954, decided to leave the Institute, but was persuaded by Kaysen to stay on 
for a few months until he could hire a replacement. 

In July, doctors were optimistic and told Oppenheimer that his cancer 
seemed to have disappeared. But his throat hurt, and his normally quiet but 
clear tenor-to-baritone voice had turned raspy and hoarse. “Recovery from 
radiation is very very slow.”® Later that month, the Oppenheimers went 
on their usual summer excursion to St. John. At one evening amongst con- 
tinentals, he complained grimly about his diet of protein powder and milk 
and stared enviously at the lamb chops. Still complaining of “an impossible 


CLOAKED MOUNTAIN PEAK 303 


throat, which lends itself neither to eating or speaking,” Robert visited the 
doctors the day after his return at the end of August.!° The doctors said 
they saw no trace of cancer, though the lab test results would take a few 
days, and attributed his discomfort to the lingering aftereffects of radiation. 
Robert then took off for the annual APS meeting, held that year in Ber- 
keley. There he was reunited—for what would turn out to be the last time— 
with many of his former students from the 1930s, including Robert Serber. 
One evening Edward McMillan had arranged a party for Serber. Oppen- 
heimer failed to appear, but called while the party was in full swing. “He 
asked [Serber recalled] if I could join him and Kitty for dinner in San Fran- 
cisco. I told him it would be difficult to get away, because the party was 
more or less in my honor. But he was rather insistent. I made my apologies 
... and drove over the bridge to meet Oppie and Kitty at Jack’s. Meeting 
him there brought back memories of the 1930s. The food was excellent; I 
still remember that Oppie told me to order a mutton chop. But the mood 
seemed a little subdued. When we left, I walked the Oppenheimers to their 
car. As I was leaning in the window to say goodnight, Oppie told me that 
he had just heard from the hospital that his throat cancer had recurred.”" 
In October the cancer was found to have spread from his throat to his 
palate, tongue, and eustachian tube. It was considered inoperable, and he 
was returned to radiation therapy, though this time not with cobalt but 
with a betatron, which produces fast and precisely tunable electrons. “What 
the doctors say is that cancers have responded favorably to this treatment, 
but everybody knows that reradiation with a still ulcerated throat is no 
great joy. It is not got bad yet, but I cannot be very sure of the future.”” 
One doctor counseled him that it was time to think “in terms of being the 
exception to collective statistics.”» By November he was telling friends 
that he has “no confidence at all of enjoying good health in the future.” 
Reluctantly, and at the doctor’s orders, Oppenheimer began to cancel 
long-planned and warmly anticipated trips: to Providence, Rhode Island, in 
November, where he was supposed to chair a session of a theoretical phys- 
ics conference; to Lisbon, Trieste, and Paris in December—even the winter 
St. John’s trip. “We are tied to Memorial Hospital and the betatron,” he 
wrote a friend.'® One day Yang dropped in. “I had planned to urge him to 
consider writing something, a kind of last testimonial, about the atomic 
bomb and mankind,” Yang wrote later. “But I found him so frail physically 
that I did not bring up the subject.” 
For the first time in ten years, the Oppenheimers spent Christmas and 
New Year’s in Princeton. Kitty asked Hobson to secure a gun for her “so 


304 = J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


that Robert could put an end to it himself if the brain were affected.”” 


Early in the new year, just before embarking on a cruise to London on 
vacation, Hobson paid a final visit to the Oppenheimers. She found Kitty 
unbearable, trying to “force over-expensive presents” on her and “intoxi- 
cated, as usual.” Shepherding Hobson to the door for the final time, Robert 
said to her, “I hope that one day you will see this, too, as a joke.”8 

Robert told colleagues that he still hoped to see them at the Coral Gables 
conference, to be held toward the end of January 1967. On January 12 he 
sent a letter to the conference organizer: “I cannot now with any candor 
pretend that I can come, or even if I come, be of any use to anyone or any 
comfort. You should make your plans knowing that I cannot be there.”” 
The word “now” revealed that Oppenheimer had become convinced that 
his days were numbered. He began to drop hints to this effect to friends and 
colleagues. At his last Tuesday lunch he made two parting remarks to Sam 
Treiman: “(1) he’d been looking at post doc applications and thought he 
might not be around when the selectees arrived on the scene; (2) ‘Sam, don’t 
smoke.” Oppenheimer started to make arrangements for his memorial 
service, contacting the Juilliard String Quartet, a group much beloved by 
physicists. Prior to the group’s formation, several of its members had played 
during the war for Manhattan Project physicists in Chicago, and after its 
formation it had visited the Institute, and on one occasion, at Einstein’s 
home, even recruited Einstein himself to join them on violin. 

On January 27, T. D. Lee went to the Institute to give a colloquium on 
“Neutral Vector Mesons and the Hadronic Electromagnetic Current.”# In 
an almost unprecedented departure from routine, Oppenheimer failed to 
appear at Lee’s talk and stayed home. He told Lee that he was not feeling 
well, but wanted to discuss the paper and invited him over to his house. Lee 
found Oppenheimer at his desk, reading through the preprint—which was 
lengthy and highly technical—and the two launched into a discussion of it. 
After half an hour Lee had 10 leave for a dinner engagement, and Oppen- 
heimer stood up and escorted him to the door. “He seemed frail but not ill,” 
Lee recalled, “though when you talk physics you tend to forget.” Then, just 
before parting, he asked Lee a personal favor—to look after Toni in the 
future—in a way that implied Oppenheimer knew his death was imminent.” 

Two weeks later, Oppenheimer attended a faculty meeting at which a 
new (nonpermanent) Institute member was hired. Dyson: “Poor Oppen- 
heimer is coming close to his end. He insisted on coming to this faculty 
meeting but he can barely speak any more. We were all very polite and told 
him how glad we were that he came; but really it is a torture for everybody 


CLOAKED MOUNTAIN PEAK 305 


to watch him sit there speechless and suffering. His doctors have now given 
him up and we can only hope for a quick end.”” 

The last faculty meeting he attended was on February 15, 1967: “After 
making the supreme effort to come to our faculty meeting on Wednesday, 
he went home to bed so exhausted that he slept almost continuously until 
Saturday. On Saturday his sleep became gradually deeper and nobody could 
tell just when he died. After hearing this, one must admire the extraordinary 
will-power and courage that kept him going until Wednesday. He not only 
came to the meeting on Wednesday but he also had done the home-work for 
it, which meant reading and remembering a big box-full of papers.”” 

His death was announced in the papers on Sunday morning, as having 
taken place the previous day, February 18. 

A memorial service was quickly arranged for the following Saturday, 
February 25. The event began with lunch for invited guests at Olden Manor, 
Oppenheimer’s home for almost 20 years. The presence of so many figures 
from Oppenheimer’s career, including former AEC chairman David 
Lilienthal, lawyer Lloyd Garrison, political colleague Arthur Schlesinger, 
Jr., and others, made the event, Pais recorded in his diary, seem “in the style 
of the epilogue.” 

After lunch, the group moved to Alexander Hall on the Princeton cam- 
pus for the memorial service. A bitter cold spared the expected crowd from 
overflowing the space. Several inelegant details revealed the event’s hasty 
organization—such as the way a big set of speakers, a podium, and setup for 
a string quartet were awkwardly crammed in a room for academic lectures. 
Pais’s diary: “The Stravinsky piece was played from a tape. It was extremely 
eerie—an empty stage but with the chairs and music stands for a quartet— 
who were to play Beethoven later on—a lectern without speaker—and the 
new sounds of a Dies Irae coming from a big loudspeaker.” 

“J. Robert Oppenheimer did more than any other man to make Ameri- 
can theoretical physics great,” Hans Bethe began, the first of the three speak- 
ers, and Bethe continued with an overview of Oppenheimer’s career in 
science and as a government adviser. Henry DeWolf Smyth (who never 
warmed to Oppenheimer), spoke of casting the sole vote among the five 
AEC commissioners in favor of reinstating Oppenheimer’s security clear- 
ance, during the height of the McCarthy epoch. “It was a horrible period in 
American history, and we paid horribly for it.” 

Concluding speaker George Kennan was the most eloquent, and in short 
remarks tried to characterize Oppenheimer’s ambitions and his acute disap- 
pointment when these were frustrated. While passionately desiring “to be 


306 J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


useful in averting the catastrophes to which the development of the weap- 
ons of mass destruction threatened to lead,” Kennan said, Oppenheimer 
knew that it was “as an American, and through the medium of this national 
community to which he belonged, that he saw his greatest possibilities for 
pursuing these ambitions.” Shortly after the 1954 hearing, Kennan had asked 
Oppenheimer why he hadn’t left the country, noting that he would be 
welcomed in “a hundred academic centers” around the globe. “Damn it, I 
happen to love this country,” Oppenheimer had replied, tears in his eyes. 
Kennan continued, 
The truth is that the U.S. Government never had a servant more devoted at 
heart than this one, in the sense of wishing to make a constructive contribution; 
and I know of nothing more tragic than the series of mistakes (in part, no doubt, 
his own, but in what small part!) that made it impossible for him to render this 
contribution—that obliged him to spend the last decade and a half of his life 
eating out his heart in frustration over the consciousness that the talents he 
knew himself to possess, once welcomed and used by the official establishment 
of his country to develop the destructive possibilities of nuclear science, were 
rejected when it came to the development of the great positive ones he believed 
that science to possess. There was, I suspect, no conviction he held more dearly— 
none that meant more to him—than the belief that the science of nuclear phys- 
ics harboured possibilities for communication and understanding among men as 
exciting in their way as its destructive possibilities were terrifying. It was one of 


the great disappointments of his life that he was permitted at the official level to 
contribute so greatly to the one, not at all to the other. 


Kennan also tried, briefly and hesitatingly, to shed light on Oppenheimer’s 
personality. “[H]e was also a man who had a deep yearning for friendship, 
for companionship, for the warmth and richness of human communica- 
tion. The arrogance which to many appeared to be a part of his personality 
masked in reality an overpowering desire to bestow and receive affection. 
Neither circumstances nor at times the asperities of his own temperament 
permitted the gratification of this need in a measure remotely approaching 
its intensity; and in this too lay a portion of that strong element of tragedy 
which all who knew him sensed, I think, in his situation.”?° 

Not long after the service, Kitty took Robert’s ashes to St. John. She and 
Toni, accompanied by Erva and John Denham, went out on the Denham’s 
boat and scattered the ashes by Carvel Rock, the dramatic up-cropping of 
granite blocks that the Oppenheimers had seen every day from their hut, 
past the mouth of Hawksnest Bay.” Years later, Kitty’s ashes would be 
scattered there. 

Meanwhile, the Monnaie de Paris struck the Oppenheimer medal with 
both the word “Caritas”—his initial, and then rejected, choice—and the 


CLOAKED MOUNTAIN PEAK 307 


equation C(y) = +y%, his final choice, expressing a unity that depends on 
the presence of polar opposites.”” 


The American Physical Society held a memorial service at their April meet- 
ing in Washington, D.C. Speakers addressed different aspects of Oppen- 
heimer’s career: Serber “The Early Years,” Weisskopf “The Los Alamos 
Years,” Pais “The Princeton Period,” Glenn Seaborg “Public Service and 
Human Contributions.” 

Only Rabi ventured to step back to make direct comments (already quoted 
above by Pais) on the connections, good and bad, between Oppenheimer’s 
life and his work. 

In an unpublished review of the book made from these speeches,” Dyson 
wrote that “the real personality of Oppenheimer remains hidden.” Indeed, 
Dysort continued, portions of the book “remind me uncomfortably of the 
testimony of the defense witnesses who failed to convince the judges in 
1954;” that is, testimonials by eminences about Oppenheimer’s greatness 
and virtue, which were rather simplistic and put “Oppenheimer upon so 
high a pedestal that it was easy for the prosecution in the end to knock him 
down.” Dyson mentioned a comment Oppenheimer himself had made about 
Einstein in his controversial talk about Einstein: “I thought that it might be 
useful . . . to start to dispel the clouds of myth and to see the great mountain 
peak that these clouds hide. As always the myth has its charms; but the 
truth is far more beautiful.”*°> Mt. Oppenheimer, Dyson was suggesting, 
remains similarly cloaked, and the effort to chart its peaks was threatened 
not only by mists but also by unwary surveyors. 

This was not all their fault. Oppenheimer himself did little to dispel the 
clouds of myth. Despite his seemingly candid remark in Geneva in 1964 
regarding his life being an open book, he did not act, either to himself or 
others, as though this were the case. He left no personal diary, no autobiog- 
raphy. He repeatedly—and clearly deliberately—frustrated efforts by inter- 
viewers to elicit personal feelings and reflections about what he’d been 
through. He sought successfully to prevent performance in the United States 
of a play based on his life. He would only speak, as in the words of the 1945 
farewell speech at Los Alamos, of “what has happened to us” rather than 
“what has happened to me.” 


Kennan’s reference, at Oppenheimer’s memorial service, to “that strong 
element of tragedy . . . in his situation” refers to more than the hearing, 
when he was abruptly, traumatically, and publicly removed from the realm 


308 =J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: A LIFE 


in which he was flourishing. It also refers to his failure to achieve in physics 
what his capacity seemed to promise. In his introduction, Pais called this, 
rather than the hearing, Oppenheimer’s real tragedy. And in another note, 
Pais wrote of Oppenheimer, “His tragedy is that he was almost a genius.””! 
Yet a final tragic element of Oppenheimer’s life is the way he evoked the 
promise of more than he delivered. He gave the appearance, as Weisskopf 
once put it, of representing “the spirit and the philosophy of all that for 
which we are living,” but also gave the appearance of, to some extent, hav- 
ing let us, and himself, down. Something about J. Robert Oppenheimer 
indeed made us want mermaids. 

Oppenheimer provided a few tantalizing remarks in which he may have 
referred to what he felt about what he had been though, but he puts them, 
of course, into the mouths of others while keeping a safe distance. The 
following remark about Galileo made in 1964, for instance, surely invites 
allegory: “The later days, when he lived in some fear and suffered the great 
indignity of his abjuration, and alienation from many of his friends, were 
certainly sad years.” But despite all that, Oppenheimer continued, Galileo 
continued to display to the end “a quality which I believe to be true of 
science in the making: a great sunniness in the act of finding out new things, 
things that he had not quite expected, things that reflected deeply on beliefs 
long held, and that pointed both in hope and in mystery to the future.” 

The remark is classic Oppenheimer, and not only for the way it suggests 
an implausible complementarity between suffering and joy, past and present; 
nor for its manufactured grandeur and simulated sincerity; nor for the ex- 
pectations it creates of personal revelation without satisfaction. It is also the 
way its note of depth sounds just a little hollow, and again a note of opti- 
mism that rings just a little false, so that it seems less a personal expression 
than a statement issued by a public custody. But Oppenheimer was acute 
enough to have heard these notes himself. 

When thinking of a literary analogue for Oppenheimer’s life, Pais thought 
not of tragedy, but of Henry James’s sentimental novel The Beast in the Jungle. 
Its protagonist, John Marcher, lives his life keeping a distance from those 
around him, in the belief that he has been selected for some prodigious 
event—in his dreams it takes the form of an encounter with a beast lying in 
wait—only to find, in the end, that the event in question has already taken 
place, which thanks to his aloofness has passed him by. This aspect may 
also be why, when Pais interviewed Melba Phillips, she suggested that he 
read J. P. Marquand’s book T/e Late George Apley, whose eponymous hero, 
born into wealth and privilege, takes himself far too seriously and never 


CLOAKED MOUNTAIN PEAK 309 


quite lives up to his own expectations. Both of these books resonate with 
important aspects of Oppenheimer’s life, but neither are tragedies. 

In multiple ways, then, Oppenheimer’s life both attracts and yet repels 
the characterization “tragic.” It’s a tragedy without a tragic hero; or, to put 
it another way that paraphrases Pais, the tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer 
was that he was a/mosta tragic figure. 


In a photocopy of a few pages on which he had written “For Epilog,” Pais 
marked the following lines from Sanskrit, that Oppenheimer translated 
himself and recited to Vannevar Bush two nights before Alamogordo: 

In battle, in the forest, at the precipice in the mountains 

On the dark great sea, in the midst of javelins and arrows, 


In sleep, in confusion, in the depths of shame, 
The ‘good deeds a man has done before defend him.” 


And at the eulogy which Pais delivered for Oppenheimer, Pais said, “Any 
single one of the following contributions would have marked Oppenheimer 
out as a pre-eminent scientist: his own research work in physics; his influ- 
ence as a teacher; his leadership at Los Alamos; the growth of the Institute 
for Advanced Study as a leading center of theoretical physics under his di- 
rectorship; and his efforts to promote a more common understanding of 
science. When all is combined we honor Oppenheimer as a great leader of 
science. When all is interwoven with the dramatic events that centered 
around him we remember Oppenheimer as one of the most remarkable 
personalities of this century.”™ 


NOTES 


FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS 


AEC 

Am. J. Phys. 
Am. Scientist 
Am. Scholar 
Ann. d. Phys. 
AP 
Astrophys. J. 


Biogr. Mem. F. R. S. 


Bull. At. Scientists 
CUOHO 

Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 
IAS 


IMJRO 


J. Appl. Phys. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
JCAE 

J. Gen. Physiology 
JRO 

LC 

Nature 
Naturw. 

NBA 

O. 

O. FBI 


Atomic Energy Commission 

Amencan Journal sf Physics 

American Scientist 

American Scholar 

Annalen der Physik 

Abraham Pais 

Astrophysical Journal 

Biographical Memeirs of Fellows of tre Royal Soctes; 

Bullezin of the Atomic Saentists 

Columbia University Oral History Office 

Deutsche Physikalische Gesel ischaft 

Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton 
University 

In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transarip+ of 
Hearing Before Personnel Secuntty Beara, United States 
Ajomic Energy Commission 

Journal of Applied Physs-s 

Journal of Chemical Physics 

Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 

Journal of General Physiology 

J. Robert Oppenheimer 

Library of Congress 

Nature 

Naturnaissenschaften 

Neils Bohr Archive, Copenhagen 

Oppenheimer 

Oppenheimer FBI File 


312 «NOTES 


Phys. Rev. Physical Review 

Phys. Today Physics Today 

Political Sci. Quarterly Political Science Quarterly 

Proc. Cambr. Phil. Soc. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 

Proc. Nat. Ac. Sci. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 

Proc. Phys.-Math. Soc. Japan — Proceedings of the Physics-Mathematical Society of Japan 

Proc. Roy. Soc. Proceedings of the Royal Society 

Progr. Theor. Phys. Progress of Theoretical Physics 

Quart. Appl. Math. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics 

Rev. Mod. Phys. Review of Modern Physics 

SAC Strategic Air Command 

Sci. Am. Scientific American 

UNAEC United Nations Atomic Energy Commission 

Zeitschr. f. Phys. Zeitschrift fir Physik 


Abraham Pais employed a unique system of citation. When citing works that have 
been referred to in an earlier note, his notes will cite the number of that note rather 
than the title or author of the work. Thus Note 7 refers the reader to Note 5, 
which cites Robert Oppenheimer, Letters and Recollections. Cross-references in the text use 
the same method. Pais left the manuscript incomplete at the time of his death; in 
preparing the book for publication Ida Nicolaisen and Robert P. Crease made the 
decision to preserve the notes as Pais had left them, emended as necessary, because 
of the risk of introducing errors by attempting to revise and renumber every note. 
The reader will find that the notes are not always numbered consecutively and that 
there are occasions in which a numbered note appears with a letter (e.g., note 26a). 
These characteristics reflect the deletion or interpolation of notes as the text was 
prepared for publication. 


1. K. Darrow, Phys. Rev. 70, 784, 1946. 

2. A. Pais, Phys. Rev. 70, 796, 1946. 

3. O., Phys. Rev. 77, 460, 1947. 

4. T.S. Kuhn, interview with O., November 18, 1963, NBA. 

5. Robert Oppenheimer, Letters and Recollections, p. 2, where Frank Oppenheimer is 
quoted, A. K. Smith and C. Weiner, eds., Harvard University Press, Cam- 
bridge 1980. Reprinted by Stanford University Press, 1995. 

6. P. Michelmore, The Swift Years, p. 142, Dodd, Mead and Co., New York 1949. 

7. Ref. 5, p. 5. 

8. P. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds, p. 11, Ariel Books, Lon- 
don 1980. Reprinted by BBC Books, 1980. 

9. Ref. 5, p. 6. 

10. See H. Bethe, Biogr. Mem. F. R. S., 74, 391, 1968. 
11. I. Rabi, in Oppenheimer, p. 4, Scribner’s, New York 1969. 


NOTES 313 


. M. Born and O., Ann. d. Phys. 43, 27, 1927. 
. O, Nature, 118, 711, 1926. SeealsoO., Naturw. 74, 1282, 1926; O., Zeitschr. 


f. Phys. 47, 268, 1927. 


. T.S. Kuhn, interview with O., November 20, 1963, NBA. 

. O., letter to F. Fergusson, November 14, 1926, Ref. 5, p. 101. 

. T.S. Kuhn, interview with P. A. M. Dirac, May 14, 1963, NBA. 
. M. Born, My Lif, p. 229, Taylor & Francis, London 1978. 

. Ibid., p. 233. 

. Ref. 5, p. 86. 

. Ibid., p. 91. 

. Ibid., p. 94. 

. Ref. 8 p. 18. 

. Ref. 5, p. 110. 

. O., Proc. Nat. Ac. Sci. 73, 800, 1927. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 37, 66, 1927. 

. Tbid., 349. 

. QO., Proc. Nat. Ac. Sci., 14, 261, 363, 1928 (the quotation in the text is from 


the second of these). See also O., Phys. Rev. 37, 914; 32, 361, 1928. 


. T. Kuhn, interview with G. E. Uhlenbeck, March 30, 1962. 
. O., letter to H. Casimir, November 29, 1946, copy in my personal files. 
. P. Ehrenfest, letter to W. Pauli, Novernber 26, 1928, Wolfgang Pauli, Scientific 


Correspondence, Vol. 1, p. 477, Springer, New York 1979. 


. P. Ehrenfest and O., Phys. Rev. 37, 333, 1931. 

. W. Pauli, letter to P. Ehrenfest, February 15, 1929, ref. 37, p. 486. 
. O., Zeitschr. f. Phys. 55, 725, 1929. 

. W. Pauli, letter to A. Sommerfeld, May 16, 1929, ref. 37, p. 500. 

. W. Heisenberg and W. Pauli, Zeitschr. f. Phys. 56, 1, 1929. 

. W. Heisenberg and W. Pauli, Zeitschr. f. Phys. 59, 168, 1930. 

. W. Pauli, letter to N. Bohr, July 17, 1929, ref. 37, p. 512. 

. W. Heisenberg, letter to W. Pauli, July 20, 1929, ref. 37, p. 514. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 35, 461, 1930. 

. R. Serber, ref. 11, p. 11. 

. R. Serber with R. Crease, Peace and War, p. 42, Columbia University Press, 


New York 1998. 


. W. Lamb, in The Birth of Particle Physics, p. 311, L. Brown and L. Hoddeson, 


eds., Cambridge University Press 1985. 


. R. Serber in ref. 47, p. 16. 
. O., Phys. Rev. 35, 562, 1930. 
. P. A.M. Dirac, in History of Twentieth-Century Physics, p. 144, C. Weiner, ed., 


Academic Press, New York 1977. 


. O., Phys. Rev. 35, 939, 1930. 

. O.andH. Hall, Phys. Rev. 38, 57, 71, 589, 1931. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 30, 725, 1931. 

. O.and F. Carlson, Phys. Rev. 39, 864, 1932. 

. O.and F. Carlson, Phys. Rev. 47, 763, 1932. 

. See e.g. A. Pais, Inward Bound, Chapter 14, section (b), Oxford University 


Press, New York 1986. 


. See ref. 59, section (d). 


J. Chadwick, Nature 7129, 312, 1932. 
J. Carlson and O., Phys. Rev. 47, 763, 1932. 


NOTES 


. C.D. Anderson, in Science News Letter of December 19, 1931. See also Sci- 


ence 76, 238, 1932; Phys. Rev. 43, 491, 1933. 


. O. and M. S. Plessett, Phys. Rev. 44, 53, 1933. 
. W. Heitler and F. Sauter, Nature 732, 892, 1933. See also E. Fermi and G. E. 


Uhlenbeck, Phys. Rev. 44, 510, 1933; H. Bethe and W. Heitler, Proc. Roy. 
Soc. A146, 83, 1934, footnote on p. 108. 


. L. Nedelsky and O., Phys. Rev. 44, 948, 1933. See also L. Nedelsky and O., 


Phys. Rev. 45, 136, 1934. 


. L. Nedelsky and O., Phys. Rev. 45, 283, 1934. 

. W.L. Severinghaus, Phys. Rev. 45, 284, 1934. 

. W. Furry and O., Phys. Rev. 45, 343, 903, 1934. 

. P. A.M. Dirac, Proc. Cambr. Phil. Soc. 30, 150, 1934. 

. R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 48, 49, 1935. 

. E. Uehling, Phys. Rev. 48, 55, 1935. 

. A. Wightman and S. Schweber, Phys. Rev. 98, 812, 1955. 
. C. Lauritsen and O., Phys. Rev. 46, 80, 1934. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 47, 144, 1935. 

. Ibid., 146. 

. Ibid., 44. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 43, 380, 1933. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 47, 845, 1935. See a/so O. and M. Phillips, Phys. Rev. 48, 500, 


1935. 


. O.and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 50, 391, 1936. 

. G.andL. Nordheim, O. and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 57, 1037, 1937. 
. F. Kalckar, O. and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 52, 273, 1937. 

. Ibid., 279. 

. O.and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 53, 636, 1938. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 50, 389, 1936. See also ref. 48, p. 47. 

. F, Carlson and O., Phys. Rev. 57, 220, 1937. 

. H. Snyder, Phys. Rev. 53, 960, 1938. 

. R.Serber, Phys. Rev. 54, 317, 1938. 

. W. Heisenberg, Zeitschr. f. Phys. 107, 533, 1936. 

. W. Heisenberg, Verl. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 78, 50, 1937. 

. S. Neddermeyer and C. D. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 57, 884, 1937. See also J. 


Street and E. Stevenson, Phys. Rev. 57, 1005, 1937. 


. O.andR. Serber, Phys. Rev. 57, 1113, 1937. 

. H. Yukawa, Proc. Phys.-Math. Soc. Japan 77, 48, 1935. 

. Ref. 48, p. 44. 

. C.F. Powell, et al. Nature 759, 694, 1947. 

. O., H. Snyder, and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 57, 75, 1940. 

. R. Christy and S. Kusaka, Phys. Rev. 59, 405, 414, 1941. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 59, 462, 1941. 

. R. Christy and O., Phys. Rev. 60, 159, 1941; See a/so O. and E. Nelson, Phys. 


Rev. 60, 159, 1941; 67, 202, 1942. 


. O., H. Lewis and S. Wouthuysen, Phys. Rev. 73, 127, 1948. 

. O., Phys. Rev. 59, 908, 1941. 

. O.and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 60, 150, 1941. 

. O. and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 56, 1066, 1959; See also O., Phys. Rev. 60, 


164, 1941. 


. O. and R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 54, 540, 1938. 


NOTES 315 


L. D. Landau, Nature 747, 333, 1938. 
R. Tolman, Phys. Rev. 55, 364, 1939. 
O. and G. Volkoff, Phys. Rev. 55, 374, 1939. 


. For further details see C. Misner, K. Thorne, and J. Wheeler, Gravitation, p. 


627, Freeman, San Francisco 1973. 


. O.and H. Snyder, Phys. Rev. 56, 455, 1939. 
. J. Wheeler, Am. Scholar 37, 248, 1968. See a/so J. Wheeler, Am. Scientist 56, 


1, 1968. 


. S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology, Chapter 14, section 5, Wiley, New York 


1972. 


. Ref. 5, p. 144. 

. Ibid., p. 145. 

. Ibid., p. 146. 

. In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer, p. 8, U.S. Government printing office, 


Washington, D.C. 1954. Reprinted by MIT Press 1971. 


. Ref. 48, p. 27. 

. Ref. 5, p. 138. 

. Ibid., p. 149. 

. Ibid., p. 183. 

. Ref. 8, p. 35. 

. Ref. 48, p. 86. 

. Ref. 115, pp. 8-10. 
. Ref. 48, pp. 59-60. 
. Ref. 8, pp. 39-40. 
. Ref. 115, p. 11. 

. O. Hahn and F. Strassmann, Naturw. 27, 11, 1939. See a/so Engl. transl. by 


H. Graetner, Am. J. Phys. 32,9, 1964. 


. G. Seaborg, ref. 11, p. 47. 

. O., letter to W. Fowler, January 28, 1939, ref. 5, p. 207. 

. O, ref. 115, p. 11. 

. L.R. Groves, Now It Can Be Told, p. 62, Harper and Row, New York 1962. 
. N. P. Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, p. 144, Simon and Schuster, New York 


1968. 


. Ref. 132, p. 63. 

. O., ref. 115, p. 12. 

. D. Hawkins, Toward Trini, Chapter 1, Tomash, San Francisco 1983. 

. Ref. 5, p. 261. 

. V. Weisskopf, ref. 11, p. 23. 

. H. Bethe, Science 755, 1082, 1967. 

. R. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, Simon and Schuster, New York 1986. 
. Ref. 133 pp. 233-240. 

. O. Frisch, quoted in ref. 8, p. 161. 

. Ref. 8, p. 162. 

. Ref. 133, p. 241. 

. O., ref. 115, p. 14. 

. Ref. 133, p. 242. 

. Ref. 140, p. 613. 

. “Notes on the Interim Committee meeting of May 31, 1945.” Reprinted in 


M. Sherwin, A World Destroyed, p. 295, A. Knopf, New York 1975. 


. Ref. 148, p. 304-5. 


NOTES 


. Ref. 115, p. 34. 

. Ref. 8, p. 167. 

. The letter is reproduced in full in ref. 5, p. 293. 

. Quoted in ref. 8, p. 173. 

. Quoted in ref. 133, p. 254. 

. Ref. 5, pp. 310-11. 

. Ibid., pp. 315-25. 

. Ref. 115, p. 15. 

. New York Times, January 21, 1923. See also New York Times, March 13, 1924. 
. A. Flexner, An Autobiography, Simon and Schuster, New York 1960. 

. A. Flexner, The American College, Century, New York 1908. 

. A. Flexner, Medical Education in the United States and Canada: A Report to the Carnegie 


Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, Arno Press, New York 1972. 


. New York Times, May 28, 1928. 

. A. Flexner, Universities: American, English, German, Oxford University Press 1930. 
. New York Times, June 8, 1930. 

. Ibid., October 12, 1930. 

. Ibid., April 19, 1955. 

. IAS, minutes of October 10, 1932. 

. P. Frank, Einstein, His Life and Times, pp. 178, 266, A. Knopf, New York 1947. 
. Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, October 11, 1937. 

. The Rockefeller Foundation Annual Report for 1936, pp. 46, 290, 351, 379. 
- Most of my information on the Gest Library comes from Hu Shih, Princeton 


University Library Chronicle 75, Spring 1954. Reprinted in 1967. 


. A. Flexner, letter to L. Bamberger, July 1, 1933. 

. Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, January 27, 1936. 

. W. Riefler and O. Veblen, letter to A. Flexner, March 14, 1936. 
. A. Flexner, Harper's Magazine, October 1939. 

. Chairman, letter to Flexner, February 22, 1939. 

. A. Flexner, letter to Professor Riefler, May 10, 1939. 

. Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, May 22, 1939. 

. A. Flexner, letter to Trustee Leidesdorf, June 29, 1939. 

. Earle, letter to Flexner, June 9, 1939. 

. Earle, letter to W. O. Aydelotte, June 28, 1939. 

. Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, October 9, 1939. 

. Aydelotte, cable to Flexner, October 18, 1939. 

. Flexner, letter to Aydelotte, October 17, 1939. 

. Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, January 22, 1940. 

. A. Flexner, I Remember, p. 397, Simon and Schuster, New York 1940. 
. Newark Evening News, March 13, 1944. 

. Newark Sunday Call, March 12, 1944. 

. New York Herald Tribune, July 27, 1944. 

. IAS Bulletin No. 11, March 1945. 

. A. Einstein, letter to W. O. Aydelotte, December 24, 1941. 

. O. Veblen, letter to Aydelotte, January 1, 1940. 

. Veblen, memorandum to Policy Committee, November 8, 1944. 
. Aydelotte, penciled note of meeting with Trustee Douglas, November 20, 


1944. 


. Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, January 19, 1945. 
. IAS Bulletin No. 12, 1945-1946, October 1946. 


194. 


195. 


196. 
197. 
198. 
199. 
200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 


204. 
205. 
206. 
207. 


208. 
209. 
210. 
211. 
212. 
213. 


214. 
215. 


216. 
217. 
218. 


219. 
220. 
221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 
225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 


235. 


NOTES 317 


For the history of this computer see my essay on von Neumann in A. Pais, 
The Genius of Science, Oxford University Press, New York 2000. 

For obituaries of Flexner see New York Times and Washington Post, both on 
September 22, 1959. 

Trustee Moe to Faculty, October 26, 1945. 

Alexander, Earle, and Panofsky to Faculty, February 4, 1946. 

Minutes, School of Mathematics, September 25, 1945. 

Ref. 115, p. 15. 

New York Times, October 18, 1945. 

Ibid., October 14, 1945. 

Ref. 8, pp. 177-78. 

R. Hewlett and O. Anderson, The New World, 1939-1946, p. 647, Pennsylva- 
nia State University Press, University Press 1969. 

Private communication from Roger Meade, Los Alamos archivist. 

The text of the McMahon bill is reproduced in ref. 372a, p. 714. 

New York Times, August 2, 1946. 

Ibid., October 29, 1946. See a/so L. Strauss, Men and Decisions, pp. 210-13, 
Doubleday, New York 1962. 

New York Times, December 13, 1946. 

Ibid., December 23, 1946. 

Aydelotte, letter to Pais, December 6, 1946. 

Veblen, letter to Strauss, April 12, 1946. 

Earle, letter to Strauss, November 4, 1946. 

Strauss has recalled that he did so during a meeting with Oppenheimer at 
San Francisco Airport, ref. 207, pp. 270, 271. 

Minutes, Trustees’ special meeting, April 1, 1947. 

Memorandum by Einstein and Wey] to the School of Mathematics, meet- 
ings February 2, 1945; March 5, 1945. 

Ref. 115, pp. 26, 27. 

Aydelotte, letter to O., April 5, 1947. 

John F. Fulton Papers, Manuscript and Archives Division, Yale Library, 
New Haven; Diary entry, March 15, 1947. 

Lloyd Garrison, summation, ref. 115, p. 971. 

Patterson, letter to Lilienthal, March 25, 1947, ref. 115, p. 377. 

Groves, letter to Patterson, March 24, 1947, ref. 115, p. 179. 

Conant, letter to Lilienthal, March 27, 1947, ref. 115, p. 378. 

Ref. 115, p. 425. 

Minutes, Faculty Standing Committee, September 29, 1947. 

Minutes, Trustees’ meeting, December 16, 1947. 

G. Kennan, in Foreign Affairs, July 1947. 

New York Times Magazine, April 18, 1948. 

Time Magazine, November 8, 1948. 

Minutes, Faculty Meeting, March 8, 1949. 

O., letter to A. Pais, April 20, 1949. 

“Director’s Report for 1948-1953,” published by the Institute, 1954. 

O., letter to H. Marshall Chadwell, September 26, 1949. 

P. Morrison, J. Appl. Phys. 78, 133, 1947. 

A. Pais, Inward Bound, Chapters 18, 19, Oxford Universitiy Press, New York 
1986. 

O., in Science in the University: by the Members of the Faculties of the University of 
California, p. 23, University of California Press, Berkeley 1944. 


318 


NOTES 


. O., with H. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 70, 451, 1946. 

. O., with S. Epstein and R. J. Finkelstein, Phys. Rev. 73, 1140, 1948. 

. O., Rev. Mod. Phys. 27, 34, 1949. 

. O., with W. Arnold, J. Gen. Physiology 33, 423, 1950. 

. O., Rev. Mod. Phys. 28, 1, 1956. 

. O., Science 89, 335, 1939. 

. O.,Sci. Am., September 1950, p. 21. 

: They were S. Epstein, R. Finkelstein, L. Foldy, H. Lewis, and S. Wouthnizen. 


All these were to become full professors at various universities. 


. O., Knowledge and the Structure of Culture, The Helen Kenyon Lecture [no. 16], 


Vassar.College, Poughkeepsie, New York 1958. 


. F. J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 73, 1272, 1948. 

. D. Weeks and J. James, Eccentrics, Orion Books, London 1966. 

. F.J. Dyson, Disturbing the Universe, Harper and Row, New York 1979. 

. F. J. Dyson, Phys. Today 42, February 1989, p. 32. 

. F.J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 75, 486, 1736, 1949. 

. F.J. Dyson, Values at War: Selected Tanner Lectures on the Nuclear Crisis, University 


of Utah Press, Salt Lake City 1983. 


. F.J. Dyson, Weapons and Hope, Harper and Row, New York 1984. 
. F.J. Dyson, Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1986. 


J. Dyson, Infinite in All Directions, Harper and Row, New York 1988. 
J. Dyson, From Eros to Gaia, Pantheon Books, New York 1992. 
J. Dyson, Foreign Affairs, April 1960, p. 457. 


Yang, J. Chem. Phys. 73, 66, 1945. 
f. 256, p. 305. 
N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 74, 764, 1948. 


F. 
F. 
F. 
. C.N. Yang, Selected Papers, pp. 3, 4, Freeman, San Francisco 1983. 
C.N. 
Re 
C. 


. C.N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 77, 242, 722, 1950. 

. C.N. Yang and J. Tiomno, Phys. Rev. 79, 495, 1950. 

. Minutes, Executive Committee, February 21, 1950. 

. Minutes, School of Mathematics, April 2, 1952. 

. C.N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 85, 808, 1952. 

. [Pais refers to the Ising model, a model of ordering of atoms in magnets— 


first in one dimension, then extended to two—developed by Ernst Ising, 
that has frequently captured the attention of theorists—RPC] 


. T.D. Lee, Astrophys. J. 177, 625, 1950. 
. T.D.Lee, Phys. Rev. 77, 842, 1950. See a/so'T. D. Lee, Astrophys. J. 172, 561, 


1950; T. D. Lee, J. Appl. Phys. 22, 524, 1952; T. D. Lee, Quart. Appl. Math. 
70, 69, 1952. 


. T.D. Lee, M. Rosenbluth, and C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 75, 905, 1949. 
. T.D. Lee and R. Christian, Phys. Rev. 94, 1760, 1954. See also T. D. Lee, R. 


Christian, and R. Friedman, Phys. Rev. 100, 1494, 1955. 


. E. Henley and T. D. Lee, Phys. Rev. 101, 1536, 1956. 
. T. D. Lee, F. Low, and D. Pines, Phys. Rev. 90, 297, 1953. See also T. D. Lee 


and D. Pines, Phys. Rev. 92, 883, 1953. 


. T.D. Lee, Phys. Rev. 95, 1329, 1954. 

. T.D. Lee and C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 104, 254, 1956. 

. S. Tomonaga in Les Prix Nobel en 1965, p. 151, Norstedt, Stockholm 1966. 

. For more details about Bohm’s career, see H. J. Hiley, Biogr. Mem. F. R. S. 


43, 107, 1997, which has also been of help in my own sketch of parts of 
Bohm’s life. 


275. 
276. 
277. 
278. 


279. 


280. 


281. 


282. 
283. 


284. 


285. 
286. 


287. 
288. 
289. 
290. 
291. 


292. 
293. 
294. 
295. 
296. 
297. 


298. 
299. 
300. 
301. 
302. 
303. 


304. 


NOTES 319 


Ref. 115, p. 150. 

Minutes, Trustees’ Meeting, April 15, 1948. 

E. Corson, Phys. Rev. 70, 728, 1946. 

This information is part of a write-up distributed by the local press to par- 
ticipants of “Shelter Island II,” a conference held June 1-4, 1988 to com- 
memorate the conference I am about to describe. 

They were Hans Bethe, David Bohm, Gregory Breit, Darrow, Herman 
Feshbach, Feynman, Kramers, Willis Lamb, Robert Marshak, von Neumann, 
Arnold Nordsieck, Oppenheimer, Pais, Linus Pauling, Rabi, Bruno Rossi, 
Julian Schwinger, Robert Serber, Edward Teller, Uhlenbeck, Van Vleck, 
Weisskopf, and Wheeler. 

New York Herald Tribune, June 3, 1947. Seealsothe September 29, 1947 issues of 
both Newsweek and Time. 

K. K. Darrow, diary entry for June 3, 1947. Diaries deposited in Niels Bohr 
Library, New York. 

V. Weisskopf, interview by S. Schweber, February 14, 1981. 

A. Pais, Inward Bound, Chapter 18, Oxford University Press, New York 1986. 
The best historical accounts of the conference are by S. Schweber, in Redativ- 
istic Groups and Topology, p. 40, B. de Witt and S. Stora, eds., Elsevier, New 
York 1984; and in Shelter Island II, p. 301, N. Khuri et al., eds., MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass. 1985. 

W. Lamb and R. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 72, 241, 1947. See also J. Nafe, E. 
Nelson, and I. Rabi, Phys. Rev. 77, 914, 1947. 

R. Marshak and H. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 72, 506, 1947. 

O., letter to F. B. Jewett, June 4, 1947, copy in Rockefeller University Ar- 
chives. 

C. F. Powell et al., Nature 159, 694, 1947. 

H. Bethe, letter to O., June 9, 1947. 

H. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 72, 339, 1947. 

J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 73, 416, 1948. 

For an excellent review of the history of the subject up to 1950, see S. S. 
Schweber, QED, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1994. 

Ref. 281, entry for June 4, 1947. 

S. Tomonaga, Progr. Theor. Phys. 7, 27, 1946; 2, 101, 1947. 

Z. Koba and S. Tomonaga, Progr. Theor. Phys. 2, 218, 1947. 

T. Tati and S. Tomonaga, Progr. Theor. Phys. 3, 391, 1948. 

S. Tomonaga, Phys. Rev. 74, 224, 1948. 

O., in Les particules élémentaires, p. 269, R. Stoops, ed., Coudenberg, Brussels 
1950. 

A. Pais, Developments in the Theory of the Electron, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton 1948. 

Ref. 297, pp. 117-28, discussion following the communication by C. F. 
Powell. 

R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 76, 749, 1949; See also Feynman, Phys. Rev. 76, 
769, 1949; Feynman, Phys. Rev. 80, 440, 1950. 

J. Steinberger, W. K. H. Panofsky, and J. Steller, Phys. Rev. 78, 802, 1956. 

J. Polkinghorne, Rochester Roundabout, Freeman, San Francisco 1989. 

L. Brown and L. Hoddeson, The Birth of Particle Physics, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge 1983; contribution by R. Marshak, p. 376. 

Ref. 302, p. 29. 


NOTES 


. Ibid., p. 32; for details, see ref. 283, chapter 20. 
. Ibid., p. 35. 
. Address by Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Tuesday, April 7, 1953, published 


by IBM. 


. O., New York Times Book Review, October 18, 1953. 
. G. Dean, Report on the Atom, Knopf, New York 1953. 
. For more details of this conference, see A. Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, Chap- 


ter 22, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1997. 


. L. V. Berkner, Phys. Today, January 1954, p. 14. 
. Proc. 4th Rochester Conference (mimeographed), p. 28. 
. R. Wilson, in A//in Our Time, p. 142, ed. J. Wilson, Educational Foundation 


Med. Sci., Chicago 1975. 


. Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos During the Oppenheimer Years, 


1943-1945, p. 104, L. Hoddeson et al., eds., Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 1993. 


. H. Bethe, The Road from Los Alamos, p. 224, Simon & Schuster, New York 


1991. 


. Ref. 140, p. 570. 

. Ibid., p. 444. 

. J. Bernstein, Hans Bethe: Prophet of Energy, p. 72, Basic Books, New York 1980. 
. Ref. 140, p. 417. 

. R. Coughlin, Life Magazine, December 13, 1963. 

. S. Blumberg and G. Owens, Energy and Conflict, p. 77, Putnam, New York 


1976. 


. O,, letter to E. Teller, September 11, 1942, ref. 5, p. 228. 
. N.P. Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, pp. 178, 180, DaCapo Press, New York 


1986. 


. E. Teller and A. Brown, The Legacy of Hiroshima, pp. 39, 40, Doubleday, New 


York 1962. 


. O. papers, July 21, 1943, box 20, LC. 

. E. Teller in Los Alamos Science, winter 1983 issue. 

. Ref. 140, p. 565. 

. Ibid., p. 444. 

. Ibid., p. 468. 

. Reminiscences of Los Alamos 1943-1945, p. 107, L. Badasl, J. O. Hirschfelder, 


and H. P. Broida, eds., Reidel, Boston 1980. 


. L. Alvarez, Adventures of a Physicist, p. 78, Basic Books, New York 1987. 
. Ref. 330, p. 128. 
. R.Serber, with R. Crease, Peace and War, p. 85-86, Columbia University Press, 


New York 1998. 


. Ref. 333, p. 89. 
. Bohr’s war experiences are described in detail in A. Pais, Niels Bohr’s Times, 


Chapter 21, Oxford University Press 1991. 


. O., letter to Gen. Groves, January 1, 1944, copy in NBA. 
. H. Bethe and E. Teller, memorandum to Gen. Groves, January 1, 1944, 


copy in NBA. 


. Ref. 318, p. 77. 
. Letter reproduced in ref. 5, p. 270. 
. W. Akers, letter to Michael Perrin, British officials, January 27, 1944, copy 


in NBA. 


NOTES 321 


343. J. Rud Nielsen, Phys. Today, October 1963, p. 22. 

344. N. Bohr, letter to Gen. Groves, March 22, 1944, copy in NBA. 

345. N. Bohr, letter to O., June 19, 19144, copy in NBA. 

346. O., New York Review of Books, December 17, 1964. 

347. Ref. 330, p. 41. 

349. O. papers, box 66, LC. 

350. O., FBI file doc. 65. 

351. Letter by Gen. Groves to O., July 29, 1943. Reprinted in ref. 5, p. 262. 

352. Ref. 5, p. 265. 

353. President Roosevelt, letter to O., June 29, 1943, O. papers, box 62, LC. 

354. O., letter to President Roosevelt, July 9, 1943. Reprinted in ref. 5, p. 260. 

355. A. Einstein, letter to O., September 29, 1945. Reprinted in O. Nathan and 
H. Norden, Einstein on Peace, p. 338, Methuen, London 1963. 

356. O., letter to A. Einstein, October 10, 1945. Reprinted in ref. 5, p. 309. 

357. O., Sci. Am. 183, September 1950, p. 20. 

358. Ref. 302, pp. 90, 91. 

364. G. Seaborg, ref. 11, p. 51. 

365. O., in One World or None, p. 22, McGraw Hill, New York 1946. 

366. For other contemporaneous estimates of the costs of atomic explosives and 
of their delivery see the article by Henry “Hap” Arnold, head of the U.S. 
Air Forces from 1943-1946, ref. 365, p. 26. 

367. O., letter to N. Bohr, December 14, 1945, NBA. 

368. N. Bohr, letter to O., stamped SECRET, June 19, 1944, NBA. 

369. O., Bull. At. Scientists 7, 7, January 1951. 

370. D. Acheson, Present at the Creation, p. 151, Norton, New York 1969. 

371. Ref. 8, pp. 178-79. 

372. D. Lilienthal, Journals, Vol. Il, p. 13, Harper and Row, New York 1964. 

372a. Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson, Jr., The New World, 1939-1946. 

A History of the Atomic Energy Commission, Volume I, p. 535, University of Cali- 
fornia Press, Berkeley, 1990. 

373. Ref. 372, p. 16. 

374. Lilienthal, letter to H. Marks, January 14, 1948, O. papers, box 46, LC. 

374a. Ref. 372a, p. 536. 

375. O., Bull. At. Scientists 7,2, December 1946. 

376. Ref. 372, p. 25. 

377. Ibid., p. 27. 

378. Ibid, p. 28. 

379. Ref. 372a, p. 501. 

380. For much more detail about the Nunn May affair see R. Rhodes, Dark Sun, 
p. 150ff, Simon and Schuster, New York 1995. 

381. O., letter to N. Bohr, March 30, 1946, copy in NBA. 

382. N. Bohr, letter to O., April 17, 1946, copy in NBA. 

383. R. Jungk, Brighter than a Thousand Suns, p. 241, Harcourt Brace, New York 
1986. 

384. Ref. 370, p. 154. 

385. Ref. 372, p. 30. 

386. Ref. 323, p. 260. 

388. Ref. 379, p. 559. 

389. Ref. 323, p. 258, 260. 

390. Reprinted in O., The Open Mind, p. 3, Simon and Schuster, New York 1955. 


422. 


423. 
424. 
426. 
427. 
430. 
431. 
432. 
433. 
434. 
435. 


436. 


NOTES 


. Ref. 379, p. 577. 

. UNAEC, official record, June 14, 1946. 

. Ref. 372, p. 69. 

. For more on the tests, see ref. 379, p. 580. 

. O,, letter to President Truman, May 3, 1946, O. papers, box 73, LC. 

. Ref. 11, p. 52. 

. Quoted in G. Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, p. 429, Harper 


Collins, New York 1995. 


. McG. Bundy, Danger and Survival, p. 166, Random House, New York 1988. 

. Ref. 115, p. 38. 

. Ref. 398, p. 173. 

. O,, letter to N. Bohr, November 17, 1948, copy in NBA. 

. Ref. 372, p. 186. 

. O., ref. 390, p. 21. 

. O., in Uncommon Sense, p. 1, Birkhauser, Boston 1984. 

. O., Foreign Affairs, January 1948. (Original title: International Control of 


Atomic Energy.) 


. Ref. 390, p. 17. 
. R. Lapp, The New Priesthood, p. 62, Harper and Row, New York 1965. 
. Harry S. Truman papers, Harry S. Truman Library and Museum, Indepen- 


dence, Mo., box 1533. 


. H.S. Truman, .Vemoirs, Vol. 1, p. 418, Doubleday, New York 1955. 
. H. Chevalier, Oppenheimer. the Story of a Friendship, pp. ix, xii, George Brasiller, 


New York 1965. 


. D. Lilienthal, Journals, Vol. 3, p. 173, Harper and Row, New York 1966. 
. As was already noted in Chapter 17, Section (d), ref. 402. 
. R. Hewlett and F. Duncan, Atomic Shield, p. 81 ff. U.S. Dept. of Commerce 


1972. 


. Ref. 8, p. 191. 

. US. Congress, JCAE hearings, Part 6, June 9, 1949, p. 233. 

. U.S. Congress, JCAE hearings, Part 7, p. 30. 

. U.S. Congress, JCAE hearings, Part 6, June 9, 1949, pp. 278-309. 
. Lilienthal and Dean quoted in ref. 411, pp. 522, 391. 

. O. papers, box 70, LC. 

421. 


The Ph.D. thesis by S. Newman, “The Oppenheimer Case,” New York 
University 1977, has been helpful in the search for references to this section. 
Quoted in R. Rhodes, Dark Sun, p. 310, Simon and Schuster, New York 
1995. 

J. Alsop and R. Lapp, Saturday Evening Post, June 31, 1954. 

Life Magazine, December 29, 1947. 

Ref. 115, p. 467. 

Ibid., pp. 615, 801, 910-11. 

Ref. 324, pp. 231-32. 

For afew more details see A. Pais, Phys. Today, 43, 13, 1990. 

Quoted in ref. 398, p. 177. 

O., quoted in M. Rouze, Robert Oppenheimer, p. 78, Eriksson, New York 1965. 
Ref. 390, pp. 40-41, 47-48. 

R. Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, p. 71, Princeton Uni- 
versity Press, Princeton 1962. 

Ref. 390, pp. 62, 122. 


437. 


NOTES 323 


O., quoted in H. S. Truman, Memoirs, Vol. 2, p. 300, Doubleday, New York 
1956. 


. O., letter to Admiral C. H. McMorris, April 14, 1948, O. papers, box 47, 


LC. 


. Ref. 324, p. 23. 

. Los Alamos report LA-575, 1971. 

. H. York, The Advisors, p. 24, Freeman and Cy., San Francisco 1976. 

. R. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, p. 568, Simon and Schuster, New 


York 1986. More biographical details on Fuchs are found in H. M. Mont- 
gomery Hyde, The Atom Bomb Spies, Ballantine, New York 1980. 


. Ref. 380, p. 298. 

. Forrestal papers, box 112, Princeton University Library. 

. The Forrestal Diaries, p. 378, W. Mills, ed., Viking, New York 1951. 

. Ibid., p. 476. 

. Ibid., p. 466. 

. Ref. 445, box 81, February 14, 1948. 

. P..Hammond, Organizing for Defense, p. 387, Princeton University Press, 


Princeton 1961. 


. Ref. 133, p. 288. 
. J. Shapley and C. Blair, The Hydrogen Bomb, pp. 171, 177, Greenwood, New 


York 1971. 


. Ref. 442, p. 769. 
. Ref. 452, p. 178. 
. R. Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, p. 116, Princeton Uni- 


versity Press, Princeton 1962. 


. T. Coffin, Passion of the Hawks, pp. 63-64, McMillan, New York 1964. 
. D. McCullough, Traman, p. 749, Simon and Schuster, New York 1992. 
. O,, letter to J. Conant, October 21, 1949. Reprinted in full in ref. 115, pp. 


242-43. 


. Report of the Scientific Panel to the Interim Committee by H. Smyth, AEC, 


ca. June 1954, p. 109. 


. O. papers, box 175, LC. 

. Ref. 452, p. 101. 

. W. Schilling, Political Sci. Quarterly 76, 32, 1961. 

. Ref. 115, p. 785. 

. Ref. 8, pp. 188-89. 

. O., Bull. At. Scientists 4, 66, 1948. 

. Ref. 8, p. 185. 

. The report is reproduced in full—apart from small deletions demanded by 


security—in ref. 441, pp. 150-59. 


. Ref. 411, Vol. 2, pp. 587, 613. 

. Ref. 207, p. 219. 

. Ref. 115, p. 87. 

. New York Times, February 1, 1950, p. 1. 

. Ref. 8, p. 204. 

. R. Hewlett and J. Holl, Avoms for Peace and War, 1953-1961, p. 31, University 


of California Press, Berkeley 1989. 


. P. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, p. 150, Harper and Row, New York 1969. 
. Ref. 411, Vol. 2, pp. 634-35. 


525. 


NOTES 


. Ref. 422, p. 411. 
. Ref. 422, p. 412. 
. R. Williams, K/aus Fuchs, p. 116, Harvard University Press, Cambridge 1987. 
. JCAE, Soviet Atomic Espionage, pp. 5-6, Government Printing Office, April 


1951. 


. For many more details see refs. 422 and 443. 

. Ref. 481, p. 183. 

. R. Peierls, Bird of Passage, p. 163, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1985. 
. Ref. 481, p. 184. 

. R. Lamphere and T. Shachtman, T/e FBI-KGB War, Random House, New 


York 1986. 


. Ref. 133, p. 324. 
. Quoted in ref. 133, p. 189. 
. S. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician, p. 463, University of California Press, 


Berkeley 1991. 


. H. Bethe, Los Alamos Science, p. 49, Autumn 1982. 

. J.C. Mark, Los Alamos Report LA 5647. 

. Ref. 422, p. 466. 

. More details of the structure of the Super are found in ref. 422, Chapter 23, 


and ref. 442, Epilogue. 


. Quoted in ref. 442, p. 773. 

. Ref. 413, p. 537. 

. E. Teller, Science 127, 267, 1955. 

. Ref. 441, p. 77. 

. For more on the Russian hydrogen bomb projects, see H. York The Advisors, 


Freeman, San Francisco 1976. 


. O,, letter to R. Tolman, September 20, 1944. Reprinted in ref. 115, p. 954. 
. O,, ref. 115, p. 20. 

. Ref. 115, p. 720. 

. Ibid., p. 251. 

. Ibid., p. 250. 

. Ibid., p. 229. 

. Ref. 441, pp. 441, ff. 

. Ref. 413, p. 518. 

. Memorandum, April 12, 1952, O. papers, box 186, LC. 

. O., Bull. At. Scientists 7, 43, 1951. 

. J. Gavin, War and Peace in the Space Age, p. 115, Harper, New York 1958. 

. O., “Project Vista draft report,” O. papers, box 218, LC. 

. J. McCormack, letter to O., O. papers, box 47, LC. 

. L. Garrison, on January 19, 1954, O. papers, box 202, LC. 

. Ref. 441, p. 139. 

. “Notes of Conference,” January 19, 1954, O. papers, box 202, LC. 

. O. papers, box 187, LC. 

. Griggs testimony, ref. 115, p. 764. 

. S. Huntington, The Common Defense, p. 334, Columbia University Press, New 


York 1961. 


. See e.g. the Alsop columns in New York Herald Tribune, June 18, 1952. See also 


Saturday Evening Post, October 25, 1952. 


. Ref. 115, p. 751. 


O. papers, box 4, LC. 


NOTES 325 


. Reprinted in ref. 133, p. 333. 

. O., letter of F. Oppenheimer, July 12, 1952. 

. See e.g., T. Finletter, Power and Policy, Harcourt Brace, New York 1954. 

. New York Times, April 20, 1954. 

. Nixon quoted in T. Finletter, Power and Policy, p. 146, Harcourt Brace, New 


York 1954. 


. Nathan Twining, quoted in New York Times, January 27, 1954. 

. Fortune Magazine, January and November 1953. 

. Acheson and Stevenson quoted by C. Murphy, Fortune Magazine, June 1954. 
. D. Eisenhower, letter to J. F. Dulles, April 15, 1952, Dulles Papers, Box 2, 


Princeton University Library. 


. O., letter to J. Volpe, December 19, 1954, O. papers, box 77, LC. 
. S. Huntington, The Common Defense, p. 336, Columbia University Press, New 


York 1961. 


. O. papers, box 4, LC. 
. C.D. Jackson, memorandum to H. Luce, October 12, 1954, Jackson papers, 


box 66, Eisenhower Library. 


. O., Bull. At. Scientists 9, 202, 1953. 
. O., interviewed by Gertrude Samuels, New York Times Magazine, June 21, 1953. 
. O.’s speech was later reproduced in O., Uncommon Sense, p. 17, Birkhauser, 


Boston 1984. 


. L. Berkner, Bull. At. Scientists 9, 154, June 1953. 
. O., Foreign Affairs, July 1953. 
. J. Dupré and S. Lakoff, Science and the Nation, p. 123, Prentice Hall, Englewood 


Cliffs, N.J. 1962. 


. O. papers, box 180, LC. 

. R. Lapps, Bull. At. Scientists 70, 314, 1954. 

. Truman, in New York Post, April 13, 1954. 

. New York Times, April 28, 1953. 

. Fortune Magazine, Vol. 47, May 1953. 

. D. Lilienthal, ref. 411, p. 370. 

. D. Parsons, letter to O., September 25, 1953, O. papers, box 56, LC. 

. Ref. 476, p. 53. 

. Ref. 207, p. 275. 

. Ref. 115, p. 502. 

~ Quoted in New York Times, April 14, 1954. 

. C. Murphy, Fortune Magazine, 48, pp. 97, 202, August 1953. 

. P. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, p. 113, Harper and Row, New York 1969. 
. Ref. 556, p. 178. 

. See ref. 115, p. 837 for this and subsequent quotations from the Borden 


letter. 


. Ref. 556, p. 2. 

. Ref. 115, p. 442. 

. J. Kunetka, Oppenheimer, p. 197, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 1983. 
. The letter is reproduced in full in ref. 115, p. 3. 

. O. quoted in New York Journal American, April 29, 1954. 

. Life Magazine, December 13, 1963. 

. Ref. 476, p. 79. 

. Ref. 115, p. 3. 

. Ref. 476, p. 80. 


601. 


602. 
603. 


NOTES 


. Ref. 207, Chapter 14. 
. Ref. 476, p. 78. 
. Quoted in ref. 561, p. 207. See also J. M. Brown, Through These Men, p. 230, 


Harper, New York 1956. 


. New York Times, January 8, 1954. 
. On this subject, including the contents of the FBI summary report, I rely 


exclusively on Dr. Newman’s account, ref. 421. 


. Ref. 207, p. 267. 
. C. P. Anderson, Outsider in the Senate, p. 186, World, New York 1970. 
. Jackson, memorandum to Luce, October 12, 1954, Eisenhower Library, 


Abilene, Kansas. 


. Ref. 207, p. 365. 

. Edwin, interview with Eisenhower, July 20, 1967, Eisenhower Library. 
. Jackson, memorandum to Luce, October 12, 1954, Eisenhower Library. 
. Washington Post, April 14, 1954. 

. The letter is found in full in ref. 115, p. 22. 

. Ref. 8, p. 224. 

. Ref. 476, p. 81. 

. Ref. 8, p. 227. 

. Ibid., p. 230. 

. Ibid., p. 228. 

. For these and more questions regarding the Q-clearances, see ref. 477, p. 


245-58. 


. Ref. 115, p. 527. 

. New York Times, April 14, 1952. 

. This letter is quoted in full in ref. 207, p. 281. 

. Ref. 115, p. 7. 

. Ibid., p. 20. 

. Robert Coughlan in Life Magazine, December 13, 1963. 
. Ref. 477, p. 197. 

. Ref. 476, p. 48. 

. Brown, ref. 570, p. 242. 

. New York Times, April 7, 1954. 

. Ref. 574, pp. 185, 186. 

. Unfortunately I lost the text of Einstein’s statement. 

. A. Einstein, Bull. At. Scientists 70 no. 5, 190, 1954. 

. Quoted in O. Nathan and H. Norden, Einstein on Peace, p. 607, Simon and 


Schuster, New York 1960. 

O., in Einstein, a Centenary Volume, p. 44, A. P. French, ed., Harvard Univer- 
sity Press, Cambridge 1979. 

Ref. 411, p. 467, entry on January 31, 1954. 

Ref. 477, p. 264, footnote. 


SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL 


CHAPTER 24 


1 


2: 
3. 


Bart Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” 
Stanford Law Review 42 (1990) 1386-88. 

W. A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, 31 March 1954, O. FBI Sect. 31, 1279. 
B. F. LaPlante to file, 3 December 1953. O. FBI. 


No 


NOTES 327 
V. F. Weisskopf to JRO, O. papers, 5 April 1954, box 202, LC. 


. AEC “Security Clearance Procedures,” Federal Register, 19 September 1950, 


6244. 
G. Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 2002). 


. J. Zacharias to JRO, O. papers, 6 April 1954, box 202, LC. 


8. W. A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, 9 April 1954, O. FBI Sect. 25, 1057. See 


38. 
39. 


also SAC Newark to Director, FBI, 16 April 1954, O. FBI Sect. 25, 1108. 


. Harold Green, “The Oppenheimer Case: A Study in the Abuse of Law,” 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (September 1977), 14-15. See also Bernstein, 1990, 
1465. 
AEC “Security Clearance Procedures,” Federal Register, 19 September 1950, 
6243. 


. A.H. Belmont to L. V. Boardman, 24 May 1954, O. FBI Sect. 36, 1540. 


W. A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, 31 March 1954, O. FBI Sect. 31, 1279. 
P. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds (New York: Fromm, 
1985), p. 231. 

“Reminiscences of I. I. Rabi,” 11 January 1983, CUOHO, p. 409. 


. Administrative Procedure Act, Statutes at Large 60, sect. 10, 766-67, 1947. 
. P. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case (New York: Harper & Row, 1969), pp. 276-77. 


Ibid., 313. 


. IMJRO (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1971), p. 154. 
. Herken, 2002. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Ibid. 

. IMJRO, p. 137. 

. Stern, 1969, p. 283. 

. Rabi, CUOHO, p. 809. 

. IMJRO, pp. 280-81. 

. Ibid., pp. 271-72. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talk with Lloyd K. Garrison,” 25 June 1979. 
. Ibid., McGeorge Bundy told Pais, “Garrison will go to heaven but not for his 


brains.” AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talk with McGeorge Bundy,” 13 
April 1982. 


. A.H. Belmont to L. V. Bordmann, 17 April 1954, O. FBI Sect. 26, 1139. 

. IMJRO, p. 385. 

. Rabi, CUOHO, p. 801. 

. Ibid., p. 245. 

. IMJRO, pp. 649-50. 

. Ibid., p.746. 

. G. Herken, “A Martian’s Chronicles,” Science (2001) 294, 1657. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Discussions with Hans Bethe,” 24 October 


1981. 


. When Lord Charwell visited Los Alamos, Oppenheimer showed him around 


and hosted a party. Through a secretarial error, Rudolf Peierls never re- 
ceived his invitation. Oppenheimer was profusely apologetic, and told Peierls, 
“There is one consolation. It would have been much worse if it had hap- 
pened to Teller.” AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Peierls,” 3 December 1981. 
E. Teller, Memoirs (Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus, 2001), p. 163. 

Ibid., p. 374. 


NOTES 


. “J. R. Oppenheimer,” O. FBI, 15 March 1954. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “With C. N. Yang,” 3 August 1979. 

. Stern, 1969, p. 357. 

. “Findings and Recommendations of the Personnel Security Board in the 


case of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer.” 


. The order of these two paragraphs is reversed from how they stand in Smyth’s 


opinion; this follows Pais’s ordering as indicated in the margins of his copy 
of Smyth’s opinion. When Pais interviewed.Smyth in 1979, the latter said 
that it angered him to hear people say he had based his decision on the fact 
that JRO was a friend and colleague. “Bram, I didn’t like him,” Smyth em- 
phasized, for he found JRO “vain and arrogant.” Smyth told Pais that he did 
not know how to interpret JRO’s performance at the hearings, except that 
JRO’s “vanity may have received such an enormous blow that he turned 
defeatist” (AP notes, “Smyth” folder). 


. Bernstein, 1990, p. 1388. 

. W. A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, 19 April 1954, O. FBI Sect. 31, 1296. 

. C, A. Rolander to G. W. Bates, 14 May 1954, O. FBI Sect. 37, 1581. 

. New York Times, 13 June 1954. 

. A. Pais to F. J. Dyson, 22 June 1954. 

. A.H. Belmont to R. R. Roach, 9 July 1954, O. FBI Sect. 46, 1866. 

. Ibid. 

. L. V. Boardman to A. H. Belmont, 24 May 1954, O. FBI Sect. 36, 1540. 

. F.J. Dyson, Disturbing the Universe (New York: Harper and Row, 1979), p. 77. 
. Stern, 1969, p. 435. 

. JRO, Uncommon Sense (Cambridge, Mass.: Birkhauser Boston, 1984), p. 165. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. “KOto Betty, Tedand Guy,” 5 July 1954, O. papers, Ra-Re file, box 59, LC. 
. JRO to J. Edgar Hoover, 17 July 1954, O. FBI Sect. 46, 1876. 
. SAC Newark to Director, FBI, 14 July 1954, O. FBI Sect. 46, 1887. 


CHAPTER 25 


on 
Mm be wWN eR Orv 


= 
an 


. Minneapolis Tribune, 16 June 1957. Cited in Stern, 1969, p. 459. 
. AP interview with Kay Russell, 10 January 1980. 


O. papers, box 202, LC. 


. Stern, 1969, p. 391. 


Time, 28 June 1954. 


. A. Pais to JRO, Telegram 2 June 1954, O. papers, box 202, LC. 
. Stern, 1969, pp. 397-98. 
. “Drama Packs Amazing Oppenheimer Transcript,” Alfred Friendly, Sec- 


tion II, p. 1. 


. Stern, 1969, p. 435. 

. Rabi, CUOHO, p. 811. 

. Chevalier to JRO, 7 July 1954, O. papers, box 26, LC. 

. Chevalier to JRO, 27 July 1954, O. papers, box 26, LC. 

. JRO to H. Chevalier, 3 September 1954, O. papers, box 26, LC. 

. Chevalier to JRO, 13 December 1954, O. papers, box 26, LC. 

. Robert W. Merry, Taking on the World: Joseph and Stewart Alsop (New York: 


Viking, 1996), p. 269. 


. Ibid, pp. 260-61. 


NOTES 329 


. Rabi, CUOHO, pp. 712, 762. 
. Charles Wyzanski to JRO, 17 January 1954, O. papers, box 202, LC. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Seattle Times, 17 September 1956, “Noted Physicists, Including Oppenheimer, 


Meet Here.” 


. William Gaddis to JRO, O. papers, box 158, LC. 
. E. Morot-Sir to JRO, 30 September 1957, O. papers, box 227, LC. 
. New York Times, 5 November 1957. “French Decorate Dr. Oppenheimer,” O. 


papers, box 210, LC. 


. Herald Tribune, 19 November 1957, O. papers, box 210, LC. 

. R.R. Roach to A. H. Belmont, 13 December 1957. O. FBI. 

. Levittown Times, 7 March 1958, “School Name Probe Urged.” 

. Levittown Times, 13 March 1959, p. 1. “Oppenheimer School Name Changed 


to Woodrow Wilson by Twp. Board,” by Gordon Parker. 


. See Time review, 2 November 1959. 
. H. Chevalier, The Man Who Would Be God (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 


1959), p. 234. 


. Heinar Kipphardt, I the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer, trans. R. Speirs (New 


York: Hill and Wang, 1969), p. 127. 


. JRO to H. Kipphardt, 12 October 1964, O. papers, box 42, LC. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Washington Post, 13 November 1964, p. A18; not intended for publication, 


JRO to V. Weisskopf, 30 November 1964, O. papers, box 77, LC. 


. New York Times, 27 December 1964, p. 52. 
. Variety, 13 January 1965, p. 76. 
. Robert H. Montgomery, Jr. to Robert Whithead, 28 November 1966, O. 


papers, box 207, LC. 


. Alan Mandell, one of the producers of a later production at the Vivian Beau- 


mont Theatre in New York City, recalled: “Oppenheimer’s wife Kitty at- 
tended a performance and I later took her backstage where she met and was 
quite taken with Joe Wiseman [who played JRO]. She gave him one of 
Oppenheimer’s pipes which Joe still has. She kept calling him Robert. Her 
behavior during the performance was somewhat odd in that she kept bang- 
ing her purse against her lap making a very audible sound. The actors were 
aware that something was going on and so I went back and explained that 
Kitty Oppenheimer was in the house and would come back stage.” (Per- 
sonal communication, thanks to Herbert Blau.) Pais photocopied an adver- 
tisement (“Last 3 Weeks!”) for that performance, taken from the New York 
Times of 30 March 1969, juxtaposing an ad for the (“complete & uncut”) 
porn film “I am Curious (Yellow),” also playing at the same time. An ex- 
ample of Pais’s quirky imagination at work. 


. R. Polenberg, ed.: In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: The Security Clearance 


Hearing (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2002), p. xxviii. 


. Cited by Gerald Holton, New York Times Book Review, 4 January 1970, p. 3. 

. Ibid, p. 16. 

. Dyson, 1979, ch. 7. 

. Dennis Schmidt, “Tragedy and Metaphor,” in American Continental Philosophy: 


A Reader (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000), p. 77. 


330 NOTES 


43, 
44, 


45. 
46. 


Quoted in ibid. 

John Leonard, review of JRO. Letters and Recollections, ed. Alice Kimball Smith 
and Charles Weiner, New York Times, 12 May 1980, p. C16. 

Stern, 1969, p. 360. 

New York Times, 3 December 1963; Cited in Stern, 1969, p. 465. 


CHAPTER 26 


— 


. Trenton Evening Times, 6 July 1954, AP dispatch, 
. G. Holton, Advancement of Science (Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University 


Press, 1986), p. 155. 


. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talk with Lloyd K. Garrison,” 25 June 1979. 


Ibid. 


. Dyson, 1979, p. 76. 
. A. Pais, Physics Today (October 1967) 43-44. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Discussions with Hans Bethe,” 24 October 


1981. 


. Rabi, CUOHO, p. 822. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Ibid. 

. Ibid. 

. Ibid. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Harold Cherniss,” 5 September 1979. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Frank Oppenheimer,” 12 January 1980. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Francis Fergusson,” 27 November 1981. 

. JROtoS. D. Leidesdorf, 2 November 1960, O. papers, box 45, LC. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Ibid. 
. Ibid. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talk with McGeorge Bundy,” 13 April 1982. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Francis Fergusson,” 27 November 1981. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Quoted in E. Regis, Who Got Einstein's Office? (New York: Addison-Wesley, 


1987), p. 152. 


. Samuel D. Leidesdorf to JRO, 14 February 1962, O. papers, box 45, LC. 

. Minutes, IAS Faculty Meeting, 7 February 1962. 

. Yang, personal communication. 

. A. Pais to JRO, May 15, 1963. 

. S.S. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb: Bethe, Oppenheimer, and the Moral Respon- 


sibility of the Scientist. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 40. 


. George F. Kennan, Memoirs 1950-1963, Vol. II (Boston: Little, Brown, 1972), 


p. 19. 


. Robert Adair, personal communication. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Rabi,” 14 May 1982. 


47. 


NOTES 331 


. Dyson, 1979, p. 73. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Discussion with Robert Serber,” 21 May 


1979. 


. S. Treiman to A. Pais, 19 August 1999, AP “End” folder. 
. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Discussion with Robert Serber,” 21 May 


1979. 


. F. J. Dyson, Physical Review 75 (1949) 486, 1736. 
. The word degeneracy had been used in the 1920s about atomic spectra to 


refer to different states that had the same essential energy but were yet 
different. 


. Rochester Conference Proceedings, 1955. 

. JROto C.N. Yang, 11 June 1956, O. papers, box 79, LC. 

. W. Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond (London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1971), p. 233. 
. JRO to D. S. Fahrney, 28 May 1957, O. papers, box 79, LC. 

. As Pais wrote in his diary in April 1966, not long after the discovery of CP 


violation, “The present situation is the opposite of atomic physics pre-1925. 
Then: with known particles find the rules of unknown laws. Now: with 
unknown particles find the rules within a totally conventional dynamics.” 
A. Pais, diary 1964-1983, p. 28. 


. G. Harbottle, “Activation Analysis in Archaeology,” Radiochemistry 3 (1976) 33. 
46. 


Pais, Physics Today (October 1967) 47. The final quotations are from Uncommon 
Sense, p. 138. 

If one were in the least intimidated by JRO’s reputation or enthralled by his 
friendship, it was difficult not to feel touched by grandeur in his evocative 
words and images, even to think them oracular. Wyzanski wrote JRO that 
he wrote “as profoundly as Lincoln did, and for the same reasons. . . a 
noble, sensitive man, charged with an awful responsibility, misunderstood 
and maligned, has been forced by the circumstances to wrestle with ultimate 
problems.” O. papers, box 79, LC. 


. AP notes, handwritten note, miscellaneous notes file. 

. Ruth Tolman to JRO, 3 April 1954, O. papers, box 72, LC. 

. O., Uncommon Sense, p. 23. 

. W.A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, 5 January 1955, O. FBI Sect. 54. 
. O., Uncommon Sense, p. 189. 

. Ibid., p. 154. 

. Ibid. p.77. 

. Ibid., p. 38. 

. Ibid., pp. 67-68. 

. O., “Analogy in Science,” The American Psychologist 11 (March 1956). 

. L. Yuan to JRO, 25 September 1964. 

. O., Uncommon Sense, p. 86. 

. From “On Singleness of Mind,” in The Flashing Stream, by Charles Morgan 


(London: Macmillan, 1938), pp. 7, 28. 


. A. Pais to JRO, May 18 (no year), O. papers, box 55, LC. 

. JRO toB. Becker, 29 August 1957, O. papers, box 17, LC. 

. Lilienthal, Journals 3 (March 1955) 615. 

. F.J. Dyson, T. D. Lee, A. Pais, and C. N. Yang to AEC Chairman Glenn T. 


Seaborg, 1 March 1962. 


. D. Acheson to JRO, 29 April 1963, O. papers, box 14, LC. 
. Robert Coughlan, Life Magazine, 13 December 1963. 


NOTES 


. E. Teller to JRO, undated note, O. papers, box 71, LC. 

. Kennan, Memoirs, V. 2, p. 21. 

. F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 12 December 1963. 

. Rev Mod. Phys. 36:1 (April 1964). 

. F. Dyson to Colleagues, 7 May 1963. 

. M. Born to JRO, 12 November 1953, Born folder, O. papers, box 22, LC. 
. F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 25 April 1964. 

. F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 30 June 1965. 

. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Harold Cherniss,” 5 September 1979. 


JRO to S. D. Leidesdorf, 15 April 1965, O. papers, box 45, LC. 


. “Oppenheimer to Retire as Head of Institute for Advanced Study,” New York 


Times, Sunday, 25 April 1965, p. 1. 


. “Oppenheimer to Retire as Head of Institute for Advanced Study,” New York 


Times, no author, 25 April 1965, p. 1. 


. F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 30 April 1965. 
. F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 28 October 1965. 
. V. Von Hagen to A. Pais, 29 August 1979; JRO to C. Engels, 15 December 


1965, O. papers, box 227, LC. 


CHAPTER 27 


. John Leonard, New York Times, 12 May 1980, p. C16. 


B. Alonzo to JRO, 6 January 1965, O. papers, box 14, LC. 


. Nicholas P. Samios, personal communication. 


F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 17 February 1966. 
F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 30 March 1966. 


. H. Burnett to JRO, 18 April 1966, O. papers, box 18, LC. 
. Princeton University, Citation by the University Orator, 14 June 1966, O. 


papers, box 228, LC. 


. JRO, “Thirty Years of Mesons,” Physics Today (November 1966) 58. 

. Telegram, JRO to N. Nabokov, 11 July 1966, O. papers, box 52, LC. 

. JROtoN. Nabokov, 20 September 1966, O. papers, box 52, LC. 

. R. Serber with R. Crease, Peace and War (New York: Columbia University 


Press, 1998), p. 202. 


. JRO toN. Nabokov, 28 October 1966, O. papers, box 52, LC. 

. H. Burnett to JRO, 28 October 1966, O. papers, folder Bu, LC. 

. J.D. B. O'Toole to JRO, 21 November 1966, O. papers, box 17, LC. 

. JROtoN. Nabokov, 16 December 1966, O. papers, box 52, LC. 

. C.N. Yang, Selected Papers 1945-1980, with Commentary (San Francisco: W. H. 


Freeman, 1983), p. 66. 


. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talks with Verna Hobson,” 12-14 October 


1979. 


. Ibid. 

. JRO to B, Kursunoglu, 12 January 1967, O, papers, LC. 

. AP notes, “End” folder, S. Treiman to A. Pais, 19 August 1999. 

. “Neutral Vector Mesons and the Hadronic Electromagnetic Current,” by 


Norman M. Kroll, T. D. Lee, and Bruno Zumino,” Physical Rerien 157 (1967) 
1376-1339. 


. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “Talk with T. D. Lee,” 16 August 1979; per- 


sonal communication, T. D. Lee. 


. F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 16 February 1967. 


24. 
. Hans A. Bethe, Henry DeWolf Smyth, and George Kennan, “Three Trib- 


26. 


27. 


28. 


NOTES 333 
F. Dyson, “Dyson Weekly,” 24 February 1967. 


utes to J. Robert Oppenheimer,” a pamphlet issued by the Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study. 

When Kitty died, on a round-the-world sailing trip with Robert Serber, 
the cottage passed to Toni. When Toni died—she committed suicide in 
the cottage—she willed the property to the “people of St. John,” probably 
in part to keep it out of the hands of the Gibneys, who might otherwise have 
had some claim on it. The cottage was impractical to keep up, and has been 
torn down and replaced by a small building used as a community center. 

V. Von Hagen to A. Pais, 29 August 1979; JRO to C. Engels, 15 December 
1965, O. papers, box 227, LC. 

Pais noted that, in years to come, JRO’s life and career will fascinate not 
only physicists but historians, psychologists, playwrights, and poets. Still, 
he added, “it would take the singular combination of talents of this extraor- 
dinary man himself to characterize his life in brief,” and concluded his talk 
by wondering whether JRO himself had come as close as humanly possible 
in the following lines: “The wealth and variety of physics itself, the greater 
wealth of the natural sciences taken as a whole, the more familiar, yet still 
strange and far wider wealth of the life of the human spirit, enriched by 
complementarity, not at once compatible ways, irreducible one to the other, 
have a greater harmony. They are the elements of man’s sorrow and his 
splendour, his frailty and his power, his death and his passing, and his undy- 
ing deeds.” : 

It was a perceptive choice: a passage that is classic JRO in the way it aims 
at the whole, notes that the divisions within this whole are incompatible, 
yet despite that promises more simplicity than is credible—cloaking the not 
credible by the articulateness and ambition with which it is spoken. Pais 
surely aware that JRO was darker than that. 


. Robert Serber, Victor F. Weisskopf, Abraham Pais, and Glenn T. Seaborg, 


Oppenheimer, Introduction by I. I. Rabi (New York: Scribner’s, 1969). 


. Personal communication, F. Dyson, in Dyson’s files. I am grateful to Free- 


man Dyson for allowing me to quote from this. 


. AP notes, “Interviews” folder, “undated, untitled note.” 
. O., Uncommon Sense, p. 170. 
. The photocopy is of pages from Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action (New 


York: William Morrow, 1970); the poem is cited on p. 148. 


. Oppenheimer (New York: Scribner’s, 1969), pp. 42-43. 


PRINCIPAL SOURCES USED 


D. Acheson, Present at the Creation. Norton, New York, 1969. 

McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival. Random House, New York, 1988. 

N. P. Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer. Da Capo, New York, 1986. 

P. Goodchild, Oppenheimer. BBC Corp., 1983. 

L. Groves, Now It Can Be Told. Harper, New York, 1962. 

R. Hewlett and O. Anderson, The New World, 1939-1946. Pennsylvania State Uni- 
versity Press, 1962. 

R. Hewlett and F. Duncan, Atomic Shield, 1947-1952. University of California Press, 
1990. 

R. Hewlett and J. Holl, Avoms jor Peace and War, 1953-1961. University of California 
Press, 1989. 

D. Lilienthal, Journals, Vol. II. Harper and Row, New York, 1964. 

S. Newman, “The Oppenheimer Case.” Ph.D. Thesis, New York University, 1977. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, papers in the Library of Congress. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, The Open Mind. Simon and Schuster, New York, 1955. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, Scéence and the Common Understanding. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1954. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, Uncommon Sense. Birkhauser, Boston, 1984. 

J. R. Oppenheimer, Asom and Void. Princeton University Press, 1989. 

A. Pais, Subtle is the Lord. Oxford University Press, 1982. 

A. Pais, Inward Bound. Oxford University Press, 1986. 

A. Pais, Nie/s Bobr’s Times. Oxford University Press, 1991. 

R. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb. Simon and Schuster, New York, 1986. 

R. Rhodes, Dar& Sun. Simon and Schuster, New York, 1995. 

A. K. Smith, A Peri! and a Hope. University of Chicago Press, 1965. 

A. K. Smith and C. Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and Recollections. Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1980. 

P. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case. Harper and Row, New York, 1969. 


336 PRINCIPAL SOURCES USED 


E. Teller, The Legacy of Hiroshima. Doubleday, New York, 1962. 

S. Weart, Nuclear Fear. Harvard University Press, 1988. 

I. Wimmler, “Technically Sweet—Politically Sweet?” Ph.D. Thesis, Graz Univer- 
sity, 1999. 


INDEX 


Note: The abbreviation JRO denotes J. Robert Oppenheimer. The term 
“Institute” refers to the Institute for Advanced Study. 


Aaserud, Finn, xv 
Able (atomic test), 154 
Abraham Pais Prize, xiii 
accusations against Oppenheimer, 199- 
200, 202-3 
Acheson, Dean Gooderman, 134, 147, 
151, 194, 228, 295 
Acheson Committee, 149 
Acheson-Lilienthal Plan, 146-51, 152, 
154, 156-57, 228, 285 
“The Age of Science: 1900-1950,” 99-100 
air defense, 189-91, 193-95, 207 
Air Policy Committee, 169. See also 
U.S. Air Force 
Alamogordo Air Force Base, 43 
Alexander, James, 67, 77, 86 
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, xv 
Alsop, Joseph, 165-66, 191, 214, 259, 263 
Alsop, Stewart, 191, 259, 263 
Alvarez, Luis, 130, 172, 188, 243 
American Institute of Physics, xiii 
American Physical Society 
Abraham Pais Prize, xiii 
meetings, 23, 27, 103, 286-87 
memorial service for JRO, 307 
and Pais, 1-2 
and JRO’s hearing, 220, 255 
JRO’s speech at, 286-87 
and shower theory, 29-30 


American Psychological Association, 
288 

Amerikaniki Skol, 91 

Anderson, Carl, 27 

Anderson, Clinton P., 205 

anti-Communism, 107-9, 150, 168-69, 
171, 254. See also Cold War 

antiprotons, 25 

archaeology, 91, 283-84 

Archimedes, 298 

Aristotle, 269, 270 

arms controls and reductions, 54-57, 
161, 174, 187 

arms race, 133, 161 

Army-McCarthy hearings, 264 

Association of Los Alamos Scientists, 
49 

astrophysics, 31-32 

Atlee, Clement, 179 

Atmospheric Test Ban Treaty, 187 

atomic energy, 52, 53, 78, 144, 149 

Atomic Energy Act of 1946, 79, 83, 
144-45, 238, 247 

Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 271 

Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). 
See also General Advisory 
Committee (GAC) 

and the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 148 
and charges against JRO, 122, 200 


338 = INDEX 


Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) 
(continued) 
contract with JRO, 197-98 
Enrico Fermi Award, 271, 295-96 
established, 144 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
171, 174, 176, 177, 188 
Institute contracts, 93 
and isotope exports, 164 
and von Neumann, 108-9 
JRO’s appointment, 82, 145 
and JRO’s hearing, 209-10, 211, 228, 
230, 233, 247-49, 257, 262-63 
and security issues, 83-84, 140, 202-3 
atomic research. See a/so hydrogen 
bomb; Los Alamos Laboratory 
and computers, 120 
and “dry bombs,” 184 
first explosion, 44 
and international controls, 148-49, 
158-59 
and international relations, 145-46 
and Los Alamos selection, 41-43 
peacetime applications, 152-53, 
159-60 
and politics, 145 
JRO on, 49-58, 98-99 
test bans, 104, 187 
testing, 44, 104, 154-55, 174, 179, 
186, 187, 228 
and theoretical physics, 125 
Atoms for Peace, 255, 278 
Auden, W. H., 269 
awards and honors 
acceptance speeches, 48 
commemorative medal, 298-99, 306 
Einstein Award, 92 
Enrico Fermi Award, 271, 295-96 
French Legion of Honor, 266 
honorary degrees, 301-2 
Medal for Merit, 48 
Aydelotte, Frank, 69, 71-73, 79, 
82-83, 86 


Bacher, Robert, 123, 131-32, 241 
Bainbridge, Ken, 44 

“Baker.” See Bohr, Niels 

Baker (atomic test), 155 
balance-of-power, 52 


Baldwin, James, 256 
Bamberger, Lavinia, 71, 73 
Bamberger, Louis, 60, 63, 69, 73 
Bamberger Corporation, 64 
Baruch, Bernard, 151-55 
The Beast in the Jungle (James), 308 
Berkeley, California, 15, 20-21, 22, 33 
Bernoulli, Daniel, 298 
Bernstein, Barton, xvii, 228, 236, 254, 
262 
beta-ray disintegration, 26 
Bethe, Hans 
Bethe-Teller memorandum, 131-32 
and Dyson, 103-4 
at Los Alamos, 42-43, 123, 125-26, 
128 
and Poconos conference, 115 
and renormalization, 280 
and Rochester conferences, 118 
on JRO’s contributions, 20 
and JRO’s hearing, 244 
on JRO’s home, 274 
at JRO’s memorial service, 305 
social life, 23 
on support for physics, 290 
and the Teller-Ulam invention, 183, 
185 
Bethe-Teller memorandum, 131-32 
Bhagavad-Gita, 44 
Bikini Atoll, 154 
The Biography of President Daniel G. Gilman 
(Flexner), 76 
biological warfare, 145 
birth, 5 
Blackett, Patrick, 13 
black holes, 32, 283 
Blair, Clay, Jr., 263 
Blau, Herbert, 268 
Bloch, Felix, 22, 113 
Block, Herbert (Herblock), 207 
Board of Consultants, 149 
Board of. Trustees, 68 
Bohm, David Joseph, 107-8 
Bohr, Aage, 131 
Bohr, Niels 
and the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 151 
Ehrenfest on, 16 
influence on JRO, 146 
at the Institute, 68, 90 


Kipphardt on, 267 
at Los Alamos, 131-34 
and Poconos conference, 115 
and political issues, 156 
and quantum mechanics, 98 
relationship with JRO, 274 
JRO compared to, 276 
JRO on, 55 
and JRO’s hearing, 233 
JRO’s introduction to, 9 
social life, 23 
and Solvay conference, 117 
as source on JRO, xx 
and Veblen, 109 
visits to the Institute, 101-2 
Boltzman, Ludwig, 298 
book reviews, 121 
Borden, William Liscum, 199-200, 
201, 206, 229, 243, 245 
Borel, Armand, 276 
Born, Max, 9-10, 11, 296 
“Born-Oppenheimer method,” 10, 14 
Bose, Satyendra Nath, 98 
Boulon, Minerva (Erva), 293, 294 
Boulon, Paul, 293, 294 
Bradbury, Norris, 241, 254 
Bravo shot (test), 186 
Bridgeman, Percy, 8 
Britain, 131, 133, 187 
British Broadcasting Corporation 
(BBC), 201 
Brode, Bernice, 134-36 
Broglie, Louis-Victor de, 98 
Brookhaven Graphite Research 
Reactor (BGRR), 283-84 
Brotherhood of the Bomb (Herken), 236 
Brown, Laurie, xiii 
Brownell, Herbert, 206 
Bruner, Jerome (“Jerry”), 89 
B-36 bomber, 170 
Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, 195 
Bulletins (Institute for Advanced Study), 
68 
Bundy, McGeorge, 295 
Bush, Vannevar 
and the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 
147 
and the Baruch plan, 151-52 


INDEX 339 


and hydrogen bomb development, 
177 
and JRO’s hearing, 241, 246 
at JRO’s memorial service, 309 
and security clearances, 84 
Byrnes, James, 151, 155 


California, 163 
California Institute of Technology 
(Caltech), 14-15, 20-21, 33, 58, 66 
Calvin, John, 258 
Cambridge, 8-9, 11 
“Cambridge five,” 181 
Campbell, Joseph, 253 
Canada, 150 
cancer, 300-305 
Carlson, Frank, 26-27, 30 
Carnegie Foundation for the 
Advancement of Teaching, 61 
Casimir, Hendrick, 16 
Castle shot (test), 186 
Cats (musical), 87 
Cavendish Laboratory, 11 
Center for Theoretical Physics, 
University of Miami, 300 
Chadwick, James, 9 
Cherniss, Harold, xix, 91, 297 
Cherniss, Ruth, xix 
Chevalier, Barbara, 236, 237 
Chevalier, Haakon 
play based on JRO, 267 
and JRO’s hearing, 235-36, 238, 
242-43, 246, 248-49, 252-53, 
262-63 
JRO’s relationship with, 205 
Chicago Daily News, 219 
childhood, 5-6 
Chomsky, Noam, 89 
Christ College, Cambridge University, 9 
Christian Science Monitor, 214 
Christy, Robert, 31 
Churchill, Winston, 149-50 
civil defense, 189 
civilian casualties, 175 
Civil War (American), 54, 161-62 
Clinton, Bill, 104 
cloud chambers, 30 
The Cocktail Party, 88 
Cold War, 49, 101, 109, 149-50, 156, 
168-69, 264 


340 ~=INDEX 


collaborations 
and arms controls, 53-54, 56-57 
cosmic ray research, 26-27 
electron-positron theory, 28-29 
with graduate students, 21-22 
international, 285 
at Los Alamos, 125 
QED research, 25 
JRO’s use of, 14, 81 
Colkers, 91 
Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 
291 
Columbia University, 94 
commemorative medal, 298-99 
Committee on Atomic Energy, 157 
Committee on Policy, 74-75 
Committee on the Directorship, 80 
Communist Party, 36-37, 107-8, 164, 
178, 200, 235-36, 251-52 
A Community of Scholars (Institute for 
Advanced Study), 59 
complementarity, 289 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, 187 
Compton, Arthur, 45, 227 
Compton, Karl T., 239 
computers, 76, 119-21 
Comteanism, 288-89 
Conant, James B. 
and the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 
147 
and the Baruch plan, 151-52 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
171-72, 187, 227 
relationship with JRO, 274 
and JRO’s hearing, 241 
and security clearances, 84 
Condon, Edward, 11 
“Conference on the Foundations of 
Quantum Mechanics,” 110-14 
conferences, 1, 110-22 
Confucius, 159 
Congress of Cultural Freedom, 274 
continuous spectra, 10 
cooperation, 99 
cosmic rays, 21, 26-27, 30-31 
Cosmic Ray Symposium, 23 
cosmology, 31-32 
Coulomb field, 28 
Council on Foreign Relations, 195 


Crease, Robert, xv, xvii-xviii 
criticisms of Oppenheimer, 298 
cyclotrons, 21. See a/so particle 
accelerators 
Czechoslovakia, 171, 194 


Daily News (New York), 217 
Dale, Ted, 258 
Darrow, Karl, 112-13 
Davidson, Gordon, 268 
Dean, Gordon, 85, 121, 165, 241 
death of Oppenheimer, 305 
declassification, 78-79, 169, 175 
Deitz, Paula, xv 
dementia praecox (schizophrenia), 12 
democracy, 53 
de Silva, Peer, 136, 238-39 
detection of atomic explosions, 157, 
166-67 
deterrence, 193-96 
deuterium, 172, 186 
Dirac, Paul 
early research, 10-11 
and electron-positron theory, 28 
hole theory, 25 
at the Institute, 68, 90, 101-2 
intellectual leadership, 280 
and Poconos conference, 115 
on JRO, 139 
JRO’s introduction to, 9 
and Shelter Island conference, 113 
and shower theory, 30 
social life, 23 
and Solvay conference, 117 
and Veblen, 109 
Director’s Fund, 87-89 
Disarmament Committee, 194-95 
Dodson, Richard, 283-84 
Dreyfus affair, 263 
“dry bomb,” 184 
Dryden, John, 12 
DuBridge, Lee, 241 
Dukas, Helen, 215, 216 
Dumbarton Oaks, 149 
Dupont, 125 
Dyson, Freeman 
background, 103-4 
at the Institute, 274-76, 279-80 
and Old Stone conference, 117 


on JRO’s health, 301 
on JRO’s leadership, 273 
at JRO’s memorial service, 307 
on JRO’s personality, 269 
and JRO’s rehabilitation, 295-98 
on JRO’s speeches, 256 
as source, XVil 
Dyson, George, 103 


Earle, Edward Mead, 67, 71, 77, 80 
East German Institute for Nuclear 
Physics, 180 
eating habits, 35 
economics, 36 
Ehrenfest, Paul, 9, 15-17, 98 
Einstein, Albert 
and Aydelotte, 73 
and Bohm, 108 
death, 97-98 
field equations, 32 
and Flexner, 70-71 
and fundraising, 92 
Institute appointment, 66-67, 68, 86 
musical talent, 304 
and Pais appointment, 94 
JRO compared to, 276 
JRO on, 90, 298 
on JRO’s directorship, 81 
and JRO’s hearing, 214-16 
and Shelter Island conference, 111, 
114 
social life, 83 
as source on JRO, xx 
on the UN, 138 
and Veblen, 110 
Einstein Award, 92 
Eisenhower, Dwight 
and deterrence policy, 193-96 
and Project Vista, 190 
JRO’s clearance revoked, 204-7 
and JRO’s hearing, 211, 212, 219, 
221, 255 
VE Day, 45 
Elasser, Walter, 23 
electromagnetic separation, 173 
electromagnetic theory, 25 
electron-positron theory, 28-29, 33 
elementary particles, 21, 117-18, 280- 
81, 282-83, 290 


INDEX 341 


Eliot, Thomas Stearns, 87-88, 90 

Eltenton, George C., 236, 246 

endowments, 276 

“Enduring Stockpile,” 187 

Engels, Friedrich, 233 

Eniwetok atoll, 186 

Enrico Fermi Award, 271, 295-96, 297 

espionage, 150-51, 177-81, 199-200, 
265 

Ethical Culture School, 5 

Evans, Ward V., 211, 250, 252-53 

executions, 181 

Executive Order 10450, 196, 233, 247 


Faculty Club, 35 
Faculty Committee, 77, 80 
fallout, 43 
family background, 4-7, 34 
Fat Man, 43, 46 
F6 (Auden and Isherwood), 269 
F Division, 129 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
and charges against JRO, 199-200, 
201 
and espionage, 178-79 
files on JRO, xxi, 81-82 
investigation of JRO, 204, 205, 207 
and Los Alamos security, 135-36 
and JRO’s hearing, 228, 231, 236, 
241, 255, 256 
and security clearances, 84-85, 93 
surveillance of JRO, 140, 204, 208-9, 
230, 293 
Federal Public Housing Authority, 75 
Federation of American Scientists, 220 
Feigenbaum, Mitchell, xv 
Feinberg, Gerald, 290 
Fergusson, Francis, xix, 11-12, 88 
Fermat, Pierre de, 298 
Fermi, Enrico 
and Bethe, 125 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
176, 227 
and the Interim Committee, 45 
and Lee, 106 
at Los Alamos, 128-29 
and Poconos conference, 115 
and JRO’s hearing, 245 
and Yang, 105 


342 = INDEX 


Feynman, Richard, 103, 104-7, 115- 
17, 130, 278 

field theory, 298-99 

Fifth Amendment, 107-8 

Fine Hall, 68 

Finletter, Thomas, 190, 191, 197 

Firestone Library, 68, 92 

First Amendment, 107 

fission, 39, 185 

The Flashing Stream (Morgan), 292 

Flerov, Georgy, 167 

Flexner, Abraham, 61-66, 68, 69-73, 
74, 76 

Flexner Report, 61-62 

Fock, Vladimir, 110 

Ford Foundation, 88 

Foreign Affairs, 104, 195 

foreign policy, 88 

Foreign Service, 158 

Forrestal, James, 78, 169, 170 

Fortune Magazine, 194, 197, 198 

“the four musketeers,” 106 

Fowler, Ralph, 9 

Fowler, Willy, 22 

France, 266 

Frankfurter, Felix, 86 

Friedman, Ella, 4-5 

Frisch, Otto, 39 

Fuchs, Emil Klaus, 169, 177-82, 200 

Fuld, Felix, 60 

Fuld, Julie Carrie, 60, 63, 69, 71, 73 

Fuld Estate, 67 

Fuld Hall, 67, 69-71, 87, 92 

fundraising, 92-93, 276-77 

Funds and Foundations (Flexner), 76 

Furry, Wendell, 28, 201 

fusion, 126-27 

“The Future of Nuclear Science” 
(meeting), 1 


Gaddis, William, 265 

Galileo, 269, 308 

Gamow, George, 23 

Garrison, Lloyd Kirkham 
on hearing outcome, 259 
Pais interview of, 272 


and JRO’s hearing, 209-10, 230, 234, 


240-41, 247-50, 253-54, 262 
at JRO’s memorial service, 305 
as source on JRO, xix 


Garrison, William Lloyd (abolitionist), 
230 
Gauss, Christian, 88 
General Advisory Committee (GAC). 
See also Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC) 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
172-76, 188 
investigation of JRO, 205, 206 
and isotope exports, 164 
and political issues, 157 
JRO’s appointment, 79, 83, 145 
JRO’s resignation, 191-92 
and security clearances, 84 
and the Teller-Ulam invention, 186 
General Fund, 87 
general relativity, 98 
The Genius of Science (Pais), xili, xxi 
genocide, 175-76 
George shot (test), 186 
George Westinghouse Centennial 
Forum, 152 
Germany, 36, 128, 131-32 
Gest Oriental Library, 68-69 
Gibney, Nancy, 294 
Gibney, Robert, 294 
Gimbel, Wendy, xv 
Glennan, T. Keith, 239 
Gédel, Kurt, 91, 92 
Gold, Harry, 179, 181 
Goldberger, Marvin Leonard, 279 
Goldman, Hetty, 67 
Golodinsky, Heinrich, 179 
Goudsmit, Samuel, 282 
government contracts, 93 
Graham, Frank, 247 
Graham, R., 249 
Gray, Gordon, 211, 233, 239, 246-49, 
250-58, 263 
Gray panel, 231, 250-58 
Great Depression, 36 
Greenbaum, Edward, 297 
Greenglass, David, 179, 181 
Greenhouse series of tests, 186, 187 
Griggs, David, 191, 243 
Gromyko, Andrey, 154, 155 
Groves, Leslie Richard 
and the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 
147, 148, 150 
award presented to Los Alamos, 48 


and the Baruch plan, 151 

and the Bethe-Teller memorandum, 
131 

on Bohr, 133 

and declassification, 78-79 

on Los Alamos population, 135 

and Los Alamos security, 137 

and JRO’s hearing, 228, 230, 237, 
238, 244, 249 

on JRO’s leadership, 40-41 

and security clearances, 84 

on Trinity test, 44 


Hahn, Otto, 39 

Halban, Hans von, 131 

Harpers, 35, 263 

Harrison, Stuart, 37 

Harrison, Wallace K., 276, 294 

Harvard College, 8, 112 

Health Group, 125 

health hazards, 124-25 

hearings, 187, 208-11, 216-23, 227-58, 
264-65, 289 

Hegemann-Harris, 67 

Heisenberg, Werner, 9-10, 18, 30, 131, 
280, 283 

Heitler, Walter, 12 

Hempleman, Louis, 240 

Herald Tribune, 214, 259 

Herblock (Herbert Block), 207 

Herken, Gregg, 230, 236 

Hickenlooper, Bourke, 164-65, 177 

Hill, Albert, 246 

Hinduism, 143 

Hiroshima, Japan, 46, 128, 200 

Hiss, Alger, 171, 265 

Hitler, Adolf, 67 

hobbies, 5 

Hobson, Verna, xix, 237, 265, 274-76, 
297, 302, 303-4 

Holton, Gerald James, 272 

honors. See awards and honors 

honors bestowed on Oppenheimer. See 
awards and honors 

Hoover, J. Edgar, 81-82, 84-85, 199, 
204-6, 212, 227-28, 258 

horsemanship, 7, 15 

House Committee on Military Affairs, 
78 


INDEX 343 


House Un-American Activities 
Committee (HUAC), 107-8, 
164, 235 
housing shortages, 75 
Houston Chronicle, 219-20 
The Hudson Review, xv 
humanitarian groups, 37 
hydrogen bomb 
and Bethe, 125 
and defense policy, 170 
and espionage, 180 
JRO’s opposition to, 187-88, 200, 
206, 212, 221, 244-45, 248, 253, 
254 
and Teller, 126-27 
and the Teller-Ulam invention, 
183-87 
test shots, 186 
U.S. policy on, 168, 171-77 
The Hydrogen Bomb (Shepley and Blair), 
263 


IBM conference, 119-21 
“The Idea of a Modern University” 
(Flexner), 62-63 
Institute Bulletin, 75 
Institute for Advanced Study 
Aydelotte leadership, 73-76 
Committee on Policy, 74-75 
development of physics program, 
102-6 
endowments, 276 
Flexner leadership, 69-73 
founded, 62 
funding and finances, 87-89, 92-93, 
276-77 
housing, 75-76 
and Pais, 1, 140 
prior to JRO, 59-76 
recruitment, 102 
and JRO’s hearing, 256 
JRO’s hopes for, 278 
JRO’s leadership, xxi, 1-3, 77-85, 
86-95, 273-78 
salaries, 92 
Trustees, 64-65, 77 
Interim Committee on Atomic 
Energy, 45-46 
International Atomic Development 
Authority, 152-53 


344 ~=INDEX 


international law, 53, 54-55, 153 

international relations, 145-46, 149- 
50, 154 

Inward Bound (Pais), xiii 

Iron Curtain, 149-50, 156 

Isherwood, Christopher, 269 

isotope exports, 164-65 

Ivy series of tests, 186 


Jackson, C. D., 206 

James, Henry, 308 

James, William, 265 

Japan, 45-46, 121-22 

Jensen, Kirk, xvii 

Jewish society, 5 

Joe 4 (Russian test), 186 

Johns Hopkins University, 76 

Johnson, Edwin, 78 

Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 
(JCAE), 164-65, 178, 199, 205 

Joint Research and Development 
Board, 80, 157 

Jones Hall, 68 

Jornado del Muerto, 43 

Jost, Res, 12 

Jouvenel, Bertrand de, 216 


Kahn, L. J., 260 
Kantorowicz, Ernst, 91 
Kaysen, Carl, 300-301 
Keitel, Wilhelm, 37 
Kelly, Mervin J., 233 
Kennan, George Frost 
on the Institute, 278 
Institute appointment, 88, 94-95 
and JRO’s hearing, 241 
at JRO’s memorial service, 268-69, 
305-6 
and JRO’s rehabilitation, 296 
and Veblen, 109 
Kennedy, Jacqueline, 296 
Kennedy, John F., 295-96 
Khuri, Nicholas, xv 
Kipphardt, Heinar, 267-68 
Knox, A. J., xiv 
Korean War, 107, 188, 189-90 
K particles, 280-82 
Kramers, Hans, 1, 101-2, 113, 147 
Kusaka, Shuichi, 31 
Kyoto conference, 122 


L. Bamberger and Company, 60 
Lamb, Willis, xix, 23 
Lambert, Rudy, 235, 239 
Lamb shift, 113-14, 115, 116 
Landau, Lev Davidovich, 31-32 
Landsdale, John, Jr., 239-41, 249 
language skills of Oppenheimer, xiv, 4, 
82, 140 
LA-602 (report), 129 
The Late George Appleby (Marquand), 308 
Latimer, Wendell, 243 
Lauritsen, Charlie, 22, 244 
Lauritsen, Tommy, 22 
Lawrence, Ernest 
atomic research, 39 
and cyclotrons, 21 
and electron-positron theory, 28 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
171 
and the Interim Committee, 45 
and JRO’s hearing, 228, 243 
as source on JRO, 165 
leadership skills of Oppenheimer, 42- 
43, 99-100, 102, 112, 273-78 
Leary, Eleanor, 86, 91 
lecture style, 20-21 
Lee, T. D., xvii-xviii, 105, 276, 279, 
282, 295, 304 
Lee, Tsing Kong, 105 
Lee, Tsung Dao, xix 
“Lee model,” 106 
Leiden, Netherlands, 15-17 
Leidesdorf, Samuel D., 297 
LeMay, Curtis, 170 
Leonard, John, 270-71 
Levittown, Pennsylvania, 266-67 
Levy, David, 88 
Lewis, Fulton, 261 
Lie, Trygve, 154 
Lif, 141, 166, 223, 295 
Lilienthal, David 
and the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, 
147-48, 150 
and the Baruch plan, 154 
and espionage, 178 
on Fortune article, 197 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
176-77 
and isotope exports, 164 


and political issues, 157 
on JRO, 81-83, 268 
and JRO’s hearing, 217, 241-42 
at JRO’s memorial service, 305 
and security clearances, 84-85 
in St. John, 293 
Lincoln, Abraham, 54, 154, 161-62 
Lincoln Summer Study Group, 191 
Linder, Harold F., 210 
lithium, 184 
Little Boy, 46 
Lomanitz, Giovanni, 235, 239 
Long Range Detection System, 166-67 
Long Range Objectives Panel, 188-89 
Los Alamos Laboratory, 123-34 
awards, 48 
and Bohm, 107 
code name, 132 
and declassification, 78-79 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
172, 173 
recruitment, 41, 102, 130 
JRO’s departure, 49-58 
JRO’s leadership, 42-43, 91, 100, 
136-38 
security, 134-36 
site selection, 41 
Technical Series, 78-79 
Theoretical Division, 184 
wives’ tales, 134-36 
Lowe, Elias, 67 


Maass, Herbert, 83, 255 

MacLean, Donald, 169, 181 

“magnetic neutrons,” 26-27 

Mair, Jan, xv 

Malenkov, Georgiy, 186 

Manger, John, xv 

Manhattan District, 43 

Manhattan Project, 78 

The Man Who Would Be God (Chevalier), 
267 

Marks, Herbert S., 147, 208-9, 209-10 

Marley, John, 173 

Marquand, J. P., 308 

marriage of Oppenheimer, 38 

Marshak, Robert, 118 

Marshall, George, 151 

mathematics, 15, 25-26, 65-66, 92, 95, 
119-20 


INDEX 345 


Maximianus, 177 
Maxwell field equations, 28 
May, Alan Nunn, 150 
May, Andrew, 78 
May-Johnson Bill, 78-79, 144 
McCarthy, Joseph 
Army-McCarthy hearings, 264 
charges against JRO, 201 
and espionage, 180 
and JRO’s hearing, 212-13, 219, 
228, 229, 255, 260 
McCarthyism, 180 
McCloy, James J., 241 
McCloy, John J., 147 
McCormick Hall, 68 
McMahon, Brien, 79 
McMahon Bill, 144 
McMillan, Edward, 22, 303 
McMillan, Elsie, 134 
Medal for Merit, 48 
media/press coverage, 121, 216-23, 
220, 257, 262-63 
medical applications of atomic 
research, 159-60 
medical education, 61-62, 76 
Meitner, Lise, 39 
Memoirs (Teller), 244-45 
memorial service for Oppenheimer, 
268-69, 305-9 
mental health, 12-13 
Merrick, David, 268 
mesons, 30-31, 114, 116-18, 281 
Mike shot (test), 186 
military service, 77-78, 103, 123-24 
Miller, George, 89 
Millikan, Robert, 66 
Milnor, John, 277 
mineralogy, 4, 5, 6 
Mitchell, William, 229 
Mitrany, David, 67 
Montgomery, Deane, 92, 94, 276 
Morgan, Charles, 292 
Morgan, Thomas A., 211, 250-52 
Morot-Sir, Edouard, 266 
Morrison, Philip, 244 
Morse, Martin, 67 
Moscow News, 167 
Moser, Jiirgen, 276-77 
Mt. Wilson Observatory, 31 


346 = INDEX 


muons, 31 

Murphy, Charles, 197, 198 
Murray, Thomas E., 253, 266 
Murrow, Edward R., 257 


Nabokov, Nicholas, 274 
Nagasaki, Japan, 46, 52, 128 
National Academy of Sciences, 111, 
117 
National Research Council, 14, 198 
national security. See security 
National Security Council (NSC), 195 
Naval Research Advisory Committee, 
157 
Navy Day speech, 57 
Nedelsky, Leo, 27, 35 
Neumann, John von 
background, 108-9 
and computers, 76 
and espionage, 180 
on fundraising, 93 
in Goettingen, 10 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
176 
and IBM conference, 119 
Institute appointment, 67 
and Old Stone conference, 117 
on Pais appointment, 82 
on JRO’s directorship, 79 
and JRO’s hearing, 241, 242-43 
and Veblen, 109 
neutrinos, 26, 31 
neutron activation, 283, 284 
neutron stars, 31-32 
New Jersey Historical Association, 60 
New Jersey State Board of Education, 
67 
“The New Look,” 193 
Newsweek, 116, 302 
New York Herald Tribune, 214, 218 
New York Post, 218 
New York Times 
coverage of JRO, 48, 82 
on espionage, 181 
on Fermi Award, 271 
on Flexner Report, 61-62 
on Fuld’s death, 60 
on Institute founding, 65 
on Institute funds, 89 


on Operation Candor, 195 
on JRO’s hearing, 210, 214, 216-17, 
219, 220, 259, 261, 262 
on JRO’s resignation, 297 
on the Teller-Ulam invention, 185 
New York World Telegram, 218-19 
Nichols, Kenneth 
and charges against JRO, 202, 204 
and JRO’s hearing, 208, 210-11, 
217, 222, 229-30, 233, 247, 249, 
253-54 
Nicolaisen, Ida, xiii-xv, xvii 
Nixon, Richard Milhous, 194, 213, 222 
Nobel Prizes, 88, 106-7 
nonlinear problems, 119-20 
Nordheim, Lothar, 113, 185 
Nordsieck, Arn, 22, 113 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 190 
Norton, Joshua, 103 
No Trath Except in the Details (Knox and 
Siegel), xiv 


Oak Ridge, 41, 173 
Office of Defense Mobilization, 157 
Office of Scientific Research and 
Development (OSRD), 39-40 
Olden Farm and Manor, 67, 274, 305 
Old Possums Book of Practical Cats (Eliot), 
87 
Old Stone conference, 117 
“On Singleness of Mind” (Morgan), 
292 
“An Open House” (Oppenheimer 
speech), 288 
Operation Candor, 194-96, 198, 207 
Operation Crossroads, 155 
Oppenheimer, Ben, 4 
Oppenheimer, Frank 
childhood, 5 
Communist Party membership, 164 
family life, 34 
on Kitty Oppenheimer, 275 
on press coverage of JRO, 35 
relationship with JRO, 274 
and JRO’s hearing, 237 
on JRO’s marriage, 38 
and security clearances, 84 
as source on JRO, xix 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert 


advisory roles, 58 

affairs, 16, 37, 165, 275 

arrogance, 11, 83, 90, 139, 165 

awards and honors, 48, 92, 112, 271, 
295-96, 298-99, 301-2, 306 

character flaws, 269 

charisma, 96-102 

childhood, 5-6 

decision-making style, 124 

driving, 35 

education, 5-6, 8-13, 14-19, 61-63, 
222, 286 

eulogies for, 285, 305-9 

father, 34 

and fundraising, 92-93, 276-77 

health, 7, 15, 300-305 

hearing and appeal, 187, 208-11, 
216-23, 227-58, 262, 264-65, 289 

homes, 5, 38, 82, 274, 294 

illnesses, 7, 137, 300-305 

indecisiveness, 124 

language skills, xiv, 4, 82, 140 

leadership skills, 42-43, 99-100, 
102, 112, 273-78 

nickname, 16 

organizational skills, xiv, xvii, 129 

and Pais appointment, 94 

personality, 5, 6, 12, 17, 42-43, 126, 
130, 137, 139, 306 

persuasive skills, 141 

physical appearance, 141, 163, 300 

political contributions, 155-57 

private life, 141, 294 

psychiatric issues, 12 

public life, 45-48 

published papers, 100-101 

recruitment efforts, 41, 66, 102, 130 

retirement, 297 

scientific contributions, 278-85 

social life, 22-23, 34-38, 81, 117, 124, 
130, 141-42, 199, 292-95, 303 

support for, 148, 163, 218, 239, 255- 
56, 260-61, 264, 265-66 

as teacher, 20-23, 33, 80 

travels, 7, 12-13, 15-17, 17-19, 34, 
41, 90, 201, 258, 292-95, 301, 
302-3 

writings, 9, 286-88 


INDEX 347 


Oppenheimer, Jackie, 38, 274 
Oppenheimer, Julius, 4 
Oppenheimer, Katherine “Kitty” 
alcoholism, 136, 142-43 
on Einstein, 83 
and Fermi Award, 296 
Hobson on, 304 
at Los Alamos, 134, 135 
relationship with JRO, 274-76 
and JRO’s hearing, 208, 236-37, 
240-41, 246, 258-59 
and JRO’s illness, 301 
and JRO’s retirement, 297 
in St. John, 293, 306 
Oppenheimer, Katherine “Toni” 
(daughter), 42, 83, 135, 143, 258, 
293, 301, 304 
Oppenheimer, Peter, 38, 83, 143 
Oppenheimer-Carlson paper, 26 
The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial 
(Stern), 232 
Oppenheimer-Phillips process, 29, 
282-83 
Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, 32 
Order of the Red Star, 181 


Pais, Abraham 
and Enrico Fermi Award, 295 
eulogy to JRO, 285-86 
and Garrison, 240 
Institute appointment, 82 
notes and research, xvii-xvili 
and Rochester conferences, 118 
JRO on, 93-94 
on JRO’s contributions, 272-73 
on JRO’s family life, 274-77 
and JRO’s hearing, 255 
at JRO’s memorial service, 305, 
307-8 
at JRO’s speeches, 1-2 
on JRO’s writings, 292 
salary, 92 
social life, 279 
on support for physics, 290 
on tragedy, 308-9 
Panel on Disarmament, 157 
Panofsky, Erwin, 67, 77 
parity violations, 282-83 
Parsons, Edwin C., 197 


348 = INDEX 


Parsons, Martha, 135, 136 
particle accelerators, 21, 117-18, 
280-81, 290 
Pash, Boris, 236, 238, 243, 248 
Patterson, Robert, 48, 78, 84 
Paul, Randolph, 240 
Pauli, Wolfgang 
and cosmic rays, 26 
and Ehrenfest, 16 
Heisenberg on, 283 
Institute appointment, 68 
intellectual leadership, 280 
and Pais, 2 
and QED, 10-11 
social life, 23 
and Solvay conference, 117 
visits to the Institute, 101-2 
in Zurich, 17-18 
Pauling, Linus, 20 
Pausinias, 91 
peacetime applications of atomic 
weapons, 152-53, 159-60 
Pearl Harbor, 37, 39-40 
Peierls, Rudolf, 179, 182 
pensions, 66 
People’s World, 37 
Perro Calliente, 15 
personal life, 34-38, 274 
Personnel Security Boards (PSBs), 208, 
211, 230-32, 251 
Peters, Bernard, 164, 235, 239 
Petrzhak, Konstantin, 167 
philanthropy, 59-65 
Phillips, Melba, xix, 35, 308 
philosophy, 222 
phone taps, 140 
photoelectric effect, 25 
Physical Review, 25, 110, 116, 282 
Physics Today, 122, 278, 302 
Piel, Gerald, 302 
Pike, Sumner, 242 
pions, 31 
Pippard, Brian, xiii 
Pitzer, Kenneth, 243 
Placzek, Elsa, 131 
Placzek, George, 23, 105, 131 
plays about Oppenheimer, 267-68 
Plessett, Milton Spinoza, 27 
plutonium, 148, 173 
Poconos conference, 114-16 


poetry, 140 

poker, 117 

Polenberg, Richard, 268 

policy recommendations, 49-58, 157-62 

Polkinghorne, John, 118, 140 

positrons, 21, 25, 27 

The Power of the Word (Pais), xiv 

praise and support for Oppenheimer, 
148, 163 

press coverage. See media/press 
coverage 

Princeton University, xx, 68, 70-71, 
76, 81-82, 107-8 

Project Charles, 189 

Project East River, 189 

Project Gabriel, 189 

Project Lincoln, 190-91, 193, 194 

Project Orion, 104 

Project Vista, 189-90, 193, 243, 246, 248 

Project Y, 40 

Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 
(broadcast), 291 

psychoanalysis, 18 

psychology, 88-89 

public information campaigns, 194-96 

public opinion, 259-64. See also media/ 
press coverage 

Puening, Franz, 258, 275 

Puening, Katherine. See Oppenheimer, 
Katherine “Kitty” 

Puening, Mutti, 258, 275 

pulsars, 32 


quantum electrodynamics (QED) 
and Dyson, 104 
and the Lamb shift, 113-14, 115, 
116 
origins of field, 10 
and parity violations, 282-83 
JRO’s contributions to, 24-26 
JRO’s introduction to, 18 
JRO’s skepticism of, 280 
quantum field theory, 18, 115 
quantum mechanics, 9, 81, 98, 104 


R. H. Macy & Co., 61 

Rabi, Isidor 
and Atoms for Peace, 278 
compared to JRO, 284 


on the hydrogen bomb, 173, 176, 
227 
Institute appointment, 68 
at Los Alamos, 130-31 
on Nagasaki bombing, 46 
and Poconos conference, 115 
on JRO, 5-6, 17-18, 47-48, 99-100, 
143 
and JRO’s hearing, 231-32, 232-33, 
238, 241, 242, 244, 262 
at JRO’s memorial service, 307 
as source, xix 
support for JRO, 260-61, 264 
on Trinity test, 44 
and Wilson, 123 
radar stations, 191 
radiation exposure, 125 
Radin, Max, 90 
radioactive alpha decay, 14 
radio addresses, 291 
Radio Corporation of America, 75, 76 
Ramsey, Norman, 241 
Ram’s Head Inn, 111 
Raymont, Henry, 215, 216-17 
reactors, 131-32 
The Recognitions (Gaddis), 265-66 
recruitment, 41, 66, 102, 130 
Reith lectures, 201 
relativity theory, 24-25, 32, 97-98 
renormalization program, 115-17, 280 
Reorganization Plan Number 6, 198 
Republic of China, 171 
Research and Development Board, 
190, 198 
research efforts, 24-32 
Reston, James, 210, 217, 259, 261 
Reviews of Modern Physics, 296 
Rexroth, Kenneth, 265 
Rhodes, Richard, 165 
Richtmeyer lectures, 98-99, 101 
Rider, Arthur, 34-35 
Riefler, Winfried, 67 
Robb, Roger, 209, 231-32, 232-50, 
252-53, 261, 264 
Robbins, Jeffrey, xv 
Rochester Association of the United 
Nations, 161 
Rochester conferences, 280-81 
Rochester Foreign Policy Association, 
161 


INDEX 349 


Rochester meetings, 117-18, 118-19, 
122 

Rockefeller Archive Center, xiv 

Rockefeller Foundation, 68, 89 

Rockefeller University, xv 

Rolander, C. A., Jr., 264 

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 45, 110, 
138 

Rosa and Lewis Strauss Memorial 
Fund, 92 

Rosenberg, Julius and Ethel, 181 

Rosenbluth, Marshall, 106 

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 257 

Rowe, Hartley, 241 

Russell, Kay, xix, 259 

Russia, 156, 187. See also Cold War; 
Soviet Union 

Rutherford, Ernest, 9 


sailing, 6-7 
salaries, 92, 276-77 
Santillana, Giorgio De, 269 
Saturday Evening Post, 91, 263, 264 
Sayre, Ed, 284 
schizophrenia, 12 
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 305 
Schmidt, Dennis, 270 
Schmitz, Henry, 265 
School of Economics, 87 
School of Historical Studies, 91 
School of Humanistic Studies, 74, 87 
School of Mathematics, 80, 87 
Schweber, Silvan, xvii-xvili, 278 
Schwinger, Julian, 31, 92, 106-7, 115- 
17, 290 
Science Advisory Committee, 157 
Scientific American, 99-100, 100-101 
Scientific Panel to the Interim 
Committee, 45-46, 46-47, 172 
scientific progress, 100-101 
Seaborg, Glenn, 39, 307 
Search Committee, 80 
secrecy, 51, 54, 56, 195, 196, 204-7 
security 
and accusations against JRO, 202-3 
and atomic policy, 146, 160 
background checks, 196 
clearances, 83-84, 107, 209-10, 231, 
247 


350 =INDEX 


security (continued) 
Groves on, 40-41 
and international control, 158 
and isotope exports, 164-65 
at Los Alamos, 134-36, 137 
JRO on, 49-58 
and Shelter Island conference, 111 
surveillance, 140, 204, 208-9, 230, 
293 
Security Council, 154 
“See It Now” (television), 257 
Seitz, Frederick, xv 
Selberg, Atle, 92, 94, 276 
Serber, Robert 
at Berkeley, 21-23 
and Bethe, 125 
and the Bethe-Teller memorandum, 
131-32 
on Bohr, 131 
and electron-positron theory, 28 
at Los Alamos, 130-31 
and mesons, 30-31 
on parity violations, 282 
and QED, 24-25, 280 
and JRO’s hearing, 244 
and JRO’s last days, 303 
at JRO’s memorial service, 307 
on JRO’s wide interests, 279 
as source, xix 
on Tatlock, 36-37 
Shelter Island conference, 110-14 
Shepley, James, 263 
shower theory, 27, 29-30, 31 
Siegel, D. M., xiv 
Sitwell, Dame Edith, 103 
slavery, 54, 162 
Smith, George E., xviii 
Smyth, Henry DeWolf, xix, 253-54, 
256, 305 
Snyder, Hartland, 30-32 
social life 
at Berkeley, 22-23 
and charges against JRO, 199 
at Los Alamos, 124 
and Old Stone conference, 117 
and Pais, 141-42 
JRO family, 34-38 
on JRO’s directorship, 81 
and JRO’s last days, 303 
Serber on, 130 


St. John, 292-95 
and students, 22 
Solvay conference, 116-17 
sources on Oppenheimer, xx-xxi, 3 
sovereignty issues, 153 
Soviet Union, 166, 186, 198-99, 228, 
266 - 
Spaatz, Carl, 170 
space race, 266 
space-time, 115 
Spain, 37 
speeches and addresses 
American Physical Society, 286-87 
awards acceptance speeches, 48 
eulogy to Einstein, 97-98 
farewell to Los Alamos, 49-58 
at Institute for Advanced Study, 2 
lecture style, 20-21 
to officers, 158-59 
“open mind” address, 161-62 
Pais on, 286-87 
on peacetime uses of atomic 
research, 159-60 
on politics of atomic weapons, 160 
Reith lectures, 201 
Richtmeyer lectures, 98-99, 101 
JRO’s popularity, 279, 285-92 
speech style, 17 
at the UN, 152 
sports, 6-7 
Sputnik, 266 
St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands, 292-95, 
302-3 
Stalin, Joseph, 88, 167, 181 
Start II treaty, 187 
Stein, Jean, xv 
Stern, Beatrice, 59, 70, 270-71 
Stern, Philip M., xix, 232 
Stevenson, Adlai, 194 


Stewart, Walter, 67, 214 


Stimson, Harry, 47, 56 

“strange” particles, 280-82 

Strassman, Fritz, 39 

Strategic Air Command (SAC), 170, 
189, 191, 193-94, 197, 243, 246 


strategic bombing, 170 


Strauss, Lewis Lichtenstein 
AEC appointment, 145 
and Atoms for Peace, 278 
attacks on JRO, 197 


background, 64 

and charges against JRO, 201, 202- 
4, 206-7. 

considered for Institute 
directorship, 77, 297 

criticisms of, 165-66 

and espionage, 178 

eulogies, 109 

and Fortune article, 198 

and hydrogen bomb development, 
176, 177 

and Institute board, 210, 272 

investigation of JRO, 204, 206 

and isotope exports, 164 

retirement, 266 

JRO’s clearance revoked, 204-7 

on JRO’s directorship, 79-83 

and JRO’s hearing, 208-9, 212, 218, 
227-31, 234, 238, 241, 243, 253- 
56, 259-61, 263 


Strittmatter, Anselm, 109 
Stromgren, Bengt, 296 

Subtle Is the Lord (Pais), xv 

suicides, 105, 143 

“Super.” See hydrogen bomb 
support for Oppenheimer, 148, 163, 


218, 239, 255-56, 260-61, 264, 
265-66 


surveillance, 140, 204, 208-9, 230, 293 
synchrocyclotron, 117 

Szilard, Gertrud, 301 

Szilard, Leo, 110, 301 


Tactical Air Command, 170 
tactical warfare, 189-90 
Tatlock, Jean, 36-37, 136-37, 235, 


275-76 


Tatlock, Robert, 275-76 
tau-theta puzzle, 281 
Tech Area, 124-25. See also Los Alamos 


Laboratory 


Teller, Edward 


and Bethe, 125 

and Bethe-Teller memorandum, 
131-32 

and defense policy, 169 

and Enrico Fermi Award, 295 

and hydrogen bomb development, 
171, 172, 186, 188 


INDEX 351 


at Los Alamos, 126-29 
and Old Stone conference, 117 
on JRO, 165 
and JRO’s hearing, 243, 244-45, 
257, 263 
Teller-Ulam invention, 183-87 
testimony against JRO, 206 
and Yang, 105 
testing of atomic weapons 
Able test, 154 
Baker test, 155 
bans, 104, 187 
Greenhouse tests, 186, 187 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
174 
Ivy tests, 186 
Joe 4 (Russian test), 186 
Trinity test, 43-44, 179 
Thebes, 177 
theoretical physics, 81, 102, 125 
Theory Division, 126 
thermonuclear bombs, 128-29, 185, 
252. See also hydrogen bomb 
theta particles, 281 
Thomas, Dylan, 265 
Thompson, Dorothy, 91 
Thompson, Homer A., 91, 283 
Thomson, Joseph John, 9 
Time, 35, 90, 222-23 
Tokyo conference, 121-22 
Tolman, Richard Chase, 22, 31-32, 
131-32, 165 
Tolman, Ruth, 22, 165, 261, 275, 287 
Tomonaga, Sin-itiro, 106-7, 116 
Toynbee, Arnold, 89, 90 
tracer materials, 159-60 
tragic heroes, 269-70 
travels 
conferences, 90 
Corsica, 13 
Europe, 7, 201 
Leiden, 15-17 
with parents, 34 
recruiting, 41 
during recuperation, 301 
and JRO’s hearing, 258 
St. John, 292-95, 302-3 
Zurich, 17-19 
Treiman, Sam Bard, 279, 304 
Trimethy (boat), 6-7 


352 INDEX 


Trinity test, 43-44, 179 
tritium, 172, 184 
Truman, Harry 
and the AEC, 78 
on atomic energy, 144 
and Atomic Energy Act, 79 
and the Baruch plan, 152, 155 
and defense policy, 169, 193 
and espionage, 179 
and hydrogen bomb development, 
168, 171, 176-77, 227 
and the Interim Committee, 45 
praise for JRO, 163 
and JRO’s hearing, 228, 246 
and JRO’s resignation, 192 
and security clearances, 84, 197 
on witch hunts, 196 
Trunk Bay Estate, 293 
Trusteeship Committee, 77 
tuberculosis, 15 
Twentieth Century Physics I-III (Pais), xiii 
two-stage fission, 185 


Uehling, Edwin, 28 
Uhlenbeck, George, xix, 9, 16, 27, 35 
Ulam, Stanislaw Marcius, 183-87 
unified field theory, 98 
United Front, 37 
United Nations (UN) 

Atomic Energy Commission, 147, 

153-54, 168-69 

and atomic security, 55 

and the Baruch plan, 151 

and Bohr, 134 

Charter, 154 

and the Cold War, 149-50 

JRO’s advocacy of, 52 

JRO’s speech, 152 

Security Council, 154 

UNESCO, 298 
United Press, 215 
University of Brussels, 116 
University of California, 34 
University of Tokyo, 116 
uranium, 128, 148, 153 
U.S. Air Force, 166, 170, 189, 191, 194, 

196 

US. Army, 76, 80, 135, 213, 228, 264 
USS. Congress, 56, 78 


U.S. Department of Defense, 171, 176, 
190, 191, 198 

U.S. Department of Justice, 209 

U.S. Department of State, 82, 88, 158, 
164, 176, 194-95 

U.S. Department of War, 56, 163, 172 

U.S. Medal for Merit, 48 

U.S. Navy, 77-78, 80, 170 

U.S. News ¢» World Report, 264 

USS. Office of Scientific Research and 
Development (OSRD), 39-40 

USS. Senate, 187, 212 

US. Virgin Islands, 292-95 

USS. Appalachia, 154 


vacations, 258, 292-95 

Valéry, Paul, xxiii 

Variety, 268 

Veblen, Oswald, 66-67, 70-75, 79, 86, 
92, 109-10 

Veblen, Thorstein, 67 

Vernant, Jean-Pierre, 270 

veto powers, 154 

Vidal-Naquet, Pierre, 270 

Villars, Jean, 268 

Volkoff, George, 32 

Volpe, Joseph, 208-9 


Wallace, Henry, 155 

Warren, Robert, 67 

Washington Post, 195, 207, 217, 262-63, 
268 

“We Accuse” (Alson and Alsop), 263 

weather prediction, 119-20 

Weil, Andre, 276 

Weinberg, Joseph, 235, 239 

Weinberg, Steven, 244, 290 

Weisskopf, Victor, 23, 42, 113, 123, 
130-32, 229, 307-8 

Weyl, Herman, 67, 81, 109, 302 

Wheeler, John Archibald, 32, 107, 109, 
115 

Whitehead, Alfred North, 109 

Whitman, Walter, 241 

Wiesel, Torsten, xv 

Wigner, Eugene, 110, 231-32 

Wilson, Carroll, 229 

Wilson, Charles “Engine,” 198, 206, 
234 

Wilson, Robert, 123-25 


Wilson, Roscoe, 243 

Wilson, Woodrow, 267 

Winne, Harry, 241 

wiretaps, 204, 208-9, 230 
Woodward, Ernest Llewellyn, 91 
World War I, 37, 39-40, 74, 96 
Wu, Chien-Shiung, 282 
Wyzanski, Charles, 264-65 


Yang, C. N. (“Frank”) 
appointment, 276 
background, 104-5 
on faculty meetings, 276 
at the Institute, 302-3 


INDEX 353 


on parity violations, 281-83 
relationship with JRO, 274 
and JRO’s hearing, 245 
and JRO’s rehabilitation, 295-97 
social life, 279 
as source, XVII-XVIl1 

Yang, Frank, xix 

Yuan, Luke, 289-90 

Yukawa, Hideki, 30, 106 


Zacharias, Jerrold, 243-44, 246, 255 
Zeitschrift fiir Physik, 9 

Zola, Emile, 263 

Zuckert, Eugene, 253-54, 261 


