Charles Thorpe 


Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer 


THE TRAGIC INTELLECT 


Charles Thorpe 


The University of Chicago Press CHICAGO ¢ LONDON 


CHARLES THORPE is lecturer in science and 
technology studies at University College London. 


The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London 
© 2006 by The University of Chicago 
All rights reserved. Published 2006 
Printed in the United States of America 


15 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 54321 


ISBN-13 (cloth): 978-0-226-79845-5 
ISBN-10 (cloth): 0-226-79845-3 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Thorpe, Charles, 1973- 
Oppenheimer : the tragic intellect / Charles Thorpe. 
p- cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN-13: 978-0-226-79845-5 (acid-free paper) 

ISBN-10: 0-226-79845-3 (acid-free paper) 

1. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967. 2. Physicists—United States— 
Biography. 3. Scientists—Intellectual life—goth century. 4. Science—Moral 
and ethical aspects. 5. Science and state—United States. 6. Atomic bomb— 
United States—History. I. Title. 

QC16.062T56 2006 
530.092—dc22 
[BI 


2006015223 


© The paper used in this publication meets the 
minimum requirements of the American National 
Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper 
for Printed Library Materials, aNst 239.48-1992. 


FOR ANGELA 


The individual event, the act, goes far beyond the general law. It is a sort of 
intersection of many generalities, harmonizing them in one instance as they 
cannot be harmonized in general. And we as men are not only the ingredients 
of our communities; we are their intersection, making a harmony which does 
not exist between the communities except as we, the individual men, may cre- 


ate it and reveal it. 


4. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Sciences and Man’s Community” (1953) 


CONTENTS 


Preface 


Acknowledgments 


1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


7 
8 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 
Struggling for Self 

Confronting the World 

King of the Hill 

Against Time 

Power and Vocation 

“T Was an Idiot” 


The Last Intellectual? 


Appendix: Interviews by the Author 


Notes 


Bibliography 


Index 


Illustrations follow page 199 


128 
160 
200 
243 
291 
293 
371 
397 


PREFACE 


This book traces the life and career of physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer. But it 
aims, through looking at his life, to analyze more general themes: the shaping 
of self; vocation; the cultural and political authority of science; charisma; 
and individual moral responsibility. Framing all of this is the way in which 
science became, in the twentieth century, a central strument of violence, 
transforming the capacity and scope of violence and, in so doing, becoming a 
vital resource of state power. 

Problems of power and violence, in light of the atomic bomb, were central 
to Oppenheimer’s reflections after World War II on the meaning of science. In 
his 1948 lecture “The Open Mind,” Oppenheimer pointed to the paradox that 
this activity, held in modern culture to be at the polar opposite to coercion, 
has become perhaps the primary medium of technological violence. A central 
faith of modernity, and perhaps the core idea of the Enlightenment, was that 
science and reason offer a solution to the problem of violence. In the middle of 
the twentieth century, such a view of the social order of science as antithetical 
to coercion took on particular significance as part of the liberal response to 
Fascism and Communism. Science, it was said, flourished in, and helped to 
preserve, a peaceful and free society. The founder of the academic history of 
science in America, George Sarton, articulated this faith most clearly when he 
wrote, “Science makes for peace more than anything else in the world; it is the 
cement that holds together the highest and the most comprehensive minds of 
all countries, ofall races, ofall creeds.” It was a view that strongly informed the 
statement by his student, sociologist Robert K. Merton, of the universalistic 


values that, Merton argued, constituted the normative structure of science.' 


xii Preface 


Yet contemporaneous developments of the twentieth century began to 
make such ideals of science sound increasingly hollow. Twentieth-century 
history attests to the intimacy of the modern relationship between science and 
violence, which has cast a shadow over visions of scientific progress. Modern 
violence has taken on an increasingly “scientific” character: impersonal, insti- 
tutionalized, and rationally organized. And science has become integral to the 
technological sophistication and power of modern warfare. If the nineteenth 
century saw the mechanization and industrialization of warfare, the twentieth 
century has been shaped by the scientization of war—a development indicated 
by the characterization, albeit caricatured, of World War I as the “chemist’s 
war” and World War IL as the “physicist’s war.” America’s chief wartime sci- 
ence administrator, Vannevar Bush, called for a “science” of total war.? And 
the scientization of warfare is today reflected in the language with terms such as 
smart bombs and surgical strikes. Yet despite the pervasiveness of the modern 
integration of science and violence, the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki stand out as having particular significance. This has to do not only 
with the degree of destruction unleashed, but also with the way in which 
the release of the power of the atom was cast as the high point of scientific 
modernity.? 

These interconnections between science and violence raise the problem 
of the responsibility and role of the scientist. Perhaps the most articulate and 
complete twentieth-century formulation of this problem was sociologist Max 
Weber’s 1918 lecture “Science as a Vocation.” For Weber, the essence of 
science as a vocation was acceptance of the divide between fact and value 
and, therefore, eschewing of professional concern for ends or ultimate values. 
Science, Weber said, serves “self-clarification and knowledge of interrelated 
facts”—in other words, awareness.* Weber insisted on the separation of fact 
from value so as to preserve the autonomy of science from politics—and 
to protect science against political violence (which he saw in, for example, 
nationalist students’ disrupting lectures of those they identified as political 
opponents). 

Herbert Marcuse later pointed out the paradox that Weber’s insistence 
on the separation of science from any substantive values makes science more 
vulnerable to being subordinated to external forces: “Your ‘neutrality’ is as 
compulsory as itis tllusory. For neutrality is only real where you have the power 
to repel interference: if you do not, you become the victim and assistant of any 
power that chooses to use you.”” Marcuse’s point is particularly significant 
when one considers problems of technology and the contemporary situation 
in which sophisticated research and development organizations are in place 


Preface xiii 


to rapidly convert scientific findings into military applications. When in mod- 
ern technological warfare the scientist becomes a servant of state power, that 
role does not contradict, but is arguably a fulfilment of, the requirements of 
the Weberian vocation. Weber’s ethos of science as a vocation, while defend- 
ing the life of science against the irrational violence of the political campaign, 
provides no ethical safeguards against modern scientized violence. Instead, 
such an ethos of value-neutrality, entailing a discipline not altogether different 
from that of bureaucratic and military organizations, facilitates the mobiliza- 
tion of science in the rationalized violence of the modern state.° 

This book examines how Oppenheimer, as wartime leader of the Los 
Alamos atomic weapons laboratory and as senior postwar scientific adviser to 
the U.S. government, sought to construct his role and attempted to handle his 
responsibilities in relation to science, politics, and the problems of warfare and 
violence. Oppenheimer formulated a vocational ethic close to the one outlined 
by Weber. Yet the physicist’s struggles in his role as atomic bomb scientist 
revealed ethical problems that ultimately could not be adequately handled 
in terms of the compartmentalized ethics of vocation. Oppenheimer’s moral 
conflicts and struggles demonstrate tensions in, and the limitations of, the 
ethics of vocation. 

Oppenheimer’s struggle with vocation also attests to the difficulty of for- 
mulating and maintaining an ethical stance that goes beyond this compart- 
mentalizing ethos. A limited and fragmented ethical orientation is powerfully 
fostered and maintained by modern, specialized technobureaucratic culture 
and institutions.’ A key message of the Personnel Security Board finding 
against Oppenheimer in 1954 was that scientists overstep the boundaries of 
their authority when they concern themselves ethically with the consequences 
of their work. In a democratic society, the board insisted, questions of ends 
should be left to elected representatives. That bureaucratic and instrumental 
conception of the scientist’s role seems to be the dominant one in modern 
Western societies. And as science journalist Daniel Greenberg has recently 
argued, scientists, overridingly concerned with protecting their sources of 
funding, have become increasingly unwilling to rock the boat by challenging 
this narrow role.§ 

Adopting a broader conception of the scientific or intellectual responsibility 
of the scientist means challenging the assimilation of science into the state and 
its corresponding divorce from civil society. It means questioning the way in 
which the conception of science as a resource or instrument has overwhelmed 
and pushed out the place of science within a public conversation constitu- 
tive of civil society. In this regard, it is worth mentioning a communication 


xiv Preface 


I recently received from the National Archives. It was in response to an inquiry 
about the famous report ofthe Atomic Energy Commission’s General Advisory 
Committee (GAC), which, under Oppenheimer’s chairmanship, took a posi- 
tion against the development of the hydrogen bomb. The archivist told me: 


AEC historical document no. 349, the report of the General Advisory 
Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission, Oct. 30, 1949, re: their 
17th meeting, whose topic was the “Super,” 1.e., development of a hy- 
drogen bomb, had its classification cancelled on March 15, 1954, by the 
Atomic Energy Commission. On February 17, 1994, it was stamped 
“classification still retained” by Department of Energy reviewers and 
was withdrawn from the open AEC records. It currently remains clas- 
sified in spite of the fact that anyone can read it in its entirety in the 
Appendix of Herbert F. York’s 1976 book, “The Advisors: Oppen- 
heimer, Teller, and the Superbomb.”? 


It is paradoxical that the document was declassified in the run-up to the 
1954 security hearing. In order to produce a publicly “successful degradation 
ceremony,”!? the AEC was forced to make public much information that 
was previously hidden behind the security curtain of the nuclear state. The 
publicly released transcript of the hearing was a revelation of the workings 
of science and policy within the Cold War state. I have no information 
about the reasons for the reclassification of the GAC report in 1994, nor 
an understanding of why this action would be seen as useful or appropriate 
when the document is now, in practice, irrevocably in the public domain. 
But the symbolic maintenance of this dissenting document as a state secret 
speaks eloquently to what sociologist Chandra Mukerji has called the state’s 
appropriation of the “voice of science.” !' It makes clear the difference between 
science as an instrument or resource of its funders and patrons (whether the 
state or business) and science as a constituent of the broader culture of civil 
society and free public discourse. This difference was an important part of 
what was at stake in the Oppenheimer security hearing. 

There is currently an intense interest in Oppenheimer among historians of 
science and scholars of American history. This book follows the publication 
of very fine studies by historians Silvan S. Schweber and, very recently, Kai 
Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, David C. Cassidy, and Priscilla McMillan. 

For Bird and Sherwin, Oppenheimer was an authentic voice of American 
scientific, intellectual, and political liberalism. For McMillan, he was a defeated 
moderating voice in American foreign policy.'* In contrast to these books, 


Preface xv 


I emphasize what I see as Oppenheimer’s failure to develop a critical political 
perspective as his liberalism was shaped by the culture of the Cold War. I 
argue that (paradoxically, in light of the security hearmg) Oppenheimer in 
significant ways accommodated himself to and internalized the culture and 
mentality of the national-security state. 

Schweber is critical of Oppenheimer’s personal inability to live up to the 
model of responsibility that he put forward in his writings and reflections on 
science. In particular, Schweber has criticized Oppenheimer’s inconsistent 
response to McCarthyism, particularly in relation to the security problems of 
his graduate students and their ordeals with the House Un-American Activities 
Committee. Schweber suggests that Oppenheimer was “too fractured an indi- 
vidual” to handle the ethical and political dilemmas presented by Hiroshima 
and the Cold War, and he instead presents physicist Hans Bethe as the more 
consistent embodiment of an ethic of scientific responsibility. Schweber cel- 
ebrates Bethe as a model of the working craftsman in science, whose research 
was his “anchor in integrity.” This is an ethic of duty in a calling, or vocation, 
and Schweber notes that Bethe “responded to the intellectual and social world 
around him by adopting a Weberian stance: he would deal with the world ra- 
tionally, to the utmost limits that rationality would allow.”!° In contrast, I take 
Oppenheimer’s dilemmas not so much as indicative of a purely personal fail- 
ure to live up to an ethic, but as indicative of both a broader ethical uncertainty 
and inherent problems with the ethics of vocation in relation to problems of 
war and state power. Cassidy has admirably contextualized Oppenheimer’s 
struggles within the framework of America’s rise to global power and the cen- 
trality to this of the alliance among science (physics in particular), industry, 
and the military. Cassidy suggests that Oppenheimer’s career reflects how this 
alliance, while strengthening American science financially and in some ways 
politically, led to a sacrifice of the independent cultural authority of science.'* 
My account is broadly in agreement with this analysis. But at the same time, 
I aim to connect these contextual themes with issues of self-shaping, the idea 
of vocation, the ethics of responsibility, and the changing cultural identity of 
the scientist. 

The recent biographies all, in different ways, place Oppenheimer’s life in 
the context of the transformations of science and American society and politics 
during the Cold War. My aim in this book has been to provide a biography that 
draws together individual character structure and social structure, looking at 
the social processes and collective work though which individual identity is 
constituted. It is a sociological biography, which looks at the collaborative and 
interactional shaping of the individual in a web of relationships. In that sense, 


xvi Preface 


it aims to break down the division between individual and context, treating 
both in terms of social process. This is a difficult task. Sociologist Norbert 
Elias has written, “Wherever one looks, one comesacross the same antinomies: 
we have a certain traditional idea of what we are as individuals. And we have 
a more or less distinct idea of what we mean when we say ‘society.’ But these 
two ideas, the consciousness we have of ourselves as society on the one hand 
and as individuals on the other, never entirely coalesce ... What we lack, let 
us be clear about it, are conceptual models and, beyond them, a total vision 
with the aid of which our ideas of human beings as individuals and as societies 
can be better harmonized.”!° This study attempts to use the narrative form 
of a sociologically conceptualized biography to weave together the threads of 
the “individual” and the “social.” 

This book can also be read as a study of themes that emerge from the work 
of Max Weber: vocation, responsibility, cultivation and expertise, charisma, 
bureaucracy, instrumental reason, fact and value, means and ends. While I did 
not consciously begin thinking of the research as Weberian, these concepts 
and themes seemed to quite naturally emerge from and fit seamlessly with 
the historical material. Many of the concepts employed by Weber—charisma, 
problems of specialization, fact and value—also occur in the discourse of the 
World War II generation of atomic scientists and are in that sense actors’ 
categories for this study. That may have something to do with the character 
of Weber’s sociology—he did not seek to replace history with an abstract so- 
ciological model, but rather to define a series of concepts that would facilitate 
interpretive historical understanding. But of course, in relation to Weber’s 
own lifetime, the events I am describing are not history, but the future. It is 
also possible, therefore, that the fit may have something to do with the cultural 
impact of Weber’s own work. For example, it seems that the widespread 
modern use of the term charisma to describe secular leadership, even if not 
always faithful to Weber’s analysis, owes something to his formulation. But the 
correspondence 1s most likely due to Weber’s picking out and codifying prob- 
lems and themes that were emerging in his time from a variety of sources and 
that would—again, through many influences and sources—become central to 
thinking about problems of science and modernity in the twentieth century. 
The “high modern” bureaucratic world of the Manhattan Project and the 
early Cold War was arguably more neatly “Weberian” than our contemporary 
postmodern society.'° Nevertheless, the issue of whether and to what extent 
these Weberian categories are an analytic resource or a cultural and historical 
topic is indicative of what Anthony Giddens has called the “double hermeneu- 
tic” of the social sciences. Giddens reminds us that sociological concepts and 


Preface xvii 


understandings of the world are constitutive elements of the modern cultures 
we seek to interpret.!” 

Finally, it is worth mentioning a paradox inherent in the writing of this 
history. In the book, I have given considerable attention to others’ impres- 
sions of Oppenheimer and also to the way in which he was described and 
his life interpreted within his own lifetime (as well as after his death). This is 
because I want to question the idea ofa discrete “real” Oppenheimer separate 
from these impressions, descriptions, and interpretations (which is not to say 
that there is nothing but representation). Representations and expectations 
of him, whether explicit or implicit, were a key part of Oppenheimer’s social 
context and social existence. In his own lifetime, it is possible to see Oppen- 
heimer responding to, resisting, and shaping but also enacting, playing to, and 
being shaped by these various representations and associated expectations. 
The narrative structure of this book ends with Oppenheimer’s death. But it is 
interesting to ask to what extent this is the natural ending point ofa biography. 
There is a sense in which death zs such an ending point—there 1s no longer 
an Oppenheimer to play “Oppenheimer.” But there is also a sense in which it 
doesn’t have to be. Sociologist Charles Horton Cooley wrote that “there is no 
separation between real and imaginary persons; indeed, to be imagined is to 
become real, in a social sense.” !’ Oppenheimer as a social item, “real” there- 
fore “in a social sense,” is continuing to be constructed by the act of writing and 
representation. As communications scholar Bryan C. Taylor has put it, Op- 
penheimer is “an enduring discursive form through which audiences discover 
and contest the ideologies of modern science and the national-security state.” 
Since Oppenheimer’s death, “history and popular culture have ‘saved’ the 
sign of Oppenheimer as an opportunity to explore the formidable social prob- 
lems associated with nuclear weapons and the possibility of their solution.”'® 
Biographies “imagine” their subjects, and also participate in creating them as 
socially real. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


There are many people to thank for their help with this project. The book 
grew out of my doctoral dissertation, and my greatest debt is to my doctoral 
supervisor, Steven Shapin, for years of patient advice and encouragement 
and for his intellectual example. I also want to thank the other members of 
my doctoral committee at the University of California, San Diego—Gerald 
Doppelt, Harvey Goldman, Naomi Oreskes, and Andrew Scull—for their ad- 
vice, critical comments, interest, and encouragement. I am, in addition, very 
grateful to Herbert York at UCSD for sharing his knowledge and experience. 

I learned a great deal from fellow participants in the 1998-99 research 
group on Scientific Personae, organized by Lorraine Daston at the Max 
Planck Institute for the History of Science; this work benefited greatly from 
that experience. It has also benefited from discussion with colleagues in the 
School of Social Sciences at Cardiff University, in particular Harry Collins, 
Robert Evans, Ian Welsh, and Barbara Adam. I would also like to thank col- 
leagues in the Department of Science and Technology Studies at University 
College London for the enthusiasm and encouragement that they communi- 
cated as I was completing the writing. For conversation, correspondence, the 
provision of documents, and their published and unpublished work that I 
have read, I am grateful to Michael Day, Shawn Mullet, James Hytya, John 
Rigden, Albert Christman, and Silvan S$. Schweber. I am very grateful to 
Cathryn Carson and David Hollinger for inviting me to participate in the Op- 
penheimer Centennial Conference at Berkeley. There I had also the opportu- 
nity to meet historians Kai Bird, Martin Sherwin, and David Cassidy, whose 
scholarly work on Oppenheimer I very much admire. David Kaiser read and 


xx Acknowledgments 


commented on a number of drafts of the full manuscript, and I have benefited 
a great deal from his insights, criticisms, and advice. 

This work also owes much to the archivists who helped me—in particular 
Roger Meade at Los Alamos National Laboratory Archives and Hedy Dunn, 
Patricia Goulding, and Shelley Morris at the Los Alamos Historical Museum, 
but also staff at the Library of Congress, the American Institute of Physics, 
and all the other archives I visited (a list of which appears in the bibliography). 
I am also extremely grateful to the Manhattan Project veterans and scientists 
who allowed me to interview them. 

The research and writing were made possible by a Science Studies Dis- 
sertation Fellowship at UCSD, a dissertation writing fellowship from the 
Charlotte Newcombe Foundation, and a pre-doctoral fellowship at the Max 
Planck Institute for the History of Science. Subsequent research was funded 
by a British Academy Small Research Grant. 

I am grateful to Katie Crawford, Philip and Diane Olsson, and Susan and 
Michael Dimock for their hospitality while I was carrying out research. I 
would also like to thank my family for their support, and I especially want to 
thank my wife, Angela, for her loving support and understanding during this 
work. 

Any errors, omissions, or shortcomings in the work are, of course, entirely 
my own fault and responsibility. 


CHAPTER ONE 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, 


and Sociological Biography 


Physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer (1904-1967) occupied a nodal position in 
the emergence of late modern technoscientific culture and in the compact 
between science and the state that developed from World War II. To trace 
the constitution of Oppenheimer’s wartime and postwar scientific identity 
is to trace the key struggles over the role of the scientist in relation to nu- 
clear weapons, the state, and culture. This is a study in biography, but it is 
one that reveals the individual—Oppenheimer—as a point of intersection of 
social forces and interests and that describes the collaborative, social, and 
interactional fashioning of his identity, his scientific role, and his intellectual, 
political, and cultural authority. It examines how he negotiated the opportu- 
nities created and the constraints imposed by the institutional positions he 
occupied and by the relationships and networks in which he was embedded. 
It traces the social and interactional constitution of a unique individual sci- 
entific identity and role. In so doing, it provides a history of the making of 
broader forms of power and authority entwining science and the late modern 
state. 

Between 1943 and 1945, Oppenheimer was director of the Los Alamos Lab- 
oratory—the remote site in northern New Mexico where the atomic bombs 
that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki were designed and built. It was the 
key installation of the Manhattan Project, a vast military-industrial-scientific 
endeavor organized under the Army Corps of Engineers. Employing at its 
peak nearly 129,000 workers and costing $2 billion, the Manhattan Project 
was the largest technoscientific project to that time. It was a hybrid organiza- 
tional network incorporating not only scientists and engineers, but also a long 


2 Chapter One 


list of America’s major industrial corporations, including DuPont, Monsanto, 
Tennessee Eastman, Westinghouse, Chrysler, Union Carbide, Bell Labs, and 
other large chemical, electrical, and construction firms. At Hanford, Washing- 
ton, and Oak Ridge, Tennessee, sprawling factories and industrial towns were 
erected to produce plutonium and to separate out the fissionable uranium-235 
isotope. The project linked these industrial sites with university laboratories 
at Chicago, Columbia, Berkeley, and elsewhere. Los Alamos was the culmi- 
nating point of the work of these disparate sites. It brought together math- 
ematicians, theoretical and experimental physicists, chemists, metallurgists, 
high-explosives experts, and engineers, combining this expertise to produce 
a novel form of technoscientific power and a new method of total war.! 

The bomb project catapulted scientists into a position within America’s 
political and administrative elites, and Oppenheimer emerged from the war 
as the chief representative of this new power of the scientist. In 1947, he was 
appointed to the country’s top science advisory position: chairman of the 
Atomic Energy Commission’s General Advisory Committee (GAC). How- 
ever, Oppenheimer’s power was beset by tensions and contradictions. Since 
his earliest involvement in the bomb project, he had been under investiga- 
tion by military intelligence and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
for his Communist associations and political involvements of the late 1930s 
and early 1940s. In 1949, when the GAC advised against the development 
of the hydrogen bomb, Oppenheimer was widely suspected of spearheading 
opposition to the new weapon. During the early 1950s, H-bomb proponents 
(including physicist Edward Teller, AEC chairman Admiral Lewis L. Strauss, 
and powerful figures in the military) began a behind-the-scenes campaign to 
remove Oppenheimer from any governmental role. This struggle culminated 
in the security hearings of 1954, when an AEC Personnel Security Board 
declared Oppenheimer a security risk. The withdrawal of Oppenheimer’s 
security clearance suddenly severed his connection with government, con- 
signing him to the political wilderness. He was only partially rehabilitated 
when, in 1963, he received the AEC’s prestigious Fermi Award, given the 
previous year to Teller. Though his past work for the government was now 
officially recognized and rewarded, his security clearance was not renewed. 

This, in outline, is a well-known story. Even during his lifetime, Oppen- 
heimer was a focal point for reflection on the place of science and scientists in 
the modern world. That remains the case today: in academia and in popular 
culture, the narrative of Oppenheimer as tragic hero has become a parable 
neatly encapsulating the moral and political dilemmas of the nuclear age. It 
is a tale that has been the subject of many biographies, historical studies, 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 3 


novels, plays, and movies.” Commonly, the Oppenheimer story relies on 
tropes of purity and danger: Oppenheimer represents the corruption of the 
pure scientist overwhelmed both by encroaching militarism and by his own 
desire for power. Oppenheimer’s role in building the atomic bomb represents 
a fall from grace, the scientist’s original sin. The security hearings are often 
portrayed as a kind of martyrdom or crucifixion, and Oppenheimer’s subse- 
quent exile from power as a retreat from a corrupt world, a chance for puri- 
ty and salvation. Oppenheimer appears sometimes as a saint, sometimes as 
Faust, with the atomic bomb as a diabolic device.? 

This narrative has found a central place in our understanding of the scien- 
tifically modern. Sociologists, philosophers, historians, and other social com- 
mentators examining the role of the scientific intellectual have all attempted to 
come to terms with the figure of Oppenheimer. In Brighter Than a Thousand 
Suns, the journalist Robert Jungk’s celebrated study of the atomic scientists, 
Oppenheimer appears in a field of struggle between pure science and the will to 
power. He is presented as embodying a unity between science and humanistic 
culture, a unity that is shattered by the one-sided technical-instrumental orien- 
tation that led to the atomic bomb. For Jungk, Oppenheimer was the tragic rep- 
resentative of the scientists’ Faustian bargain with military technology. Jungk 
wrote in 1958, nine years before Oppenheimer’s death: “Oppenheimer ... 
reveals ... why the twentieth century Faust allows himself, in his obsession 
with success and despite occasional twinges of conscience, to be persuaded 
into signing the pact with the Devil that confronts him: What is ‘technically 
sweet’ he finds nothing less than irresistible.”* Oppenheimer’s former friend, 
Haakon Chevalier (their connection was to be the key subject of interrogation 
in the 1954 hearings), concluded that Oppenheimer was “a Faust of the 
twentieth century, he had sold his soul to the bomb.” 

For sociologist Lewis Feuer, Oppenheimer represented the rise of man- 
agerialism, technocratic power, and militarism in science. “During our gen- 
eration,” he wrote, “science has become the bearer of a death wish,” and he 
quoted Oppenheimer’s famous reaction to the first atomic bomb test: “I am 
become death—the shatterer of worlds.”® Lewis Coser was also interested in 
Oppenheimer as a leading representative of the scientists’ new public role in 
confronting the problems of atomic weapons. Like Feuer, Coser was worried 
that scientists were becoming “the domesticated retainers of their bureau- 
cratic masters.” But in contrast to Feuer, he saw Oppenheimer as exemplary 
of scientists who “have cultivated uncommon sensitivity to the values of our 
culture and the fate of our society.” In Coser’s view, Oppenheimer was a “true 
scientific intellectual.”” 


4 Chapter One 


Philip Rieff similarly dwelled on Oppenheimer’s “charismatic” and sym- 
bolic role: “His thin handsome face and figure replaced Einstein’s as the pub- 
lic image of genius ... He had actually become the priest-scientist of Gom- 
tean vision, transforming history as well as nature.” But Rieff argued that 
the scope for such a charismatic role for scientists in modern America was 
limited. Without a vibrant humanistic public culture to support them, the 
scientists’ engagement with politics was doomed to failure. For Rieff, Oppen- 
heimer’s denunciation by the AEC signified the reduction of the scientific elite 
to the merely technical function of a “service class.”® 

The security hearings have frequently been taken to instantiate a deep- 
rooted, or even inevitable, conflict between the intellectual and the powers. 
Historian Giorgio de Santillana was directly inspired by the Oppenheimer 
case in writing The Crime of Galileo, published in 1958. In both cases, he ar- 
gued, the free “scientific mind” was at odds with “Reasons of State.” Political 
scientist Sanford Lakoff compared the Oppenheimer hearings with the Atheni- 
ans’ persecution of Socrates and argued that “the trial of Dr. Oppenheimer was 
also the trial of liberal democracy in America.” But above all, Lakoffargued, the 
“tragedy in Dr. Oppenheimer’s predicament. . . stemmed. . . from his internal 
struggle with the scientific vocation.” For Oppenheimer, unlike Socrates, “the 
center of his life is not the city but his vocation.” Oppenheimer symbolized 
for Lakoff the “alienation” of the modern intellectual and the severance of spe- 
cialized knowledge from a moral and political engagement with the world.!° 


NUCLEAR PHYSICS, RESPONSIBILITY, AND VOCATION 


Oppenheimer has been a focus for reflection on the relationship between truth 
and worldly power: between the intellectual and the polis, “pure science” and 
technology, charisma and bureaucracy. Oppenheimer’s personal trajectory 
represents a key moment in a larger story of social changes impacting the 
organization of science and intellectual life: bureaucratization, professional- 
ization, the rise of science as a career, the routinization of career patterns, and, 
above all, the ever closer integration of science into the affairs of state. 

Max Weber linked the rise of modern rational bureaucracy to a particular 
character structure, that of the “personally detached and strictly ‘objective’ 
expert.” This figure of the expert stood in conflict with, and in Western 
societies has gradually replaced, the older type of humanistic cultivated man. 
The education of the cultivated man aimed at producing a particular kind of 
“bearing in life” rather than expert knowledge per se. Weber wrote, “Behind 
all the present discussions of the foundations of the educational system, the 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 5 


struggle of the ‘specialist type of man’ against the older type of ‘cultivated 
man’ is hidden at some decisive point . . . This fight intrudes into all intimate 
cultural questions.”'! The decline of the cultivated man and the rise of the 
specialist reflected the increasing cultural dominance of science, expertise, 
and rationality and their separation from other frameworks of value. In the 
disenchanted world of modernity, science has had to stand independently 
from religion, art, or humanistic moral values. All “former illusions” such as 
science as the “way to true God” or the “way to true happiness” have been 
dispelled. Weber agreed with Tolstoy that science could give “no answer to... 
the only question important for us: ‘What shall we do and how shall we live?’” 
Instead, the value of the scientific enterprise in a rationalized and disenchanted 
world was limited to the service of factual knowledge: “Science today is a 
‘vocation’ organized in special disciplines in the service of self-clarification 
and knowledge of interrelated facts. It is not the gift of grace of seers and 
prophets dispensing sacred values and revelations.” Weber’s conception of 
the ethos of science was set in tension between the twin connotations of both 
the German Beruf and the English vocation: on the one hand, the more archaic 
and spiritual value of the calling; on the other, the modern secular occupation. 
Weber’s concern was whether it was possible to sustain a sense of the meaning 
and value of science while it was becoming a secular, routinized profession.'* 

Michel Foucault has also centrally grappled with the implications of the 
specialization and disenchantment of the intellectual role during the twenti- 
eth century, and he has pointed to Oppenheimer as a pivotal figure in these 
transformations. Like Weber, he emphasized the modern divorce of knowl- 
edge from sacred religious and moral values: “Truth is a thing of this world.” 
Instead of speaking for transcendent values or universal truths, the modern 
intellectual-as-expert provides techniques of power: the intellectual “is no 
longer the rhapsodist of the eternal, but the strategist of life and death.” And 
Foucault wrote, “It seems to me that this figure of the ‘specific’ intellectual has 
emerged since the Second World War. Perhaps it was the atomic scientist (in 
a word, or rather a name: Oppenheimer) who acted as the point of transition 
between the universal and the specific intellectual.”'? Foucault suggested that 
Oppenheimer and the atomic scientists were able to combine the narrowly 
focused expertise of the specific intellectual with the claim to speak for all 
people that had been the mark of the universal intellectual. The global scope 
of the atomic threat enabled the scientists to be understood as speaking for 
humanity when they addressed the problems of the nuclear age. This univer- 
sality, however, was rooted not in claims to universal truth or transcendent 
moral law, but rather in a new kind of global technological power. 


6 Chapter One 


Foucault’s account points to the way in which the Manhattan Project drew 
together and intensified those processes identified by Weber, which in more 
dispersed ways were already changing the nature of the scientific vocation. 
Foucault, however, did not adequately address the ethical tensions and am- 
biguities in the new scientific role that emerged. The claim to “universality” 
of specialized expertise remains contested, and the Tolstoyan problem of 
meaning, emphasized by Weber, has not disappeared. The threat of atomic 
warfare gave rise to moral problems that could not be addressed by specialized 
expertise alone. The atomic bomb was the culmination of the rise of technical 
expertise, but it also called into question the nature of expert authority and its 
adequacy to deal with the crises of the modern world. The bomb project put 
scientists in a new situation, in which they had to either claim some sort of 
moral authority or publicly divest themselves of it entirely. Weber’s problem 
of vocation was at the heart of struggles over the nature and scope of scientific 
authority in the wake of World War II.!* 

This book tells a particular story, about how these tensions played out in 
Oppenheimer’s life and career. It aims to capture the particularity of his situ- 
ation and of his interventions, while at the same time drawing attention to the 
broader institutional and cultural context that he was negotiating. It was a par- 
ticular social and institutional trajectory that shaped Oppenheimer’s personal 
identity and his historical significance. Of course, there are other individuals 
whose trajectories offer similarities and who responded in interestingly similar 
and different ways to the challenge of atomic weapons. But more than any 
other figure, Oppenheimer had the potential to combine the emerging tech- 
nocratic power of the scientist within the state with a humanistic and critical 
perspective on the development of nuclear weapons. He therefore stood in 
notable contrast with such scientists as Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr, and 
others who criticized the national-security state from positions outside it. He 
equally stood in contrast with institutional insiders, such as Edward Teller, 
who defined their role as scientists strictly in instrumental terms, exclusive of 
any obligation to consider questions of ultimate ends. 

Einstein was the most important representative of the view that scientists 
have a moral obligation to address the ends to which research is applied. His 
only direct involvement with the atomic bomb project was in signing a letter 
to Roosevelt urging that the U.S. government take seriously the possibility 
of developing an atomic weapon. This step was motivated by his fear of the 
Nazis. But after World War II, Einstein became a vigorous advocate of arms 
control and world government. For example, the (Bertrand) Russell-Einstein 
manifesto of 1955 highlighted the threat of nuclear holocaust and called on 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 7 


scientists to work toward the goal of ending war. It led to the institution of 
the Pugwash conferences, aiming to promote scientific internationalism as a 
vehicle for peaceful international cooperation. Einstein was never included in, 
nor did he seek inclusion in, formal government advisory bodies. His political 
engagement was always as an outsider, drawing on moral authority rather than 
political power.’ 

Others more embroiled than Einstein in the atomic bomb project could 
nevertheless foresee an arms race and tried to take steps to prevent one. Bohr 
spent the war trying to convince the British and U.S. governments to supporta 
plan for international control of atomic energy. Although he was an important 
influence on other scientists, including Oppenheimer, his own direct inter- 
ventions met with little success. For example, Bohr’s meeting with Winston 
Churchill in May 1944 was a disaster. Bohr, characteristically, mumbled in a 
barely audible voice, and Churchill understood only that he was advocating 
telling the Soviets about the atomic bomb. Churchill thought Bohr danger- 
ously naive, and Bohr later said, “We did not speak the same language.” !° 

A group of scientists on the Manhattan Project at Chicago, including James 
Franck, Leo Szilard, and Eugene Rabinowitch, tried to prevent the military 
use of the atomic bomb by arguing for a technical demonstration instead. 
Szilard circulated a petition urging restraint against the military use of the 
bomb. Versions of this petition were signed by more than a hundred scientists 
in the Chicago and Oak Ridge laboratories. But in the face of the powerful in- 
stitutional and bureaucratic momentum toward use of the bomb, such efforts 
proved of little avail. Szilard told Oppenheimer at the time that although the 
petition was unlikely to influence wartime decisions, nevertheless, “from a 
point of view of the standing of the scientists in the eyes of the general public 
one or two years from now it is a good thing that a minority of scientists should 
have gone on record in favor of giving greater weight to moral arguments.” !” 

The connection of science to political activity has often been associated 
with a belief in the possibility of a rational solution to political problems. 
Rabinowitch and other figures associated with the Federation of American 
Scientists and the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists believed that, as sociologist 
Edward Shils summarized it, “the scientific method that led to the monstros- 
ity [of the atomic bomb] could also lead the way to the solution.” Rabinowitch 
“thought that the scientific method could replace the vagaries of political 
passion, ideology, and self-righteousness.”'® The same spirit was expressed 
by Linus Pauling, the 1962 Nobel Peace Prize winner, co-founder of the 
Emergency Committee of the Atomic Scientists in 1946, and an important 
force behind the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty. Joseph Rotblat was working 


8 Chapter One 


along the same lines in Britain after the war. The only scientist to leave Los 
Alamos on moral grounds, he later became a founder of Pugwash and won 
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995 for his work in promoting arms control. These 
scientists explicitly sought to connect their professional identity with a moral 
and political agenda, and they have done so largely outside governmental 
channels, pursuing their campaign within civil society.’ 

Others, while harboring moral objections to the buildup of nuclear weap- 
ons, have been more ambivalent about the place these objections should oc- 
cupy in relation to their professional scientific life. For example, historian 
Silvan S. Schweber suggests that the theoretical physicist Hans Bethe wres- 
tled with moral problems but ultimately decided that only through working 
on weapons could he have any real influence on policy. While he articulated 
technical arguments for a test ban and, later, against the Strategic Defense Ini- 
tiative, he did not—unlike, say, Einstein—consistently oppose nuclear weap- 
ons on moral grounds.”? 

Teller, in contrast, showed no ambivalence whatever. For him, scientists 
in the relevant fields had a clear-cut, positive obligation to push the bound- 
aries of what is technically possible; in the field of weapons research, this 
meant developing ever more powerful and sophisticated means of destruc- 
tion. Teller argued that “scientists have responsibilities that are real and great. 
The scientist must try to understand nature and to extend man’s use of that 
understanding. When a scientist has learned what he can and built what he can 
build, his work is not yet done. He must also explain in clear and simple terms 
what he has found and what he has constructed. And there his responsibility 
as a scientist ends.””! 

Teller’s argument is premised on the radical incommensurability between 
ultimate values. In an argument closely paralleling Weber’s, he suggested that 
science as a vocation is one value-sphere among many and that the responsi- 
bility of the scientist is strictly limited to that particular value-sphere: 


There are three things of great importance which philosophers like 
Plato said must be answered together in a positive way: What is good? 
What is true? What is beautiful? I disagree with Plato. I think that these 
are three entirely different questions. What is true is up to the scientist. 
What is good is up to the politician and maybe the religious leaders. 
What is beautiful is up to the artist. These are three very important 
questions. And neither of them should be handled by what the other 


two answers are.?? 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 9 


The modern condition of the separation between value-spheres and the frag- 
mentation of authority implied for Teller the limitation of the weapons scien- 
tist to the production of weapons—he should not concern himself with their 
consequences. 

Teller’s position is the official one of modern Western society. It is institu- 
tionalized in the official culture of bureaucratic organizations that divide pro- 
fessional from personal life and that restrict responsibility to narrow institu- 
tional roles. While Teller himself may be a controversial figure, his conception 
of the scientific role and its responsibilities is not. It is one that is tacitly sub- 
scribed to by the many thousands of scientists across the industrialized world 
who work in weapons laboratories and for whom perfecting the means of mass 
killing is a bureaucratic job requirement.”’ Assuming a responsibility beyond 
the instrumental role advocated by Teller has generally meant becoming an 
outsider in relation to the bureaucratic apparatus of the national-security state. 

The predicament in which I situate Oppenheimer is therefore general 
across Western societies. It involves, first, the fragmentation of cultural au- 
thority endemic to bureaucratic and industrial modernity and to the scientific 
vocation in the twentieth century; and, second, the crisis posed by the atomic 
bomb and forms of technoscientific power that break down the institutional 
boundaries of science as a distinct sphere. Specialized modern intellectual 
authority appears increasingly inadequate to deal with the global dimensions 
of the problems of late modern technoscience. As Einstein put it, “By painful 
experience we have learned that rational thinking does not suffice to solve the 
problems of our social life. Penetrating research and keen scientific work have 
often had tragic implications for mankind, . . . creating the means for his own 
mass destruction.””* 

The integration of science with state power and violence cut to the heart of 
postwar liberal political culture. Science was a key motif in the reconstruction 
of Western liberalism after the end of World War II. Sociologist Shiv Vis- 
vanathan has argued that in the face of the twin crises of the Great Depression 
and the plunge into world war, “science took over as the sustaining force of 
the liberal imagination ... The scientific method was substituted for the in- 
visible hand and [Karl] Popper and [Michael] Polanyi became the Adam 
Smiths of this new regime.””? Popper’s The Open Society and Its Enemies 
(1945) and Polanyi’s Sceence, Faith and Society (1946), though they expressed 
different epistemologies, converged on the notion that science instantiated 
and expressed the core values of liberal democracy and that the professional 


values of science made it incompatible with totalitarianism.”° 


10 Chapter One 


Yet this vision of science as a beacon of liberal humanist values was dis- 
turbed by the nightmares of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Even as the atomic 
bomb made science a sword and shield against totalitarianism, it also ren- 
dered the gap between high culture and barbarism uncomfortably narrow, 
even nonexistent. As Oppenheimer saw it, the scientific endeavor, “fostered 
throughout the centuries, in which the role of coercion was perhaps reduced 
more completely than in any other human activity,” had culminated in the 
construction of “a secret, and an unparalleled instrument of coercion.””” 

Oppenheimer occupied a pivotal position in these moral, political, and 
cultural dilemmas and conflicts. He emerged from the war as a nodal figure 
in the new relationship between science and the American state and as the 
embodiment of the new cultural significance of science. Until 1954, he played 
a key mediating role between government and the scientific community. 
Oppenheimer attempted to hold together the competing scientific roles of the 
humanistic critic, the technocrat, and the weaponeer. He was seen as unique- 
ly able to combine a technocratic advisory role within the state with more 
archaic forms of cultural authority. To explore Oppenheimer’s individual tra- 
jJectory is therefore to examine tensions between humanism and technolog- 
ical expertise that lie at the core of modern science and society. 


CULTIVATION, CHARISMA, AND SCIENTIFIC AUTHORITY 


Oppenheimer’s persona seems to pitch directly against dominant sociological 
ideas about the nature of self and authority in modern science, large-scale 
organizations, and government. He was not only a nuclear expert but also 
the kind of “cultivated man” whom cultural commentators since Weber have 
repeatedly pronounced extinct. In contrast to the narrowly specialized focus 
of modern bureaucratized “big science,” Oppenheimer came to be celebrated 
for his general or “humanistic” intellect. He once described himself as “a 
properly educated esthete.” Chemist Glenn Seaborg wrote of “the scope of 
his knowledge and interest—in languages, literature, the arts, music, and the 
social and political problems of the world” and of “his fervent desire to see and 
relate an order and purpose in the entire spectrum of human existence and 
experience.” William L. Laurence, the only journalist to witness the Manhattan 
Project’s first atomic bomb test, described Oppenheimer as not merely a 
scientist but “a poet and a dreamer.” At one of his last public appearances, to 
receive an honorary degree at Princeton, Oppenheimer was introduced as a 
modern Renaissance man: a “physicist and sailor, philosopher and horseman, 


linguist and cook, lover of fine wine and better poetry.””® 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 11 


Aesthetic values were central to Oppenheimer’s personal appeal and public 
image. The wife of physicist P. A. M. Dirac wrote to Oppenheimer in 1964 
commending him on his impeccable taste: “Many people have a lot of money, 
but few people have taste.” The Oppenheimer house was a relief from this 
general philistinism; “to wake up in surroundings so pleasant to the eye, 
wherever one turns to, is to me a great feast indeed.” Oppenheimer was “a 
darling host.” The Oppenheimers’ home in Princeton (a house dating from 
1696), with its collection of French literature and paintings by van Gogh, Vuil- 
lard, and Derain, was described by a journalist as “the perfect mirror of their 
cultivation.” It was characteristic that in 1958, Look magazine photographed 
Oppenheimer in the Princeton house standing in front of his inherited van 
Gogh.”9 

Because he was financially independent, Oppenheimer could not be per- 
ceived as a mere bureaucratic hireling. While science was increasingly profes- 
sionalized and bureaucratized, he retained some remnants of the qualities of 
the gentleman-amateur. Physicist Isidor I. Rabi, for example, had been struck 
by the way in which Oppenheimer, as a postdoctoral student in Zurich, would 
talk about literature rather than his studies in physics, and also by the apparent 
effortlessness and unconcern with which Oppenheimer approached his work. 
Even at Los Alamos, according to physicist Charles Critchfield, Oppenheimer 
“didn’t talk about weapons or physics. He talked about the mystery of life .. . 
He [would] walk around the room . .. He would rub his palms together and 
look to the side ... He kept quoting the Bhagavad Gita.””° 

Oppenheimer’s cultivation was often invoked in relation to social virtues. 
In his novel The Man Who Would Be God, Chevalier’s character of Sebastian 
Bloch—clearly recognizable as Oppenheimer—is celebrated for his general 
intellect: “He’s said to have what they call a universal mind. He doesn’t limit 
himself to one speciality like most scientists, but seems to be completely at 
home in the whole realm of science and the arts as well.” And this general 
cultivation is crucially linked in the description to gentlemanly qualities of 
disinterestedness: “He seems to have little or no personal ambition ... Most 
of the important contributions he has made have been ideas passed on to 
colleagues and students, or work done in collaboration, for which he has 
never claimed credit.”?! 

Chevalier wrote of Oppenheimer, “His presence . . . seemed to bring out in 
each of the assembled what was most genuine and most expressive in his true 
nature.” This mirrors the refrain of the Los Alamos scientists, who noted that 
Oppenheimer tended to draw out and clarify the key points of any technical 
discussion, his gentlemanly disinterestedness ensuring a genuinely civil, rather 


12 Chapter One 


than autocratic, role. According to Victor Weisskopf, “Oppenheimer gave us 
an example of how large scientific enterprises can be more than the sum of 
the collaborative effort of their groups. They can be imbued with a creative 
spirit based upon a common heritage and a common aim.” Physicist James 
Tuck, part of the British mission to Los Alamos, similarly said, “(His function 
here [at Los Alamos] was not to do penetrating original research but to in- 
spire it. It required a surpassing knowledge of science and of scientists ... A 
lesser man could not have done it. Scientists are not necessarily cultured, es- 
pecially in America. Oppenheimer had to be.” And it was because they had 
“a great gentleman to serve under,” said Tuck, that the Los Alamos scientists 
invariably “remember that golden time with enormous emotion.”*” 

Oppenheimer’s breadth and cultivation were not only humanistic and 
aesthetic, but also technical and scientific. Physicist Robert R. Wilson, for 
example, highlighted the aesthetic in Oppenheimer’s influence on and lead- 
ership of American physics. When Oppenheimer received the Fermi Award 
in 1963, Wilson wrote to him that “American physics is beautiful to behold,” 
and this beauty “has to do with a style, and an intensity, and a depth that 
we can relate to your profound example.” Rabi wrote, “Oppenheimer un- 
derstood the whole structure of physics with extraordinary clarity, and not 
only the structure, but the interactions between the different elements.” In 
addition to his expertise in theoretical physics, he “would continually amaze 
experimenters by his great knowledge of their own subject.” In an age of spe- 
cialization, Oppenheimer stood out as a general scientific philosopher, and 
this was a key part of what was described as his “intellectual sex appeal.”°” 

Oppenheimer is remembered as the man who insisted that the first atomic 
bomb test be called Trinity, invoking John Donne’s sonnet “Batter my heart, 
three-person’d God”; who summed up the new place of the scientist in the 
atomic age by quoting a line from the Bhagavad Gita, “I am become Death, 
destroyer of worlds”; who told Truman, “Mr. President, I have blood on 
my hands”; and who recognized that “the physicists have known sin.”** 
Oppenheimer was seen to transcend the role of the scientific specialist even as 
he gave voice to the predicament of this figure and to the meaning of science 
in the postwar nuclear age. This was a key aspect of what was, and still is, 
repeatedly referred to as Oppenheimer’s “charisma.” 

The term charisma was introduced into sociological vocabulary by Weber 
to pick out a form of authority that was being lost from the modern scientific 
and bureaucratic world. In Weber’s usage, charismatic authority derived 
from an attributed “gift of grace” or “specific gifts of body and spirit” that 
set an individual apart as a “natural leader.” Weber described charisma as a 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 13 


revolutionary force, fundamentally opposed to any form of institutional rou- 
tine and especially to bureaucratic organization. “The charismatic structure,” 
he said, “knows no regulated ‘career,’ ‘advancement,’ ‘salary,’ or regulated 
and expert training.” The modern “disenchanted” world, devoid of belief 
in magical or supernatural forces and qualities and increasingly pervaded by 
bureaucratic structures, is also a world emptied of charisma. Since science is 
the source of this “disenchantment of the world,” and since Weber observed 
the increasingly close affiliation of science with the bureaucratic state, he 
suggested that scientists would be one of the most unlikely groups in which 
to find a charismatic leader.*® 

For sociologist Daniel Bell, it was just this contrast and paradox that made 
Oppenheimer’s persona such an appealing, but also elusive, one. He described 
Oppenheimer as a “gnostic figure” who “seemed to have stepped more from 
the world of thaumaturgy than ofscience.” To Bell, Oppenheimer exemplified 
the “messianic role of the scientist” and the “charismatic dimension” of mod- 
ern science; and, he added, it is “the tension between those charismatic ele- 
ments and the realities of large-scale organization that will frame the political 
realities of the post-industrial society.”°° 

Oppenheimer’s scientific colleagues have recurrently drawn on the notion 
of charisma to describe what they saw as Oppenheimer’s special personal 
qualities of leadership. Rabi wrote that Oppenheimer succeeded Einstein “as 
the great charismatic figure of the scientific world,” linking Oppenheimer’s 
charisma to his “spiritual quality, this refinement as expressed in speech 
and manner.” Wilson reported how he was “caught up by the Oppenheimer 
charisma” at Los Alamos. Seaborg dwelled on Oppenheimer’s “magnetic, 
really electric, personality, [and] his charismatic presence.” And Teller spoke 
of the “brilliance, enthusiasm and charisma” with which Oppenheimer led 
Los Alamos.?” 

As descriptions of Oppenheimer as “charismatic” are elaborated in terms 
of his intellectual powers and qualities of leadership, these, in turn, are per- 
vasively linked with descriptions of his physiognomy. Almost no commentary 
on the force of Oppenheimer’s personal presence failed to remark upon his 
tall, thin frame and especially upon the color of his eyes and the intensity of his 
gaze. Before the war, his Berkeley students were used to what they called the 
“blue glare treatment”: “when aroused,” journalist Peter Goodchild reports, 
“Oppenheimer’s eyes seemed to turn from a grey-blue to a vivid blue.” Los 
Alamos resident Bernice Brode also wrote about his blue eyes, which “had 
that special intensity, peculiar to him.” Bell commented on Oppenheimer’s 
“bony features and translucent eyes . . . set in a face that seemed to have been 


14 Chapter One 


etched by inner anguish.” French social and political thinker Raymond Aron, 
who associated with Oppenheimer after the hearings, recalled that “he created 
a strong impression by the contrast between the purity of his blue eyes and the 
nervous tension in all his gestures and statements.” Roger Robb, the AEC’s 
counsel in the security hearings, expressed his dislike of Oppenheimer in phy- 
siognomic terms: “he had the iciest pair of blue eyes I ever saw.”°* And Cheva- 
lier described Oppenheimer as 


tall, nervous and intent. . . But it was the head that was the most striking: 
the halo of wispy black curly hair, the fine, sharp nose, and especially 
the eyes, surprisingly blue, having a strange depth and intensity, and 
yet expressive ofa candor that was altogether disarming. He looked like 
a young Einstein, and at the same time like an over-grown chou-boy. 


It was a face that made Chevalier think about glorified faces he had seen in 
paintings: “I associated it with the faces of apostles ... A kind of light shone 
from it, which illuminated the scene around him.” One wartime Los Alamos 
resident thought that “something about his eyes gave him a certain aura.”°? 

It was a face and a body that summoned up similar images in Robert Wil- 
son’s wife, Jane; when, toward the end of the Manhattan Project, Oppen- 
heimer was ill with chicken pox and reduced to about 115 pounds, she thought 
that “our thin, ascetic Director looked like a 15th-century portrait of a saint.” 
In describing Oppenheimer, Rabi was reminded of a friend he had known as 
a student at Cornell: “Physically and perhaps intellectually and emotionally, 
he was very like Oppenheimer. One day he announced: ‘I give the lie to the 
materialist. I am a disembodied spirit.’ In Oppenheimer,” Rabi concluded, 
“the element of earthiness was feeble.” The physicist Leona Libby contrasted 
Enrico Fermi’s earthiness with the “the poetic, disembodied, spiritual emana- 
tions that were the basis for Oppenheimer’s charisma.” And journalist John 
Mason Brown thought that “the power of [Oppenheimer’s] personality” was 
reinforced by “the fragility of his person. When he speaks he seems to grow, 
since the largeness of his mind so affirms itself that the smallness of his body 
is forgotten.”*° So Oppenheimer was identified, in part, as an ascetic, with 
the moral authority that has been associated with the ascetic way of life over a 
great span of Western history.*! 

These sensibilities, archaic in tone and texture although recently expressed, 
clash with our understanding of ourselves as rational, egalitarian moderns, 
and their overtones of Carlylean “great man” history may raise the hackles of 
sociologists and social historians. There might therefore be a natural tendency 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 15 


to dismiss this talk as mere “legend-making” or “mythmaking.”*” To disregard 
the language of “charisma” and “cultivation,” however, and consider it merely 
epiphenomenal would bea mistake. Such imagery was constitutive, in very real 
ways, of Oppenheimer’s cultural authority. These were images and responses 
that Oppenheimer himself, as we will see, acted so as to encourage and foster. 
The “real” Oppenheimer can in no sense be separated from this symbolism. 
Rather than attempt merely to debunk the “Oppenheimer legend,” it is, in 
my view, more interesting to seriously engage with the issue and topic of 
his embodied cultural authority and with its place, however tension-ridden 
and contradictory, within modern technoscience. Yet one cannot, of course, 
stop with this imagery and these sensibilities; we must ask how Oppenheimer 
fashioned his self, identity, and authority, for what purposes, and with what 


consequences.” 


BIOGRAPHY AS SOCIOLOGY 


The cover photograph for the first issue of Physics Today, in May 1948, showed 
Oppenheimer’s trademark porkpie hat resting on the piping of a cyclotron 
accelerator. Awkward against the symmetric architecture of the machinery, 
the hat sits as it would be worn—pulled down to one side. It was a touch of 
personal style; yet underneath the hat, instead of a face, is still more piping, 
merging into shadow. Oppenheimer himself is physically absent from the 
photograph, lurking as an invisible presence. The very iconography through 
which Oppenheimer is remembered and celebrated has often seemed to hide 
the man rather than illuminate him. There was, and still is, an elusive quality 
to him. An obituary aptly described him as “the equivocal hero of science.” 
He was a man who was at once “loved and hated, trusted and mistrusted, 
admired and reviled.”** Often, colleagues, friends, and even enemies found 
these conflicting responses intermingled, almost inseparable in their opinion 
ofthe man. The physicist David Bohm, one ofhis former students, thought that 
the “infinite sadness” of Oppenheimer’s face on the cover of Time magazine 
made him look like Jesus Christ. But, Bohm reflected, “I think a better image 
would be a linear combination of J[esus] C[hrist] and Judas, or of Judas trying 
to look like J[esus] C[hrist]. An interesting case of mistaken identification.” 
This sentiment was echoed by Chevalier: in portraits, he said, Oppenheimer’s 
expression “could be Christ-like and Mephistophelean by turns.”“° 

“Who was he, what was he? Who knew him?” These questions, asked in an 
obituary of Oppenheimer, had been the subject of intense, ongoing reflection 
during Oppenheimer’s lifetime. The questions remained unresolved at the 


16 Chapter One 


time of his death, and they remain so today. As one commentator put it, “If 
what he did is familiar, exactly how he did it is not so fully understood; and 
who he was, and what he became in the process of doing it, is probably beyond 
full knowing.”*° In Oppenheimer, there was a convergence of the roles of the 
scientific specialist and the broadly cultivated humanist, the ascetic and the 
high-living socialite, the intellectual bohemian and the governmental insider, 
the pure scientist and the atomic bomb builder. His public identity was a con- 
fusing union of opposites. Nor can coherence easily be found in his private self. 

The task of finding a more basic private self behind Oppenheimer’s public 
personas proves frustrating. Even his closest colleagues felt that they did not 
know him intimately. Particularly after the war, if there was a private man 
behind the public facade, he was so well hidden as to be, for all intents and 
purposes, nonexistent. There was just the public face.” When interviewed 
by the FBI in 1947, physicist Enrico Fermi said that as far as he knew, 
“Oppenheimer has no really close personal friends . . . The friends which he 
does have are largely associated with him because of scientific matters.” Fermi 
did not recall that Oppenheimer “had any real intimates on the project at Los 
Alamos.” A journalist wrote that “again and again, as I talked with his friends, 
I heard the refrain, ‘I’m devoted to Robert. And yet, when I think about it, I 
can’t say that I really know him well.’”48 

Others expressed a different sense in which Oppenheimer was an enigma. 
Physicist Felix Bloch once asked Rabi, “You know, I wonder of all the Op- 
penheimers I have seen, which is the real one?” Rabi replied, “I'll bet you 
Robert doesn’t know himself.” Rabi, perhaps Oppenheimer’s closest confi- 
dant in the war years, could find no underlying unity to Oppenheimer. He was, 
Rabi said, “a man who was put together of many bright shining splinters.” 
Abraham Pais, a physicist who worked with Oppenheimer at the Institute 
for Advanced Study at Princeton, wrote, “In all my life I have never known 
a personality more complex than Robert Oppenheimer.” This “explains, I 
think, why different people reacted to him in such extremely varied ways.” 
Pais summarized his own attitude toward the man as one of “ambivalence.”*? 
Journalists and historians have also expressed these sentiments. Jungk re- 
ferred to Oppenheimer’s “complex and inconsistent” character, and Richard 
Rhodes described him as “a man of disturbing contradictions.” More recently, 
Schweber has critically contrasted Oppenheimer’s fragmentation with what 
he sees as Bethe’s stronger sense of self rooted in his vocation.” 
This complexity was given particular significance in Teller’s testimony 
og 4 


during the 1954 loyalty-security hearings that Oppenheimer’s “confused and 


complicated” behavior made him “exceedingly hard to understand.” Teller 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 17 


said that he would rather the security of the country be “in hands which I 
understand better, and therefore trust more.”°! In the hearings, conflicting 
understandings of the role of the scientist in the polity and of the legitimate 
scope of scientific authority were played out as a struggle over the person of 
Oppenheimer. At stake in this examination of, and contestation over, Oppen- 
heimer’s biography and character was the entire history of the relationship 
between science and the state as it had developed during and following World 
War II. 

The making of Oppenheimer’s life into public drama did not happen only 
after his death. His life was public drama, and it was recognized as such by 
his friends, colleagues, and enemies. Describing Oppenheimer’s reaction to 
the stagnation of efforts at international arms control in 1946, AEC chairman 
David Lilienthal wrote in his diary, “He is really a tragic figure ... Here is 
the making of great drama; indeed, this 2s great drama.” Journalist Alfred 
Friendly described the transcript of the security hearings as “Aristotelian 
drama,” “Shakespearian in richness and variety,” with a “plot more intricate 
than Gone With The Wind.” It was almost inevitable that a stage play would 
be based on the transcript of the hearings. Heinar Kipphardt’s production of 
In the Matter of F. Robert Oppenheimer opened in 1964, three years before 
Oppenheimer’s death.” 

Libby described Oppenheimer as “‘an accomplished actor.” Rabi said that 
he “lived a charade.” These perceptions are partly connected with the fact 
that Oppenheimer was, after the war, an archetypal scientist of not only the 
nuclear age but also the age of mass media, representing science for Time, 
Life, and Look magazines and for radio and television audiences. He followed 
Einstein in being a scientific celebrity. But he was ambivalent about this role, 
both resisting and playing to his various public scripts. And this ambivalence 
in turn exacerbated his fragmentation and disunity of self. Jeremy Bernstein 
witnessed a television newsman’s interview of Oppenheimer: 


When the cameras were rolling he spoke ina soft voice, his eyes lowered; 
he wore an almost martyred look. I think [they] were discussing what he 
used to refer to contemptuously as his “case,” the security trial. When 
the cameras stopped, there was a different Oppenheimer—the “smiling 
public man”—discussing with Smith the “in” French restaurants in 
New York and the Caribbean, where Oppie had a home. It was an eerie 
form of show business. At some point he caught sight of me and said I 
could watch so long as he couldn’t see me—an odd request to which, of 
course, I agreed.” 


18 Chapter One 


Such testimony by colleagues and associates would suggest that to understand 
Oppenheimer is just to appreciate a series of performances and roles enacted 
in different settings. 

Oppenheimer fashioned different identities, in different places and at dif- 
ferent tmes—hero, martyr, saint, philosopher, technocrat, detached expert, 
engaged intellectual—and he was helped to do so by friends and colleagues, 
allies, and sometimes opponents, all of whom were willing participants or were 
drawn into the charade. His identity was the outcome of collective work, in 
his interaction with others. It was also shaped by the various institutional con- 
texts in which he operated and through which he had a particular trajectory. 
Through collective interactional and representational work, Oppenheimer’s 
unique identity became inscribed as a central reference point of late modern 
technoscientific culture. To write the biography of Oppenheimer is therefore 
to write simultaneously both the account of an individual life and the history 
of the making of social, institutional, and cultural forms; it is in that sense 
sociological biography.™* 

Oppenheimer occupied a nodal point at which competing cultural tenden- 
cles converged and intersected.”> He emblematized, in particular, the tension 
between a broad political and cultural role for the scientist as intellectual, and 
theinstrumental role for science asa means and source of power. Oppenheimer 
came to embody cultural tensions rooted in the development of the secular, 
modern conception of truth as “a thing of this world.” As bomb builder, 
public spokesman, and symbol of esoteric pure science, Oppenheimer came 
to exemplify an emerging understanding of truth as power as well as cultural 
tensions between truth and power. As both expert and cultivated man, he 
personified tensions between, on the one hand, the narrowing and fragmen- 
tation of cognitive and cultural authority, due to specialization; and, on the 
other hand, the increasingly far-reaching impact of science on politics and 
culture. 

At Los Alamos, Oppenheimer became the focal point for conflicts of scien- 
tific collegiality and openness versus security, secrecy, and compartmentaliza- 
tion. After the war, he was centrally implicated in tensions in the relationship 
of science to the state and to international affairs. Could the atomic bobmb—an 
unprecedented instrument of military and political power—provide a basis 
for transcending worldly conflicts and divisions, and for the creation of a 
newly universal role for intellectuals? Did the incorporation of scientists into 
technological, military, and advisory roles in the state mean the politicization 
and instrumentalization of science—or did it, as some hoped, augur a new 
rationality in politics and international relations? Could science be treated 


Introduction: Charisma, Self, and Sociological Biography 19 


as a model of democratic civil society even while it was being mobilized as 
a technological and military resource of the state? What sorts of individual 
and collective responsibility, and what kinds of intellectual authority, were 
demanded by the new atomic technoscience and the new formations of knowl- 
edge and power? 

If Oppenheimer is a figure whose historical significance is chronically 
unresolved, it is because the cultural struggles in which he was implicated and 
in which his identity was forged remain unresolved and ongoing.”® This book 
is a study of the making of individual self and identity, but also of the making 
of cultural forms and historical meanings. 

Chapter 2 will trace Oppenheimer’s youthful struggles for self in relation 
to Jewish cultural identity, education and self-cultivation, and the specialized 
scientific vocation. Becoming a physicist meant negotiating a set of cultural and 
moral repertoires for the disciplining and fashioning of the self. The chapter 
examines in particular how Oppenheimer dealt with tensions between Bildung 
and science, between humanistic breadth and technical specialization, and the 
ways in which these antinomies were interwoven with more personal struggles 
for acceptance and identity. 

Chapter 3 examines how Oppenheimer’s understanding of self and voca- 
tion and their relationship to social responsibility, politics, and power changed 
during his period as a professor of physics at Berkeley, from the early 1930s 
to the beginning of his involvement in the war and Los Alamos. The chapter 
traces Oppenheimer’s shift from inwardness to involvement in the political 
world. I suggest that this shift expressed changing personal, social, and in- 
stitutional relationships. In particular, I argue that Oppenheimer’s surprising 
emergence as a scientific organizer and leader of Los Alamos was the result of 
collective work by colleagues as well as countervailing pressures from military 
authorities with an interest in shaping his role and function to their ends. 

Chapter 4 describes how the construction of Los Alamos as an institu- 
tion involved the collaborative fashioning of Oppenheimer as its charismatic 
leader. I develop a sociological analysis of how the complex organization of 
Los Alamos was constructed and defined and the role that Oppenheimer’s 
charismatic authority played in this process. In order to examine the social 
constitution of Oppenheimer’s charisma, I provide an analysis of his location 
in the organizational and political hierarchy of the Manhattan Project and an 
account of the meaning and functions of his leadership in quotidian life at 
Los Alamos. I therefore aim to situate Oppenheimer within the history of 
Los Alamos, from above and below, and to describe his role in relation to the 
moral texture of social and organizational life. 


20 Chapter One 


The Los Alamos scientists deeply internalized the institutional goals of 
the Manhattan Project. In order to understand this collective dedication to 
building the “gadget,” and to apprehend the organizational functions of Op- 
penheimer’s charismatic leadership, it is necessary also to grasp how everyday 
life at Los Alamos was subtly but powerfully structured around the project’s 
military goal. Chapter 5 examines the more coercive side of Oppenheimer’s 
leadership in enforcing the schedule and the instrumental mission of the 
laboratory. It introduces dilemmas about the relationship between moral re- 
sponsibility, technology, and bureaucracy that would become central to the 
problems of the scientific role in the postwar period. 

During the war, Oppenheimer mediated between rank-and-file Los Alamos 
scientists and the project’s military and civilian administrative elites. His 
wartime position evolved into a postwar role as a key representative of the 
broader scientific community in its relations with government. In chapter 6, 
I analyze how he negotiated his scientific role in relation to the politics of the 
Atomic Energy Commission and the power of the military, and I examine the 
relationship between these political struggles and Oppenheimer’s changing 
formulations of the scientific vocation. 

Chapter 7 examines the 1954 loyalty-security hearings as a key site of conflict 
over the role of the scientist in relation to the national-security state and over the 
legitimate content and scope of scientific authority. Oppenheimer’s personal 
identity became a focal point of contestation over the definition of the social 
and political role of the scientist. 

Chapter 8 is a concluding examination of how Oppenheimer tried to 
reconstitute his public role after the security hearings had cut his ties to 
government. Oppenheimer survived this defeat by embracing it, becoming the 
very embodiment of the despair of the humanist intellectual in a technological 
world. For this performance, he fell back on personal resources of cultivation 
and general culture. As he made speeches lamenting the death of the humanist 
intellectual and the impossibility of cultivation in an age of specialization and 
technology, Oppenheimer presented himself precisely as the embodiment of 
that humanistic ideal—as the last intellectual. 


CHAPTER TWO 


Struggling for Self 


THE OPPENHEIMER FAMILY: 
IMMIGRATION, ASSIMILATION, AND CULTURE 


J. Robert Oppenheimer was born into an upper-middle-class German Jewish 
family in Manhattan. His father, Julius, was born in Hanau (near Frankfurt) 
and immigrated to the United States in 1888, at the age of seventeen.! Julius 
joined two of his relatives who had immigrated around 1870 and set up an 
enterprise called Rothfeld, Stern and Company, which imported cloth for the 
lining of men’s suits. He later became the manager of the firm, and by the time 
Robert was born, in 1904, the business was very successful and the family quite 
wealthy. Julius’s wife, Ella Friedman, was an artist, also of German Jewish 
background, whose family had come to the United States in the 1840s. Robert 
and his brother, Frank, younger by eight years, grew up ina nine-room apart- 
ment on Riverside Drive in the Upper West Side, overlooking the Hudson.” 

The Oppenheimers were secular and culturally assimilated. Oppenhei- 
mer’s father achieved his “principal ambition” when he became an American 
citizen. The family minimized any identification with Germany. German was 
not spoken at home; Robert later said, “My mother didn’t talk it well, my 
father didn’t believe in talking it.” Before World War I, and then again in 1921 
and 1924, the family accompanied Julius on business trips to Germany, which 
were extended into family vacations.’ Most of Julius’s family had remained 
in Germany. Oppenheimer last saw his grandfather at the age of seven; he 
described him as “an unsuccessful business man, born himself in a hovel, 


really, in an almost medieval German village, with a taste for scholarship.” 


22 Chapter Two 


According to Isidor Rabi, Robert’s parents were “delightful persons of great 
cultivation and taste.” Julius was described by his employees as a “proper gen- 
tleman.” Oppenheimer’s youthhood friend Paul Horgan thought of Julius as 
“desperately amiable, anxious to be agreeable.” Remembering Mrs. Oppen- 
heimer, Horgan said, “I always think of her in tones of pearl gray, because she 
kept wearing chiffon of that color, and she wore a string of pearls. She had an 
artificial hand, which she supported with the other hand, always [wearing] a 
gray silk glove.” She was, he said, “very handsome . . . a very delicate person, I 
think probably highly neurotic, highly attenuated emotionally, and she always 
presided with a great delicacy and grace at the table and other events.” Like 
her husband, she was anxiously polite and attentive to others, and from her 
Oppenheimer inherited his decorous manners.” 

Before her marriage, Ella had been active as an artist, studying and painting 
in Paris. On her return to the United States, she had set up a fashionable 
studio in New York, and she taught art at college level. She did not paint very 
much after marriage; instead, she and Julius became collectors, and they were 
early buyers of van Gogh.° 

Asa child, Robert was surrounded by wealth and attended by nurses and 
servants. But his home was also strict and claustrophobic—offering, he later 
said, “no normal healthy way to be a bastard.” According to Horgan, the 
household was “very formal” and had “a sadness, there was a melancholy 
tone.” Frank remembered the family home as having “a feeling of friendliness 
and warmth and gentleness and quite a lot of conversation.” But at the same 
time, “it was reasonably formal.” A college friend who visited the family’s 
holiday home in Bay Shore, Long Island, later described the atmosphere of 
the family as “European sort of . . . not free and easy like Americans, though 
they wouldn’t have thought of themselves as foreigners I’m sure.”’ 

It was a highly sheltered environment, even cloistered. “Everything was 
done in the home,” said Frank, and there was a strong sense, which the parents 
communicated to their sons, of this domestic space being protected against 
a threatening outside world. Frank recalled, “One couldn’t buy apples off 
the street because the vendors would spit on them and contaminate them, 
and the barber came to the house and cut one’s hair, and I had my tonsils 
out in my own room. Just a general distrust of the pollution of the outside 
world.” This cosseting was a reaction to the death, soon after birth, of the 
Oppenheimers’ second child, when Robert was four years old. The emotional 
repressiveness of these upper-class surroundings is clear from Oppenheimer’s 
later description of himself‘as having been “‘an unctuous repulsively good little 


Struggling for Self 23 


boy.” “My life as a child,” he said, “did not prepare me in any way for the fact 
that there are cruel and bitter things.”* 

At the same time that the parents’ fears protected the boys from the outside 
world, Robert was aware of his mother’s worry at the result, which was his 
isolation from other children. When interviewed later in life by the philosopher 
and historian of science Thomas Kuhn, Oppenheimer said, “I think my mother 
especially was dissatisfied with the limited interest I had in people of my own 
age, and ... I know she kept trying to get me to be more like other boys, 
but with indifferent success.” When he was fourteen years old, his parents 
sent him to a summer camp. But his physical delicacy and his naiveté about 
the world made him an obvious target for bullying. Throughout his teenage 
years, Oppenheimer was awkward in his body: a former classmate said that 
“there was something strangely childish about him ... There was a sort of 
déséquilibre.”® 

Between 1911 and 1921, Oppenheimer attended the Ethical Culture School 
on Central Park West near Sixty-third Street. He immersed himself in school- 
work and study. His hobby, from the age of five, was mineralogy; at age eleven 
he was a member of the New York Mineralogical Club, and at age twelve 
he presented a paper there. His mother and father “were pleased that I was 
a good student, were pleased that I was highbrow, were perhaps somewhat 
mockingly proud of my vigor in collecting and learning about minerals.”!° 
The family’s interests were, in general, aesthetic rather than scholarly; they 
were “literate” but not “bookish.” They placed great emphasis on education, 
however. Julius was on the board of the Ethical Culture School between 1907 
and 1915 and was a great admirer of its founder, Felix Adler (1851-1933). And 
beyond this educational interest, Julius was interested in Ethical Culture as a 
philosophy and a worldview. The adolescent Oppenheimer quipped that his 
father “swallowed Dr. Adler like morality compressed.”"! 

Adler, the son ofa Reform rabbi, was born in Germany but was raised in the 
United States, where he founded the Ethical Culture movement. In develop- 
ing his educational philosophy, Adler argued that the universal moral message 
of Judaism should be stripped of the trappings of religious doctrine and ritual. 
Ethical Culture was an attempt to move beyond religion per se to an emphasis 
on worldly goals of social reform and, in particular, education. Education 
was deemed by Adler to be in itself a moral process.'* Fundamental to this 
philosophy was the German Enlightenment idea of Bildung. Itis not a concept 
that translates easily, but at its core was the idea of self-cultivation through ed- 
ucation. Education was broadly conceived as moral self-development, aimed 


24 Chapter Two 


at drawing forth the individual’s unique personality. The inward search for 
the “true self” meant attempting to transcend particularistic forms of iden- 
tity. The understanding of self as being formed through an active process 
of disciplined work and study held the meritocratic implication that distinc- 
tion and status could be achieved through education, rather than being given 
by birth. In such egalitarian and universalistic implications lay the appeal of 
Bildung for emancipated German Jews. Bildung promised Jews a new, secular 
identity, which would allow assimilation and inclusion without requiring an 
outright rejection of their Jewishness. According to historian George Mosse, 
it was “an ideal ready-made for Jewish assimilation, because it transcended all 
differences of nationality and religion through the unfolding of the individual 
personality.”!° 

Yet these ideals never had broad appeal across class lines, even within Ger- 
many. Bildung was embraced initially by parts of the German upper class and 
aristocracy, then by civil servants and sections of the middle classes. Among 
the middle classes, Beldung tended to be a decorative ideal, maintained for 
prestige value only. And over the course of the nineteenth century, it became 
increasingly detached from the progressive humanism of the Enlightenment 
and associated instead with conservative nationalist ideals of Volk culture. 
The Jews maintained allegiance to the original Enlightenment conception of 
Bildung even while the majority of the German bourgeoisie and intellectuals 
were turning away from it. By the turn of the century (and into the twentieth 
century), the German middle classes were remaking Bildung as an idea of 
national Gemeinschaft, or the particular virtues of German culture. Paradox- 
ically, then, as Jews clung to the original, pure conception of Bildung, they 
found themselves increasingly culturally isolated from the German middle 
classes. At the same time, their assimilationist orientation and attachment to 
German high-cultural ideals separated German Jews from eastern European 
Jews. The German Jews shared the deep prejudices of German speakers 
against all eastern Europeans. The world of the Jews was highly stratified by 
country of origin, language, urban versus rural background, social class, and 
strength of religious identification. 4 

These divisions were also present in the New World, in tensions between 
the different immigrant Jewish communities of New York City. There was a 
sharp divide between the more established and wealthy German Jews, who had 
immigrated after 1848, and the much larger numbers of eastern European Jews, 
who had immigrated after 1880, fleeing pogroms and persecution.!° In addi- 
tion to marked economic differences between the communities, there were di- 
vergent cultural and religious orientations. The eastern European immigrants 


Struggling for Self 25 


tended to be devoutly religious and Orthodox, in contrast to the secular or 
Reformist German Jews. These differences led to strains between the Jewish 
communities, heightened by the fact that the new wave of immigration was 
met with an anti-Semitic backlash among the American public and press. The 
German Jews themselves carried their German prejudices against Yiddish- 
speaking eastern Jews, and many were anxious not to be associated with the 
newcomers. What is more, the poverty of the new immigrants confronted 
the emancipated German Jews with an image of the ghetto, which they had 
long ago left behind. Their reactions were complex. Social-reform zeal aimed 
at “Americanizing” the newcomers, and philanthropy aimed at improving 
conditions in immigrant slums; but these efforts coexisted with forms of social 
distancing and restrictionism that, as historian Howard Sachar wrote, “swiftly 
emulated Gentile snobbery in every respect.” 

The appeal of Ethical Culture was framed and restricted by these divi- 
sions. Drawing heavily on German intellectual and cultural traditions, Adler’s 
philosophy attracted mainly relatively well-to-do families of German Jewish 
background. Even among German Jews, Adler’s program enjoyed only limited 
appeal in comparison with Reform Judaism. As a result, the Ethical Culture 
society had, as one historian noted, only “marginal status, ifeven that, n Jewish 
communal life.” The assimilationist outlook of Ethical Culture was partly a 
response to the increasing anti-Semitism of late nineteenth-century America. 
Adler himself promoted assimilation as the solution to anti-Semitism. !” 

Perhaps the greatest impact of the Ethical Culture School on Oppenheimer 
came from the two teachers who tooka strong personal interest in his education 
and his life as a young man. The first was Augustus Klock, who taught chem- 
istry and physics. Early on, Klock regarded Oppenheimer as having great po- 
tential and gave him private tutoring outside school hours. During two winters 
and one summer vacation, they spent about five days a week together, working 
on chemistry and physics experiments and on Oppenheimer’s hobby of min- 
eral collecting. Oppenheimer had a microscope anda polarizer at home, which 
he would use to test minerals. He recalled that he “loved” laboratory work and 
that, for him, the “whole bifurcation” between theory and experiment came 
later.!® 

In addition to Klock, Oppenheimer was strongly influenced, in an alto- 
gether different intellectual direction, by his English teacher Herbert Smith. 
Students would go to Smith’s home and discuss poetry and literature. Op- 
penheimer continued to send Smith examples of his poetry from university. 
Oppenheimer’s great affection for him is clear in the vigorous and flamboyant 
correspondence that they kept up, particularly while Oppenheimer was at 


26 Chapter Two 


Harvard and later Cambridge (England). Oppenheimer’s interests ranged 
from science to literature, poetry, and art. His close school friend Francis Fer- 
gusson expected him to become a writer.'? One teacher at the Ethical Culture 
School, in view of Oppenheimer’s twin enthusiasms, suggested to him that 
“your vocation is to beascience writer,” but this did not appeal to him. A career 
as a mining engineer seemed more romantic. While at Harvard, Oppenheimer 
wrote a short story for Smith in which the protagonist was a mining engineer. 
But, revealingly, Oppenheimer described his fictional hero as “a sophisticated 
and introspective person, and the filth, the phosphorescent manager, and the 
miserable, indifferent miners only make him laugh and look smugly at the 
sunset.”70 

The summer of 1922, before he went to Harvard, had a profound impact 
on Oppenheimer’s sense of self. The previous summer, while in Europe with 
his family, Oppenheimer had ventured off to prospect for minerals in the old 
mines of Bohemia. He contracted a very serious case of “trench dysentery”; in 
its wake came a persistent colitis, which forced him to postpone his entrance 
to Harvard for a year. A trip to the high desert of New Mexico, something 
often prescribed for American consumptives, was suggested by his parents, 
and Smith offered to take him. They stayed with Fergusson’s family in Albu- 
querque. Francis’s older brother, Harvey, wasa novelist, and his mother would 
later publish classic works on the cultures of the Southwest. It was on this trip 
that Oppenheimer met Paul Horgan, who in adulthood would become a major 
American novelist.! 

In a direct reaction against the claustrophobic propriety of his upbringing, 
Oppenheimer took with alacrity to New Mexico’s hardy outdoor life and be- 
came proficient at horseback riding. He and Horgan would travel on horseback 
over trails across the Sangre de Cristo Mountains and stay at the guest ranch 


of Katherine Chaves Page, a place Oppenheimer found magical.” 


Page—a 
beautiful, aristocratic woman from an old hidalgo family, living in reduced 
circumstances—took Oppenheimer under her wing. Horgan remembers that 
“she was a very beautiful woman and very intelligent, sweet-natured,” and that 
Oppenheimer “was deeply devoted” to her. When Oppenheimer read Willa 
Cather’s A Lost Lady (published in 1923), he was reminded of Mrs. Page.”° 
The New Mexico experience was particularly significant for Oppenheimer, 
because of the continuing exclusion that Jews faced in American society. At the 
start of the trip, Oppenheimer asked Smith ifhe could travel as his brother; this 
request was sharply refused. But even without such overt disguise of his ethnic 
background, Oppenheimer was able to adeptly traverse social boundaries. 
That the trip to New Mexico was bound up with questions of identity and 


Struggling for Self 27 


selfhood is suggested by Fergusson, who said that Robert felt “his Jewishness 
and his wealth, and his eastern connections, and his going to New Mexico was 
partly to escape from that.”** 

Oppenheimer’s discomfort about his background was evident when, in 
early 1923, Katherine Page was in New York City teaching Spanish at Finch 
Junior College and attended a party at the Oppenheimer home. Robert wrote 
to Smith that “Mrs. Page started bravely enough, but soon grew silent under 
the weight of paternal banalities and Ethical gossip.” Robert found the evening 
very trying, a “dismal gathering.” His anxiety about the occasion suggests that 
he was straddling separate social worlds that appeared to him to be ncompat- 
ible. Another occasion on which the world of his New Mexico escape collided 
with the world of his upbringing was when his family drove Paul Horgan to 
Buffalo enroute to Quebec. Robert thought the trip was a disaster. The mixture 
of Horgan with his parents was, he said, an “explosive agglomeration.” Robert 
believed that his parents were “a little jealous of Paul, and a little irritated at the 
ease with which he disregarded obstacles whose conquests formed the central 
Jewels in the Oppenheimer crown.” He referred specifically to what he per- 
ceived to be the source of their insecurity—a “complex” due to which, he felt, 
they “tried to apologize for being Jews.”” 

Robert’s relationship with his father was a tense one, and it is probable that 
his insistence throughout his life that his first initial, J., stood for nothing (rath- 
er than “Julius,” as recorded on his birth certificate) reflected these strains.”° 
In the late 1940s, Smith told a journalist that Robert’s father had a touch of 
“business vulgarity which acutely embarrassed Robert, although he would 
never mention it.” The importance of this observation is clear in relation to 
the negative stereotypes of Jews that were prevalent in American society when 
Julius immigrated, in which the notion of “vulgarity” was a central trope. 
The tragedy suggested by Smith’s statement was that the Oppenheimers were 
haunted by these stereotypes, and that their insecure and self-conscious son 
was particularly attuned and sensitive to such images. Smith thought that 
Robert’s problems, including the “psychosomatic” persistence of his colitis, 
were due to a “pronounced oedipal attitude” toward his father. Whatever 
the psychological roots may have been, there was an important sociocultural 
dimension to the tension in Robert’s relationship with his father. At one point, 
on the New Mexico trip, Smith asked Robert to fold his jacket for him. Robert 
snapped back, “Oh yes. The tailor’s son would know how to do that, wouldn’t 
he?”” Allusions to Shylock and references to “skinflint Jews” in his letters 
suggest, in the context of Oppenheimer’s difficult and complex relationship 
with his family, some internalization of anti-Semitic attitudes.?° This was part 


28 Chapter Two 


of what was behind Oppenheimer’s almost neurotic self-consciousness, his 
constant monitoring of himself for any slip or faux pas. He later said, “My 
feeling about myself was always one of extreme discontent.””* 

Rabi thought that Oppenheimer actively distanced himself from his Jewish 
background, and he saw this as absolutely key to understanding this complex 
man: “Oppenheimer was Jewish, but he wished he weren’t and tried to pretend 
that he wasn’t.” Felix Bloch agreed: Oppenheimer “tried to act as ifhe were not 
a Jew and succeeded well because he was a good actor.” Rabi, having no such 
problems with his own Jewishness, believed that this was why Oppenheimer 
“never got to be an integrated personality.”°° 

Rabi very strongly disapproved of what he saw as Oppenheimer’s confu- 
sion about Jewish identity. Rabi had been raised in poverty in an Orthodox, 
Yiddish-speaking home in Manhattan’s Lower East Side and later in Brooklyn. 
The differences between the German and eastern European Jewish commu- 
nities in New York could not have been presented more starkly than in the 
contrast between Oppenheimer’s and Rabi’s childhoods. And although Rabi 
rebelled against Orthodox Judaism, his religious roots always remained central 
to his self-identity.*! Rabi’s stake in these issues does not lessen the validity of 
his observation. The question of Jewishness was at the heart of Oppenheimer’s 
youthful problem ofidentity, and Oppenheimer’s project of active self-creation 
followed from this rejection of, and escape from, Jewish identification. 


BECOMING A SCIENTIST: 
SELF-SHAPING AND IDENTITY CRISIS 


Oppenheimer entered Harvard University in August 1922. Going to Harvard 
was a fulfillment of the hopes of advancement through education that were 
expressed in his upbringing. It was a period of intellectual exploration and 
self-development. But in the background of his years there were the realities 
of institutionalized discrimination and exclusion. At Harvard, Oppenheimer 
was faced with the problem of navigating his way through an institution shot 
through with anti-Semitism. 

At the time he entered the university, it was embroiled in controversy 
over a proposed quota designed to reduce the number of Jewish students. 
The university’s establishment felt that the rising number of Jewish students 
threatened the “social standards” of the school—specifically, its character as 
an Anglo-Saxon Protestant institution.°? The quota, proposed by university 
president Lawrence Lowell, led to a massive public controversy and was 
temporarily defeated. However, Lowell partially achieved his goal in January 


Struggling for Self 29 


1926, when Harvard adopted a plan whose ostensible purpose was to create a 
“student body . . . properly representative of all groups in our national life,” 
by increasing the weight given to personal information other than examination 
results in the selection of candidates.°? 

Oppenheimer’s quip that his arrival at Harvard was “like the Goths coming 
into Rome” not only suggests his excitement at being able to “ransack” the 
libraries and the courses, but also strongly evokes a sense of being an outsider, 
breaking his way into a place that had erected barriers to try to prevent 
his entry. The barriers Oppenheimer faced are suggested by the experience 
of Rabi a few years earlier at Cornell. Rabi reported that because of the 
“discrimination and anti-Jewish sentiment” that he encountered at Cornell, 
“T never had enough confidence to get to know any faculty member. I went 
through all the years not knowing a single faculty member.” Oppenheimer’s 
later friend and colleague from Berkeley and Los Alamos, David Hawkins, 
has said that it was “not a negligible fact in Robert’s background that he had 
been a victim of considerable anti-Semitism at Harvard and elsewhere.”?4 

Oppenheimer’s friend Jeffries Wyman remembered, “He found social ad- 
justment very difficult, and I think he was often very unhappy. I suppose 
he was lonely and he didn’t fit in well with the human environment.” But 
Oppenheimer did cultivate a small group of close friends, most of whom felt 
themselves to be at odds with the mainstream of student culture at Harvard. 
A couple of months into his first semester, Oppenheimer reassured Smith 
that “I have not suffered from loneliness. There are plenty of amusing fellows 
with whom to read, talk, play tennis and make expeditions into the hills and 
toward the water.” 

Oppenheimer kept up his correspondence with Horgan, who went to study 
at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York, and he also main- 
tained a lively correspondence with Smith. Fergusson was with Oppenheimer 
at Harvard for one year, before going to Oxford on a Rhodes scholarship. 
Perhaps feeling responsible for his insecure and less mature friend, Fergusson 
initiated Oppenheimer into a circle of intellectually serious seniors and grad- 
uate students. Fergusson was concentrating in biology at Harvard, turning to 
literature and the arts when he went to Oxford. He introduced Oppenheimer 
to a science discussion group of about twelve people that met on Mondays, 
sometimes inviting a professor to give a talk. Wyman, also a biology student, 
remembered Fergusson’s insistence that he meet Oppenheimer: “Francis was 
full of talk about Bob Oppenheimer.”*® 

Other members of Oppenheimer’s circle at Harvard were John Edsall, 
a senior premedical student; William Clouser Boyd (whom Oppenheimer 


30 Chapter Two 


called “Clowser”), a classmate in his freshman chemistry course; and Freder- 
ick Bernheim, who had been in the class behind Oppenheimer at the Ethical 
Culture School, although they did not meet until college. On arrival at Har- 
vard, Bernheim had opted to live with a missionary from Andover: “I wanted 
not to be involved in a sort of Jewish enclave.” Bernheim’s background, like 
Oppenheimer’s, was German Jewish. He said, “I had come from a school 
where ... eighty percent [were Jewish|—and at that time there was a good 
deal of anti-Semitism, and ... [I wanted to] be able to go around with the 
non-Jewish students, which I proceeded to do for the first year.” But once he 
met Oppenheimer, “there was no question about whom I would want to room 
with next year, because he was then quite obviously much more congenial to 
me than my missionary roommate. So despite my prejudices, I roomed with 
him for the next two years.”°7 

Oppenheimer shared with other graduates of the Ethical Culture School 
an attitude of intellectual seriousness. They viewed their studies as important 
above all else, and they felt that this set them apart from the mainstream of un- 
dergraduate culture. One of Oppenheimer’s Ethical Culture contemporaries, 
who went on to the all-female Vassar College, wrote to Smith complaining 
about the debutante culture among the undergraduates: “The manners and 
costumes and ancestors of the girls here seem to count more than Phi Beta 
Kappas. In other words the atmosphere is refined while at school it was rather 
tough.” She was told by one of the faculty, “O, you know a lot more than 
these people here if you come from the Ethical Culture School.”°* Fergusson 
felt similarly about Harvard: 


Instead of five thousand keen, intellectually awake, well-read young 
men ... I find five thousand tawdry yokels, yanked from fat farms and 
smug small towns to bellow at football games . . . I did not come here to 
be made a 100% American; I am not going to bea “bizzness” man. Icame 
here to acquire an education, and I hope to be a person of intelligence 
some day. 


Nevertheless, Fergusson concluded that “if one is willing to embrace misan- 
thropy, the education is here for the taking.”°? 

Misanthropy was the effective antidote to the enforced sociability and Bab- 
bittry of undergraduate culture. A degree of alienation and isolation was fitting 
for a young scholar. Like Fergusson, Oppenheimer was disengaged from col- 
lective undergraduate activities; his friendships were “wholly onan intellectual 


basis.” He recalled that “I had a few very close friends, but we really all of us 


Struggling for Self 31 


were working almost to the limit of our capacity and, I would have thought, 
not talking too much.”“° Such aloofness was, in part, a response to the exclu- 
siveness of Massachusetts society, in which social standing was closely linked 
to ancestral lineage. In response to a remark made by Boyd, who was of Scots- 
Irish and German descent, Oppenheimer said, “Well, neither of us came over 
on the Mayflower, you know.” To Boyd, “that meant, I think, that he didn’t 
try to cultivate the socially prominent, just as I didn’t. We wanted to know 
people who had some brains.”*! 

Oppenheimer may not have come over on the Mayflower, but he had 
what Horgan called an “innately aristocratic” quality. This was due partly to 
his “exquisite manners”; Horgan said, “I’ve rarely known anyone with more 
beautiful manners.” In addition, he had a generous allowance from his father 
and would splurge on evenings with his friends. Oppenheimer had, according 
to Horgan, a “nice feeling for good restaurants.” For example, he took Horgan 
to the “very grand” Voisin restaurant in New York, a favorite of his father’s, 
and after dinner they saw actress Jeanne Eagels’s celebrated performance in 
Rain.” Boyd recalls, “He was a very nice person to know. He was the soul of 
generosity. That was practically a religion with him.” 

Oppenheimer does not seem to have had any interest in politics during this 
period. His friends do not remember him ever discussing political matters. 
So it is curious that he joined the Liberal Club, which was a meeting point 
for liberal and internationalist students disillusioned with the world situation 
after the war, in particular the collapse of American support for the League 
of Nations. But, as historian David Cassidy points out, many of the student 
clubs and societies excluded Jews, and Oppenheimer was not predisposed 
to identify with specifically Jewish student organizations. The Liberal Club 
stood out from the other clubs in its more open membership policy and 
atmosphere, so Oppenheimer may have joined simply in order to belong 
somewhere. Also, the liberal-left political attitudes were perhaps comfortably 
familiar in relation to the social-reformist ethos of Ethical Culture, and one of 
Oppenheimer’s former schoolmates, Algernon Black, was a leading member 
of the club. Through Black, Oppenheimer met Edsall, who persuaded him 
to help edit the club’s new magazine. Oppenheimer suggested its name— The 
Gad-Fly, after Socrates, who was the “gadfly” of the Athenian people. Oppen- 
heimer helped edit the first two issues and may have contributed some articles, 
though none bore his name. Still, he remembered feeling “very much like a 
fish out of water” in the club. In a letter to Smith, he lambasted the members’ 
“assinine [stc] pomposity” and “the methodical expletives of our drunken 


patriots.”*4 


32 Chapter Two 


Oppenheimer shared Fergusson’s disdain for team sports and heavy drink- 
ing. Even upon graduation, when Bernheim and Boyd got “plastered” on al- 
cohol they’d smuggled out of the labs, Oppenheimer “only took one drink and 
retired to his room.” Bernheim remembered, “I don’t think he ever enjoyed 
alcohol.” He was also a bit prudish. Fergusson observed that a friend of theirs 
had earned “the condemnation of Bob [Oppenheimer] by the ruthlessness 
and pride with which he pursues low women.” 

Oppenheimer was ambivalent about women. He was happy to contemplate 
the opposite sex from a distance or to construct romantic literary fantasies, but 
women in the flesh made him uneasy. He wrote to Smith, for example, “I have 
come, lugubriously, to the conclusion that the two people at Wellesley and 
the dozen or so here that even pretend to pursue me are a sorry and worthless 
lot.” He had come across “several New England women trying to live down a 
congenital primness and psychic sterility.”° On the other hand, he referred 
to a former Ethical Culture schoolmate, whom he bumped into in Cambridge, 
as “a spiteful and unprofitable slut.”47 There were a couple of women in 
whom he showed mild interest. At one point he found himself diverted from 
his studies by “the contemplation of a most beautiful and lovely lady who 
is writing a thesis on Spinoza—charmingly ironic, at that, don’t you think?” 
But it seems that, like the protagonist of one of his favorite novels—Aldous 
Huxley’s Crome Yellow—Oppenheimer was too intensely self-conscious and 
introspective to do more than contemplate.*® 

Oppenheimer’s friends from that period do not remember him spending 
time with women. Wyman said, “We were all too much in love with problems 
in philosophy and science and the arts and intellectual life to be thinking about 
girls at that time ... We were young people falling in love with ideas right 
and left and interested in people who gave us ideas . . . But perhaps we lacked 
some of the mundane forms of love affairs that make life easier—perhaps Bob 
Oppenheimer did.”*° Partly as a result, Oppenheimer’s relationships with 
his small circle of male friends were particularly intense. Boyd remembered 
a classmate who said, “Who is this guy Oppenheimer who keeps coming to 
you? I think he’s a pest.” “Well,” said Boyd, “I didn’t think he was a pest.”°? 
But Oppenheimer’s roommate, Bernheim, did find his attachment sometimes 
overly intense. 


In fact, he was a little bit possessive . . . I think, first of all, he felt he was 
very inadequate with girls, and he would resent it very much ifI went out 
with a girl. And ... when I wanted to invite somebody to go to dinner 
with us and I invited him too often [Oppenheimer | would object. There 


Struggling for Self 33 


was not homosexuality at all. I don’t think he was homosexual in any 
way. I had no sexual feelings for him or he for me, as far as I know, but 
he had . . . a sort of feeling that we should make a unit.”! 


Oppenheimer’s letters suggest an almost romantic quality to his relation- 
ships with his male friends. For example, in a letter to Smith, he wrote: “I 
begin to believe in eternal passions, now, when I see that each note from 
you still sends me into a violent schoolgirl flutter of excitement.” He also 
wrote florid, and fairly excruciating, poetry, which he would describe apolo- 
getically as “exhibitionism,” “debauches,” and “masturbation” but which he 
nevertheless circulated within his literary clique.” 

In such letters and poetry, Oppenheimer was carrying on a performance: 
his greatest fear was that his correspondents would get bored with him. 
Smith was an enthusiast for Freud. Through his displays of neuroses and 
psychosexual ambiguity, Oppenheimer attempted to hold Smith’s interest by 
making himself into a “case” for analysis. Sending him one composition, Op- 
penheimer apparently hoped that Smith would accuse him of “morbidity and 
neuroticism.”** And although he frowned upon drinking and womanizing, he 
also liked to think of himself as morally degenerate.*” Above all, he refused to 
accept the mundane. In Oppenheimer’s hands, descriptions of day-to-day life 
at Harvard quickly gave way to melodrama: “I make stenches in three different 
labs, ... serve tea and talk learnedly to a few lost souls, go off for the week- 
end to distill the low grade energy into laughter and exhaustion, read Greek, 
commit faux pas, search my desk for letters, and wish I were dead. Voila.”*© 

Oppenheimer did not have a sturdy constitution. As well as enduring a per- 
sistent colitis, he was frequently ill with minor complaints. Bernheim thought 
that his roommate “was somewhat of a hypochondriac.” Oppenheimer took 
an electric pad to bed with him every night, which one night overheated, 
almost causing a serious fire. Sickness became part of his self-fashioning. 
For example, apologizing to Smith for the “surliness” of one of his letters, 
he explained, “I must assure you that it was written in one of those spells 
of colitic insolence and misanthropy from which you have already suffered 
so.” On another occasion, he asked Smith’s forgiveness for his “colitic exe- 
crabilities.” In February of his freshman year, Oppenheimer wrote to Smith 
from Harvard’s Stillman Infirmary, “I have had a terrific fever, and have read 
another Conrad. So this may sound a bit strange.”°” Fergusson submitted an 
independent report on the patient: “At present he is in the infirmary recover- 
ing from an attack of grippe. He is cheerful, well-fed, and not very sick. He 
frugally consumes a Hamlet or so while under the weather.””* Together with 


34 Chapter Two 


his advertised neuroses, Oppenheimer cultivated physical frailty as an aspect 
of the intellectual and literary self. 

It was, after all, his colitis that Oppenheimer had to thank for his discovery 
of New Mexico and the literary and artistic circle he met there. In his letters 
to Smith, New Mexico appeared as an intellectual and artistic utopia.°? The 
charm of the Pecos Valley even provided Oppenheimer with a new adjective: 
“Harvard,” he wrote, “hasa serene and ridiculous appearance. . . [whichis] as 
amusing as Crome Yellow, and . . . at least as delightful in a somewhat Pecosian 
way.” In his search for identity, Oppenheimer cast himself, Smith, and his 
own small circle of highbrow teenage friends as an elite avant-garde. He could 
thus rationalize his sense of isolation and could see Smith as his soul mate in an 
imaginary higher form of intellectual community: “For me, and, I suspect, for 
you, it was never the opinion of the multitude that counted so much; it was the 
opinion and the conduct of the great—I don’t mean absolutely, but to us.” 

Oppenheimer was still very much influenced by Smith and his milieu in 
modeling his own identity. Oppenheimer called Fergusson “my revered mas- 
ter and tutor in the science of Smithology.” Ina letter to Smith, Fergusson de- 
scribed Oppenheimer’s “conversation” as “a caricature of yours, ornamented 
with some of Paul [Horgan]’s and my more elaborate affectations.” Literature 
became for Oppenheimer, Horgan, and Fergusson their own language that set 
them apart as a clique. Horgan remembered, “[We were enchanted] with the 
notion of great enrichment of language so that we often conversed in a baroque 
lingo.”°! These interests, however, tended to demarcate his friendship with 
Horgan and Fergusson from that with Bernheim and Boyd. Bernheim did not 
share Oppenheimer’s literary bent, finding Oppenheimer “a little bit precious 
in the way he quoted French poetry, Verlaine, Baudelaire, and so on. And I 
tended to resent it.” Boyd found Oppenheimer’s compositions “very avant 
garde for my taste.” 

Oppenheimer maintained a literary and cultivated posture even while he 
was increasingly fixing his intellectual course toward a specialized scientific 
training. Despite idolizing Smith and adopting many of his tastes, Oppen- 
heimer was to make a vocational choice for professional science, in which 
his literary and poetic interests were widely regarded as unusual. Whether or 
not Oppenheimer was aware of it, academic anti-Semitism was particularly 
strong in the humanistic disciplines of history and English literature. Historian 
Leonard Dinnerstein wrote that in the first decades of the twentieth century, 
it was widely regarded as “inconceivable for a Jew to transmit or comprehend 
the culture and traditions of an American Christian society.” Max Lerner, 
who graduated from Yale in 1923, was told that as a Jew, he could not hope to 


Struggling for Self 35 


teach literature at a college. It was not until 1939 that Lionel Trilling became 
Columbia University’s first Jewish tenure-track professor in English literature. 
The University of Michigan was exceptional in that at the end of the 1920s, it 
had Jewish faculty chairing the departments of English, Romance languages, 
and economics. Scientific disciplines were more open to Jews than were the 
humanities.” 

Thinking that he would be a mining engineer, Oppenheimer began his col- 
lege career as a chemistry major. But in the spring semester of his second year, 
he took advanced thermodynamics from the famous experimental physicist 
Percy Bridgman; this was a small seminar group that met for an hour and a 
half twice a week. 

Inhis third and final year at Harvard, Oppenheimer began “spendinga great 
deal of time in Bridgman’s Laboratory.” This was, he remembered, “as far as 
science goes ... the really great part of my time at Harvard.” Oppenheimer 
felt “enormous joy and admiration” for Bridgman, regarding him as “a man 
to whom one wanted to be an apprentice.” Oppenheimer was learning from 
Bridgman not only techniques and theorems, but also what it was to be a 
scientist. Bridgman’s pragmatic philosophy of science was that “scientific 
method is what working scientists do, not what other people or even they 
themselves may say aboutit.” Oppenheimer told Thomas Kuhn that Bridgman 
“didn’t articulate a philosophic point of view, but he lived it, both in the way 
he worked in the laboratory, which, as you know, was very special, and in the 
way he taught.” 

However, in order to gain the patronage of men like Bridgman, Oppen- 
heimer had to carefully manage his presentations of self, particularly in relation 
to his Jewishness. In his last year at Harvard, he applied to Cambridge, hop- 
ing to study at the Cavendish Laboratory with its director, the Nobel Prize- 
winning physicist Ernest Rutherford. Bridgman supported Oppenheimer’s 
application, telling Rutherford that Oppenheimer was a good “betting propo- 
sition.” At the end of the letter, he added, “As appears from his name, 
Oppenheimer is a Jew, but entirely without the usual qualifications of his 
race. He is a tall, well set-up young man, with a rather engaging diffidence 
of manner, and I think you need have no hesitation whatever for any reason 
of this sort in considering his application.”©” The Harvard mathematician 
George D. Birkhoff, with whom Oppenheimer also studied, recommended 
Oppenheimer ina similar fashion a few years later: “He is Jewish but I should 
consider him a very fine type of young man.”°° 

Oppenheimer’s cultural capital allowed him to cross social boundaries. 
Horgan said that in his student years, Oppenheimer had “this lovely social 


36 Chapter Two 


quality that permitted him to enter into the moment very strongly, wherever it 
was and whenever it was.” This quality was a mixture of “a great superiority” 
and “great charm.” But others noticed Oppenheimer’s underlying awkward- 
ness and self-consciousness. One incident that stuck in Bridgman’s mind was 
when Oppenheimer was admiring a picture of a Greek temple at Bridgman’s 
house. When Bridgman mentioned the date and style of the architecture, 
Oppenheimer responded, “Oh, that’s interesting, because from the style of 
the capitals I would have put it at fifty, a hundred years earlier than that.” Op- 
penheimer’s performance was rough around the edges; his intended graceful 
displays of erudition could come out as pedantic or clumsily patronizing. He 
lacked the insider’s self-assurance. Birkhoff also reported, “I have been told 
that he is highly strung.”©° 

Oppenheimer worked tremendously hard at Harvard, taking a six-course 
load each semester and graduating in three years. He occasionally revealed the 
intensity of his academic work in letters to Smith. Nevertheless, he appeared 
to his friends never to study—or, as Boyd put it, if he did study, “he was 
pretty careful not to let you catch him at it.” And he would treat with studied 
casualness what to others were difficult intellectual accomplishments. Boyd 
thought that “he just seemed to know everything without trying . . . He never 
seemed to have to study.””° This self-presentation by Oppenheimer was sig- 
nificant in another respect: through his display of effortlessness, Oppenheimer 
distinguished himself from the derogatory image of Jews as ungentlemanly 
“overachievers.””! 

Oppenheimer emphasized to Kuhn the unevenness and lack of structure 
in his education: he “never had an elementary course in physics ... There’s 
nothing there—just a skin over a hole.” Because of “never having the same 
underpinning in physics or in collateral preparatory courses,” Oppenheimer 
felt that among his physics and chemistry student contemporaries, “I had no 
‘co-moving coordinates;’ there wasn’t anyone else who was having the same 
lack of preoccupations and the same preoccupations.”” 

Oppenheimer also told Kuhn that his education did not channel him in a 
rigidly scientific direction. 


At school and at Harvard I learned a lot of things that had no immediate 
connection with chemistry or physics. I learned Greek at school which 
was even then somewhat exotic ... and I continued doing things like 
that at Harvard on a quite massive scale so that the notion that I was 
travelling down a clear track would be wrong. I determined to get a 


Struggling for Self 37 


mastery of French and its literature which I knew very poorly; I had a 
very exciting time reading the Principia with Whitehead.” 


He wrote to Smith that he was going to have to debate with Whitehead in one 
of the seminars and was “already trembling” at the prospect.’4 But the courses 
Oppenheimer took focused on chemistry and physics.” The addition of, for 
example, “A General View of French Literature” and “Theory of Knowledge” 
does not represent a remarkable eclecticism, particularly in the context of a 
liberal education in the United States. 

Oppenheimer’s search for an intellectual identity or vocation became par- 
ticularly pressing upon his graduation from Harvard in 1925, when he went 
to study at Christ’s College, Cambridge, and the Cavendish Laboratory. He 
told Kuhn, “I don’t know why I picked Cambridge, but I wanted to go to 
Rutherford’s laboratory. I know I talked to Bridgman about it.””° 

It was especially peculiar that Oppenheimer chose this center of exper- 
imental physics, because two months before his graduation he had written 
to Fergusson that his work with Bridgman “convinces me that my genre, 
whatever it is, is not experimental physics.””” While praising Oppenheimer’s 
intellect and academic record, Bridgman told Rutherford that Oppenheimer’s 
mind was “analytical, rather than physical, and he is not at home in the ma- 
nipulations of the laboratory.”’* But Oppenheimer told Kuhn that as far as 
theoretical physics was concerned, at that time “I didn’t know you could earn 
your living that way [nor] . .. whether it was a way of life.” Probably for that 
reason, “it didn’t occur to me to go to Germany. It didn’t occur to me to go to 
Copenhagen.”” 

At Harvard, Oppenheimer was removed from, and did not appreciate, 
the revolutionary significance of the developments in theoretical physics in 
Europe, particularly quantum mechanics: “If I’d been asked if this was a ‘hot 
time’ [in physics] I’d probably have said no more than what was normal.” He 
was also still a novice. “It wasn’t yet myjob . . . Iwas still, in the bad sense of the 
word, a student.” Oppenheimer joined the large number of American physics 
students who went to Europe for graduate and postdoctoral work and, on 
their return, transformed the state of American physics. But at this stage, Op- 
penheimer had no idea of the things he would be bringing back. He later said, 
“T don’t even know why I left Harvard, but I somehow felt that [Cambridge | 
was more near the center.”°° 

Rutherford did not take Oppenheimer on, but he made arrangements for 
him to work in the laboratory of J. J. Thomson, who had discovered the 


38 Chapter Two 


electron and was now almost seventy years old. Oppenheimer spent his time 
at Cambridge in a corner of Thomson’s basement laboratory engaged in what 
he later called the “miseries” of making thin films of beryllium, to use in 
experiments on metallic conductivity. He found the laboratory work dull, and 
his lack of manual skill contrasted with the ability of the English physicists, 
who blew their own glass and seemed “uncommonly skillful.” Oppenheimer’s 
own “inability to solder two copper wires together” was, he said, “probably 
succeeding in getting me crazy.”*! This, together with lack of success with 
women, resulted in his feeling “about as manly as a tadpole or a cauliflower.”*” 

Cambridge was a great disappointment to Oppenheimer on a number of 
fronts. Fergusson’s horror stories about Oxford made Cambridge seem slight- 
ly better. “But,” Oppenheimer said, “its excellences are just as fantastically 
inaccessible, and there are vast, sloppy strata where there is nothing, absolutely 
nothing, to be found.” He described the lecturesas “abominable” and “vile.”*? 

At Cambridge, Oppenheimer became increasingly isolated. Although 
friends from Harvard—Bernheim and Wyman—had also gone on to Cam- 
bridge, and Fergusson was at Oxford, the intimacy of their life at Harvard did 
not survive in England. Bernheim, studying biochemistry, was at a different 
college, and they roomed separately. Bernheim met his future wife at his labo- 
ratory in Cambridge and spent most ofhis free time with her. He found itarelief 
og 4 


to be separated from his former roommate; Oppenheimer’s “intensity and his 


drive,” said Bernheim, “always made me feel slightly uncomfortable.”** 

Wyman was at St. John’s College, but he did not see much of Oppenheimer, 
which he puts down to their both being “fairly busy and occupied.” He was, 
however, aware that Oppenheimer was “very unhappy.” During a holiday 
reunion with Fergusson in Paris, Oppenheimer suddenly, in the middle of a 
conversation, leapt on his friend as if to strangle him. Fergusson easily fended 
off the attack, and Oppenheimer wrote to him with abject apologies when 
back in England. But it was another sign of his inner troubles.°° 

In March of 1926, he took a trip to Corsica with Wyman and Edsall. On 
this trip, Oppenheimer’s psychological troubles apparently came to a head. 
Toward the end of the vacation, the three were having dinner when a waiter 
interrupted in order to give Oppenheimer the time of the boat back to the 
mainland. Oppenheimer told his companions that he had left a poisoned 
apple on the desk of the Cavendish physicist P. M.S. Blackett and that he had 
to go back to “see what happened.” Oppenheimer did return to Cambridge, 
but neither Wyman nor Edsall knew whether his story was true. Blackett was 
unharmed. Nevertheless, whether the apple was fact or—as is more likely— 
fantasy, both his companions saw the episode as an expression of jealousy. 


Struggling for Self 39 


Oppenheimer’s work with Thomson was going poorly, and he resented 
Blackett’s success and burgeoning reputation as an experimental physicist. 
This jealousy was made harder to bear by the fact that Blackett was so well and 
widely liked and seemingly immune from the sorts of self-doubt suffered by 
Oppenheimer. Edsall, who was first introduced to Blackett by Oppenheimer, 
thought that Oppenheimer’s “feeling toward Blackett was one of tremendous 
admiration, combined perhaps with an intense jealousy—jealousy because of 
his feeling that Blackett was brilliant and handsome and a man of great social 
charm, and combining all this with great brilliance as a scientist—and I think 
he had a sense of his own comparative awkwardness and perhaps a personal 
sense of being physically unattractive compared to Blackett and so on.”°° 
The seriousness of Oppenheimer’s psychological and emotional crisis was 
indicated by the fact that he had been to see a Harley Street psychiatrist. 
He told Edsall that June (1926) that he had been diagnosed with dementia 
praecox, for which, the psychiatrist said, treatment would do more harm than 
good. Horgan thought the dementia praecox was merely a “typical” example 
of Oppenheimer’s “baroque tendency to exaggerate.” But those with him at 
Cambridge sensed that there was more to it. Oppenheimer told Wyman that 
he would sometimes just lie on the floor ofhis room and roll from side to side.*” 


THE DISCIPLINING OF SELF AND THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF A PROFESSIONAL IDENTITY 


Oppenheimer’s inner struggles of identity were inextricably interwoven with 
the broader question of finding his place in the social world. The search for 
vocation was a matter both of finding an institutional position and formal career 
and of finding a disciplining framework that would structure his identity and 
provide a sense of meaning and direction. The process of becoming a mature 
scientist was a struggle involving the active transformation of the self.*° It also 
required a monomaniacal focus on a specialized task. For Oppenheimer, this 
focus was the most problematic aspect of a scientific career. At the end of his 
year at Cambridge, his direction was still uncertain. 

Yet the beginnings ofa new direction were in fact appearing during Oppen- 
heimer’s time at Cambridge. Under the tutelage of physicist Ralph Fowler, 
Oppenheimer started to develop an interest in quantum mechanics. He began 
to attend meetings of the Kapitza Club, an informal physics discussion group, 
and read extensively in the published literature on quantum mechanics. Vis- 
itors to the Cavendish were also crucial in his developing sense of direction. 
Meeting Niels Bohr was formative: “At that point I forgot about beryllium and 


40 Chapter Two 


films and decided to try to learn the trade of being a theoretical physicist.” He 
also met and became friends with Paul Dirac, although Oppenheimer took 
a while to warm to him. When Wyman told Oppenheimer how impressed 
he was by a seminar that Dirac had given, Oppenheimer’s competitiveness 
showed through. He said that he “didn’t think Dirac really amounted to 
anything.” But it was not long before Oppenheimer changed his mind and 
came to see Dirac as “absolutely grand.” Blackett introduced Oppenheimer 
to Paul Ehrenfest, who was “extraordinarily warm and friendly” the two men 
would often go “out on the river” together and talk about “collision problems, 
Coulomb’s law.” Oppenheimer also met and struck up a warm relationship 
with Ehrenfest’s assistant, George Uhlenbeck, during a week with other Amer- 
ican physicists at the University of Leiden (which Oppenheimer welcomed 
as a break from England). Oppenheimer thus found himself already gaining 
acceptance by this impressive group. Max Born visited the Cavendish in 
spring 1926 and invited Oppenheimer to continue his work on the problem 
of continuous spectra at his Institute of Theoretical Physics at Gottingen. 
Oppenheimer accepted the offer. Upon leaving Cambridge, he felt himself to 
be embarking on a new course as a theoretician: “I felt completely relieved of 
the responsibility to go back into the laboratory. I hadn’t been good, I hadn’t 
done anybody any good, and I hadn’t had any fun whatever; and here was 
something I felt just driven to try.”°? He earned his PhD at Gottingen and 
stayed on another year as a postdoctoral student. 

Géttingen provided for Oppenheimer the intellectual “center” he had 
been seeking. On Christmas Eve 1926, soon after he arrived, his article “On 
the Quantum Theory of Continuous Spectra” was accepted by the jour- 
nal Zeitschrift fiir Phystk. In the following year he wrote four more articles, 
including one that would become a classic—““The Born-Oppenheimer Ap- 
proximation,” co-authored with his mentor, Max Born. At Gottingen, Oppen- 
heimer found himself accepted as an equal and “part of a little community of 
people” with “common [intellectual] interests and tastes.”°? Here he met 
figures such as Richard Courant, James Franck, Werner Heisenberg, Gregor 
Wentzel, Wolfgang Pauli, Pascual Jordan, Maria Géppert Mayer, and John 
von Neumann.” Another young American physicist, Earle H. Kennard, wrote 
that “there are three young geniuses in theory here”—Pascual Jordan, Paul 
Dirac, and Oppenheimer.” 

Oppenheimer lodged with a physician, Dr. Cario, who was facing ruin due 
to inflation and was taking in guests in order to make ends meet. Oppenheimer 
was joined there by Dirac—with whom he took long Sunday walks—and by 
Karl T. Compton, who brought his wife and daughter. Oppenheimer tended 


Struggling for Self 41 


to keep his distance from the other American physicists, whom he patroniz- 
ingly described as “pretty good at physics, but completely uneducated and 
unspoiled.” He added, “They envy the Germans their intellectual adroitness 
& organization, & want physics to come to America.” Oppenheimer was 
fascinated by Dirac, who was notorious for being either silent or terse and ob- 
scure. Oppenheimer later told Kuhn that Dirac’s creativity was “never initially 
verbal but initially algebraic” and that he regarded words as “a way to make 
himself intelligible to other people, which he hardly needs.” He was thrilled 
when Dirac, on arriving in Gottingen, gave him the proofs of his paper on the 
quantum theory of radiation.°? 

Oppenheimer was at Gottingen during what he later described as the 
“heroic time” of the quantum revolution in physics, of which his new mentor, 
Born, was a key proponent. It was, Oppenheimer remembered, “a period .. . 
of many false starts and many untenable conjectures ... a time of earnest 
correspondence and hurried conferences, of debate, criticism, and brilliant 
mathematical improvisation.” Even more than the seminars he attended, it was 
friendships and informal discussion that, Oppenheimer said, “gave me some 
sense and perhaps more gradually some taste in physics.” The American 
theoretical physicist Edwin Kemble, during his visit to Gottingen in June 
1927, reported back to Harvard, “Oppenheimer is turning out to be even 
more brilliant than we thought when we had him at Harvard. He is turning 
out new work very rapidly and is able to hold his own with any of the galaxy 
of young mathematical physicists here.” He added, however, “Unfortunately 
Born tells me that he has the same difficulty about expressing himself in 
writing which we observed at Harvard.”®** Historians Kai Bird and Martin 
Sherwin have suggested that Kemble had in mind the contrast between the 
expressiveness of Oppenheimer’s literary writing and conversation and the 
overly terse character of his scientific writing at that point. Kemble thought that 
Oppenheimer seemed to be “two different people” when discussing science 
on the one hand and general, cultural topics on the other.” 

Born found Oppenheimer to be arrogant and difficult to teach: “He was a 
man of great talent, and he was conscious of his superiority in a way which 
was embarrassing and led to trouble.” In particular, Born was frustrated about 
frequent interruptions of the seminar on quantum mechanics, when Oppen- 
heimer would take the chalk and announce, “This can be done much better 
in the following manner .. .” Born said, “I was a little afraid of Oppenheimer, 
and my half-hearted attempts to stop him were unsuccessful.” Eventually, the 
students wrote a petition in which they threatened to boycott the seminar un- 
less Born cracked down on Oppenheimer’s interruptions. Born dealt with the 


42 Chapter Two 


matter by placing the petition in a conspicuous position on his desk and then 
leaving the room during a meeting with his troublesome American student. 
When he reentered the room, Born found Oppenheimer “rather pale and not 
so voluble as usual. And the interruptions in the seminar ceased altogether.” 
On another occasion, Born gave Oppenheimer a copy of a paper he had 
just finished on the collision of electrons and hydrogen atoms. Born wanted 
Oppenheimer to check over the complex calculations. He remembered how 
Oppenheimer “broughtit back and said: ‘I couldn’t find any mistake—did you 
really do this alone?’ The astonishment expressed by these words and visible 
on his face was rather excusable, for I was never good at long calculations and 
always made silly mistakes. All my pupils knew that, but Robert Oppenheimer 
was the only one frank and rude enough to say it without joking. I was not 
offended; it actually increased my esteem for his remarkable personality.”%° 

Oppenheimer was something of an anomaly at Gottingen, and as such 
he was a subject of gossip. His “highly-developed table manners” made 
the students lodging with him in Géttingen “feel like barbarians.” He was 
much wealthier than his fellow students and was sometimes resented as being 
ostentatious. For example, it was one of his “well known peculiarities that, if 
anyone admired something of his, he would find some pretext of making a 
present of it.” He did this when a graduate student in physics whom he was 
courting, Charlotte Riefenstahl, admired his fine pigskin luggage. When he left 
Géttingen, he gave Born a valuable first-edition copy of Lagrange’s Mécanique 
Analytique. But his peers often felt that he was “showing off, putting on a 
performance.”9” 

The hostility Oppenheimer faced from fellow students was part of an in- 
creasingly nationalist, anti-Semitic climate. Géttingen University was a hotbed 
of nationalist activity during the 1920s. For example, in 1923, three visiting 
French theology students had been driven out of town by a right-wing stu- 
dent mob. The university took no action against the nationalist students but 
instead censured the professors who had hosted the French visitors. Both 
anti-Semitism and hostility to the Weimar Republic were rife among the stu- 
dent population. The students, who were predominantly middle and upper 
class and affiliated with fraternities, bitterly resented their newly pinched 
economic circumstances, caused by inflation. This resentment often focused 
on foreign students, whose currency stretched further, and it was fueled by 
xenophobic and anti-Semitic articles in the newspaper Géttinger Tageblatt. 
For his part, Oppenheimer began to find Germany austere and depressing. 
He later told Kuhn that a friend whose family owned a publishing house 
and who therefore could afford a car always parked the car in a barn outside 


Struggling for Self 43 


Géttingen, “because he thought it was dangerous to be seen driving it” in 
town. In November 1926, Oppenheimer wrote to Fergusson about the social 
climate: “Neuroticism 1s severely frowned upon. So are Jews, Prussians and 
French.” Looking back later in life, Oppenheimer reflected, “[I] got out of 
Gottingen when I could. It was a bitter time. It was before the Nazis but it 
was ...ata time when the beginnings of this bitterness were extremely clear. 
Inflation had occurred—people who were ruined by it were—you could see 
the hostility and harshness in them.” He got out of the university early by 
petitioning to take his doctoral examination in the spring of 1927, rather than 
wait until the end of the summer.°® 

Oppenheimer returned to the United States for a year in July 1927. That 
summer, Riefenstahl visited America, and Oppenheimer took her and some 
friends, including physicist Samuel Goudsmit, on a tour of New York. He 
gave them what Goudsmit called “the real Oppenheimer treatment ... He 
met us in this great chauffeur-driven limousine, and took us downtown to a 
hotel he had selected in Greenwich Village. Then he took us to dinner at the 
Prince George Hotel . . . And there we sat, in the kind of restaurant I’ve hardly 
ever been to before or since ... Very memorable.” 

Oppenheimer worked at Harvard until Christmas and then moved to the 
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, where he observed experi- 
mental work going on under Robert Millikan. While in America, he kept up 
correspondence with European physicists. He turned down a job offer from 
Harvard, choosing instead a joint appointment at the University of California, 
Berkeley and Caltech. Berkeley was an intellectual “desert” with “no theo- 
retical physics.” But Oppenheimer thought “it would be nice to try to start 
something.” Worried about being too far out of touch, he decided to maintain 
his connection with Caltech.'°° And before he started the appointment, he 
was able to take another postdoctoral year (1928-29) in Europe. He visited 
Leiden to work with Ehrenfest and then went to Utrecht to work for one month 
with the Dutch theoretical physicist Hendrik A. Kramers. He had planned, 
following this, to join Bohr’s Institute for Theoretical Physics in Copenhagen 
but was dissuaded by Ehrenfest, who arranged for him to work under Pauli 
in Zurich instead. 

Ehrenfest thought that Bohr’s “largeness and vagueness” would not be 
helpful to Oppenheimer. Rather, Oppenheimer said, Ehrenfest believed “that 
I needed someone who was a professional calculating physicist and that Pauli 
would be right for me ... He thought in other words that I needed more 
discipline and more schooling ... It was clear that he was sending me there 
to be fixed up.” Ehrenfest wrote to Pauli, “For the development of his great 


44 Chapter Two 


scientific talents Oppenheimer needs right now to be morally and intellectually 
spanked into shape!” Victor Weisskopf, who was Pauli’s assistant between 
1934 and 1936, said that Oppenheimer did not stay long enough in Zurich to 
get the full “Pauli treatment”—but “those of us who stayed longer were all 
spanked into shape by Pauli, and we loved it.” Nevertheless, Oppenheimer 
said, “I got to be not only extremely respectful but also extremely fond of Pauli 
and I learned a lot from him.” Oppenheimer’s chronic colitis still dogged 
him, however. He had succumbed to occasional illness while at Gottingen. 
Ehrenfest added health grounds to support Oppenheimer’s application to the 
International Education Board to study in Ziirich: “So long as he keeps that 
obstinate cough ... it is better that he perhaps remains where the climate 
is more favourable than it is here.” Despite the milder climate in Zurich, 
Oppenheimer had to take a six-week break from working with Pauli, with 
doctor’s orders not to do any physics. !"! 

Rabi, another American studying at Zurich, was struck by the fact that 
although “Oppenheimer worked very hard that spring [he] had a gift of 
concealing his assiduous application with an air of easy nonchalance.” Pauli 
remarked to him that Oppenheimer “seemed to treat physics as an avocation 
and psychoanalysis as a vocation.” It was characteristic of Oppenheimer, Rabi 
wrote, that even while working on complex problems of astrophysics—such 
as a calculation of the opacity of surfaces of stars to their internal radiation— 
“he spoke little of these problems and seemed to be much more interested 
in literature, especially the Hindu classics and the more esoteric Western 
writers.” At the time, Oppenheimer was learning Italian in order to read 
Dante in the original.!” 

His breadth of interests clashed with the disciplined focus required of the 
professional physicist. Gottingen, Oppenheimer had remarked, was “almost 
exclusively scientific, & such philosophers as are here are pretty largely 
interested in epistemological paradoxes and tricks.” Dirac had reproached 
him: “I hear that you write poetry as well as working at physics. How on 
earth can you do two such things at once? In science one tries to tell people, 
in such a way as to be understood by everyone, something that no one ever 
knew before. But in the case of poetry it’s the exact opposite!”!°? German 
scientific education in the 1920s was just as utilitarian as the American system, 
if not more so. Oppenheimer told Fergusson that at Gottingen, “they have an 
enormous respect for America, for Ford and Compton and the bogus realism 
of Sinclair Lewis”—and that “they are working very hard here, and combining 
a fantastically impregnable metaphysical disingenuousness with the gogetting 
habits of a wall paper manufacturer . .. Everyone else seems to be concerned 


Struggling for Self 45 


about trying to make Germany a practically successful and sane country.” 


In this situation, Oppenheimer’s general culture was sometimes interpreted 
as suggesting amateurism or dilettantism. 

Between 1925 and 1929, then, Oppenheimer was immersed in and trained 
in what he called “the more critical, more disciplined, more professional sci- 
ence of Europe.”!” It was on the basis of this training that he made his key 
early contributions—in 1927, the Born-Oppenheimer approximation; in 1928, 
an article on the quantum mechanical idea of “tunneling,” published in the 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Under Pauli’s guidance, Op- 
penheimer began work on the fundamental problems of quantum mechanics 
and on analyzing remaining difficulties with quantum electrodynamics. '°° By 
1930, he was a member of a small, specialized elite circle, working at the eso- 
teric forefront of the new physics. At the same time, however, he maintained 
a self-presentation as a generally cultivated aesthete and leisured gentleman— 
identities frequently regarded as incongruous with the role of the scientific 
specialist, which Oppenheimer was pursuing in his education and career. 

This chapter has suggested that in Oppenheimer’s youthful self-formation, 
the interplay and tensions between general aesthetic cultivation and special- 
ized expertise were closely bound up with questions of Jewish identity and 
assimilation. The German Jewish attachment to Beldung was expressed in the 
habitus of Oppenheimer’s parents and was reinforced and refracted through 
his Ethical Culture education. This attachment was an aspect of the German 
Jewish search for a secular, universalistic conception of self and identity, an 
ideal developed in an American context by Adler. Paradoxically, however, 
this model of universalistic identity became identified in a particularistic way 
as (German) Jewish. Just as Bernheim, on entering Harvard, hoped to break 
out of the “Jewish enclave” of the Ethical Culture School, so Oppenheimer’s 
rebellion against Adler’s “morality compressed” was a further escape from 
Jewish identification. His attraction to a flamboyant literary and artistic per- 
sona, made available by Smith and his circle of young disciples, was in part a 
reaction against the sober moralism of his school and his father. New Mexico, 
too, seemed to offer a space where he could create himself in an unfettered 
way. This active self-creation, at once rebellious and unconfident, would in 
turn help Oppenheimer negotiate the institutionally anti-Semitic environment 
of Harvard. Through his cultivation of an elite habitus, displaying effortless 
superiority, Oppenheimer, whether consciously or not, constructed himself 
in opposition to stereotypes of the earnestly achieving, upwardly mobile 
Jewish student. This was his “diffidence of manner” that Bridgman found 
both “engaging” and un-Jewish. This mode of self-construction, however, 


46 Chapter Two 


became more problematic as Oppenheimer entered the world of theoretical 
physics, a professional community within which Jewishness was not an ob- 
stacle (though during his time at Gottingen, Oppenheimer was aware of the 
climate of German nationalist anti-Semitism that was soon to impinge on this 
world). Membership in this scholarly community meant adjusting to its own 
countervailing pressures toward disciplined intellectual focus and the profes- 
sional self. Oppenheimer had to choose between making physics a vocation 
or, as Pauli put it, an avocation. 

Yet even as Oppenheimer pursued the vocation of theoretical physics, 
he combined it with his earlier literary-creative habitus. This characteristic 
combination became part of his appeal as a flamboyant, cultured teacher of 
physics, with a tinge of the outsider, at Berkeley in the 1930s. 


CHAPTER THREE 


Confronting the World 


BERKELEY: THE TEACHER 


Oppenheimer returned to California in the summer of 1929 as a recognized 
member of the European community of theoretical physicists and a partic- 
ipant in the revolutionary new field of quantum mechanics. His emerging 
professional identity combined this expertise with his general aesthetic cul- 
tivation. The chair of the Berkeley physics department, Raymond T. Birge, 
remarked on the scope of Oppenheimer’s knowledge and understanding in 
physics and his cultural interests outside science. Oppenheimer’s cultural 
capacities and presentation of self were particularly important in his role as 
a teacher. Oppenheimer most powerfully transmitted the culture of quan- 
tum theory not through the impersonal mechanism of publication, but rather 
through face-to-face teaching and the establishment of a school of theoretical 
physics at Berkeley. Indeed, his role in the development of quantum theory 
in America was most importantly in transmission, rather than extension. His 
main influence was in building up a first-class school of theoretical physics. ! 

Oppenheimer was brought to California as a representative and carrier of 
the largely European culture ofthe new physics. In founding the first American 
school of theoretical physics at Berkeley in the 1930s, he formed a bridge 
between the “great tradition” of the European theoretical schools and the 
emerging vitality of an American program in both theoretical and experimen- 
tal physics.” 

Oppenheimer was also able to bridge the divide between the worlds of 
experimental and theoretical physics. At Berkeley, his research was centered 


48 Chapter Three 


around Ernest Lawrence’s cyclotron and the experimental program of the 
Radiation Laboratory (Rad Lab). Birge was enthusiastic about Oppenheimer’s 
ability to provide theoretical interpretations of experimental findings: “He 
has a more extensive knowledge of experimental results than any theoretical 
physicist that I know. . . [and]isaperfect team-mate for Professor Lawrence.” 

Experimentalists and theorists met regularly, at weekly colloquiums and the 
weekly Journal Club. Robert Wilson, as a young experimentalist working in 
the Rad Lab, was urged by Lawrence to attend the theory seminar. “We won’t 
understand a word,” Lawrence told him, “but it’s good for you to hear what 
the theorists are talking about.” Wilson continued to attend these seminars 
and found them useful for acquiring “a flavor of what was going on ... [to] 
get a feeling for what’s exciting, and maybe think about a theoretical problem 
myself for a bit. Or, sometimes, it was like going to Quaker Church, where 
you just sit and think.’ 

Oppenheimer’s influence was, however, strongest within his small circle 
of students, for whom he took on a charismatic aura. Birge noted the role of 
Oppenheimer’s personality in his teaching: he was, “through his inspiration, 
interest, and personality, attracting graduate students to him.” He worried 
about Oppenheimer’s tendency to “go over the heads” of his students and 
about his impatience with those less intellectually agile than himself. Never- 
theless, Birge saw improvement on this front over time, and Oppenheimer 
developed quickly as a teacher. Indeed, part of what attracted students to 
Oppenheimer was his oracular quality. According to Isidor Rabi, he “never 
expressed himself completely. He always left a feeling that there were depths 
of sensibility and insight not yet revealed.” Oppenheimer’s group of eight 
to ten graduate students and about half a dozen postdoctoral fellows met 
every day in Oppenheimer’s office. They would discuss each other’s work 
in progress, ranging from electrodynamics to cosmic rays, astrophysics, and 
nuclear physics. Oppenheimer would advise each student on how to proceed. 
After he left, most of the students would stay behind so that Oppenheimer’s 
close intellectual collaborator, postdoc Robert Serber, could interpret, ex- 
plaining to each student “what Oppie had told him to do.” “They were,” 
Serber recalled, “much more willing to display lack of understanding to me 
than they were to Oppie.” Such close, daily interaction instilled a sense of 
collective endeavor, a group identity centered upon a common apprenticeship 
to a master—an apostolic model of education, so to speak.° 

Oppenheimer’s powerful personal influence was compounded by the 
fact that the physics group at Berkeley had relatively little direct contact 
with the wider theoretical physics community. Although there was the odd 


Confronting the World 49 


distinguished visitor, notably including Niels Bohr in 1933 and Enrico Fermi 
in 1935, the general isolation was an important factor in Oppenheimer’s be- 
coming, for the young scientists, the personal embodiment of the role of the- 
oretical physicist. A close friend and admirer of Oppenheimer’s, the philoso- 
pher David Hawkins, recalled that “he had devoted students who would 
stay up all night studying something in order to be able to say something 
rather casually that he would approve of.” They were famous for imitating 
his mannerisms. Pauli referred to the theoretical physics group at Berkeley 
as Oppenheimer’s “nim nim nim boys,” because they adopted their profes- 
sor’s tendency to mumble incomprehensibly while in thought. They copied 
him down to the last detail, including his flat-footed walk and his habit of 
jumping up to light others’ cigarettes or pipes. They also adopted his habit 
of signaling assent or thought with a Germanic “ja, ja.” According to Wilson, 
Oppenheimer “affected a German mode.” The connection with Europe was 
thus not only intellectual but was also inscribed in the cultural orientation and 
habits of Oppenheimer’s theoretical physics group.° 

Following Oppenheimer’s example of what it meant to be a theoretical 
physicist and an intellectual also involved emulating his cultural and aesthetic 
tastes. So, according to Wilson, Oppenheimer’s students would listen to 
“Bach. Always Bach. The B Minor [Mass] ... must have been a favorite of 
Oppie.” They cultivated a style that marked them as a set. “They were,” 
Wilson remembered, “a separate group from the students in the Rad Lab. 
I think they somewhat disdained those of us who were working in the lab.” 
Oppenheimer’s students went everywhere with him, following him to Caltech, 
where he taught in the summers, and to his holiday ranch in New Mexico. 
Wilson reflected, “I was jealous because I was not one of the theory students. 
After you had been a student of Oppie’s for a certain time, then you became 
a member of his circle. They would go off to fancy dinners with Oppie, to 
his home, and they did social things . . . They lived a high kind of life that we 
would hear about. I looked at them with great envy and hoped to become a 
member of that clique somehow, but I never made it.”” 

Oppenheimer regarded dining at expensive Bay Area restaurants and sam- 
pling fine wines as part of a “total education” for his students. Theoretical 
physicist Rudolf Peierls wrote that Oppenheimer “had strong views on ques- 
tions of style in food and drink. Martinis had to be strong. Coffee had to 
be black.” Peierls recalled that when Oppenheimer took the members of a 
committee to a steak house after a meeting, nearly everyone took the cue 
from Oppenheimer that the steak should be ordered rare. Only one person 
ordered his beef well-done. “Robert looked at him and said, ‘Why don’t you 


50 Chapter Three 


have fish?’” Wilson remembered that an evening at the Oppenheimer house 
in Berkeley typically involved “the driest of martinis mixed by the hand of 
the master, sophisticated guests, gourmet food (but on the scant side), and 
amorphous buzz of conversation, smoke, alcohol.” One speciality was Op- 
penheimer’s version of the spicy Indonesian dish nasi goreng, which among 
his guests earned the nickname “nasty gory.” Edward Teller, the first time he 
met Oppenheimer (in 1937), was taken to a Mexican restaurant in San Fran- 
cisco. Teller found the combination of the spicy food and Oppenheimer’s 
personality so “overpowering” that he lost his voice.* 

Oppenheimer’s ability to be the center of the group, to treat his students to 
dinner, to throw lavish parties, was due to his inherited wealth.? This material 
capital was a necessary support for his social capital. Others may have aspired 
to his munificence but could not carry it off. Oppenheimer regularly paid for 
dinner for large groups of students and colleagues at expensive restaurants in 
San Francisco. Serber remembered that on one such occasion, after a joint 
seminar with Stanford, “[Felix] Bloch grew expansive, and leaned over and 
picked up the check. He looked at it, blinked, leaned over again and put it 
back down.”!® In the midst of the Depression, Oppenheimer’s wealth and 
extravagance certainly added to his personal aura. His money enabled him, to 
some extent, to adopt the attitude of the gentleman-amateur, in contrast with 
that of the harried professional. His lavish lifestyle and personal sophistication 
were a source of authority that contributed to his ability to lead and bind 
together a new school of theoretical physics. 

A friend and colleague from Berkeley remembered that Oppenheimer 
“found it very difficult to form proper relationships with equals” and tended 
to surround himself with “adoring disciples.” Outside this small circle, such 
adulation was looked at with some bemusement. The Italian physicist Emilio 
Segré was always skeptical about Oppenheimer. When Segré was working 
at the Rad Lab, he found that Oppenheimer “was considered a demigod by 
himself and others at Berkeley, and as such he spake in learned and obscure 
fashions.” To Segré, Oppenheimer’s physical research hardly merited wor- 
ship. Oppenheimer and his students at Berkeley tended to attack problems 
prematurely, “resulting in indifferent success.” Oppenheimer’s work on cos- 
mic rays and atomic and nuclear physics “embodied many good and prescient 
ideas, but was often inconclusive.” His best work, in astrophysics, proved 
“truly prophetic” only after his death. Moreover, Segré was not impressed by 
the high culture of Oppenheimer and his “acolytes”: “Oppenheimer and his 
group did not inspire in me the awe that they perhaps expected. I had the 
impression that their celebrated general culture was not superior to that 


Confronting the World 51 


expected in a boy who had attended a good European high school. I was 
already acquainted with most of their cultural discoveries, and I found Op- 
penheimer’s ostentation slightly ridiculous.”"! 

While his students imitated him, Oppenheimer had a tendency himself to 
fix on particular people to idealize and emulate. At Caltech, he met the physical 
chemist Linus Pauling. They were the same age and became fast friends, 
planning to collaborate on scientific work. Oppenheimer was fascinated by 
Pauling and began to copy him. Pauling’s biographer wrote that Oppenheimer 
“not only adopted some of Pauling’s lecturing style; he began wearing an old 
fedora around campus, much like the one that Pauling wore.” He bestowed 
lavish gifts on the chemist, from an expensive ring to items of great personal 
value, such as his childhood mineral collection. He wrote poems for Pauling 
that the recipient found “both obscureand troubling, mixing classical allusions 
with lines about mineralogy, Dante, and pederasty.” Their friendship ended 
when Oppenheimer made a pass at Pauling’s wife, which she found both 
flattering and resistable. Years later she told her husband, “You know, I don’t 
think Oppenheimer was in love with me. I think he was in love with you.” 

There were rumors circulating at Berkeley that Oppenheimer had had 
a homosexual affair with Harvey Hall, one of his first graduate students 
there. This gossip later came to the attention of FBI agents investigating Op- 
penheimer’s political activities.'? Whether or not these rumors were true 
(and there is no evidence to support them), it seems fairly likely that sexual 
ambivalence was one aspect of Oppenheimer’s youthful problems of identity. 
He was, at any rate, frustrated with his lack of success in what he called his 
“negotiations” with the opposite sex. During his first year at Berkeley, he 
told his brother that girls were not worth worrying too much about. “The 
obligation,” he asserted, “is always on the girl for making a go of conversation: 
if she does not accept the obligation nothing that you can do will make the 
negotiations pleasant.” It was futile, he said, to be concerned about whether 
one was pleasing to women.'* 

During this early period at Berkeley, Oppenheimer developed a strong 
interest in ascetic philosophies and in ideas of discipline, transcendence, and 
renunciation, becoming particularly interested in Hinduism. He had begun 
to read Hindu texts in translation while he was an undergraduate at Harvard, 
and Rabi remembered him talking about Hindu classics while in Zurich. At 
Berkeley, Oppenheimer read more widely and deeply in this tradition. In 1931 
he began to learn Sanskrit; he told his brother that he was “enjoying it very 
much and enjoying again the luxury of being taught.”!° In letters to Frank, 
he dwelled on themes of discipline and on the goal of transcendence, drawing 


52 Chapter Three 


not only on Hinduism but on a range of ancient, classical, and medieval 
models of the ascetic and contemplative life.'° Oppenheimer archly advised 
his brother to cultivate “a little leisure, a certain detached solitariness and a 
quiet discipline which uses but transcends the discipline of our duties.” In 
practical terms, he advised him to spend “not too hellishly many hours” on 
school and to eat “once in a while for your humility a green vegetable.” With 
the help of such a regime, he said, one could hope to achieve “the assurance 
and the certainty, and to some extent that delectatio contemplationis which is 
the reward and reason of our way of life.”!” 

Although he embraced his younger brother in speaking of “our way of 
life,” Oppenheimer was worried about his sibling’s decision to follow in his 
footsteps and become a physicist. He lectured Frank paternalistically on the 
responsibility of choosing a vocation: “I am sure you are right in preferring 
physics as a science to study and learn; but should you prefer it as a science 
at which to work, a vocation? By all means, and with my whole blessing, 
learn physics, all there is of it, so that you understand it, and can use it and 
contemplate it, and, if you should want, teach it; but do not plan yet to ‘do’ it: 
to adopt physical research as a vocation. For that decision you should know 
something more of the other sciences, and a good deal more physics.” He told 
his brother that he was worried about “the possibility that you are more and 
more deeply committing yourself to a vocation which you will regret.”"*® 

At the heart of “vocation,” Oppenheimer suggested, was “discipline.” Of 
this he wrote, “I do value it—and I think you do too—more than for its earthly 
fruit, proficiency.” Listing in his support “the bhagavad gita, Ecclesiastes, 
the Stoa, the beginning of the Laws, Hugo of St Victor, St Thomas, John of 
the Cross, Spinoza,” Oppenheimer wrote that “through discipline, though 
not through discipline alone, we can achieve serenity, and a certain small but 
precious measure of freedom from the accidents of incarnation and charity, 
and that detachment which preserves the world which it renounces.” Oppen- 
heimer emphasized that it was the shaping of one’s inner life that mattered 
above all. He announced that he wanted to be in the world, but not of the 
world.’ 

In 1933, Oppenheimer started attending Thursday-evening readings of the 
Bhagavad Gita in the original, under the guidance of the renowned Berkeley 
Sanskritist Arthur Ryder. Oppenheimer later described the experience and 
his view of Ryder as a moral paragon: “Ryder felt and thought and talked as a 
Stoic ... a special subclass of people who have a tragic sense in life.” Ryder 
gave him “a feeling for the place of ethics” and an understanding of voca- 
tion, teaching him that “any man who does a hard thing well is automatically 


Confronting the World 53 


respectable and worthy of respect.” Oppenheimer found, expressed in the 
Bhagavad Gita and embodied in Ryder, an ascetic ethos on which to model 
his own self-fashioning. The Hindu notion of dharma meshed with Oppen- 
heimer’s interest in ascetic discipline and with his understanding of the pursuit 
of science as a calling, or vocation. Oppenheimer often used the language of 
the Gita to express ideas not substantively different from the Protestant work 
ethic.” 

It is also possible, however, that Oppenheimer was intrigued by the Hindu 
classic’s dynamic tension between detachment from and engagement in the 
world. He was ambivalent between the urge to seek refuge from a world in 
which he felt ill at ease and the competing desire for active involvement and 
intimacy with others. He was, so to speak, uncomfortable in his own skin— 
hence, perhaps, the appeal of what he called “freedom from the accidents of 
incarnation.” Rabi later expressed disapproval of Oppenheimer’s broad cul- 
tural interests and commented that if Oppenheimer had “studied the Talmud 
rather than Sanskrit,” it “would have given him a greater sense of himself.”*! 
But for Oppenheimer, the point was that, unlike the Talmud, the Gita car- 
ried a message that appeared to transcend its particular religious and cultural 
tradition. 

Felix Adler had sought to extract from Judaism and Christianity a univer- 
sal morality that could be separated from religious doctrines and religious 
ritual. Oppenheimer’s search for moral meaning beyond these Western tradi- 
tions could be seen as continuous with Adler’s universalistic ideal. However, 
Oppenheimer found Ethical Culture itself to be too narrow and constraining. 
Rabi observed that “too great a dose of ethical culture can often sour the 
budding intellectual who would prefer a more profound approach to human 
relations and man’s place in the universe.””* Oppenheimer’s interest in the 
Gita and his prescription of renunciation, hardship, detachment, and inner 
peace in letters to his brother were a reaction against Adler’s project. Whereas 
Ethical Culture emphasized moral action in the world aimed at improving 
human welfare, what Oppenheimer proposed verged on mystic renunciation 
of the world. 

The ideal ofhardship and the strenuous life that he prescribed to his brother 
stood in opposition also to his parents’ ideal of cultivation, which expressed 
the German-Jewish attachment to Bildung. Instead of the flowering of the self 
through aesthetic cultivation, Oppenheimer now suggested the subjugation 
of the self through ascetic discipline. But there is no need to assume that 
Oppenheimer practiced what he preached. He did not live a life of ascetic 
self-denial. Instead, his study of Sanskrit and the Gita served as evidence of 


54 Chapter Three 


his cultivation. It was primarily an aesthetic and decorative accomplishment 
and a display of virtuosity. Hawkins recalled with a laugh, “I once was sitting 
in his living room before the war in Berkeley, and to the left on the bookshelf 
was a whole string of classics. I saw Plato and pulled down a volume, and I 
said, ‘You know, I’ve just been studying this volume.’ And he said, owlishly, 
‘ve read the Greeks, I find the Hindus deeper.’ Wow! One-upmanship! 
He had that side to him, too.”** Instead of a path to the disciplining of the 
self, Oppenheimer’s interest in Hinduism functioned as ornamental cultural 
capital. Similar tensions between ascetic discipline and aesthetic cultivation, 
and between engaging in the world and renouncing it, were at the heart of 
Oppenheimer’s scientific and intellectual identity. 


OPPENHEIMER’S INTRODUCTION TO POLITICS 


Oppenheimer’s letters to his brother in the early to mid-1930s reveal a fo- 
cus on inner self-discipline, as well as an attachment to aesthetic modes of 
self-fashioning. Though in some ways competing, these preoccupations came 
together in their inward focus on the self. In the later 1930s, however, this 
solipsistic and introspective orientation was to be shattered by new relation- 
ships and a growing political consciousness, leading Oppenheimer to new 
kinds of engagement in the world. Before the mid-1930s, he was highly insu- 
lated from political events. Harvey Hall later told the FBI that during those 
years, Oppenheimer “had very limited outside acquaintances and interests.” 
Beyond physics, Oppenheimer was interested in “art subjects and classical 
concerts and movies,” but not politics. Oppenheimer testified at the 1954 
security hearings that in this period, he “was not interested in and did not 
read about economics or politics. I was almost wholly divorced from the con- 
temporary scene in this country. I never read a newspaper or a current mag- 
azine like Time or Harper’s; I had no radio, no telephone; I learned of the 
stock-market [crash] in the fall of 1929 only long after the event; the first time 
I ever voted was in the presidential election of 1936.” Oppenheimer’s interest 
in progressive politics was catalyzed by a number of influences. His father 
was helping relatives in Germany, including his own sister, to immigrate to 
America in order to escape from the Nazis. When Julius died in Septem- 
ber 1937, Robert became their sponsor. He was deeply affected by what he 
learned of the Nazi persecution of the Jews, feeling what he later described 
as a “continuing, smoldering fury about the treatment of Jews in Germany.” 
In addition, although his own wealth insulated him against the Depression, 


Confronting the World 55 


he was made aware of its effects by the plight of his graduate students, who 
were facing enormous problems finding jobs and for whom Oppenheimer 
had difficulty securing funds from the department.** 

Oppenheimer’s growing political involvement was closely interwoven with 
his relationships and social life. His first mature love affair began in the 
spring of 1936, when he fell passionately in love with a young woman named 
Jean Tatlock, the daughter of a Berkeley professor of medieval literature. 
Oppenheimer later said, “We were at least twice close enough to marriage 
to think of ourselves as engaged.” Tatlock was, as Oppenheimer put it, an 
“on again, off again” member of the Communist Party. She introduced him 
to many of the causes and groups that he would support in the coming years. 
However, their relationship was stormy, and they broke up in early 1939. 
Tatlock was subject to periodic episodes of serious depression. The last time 
they saw each other was during one particularly bad such episode in the early 
summer of 1943. Oppenheimer responded to her call for help and, watched 
by security agents, made a trip back from Los Alamos to Berkeley to visit her. 
In January 1944, she committed suicide.”° 

Oppenheimer took a strong interest in the Spanish civil war. For a few 
years, he donated about a thousand dollars annually through Communist 
channels to the Spanish Loyalist cause and attended fund-raising parties for 
the Loyalists. He began a subscription to the People’s World, the newspaper 
of the Communist Party on the West Coast. In April 1938, he signed a 
petition by academics calling on President Roosevelt to lift the embargo on 
the Spanish republic. He also became involved in local activism, working, 
for example, as recording secretary for the Teacher’s Union at Berkeley. 
He joined the San Francisco Executive Committee of the American Civil 
Liberties Union in January 1939. He also sponsored the union of progressive 
scientists, the American Association of Scientific Workers. And he took an 
interest in local issues such as the plight of migrant workers in California and 
the longshoremen’s strike.”° 

There is no conclusive or firm evidence that Oppenheimer ever joined the 
Communist Party. But he certainly cooperated closely with it during this Pop- 
ular Front period, when the party was seeking alliances with liberals and pro- 
gressives and when the class struggle was subordinated to the struggle against 
Fascism. Through his political involvement, Oppenheimer became close 
friends with Haakon Chevalier, a young leftist professor of Romance lan- 
guages. Chevalier idolized Oppenheimer; for him, the years from 1937 to 1943, 
when the physicist left for Los Alamos, were “dominated by the personality 


56 Chapter Three 


of Oppenheimer.” Chevalier later alleged that Oppenheimer had been a mem- 
ber of the same Communist Party cell that Chevalier belonged to. Oppen- 
heimer denied this; he always maintained that he had never been a party 
member, although he once said that he had “probably belonged to every 
Communist-front organization on the West Coast.” Oppenheimer engaged 
with a variety of progressive causes associated with the Popular Front and was 
actively involved in the Berkeley leftist milieu, in which party and non-party 
members worked together and in which political outlook was more important 
than a membership card. Oppenheimer told the AEC hearings that he had 
acquired a favorable view of the Soviet Union from reading, in 1936, Sidney 
and Beatrice Webb’s Soviet Communism: A New Civilization? This book “and 
the talk that I heard at the time,” he said, “had predisposed me to make much 
of the economic progress and general level of welfare in Russia and little of its 
political tyranny.”?” 

Oppenheimer’s involvement with progressive causes during the late 1930s 
meshed with and reinforced his role as a charismatic teacher. Indeed, his 
former student Philip Morrison credited Oppenheimer’s development into a 
great teacher to the change in worldview that followed his political involve- 
ment: “My experience was that when I got there in ’36, he .. . had become a 
superb teacher. I know that in ’34 he was not. I'd talked to people who saw the 
change. He changed greatly in his attitude toward teaching and to students, 
between ’34 and’36.” This was not due merely to the accumulation of experi- 
ence and confidence in the classroom. Rather, “it was an actual change in deep 
personality. He was much less isolated, more concerned with politics, more 
concerned with the outer world, more concerned with other people. He was 
sensitized. Before that, he was a very self-indulgent person ... He spent his 
time studying Sanskrit and so on. He didn’t care much about other matters. . . 
And I don’t think I would have done very well if ’d been with his earlier self. I 
know he would not have increased the number of students the way he did.”** 

Oppenheimer’s circle of students tended to share his political views. Ac- 
cording to Chevalier, “when they learned that Opje was a member of the 
Teachers Union the young teaching assistants joined the union too. Many of 
them were or became left-wingers, by gravitation or contagion, and they were 
always eager to hear his views on the rapidly evolving political events at home 
and abroad.” Physicist Edward Condon, rather dismissively, described Op- 
penheimer as “kind ofan active parlor pink” at that time. “And,” he said, “that’s 
how all these other boys who were his students and were great imitators of him 
in every way, they too got involved with various left wing labor business.””9 
It would be wrong, however, to think that the politics of Oppenheimer’s 


Confronting the World 57 


students were merely imitative. For many, their left-wing political commit- 
ments were formed before arrival at Berkeley. 

According to Morrison, about half of Oppenheimer’s ten or eleven gradu- 
ate students were “seriously left students and wanted to do everything that you 
can do.” It was, he said, “especially galvanizing because Oppenheimer’s land- 
lady ... was a very energetic and enterprising lady of high position socially, 
had a good deal of money, espoused the cause of the Spanish Medical Bureau, 
which was an organization to collect funds and to send people to go to serve as 
nurses and doctors in Spain and above all to support them with supplies, and 
things of that sort, which we were all engaged in. And Oppie’s house was a 
good place to meet for that.”° There was often very little distinction between 
a political event and a social event. So there were frequent parties to raise 
money for republican Spain and later on behalf of Russian War Relief. Cheva- 
lier wrote, “These were invariably lively and successful affairs, with some 
celebrity as a drawing card .. . and the reliable contingents of pretty girls .. . 
who would pass through the crowd selling flowers or encouraging people 
to buy drinks.” Chemist Martin Kamen called the Berkeley leftist milieu the 
“cocktail front.”?! 

Oppenheimer’s relationship with Jean Tatlock may have been the cata- 
lyst to his political engagement, but it was far from being the only factor.” 
The causes and groups with which Oppenheimer became involved in the late 
1930s satisfied a longing for involvement and for camaraderie. The progressive 
and internationalist character of the Popular Front appealed to him. Oppen- 
heimer’s left-wing political views during the thirties were to some degree 
continuous with the social values of the Ethical Culture School. It seems that 
Oppenheimer, like many intellectuals, was attracted to the cultural agenda of 
the Left, above all to the ideal of constructing and belonging to a new form 
of community—one that promised to overcome traditional divisions between 
people, both of class and of ethnicity. Sociologist Nathan Glazer has argued 
that American Jews who joined the Communist Party were often drawn to it 
by this cultural agenda: “To be a Communist meant to shed the limitations 
of one’s social reality, and to join a fraternity that transcended the divisions 
of the world. This was the attraction of Communism to many Jews who no 
longer thought of themselves as in any way Jewish.”* 

When Oppenheimer later reflected on his political involvements of the 
19308, he also cast them in terms of issues of community, culture, and identity. 
In 1948, he described his awakening to politics as a coming to maturity: “I’m 
not ashamed of it; I’m more ashamed of the lateness ... Most of what I 
believed then now seems complete nonsense, but it was an essential part 


58 Chapter Three 


of becoming a whole man. If it hadn’t been for this late but indispensable 
education, I couldn’t have done the job at Los Alamos at all.”°4 He said at 
the security hearings that his youthful political involvement gave him a way to 
“participate more fully in the life of the community .. . I liked the new sense 
of companionship, and at the same time felt that I was coming to be part of the 
life of my time and country.”*? Oppenheimer, then, described his political 
interests in terms of self-shaping, of personality, of “becoming a whole man.” 
It was, for him, an aspect of self-cultivation. But in contrast to his earlier, 
inward-looking focus, Oppenheimer now understood such self-shaping to 
require active involvement in a political community and engagement with the 
world. So Oppenheimer’s activist, left-wing political involvement was both 
an extension of the universalism of Beldung and Adler’s secular religion of 
Ethical Culture and a rejection and transcendence of the limitations of these 
outlooks in favor of a more worldly, more active, and even more universalistic 
philosophy and orientation. 

In August 1939, Oppenheimer met Katherine (Kitty) Puening Harrison, 
and they married the next year. Kitty’s second husband had been Joe Dallet, 
the Dartmouth-educated son of an investment banker. Dallet had severed ties 
with his family, jomed the Communist Party, and gone to Spain to fight with the 
International Brigades. Kitty had also joined the party. She was permitted to 
do so only after she had performed “‘a number of tasks which were extremely 
painful to me, such as selling the Dazly Worker on the street and passing 
out leaflets at the steel mill.” Kitty, who came from a wealthy and established 
German family, found the poverty in which she lived with Dallet “depressing,” 
and they separated in 1936. But the following year, she had a change of heart. 
In June 1937, just before Dallet went to Spain, they had areunion in Paris. Kitty 
promised to join him in Spain. A few months later, he was killed in action. 
She returned to the United States, enrolling at the University of Pennsylvania 
to study biology, and married her third husband, a British physician named 
Richard Harrison.*° 

Oppenheimer met Kitty at a garden party in Pasadena while she was still 
married to Harrison, who was then doing an internship at a Los Angeles 
hospital and was friends with a number of Caltech physicists. Kitty said, “I 
fell in love with Robert that day, but hoped to conceal it.” The following year, 
Oppenheimer asked the couple to join him for the summer at his New Mexico 
ranch. Kitty accepted the invitation, while Harrison stayed behind to study 
for his examinations. Kitty said that during that time at the ranch, “Robert and 
I realised that we were both in love.” On November 1, 1940, Kitty divorced 
Harrison and married Oppenheimer. She was already pregnant with their 


Confronting the World 59 


first child, Peter, who was born in May 1941. Their affair had created a minor 
scandal at Berkeley.°” 

It was via Kitty that Oppenheimer came to meet Steve Nelson, a prominent 
Bay Area Communist Party organizer. Nelson had been a friend of Dallet’s and 
had stayed with Kitty for two weeks in Paris to help her come to terms with the 
news of her husband’s death. Oppenheimer and Nelson met in autumn 1940 at 
an event held to raise money for Spanish refugees. Nelson recalled that it was 
Oppenheimer who introduced himself after giving a talk about the Spanish 
war, surprising him by announcing that he was about to marry a friend of 
Nelson’s. Oppenheimer invited Nelson to his house for a get-together with 
university people who wanted to meet a veteran of the International Brigades. 
The two men subsequently met occasionally as Nelson worked on organizing 
people in the university; he remembered that “a number of Oppenheimer’s 
graduate students in the field of physics were quite active.” Nelson said, “Our 
contacts were more on their terms than ours. They lived in a more rarefied 
intellectual and cultural atmosphere.” He was impressed by Oppenheimer, 
particularly when the physicist “casually remarked” that he had read all 
three volumes of Marx’s Capital on a three-day train ride. As Nelson put it, 
“Oppenheimer had such intellectual presence that almost everyone deferred 
to him. I was very impressed with our discussions and began to admire him.” 
But he added that they “never became close friends” and that Oppenheimer’s 
connection with the Communist Party had been “tenuous at best.”?8 

Kitty’s Communist connections, via Dallet, were to become a subject of 
interest to military intelligence and the FBI during the war, and they were also 
brought up in the 1954 hearings. But Kitty herself'was far from a dyed-in-the- 
woolleftist. Jackie Oppenheimer, Frank’s wife (both of them were Communist 
Party members), intensely disliked Kitty and said, “All her political convictions 
were phony.” Following his marriage to Kitty, Oppenheimer withdrew more 
and more from the political causes and groups in which he had been involved. 
He later said that after his marriage, “a certain stuffiness overcame me.”*? 

Like many affiliated with the Popular Front, Oppenheimer became disen- 
chanted with the causes of the 1930s as World War II loomed. This change 
began for Oppenheimer when he learned more about the purges and political 
repression in the Soviet Union. He was particularly influenced by the negative 
opinion of Russia expressed to him by the politically liberal physicists George 
Placzek, Marcel Schein, and Victor Weisskopf, who had visited the Soviet 
Union a year and a half earlier.*” 

The Soviet-Nazi nonaggression pact was disillusioning for Oppenheimer, 
as it was for many intellectuals who had engaged with Communists in the 


60 Chapter Three 


cause of building a united front against Fascism. But Chevalier suggested 
that Oppenheimer’s first reaction was to try to rationalize the Soviet position: 
“He communicated with extraordinary effectiveness his own conviction that 
political events ... could be made to yield their significance if examined 
objectively, in the light of the factors that had conditioned them.”*" 

According to Segré, “Oppenheimer and his acolytes followed the political 
line of the Communist Party of the United States,” and Oppenheimer would 
often repeat “with the faith of the true believer, the nonsense originating 
from Stalin’s Cominform.” Chevalier recalled that in late 1939 or early 1940, 
Oppenheimer suggested writing pamphlets for circulation among academic 
colleagues setting out the Left’s position on issues such as the nonaggression 
pact. Oppenheimer’s hope, said Chevalier, was that “a well-written, well- 
printed and dignified-looking four-page brochure dealing seriously with some 
of the most fundamental current political problems, could have an incalculable 
impact on the academic mind.” William R. Smythe, a physics professor at 
Caltech, told a security agent in July 1943 that “there was at one time a 
small pamphlet put out to be sent to the various professors of the California 
Institute of Technology, which definitely indicated a Communistic influence. 
[Smythe] ... personally suspected that Robert Oppenheimer was the one 
who instigated the sending of these pamphlets [but] had no tangible proof or 
evidence that such was the case.”“” 

Nevertheless, after the nonaggression pact, Oppenheimer began to move 
away from his previous political causes. Morrison described the pact as a 
“seismic fault in the whole relationship between certainly the academic lefties 
and the Communist Party.” After it, “the politics was less clear.” Oppenheimer 
himself began to feel that he “had had enough of the Spanish cause and that 
there were other and more pressing crises in the world.”“? When World War II 
came, he embraced the war effort with the same fervor and the same ideals that 
had been behind his interest in the Spanish cause. Hans Bethe recalled how at 
the 1940 meeting of the American Physical Society, Oppenheimer “talked for 
quite a long time” about the significance of the fall of France. “He told us how 
much France meant to the western world, and how the fall of France meant an 
end of many things that he had considered precious and that now the western 
civilization was really ina critical situation, and that it was very necessary to do 
something to save the values of western civilization.” Oppenheimer told the 
assembled scientists that they would have to “defend western values against 
the Nazis” and that “because of the Molotov-von Ribbentrop pact we can 


have no truck with the Communists.”*4 


Confronting the World 61 


WAR, POLITICS, AND THE ATOMIC BOMB 


Oppenheimer’s left-wing political views strained his relationship with senior 
figures in the physics department at Berkeley. Oppenheimer was recognized 
as a brilliant theoretician, and his success in building a prestigious school of 
theoretical physics had significantly added to the renown of the department. 
Lawrence, the founder and director of the Rad Lab, greatly respected Op- 
penheimer as a physicist and also, it seems, had considerable affection for 
him as a person. However, there were also tensions, hinted at in the letter 
Oppenheimer wrote to Lawrence in August 1945 giving his reasons for de- 
ciding not to return to Berkeley: “I think it would not have seemed so odd 
[to you] ... nor so hard to understand if you remembered how much more 
of an underdogger I have always been than you.”*° Caltech president Robert 
Millikan told a security agent in July 1943 that “while Robert Oppenheimer 
was at the University of California he was regarded as an extreme radical 
and having some subversive tendencies.” He added that he thought Oppen- 
heimer “unquestionably would have been fired had it not been for his extreme 
brilliance in his particular field.”*° 

Both Birge (the department chair) and Lawrence were at odds with Op- 
penheimer over what Birge referred to as “the type of person who should 
be added to the department”: “The only sort of person that Oppie seems to 
want is just the sort that Lawrence and I do not care to have on our staff.” 
Birge explained, “New York Jews flocked out here to him and some were not 
as nice as he was ... Lawrence and I were very concerned to have people 
here who were nice people as well as good students.”*” The chemist Martin 
Kamen, who worked at the Rad Lab during the late 1930s and early 1940s, 
thought that Lawrence “was ill at ease among Bohemian types.” “Bohemian,” 
in that context, meant Jewish and left-wing. The label was often attached to 
Oppenheimer’s brother, Frank, who was then studying at Caltech—although, 
interestingly, not so much to Robert himself.*® 

When Oppenheimer enrolled Bernard Peters for graduate studies, Birge 
objected that the young man did not have a bachelor’s degree. Peters and his 
wife had come to America as refugees after he had escaped from a German 
concentration camp. According to Condon, Peters “had never really had any 
undergraduate university work when he went to Dachau in the middle of his 
first year,” but he was a “brilliant fellow,” and Oppenheimer took him on for 
that reason. Oppenheimer, said Condon, was “a great iconoclast” and “was a 
great one to break university rules and get away with it.”49 Tensions between 


62 Chapter Three 


Oppenheimer and Birge became marked toward the end of the war, with 
the department turning down Oppenheimer’s recommendations for postwar 
appointments—refusing to commit to a place even for the brilliant Richard 
Feynman.” 

Despite the mutual respect that Lawrence and Oppenheimer had for each 
other as physicists, their political differences became increasingly marked. In 
contrast to Oppenheimer’s leftist milieu, Lawrence paid court to the rich and 
powerful as he sought to raise funds for the increasingly expensive research at 
the Radiation Laboratory. Lawrence, like most senior faculty of the Berkeley 
physics department, was rigidly conservative in his politics. In the 1930s, the 
personnel manager for the Rad Lab was George Everson, who was very anti- 
Communist and anti-New Deal. In reaction to the prevalence of left-wing ideas 
among young researchers at the Rad Lab, Lawrence “effectively banned” po- 
litical discussion in the lab.°! 

Herbert York, then a graduate student in the lab, described Lawrence’s ra- 
tionale: “Scientists, he said, especially young ones, should not waste precious 
working time on extraneous issues for which they had no special training.” It 
is significant that Oppenheimer did not see political activism as extraneous. 
The fact that he wrote an invitation to a party benefiting the Spanish Loy- 
alists on a Rad Lab blackboard (which Lawrence later erased) suggests that 
he saw no need to separate his intellectual and academic life from his politi- 
cal life. Morrison, similarly, saw these roles as continuous: “I used to talk a 
lot—especially to the academic community in various groups and clubs and 
so on—about the fact that modern physics was answering the great problems 
of the world and that attention to it was an essential part of the modern world, 
and no political movement could afford not to take into account what this 
might mean.” Morrison was at the time a reader of J. D. Bernal and other 
British socialist writers, who emphasized the importance of science as the key 
force of production and social change in modern society. Oppenheimer would 
have encountered similar ideas in the Webbs’ book, which called science the 
“salvation of mankind” and praised the Soviets’ “devotion to science,” as well 
as their planning of scientific research. There is, however, no evidence that 
Oppenheimer was influenced directly or persuaded by Bernalist ideas.” 

It turned out to be the war that would connect science most decisively 
with larger social, political, and economic forces. American science was har- 
nessed to the war effort first under the National Defense Research Committee 
(NDRC), created in 1940 by Roosevelt at the urging of the president of the 
Carnegie Institution, engineer Vannevar Bush. From the early fall of 1941, the 
Rad Lab was increasingly given over to war research for the atomic bomb 


Confronting the World 63 


project, organized under the Office of Scientific Research and Development 
(OSRD)—the organization (again directed by Bush) that in June had in- 
corporated and replaced the NDRC as the umbrella for wartime scientific 
research. Work at the Rad Lab on the separation of uranium isotope was car- 
ried out under the OSRD’s S-1 Section, the branch that under the supervision 
of Bush’s deputy, Harvard president James B. Conant, coordinated atomic 
bomb research.” 

It was during this time that Lawrence’s disapproval of left-wing political 
activism hardened into prohibition. Oppenheimer had previously been able 
to combine his political activism and membership in a radical circle with the 
maintenance of good relations with Lawrence. The entry of the United States 
into the war and the militarization of scientific research meant that Oppen- 
heimer could no longer hold together his position as both outsider political 
activist and academic insider. This tension, which had already become evident 
before Pearl Harbor, was evinced by Oppenheimer’s oscillations with regard 
to his support for the American Association of Scientific Workers (AASW). 

Late in 1938, Martin Kamen attended a scientific meeting in honor of Nobel 
Prize-winning chemist Harold Urey. There he picked up information about 
the AASW, which had recently been formed on the national level. Kamen 
agreed to pass the material on to Oppenheimer and psychologist Edward 
C. Tolman, who were known as the most active among the left-wing and 
liberal scientists on the Berkeley campus. Kamen, however, found Oppen- 
heimer extremely worried about an un-American activities committee recently 
set up by the California State Assembly. According to Kamen, “Oppie felt 
that his participation in any attempt to help the [AJASW might be its ‘kiss 
of death,’” and Oppenheimer took a position against setting up a campus 
branch of the organization. It struck Kamen at the time that Oppenheimer was 
exaggerating the risks. But by the fall of 1941, Kamen said, Oppenheimer had 
completely reversed his stand: he was now speaking enthusiastically about 
forming a chapter of the AASW, which would give support to the Federa- 
tion of Architects, Engineers, Chemists and Technicians (FAECT), a union 
affiliated with the CIO (Congress of Industrial Organizations) that was cam- 
paigning to organize a branch at the nearby Shell Development Company 
plant. Oppenheimer apparently urged Kamen—as well as Al Marshak, also 
of the Rad Lab—to come to a discussion at his home to “hear the case for 
the FAECT.” Oppenheimer introduced two representatives of FAECT, who 
made the case for setting up a campus branch of the AASW to bolster the 
FAECT’s organizing at Shell. Oppenheimer had not, however, considered 
Lawrence’s predictably negative response to the notion of political organizing 


64 Chapter Three 


at the Rad Lab. When Lawrence put his foot down and demanded the names 
of staff members who had attended the meeting, Oppenheimer’s reaction 
was clumsy. He would not identify anyone himself but instead said that “he 
would inform those involved and leave it to them to see E.O.L. [Lawrence] 
if they wished.” This put Kamen in a bind. If he confessed his involvement 
to Lawrence, he would irrevocably damage his relationship with the Rad Lab 
chief. But if he didn’t, and Lawrence learned of his involvement, the conse- 
quences would be worse. He decided to go to Lawrence, who lectured him 
about Communist influence on labor organizations and complained about the 
trouble caused by Oppenheimer’s “fuzzy-minded efforts to do good.”°4 

On November 12, 1941, Oppenheimer wrote a letter to Lawrence, distancing 
himself from the AASW: “I... assure you that there will be no further dif- 
ficulties at any time with the A.A.S.W. ... and I doubt very much whether 
anyone will want to start at this time an organization which could in any way 
embarrass, divide or interfere with the work we have in hand . . . All those to 
whom I have spoken agree with us; so you can forget it.”>? Kamen reflected 
bitterly that “there were some of us who were not allowed to ‘forget it.’” 
Throughout the war, Kamen was under surveillance by military intelligence, 
and in early July 1944 he was expelled from the Rad Lab as an alleged security 
risk. Blacklisted, he was forced to find work at the San Francisco shipyards.”° 

As he became involved with war work, Oppenheimer came under pressure 
to renounce his political commitments and solidarities. It was his entry into 
the atomic bomb project, more than events such as the nonaggression pact or 
the invasion of France, that precipitated his break with the Left. His extreme 
anxiety about Lawrence’s criticism and his apologetic letter of November 12 
were due precisely to the fact that Lawrence had just recently brought him into 
the bomb project. Oppenheimer’s relationship with the project had begun at 
Berkeley in early 1941, when he and other theoretical physicists collaborated 
with Lawrence in the development of the electromagnetic process for the 
separation of uranium isotope. And it was Lawrence who thrust Oppenheimer 
forward, bringing him to the attention of the scientific leadership of the bomb 
project. Lawrence wrote to physicist Arthur H. Compton, a fellow member of 
the S-1 Executive Committee, in October of 1941 vouching for Oppenheimer, 
stating that the latter had “important new ideas” and assuring Compton, “I 
have a great deal of confidence in Oppenheimer.” Lawrence requested firmly 
that Oppenheimer be included among the attendees at a conference on fast- 
neutron research to be held at the General Electric Research Laboratory on 
October 21 in Schenectady, New York.>” Compton was sufficiently impressed 
by Oppenheimer’s performance there, and by his subsequent correspondence 


Confronting the World 65 


with the young theoretician, that in January 1942 he appointed him as head 
of fast-neutron research at Berkeley. This was part of the program taking 
place at laboratories across the country under the overall direction of Gregory 
Breit. Partly because of his rigidity in restricting communication between 
laboratories, Breit’s leadership had become widely unpopular. When Breit 
resigned in May 1942, Compton gave Oppenheimer his job. In the following 
months, with the help of experimental physicist John Manley, Oppenheimer 
took on the task of coordinating fast-neutron research.” 

He had already begun to sever his ties with the Left. On December 6, 1941, 
the day before Pearl Harbor, Oppenheimer attended his very last party for 
Spanish war relief. It is unclear when he made his last contributions to that 
cause through the Communist Party. Oppenheimer said it was in early 1942. 
The report of the security hearings put it in April, coinciding with Oppen- 
heimer’s formal entry into the atomic bomb project. It was on April 22, 1942, 
that Oppenheimer completed his first security questionnaire; in May he began 
full-time work.*® It is equally unclear when he last saw Steve Nelson. Oppen- 
heimer told the security hearings that, after their initial encounter at the meet- 
ing for Spain, the only times he met with Nelson were a few occasions when 
Nelson and his wife visited the Oppenheimers socially at their home. This was 
not challenged during the hearings. However, in his autobiography, Nelson as- 
serted that Oppenheimer contacted him shortly before leaving for Los Alamos, 
which would suggest that their last encounter took place sometime in early 
1943. According to Nelson, they met at a Berkeley restaurant. Oppenheimer 
“appeared excited to the point of nervousness. He couldn’t discuss where he 
was going, but would only say that it had to do with the war effort.” Saying 
good-bye to Nelson, Oppenheimer added that “it was too bad that the Spanish 
Loyalists had not been able to hold out a little longer so that we could have 
buried Franco and Hitler in the same grave.” “That,” wrote Nelson, “was the 
last time I ever saw him, except on television.”™ 

Throughout 1942, Oppenheimer was a rising star within the atomic bomb 
project. Compton was impressed at the progress Oppenheimer made in the 
fast-fission work: “Under Oppenheimer,” he said later, “something really got 
done, and doneatastonishing speed.” Oppenheimer proposed ajoint meeting 
of theorists and experimentalists to work out the problems of fast fission. The 
physicists met in Chicago on June 5 and 6; in the latter part of July, there was 
also an important meeting at Berkeley, which Oppenheimer chaired, focused 
on theoretical work. Meanwhile, the government was making arrangements 
for the atomic bomb project to be placed under the control of the Army. On 
June 17, President Roosevelt approved the proposals made by Conant and 


66 Chapter Three 


Bush, the administrative heads of civilian wartime scientific research, that the 
Army take over direction of the program. The Army Corps of Engineers was 
the only organization with the capacity to organize a project of such magnitude. 
Moreover, the expenditures could now be hidden within the massive wartime 
defense budget. In September, General Leslie R. Groves was chosen as overall 
head of the bomb project, now known as the Manhattan Project after its Corps 
of Engineers administrative designation, the Manhattan Engineer District. 
Groves had much experience in leading large-scale construction programs— 
including the building of the Pentagon—and had a reputation as a tough and 
efficient organizer.*! 

Groves and Oppenheimer first met in early October 1942, when Groves 
visited the laboratories at Berkeley. Groves was impressed by a report Oppen- 
heimer gave, and “the two men hit it offat once.” Particularly interesting to 
Groves was Oppenheimer’s proposal for centralizing fast-fission research in 
one main laboratory. Oppenheimer, Groves, and Colonel Kenneth D. Nichols 
discussed the matter further ona train from Chicago to New York. And Groves 
invited Oppenheimer to Washington to go over plans for the new lab with 
Compton and Bush. On October 19, Groves gave the go-ahead for the new 
lab. Oppenheimer went immediately to Harvard to brief Conant. He also 
played a key role in choosing the site for the new laboratory. He was familiar 
with northern New Mexico, which had many geographical advantages for a 
secret project, and he suggested looking at Los Alamos.™ 

As well as being instrumental in the choice of location, Oppenheimer 
played a central role in staffing Los Alamos, recruiting most of the senior 
scientists himself. In December 1942, he carried out a “personal raid” on the 
Radiation Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. Hans Bethe was one of the outstanding physicists 
there whom Oppenheimer enticed to Los Alamos. Oppenheimer “tended to 
wade into already established laboratories as if he were wielding the sword 
of scientific liberation.” When talking to new recruits about the Los Alamos 
project, “he was burning with an inner fire.” He later said that “the notion 
of disappearing into the New Mexico desert for an indeterminate period 
and under quasi-military auspices disturbed a good many scientists, and the 
families of many more.” But, he said, “there was another side to it,” and 
this was what Oppenheimer emphasized on his visits to the universities. Not 
only might the project “determine the outcome of the war,” but “it was an 
unparalleled opportunity to bring to bear the basic knowledge and art of 
science for the benefit of the country .. . This job, if it were achieved, would 
be a part of history.” Finally, he said, “this sense of excitement, of devotion 


Confronting the World 67 


and of patriotism . . . prevailed. Most of those with whom I talked came to Los 
Alamos.”® Oppenheimer thus presented a romantic portrait of Los Alamos as 
aheroic scientific endeavor and the mesaas an ideal small university campus. 
As he recruited these top-flight physicists to the project, he portrayed it as 
at once a wilderness scientific retreat, an opportunity to make manifest the 
truth and power of the new physics, and a way to connect their vocation as 
physicists with the global struggle against Fascism. But joining the project 
also meant joining a military organization. Oppenheimer’s colleagues began 
to feel that he had not fully grasped what that meant. 

In the fall of 1942, as Oppenheimer was at the forefront of the effort to 
establish and staff the new laboratory, he came to be recognized as the de facto 
head of the new enterprise. According to Bush, “Oppenheimer was chosen 
in November of 1942.”° Physicists joining the project saw Oppenheimer as 
its scientific leader. But his directorship of Los Alamos was not formalized 
until February 25, 1943, in a letter from Groves and Conant, and it did not 
become final until his security clearance was granted in mid-July. By that 
time, the laboratory had been in full operation for about three months. This 
delay enabled the general to test Oppenheimer’s mettle and willingness to 
do his bidding before making a firm commitment. Oppenheimer’s security 
problems helped to strengthen Groves’s grip on him. Oppenheimer had been 
under investigation by the FBI since 1941, when the bureau put him on a 
list of potential subversives who might be placed in custodial detention. 
G-2 (military intelligence) agents were very worried about Oppenheimer’s 
close political and personal connections with Communists, and his security 
clearance was entirely due to Groves’s support for him. Colonel John Lansdale 
Jr. was in the Army’s Counter Intelligence Group, based in Washington, D.C., 
and was investigating what the Army believed to be Communist infiltration of 
the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory. According to Lansdale, the information 
they received from the FBI caused them “a great deal of concern.” However, 
Groves’s position “was (a) that Dr. Oppenheimer was essential; (b) that in his 
judgment—and he had gotten to know Dr. Oppenheimer very well by that 
time—he was loyal; and (c) we would clear him for this work whatever the 
reports said.”’° As a result, Oppenheimer was personally indebted to Groves 
for his position in the project. 

Groves also overcame opposition to Oppenheimer’s appointment from 
quarters other than his own security personnel and G-2 military intelligence. 
In the initial stages of the project, Oppenheimer was regarded by his scientific 
colleagues as an unlikely choice, a man unsuited by character, temperament, 
and ability to the task awaiting him. His selection as director of the new 


68 Chapter Three 


laboratory was not a result of his having climbed to the pinnacle of his 
profession, nor of his being a recognized leader of the scientific community. 
Oppenheimer’s most significant role in professional physics before the war 
had been in training a new generation of theoretical physicists at Berkeley 
and Caltech. He had published approximately fifty articles and notes in the 
Physical Review, but he was not among those who published on the topic 
of fission before scientific interchange was halted because of the war. His 
influence was confined largely to the California schools at which he taught.’ 
And the fervor with which Oppenheimer went about recruitment in fact 
alarmed the wartime scientific establishment. Henry Smyth, who ran the 
physics department at Princeton, protested to Conant when Oppenheimer 
poached Robert Wilson from his department, together with Wilson’s group of 
young cyclotron physicists and a promising young theorist, Richard Feynman. 
While Conant supported efforts to find the best scientists for Los Alamos, he 
could not afford to gut the other wartime projects for which he was responsible 
and thus alienate the scientific leadership in the rest of war research. Conant 
wrote to Groves voicing doubts about Oppenheimer: “We are wondering if 
we have found the right man to be leader.” 

According to Groves’s deputy, Colonel Kenneth Nichols, the general “rec- 
ognized that he would encounter opposition both in the scientific community 
and in Army security if he were to select Oppenheimer” as director of the new 
bomb lab. After all, as Nichols pointed out, Oppenheimer did not havea Nobel 
Prize—an honor that “contributed to the prestige of the other project scientific 
leaders,” including Lawrence, Fermi, Urey, and Compton. Groves later wrote, 
“There was a strong feeling among most of the scientific people with whom I 
discussed the matter that the head of Project Y [Los Alamos] should also be 
[a Nobelist],” and “because of the prevailing sentiment that [Oppenheimer] 
would not succeed, there was considerable opposition to my naming him.” 

Even among scientists at Berkeley, Groves’s decision seemed surprising. 
Luis Alvarez recalled that despite Lawrence’s support for Oppenheimer’s 
appointment, even “some of Robert’s closest friends were skeptical. ‘He 
couldn’t run a hamburger stand,’ I heard one of them say.” Alvarez himself 
was initially skeptical. Rabi thought that Oppenheimer “was absolutely the 
most unlikely choice for a laboratory director imaginable.” For one thing, “he 
was a very impractical sort of fellow. He walked about in scuffed shoes and a 
funny hat, and, more important, he didn’t know anything about equipment.” 
Eugene Wigner agreed that Oppenheimer “did not look like a leader. He 
held himself slightly apart from others,” and his “sensitive temperament and 
unusual habits” did not suggest the robustness of character required for 


Confronting the World 69 


such a leadership role. Such doubts were not dispelled by Oppenheimer’s 
performance in the planning phase during late 1942. Samuel Allison, a physi- 
cist from the University of Chicago brought in by Oppenheimer to help with 
the planning, recalled: 


Just before Christmas of 1942, Oppenheimer asked me to come and 
help plan the preliminary layout ... On the Mesa he and I sat down and 
planned the laboratory. He showed me what he called an organisation 
chart for a hundred personnel. I looked at it and felt sure that something 
was wrong, but I didn’t know what. The best I could do was to poke 
at random. “Where are the shipping clerks?” I asked. He gave me a 
thoughtful sympathetic look. “We’re not going to ship anything,” he 
answered. I completely underestimated the size of the installation but 
not so much as he did.”4 


Manley was also concerned that a definite organizational structure had not 
been settled. He found Oppenheimer “about as unresponsive to such mun- 
dane matters as an experimentalist would expect a theoretical physicist to 
be, perhaps more so.” At one point, Manley’s urging seemed to have had 
an effect. In January 1943, he took a plane from Chicago to Oakland, flying 
through a storm for much of the journey. He finally arrived at the University 
of California, Berkeley, feeling tired out, and climbed up to Oppenheimer’s 
office at the top of the physics building, Le Conte Hall. Manley recalled, 
“T had scarcely opened the door when he shoved a piece of paper at me, 
saying ‘Here’s your damned organizational chart.’””° 

However, this did not put an end to administrative problems. When Robert 
Wilson made a visit to Los Alamos in March 1943 to inspect construction, 
he found the site in a very poor state and building work behind schedule. 
Following the trip, Wilson and Manley met with Oppenheimer in Berkeley to 
inform him of the project’s “state of chaos”: “Manley and I nagged at Oppy all 
day about his indecisiveness. We insisted that he had decisions to be made... 
We wanted to know who was to be in charge of what, not just vague talk 
about scientific problems nor even vaguer ideas about democracy. There 
were immediate problems to be faced, and from our point of view Oppy was 
not facing them.””° When the two experimentalists pressed him to get on with 


organizational planning, 


Oppenheimer became extremely angry. He began to use vile language, 
asking us why we were telling him of these insignificant problems, that 


70 Chapter Three 


it was none of our business, and so on. Both of us were scared to death. 
We were frightened because, if this was the leader and, if the leader was 
going to have a tantrum to resolve a problem, then how was anything 
going to get sorted [out]? So we withdrew, John and I, and discussed 
some more, and decided that we would take more initiative and not look 
for so much leadership from Oppy.”” 


Given such early worries, why did Groves regard Oppenheimer as the only 
man for the job? David Hawkins believed that Groves picked Oppenheimer 
“for reasons that were mysterious because many people senior to Oppen- 
heimer were felt to be the more proper choice, but Groves somehow knew 
that Oppenheimer was the man for the job ... It gives Groves credit for a 
level of insight that is not often attributed to him.” Oppenheimer himself said 
blandly that Groves simply had “a weakness for good men.” “My own feeling,” 
Groves said, “was that he was well qualified to handle the theoretical aspects 
of the work, but how he would do on the practical experimentation, or how he 
would handle the administrative responsibilities, I had no idea.” Groves felt 
that there were no other candidates who were notalready running other impor- 
tant sites of the project. The other credible choice was Lawrence. Groves said, 
“T had no doubt that Ernest Lawrence could handle it . .. However he could 
not be spared from his work on the electromagnetic process.” Nevertheless, 
Lawrence and Compton told Groves that if Oppenheimer failed, Lawrence 
would take over and pick up the pieces. Groves’s biographer has suggested 
that the selection was based primarily on Oppenheimer’s acceptance of the 
idea of a militarized laboratory: “Oppenheimer’s unique compliance with 
what for [Groves] was one of the linchpins of bomb lab planning may have 
been the deciding, ifnot the overwhelming, consideration in determining that 
the physicist was ‘the best man, the only man’ for the director’s job.””8 

The idea of Los Alamos as a military organization with scientists as com- 
missioned officers was supported by Conant and was at the heart of Groves’s 
conception of the project’s organization. Oppenheimer was an initial sup- 
porter of the idea of'a military laboratory. He even said, “I would have been 
glad to be an officer.” Wilson remembered Oppenheimer justifying this stance 
by describing the war as a people’s war. Oppenheimer thought that to join the 
Army was to place oneself side by side with the fighting masses: “Oppy would 
get a faraway look in his eyes and tell me that this war was different from any 
war ever fought before: it was a war about the principles of freedom, and it 
was being fought by a ‘people’s army.’” Wilson confessed, “Now I can be as 
idealistic as the next guy, but I thought he had a screw loose when he talked 


Confronting the World 71 


like that.” Wilson doubted that “scientists could function at all” if they were 
“unquestioningly following orders.” But for the time being, he was unable to 
convince Oppenheimer of this. Oppenheimer even went to the Presidio in San 
Francisco to begin the process of enlisting asa lieutenant colonel, and he began 
to look the part.’ At least until 1941, Oppenheimer’s hair had been long, and 
so tangled that he had to comb it with a steel dog comb; Bethe used to tease 
him that it made him look “like a Bolshevik.” In preparation for his new role, 
Oppenheimer got a crew cut. Alvarez remembered it as being “almost as short 
as a military officer’s.” Robert and Jane Wilson thought that the length of Op- 
penheimer’s hair reflected the various roles he assumed throughout his life: as 
a“young, radical professor at Berkeley . . . his hair was all little black curls. And 
then he was much more subdued at Los Alamos, the curls were not so curly.”*° 

Oppenheimer’s scientific colleagues saw him as initially very much under 
the power of Groves and sought to counteract this influence. Rabi, for example, 
said that Oppenheimer “was not a strong character. He was indecisive, and 
definitely not a fighter. If he couldn’t persuade you, he’d cave in, especially 
to group opposition. Groves, on the other hand, could provide him with 
strong backbone in the form of consistent policy.”*! Rabi and other scientists 
opposed to the idea of a military laboratory sought to win Oppenheimer over 
to their own policy, to transform him into a representative of their aspirations 
for the role of the scientist in the new laboratory. 

In January 1943, a pivotal meeting took place at MIT between Oppen- 
heimer and physicists Robert Bacher, Edwin McMillan, Alvarez, and Rabi. It 
was here that Oppenheimer admitted to the plan for a militarized laboratory 
that he had discussed with Groves as far back as October 1942. When they 
were told of this, Bacher says, “we were horrified.” Both Bacher and Rabi 
threatened to have nothing further to do with the project if this plan were 
carried out. They were worried that military rank would trump scientific 
expertise and interfere with the free flow of scientific communication. They 
told Oppenheimer that “lieutenant colonels didn’t have anything to say, and 
that if he tried to establish a scientific laboratory [with] a hierarchy that was 
composed of military people, that it just plain wouldn’t work.” Rabi said, 
“We knew the military” through the radar work at MIT: “We'd been engaged 
in making military things, had the military around us. We knew it wouldn’t 
work. In the first place, none of us would come.” Alvarez said, “I don’t think 
science can be done under authoritarian arrangements.”** 

This sustained opposition by his colleagues forced Oppenheimer to back 
down. He wrote to Conant informing him of the scientists’ view “that the 
Laboratory must demilitarize: the arguments here were first that a divided 


72, Chapter Three 


personnel would inevitably lead to friction, and to a collapse of Laboratory 
morale, complicated in our case by social cleavage, and, more important, that 
in any issue in which we were instructed by our military superiors, the whole 
Laboratory would be forced to follow their instructions and thus in effect lose 
its scientific autonomy.” A few weeks later, Oppenheimer was given a letter by 
Groves and Conant that not only formalized his own positionas head ofthe new 
laboratory, but stipulated that, at least in its early stages, the laboratory would 
be civilian-run.*’ Groves remained bitter about this incident. He focused 
the blame on Rabi for swaying Oppenheimer on this critical issue. A 1946 
War Department report, “Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” had an 
entire section titled “The attitude of Dr. I. I. Rabi.” Rabi’s “influence” and 
“determined position” in demanding a civilian laboratory, the report stated, 
“was such that many of the troubles in the operations of the Los Alamos 
Laboratory stemmed from his original stand.”*4 

Oppenheimer had initially asked Rabi to be associate director of the new 
laboratory. Rabi turned down the offer, feeling that the radar work he was 
doing at MIT was more vital to the war effort. Nevertheless, he made frequent 
visits to Los Alamos as a consultant, an exception to the quarantine of Los 
Alamos from the rest of the scientific world that Groves grudgingly allowed.®° 
Oppenheimer became quite reliant on Rabi as an adviser, particularly in for- 
mulating a position with which to oppose Groves’s desire for authoritarian 
military control of the lab. In early February 1943, during the beginning of 
construction of the Los Alamos Laboratory, Oppenheimer sent a note to Rabi 
asking for his recommendations before the general’s visit to the site, which 
was to take place in less than a week. Rabi tutored Oppenheimer on how to be 
a leader of such a large-scale, bureaucratic, and demanding project. He told 
Oppenheimer, “The main idea is to get going immediately, to keep up the 
morale, to test the organization and to assemble a smoothly running team.” In 
advance of Groves’s visit, Rabi sent Oppenheimer a detailed memorandum 
providing, for example, predictions of when construction of the physical site 
would be finished and concrete proposals for assembling teams of scientists 
from various universities. He added, “Keep them flying.” The experience of 
Rabi and Bacher from war projects at MIT was vital. Bethe said, “We found 
[the] MIT Radiation Lab [to be] the best model. So that was already adopted 
in the organization into six or eight divisions, and then each division into 
several groups... This general structure we just took over from the Radiation 
Lab.” The importation of this structure to Los Alamos, he added, was Rabi’s 
idea. Armed with such support from his colleagues, Oppenheimer was in a 
much stronger position to hold his own with the general. He continued to 


Confronting the World 73 


rely on Rabi’s help throughout the project; according to Bethe, “Rabi made 
Oppenheimer more practical.” Without Rabi’s intervention, the project 
“would have been a mess.*° 

Groves was concerned about Oppenheimer’s lack of either administrative 
experience or knowledge of engineering practice. He persuaded Oppen- 
heimer to appoint as associate director a physicist with an industrial back- 
ground. Edward Condon, from the Westinghouse Research Laboratories, fit 
the bill. Groves assumed that because of his background in industrial research, 
Condon would be the general’s natural ally and would help to overcome what 
Groves saw as the congenital aversion of academic scientists to strict organi- 
zation and a mission-directed program of research. Condon would take over 
procurement and management of personnel and relations with the military, 
leaving Oppenheimer to “think [through] the scientific problems and to estab- 
lish the schedule of scientific and technical work.” However, Condon proved 
to be just the opposite of what Groves had hoped for. Groves said, “Dr. Con- 
don turned out to be not an industrial scientist, but an academic scientist with 
all of the faults and none of the virtues.”8” What angered the general most was 
Condon’s opposition to the policy of compartmentalization of information, 
which Groves saw as essential to the project’s security. In late April 1943, less 
than a month into the lab’s full-time operation, Condon resigned. In his res- 
ignation letter, he cited the “extraordinarily close security policy.” He said he 
found “the discussion about . . . the possible militarization and complete iso- 
lation of the personnel from the outside world” to be “morbidly depressing.” 
Groves said, “I could never make up my own mind as to whether Dr. Oppen- 
heimer was the one primarily at fault in breaking up the compartmentalization 
or whether it was Condon.” He strongly suspected that it was Condon.** 

Oppenheimer had begun to play a mediating role between the military 
establishment and the civilian scientific community. Both Groves and the 
scientists sought to fashion Oppenheimer into a representative of their interests 
and their vision for the project. For both camps, their hopes in Oppenheimer 
were based not so much on who he was and what he had accomplished, but 
on who they thought he might become with their guidance. Oppenheimer 
was embroiled in new relationships and subject to new pressures that would 
remake him as a person. When he moved to Los Alamos on a permanent 
basis on March 15, 1943, he left behind his life at Berkeley and stepped into a 
self-contained world.*® 

However, this break was not absolutely clean. Between 1941 and 1943, 
Oppenheimer found himself straddling two increasingly incompatible social 
worlds: leftist ties became an embarrassment to him as he realized that he was 


74 Chapter Three 


under the glare of the project’s security apparatus. Sometime in January or 
February 1943, Chevalier and his wife came to dinner at the Oppenheimers’ 
house. When Oppenheimer went to the kitchen to prepare the usual marti- 
nis, Chevalier followed him. Chevalier mentioned a recent encounter with a 
friend of his, with whom Oppenheimer was acquainted. This was a British 
chemical engineer named George Eltenton, who was involved with FAECT at 
the Shell Development Company. (Oppenheimer later testified that Eltenton 
had been present at the autumn 1941 meeting at Oppenheimer’s home in 
Berkeley about setting up a branch of the AASW in support of FAECT.) 
Apparently, Eltenton had phoned Chevalier and asked to meet him. Cheva- 
lier told Oppenheimer that Eltenton had inquired into the possibility of 
Oppenheimer’s passing technical information, via Eltenton, to the Russians. 
Both Oppenheimer and Chevalier would later deny that Chevalier was asking 
Oppenheimer to consider leaking information; either he was warning Oppen- 
heimer about Eltenton, or he was announcing that he had been confused by 
Eltenton’s suggestion. Oppenheimer told the security hearings in 1954 that 
he had exclaimed that what Eltenton proposed was “treason,” that Chevalier 
had agreed with this judgment, and that the topic had been dropped.”° Later 
in 1943, however, Oppenheimer would revisit that conversation, and it would 
gain a new significance in his life. 

In the spring of 1943, Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash, chief of counterintel- 
ligence for the Fourth Army Western Defense Command, began investigating 
reports that a Soviet espionage cell was operating in the Radiation Laboratory 
at Berkeley. Pash came to suspect that the cell included some former students 
of Oppenheimer’s, namely, Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, Joseph Weinberg, and 
David Bohm; that it was organized by Steve Nelson; and that Nelson had 
asked Oppenheimer for information on the bomb project.?' Lomanitz, Wein- 
berg, and Bohm were all members of FAECT, which Pash regarded as a 
Communist front organization attempting to infiltrate the Manhattan Project 
through the Rad Lab.” Pash’s organization also believed it had evidence that 
all three were Communist Party members.’ Lomanitz usefully reminds us, 
however, that things were neither so black and white nor so cloak-and-dagger: 
“T attended some meetings, because at that time meetings were much more 
open, free, and easy. There wasn’t any great distinction ... I was at some 
discussion meetings where members of the Communist Party spoke. Who 
was officially a member or what it took to be officially a member, I can’t tell 
you to this day. It just wasn’t all that conspiratorial.”%4 

At the end of March 1943, Pash received a report from the FBI that Nelson 
had made an attempt to gain technical information on the bomb project from 


Confronting the World 75 


a scientist named “Joe.” Pash set about trying to determine “Joe’s” identity. 
The transcript ofa conversation in Nelson’s house (which had been bugged by 
the FBI) provided only the first name of the scientist and the fact that he came 
from New York and had two sisters living there. This led to a broad investiga- 
tion of Rad Lab personnel. The first suspect was Lomanitz, whose first name, 
Giovanni, might (it was thought) be anglicized as “Joe.” Eventually, however, 
security officers pinpointed as their suspect Joseph Weinberg, an Oppen- 
heimer student who had come to Berkeley from City College, New York.” 

The bugged conversation began with a discussion ofa man that Nelson and 
Joe called “the professor.” On the basis of a number of telling circumstantial 
details provided in the conversation, the FBI believed this professor to be 
Oppenheimer. Nelson mentioned, “I was quite intimate with the guy and 
there was a personal relationship also because his wife used to be the wife of 
my best friend who was killed in Spain. I know her well.” He bemoaned the 
professor’s increasing distance from the party and from leftist acquaintances: 
“He’s very much worried now and we make him feel uncomfortable.” Nelson 
had “spent a little time” at the professor’s home but found him “jittery” and 
under “the impression that he was being watched.” In Nelson’s view, the man 
was confused: “You know what I mean. He’s just not a Marxist . . . [and] now 
he’s gone a little further away from whatever associations he had with us.” 
Nelson saw this as connected to the professor’s new role in the project and his 
desire “to make a name for himself.” Nelson also blamed the professor’s wife 
for “influencing him in the wrong direction.” Joe agreed that “he’s changed a 
bit .. . You won’t hardly believe the change that has taken place.”?° 

Nelson went on to ask if Joe would give him information on the project and 
“what kind of materials they are working on.” Nelson indicated that he had 
approached the professor for information about the project but that he had 
been reluctant to provide anything specific, and Nelson had not thought it 
wise to press him.°” Joe said that probably the professor didn’t feel Nelson was 
senior enough to receive that information. Joe told him that the “basic idea” 
was published and available in the open literature, and he agreed to get Nelson 
reprints of articles. While telling Nelson “It’s natural I’m a little bit scared,” 
Joe went on to describe more specific features of the project, including the fact 
that “the material is uranium, a radioactive substance, as you know.” He also 
provided estimated timescales for the project, which were regarded as highly 
sensitive information. Pash was therefore confronted with what appeared to 
be a very serious security breach, and he undertook an intensive investigation 
of the Rad Lab. Oppenheimer was not directly incriminated; the transcript 
suggested that the “professor” had resisted pressure to leak information. But 


76 Chapter Three 


it did seem that there were numerous threads connecting Oppenheimer to the 
persons involved, and Pash became increasingly convinced that Oppenheimer 
was at the center of a conspiracy.”® 

It was in June 1943 that Oppenheimer, trailed by security officers, visited 
Jean Tatlock in Berkeley. Pash saw this visit as suggesting Oppenheimer’s 
continued links with the Communist Party. On the same trip, Oppenheimer 
hired David Hawkins to be his personal administrative assistant at Los Alamos. 
Army security suspected Hawkins of being a Communist.” On July 22, a 
security agent investigating Frank Oppenheimer reported his opinion that 
Frank was a member of the Communist Party and that Robert Oppenheimer 
was “very possibly a member of the Communist Party, and has definitely 
indicated sympathy towards that group.”!° 

Around this time, Oppenheimer’s relationship with young FAECT mem- 
bers at the Rad Lab was coming under scrutiny. Lomanitz was working at the 
laboratory and taking over work from scientists going to Los Alamos. But in 
late July, he found his draft deferment had been canceled. Lomanitz turned 
for help to both Lawrence and Oppenheimer.!°! Oppenheimer contacted the 
New York headquarters of the Manhattan Engineer District to ask them to in- 
tervene to keep Lomanitz on the project. However, all appeals on Lomanitz’s 
behalf were unsuccessful, and he was drafted into the regular army. His work 
at the Rad Lab was taken over by Condon, who had recently resigned from 
his position as Oppenheimer’s right-hand man at Los Alamos.’ 

In August, Colonel Lansdale visited Oppenheimer at Los Alamos and in- 
terviewed him about Lomanitz. Oppenheimer told Lansdale that he had 
encouraged Lomanitz to join the project at Berkeley and had also warned the 
young man, in the strongest terms, to “forgo all political activity if he came 
on to the project.” According to Lansdale, Oppenheimer “had previously 
stated that he knew Lomanitz had been very much of a Red.” Lansdale told 
Oppenheimer not to make any further requests on Lomanitz’s behalf, because 
the young man “had been guilty of indiscretions.” When told that Lomanitz 
had not given up “political activities,” Oppenheimer’s response was, “That 
makes me mad.”!0? 

Oppenheimer was clearly trying to ingratiate himself with Lansdale and 
was anxious to appear firm regarding security. Lansdale told him that “from a 
military intelligence standpoint we were quite unconcerned with a man’s po- 
litical or social beliefs, and we were only concerned with preventing the trans- 
mission of classified information to unauthorized persons.” Oppenheimer 
replied that he thought a stronger approach was required with regard to the 


Confronting the World 77 


Communist Party: “He stated that he did not want anybody working for him 
on the project that was a member of the Communist Party. He stated that the 
reason for that was that ‘one always had a question of divided loyalty.’ He 
stated that the discipline of the Communist Party was very severe and was not 
compatible with complete loyalty to the project. He made it clear he was not 
referring to people who had been members of the Communist Party, stating 
that he knew several now at Los Alamos who had been members.” Perhaps 
Oppenheimer thought Lansdale’s tolerance was feigned, designed to set a 
trap for him, and Oppenheimer was therefore making a show of being tough 
and “on-side.” But Lansdale saw a deeper significance to the physicist’s com- 
ments: “This officer also had the definite impression that Oppenheimer was 
trying to indicate that he had been a member of the party, and had definitely 
severed his connections upon engaging in this work.”!4 

Lansdale had mentioned to Oppenheimer that security officers were partic- 
ularly concerned about what they saw as Communist infiltration of the project 
through FAECT. Oppenheimer remembered that Eltenton was a prominent 
member of the union. On August 25, while in Berkeley, Oppenheimer went to 
see Lieutenant Lyall Johnson, the project’s security officer for the university. 
Oppenheimer gave him Eltenton’s name as a man the security agents should 
keep an eye on. Johnson passed the information on to Pash, who arranged for 
himself and Johnson to interview Oppenheimer the following day—this time 
with a tape recorder hidden in the room. Oppenheimer immediately began to 
talk about Lomanitz, offering to have a stern talk with him. Pash steered the 
conversation to what he considered a “more serious” matter, that of Eltenton. 
It was then that Oppenheimer came forth with what he would later admit was 
a “cock-and-bull story.” It was an account in which neither he nor Chevalier 
was implicated. “I think it is true,” he said at the time, “that a man, whose 
name I never heard, who was attached to the Soviet Consul, has indicated 
indirectly through intermediate people concerned in this project that he was 
in a position to transmit, without any danger ofa leak, or scandal, or anything 
of that kind, information which they might supply.” The approaches, he said, 
“were always through other people, who were troubled by them, and some- 
times came and discussed them with me.” Oppenheimer said that he did not 
want to give the names of the people approached, since that would “implicate 
people whose attitude was one of bewilderment rather than one of coopera- 
tion.” But he did name Eltenton as a man “whose name was mentioned to me 
a couple of times” and who was “involved as an intermediary.” He added, 
“Whether he is successful or not, I do not know, but he talked to a friend of 


78 Chapter Three 


his who is also an acquaintance of one of the men on the project, and that was 
one of the channels by which this thing went. Now I think that to go beyond 
that would be to puta lot ofnames down, of people who are not only innocent 
but whose attitude was 100 percent cooperative.” 

Rather than revealing the kitchen conversation with Chevalier, Oppen- 
heimer had painted a picture of a sustained espionage campaign against the 
project. As he was pressed for details, Oppenheimer said that “two or three” 
people were approached, “and I think two of them are with me at Los Alamos— 
they are men who are closely associated with me.” These men, Oppenheimer 
said, were approached not by Eltenton himself but by “another party.” Nat- 
urally, Pash asked him who that intermediary was. Oppenheimer replied, “I 
think it would be a mistake, that is, I think I have told you where the initiative 
came from and that the other things were almost purely accident and that 
it would involve people who ought not to be involved in this.” A few ques- 
tions later and Oppenheimer had blurted out that the intermediary between 
Eltenton and the men on the project was “a member of the [Berkeley] faculty, 
but not on the project.” After a few minutes of sustained questioning, then, 
Oppenheimer had elaborated his story into a portrait of a conspiracy involving 
a number of people. He had also set project security on the trail of a faculty 
member apparently at the heart of this conspiracy. It was months later, when 
Groves ordered Oppenheimer to identify the faculty member, that he named 
Chevalier. It remains unclear whether Oppenheimer admitted to Groves at 
this time that the story of the three approaches had been a fabrication and 
that he himself was the only person approached.'©° It was due to his view of 
Oppenheimer’s importance to the project and of the necessity of maintaining 
Oppenheimer’s trust in him personally that Groves allowed months to go by 
before giving that order.!°” Meanwhile, the project’s security officers were 
calling for Oppenheimer’s head. 

Pash wrote a memorandum to Groves on September 2 with his interpreta- 
tion of the significance of Oppenheimer’s naming of Eltenton. In Pash’s view, 
Oppenheimer suspected that he himself was under investigation for radical 
activities, and his revelation about Eltenton was just an attempt to protect 
himself and “retain the [Army’s] confidence” by preempting the findings 
of any investigation. Pash concluded, “It is not believed that he should be 
taken into the confidence of the Army in the matters pertaining to subversive 
activities.”!08 

Not only had Oppenheimer triggered a large-scale search for a fictionalized 
(or at least massively exaggerated) espionage conspiracy, he had also increased 


Confronting the World 79 


the suspicions that were hanging over him. Los Alamos security officer Cap- 
tain Peer de Silva wrote to Pash with his own opinion that “J. R. Oppenheimer 
is playing a key part in the attempts of the Soviet Union to secure, by espi- 
onage, highly secret information which is vital to the security of the United 
States.719 

Historians Kai Bird and Martin Sherwin recently gave an interesting and 
novel interpretation of the Chevalier affair, one that is more charitable to Op- 
penheimer than most existing accounts. They suggested that Oppenheimer’s 
story of the three approaches may not have been entirely fabricated. Eltenton 
later told the FBI that his Soviet contact, Peter Ivanov, had suggested ap- 
proaching Ernest Lawrence and Luis Alvarez, as well as Oppenheimer. It is 
possible, Bird and Sherwin surmised, that the idea of these other approach- 
es had been passed on via Chevalier to Oppenheimer. If that was the case, 
it would seem to provide a source for Oppenheimer’s tale of the three ap- 
proaches. What was actually said in the crucial kitchen conversation will never 
be known with any certainty. It nevertheless remains clear that the account 
Oppenheimer gave security officers was substantially fabricated—in particu- 
lar his statement that the approaches were always to other people, rather than 
to him. These fabrications not only protected Chevalier, but also distanced 
Oppenheimer from the events. It should also be noted that Oppenheimer’s 
account to the security officers suggested that the same intermediary contacted 
all three of the scientists on the project. But Oppenheimer would have had 
no reason to assume that Chevalier had in fact approached Lawrence and 
Alvarez. Apart from the fact that they were colleagues at the same university, 
and possibly had a casual acquaintanceship through Oppenheimer, these men 
were strangers to Chevalier, with opposing politics and outlook. Alvarez was 
on leave from Berkeley, having gone to work at the MIT Radiation Labora- 
tory in 1940 and moving on to Chicago in 1943. And after Oppenheimer’s 
political run-ins with Lawrence, if Chevalier had mentioned the idea of ap- 
proaching Lawrence, Oppenheimer would no doubt have impressed on him 
just how unreceptive his deeply conservative colleague would be. Further, 
Oppenheimer had told Pash and Johnson that two of the people approached 
by the intermediary were now at Los Alamos. Lawrence’s only relationship 
with Los Alamos was as a consultant, and Alvarez did not begin work at the 
facility until the following year. When interviewed by the FBI in 1946, and 
during the 1954 security hearmgs, Oppenheimer came up with no factual 
basis for the “three approaches” story, saying it was merely “concocted” ora 


“cock-and-bull story.”!!° 


80 Chapter Three 


BETWEEN GROVES AND THE SCIENTISTS 


In the first few months of Oppenheimer’s directorship of Los Alamos, his 
position was already highly compromised. De Silva recognized that the Army 
held the physicist in its grip: “It is the opinion of this officer that Oppenheimer 
is deeply concerned with gaining a worldwide reputation as a scientist and 
a place in history, as a result of the DSM project [Manhattan Project]. It is 
also believed that the Army is in the position of being able to allow him to do 
so or to destroy his name, reputation, and career, if it should choose to do 
so.” De Silva saw that the Army could take advantage of his uncomfortable 
position in order to control him. De Silva thought that Oppenheimer should 
be told that the Army held his reputation in its hands and had the power 
to bring him down. “Such a possibility, if strongly presented to him, would 
possibly give him a different view of his position with respect to the Army, 
which has been, heretofore, one in which he has been dominant because of 
his supposed essentiality.” And through its control over Oppenheimer, the 
Army could discipline the Los Alamos scientists: “If his attitude should be 
changed by such an action, a more wholesome and loyal attitude might, in 
turn, be injected into the lower echelons of employees.”!!! 

The summer of 1943 was a low point for Oppenheimer. His security 
troubles, together with the new administrative burdens and responsibilities 
that he faced at Los Alamos, were causing him to have doubts about his capacity 
to lead the project. According to Bacher, “as the work got started out there, 
and especially after I came in residence, I found that Robert Oppenheimer 
was deeply concerned about many things and seemed very worried about 
how he was doing as director . . . There was a period during this time when 
he felt he could not continue as a director.” He even considered resignation, 
although “he was very much upset” about this possibility. During that summer, 
Bacher “spent about two hours a day with him, discussing things. Sometimes, 
after work at night, we’d talk for an hour or more.” These talks involved 
keeping up Oppenheimer’s spirits and morale, providing emotional and moral 
support. The supporting roles played by Bacher, Rabi, and others were 
crucial in transforming Oppenheimer into the powerful figure he ultimately 
became. Bacher said, “Within a relatively short time, he was as different from 
the professor I had known before the war as you could possibly think of 
anybody being.” This transformation involved, crucially, the ability to stand 
up to Groves and to represent to him the scientists’ collective point of view. 
According to Bacher, Oppenheimer “maintained a position of great influence 
with Groves,” in spite of the fact that “it would be hard to think of two 


Confronting the World 81 


people who were more dissimilar. The directors of the laboratories who were 
more nearly people who you’d think could deal easily with Groves, were 
precisely the ones who didn’t.”!'* Oppenheimer’s ability to be an effective 
representative of the scientists in the administration of the project depended on 
his status as an irreplaceable and essential person. The Los Alamos scientists 
needed a charismatic “natural leader”—and that is what Oppenheimer, with 
their help, became. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


King of the Hill 


A CHARISMATIC LEADER 


Arno Roensch, a scientific glass—blower, looked back at his time at Los Alamos 
during the war and remembered above all “seeing Oppie and his pork-pie hat 
and seeing him in the hall and having him nod to you and, I don’t know, he 
was the project as far as I was concerned.” At Los Alamos there was assembled 
an impressive array of the scientific stars of the day, yet Oppenheimer stood 
out as having a unique importance in the life of the laboratory. “Somehow 
he was the glue that held them all together and that feeling always stayed 
with me,” said Roensch. “It’s synonymous with Los Alamos.”’ For a great 
many participants in the wartime atomic bomb project at Los Alamos, the 
place and the time were indelibly associated with the person of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer. For them the project, in all its complexity, excitement, and 
solemn significance, was embodied by the enigmatic figure in the porkpie hat. 
Not only did Oppenheimer symbolize the meaning of the project, but he was, 
in their view, a powerful causal factor in its success. It is in seeking to describe 
this unique role that participants and historians have identified Oppenheimer 
as a “charismatic” leader. 

Oppenheimer has been frequently described as a “born leader” or a “nat- 
ural leader.” Hans Bethe said simply, “He was a leader.” Bethe went on to 
describe the inspirational quality of Oppenheimer’s guidance: compared with 
Los Alamos, none of the other wartime laboratories had “quite the spirit of 
belonging together, quite the urge to reminisce about the days of the labo- 
ratory, quite the feeling that this was really the great time of their lives.” He 


King of the Hill 83 


attributed this spirit to Oppenheimer personally. Los Alamos, Bethe said, 
“might have succeeded without him, but certainly only with much greater 
strain, less enthusiasm, and less speed.” Robert Wilson pointed to Oppen- 
heimer’s “combination of skill, wisdom, and moral stature” when he said that 
Oppenheimer was “our leader in every respect.” When Oppenheimer visited 
the laboratory late in his life, his successor, Norris Bradbury, introduced him 
as “Mr. Los Alamos.” Oppenheimer, Bradbury said, had “built Los Alamos 
by the sheer force of personality and character.” “He was the leader,” Brad- 
bury said. “He was the boss. It was Oppie’s project.” According to Laura 
Fermi, the wife of the famous physicist, Oppenheimer was “the real soul of 
the project.” Enrico Fermi told Emilio Segré, “When anyone mentions labo- 
ratory directors, I think of directors and directors and Oppenheimer, who is 
unique.” Even Edward Teller, one of Los Alamos’s most malcontent inhabi- 
tants, remarked, “Oppenheimer was probably the best lab director I have ever 
seen.” According to Teller, Oppenheimer “was the constituted authority at 
Los Alamos. But he was more: His brilliant mind, his quick intellect, and his 
penetrating interest in everyone at the laboratory made him our natural leader 
as well.” 

When Oppenheimer left Los Alamos after the war, scientific colleagues 
read outa tribute that vividly credited features of the site and the laboratory’s 


social order to Oppenheimer as the charismatic leader: 


He selected this place. Let us thank him for the fishing, hiking, skiing, 
and for the New Mexico weather. He selected our collaborators. Let us 
thank him for the company we had, for the parties, and for the intellectual 
atmosphere ... He was our director. Let us thank him for the way he 
directed our work, for the many occasions where he was the eloquent 
spokesman for our thoughts. It was his acquaintance with every single 
little and big difficulty that helped us so much to overcome them. It was 
his spirit of scientific dignity that made us feel we would be in the right 
place here. We drew much more satisfaction from our work than our 
consciences ought to have allowed.’ 


In its repetition of “Let us thank him,” the tribute is reminiscent of a Christian 
prayer. But at the end, there is the implication of something more sinister— 
indeed, Mephistophelean: a sense of Oppenheimer as a seducer. 
Participants’ accounts suggest that in order to understand the complex 
social organization of Los Alamos, one must come to grips with embodied 
personal authority, with the special personal qualities of the project’s leader. 


84 Chapter Four 


Equally, as I will argue, Oppenheimer’s charismatic role was a collective ac- 
complishment, arising in response to social and organizational problems. The 
organizational order of Los Alamos and the personal identity of Oppenheimer 
were constructed together. If Los Alamos was shaped by Oppenheimer’s per- 
sonality, this was a recursive process: Oppenheimer was equally shaped and 
transformed by Los Alamos. Identity, authority, and organizational order 
were emergent properties of the ongoing social interaction of scientists, tech- 
nicians, military personnel, and the other men and women engaged in the 
project and the community life of Los Alamos. 

Oppenheimer’s charismatic authority was constituted as a partial solution 
to the intense normative uncertainty that characterized everyday life at Los 
Alamos. His charisma was a resource mobilized in attempts to define the situa- 
tion, to identify what type of place this was, and consequently to specify norms 
of appropriate conduct. Los Alamos was a hybrid organization involving 
diverse groups with contradictory understandings of, interests in, and agendas 
for the place.‘ The definition of the situation was chronically unclear and 
contested; as one participant said, “Everyone had his own Los Alamos.” 
Collective identity, the structure and legitimacy of forms of power and 
authority, the specification of appropriate channels for communication, and 
the delineation of legitimate forms of discourse were all at issue throughout 
the war. Oppenheimer emerged as uniquely able to speak for, signal, embody, 
and give legitimacy to a particular understanding of the place and its moral 
order. His personal identity was centrally at stake in the collective construc- 
tion of Los Alamos, a process that was both collaborative and conflictual. 
Appreciating Oppenheimer’s charismatic role requires a fine-grained portrait 
of quotidian life at Los Alamos—a description of the experience of life both 
inside and outside the laboratory. 


“aN ISLAND IN THE SKY” 


Los Alamos was a quintessentially modern site, severing people from tradi- 
tional ties of community, assembling them under the auspices of a military- 
industrial organ of the state, directing them toward specific instrumental goal. 
Participants in the project were faced with the tasks of making sense of this 
radically new setting and constructing social bonds within it. To its new 
residents, Los Alamos was largely a tabula rasa, a community whose identity 
remained to be defined. For the project’s military command, General Groves 
and the Army Corps of Engineers, the problem was simply to construct a util- 
itarian and rationalistic planned compound on the mesa, on the model of an 


King of the Mill 85 


Army camp. But the absence ofa coherent tradition not only created a free 
field for the imposition of legal-rational authority, it also allowed the con- 
struction of new forms of identity and solidarity. Charismatic authority was 
a response and a solution to the problem of constructing a social order ex 
nihilo. Equally, Los Alamos provided a theater in which a charismatic self- 
presentation could be enacted. If Oppenheimer was, as many have suggested, a 
consummate actor, he found at Los Alamos the ideal stage. Asa tabula rasa, Los 
Alamos had the potential to enable sucha utopian, free shaping of selfand com- 
munity. However, the dislocation and isolation of its residents from broader 
attachments allowed their identities to be shaped, in a one-dimensional way, 
toward identification with the hegemonic institutional goals of the Manhattan 
Project. 

Situated on a remote mesa named Pajarito Plateau, at seventy-three hundred 
feet above sea level, Los Alamos was nicknamed “the Hill” by the scientists 
and their families. The place seemed to many of these participants to be “a 
world unto itself, an island in the sky.” It was entirely separate from the urban 
communities from which most of them had come, and they arrived there 
knowing little or nothing about what they would find.® The island metaphor 
expressed the new residents’ profound sense of dislocation from their familiar 
social worlds. It is also reflective of the detachment of the military-scientific 
settlement from the locale and the communities amid which it was set. 

The site had been selected in November 1942.’ Most of the land was man- 
aged by agencies of the federal government—the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the 
Forest Service, and the National Park Service; the rest was divided between 
homesteaders and a boys’ boarding school, the Los Alamos Ranch School, 
whose buildings provided the hub for the new settlement. The Manhattan En- 
gineer District appropriated the land through compulsory purchase, bringing 
the school and the history of ranching and homesteading on the mesa to an 
abrupt end. As one historian of the region, Hal Rothman, put it, “Los Alamos 
had been dropped into a world to which it bore no relation.”® To the extent 
that the new arrivals could find meaning in their situation, it was precisely in 
this unfamiliarity. Los Alamos was to them a world outside of and far removed 
from the regular flow of their lives; it was similar in that sense to a vaca- 
tion. Frangoise Ulam, the wife of Los Alamos mathematician Stanislaw Ulam, 
called it “a mountain resort as well as an Army camp”—“just like a camp out.” 
The physicist Otto Frisch described it as “a first rate holiday place.”® 

Others were reminded of fabulous fictional locations. A recurrent image 
was “Shangri-La,” the magical Tibetan monastery in James Hilton’s highly 
popular novel of escapist fantasy, Lost Horizon, and Fritz Capra’s 1937 film 


86 Chapter Four 


adaptation. It was also the name chosen by President Roosevelt for his re- 
treat (which Eisenhower renamed Camp David). So, for example, Phyllis 
Fisher wrote to her parents in October 1944 that her husband was taking them 
to an unknown location, which she jokingly called “Shangri-La.” This image 
proved to be surprisingly apt, for, as she noted, it was “the name ofa strange, 
hidden, magical mountain community.”!? At one party early in the project, 
Edward Condon, at that time associate director of Los Alamos, “picked up a 
copy of The Tempest and sat in a corner reading aloud passages appropriate 
to intellectuals in exotic isolation.” To some Europeans, the relevant imagery 
was provided by Thomas Mann’s The Magic Mountain."! 

Such descriptions of the place as “magic” or particularly “spiritual” drew 
on American culture’s romanticizing of the Southwest and New Mexico. In 
1941, only two years before construction of the Los Alamos Laboratory began, 
the state of New Mexico adopted the slogan “Land of Enchantment” for its 
tourist campaign. This kind of imagery derived from the quasi-colonial idea 
of New Mexico as a romantic domestic Orient. With its ancient pueblos and 
picturesque Spanish-American villages, the state appeared to be caught in a 
time past, outside the boundaries of modern American life. Ruth Marshak 
(the wife of physicist Robert Marshak) remarked, “Too much cannot be said 
for the poetic gesture which placed that fantastic settlement, Los Alamos, in 
that fantastic state, New Mexico.”” 

The “poetic gesture” was widely seen to be Oppenheimer’s. In the 1930s, 
he and his brother, Frank, had entertained friends and colleagues at the ranch 
not far from Los Alamos that they had leased and later bought. Oppenheimer 
had developed a taste for horse-riding and for chili, and a Santa Fe silver belt 
buckle became part of his attire at Berkeley. He had once said, “My two great 
loves are physics and desert country . . . It’s a pity they can’t be combined.”” 
Through his prior connection to and enthusiasm for the place, Oppenheimer 
helped give legitimacy to the idea that this was an appropriate setting in which 
to do science. But underlying the invocation of the kitsch imagery of the Land 
of Enchantment was the fact that neither the residents of Los Alamos nor the 
project had any organic connection with the place itself. As Rothman aptly put 
it, they “could see the land they inhabited only as a stage, its scenic mountains 
as backdrop.” 

To new arrivals, Los Alamos often appeared to be literally no place at all. 
Most recruits to the project arrived by train. The nearest station was Lamy, a 
tiny place a few miles from Santa Fe. Elsie McMillan, the wife of a Rad Lab 
physicist, described her reaction when she arrived at Lamy: “What desolation! 
Were we to live in this nowhere?” Charles Bagley, an explosives engineer 


King of the Mill 87 


attached to the Special Engineer Detachment (SED), had a similar response: 
“Jesus, what’s out there? Nothing.”!° Jacob Wechsler, another SED (as the 
detachment’s members were called), told of being put on a train at the unit’s 
headquarters in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and being shuttled across the country 
without knowing where they were going nor where they were when they 
arrived. Sitting in the back of the truck that took them from Santa Fe thirty- 
five miles up the winding dirt road to Los Alamos, Wechsler put on his infantry 
gas mask to protect himself against the clouds of dust. The truck was waved 
through the gate into Los Alamos by military police and stopped near the base 
headquarters. Cameras and guns were checked in, and the men were then 
shown to the crowded barracks. “Nobody would say anything about why we 
were here, what our duties or chores were to be, what they called the base or 
anything else ... We had a little indoctrination that said that there had been 
special clearance investigations for us to get here. We didn’t even know what 
that meant.”!7 

A strong initial feeling of disorientation and ofarrival as being a sharp break 
from one’s life hitherto was common among military personnel and civilians 
entering the project. This sense of separation was particularly powerful be- 
cause of the inability to tell friends and relatives where one was going and 
because of the need to lie about it. Ruth Marshak recalls her realization “that 
when my husband joined the Manhattan Project it would be as if we shut a 
great door behind us. The world I had known of friends and family would no 
longer be real to me.”!® 

The office of Dorothy McKibben at 109 East Palace Avenue in Santa Fe 
was the first stop for new arrivals. There they were issued a temporary pass, 
valid for twenty-four hours. Soon after arrival at Los Alamos, therefore, they 
were required to go to the Pass Office to receive a new one. Here they 
were fingerprinted and photographed. “The procedure,” said Ruth Marshak, 
“struck me as similar to that which a criminal undergoes when he visits a police 
station.” Newcomers were briefed on security regulations and told not to 
reveal to anyone the location of the project, the scale of the site, the size of 
the population, or the names of any of the scientists. They also had to sign an 
acknowledgment of the Espionage Act. They were then given anew temporary 
pass, valid for two weeks, at which time they were to report back to receive 
their permanent passes.”” Famous scientists were given new names and were 
assigned bodyguards. Enrico Fermi was to be called Mr. Farmer, Niels Bohr 
was Mr. Baker, and so on.*! The New Mexico driver’s license of Robert Serber 
stated “Not Required” under “Name.” Under “Address,” it read “Special 
List B.”?? 


88 Chapter Four 


Admuinistratively and politically, Los Alamos was an entity separate from 
the rest of northern New Mexico. Judicially, everyone and everything inside 
the post fence was “outside the clutches of New Mexico law [and] strictly the 
responsibility of the Army.” Even the size of this new population was kept 
secret; accordingly, there was no official census at Los Alamos until April 
1946.” 

In order to maintain secrecy, the town was supposed to be as self-sustain- 
ing as possible. The post had a commissary selling general wares and a post 
exchange (PX). Clothes were often purchased from catalogs; all goods and 
mail for Los Alamos were to be addressed to Box 1663, Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
Many services were set up on an ad hoc basis within the post or laboratory. 
For medical care, the residents of Los Alamos were served by a small Army 
hospital with six beds.** 

The post was surrounded by a barbed-wire fence. In order to enter or 
exit, all personnel had to show their passes. The only visitors allowed were 
those who had special business either with the laboratory or working on 
construction. Residents could not have guests or casual visitors from outside. 
Travel from the town was severely restricted; special permission was required 
to go more than one hundred miles, or further than Albuquerque. The most 
popular destination was Santa Fe. Few of the residents owned cars, however, 
and because gas was rationed, even a trip to Santa Fe was a special treat. 
Laboratory employees were given one day off per month for a shopping trip 
to the town, for which the Army provided bus transportation.’ Such trips 
were defined not as a right but as a privilege, one that could be withdrawn at 
any time. The chemist Joseph Kennedy, who sat on the laboratory’s Security 
Committee, proposed to the Governing Board that “a memorandum be sent 
to all personnel cautioning them that the privilege of visiting Santa Fe would 
have to be removed if the F.B.I. or G2 found any evidence of a leak from this 
source.””° Personal trips beyond the local area were allowed only in special 
circumstances—for example, if there was a death in the family. 

Communication in any form with persons outside the project was severely 
restricted. Mail censorship was introduced early in the project. Mail was 
allowed to be sent only via authorized drop boxes on the site, and both in- 
coming and outgoing letters were censored. Residents did not have access to 
telephones for personal calls. A few senior project administrators had tele- 
phones in their houses, but these were for emergency purposes only. The 
laboratory had its own switchboard, operated by members of the Women’s 
Army Corps (WAC). Long-distance calls from this switchboard were moni- 
tored. The monitor would announce at the beginning of the call that she was 


King of the Mill 89 


on the line; she had instructions to break the circuit “if there is any obvious 
breach of security” and to report “any conversation which seems doubtful.””’ 
Secrecy and censorship were meant to sever or profoundly weaken any 
social ties extending beyond Los Alamos. According to Elsie McMillan, “se- 
curity rules forced us not to make friends with outsiders. We might get too 
garrulous or let something slip.” Jane Wilson, Robert Wilson’s wife, described 
a chance encounter in the streets of Santa Fe with a college friend. Not having 
spoken for more than a year to anyone who was not part of the project, she 
was excited to see someone “from the outside world.” However, even this en- 
counter was against the rules, and she found herself unable to converse: “My 
conversation was a succession of fluid grunts. A moment’s slip and I, by nature 
blabbermouthed, felt that I would find myselfhurtling into the gaping entrance 
to hell. It was a relief to say goodbye. Then, like a child confessing that she 
has been naughty, I reported my social engagement to the Security Officer. Ev- 
erything had to be reported to the Security Officer. Living at Los Alamos was 
sometimes like living in jail.” She also felt confused and stifled by censorship 
regulations governing personal letters: “For fear of saying the wrong thing, one 
said as little as possible. Letters home were inclined to be terse and in my case, 
anyhow, painfully self-conscious. I couldn’t write a letter without seeing a cen- 
sor pouring over it.” The inability to express oneself intimately in letters also 
blocked an important medium for personal reflection, an effect compounded 
by a prohibition against keeping personal diaries.** All these restrictions 
helped to produce the peculiar intensity and one-dimensionality of life at Los 
Alamos. Because the participants were entirely caught up in the immediate life 
of this small community, the project became the totality of their experience. 


A COMPANY TOWN 


Another feature of everyday life on the project was a feeling of imperma- 
nence and instability. The rapid expansion of the laboratory and community 
exceeded all predictions. Oppenheimer’s initial understanding of the nature 
and scale of the project proved entirely unrealistic. He originally saw it as 
a type of retreat for a small group of senior physicists, a collaboration that 
would draw upon the academic physics community’s intimacy, collegiality, 
and sense of vocation. At the end of November 1942, he wrote to James B. 
Conant (one of the senior civilian administrators overseeing the atomic bomb 
effort) that “the technical details of this work will in large part have to do 
with atomic physics so that any man whose experience has been in another 
field will necessarily be of more limited usefulness.” He therefore thought that 


90 Chapter Four 


“in a tight isolated group such as we are now planning, some warmth and trust 
in personal relations is an indispensable prerequisite, and we are, of course, 
able to insure this only in the case of men whom we have known in the past.””” 

It was notlong before this conception ofa small, homogeneous staff began to 
seem inadequate. In the spring of 1943, Oppenheimer was trying to persuade 
the talented scientific organizer Robert F. Bacher to come to Los Alamos 
from MIT. Bacher insisted on the need for a strong engineering program: 
engineers, he said, “had to permeate the place.” And Oppenheimer asked 
Bacher to recruit “a group of men whom you would call physicist engineers.” 
Between late spring and early summer 1943, Los Alamos began trying to 
recruit chemists, metallurgists, and engineers.*° The laboratory grew even 
more rapidly the following year, when large numbers of technicians, engineers, 
and junior scientists were brought in via the Army Corps of Engineers’ Special 
Engineer Detachment. SEDs were technical workers from industry or college 
students; they were enlisted into the Army and channeled into the Manhattan 
Project, often after further technical and scientific education at universities 
under the Army Specialized Training Program. 

Oppenheimer’s earliest conception of weapon-design work was that it 
would require as few as six scientists—as he put it to Lawrence, “three expe- 
rienced men and perhaps an equal number of younger ones.” In late 1942 and 
early 1943, Oppenheimer was operating with an estimate of around a hundred 
scientists, or, including support personnel, several hundred persons.?! The 
real figures turned out to be in the thousands. Providing housing and provi- 
sions for the expanding population was a constant source of difficulty: a post 
administrator stated in February 1945 that the increase in population “taxes 
practically all our facilities beyond capacity.”** Construction on the project 
began in January 1943; scientific personnel began to move in on a permanent 
basis toward the end of March, and the population reached an estimated 3,500 
by the end of the year. In December 1944 there were 5,675 people living at 
Los Alamos, and by June 1945 the total population had reached its wartime 
peak of approximately 8,750, including about 1,750 dependents.”* 

Los Alamos was a highly artificial, demographically anomalous commu- 
nity. It was overwhelmingly composed of young people. The average age 
of the scientific personnel was twenty-nine; only one scientist was over fifty- 
eight years old.°* Oppenheimer himself was only thirty-eight when he became 
director. The youth of the population, combined with the uprooted charac- 
ter of the community, made for a sense of freedom and vitality. The life, 
wrote Jean Bacher (Robert Bacher’s wife), was “peculiarly uninhibited and 
completely unrelaxed.” On the weekends, the employees “let off steam—steam 


King of the Hill 91 


with a collegiate flavor. Large dances, which often turned into binges, were 
popular.” 

The carefree atmosphere was accompanied by, and encouraged by, the 
enforced intimacy. This was true not only for the GIs, WACs, and single 
civilians, who lived in barracks and dormitories, but also for families. At Los 
Alamos, as in other small towns, “private matters were of public concern.”*° 
The informality and intimacy of life contributed to a sense of commonality 
and camaraderie. It remforced the communitarian ethic of a group of people 
united by a common mission. 

Los Alamos was a company town, in which the goals and values of the 
laboratory and the Manhattan Project were dominant. Community life at 
Los Alamos developed in a one-sided way, oriented completely toward the 
instrumental goals of the mission that had brought the residents to the site. 
At a Governing Board meeting in May 1943, David Hawkins, who organized 
liaison between the laboratory and the post, “emphasized the importance of 
putting across to the community the idea that this was a war project and the 
interests of the community must be subordinated to the progress of work in 
the laboratory.”?” 

Particularly worrisome for the community’s planners were nonworking 
wives, many of whom were raising families at Los Alamos. The problematic 
situation of the wives was exacerbated by the fact that Los Alamos was a 
planned community. The Army was charged with managing daily life in order 
to minimize any tendency for domestic problems to distract the scientists from 
their work. The more functions the Army took over in the management of 
everyday life, the more apparently superfluous was the domestic role of wives. 
A psychiatrist, called in by General Groves to assess the community, reported 
in the summer of 1944 that “the creation of jobs that provide emotional outlets 
for unoccupied wives has apparently done much to improve morale.” For 
example, the establishment of a nursery school was “invaluable as a morale 
builder as well as an educational unit, permitting many mothers who would 
otherwise be discontented to become contributors to the productivity of the 
unit.”°8 Ideally, all spheres of life, including the domestic sphere, were to be 
assimilated and subordinated to the overarching goal of producing the bomb. 

Asa planned community, Los Alamos had some characteristics ofa utopian 
social experiment. More than one commentator has noted the “strong hint 
of utopian collectivism” that characterized the community.°? An example of 
this was the linking of rent to salary, so that higher earners would pay higher 
rent.*° Medical services were provided by the Army. Laura Fermi thought that 
at Los Alamos, the Army was running a “socialistic community.”*! Groves 


92 Chapter Four 


emphasized that the Army should, through its management of the town, en- 
sure that domestic issues would not be allowed to distract scientists from the 
project’s technical goals. He instructed Colonel Gerard Tyler, who in 1944 
took over as post commander of Los Alamos, to “try to satisfy these temp- 
eramental people. Don’t allow living conditions, family problems, or anything 
else to take their minds off their work.”“? At the same time, the scientists and 
their families, as members of the professional middle classes, were used to 
having a high degree of control over the conditions of their lives; they felt 
strongly that they had the right to personal autonomy, even while living on an 
Army post. Because of their value to the project, the scientists had the power 
to demand privileges. The Town Council, established in June 1943, was a 
way for civilians to air their grievances about living conditions. Reminiscent 
of student government, it was a gesture toward participatory democracy, 
anomalous in its wartime context. The young scientists and their families here 
debated with gusto the minutiae of post administration, from parking tickets 
to food in the PX to restrictions on dormitory visits by the opposite sex. 

It was hoped that the scientific and technical workers at Los Alamos 
would feel a moral bond to the project—a commitment above and beyond the 
call of duty. But the laboratory’s administrators did not regard this attitude as 
something that could be left to develop organically in the community. Instead, 
they thought it had to be inculcated, or at least encouraged. Hence David 
Hawkins’s concern with “the importance of increasing people’s awareness of 
the war and of the fact that this is a war project.”“* In general, during the war, 
the Army paid considerable attention to the problem of generating “morale”— 
in other words, manufacturing appropriate motivations among soldiers, war 
workers, and the general population. Sociologist Morris Janowitz has argued 
that this emphasis by the military on morale, which was particularly evident 
during World War II, was a response to the increased reliance of the military 
on technology, and hence on personnel drawn from skilled and educated 
urban industrial populations. According to Janowitz, such personnel respond 
better to explicit motives than to simple discipline. Certainly, this applied 
to the highly educated scientific and technical workforce employed at Los 
Alamos. The Army commanders at the post felt that they were forced to 
make considerable “concessions” to the “personal wishes” of the scientists in 
order to “keep the life of the working community running as smoothly and 
contentedly as possible.”*° 

The concept of morale as employed at Los Alamos expressed a social ethic, 
emphasizing the virtue of integrating the individual into the life and norms of 
the community. For example, Oppenheimer’s successor, Norris Bradbury, 


King of the Hill 93 


highlighted the “extraordinary harmony” and “sense of homogeneity” with 
which people worked together at Los Alamos during the war. By May 1945, 
the visiting psychiatrist Eric Kent Clarke thought Los Alamos a “closely-knit 
group with a feeling of accomplishment, and a sense of personal responsibil- 
ity.” “The compactness and isolation,” he said, “actually has helped promote 
this.” Despite the “feeling of impermanence,” he felt that “there is now a suf- 
ficient volume of old residents to create an acceptance of the limitations, that 
is helpful in acclimatizing newcomers.” He was pleased with Los Alamos’s 
success in the “integration of the individual into the community.” Clarke’s 
philosophy of ‘mental hygiene” and “psychological adjustment” fit well with 
the project administrators’ desire for a population single-mindedly oriented 
toward the goals of the project and bound together by a common ethos. Clarke 
thought that Los Alamos, with its close-knit community life and availability 
of healthy outdoor sports, was suited to “young, athletically-inclined extro- 
verts.” It was the “non-athletic, the introvert, the older people, the confirmed 
city-dweller,” who he thought would be unhappy and dissatisfied. This “in- 
dividualistic” group found “the isolation and necessity of living in such close 
physical contact with neighbors trying.”*” The isolated and close-knit nature 
of the community at Los Alamos, together with the collaborative nature of 
the scientific and technical work, meant that virtues of integration, teamwork, 
and sociability were primary. 

So far, I have argued that Los Alamos was a community of uprooted and 
dislocated individuals, but a solidaristic one. Arrival there, I have suggested, 
was experienced as an autobiographical break, disconnecting project person- 
nel from the social milieu from which they came and defining Los Alamos as 
a radically new situation. Once at Los Alamos, individuals were faced with 
powerful social-psychological pressures that recast their identity in confor- 
mity with the local communal identity of the laboratory and the town that 
supported it. The distinction between public and private at Los Alamos was 
only weakly maintained. All spheres of life, including the domestic sphere, 
were subordinated to the goals of the laboratory. Los Alamos was a peculiarly 
one-dimensional community, dominated by a single institution. Yet at the 
same time, the town was a place of radical normative uncertainty. The people 
who inhabited this place faced the problem of making sense of, and collectively 
defining, this new situation. 

Were the scientists who worked in the laboratory supposed to think of the 
experience and the setting as simply continuous with the university environ- 
ments from which they came? Was Los Alamos just an academic laboratory 
transplanted to a remote location? Or was it, on the other hand, more like an 


94 Chapter Four 


industrial research and development laboratory, along the lines of Bell Labs 
or the research branch of Westinghouse? Was it more like a military ord- 
nance facility, such as the naval and army ordnance laboratories at Dahlgren, 
Virginia, and Aberdeen, Maryland?** Or was Los Alamosa radically new kind 
of place—similar in some aspects to each the above, but also highly different 
from any one of them? Participants faced the problem of finding a model on 
the basis of which to understand what was expected of them, what would 
count as proper behavior, what rights they could legitimately demand, and 
what privileges they would have to forgo. But the applicability of such models 
was always incomplete, and the relevance and/or legitimacy of any particular 
definition of the situation was open to contestation. 


A MILITARY OR A CIVILIAN LABORATORY? 


The key uncertainty facing participants was whether Los Alamos was pri- 
marily a military or a civilian facility. Two fences defined Los Alamos both 
geographically and symbolically. The outer fence, which divided the site geo- 
graphically, legally, and politically from the state of New Mexico, marked out 
the Army post. A second fence separated the post—and hence the authority of 
its Army commanders—from the Technical Area, which was a formally civil- 
ian institution, operated under a contract with the University of California 
and with Oppenheimer as the lab’s civilian director. 

This apparently neat division of space and authority, however, was less 
simple in practice. Oppenheimer, like the military post commander, reported 
to General Groves of the Army Corps of Engineers. Indeed, Oppenheimer had 
been selected and appointed by Groves personally. The general maintained 
tight personal control over the project through telephone and teletype, and he 
very often visited Los Alamos, inspecting the site and attending key meetings. 
He exercised control through Oppenheimer and through the Albuquerque 
District Engineer, the Los Alamos post commander, and the Army and Navy 
liaison officers assigned to the laboratory. He was in close contact with, for 
example, the head of the laboratory’s Ordnance Division, Captain William 
S. “Deak” Parsons. The role of the University of California was, in practice, 
limited to procurement for the laboratory and other business matters. Even 
when they signed the contract to manage the laboratory, the university’s 
representatives were not told the project’s purpose. So the fence around 
the Technical Area did not unambiguously demarcate civilian from military 
authority. As one Army report stated, “As the project developed, the lines 


King of the Hill 95 


between the responsibilities of the local scientific and military leaders became, 
of necessity, more flexible and overlapping.”” 

The boundary between military and civilian authority was further blurred 
by the growth in the proportion of laboratory staff who were military per- 
sonnel—scientists and technicians in uniform. In August 1943, approximately 
5 percent of personnel were military. In August 1945, civilians and military 
personnel were represented in equal proportions. The majority of these new 
technical personnel in uniform were SEDs. In July 1945, there were four- 
teen hundred SEDs working for the laboratory. In addition, about seventy 
WACs were employed there—the majority as clerks, librarians, and telephone 
operators, but several as scientific researchers and technicians.°? The posi- 
tion of these personnel in relation to the military authority of the post and 
the civilian authority of the laboratory was unclear and contested. The HE 
(high-explosives) development for the implosion device (the design of the plu- 
tonium atomic bomb, “Fat Man”) relied very heavily on SED manpower.”! 
The Gls working in this program at testing ranges in the mountains and 
canyons around Los Alamos spent their working day beyond the reach of 
military commanders. Officers of the post often had trouble even knowing 
where their SED troops were at any particular point in the day, and most of 
these officers, unlike their troops, did not have passes to enter the Technical 
Area. General Groves was understandably disturbed by this obstacle to the 
authority of his commanders over their troops, and he moved to put officers 
of the Corps of Engineers directly in charge of the SEDs at the HE testing 
sites. George Kistiakowsky, the chemist running the HE program, strongly 
objected to this proposal. He told Oppenheimer that it was unacceptable, 
since the place of officers in the military chain of command would be unlikely 
to coincide with technical expertise.” 

In general, the ability of SEDs to work effectively in the laboratory was 
given precedence over the enforcement of normal Army procedures. For ex- 
ample, Major T. O. Palmer, upon his appointment as commanding officer 
of the SED in August 1944, eliminated morning reveille and calisthenics for 
these troops. At a conference of senior post staff in early 1945, Palmer re- 
sponded to the question of whether the SEDs were being “subjected to too 
much military work”: he did “not see how the SEDs could have any fewer 
military duties.” Clarke, the visiting psychiatrist, noted in passing that “the 
S.E.D. cannot be regarded as regular soldiers, having been segregated soon 
after enlistment for specific jobs because of specialized education. The work 
under civilian administrators places military regulations as secondary to the 


96 Chapter Four 


scientific program.” This “anomalous situation” of the SED—between civilian 
and military authority—was, in his view, “a knotty one.””? 

As a former SED put it, “This was the least military of any military outfit 
I have ever been in. Now I understand that other units, the construction 
group and the MPs [military police], were really G.I., but not us. We were 
quite un-G.I.” Another recalled, “Tech Area pressure kept the military from 
interfermg and trying to make us G.I.” Charles Bagley played down the 
distinction between military and civilian laboratory personnel, emphasizing 
the fact that he and many other SEDs were students when they were drafted 
or enlisted. They came to the project “right out of colleges, right out of the 
academic life.” Another former SED said, “I was simply a civilian placed in 
military uniform.” Still another reflected, “It was kind of frustrating to Major 
Palmer and all those who had been out where military was the thing to come 
out here where people were running around like a rag-tag militia.” SEDs 
enjoyed the fact that work in the laboratory placed them temporarily outside 
the military environment. Roy Merryman recalled, “We kind of lived in the 
laboratory building, rather than sit around in the barracks on our bums. That 
was almost home to us.” According to a former WAC who worked in the 
Tech Area, “it wasn’t like anything else in the Army... Everyone had their 
job and no one was much concerned with rank.” 

The uncertain coexistence of military and civilian forms of life inevitably 
produced conflicts and tensions on both sides. Civilians felt regimented and 
threatened by the restrictions of life on an Army post. Military personnel— 
particularly those in support functions, who did not have access to the Tech- 
nical Area and from whom the project’s goals were kept secret—felt that they 
were treated as secondary to the civilian scientists. Clarke reported that the 
“greatest single problem is the discrepancy between civilian and military life.” 
The strongest complaint by military personnel working in the laboratory and 
on the post was that they received less pay for the same work. More generally, 
as Clarke stated, “the army group feel that they are penalized by being in 
uniform, are crowded out of their facilities, and in addition are patronized .. . 
The feeling prevails that the civilians are pampered lest they leave the project 
while the army group have no such similar opportunity.””° 

The relationship between civilian and military organization and authority 
was also complicated by the fact that formally, the laboratory’s civilian status 
could be revoked. The original directive for Los Alamos was signed by both 
Groves for the military and Conant for the civilian scientific community. The 
directive divided the work of the laboratory into two periods, the first involv- 
ing “certain experimental studies in science, engineering and ordnance,” the 


King of the Mill 97 


second involving “large-scale experiments involving difficult ordnance pro- 
cedures and the handling of highly dangerous material.” In other words, the 
directive conceived of the programas being divisible into an initial phase of ba- 
sic research and a later phase of weapon engineering. “During the first phase,” 
the letter stated, “the laboratory will be ona strictly civilian basis.” Upon com- 
mencement of the latter phase, however, “the scientific and engineering staff 
will be composed of commissioned officers.” It was expected that at that time, 
the civilian scientists in the laboratory would be willing to take commissions as 
Army officers, and this was projected to occur sometime after the beginning of 
1944.°° Few senior scientists were eager to be enlisted, however. Bacher, for 
example, upon accepting his post in the laboratory, also submitted a resigna- 
tion letter, to become effective on such date as the laboratory was militarized. 
This change never came to pass. But the civilian status of the laboratory was 
always a tentative one, with no guarantee of permanence. The fate of the 
laboratory was in this respect open. It was also entirely in the hands of one 
man—the overall executive head of the project, General Leslie R. Groves. 


THE CHAIN OF COMMAND 


At Los Alamos, to civilians and GIs alike, General Groves was the military per- 
sonified. This perception was in many ways accurate, given Groves’s strong 
personal control of the project. Rather than an impersonal bureaucracy, the 
Manhattan District is more correctly seen as having been a personal fiefdom. 
Formal divisions of power and authority in the project were beset with am- 
biguity and uncertainty, and above these formal relations, Groves’s authority 
floated free, encompassing in its sweep the entire project. Historian Peter 
Bacon Hales pointed out that Groves was invisible in the project’s organi- 
zational charts: “At the top was always the district engineer—first [Colonel 
James C.] Marshall, then [Colonel Kenneth D.] Nichols. Groves himself 
existed immaterially, at once everywhere and nowhere.”*” 

A circular from Nichols, who functioned as Groves’s deputy, stated, “Ow- 
ing to the secret nature, urgency, scope, and importance of the projects 
assigned to this district, it is frequently necessary that instructions be issued 
and information requested without regard to normal organizational channels.” 
Groves, in particular, was to be insulated from these usual channels: 


General Groves does not wish to be designated to individuals outside 
the Manhattan District, particularly to investigating agencies, as having 
any direct connection with the Manhattan District .. . In general, if any 


98 Chapter Four 


outside agency requests information concerning what is the next higher 
echelon of command above the District Engineer, the answer should be 
that the next higher echelon is the Office, Chief of Engineers, and no 
particular individual designated.°® 


Groves’s powers were sweeping; from his position outside regular organi- 
zational channels, he was able to overcome bureaucratic conservatism and 
inertia. He prided himself on his ability to “cut through all sorts of intermedi- 
ate layers of authority.” Indeed, he himself proudly claimed that “there was 
nothing more unorthodox than my operations either on construction or on 
the Manhattan Project.” 

Groves’s extraordinary personal power derived, above all, from his ability 
to claim a direct link to the authority of the president. Roosevelt, Groves 
believed, “took a personal interest” in the project and had “gone over my 
record when my name came in and had personally approved it.” But Groves 
met Roosevelt only once during the war, with Secretary of War Henry L. 
Stimson, on December 30, 1944. They were allotted half an hour, but the 
meeting took considerably longer. “That’s the only time I saw him or talked 
to him about the Manhattan Project,” Groves said. 

Groves was obsessed with maintaining close personal control over the 
operations of the Manhattan District. He was also the only individual with 
a synthetic and overarching view of all dimensions and levels of the project. 
Stimson informed Roosevelt that “Groves . . . is the only one who has a really 
complete knowledge of the entire situation.”*' The broad range of Groves’s 
personal role was later described by Nichols: “Throughout the war . . . Groves 
maintained direct access to both General Marshall and the Secretary of War 
whenever he saw fit .. . In addition, he maintained direct control of constru- 
ction and operations at Los Alamos . .. He also assumed control over many of 
the international contacts, all intelligence efforts, and at the request of Gen- 
eral Marshall, military planning for the use of the bomb.” Nichols noted that 
“an organization purist would say that this hybrid organization would gen- 
erate friction, confusion, and might not be able to function smoothly.” But in 
Nichols’s view, the arrangement “expedited decisions and results.” 

The fact that Groves did not respect regular organizational channels meant 
that he kept his subordinates in a state of uncertainty, thereby reinforcing 
their dependence on him and strengthening his own personal power over 
the network. However, despite his unique organizational power, Groves was 
himself in a state of dependence: he relied utterly on the scientists’ willingness 
and ability to get the job done. When he tried to pressure Ernest Lawrence 


King of the Mill 99 


by telling him, “Your reputation at stake,” the Nobelist replied, “You know 

General, my reputation is made. It is yours that depends on the outcome of 
» Iy rep y. Pp 

the Manhattan Project.” 


COMPARTMENTALIZATION: SECURITY AND CONTROL 


A key aspect of Groves’s power was control over the circulation of informa- 
tion. A system of such control, termed compartmentalization, was already in 
place when the Army took over the atomic bomb project in the summer of 
1942. But under military leadership, it took on new importance. The system 
required that, as far as possible, each task was to be performed in isolation 
from all the others. Those highest in the administrative hierarchy would 
have the greatest breadth of knowledge about the project, and only Groves, as 
overall director, would have a complete overview. The system was justified on 
security grounds: limiting each individual’s knowledge of the project would 
make it impossible for an enemy spy to give away anything more than a 
fragmentary picture of what was taking place and, most importantly, of the 
technical details of how it was being accomplished. “Compartmentalization 
of knowledge,” Groves said, “was the very heart of security.” 

Compartmentalization also served other organizational functions. For 
Groves, it was a means of intervention in the process of scientific work on 
the project. It was a mechanism by which the practices of scientists could be 
transformed so as to be in keeping with the character of the Manhattan Project 
as a large-scale military-industrial system. When the Army Corps of Engineers 
took over control of the atomic bomb project, they found the state of scientific 
knowledge to be utterly inadequate as a basis on which to begin engineering 
development. It seemed to them unlikely that an academic approach would, 
on its own, lead to establishing the necessary levels of certainty on which to 
base planning. As Colonel Marshall described the situation, “When you get 
six or seven Ph.D.’s and three or four Nobel Prize winners around the table, 
you know, they are in the clouds.” Marshall told the scientists that “if they 
didn’t hurry up and make up their minds what they wanted to develop, we 
might not need a site; the war would be over.” When Groves took over as 
head of the Manhattan District, it seemed to him “as if the whole endeavor 
was founded on possibilities rather than probabilities. Of theory there was a 
great deal, of proven knowledge not much. Even if the theories were correct, 
the engineering difficulties would be unprecedented.” 

In Groves’s view, scientific curiosity could lead to all sorts of blind alleys. 
If the necessary discipline could not already be found in the practices of 


100 Chapter Four 


the scientists, it would need to be imposed externally. This, then, was a 
key benefit of compartmentalization. This system of control over information, 
Groves said, “not only provided an adequate measure of security, but it greatly 
improved over-all efficiency by making our people stick to their knitting. 
And it made quite clear to all concerned that the project existed to produce 
a specific end product—not to enable individuals to satisfy their curiosity 
and to increase their scientific knowledge.”°° Compartmentalization defined 
scientists’ work in instrumental or utilitarian terms, creating a structure of 
control and authority. Instrumental goals were established at the highest 
rungs of the Manhattan District, and the scientists were to labor to realize 
these externally determined ends. 

By limiting scientists’ tasks to particular technical problems and insulating 
them from knowledge of the overall framework of the project, compartmen- 
talization strictly circumscribed the authority of scientists within the project. 
According to Arthur H. Compton, Groves “did not want any one man under 
him to have so much responsibility that he would become indispensable.” By 
dividing authority and responsibility, Groves “avoided the troubles that he 
feared if some single scientist had been in a dominating position.” Scientists 
were to be technicians, not strategists or policy makers. As Hales observed, 
compartmentalization was “a means to redesignate scientists and engineers as 
workers, equivalently obligated to management.”°” Groves was dismissive of 
scientists’ resistance to the role defined for them in this system: “A lot of them 
were resentful because their opinions had not been asked for during the War; 
there had been no ‘faculty’ meetings. If I went to Los Alamos, for example, I 
would see Oppenheimer and his group leaders. We might go around and see 
things and talk to various individuals who were way down on the scale, but 
they weren’t asked for their views on how to solve these problems or what 
we should do.” For Groves, compartmentalization was about much more 
than secrecy; it defined a structure of authority: “We had strict discipline and 
we had to have it; not military discipline but real discipline, with everyone 
interested only in one thing and that was the achievement of the goal. As 
soon as the need for such discipline is removed there is a blow-up.” Security 
regulations allowed Groves to regiment and standardize the work practices of 
the heterogeneous groups involved in the Manhattan Project, thereby creating 
a homogeneous organizational structure. Compartmentalization rendered the 
militarization of the whole project unnecessary. Without putting scientists 
in uniform, the general had discovered a way to firmly define their role and 
place within an organizational hierarchy and to limit scientific authority to the 
purely or merely technical. 


King of the Hill 101 


Security regulations functioned to break up associations, disrupting in- 
formal scientific culture and replacing it with the formal structure of the 
organization charts. In 1942, physicist Leo Szilard complained that com- 
partmentalization caused “strain” and embarrassment between him and his 
“old friend” Teller and had led to their misunderstanding each other during 
discussion of an important scientific problem. According to Szilard, com- 
partmentalization “poisons the discussion, even in those fields which are not 
explicitly excluded from discussion.”© Szilard’s colleague at the Manhat- 
tan Project’s Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory (Met Lab), fellow Hungarian 
Eugene Wigner, similarly contrasted scientific fraternity with the formality 
of large-scale organizations, such as DuPont. The “outlook on life” and “at- 
titudes toward the work” differed greatly between scientists and industrial 
engineers. Wigner thought that the engineer was motivated by “money and 
power,” the scientist by the desire for “the esteem of his friends and collabo- 
rators” and “the satisfaction of having understood something.” It seemed to 
Wigner that the DuPont men measured themselves and others by their place 
in the organization. By contrast, the moral order of science was violated by any 
privileging of the position over the person. So, he said, “if it is necessary for 
us to point to our authority embodied in the organization chart to someone, 
we may just as well terminate the relation with that collaborator—he would 
not do us much good.””° Szilard and Wigner regarded compartmentalization 
as socially and scientifically corrosive, replacing scientific collegiality with an 
alien hierarchy. 

Groves, however, was suspicious of such informal communication among 
scientists and of the social networks in which it was embedded. He was wary of 
foreign scientists—particularly Szilard, whom he regarded as disloyal.’! The 
type of authority structure described by Wigner was inherently threatening 
to Groves. Without a scientific background, the general would have had a 
weak position in such an intellectual hierarchy. During one visit to Chicago, 
he defensively claimed that because he had attended Army schools for ten 
years after graduating from West Point, he had the equivalent of two Ph.Ds.” 
Colonel Nichols had a Ph.D. from the University of Iowa and had studied 
engineering at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin; he was, therefore, useful 
in being able to mediate these relationships for Groves. Groves said, “Because 
I suspected that Compton liked Colonel Nichols more than he did me, pri- 
marily because Colonel Nichols had a Ph.D. and looked very scholarly .. ., 
everything done with Compton was generally done through Colonel Nichols; 
that is, anything that was difficult.””? The reputational authority structure 
of scientific community was an obstacle to Groves’s personal control of 


102 Chapter Four 


the project.’4 If compartmentalization replaced such collegial authority with 
formal, organizational channels, so much the better, from Groves’s point of 
view. 

In the general’s vision, Los Alamos was to be a place where scientific 
community and practice could be disciplined by military-industrial standards, 
in order to serve a military need. The decision to centralize research on bomb 
design in a new laboratory, situated in a secret location, was one of the 
first and most important moves that Groves made upon assuming control of 
the Manhattan District. Bringing the atomic scientists to Los Alamos would 
bring them directly under Groves’s power and control, insulating them from 
other, opposing influences. Groves took a special and personal interest in Los 
Alamos. In contrast to other sites of the project—where his deputy, Colonel 
Nichols, had an important role to play—“in the case of Los Alamos, Groves 
made it clear that he personally would do all the direct supervision of the 
work.” Groves later said that “from a practical standpoint, although not on 
paper, the chain of command was direct from me to Dr. Oppenheimer.””® 

However, Groves’s desire to situate the scientific work securely under 
his control was potentially frustrated by an opposing agenda for the new 
laboratory. Oppenheimer and other senior scientists saw the lab as a chance 
to overcome the restrictions and difficulties of the compartmentalized and 
dispersed nature of the fast-neutron work that had been going on, without 
great success, in university laboratories across the country.’° They argued 
that scientific freedom within the new laboratory was necessary if Los Alamos 
was to efficiently meet the instrumental goal of producing atomic bombs. 


INFORMATION FLOW AND SOCIAL ORDER 


An important motive for the creation of Los Alamos, from Oppenheimer’s 
point of view, was to overcome problems of communication. Concentrat- 
ing the fast-neutron research in one geographical location would be a vast 
improvement over the situation that he and John Manley faced in the latter 
part of 1942, in attempting to coordinate a gaggle of widely geographically 
dispersed fast-neutron laboratories.’’ However, less than a year into Los 
Alamos’s operation, such problems of coordination and communication were 
being reproduced within this new laboratory. The senior scientists at Los 
Alamos were sensitized to problems of information flow, which arose not only 
from restrictions imposed by Groves, but also from the de facto compartmen- 
talization that was an aspect of the increasing complexity and differentiation 
of the laboratory’s organization.’* As early as November 1943, Oppenheimer 


King of the Hill 103 


“felt the laboratory was now so complicated that he should call to the attention 
of the board the problem of relations between divisions.” That same month, 
the laboratory established a Liaison Committee, chaired by Edward Teller, 
to coordinate communication with other sites of the Manhattan Project. By 
January 1944, however, this committee had been forced to turn its attention 
to the problem of so-called internal liaison.” 

The scientists responded to these problems of communication by attempt- 
ing to locate scientific work and intercourse in face-to-face interaction. In 
early May 1943, Bethe proposed to the Governing Board (the laboratory’s top 
decision-making committee, composed of the most senior scientific and ad- 
ministrative staff) the idea of instituting “regular colloquia for the entire staff,” 
to be held weekly or fortnightly. These might, he added, include reports from 
other sites of the Manhattan Project. Oppenheimer agreed with the thrust 
of Bethe’s proposal and emphasized the “importance” that “should be given 
to regular meetings of the groups in which general laboratory affairs should 
be discussed, as well as specific problems of the groups.” Bethe’s proposal 
was accepted at the Governing Board meeting. The board decided that such 
“general colloquia” should be “held every two weeks on Tuesday night,” 
and it made Teller responsible for organizing the meetings. However, some- 
what ominously, the point was added that the meetings should be “carefully 
supervised.”*° 

Almost inevitably, the Colloquium and its organizers came into conflict 
with the Army, to whose security rules the very existence of such meetings 
appeared to be an affront. Groves told Oppenheimer a few months later that 
both he and the post commander, Colonel Whitney Ashbridge, were “dis- 
turbed” about the “quite comprehensive review” of the program that Op- 
penheimer gave at the first colloquium. They felt that “from the beginning 
the colloquium has been operated very liberally according to war laboratory 
standards.” Groves’s personal scientific advisor, physicist Richard Tolman, 
supported such concerns. He was “troubled” by the presentation at a collo- 
quium of a report on the methods that chemist Harold Urey was employing 
at Columbia University for separating boron isotopes. Oppenheimer replied 
in defense of the meetings, stating that he was “committed to this policy” 
and that he believed it was “the right policy.”8! Nevertheless, he agreed to 
a compromise under which restrictions were placed both on what could be 
discussed at the Colloquium and on who could attend these sessions. 

Groves responded to the institution of the Colloquium by toughening 
his position that the laboratory should be a world unto itself, with the very 
minimum of contact, scientific or otherwise, with people or institutions beyond 


104 Chapter Four 


its fences. He told the Los Alamos Governing Board that “it was only with the 
greatest reluctance that he approved having anyone here who was allowed to 
leave, or having anyone visit here in a consultative capacity.”*” 

Probably the most controversial aspect of the Colloquium arose from 
Bethe’s initial suggestion that these meetings include reports from other sites 
of the project. At a Governing Board meeting on October 28, 1943, several 
leading physicists at Los Alamos took part in a lengthy discussion about this 
issue. The minutes stated optimistically that “the only specific restrictions 
imposed on the dissemination of information were on engineering details of 
the work in Chicago, and on production schedules that would determine 
the effectiveness of the end product as a military weapon.” However, these 
restrictions were seen to be of great significance. Also, more far-reaching than 
these “specific restrictions” was the general climate of uncertainty about what 
could or could not be discussed. The result of such uncertainty was to make 
people even more cautious and tight-lipped than absolutely necessary. For 
example, in addition to restrictions on discussion of work at Chicago, Bacher, 
Bethe, and Oppenheimer responded to Tolman’s comments by urging Teller 
not to discuss Urey’s work on boron at future meetings. 

During the October 28 meeting, Teller emerged as the most staunch 
defender of the original spirit of the Colloquium. He told the board that 
he felt “very strongly” that “imposing any limitations on the discussion in 
colloquia is contrary to the spirit with which the colloquia are supposed to 
be operated.” He also felt that if restrictions were to be made, this should 
not be simply a matter for the division leaders on the Governing Board, but 
the policy should be at least announced to group leaders, one organizational 
rung down, on the Coordinating Council. This position pitted Teller directly 
against Oppenheimer, who advocated a more cautious and conciliatory path 
between scientific freedom and military regulation. Oppenheimer stated that 
“he could not formulate a policy except to say that the liberties permitted in 
this laboratory were much greater than in any other war laboratories and that 
he felt that discretion should be exercised so that those persons who were 
concerned about the scope of these liberties would not be alarmed. He felt that 
no information should be given which could not be justified by its connection 
with the work here.” Oppenheimer was also “personally opposed” to the idea 
of discussing the policy with the Coordinating Council. 

Teller did not hesitate to point out that Oppenheimer’s proposed compro- 
mise violated the original intent of the Colloquium. The criterion that only 
information connected with the work at Los Alamos could be discussed was, 


King of the Mill 105 


in Teller’s view, “too vague to be applied.” He said that “a function of the 
colloquium was to bring a variety of matters to the attention of staff members 
in order to stimulate useful ideas. It would be practically impossible for one 
man to judge what the most productive questions for discussion would be.” It 
was also unclear whether this criterion (that information was admissible only 
if relevant to the work at Los Alamos) was a change in policy. The general view 
was that “this statement does not represent a change but merely a formulation 
of existing policy” and that “the only basis for thinking that it is a change 
is Dr. [Vannevar] Bush’s statement that all information would come to Los 
Alamos and none would go out.” The other members of the Governing Board 
were leery of antagonizing Groves and Army security and felt themselves to 
be walking a tightrope between freedom and restriction: “It appeared to be 
the general feeling of the board that it would be wise not to act in such a way as 
to cause restrictions to be imposed by those who have the executive respon- 
sibility for the project. In particular it was felt that the laboratory would be 
harmed if documents were withheld from us on the ground that we discussed 
them too freely in colloquia.” Teller left this meeting to attend another one; 
in his absence, the board recommended “that all work done in this laboratory 
can appropriately be discussed in colloquia. Of work done elsewhere which 
reaches us in the form of classified reports, all questions which have a pre- 
sumptive bearing on the work of this laboratory may be discussed.”*? Teller, 
it appears, was overruled, but the board’s decision left room for negotiation. 
What, for example, was to count legitimately as “presumptive” relevance? 
These discussions exemplify a number of important features of life at Los 
Alamos. First, they show the way in which the senior scientists, in shaping 
the social order of the laboratory, oriented themselves in relation to their 
perception of the likely reaction of Groves and the military authorities. Groves 
was thereby able to exercise control in absentia. Second, the controversy 
provides an example of the normative uncertainty surrounding institutional 
practice at Los Alamos. The policy on information flow was unclear and 
contested, and different formulations were possible. As Teller recognized 
when he “asked that if restrictions were to be imposed they be made specific,” 
this uncertainty could itself be restrictive. This was particularly the case if 
the board was inclined to err on the side of caution in relation to the military 
authorities. Third, Oppenheimer’s role in the controversy demonstrates his 
intermediate position between the scientists and Groves’s military authority. 
To Groves, Oppenheimer defended the Colloquium; to the scientists, he 
stressed the need to play within the Army’s rules and to accommodate the 


106 Chapter Four 


interests of security. Oppenheimer embodied and personally mediated the 
conflicts and tensions at the heart of the social organization of the project. 

In response to the Colloquium, Groves sought to impose a firm cordon of 
security around Los Alamos. However, any such cordon would necessarily be 
porous to a degree. Los Alamos required both information and materials from 
other sites of the Manhattan Project, so it could not be entirely isolated.** The 
Governing Board was constantly trying to get Groves to allow it more access 
to information about Oak Ridge production schedules. This information, 
essential for planning the Los Alamos program, came via Groves, and he did 
not want to have another set of estimates that would compete with his own and 
provide a basis upon which to challenge his authority. After all, one important 
way in which Groves was able to intervene at Los Alamos was in pressing the 
Governing Board to keep up with schedules. Issues of the flow of information 
were issues of authority and organizational control.°° 

The Colloquium was thus affected by general restrictions on liaison of Los 
Alamos with other sites and on the flow of information across the Manhattan 
Project. Moreover, the meetings were open only to laboratory staff members, 
defined as those with a bachelor’s degree or higher. In general, technicians, in- 
cluding most SEDs, could not attend.*° Many of the SEDs, for example, were 
enlisted during their undergraduate education, before receiving a degree. For 
these personnel, access to information was on a strictly need-to-know basis. 
McAllister Hull Jr., an SED directing the casting of explosive lenses, said, 
“That was the way I was taught. I was taught need-to-know ... The badges 
said what kinds of things you could talk about. I suppose if you had a white 
badge ... you could talk about anything . . . So there was that kind of com- 
partmentalization. When somebody says there was no compartmentalization 
because people went to the seminars, well, who was invited to the seminars? . . . 
That’s the point. I didn’t get to the seminars. I didn’t need to know this the- 
oretical stuff that was going on in order to cast things out at S-Site.” The 
extent of compartmentalization was asymmetrical, differing across the levels 
of personnel in the laboratory: “There was compartmentalization in terms of 
the technical people, but . . . for all of the real physicists there wasn’t so much 
or wasn’t any, with seminars, etc.”°7 

SED Jay Wechsler, working on electronics under Otto Frisch, described 
in detail the experience of junior personnel: “We did not have any meetings. 
Otto attended meetings, apparently at a high level. At that time, I had nothing 
to do with meetings at a high level at all.” Whatever overall picture of the 
project Wechsler acquired was through a gradual, informal, and intuitive 
process of piecing together what information he could pick up from scattered 


King of the Mill 107 


conversations. After receiving his clearance and badge, Wechsler went to 
work in the Technical Area: 


Otto showed me this lab that was essentially empty and said that it would 
be a physics lab. And we were going to be working on things. Being 
curious, I asked him, “Well, what?” What were we doing and so on... 
and I wasn’t getting any real response. And he pulled out some piece of 
equipment that he wanted me to help [with,] getting ready and hooking 
up the electronics for and so on. It was a very, very strange beast. I 
couldn’t quite understand it. He began to explain to me what it was, 
and I could not associate what we were trying to do with anything... 
I got to know some of the people next door. I was talking to one of 
them in the next lab and I asked him some questions. And he wasn’t 
answering anything very much. . . [had set up a glass vacuum pumping 
system with some diffusion pumps and mechanical vacuum pumps and 
got the equipment out of some of the supplies. The kinds of things that 
I thought that I needed to work for Otto. But I still didn’t know why. It 
Just was not making an awful lot of sense. He just kept calling it a piece 
of equipment that he had shipped over ... but nothing was hanging 
together ... I didn’t even understand how the piece of equipment 
worked, let alone what we were going to use it for. It was more like 
instructions—we need to be able to do certain electronic measurements 
and there are some defects in the electronics and there are some defects 
and leaks in the vacuum system and you need to be finding out where 
they were and. . . figuring out ways to fix it—and it was very cryptic. Very 


cryptic. 


The pieces began to fit together when Wechsler went to the report library and 
found a copy of Who’s Who in Science: 


I looked up Otto’s name, and then I began to see that he had worked 
in fission and [was] Lise Meitner’s nephew, and things started kind of 
coming together a little bit. And then I get thinking about the piece of 
equipment I was working on, and I realized that this was probably a 
special ionization chamber or something of that nature. So I came back 
to the lab and Otto was at the desk, and he was working on some things 
and I was sitting over where I had all my equipment. I was looking at 
him and I was thinking, “Well, this is a pretty famous guy, and I was 
trying to put two and two together, and finally he turned around and 


108 Chapter Four 


he said to me, “What are you looking at?” And I said, “You.” He said, 
“Why are you looking at me?” I said, “I just found out who you are.” 
And he said, “So, now get back to work.” I said, “Well, I think I even 
know what we’re trying to do.” And he said, “Oh? Then you’d better 
realize you'd better get back to work.” 


Wechsler concluded, “The more I got into it, the more I realized why nobody 
was saying anything. So I just didn’t discuss it anymore at all.”** 

Access to information, then, stratified the laboratory. According to Wech- 
sler, “it was clear that there were many areas that were being addressed and 
that there was some hierarchy up there who had figured how all this fit to- 
gether.” Butat the level of the SED technician, “you sure weren’t going to find 
anything much of that.” Alongside formal channels of information flow, how- 
ever, there existed a range of informal channels. According to SED Charles 
Bagley, “there was a lot of talk that went on in the barracks.” McAllister 
Hull had friends working in the Theoretical Division, from whom he gained 
information about broader aspects of the project. “But,” he said, “officially 
I didn’t know a lot of these things that I in fact knew quite well.”*? 


THE GOOD HOST 


The Colloquium symbolized an informal, face-to-face, and collegial social 
order in the Los Alamos Laboratory, in continuity with the norms of the 
university. According to David Hawkins, attending was a “relief from the hard 
work, and it was for your general education, often dealing with subjects quite 
unrelated even to physics.” For example, John von Neumann gave a lecture 
on the mathematical theory of games. To Hawkins, the Colloquium’s value 
lay in helping to maintain an academic atmosphere.*’ Equally importantly, 
in the context of an expanding and internally divisionalized organization, the 
Colloquium served to make visible the laboratory and the program as a whole, 
to represent tangibly the social and epistemic coherence of the laboratory. 
The lab, represented abstractly on paper in organizational charts, was given 
corporeality in the gathering together of its scientific personnel in one hall. 
The Colloquium was a means of disseminating information, but it was 
also recognized as being more than that. It was suggested at a meeting of the 
Governing Board in late May 1943 that the Colloquium be used to re-instill 
“habits of work” after the interruption involved in constructing buildings and 
setting up equipment. Oppenheimer said that the Colloquium contributed 
°g (4 


to the laboratory’s “effectiveness, morale and security.” Bacher, head of the 


King of the Hill 109 


Experimental Physics Division, told the Governing Board that the “most 
important value of the colloquia” was “integration.” In general, issues of 
epistemic integration and information flow were often discursively framed in 
terms of “morale.” Philip Morrison argued that the Colloquium “unified” the 
scientific workforce and “made us all feel more responsible for the whole out- 
come.” According to Bethe, the most important benefit was that “everybody 
in the laboratory felt a part of the whole and felt that he should contribute to 
the success of the program.” Victor Weisskopf later praised the Coordinating 
Council in similar terms: it was a “very open council. Problems were really 
openly discussed and you had the feeling that you knew what was really going 
on.” He qualified this thought by adding, “You hadn’t, I actually think”; the 
sense of overview provided by the meetings was more illusion than reality. “But 
the point is you had the feeling and that was of such importance.” This feeling 
perhaps arose because “you had an opportunity to protest and tell your opin- 
ion and that contributed very much to the morale of the place.” All of this he 
attributed to Oppenheimer, who “as the chairman did that extremely well.”?! 

The integrating effects of the Colloquium and other meetings were asso- 
ciated with Oppenheimer personally. It was he who usually presided at the 
colloquia and made the introductory remarks. Above all, he was credited 
by the scientists with establishing the Colloquium and with defending the 
values associated with it. This was despite the fact that the Governing Board 
minutes from the October 28, 1943, meeting reveal Teller to have been the 
more adamant defender of freedom of discussion. Weisskopf ascribed the 
Colloquium and its integrating effects to Oppenheimer personally: “Oppen- 
heimer insisted on having these regular colloquia against the opposition of 
the security-minded people, who wanted each man only to know his part of 
the work. He knew that each one must know the whole thing if he was to be 
creative.” Hawkins said: 


The battle that Oppenheimer had with Groves [was because] Groves’s 
pattern with regard to military security was the well-known formula for 
“need to know.” Youre not told anything unless you need to know it. 
But of course that means that the need is available, is defined. And in 
research the need to know is not defined. So Oppenheimer said, Look, I 
cannot run a laboratory unless there is complete openness among all the 
parts of the laboratory. Everybody who will be considered a scientific 
staff member will have full access to all information, and Groves was 
horrified by this .. . but finally he had great respect for Oppenheimer. 


He knew that his whole future depended on Oppenheimer.*? 


110 Chapter Four 


Oppenheimer’s individual role was emphasized also by Bethe, who wrote, 
“Oppenheimer had to fight hard for free discussion among all qualified mem- 
bers of the laboratory. But the free flow of information and discussion, together 
with Oppenheimer’s personality, kept morale at its highest throughout the 
war.” Luis Alvarez insisted that “the laboratory’s fantastic morale could be 
traced directly to the personal quality of Oppenheimer’s guidance.” Rudolf 
Peierls also credited the comparative openness of discussion at Los Alamos, 
and the laboratory’s consequent morale, to Oppenheimer personally: “Inside 
the laboratory he was able to maintain the completely free exchange of in- 
formation between its scientific members.”°? Donald Hirsch, an SED who 
arrived the day of Trinity—the first atomic bomb test—was told at a brief- 
ing the following day that the laboratory was working on atomic weapons. 
“Oppenheimer’s orientation meeting,” he said, “startled us with his openness 
and we discovered later that was the hallmark of the way Oppenheimer ran 
the Hill. It was not a military establishment, in no way.” Such openness was 
regarded as essential not only for morale but also—in direct contradiction to 
Groves’s view—for efficiency. Morrison estimated that if there had been strict 
compartmentalization, the project “would have taken another six months ... 
because everybody [would have had] to pass the blueprints back and forth,” 
and because of the constraints that compartmentalization would necessarily 
have imposed on initiative in the lower levels of the organization.°4 

At Los Alamos, Oppenheimer became the personal embodiment of the 
virtues ofacademic-scientific forms of organization, as opposed to military reg- 
imentation. Hawkins remembered a Coordinating Council meeting at which 
the Army’s security officer, Captain Peer de Silva, complained about the lack 
of respect shown to him by a young SED who had sat on the edge of de Silva’s 
desk. Oppenheimer replied, “In this laboratory anybody can sit on anybody 
else’s desk.” De Silva, Hawkins said, “was slammed.” Oppenheimer was as 
good as his word; one young scientist found that “his office was always open 
and each of us could walk in, sit on his desk, and tell him how we thought that 
something could be improved.” This instantiated what Hawkins called the 
“spirit of the laboratory,” the principle that “anybody in the lab whois involved 
in serious work may have an idea that’s useful. It’s a democratic principle.” In 
this way, for Hawkins and many other participants, Los Alamos epitomized 
“the democracy of science.” Even one of the scientists who was later most 
critical of Oppenheimer, Harold Agnew, said, “Here everybody was equal. 
There was no question about it. There were no special privileges for anybody. 
That was a tribute to Oppie who understood that’s the way it worked ... To 
me it was just a wonderful place, wonderful experience.” In a situation of 


King of the Hill, 111 


competing and conflicting norms, Oppenheimer gave voice to, and signaled 
in more subtle ways, a definition of the situation that made it legitimate to act 
in ways contrary to militaristic or bureaucratic codes of behavior. 

In addition to being credited with institutional reforms, Oppenheimer was 
viewed as himself embodying—instantiating in his character and displaying 
in his person—these same values and functions. Over and over, Los Alamos 
scientists drew attention to how Oppenheimer in effect “knew it all.” He was 
the one person at Los Alamos, it was repeatedly said, with the intellectual 
range and ability to possess an overview of the scientific work. Bethe recalled 
that Oppenheimer “knew and understood everything that went on in the 
laboratory, whether it was chemistry or theoretical physics or machine shop. 
He could keep itallin his head and coordinateit . . . There was just nobody else 
in that laboratory who came even close to him” in knowledge. Oppenheimer’s 
breadth ofknowledge and understanding ofthe project, Bethe said, were “clear 
to all of us, whenever he spoke.” And as the laboratory’s formal organization 
and technical program became increasingly complex, it was a relief to know 
that Oppenheimer “had it well organized in his head.” According to Peierls, 
“his quick perception enabled him to remain in touch with all phases of the 
work.” He could walk into a technical discussion in an area about which he 
might be presumed ignorant and make a decisive intervention—if not because 
of his factual or theoretical knowledge, then because of his ability to cut to the 
heart of any kind of problem. It was said that Oppenheimer “once joined a 
metallurgy session during an inconclusive argument over the type of refractory 
container to be used for melting plutonium. Although this was hardly familiar 
ground to a theoretical physicist, after Oppenheimer had listened for a time, 
he summed up the discussion so clearly that the right answer, though he did 
not provide it, was immediately apparent.””° 

But other commentary on Oppenheimer’s intellectual scope and its inte- 
grating power is not so easy to understand in these terms, instead gesturing 
at the mental role of his physical presence. Weisskopf noted “some almost 
super ESP kind of connection” by virtue of which Oppenheimer managed 
to be on the spot when and where exciting developments were taking place. 
Stanislaw Ulam described one such occasion: “I saw Robert Oppenheimer 
running excitedly downa corridor holding a small vial in his hand, with Victor 
Weisskopf trailing after him. He was showing some mysterious drops of 
something at the bottom of the vial. Doors opened, people were summoned, 
whispered conversations ensued, there was great excitement. The first quan- 
tity of plutonium had just arrived at the lab.” Oppenheimer, said Weisskopf, 
“was intellectually and even physically present at each significant step; he 


112 Chapter Four 


was present in the laboratory or in the seminar room when a new effect was 
measured, when a new idea was conceived. It was not that he contributed 
so many ideas or suggestions; he did so sometimes, but his main influence 
came from his continuous and intense presence, which produced a sense 
of direct participation in all of us.”°” Weisskopf emphasized “how tremen- 
dously important it was for the morale at Los Alamos ... if you come to the 
final experiment and the director is there.” Oppenheimer “always went to 
the important discussions at seminars, in spite of his administrative load.”°% 
This was a display ofhuman concern and personal involvement. His presence 
made a difference, both intellectually and morally. 

Robert Wilson remarked on the intellectually transformative power of 
Oppenheimer’s physical presence: 


In his presence, I became more intelligent, more vocal, more intense, 
more prescient, more poetic myself. Although normally a slow reader, 
when he handed me a letter I would glance at it and hand it back prepared 
to discuss the nuances of it minutely. Now it is true, in retrospect, that 
there was a certain element of self-delusion in all that, and that once 
out of his presence the bright things that had been said were difficult to 
reconstruct or remember. Nor, as I left, could I quite decide what it was 
we had agreed to do. No matter, the tone had been established. I would 


know how to invent what it was that had to be done.°? 


Oppenheimer’s body, gestures, and physical presence were equally essential 
to the apparently effortless way in which he was able to assert authority over his 
colleagues and to direct the laboratory with a minimum of friction. According 
to Wigner, the scientists at Los Alamos “disliked being visibly directed. 
Oppenheimer understood that. He knew their strengths and weaknesses 
without asking and treated them with some sensitivity.” Wigner provided an 
example of this graceful exercise of authority: 


Oppenheimer. . .smokeda pipe and he gave some deft direction with his 
pipealone. When a subordinate reached him witha grievance or request, 
Oppenheimer received him with the pipe in his mouth. He listened 
carefully to the man, all the while making clear that his pipe also required 
some attention. In this way, Oppenheimer quietly sent his subordinates 
an important message: that a successful project understands the personal 
needs of its members but does not cater to them. He did all this very 


King of the Mill 113 


easily and naturally, with just his eyes, his two hands, and a half-lighted 
pipe. 


Oppenheimer’s capacity to weave together the manifold intellectual threads 
of the project was inseparable from his ability to bring moral cohesion to 
the scientific workforce. The English physicist James Tuck, in describing 
Oppenheimer as a “great gentleman,” pointed to his ability to “sit above 
the warring groups and unify them.” According to Peierls, “he guided the 
discussions ... in the same spirit of a cooperative search for the answer in 
which he had guided discussions with his students.” Now, however, the 
“students” included Nobel Prize winners. It was therefore important that this 
guidance be experienced not as domination, but as facilitation. In Bethe’s 
words, “he never dictated what should be done. He brought out the best in 
all of us, like a good host with his guests.”!0! 

Peierls recalled that Oppenheimer “managed to deal with people in a man- 
ner which made them feel that they were respected, and gave them the con- 
fidence that their views and their needs were taken into account.” Above all, 
he “was able to delegate responsibility and to make people feel that they were 
being trusted.” A. L. Hughes, the assistant director of Los Alamos, said, “We 
trusted him. He was completely honest.” Oppenheimer’s “remarkable capac- 
ity for seeing the other point of view” allowed him to identify and overcome 
people’s doubts and worries. The head of metallurgical work at Los Alamos, 
Cyril Smith, recalled that when he was faced with a difficult scientific dispute 
with a colleague, an informal, five-minute discussion with Oppenheimer was 
all that was required to give “the necessary perspective” so that he “knew 
exactly what to do.” Teller was impressed by Oppenheimer’s chairmanship 
of the 1942 summer conference in Berkeley on the theoretical physics of the 
atomic bomb, in which role Oppenheimer “showed a refined, sure, informal 
touch.” Oppenheimer was seen personally, and even physically, to catalyze the 
emergence ofa unity and coherence that already existed in potential. Hawkins 
recalled that if there was “an incipient disagreement” during a Governing 
Board meeting, “one would listen patiently to an argument beginning, and 
finally Oppenheimer would summarize, and he would do it in such a way that 
there was no disagreement.” “It was,” Hawkins said, “a kind of magical trick 
that brought respect from all those people, some of them his superiors in terms 
of their scientific record, brought them to acknowledge him as the boss ... 
So that’s why . . . there was never any disagreement that he was the leader of 


that enterprise.” 10? 


114 Chapter Four 


Oppenheimer was celebrated for knowing all the science of Los Alamos, 
but also all the scientists—and not just the scientists. “The indefatigable 
Oppie,” journalist Robert Jungk wrote, “knew not only all the scientists, but 
also most of the laborers by their first names.” One young SED wrote home 
to his parents after the bombing of Hiroshima, describing the “informality” of 
Los Alamos, which, he said, was “unparalleled in any other organization that 
I have seen.” For example, he told them, “several ttmes Dr. Oppenheimer has 
called me for something or other . . . and every time, when I would answer the 
phone with ‘Doty,’ the voice at the other end would say, ‘This is Oppy’.”! 

Oppenheimer set the tone, and the laboratory followed his example. This 
moral example was communicated, crucially, through his physical presence. 
“His porkpie hat,” wrote historian James Kunetka, “became emblematic” of 
his presence throughout the laboratory. He showed himself, and by doing 
so, he showed his concern and his integrative knowledge. His appearances 
all around Los Alamos were like a squire’s passage through his domain: a 
display of mastery over, as well as of belonging to, the place. “Each Sunday,” 
a group leader wrote, “he would ride his beautiful chestnut horse from the 
cavalry stable at the east side of the town to the mountain trails on the west 
side of town greeting each of the people he passed with a wave of his pork-pie 
hat and a friendly remark. He knew everyone who lived in Los Alamos, from 
the top scientists to the children of the Spanish-American janitors—they were 
all Oppenheimer’s family.” When the Oppenheimers’ daughter was born, the 
“whole town” came to give its blessing: “The sign ‘Oppenheimer’ was placed 
over baby Tony’s crib and people filed by in the corridor for days to view 
the boss’s baby girl.”!°* Oppenheimer was also celebrated for his concern 
over the lives of scientists’ spouses and families. Like a secular saint, he was 
celebrated for tending the sick and consoling the bereaved; he was said to 
be “a little aloof, but still a warm and comforting presence.” At the marriage 
of secretary Marge Hall to the young physicist Hugh Bradner, Oppenheimer 
took the role of the ““father’ who gave the bride away.”!”° Knowing everything 
about Los Alamos, then, meant knowing human and moral things as well as 
natural and technical things. The man who was supposed to be personally 
responsible for the integrative and morale-enhancing Colloquium was the 
same man who was supposed to know essentially everything about the lives 
of Los Alamos people—to know them as emotional and social beings as well 
as the bearers of scientific thought. 

However, underlying this appearance of integration were sharp demar- 
cations of status and privilege within the laboratory, and these distinctions 


King of the Hill 115 


were also constitutive of Oppenheimer’s authority and role. As previously 
discussed, the SEDs’ experience of the laboratory’s social and informational 
order was markedly different from that of the civilian scientific staff members. 
What Hawkins called the “democratic principle” of the Colloquium was only 
for the initiated. As McAllister Hull put it, “One of the things Oppie did was 
to insist on the seminars, to say we’ve got to do it this way, we’ve got to share, 
we can’t have this compartmentalization. But that’s just [at] the level that 
Oppie operated on. Now you get below that, where people are manufacturing 
things, building things, then it was ‘need to know.’”!°° The distinction be- 
tween openness and compartmentalization, then, mapped onto status-laden 
distinctions between thinkers and manufacturers, mental work and manual 
labor, knowledge and skill, science and engineering. Hawkins thought that a 
key value of the Colloquium lay in maintaining academic norms and remind- 
ing the staff, “We mustn’t forget that we are scientists, not just engineers.”!07 
These restrictions on who could attend the Colloquium also defined what the 
Colloquium represented. 

By being excluded from the Colloquium, the SEDs were rendered in- 
stitutionally invisible (as they have been made historically invisible in most 
published accounts of Los Alamos).!°° To the extent that the laboratory social 
order came to be defined, for the senior scientists, by the Colloquium, it was 
defined by a setting from which the SEDs were absent. Their absence and 
invisibility were essential to the self-reflexive mythos of Los Alamos at the 
time: that it was a social order continuous with the university. Arguably, the 
SEDs were the hybrid scientist-engineers that Bacher had predicted would 
be essential to the success of the project, and they were particularly important 
in the implosion work. But they also represented the model of the “scientist 
in uniform” that Rabi, Bacher, and others had insisted would be unworkable. 
Although the SEDs were essential, their presence threatened to muddy the 
civilian-academic definition of the situation mapped out by Los Alamos’s 
scientific elite and associated with Oppenheimer’s personal charisma. As the 
Colloquium came to symbolize the moral order of the laboratory, the exclu- 
sion of the SEDs allowed the lab to be conceived as scientific rather than 
engineering-focused, academic rather than industrial, civilian rather than mil- 
itary, and a small, face-to-face community rather than a large, impersonal orga- 
nization. In other words, this exclusion fed into the symbolic accomplishment 
of all those features of Los Alamos’s moral order with which Oppenheimer’s 
charismatic authority was associated. The invisible labor of the SEDs and 
other hidden workers (such as the female “computers” who carried out highly 


116 Chapter Four 


ye? 


routinized implosion calculations)""~ was the social substructure supporting 


Los Alamos’s “democracy of science” and Oppenheimer’s charismatic role. 


RITES OF PASSAGE 


Oppenheimer’s Los Alamos persona was constructed in counterpoint to that 
of Groves. This was particularly clear in the contrast between the meanings 
attached to the physical presence of each man in the laboratory. Whereas 
Oppenheimer’s tours of the lab were regarded as integrative, Groves’s in- 
spections, on his frequent visits to the site, were experienced as disciplinary 
control.'!° They were also taken as opportunities to playfully test Groves’s 
authority, as scientific personnel attempted to catch the general out and, if 
possible, subject him to ridicule. Physicist Charles Critchfield recalled an 
incident when Groves toured the chemistry labs at Los Alamos. The head of 
chemistry, Joe Kennedy, asked the general whether he would like to see the 
bomb’s initiator. Groves replied, “Of course.” Kennedy knew that the little 
black ball in the cardboard box was loaded with fifty curies of polonium and 
was hot enough to burn one’s fingers if touched. Mischievously, he asked 
Groves if he would like to pick it up. Groves replied, ““It’s probably hot isn’t 
it?’ and so he certainly wasn’t that stupid, but .. . Joe didn’t like him.” SEDs 
and WACs also found Groves’s visits an opportunity to comically test and 
challenge his authority. Bagley recounted one such occasion, when Groves 
inspected the cluttered SED barracks: “The aisles were narrow because we 
were double-decked on both sides and there was just enough room to walk 
through, and we had barracks bags hanging over the ends of the bunks ... 
Because General Groves was going to pay a visit, ... we had to have every- 
thing neat. So we loaded down the barracks bags and we hung them up with 
everything we could think of, and they stuck out in the aisle ... Groves was 
corpulent, to say the least. He couldn’t get through. He had to turn side- 
ways and wiggle through the barracks bags, down the aisle.” The young men 
delighted in having created this “barricade.”!"! 

Groves was uncomfortable as a public speaker. Even while expressing his 
admiration for the general, Agnew admitted, “I’ve never heard Groves speak 
[publicly] except at the end of the war, we got an E Award ... and he gave 
a little introductory speech and that was all, he probably read it. But he had 
no pizzazz.” WAC Eleanor Roensch said that “sometimes General Groves—I 
didn’t like General Groves—he required that all of us be marched out. We 
would march out and go to Theater Number 2 this one time, to listen to some 
important speech that he wanted to give us and when we got there we were all 


King of the Hill 117 


crammed into this Theater. There were so many ofus and we had to stand and 
we waited and waited and waited and finally General Groves appeared and 
he made some speech, something like be sure to write home to your folks.” 
Bagley remembered the same incident: “One time he gave us a pep talk, and 
I guess he looked at the military manual. Now he was talking to a bunch of 
people that [for the] most part were graduates or a couple of years, anyway, 
into college. He said, ‘I want you fellows to write home to your parents. This 
is the time of the year, now don’t forget to write home to your parents.’ Now 
that got to be a big joke around there.” On another occasion, Groves told an 
assembly of SEDs that he had “tried to hire civilians first. He said, we looked 
around and we found out that there weren’t that many civilians, so we went 
to the Army Specialized Training [Program] and we scraped the bottom of 
the barrel and we got you guys. I’d say, what a stupid man to say that to a 
bunch of guys. We always referred to ourselves as the scrapings of the bottom 
of the barrel.” Bagley added, “In my opinion of him, he did not consider the 
enlisted man a worthy person, just from such foolish things like that.”!!? 
The image of Groves as clumsy, uncomfortable, and occasionally crass 
was accentuated at Los Alamos by the contrast with Oppenheimer’s displays 
of sophistication and self-assurance. Agnew said, “Groves didn’t have this 
panache, this pizzazz, the porkpie hat ... and a lot of money. And all of that 
went together and Oppie was the darling.” Agnew also pointed out that 
“Groves physically was a little rumpled looking. He spent the whole three 
or four years I would say riding on trains, so he looked a little disheveled at 
times.” The disparity was particularly apparent when the director and the 
general toured the laboratory together. Hull recalled a revealing incident: 


Just about the time I’d gotten the techniques down pretty well, Oppen- 
heimer comes up with Groves. Now Oppie always thought he knew 
everything about anything in the lab that was going on, and mostly 
he did. But what that meant was that if he came into your lab, as he 
did in mine with Groves, he didn’t ask me to explain what was going 
on. He proceeded to explain what was going on. So I stood back and 
folded my arms, and Oppie and Groves stood over one of these big 
bowls ... and of course there were three rubber tubes with hot water 
going into the casing. So, Oppenheimer is talking here and Groves is 
standing here, and Groves stands on the hottest [tube]. It pops off from 
the wall, and a stream of water just below boiling point shoots across 
the room. And if you’ve ever seen a picture of Groves, you know what it 
hit. And I contained myself from laughing, because I valued my stripes. 


118 Chapter Four 


And Oppenheimer looked over and said, “Well, just goes to show the 
incompressibility of water.” And at that point I broke up. Groves was 


so embarrassed he didn’t look around, so I retained my stripes.''? 


This anecdote suggests not only the laboratory workforce’s perception of 
Groves, but also the ways in which Oppenheimer, as he escorted Groves 
around the lab, performed his intellectual and social mastery of the site. 
While Groves may have been the object of humor here, the solidarity between 
Oppenheimer and his workforce—which the anecdote also suggests—was 
ultimately to Groves’s advantage. 

Groves later said, “One of the big complaints made about me after the 
War was that scientists didn’t like me. I think the answer to that is: who 
cares whether they liked you or not? That wasn’t the objective; it was to 
have things running well.” Groves’s view was expressed in the November 
1946 report “Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” which stated that 
“frictions which developed between the scientific and military personnel” 
were in fact useful to the development of the project, since they generated 
cohesion among the scientific workers at Los Alamos: 


The success of the project as a whole was in a measure because of these 
difficulties rather than despite them. The scientists and technicians who 
came to the project, inexperienced as they were in large and complex 
undertakings, inexperienced in cooperating, under pressure, with large 
and varied groups, had of necessity to collaborate not only with the 
military but also with their own numerous and diversified members: 
physicists, chemists, metallurgists, engineers, etc. Their task, and the 
time-schedule which was imposed on it, made this collaboration im- 
perative. There seems to be no doubt, in retrospect, that the common 
attitude of opposition and objection to the military, on the part of sci- 
entists and technicians, drew all groups of the latter closer together 
and tended to fuse them into a far more cooperative whole than might 


otherwise have been possible.'!* 


Rather than being in opposition to each other, Oppenheimer’s and Groves’s 
leadership roles were functionally complementary. In contrast with Oppen- 
heimer’s harmonizing style, Groves’s leadership consisted of more coercive 
managerial power. Los Alamos scientists observed that Groves was used to 
getting his way by intimidating his subordinates into a state of blind obedience. 


King of the Hill 119 


The apparent absence of coercion in Oppenheimer’s leadership was made 
possible by Groves’s assumption of this more severe role. As physicist Rae- 
mer Schreiber put it, Groves was the “fall-guy” for anything the Los Alamos 
residents and scientists were not allowed to do. After all, he said, “you’ve got 
to have somebody to be mad at.”'!® 

The notion that Oppenheimer’s authority was opposed to the general’s 
was, therefore, largely an illusion. Groves had just as much of an interest in 
supporting Oppenheimer’s personal role as did the scientists, because their 
allegiance to Oppenheimer functioned to accommodate them to bomb work 
and ultimately to the general’s own authority. Oppenheimer was, after all, 
Groves’s handpicked lieutenant, and it was Groves who was always firmly 
in charge. As they supported and celebrated Oppenheimer’s charismatic 
role, the scientists were both making and seducing themselves into the new 
technoscientific culture of nuclear weapons. This seduction depended on the 
accommodation between values of scientific freedom and collegiality and the 
more coercive structures of large-scale military-industrial organization. 


AUTHORITY AND COLLEGIALITY 


A fundamental tension at Los Alamos was the one between the collegial equal- 
ity of its senior scientists and the mission-directed and hierarchical structure 
of laboratory organization. For example, the decision regarding who was to 
lead the Theoretical Division could not be made solely on the basis of scientific 
reputation. With a workforce in this division consisting of men such as Hans 
Bethe, Edward Teller, Victor Weisskopf, and Rudolf Peierls—among many 
others at the top of the field—the imposition of vertical lines of authority, with 
section leaders reporting to group leaders who reported to a division leader, 
was likely to strain relations among scientific equals. 

The most important example of strain arising from the hierarchical and 
mission-directed organization of the laboratory concerned the place of Ed- 
ward Teller in the Theoretical Division, which was headed by Bethe. Teller 
was a personality who did not fit easily into the structure of the laboratory. 
Marjorie Ulam recalled that she learned early on that “Teller seemed to be 
the enfant terrible and had violent disagreements with Oppenheimer.” In 
Serber’s opinion, Teller was “a disaster to any organization.” Throughout 
his career, Teller reveled in that sort of judgment and portrayed himself as 
deeply uncomfortable in large-scale technocratic organizations (though not 
uncomfortable about nuclear weapons work in itself). “Before I participated 


120 Chapter Four 


in the Manhattan Project,” he said, “I was anything but an organization man.” 
Rather, “I worked on subjects that I liked because I liked them. I did not work 
on anything for the purpose, let us say, of my career . . . I was not and did not 
desire to become part of an organization.” However, “one cannot work on 
something like atomic energy without becoming part of an organization.”!° 
Until he left for Chicago on February 1, 1946, Teller would sometimes vent 
his frustration at Los Alamos life to his friend and colleague Maria Mayer, a 
physicist who was working on the Manhattan Project at Columbia University. 
To Teller, Los Alamos was a “physicist-reservation,” and he joked, “Don’t 
shoot them except in season.”!!7 He chafed at the enforced conviviality of 
life at Los Alamos and the requirements of collaborative work in the formal 
organizational structure of the laboratory. In one letter, he quipped to Mayer 
that he was being “virtuous”: “With getting up early, being not later for 
appointments than expected and being, I hope, on the whole a good boy.”!"8 
Teller regarded himself as temperamentally unsuited to the emotional 
requirements of Los Alamos’s style of large-scale collaborative work. In his 
letters to Mayer, he often made reference to his efforts to maintain the emotional 
self-control necessary to fit into the social structure of the laboratory: “So far 
I kept alive successfully. Yesterday I passed up one of the best opportunities 
to get mad. Now I am duly proud of it.”'!® Teller apparently found the close- 
knit, small-town atmosphere of Los Alamos to be oppressive: “In this place 
it is a real blessing to be, for a short time, devoid of company. You know 
how dense the population is in this part of the country.”'*° For many of Los 
Alamos’s scientists, the communal life and the availability of outdoor activities 
were a compensation for the restrictions of life there. Skung and hiking, as 
well as an interest in the “Land of Enchantment” mystique of New Mexico, 
were important aspects of a developing community identity at Los Alamos. 
Teller, however, was scornful of such interests and activities. He was thankful 
for the coming of spring, when “the snow is relegated to the place to which 
it belongs, namely to the scenery.” He was also less than impressed with the 
Native American culture, which many of the other scientists romanticized. 
When his wife, Mici, dragged him along to watch an “indian dance,” he found 


”121 After a particularly 


it “picturesque and just as dull as I expected it to be. 
heavy snow in 1945, Teller wrote that Mici had joined a group on a skiing 
expedition: “Only those are left behind who don’t ski and therefore don’t 
count.” But “it is almost allways [sic] true that I do not mind to be left 
alone.”!”? Teller perceived himself to be a marginal individual at Los Alamos, 


and he cultivated the self-image and role of the individualist opposed to the 


King of the Hill 121 


pressures of organization and to the compromise, self-control, and conviviality 
that it required. 

Teller’s discontent was focused on his place within the organization. He re- 
sented working under Bethe in the Theoretical Division, and he also resented 
the burden of what he felt were mundane and routine calculations, which 
he was required to carry out for the theory of the implosion. He objected in 
general to being on an intermediate rung in the hierarchy of a mission-directed 
laboratory. In his opinion, Bethe “overorganized” the division. “It was much 
too much of a military organization,” he said, referring to it also as “a line 
organization.” According to Bethe, as soon as the laboratory structure was set 
up, “Edward essentially went on strike ... He continued to work, but from 
then on he seemed rather disinterested in working on the direct business of 
the laboratory.” He was dissatisfied with his place in the hierarchy; Bethe 
said, “I believe maybe he resented my being placed on top of him.” Teller also 
took umbrage when Bethe appointed Weisskopf to be deputy division leader. 
According to Weisskopf, “Edward maintained that he was the better physicist 
and should have been given the job. I didn’t try to deny the allegation but 
pointed out to him that Hans probably had chosen me because I was better 
in dealing with people.”'** In general, Teller’s situation in the Theoretical 
Division instantiated the problem of vertical organization of scientists whose 
professional reputations were essentially equal. According to his biographers, 
“at Los Alamos Teller was officially only a scientist with a third-rank authority, 
but the chances are that in his own mind—even if only subconsciously—he 
saw himself as the director’s equal.”!** 

In particular, Teller was upset that his brainchild—the hydrogen bomb, 
or superbomb—was not included in the laboratory’s mission. In his work 
in the Theoretical Division, he was told to focus on implosion and that the 
“Super” would have to wait. The Super had been the focus of discussion 
during the 1942 summer theory conference at Berkeley. The idea of using 
a fission bomb to set off a fusion reaction in deuterium had captivated the 
participants at the conference, including Bethe and Oppenheimer. But when it 
came to organizing the program at Los Alamos, the Super was relegated to the 
back burner. Teller felt strongly, and in a personal way, the contrast between 
the character of discussion at Berkeley and the more controlled atmosphere 
of Los Alamos. According to Bethe, “in Berkeley it was very much the style 
that Teller and Oppenheimer liked, namely, that we talked constantly to each 
other. And this had to come to an end. We had to sit down in our offices and 
actually work something out, and this was against his style.” The pressure 


122 Chapter Four 


of time, which lay powerfully behind the mission-directed and hierarchical 
nature of the laboratory, was particularly symbolic to Teller of the general 
constraint that he felt in his work. Bethe said, “He resented particularly that I 
was no longer available very much for discussions. I remember one occasion 
when I was terribly busy, and he came in to discuss some problem which 
sounded to me rather far away from our main problems, and so after an hour 
or so I looked rather conspicuously at my watch, which was one of those 
dollar watches you haul out of your pocket, and he didn’t like it at all.”!”° 

To some extent, Teller projected these generalized feelings of discontent 
at Los Alamos onto the figure of its scientific director. But this discontent 
coexisted, it seems, with a continued and genuine appreciation for Oppen- 
heimer. Teller focused his sense of anger and frustration much more strongly 
on men suchas Bethe, who were Oppenheimer’s deputies but above Teller in 
the laboratory hierarchy. Teller had long “liked and respected Oppenheimer 
enormously. He kept wanting to bring up his name in conversation.” Bethe 
thought the two men were in many respects “fundamentally . . . very similar.” 
Teller’s frustration at Los Alamos did, however, strongly color his attitude 
toward its director. What others regarded as Oppenheimer’s sprezzatura—his 
effortless superiority, his ability to “lead without seeming to”—to Teller ap- 
peared to be just a more insidious form of control. According to Teller, none 
of the other sites of the Manhattan Project that he visited, including Columbia, 
Chicago, and Oak Ridge, “were run as systematically, with as much direction 
or with as much psychological finesse as Los Alamos, and this, to me, was 
deeply repulsive.” Oppenheimer, in Teller’s view, was a “politician” who was 
charming to anyone, so long as they could be of use to him.'*° 

When physicist Felix Bloch, who also suffered under the rigidity of the 
organization, resigned from the project, Teller wanted to drive him to the 
train station at Lamy. That same night, Oppenheimer invited Teller to one of 
his parties, something he had never done before. In Teller’s view, the reason 
behind the invitation was that “Oppenheimer did not want me exposed to 
the evil influence of a deserter ... I may be unjust, but the whole thing just 
looked like too much of a coincidence. He used friendships, he exploited 
friendships. Granted, he did not want me to leave Los Alamos, but obviously he 
manipulated people.”!*” Rather than miss the party entirely, Teller dropped 
off Bloch and went to the party late. 

Personal access to Oppenheimer and to the close circle around him was 
necessary for power and status in the project, and Teller did not wish to forgo 
that. His sense of being marginal and disempowered in his position in the 
organization was closely bound up with the feeling of being distanced from 


King of the Hill 123 


Oppenheimer. Teller, according to Bethe, “resented even more that he was 
removed from Oppenheimer. He had come to like discussions with Oppie 
very much, but Oppie was terribly busy. In the end an arrangement was made 
that Teller would see Oppenheimer once a week, for one predetermined 
hour—I think from ten to eleven on Monday morning or some such thing, 
and so that was that.”!8 

Perhaps most revealing was Teller’s reaction when, in June 1945, his old 
friend Leo Szilard sent him a copy of the petition drawn up by Chicago 
scientists against use of the bomb. Against Szilard’s wishes, Teller went to 
Oppenheimer to ask his permission to circulate the petition. Oppenheimer 
dissuaded him from doing so, and Teller, without mentioning his conversation 
with Oppenheimer, wrote to Szilard telling his friend that he disagreed with 
him on this issue. !*° Teller later regretted allowing himself to be so influenced 
by Oppenheimer: “Oppenheimer persuaded me at least not to take action 
at that time and I’m sorry, I was wrong. He should not have. I should not 
have. But I did.”!°° Nevertheless, if Teller was indeed so influenced, this 
does suggest a degree of admiration and respect for Oppenheimer that at least 
coexisted in an ambivalent way with any more negative feelings. 

In general, the Los Alamos scientists did not directly associate Oppen- 
heimer’s leadership with the more coercive aspects of the laboratory’s or- 
ganization. His perceived ability to direct on the basis of consensus rather 
than coercion was supported by his institutional separation from instrumental 
functions. The enforcement of schedules and policy decisions was delegated 
to division leaders such as Bethe, Kistiakowsky, Parsons, and Bacher, who 
acted as his deputies. When the laboratory was put on an extremely tight 
schedule in the final months of the project, the supervision and enforcement 
of the schedule was carried out by a “Cowpuncher Committee,” chaired by 
physicist Sam Allison. Bacher also served on this committee; he took charge 
of a range of instrumental functions for Oppenheimer, and sometimes it was 
Bacher, rather than Oppenheimer, who conveniently took the blame for un- 
popular decisions. Teller, a year and a half after the end of the war, wrote to 
Mayer of his thoughts regarding Bacher, who had recently been appointed to 
the Atomic Energy Commission. Teller admitted that he “never particularly 
liked” the man, who was “at best a third-rate physicist” and essentially a ca- 
reerist and opportunist, “a great master of how-not-to-stick-your-neck-out.” 
Teller described Bacher as “a normal human being of the genus ‘manager’” 
andas “a great administrator. He loves organization charts and he loves reports 
in proper shape and he is completely devoted to priorities.” Teller added, 


“To Oppy he was the ideal yes-man.”!?1 


124 Chapter Four 


Ultimately, the differentiated structure of the organization allowed a resolu- 
tion of the superbomb issue—if only for the duration of the war—and a way out 
of the stalemate in relations between Teller and Bethe. In June 1944, Teller and 
his group were removed from the Theoretical Division and given independent 
status, reporting directly to Oppenheimer. The restructuring of the laboratory 
later that summer, in response to the new emphasis on implosion, provided 
an opportunity for a more permanent resolution of Teller’s position. He and 
his group were allowed to work on the superbomb in the new F-Division, led 
by Enrico Fermi, with whom Teller had a good rapport. F-Division was a 
collection of groups that were carrying out research deemed unlikely to have a 
payoff before the end of the war, and they were therefore left outside the main 
thrust of the laboratory. This allowed Teller and his small band of superbomb 
enthusiasts to avoid the strict mission control and discipline to which most of 
the laboratory was subjected in the final “weaponeering” stages of the project. 
This separation freed Teller to work on the Super; however, it also decisively 
defined this work as outside the central mission of the lab and as something 


for postwar rather than wartime development.!*? 


FIRST AMONG EQUALS 


Oppenheimer’s leadership at Los Alamos was defined by the social structures 
in which it was embedded. The association of his leadership with consensus 
rather than coercion was substantially a product of the assumption of coercive 
roles by Groves and by Oppenheimer’s scientific deputies, such as Bacher. It 
relied also on the combination of the laboratory’s differentiated structure with 
practically unlimited material resources. This combination enabled avoidance 
of conflicts among senior scientists, as in the case of Teller’s removal to F- 
Division. It allowed the reconciliation, to a degree, of the laboratory’s vertical 
hierarchy with collegial equality among the lab’s scientific elite. When Oppen- 
heimer took up his position at Los Alamos, his reputational authority within 
the scientific community was not sufficiently great to give his decisions and 
opinions automatic authority above those of his scientific colleagues. This was 
precisely the initial worry of Bush and Conant: that because Oppenheimer did 
not have a Nobel Prize to provide authority above the men he was to direct, 
his leadership would not be adequate to move the project along. At the outset 
of the project, Oppenheimer was very far from being a natural leader of the 
scientists. Yet it was precisely in terms of natural qualities of leadership that 
we find his role at Los Alamos described. One can make sense of this paradox, 


King of the Mill 125 


I suggest, by understanding how Oppenheimer’s leadership was shaped, 
enabled, and constrained. 

Oppenheimer was celebrated at Los Alamos for his ability to see the big 
picture: to synthesize the entire body of science involved in the project and, 
from this overall perspective, to bring order and cohesion to decision making 
and discourse. Famously, he could sum up opposing views in such a way 
that the argument would appear resolved—his “magical trick that brought 
respect” even from those who were “his superiors in terms of their scientific 
record.”!°? Although not set apart by a Nobel Prize, he was seen to be able 
to “rise above” the scientific flock, due to this combination of moral and 
intellectual qualities. His authority derived from an ability to speak for and 
bring to bear a consensus that was seen to already exist in potential. His 
synthetic knowledge, together with his perceived moral qualities, allowed 
him to reconcile conflicting parties and made him the “natural” spokesman 
for an underlying, though not yet realized, consensus. It was this underlying 
collegial consensus, for which he was believed to speak, that was the root and 
source of his authority; hence the close association between Oppenheimer’s 
leadership and organizational forms (such as the Colloquium) that expressed 
that collegial order. 

Oppenheimer was himself aware of this collective source of his authority 
and the limits that it entailed. In early September 1944, Parsons, the head of 
the Ordnance Division at Los Alamos, sent Oppenheimer a memorandum 
requesting far-reaching “executive” powers within the laboratory to direct 
work on mechanical, electrical, and explosives aspects of the design of the 
implosion bomb.'** This would have given Parsons an extraordinary position 
of power in relation to the leaders of the divisions working on implosion. But 
Oppenheimer denied that such power was his to bestow. 

In his reply to Parsons, Oppenheimer outlined his understanding of the 
structure of power and authority in the laboratory and the real limitations 
placed on his own power as director. He told Parsons, “The kind of authority 
which you appear to request from me is something that I cannot delegate 
to you because I do not possess it. I do not in fact, whatever protocol may 
suggest, have the authority to make decisions which are not understood 
and approved by the qualified scientists of the laboratory who must execute 
them.” If Oppenheimer was a master at reconciling disputes, it was because 
these were precisely the situations in which his authority to intervene was most 
legitimate and therefore effective. He qualified his comments on the limitations 
of his authority, saying, “I do not mean by this that in the case of a divided 


126 Chapter Four 


opinion it is not appropriate for you or for me to let our own views render 
the decision.” But this rendering of the decision, he suggested, was always 
with reference to some potential consensus: “I should not consider making a 
decision which was not supported by responsible and competent men in the 
laboratory.” Ultimately, he told Parsons, decisions had to be arrived at and 
justified through collegial discussion: 


You have pointed out that you are afraid that your position in the 
laboratory might make it necessary for you to engage in prolonged 
argument and discussion in order to obtain the agreement upon which 
the progress of work would depend. Nothing that I can put in writing 
can eliminate this necessity. All that I can say is that I will support 
decisions reached by you in consultation with the other members of the 
laboratory and that such support is in fact axiomatic and trivial as long 
as these decisions are reached after competent technical discussion and 
after the opinions of all vitally concerned have been given appropriate 
weight. I am not arguing that the laboratory should be so constituted. It 
is in fact so constituted. !%° 


Oppenheimer’s individual leadership was itself a collective accomplish- 
ment, a matter of interactional work by the members of the laboratory. Op- 
penheimer’s ability to direct without seeming to do so, to rely on consensus 
rather than coercion, was a product of the interactional support of his role and 
his authority by other powerful members of the lab. John Manley described 
the give-and-take on which Oppenheimer’s leadership relied: Oppenheimer 
“had no great reluctance about using people,” but “it was an enjoyable expe- 
rience because of the character of Robert to do it so adroitly. And I think that 
he ... realized that the other person knew that this was going on ... It was 
like a ballet . . . each one knowing the part and the role he’s playing, and there 
wasn’t any subterfuge in it.”!°° 

The collaborative nature of Oppenheimer’s leadership, however, implied 
constraints on his power. His charismatic authority relied upon a network 
of support from his colleagues. His authority was collectively produced and 
collectively constrained. As Oppenheimer mediated between the various in- 
terests engaged in the project—in particular between the military and the 
civilian scientists—his leadership was shaped by these interests. Personal 
access to Oppenheimer, and influence or control over him, became a key 
resource by which other actors sought to influence the project. Oppenheimer 


King of the Mill 127 


was thus a nodal point at the intersection of the networks of power in the 
Manhattan Project. 

The first atomic explosion took place in the desert at Alamogordo, New 
Mexico, on July 16, 1945. Months of preparation had gone into readying the 
equipment and the test site. General Groves urged that the test be completed 
in time for the news to be delivered to Truman at the Potsdam conference.!°” 
With such vast resources already committed to the project, and so much riding 
on the outcome of the test, Groves could not afford to allow for contingencies. 
It is an indicator of Oppenheimer’s significance in the project that in the 
hours leading up to the test, from one o’clock in the morning until about 
five o’clock, Groves was with Oppenheimer “constantly.” “Naturally he was 
nervous,” Groves wrote to the secretary of war two days later. “I devoted 
my entire attention to shielding him from the excited and generally faulty 
advice of his assistants who were more than disturbed by the unusual weather 
conditions.” Groves sequestered Oppenheimer from his advisers and, by 
restricting and controlling access to the director, cemented his own power in 
the local situation. Groves was in control of the test by being in control of 
Oppenheimer. “Every time the Director would be about to explode because 
of some untoward happening, General Groves would take him off and walk 
with him in the rain, counselling with him and reassuring him that everything 
would be all right.”'°8 

Here we see the volatility of charismatic authority, but we also see how 
Oppenheimer’s person and his personal authority were shaped and stabilized 
by the other actors engaged in the project. If Oppenheimer was the right man 
for the job, it was because people worked to make him that. Shaping him 
into the natural leader was a collective task and a collective accomplishment, 
one in which competing actors and groups in the project each had their 
own stake. Oppenheimer himself was the focus of struggle between these 
competing interests. He embodied not only the success of the project, but 
also its tensions and contradictions. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Against Time 


MOMENTUM 


Oppenheimer, we have seen, was credited with defending academic norms 
and values against military hierarchy and compartmentalization. The Collo- 
quium symbolized the triumph of scientific collegiality and free exchange of 
information over military restrictions, and the threat that the laboratory would 
be militarized once the project became large-scale never materialized. How- 
ever, there were tensions at Los Alamos other than this overt conflict between 
the military and the academic ways of life. The laboratory’s civilian scientific 
leadership was charged with producing a weapon, in time for use in the war. 
The character of life and work at Los Alamos changed as the project grew 
and as the laboratory’s program became increasingly synchronized and inte- 
grated with the industrial production of fissionable material and with military 
planning for combat delivery of the bomb. Habits that were appropriate for 
open-ended scientific inquiry gave way to a more disciplined, instrumental, 
and hierarchically directed focus on engineering problems. 

David Hawkins noted that the bomb project built up “an institutional 
momentum which . . . grew great enough to almost limit or even predetermine 
many later decisions.”! This momentum was expressed ina rigorous system of 
scheduling. Schedules formed a powerful underlying framework, structuring 
and disciplining the social life of the project. They allowed the coordina- 
tion and control of an increasingly vast and complex enterprise, spanning 
geographically dispersed production and research sites.” In the organization- 
ally and socially hybrid structure of the Manhattan Project, encompassing 


Against Time 129 


military, industrial, and academic forms of life, scheduling was a means of 
creating symmetry among different types of settings. Within sites, schedules 
bound the activities and regimes of individuals into a coordinated, collective 
task. They served as a powerful mechanism of social control that tied both 
the daily lives and the consciousness of the scientists to the overall goals of 
the institution. The regulation of time was a means by which the role of the 
scientist, within the new institutional framework of the bomb project, was 
constituted and defined. The domination of everyday life by the schedule 
served to narrow the scientists’ perspective to the merely instrumental atti- 
tude of accomplishing the “job at hand.” The pressure of time, expressed in 
the schedule, became a force against any moral examination or questioning of 
the project’s goal. 

Oppenheimer played a crucial role in easing the introduction of industrial 
modes of temporal organization into the laboratory. He helped to establish 
the legitimacy of the schedule and to habituate the Los Alamos scientists to 
this new form of discipline. It was an aspect of his leadership that he was 
able to seamlessly weave together academic norms of free inquiry with the 
military’s imperative to produce a bomb on time. He attached his personal 
authority to the schedule, thereby lending moral force to the discipline of the 
laboratory’s temporal regime. He also worked to suppress what few attempts 
there were to raise moral concerns about use of the bomb, and in so doing 
he kept the scientists focused on the instrumental problems of the weapon’s 
design and manufacture. Oppenheimer’s directorship of the laboratory was 
therefore bound up with key tensions between collegiality and bureaucracy, 
the university and the factory, science asa calling and scienceas an instrumental 
occupation, and soldierly duty and broader moral responsibility. 


THE ATOMIC FACTORY 


The Manhattan Project was an organizational network incorporating, in a 
web of contracts, numerous geographically dispersed sites: the plutontum- 
production factories at Hanford, Washington; uranium-isotope separation 
plants at Oak Ridge, Tennessee; and the atomic weapons laboratory at 
Los Alamos, as well as university laboratories at the University of Chicago, 
Columbia University, the University of California at Berkeley, and elsewhere. 
It was a hybrid network requiring coordination of the Army Corps of Engi- 
neers, naval ordnance facilities, the Army Air Forces, commercial-industrial 
conglomerates, and also academic sites—laboratories and universities.? Engi- 
neering the bomb meant engineering a complex social structure, combining 


130 Chapter Five 


these diverse organizations and directing them toward a well-defined instru- 
mental goal. It meant bringing together laboratory science with the organiza- 
tional techniques of American Taylorist and Fordist manufacture. The reach 
of the resulting network and infrastructure was suggested by Niels Bohr’s 
comment on the successful separation of uranium isotope: “You see, I told 
you it couldn’t be done without turning the entire country into a factory. They 
have done just that.” 

Managing such diverse organizational and human elements required the 
alignment of divergent practices and settings, in particular the reconciliation 
of large-scale engineering and industrial production with a scientific state of 
the art characterized by a very high degree of uncertainty in basic processes 
and techniques. This required deviation from the usually conservative and 
risk-averse engineering practices of firms such as DuPont. But it also meant the 
transformation of scientific practice. The previous chapter discussed how the 
compartmentalization of information was a means by which General Groves 
could discipline the scientists’ practices, rendering them compatible with 
military-industrial organization. The management of time was another means 
for accomplishing such a transformation and for imposing control over daily 
life in the laboratory. Deciding how working time was to be organized was a 
key element in establishing what kind of social order Los Alamos was to be. 

The organizational identity of Los Alamos, as we have seen, was confused 
and contested. Since this was a laboratory within a military post, life at Los 
Alamos was obviously quite different from university patterns. But Los Alamos 
scientists saw, or constructed, a degree of continuity with academic norms 
and practices. Stanislaw Ulam wrote of his early days at Los Alamos: “The 
atmosphere of work was extremely intense at that time and more characteristic 
of university seminars than technological or engineering laboratories by its 
informality and the exploratory and, one might say, abstract character of sci- 
entific discussions.” This informal, academic character was at odds with the 
sort of compartmentalized focus that Groves hoped to instill in his workers. 
Ulam found “a milieu reminiscent of a group of mathematicians discussing 
their abstract speculations rather than of engineers working on a well-defined 
practical project.” And this character of the work was expressed crucially 
through the organization of time. Ulam was impressed that “discussions were 
going on informally often until late at night.” For Ulam, informality was tied 
to a voluntaristic form of organization. Los Alamos, in his view, was unlike 
a technological and engineering laboratory because one did not clock in and 
out but stayed on to discuss a problem into the night, perhaps sleeping later 
the next day. An academic setting was characterized by the lack of a rigid 


Against Time 131 


distinction between working time and free time. The autonomy of the pro- 
fessional scientist was powerfully expressed by the flexibility of his working 
day—one regulated internally, by his dedication to the task, rather than exter- 
nally by a clock and a schedule. 

Flexibility in the organization of daily time was particularly significant for 
the GIs who, as members of the Special Engineer Detachment (SED), worked 
as scientists and technicians in the Los Alamos Technical Area. The workday 
of the Technical Area was not easily coordinated with that ofan Army post. As 
noted in the previous chapter, a certain esprit de corps also developed among 
the SEDs, due to the unusual license that they enjoyed within the Army. 
In particular, the voluntaristic spirit represented by this relatively unstruc- 
tured organization of daily time was important in their view of themselves as 
colleagues of the civilian scientists, albeit colleagues in uniform. 

A culture emphasizing self-motivation and seeing a problem through rather 
than working fixed hours permeated the laboratory. SED glassblower Arno 
Roensch recalled that if there was an urgent job, they would work in the shop 
into the night, and the SED commanders made allowances for this: “The 
lab was open day and night in those days. It was something, everyone felt so 
dedicated. There were no time limits .. . If you wanted to go back to work 
and work till one o’clock or two o’clock in the morning there was no problem. 
You just signed the out sheet in the orderly room and you could sleep in the 
morning.”° 

In the early stages of the project, considerable uncertainty surrounded 
scheduling. The Los Alamos scientists were frustrated at the difficulty of get- 
ting reliable scheduling information from the production sites. They blamed 
this on compartmentalization; and, as I suggested in the previous chapter, 
General Groves’s insistence that he be the main conveyor of scheduling infor- 
mation to Los Alamos was motivated by his desire to maintain personal control 
of the organization. But there was, in addition to this, a more straightforward 
reason for Los Alamos’s lack of clear scheduling information in the first year 
of the project. Groves explained that “this lack did not result so much from 
poor liaison as from the fact that during this period all schedules were vague, 
incomplete and contradictory. It was not only difficult but impossible to arrive 
at sensible schedules for bomb research and development, when we simply 
could not predict when the necessary U-235 or plutonium would be ready.”” 

This situation of uncertainty changed roughly midway through the Los 
Alamos program. As soon as it became possible to make reasonably reliable 
predictions about schedules for the production of fissionable materials coming 
from Oak Ridge and Hanford, the practices and routines of Los Alamos began 


132 Chapter Five 


to be coupled with those of the distant uranium and plutonium factories. This 
involved the “domination of research schedules by production schedules . . . 
Every month’s delay would have to be counted as a loss to the war.”8 

The linking of these schedules provided the technological momentum of 
the project. The first large shipment of uranium-235 from Oak Ridge arrived 
at Los Alamos in August 1944.” The Hanford plutonium pile became ready 
for the first time on September 26, 1944.'” This period was marked by a 
massive reorganization of the laboratory around the implosion method of 
bomb assembly and also by a large influx of SED manpower. The new sense 
of urgency led to increased regulation and greater routinization of life and work 
at Los Alamos. The laboratory’s Administrative Board (which succeeded the 
Governing Board in mid-1944) expressed concern at numerous times in this 
period that workers were not sufficiently dedicated to the task of building the 
bomb."! But there was considerable equivocation by the scientific leadership 
of Los Alamos between coercing and more subtly co-opting the appropriate 
orientation from the lab’s workforce. 

On August 17, 1944, Oppenheimer commented to the Administrative Board 
that “too much time was being spent in the PX [general store/café] by employ- 
ees.” Oppenheimer “felt that exhortation should be used before more forceful 
methods, in order to instill a feeling of responsibility in employees.” For ex- 
ample, he “wished to have time clocks installed only as a last resort.” In the 
meantime, he “requested that a letter be distributed to all employees drawing 
attention to the present laxness.”'” Oppenheimer regarded appeals to moral 
responsibility as preferable to the imposition of external regulation. But he 
was also keenly aware of the laboratory’s position within the broader nexus 
of the Manhattan Project, and of his own accountability to General Groves. 

The allegation of time-wasting was revived a month later when Colonel 
Elmer E. Kirkpatrick Jr., of the Corps of Engineers, reported to the Admin- 
istrative Board on his visit to Los Alamos. Kirkpatrick had had a long asso- 
ciation with Groves on Army construction projects, and Groves had brought 
him to the project that September as the Manhattan District’s deputy engi- 
neer. One of Kirkpatrick’s key duties, as Groves’s special representative, was 
making preparations to ensure the timely delivery of bomb components to 
the planned overseas operational base. Visiting Los Alamos soon after his 
appointment, Kirkpatrick commented prominently on his “strong feeling that 
a large part of the personnel were lacking in a sense of urgency, as evidenced 
by a laxness in working hours.” He emphasized that this applied both to the 
Technical Area and the post. Kirkpatrick’s comments were, it seems, taken 
extremely seriously, particularly because the “situation was recognized by the 


Against Time 133 


board as it had been discussed several times in the past.” Promptly after Kirk- 
patrick’s report, a siren was introduced at the lab. Starting Monday morning, 
October 2, 1944, the siren sounded at 7:25, 7:30, 8:25, and 8:30 a.m.; 12:00 
noon; and 12:55, 1:00, and 5:30 p.m.'” 

The siren was understood as belonging to an industrial mode of organiza- 
tion. Bernice Brode, a physicist’s wife, wrote of the scientists’ being “cooped 
up in a factory atmosphere where the whistle blew at 7 and 7:30 summoning 
them to the grind.”'4 According to Laura Fermi, despite the “impression of 
confusion,” in fact “our life there was more than orderly, it was overregulated.” 
She wrote, “Our daily schedule [was] adjusted to the sirens that announced 
beginning and termination of work.” But this compulsion by the siren was re- 
inforced by Oppenheimer’s embodied moral authority. His personal example 
played the key role of vouching for, and lending legitimacy to, the normative 
orientation toward time that was signaled in a mechanical way by the siren. 
Brode wrote, for example, “Even Oppie abandoned his former pattern of 
living. I remember the days when he would not accept a class before 11 in 
the morning so he could feel free to stay up late for parties, music, or ideas. 
But at Los Alamos, when the whistle blew at 7:30, Oppie would be on his 
way to T [Technical Area], and hardly any would beat him to it. When Sam 
Allison came to the site from Chicago, he shared Oppie’s office for some time. 
Sam said his one ambition was to be sitting at his desk when Oppie opened 
the door.” Groves was worried about Oppenheimer’s health collapsing from 
overwork. “But,” he said, “I never could slow him down in any way.”!? 

Although the siren signaled the end of the workday at 5:30 p.m., working 
hours varied across disciplines. An experimentalist might work on an experi- 
ment all night, but, as Robert Serber recalled, “a theorist had no excuses and 
it was eight to five, five days a week.” Many workers, however, both scientists 
and technicians, would stay late at the Technical Area. In general, the siren 
did not rigidly demarcate work time from leisure time or private time, a fact 
that was upsetting to many of the scientists’ wives. Ruth Marshak saw the 
Technical Area as “a great pit which swallowed our husbands out of sight, 
almost out of our lives ... They worked as they had never worked before. 
They worked at night and often came home at three or four in the morning. 
Sometimes, they set up Army cots in the laboratories and did not come home 
at all. Other times, they did not sleep at all .. . The loneliness and heartache 
of some scientists’ wives during the years before the atomic bomb was born 
were very real.”'® 

Marshak ascribed these long hours to “curiosity and zeal. . . [and] an inspir- 
ing patriotism.” Such motivations were cultivated by the wartime atmosphere 


134 Chapter Five 


and were reinforced by Oppenheimer’s charismatic example. Oppenheimer 
himself, said Los Alamos administrator Dana Mitchell, “gave you a sense of 
urgency and made you feel that what you did was important,” helping to 
foster the scientists’ very high degree of commitment to the institutional goals 
of the project. Historian Lillian Hoddeson noted that the scientists, though 
working on “this strongly mission-directed problem . . . experienced the joy 
of research and the sense that they were working on their own problem.” She 
posed, in passing, the question of “how it is possible for a large laboratory to 
create an environment in which many or most of its scientists can experience 
such a sense of free inquiry while in fact they are working directly in line with 
the mission.”!” One example of how this subjective sense of freedom could 
coexist institutionally with strict overall direction was the fact that the working 
day itself was only weakly regulated. Despite the overt regulation of the siren 
(which in any case, it appears, was generally taken to define only the minimum 
required working day), scientists would organize their workday as required 
to accomplish the task at hand. 

However, alongside this weak regulation of the day was a much stronger 
regulation of the overall temporal framework for the completion of tasks. In- 
creasingly, work at Los Alamos came to be governed by a system of schedules. 
These overarching schedules set the rapid tempo into which the Los Alamos 
scientists choreographed their individual and group work routines. 


IMPLOSION AND THE IMPERATIVES OF TIME AND SCALE 


The increasing routinization of scientific work at Los Alamos can be seen most 
clearly in the program to develop the implosion method of assembly. The im- 
plosion program began in spring 1943 as an organizationally isolated, low-key 
effort involving just a handful of scientists. By late 1944, it was the centerpiece 
of the laboratory’s mission. The laboratory’s leadership saw inculcating a new 
orientation to time as essential in habituating the scientific workforce to such a 
large-scale endeavor. This new orientation was understood to require a break 
with academic norms and practices. 

Until the summer of 1944, it was thought that the gun method of assembly 
would be used for both the uranium and the plutonium bombs. This method 
involved shooting together two subcritical pieces of fissionable material, inside 
a specially designed gun barrel, to forma critical mass. Work on this technique 
was organized within the laboratory’s Ordnance Division, under the naval 
ordnance expert Captain William S. “Deak” Parsons. 


Against Time 135 


However, from the beginning, alternative methods were considered. 
Among these was implosion, referred to in Serber’s introductory lectures 
given at the laboratory in April 1943 (known as the “indoctrination course”). 
The fundamental idea was to squeeze a subcritical mass of fissionable material 
in upon itself with the simultaneous application of great pressure from all 
sides equally. Serber’s presentation sparked the interest of the experimental 
physicist Seth Neddermeyer, formerly of Caltech.'® 

Neddermeyer enthusiastically developed the concept and presented his 
ideas to a meeting on ordnance problems on April 28, 1943. His presentation, 
however, met with little encouragement. Parsons called it “‘a touch of relief” 
from the usually “dead earnest” atmosphere of the laboratory.!?But it was 
policy across the Manhattan Project to “buy time with money” by concurrently 
pursuing a variety of different potential technical solutions to any problem, 
whatever the extra cost. That way, the failure of any one research program 
would not slow down the project overall. In line with this policy, Oppenheimer 
was willing to allow Neddermeyer some free rein to follow his intuition.”° 
Neddermeyer put together a small group of volunteers (Hugh Bradner, John 
Streib, and Charles Critchfield). This team worked in an arroyo away from the 
main part of the Technical Area, carrying out exploratory research in which 
they wrapped steel pipes with TNT and blew them inward, the goal being 
to compact the hollow pipes into a solid bar. The hope was that it would 
eventually be possible to compress a spherical shell of fissionable material so 
as to form a critical mass. The key problem faced by the implosion program 
was how to generate a symmetrical imploding shock wave. As ordnance expert 
L. T. E. Thompson put it in a memo, “a spherical shell under high external 
pressure, with impact load over one section, should begin to collapse, I think, 
in about the same manner of a dead tennis ball hit with a hammer.””! 

In June 1943, the team was incorporated as a group (E-5, Implosion Ex- 
perimentation) into the Ordnance Division, with Neddermeyer as the group 
leader, but the implosion program remained institutionally isolated within 
the division. Working “in a little corner,” Neddermeyer did not succeed in 
constructing broad networks of support for his idea. A poor politician, he was 
not personally suited to the entrepreneurial role of generating such networks. 


29 66 


Los Alamos colleagues described him as “shy,” “a very mild sort of guy and 


avery poor salesman.” As Neddermeyer himself told Oppenheimer, “I’m no 
operator.”2? 
The fortunes of the implosion program changed when the mathematician 


John von Neumann visited Los Alamos as a consultant in September 1943.”° 


136 Chapter Five 


Von Neumann had been working for Conant’s National Defense Research 
Committee (NDRC), on the hydrodynamics of shock waves produced by 
shaped charges. He had been introduced to this problem by a Russian- 
born chemist from Harvard, George Kistiakowsky, head of the Explosives 
Research Laboratory in Bruceton, Pennsylvania. Kistiakowsky’s approach 
was novel and unorthodox, treating high explosives as precision instruments. 
Von Neumann immediately saw a connection between implosion and his work 
for the NDRC.*! He gave his personal endorsement to the implosion idea and 
helped to catalyze support among the laboratory’s leadership. Von Neumann 
was important in his ability to move between cognitive and technical domains. 
He translated knowledge of high explosives into the language of mathematics 
and physical theory and hence into the language and sphere of interest of 
powerful actors such as Teller and Oppenheimer. 

According to Neddermeyer’s collaborator Charles Critchfield, von Neu- 
mann “woke everybody up.” Among those stirred was General Groves, who 
reprimanded Captain Parsons for not keeping him informed regarding im- 
plosion. Bethe, Oppenheimer, and Teller also became excited, as they began 
to see the potential in implosion for a more efficient weapon. Teller called 
Critchfield and asked, “Why didn’t you tell me about this stuff?” to which the 
latter responded that “Seth and Hugh [Bradner] and Streibo [John Streib] 
and I have been working on this and nobody paid any attention to it.” As 
Neddermeyer put it, “I made a simple theory that worked up to a certain level 
of violence in the shockwave ... Von Neumann is generally credited with 
originating the science of large compressions. This is true with respect to the 
organized research of the project itself. But I knew it before and had done it 
in a naive way. Von Neumann’s was more sophisticated.””° 

Groves himself attended a number of key transitional meetings held by the 
Los Alamos Governing Board to plan a new, concerted effort on implosion. 
Groves was excited about implosion, but he demanded a clear and determi- 
nate time frame for its development. As the implosion work was foregrounded 
in the laboratory’s concerns and was established as a key aspect of the devel- 
opment of the Manhattan Project as a whole, there was a powerful impetus to 
discipline and routinize the work. This would transform the character of the 
“HE Program,” the experimental and engineering effort to develop implosion 
using high-explosive assemblies.”° 

Whereas Neddermeyer’s group was small-scale, informal, and voluntaris- 
tic, there was now increased pressure for the formalization of the program’s 
organizational structure. Almost immediately after von Neumann’s visit, Op- 
penheimer expressed concern that the implosion work was “short staffed.” 


Against Time 137 


“Use more men and move faster,” he told Neddermeyer. At its meeting on 
October 28, 1943, the Governing Board noted critically that the implosion 
experimentation work was “being carried on by a group of eight men whose 
relations with the rest of the engineering division are rather loose” and who 
“have not yet become accustomed to the idea of a large scale operation.”?’ 

Oppenheimer believed that expansion of the implosion work required 
placing the HE program under robust leadership. A serious hindrance to 
the success of the program, he told Conant, was the “reciprocal lack of 
confidence” between Neddermeyer and his Ordnance Division boss, Parsons. 
Unless new leadership and an influx of new staff were introduced to the work, 
he said, “I should very seriously doubt whether the implosion method could 
be developed in time.” For this leadership, the Governing Board looked to 
Kistiakowsky, who began to visit Los Alamos as a consultant in the fall of 
1943. Kistiakowsky was, as he himself put it, a somewhat “reluctant bride,” 
at first skeptical of the work’s chances for success—”I didn’t think the bomb 
would be ready in time and I was interested in helping to win the war.” 
Additionally, he “feared that difficult relations may result between myself and 
Seth Neddermeyer.” Neddermeyer was likely to resent any interference in 
the implosion program, which had been his brainchild and personal project. 
Kistiakowsky was forced to swallow his reservations, however, finding himself 
under “pressure. . . [from] Oppenheimer and General Groves and particularly 
Conant, which really mattered, to go there on full time.” Bowing to this 
pressure, he took a permanent position at Los Alamos early in 1944, bringing 
with him a team from the explosives division of the NDRC.”° 

Kistiakowsky soon found his initial doubts confirmed by his situation with- 
in the Los Alamos organization. He was caught “in the middle” of a “contin- 
uing angry conflict” between Parsons and Neddermeyer, whom he described 
as being “at each other’s throats.” Their conflict revolved around competing 
ideas about what sort of place Los Alamos was and how work there should be 
run. Parsons was “accustomed to developing mass products” and based his 
management of the division on a conservative military model. Neddermeyer, 
who was in temperament the exact opposite of Parsons, “believed that the 
implosion research should be done by a small group, in a consecutive set of 
experiments until the right way of doing it was achieved ... Neddermeyer 
believed that this had to be discovered in a scientific, orderly fashion.””9 

Kistiakowsky was committed to a model of wartime research and develop- 
ment as necessarily large-scale and rapid. In his role as consultant in November 
1943, Kistiakowsky had already recommended the reorganization of the HE 
program, establishing a clear division of labor. He also advocated centralized 


138 Chapter Five 


means of coordinating the expanding program of research—for example, a 
data-analysis project “to provide a centralized mechanism for correlation and 
interpretation of data obtained in the field by the operating crew.” By Febru- 
ary 16, 1944, when Kistiakowsky joined the program full-time, the E-5 group 
had been divided into the sections that he had suggested. Between March 
and September, the sections followed an “ambitious work schedule” that 
Kistiakowsky had prepared for the diagnostic work.*° 

During 1944, implosion research took place on a wide range of fronts. After 
von Neumann’s visit, members of the Theoretical Division became engaged in 
developing mathematical models of the hydrodynamics of implosion, in April 
beginning to use IBM machines for the complex calculations involved.>! On 
the experimental front, diagnostic studies to determine the degree of symme- 
try of the implosion were becoming a multidisciplinary effort cutting across a 
number of divisions and involving a variety of groups of physicists, metallur- 
gists, machinists, chemists, electronics engineers, and explosives experts. By 
the spring and early summer, implosion was no longer an isolated project in 
one marginal group in the Ordnance Division, but the subject of coordinated 
work throughout the laboratory. Coordination and control of the work threw 
up difficult management questions among groups. The implosion program 
required systematizing a diverse array of groups of scientists and bodies of 
expert knowledge. 


“QUEER DUCKS” AND ORGANIZATION MEN 


The place of Neddermeyer’s group within this growing network was increas- 
ingly problematic. By the summer of 1944, this group, known as E-5, was 
at the focal point of a large proportion of the laboratory’s effort. However, 
the group was regarded as unprepared for this new role, and the blame was 
placed squarely on its leader, Neddermeyer. From the time that von Neumann 
focused interest on implosion, “it was evident,” according to Bethe, that Ned- 
dermeyer “was not the right man.” He was, said Bethe, “rather lackadaisical 
and was really not trying to put a big effort into it ... Neddermeyer did not 
have the drive and had no intention at all to make it a large effort.”°* He had 
not come to terms with the expansion of the implosion program, nor with 
the character of the Manhattan Project as a large-scale technological system. 
Such a view of Neddermeyer was also expressed by Kistiakowsky when, in 
the early summer of 1944, the latter forced action on the issue of leadership of 
the HE research. 


Against Time 139 


Atthe beginning of June, Kistiakowsky gave an ultimatum to Oppenheimer, 
demanding that Neddermeyer’s role be clearly defined and circumscribed. 
Kistiakowsky noted that when he had voiced such concerns early on, Oppen- 
heimer had reassured him that “the natural reluctance of Seth to surrender 
some of his authority and to submit to a much closer supervision than that 
exercised by Capt. Parsons previous to my [Kistiakowsky’s] coming, will be 
overcome in time and friendly cooperation based on mutual confidence estab- 
lished.” Kistiakowsky now felt that he had been let down in these expectations. 
The impasse between Neddermeyer and Parsons, which the introduction ofa 
third party was supposed to have broken, was now reproduced in relations be- 
tween Neddermeyer and Kistiakowsky. Neddermeyer, alleged Kistiakowsky, 
was “j[e]alous of his authority” and had become “essentially resentful of all 
attempts to interfere with the manner in which he runs E-5.” According to 
Kistiakowsky, the result of the ambiguity of the chain of command between 
himself and Neddermeyer was that “our discussions of E-5 affairs, except 
those of purely technical nature, have usually ended either in a stalemate, 
with no action being taken by Seth or, when I was more insistent, even led to 
acrimonious altercations. In most instances I have chosen not to force through 
my opinions against his open resentment and have gradual[l|y converted my 
relation to E-5 to that of a technical consultant.” Such a de facto division of 
authority was unacceptable to Kistiakowsky: “I do not think that as the admin- 
istrative leader of E-5, Seth does a good job, however earnestly he tries.”°? 

By the late spring to early summer of 1944, a clear schedule for the delivery 
of plutonium had been established. Quantities sufficient for a weapon were 
projected to become available by the summer of 1945.°* There was therefore 
a considerable demand, both from within the Manhattan Project and from its 
political sponsors, for an increase in the pace of work at Los Alamos. It was in 
this context that tensions in Kistiakowsky’s relationship with Neddermeyer 
came to a head. 

The autonomy that Neddermeyer had enjoyed in 1943, and that Parsons 
had allowed him, was, in Kistiakowsky’s view, increasingly problematic as 
the implosion program took on the character of a large-scale and centrally 
planned enterprise. In this emerging organizational structure, the parts had to 
be engineered to fit the whole. So Kistiakowsky’s criticisms of Neddermeyer 
were focused on the local culture of the implosion experimentation group, 
which, he suggested, was incompatible with that of the larger laboratory. In 
particular, he implied that the intense mutual loyalty between Neddermeyer 
and his men was pathological, since it generated resistance to organizational 


140 Chapter Five 


and personnel changes. Neddermeyer, Kistiakowsky said, “is unwilling to 
bring new blood into E-5 and the few persons he has suggested as possible 
candidates acceptable to him appear to be ‘queer ducks’, if one is to believe 
other physicists opinions; on the other hand he develops a feeling of strong 
loyalty to men who are already working with him and is very slow to admit their 
limitations and weaknesses, with the net result that the quality of the technical 
E-5 staff is not nearly as high as it could have been.” And Neddermeyer himself 
could not be altogether removed from the HE project, partly because the E-5 
staff was “very loyal to Seth.”*° 

Kistiakowsky also established a contrast between the growth and differ- 
entiation of the project as a whole and the integration of the HE program 
around the person of Neddermeyer. According to Kistiakowsky, Nedder- 
meyer’s “natural tendency, which he controls but rarely, is to do every job 
himself, the result being that he neither deputises his authority down the line, 
nor passes the jobs to specialists outside his group.” Consequently, his time 
was taken up on “matters which could have been taken care of by others,” and 
he did not have “enough time to give adequate technical supervision to his 
staff” or for “a more careful planning of the future needs and technical plans of 
E-5.” Kistiakowsky framed his main criticism of Neddermeyer’s leadership as 
an issue of time: “It is not that E-5 has broken down completely; actually lots 
of valuable data are being, and will be, obtained.” But under Neddermeyer, 
“more time will be taken to obtain them than absolutely necessary and this 
may jeopardize the timely completion of the entire H.E. project because the 
work of Es is the foundation on which everything else rests.” As a member 
of Neddermeyer’s group, Hugh Bradner, later recalled, “Kisti said, We’re 
fighting a war. We can’t afford to have somebody who takes time . . . And [so] 
Kisti would have no patience with [Neddermeyer] at all.”°° 

Oppenheimer was unwilling to lose Kistiakowsky from the project and 
was more willing to sacrifice Neddermeyer. He essentially agreed with Kis- 
tiakowsky’s criticism that Neddermeyer was behaving too much like an aca- 
demic scientist. As Neddermeyer himself stated, Oppenheimer “became terri- 
bly impatient with me in the spring of 1944. . . [thinkhe felt very badly because 
I seemed not to push things as for war research but acted as though it were just 
a normal research situation.” Kistiakowsky presented a number of options 
by which Neddermeyer could continue to guide the scientific research, but 
with control of administrative and personnel aspects handed over to either 
Kistiakowsky or someone even “more hardboiled than I am.” Oppenheimer 
went further, giving Kistiakowsky complete overall control of the HE work, as 
an associate division leader in the Ordnance Division. Neddermeyer would 


Against Time 141 


become a senior technical adviser. Neddermeyer walked out of the meeting 
at which this was announced. Oppenheimer wrote to him that evening: “In 
behalf of the success of the whole project, as well as the peace of mind and 
effectiveness of the workers in the H.E. program, I am making this request of 
you. I hope you will be able to accept it.” Neddermeyer, however, remained 
bitter that implosion was taken out of his hands.°’ 


ROUTINIZING THE HE PROGRAM AND 
REORGANIZING THE LABORATORY 


Kistiakowsky set about the task of transforming the HE program into a large- 
scale and disciplined operation. He redrew the “organization table,” estab- 
lishing a new Technical Steering Committee, which he would chair. This 
committee met weekly and was to have strict executive control over the HE 
program. “The decisions of this Committee,” Kistiakowsky announced, “are 
binding on the leaders of the operating branches.”°* 

Kistiakowsky faced the problem of coordinating the increasingly large-scale 
and differentiated structure of the HE program. The size of the program was 
illustrated by Kistiakowsky’s (unsuccessful) request in May 1944 that several 
members of Group E-g be allowed to attend Coordinating Council meetings 
(hitherto restricted to group leaders): “I should like to point out that in 
some respects the organization and activities of the Groups comprising H.E. 
Project are quite different from Groups in the rest of the laboratory. With few 
exceptions these other Groups have a small number of men in them, usually 
under ten; their activities are well centralized, being limited to a few adjoining 
offices or one building. On the other hand, Groups E-5 and E-g have, or 
will have, more than fifty men a-piece.” Kistiakowsky argued that in fact, “it 
could be said that the activities of these two Groups are equivalent to a full 
division.” The size of these groups was indeed unusual; also atypical was the 
fact that their work locations ranged from laboratories in the Technical Area 
to “widely scattered field locations.” As a result, the structure of the high- 
explosives work was highly decentralized, with sections having considerable 
autonomy from each other as well as from the overall leadership. Given this 
autonomy and the scale of their operations, Kistiakowsky argued, “the section 
leaders within these Groups are more nearly comparable to the group leaders 
in other divisions of the laboratory.”?? 

It was during this period that research on the plutontum-gun idea faced its 
most serious setback and the laboratory’s hopes came to be placed squarely 
on implosion. This shift was due to the results of a set of tests conducted by 


142 Chapter Five 


experimental physicist Emilio Segré, between early April and mid-July 1944, 
on samples of plutonium from the Clinton reactor at Oak Ridge. Segré found 
an extremely high rate of neutron emission in the samples, much higher than 
that exhibited by the small quantities of laboratory-produced samples with 
which Los Alamos had previously worked. This was determined to bea result 
of contamination by the isotope plutonium-240 of the Clinton plutonium. 
The clear implication was that the probability of spontaneous fission in the 
plutonium that was due to arrive from Hanford was even higher than had been 
predicted on the basis of the relatively pure laboratory plutonium. The rela- 
tively slow gun method, it now appeared, would not assemble a critical mass 
in time to prevent predetonation (premature detonation). The plutonium-gun 
program faced a crisis.*° 

The response to this situation was a rapid reorientation of the develop- 
ment of the plutonium bomb in favor of the implosion method of assembly. 
Initially, a number of alternative solutions to the crisis were considered. Gun 
researchers did not automatically abandon the gun principle as infeasible but 
considered the possibility of producing faster guns. Chemists and physicists 
looked into the possibility of separating out the problematic isotope. What 
enabled such alternatives to be so quickly ruled out was the particular way 
in which the laboratory had been organized. The power of the Segré experi- 
ments to effect far-reaching technical and organizational change depended to a 
large degree on the fact that the implosion program had already been pursued 
with some priority since the previous fall. The shift was also facilitated by the 
Governing Board’s strong, centralized control of the laboratory’s program, 
reinforced by the overarching importance attached to speed of development.” 

Oppenheimer told the Administrative Board on July 20 that “essentially 
all work on the 49 [plutonium] gun program and the extreme purification 
of 49 should be stopped immediately” and that “all possible priority should 
be given to the implosion program.”*” This decision led to the reorganiza- 
tion of the laboratory, bifurcating its work between the gun method for the 
assembly of the uranium bomb and the implosion method for the plutonium 
version. Oppenheimer created two new divisions focused entirely on implo- 
sion: the Weapons Physics Division, or G (for “gadget”) Division, under 
Robert Bacher; and the Explosives (X) Division, under Kistiakowsky. The 
reorganization led to massive growth in the scale of the implosion program. 
By July 1945, the work under G and X divisions accounted for almost 35 per- 


Le 


cent of the laboratory’s personnel.*” The demand for personnel created by 


the intensive development ofimplosion, and the later engineering phase of the 


Against Time 143 


project, led the laboratory to recruit large numbers of SEDs from the Corps 
of Engineers. 

The reorganization coincided with the anticipation, in late summer and 
fall of 1944, of the arrival of the Hanford plutonium. From now on, work 
rhythms at Los Alamos were to be tied to the industrial output of the uranium 
and plutonium factories. A strict system of reporting and scheduling was 
applied to the HE program by Kistiakowsky in August 1944, under orders from 
Oppenheimer and Parsons. Kistiakowsky announced to his men that “our 
reporting system must be considerably more systematized and strengthened 
in the future, and must include scheduling of anticipated progress.” He 
required biweekly reports from each group. These reports were to be highly 
detailed, covering “every separate research program, which is either actively 
worked upon now, or for which definite future plans have been laid.” The 
concern for planning and for meeting production output was also reflected 
in the requirement that the report present “a coherent picture of short and 
long range scheduling.” Kistiakowsky stated that he wanted to have “thorough 
discussions of the outstanding problems with each Group Leader at bi-weekly 
intervals, and Group Leaders will have to be prepared to give me information 
on their plans and on factors which determine the rate of progress.”*4 

Kistiakowsky’s demand for regular reports proved more difficult in practice 
than in theory. According to the explosives chemist Hyman Rudoff, the idea 
ofa fortnightly report was a compromise Kistiakowsky came up with to placate 
experimenters who were “loath to devote all that time to paper work” and 
“Sjibbed at the idea of a weekly report.” However, “not all of the American 
workers were absolutely certain what a fortnight was, so he came up with what 
was, in essence, an equivalent. He asked for a semi-monthly report.” This did 
not resolve matters. At a low point in the work, Kistiakowsky reprimanded 
his staff for not reporting frequently enough. When they protested that they 
did indeed submit bimonthly reports, Kistiakowsky replied, “Gentlemen, I 
am only a poor Russian immigrant, but even I know the difference between a 
semi-monthly and a bi-monthly report. Why don’t you?” 


FREEZING THE DESIGN 


The move toward routinization of the work in the new divisions was rendered 
problematic in part by the degree of technical uncertainty still inherent in the 
science and techniques of implosion. If a weapon was to be prepared in the 
next year, it would require taking urgent steps to stabilize, or “freeze,” an 


144 Chapter Five 


implosion design. Captain Parsons, associate director of the laboratory since 
the August reorganization, played the key role in urging a quick decision on, 
and enforcement of, an implosion design. In November 1944, he took on the 
role of chair of the Intermediate Scheduling Conference, an interdivisional 
committee that began meeting in August with the task of coordinating the 
various groups involved in the design and testing of the implosion device. 
Immediately before coming to Los Alamos, Parsons had helped take the 
proximity fuse from the laboratory and testing ground into naval combat 
use.*° At Los Alamos, he emphasized that the laboratory was just one part of 
a wider system, which would extend to the combat use of the atomic bomb. 
Parsons regarded uncertainty as not merely a technical problem, but also 
a human and organizational one. Uncertainty was to be reduced, as far as 
possible, by clarifying and enforcing the instrumental mission of the labo- 
ratory. This would be achieved by a strong executive authority who could 
autocratically force the project from the experimental stage through to the 
delivery stage, a role for which Parsons saw himself as ideally suited. “In my 
opinion,” he warned, “if the executive function I have outlined above is not 
made the responsibility of a qualified individual (not a committee or board) 
the necessary decisions and vigorous action will not be taken, and success in 
the experimental program will not be followed by successful fabrication and 
delivery of the weapon.” Parsons requested “full authority . . . to carry out the 
policies and schedules by resolving conflicts in detail, coordinating the plans 
and schedules of the divisions and groups whose primary efforts are directed 
toward development, design and production of all mechanical, electrical and 
explosive parts of the gadget which will be carried in the airplane.”*” Oppen- 
heimer balked at granting Parsons individually such far-reaching powers. But 
it was Parsons’s vision of the disciplined and hierarchical organizational struc- 
ture, which would be required to accomplish the laboratory’s transition from 
research to engineering, that was to guide the final six months of the project. 
Parsons’s demand for the “freezing” of the design was connected in part 
with his concern about what he saw as chronic residual uncertainties in the 
implosion process. The problem of generating symmetry had dogged the 
implosion design from the beginning. The solution adopted by the laboratory 
was to employ explosive lenses, a configuration of explosives that would 
focus the blast into a symmetrically converging shock wave. The idea of 
using lenses was introduced to Los Alamos by the British physicist James 
Tuck, who had worked on similar devices before coming to Los Alamos in 
May 1944. The lenses adopted at the laboratory consisted of a fast explosive, 
Composition B, and a slow explosive, baratol. Manufacturing these lenses 


Against Time 145 


was a very delicate and difficult procedure, because any imperfections would 
distort the imploding wave.**® 

Parsons felt that the research and development phase was being unjusti- 
fiably prolonged by the scientists’ fascination with the complex and, in his 
view, esoteric lens method.*? The esotericism of the lens assembly was, Par- 
sons believed, a product of physicists’ domination of the laboratory and the 
consequent lack of importance attached to engineering protocols. He wrote to 
Groves that “in this endeavor the importance of an exciting, elegant research 
solution must not be placed above the prosaic materialization of this solution 
ina finished weapon.””? 

Instead, Parsons argued, the laboratory should focus on what he regarded 
as a simpler, non-lens model. He wrote to Oppenheimer in October 1944 
expressing concern about intentions to rely on the lens model. A meeting 
on November 2 was devoted to whether to continue research on a non-lens 
version of the “gadget.” Because no agreement was reached, Oppenheimer 
allowed work to continue on “both lens and non-lens problems,” though he 
stated that he found this situation “undesirable.”°! 

Parsons wrote again to Oppenheimer on February 19, 1945, outlining his 
objections to the lens program: “We embraced lenses as our first love in July 
1944, renewing our pledge in September and December. With this highest 
priority assignable here (in thought, in field work, in explosives casting, design 
and shop work). . . we have failed to make the schedules confidently predicted 
in September and December.” He continued, “To know all is to forgive all’— 
perhaps—but we are now asked to discard other alternatives and ‘concentrate’ 
on lenses, essentially because our previous attempted consideration on lenses 
has produced so few experimental facts that we must now decide without 
those facts.” Parsons suggested that “this failure to meet all lens schedules 
is not a cause for recrimination but is data in itself.” Faced with the lack of 
experimental data, he argued, “physicists, deprived of basic understanding{, | 
have lost their seven league boots.” He pointed out the problems that existed 
not only in the conception but also in the craft of lens development: “I believe 
that experience to date shows that regardless of how simple an explosive lens 
looks in schematic design, its actual design, manufacture and final casting 
are steps which usually require several times as long as the most pessimistic 
‘rational’ predictions. These are arts in which we can hope for no outside 
assistance except in machining before June, 1945.” Parsons predicted that 
it would be “difficult in cold blood to look for an adequately tested lens 
implosion gadget in 1945” and argued that “the possible Summer 1945 gadget 
is anon-lens model.” He added, “The non-lens implosion gadget as a limited 


146 Chapter Five 


objective (June-September, 1945) I believe could be engineered if there is 
good luck at every turn and ifthe philosophy is kept straight.” On February 28, 
Parsons put forward the case against lenses ata meeting with Oppenheimer and 
other senior figures among the laboratory’s scientific staff. But the committee 
decided against him and in favor of an all-out pursuit of the lens model.” 

Kistiakowsky, Bethe, and Rudolf Peierls had been particularly strong ad- 
vocates of the lens program.” It was the lensed design that was taken into the 
final two stages of development: the freezing of the implosion design, which 
took place between the fall of 1944 and the late winter to early spring of 1945; 
and the actual production of the bomb for the Trinity test, between March 
and July 1945. Kistiakowsky later emphasized that Oppenheimer’s personal 
intervention had been crucial in resolving the dispute in favor of lenses: “In 
early 1945 we had a top-level meeting with General Groves present in which a 
kind of battle royal was fought, ina friendly way, between Parsons and me... 
Oppenheimer in the end decided for the lenses and that was that.” Indeed, 
Oppenheimer is said to have told Parsons, “You might say some of your best 
friends are lenses,” implying that nothing but prejudice lay behind Parsons’s 
skepticism about the lens program.°* However, although Parsons lost his spe- 
cific battle for a non-lens device, his general vision of the organizational and 
attitudinal changes required for the transition to engineering was instantiated 
in the steps taken to freeze the (lensed) implosion design. 

Taking the project into its “weaponeering” phase meant establishing both 
a definite bomb design and a clear organizational hierarchy and chain of com- 
mand. The execution of this program was very much in line with Parsons’s 
organizational philosophy. Parsons called for an executive authority to steer 
the technical work at Los Alamos toward its instrumental goal. Scheduling was 
a key means by which this control would be imposed upon the organization 
and the technical work, as Parsons made quite clear in his February 1945 memo 
on “homestretch measures.” Decisions made by the executive would be ex- 
pressed, he said, “in a binding directive, schedule, design or production order 
as the case may be.” He emphasized the need for strong, top-down direction 
of the weaponeering program: “Ruthless, brutal people must band together to 
force the FM [Fat Man] components to dovetail in time and space. This is to- 
tally true of the first battle model, whether it is lens or non-lens.” Backing away 
from his earlier expression of distaste for committees, Parsons advocated the 
establishment of a committee of senior members of the laboratory to strictly 
determine and enforce designs and schedules. “They must,” he wrote, “feel 
that they have a mandate to circumvent or crush opposition from above and 


below, animate or inanimate—even nuclear!””® 


Against Time 147 


In Parsons’s model, then, engineering the atomic bomb meant engineering 
a sociotechnical system, requiring the disciplining and control of nature, 
technologies, and human beings. Scheduling was a key means by which these 
heterogeneous components of the system could be forced to “dovetail in time 
and space.” 

On March 1, 1945, Oppenheimer appointed the so-called Cowpuncher 
Committee, to “ride herd on” the implosion program. The committee’s mem- 
bership (Bethe, Kistiakowsky, Parsons, Bacher, Samuel Allison, Cyril Smith, 
and Kenneth Bainbridge) was substantially on the lines suggested by Par- 
sons. This committee, meeting weekly, “relentlessly defined and redefined 
the assignments to individual groups, while constantly adjusting scheduled 
milestones.” It oversaw and integrated the implosion work of the Explosives 
and Gadget divisions, including the fabrication and inspection of explosive 
lenses, the design and construction of detonators, diagnostic tests, chemistry 
and metallurgy, studies of nuclear physics, design of the ner metal parts 
of the implosion assembly, and coordination of the Trinity test, as well as 
administrative matters such as establishing shop priorities. Most importantly, 
the Cowpuncher Committee determined and enforced the project’s sched- 
ule in the run-up to Trinity. Without this committee, Parsons later stated, 
“Los Alamos would still have been fumbling over minor engineering and 
procurement problems in the Fall of 1945.”°° 

Under this regime, the implosion design was stabilized and the laboratory 
shifted gear from research to weapon engineering and testing. In April 1945, 
Kistiakowsky reported that “one can now state with a reasonable degree of 
assurance that all major research and design gambles involved in the freeze 
of the program of the X-Division have been won.” With the routinization of 
the technical work at Los Alamos, its schedule could be seamlessly dovetailed 
with other production schedules: “Progress is more and more determined by 
the rate of supply of manufactured items.” And in his monthly report for May, 
Kistiakowsky added that X-Division’s activities “have lost all semblance to 
research and have become so largely production and inspection and testing 
that their brief summary here seems impractical.”°” 

The Cowpuncher Committee relentlessly drove the laboratory in its work 
leading up to the Trinity test on July 16, 1945. Everyday life took on a peculiar 
intensity in the effort to ready the weapon for the test. During the early spring, 
recalled one Los Alamos resident, “the momentum of the Post and Laboratory 
quickened. There was an eerie quality in our immediate surroundings. The 
key men and women worked ata feverish pace and the auxiliary functions tried 
to keep up with them.” McAllister Hull Jr., an SED who was in charge of the 


148 Chapter Five 


casting of explosive lenses, recalled, “I lived at S-Site for about three or four 
weeks before the shot [Trinity]. My colleagues brought me clean uniforms. We 
had three shifts. So I ate five meals a day, showered in the showers they used 
for chemical clean-up, and slept on my desk.” He added, “We had one goal. 
That’s to make this thing as fast as possible, to make it work.” Hull oversaw 
a team of powdermen from DuPont, brought in to cast the explosives on a pro- 
duction-line basis for the test. In the period leading up to the test, “we worked 


like dogs, and we took chances and we didn’t worry about anything.”°* 


CREATING A CHAIN OF EVENTS 


From 1944, the work at Los Alamos was integrated into a military operation 
aimed at the combat delivery of the weapon. In August General Groves, as he 
began to acquire firm production schedules for fissionable materials, gave the 
Air Force estimates for when the bombs would be ready: the implosion bomb 
in January 1945 and the gun-assembly bomb in June. Groves later said that 
he intentionally gave dates ahead of his actual expectations in order to “avoid 
any possible unnecessary delay in the use of the bomb.””? 

In September 1944, bomber pilot Colonel Paul W. Tibbets began to or- 
ganize the 509th Composite Group, the combat unit that would deliver the 
bomb. Tibbets trained his team and carried out practice drops at Wendover 
Field, Utah. He was in close contact with Groves and Parsons at Los Alamos. 
During this period, Parsons insisted that the work at Los Alamos had to be 
closely integrated with military preparations for use of the bomb. Parsons saw 
his task in organizing delivery and liaison with the Air Force as the coordina- 
tion and linking of different sociotechnical systems. This involved, as he put 
it, “the planning, training and logistic functions which seemed necessary to 
connect Y [the laboratory] with the goth Air Force as a weapon producing, 
servicing and operating team.” On September 7, he urged Oppenheimer to 
ensure that “success in the experimental program” would be “followed by 
successful fabrication and delivery of the weapon.” 

Parsons argued that making Los Alamos into a “weaponeering” organiza- 
tion required making sure that its technical staff was committed to a military 
conception of the project. On September 25, he wrote a report for Groves in 
which he expressed his concern about “tender souls” who are “appalled at 
the idea of the horrible destruction which this bomb might wreak in battle de- 
livery.” Such “loose reasoning” might lead to “the expressed or unexpressed 
hope that ‘We may never have to use this weapon in battle’” and thereby 
to the jeopardizing of the mission. It appears that Parsons was referring to 


Against Time 149 


early rumblings of discontent among scientists at the Chicago Metallurgical 
Laboratory (Met Lab), who were starting to discuss alternatives to military 
use of the bomb. Parsons was clearly worried that these ideas might spread 
to the New Mexico site, but he noted with satisfaction that as yet, “in its 
expressed form, this hope [of avoiding the bomb’s use] is not encountered at 
Los Alamos.”°! 

Transmitting Parsons’s report, Oppenheimer was at pains to assure the 
general that the laboratory was committed to the production and use of a 


weapon: 


1. I believe that Captain Parsons somewhat misjudges the temper of the 
laboratory. It is true that there are a few people here whose interests are 
exclusively ‘scientific’ in the sense that they will abandon any problem 
that appears to be soluble. I believe that these men are now in appro- 
priate positions in the organization. For the most part the men actually 
responsible for the prosecution of the work have proven records of 
carrying developments through the scientific and into the engineering 
stage. For the most part these men regard their work here not as a sci- 
entific adventure, but as a responsible mission which will have failed if 
it is let drop at the laboratory phase ... 

2. agree completely with all the comments of Captain Parsons’ memo- 
randum on the fallacy of regarding a controlled test as the culmination of 
the work of this laboratory. The laboratory is operating under a direc- 


tive to produce weapons; this directive has been and will be rigorously 
adhered to. 


By September-October 1944, there was only one legitimate definition of Los 
Alamos’s mission: it was to produce a weapon to be used in combat. 

Parsons worked meticulously to ensure that no contingencies would arise 
to stand in the way of a clear-cut chain of events from production of the 
bombs at Los Alamos to their military use. He described his task as “the 
overall planning and technical initiative functions required to crystallize and 
integrate the combination of B-29 and bomb into a battle weapon.” As early 
as September 1944, Parsons had been concerned about delivery problems. 
He pointed to, for example, the “notoriously unreliable engine” of the B-29 
bomber. As historian Al Christman put it, Parsons’s worry was that “worn 
out [B-29s] could become the fatal weak link in the chain of events.” 

Parsons was equally concerned about the “mass-bombing psychology” 
of the Army Air Forces. Unlike mass raids, the success of which was judged 


150 Chapter Five 


statistically, the atomic bomb mission would need to guarantee the success ofa 
single plane. In March 1945, Parsons was designated as head of the Los Alamos 
team, code-named Project Alberta, which was responsible for the combat 
delivery of the bombs. He wrote to Groves of his eagerness “to represent 
you in the initial battle delivery.”“ Project Alberta was assigned to the First 
Technical Detachment, attached to the 509th Composite Group. This unit 
would assemble the bomb components and oversee technical preparations on 
the Pacific island of Tinian, the base from which the 509th would attack Japan. 
Throughout, Parsons regarded both human and technological aspects of 
delivery as proper objects of engineering concern. Flight-testing and training, 
which he supervised over this period, “served not only to perfect the design 
but also to sift the young scientists and technicians and eliminate any who got 
jittery or tended to make mistakes under field conditions.” A final precaution 
was delaying the arming of the bomb until the B-29 was on its way to Japan. 
Parsons himself would carry out this task on board the Enola Gay as it flew 


toward Hiroshima.™ 


NOT TO REASON WHY 


An important effect of the laboratory’s industrial discipline and social control 
was the suppression of moral and political dissent. The project’s military 
leaders saw any moral qualms as dangerous interference in the chain of events 
from weapon production to weapon use. Groves attended a meeting in late 
March 1945 with Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson, at which the 
latter “asked whether there was any indication of anyone flinching from the 
use of the product.” Groves was adamant that he had “heard no rumors to 
that effect” and explained his personal view “as to what a complete mess any 
such action would make of everything including the reputations of everyone 
who had authorized or urged or even permitted the work in the first place.” 
The defeat of Germany, Groves argued, while removing the character of a 
“race” against a possible enemy bomb, “would not remove the necessity for 
going ahead.”°° 

As early as March 1944, at a Los Alamos dinner party held by James 
Chadwick, leader of the British scientific mission, Groves had commented 
to the effect that “the real purpose in making the bomb was to subdue the 


Soviets.”°7 


Groves’s remark made a particularly deep impression on one of 
the guests, physicist Joseph Rotblat: “I felt deeply the sense of betrayal of 
an ally ... this was said at a time when thousands of Russians were dying 


every day on the Eastern Front ... Until then I had thought that our work 


Against Time 151 


was to prevent a Nazi victory, and now I was told that the weapon we were 
preparing was intended for use against the people who were making extreme 
sacrifices for that very aim.” When it became evident to him, toward the end 
of 1944, that the European war would soon be over and that there was now no 
possibility of a German atomic bomb, Rotblat decided to leave the project. 
As a pretext for detaining him, security officers accused him of being a spy. 
Nevertheless, he was able to refute these charges, and he sailed for Britain 
on Christmas Eve. But he was not allowed to tell anyone at Los Alamos his 
real reasons for quitting the project, and the official explanation was that he 
left due to worries about his wife in Poland. He was the only member of the 
project ever to leave on moral grounds.®* 

At Los Alamos, there was little overt opposition to the lethal use of the 
weapon. Los Alamos scientists played key roles in the planning of the atomic 
attacks. In late April 1945, Groves established a committee to help choose 
targets for the bombings. The committee, which included three Los Alamos 
scientists (John von Neumann, William G. Penney, and Robert R. Wilson), 
met at the laboratory in May to gather scientific opinion on the probable 
effects of the bomb and on suitable targets. In addition to the committee mem- 
bers, among the attendees at these meetings were Oppenheimer, Richard 
Tolman, and Parsons. Oppenheimer opened the meeting with a summary 
of the agenda: the height of detonation, report on weather and operations, 
“gadget” jettisoning and landing, status of targets, psychological factors in 
target selection, use against military objectives, radiological effects, coordi- 
nated air operations, bombing rehearsals, operating requirements for safety 
of airplanes, coordination with Twenty-first Bomber Command.” 

These meetings were entirely focused on the military goal of the most 
efficient and most devastating use of the weapons. Humanitarian and moral 
concerns were entirely absent from the discussions. Hans Bethe and Robert 
Brode were brought in to provide calculations of the optimum height at 
which the bomb should be detonated for maximum destruction. Dr. Joyce 
C. Stearns of the Army Air Forces listed potential targets: Kyoto, Hiroshima, 
Yokohama, Kokura Arsenal, and Niigata. In addition, the group discussed 
the possibility of bombing the emperor’s palace. It was agreed that the targets 
should be “in a large urban area of more than three miles diameter.” Attacking 
a civilian population was favored because of the “psychological” effect. The 
group thought that Kyoto had “the advantage of the people being more highly 
intelligent and hence better able to appreciate the significance of the weapon. 
Hiroshima has the advantage of being such a size and with possible focusing 
from nearby mountains that a large fraction of the city may be destroyed.” The 


152 Chapter Five 


assembled experts warned against a purely military target: “Any small and 
strictly military objective should be located in a much larger area subject to 
blast damage in order to avoid undue risks of the weapon being lost due to bad 
placing of the bomb.” They also thought about following the atomic attack 
with an incendiary raid: “This has the great advantage that the enemies’ fire 
fighting ability will probably be paralyzed by the gadget so that a very serious 
conflagration should be capable of being started.” The chief worry about an 
incendiary raid was that radioactive clouds would make any such immediate 
follow-up hazardous, although it would be possible the very next day.” 
This focus on immediate military questions contrasted with the situation 
at the Met Lab, where discussion of the moral and political implications of 
the atomic bomb led to the drafting of the Franck Report. Completed on June 
11, 1945, it called for a nonlethal technical demonstration rather than military 
use of the bomb and argued for international control of atomic energy. The 
report was the outcome of discussions that had been taking place informally 
at the laboratory since the previous summer. In addition to the report, during 
June and July, Leo Szilard circulated his petition against military use of the 
bomb. Chicago scientist Ralph Lapp wrote that while this “dissent was futile 
with respect to altering the decision on the bomb,” its real importance was in 
kindling the postwar scientists’ movement for international control of atomic 
energy. A number of factors led to this ferment at Chicago. It owed a great 
deal to leaders such as Szilard and James Franck. In addition, the scientists 
at Chicago were not subject to the extreme restrictions faced at Los Alamos. 
The Met Lab was affiliated with the University of Chicago and was in an 
urban setting. As the official history of the AEC put it, “the Metallurgical 
Laboratory retained the essential features of academic research.” Scientific 
work on reactor design had been completed, and plutonium production had 
been taken over by DuPont, so the Met Lab scientists were not under the same 
pressures of time as their Los Alamos counterparts. Moreover, their intense 
discontent with DuPont’s management of the plutonium program made the 
Chicago scientists less inclined to trust the overall leadership of the project.”! 
At Los Alamos, any potential concern with the moral implications of the 
bomb, or with its long-term consequences, was eclipsed by the scientists’ 
disciplined focus on technical problems. Victor Weisskopf wrote that he 
entered the project for fear of the consequences if the Nazis acquired an atomic 
bomb first. He “secretly wished that the difficulties would be insurmountable.” 
However, he said, “imperceptibly, a change of attitude came over us. As we 
became more deeply involved in the day-to-day work of our collective task, 
any misgivings that we had at the start began to fade, and slowly the great aim 


Against Time 153 


became the overriding driving force: We had to achieve what we had set out 
to do.” Weisskopf noted how the focus on the instrumental problems of the 
bomb’s operation and effects left little mental space for moral reflection and 
tended to deaden any ethical sensibilities. 


We tried to determine the degree of destruction, the number of victims if 
the bomb exploded over a city, and the potential for radioactive damage 
to humans, animals and soil. All this required painstaking research in 
our laboratories and at our desks. Under the circumstances we were un- 
able to confront the moral issues of our work even though we recognized 
them. There is no denying that constant discussions about the nature of 
the damage caused by fire and radiation sickness, and about the millions 
of deaths led to a growing numbness toward those terrible consequences. 


Richard Feynman described a similar transformation of consciousness. The 
original reasons for the development of the bomb faded from his conscience 
as, he suggests, its creation became an end in itself. “What I did immorally 
was not to remember the reason and why I was doing it. So when the reason 
changed, which was that Germany was defeated, not a single thought came to 
my mind that it meant that I should reconsider why I was continuing to do 
this. I simply didn’t think.” Rotblat said, “Scientists with a social conscience 
were a minority in the scientific community. The majority were not bothered 
by moral scruples; they were quite content to leave it to others to decide 
how their work would be used.””” The very fact that Rotblat was the only 
scientist to quit after the disappearance of the original rationale indicates that, 
in attempting to understand what drove the relentless and dedicated work on 
the bomb, we must look not to some motivating set of ideas or reasons, but 
rather to the social organization of the project. 

The apparent inexorability of the bomb’s development was produced by 
the system-building efforts of Groves, Parsons, and the Los Alamos scientists 
themselves. From early 1943, Isidor Rabi, on the basis of his experience man- 
aging the radar program at MIT, advised Oppenheimer of the importance of 
getting the project moving forward. Rabi warned, for example, that morale was 
“sinking” among research groups “standing idle” while Los Alamos was being 
constructed. It was imperative that they “be put to work immediately.””” 

The generation of impetus, then, was aimed at binding people to social 
order—conceived of in terms of “morale”—at the same time that it bound 
them to a schedule. This binding and ordering function of the schedule 
helps to explain how it was that, as sociologist William Ray Arney said, “the 


154 Chapter Five 


individual scientist at Los Alamos was a consummate team member at once 
vitalized by the work and submerged in it.” The high level of social integration 
at Los Alamos—the strong identification of individuals with the aims of the 
organization—was to a large degree orchestrated through the management of 
time. There was very little private time. Most waking hours were devoted to 
working on the bomb. Workers were kept in a frenzy of activity, and this itself 
was crucial in maintaining the cohesion of the group. According to Emilio 
Segré, “the pressure of work was immense and enhanced by the unavoidable 
deadlines and heavy responsibilities.” Teller noted in a letter the frenetic and 
all-consuming pace of activity: “I should like to have a chance to think, to 
do some useless work, even to get bored ... Since the war started I have 
not been bored.”” In particular, the structuring of time and the laboratory’s 
“ownership” of time subdued thoughts of the moral implications of the atomic 
bomb. 

Oppenheimer, as director, ensured that the instrumental mission of the 
laboratory was enforced. A key aspect of this enforcement was preventing 
scientific deviations from the established technical design. His successor, 
Norris Bradbury, observed that “Oppenheimer. . . very resiliently kept people 
working on those two tasks [implosion and the gun method of assembly] and 
did not let the effort of the project be diverted, diluted into other goals 
not directly related to getting this particular job done[,| namely getting the 
atomic bomb done in the time that the war might last.””° It was not a great 
extension of this role for Oppenheimer to move to deter any moral or political 
diversions from the laboratory’s work or any dilution of the workforce’s 
collective dedication to producing the bomb. He accomplished this through 
a combination of coercion and co-optation, both enforcing the hierarchically 
established mission of the laboratory and formulating the moral justification 
for that mission. 

Robert Wilson—then a young group leader and experimental physicist, of 
Quaker background—wrote of how he called a meeting sometime in late 1944 
or early 1945 to discuss the topic “The Impact of the Gadget on Civilization.” 
“It was evident,” said Wilson, “that the Germans would be beaten, and I 
wanted to raise questions about what our next steps should be.” Oppenheimer 
had warned Wilson against holding the meeting, telling him that it would 
lead to trouble with the laboratory’s security officers. When Wilson ignored 
this advice and went ahead, Oppenheimer came to the meeting, drawing on 
his authority among the scientists and his powers of oratory to direct the 
discussion: “Eloquent and persuasive as ever, Oppenheimer dominated the 
meeting. He argued that we should redouble our effort in order to demonstrate 


Against Time 155 


the reality of the nuclear bomb, so that the United Nations would be set up 
in an intelligent manner to deal with the problems presented by this new 
weapon.”’° There was no question at the meeting but that the bomb should 
be built. “It is significant,” Wilson wrote, “that no one at that meeting . . . even 
raised the possibility that what we were doing might be morally wrong. No one 
suggested that we pack our bags and leave.” Oppenheimer skillfully channeled 
the internationalist idealism of this group of young scientists into the task of 
building the bomb and used the meeting to reinforce their dedication to the 
work. “It is hard to express now the loyalty we felt for Oppy, our leader, and 
our confidence that he would do the right thing . .. Maybe we had no other 
choice than to put our trust in him, but in any case, we did,” said Wilson. 
“With missionary zeal, we resumed our work.””” 

Philip Morrison remembered the way in which Oppenheimer conveyed 
a sense of the rightness of their task and of its urgency. Oppenheimer was 
unflinching in his support for use of the weapon: “Oppie had said spookily, 
I remember it so clearly: ‘We must use Fat Man. We must bomb Berlin 
and Tokyo simultaneously.’” Morrison spoke of his experience as a junior 
scientist in thrall to Oppenheimer: “For nearly three years Oppenheimer 
labored ceaselessly: with him, for him, we worked as hard. It was our labor 
of love .. . 1 admired Robert Oppenheimer. He was of course my senior and 
my superior. It would be presumptuous to say I loved him or even feared 
him—Oppenheimer filled me with angst. Whatever the case, I listened to 
him. He had many arguments.” The primary argument that Oppenheimer 
had in his arsenal, one to trump all opposition, was that only combat use of 
the weapon would demonstrate to the world its destructiveness, and that this 
destructiveness itself might mean the end of all war.’ 

Oppenheimer played a central role in supporting and lending legitimacy 
to the system of social discipline expressed in the project’s institutional mo- 
mentum. That this discipline was not questioned and was not experienced 
as coercive was due in part to Oppenheimer’s ability to inspire his workforce 
with a picture of the laboratory’s mission as being universalistic and moral. 
At a memorial service for Roosevelt, held at Los Alamos on April 15, 1945, 
Oppenheimer delivered a eulogy that was at the same time a rallying cry to 
continue the laboratory’s work: 


We have been living through years of great evil, and of great terror. Roo- 
sevelt has been our President, our Commander-in-Chief and, in an old 
and unperverted sense, our leader. All over the world men have looked 
to him for guidance, and have seen symbolized in him their hope ... 


156 Chapter Five 


that the terrible sacrifices which have been made, and those that are still 
to be made, would lead to a world more fit for human habitation . . . 

In the Hindu scripture, in the Bhagavad-Gita, it says, “Man is a 
creature whose substance is faith. What his faith is, he is.” The faith of 
Roosevelt is one that is shared by millions ... in every country of the 
world. For this reason . .. it is right that we should dedicate ourselves 
to the hope, that his good works will not have ended with his death.”® 


This secular sermon was a performance that asserted and instantiated Oppen- 
heimer’s charismatic leadership of the laboratory and community. Oppen- 
heimer was at once a priest, calming and reassuring his flock, and a military 
leader, rallying his troops in time of war. And as he celebrated Roosevelt’s 
leadership, his message was also that the scientists at Los Alamos should trust 
and have faith in their more immediate leadership and in the rightness of their 
mission. 

Oppenheimer personally blocked the distribution at Los Alamos of Szi- 
lard’s petition against use of the bomb. The petition stated, “We feel . . . that 
[atomic bomb] attacks on Japan could not be justified, at least not unless 
the terms which will be imposed after the war on Japan were made public in 
detail and Japan were given an opportunity to surrender.” Communication 
between Los Alamos and Chicago was hindered by compartmentalization, 
so the logistics of sending the petition to Los Alamos were complicated. In 
the first attempt, Szilard gave the petition to Ralph Lapp, who was traveling 
to Los Alamos. Lapp was supposed to give it to another scientist to hold in 
a sealed envelope until Szilard could explain to Oppenheimer its purpose. 
But the petition was handed to Oppenheimer immediately, and he declared 
that it could not be circulated. Then Szilard asked Teller to try to have the 
petition distributed in the laboratory. But after speaking with Oppenheimer, 
Teller wrote to his Hungarian friend telling him that he could not support his 
protest. “The things we are working on,” Teller said, “are so terrible that no 
amount of protesting or fiddling with politics will save our souls . . . Our only 
hope is in getting the facts of our results before the people. This might help to 
convince everybody that the next war would be fatal. For this purpose, actual 
combat-use might even be the best thing.”®° 

Suppressing moral opposition to the bomb went hand in hand with enforc- 
ing the schedule for its production. The schedule itself took on the character 
of a transcendent principle, by reference to which political protest could be 
branded as illegitimate. For Oppenheimer, moral and political discussion was 
quite simply a waste of time. He enforced a disciplined focus on the narrowly 


Against Time 157 


technical problems of bomb construction. Metallurgist Ed Hammel recalled, 
“Los Alamos ... was by ’44 given the schedule of the production plants 
and associated pressure beneath, and we ... were absolutely forbidden to 
get involved in any of these [political] things ... That was canned as soon 
as Oppenheimer heard about it ... Not only [was it] forbidden, but it was 
coming out of the program time, and that was unacceptable.”*! 

The schedule itself helped to produce among the scientists a narrow ori- 
entation toward the merely technical problems of producing the bomb, as 
their focus on building the “gadget” crowded out any moral qualms. Wilson 
pointed to the scientists’ sense of urgency as a reason for the overall lack of 
political discussion during the war: “At Los Alamos, we worked frantically 
so that a weapon could be ready at the earliest moment. Once caught up in 
such a mass effort, one did not debate at every moment, Hamlet-fashion, its 
moral basis.”8? V-E Day—May 8, 1945—did not lead Wilson to reexamine his 
commitment to the endeavor, though he later regretted that he had not left the 
project. “The thought never occurred to me,” he said. “Nor, to my knowledge, 
did any of my friends raise any such question on that occasion.” He was pulled 
along by the dynamism of the project, which structured his experience of time: 


Perhaps events were moving just too incredibly fast. We were at the 
climax of the project—just on the verge of exploding the test bomb 
in the desert. Every faculty, every thought, every effort was directed 
toward making that a success . . . Things and events were happening on 
a scale of weeks: the death of Roosevelt [April 12], the fall of Germany 
[surrender on May 7], the 100-ton TNT test of May 7, the bomb test 
of July 16, each seemed to follow on the heels of the other. A person 
cannot react that fast.8? 


Physicist Bernard Feld also emphasized the controlling pace of work, which 
prevented a reevaluation of the goals of the project in the wake of Germany’s 
defeat: “Nobody stopped and said, ‘We are not at war with the Germans any 
longer, do we have to stop and think?’ We were caught up in this activity, 
which was all consuming. Nobody worked less than 15, 16, 17 hours a day. 
There was nothing else in your life, but this passion to get it done.” The 
result was a “kind of tunnel vision.”*4 

The laboratory took on the character ofa total institution or a superorgan- 
ism, one that claimed the scientists’ whole lives. From the perspective of one 
scientist’s wife, “Los Alamos was like a giant ant hill. The atom bomb was 
its queen and the Tech Area was her nest”—and “the Queen’s demands for 


158 Chapter Five 


nourishment were unceasing.”®? In a letter to Oppenheimer, Szilard astutely 
suggested that the intensity of their labor had itself shaped the Los Alamos 
scientists’ attitudes: “I expect you who have been so strenuously working at 
the site on getting these devices ready will naturally lean towards wanting that 
they should be used.”*° 

It was in the period after the defeat of Germany that the Cowpuncher 
Committee was freezing the weapons’ designs and enforcing a strict regime of 
scheduling. So it is not surprising that, as Segré said, “the efforts to assemble 
the atomic weapon were redoubled during the late spring and early summer.” 
Oppenheimer said that the project’s “tempo” increased after the end of the 
war in Europe: “We were still more frantic to have the job done . . . We want- 
ed to have it done before the war was over . . . 1 don’t think there was any time 
where we worked harder at the speedup than in the period between the 
German surrender and the actual use of the atomic bomb.”87 


THE SCIENTIST IN THE TECHNOLOGICAL SYSTEM 


If the Los Alamos scientists did not question the rightness of their mission, it 
was in large part because of the way in which their horizons were enclosed by 
the schedule. Groves had hoped that compartmentalization would make the 
scientists “stick to their knitting.” The schedule proved far more effective in 
achieving this. And while Oppenheimer had opposed compartmentalization, 
he played a central role in supporting and lending legitimacy to the system 
of social discipline expressed in the project’s schedule and institutional mo- 
mentum. Through the schedule, everyday life at Los Alamos was woven into 
and structured by the vast technological and political-economic system of 
the Manhattan Project. Binding Los Alamos into this system meant the elim- 
ination of uncertainties in the design, manufacture, and human and moral 
dimensions of the bomb. Engineering the atomic system involved engineer- 
ing the project’s participants, molding them into a dedicated and disciplined 
workforce, devoted to the singular goal of bomb production and marching to 
the beat of a single drum. The Los Alamos scientists, in their fervor to get 
the bomb built on time, became the relatively unquestioning implementers of 
policy decisions made at higher levels of the organization. 

Los Alamos was a closed world, and during the war, Oppenheimer was 


the scientists’ “ 


only contact with the world of Washington,” at least the 
only one that they believed would represent their views and interests.°* He 
paternalistically urged his colleagues to attend to their technical work and 


trust him to articulate their hopes and fears inside government. The bombing 


Against Time 159 


of Hiroshima and Nagasaki broke down the isolation of the Los Alamos 
community. The end of the war also temporarily interrupted the compulsive 
momentum of atomic weapons manufacture. After the initial euphoria of 
victory subsided, there was some time for somber reflection. With the war’s 
end, many of the scientists emerging from the project, in the new “scientists’ 
movement,” would question and seek to break out from the limited role to 
which they had been assigned. They campaigned for ideas such as civilian 
and international control of atomic energy, as well as against secrecy. At 
the same time, however, many continued to respond to the allure of what 
Oppenheimer later called the “technically sweet” problems of weapons work, 
augmenting the sophistication, power, and numbers of the atomic weapons 
arsenal. Oppenheimer found himself in an increasingly tense and unstable 
position as he attempted to reconcile his role as weapons builder with his 
alter ego as academic “pure scientist” and as he mediated between the atomic 
scientists and the state. 


CHAPTER SIX 


Power and Vocation 


“OPPIE’S GREATEST POEM” 


The wartime mobilization of science for military ends led to an unprecedented 
incorporation of scientists into the apparatus of government, particularly as ad- 
visers to the new executive agencies established to manage atomic energy. This 
new insider role was exemplified by Oppenheimer, as were its accompanying 
tensions. Oppenheimer occupied a unique position from the end of World 
War II until the 1954 security hearings that excluded him from government. 
He was the personification of the new power of the scientists who emerged 
triumphant from creating the atomic bomb and who were widely credited with 
ending the war. Oppenheimer responded to the new expectations of him and 
rose to his new status. Friends who had not seen him since before the war were 
surprised at his confidence as a public figure and skill as an orator. Returning 
to Berkeley not long after the end of the war, classics scholar Harold Cherniss 
attended a large convocation to which Oppenheimer had been invited to ad- 
dress the student body. Oppenheimer spoke for about an hour to an audience 
of a few thousand gathered in the men’s gymnasium—“and there was scarcely 
a whisper could be heard during all this time.” According to Cherniss, “it 
was nothing that he said that held them spell-bound; it was this peculiar kind 
of magical influence that he could have.” University of California president 
Robert Gordon Sproul had introduced the physicist by saying that this was 
“the Oppenheimer age.”! 

In 1946, Time magazine, saying that the atomic bomb had shattered the 
“ivory tower” and thrust scientists into the political fray, paid Oppenheimer 


Power and Vocation 161 


the somewhat backhanded compliment of calling him the “most articulate of 
the new politicians.”* Oppenheimer became the chief public articulator of the 
cultural and political meaning of the atomic bomb. His ornate prose promised 
a new philosophy for the age of the atom, combining popular hyperbole 
with a sense of gravitas. In expressing the meaning of the new atomic power, 
Oppenheimer fashioned his reaction at the Trinity atomic bomb test into an 
iconic moment. The story of his personal response to Trinity went through 
different permutations as Oppenheimer molded it as an oratorical device. In 
1946, he told a university audience that at the test, “we thought of the legend 
of Prometheus, of that deep sense of guilt in man’s new powers that reflects 
his recognition of evil, and his long knowledge of it.”? The first publication 
of Oppenheimer’s now-iconic reaction to the test was in a Time article on 
November 8, 1948, for which Oppenheimer was interviewed. The article 
stated, “Oppenheimer recalls that [at Trinity] two lines of the Bhagavad-Gita 
flashed through his mind: ‘Iam become death, the shatterer of worlds.’”* 

The quotation was first given real prominence in Robert Jungk’s best- 
selling 1958 book Brighter Than a Thousand Suns.° In a book published a 
year after that, William L. Laurence, the New York Times journalist brought in 
by General Groves to witness the Trinity test, claamed that Oppenheimer told 
him of this reaction at Los Alamos on the day of the test: “‘At that moment,” 
I heard him say, ‘there flashed into my mind a passage from the Bhagavad- 
Gita, the sacred book of the Hindus: “I am Become Death, the Shatterer of 
Worlds.”’ “ Laurence wrote, “I shall never forget the shattering impact of those 
words.” But in a New York Times article in late September 1945, Laurence 
had written, “To Prof. J. R. Oppenheimer of the University of California, who 
directed the work on the bomb, the effect, he told me, was ‘terrifying’ and ‘not 
entirely undepressing.’ After a pause he added: ‘Lots of boys not grown up 
yet will owe their life to it.””° In his 1947 book Dawn over Zero, Laurence still 
did not mention the Bhagavad Gita quotation. But he wrote of Oppenheimer, 
“This absent-minded scholar, who now finds outlet for his poetic vision 
through higher mathematics, turned out, in this very quiet and soft-spoken 
way, to be a veritable dynamo of action, animating the entire project with a 
vitality never seen in any laboratory. Los Alamos would go down in history as 
Oppie’s greatest poem.”” 

The meaning of Los Alamos as a moment of transformation in the scientific 
vocation has indeed come to be framed by Oppenheimer’s poetic invocation 
of the Hindu classic. The quotation “I am become Death” personalizes the 
destructive power of the atom and seems to call for a moral response. In this 
way, it encapsulates a humanistic formulation of the problems of the atomic 


162 Chapter Six 


age in relation to individual moral responsibility. If this was Oppenheimer’s 
immediate response to atomic power, it suggests an immediate countering of 
technological power with liberal humanist morality. To many among the sci- 
entific community and the educated public, Oppenheimer seemed capable of 
bringing a civilized liberal humanism to bear on the unprecedented problems 
of nuclear weaponry. Fear of the atomic bomb as technology out of control 
was to some degree mitigated by the hope that this technological development 
was in the hands of a morally concerned elite. 

It is impossible to know what in fact took place in Oppenheimer’s mind 
on the morning of the Alamogordo explosion. But Frank Oppenheimer, who 
witnessed the test with his brother, said, “I wish I would remember what my 
brother said, but I can’t—but I think we just said, ‘It worked.’ I think that’s 
what we said, both of us, ‘It worked.’”® The disjunction between these two 
responses—one moral and existential, the other coldly instrumental and tech- 
nical (the two not necessarily psychologically mutually exclusive)—encap- 
sulates the problem of Oppenheimer’s persona and role at Los Alamos and in 
the postwar years. It mirrors the split between Oppenheimer’s official func- 
tion as a technical servant of the state and his public image as a humanistic 
spokesman for arms control and moral responsibility. It also mirrors Oppen- 
heimer’s dilemma in the face of competing conceptions of responsibility: to 
the state, to science itself, and to humanity. 

Oppenheimer’s postwar authority as scientific adviser and spokesman for 
the scientific community depended on his ability to embrace hopes for arms 
control and a peaceful postwar world while at the same time representing the 
utility of science as a source of military power. His authority was a careful 
balancing act, as he mediated between the scientific community and the state. 
In comparison with Oppenheimer, other scientists, notably Albert Einstein 
and Leo Szilard, were more consistent in their opposition to atomic weapons 
and the arms race, and this consistency gave them greater moral authority as 
spokesmen for scientific humanism. But unlike Oppenheimer, these figures 
were outsiders, without direct access to the closed circles where atomic 
weapons policies were made. 

Oppenheimer was uniquely able to combine power with humanism and 
moral concern. He attempted to bring to the new role of the scientist as 
bomb builder and policy adviser the cultural authority that derived from the 
idea of “pure science” and from the Platonic image of the universality of 
scientific knowledge. In practice, this mediation between truth and power 
was a fragile political accomplishment, and one that he ultimately failed to 
maintain. The intensification of the Cold War limited his perspective and that 


Power and Vocation 163 


of scientists generally. With the failure of negotiations for international control 
of atomic energy and the explosion of the first Soviet atomic bomb in 1949, 
and against the background of intensifying Cold War antagonism culminating 
in the Korean War, the American scientific community turned away from 
internationalism and toward the national-security state. This chapter examines 
the complex relationship between, on the one hand, Oppenheimer’s cultural 
role in articulating the meaning of science and the place of the scientist in the 
modern world and, on the other hand, his political role as an adviser to the 
state. 


INTERIM: OPPENHEIMER AND THE WARTIME 
SCIENTIFIC ESTABLISHMENT 


Oppenheimer’s position as an insider among the policy elite of the Manhattan 
Project was institutionalized in his membership on the Scientific Panel of the 
Interim Committee, set up in the spring of 1945 by Secretary of War Henry 
Stimson. The committee was to give advice on a wide range of matters relating 
to atomic weapons and atomic energy, and especially to advise on postwar 
nuclear policy.’ The Scientific Panel—chaired by Oppenheimer, with Arthur 
Compton, Ernest Lawrence, and Enrico Fermi as the other members—was 
conceived as the voice of the scientific community in the corridors of power. 
However, the emphasis in creating the panel was less on giving the scientists 
input into decision making than on defusing potential opposition to the use 
of the bomb, such as had emerged at Chicago.!° 

That the advisory function of the panel was ritualistic was particularly 
clear in the case of its consideration of the question of the military use of the 
atomic bomb. In the assessment of historian Gar Alperovitz, the scientists 
“had virtually no impact on government decisions” during the war.'! That 
the bomb would be used militarily had been an organizing assumption of the 
entire project, and as the project grew into a giant military-industrial system, it 
developed a powerful institutional momentum toward that end. Oppenheimer 
himself said that “the decision was implicit in the project. I don’t know whether 
it could have been stopped.” ” 

Oppenheimer and the Scientific Panel were able to consider the question 
of the use of the bomb only in the narrowest of terms. They acted as technical 
experts, providing information about the effects of the bomb.’ The only 
alternative to military use that they were able to consider was the idea of a 
nonlethal demonstration, advocated by scientists at Chicago. This proposal, 
however, did not challenge the assumption that the atomic bomb was the key 


164 Chapter Six 


to ending the war. The demonstration idea was dismissed by Oppenheimer 
on technical grounds. He said that he could not think of how to make a non- 
lethal demonstration sufficiently spectacular that it would cause the Japanese 
to give up. This narrowly technical orientation was, in part, a result of the 
panel’s insulation from knowledge of broader political, diplomatic, and mil- 
itary realities.'* Oppenheimer later said, “We didn’t know beans about the 
military situation in Japan. We didn’t know whether they could be caused to 
surrender by other means or whether the invasion was really inevitable. But 
in the back of our minds was the notion that invasion was really inevitable 
because we had been told that.”!° The panel’s extremely brief consideration 
of alternatives to military use of the bomb presupposed that an end to the war 
had to be brought about militarily rather than through diplomacy. Against 
this background, the demonstration idea was a nonstarter. Alperovitz wrote, 
“That the bomb would be used was essentially taken for granted when the 
Interim Committee did its main work,” between May and July 1945. At the 
point during the war when scientists were included in the policy arena, they 
were in a position to be nothing more than a rubber stamp. The Scientific 
Panel merely provided an aura of rationality and of propriety and thereby 
helped to lend legitimacy to the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.'° 

There was one aspect in which the Scientific Panel did go beyond a 
narrowly technical role; this was on the question of international cooperation. 
At the panel’s May 31 meeting, Oppenheimer presented his view that “Russia 
had always been very friendly to science and .. . that we might open up this 
subject with them in a tentative fashion and in most general terms without 
giving them any details of our productive effort.”!” In its June 16 report, the 
panel advised that before using the bomb, the United States should approach 
all its major allies, including the Soviet Union, with overtures regarding future 
cooperation.!® 

However, as the scientists got back to their technical work, their proposals 
for international cooperation were quietly, but decisively, shelved. The news 
of the atomic test profoundly affected Truman’s dealings with the Soviets, but 
it did notlead toward greater cooperation, as the atomic scientists had hoped.'® 
Indeed, the bomb removed the immediate necessity of such cooperation— 
Truman felt that he no longer needed the Soviet Union’s help in the war against 
Japan. In contrast to the hopes of the Scientific Panel, Potsdam marked the 
beginning not of cooperation but of a policy of superpower confrontation, of 
which the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were an expression.”” A few 
months after the bombings, Oppenheimer seemed to have briefly come close to 
recognizing this, but he expressed any concern only privately. In mid-October, 


Power and Vocation 165 


he met with Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace. According to Wallace’s 
diary, the physicist “seemed to feel that the destruction of the entire human 
race wasimminent. . . Itseems that Secretary [of State] [ James] Byrnes has felt 
that we could use the bomb as a pistol to get what we wanted in international 
diplomacy. Oppenheimer believes that that method will not work ... He 
thinks the mishandling of the situation at Potsdam has prepared the way for 
the eventual slaughter of tens of millions or perhaps hundreds of millions of 


innocent people.”?! 


“WE STILL BELIEVE”: OPPENHEIMER, ALAS, 
AND THE SCIENTISTS’ MOVEMENT 


Oppenheimer combined membership in the Manhattan Project’s policy elite 
with paternalistic authority in relation to the laboratory scientists at Los 
Alamos. The laboratory’s scientific rank and file, insulated from scientists 
at other sites by compartmentalization and without direct access to policy 
decisions, had little choice but to have faith in Oppenheimer as their repre- 
sentative. While the Los Alamos scientists harbored deep suspicion of General 
Groves and the project’s military leadership, Oppenheimer encouraged his 
colleagues to defer to the judgment of the civilian political and scientific elites 
in the project’s high command, from Vannevar Bush and James Conant to Sec- 
retary Stimson. Oppenheimer thus prevented the circulation at Los Alamos 
of Szilard’s petition against use of the bomb and was able to persuade the 
scientists to forgo political meetings, subordinating their moral and politi- 
cal concerns to the institutional goal of developing the bomb. Oppenheimer 
gave legitimacy to the hierarchical structure and leadership of the Manhattan 
Project. The end of the war, however, disrupted this structure of authority 
and deference. 

Peace interrupted the disciplined dedication to weaponeering that had 
so dominated the consciousness of the Los Alamos scientists and that had 
largely prevented the emergence of any significant critical reflection on the 
deeper meaning or morality of their work. Scientists’ accounts of their reaction 
to Hiroshima emphasize how the initial euphoria of victory gave way to a 
stark realization of the horrors of the atomic age. Robert Wilson was one 
of the scientists most powerfully affected by Hiroshima: “The news of the 
tremendous suffering and damage and loss of lives ... was an epiphany that 
has changed my life ever since.”?? While most Manhattan Project scientists 
accepted the official justification of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 
many of them quickly became concerned that the full implications of the new 


166 Chapter Six 


weapon were not understood or were not being faced by the public and the 
country’s political leaders. They were worried also about secrecy and military 
control, which had been necessary during the war but which they feared might 
prevent a proper public understanding of, and a long-term political solution 
to, the unprecedented global crisis presented by the atomic bomb. 

Nevertheless, the idea that the Manhattan Project’s scientists were collec- 
tively wracked with guilt over Hiroshima and Nagasaki is a misconception. 
Some were, but Oppenheimer’s anguished confession that he had “blood on 
[his] hands,” which he expressed to an unsympathetic Truman, has too often 
been taken as typical. It is usefully balanced by physicist Freeman Dyson’s 
perception of the young scientists working at Cornell University in the late 
1940s who were fresh out of the Manhattan Project. Dyson perceived that, 
“having no sense of tragedy, they also had no sense of guilt ... They had 
come through the war without scars. Los Alamos had been for them a great 
lark. It left their innocence untouched.””? 

The overarching feeling among the scientific community at the end of the 
war was optimism and a strong sense of accomplishment and of their own po- 
tency in the creation of the atomic bomb. There was a powerful technological- 
utopian strain in the scientists’ desire to find “a silver lining even in the 


nes Many of the scientists believed 


destructive mushroom cloud of the atom. 
that the atomic bomb rendered conventional war obsolete and that it de- 
manded a new approach to international relations. Oppenheimer himself had 
been greatly impressed with Niels Bohr’s vision of atomic science as the 
keystone of a new internationalism. Bohr had spent his wartime exile from 
Nazi-occupied Denmark as an advocate for postwar arms control. He argued 
that the atomic bomb would be a weapon of unprecedented power and that its 
existence would demand a new approach to international peace and security. 
The only way to guarantee security, he argued, was through international con- 
trol, to ensure that the science and technology be developed only for peaceful 
purposes after the end of the war.”° 

Central to Bohr’s vision was the international fraternity of scientists that 
offered a model of peaceful cooperation across national divisions and an 
already existing set of relationships on the basis of which mutual trust could 
be promoted. In particular, he regarded norms of scientific openness and free 
communication as crucial for creating the kind of “open world” necessary 
for peaceful atomic cooperation.”° Bohr failed to convince either Churchill 
or Roosevelt of the need for such cooperation, but he was more successful 
in proselytizing among his scientific colleagues. During the war, Bohr had 
visited Los Alamos as a consultant. Known to the scientists there as “Uncle 


Power and Vocation 167 


Nick,” he was a patrician figure whose presence at the laboratory was felt 
to inject a sense of moral purpose into the work. His utopian vision for the 
role of atomic weapons in creating a peaceful world helped to maintain the 
dedication of the Los Alamos workforce to building the bomb. Oppenheimer 
later reflected that Bohr “made the enterprise which looked so macabre seem 
hopeful.”?” 

Bohr’s ideals resonated with the hopes of young scientists who, embracing 
their liberation from military strictures after the end of the war, formed what 
came to be called the “scientists’ movement.” Scientists’ organizations sprang 
up at all the major Manhattan Project sites. Although it was at Chicago that the 
seeds of the scientists’ movement had been sown, the first formal organization 
was the Association of Los Alamos Scientists (ALAS), established on August 
30, 1945. Initially, scientists’ political organizations were site-specific. As well 
as ALAS, there were the Atomic Scientists of Chicago, the Atomic Engineers 
of Oak Ridge, the Association of Oak Ridge Scientists at Clinton Laboratories, 
and the Association of Manhattan Project Scientists at Columbia University. 
These groups would later join together in the Federation of Atomic Scientists 
(which subsequently became the Federation of American Scientists).7% 

The ALAS scientists looked to Oppenheimer to represent their hopes. 
Oppenheimer was faced with the impossible task of reconciling the idealism 
of Bohr and the Los Alamos scientists with a narrow political pragmatism as 
a servant of the state. He counseled patience, urging his colleagues to have 
faith in the Truman administration, in the scientific leadership of Bush and 
Conant, and in himself as the scientists’ representative in the corridors of 
power. However, as his commitments in Washington pulled him away from 
Los Alamos, he increasingly lost touch with the grass roots of his scientific 
constituency. 

On September 7, 1945, ALAS completed a statement for public release, 
signed by almost all the civilian scientific employees of Los Alamos. The 
statement set out the position of the atomic scientists, describing the power of 
the bomb and its implications and arguing for the necessity of vesting control 
in an international organization. Victor Weisskopf wrote to Oppenheimer on 
behalf of ALAS, asking him to submit the statement to the Interim Committee 
so that it could be approved for release to the press. As Wilson put it, “Because 
wewere still living on top ofa mountain under the strictures of absolute secrecy, 
we turned it over, trustingly, to Oppenheimer to expedite its release.””° 
Oppenheimer submitted the document as requested. When it was received 


by the War Department, however, Washington bureaucracy proceeded to 
block it. 


168 Chapter Six 


Meanwhile, the ALAS members were becoming increasingly restless. Weis- 
skopfagain wrote to Oppenheimer asking whether, as a member of the Interim 
Committee, he would approve of their writing a “group statement, political 
only,” for direct distribution to newspapers, radio commentators, and mem- 
bers of Congress. Oppenheimer replied that while he could not argue against 
individual letter-writing, he was very strongly opposed to any group statement 
or collective action. He was worried that the release ofsucha statement “would 
be a breach of faith with the administration.” And he threatened that if the 
scientists released the document, he would give up his work in Washington 
and return to California. Then he dropped the bombshell that the ALAS 
statement that he had passed along to the War Department had been classified 
by the department as a state paper. Oppenheimer tried to put forward the 
most positive interpretation of this development. ALAS chairman William A. 
Higinbotham’s naive initial reaction to Oppenheimer’s version of events was, 
“Yes! Our document has become a state paper and has aroused a lot of helpful 
disc[ussion] in the cabinet.” But the ALAS membership quickly realized that 
the statement could not now be released and that Los Alamos no longer had 
control over it.°? 

Soon after these exchanges, at an IBM (International Business Machines) 
luncheon, General Groves made a speech disparaging scientists’ authority to 
speak out on policy questions, and his comments were widely quoted in the 
press. John Manley wrote to Groves advising him that Manley and a few others 
were trying to prevent their colleagues at Los Alamos from “doing anything 
which might embarrass the Administration.” This task, he said, was made 
considerably more difficult by Groves’s statement, and he warned the general 
of the danger of a schism developing between the administration, the Army, 
and the scientists.?! 

Norris Bradbury, who served as acting director of Los Alamos during Op- 
penheimer’s many trips to Washington and who was soon to succeed him as 
director, wrote to Oppenheimer about the demand by the staff at Los Alamos 
to send a protest to the Interim Committee. Characteristically, Oppenheimer 
attempted to smooth ruffled feathers and to prevent a confrontation. While 
he would not object to their writing to the committee, he told Bradbury, 
“the Interim Committee is largely defunct and I doubt whether the desired 
answer will be forthcoming.” This was certainly news to the scientists at Los 
Alamos—another indication of their distance from power and their reliance 
on Oppenheimer as their representative in Washington. And Oppenheimer 
added, conveying the impression of intimacy with those in power, that “Gen- 
eral Groves and I can both assure you that he spoke in New York, as at 


Power and Vocation 169 


other times, as an individual and I can assure you that the quoted newspaper 
accounts do not appear to correspond with the views of any of the members of 
the Interim Committee, nor, I believe, to official War Department views.”*” 

Oppenheimer had begun to one-sidedly present the official line to the 
scientists. By binding the scientific community to the state, he helped to 
undercut the scientists’ capacity to engage with the public. This was evident 
as Oppenheimer turned to the matter of what he called “the famous memo”— 
that is, the now-classified ALAS statement. “It is my feeling,” he wrote to 
Bradbury, “and the general feeling of all with whom I have talked, that public 
discussion of the issues involved is very much to be desired, but that it should 
follow rather than precede the President’s statement of national policy which 
will be conveyed in his message to Congress.” The presidential message was 
to be the announcement ofa new bill on atomic energy. “We do not anticipate 
further great delays in this message,” Oppenheimer said, his use of the first- 
person plural suggesting, reassuringly, that he himself was involved in the 
process. 

Oppenheimer emphasized his intimacy with the administration and the 
ultimate harmony of the scientists’ goals with those of the government. His 
appeal to his constituency was successful. Higinbotham told an ALAS meet- 
ing, “We have one representative ... that is, Oppie ... We still believe and 
urge you to go along with Oppie and the administration.” The meeting agreed 
not to issue a statement until after the president’s speech and, without dis- 
sent, carried the motion “that Willy tell Oppie that we are strongly behind 
him.” The general feeling was that “as long as Oppie was our voice, we leave 
everything up to him.”** 

But some were no longer willing to leave everything up to Oppenheimer; 
they came to believe that he was being used by the administration to keep the 
scientific community in line. Wilson wrote out his own version of the ALAS 
statement and mailed it, as an individual, to the New York Times. He reflected, 
“Mailing it was a serious violation of security. But it made the front page of 
the Times, and no one has ever questioned my right to send it. For me, it 
was a declaration of independence from our leaders at Los Alamos, not that 
I did not continue to admire and cherish them. But the lesson we learned 
early on was that the Best and the Brightest, if in a position of power, were 
frequently constrained by other considerations and were not necessarily to be 
relied upon.” 

A further challenge to Oppenheimer’s authority, however, was to come 
with the presidential announcement, upon which the scientists had been 
enjoined to wait before publicizing their views, and the introduction of the 


170 Chapter Six 


May-Johnson bill to Congress on October 4.°° Most worrying for the scientists 
was the extent to which the bill would hand control of atomic energy over to 
the military. The scientists had the impression that the Army was attempting 
to rush the bill through Congress without adequate debate or scrutiny. They 
feared that if the bill passed, it would mean the indefinite extension of the 
wartime regime of the Manhattan Project.” 

On October 7, Oppenheimer brought from Washington a copy of the 
May-Johnson bill and discussed it with the ALAS executive committee. He 
urged the scientists to have faith in the Truman administration and not to 
criticize the government’s position. He was able to overcome the scientists’ 
initial adverse reaction, and by the end of the session the committee had voted 
unanimously to endorse the bill.** In its support for the bill, ALAS stood in 
contrast with the scientists’ organizations of the other Manhattan Project labs. 
The influence and independence of the broader scientists’ movement proved 
harder to contain. 

After visiting Chicago from Los Alamos, Herbert Anderson, himself for- 
merly a member of the Met Lab, wrote angrily to Higinbotham: “We had 
been asked by our representatives in Washington to withhold comment lest 
this cause undue controversy and delay the acceptance of the measure.” And 
he said that “I must confess my confidence in our leaders Oppenheimer, 
Lawrence, Compton, and Fermi, all members of the Scientific Panel advising 
the Interim Committee and who enjoined us to have faith in them and not 
influence this legislation, is shaken.”°? The same day (October 11), Oppen- 
heimer, Fermi, and Lawrence sent a telegram to Stimson’s successor, Robert 
Patterson. The scientists wrote that they “strongly urge[d] the passage of 
the legislation,” defending it as “the fruits of well-informed and experienced 
consideration.”“° A rift was becoming apparent between the scientific lead- 
ership who had formed the Interim Committee and the general opinion of 
the rank-and-file laboratory scientists. In the following week, the previously 
unquestioned leadership of the wartime elite was challenged, as scientists from 
the various organizations descended on Washington to express their views on 
the atomic energy legislation. 

Before returning to Washington, Oppenheimer was given another oppor- 
tunity to rally Los Alamos behind him. On October 16, he resigned as director 
of Los Alamos; at the ceremony held that day, he accepted, on behalf of the 
laboratory, the Army-Navy Award for Excellence and a Certificate of Ap- 
preciation from the secretary of war.*! Faced with dissent and controversy 
over the impending domestic legislation, Oppenheimer repeatedly sought to 
downplay its significance, stressing instead the higher goal of international 


Power and Vocation 171 


control of atomic energy as a vehicle of world peace.” This, he suggested, was 
the scientists’ true purpose, since it arose from the very nature of the scientific 
community as an international fraternity. It was to these utopian themes that 
Oppenheimer appealed in his final speech as director of Los Alamos. “By 
our works,” he told his colleagues, “we are committed, committed to a world 
united, before this common peril, in law, and in humanity.”*? As when he 
had spoken on the occasion of Roosevelt’s death, Oppenheimer wove the 
laboratory’s instrumental work into a messianic narrative of a moral mission. 
It was a performance delivered with true virtuosity, “his voice ... pregnant 
with responsibility,” and it reinforced his authority as “the man who guided 
the work and wove the threads together.” As during the war, he again called 
forth solidarity in the pursuit of a communal goal and integrated Los Alamos 
behind his leadership. As resident Eleanor Jette put it, “That day he was us. 
He spoke to us, and for us.” 

The following day, he was in Washington. But his role in speaking for 
the scientists was now more problematic. While repeating passionately the 
scientists’ mantra that they needed freedom in pursuing their research, Op- 
penheimer was also there to give his support to the May-Johnson bill, widely 
opposed by the atomic scientists outside Los Alamos. Oppenheimer was 
asked for his opinions on the bill while testifying to a Senate subcommittee 
dealing with science legislation. Giving his views on the organization and 
funding of basic research, Oppenheimer appealed for the freedom of the sci- 
entific community from regulation, control, and formal accountability, even 
while unprecedented amounts of public money were to be directed its way. 
He made “a plea for not overorganizing the work of scientists, and for trusting, 
as we have in the past, their own judgment of what work is worth doing.””” 

In defense of this autonomy, Oppenheimer presented an image of the scien- 
tific community as self-regulating. He drew on a conservative discourse about 
science as traditional knowledge, embodied in what he called “a way of life.” 
Opposed to progressive calls for the planning of science to meet goals of so- 
cial welfare, Oppenheimer argued that such motivation could not be imposed 
externally. Rather, “it is only indirectly, through the complex mechanisms 
of education, taste, and value, that the need of society for science does get 
translated into the seed of the scientists.” Oppenheimer presented scientific 
progress as the organic growth ofa community, with its own traditions, values, 
and modes of social control. He invoked ideas of fellowship, community, and 
apprenticeship as an alternative to formal control: “The scientist does not 
work in a vacuum, though he sometimes talks as though he does. He needs 
freedom; that is not because he is an isolated individual, but only because he 


172 Chapter Six 


may be in a better position to plan his work than anyone else. Equally, and 
equally deeply, he needs a sense of community with his fellow men.”“° 

This defense of scientific autonomy, however, stood in tension with Op- 
penheimer’s support for the May-Johnson bill, which proposed far-reaching 
powers for a militarily oriented Atomic Energy Commission. When he found 
himself pressed on this point by Senator William Fulbright, what was most 
striking in Oppenheimer’s response was just how little he had concretely to 
say about the atomic energy legislation: “The Johnson bill, I don’t know much 
about.”47 

Oppenheimer’s message to the senators and representatives was substan- 
tially the same as the advice he had given the scientists at Los Alamos: an 
injunction to trust the good men of the administration. He told the House 


Committee on Military Affairs the following day: 


The [May-Johnson] bill was drafted with the detailed supervision of 
Dr. Bush and Dr. Conant, with the knowledge and the agreement of 
the former Secretary of War, Mr. Stimson. I think that no one in the 
country carried a greater weight of responsibility for this project than 
Mr. Stimson. I think no men in positions of responsibility, who were 
scientists, took more responsibility or were more courageous or better 
informed in the general sense than Dr. Bush and Dr. Conant. I think if 
they liked the philosophy of this bill and urged this bill it is a very strong 
argument. I know that many scientists do not agree with me on this, but 
I am nevertheless convinced myself.** 


Critics of the bill, including both scientists and politicians, were worried 
about the breadth of power that it would give to the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion. The commission’s powers appeared dangerously undefined in the bill’s 
wording. The scientists’ organizations were, for example, concerned that the 
AEC’s control over atomic energy would extend to the regulation of labora- 
tory research within universities. Oppenheimer argued that such breadth and 
vagueness were a necessary response to the novelty and uncertainty of atomic 
energy. 

Just as Oppenheimer’s argument for the bill was predicated on trust in 
Stimson, Bush, and Conant, so his conception of the operation of the com- 
mission was predicated on trust in the future commissioners. More important 
than written provisions, to Oppenheimer, was the character of the commis- 
sioners themselves. So, while admitting that “if it is construed unwisely; that 
is, ifit is executed unwisely, it could stop science in its tracks,” he argued that 


Power and Vocation 173 


“the whole philosophy of the bill is that it will be possible to find a commission 
that will execute these provisions wisely.”4° 

Further, unlike many of his scientific colleagues, Oppenheimer was not 
overly perturbed by the fact that the May-Johnson bill permitted military 
officers to be appointed to powerful positions within the commission. He told 
the House committee, “I think it is a matter not what uniform a man wears 
but what kind of man he is.” “I cannot,” he said, “think ofan administrator in 
whom I would have more confidence than General Marshall.”°” 

During the war, Oppenheimer had been initiated into a small but powerful 
policy elite, which was subject to almost no outside scrutiny or accountability. 
His appeals for trust in this elite signaled to others that he himself was now 
fully a member. But Oppenheimer failed to understand that such personal 
trust came less easily and was much less appealing to members of Congress, 
who valued their powers of scrutiny and oversight, and to those scientists 
who had felt marginalized and disempowered by their exclusion from key 
decisions during the war. To those situated at a greater social distance from 
the Manhattan Project’s inner circle, Oppenheimer’s advertisement ofhis easy 
familiarity in this elite could trigger suspicion. As one scientist commented, 
“When he started referring to General Marshall as ‘George,’ we knew what a 
change had come over him.”°! 

So Oppenheimer combined a defense of the autonomy of the scientific com- 
munity with an equally elitist defense of broad powers for a scientific-military 
administrative elite. In both cases, his argument was for personal trust rather 
than formal accountability and control. Oppenheimer was performing a dual 
role—as spokesman both for the scientific community (pressing for research 
autonomy) and for the administrative elite (pressing for strong administrative 
power with minimal accountability). He struggled to reconcile the former with 
the latter, but he seemed unprepared to deal with the potential for conflict 
between these roles. 

If Oppenheimer had not expected such conflict between his constituen- 
cles, it was because of his belief that he himself had been able to bridge them. 
His rhetoric, appealing to notions of fellowship, community, and transcendent 
purpose, tended to paper over such grubby questions of power and conflict 
in favor of an image of national solidarity and moral cohesion wisely presided 
over by a trusted elite, in which he was embedded. 

While not denying that the war had generated important changes, Oppen- 
heimer sought to recapture a status quo ante bellum. This was also an effort 
to define the meaning of his own role as a scientist. Oppenheimer’s argu- 
ments for scientific autonomy amounted to an elitist defense of the academic 


174 Chapter Six 


establishment, an appeal to an image of academic “purity” in denial of the new 
interweaving of academia with the military-industrial complex. Despite the 
new complexity of the scientific role, Oppenheimer sought to extract a sphere 
that he painted as somehow inherently untouched by the war. Rather than 
science having been transformed by the war, this rhetoric portrayed science 
as having been put on hold, or deep-frozen, during this time; its pristine body 
could now, after the war, be revived.>” 

Oppenheimer argued that the bomb project had been “an enormous tech- 
nological development ... but it was not science, and its whole spirit was 
one of frantic exploitation of the known; it was not that of the sober, modest 
attempt to penetrate the unknown.” It followed from this that the mission- 
directed and government-controlled wartime organization of science could in 
no way be adequate as a model for scientific institutions in times of peace. 
“This is,” he stated, “a plea for leaving much of the scientific strength of 
the country in the universities and technical schools, the small institutions 
in which scientists have worked in the past and in which they will have the 
leisure and privacy to think those essential, dangerous thoughts which are the 
true substance of science.” A distinction between science and technology, 
and the definition of the war’s legacy as merely technological, was essential 
to Oppenheimer’s negotiation of, on the one hand, academic autonomy and, 
on the other, control of atomic energy for national security. The science of 
the atom would be autonomous. The technology of atomic energy would be 
controlled and directed by the government. 

Such a demarcation was also implicated in Oppenheimer’s presentation of 
self. Indeed, Oppenheimer distanced himself from the very topic addressed 
by the May-Johnson bill. His statement, he told the senators, would be “some- 
what academic and corresponds to my position as professor of physics rather 
than to my position as a maker ofbombs.” When Oppenheimer testified before 
the House committee, specifically on the May-Johnson bill, he was asked, as a 
matter of course, what his qualifications were on the subject. He replied airily, 
“T have practically no qualifications, Mr. Chairman. Iama physicist who taught 
in California, in Berkeley and in Pasadena, before the war. In 1941 I became 
interested in the possibility of making atomic weapons, and since the inception 
of the laboratory at Los Alamos I have been its director. So I know a little bit 
about the making of bombs.”°4 Although it was Oppenheimer’s managerial 
role as director of a large-scale wartime weapons laboratory that was of most 
interest to the representatives and senators, he often distanced himself from 
what soon came to be called “big science.” While pointing out the demand 
of experimental laboratories for those “large and expensive gadgets which 


Power and Vocation 175 


physicists like to play with,” Oppenheimer said, “You see my equipment 
[indicating pencil]. This is a rather luxurious specimen, so I am not a very 
good person to talk about it.”® When it suited him, Oppenheimer would play 
the cloistered theoretician, unconcerned with matters of the world. Much of 
his public discussion of atomic energy after the war was characterized by this 
aloofness, as if to suggest that his sights were focused on contemplating matters 
deeper or higher—at any rate, less mundane. It was as though atomic energy 
were something of a nuisance: it had to be sorted out, but it was only a rather 
nasty and annoying interlude from the real preoccupations of the scientist. 

Oppenheimer’s claim to speak on behalf of the scientists was further trou- 
bled by the fact that he was now testifying alongside delegates from the various 
new scientists’ organizations. At the morning session of the Senate subcom- 
mittee on October 17, Oppenheimer was joined by Howard J. Curtis from 
the Association of Oak Ridge Scientists at Clinton Laboratories. There were 
a number of key points of disagreement between Curtis’s testimony and that 
of Oppenheimer. These led to a sharp exchange when Oppenheimer asked 
to comment on the testimony that Curtis had just given. Curtis had, for ex- 
ample, rejected Oppenheimer’s distinction between science and technology, 
addressing this as “a misconception which has crept into the press recently.” 
No such distinction could be maintained, Curtis said: “The two are so closely 
connected that it would be impossible to pick out any single fact and say ‘this 
is a scientific fact, devoid of industrial applications,’ and any attempt to do so 
seems ludicrous.””° 

Curtis concluded that no institutional separation could be maintained be- 
tween free scientific research and secret, military-oriented bomb research: “If 
the so-called secret of the atomic bomb is to be kept in this country, then 
American science as we have known it, will cease to exist.” Oppenheimer 
responded that he could “see no technical difficulty about keeping consider- 
able parts of this secret without interfering in a major way with [research] .. . 
People have kept military things secret in the past. If they wish to, they can in 
the future.”°” 

Curtis had stressed that the “only . . . solution to the secrecy problem” lay 
in the establishment of international control of atomic energy. Oppenheimer 
argued in response that the May-Johnson bill was a necessary stopgap that 
would allow the continuation of atomic research until the creation of such an 
international organization.”® 

Oppenheimer’s authority in such situations depended on the management 
of potentially conflicting constituencies. Alice Kimball Smith admiringly re- 
ferred to Oppenheimeras playing the role of the “very helpful elder statesman,” 


176 Chapter Six 


aiding the debate by presenting both sides of the argument.”? Certainly, this 
is the image at which Oppenheimer was aiming, one that would transcend the 
differences between the factions on whose support he relied. There seems to 
have been some difficulty at the time in figuring out exactly what position he 
was taking; Oppenheimer’s Senate testimony was reported by one newspaper 
on the following day as an “oblique attack” on the May-Johnson bill. 

Oppenheimer’s intentionally mixed performance was, however, disap- 
pointing to the scientists who had relied on him as their spokesman. His state- 
ment that the administration’s atomic energy bill was something about which 
he knew little came as an unpleasant surprise to scientists at Los Alamos: 
they had previously been led to believe that he was intimately involved in its 
preparation, and they had been counting on his benevolent influence on its 
content and direction. Meeting ALAS members after his testtmony, Oppen- 
heimer faced—in contrast with his heroic send-off from Los Alamos—what 
one scientist described as “the coolest reception I have ever seen Oppie given 
by a group of scientists.” At a meeting of the ALAS executive committee on 
October 25, Weisskopf suggested not only that the group’s “future action” 
be “not based on [the] assumption that [the] administration is with us,” but 
also that “Oppie’s suggestions be studied more critically.”°! 

The tide was turning against the May-Johnson bill. In addition to the in- 
tense lobbying by the atomic scientists, the bill began to face opposition within 
the administration, fueled by worries about the lack of clear political account- 
ability of the future AEC. The administration put its support behind a com- 
peting bill put forward by Senator Brien McMahon of Connecticut. This bill 
provided for a civilian commission and did not include such heavy-handed 
security provisions and restrictions on information as had its predecessor. 

However, the sense of victory was short-lived: the House managed to 
introduce so many changes to the bill that, as historian Lawrence Badash 
wrote, “the product resembled May-Johnson more than it did McMahon.” 
The Atomic Energy Act, signed by the president at the beginning of August 
1946, proved to be a Pyrrhic victory for the scientists’ movement. Though 
nominally civilian, the commission incorporated a powerful Military Liaison 
Committee, and its work, in practice, came to be oriented primarily toward 
military goals. Historian Michael Sherry observed that “the struggle over 
civilian control obscured how civilian elites matched the zeal of military 
officers in pursuing national security.”°? 

Oppenheimer was damaged by his support for the May-Johnson bill, but 
he weathered the storm. His ability to come out relatively unscathed was 
due primarily to the fact that he had never identified himself wholly with the 


Power and Vocation 177 


bill. Rather, he had always emphasized what he regarded as the higher goal 
of the international control of atomic energy. It was with this transcendent 
goal that Oppenheimer was most strongly associated by the scientists, as he 
articulated a vision of a utopian mission for the scientists arising both from 
the nature of scientific community and from their work on the atomic bomb. 
On November 2, 1945, Oppenheimer spoke to ALAS members packing the 
Los Alamos movie theater. His speech wove together their instrumental work 
on the bomb and a sense of transcendent mission. Oppenheimer’s skill here 
was in connecting the theme of special scientific responsibility with a defense 
of the administration. As he did so, he sought to present himself as chief 
mediator of the relationship between science and the state. 

In this speech, Oppenheimer set out a conception of scientific vocation 
that presented scientists’ wartime work on the bomb as legitimate and that 
also suggested a way in which scientists were centrally implicated in, and 
responsible for, the postwar problems arising from the bomb. He portrayed the 
role of the scientist as embodying certain inherent values, and he claimed that 
the atomic bomb was not a breach but a fulfillment of these values. Whatever 
the individual motivations—whether fear, curiosity, or political principles— 
that led scientists to engage in building the atomic bomb, he argued that there 
was a deeper reason for their involvement: “When you come right down to it 
the reason that we did this job is because it was an organic necessity. If you 
are a scientist you cannot stop such a thing. If you are a scientist you believe 
that it is good to find out how the world works; that it is good to find out what 
the realities are; that it is good to turn over to mankind at large the greatest 
possible power to control the world and to deal with it according to its lights 
and its values.”°4 Oppenheimer thereby presented science as a calling, valued 
for its own sake. 

However, Oppenheimer also sought to present this pursuit of science for 
its own sake as connecting with more universal human values. He did so by 
representing the atomic bomb itself as a vehicle for wider human aspirations. 
While there had “always been good arguments” for overcoming war, and 
specifically for the organization of a world federation or United Nations 
organization, Oppenheimer argued that the atomic bomb provided a new 
urgency and a new opportunity for achieving such goals. Atomic weapons, he 
said, are a universal problem for humanity, “a peril which affect[s] everyone in 
the world . . .a completely common problem.” Because of that, the bomb was 
“not only a great peril, but a great hope.” In this way, Oppenheimer connected 
technological determinism with the historical agency of the scientists. And he 
wove together the roles of pure scientist, bomb builder, and moralist.© 


178 Chapter Six 


In arguing for a special role for scientists, Oppenheimer represented the 
communal structure of the scientific vocation as carrying universal signifi- 
cance. He argued that atomic energy “is a new field, in which just the novelty 
and the special characteristics of the technical operations should enable one 
to establish a community of interest which might almost be regarded as a pilot 
plant for anew type ofinternational relations.” The internationalism of science, 
as a model for a new international order, would combine with the globalism 
of the nuclear threat to produce “a new spirit in international affairs.” 

Oppenheimer balanced the potential radicalism of this line with his now- 
familiar appeal for trust in the powers that be. Secretary Stimson, he said, 
shared the scientists’ “hope ... that there would be a new world.” He also 
praised President Truman: “Certainly you will notice, especially in the mes- 
sage to Congress, many indications of a sympathy with, and an understanding 
of, the views which this group holds.”°’ Thus, Oppenheimer set out an image 
ofa revolutionary or messianic role for the scientist in ushering in a new world 
order, but he tempered this with an appeal for trust in the political establish- 
ment. In so doing, he staked a claim to a personal role as conduit between 
the atomic scientists and the government, connecting the professional ethos 
of science with the power of the state. 


TOWARD INTERNATIONAL CONTROL: SCIENTIFIC 
MESSIANISM AND TRIUMPHANT AMERICAN LIBERALISM 


If Oppenheimer’s stance on the domestic politics of atomic energy strained 
his relationship with his scientific constituency, the issue of international con- 
trol maintained his status as the legitimate voice of scientists’ hopes. Once 
more he performed a bridging function, this time through his central role in 
early 1946 on David Lilienthal’s Board of Consultants to the State Department. 
Lilienthal, the former chief of the New Deal organizational and engineering 
feat the Tennessee Valley Authority, was tasked by Under Secretary of State 
Dean Acheson with formulating a plan for the international control of atomic 
energy. In his work on what became known as the Acheson-Lilienthal re- 
port, Oppenheimer welded the ideology of the scientists’ movement to the 
policy structure of the U.S. government and channeled the aspirations of the 
scientists’ movement into support for existing political structures.°° Oppen- 
heimer’s influence is clear in the report’s statement that the development of 
atomic energy “may contain seeds which will in time grow into that coopera- 
tion between nations which may bring an end to all war” and in the report’s 
invocation of Bohr’s ideal of the international Republic of Science: “There 


Power and Vocation 179 


can be no international cooperation which does not presuppose an interna- 
tional community of knowledge.”®? Oppenheimer was gratified to receive a 
letter from Bohr endorsing the report: “In every word of it I find just the spirit 
which I think offers the best hopes for the development in which we all put 
our whole faith .. . From page to page I recognized your broad views and re- 
fined power of expression.”’° Through his work on the report, Oppenheimer 
helped to give American foreign policy the aura of scientific legitimacy and to 
paint this policy as a realization of utopian scientific modernism.”! 

From their first encounter, Lilienthal was particularly impressed with Op- 
penheimer and acted as his governmental patron from that time on. For good 
or ill, Oppenheimer came to be closely identified with Lilienthal’s regime. 
Their initial meeting was in a Washington hotel room on January 22, 1946. 
Oppenheimer, Lilienthal recorded in his diary, “walked back and forth, mak- 
ing funny ‘hugh’ sounds between sentences or phrases as he paced the room, 
looking at the floor—a mannerism quite strange ... I left liking him, greatly 
impressed with his flash of a mind, but rather disconcerted by the flow of 
words.” Lilienthal’s awe at Oppenheimer’s intellectual powers soon grew. 
He described his meeting with Acheson, Conant, Bush, Groves, and Oppen- 
heimer the next day as “one of the most memorable intellectual and emotional 
experiences of my life” and made particular reference to Oppenheimer again: 
“The scientist who more than anyone else was able at Los Alamos to find a 
way to turn the knowledge of nuclear forces into a weapon that shattered the 
whole world, as we knew it, at Hiroshima; an extraordinary personage (and 
as I learned today a really great teacher).”” 

To Lilienthal, Oppenheimer embodied the scientific aspects of the atomic 
bomb project, whose secrets he was now learning for the first time. He was 
thrilled when, at a meeting of the advisory group, “Oppenheimer talked to 
us, without limitation (i.e. including some of the top secrets, chiefly scien- 
tific discoveries not ‘released’ about fundamentals).” A few days later, briefed 
further by Oppenheimer, Lilienthal wrote in his diary, “No fairy tale that I 
read in utter rapture and enchantment as a child, no spy mystery, no ‘horror’ 
story, can remotely compare with the scientific recital I listened to for six or 
seven hours today . . . I was told well, technically, dispassionately, but inter- 
spersed with stories of the decisions that had to be made, the utter simplicity 
and yet fantastic complexity of the peering into the laws of nature. That is the 
essence of this utterly bizarre and, literally, incredible business.””” Lilienthal 
later told AEC attorney Herbert Marks of his intense admiration for Oppen- 
heimer: “[It] is worth living a lifetime just to know that mankind has been 


able to produce such a being.””4 


180 Chapter Six 


Oppenheimer’s command of esoteric knowledge was particularly attractive 
to Lilienthal, because of his own modernist-technocratic faith in information 
and expertise. Lilienthal believed that his committee had “an opportunity to 
analyze what is called a political problem in a scientific spirit ... We started 
somewhat as a chemist might, tackling a technical problem: with the facts as 
he found them.””* 

Oppenheimer likewise urged the “injection of the spirit of the scientists 
into this problem of atomic weapons.” He again drew on the notion of science 
as a universal culture, in the reach and significance of its knowledge and in 
the internationalism of scientific community: “Science, by its methods, its 
values, and the nature of the objectivity it seeks, is universally human.””° 
Speaking to a crowd of fifteen hundred at Cornell University in early May 
1946, Oppenheimer presented wartime Los Alamos itself as exemplifying the 
capacity of scientists of different nationalities to work together in a common 
cause.’” The universality of scientific culture was, ina sense, realized through 
the universality of the atomic threat. The bomb was “ta new mechanism for 
altering the political complexion of the world.””? Oppenheimer wove the 
atomic bomb into a narrative of progress, the weapon’s global destructiveness 
providing a vehicle for the achievement of universal human ideals. In the same 
month, he told an audience in Pittsburgh that the only solution to the problem 
of atomic weapons was an end to war in general, but that the existence of 
the bomb itself provided an unprecedented opportunity to achieve this: “The 
atomic bomb, most spectacular of proven weapons, the most inextricably 
intertwined with constructive developments and the least fettered by private 
or vested interests or by long national tradition is for these and other reasons 
the place to start.””? 

Oppenheimer thereby presented the bomb as a medium for transcendence, 
a realization of modernist dreams of breaching the constraints of history and 
tradition. The technological achievement of the bomb paved the way for a 
purely rational solution to international relations. In this way, Oppenheimer 
mobilized the technological-utopian rhetoric of the scientists’ movement to 
justify the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. He told a subcommittee of 
the Senate Committee on Military Affairs in October 1945 that the intensity 
of the scientists’ wartime work was fueled by this philosophy: “We [at Los 
Alamos] thought that since atomic weapons could be realized, they must 
be realized for the world to see because they were the best argument that 
science could make . . . for a more reasonable and a new idea of the relations 
between nations.” Senator Fulbright responded, “In other words, that is one 


Power and Vocation 181 


of the justifications for its use. It took the shock, we will say, of Hiroshima, 
to bring the world to a consciousness of what another war might mean, and 
it therefore gives the reason for seeing that there is no more war. | think 
in that sense it does justify its use, regardless of how regrettable it may 
have been in that particular instance.” Oppenheimer replied, “That is in my 
opinion,” and he added, “I know that my colleagues share these views.”*° 
As he presented the concrete horror of the atomic attacks as a necessary 
means to the abstract good of pax atomica, Oppenheimer sought to connect 
the instrumental scientific role of bomb builder with a broader role for the 
scientist as a representative of moral progress. Through his membership on 
the Board of Consultants, Oppenheimer could be at once technical adviser to 
a governmental-bureaucratic committee and spokesman for utopian-human- 
istic aspirations for a world freed from war. 

Oppenheimer’s hope that a panel of experts could achieve a purely techni- 
cal solution to the problems of world order was to be dented by increasingly 
fraught political conflicts. The appointment by Secretary Byrnes of Bernard 
Baruch to put forward the Acheson-Lilienthal proposals at the United Nations 
was recognized by those who had worked on the original reportas signaling the 
impending defeat of their hopes.*! The seventy-six-year-old retired financier, 
whom Oppenheimer and Lilienthal referred to as “the Old Man,” could not 
have stood in sharper contrast with the sort of youthful, forward-looking 
technical elite that Lilienthal saw embodied in Oppenheimer and the atomic 
scientists.°” 

Oppenheimer and Lilienthal’s fears were confirmed when Baruch began 
to demand changes to their plan. Baruch and his coterie were not in sympathy 
with the philosophy of the Acheson-Lilienthal report. Herbert Swope, one 
of Baruch’s assistants, called the report “a set of pious platitudes.” Swope 
was particularly annoyed by the scientists’ “hoity-toity” talk of the “sanctity 
and illimitability” of science.8? Baruch took exception to what he saw as 
the arrogance of the scientists’ view that they “were wiser or more noble than 
others when it came to dealing with the world’s fate.” To him, the fundamental 
questions at stake were political.*4 

Baruch specifically objected to the lack of provision in the Acheson- 
Lilienthal report for enforcement or sanctions in case of treaty violation, and 
this became the key difference between the Baruch Plan and the earlier report, 
which it superseded. Baruch insisted that any agreement include penalties for 
violation, a detailed schedule for transition to UN control of atomic energy, 
and, crucially, the removal of the Security Council veto over penalties for 


182 Chapter Six 


treaty violation. The State Department had argued that it was pointless to 
spell out penalties in this way. If a major nation violated the treaty, the UN 
would be unable to compel compliance without a war, and talk of penalties 
would invite rejection by the Soviets.®° 

Any remote possibility of Soviet acceptance of the plan was also safely put to 
rest by the U.S. atomic tests in the Pacific, carried out for the Navy’s Operation 
Crossroads. The first of the two tests occurred at just over two weeks into the 
UN negotiations, with a B-29 dropping an atomic bomb on captured Japanese 
naval vessels off Bikini atoll. The Soviets interpreted the tests as a signal that 
America’s real aim was to maintain its atomic monopoly and as an attempt to 
put pressure on the negotiations.°° The tests also weakened the American pub- 
lic’s sense of the urgency of arms control, normalizing the atomic bomb as 
merely another weapon, not an outstanding moral and political problem. Jour- 
nalist Norman Cousins wrote that “after four bombs, the mystery dissolves 
into a pattern. By this time there is almost a standardization of catastrophe.”*” 
When Baruch resigned as the United States’ representative in January 1947, the 
talks at the UN had already become a meaningless exchange of propaganda.** 

In his journal entries, Lilienthal described Oppenheimer’s belief in the 
importance of the Baruch Plan as a fork in the road between peace and war, 
and he noted the physicist’s consequent despair at the demise of the talks. In 
July 1946, Oppenheimer had confided in Lilienthal his belief that if the talks 
ultimately failed, “this will be construed as a demonstration of Russia’s warlike 
intentions. And this will fit perfectly into the planning of that growing number 
who want to put the country on a war footing, first psychologically, then 
actually. The Army directing the country’s research; Red-baiting; treating all 
labor organizations, CIO first, as Communist and therefore traitorous etc.” 
Lilienthal recorded in his diary, “He is really a tragic figure; with all his great 
attractiveness, brilliance of mind. As I left him he looked so sad: ‘I am ready 
to go anywhere and do anything, but I am bankrupt of further ideas. And I 
find that physics and the teaching of physics, which is my life, now seems 
irrelevant.’” This, Lilienthal reported, “wrung my heart.”*? 

However, this was a dramatic part that Oppenheimer had been prepared to 
enact. Failure of the UN negotiations had been most likely from the begmning. 
As early as April, Oppenheimer had told Baruch that he believed the measures 
called for by the Acheson-Lilienthal report were incompatible with the Soviet 
system of government. Oppenheimer essentially saw the plan as a way for the 
United States to do the right thing and give the Soviets a chance to cooperate, 
even though he strongly doubted that they would. But he apparently did not 
question why the United States would pursue such a plan. He stopped short 


Power and Vocation 183 


of attempting to gain a critical understanding of the power-political interests 
or diplomatic gamesmanship behind the plan.” 

In treating the problems of atomic energy as technical ones to which a ra- 
tional solution could be applied, Oppenheimer and the Board of Consultants 
abstracted these problems from the asymmetrical nature of atomic power in 
the immediate aftermath of the war. An unwillingness to confront issues of 
power (particularly to analyze American power from a realist perspective) 
was inherent in Oppenheimer’s positivistic-technical approach. This turning 
away from the realities of power politics was also involved in Oppenheimer’s 
characteristic rhetorical appeals to notions of “fraternity” and “community” 
and his belief that through the bomb, these values could come to form the basis 
for a new “spirit” in international affairs. He could see power politics at work 
only in the Soviet rejection of the proposals. The Acheson-Lilienthal report 
and the Baruch Plan were, he publicly maintained, rational proposals put for- 
ward in a spirit of generosity. The desire to present American science, and by 
extension the American atomic bomb, as transcending the world of power pol- 
itics strongly informed the scientists’ understanding of the Baruch Plan. Their 
spokesmen reacted swiftly and angrily to any challenges to this understanding. 

The most significant such challenge came from British physicist P. M.S. 
Blackett. Blackett was a pioneer of operational research (OR) during the war, 
and in 1941 he participated in the writing of the British government’s MAUD 
Committee report on the possibility of building an atomic bomb. Between 
August 1945 and spring 1947, he served on the Attlee government’s Advisory 
Committee on Atomic Energy. In 1948, he received the Nobel Prize for Physics 
for confirming the existence of the positron. His book Fear, War, and the 
Bomb, first published in 1948 and released in Americaa year later, attacked the 
sacred canons of the American scientists’ movement one by one, beginning 
with the official interpretation of Hiroshima.*! 

The American scientific elite largely supported the official account pre- 
sented by Henry Stimson: that the bombing of Hiroshima had ended the war, 
saving in the process between half a million and one million American and 
Japanese lives—a figure that was plucked from thin air and that survives as 
a powerful myth.” Blackett argued that on the contrary, the purpose of the 
atomic bombings had been not only to end the war in the Pacific but also, and 
even more importantly, to end the war on American terms by preempting the 
agreed-on date for the Soviets’ entry into the war against Japan. He concluded 
that “the dropping of the atomic bombs was not so much the last military act 
of the second World War, as the first major operation of the cold diplomatic 


war with Russia now in progress.” 


184 Chapter Six 


Blackett’s analysis of Hiroshima could not have been more unwelcome to 
the U.S. government and American scientists.°* Stimson’s version—that the 
atomic bomb saved both American and Japanese lives—was conducive to the 
scientists’ self-image as universalistic representatives of human, rather than 
national or sectional, interests. The central canon of the scientists’ movement 
was that the atomic bomb was not merely another weapon, but a new, tran- 
scendent force leading to the end of war altogether. Blackett’s analysis, on the 
contrary, suggested that the atomic bomb was born and first used precisely as 
an instrument of machtpolitik (power politics) and that it signaled not a new 
era of peace, but the beginning of the Cold War.” 

The power-political motives behind the atomic bombings were obscured 
not only by Stimson’s official justificatory rhetoric. Blackett thought that 
even when American scientists started to have doubts about the validity of 
the official account, they opted for blanket pessimism rather than realistic 
analysis. Because they found the idea that the bombs were used to “win a 
diplomatic victory” to be “too morally repugnant to be entertained, [their] 
only remaining resort is to maintain that such things just happen, and that 
they are the ‘essence of total war.’”?° 

As an example of this pessimistic “essence of total war” thesis, Blackett 
quoted a statement in which Oppenheimer seemed to depart from the official 
U.S. account. Oppenheimer had written that “every American knows that if 
there is another major war, atomic weapons will be used ... We know this 
because in the last war, the two nations which we like to think are the most 
enlightened and humane in the world—Great Britain and the United States— 
used atomic weapons against an enemy which was essentially defeated.” The 
statement that Japan was “essentially defeated” before the bombs were used 
seemed to put the event in a different light than did the Stimson version. But 
to Blackett, even this statement of Oppenheimer’s did not demonstrate a real 
understanding of the reasons for the atomic bombings. Instead, he interpreted 
what Oppenheimer had said as suggesting that there was no real reason for 
the bombings, that they simply followed from the pursuit of total war, and 
therefore that such bombs would be used again by any side possessing them. 
This was a view that created “an atmosphere ofimminent world destruction. . . 
in which clear thinking was at a discount and emotion triumphant.” Oppen- 
heimer’s statement, Blackett said, exemplified the kind of “belief that provides 
the breeding ground for hysteria.”®” 

Blackett presented his own view as being “in decisive contrast” both to 
Stimson’s official explanation and to Oppenheimer’s pessimistic argument. 
For Blackett, it was clear that the bombs were dropped “for very real and 


Power and Vocation 185 


compelling reasons—but diplomatic rather than military ones.” He saw a 
diplomatic war that had, in a sense, been initiated with the atomic bombings 
and was now being continued at the arms control negotiating table.°* 

It followed from Blackett’s analysis that it was impossible to take seriously 
the image of universalism and generosity surrounding the American proposals 
to the UN in 1946. The Baruch Plan, for Blackett, was thinly disguised atomic 
diplomacy. And Blackett focused criticism not only on the U.S. delegation, but 
also on the original Acheson-Lilenthal report (drafted by Oppenheimer), on 
which the American proposal was based. An “essential asymmetry as between 
America and Russia,” Blackett noted, was “inherent in the early stages of 
the Plan.” The Soviet Union, he said, was “keenly aware of the immediate 
danger to her military security and the long-range danger to her economic 
development underlying the idealistic phraseology of the Lilienthal Plan.” 
Even though it drew on the language of idealistic internationalism, Blackett 
argued, “support for the Baruch Plan falls into place as a consistent part of the 
Anglo-American policy of ‘containing’? Communism at all possible points.” 

Blackett maintained that the American scientific elite had constructed an 
ideology that both legitimated American policy and obscured the realities of 
the place of atomic weapons in global politics. The scientists formed part of the 
group of “idealists and liberals” who “sincerely believed the [Baruch] Plan to 
be so equitable and even generous that its rejection by the U.S.S.R. could only 
be attributed to their willful neglect of their own self-interest . .. Such people, 
on seeing the U.S.S.R. reject these ‘generous’ proposals, tended in many cases 
passionately to implore the Russian leaders to realize the danger in which they 
stood from American atomic bombs.” The aura of impartiality, universalism, 
and objectivity that the atomic scientists constructed for themselves masked 
the extent to which they were merely supporting American interests in the 
emerging Cold War.'”° 

Oppenheimer’s close colleague Isidor Rabi led the reaction against Black- 
ett in the American scientific community. Dismissing Blackett’s view that 
Hiroshima was the first act of the Cold War, Rabi went on to defend the 
American position at the UN. The Baruch Plan, Rabi said, was a “great and 
generous gesture. It was an offer to surrender our greatest weapon of military 
power in the interest of the security of all nations.” The only reason for the 
Soviets’ position was “the Original Sin of Communism, the intrinsic inability 
of a totalitarian state to withstand impartial inspection from outside,” as well 
as the Kremlin’s sheer “ignorance” and “cussedness.”!0! 

Oppenheimer did not himself respond publicly to Blackett.'°? But he never 
developed the type of radical critique of American atomic diplomacy that the 


186 Chapter Six 


British physicist and socialist developed. While Oppenheimer saw Baruch’s 
punitive approach as dooming the UN negotiations and was also dismayed 
by the decision to go ahead with the Bikini tests, his critique was limited 
by the political and intellectual constraints that he accepted as a scientific- 
governmental insider.!”? Furthermore, his perspective on the arms control 
negotiations was framed overall by his view that the “open world” that would 
be required for success on this front was incompatible with the Soviet sys- 
tem. As he focused his blame for the failure of the Baruch Plan on Soviet 
obstructionism, Oppenheimer’s internationalist liberalism began its mutation 
into Cold War chauvinism. 

Oppenheimer was now enlisted in the program, announced by Truman 
in the spring of 1947, of containing Communism. The physicist was present 
at the Harvard commencement on June 5, 1947, when his hero, General 
George C. Marshall—now secretary of state—announced his economic plan 
to bolster the Western European democracies against the Communist threat. 
Historian Frances Stonor Saunders observed, “It was no coincidence that 
[Marshall] had decided to deliver his speech here [at Harvard], rather than on 
some formal government podium. For these were the men assigned to realize 
America’s ‘manifest destiny,’ the elite charged with organizing the world 
around values which the Communist darkness threatened to obscure.”!4 
This was a mission, with its connotations of American benevolence and 
idealism, to which Oppenheimer felt privileged to subscribe. 

In September 1947, speaking to an audience of military officers as well as of- 
ficials in the Foreign Service and the State Department, Oppenheimer painted 
a picture of Western reasonableness struggling against Soviet intransigence. 
He blamed the failure of the Baruch Plan on the fact that the “cornerstone of 
our proposal is an institution which requires candidness and great openness in 
regard to technical realities and policy.” In a strong echo of diplomat George 
F. Kennan’s anonymous July 1947 article in Foreign Affairs, “The Sources 
of Soviet Conduct,” Oppenheimer asserted that the cooperative and open 
pattern of control embodied in the American UN proposals stood “in a very 
gross conflict to the present patterns of state power in Russia, namely the 
inevitability of conflict between Russia and the capitalist world.”!” 

Oppenheimer contrasted the closed society of the Soviet Union with the 
political openness embodied both by American democracy and by the arms 
control structures of the Acheson-Lilienthal report, themselves modeled on 
the open structure of science. He thus came to portray the American republic 
and the Republic of Science as morally identical. Science depends, he argued, 
on the minimization of both secrecy and coercion, and those are ideals that 


Power and Vocation 187 


“are very deep in our ethical as well as in our political traditions, and are 
recorded in earnest, eloquent simplicity in the words of those who founded 
this nation.” Oppenheimer considered it a great puzzle of World War II that 
“the atomic bomb, born ofa way of life, fostered throughout the centuries, in 
which the role of coercion was perhaps reduced more completely than in any 
other human activity, and which owed its whole success and its very existence 
to the possibility of open discussion and free inquiry, appeared in a strange 
paradox, at once a secret, and an unparalleled instrument of coercion.” How 
could science have begot the atomic bomb? For Oppenheimer, this genealogy 
was nothing more than a bizarre “paradox.” The bomb was spawned by 
science, but its nature was alien to science. Even when he described the 
atomic bomb as an instrument of power, he distanced both his profession and 
his nation from the bomb’s violence. So, despite Hiroshima, Oppenheimer 
was able to assert that Americans are “stubbornly distrustful” of the use of 
power in foreign affairs and that “we seem to know, and seem to come back 
again and again to this knowledge, that the purposes of this country in the 
field of foreign policy cannot in any real or enduring way be achieved by 
coercion.” 16 

The representation of the scientific community as an “open society,” an 
image mobilized by scientists immediately after the war in appeals that state 
patronage be combined with professional autonomy, was now rhetorically 
attached to the Cold War dualism of Western enlightenment versus the dark- 
ness of the Eastern bloc. As Oppenheimer represented scientific reason as 
antithetical to Soviet Communism, he sought to place an image of science 
at the center of American national ideology. In so doing, he was solidifying 
his own position as representative of a civilian scientific elite in a strategic 
alliance with the national-security state.!°” By presenting science itself as an 
American value to be defended against the Soviets, Oppenheimer strove to 
bolster his and other scientists’ authority within the polity. He suggested that 
the national-security state should sponsor scientists not only for their instru- 
mental function as builders of the nation’s atomic arsenal, but also for their 
ideological or legitimatory function in embodying and articulating what it was 
that that arsenal was in place to defend. Cultivating science would mean not 
only winning the technological and strategic war; Oppenheimer suggested 
that it was also, and perhaps more importantly, the key to winning the ide- 
ological Cold War. It was by presenting itself as the righteous defender of 
Western civilization, Oppenheimer suggested, that America could win allies 


in this ideological struggle: “We want the intellectuals of Europe to be friends 
of the United States.” 1°8 


188 Chapter Six 


This ideological mobilization of science meant that paradoxically, as more 
and more of America’s scientists embraced a narrowly instrumental militaristic 
role, and as their science was carried out in secret under the patronage 
of the military, this scientific elite increasingly proclaimed the openness of 
science as being at the heart of what separated America from its Communist 
enemy. There was also a pragmatic reason for this rhetoric. While scientists 
collectively embraced military funding and often subscribed to military goals, 
they were nervous of being controlled by the military. They valued their 
social status as professionals, a status that was in part connected to an image of 
“pure science” and to the degree ofautonomy that this involved. Oppenheimer 
argued that this autonomy was necessary for the vitality of science: the scientific 
community “must not be sewed up so tightly that it is not a part of the living 
culture and development of the country.” He advocated the combination of 
state patronage with support for “basic research” in a university setting. This 
might, in the short term, reduce the numbers working directly on atomic 
armament, but in the long run it was important in “cultivating a corps of 
people” with the knowledge and skills necessary to ensure “a heroic future” 
for America in atomic energy.'° 

Oppenheimer, therefore, sought to incorporate a reverence for “pure sci- 
ence” into American Cold War culture. As he embraced the Cold War, he also 
attempted to preserve within this new political context the combination of 
patronage and autonomy from political accountability that the scientific com- 
munity had achieved after the war. America’s civilian scientific elite hoped 
to fend off the bugbear of “military control” by adopting the military’s goals 
as their own and by presenting themselves as the most qualified to advance 
these goals. In the late 1940s, the military was the main financial supporter of 
American science. And even after the establishment of the National Science 
Foundation (NSF) in 1950, Department of Defense support for scientific re- 
search dwarfed NSF budgets.'!? Even as they proclaimed their autonomy, 
America’s scientific elite became increasingly subservient to the military goals 
of the Cold War and the arms race.'!! 


REDEFINING THE SCIENTIFIC ROLE: 
WEAPONS AND “RESPONSIBILITY” 


A new pessimism and self-doubt became evident in the Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists between 1947 and 1948. One article noted the paralysis of the 
scientists’ movement in the wake of the failure of the Acheson-Lilienthal report 
and put it down to “the schematic and over-simplified one-world-or-none 


Power and Vocation 189 


reasoning,” which led to the scientists’ being “trapped by their own logic.”!'” 


The scientists had argued that Hiroshima was a point of decision, presenting 
either an opportunity for an international regime leading to the elimination 
of war, or a path to an atomic arms race and atomic brinkmanship, leading 
most probably to a third world war. The failure of the goals of the Acheson- 
Lilienthal report signaled clearly that the first route had been missed (had it 
ever really existed) and that the United States was heading inexorably along 
the other path. As Oppenheimer put it, “the jig was up.” After the excursion 
into politics, it was now time for “getting back to [scientific and technical] 
work.”!13 

Oppenheimer’s advice was that the scientists should accommodate them- 
selves to this new reality. While they should not give up the hope for arms 
control as an ultimate goal, he argued that they could no longer advocate or 
work toward it in the same way that they once had. The atomic scientists, 
he said, must recognize that their role was no longer that of “the prophets of 
doom coming out of the desert, but rather that of a group of specialized and, 
in their way, competent, men who must be sensitive to all avenues ofapproach 
which are hopeful and who are after all intellectuals and not politicians.”''* 
The role of the intellectual, in Oppenheimer’s account, was a stringently 
restricted one. Oppenheimer’s distinguishing of the “intellectual” from the 
“politician” now mandated a retreat from the polis. He appealed to an image 
of a state of intellectual purity that, though presently lost, could in principle 
be recaptured. 

Oppenheimer took the opportunity ofa public lecture at MIT, in late Nov- 
ember 1947, to outline his new understanding of the responsibilities of sci- 
entists. The speech, titled “Physics in the Contemporary World,” marked 
an important turning point in his public rhetoric. This new conception of 
the scientist’s role lacked any of the utopianism that had characterized his 
speech to ALAS two years before. Scientists, he now said, are not qualified 
to solve humanity’s problems: “The study of physics, and I think my col- 
leagues in the other sciences will let me speak for them too, does not make 
philosopher-kings. It has not, until now, made kings. It almost never makes 
fit philosophers.” Oppenheimer spoke of “how much the applications of 
science ... have cast in doubt that traditional optimism, that confidence in 
progress, which have characterized Western culture since the Renaissance.” 
The scientist could offer no general route to salvation. The world had proved 
itself too corrupt to be remade in the scientific image. And he represented the 
scientific engagement with this world, in war and the atomic bomb, as a fall 
from grace. In facing the reality that they could offer no universal salvation, 


190 Chapter Six 


scientists should, Oppenheimer suggested, focus on their own personal salva- 
tion. In other words, they should attend to the special duties of their vocation: 
“The true responsibility of the scientist, as we all know, is to the integrity 
and vigor of his science. And ... [scientists] have a responsibility for the 
communication of the truths they have found ... That we should see in this 
any insurance that the fruits of science will be used for man’s benefit, or 
denied to man when they make for his distress or destruction, would be a 
tragic naiveté.”'!° The “responsibilities” of the scientist were, Oppenheimer 
argued, purely vocational and strictly delimited. In performing these duties, 
the scientist fulfilled a personal calling. But that should not be mistaken for 
offering any comfort to humankind as a whole. 

It was an appeal to an image of lost innocence. For Oppenheimer, the em- 
bodiment of this innocence was the Géttingen mathematician David Hilbert. 
To the question of the relationship between science and technology, Hilbert 
had answered, “Sve haben ja gar nichts mit enander zu tun. They have nothing 
whatever to do with one another.”'!® While Oppenheimer recognized that it 
was no longer possible to accept such a nonchalant dismissal of the question, 
there was something in Hilbert’s attitude that he wanted to recapture, refor- 
mulate, and revitalize. It could not now be denied that there was a powerful 
relationship between science and technology. For example, the demand of 
modern societies for technology was, Oppenheimer knew, a central reason 
for the social support of science. But in his view, it was crucial to recognize 
the essential differences between the two enterprises. For “no scientist, no 
matter how aware he may be of these fruits of his science, cultivates his work, 
or refrains from it,” merely because of the technological and social benefits or 
problems that might result from the scientific exploration. The individual sci- 
entist’s “compelling motive” for his work was quite different from any “social 
justification” for that labor. Oppenheimer’s argument was that even today, 
the individual motive should differ little between the contemporary scientist 
and Hilbert. The purity of soul of this mathematician could be recaptured 
through an understanding of science as a calling.!!” 

In order to recapture this spirit, however, scientists had to confront the 
recent history of the war. A recognition of sin was the first step on the path to 
redemption. Hence Oppenheimer’s famous admission and admonition that 
“in some sort of crude sense, which no vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement 
can quite extinguish, the physicists have known sin; and this is a knowledge 
which they cannot lose.” This was, of course, a reference to Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. But while Oppenheimer admitted that the bomb was a product of 


Power and Vocation 191 


physics, he also insisted that there was a sense in which they should be recog- 
nized as separate. Crucially, in Oppenheimer’s rendition, bomb building was 
not physics. The physicists were acting as engineers, merely applying physics. 
In “the last world war ... the demands of military technology . . . distracted 
the physicists from their normal occupations.” The war created “a great gap 
in physical science,” from which science had only begun to recover.'!® 

When Oppenheimer spoke of “sin,” he had in mind this abandonment, 
however necessary, of physics as a vocation. Time magazine expressed what 
was the most common interpretation of Oppenheimer’s words “the physicists 
have known sin” when it said, “As if to expiate this sense of sin Oppenheimer 
threw himself into the campaign for international atomic regulation.”!!? While 
Oppenheimer allowed this ambiguity, that foray into politics was, in his 
characterization of sin, as much part of the sin as was the building of the bomb. 
Certainly the physicists could not have done otherwise than give their aid in 
time of war, and Oppenheimer drew a parallel between scientists working at 
Los Alamos and physicists in Europe who had joined the Resistance. (He did 
not mention the Nazi bomb project under Werner Heisenberg.)'”” But the 
price that they paid in leaving their laboratories and desks for the world was a 
loss of purity. This purity could be recaptured by a revitalized understanding 
of the meaning of physics as a vocation. Such an understanding would mean 
attending to their vocational duties, but also recognizing the limits of these 
responsibilities. 

Paradoxically, however, this idea of recapturing a vocational purity could 
legitimate the instrumental role of the scientist in the service of the national- 
security state. Such an ethos has one meaning in a situation in which the 
institutional and social basis of scientific research is independent and insu- 
lated from institutions responsible for industrial and military technology. But 
this appeal to an idea of “purity” had quite another meaning and set of impli- 
cations after World War II, when the institutional separation of academia from 
industry and from the military had been considerably eroded, when university 
research was funded by the Office of Naval Research and other military bodies, 
and when a sophisticated research and development organization was in place 
to rapidly convert scientific findings into technological applications. It was 
in this radically new setting that Oppenheimer sought to invoke a traditional 
notion of “pure science,” retreat from the world, and a narrow framework of 
vocational duties. However, in this new context, a formulation that divorced 
the value of science from questions of the ends to which it would be applied 
had the effect of legitimating a narrowly instrumental function for the scientist. 


192 Chapter Six 


Oppenheimer’s call for a retreat to purity was in fact a capitulation to the de- 
mands of the national-security state. 


THE ATOMIC “EXPLOSIVES” COMMISSION 


Oppenheimer’s increasingly restricted conception of scientific responsibility 
meshed with the narrowing of political possibilities as the Cold War intensi- 
fied. It was as chairman ofthe AEC’s General Advisory Committee (GAC), the 
nation’s most powerful scientific advisory body, that Oppenheimer responded 
in practice to the new constraints and attempted to act on his restricted con- 
ception of the scientific role. He was elected to the chairmanship at the GAC’s 
first meeting in January 1947 and held that position until the summer of 1952. 
In June 1947, Oppenheimer told the commission that since scientists were 
years away from achieving the technology for civilian nuclear power plants, 
there was currently very little for the AEC to concern itself with but weapons: 


121 This was “quite a blow” to Lilienthal’s 


“energy” would mean “explosives. 
hopes of developing an open and civilian-oriented atomic energy program. It 
signaled that the AEC would not easily be able to break its dependence on the 
military, nor escape from the shroud of secrecy. In late 1947 Oppenheimer 
said, “Without debate—I suppose with some melancholy—we concluded that 
the principal job of the Commission was to provide atomic weapons and good 
atomic weapons and many atomic weapons.” Asserting the GAC’s commit- 
ment to this task, Oppenheimer dismissed the internationalist hopes of the 
scientists’ movement as mere nostalgia for an irretrievable non-nuclear world: 
“Tt must be recognized that within our hearts we have been hoping that the 
world will be the world it was ten years ago. This is no longer possible.” !”” 
Oppenheimer now responded with outright skepticism to some scientists’ 
ongoing efforts for arms control. Turning down a request from physicist 
Harrison S. Brown that he attend a conference of the world-government- 
oriented Emergency Committee of the Atomic Scientists, Oppenheimer said 
that the proposed date conflicted with his commitments at Berkeley and 


Pasadena. He then added dryly: 


It will of course be clear to you that in matters potentially so important 
for our common hopes, no engagement, no matter how firm and how 
urgent, can be allowed to stand in the way. You will therefore inevitably 
interpret my reluctance to cancel my California commitments as a certain 
expression of doubt as to the helpfulness of the proposed conference. I 


think it is only right to make that expression explicit. 1” 


Power and Vocation 193 


Oppenheimer could barely conceal his contempt for what he saw as the self- 
indulgent and naive idealism of this sort of political organizing: it was time to 
give up political distractions from the pure vocation of the scientist. 

Nevertheless, he still clung to the belief that even if international arms 
control was not possible in the foreseeable future, it was the only way forward 
in the long run and the only ultimate source of hope for the future. Therefore, 
he believed, the strategy of contamment should not include measures that 
would tend to close off the possibility of one day choosing a more peaceful 
direction. The contrasting position, represented by Edward Teller, was that 
there was no foreseeable alternative to containment through nuclear strength. 
This difference was at the heart of the debate over the hydrogen bomb from 
1949 into the early 1950s. 74 

On August 29, 1949, the Soviet Union carried out its first test of an atomic 
weapon. The test was detected by a U.S. Air Force B-gg flying near Japan, 
which picked up unusually high levels of radioactivity. On September 23, 
Truman announced the end of America’s nuclear monopoly. The GAC was 
burdened with the heavy responsibility of deciding the U.S. response. With 
Oppenheimer on the GAC were the wartime science administrator and Har- 
vard president James B. Conant, Caltech president Lee DuBridge, physicists 
Enrico Fermiand Isidor Rabi, metallurgist Cyril Smith, Bell Telephone Labo- 
ratories president Oliver E. Buckley, and the chief engineer and vice president 
of United Fruit Company, Hartley Rowe. Another member, Glenn Seaborg, 
a chemist and the co-discoverer of plutonium, was in Sweden on a lecture 
tour during the crucial meetings at which the GAC formulated its reaction. !”° 

The Soviet bomb brought into sharp focus competing visions of American 
military strategy and defense. The Strategic Air Command (SAC) and a 
powerful lobby of scientists, including Ernest Lawrence, Wendell Latimer, 
Luis Alvarez, and Edward Teller, advocated strategic bombing and the search 
for ever more powerful weapons as the twin cornerstones of American military 
and defense policy. From 1942, Teller had been interested in the possibility of 
a “superbomb,” the basic principle of which would be to use a regular atomic 
bomb to set off a fusion reaction in deutertum. The “Super,” or hydrogen 
bomb, promised a weapon that could release one hundred to one thousand 
times more energy than existing fission weapons and could damage an area 
twenty to one hundred times larger.'*° 

The Soviet bomb gave Teller and the H-bomb lobby the argument they 
needed to push through their program. Ernest Lawrence announced that 
there was “nothing to think over” and said that the H-bomb called for “the 
spirit of Groves.” Lilienthal, on the other hand, was sickened by what he saw 


194 Chapter Six 


as the “bloodthirsty” attitude of these scientists.'7” The GAC members were 
likewise loath to take what they saw would be a decisive, and most probably 
irreversible, step toward nuclear escalation, yet they were split on how to 
address the question. The most adamant in his opposition to the H-bomb 
was Conant, and it is likely that this strengthened Oppenheimer’s nerve to 
come out against the new weapon.!** In his diary entry for October 29, 
1949, Lilienthal recorded that Conant was “flatly against” the bomb and that 
Oppenheimer was “inclined that way.” Both Rabi and Fermi saw the attempt 
to develop the weapon as inevitable, and Fermi saw it as a scientific duty. 
Lilienthal rebutted the idea that there was any such imperative: “I deny there 
is anything inevitable about political decisions.”!?° 

The GAC’s report of October 30, 1949, took a stand against development 
of the H-bomb. Instead, the advisory committee advocated expanding the ca- 
pacity to produce fission bombs, particularly tactical nuclear weapons. While 
forecasting that “‘an imaginative and concerted attack on the [H-bomb] prob- 
lem has a better than even chance of producing the weapon within five years,” 
the GAC opposed a crash program or “all-out effort” for its development: 
“We all hope that by one means or another, the development of these weapons 
can be avoided.” They advocated making a “commitment not to develop 
the weapon,” though they disagreed over whether this commitment should 
be unqualified or conditional on the course of action taken by the Soviets. 
The majority urged an unqualified commitment not to develop the weapon, 
while Rabi and Fermi wrote their own minority statement that made the more 
limited call for the United States not to “initiate” development of the bomb. 

The GAC’s opposition to the H-bomb was extremely cautious. Only in 
addenda did they deal with their moral and political objections to the weapon, 
separating these from the more dry and technical language of the body of the 
report. The majority addendum stated the fear that “a super bomb might 
become a weapon of genocide.” And despite their more resigned sense that 
the weapon’s development was probably inevitable, Rabi and Fermi reiterated 
this claim, adding that the Super was “an evil thing considered in any light.”'°° 

The GAC recommendation did not, however, end pressure for the H- 
bomb. The committee’s report was countered by one from the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, which declared that “the United States would be in an intolerable 
position if a possible enemy possessed the bomb and the United States did 
not.” It was this military reasoning that was most persuasive to Truman, 
and on January 31, 1950, he announced the decision to pursue an H-bomb 
program. According to officials close to him, Truman had already made up 


Power and Vocation 195 


his mind in favor of developing the weapon, on the basis that the Soviet Union 
only respected military strength.'°! 

Less than a month after the GAC report on the hydrogen bomb, Lilienthal 
submitted to the president his resignation as AEC chairman. This was pre- 
cipitated by his growing disenchantment with the militarism and secrecy that 
dominated the AEC’s function and by his political isolation in his opposition 
to the H-bomb.'*? In the weeks after the GAC report, the Rochester Democrat 
and Chronicle reported that Oppenheimer and Lilienthal had “developed a 
noticeable coolness” and that “Oppenheimer is said to have bluntly advised 
Lilienthal that the best thing he could do for the future of the atomic program 
would be to resign as AEC chairman.”!*? 

President Truman, in response to Lilienthal’s resignation letter, acknowl- 
edged that the AEC chairman had been “under tremendous pressure and 
often under destructive criticism.” The president added, “Yours was the task 
to solve a problem which presented the strange anomaly of secrecy ina public 
undertaking.” !°4 The handling of the H-bomb issue was indeed framed by 
secrecy. In sharp contradistinction to the public campaign of the scientists’ 
movement in 1945-47, the debate over the H-bomb was a closed affair within 
the policy elite; it took the publication of the transcript of the Oppenheimer 
hearings in 1954 to open the dynamics of this debate to public view.'*> The 
fact that the debate was shrouded in secrecy helped moral concerns to be 
subordinated to raison d’état and power politics. 

After Truman announced his decision to pursue the hydrogen bomb, 
Lilienthal said that the AEC was now “nothing more than a major contrac- 
tor to the Department of Defense.”!°° Isolated from any broad constituency, 
and now without Lilienthal as a defender and ally, Oppenheimer adjusted 
himself to the new configuration of institutional forces. He stood down from 
his original outright opposition to the weapon, as did other scientists who 
had previously voiced moral opposition. But exactly what stance he took after 
the presidential directive was a key matter of controversy during the security 
hearings. It was later alleged that Oppenheimer continued to surreptitiously 
oppose the H-bomb, and even that his “insufficient enthusiasm” was respon- 
sible for delaying the program. Others presented a different view. According 
to Gordon Dean (the AEC chairman between 1950 and 1953), Oppenheimer 
“very actively” participated in discussions about and calculations for the new 
design. He was “enthusiastic now that you had something foreseeable ... 
He was, I could say, almost thrilled that we had something here that looked 
as though it might work.”!37 Whatever Oppenheimer’s feelings about the 


196 Chapter Six 


H-bomb, he no longer expressed direct opposition to development of the 
weapon. And he famously told the 1954 hearings that the Teller-Ulam design, 
developed in 1951, was “technically so sweet that you could not argue” about 
it.!9° It appears that Oppenheimer was ambivalent between, on the one hand, 
his moral objections to the Super and, on the other, both his fascination with 
the technical problems of its design and his likely unwillingness to stand in 
opposition to an executive decision. '*? 

Oppenheimer resolved the dilemma by choosing a third way, throwing his 
weight behind the parallel development of tactical nuclear weapons. Through 
the early 1950s, he played an important role in supporting the Army’s desire 
for a tactical nuclear capability, involving warheads for short-range rockets, 
missiles, and artillery. He became closely involved in Project Vista, a large- 
scale scientific and technical study of tactical nuclear weapons begun by 
Caltech in early 1951.'*° 

Oppenheimer supported tactical nuclear weaponsas an alternative to strate- 
gic bombing. Paradoxically, however, in so doing, he was engaged in the 
normalization of atomic warfare. His new position contrasted sharply with his 
statements in the aftermath of Hiroshima that atomic weapons called for a rad- 
ical new way of thinking and a new world order, and could not be considered 
to be just any other weapon. In Project Vista, Oppenheimer was now deeply 
engaged in the problem ofhow to fit atomic weapons into the framework of con- 
ventional warfare, how to make them into usable military weapons. He moti- 
vated Project Vista with the question, “What contribution may one reasonably 
hope that the atom can make to our military power, the power for the preven- 
tion of war, the limitation of war, and for the defeat of the enemy in the event 
that war does come?”'' In 1946, Oppenheimer had said that atomic weapons 
“are not police weapons . . . They are themselves a supreme expression of the 
concepts of total war.” In 1951 he said, “It is clear that they [atomic weapons] 
can be used only as adjuncts in a military campaign which has some other 
components, and whose purpose is a military victory. They are not primarily 
weapons of totality or terror, but weapons used to give combat forces help 
that they would otherwise lack.”!“” According to Rabi, Oppenheimer during 
this time was becoming increasingly “inclined toward a preventive war.”'? 

An indicator of Oppenheimer’s influence on military policy came when 
he flew to Europe in December 1951 for a meeting with General Dwight D. 
Eisenhower. The press reported that he was passing on information from 
nuclear tests in Nevada of small-scale tactical atomic bombs. The Herald 
Tribune said, “The development of atom bombs for use against troops in the 
field has been regarded in high American quarters as an Allied trump card in 


Power and Vocation 197 


event of a Russian attempt to sweep westward to the English Channel. Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s mission was understood to be a briefing of American generals 
on just what they could expect, so the information can be incorporated in 
their defense planning.”!“* The introduction of tactical nuclear weapons to 
NATO, advocated by Project Vista, became the cornerstone of the Army’s nu- 
clear doctrine. At the same time, the development of tactical atomic weapons 
complemented rather than competed with the strategic nuclear program of 
General Curtis LeMay and SAC. In the judgment of historians, “the acqui- 
sition by NATO of a tactical nuclear capability did not, as it turned out, 
materially impede SAC’s capabilities. Indeed, in some respects it promised to 
enhance them. Nor did it lessen reliance on strategic forces, as Oppenheimer 
and others who worked on the Vista study hoped it would.”!* 

Freeman Dyson gave considerable critical attention to Oppenheimer’s 
role as “scholar-soldier” in advocating the development of tactical nuclear 
weapons. Writing during the mid-i980s, Dyson reflected that “Oppen- 
heimer’s efforts to sell tactical nuclear weapons to the army succeeded all 
too well ... The six thousand NATO tactical warheads now in Europe are 
an enduring monument to Oppenheimer’s powers of persuasion.”!*° Op- 
penheimer’s advocacy of tactical nuclear weapons was, in part, an attempt to 
employ interservice rivalry between the Army and Air Force in the attempt to 
counter the H-bomb program and SAC’s doctrine of strategic bombing. But it 
also went deeper, expressing an important feature of Oppenheimer’s changing 
orientation as a scientist. Dyson argued that in the immediate aftermath of 
World War II, Oppenheimer briefly “transcended his role as an American 
weaponeer and became for a while an international statesman, a spokesman 
for world scientific community.” However, with the failure of efforts for inter- 
national arms control, the Soviet atomic test of 1949, and the outbreak of the 
Korean War in 1950, his moral and political “horizons” became increasingly 
“narrow.” By the early 1950s, he was “again, as in the Los Alamos days, a 
good soldier committed to the service of his country’s military strength.” !*7 

The ethic of scientific responsibility that Oppenheimer formulated in his 
writings and speeches, from 1947 onward, was close to a soldierly ethic of 
duty. Abandoning the utopian dreams of the early scientists’ movement, Op- 
penheimer denied that science could be a vehicle for transforming worldly re- 
ality. Instead, he argued that scientists had to adapt themselves to that reality, 
attending to the demands of the day. Scientists were not prophets but spe- 
cialized technical experts. And once again, Oppenheimer set about placing 
his technical expertise at the disposal of the military, in pursuit of tactical 
nuclear weapons. 


198 Chapter Six 


Yet there is a fundamental ambivalence and ambiguity here. On what 
grounds was Oppenheimer choosing between tactical and strategic weapons? 
Was this decision purely a technical one? Or, as was later widely alleged, was 
Oppenheimer’s stance against the hydrogen bomb based on a fundamental 
moral position, in which he set himself against state policy and military-tech- 
nological momentum? Oppenheimer’s conception of the vocational respon- 
sibility of the scientist “to his science” was of little use as a guide to how to 
address the complex issue of the hydrogen bomb, in which technical, military 
and strategic, and political considerations were tightly interwoven. Teller pre- 
sented his single-minded pursuit of the H-bomb design as an exercise of his 
vocational duty.!4° For Teller, the same conception of scientific responsibility 
set out by Oppenheimer in his 1947 speech “Physics in the Contemporary 
World” made pursuit of the hydrogen bomb not only ethically acceptable, 
but a positive duty. 

Was the hydrogen bomb, however, a logical development and extension of 
existing science, apart from the consideration of any substantive goals? The 
advocates of the hydrogen bomb presented it as a natural step in two related 
senses: first, as a scientific and technical step; and second, as a strategic step 
in the arms race. On this view, the natural trajectory of both weapons research 
and the arms race was simply toward bigger, more powerful bombs. In its 
recommendation against a crash program, the GAC sought to disrupt this 
image of natural progression. How, and whether, to respond to the Soviet 
bomb was a choice. The crux of the GAC’s position, then, was that the 
“technological imperative” did not lead deterministically to the hydrogen 
bomb, but instead was contingent. It was therefore possible, and indeed 
necessary, to consider broader ends, whether military and strategic, political, 
or moral. In political terms, the GAC suggested that if the United States 
refrained from development of the H-bomb, that might encourage the Soviets 
to do the same. Faced with a choice, the committee argued, the government 
should forgo the destructive quantum leap of the H-bomb. 

That advice, however, went beyond Oppenheimer’s narrow conception of 
scientists’ responsibilities as being to their science. In particular, the addition 
to the report of moral concerns about the genocidal nature of the weapon 
expressed precisely the sort of concern for humanity that Oppenheimer had 
earlier defined as superfluous to science. Although the moral and political 
arguments in the GAC report were published in appendixes, it is clear that 
the committee felt that its response to the H-bomb issue should not be limited 
to technical issues. Physicist Herbert York argued that moral and pragmatic 
objections to the Super were necessarily connected: “If either ofthese elements 


Power and Vocation 199 


had been missing they would not have made the recommendation they did. If 
they had felt it was essential for national security they would have overcome 
(although probably with considerable regret) their ethical reservations. And if 
they had not been concerned about its excessive power they would not have so 
concerned themselves with the question of whether or not it was essential.”!“9 

Oppenheimer was faced with a complex moral and political decision of 
the kind for which a soldier’s ethic of “duty” offered little guidance. Unlike a 
soldier, he was not locked into a chain of command; he was, rather, forced to 
negotiate a position within a shifting, conflict-ridden, and unstable political 
terrain. But his failure to formulate and articulate a consistent and coherent 
conception of what substantive moral values the scientist should preserve 
and defend meant that his action in relation to nuclear weapons ultimately 
collapsed into narrow pragmatism. He was unable to sustain a principled 
rejection of the H-bomb, and his antagonism to this weapon merely led him 
to expedient support of tactical weapons as alternatives. What was lacking, 
and what Oppenheimer’s instrumental ethic of vocation prevented him from 
developing, wasa consistent moral opposition to the militaristic appropriation 
of science and its application to destructive ends. 


PLATE1 The “long-haired” professor. Robert Oppenheimer (left) wearing jeans 
and a silver Santa Fe-style belt buckle while visiting his New Mexico summer ranch, 
Perro Caliente, with Ernest O. Lawrence in the early 1930s. Courtesy of American 
Institute of Physics, Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


PLATE 2 Photograph for Oppenheimer’s Los Alamos identification card. Courtesy 
of Los Alamos National Laboratory. 


PLATE 3 Oppenheimer as director of the wartime Los Alamos Laboratory. He 
was “intellectually and even physically present at each significant step,” and his 


“continuous and intense presence . . . produced a sense of direct participation” 
in the scientists working there. Photograph from Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists; 
courtesy of American Institute of Physics, Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


PLATE 4 “Like a good host with his guests”: Oppenheimer at a party in Fuller 
Lodge at Los Alamos, ca. 1945. Courtesy of Los Alamos National Laboratory. 


06 Nees 


MAIN GATE 


PASSES MUST BE 
PRESENTED TO 
Gv 


CtO-# 76-12973, 


PLATE 5 Los Alamos main gate. New arrivals at Los Alamos were fingerprinted 
and photographed and had to sign the Espionage Act. Courtesy of Los Alamos 
National Laboratory. 


ie ’ 
; BEHoLb-THE TURTLE! | 
HE MAKES PROGRESS ONLY / 
\. WHEN HIS NECK /S OU7:.. / 
\ a 


Pe ee 


PLATE 6 Acartoon distributed at Manhattan Project sites during 1944. The 
purpose of the image, according to General Leslie R. Groves, was “to impress on all 
concerned the necessity of making decisions promptly and that a ‘safety first’ policy 
would insure defeat.” Correspondence and Related Papers on the MED, 1942-70, 
Papers of General Leslie R. Groves, National Archives and Records Administration. 


PLATE 7 During preparations for the Trinity atomic bomb test at Alamogordo, 
New Mexico, Oppenheimer is silhouetted against the bomb. Courtesy of Los Alamos 
National Laboratory. 


PLATE 8 Oppenheimer and General Leslie R. Groves at the Trinity site. In the 
foreground are the remains of the tower on which the atomic bomb was mounted. 
Courtesy of Los Alamos National Laboratory; photograph by United Press 
International. 


PLATEQ “That day he was us”: Oppenheimer (left) accepting the Army-Navy 
Award for Excellence on behalf of Los Alamos Laboratory, October 16, 1945. 

To Oppenheimer’s left are General Leslie R. Groves, University of California 
president Robert G. Sproul, and Commodore William S. “Deak” Parsons. Courtesy 
of J. Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Committee, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 


PLATE10 “Father of the atomic bomb”: Oppenheimer (r7ght) with Henry D. 
Smyth and General Kenneth D. Nichols. Courtesy of American Institute of Physics, 
Emilio Segré Visual Archives; photograph by United Press International. 


TRENDS IN AMERICAN SCIENCE by Vannevar Bush 


PLATE11 The cover of the first issue of Physics Today (May 1948). 
Oppenheimer’s trademark porkpie hat rests against cyclotron piping. Courtesy of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Committee, Los Alamos National Laboratory. 


PLATE 12 Oppenheimer with Albert Einstein at the Princeton Institute for 
Advanced Study. To the physicists, “Einstein was God and Oppie was His only 
begotten Son.” International Communication Agency, United States Information 
Service; courtesy of American Institute of Physics, Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


PLATE 13 Oppenheimer waits to testify before a closed session of the House 
Un-American Activities Committee, June 7, 1949. Library of Congress; photograph 
by ACME Photo. 


PLATE14 “Now This!” Cartoonist Hy Rosen’s depiction in the right-wing Vew 
York Fournal-American (April 17, 1954) of the explosive impact of the Oppenheimer 
case. 


PLATE15 Herbert Block’s interpretation of the message of the Atomic Energy 
Commission’s Personnel Security Board in the Oppenheimer case. The cartoonist 
is referring to the board’s criticism of Oppenheimer’s lack of “enthusiasm” for the 
hydrogen bomb program. Herbert Block, Herblock’s Here and Now (New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1955), 23; originally published in the Washington Post, June 3, 
1954. 


PLATE16 The security hearings took a physical toll on Oppenheimer, exagger- 
ating his already thin and angular features. As one commentator put it, the hearings 
left him “‘a thin, gray, shrunken ghost.” Courtesy of American Institute of Physics, 
Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


PLATE17 Oppenheimer in front of his inherited van Gogh painting, Enclosed 


Field with Rising Sun. Library of Congress; photograph by John Vachon, in Look 
magazine, April 1, 1958; courtesy of Ann Vachon. 


PLATE18 The tragic intellect. Oppenheimer during a return visit to Los Alamos 
in 1964, where he delivered a talk on Niels Bohr. Los Alamos National Laboratory; 
courtesy of American Institute of Physics, Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


PLATE19 Oppenheimer speaking at an American Physical Society press 
conference, January 27, 1966. Kitty Oppenheimer is sitting behind him. Courtesy 
of American Institute of Physics, Emilio Segré Visual Archives; photograph by 
Mitchell Valentine. 


PLATE 20 “I wonder ofall the Oppenheimers I have seen, which is the real 
one?” Contact sheet with pencil marks by photographer John Vachon, selecting 
photographs for Look magazine, 1958. Library of Congress; courtesy of Ann Vachon. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


“T Was an Idiot” 


POWER AND INSECURITY 


Occupying a nodal position within the complex scientific advisory apparatus 
that grew up within the U.S. government after World War II, Oppenheimer 
embodied what appeared to be massive de facto power accruing to the new 
advisors and consultants. It was a widespread belief that he “could block 


1 What this influence involved, 


[policies] merely by expressing his dislike. 
however, was unclear, undefined by any fixed mandate or position. In addition 
to his formal positions, Oppenheimer exercised what one FBI agent called 
“considerable behind-the-scenes influence” over atomic energy policy, and 
his enemies regarded his influence as specially ubiquitous.” More than any 
other figure, Oppenheimer symbolized the idea, and the fear, that scientists 
might be “on top” rather than merely “on tap.”? 

Oppenheimer combined institutional influence within the state with public 
authority associated with his qualities of general humanistic cultivation and 
moral sensitivity. He frequently employed overtly moral, and sometimes even 
religious, language to talk about the implications of the atomic bomb and 
the role of the scientist. Even though Oppenheimer increasingly articulated a 
highly restricted conception of scientists’ vocational responsibilities, he was 
publicly associated with a claim to broad cultural and moral authority on the 
part of scientists. 

In the immediate aftermath of the war, this combination of special exper- 
tise and broad humanistic authority meshed with the symbolism of atomic 


energy as a transformative power ushering in a new era of peace and liberal 


“I Was an Idiot” 201 


modernity. However, the routinization of the bomb into the military arsenal, 
the increasing paranoia and secrecy of the Cold War, and the bureaucratiza- 
tion of the scientific role within the AEC and the national-security state made 
Oppenheimer’s charismatic persona more problematic. 

Oppenheimer’s support from the scientific community and the organized 
scientists’ movement had allowed him some degree of autonomy, even as 
he operated within bureaucratic organizations such as the AEC. But as the 
scientists’ movement atrophied, as the atomic scientists increasingly divided 
into those thoroughly incorporated into technical and policy functions within 
the state and those who remained outsiders, Oppenheimer was less and less 
able to sustain an autonomous role in relation to the state and its agencies. As 
he accommodated himself to the military and the security state, he was vulner- 
able to the regimes of these institutions. And as his authority was increasingly 
defined by his advisory offices, rather than by his charisma in the eyes of the 
scientific community or the public, he became more and more subject to the 
institutional constraints of bureaucratic office and to the state’s disciplinary 
apparatus. 

This institutional dependence was, in fact, an element of Oppenheimer’s 
authority from the beginning of the war. As Oppenheimer was emerging as the 
charismatic leader of Los Alamos, a quite different identity was being negoti- 
ated and constructed out of view of his scientific colleagues, in FBI and Army 
security investigations of, and interviews with, the physicist. Oppenheimer’s 
insecurity in these interrogations contrasted starkly with the “effortless superi- 
ority” that he was seen to display in his public role as laboratory director. Even 
at the height of his accomplishments at Los Alamos and afterward, his position 
was in fact highly vulnerable. Behind the public face and out of view was a 
“backstage” identity—an ossified documentary identity, or “file person.”4 

Oppenheimer’s willingness and ability to adapt to the situation and to oth- 
ers’ expectations was crucial to his success at Los Alamos and afterward. This 
changeling quality was essential to, and was reinforced by, Oppenheimer’s role 
in mediating between the different groups and interests involved in the alliance 
between science and the national-security state. His inconsistency—what has 
been seen as his lack ofa unitary self or identity—was crucial to, and to a large 
extent an outcome of, his mediation between different fractions and interests 
in the technoscientific state. Yet even as Oppenheimer adapted, changed, and 
shifted, his past was collected in petrified form in files and dossiers. These 
records amounted to a documentary biography, one that could at any time 
be employed to challenge Oppenheimer’s current presentation of self and to 
undermine his power.® 


202 Chapter Seven 


This chapter examines the institutional, social, and discursive dynamics 
involved in the destruction of Oppenheimer’s authority and role as a state 
adviser. I argue that the interrogation and judgment of Oppenheimer was 
simultaneously an appraisal of the role of the scientist, and the relationship 
between science and the state, as these had developed from World War II. 


BACKGROUND TO THE CASE: 
“UN-AMERICAN ACTIVITIES” 


Since the beginning of his involvement in the war effort, Oppenheimer had 
been under scrutiny by the FBI, and by the time of the hearings in 1954, his FBI 
file was thirty inches thick.° Oppenheimer was also being investigated during 
the war by the Army’s G-2 intelligence division, which dealt with Manhattan 
Project security. It was in interviews with security officers that Oppenheimer 
had invented the tortuous version of the “Chevalier incident” that would dog 
both men for years to come. 

During the war, Chevalier had been shaken by the fact that when he had 
gone to New York to work for the Office of War Information, he waited half 
a year for security clearance and then was denied. Unaware of his friend’s 
role in his difficulties, he wrote to Oppenheimer during that time, “All my 
foundations seem to have been knocked out from under me, and I am alone 
dangling in space, with no ties, no hope, no future.”” 

In 1946, FBI director J. Edgar Hoover put pressure on General Groves 
to provide the agency with the details of his wartime conversation in which 
Oppenheimer named Chevalier. But Groves told him, “I still feel that it would 
not be desirable for me to furnish you any details concerning the information 
reported to me by Oppenheimer, as it would endanger our relationship 
which must, in the best interest of the United States, be continued in its 
present state.”® Between June and September 1946, the FBI interviewed both 
Chevalier and Oppenheimer, as well as the alleged contact, George Eltenton.? 
In August 1947, the AEC granted Oppenheimer a new security clearance for 
his work as GAC chairman, which he had begun in January of that year.'° 
Nevertheless, the Chevalier incident, and the inconsistencies between his 
different accounts of it, would remain an unsettling presence beneath his new 
position of power. 

Oppenheimer was under near-constant surveillance during this period. 
From when he left Los Alamos in October 1945 until the summer of 1947, 
Oppenheimer divided his time between appointments in Washington, D.C., 
and teaching, which he resumed at Caltech and Berkeley. In July 1947, he 


“I Was an Idiot” 203 


moved his family from Berkeley to Princeton, where he had accepted the 
position of director of the Institute for Advanced Study (again alongside his 
Washington commitments, particularly for the GAC). It appears that the 
Oppenheimers were aware during their postwar interlude in Berkeley that 
their phone was tapped. During one monitored phone conversation between 
Oppenheimer and Kitty in 1946, there was a clicking sound. Oppenheimer 
asked, “Are you still there? I wonder who’s listening to us.” Kitty replied 
(“lackadaisically,” according to the report), “The FBI dear.” Ralph Lapp 
recalled an incident at Oppenheimer’s Princeton office about a year after 
Oppenheimer had taken up his appointment there: Lapp had begun to speak 
when Oppenheimer warned him, “Even the walls have ears.”"! 

Oppenheimer’s brother was also being hounded by the FBI, and informa- 
tion from Frank’s FBI report found its way into the press. On July 12, 1947, 
the Washington Times-Herald published a front-page story branding Frank 
Oppenheimer as a former “card-carrying member of the Communist Party.” 
The Times-Herald article carried the italicized disclaimer that the report on 
Frank “in no way reflects on the loyalty or ability of his brother, Dr. F. Robert 
Oppenheimer.” ” 

However, only a few months later, the chairman of the House Un-American 
Activities Committee (HUAC), J. Parnell Thomas, was seeking to branch out 
from the investigation of Hollywood and decided to look at atomic espionage. 
He told Hoover he wanted to include “the tie-up between the Oppenheimers 
and the Soviet embassy.” At the end of October 1947, a HUAC investiga- 
tor, former FBI agent Louis J. Russell, testified before the committee about 
the Chevalier incident, and his remarks were widely repeated in the press. 
Chevalier was now accused of approaching not three scientists, but one— 
Oppenheimer. At this time, these revelations did not significantly damage 
Oppenheimer. Russell had said that the approach to Oppenheimer had been 
unsuccessful and that Oppenheimer had called Eltenton’s activities “trea- 
sonable.” Oppenheimer released a statement that he wished to “withhold 
comment, either confirmation or denial.” For the time being, that seemed 
to dampen the flames; the story faded. Chevalier was subpoenaed to appear 
before California’s Joint Fact-Finding Committee on Un-American Activities, 
known as the Tenney Committee. But he was dismissed without being asked 
about his wartime conversation with Oppenheimer.) 

HUAC?’s growing confidence in confronting the scientific community was 
signaled by its attack on Edward Condon—briefly Oppenheimer’s associate 
director at Los Alamos and, since late 1945, director of the National Bureau 
of Standards.'* On March 1, 1948, after a drawn-out campaign of innuendo 


204 Chapter Seven 


in the press, Thomas released a report that accused Condon of being “one 
of the weakest links in our atomic security.”!° The report was thin on evi- 
dence, dwelling on Condon’s liberal political views and his membership in the 
Soviet-American Science Society (which HUAC alleged was a Communist 
front organization). The scientific community rallied to Condon’s defense, 
with statements from Nobelists Albert Einstein and Harold Urey, the Ameri- 
can Physical Society, and the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, among others. 

Oppenheimer was asked by Urey to sponsor an Emergency Committee 
of Atomic Scientists dinner in honor of Condon and in protest against the 
HUAC attack. Proceeds would go to the Bulletin of the Atomic Screntists. 
Oppenheimer, however, had become markedly cautious about putting his 
name to anything that could be construed as oppositional politics. He declined 
the offer, explaining in a telegram, “Have participated in and welcomed past 
expressions of confidence in Condon and am prepared to welcome future 
expressions.” While he was “also deeply concerned at [the] general situation 
which made [the] attack on Condon possible,” he added, “Believe, however, 
that these matters should all be kept separate.”!® It seems that Oppenheimer 
was wary of framing support for Condon within a general condemnation of 
anti-Communist politics and of connecting such support with the politics of 
arms control as represented by the Bulletin and the Emergency Committee. 

The following month, spurred by the attack on Condon, the National 
Academy of Sciences (NAS) addressed, for the first time, the civil liberties of 
scientists. But the organization equivocated over what sort ofresponse to make, 
some members worrying about compromising their “political neutrality” by 
entering the fray. At an NAS business session on April 27, Oppenheimer 
announced that most American scientists “will regard it as very odd, they 
will regard it as incomprehensible, that we should let pass an outrage of this 
kind and remain silent.” It was necessary for the NAS to take a stand on 
“what every one of your colleagues—not every one, but an overwhelming 
majority—regards as a clear evil.”!” However, the statement that the academy 
eventually released was bland and not widely reported in the press.'* Condon 
commented to chemist Martin Kamen, “It is amazing to me how some of the 
older scientists seem to be so completely lacking in perception of what is 
going on.” Kamen replied, “I agree with you regarding the pusillanimity of 
the Academy hierarchy. It may be that these top scientists are suckers. I am 
not inclined to be so charitable.”! 

In November 1948, the NAS set up a Committee on Civil Liberties, chaired 
by James Conant and also including Oppenheimer and Oliver E. Buckley, the 


“I Was an Idiot” 205 


president of Bell Telephone Laboratories.”° The committee’s report, released 
in early February of the following year, was tortuously worded and hardly 
qualified as a ringing defense of civil liberty. The report concluded, “We 
believe that by a more careful separation of its punitive from its preventive 
aspects, the problem of security in government service will be rendered, not 
easy surely, but far more manageable.””! The NAS sought to rein in what 
it saw as the more irresponsible uses of the security apparatus. It did not 
challenge the logic or legitimacy of the security state. Oppenheimer admitted 
to NAS president Alfred N. Richards that the report was “not very hot stuff.” 
The institutional dependence of the scientific elite on the national-security 
state fostered political timidity in the face of Cold War anti-Communism.”* 
In the case of Oppenheimer, this reticence was compounded by what he must 
have felt to be his own vulnerability to such attacks. 

In September 1948, HUAC began to call witnesses in hopes of unearthing 
wartime Communist atomic espionage at Berkeley. Witnesses included Ka- 
men, Communist Party organizer Steve Nelson, and Joseph Weinberg, a 
former student of Oppenheimer’s.”’ At the end of the month, the committee 
released a preliminary report on its investigations, “Soviet Espionage Activi- 
ties in Connection with the Atomic Bomb.” The report claimed that during 
the war, there had been a concerted Communist campaign to channel secret 
information about the atomic bomb project to the Soviets. It accused former 
Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory scientists Clarence Hiskey and John H. 
Chapin of being involved in an espionage conspiracy against the Manhattan 
Project, and it claimed that Kamen had passed secrets about the work of the 
Berkeley Radiation Laboratory to representatives of the Soviet consulate in 
San Francisco. In addition, the committee cited the case of a “Scientist X” at 
the Berkeley Rad Lab who, the report claimed, had given information about 
the project—including a secret “formula”—to Nelson. Though not identi- 
fied in this report, “Scientist X” was named by HUAC the following year 
as Weinberg. The report also mentioned Oppenheimer in connection with 
the Chevalier incident. Although the committee noted that Oppenheimer had 
“refused to cooperate” in the scheme, the fact that the report placed him amid 
the “interlocking associations” of a Communist network was, at the least, 
highly discomforting.”* 

In 1949, Oppenheimer’s former students David Bohm and Giovanni Rossi 
Lomanitz were subpoenaed to testify before the committee. Both pleaded the 
Fifth Amendment when asked if they had been members of the Communist 
Party and whether they had known Nelson.”? Oppenheimer regarded taking 
the Fifth as dishonorable, and when he himself appeared before the commit- 


206 Chapter Seven 


tee, on June 7, he adopted a different strategy. He had been called for “assis- 
tance” in the investigation of the Rad Lab and was told that he himself was 
not under suspicion. AEC general counsel Joseph Volpe, who sat beside Op- 
penheimer at the witness table, remembered, “Robert seemed to have made 
up his mind to charm these Congressmen out of their seats.” The strategy 
apparently succeeded. At the end of the testimony, each of the stx members 
of the committee came over to shake his hand. Congressman Richard Nixon 
later described him as having been “a cooperative witness.””° 

Exactly how cooperative Oppenheimer had been became public the fol- 
lowing week when a Rochester, New York, newspaper published details of the 
testimony he gave regarding a former student, Bernard Peters. Oppenheimer 
had described Peters as “a dangerous man and quite Red.” He said that Peters 
was an ultraleftist who had viewed the American Communist Party as not sufh- 
ciently dedicated to violent revolution. Incredibly, he even referred to Peters’s 
escape “by guile” from a Nazi concentration camp as evidence ofa suspicious 


tendency toward “direct action.”?” 


This betrayal of his own student deeply 
disturbed a number of Oppenheimer’s scientific colleagues, including Con- 
don, Hans Bethe, and Victor Weisskopf, all of whom wrote to Oppenheimer 
expressing their disappointment. Weisskopf told Oppenheimer that “we are 
all losing something that is irreparable. Namely confidence in you.” He begged 
Oppenheimer to “set this record straight ... even if you have to pay for it by 
losing reputation somewhere else.””* 

Oppenheimer did write a letter to another newspaper, the Rochester Demo- 
crat and Chronicle, saying that his comments had been “misconstrued and. . . 
abused” and regretting that anything he said might “damage Dr. Peters and 
threaten his distinguished future career as a scientist.” Oppenheimer added 
a point of principle: “Political opinion, no matter how radical or how freely 
expressed, does not disqualify a scientist for a high career in science.” But 
this seemed to many of his colleagues to be too little, too late, and Oppen- 
heimer’s post hoc defense of the separation of science from politics smacked 
of hypocrisy.” Condon remained especially angry about this incident. When 
he had first learned of the HUAC testimony, he wrote to Oppenheimer, “One 
is tempted to feel that you are so foolish as to think you can buy immunity for 
yourself by turning informer. I hope that this is not true. You know very well 
that once these people decide to go into your own dossier and make it public 
that it will make the ‘revelations’ that have been made so far look pretty tame.”°° 

Many years later, Condon told an interviewer that Oppenheimer’s testi- 
mony “was the dirtiest two-faced thing I ever saw.” “The thing that horrified 


me most,” Condon said, “was, he, a Jewish boy, so soon after the six million 


“I Was an Idiot” 207 


had been cremated, and this was his personal protégé, also a Jewish boy—he 
said to this scoundrelly committee, ‘I’m not sure how far I would trust Peters, 
because he resorted to guile in escaping from Dachau.’”?' When he read of 
Oppenheimer’s testimony, Condon wrote to his wife, “Oppie is really be- 
coming unbalanced.” He added, “If he cracks up it will certainly be a great 
tragedy. I only hope that he does not drag down too many others with him.”*? 

Oppenheimer’s conciliatory stance toward HUAC contrasted with other 
occasions on which he was less politic, and when flashes of arrogance helped 
to make him powerful enemies. On June 13, 1949, appearing again before 
Congress—this time in front of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy— 
Oppenheimer criticized AEC commissioner Admiral Lewis Strauss’s grounds 
for opposing shipment of radioisotopes to foreign countries. Oppenheimer as- 
sessed radioisotopes as being no more worth protecting from proliferation than 
a bottle of beer ora shovel. Strauss never forgave Oppenheimer for this public 
ridicule.°? 

The following day, Frank Oppenheimer and his wife, Jackie, appeared 
before HUAC to answer questions about Communist activities at the Rad 
Lab. In 1947, when questioned by a journalist, Frank had denied that he had 
been a party member. He had also written a letter to his employer, the Uni- 
versity of Minnesota, denying this allegation. Now, testifying before the con- 
gressional committee, Frank admitted that he had been a member of the Com- 
munist Party but claimed he had left “long before” he began war research. 
Less than an hour after his appearance before the committee, he heard from 
news reporters that he had been fired by his university. From then until 
the early 1960s, Frank was on a blacklist and was unable to gain academic 
employment.** 

Chevalier, finding himself blocked for promotion at the University of Cali- 
fornia, had resigned his academic post.°’ He also attributed the deterioration 
and eventual breakup of his marriage to the disintegration of his career. He 
was interested in Oppenheimer’s HUAC testimony after reading reports that 
Oppenheimer had publicly vindicated him. He thought that if he could have 
an account of the testimony, it would help him in applications to find a new 
academic position. Oppenheimer replied, “I said that you had told me of a 
discussion of providing technical information to the USSR which disturbed 
you considerably, and which you thought I ought to know about.” He added, 
“As you know, I have been deeply disturbed by the threat to your career which 
these ugly stories could constitute. If I can help you in that, you may call on 
me.” In an attached letter, he told his old friend, “The reason for the formality 
of this letter which I enclose is that it seemed to me likely that you might find 


208 Chapter Seven 


some occasion to use it, and that it ought to be couched in fairly formal terms. 
I do not feel at all formal about the troubles you are having; and I wish that I 
might think ofan easy solution.” Denied a U.S. passport, Chevalier made use 
of his dual nationality and moved to Paris.*© 

In early 1950, coinciding with Truman’s announcement of the go-ahead 
for the hydrogen bomb, the country was rocked by revelations of Soviet es- 
pionage. Alger Hiss, a former special assistant to the secretary of state, had 
been accused of passing secret information to the Soviets; on January 21, 
he was convicted of perjury when he denied being involved with espionage. 
Hiss seemed the epitome of the East Coast liberal establishment—an upper- 
class diplomat, a graduate of Johns Hopkins University and Harvard Law 
School. His conviction fueled far-fetched allegations of a Communist con- 
spiracy within the highest rungs of the American establishment, and it also 
bolstered the confidence of HUAC in taking on such elite figures.?” Then, 
on January 24, a few days before Truman’s H-bomb decision, Klaus Fuchs, 
working at Harwell nuclear laboratory in Britain, confessed to having spied for 
the Soviets while working in the Theoretical Division at Los Alamos. When 
he read in the papers about the Fuchs case, former Manhattan Project security 
officer Colonel Boris Pash immediately “felt that he would next be reading 
about Dr. Oppenheimer’s involvement in such activities.”?% 

Then, in May, Sylvia Crouch testified before the California Senate Com- 
mittee on Un-American Activities in Oakland that in late July of 1941, Op- 
penheimer had hosted a “session of a top-drawer Communist group” at his 
Berkeley home.°? Paul and Sylvia Crouch, though later discredited, were 
at this time prized ex-Communist informants for the Department of Jus- 
tice and the array of legislative committees involved in the anti-Communist 
campaign.*° The clear implication of the testimony was that Oppenheimer had 
been a party member, and a very senior one at that. Oppenheimer promptly 
issued a statement denying the allegation and asserting, “I have never been 
a member of the Communist Party.”*! The papers responded with splashy 
headlines such as “A-Scientist Oppenheimer at Red Meet, Probers Told,” 
“Says A-Wizard Met with Reds,” “Red Huddle Denied by Oppenheimer,” 
and “Commy Meetings in Home Denied by Oppenheimer.””” 

Crouch’s allegation, though unsettling, was not fatal. Powerful figures 
rallied to Oppenheimer’s support. Nixon, who had been so impressed by Op- 
penheimer’s performance before HUAC, took time during a campaign speech 
to assert his faith in the physicist: “I am convinced that Dr. Oppenheimer 
has been and is a completely loyal American and, further, one to whom the 
people of the United States owe a great deal of gratitude for his tireless and 


“I Was an Idiot” 209 


magnificent job in atomic research.” General Groves wrote Oppenheimer a 
letter for use if he needed it, affirming his confidence in the physicist.*? Such 
statements of support generated sympathetic treatment for Oppenheimer in 
the editorial pages, and there was frequent criticism of the California com- 
mittee for being hysterical and overly credulous of informers. Some even 
carried paranoia full circle by suggesting that the Crouches could themselves 
be carrying out a Communist plot to sow distrust and discord in America’s 
institutions.“* Oppenheimer was able to ride out the storm. But Lilienthal’s 
reassurance to Oppenheimer that the Oakland affair was “like a puff of wind 
against the Gibraltar of your great standing in American life” was perhaps an 
overstatement. For with each new public allegation, that standing was, little 
by little, eroded. The Oakland Tribune was already writing of “the Robert 
Oppenheimer case” and predicted that “there is more to come.” A few days 
later, the San Francisco Chronicle described Oppenheimer as “the brightest 
star in the firmament” of science—but said that there was now “mud on the 
star.” The controversy not only tarnished Oppenheimer’s public image; it 
also took a personal toll. Toward the end of May, Oppenheimer wrote to 
Robert Bacher about what he called “the California doings”: “I took it all very 
badly and feel now like a man slowly convalescing from a serious illness.” 

Sylvia Crouch’s allegations continued to hang around Oppenheimer’s 
neck. During her Oakland testimony, she had claimed that Weinberg was 
one of those present at the 1941 gathering at the Oppenheimer home. This 
allegation was marshaled by the prosecution when, in 1952, Weinberg faced 
a grand jury, charged with perjury regarding his denials to HUAC two years 
earlier that he had been a Communist or had attended Communist meetings. 
As a result, the story of Oppenheimer hosting a closed Communist meeting 
was again in the headlines.*° 

In the spring of 1952, the assistant U.S. attorney prosecuting the Wein- 
berg case requested a meeting with Oppenheimer and his lawyers. There 
Oppenheimer was brought face to face with Paul Crouch, who claimed to 
have accompanied his wife to the 1941 gathering at the Oppenheimer home 
and to have addressed the group about the new party line after the outbreak of 
war between Germany and the Soviet Union. Oppenheimer said he had never 
met the man before and proceeded to directly challenge Crouch on details of 
his story. For example, Crouch claimed that he and his wife entered the living 
room through the house’s back entrance. Oppenheimer asked, “Up some 
steps at the back?” When Crouch assented, Oppenheimer stated, “There 
were no steps.” It was not difficult to pick holes in Crouch’s testimony. When 
questioned about the physicist’s appearance, he said that Oppenheimer had 


210 Chapter Seven 


had the same crew cut that he had now. Oppenheimer and his attorneys 
pointed out that his hair had been long and tangled.*” Oppenheimer was sure 
that he had been in New Mexico at the time the gathering at his house was 
supposed to have taken place. He and his lawyers set about the arduous task of 
trying to document his whereabouts on that date, ten years ago, by digging up 
records and interviewing old friends in New Mexico and Berkeley.** Wein- 
berg was eventually acquitted on all counts in March 1953, though the judge 
expressed his view that, from the evidence, the security situation at wartime 
Berkeley had been “shocking.” 

Oppenheimer was able to establish quite securely that he had been in 
New Mexico when the Crouches placed him as host of the meeting. But their 
allegations had been causing trouble for Oppenheimer for several years, and 
in the 1954 hearings he would again be called on to rebut them (“Transcript,” 
16, 216-18). Such attacks and allegations concerning Oppenheimer’s prewar 
politics, though bolstered by the climate of McCarthyism, would most likely 
have continued to be fended off, without impact, were it not for the enemies in 
the military and the scientific community that Oppenheimer had made through 
his initial opposition to the Super. It was this, more than anything else, that 
led to the events of 1954. Herbert York wrote that “despite elaborate efforts 
to assert the contrary, the real stimulus for the removal of Oppenheimer’s 
clearance was his opposition to the program for superbomb development.””” 

Teller, in particular, played a crucial behind-the-scenes role in manufac- 
turing a case that Oppenheimer had intentionally hindered the development 
of the H-bomb. For example, a May 1952 FBI report noted that “Dr. Teller... 
believes that the H-bomb would have been a reality at least a year ago if it had 
not been for Oppenheimer’s opposition ... Oppenheimer either delayed or 
hindered the development of the H-bomb from 1945 to 1950 by opposing it 
on moral grounds .. . [and subsequently] opposed it on the basis that it was 
not feasible.” Teller’s account suggested that Oppenheimer would use any 
argument available to oppose the H-bomb. While Teller said that he did not 
believe Oppenheimer’s motives were “subversive,” that was strongly implied 
by the direction ofhis commentary.°! He also mused that Oppenheimer was “a 
very complicated person . . . [who] in his youth was troubled with some sort of 
physical or mental attacks which may have permanently affected him. He also 
had great ambitions in science and realizes that he is not as great a physicist as 
he would like to be.” At the same time, Teller was highly sensitive about being 
exposed as having informed on Oppenheimer, and he requested that those 
psychological tidbits be excluded from the report. Teller thought it would 
be obvious that he was the source, and he was worried that such exposure 


“I Was an Idiot” 211 


“could prove very embarrassing to him personally.”°” Teller’s caution is made 
understandable by the comment of a close friend of his on Oppenheimer’s 
perceived status in the physics community: “Einstein was God and Oppie 
was His only begotten Son.””? 

The campaign against him by pro-H-bomb scientists (clustered around the 
Berkeley Radiation Laboratory), senior Air Force figures, and AEC adminis- 
trators had taken its toll on Oppenheimer. When his term as GAC chairman 
came to an end in the summer of 1952, Oppenheimer stepped down, as did 
his colleagues Conant and DuBridge.™ All three men had decided to jump 
before they were pushed. Admiral Sidney W. Souers, a special consultant to 
President Truman, told Hoover in July that the administration was “making 
a clean sweep” of the GAC.” Just before his term came to an end, Oppen- 
heimer expressed his weariness in a private letter to his brother: “By August, 
my six years on the Gen. Advisory Committee are over; they have seemed 
long.”°® But Oppenheimer’s removal from the committee did not appease his 
enemies in the AEC, the military, and the administration; they wanted to see 
him barred completely from government work.*” 

If Oppenheimer had been increasingly frozen out of the Truman adminis- 
tration, he faced an even colder shoulder following Eisenhower’s inauguration 
in late January 1953. When Lewis Strauss was appointed AEC chairman (to 
become effective July 1 of that year), he told Eisenhower that he “could not do 
the job . . . if Oppenheimer was connected in any way with the program.””* 
Strauss, in close contact with Hoover, carried out an unrelenting campaign to 
undermine the physicist.°? Oppenheimer had already begun to be excluded 
informally. In 1951, the Air Force stopped using him asa consultant. Secretary 
of Defense Charles E. Wilson simply abolished the department’s Research 
and Development Board, of which Oppenheimer was a member; he bragged 
at a press conference in April 1954 that “we dropped the whole board. That 
was a real smooth way of doing that one as far as the Defense Department was 
concerned.” In 1952, Oppenheimer’s consulting work for the AEC totaled 
only two days, and in the following year only four days. 

The campaign against Oppenheimer was brought into public view by an 
anonymous article in Fortune magazine in May 1953, “The Hidden Struggle 
for the H-Bomb.” The article alleged that Oppenheimer was the leading figure 
among a group of scientists opposing SAC and the H-bomb and accused him 
of trying to stop testing of the H-bomb in 1952. The article also placed 
Oppenheimer at the head ofa shadowy group allegedly calling itself ZORC— 
“Z” for MIT physicist Jerrold Zacharias, “O” for Oppenheimer, “R” for Rabi, 
and “C” for Charles Lauritsen, who were said to be trying to undercut the 


212 Chapter Seven 


Air Force’s “deterrent-retaliatory” strategy. The writer strongly suggested 
that these scientists’ proposals for air defense (as an alternative to deterrence) 
were designed primarily as a way to hinder the Air Force program. The 
article finished by asserting that “there was a serious question of propriety 
of scientists’ trying to settle such grave national issues alone, inasmuch as 
they bear no responsibility for the successful execution of war plans.”°’ The 
author was Air Force reservist Charles J. V. Murphy, who thought that Op- 
penheimer was out to “denuclearize” American policy. During a recent tour 
of duty in the Air Force’s top echelons, Murphy had had access to secret docu- 
ments and private conversations regarding Oppenheimer and atomic policy.” 
The Fortune article marked Oppenheimer as fair game for press criticism. 
In September, a Time article eulogizing Strauss accused Oppenheimer and 
Lilienthal of indulging in the “paralyzing combination” of “hand wringing 
and baseless hope” in their opposition to the H-bomb.™ 

Perhaps most galling of all to the H-bomb lobby wasa critique that Oppen- 
heimer published in the July 1953 issue of Foreign Affairs. One foothold in 
Washington that Oppenheimer had maintained after stepping down from the 
GAC was on the State Department’s Panel of Consultants on Disarmament, 
set up by Secretary Dean Acheson. The group made a series of radical and 
forward-looking proposals on limiting the arms race, including a moratorium 
on H-bomb testing. Among the ideas they forwarded to the incoming Eisen- 
hower administration was the promotion of “candor” rather than secrecy in 
nuclear policy. Frustrated at the lack of governmental attention the proposals 
were receiving, Oppenheimer took the panel’s idea to an elite public audience in 
a February talk at the Council on Foreign Relations and in the resulting article 
for Foreign Affairs. Here, he criticized overreliance on nuclear weapons and 
the “rigidity” ofthe administration’s strategic ideology. Noting the futility ofan 
inexorable arms buildup, Oppenheimer argued that “our twenty-thousandth 
bomb ... will not in any deep strategic sense offset their two-thousandth.” 
The arms race, he said, was leading to “a state of affairs in which two Great 
Powers will each be in a position to put an end to the civilization and life of 
the other, though not without risking his own.” And Oppenheimer vividly 
likened this situation to “two scorpions in a bottle, each capable of killing 
the other, but only at the risk of his own life.” He also criticized the culture of 
secrecy that shielded the real state of the arms race from democratic scrutiny. 

The publication of Oppenheimer’s Foreign Affairs article suggested that 
the policy of easing him out of governmental power was allowing him to take a 
more publicly critical stance toward nuclear defense policy. Though he was in- 
creasingly cut off from insider influence, Oppenheimer’s top-secret Q clearance 


“I Was an Idiot” 213 


gave him the authority to speak with insider knowledge on atomic weapons 
issues. The danger for the administration was that Oppenheimer would be an 
external critic with the authority ofan insider. Strauss and his allies needed to 
find a way to destroy his credibility and authority entirely. At the same time, 
pressure was mounting from another source—Senator Joseph McCarthy. The 
Fortune article, with its suggestion of a shadowy “ZORC” conspiracy, had 
caught the McCarthy committee’s attention.© 

On May 12, 1953, McCarthy informed Hoover that his Senate Investigations 
Committee was planning to inquire into Oppenheimer. Hoover warned him 
that ifhe did so, he would have to prepare well, with “a great deal of preliminary 
spade work.” It would be a symbolic battle: Oppenheimer was a “figure ... 
around whom the scientists of the country have usually rallied.” Hoover was 
particularly concerned that Oppenheimer should not “end up by becoming a 
martyr.” Strauss also worried that McCarthy would bungle the investigation, 
agreeing with Hoover that “this was not a case which should be prematurely 
gone into solely for the purpose of headlines.” A direct attack by McCarthy 
on the scientist would by extension implicate the administration. The desire 
to head off such a move was a key factor leading Eisenhower to endorse 
internal AEC action against Oppenheimer. All were aware, however, that 
action against Oppenheimer would be treated as an attack on the scientific 
community itself. In December, Hoover told the Secretary of Defense that 
“the scientists considered themselves sacrosanct and if anyone criticized them 
they all rose up in righteous indignation,” adding that “my personal feeling 
was that they were no different from anyone else.” 

Oppenheimer was the most senior scientist of the time to have his security 
clearance denied. He was also the most prominent and powerful individual 
ever to be brought down by such a proceeding. The hearings were regarded 
by many at the time as a watershed, having the potential to be either a great 
symbolic victory for the anti-Communists or an example of an overconfident 
security system finally overreaching itself. 


THE CASE AGAINST OPPENHEIMER 


The charges against Oppenheimer were initiated by William L. Borden, who 
had recently stepped down as executive director of the congressional Joint 
Committee on Atomic Energy. On November 7, 1953, Borden wrote to Hoover 
alleging that Oppenheimer was in all probability an “agent of the Soviet Union” 
(“Transcript,” 837-38). The FBI forwarded the letter to the White House, and 
on December 3, President Eisenhower ordered that Oppenheimer’s security 


214 Chapter Seven 


clearance be withdrawn and that a “blank wall” be erected between the scien- 
tist and the nation’s atomic secrets. Just before Christmas, Oppenheimer was 
given a letter from General Kenneth D. Nichols, General Groves’s Manhattan 
Project deputy during the war and now the general manager of the AEC, 
informing the physicist that his clearance had been revoked.°” Oppenheimer 
refused to resign as a consultant to the AEC in response to Nichols’s charges. 
He told Strauss that resigning “would mean that I accept and concur in the 
view that I am not fit to serve this Government, that I have now served for 
some 12 years ... This I cannot do.” Seeking to clear his name, he exercised 
his right to appeal before an AEC Personnel Security Board (PSB).°° 

The hearings began on April 12, 1954. The PSB’s task was to evaluate the 
charges and the evidence and to determine whether Oppenheimer’s continued 
employment did pose a risk to the nation’s security. The proceedings lasted 
almost a month, the board hearing the testimony of forty witnesses before 
wrapping up on May 6. The board sent its report to Nichols, who forwarded 
it to the AEC commissioners. On June 29, the commissioners announced their 
finding that Oppenheimer was indeed a security risk, and they upheld the 
withdrawal of his clearance. Oppenheimer was barred from access to govern- 
ment secrets. He could no longer be called upon to advise on matters of atomic 
energy, and his ties to the institutions of government were effectively severed. 

Harold P. Green, the AEC legal officer who drafted the original letter 
of allegations sent by Nichols to Oppenheimer, subsequently criticized the 
ambiguous, quasi-legal character of the proceedings as inhabiting a gray area 
of “demi-jurisprudence.” Formal rules, criteria, and procedures for security 
were relatively new in the late 1940s, replacing the more ad hoc and informal 
types of judgment made during the war. In consequence, there were “no 
established traditions . . . no publicly available precedents.” The proceedings 
had “many of the trappings of the judicial process,” but without the protections 
usually associated with law.°° 

The three-member board was chaired by Gordon Gray, president of the 
University of North Carolina, a former secretary of the Army under Truman, 
and aman firmly entrenched in the American establishment. Sitting alongside 
him were Dr. Ward Evans, a professor of chemistry at Northwestern Uni- 
versity, and Thomas Morgan, retired chairman of the board of the defense 
contractor Sperry Gyroscope and a director of Lehman Brothers and Bankers 
Trust.” 

As the hearings commenced, Gray reminded those present that this was 
“an inquiry and notin the nature ofa trial. We shall approach our duties in that 
atmosphere and in that spirit” (““Transcript,” 20). But as one commentator 


“I Was an Idiot” 215 


observed, the proceedings were “neither wholly an inquiry nor wholly a trial. 
The Board permitted them to fallintoa muddled middle course.”’! The AEC’s 
attorney, Roger Robb, was a highly successful criminal prosecutor, used to 
trying murder cases, and he pursued the Oppenheimer case in the same style. 
Robb was both behaving as a prosecuting attorney and acting on behalf of the 
PSB, a combination that has called into question the board’s neutrality.” 
According to Green, the hearings were “launched with the predetermined 
objective” of finding Oppenheimer a security risk. He remembered how 
Nichols had gloated that they were about to finally catch the “slippery 
sonuvabitch.” There was considerable pressure for such an outcome from 
Strauss, as well as Hoover. Green alleged that hard-liners who would have “a 
predisposition to find against Oppenheimer” were selected for the board.” 
The three were assembled in Washington a week prior to the beginning of the 
hearings and were shown the files on Oppenheimer, including the FBI file— 
documents that were not made available to Oppenheimer and his attorneys.’4 
During the last stages of the AEC’s deliberations, Strauss told Eisenhower 
he was worried that other AEC commissioners—Henry D. Smyth, Eugene 
Zuckert, and Thomas A. Murray—would vote in favor of Oppenheimer. 
According to Green, Eisenhower urged Strauss to do all he could to ensure 
that they would find against Oppenheimer; and after the AEC’s decision, 
Eisenhower wrote a letter of congratulation to Strauss on the result.” 
Eisenhower was deeply worried that if the case did not go the right way, 
it would become a stick with which McCarthy could beat the administration 
and boost his own power. Despite Gray’s pains to present the hearings as a 
neutral and routine administrative inquiry, the whole proceeding was haunted 
by the specter of McCarthy. Six days before it began, McCarthy stated on 
television that Communists in government were responsible for setting back 
the development of the H-bomb program for eighteen months. McCarthy said, 
“Our nation may well die” because of the delay, and he added, “I ask who 
caused it? Was it loyal Americans—or was it traitors in our government?””® 
The initial secrecy surrounding the proceedings broke down. The AEC 
and Oppenheimer’s attorneys came to regard a controlled release of informa- 
tion as preferable to sensationalized revelations from McCarthy. Also, during 
the AEC’s deliberations, Zuckert left under a train-carriage seat a copy of key 
documents concerning the hearings. The following evening, the commission- 
ers held an emergency meeting in which Strauss urged them to publish the 
transcript, this being preferable to possible unauthorized release if the doc- 
uments had gone missing. Although the package was safely recovered, with 
no evidence of tampering, the publication went ahead. On June 15, before the 


216 Chapter Seven 


commissioners delivered their judgment, copies of the entire transcript were 
passed to the press.’” 

Another peculiarity of the proceedings was the lack of clarity about the 
criteria against which Oppenheimer was being judged. The meaning of the 
label “security risk” was disturbingly ambiguous. Green noted the govern- 
ment’s vacillation between two general standards of security. The first was the 
““Caesar’s wife” approach—“Caesar’s wife must be above suspicion.” On this 
criterion, any item of information suggesting disloyalty, if found to be true, 
would be grounds for the denial of security clearance. The second was the 
“whole man” approach, according to which any “derogatory information” 
must be weighed against favorable factors, including the person’s value to the 
nuclear program.’* The tension between the two understandings of security 
was to prove critical during the hearings. 

A further confusion about the meaning of “security risk” lay in the question 
of what information or events could be counted as relevant. Borden’s letter 
to the FBI accused Oppenheimer of being an enemy agent. “The central 
problem,” Borden wrote, “is assessing ... whether he became an actual 
espionage and policy instrument of the Soviets ... My opinion is that, more 
probably than not, the worst is in fact the truth.” However, the evidence that 
Borden put forward to support this allegation was most indirect. It focused 
mainly on questions of association, particularly Oppenheimer’s links with 
Communists in the 1930s and financial contributions to the party. As to the 
question of Oppenheimer’s actions, Borden alleged only that Oppenheimer 
“was a sufficiently hardened Communist that he either volunteered to the 
Soviets or complied with a request for such information.” This charge was 
based, however, on the premise that any Communist with the opportunity to 
do so would carry out espionage for the Soviets (“Transcript,” 838). 

As Borden framed his allegations, Oppenheimer did not need to be caught 
red-handed asa spy. Rather, given the fact that his advisory positions gave him 
ample opportunity to carry out espionage, all that needed to be shown was that 
Oppenheimer was a Communist (something that Borden regarded as clearly 
demonstrated by his associations). Even in Borden’s original denunciation, 
then, the very clear allegation of espionage easily slid into an emphasis, for 
practical purposes, on more diffuse questions of association. And application 
of the “Caesar’s wife” standard meant that, quite apart from any presumption 
of actual espionage, derogatory information (such as association with Com- 
munists) would be zn itself sufficient to render a judgment of Oppenheimer 
as being a security risk. 


“I Was an Idiot” 217 


Such matters of “character” formed the substance of Nichols’s letter listing 
the charges Oppenheimer faced. The letter was a rambling hodgepodge of al- 
legations: that Oppenheimer had belonged to Communist front organizations, 
that he had had Communist friends, that his brother Frank had been amember 
of the Communist Party, and that Oppenheimer was responsible for having 
Communists recruited to the Manhattan Project. Nichols’s letter further ex- 
panded the question of security by casting doubt on Oppenheimer’s “veracity, 
conduct and even your loyalty.” Therefore, he said, “the Commission has no 
other recourse, in discharge of its obligations to protect the common defense 
and security, but to suspend your clearance” (“Transcript,” 6). 

Nichols’s letter also gave central importance to the “Chevalier affair.” 
Nichols highlighted the fact that Oppenheimer did not initially report the 
incident to the authorities and that only when compelled by Groves did 
he identify Chevalier (“Transcript,” 5-6). The Chevalier affair, which was 
seen as suggesting Communist associations and a cavalier attitude toward 
security, formed the basis for the judgment that Oppenheimer’s “defects of 
character” made him a security risk. This understanding of “security risk” 
was wholly separate from the original charge of espionage or from any actions 
of Oppenheimer’s that might have been directly harmful to the United States. 
Rather, it was maintained that his character was such that he could not be 
trusted: it was a question of what he might do, rather than what he had done. 

Another of Borden’s allegations did suggest that Oppenheimer had actively 
harmed the security of the United States. This played an important role in 
the hearings and was emphasized in the findings of the PSB. Borden accused 
Oppenheimer not just of espionage, but of being a “policy instrument” of the 
Soviet Union, via his influence on American nuclear weapons policies. This 
accusation made Oppenheimer’s views and his positions taken as a scientific 
adviser central to the case against him. Oppenheimer had used his “potent 
influence,” Borden alleged, to hinder the nation’s postwar development of 
atomic weapons and had “worked tirelessly ... to retard the United States 
H-bomb program” (“Transcript,” 838). Nichols charged that Oppenheimer 
had “opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb (1) on moral grounds, 
(2) by claiming that it was not feasible, (3) by claiming that there were in- 
sufficient facilities and scientific personnel to carry on the development, and 
(4) that it was not politically desirable.” He also charged that Oppenheimer 
had continued to oppose the H-bomb project even after it became national 
policy. Like Borden, he highlighted Oppenheimer’s influence within the sci- 


entific community and government: “You were instrumental in persuading 


218 Chapter Seven 


other outstanding scientists not to work on the hydrogen-bomb project .. . 
[This opposition] has definitely slowed down its development” (6). 

Interlocking in the case against Oppenheimer, therefore, were questions 
both of biography and character and of the proper role of the scientific adviser. 
Oppenheimer’s motivations and loyalties were seen to reflect in important 
ways on the trustworthiness of his scientific advice. Intimate aspects of his 
biography were seen to be bound up with general questions of the role of the 
scientist and the relationship between science and the state. 


IDENTITY AS AN OBJECT 


Oppenheimer said that during the hearings, he had “very little sense of self.””9 


The hearings made his identity a public object over which he was able to main- 
tain relatively little discursive control. The writer André Malraux, for example, 
could not understand what he saw as Oppenheimer’s passivity in relation to 
his accusers: “The trouble was, he accepted his accusers’ terms from the 
beginning.”®” The disorienting quality of the proceedings for Oppenheimer, 
however, was due precisely to the fact that he had very little control over 
biographical information and hence over the definition of his self. The pros- 
ecution’s strategy was to cast doubt on Oppenheimer’s trustworthiness by 
disrupting any attempt to create a coherent biographical narrative. 

Oppenheimer’s memories and his accounts of himself could be shown to be 
inconsistent in relation to transcripts and memoranda produced from wartime 
and later security interviews. Collected as a file, these formed a documentary 
biography that developed a coherence and objective reality of its own, and 
in relation to which Oppenheimer’s self-descriptions could be compared and 
judged. Robb, on behalf ofthe AEC, used this documentary record with great 
effect to shatter the coherence of Oppenheimer’s self-presentation during the 
hearings.*! Robb was aided by the fact that Oppenheimer and his counsel did 
not have access to key pieces of evidence. The FBI file, for example, though 
read by the security board, was not available to Oppenheimer and his attor- 
neys, nor were many of the key classified documents used in the case.** When, 
early on in the proceedings, Oppenheimer’s attorney Lloyd Garrison referred 
to a wartime telegram from Oppenheimer to Colonel James C. Marshall of 
the Corps of Engineers, both Robb and Gray challenged him as to what “a 
lawyer in private practice, is doing with parts of the files of the Manhattan 
Engineering District” (“Transcript,” 123). 

Control over the documentary record gave Robb authority in determining 
the real history. Oppenheimer very frequently deferred to Robb’s description 


“I Was an Idiot” 219 


of events, accepting the documentary record as more reliable than his own 
memory.®° Robb was greatly assisted by Oppenheimer’s readiness to disavow 
his previous accounts of the Chevalier incident. Early in his testimony, Oppen- 
heimer confessed to having “invented a cock-and-bull story” for Manhattan 
Project security officers in 1943 when he gave his original account of the inci- 
dent. When asked why he had claimed that the intermediary had approached 
three people, he replied, “Because I was an idiot” (“Transcript,” 137). 

Robb subsequently forced Oppenheimer to acknowledge exactly those 
places where he had lied in the crucial wartime security interview. At this 
point in the hearings, Oppenheimer’s attorneys had not yet been allowed 
to see this transcript, even though it was being used in cross-examination. 
When Robb confronted Oppenheimer with his account to Pash, in which he 
had described three people in the project being approached, Oppenheimer 
stated that “this whole thing was a pure fabrication except for the one name 
Eltenton” (““Transcript,” 146). Robb asked, “Why did you go into such great 
circumstantial detail about this thing if you were telling a cock and bull story?” 
Oppenheimer responded, “I fear that this whole thing is a piece of idiocy ... 
[It] seems wholly false to me” (149). 

Oppenheimer still wanted to present himself as having eventually told 
Groves the whole story.** But the effect of Robb’s cross-examination was to 
utterly discredit Oppenheimer’s veracity. Robb put it to Oppenheimer that he 
had lied to Groves as well. He produced in support a telegram from Colonel 
Nichols to security officer Lieutenant Lyall Johnson informing Johnson of 
Chevalier, whose name Oppenheimer had given Groves the day before. The 
telegram read, “Oppenheimer states in his opinion Chevalier engaged in no 
further activity other than three original attempts.” Robb drew Oppenheimer’s 
attention to the circumstantial detail still present in this telegram, pointing out 
that Oppenheimer was “still talking about the three people.”®? 

Toward the end of the hearings, Oppenheimer was questioned by Gray 
about why, if Oppenheimer had been trying to protect Chevalier, he had 
concocted a false story that “showed that Chevalier was deeply involved, 
that it was not just a casual conversation, that it would not under those 
circumstances just have been an innocent and meaningless contact, and that 
it was a criminal conspiracy” (““Transcript,” 887). In his recommendations to 
the AEC, Nichols made clear the implication: “It is difficult to conclude that 
the detailed and circumstantial account given by Dr. Oppenheimer to Colonel 
Pash was false and that the story now told by Oppenheimer isan honest one... 
Is it reasonable to believe a man will deliberately tell a lie that seriously reflects 
upon himself and his friend, when he knows that the truth will show them 


220 Chapter Seven 


both to be innocent?” In other words, the account Oppenheimer had offered 
during the hearings was more consistent with a motive to lie than the version 
he had given to Pash. According to Nichols, it was not until after the war, 
when Oppenheimer was interviewed by the FBI in 1946, that he began to 
tell the version of events presented at the hearings. And Nichols asserted 
that Oppenheimer had conferred with Chevalier about the latter’s earlier 
FBI interview and had adapted his own account to be consistent. Nichols 
concluded, “From all these facts and circumstances, itis a fair inference that Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s story to Colonel Pash and other Manhattan District officials 
was substantially true and that his later statement on the subject to the FBI, 
and his recent testimony before the Personnel Security Board, were false.”°° 
In their final decision, the commissioners gave weight to Nichols’s ar- 


gument. In their findings “as to ‘character,’” 


they wrote: “In the hearings 
recently concluded, Dr. Oppenheimer under oath swears that the story he 
told Colonel Pash was a ‘whole fabrication and tissue of lies.’ It is not clear 
today whether the account Dr. Oppenheimer gave to Colonel Pash in 1943 
concerning the Chevalier incident or the story he told the Gray Board last 
month is the true version.”*®” Oppenheimer’s adversaries were able to claim 
that his duplicity was such that it was impossible to determine when he was 
telling the truth and when he was not. 

The general sense that Oppenheimer was a man not to be trusted was all that 
was required to make a successful case for disqualification on the grounds of 
“defects of character.”** This helps to explain why Edward Teller’s testimony 
was so damaging. What was so significant in Teller’s testimony was his 
expression ofa feeling of vague unease about Oppenheimer’s moral reliability: 
“T thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues and his actions frankly 
appeared to me confused and complicated. To this extent I feel that I would 
like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand better, 
and therefore trust more” (“Transcript,” 710). This attack on Oppenheimer’s 
character meshed perfectly with Robb’s strategy. 


“WRITING A MAN’S LIFE”: 
IDENTITY, SOLIDARITY, AND THE SYSTEM 


The cases for and against Oppenheimer divided largely along the lines of the 
two approaches to evaluating a security risk: “Caesar’s wife” versus the “whole 
man.” Whereas Robb emphasized particular incidents that would count as 
black marks against Oppenheimer’s character, the physicist’s defense counted 
on recontextualizing such items within a general portrait of Oppenheimer as 


“T Was an Idiot” 221 


a man. This was Oppenheimer’s strategy in his letter of reply to Nichols’s 
charges: “The items of so-called derogatory information set forth in your letter 
cannot be fairly understood except in the context of my life and my work” 
(“Transcript,” 7). The very intimate quality of his account of himself in that 
letter contrasted strongly with Nichols’s dry and disjointed bureaucratic lan- 
guage. But the argument behind the “whole man” approach was put forward 
most forcefully by Oppenheimer’s friend and colleague Isidor Rabi. 

Robb attempted to co-opt Rabi by getting him to accept the primacy of the 
“facts” contained in the files, to which Rabi did not have access. Rabi, however, 
resisted this attempt by Robb to prioritize documentary “information” over 
his own personal experience with Oppenheimer: “I am in possession of along 
experience with this man, ... and there is a kind of seat of the pants feeling 
[on] which I myselflay great weight . . . | have seen his mind work. I have seen 
his sentiments develop.” Rabi therefore rejected the idea that the file could 
speak for itself. “You have to take the whole story .. . That is what novels are 
about. There is a dramatic moment and the history of the man, what made 
him act, what he did, and what sort of person he was. That is what you are 
really doing here. You are writing a man’s life” (“Transcript,” 469-70). 

As wellas the tension between the two criteria forjudging a security risk, the 
hearings centrally involved a related conflict: that between two conceptions 
of trust. In the first conception, trust was personal, founded on face-to-face 
interaction, and involved bonds of collegiality, friendship, and even family. 
In the second, it was impersonal and bureaucratic, operating through formal 
methods such as surveillance and record-keeping. The contrast between these 
two frameworks of trust was highlighted when Robb pressed Oppenheimer 
on why he had felt it safe to bring his brother to Los Alamos, knowing that 
Frank had been a Communist. Robb asked, “Tell us the test that you applied 
to acquire the confidence that you have spoken of?” Oppenheimer replied, 
“In the case of a brother you don’t make tests, at least I didn’t... 1 knew my 
brother.” In Robb’s hands, this became further evidence that Oppenheimer 
was not scrupulous in his application of security regulations: “I see,” the 
lawyer said. “In other words, you felt that your brother was an exception” 
(“Transcript,” 111). 

Mathematician John von Neumann also highlighted the difference between 
bureaucratic and personal frameworks of trust, but in relation to collegial 
relationships. He told the board that they should take into account scientists’ 
general inexperience during the war in dealing with “a universe we had not 
known before.” What made this “Buck Rogers universe” new and particu- 
larly disturbing was “this peculiar problem of security.” The problem lay in 


222 Chapter Seven 


attempting to adjust to a way of thinking in which “people who looked alright 
might be conspirators and might be spies.” Such things “do not enter one’s 
experience in normal times” (“Transcript,” 649-50). Particularly difficult was 
the requirement not to accept the facework commitments of others, not to 
base one’s judgment of people on the fact that they “looked alright.” In place 
of face-to-face forms of accountability, the security system substituted surveil- 
lance and documentation. The Oppenheimer hearings were, in a sense, the 
culmination of this process and of the conflicts that were bound up with it. 
The AEC’s official rhetoric demanded the subordination of the local, 
familiar, and personal to formal channels and bureaucratic procedures.*? The 
need to subordinate personal inclinations to the supposedly transcendent 
requirements of the security system was a central trope in the hearings. The 
PSB’s findings spoke of the requirement for “protection and support of the 
entire [security] system itself.” A proper attitude toward security demanded, 
the board said, “a subordination of personal judgment as to the security status 
of an individual as against a professional judgment in the light of standards 
and procedures when they have been clearly established by the appropriate 
process. It must entail a wholehearted commitment to the preservation of 
the security system.””? The ideology of security presented local loyalties to 
friends and colleagues as potentially at odds with loyalty to state and nation. 
Oppenheimer’s refusal to name Chevalier was taken as evidence that he 
would place his loyalty to friends, and his own judgment regarding their 
reliability, above his duties to the security system.°! The PSB’s report stated 
that Oppenheimer “repeatedly exercised an arrogance of his own judgment 
with respect to the loyalty and reliability of other citizens to an extent which has 
frustrated and at times impeded the workings of the system.” “Loyalty to one’s 
friends,” the board said, “is one of the noblest qualities.” However, “being 
loyal to one’s friends above reasonable obligations to the country and to the 
security system . . . is not clearly consistent with the interests of security.” As 
aresult of this loyalty to friends, it was argued, Oppenheimer had “‘a tendency 
to be coerced, or at least influenced in conduct over a period of years.” 
°g (4 


Oppenheimer’s “susceptibility to influence” was referred to prominently as a 


reason for denying him clearance.”” 
This distrust of the local and the familiar extended to the collegial ties of 
the scientific community. The PSB expressed concern about what it called 


the “solidarity” of the scientific community: 


The Board has been impressed, and in many ways heartened by the 
manner in which many scientists have sprung to the defense ofone whom 


“I Was an Idiot” 223 


many felt was under unfair attack. This is important and encouraging 
when one is concerned with the vitality of our society. However, the 
Board feels constrained to express its concern that in this solidarity 
there have been attitudes so uncompromising in support of science in 
general, and Dr. Oppenheimer in particular, that some witnesses have, 
in our judgment, allowed their convictions to supersede what might 


reasonably have been their recollections.” 


Adherence to the security system, therefore, required the formation of a 
particular model of identity and solidarity in which loyalty to the state was 
expected to trump all other commitments.°4 


CHARISMA AND THE HYDROGEN BOMB 


Paradoxically, alongside the charge that Oppenheimer was unduly susceptible 
to being influenced by other people, it was also claimed during the hearings 
that he himself had an extraordinary capacity to influence others; that he 
was, so to speak, a scientific Svengali. Oppenheimer’s perceived charisma 
was a significant theme running through both the testimony and the findings. 
Underlying this theme was the question of the role of the scientific adviser 
and the limits of scientific authority. Oppenheimer’s charismatic power to 
persuade was portrayed as destabilizing the boundaries of scientific authority, 
blurring the “technical” into the “moral” and “political.” 

The PSB chairman, Gray, expressed the board’s view of the importance 
of the issue of the H-bomb in the case against Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer’s 
opposition to the H-bomb, it was alleged, departed from attention to the 
purely technical and was motivated by moral and political concerns in which 
Oppenheimer had no special authority (“Transcript,” 250). 

It was in defending himself against this charge that Oppenheimer made 
his famous remarks about the H-bomb problems being “technically sweet,” 
a phrase he repeated twice. Early on in the proceedings, he speculated on 
how the GAC’s response to the H-bomb question in 1949 would have been 
different if the technical problems of its development had then been solved to 
the degree that they were two years later: 


It is my judgment in these things that when you see something that is 
technically sweet, you go ahead and do it and you argue about what 
to do about it only after you have had your technical success. That is 
the way it was with the atomic bomb. I do not think anybody opposed 


224 Chapter Seven 


making it; there were some debates about what to do with it after it was 
made. I cannot very well imagine if we had known in late 1949 what we 
got to know by early 1951 that the tone of our report would have been 
the same. (“Transcript,” 81) 


Later on in the hearings, he said, “The program we had in 1949 wasa tortured 
thing that you could well argue did not make a great deal of technical sense. It 
was therefore possible to argue also that you did not want it even if you could 
have it. The program in 1951 was technically so sweet that you could not argue 
about that” (“Transcript,” 251). This statement was a useful rhetorical device, 
painting Oppenheimer qua scientist as a different emotional entity from his 
political or moral identity. He admitted that he was greatly troubled “when it 
became clear to me that we would tend to use any weapon we had.” But he 
reconciled this with his role as a scientist by claiming that there was a “sharp 
distinction” between the questions of whether to build the bomb and whether 
to use it (250). 

The scientist’s concern, Oppenheimer admitted, should be focused on the 
technical feasibility of building the bomb, rather than the moral and political 
questions ofits use. It was for that reason, he asserted, that the GAC separated 
such “general advice” touching on questions of morality and politics into the 
annexes of the 1949 report (“Transcript,” 236). He admitted that he did bring 
some “freight ... ito the General Advisory Committee, and into the meet- 
ings that discussed the hydrogen bomb.” This freight was that while he 
believed that nuclear weapons would “put an end to major total wars . . . the 
notion that this will have to come about by the employment of these weapons 
on a massive scale against civilizations and cities has always bothered me.” 
But, he said, “I know of no case where I misrepresented or distorted the 
technical situation in reporting it to my superiors or those to whom I was 
bound to give advice and counsel” (87). 

Despite Oppenheimer’s assertion of the clarity of the boundaries between 
the technical and the political, in practice they were always ambiguous and 
uncertain. Anxiety about Oppenheimer’s “influence” and powers of persua- 
sion was closely bound up with the perception that these boundaries were 
permeable and hence that the powers of the adviser were pervasive, and Robb 
used this anxiety to his advantage. The political scientist Sanford Lakoff aptly 
described this strategy of Oppenheimer’s accusers as the “imputation of ser- 
pentine charisma.”®? Physicist Luis Alvarez told the board that Oppenheimer 
was “one of the most persuasive men that has ever lived” (“Transcript,” 803). 
Wendell Latimer, associate director of the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory 


“I Was an Idiot” 225 


and an advocate of the H-bomb, emphasized that Oppenheimer used his 
great “influence” in order to hinder the H-bomb program. As an example of 
Oppenheimer’s personal power, Latimer said that during the war, General 
Groves had been very much under Oppenheimer’s influence. Groves was 
“simply an administrator”; it was Oppenheimer who was doing “the think- 
ing for the program.” According to Latimer, Groves found Oppenheimer 
“overwhelming” and was “so dependent” on Oppenheimer’s judgment “that 
I think it is reasonable to conclude that most of his ideas were coming from 
Dr. Oppenheimer” (663). 

Over the years that he knew Oppenheimer, Latimer made what he called a 
“study” of the man, which he described as “most interesting” and even “amaz- 
ing.” “Unconsciously,” he said, “I think one tries to put together the elements 
in a man that make him tick.” Latimer dwelled on Oppenheimer’s power as 
chairman of the GAC: he felt unable to understand how the GAC could, on 
rational grounds, warn against an H-bomb crash program. Searching for an 
explanation, he claimed, led him to hit upon Oppenheimer’s magnetic influ- 
ence. “I kept turning over in my mind how they could possibly come to such 
conclusions, and what was in Oppenheimer that gave him such tremendous 
power over these men.” He described Oppenheimer’s charismatic powers: 
“T have seen him sway audiences. It was just marvelous, the phraseology and 
the influence is just tremendous” (““Transcript,” 663-64). 

Even Conant was swayed, in Latimer’s opinion. Himselfa chemist, Conant, 
“in matters pertaining to theoretical physics, ... trusted Dr. Oppenheimer 
completely.” Oppenheimer’s attorney asked Latimer “whether Dr. Conant’s 
judgment in connection with the hydrogen bomb was based on a technical 
evaluation . . .ajudgmentas to the nuclear aspects ofthe problem, the scientific 
nuclear aspects of the problem.” Latimer replied, “Those were the reasons 
which were given in the report. They were expressed in technical terms. 
I was by no means convinced that those were the real reasons behind the 
decision.” These “technical reasons” sounded to Latimer “pretty phony.” 
He admitted that they “would have been legitimate reasons ifhe [Conant] had 
been exercising his free judgment.” However, Conant was “overwhelmed by 
his great confidence in Dr. Oppenheimer’s judgment,” and Latimer therefore 
doubted that “it was free judgment on his part” (““Transcript,” 664-65). 

Prima facie, the reasons given by the GAC against the H-bomb program 
(including the worry that it would divert manpower away from other needed 
programs) were technical, and therefore legitimate (although in Latimer’s 
opinion, wrong). What rendered Conant’s opinion illegitimate and his tech- 
nical reasons “phony,” in Latimer’s view, was that it was possible to give a 


226 Chapter Seven 


causal, quasi-sociological account of the origins of his beliefs, an account that 
Latimer framed in terms of Oppenheimer’s charismatic influence.*° The tech- 
nical reasons that Conant and other members of the GAC gave for opposing 
the H-bomb were “phony” because they were pressed upon them by the pow- 
erful personal influence of Oppenheimer and were a front for Oppenheimer’s 
political opposition to the H-bomb. 

Oppenheimer’s supporters also regarded him as charismatic, but they por- 
trayed his charisma in a very different way. Caltech president Lee DuBridge 
said that, as chair of the GAC, Oppenheimer “was so naturally a leader of 
our group that it was impossible to imagine that he should not be in the 
chair ... He was the natural leader because we respected his intelligence, 
his judgment, his personal attitude toward the work of the Commission . .. 
He was a natural and respected and at times a loved leader of that group.”®” 
DuBridge denied that this charisma was in any way insidious. On the contrary, 
he presented Oppenheimer as aiding the rational consensus of scientific opin- 
ion: “He encouraged a full and free and frank exchange of ideas throughout 
the full history of the Committee ... He never dominated nor suppressed 
contrary or different opinions” (“Transcript,” 518). Rabi said that “it was al- 
ways a miracle to the other members on the [GAC] how he could summarize 
three days of discussions and give the proper weight to the opinion of every 
member, the proper shade, and it rarely happened that some member would 
speak up and say, ‘This isn’t exactly what I meant.’ It was a rather miracu- 
lous performance.”?* On this account, Oppenheimer’s charismatic leadership 
brought out the consensus of the group and created an atmosphere in which 
others were able to present their views freely. Whereas Latimer presented 
Oppenheimer’s charisma as anathema to reason, Rabi painted Oppenheimer 
as a disinterested vehicle of rational discourse. 

The nature of Oppenheimer’s personal influence was thus contested dur- 
ing the hearings. Centrally at stake was whether such charismatic personal 
authority and influence was compatible with the role of the scientist as adviser 
to government and servant of the state. To his opponents, Oppenheimer’s 
charisma suggested that his powers were broad and undefined. It meant that 
his influence could breach the boundaries of the “technical” and that he could 
exercise “political” influence through his scientific advice, an influence that 
they believed to be incompatible with the interests of national security. His 
supporters, however, sought to dissociate charisma from worries about “in- 
fluence” by portraying Oppenheimer as disinterested. While not denying that 
he had definite ideas of his own, they argued that what made him charismatic 
was precisely his willingness to suppress his own viewpoint for the purpose 


“I Was an Idiot” 227 


of rational debate and consensus. Rather than pushing any particular policy 
line, Oppenheimer, they said, helped to create a communicative environment 
in which a consensus could emerge freely and rationally. In contradistinction 
to what Lakoff called “serpentine charisma,” they associated Oppenheimer 
with an ideal of communitarian scientific debate. 


REASONS AND MOTIVES: 
TRYING A MAN FOR HIS OPINIONS? 


Was Oppenheimer’s opposition to the H-bomb in itself sufficient to make him 
arisk to national security? Could the content of his scientific and policy advice 
legitimately be the subject of the case against him? Significant problems of 
legitimacy were involved in the pursuit ofa case against Oppenheimer based on 
his stance toward the H-bomb. A number of senior scientists testifying before 
the board strongly condemned this aspect of the case.*” The strongest critics 
were Conant and Vannevar Bush. Conant had himself been an outspoken 
critic of the H-bomb program, and he told the committee of his concern that 
the wording of Nichols’s letter outlining the charges against Oppenheimer 
“would indicate that anybody who opposed the development of the hydrogen 
bomb was not eligible for employment on atomic energy work later.” This, 
he argued, would be in conflict with American liberal democratic principles: 
“Such a position would be an impossible position to hold in this country” 
(“Transcript,” 384). Bush presented the argument even more forcefully: “I 
think in fact the Republic is in danger ... I think this board or no board 
should ever sit on a question in this country of whether a man should serve his 
country or not because he expressed strong opinions.” To prosecute a man 
for his opinions, he said, is “contrary to the American system.”!°° 

There was, however, an alternative construction of the relevance of the 
H-bomb issue to the case, one that was seen to sidestep such objections. !°! 
Bush himself, for example, stated that if the charges against Oppenheimer 
had been worded to say that “by improper motivation because this man had 
allegiance to another system than that of [this] country, he expressed these 
opinions in an attempt to block the program, then I would not have objected” 
(“Transcript,” 567). While he was not endorsing that charge of improper mo- 
tivation, Bush had to agree that his strong objections of principle would not 
apply to it. This was where allegations regarding Oppenheimer’s associations 
and character became relevant to the assessment ofhis scientific advice. Conant 
recognized that the allegations regarding the H-bomb implicitly referred back 
to these prior charges: “It seems to me that . . . the implied indictment [is that] 


228 Chapter Seven 


because of... Dr. Oppenheimer’s association with alleged Communist sym- 
pathizers in the early days in his youth—that that somehow created a state 
of mind in Dr. Oppenheimer so that he opposed the development of the 
hydrogen bomb for what might be said reasons which were detrimental to the 
best interests of the United States, because they were interests of the Soviet 
Union which he in one way or another had at heart.”! 

On such a view, the issue of Oppenheimer’s H-bomb advice, if it was to 
be relevant, had to be convincingly related to other aspects of the case against 
hin, in particular the charges regarding his character, associations, and earlier 
history. This argument was in fact made by Oppenheimer’s own attorney. Gar- 
rison announced early on in the hearings that he would present a /ay case. The 
proper question, he told the board, was not whether Oppenheimer’s scientific 
judgment was right or wrong but whether this was “an honest judgement.” In 
other words, did Oppenheimer “do the best he could for his Government”? 
(“Transcript,” 23). The critical issue was to be Oppenheimer’s motivation. 
As Garrison put it after the proceedings had ended, “If Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
motives were honorable, his recommendations were irrelevant.” !° 

Garrison’s strategy in shifting the question from reasons to motives suggests 
that he was confident of his ability to rebut the charges of disloyalty. However, 
the strategy was risky in that it allowed the issue of Oppenheimer’s H-bomb 
advice to blur into, and be colored by, the more general doubts about his loyalty 
and character. In the hearings, questions of character were intimately related to 
the examination of the boundaries and legitimacy of Oppenheimer’s scientific 
authority. Deciding the legitimacy of scientific advice became a question about 
the personal trustworthiness of the scientific adviser. 


DISCIPLINING EXPERTS: THE BOARD’S FINDINGS 


The recommendations of the Personnel Security Board explicitly cited Op- 
penheimer’s H-bomb advice as a reason for withholding clearance: “We find 
his conduct in the hydrogen-bomb program sufficiently disturbing as to raise 
a doubt as to whether his future participation, if characterized by the same 
attitudes in a Government program relating to the national defense, would be 
clearly consistent with the best interests of security.”!°4 However, the type of 
objections raised by Bush and Conant, drawingas they did on powerful liberal 
democratic conceptions of political legitimacy, were never entirely dispelled. 
In framing the case against Oppenheimer, his accusers implicitly recognized 
the power of these challenges to the legitimacy of the proceedings, and the 
need to counter such objections. Gray and Morgan, in their findings (which 


“I Was an Idiot” 229 


formed the majority report of the PSB), felt compelled to dwell at length 
on these objections: “It is our conclusion that, whatever the motivation, the 
security interests of the United States were affected” by Oppenheimer’s op- 
position, or, as they notoriously put it, his insufficient “enthusiasm” for the 
H-bomb (“Findings,” 1017). In place of a distinction between loyal and dis- 
loyal motives, the board substituted a distinction between the technical and 
the moral, limiting the authority of the scientific adviser to the technical. It 
was this shift away from the question of the loyalty of Oppenheimer’s motives 
that allowed the board to find—in their view, without contradiction—that 
Oppenheimer was both loyal and a security risk. But this move was arguably 
an expansion of the domain of motives now deemed illegitimate. Gray and 
Morgan regarded as potentially subversive any role for scientific advice be- 
yond narrowly construed technical problems. It was Oppenheimer’s concern 
with moral issues that made him a security risk. The implicit reply to Bush 
and Conant was, then, that the freedom of expert scientific opinion was to 
be respected, but that scientific opinion was to be regarded as “free” and 
“expert” only so long as it was separate from moral and political concerns. 

The board members considered it their duty not only to make specific 
recommendations concerning Oppenheimer, but also to define the norms 
that would govern scientific advisers’ sphere of authority. Their report stated 
that “one important consideration brought into focus by this case is the role of 
scientists as advisers in the formulation of Government policy.” Bush invoked 
the democratic republic in defense of Oppenheimer’s freedom of opinion. 
The board appealed to similar principles, but for the opposite reason: 


As a Nation we find it necessary to delegate temporary authority ... 
to duly elected representatives and appointive officials as provided for 
by the Constitution and laws. For the most part, these representatives 
and officials are not capable of passing judgment on technical matters 
and, therefore, appropriately look to specialists for advice ... These 
specialists have an exponential amplification of influence which 1s vastly 
greater than that of the individual citizen. (“Findings,” 1015) 


This power of experts was not only vast but also ill-defined and ambiguous. 
Gray and Morgan saw the PSB’s task as establishing clear limits on this power. 
Their solution was to call for the bounding of the authority of experts within 
the realm of the “technical”: “A question can properly be raised about advice of 
specialists relating to moral, military and political issues, under circumstances 
which lend such advice an undue and in some cases decisive weight. Caution 


230 Chapter Seven 


must be expressed with respect to judgments which go beyond areas of special 
and particular competence” (1016). 

For Gray and Morgan, the boundary dividing the technical from the moral 
was identical with a boundary between objectivity and emotion. They warned, 
“Those officials in Government who are responsible for the security of the 
country must be certain that the advice which they seriously seek appropriately 
reflects special competence on the one hand, and soundly based conviction on 
the other, uncolored and uninfluenced by considerations ofan emotional char- 
acter.” Emotions, they demanded, must be regulated according to the national 
interest, and dominated by patriotism: “Emotional involvement in the current 
crisis, like all other things, must yield to the security of the nation.” They 
mentioned, as an example of such “emotion,” the feelings of guilt expressed by 
Oppenheimer and other scientists who had worked on the Manhattan Project. 
Gray and Morgan suggested that this guilt had clouded Oppenheimer’s tech- 
nical judgment. They concluded this section of the report with general recom- 
mendations for the political evaluation of expert advice: “In evaluating advice 
from a specialist which departs from the area of his speciality, Government of- 
ficials charged with the military posture of our country must also be certain that 
underlying any advice is a genuine conviction that this country cannot in the 
interest of security have less than the strongest possible offensive capabilities 
in a time of national danger” (“Findings,” 1016). The national interest was 
thus explicitly defined in militaristic terms. And patriotism was rhetorically 
united with objectivity and reason against subjectivity and emotion. 

The board’s findings with regard to Oppenheimer were presented as a 
simple application of these general principles. This provided a response to 
Bush: the board could claim that it did not “question Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
right to the opinions he held” and that it was “willing to assume that they 
were motivated by deep moral conviction.” The key criticism, however, was 
precisely that in the board’s view, Oppenheimer’s objections to the H-bomb 
were moral. As one commentator put it ina book published a year later, “They 
did not care what his moral scruples were. It was the fact that he had any at all 
which was derogatory and which made him a security risk.”!° 

This exclusion of moral concerns was demanded both by science and by 
patriotism. Gray and Morgan wrote, “We are concerned . . . that he may have 
departed his role as scientific adviser to exercise highly persuasive influence in 
matters in which his convictions were not necessarily a reflection of technical 
judgment, and also not necessarily related to the protection of the strongest 
offensive military interests of the country” (“Findings,” 1017-18). Here again 
was a militaristic definition of the national interest and the use of the national 


“I Was an Idiot” 231 


interest as a transcendent standard against which expertise was to be judged. 
This framework also casts light on Oppenheimer’s “lack of enthusiasm” for the 
H-bomb program: “He did not show the enthusiastic support for the program 
which might have been expected of the chief atomic adviser to the Govern- 
ment ... [and this] undoubtedly had an effect upon other scientists” (1017). 
The implication was that experts should demonstrate self-control in calling 
up only those emotions appropriate to the national interest. The expert’s emo- 
tions were to be rigidly disciplined by an underlying patriotism. The emotional 
hardness of the hard scientist became, through these tropes, identical with 


the soldierly hardness of the patriot. 


JUSTIFICATION AND ACTION 


The PSB’s goal of closing the case with a neat statement of principle proved 
impossible to sustain in the face of competing political pressures. In particular, 
the charges regarding Oppenheimer’s stance toward the H-bomb, from which 
the PSB’s statement on the role of the adviser followed, became increasingly 
politically difficult. The instability of the PSB’s position was signaled initially 
by the fact that the only scientist on the board dissented strongly from the 
majority opinion. Ward Evans wrote that there was “nothing wrong with 
[Oppenheimer’s] character.” On the matter of the H-bomb, Evans said that 
“he did not hinder the development of the H-bomb and there is absolutely 
nothing in his testimony to show that he did.” And Evans rejected worries 
about Oppenheimer’s powers of “influence”: “Ifhis opposition to the H-bomb 
caused any people not to work on it, it was because of his intellectual promi- 
nence and influence over scientific people and not because of any subversive 
tendencies.” Most significantly, Evans expressed his concern about the effect 
that finding against Oppenheimer would have on American science: “His 
witnesses are a considerable segment of the scientific backbone of our Nation 
and they endorse him. I am worried about the effect an improper decision 
may have on the scientific development in our country.” Fear of alienating the 
scientific community was the key factor that led to the AEC’s equivocation 
over what place the issue of the H-bomb should have in the verdict against 
Oppenheimer. '°” 

As the matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer passed from the PSB to the general 
manager to the AEC itself, the H-bomb allegations were subordinated to the 
more general issues of “character” raised by the Chevalier incident. The AEC 
commissioners’ equivocation over what place the issue of the H-bomb should 
have in their verdict was due in part to fear of alienating the scientific elite. But 


232 Chapter Seven 


probably more important was the fact that the premise—that there had been a 
delay in the production of the bomb—had been publicly denied by Eisenhower 
in response to attacks by McCarthy. The PSB’s finding, since it implied such 
a delay, was in danger of embarrassing the administration.!°° Nichols now 
backed away from his inclusion of the H-bomb issue in the original charge. 
His prose was tortured as he attempted to drop the hot potato of the H-bomb 
allegations while at the same time defending his original decision to include 
them. It was necessary for the board to consider the H-bomb issue, he stated, 
“in order that the good faith of [Oppenheimer’s] technical opinions might 
be determined.” He conceded that although Oppenheimer had not shown 
appropriately “enthusiastic support” for the H-bomb program, no sinister 
motives were established. Instead, Nichols asserted that his chief concern was 
with the issue of character and associations.'°° 

The majority report of the AEC was drafted by Lewis L. Strauss and signed 
by Eugene Zuckert and Joseph Campbell. Following Nichols’s new position, 
they argued that they had not been swayed by the issue of Oppenheimer’s H- 
bomb recommendations. However, Strauss brought to prominence another 
allegation not mentioned in the PSB’s report at all. This was the charge 
that Oppenheimer had misled the PSB when he said that the GAC was 
“surprisingly unanimous” against the H-bomb. Glenn Seaborg, who had been 
in Sweden when the GAC met, had in a letter expressed opinions favorable 
to development of the H-bomb, and Strauss claimed that Oppenheimer had 
covered this up.'!? This allegation connected back to the issue of character, 
which was for Strauss, Zuckert, and Campbell the primary justification for 
finding Oppenheimer a security risk. The alleged lie regarding Seaborg’s H- 
bomb opinion was listed in a section labeled “As to ‘character,’” together with 
the Chevalier incident, as evidence of Oppenheimer’s personal unreliability 
and “fundamental defects in his ‘character’” (“Decision and Opinions,” 1049). 

Zuckert appended to the commission’s statement his own concurring opin- 
ion. Healso felt it important to state that he was not condemning Oppenheimer 
for his opinions. Oppenheimer’s advice on the H-bomb did not provide 
grounds for finding him a security risk, since there was no evidence of im- 
proper motive (“Decision and Opinions,” 1055). Zuckert said that he had 
“considered the evidence as a whole and no single fact was decisive.” What 
concerned him was the accumulation of questionable incidents and associa- 
tions. He wrote that “when I see such a combination of seriously disturbing 
actions and events as are present in this case, then I believe the risk to security 
passes acceptable bounds” (1052). 


“I Was an Idiot” 233 


Campbell likewise stated that his decision was based not on the H-bomb 
issue, but on “character, loyalty, and associations.” But he gave no further 
details as to the exact evidence that led to his view. Rather, he blandly stated 
that he regarded the PSB members as men of “honor and integrity, and that 
in their majority opinion Dr. Oppenheimer did not refute the serious charges 
which faced him” (“Decision and Opinions,” 1057, 1058). Therefore, he said, 
it was his duty to uphold the recommendation of the PSB and the general 
manager to withhold clearance. 

Commissioner Thomas Murray did not sign the majority report but instead 
drafted his own concurring opinion. He contradicted outright the PSB on the 
issue of H-bomb advice, stating, “Government cannot command a citizen’s 
enthusiasm for any particular program or policy projected in the national 
interests. The citizen remains free to be enthusiastic or not at the impulse 


of his own inner convictions” 


(“Decision and Opinions,” 1059). Yet despite 
dismissing the H-bomb allegations, Murray stated flatly that Oppenheimer 
was “disloyal.” This conclusion depended on a definition of loyalty as strict 
adherence to security regulations. Oppenheimer was not “scrupulous in his 
fidelity to security regulations”; ergo, he was disloyal. Murray adopted the 
strict “Caesar’s wife” criterion of security. Whether or not Oppenheimer had 
revealed secrets, his associations themselves constituted a breach of security 
rules. “No matter how high a man stands in the service ofhis country,” Murray 
argued, “he still stands under the law. To permit a man in a position of the 
highest trust to set himself above any of the laws of security would be to invite 
the destruction of the whole security system” (1061). 

The only AEC commissioner to support Oppenheimer’s continued secu- 
rity clearance was the physicist Henry D. Smyth. He emphasized that the 
only question that mattered was whether Oppenheimer was likely to reveal 
secrets to the nation’s enemies. In his view, nothing in the evidence presented 
suggested such a danger. This included the Chevalier incident, which the 
other commissioners thought so obviously damning. Smyth’s definition of 
the problem also meant that Oppenheimer’s H-bomb advice was irrelevant. 
He dealt with this matter only in order to address the question of whether 
Oppenheimer had suppressed Seaborg’s opinion in the GAC report. Smyth 
doubted that Oppenheimer had intentionally suppressed the letter, and he 
added, contrary to Strauss, that Seaborg’s letter did not express a formal con- 
clusion in favor of the H-bomb (“Decision and Opinions,” 1064). Moreover, 
Smyth radically disagreed with the other commissioners on the status of the 
security regulations. His comments sharply contradicted Murray’s view, for 


234 Chapter Seven 


example, that adherence to the system had to be perfect: “I would suggest 
that the [security] system itself is nothing to worship. It is a necessary means 
to an end ... Ifa man protects the secrets he has in his hands and his head, 
he has shown essential regard for the security system.” Smyth defended Op- 
penheimer, saying that the physicist’s “further employment will continue to 
strengthen the United States” (1065). 

Differences between the reports of the PSB and the AEC on the validity and 
significance of the H-bomb charges showed residual uncertainties over the 
normative framework by which science advisers were to be held accountable. 
The AEC was never going to succeed in formulating abstract standards demar- 
cating a person’s responsibilities as scientist, official, citizen, and human being. 
The justifications in the final report for the withdrawal of clearance were con- 
tradictory and confusing. However, while offering variant justifications, the 
majority on the PSB and among the AEC commissioners were agreed on 
the verdict: Oppenheimer’s clearance was to be denied. The real message of 
the hearings was contained not in the report, but in the action taken. 

The hearings were, above all, drama and ceremony, and at their center was 
the person of Oppenheimer. In the wake of the PSB’s findings, the secretary of 
the American Physical Society, Karl Darrow, wrote to his colleagues Raymond 
T. Birge and Hans Bethe: 


I think that we can no longer handle this issue by just stating princi- 
ples. The three members of the Board apparently had much the same 
principles, yet one of the three differed from the two others in the ap- 
plication of these principles. In my inclination to side with the minority 
of the Board, I find that I am not moved by dissent from the principles 
expressed by the Board, but by my feeling that Robert is perfectly safe 
and deserves the confidence of the nation. The crux of this matter is, 
that it is impossible to draw up principles which will pass some people 
and stop others, without stating very exactly what are the qualities of 
the people who should be passed; but this amounts to saying that these 
people are people like Robert, so that Robert himself becomes part of 


the definition of the principles.'!! 


The disagreement between the two sides, Darrow argued, concerned not 
abstract principles, but Oppenheimer himself. The true meaning of the issues 
could not be detached from the man around whom the controversy swirled. 
Darrow’s argument points to the symbolic quality of the denial of Oppen- 
heimer’s clearance. Struggles over the nature and extent of scientific authority 


“I Was an Idiot” 235 


and the relationship between science and liberal democracy converged on the 
personal role of Oppenheimer and the question of whether his example was 
to be emulated or repudiated. 


REACTION AND FALLOUT 


A cartoon on the front page of the New York Fournal-American portrayed the 
Oppenheimer case as an H-bomb exploding over Washington, D.C.'!” The 
“detonation” of this case was supposed to be controlled and contained, with 
access to the proceeding restricted and testimony kept confidential. But it 
quickly became an all-out battle for public opinion. Some prominent colum- 
nists, notably Joseph and Stewart Alsop, vigorously defended Oppenheimer. 
However, the transcript’s revelations of Oppenheimer’s confused and contra- 
dictory actions and testimony in relation to the Chevalier incident consider- 
ably dampened public support for the physicist.!'° In particular, newspapers 
emphasized the theme, stressed by the PSB and especially Commissioner 
Murray, of the supremacy of law over the individual person. Although there 
were numerous voices of dissent, the strongest tenor of the newspaper reaction 
was that the case exemplified the proper functioning of the security system. 
For many, the very fact that such a prominent figure as Oppenheimer could 
be proceeded against demonstrated the impartiality of the system. Efforts to 
excuse Oppenheimer were frequently cast as mere “special pleading.” 

The New York Herald Tribune provides a particularly interesting lens on 
opinion about the case. Its letters pages contained many statements in support 
of Oppenheimer, as well as plenty against him. Its opinion pages featured the 
Alsops’ forceful defense of Oppenheimer in their column “Matter of Fact,” as 
wellas regular attacks on the physicist by right-wing journalist David Lawrence 
in his column “Today in Washington.”''* In its editorials, the Herald Tribune 
from the beginning tried to defend the legitimacy of the proceedings against 
the charge that they were merely a form of McCarthyism. It stated two days 
after the hearings began, “The encouraging aspect of the case is that the 
investigation should be in good hands and under sound procedures.”'!? 
Following the PSB’s report, the paper’s editors asserted that the Gray Board 


is a board of outstanding men and it has performed its arduous task 
with a seriousness, with a sense of responsibility and a feeling for the 
gravity of the issues involved which deserves the highest praise ... 
Given the limits set for them and the evidence presented, they could 
scarcely have avoided the conclusion that Dr. Oppenheimer falls within 


236 Chapter Seven 


the category of a “security risk.” Under the same laws others have been 
held security risks time and time again. Dr. Oppenheimer, despite his 
immense scientific contributions, stood—as under a government of laws 
he must stand—on an equal footing with those whose genius has been 
of a far lesser order. 


“While the final determination remains to be made by the Atomic Energy 
Commission,” the editors wrote on June 3, “the Gray report will stand as a 
vital document on its own merits.”!!° 

The Herald Tribune stated in an editorial on June 8 that the purpose of 
the government’s security policies was to create “a number of tests which 
permit boards to establish, factually and objectively, whether an individual 
falls within the classification of a ‘security risk.’ Factually and objectively it 
has been determined that Dr. Oppenheimer does so fall.”!!” When the AEC 
delivered its verdict, the editors asserted that “the matter can be expected to 
end here.”!18 

Yet alongside such statements presenting the hearings as normal bureau- 
cratic and legal procedure, there was also the argument that the pressing 
Communist threat made extraordinary measures necessary. The Herald Tri- 
bune editors wrote, “What weighs over everything else is the danger in which 
America finds itself. Itis confronted by an enemy as implacable as resourceful, 
adopting every means of infiltration and subversion, taking advantage of the 
smallest carelessness or weakness to work its fatal poison. Special standards, 
special laws and regulations are called for in such a time.” The editors argued 
that the AEC was “in a position to be supremely aware of the mortal Commu- 
nist threat. In the Oppenheimer case the majority of its members have acted 
so as to avoid, as far as humanly possible, any flaw in the security regulations 


that might betray us now or later.”!19 


The New York Times columnist Arthur Krock greeted the AEC’s finding 
as a conclusive refutation of the arguments by Oppenheimer’s supporters 
that the benefits to government of his scientific advice outweighed the risks. 
Referring to findings by the PSB, the general manager, and the AEC, the 
Times stated, “This viewpoint has now been impressively rejected after three 
fair and painstaking examinations of Oppenheimer as ‘the man himself,’ and 
as an official from whom the nation, having entrusted him with its deepest 
confidence, had a right to expect very different conduct.”!*° Editorial pages 
across the country came down overwhelmingly against Oppenheimer and in 
support of the AEC’s verdict. It was widely accepted that Oppenheimer was 
guilty of disreputable conduct. The New York Post said, “Dr. Oppenheimer is 


“I Was an Idiot” 237 


clearly guilty ofarbitrariness and deceit,” and the Philadelphia Inquirer stated, 
“The tragedy is not in the decision. It was in Oppenheimer’s conduct which 
made that decision necessary.” Common themes were that the verdict was 
necessary and unavoidable and that the fate of the individual was subordinate 
to the security of the nation. Many journalists wrote of the verdict and even 
of the proceedings as a vindication of the security system and an instantiation 
of the democratic principle that all are equal before the law. The New York 
Fournal-American said, “No man or woman is, or ever can be, greater than 
the security of the nation.” The Detroit News wrote, “Acting as a law unto 
himself, Dr. Oppenheimer flouted certain . . . rules. The transgression was no 
more tolerable in him than in any lesser man if general respect for the system 
is to be preserved.” The Los Angeles Times asserted that “he willfully broke 
the rules—broke them with assurance, even with arrogance, as if they were 
not made for the special breed of which he is a member.”!?! 

Reaction regarding the issue of the GAC’s opposition to the H-bomb was 
more complex. In revealing the struggles of 1949-50 for and against the H- 
bomb, the hearings pulled back the curtain on the political conflicts within 
the country’s scientific elite. The New York Times reported, “The investiga- 
tion merely brought into the open and intensified one of the most dramatic 
hidden conflicts of our times—the very wide schism that has split a part of 
the country’s scientific community ever since World War II.”!”* William L. 
Laurence wrote that the hearings had focused attention on the “momentous 
debates in the winter 1949-1950. Those behind-the-scenes arguments, of truly 
Homeric dimensions, raged over whether to proceed with a ‘crash program’ 
to develop and produce the hydrogen bomb with all possible speed.”!”° The 
public response to these conflicts, and the complex intertwining of technical 
with moral and political issues revealed by the hearings in the case of the H- 
bomb, was worry about the relationship between science and politics and calls 
for policing the boundaries. If politics militated against disinterested inquiry, 
science was equally distorting of politics. A key lesson of the PSB’s report, 
repeated widely in the press, was that the authority of scientists within the 
polity should be strictly delimited. Waldemar Kaempffert remarked, writing 
in the New York Times Magazine early on in the proceedings, that the case 
provided an “x-ray of the scientific mind.” The scientific mind, he said, was 
characterized by “objectivity, curiosity, [and] skepticism.” However, “the sci- 
entist does not necessarily apply these qualities with brilliance outside his own 
field.” “The plain truth,” Kaempffert asserted, “is that there is nothing unique 
about the ‘scientific mind.’ It has no monopoly on objectivity.”!74 A New York 
Times headline after the release of the PSB’s findings read, “Scientists’ Views 


238 Chapter Seven 


Stir Panel Worry: U.S. Is Warned to Evaluate with Care Nontechnical Opin- 
ions of Experts.”!*° Yet one scientist—Dr. John R. Schenken, president of the 
International Congress of Pathology—called for his colleagues not to be intim- 
idated into being mere courtiers to the state. The New York Times reported 
that he warned scientists “not to become ‘political eunuchs’ and urged them 
to speak out forthrightly in the cause of freedom.” He blamed “the ‘modern 
tragedy’ of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, atomic scientist, on Oppenheimer’s 
‘political celibacy.’”!*° 

The hearings crystallized tensions between competing understandings of 
the legitimate place of scientists and scientific expertise in the American polity. 
After World War II, science was valued both as a manufactory of military and 
technological power and as a source and symbol of political legitimacy. It 
was frequently portrayed as embodying core values of liberal democratic 
civil society, and it was looked to as a model of rationality, efficiency, and 
objectivity for state administration and policy making. But these multiple 
material and ideological uses of science coexisted uneasily. The PSB’s case 
rested on locating Oppenheimer as a bureaucratic official within the state, 
charged with efficient execution of the public will, with no authority to make 
decisions about what ends the government ought to pursue. Oppenheimer’s 
supporters, notably Conant and Bush in the proceedings and the Alsops in the 
press, instead drew on norms of liberal democratic civil society or the public 
sphere, in particular freedom of speech and freedom of conscience. According 
to these supporters, Oppenheimer had every right to exercise his conscience 
as a citizen in opposing the development of the hydrogen bomb. These 
competing arguments revealed the tension between a conception of science 
as an instrumental resource of the state and the image of scientific knowledge 
and community as free and autonomous components of civil society. Both 
conceptions were important components of American political culture during 
this period, but they were never reconciled. 

Put on the defensive, Strauss and the AEC were at pains after the hearings 
to say that Oppenheimer had not been simply purged because he uttered 
unpopular opinions. But that remained a widespread reading of the signifi- 
cance of the hearings. Scientists at Argonne National Laboratory released a 
statement warning that “if the consequences to the individual of an unpopular 
or unwise decision are the same as the consequences of a disloyal act, then 
the making of decisions . . . will be shunned, and two of the most important 
ingredients of national strength—faith in the individual’s honesty ofjudgment 
and willingness to back one’s opinions with action—will become increasingly 


“I Was an Idiot” 239 


rare.” The Alsops said that the lesson of the hearings was “Don’t argue!”!?’ 
Dr. James R. Killian Jr., who served as presidential science advisor between 
1957 and 1959, said, when looking back on the case more than ten years later, 
“One of the frightening aspects of the Oppenheimer case was the fear it cre- 
ated ... that technical advice, when not in support of some current military 
or political policy, might be condemned.”!*8 

At the time of the hearings, it was widely remarked that the action against 
Oppenheimer could jeopardize the entire relationship between scientists and 
the federal government that had developed from the war and that was essential 
to the country’s national security. Ultimately, however, there was no scientific 
boycott of weapons work or government service in the aftermath of the case. 
In fact, though many prominent physicists and other scientists came to Op- 
penheimer’s defense, the scientific community was split in its response to the 
verdict. Journalist William Laurence reported from the annual meeting of the 
American Physical Society at the end of April 1954 that the physicists were di- 
vided over whether the withdrawal of Oppenheimer’s clearance was justified. 
There were “diametrically opposing views among his colleagues,” Laurence 
said. He quoted one “leading scientist” as saying, “We dismiss generals if 
they make mistakes, and sometimes even court-martial them. Why should 
scientists who give bad advice not be subject to the same treatment?” Samuel 
Goudsmit of Brookhaven National Laboratory commented at the meeting, 
“It may surprise many of you that there are colleagues, physicists, scientists, 
who sincerely believe in the possibility of Oppenheimer being a security risk. 
According to their line of reasoning, Oppenheimer’s alleged obstruction of 
the hydrogen bomb is proof of his disloyalty.”!”9 

Teller’s testimony in the hearings enraged much of the physics community, 
and antagonisms were brought to the boil in the fall of 1954 by the publication 
of a book by journalists James Shepley and Clay Blair Jr., The Hydrogen Bomb: 
The Men, the Menace, the Mechanism. Shepley and Blair’s hero was Teller, 
resiliently pursuing his scientific-technological vision and safeguarding the 
nation’s security against an Oppenheimer coterie distracted by “moral” con- 
cerns that were tantamount to disloyalty. Nevertheless, although the book 
provoked a great deal of anger within the scientific establishment, the issues 
at stake in this controversy were rather narrow. The anger directed at Shepley 
and Blair essentially concerned how they assigned credit for the achieve- 
ment of the H-bomb. Los Alamos scientists were incensed by the book’s 
presentation of Teller, and his and Ernest Lawrence’s second weapons labo- 
ratory at Livermore, California, as almost solely responsible for the H-bomb. 


240 Chapter Seven 


They were angered further by the book’s suggestion that Los Alamos, under 
Oppenheimer’s influence, had blocked the weapon.'°° Los Alamos director 
Norris Bradbury released a rebuttal, asserting the fundamental contribution 
made by Los Alamos to the development of the weapon. Facing this angry 
reaction, Teller tried to distance himself from the book. In an effort to defuse 
the controversy, he published an article in Science attributing the successful 
development of the hydrogen bomb to “the work of many people.”!?! 

The scientists angered by the book did not publicly question whether 
the H-bomb’s development was right or justified. The controversy concerned 
only who got the credit, the competing reputations of the two nuclear weapons 
laboratories, and criticism of the book’s biases and vindictive tone. The most 
insightful criticism of the book was provided by journalist Nat Finney, who 
reviewed it for the Herald Tribune. He argued that the authors missed the 
point in their targeting of Oppenheimer and the GAC. The problem, Finney 
said, was that this body should never have been given responsibility for such 
an important decision in the first place: “The G.A.C. were invited to make 
a decision of state of transcendent magnitude. There did not seem to be a 
responsible political official in Washington who understood that the G.A.C. 
not only should not but could not make such a decision. The G.A.C. was, of 
course, unwise in the extreme to try to fill the policy vacuum in Washington. 
But what kind of statecraft permitted such a folly?” The scientific squabbling 
over the H-bomb highlighted the lack of political will and competence in 
“decisions where technical and political considerations must be weighed 
together.” For Finney, it was obvious that what was required was a reassertion 
of political will, instead of passing the buck to scientists who had no business 
making political decisions.” 

The transcript of the security hearings had provided the first real public 
glimpse into the politics and conflicts within the technocratic sanctum of the 
AEC, and many were disturbed by the revelation of the complex intermixing of 
politics with technical decision making in the H-bomb controversy. Political 
fractures within the AEC became increasingly hard to contain in the wake 
of the hearings. As early as June, while the AEC was still deliberating on 
the case, the Herald Tribune alleged that the Oppenheimer case highlighted 
a division in the AEC between a committee style of management and the 
more centralized, executive style that Strauss was introducing: “Chairman 
Strauss, by the force and vigor of his personality and by his special access 
to the President, has acquired a commanding position. The team operation 
of the past has been badly shaken.”!’? On May 21, the AEC’s director of 


“I Was an Idiot” 241 


classification, Dr. James G. Beckerley, a critic of Strauss’s “conservative” 
security policy and an advocate of relaxing some security rules, announced that 
he would be resigning to join private industry.'°* Smyth, who had dissented 
in favor of Oppenheimer, resigned in mid-September to return to teaching 
at Princeton.'*° The following January, General Nichols stepped down from 
his position as AEC general manager, publicly saying that his resignation was 
not due to “any conflict of any kind” and that he simply wanted to go into the 
private sector in order to earn more money.!”° 

For Oppenheimer, the significance of the hearings lay both in the with- 
drawal of his clearance and in the public humiliation to which it subjected 
him. As one AEC official put it in conversation with Teller, the point had been 


h.”!37 The ceremonial quality 


to “unfrock [Oppenheimer] in his own churc 
of the hearings was key here. Oppenheimer’s authority was embodied and 
performative, and the destruction of this authority had to be similarly dra- 
matic. Because of the media attention the hearings received, the publication 
of Nichols’s letter of charges and Oppenheimer’s reply, and the release of the 
transcript, the hearings were a dramatic public event. In a sense, whatever the 
verdict, Oppenheimer could not have continued to occupy his former role. 
The release of the transcript made Oppenheimer’s humiliation at the hands 
of Robb and the PSB publicly available in every detail, as well as opening for 
public view the “derogatory information” of the previously closed files and 
interrogations. Readers of the transcript and of the commentary in newspa- 
pers and journals saw an Oppenheimer they had not known before: passive, 
self-contradictory, reduced to admitting that he had been “an idiot.” 
Midway through the proceedings, Alistair Cooke of the Manchester 
Guardian stated that the case would “test, as no other has done, whether 
a very distinguished reputation, in the most secret counsels of the Govern- 
ment, can survive the publication of grave charges even if his loyalty and 
reliability are afterwards affirmed.”'** As Cooke suggested, the very process 
of these invasive hearings was enough to destroy Oppenheimer’s reputation 
and authority. The Reporter magazine’s Max Ascoli observed, “All that he 
did, the common and uncommon part of it, is now in the public domain.” 
Oppenheimer, Ascoli said, was now “at once invulnerable and doomed”— 
invulnerable because there was no secret left to expose and he had no power left 
to be taken away from him, doomed because he would never again be trusted 
with public office. “For no man who has been the object of prolonged, widely 
publicized security investigation,” Ascoli pointed out, “has ever succeeded 
in gaining a decisive, unalterable clearance. That is the first principle of the 


242 Chapter Seven 


Jurisprudence of Security.”'°° In the wake of the PSB’s verdict, it was widely 
reported that Oppenheimer had told an Australian journalist, “Maybe this is 
the end of the road for me”—though Oppenheimer denied the comment.'*° 
The security hearings were certainly the end of the road on which Op- 
penheimer had been traveling since the war. The denial of security clearance, 
barring him from involvement with the agencies of the state, meant that al- 
though he might speak on contemporary issues, he would thereafter do so as 
an outsider. In the Cold War, being an expert meant knowing secrets. As he 
was cut off from state secrets, and from the inner chambers of technoscientific 
and military decision making, he could no longer speak as an expert with 
intimate knowledge of nuclear programs and the affairs of state. He was free 
to make moral or political pronouncements about nuclear weapons, but these 
would not be confused with, or carry the weight of, expert opinion. 
Oppenheimer’s fate was read as having broader significance for the position 
of scientists within the polity. Future scientific advisers would not seek to 
follow in Oppenheimer’s footsteps or emulate his example. The particular 
combination that Oppenheimer had embodied after the war—of specialized 
expertise, a powerful position within the state, and broad moral and cultural 
authority—was now closed offand discredited. Ifthe atomic scientists emerged 
from Los Alamos and the other wartime laboratories as Promethean figures, 
with the collective charisma of bearing the mysterious power of the atom, 
the hearings signified the end of this world-making role.'*! They marked the 
integration of science into the apparatus of the state, and the routinization 
and bureaucratization of the scientific role. Sociologist Daniel Bell observed, 
almost two decades after the hearings, that “what the Oppenheimer case 


signified was that the messianic role of the scientists . . . was finished.”!*? 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


The Last Intellectual? 


The loyalty-security hearings of 1954 altered, but did not end, Oppenheimer’s 
public role. Since he was now excluded from the inner circles ofnuclear policy, 
he could no longer lay claim to technocratic expert authority. But he was able 
to reconstitute his public and intellectual role and refashion an authoritative 
self-presentation by drawing on an alternative repertoire. Oppenheimer’s 
uniqueness as a leader of Cold War science had consisted in his ability to 
hold together the roles of cultivated man and scientific-technical expert. Now, 
in reconstituting his public role outside the state, he fell back more heavily 
on repertoires of humanistic cultivation. In doing so, he was able to turn his 
outsider status into ascetic virtue, providing renewed moral authority. And 
in line with this new self-presentation, he wove the hearings and his own 
trajectory into a broader narrative of the tragic fate of the humanistic intellec- 
tual in modernity. 

This tragic role was often seen as being symbolically manifested by Oppen- 
heimer’s body. His physical condition was widely ascribed moral meaning. 
Journalists Robert Coughlan and Alfred Friendly wrote that the pain of be- 
ing denounced in the hearings had left him “a thin, gray, shrunken ghost” 
and that he “grew gray and withdrawn,” losing his former “preternatural 
youthfulness.”! Victor Weisskopf blamed Oppenheimer’s early death on that 
trauma: “He was a broken man. It was really terrible to see how he sort of 
sagged after the trial and how he was melancholic and he had no longer the 
verve and all the qualities he had before. Then he got sick, of course, but 
in my mind it was a psychological disease, a psychosomatic disease. It was 
a complete breakdown due to the trial that made him die.”* Yet the air of 


244 Chapter Eight 


suffering that surrounded Oppenheimer in his later years added to his moral 
authority as ascetic outsider. Abraham Pais commented that Oppenheimer’s 
“charisma” in these years was “enhanced by his now ascetically frail looks.” 

Some were skeptical about the depth and significance of Oppenheimer’s 
personal transformation. One of his former students said, “I’m afraid he has 
only assumed a new role in his big repertoire. Just now he appears to be, of 
necessity, saint and martyr, but if the wind ever changes, he’ll be busy again in 
Washington with the rest of them.”* But Oppenheimer was never again busy 
in Washington. When in 1955 the General Advisory Committee was debating 
who should chair an international conference on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, Rabi commented bitterly, “I guess we’ve killed cock robin.” 

In November 1957, a member of the congressional Joint Committee on 
Atomic Energy, Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington, stated that it 
would be “entirely proper” for the AEC to reconsider the Oppenheimer case. 
In December, the Washington Post and Times-Herald conducted a poll of 
members of Eisenhower’s Science Advisory Committee, finding that a ma- 
jority favored reinstating Oppenheimer’s clearance and that none specifically 
objected to it. Later that month, AEC commissioner Thomas Murray, who 
had found against Oppenheimer in 1954, said that he now neither advocated 
nor opposed his reinstatement and that his earlier decision had been made 
“within the exigencies of the moment.” In 1962, Oppenheimer was invited as 
a guest toa Kennedy White House dinner for Nobel laureates. Glenn Seaborg, 
now chairman of the AEC, asked Oppenheimer whether he would submit to 
another security hearing, this time to clear his name. Oppenheimer replied, 
“Not on your life.” Instead, in late 1963, he was symbolically rehabilitated 
by being presented with the AEC’s prestigious Fermi Award. But the signif- 
icance of this return from exile was unclear. As Robert Coughlan observed, 
“Rehabilitated or not, even if his security clearance were restored (it was not) 
he could never be that man again. His case had caused too much bitterness, 
raised too many doubts, congealed too many protagonists in historic postures 
and attitudes ... Oppenheimer could never again have any leading role in 
government or government-affiliated science.” In hindsight, Alfred Friendly 
described the award as an “anticlimax.”® 

Nevertheless, with the support of the trustees of the Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton, Oppenheimer was able to continue as director of the in- 
stitute until June 1966, when, in worsening health, he stepped down.’ He also 
traveled widely in the United States and internationally, giving lectures on the 
philosophy of science and on problems of culture. And he integrated himself 
into new social and intellectual networks, in particular becoming increasingly 


The Last Intellectual? 245 


active in the Congress for Cultural Freedom. By examining the milieux in 
which he operated and the cultural repertoires on which he drew, this chapter 
traces how, in his later years, Oppenheimer was able to maintain cultural and 
intellectual authority separate from governmental and technocratic power. 


MAKING SENSE OF THE OPPENHEIMER CASE: 
SCIENTISTS, INTELLECTUALS, AND ANTI-COMMUNISM 


What was the meaning of the Oppenheimer case? The proceedings them- 
selves and the findings against Oppenheimer were inherently confusing.* In 
his New York Herald Tribune column “Today and Tomorrow,” Walter Lipp- 
mann wrote, “The one intolerable result is the result we have got, a divided, 
confused, contradictory verdict that raises enormous issues and settles none 
of them.” From the outset, this outcome was “almost unavoidable,” he said, 
“for the allegations were so vaguely defined, the issues were so carelessly 
posed, that they invited an indecisive result.” The AEC’s conclusion—that 
Oppenheimer was loyal to the United States but, due to “defects of character,” 
was a security risk—was paradoxical. Oppenheimer was not a Hiss, a Fuchs, 
or a Rosenberg, but what was he? Could someone branded a “security risk” 
still legitimately play a role in public life? The terms of the findings allowed 
for multiple interpretations. Partly due to this ambiguity, the case became a 
symbolic peg onto which a variety of social and cultural conflicts were hung. 
And Oppenheimer himself became an emblem of the broader cultural condi- 
tion. Even as the hearings were under way, Time magazine wrote, “However 
he came to his present ordeal, J. Robert Oppenheimer’s life is a bitter parable 
of a bitter time.”? 

The journalists Joseph and Stewart Alsop saw Oppenheimer as an Amer- 
ican Dreyfus, and they titled their defense of him after Emile Zola’s famous 
1898 letter “J’accuse.” The Alsops’ polemic was a passionate assertion of 
liberal democratic principles threatened by the expansion of the security ap- 
paratus. But their defense of Oppenheimer’s liberal freedoms went only so far. 
Their willingness to champion him was dependent on his having repudiated 
Communism as a youthful error. Novelist and critic Waldo Frank pointed 
out in The Nation that the Alsops’ defense divided Oppenheimer’s biography 
into an acceptable and unacceptable part—the young leftist is firmly rejected 
so that the later pillar of the liberal elite can be rehabilitated. 

Most criticism of the hearings was framed in terms of worries over the 
decline of institutional decency and civility in the culture of accusation and 
investigation. Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. admitted that Oppenheimer 


246 Chapter Fight 


“was doubtless at moments a cocky, irritating, even arrogant man.” But he 
condemned the greater arrogance shown by the AEC in claiming the right to 
“search ... the soul of an individual.” “The government which claims to do 
this,” Schlesinger argued, “would hardly seem a government for Americans.” 
To others, the case dramatized the anti-intellectual undercurrent in American 
culture. One of Oppenheimer’s former Berkeley colleagues, psychologist 
Edward C. Tolman, told the International Congress of Psychology that the 
Oppenheimer case was an illustration of America’s “blind and stupid anti- 
intellectualism.” Scientists should defy this, he said, by wearing the label 
“ego-head” with pride.!! 

Social scientists and literary intellectuals pointed to the hearings as indica- 
tive of the collective fate of intellectuals in modern America, thereby aligning 
their own position with that of Oppenheimer.’? In an article for the journal 
The Twentieth Century, Philip Rieff argued that the hearings represented the 
breakdown of liberal norms that had hitherto protected intellectuals against 
political interference and discipline. They also dramatized the separation 
between humanists and scientists and between intellectuals and the public, 
indicating a vacuum in America’s cultural life. For Rieff, Oppenheimer was a 
victim of this collapse of a common culture.!° 

In the pages of the Partisan Review, the case touched offa debate over how 
intellectuals should respond to McCarthyism. Diana Trilling wrote that “ever 
since Los Alamos, Dr. Oppenheimer had ... been something of a culture 
hero for American intellectuals.” Despite this, her attitude to Oppenheimer 
was ambivalent. Five years earlier, in response to the Hiss case, Trilling had 
advised liberals to maintain “a very delicate position which neither supports 
a McCarthy nor automatically defends anyone whom a McCarthy attacks.” 
She appeared to condone HUAC’s strategy of trying Communists for their 
beliefs, arguing that “the Communist idea must be judged as a Communist 
act.” Trilling’s first instinct had not been to jump to Oppenheimer’s defense. 
She wrote that as a “conventional anti-Stalinist,” her initial reaction to the H- 
bomb allegations had been to assume that Oppenheimer was indeed “wrongly 
motivated”—why else would he have worked for the A-bomb against Germany 
and Japan, but held back when later it came to developing the H-bomb against 
the Soviet Union? Her reading of the transcript changed her mind on that 
score: there were plenty of good reasons for opposing the H-bomb, and 
Oppenheimer’s political attitudes were “wholly irrelevant to his H-bomb 
position.” But she nevertheless thought that there were important lessons to 
be drawn from Oppenheimer’s prewar political involvements. Oppenheimer 
was, she said, “par excellence the Popular Front fellow-traveler.” His mistake 


The Last Intellectual? 247 


during the hearings was in assuming that his own trajectory “is so very special.” 
Rather, she suggested, Oppenheimer’s defense should have been that his story 
“is the story of countless high-minded persons of liberal impulse who came 
to maturity with him.” His slowness in recognizing the “totalitarian” nature 
of the Soviet Union, and his remaining loyalty to the “movement,” were 
symptoms ofa broader condition of the liberal-left milieu at that time. Trilling 
used the Oppenheimer case to launch a critique of what she regarded as the 
naive attitude of American liberals toward the Soviet Union before and during 
World War II and the history of American intellectuals’ involvement with 
the Communist Party and the Popular Front. Trilling’s conclusion was that 
Oppenheimer’s political naiveté was only that of the liberal intelligentsia in 
general—and, she suggested, that is why “the intellectual does not belong in 
the active world of politics.”'* 

The Oppenheimer case became a symbolic moment for embattled liberal 
intellectuals. The dredging up of Oppenheimer’s prewar political commit- 
ments foregrounded the sensitive relationship between 1950s liberals and the 
1930s Left. At the same time, the case forced liberals to confront their own 
complicity with postwar Red-baiting, which now appeared to be rebound- 
ing on them.’ Identifying themselves as “anti-Stalinist,” liberal intellectuals 
had often been unwilling to condemn, or had passively supported, HUAC’s 
attacks on Communist Party activists, reserving their criticism for “irrespon- 
sible” excesses rather than the core ideology of Cold War anti-Communism. 
Oppenheimer’s own position was ambivalent. He was himself associated with 
a liberal, anti-Communist group of intellectuals, the American Committee 
for Cultural Freedom (ACCF), affiliated with the international Congress for 
Cultural Freedom (CCF). The congress, which arose from a conference of 
intellectuals held in Berlin in June 1950, aimed to solidify the cultural rela- 
tionship between American and European intellectuals and to promote liberal 
pluralist ideas as a way of countering the cultural and intellectual influence of 
Communism. In 1953, Oppenheimer was a sponsor of the CCF’s Conference 
on Science and Freedom, held in Hamburg. The conference was organized 
by the Hungarian-born chemist and philosopher Michael Polanyi, based at 
Manchester University; he was a strong critic of the Soviet Union and a 
campaigner against British socialists’ calls for the planning of science.'® 

In early March 1954, in the midst of preparing for the security hearings, 
Oppenheimer had taken time to try to persuade Einstein to dissociate himself 
from the Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, which was holding a gather- 
ing in honor of the physicist’s seventy-fifth birthday. Oppenheimer had been 
tipped off by the ACCF of their view that the group was a Communist front 


248 Chapter Fight 


organization. Sol Stein, the executive director of the ACCF, wrote to Oppen- 
heimer that “leaders of the American Jewish community” were “very much 
concerned lest Dr. Einstein be sucked into another Communist-inspired oc- 
casion. Such an occasion will again tie up Judaism and Communism .. . [and] 
will help to spread the notion one hears so often nowadays about physical 
scientists being political babes-in-the-woods.” Oppenheimer did the ACCF’s 
bidding and persuaded Einstein not to participate in the meeting of what he 
called “this goddamn outfit.”!” The last thing that Oppenheimer wanted as he 
faced the Personnel Security Board was a political controversy involving the 
Institute for Advanced Study, of which Einstein had been a faculty member 
since the 1930s. 

Einstein, as a matter of both principle and political strategy, took the posi- 
tion that anti-Communist attacks should be countered head-on with straight- 
forward statements of principle defending civil liberties. In 1949, he had 
advised David Bohm to refuse to appear before HUAC, even if it meant a 
jail term. Einstein thought that the right course of action for Oppenheimer in 
facing the PSB was simple: he should just tell the officials that they were fools 
and then go home.!® 

Oppenheimer, however, could not contemplate this sort of direct opposi- 
tion. Instead, since testifying before HUAC in 1949, he had pursued the more 
cautious strategy of trying to cooperate with and, up to a point, accommo- 
date anti-Communism, in the hope that its sharper edges could be blunted. 
Oppenheimer worried that Einstein’s views on civil liberties were, given the 
political climate of the time, “inflammatory and certainly most unpopular,” 
and he urged Einstein to acknowledge “the harm that communists had done 
in this country.”'? 

Pleased with Oppenheimer’s intervention with Einstein, the ACCF duly 
sent a message to the AEC’s Personnel Security Board vouching for Op- 
penheimer’s anti-Communist credentials.2? Oppenheimer agreed with the 
ACCF’s stance of trying to foster a responsible, liberal anti-Communism as an 
inoculation against the excesses of McCarthyism. The security hearing, how- 
ever, cast doubt on this strategy. The persecution ofsuch a prominent scientist 
and cultural figure as Oppenheimer by the executive branch of the federal 
government was taken by ACCF intellectuals as a sign that anti-Communism 
had gone too far. In 1955, Schlesinger criticized the group as too fanatical, 
and he resigned within a year—as did, among others, David Riesman, John 
Kenneth Galbraith, and Diana Trilling. Historian Richard Pells wrote, “Each 
offered different explanations for resigning, but a major catalyst was clearly 


the persecution of Oppenheimer.”?! 


The Last Intellectual? 249 


Ironically, however, the hearings immediately propelled Oppenheimer into 
the ACCF. It was the sociologist Daniel Bell who put forward Oppenheimer’s 
name and sponsored him for membership at the July 1954 meeting of the 
ACCF’s Executive Committee, shortly after the AEC verdict. On November 
g, Oppenheimer accepted the invitation to join the organization. The ACCF’s 
press release announcing his membership proudly stated that “in March of 
1954, he was. . . instrumental in helping the cultural freedom group discourage 
eminent scientists from cooperating with a Communist-line group in this 
country.” Oppenheimer remained with the organization to the end of his life. 
The international CCF, in particular, provided him with a milieu in which he 
fashioned his intellectual identity of these later years.” 

The Oppenheimer case symbolically tapped into and reignited a variety of 
simmering cultural conflicts. This symbolic function of the case was particu- 
larly evident in American universities, where academic freedom had already 
been greatly compromised by loyalty tests, oaths, and investigations. In 1955, 
the University of Washington, which had been the site of a number of very 
important battles over academic freedom since the late 1940s, became the 
focus of national attention for bowing to pressure from the state governor 
and the conservative local press and withdrawing its offer to Oppenheimer 
of a visiting professorship.”’ In protest, a number of prominent academics 
canceled visits and lectures there, and an informal boycott of the university 
began. Seven biochemists backed out ofa medical school symposium, forcing 
the meeting to be canceled, and six physiologists refused to attend a sympo- 
sium at the university’s zoology department.”4 Cornelius Wiersma of Caltech 
explained his reasons for not attending this conference: “The whole principle 
ofacademic freedom is under severe attack these days. I feel strongly that if the 
academic world does not in every way protest whenever an obvious violation 
of academic freedom is proposed or executed, the idea of a university as a 
place in which freedom of speech is maintained at its highest level will soon 
belong to the past.””° 

Oppenheimer himself remained somewhat detached from the University 
of Washington controversy. He told a journalist that he had only heard of it 
via the New York Times and that he had never been formally invited to the 
university. (He and Edwin Uehling, a former postdoctoral student of Op- 
penheimer’s at Berkeley and now acting chairman of the physics department 
at Washington, had informally worked out a date when he was available to 
come.) To the question of whether the university was violating academic 
freedom, Oppenheimer responded, “That’s not my problem.” When asked 
if the scientists’ boycott might embarrass the university, he said, “It seems 


250 Chapter Eight 


to me that the University has already embarrassed itself.”*° Instead of being 
an active participant in the controversy, Oppenheimer was, rather, a symbol 
around which others rallied and around which existing tensions coalesced into 
actual conflict. The divisions on campus festered for more than a year until a 
compromise was worked out in the summer of 1956: the physics department 
would host the National Science Foundation’s International Congress on 
Theoretical Physics, which would include Oppenheimer but would involve 
no university funds.?’ 

Alarge section of the wartime physics elite, particularly those who had spent 
the war at Los Alamos, rallied to Oppenheimer’s defense during and after the 
hearings. Oppenheimer’s defenders strove to present the image of a homoge- 
neous scientific community unified behind him, despite the fact that he was 
vigorously opposed by those scientists who were prominent H-bomb advo- 
cates, including Ernest Lawrence, Luis Alvarez, and Edward Teller. An attack 
on Oppenheimer, it was frequently repeated, was an attack on the whole scien- 
tific community. These defenders contrived to make Oppenheimer a martyr 
for science. Weisskopf wrote to him during the hearings, ““Somehow Fate has 
chosen you as the one who has to bear the heaviest load in this struggle .. . 
Who else in this country could represent better than you the spirit and phi- 
losophy of all that for which we are living.”** The Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, as well as publishing articles criticizing the proceedings, included 
letters of support for Oppenheimer written by colleagues at Princeton, Los 
Alamos, and Chicago.” 

Caltech president Lee DuBridge, who had served with Oppenheimer on 
the GAC, testified in Oppenheimer’s defense during the hearings and after- 
ward expressed strong public support for the physicist. For example, he took 
the opportunity of'a luncheon meeting of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers on June 23, 1954, to speak out against the hearings, and his com- 
ments were quoted in the Los Angeles press. For his support of Oppenheimer, 
DuBridge was bombarded with criticism from alumni and the general public 
in Pasadena and Los Angeles. One critic wrote, 


By his own personal misconduct, [Oppenheimer] has ended his future 
usefullness [szc] to his country in any official capacity. Tragic as that 
may be, the political situation in the world to-day makes it imperative 
that our policies, both domestic and foreign, take on almost a “black 
or white” concept... As you must admit, Doctor, our educational and 
scientific circles have long been suspect. Often unfairly. Yet, opinions 
such as you voiced . . . do not make the nation any less willing to tolerate 


The Last Intellectual? 251 


or approve or underwrite such sentiments . . . The country is in an ugly 
mood and will make short shrift of any leader that proves unfaithful 
to the confidence that we have the right to expect. This is no time to 
condone alleged “mistakes in judgment” that are, in fact, treason. No 
matter how innocently such “mistakes” may have been made. 


DuBridge replied, “You are apparently right that the country is in an ugly 
mood and your letter is one of the ugliest parts of it.”°° 

Anti-Communism had multiple meanings and was often connected in 
complex ways with other cultural struggles concerning the role of science. 


One woman wrote to DuBridge that 


the American people are getting fed-up on the over-emphasis of “sci- 
ence.” The most recent and most spectacular contribution to science 
is a creation that so far, has brought the world nothing but fear and 
destruction. Let us have more men like Lincoln and MacArthur and less 
of men like Fuchs and Rosenberg . . . the Atomic Energy Commission 
had disposed of Mr. Oppenheimer to the satisfaction of the American 
People.*! 


Anti-Communist discourse was often bound up with nativism, anti-intellec- 
tualism, and encoded anti-Semitism. Press portrayals of Oppenheimer as an 
archetypally amoral scientist tapped into deep-rooted conflicts in American 
society over cultural homogeneity versus pluralism and secular versus Chris- 
tian bases for culture and morality.” 

In November 1954, the president and Mrs. Eisenhower attended a ser- 
vice at St. John’s Episcopal Church in Washington and heard a sermon by 
Dr. Charles Lowry, chairman of the Foundation for Religious Action in the So- 
cial and Civil Order. The Reverend Doctor told the congregation that “Robert 
Oppenheimer was symptomatic of a very large number of top flight scientists 
in the evident vacuum ofhis soul” and that “if by some evil chance our globe is 
destroyed, this will be the real reason—the tyranny of science and the poverty 
and defensiveness of the forces of salvation.”°? The right-wing American 
Mercury derided Oppenheimer as the “long-time glamor-boy of the atomic 
scientists.” Attacking DuBridge for his public support of Oppenheimer, the 
Mercury asked, “If educators continue to coddle potential traitors . . . will not 
students be encouraged to feel that intellectual achievement carries with it an 
unrestrained license to pursue unmoral, if not immoral behavior? Have they 
not already before them the pattern whereby patriotism, moral and spiritual 


252 Chapter Fight 


values are excluded from the realm of science?”** Hoping to head off this 
kind of attack, DuBridge replied to one letter from a member of the public by 
affirming his own Protestant upbringing: 


As the son of a YMCA secretary and a lifetime member of a Protestant 
church, it was rather a shock to have you imply that I was one of the 
people who did not “feel that high moral character is essential” ... I 
know Oppenheimer personally and intimately and I can assure you that 
whatever terrible mistakes he may have made in his younger years, he 
has repented and atoned for them a thousand times over in recent years. 
My upbringing may have been old-fashioned, but I was taught that in 
cases like this the sins of youth might be forgiven ... I would suggest 
that we not punish St. Paul for the sins of Saul.?° 


The letters DuBridge received from the public were overwhelmingly hostile 
and even included some anonymous hate mail. But a rumor that DuBridge had 
set up a defense fund for Oppenheimer also brought in some contributions 
from well-wishers, which DuBridge duly returned. DuBridge confided to his 
colleague Edward Condon that 


it is probably quite impossible for anything to be done about the Op- 
penheimer case itself. The term “security risk” is such a broad one that 
you can start out accusing a fellow of treason and end up by convicting 
him of fibbing, but still impose the same punishment. I guess there is 
no doubt that Robert did do some fibbing, and in the public mind now 
anybody who fibbed and also once was a “Communist” is clearly an 
unforgivable character.°° 


He also felt obliged to provide the Caltech board of trustees with a point-by- 
point statement of his views on the Oppenheimer case, as well as a defense 
of his decision to speak out publicly on the matter. He told the board, “I 
think I reflected in my opinions the views of the overwhelming majority of 
scientists.”°7 

It was important to the scientists who came to Oppenheimer’s defense 
to present themselves as speaking for a homogeneous and unified scientific 
community. Ostracizing Teller as a disruptive presence was part of the process 
of defining this community of opinion.°® Teller remarked bitterly, “One of 
the things that happened to me is not only that I lost my friends, but I believe 
I lost my status as an intellectual. You know, an intellectual, as I found out 


The Last Intellectual? 253 


to my grief, is not necessarily a man who is intelligent, but a man who agrees 
with other intellectuals. He is a man with whom it is acceptable for other 
intellectuals to associate. I lost my membership in that club.”°° 

One “world-renowned physicist,” when asked by Teller’s biographers 
whether the AEC trial had destroyed Oppenheimer, answered “No. I think 
it made Oppenheimer. I think it destroyed Teller.“ More specifically, if the 
hearings closed off to Teller the status of intellectual, they served to confirm 
Oppenheimer in that role. The “intellectual” was an available cultural image 
that was immediately invoked to make sense of Oppenheimer’s identity and 
the events surrounding the hearings, and one that Oppenheimer could draw 
upon in reconstructing his public identity. In doing so, he was able to maintain 
a public role beyond the relatively calm enclave of academia. 


ACADEMIA AND PUBLIC LIFE 


Even while assuming a technocratic advisory role after World War II, Oppen- 
heimer had maintained his position as an academic scientist. As director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study after 1947, Oppenheimer played a crucial role in 
nurturing young talent—a new generation of theoretical physicists including 
Freeman Dyson, Murray Gell-Mann, T. D. Lee, C. N. Yang, and Abraham 
Pais.‘! Oppenheimer occupied a central place in the postwar physics commu- 
nity. The biographer of Murray Gell-Mann wrote, “When a physicist came up 
with a new discovery, it was customary to make a pilgrimage to the Institute 
and try out the new idea on Oppenheimer and his young geniuses.” This 
was a trial by fire; Oppenheimer was notorious for his ability to demolish 
faulty arguments and, on occasion, even some good ones.*” He continued to 
play this symbolic presiding role in the physics community after 1954. Dyson 
thought that Oppenheimer became a better director of the institute in those 
later years, because without his governmental duties, he was free to devote 
more time to the place. Oppenheimer saw the purpose of the institute as being 
to take on young scholars for short periods of time so that they could work 
intensively, free from other obligations. He was in many ways the focal point 
of this community of scholars. 

The Institute for Advanced Study was the most prestigious academic insti- 
tution in the country and the archetypal ivory tower. Just as Oppenheimer’s 
leadership of Los Alamos had fixed him indelibly in the public mind as the 
man behind the bomb, his directorship of the institute confirmed him as the 
chief embodiment, representative, and spokesman for “pure science.” And he 
cultivated this image in his professional and public appearances. His lecturing 


254 Chapter Eight 


style was, according to Pais, “priestly .. . It was, one might say, as if he were 
aiming at initiating his audience into Nature’s divine mysteries.” It was char- 
acteristic that at the end of the talk, the sense of mystery would remain. Pais 
recalled that after a lecture on mesons that Oppenheimer gave at the American 
Physical Society in January 1947, “I tried to play back what he had just said, 
and I recall my thought: What the hell do I remember about his talk? I had 
been intrigued, nay moved, by his words, but now found myself unable to 
reconstruct anything of substance. I would now say that this was not just 
a matter of stupidity on my part.” Oppenheimer self-consciously cultivated 
an oracular style, whether talking about physics or public affairs. He had 
attempted to tutor David Lilienthal in the art, praising one of his speeches as 
“very sound and deep and with just the right lightness of touch in pointing to 
the great human and ethical substrata that determine our way of life without 
handling them in such an explicit way that the touch destroys.” As Pais put 
it, Oppenheimer was “a rhetor rather than a speaker.”*? 

Jeremy Bernstein heard Oppenheimer give a public lecture on quantum 
mechanics at Harvard in 1957: “His use of language was somewhat opaque, 
often poetic, and he had an odd, clipped diction that commanded attention.” 
Bernstein noticed in the audience two frail-looking “classic blue-haired Boston 
dowagers,” both listening in awe to Oppenheimer’s speech. At one point, the 
physicist wrote an equation on the board, whereupon “the two old ladies 
clutched each other for reassurance. Perhaps they thought that the formula 
was going to explode.” Oppenheimer’s aura combined the raw power of the 
atomic bomb with the mystique of “pure science.” That fusion, together with 
his eloquence, made him an “electrifying public figure” and, as one journalist 
put it, “the acknowledged spokesman for his profession.”“4 

Yet Oppenheimer’s authoritative public presence as a spokesman for sci- 
ence and his aggressive intellectual style in discussions with colleagues and 
students masked anxiety about his increasing distance from new creative 
work in physics. In the summer of 1952, when his term as GAC chairman 
was coming to an end, he wrote to his brother, “Physics is complicated and 
wondersome, and much too hard for me except as a spectator; it will have 
to get easy again one of these days, but perhaps not soon.”*” In an interview 
with Thomas Kuhn late in 1963, Oppenheimer strongly hinted at his sense of 
isolation. He said he missed the interaction with experimental physicists that 
he had had before the war at Berkeley (and, of course, during the war at Los 
Alamos). He did not miss teaching, since he thought he had lost his vocation 
for this: “I think that the charm went out of teaching after the great change of 
the war ... I was always called away and distracted because I was thinking 


The Last Intellectual? 255 


about other things, but actually I don’t think I ever taught well after the war. 
I have a feeling that what my job was was to get a part of the next generation 
brought up and that job was done when I came here.”*° 

In his later years, Oppenheimer was not content with a purely academic 
role and was eager to find spheres of intellectual discourse and influence 
beyond the university. He was increasingly concerned with the constitution 
of the public sphere but was pessimistic about the possibility of successfully 
connecting science with public discourse. Whereas Harvard president James 
Conant had tried to describe “science in the making” for the lay reader 
and introduced his popular book Science and Common Sense as a “citizen’s 
guide to the methods of experimental science,” Oppenheimer was suspicious 
of these populist sentiments.*” When he read Conant’s On Understanding 
Sctence in 1947, Oppenheimer wrote to Conant, “With its fundamental tenet— 
that one can understand science only intensively, not extensively, and that 
we in fact know too little of how scientific progress is made to theorize 
about it and know only barely enough im a few instances to describe it—with 
this I deeply agree.”4* But Oppenheimer drew from this the elitist lesson 
that “understanding science” was possible only for those initiated through 
practice and membership in the scientific community. He doubted that it 
could be achieved as part of a “general education.” There was necessarily 
“something fake” about the controlled environment of the high school or 
undergraduate laboratory, where there is never real uncertainty about what 
is the correct experimental outcome. And to Oppenheimer’s mind, Conant’s 
project of teaching science through history ran the risk of becoming “corrupt 
with antiquarianism.”*? In contrast to Conant’s optimism, Oppenheimer 
dwelled on what he saw as the inescapable gulf of misunderstanding between 
professional and layman, and between professionals in different fields. 

This problem was at the heart of the Reith Lectures, which Oppenheimer 
delivered for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in November 1953. 
In them, he described science as a form of life with its own particular tradi- 
tions, skills, and practices. The ideas of any branch of science were likely to 
be misinterpreted without immersion in the cumulative development of these 
traditions. New knowledge and techniques transcended but also incorpo- 
rated past knowledge. Without being oneself a part of that process of change, 
one could not hope to fully understand the new knowledge. The cumulative 
character of science was archetypal for modern ideas of progress. But Op- 
penheimer presented this cumulativeness as having fundamentally premodern 
characteristics. He described science as a craft—performed by master artisans, 


organized in guilds, steeped in tradition.”? 


256 Chapter Eight 


Yet if science was disconnected from public life and common culture, this 
held the danger that science would be valued for, and would come to rely 
entirely for its maintenance on, its instrumental utility as a source of material 
power. Public support for “pure science” depended on the ability of scientific 
communities to connect with a broader human community in the public 
sphere. 

It was this connection with a wider community that the Reith Lectures were 
an attempt to foster. But it was clear to Oppenheimer that ideas would always 
be distorted by the process of translation from one community of experience 
to another. The problem was therefore in what sense one could speak of there 
being a common culture. A rapprochement of science with public culture was 
rendered particularly problematic by the ways in which the theories of relativ- 
ity and quantum mechanics ran counter to commonsensical ideas about time, 
space, and causality.°! 

Oppenheimer presented this gap between science and common culture 
in stark terms. Nevertheless, he did hope to rescue some sense in which 
science could contribute to broader human culture. In this connection, he 
emphasized the notion of analogy. He saw the influence of Newtonianism 
within the Enlightenment as an ideal model for the central place that scientific 
ideas could occupy within the culture (however at odds this influence might 
be with the original meanings of the ideas). The grand mathematical synthesis 
accomplished by Newton provided for the philosophes an analogy through 
which to develop their aspirations for a unified science of man and for the 
power of reason to understand and control human affairs. 

The situation in the mid-twentieth century was different: just as Newton’s 
overarching synthesis had been overturned, so, for different reasons, had 
the vision of progress and unity that characterized the Enlightenment lost its 
luster. The question Oppenheimer was grappling with was whether quantum 
mechanics and atomic physics could play a cultural role in the present age 
comparable to that which Newtonianism had played in the eighteenth century. 
If quantum physics was to have such an impact, it would be not through direct 
application, but through analogy. It was in this indirect and imaginative sense 
that Oppenheimer sought to draw from physics moral lessons for human 
affairs. “The story of atomic discovery,” Oppenheimer said, is “so full of 
instruction for all, for layman as well as specialist. For it has recalled to us 
traits of old wisdom that we can well take to heart in human affairs.” 

The chief embodied source of such wisdom, for Oppenheimer, was 
Niels Bohr. Oppenheimer’s old friend Jeffries Wyman recalled that when 
he was with Oppenheimer in Paris in late 1953, following the Reith Lectures, 


The Last Intellectual? 257 


Oppenheimer was talking excitedly about Bohr. It seemed to Wyman that 
“Bohr was his idol ... He spoke of Bohr almost as of a god.”°? Bohr’s no- 
tion of complementarity was the central motif through which, Oppenheimer 
thought, the cultural role of physics could be developed. Oppenheimer em- 
ployed complementarity as a metaphor for existential dilemmas, speaking, for 
example, of the complementarity of the eternal and the transient in human 
life. He also applied it as a principle of pluralism and liberal tolerance: there 
is not one overarching truth, but many truths, each of which is appropriate to 
a different dimension of experience. The notion of complementarity allowed 
Oppenheimer to move easily between physics and moral philosophy, while 
reminding his listeners of the multifaceted nature of the human spirit and of 
the diversity of human experience.” 

Some years earlier, Oppenheimer had said, “Science is not all of the life 
of reason; it is a part of it.” In his final Reith lecture, “The Sciences and 
Man’s Community,” Oppenheimer again asserted the unbridgeable pluralism 
ofmodern culture. This condition, he said, ruled out the traditional ideal of the 
cultivated general intellect: “Even the best of us knows how to do only a very 
few things well; and of whats available in knowledge of fact, whether of science 
or of history, only the smallest part is in any one man’s knowing.” Applying 
the principle of complementarity to the life of the individual suggested that 
in a “man’s life ... he may be any of a number of things; he will not be all 
of them.”°® The goal of cultivation, the formation of an individual self that 
would be equal to the scope of human culture, was no longer feasible. 

Rather than through modes of self-formation, integration could now be 
achieved only through new forms of solidarity and community: “Each of us 
knows... . how much even a casual and limited association of man goes beyond 
him in knowledge, in understanding, in humanity, and in power .. . Each of 
us knows how much he has been transcended by the group of which he 
has been or is a part.”*” In place of cultivation, Oppenheimer substituted an 
ideal of dialogue between diverse communities. The problem of the unity of 
knowledge and the problem of human solidarity were identical. 

For the solution to this dual problem of knowledge and solidarity, Oppen- 
heimer turned to Tocqueville’s understanding of American democracy as be- 
ing composed of pluralistic civic associations. This communitarian pluralism, 
Oppenheimer suggested, connected the trajectory of American democracy 
with that of modern science: these “fluid and yet intense communities ... 
form a common pattern for our civilization. It brought men together in the 
Royal Society and in the French Academy and in the Philosophical Society 
that Franklin founded.”°® 


258 Chapter Eight 


As he articulated a conception of science as an instantiation of liberal demo- 
cratic values, Oppenheimer presented himself as a spokesman for these values 
and constituted his own authority as interpreter of the cultural meaning of 
science. In giving the Reith Lectures, Oppenheimer was defining his personal 
role as an intellectual. The lectures were a performance, and it mattered that 
it was Oppenheimer who was delivering them. Though he announced the 
death of the cultivated man, these lectures were nothing if not a display of 
cultivation; and while he pointed to the splintering of culture into specialized 
segments, he demonstrated his own ability to transcend such divisions. The 
Times wrote that Oppenheimer “can speak with authority, for he combines 
the highest technical competence with administrative experience and wide 
interests,” and added that “a touch of the poet gives him the power to express 
the scientist’s situation in our time.””? American journalist John Mason Brown 
said, “It is the work of a scientist who is an artist and an artist who is a poet.” 
Oppenheimer constituted himself as embodied solution to the very problems 
of cultural fragmentation that he was pointing out. 

Yet his lectures were in some ways a practical example of his point about 
the gap between science and common understanding. Many among the British 
audience who listened to the lectures on the radio complained that they could 
not follow the speaker. Amid the controversy of the security hearings, the 
Guardian recalled that the Reith Lectures had been “controversial only in 
one sense: they could not be understood, so many complained, by the common 
educated man.”°! Those who found the secular sermon uplifting were moved 
not so much by the content as by the voice of the speaker. One listener wrote to 
Oppenheimer, “Your voice, so full of the effect of wisdom and consciousness 
of the Infinite, was a delight past defining in words.” Another said, “I loved 
the nobility of your utterance and the wisdom and beauty of the language. I 
rose from my chair with a purity of mind and an elevation of emotion; I rose, 
if I may with reverence say it, as from a Sacrament.”©” 

One reviewer suggested that Oppenheimer’s ability to hold together di- 
verse intellectual elements, and to embody a kind of cultural unity, was a 
trick of his voice, an effect that disappeared when the text was divorced from 
the speaker. The reviewer of Science and the Common Understanding for 
the British Universities Quarterly observed, “When I started to read these 
lectures, they seemed inescapably associated with Dr. Oppenheimer’s voice 
and intonation which gave the broadcasts a flavour unique in modern scientific 
exposition. But when I had got to the end and began to re-read in bits, I found 
that the spoken word had gone and that the book divided itself into two 


The Last Intellectual? 259 


parts ... T'wo men wrote this book, Dr. Oppenheimer, Scientist [and] Dr. 


Oppenheimer, Romantic.” 


EXILE AND HOPE 


The Reith Lectures prepared the part that Oppenheimer would assume in 
the wake of the security hearings and supplied him with the vocabulary that 
he would use to remake himself in this new role. The hearings closed off to 
Oppenheimer the possibility ofa technocratic role in the state but left available 
to him the cultural role that he had begun to map out in his BBC appearance. 
A Herald Tribune reviewer of Science and the Common Understanding told 
readers that “ta few paragraphs” of this book “may tell more of the essential 
faith and nature of this man than columns of testimony.” It was in terms of the 
cultural problems addressed in the Reith Lectures that Oppenheimer made 
sense of his new position. Instead of underlining that he had been unfairly 
attacked by specific political enemies, he presented his new status as victim 
as manifesting the more general defeat of the intellectual in a fragmented and 
degraded modern culture. 

On December 26, 1954, some six months after the AEC’s finding against 
him, Oppenheimer gave a lecture titled “Prospects in the Arts and Sciences” 
for Columbia University’s bicentennial. The talk was broadcast nationwide 
by the Columbia Broadcasting System (later CBS). He recapitulated many 
of the ideas that he had first articulated in the Reith Lectures. But this new 
version was without the optimistic notions of pluralism and community that he 
had outlined just a year earlier. Instead, Oppenheimer emphasized personal 
feelings of weakness and of being overwhelmed by a world beyond one’s 
control. His communitarianism now took the form ofa defensive retreat: “This 
is a world in which each of us, knowing his limitations, knowing the evils of 
superficiality, will have to cling to what is close to him, to what he knows, to 
what he can do, to his friends and his tradition and his love, lest he be dis- 
solved in a universal confusion and know nothing and love nothing.” The 
lecture was shot through with the fear of the dissolution of self, of being unable 
to hold one’s own against others: “If a man tells us that he sees differently 
than we, or that he finds beautiful what we find ugly, we may have to leave the 
room, from fatigue or trouble; but that is our weakness and our default. If we 
must live with a perpetual sense that the world and the men in it are greater 
than we and too much for us, let it be the measure of our virtue that we know 
this and seek no comfort.” Oppenheimer painted a picture of the individual 


260 Chapter Eight 


confronting others as alien and hostile and experiencing the social world 
itself as a vast and opposing power. He presented not only the individual, 
but culture itself as on the defensive against this great anonymity. “Never 
before today,” he said, “has the integrity of the intimate, the detailed, the true 
art, the integrity of craftsmanship and the preservation of the familiar, of the 
humorous and the beautiful stood in more massive contrast to the vastness of 
life, the greatness of the globe, the otherness of people, the otherness of ways, 
and the all-encompassing dark.” 

Pervading the lecture was a profound sense of homelessness, of the “artist’s 
loneliness” and of the scientist working at the boundaries of knowledge who 
finds himself“a very long way from home.” Oppenheimer described this sense 
of homelessness above all in relation to mass culture. This meant the ersatz 
products channeled through what he called the “superhighways” of the “mass 
media.” Echoing the views of liberal social scientists, Oppenheimer linked 
popular culture with totalitarianism. The “superhighways” ranged from “the 
loudspeakers in the deserts of Asia Minor and the cities of Communist China 
to the organized professional theater of Broadway. They are purveyors of 
art and science and culture for the millions upon millions.” While making 
us aware of events across the globe, these “superhighways” were ultimately 
destructive of genuine solidarity: “They are also the means by which the true 
human community . . . [is] being blown dry and issueless, the means by which 
the passivity of the disengaged spectator presents to the man of art and science 
the bleak face of unhumanity.”°° Degraded mass culture left no room for an 
authentic intellectual role. 

In his critique of popular culture, Oppenheimer was echoing a dominant 
theme in mid-twentieth-century intellectual discourse. His language was par- 
ticularly evocative of the defensive pessimism of the 1930s cultural critics José 
Ortega y Gasset and Clement Greenberg. However, there was a key differ- 
ence. Most critics of mass culture dwelled on the opposition between popular 
culture and avant-garde art and literature and were inclined to see science, 
particularly technological “big science,” as itself symptomatic of bureaucratic 
and mass society. Oppenheimer’s account stood out by the prominence he 
gave to science, rather than literature, as a locus of high cultural values. Op- 
penheimer placed the figure of the scientist at the center of the preexisting 
narrative of the lonely and embattled modern intellectual.” 

Alistair Cooke, who had followed the security hearings for the Manchester 
Guardian, wrote that in his Columbia address, Oppenheimer both spoke 
about and himself instantiated and embodied “the isolation of the specialist” 
in modern society. From “the loneliness of his own exile,” Oppenheimer 


The Last Intellectual? 261 


articulated the condition of “the lonely man in society.” “So in the end 
Oppenheimer came to identify the world’s plight with his own: that ofa natural 
recluse too much bruised by the public world which repulsed the great gifts he 
felt he owed it.”°* The Edinburgh Scotsman elected Oppenheimer as its man 
of the year, explaining, “It seems to us that Dr Oppenheimer has emerged as a 
kind of new human prototype—the brilliant intellectual shorn of his roots .. . 
A respected leper, lingering in the outer purlieus of a strange citadel he knew 
so well he seems to us to be the sad symbol of an age that can take nothing on 
trust. He is the man who knew too much and therefore, to us, the man of the 
year.”©9 

On December 16, 1954, television cameras invaded Oppenheimer’s own 
anchoritic retreat—the Institute for Advanced Study—and a half-hour conver- 
sation between Oppenheimer and journalist Edward R. Murrow was broad- 
cast on the popular television program See It Now. Avoiding discussion of 
the hearings, the program focused instead on Oppenheimer’s role as director 
of the institute. Oppenheimer appeared as the linchpin holding the scholars 
of the institute together. The man who at Los Alamos had been the only 
one able to understand in detail each part of the laboratory’s work and to 
synthesize it into a whole now oversaw and appeared able to fuse together 
the intellectual endeavors of the institute’s solipsistic inhabitants. Describing 
the life of institute, he gave brief summaries of the work of each of the major 
scholars who were sequestered there, from young physicists Abraham Pais 
and Freeman Dyson to the psychologist Jean Piaget, the art historian Erwin 
Panofsky, and the medievalist Ernst Kantorowicz. Only when it came to 
Einstein did Oppenheimer have little to say. Asked by Murrow, “And Pro- 
fessor Einstein is still here too, isn’t he?” Oppenheimer replied, “Oh, indeed 
he is. Indeed he is. He’s—he’s one of the most lovable of men.””° 

Tensions in Oppenheimer’s relationship with Einstein were in large part 
due to their competing conceptions of the proper role of scientists as intellec- 
tuals. Though he has become almost archetypal of the solitary and disengaged 
life of the mind, in his later years Einstein came to see direct political engage- 
ment (for example, in defense of civil liberties) as the intellectual’s duty. This 
was anathema to Oppenheimer’s conception both of the scientific vocation 
and the function of the institute. Oppenheimer described the institute to 
Murrow as shutting out the world: “We are here as an institution . . . to take 
away from men the cares, the pleasures that are their normal excuse for not 
following the rugged road of their own—own life and need and destiny.” At 
the institute, he said, “they can’t run away ... from the job that it is their 


destiny to do.””! 


262 Chapter Eight 


Oppenheimer presented the life of the scientist as ascetic and disciplined: 
it was not only a retreat from the world, but also a means of steeling oneself 
with the mental toughness required to cope with a harsh and chaotic world. 
Paradoxically, however, this intensely inward concern with shaping the self 
was at the same time being enacted and displayed for public consumption. 
Oppenheimer provided the television audience with a glimpse into this ascetic 
community and way of life that he at the same time presented as utterly 
anathema to mass culture. 

A condition of the Murrow interview was that there be no questions about 
the hearings.”” It was three years before Oppenheimer was willing to talk 
publicly about his “case.” In 1957, he granted an interview to Victor Cohn, a 
reporter from the Minneapolis Tribune. The article opened with a quotation 
from the physicist: “I have tried to prove that a security risk can survive.” He 
said, “I had to establish . . . that what was put out as a final judgment about me 
wasn’t the final judgment. And the only way to do this was by surviving.” This 
survival owed a great deal to his continuing role as director of the Institute 
for Advanced Study. But the article also dwelled heavily on Oppenheimer’s 
scientific and social philosophy. Oppenheimer survived as an interpreter of 
science and of the condition of the culture.” 

A few months later, on October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union’s successful 
launch of Sputnik I, the world’s first artificial satellite, sent shock waves 
through the United States. The Eisenhower administration demanded a new 
heightened state of scientific mobilization, this time to catch up with the 
Soviets in the space race. Just as the explosion of the Soviet atomic bomb 
in August 1949 had demolished the security of America’s atomic monopoly, 
Sputnik evaporated the complacent view, commonly expressed by American 
scientists and liberal intellectuals, that science and technology could not 
prosper outside Western democracies. And if relations between scientists and 
the federal government had been soured by the Oppenheimer affair, it was 
clear that these had to be mended. A side effect of the crisis was that it led to 
calls for Oppenheimer’s reinstatement. The director of the United States’ own 
satellite program, for example, when asked by journalists “whether ‘a nation in 
first place’ could afford to waste the services of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 
replied that “‘a nation in first or last place’ could not afford it.””4 

Blame for America’s lagging behind the Soviets in space quickly focused 
on the education system. A new drive for improved science and technology 
education, and broader access to that education, led to the passing in 1958 
of the National Defense Education Act. The increased federal funding for 
education was broadly welcomed. But at a talk at Pingry School, a private 


The Last Intellectual? 263 


preparatory school in New Jersey, Vannevar Bush expressed worry about the 
narrow focus on technical education. Instead, he called for a revival of the ideal 
of the “gentleman of culture,” so that “youth will .. . seek to emulate the full 
man.” 

For Bush, the model of the “cultured gentleman” was necessary for “the 
modern select group upon whom the continuance and further development of 
our free way of life ultimately depends.” In a time of crisis, the nation needed 
to be able to look to an elite who would stand above the diverse interests 
and pressure groups of the pluralist society, an elite with “a certain aloofness 
from the crowd” who could act “as trustees of the common weal.” This elite 
was also necessary for waging the Cold War: “We cannot compete effectively 
in a complex world of air transport, guided missiles, and satellites by being 
merely tough and practical.” Even if Sputnik had weakened the certainty in 
the scientific and cultural superiority of democracy and the free market, Bush 
argued, the Soviets had another weakness, and that was the “narrowness” of 
their education. A well-rounded gentlemanly elite, Bush hoped, would assert 
American cultural authority and superiority by integrating science, intellectual 
life, and culture for the benefit of the nation.” 

It was that very integration in Oppenheimer, his ability to embody culture, 
that was the source of his continuing fascination for Cold War liberal intellec- 
tuals and was essential to his survival after the hearings. Yet even as he took 
on the role of “cultured gentleman,” Oppenheimer also bore witness to the 
decline of this ideal in society at large. Specialization in science was inevitable, 
he said, and had to be accepted. In his 1958 lecture “Knowledge and the 
Structure of Culture,” delivered at Vassar College in upstate New York, Op- 
penheimer argued that scientists’ responsibilities were purely vocational. A 
commitment to “know something [rather] than not know it,” he asserted, was 
“the only clear simple answer to the question . . . ‘What is the responsibility of 
the scientist?’”’” It was an ethic of awareness, rather than of action. Even this 
injunction to be aware was limited. Oppenheimer maintained that it did not 
extend to aresponsibility for Soviet scientists to criticize the political system of 
their country, nor for American scientists to criticize theirs. It was not a gener- 
alized responsibility to speak truth to power. Oppenheimer saw awareness as 
necessarily restricted within the professional domain of scientists’ expertise. 
Scientists were specialists, not general intellectuals. 

Oppenheimer presented a defense of scientific specialization as a bulwark 
against the dilution of knowledge by mass culture: “We who live in univer- 
sities ... have a kind of high duty to insist on being difficult . . . and insist on 
being recondite and honest and intimate.”’* But that still was an inadequate 


264 Chapter Eight 


remedy for the essential lack of commonality that Oppenheimer saw in modern 
life. He told an audience at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, the following year 
that the very intimacy of small, specialized communities, while bringing these 
few people together, by the same token rendered them “isolated” from the rest 
of culture and humankind. Oppenheimer contrasted the public sector “not 
only ... with what in the privacy ofa man’s life or his family may be dear to 
him, but whatis held asa guild or trade secret by small communities of men.” 
Science was in some important senses anathema to the public sector. The 
image of objectivity that accompanied science, and the fetishism of objectivity 
arising from the prestige of science, corroded the kind of intersubjective 
discourse that constitutes the public sector. Oppenheimer argued that “we 
have to some extent lost the confidence in the value of talking with one another 
in a common discussion where verifiable truth in the sense of the sciences, 
and objectivity in the very special sense of the sciences, is not attainable.”*° 
Oppenheimer was now centrally concerned with the limits of scientific 
rationality and objectivity. Science, he recognized, was incapable of providing 
answers about what goals society ought to pursue, about meanings, and 
about the purposes to which scientific developments should be applied. The 
crowding out of moral discourse by scientific instrumentality and objectivity 
was most brutally apparent in the case of atomic weapons. “Public discourse 
and common discourse,” Oppenheimer argued, were “cryingly needed” if 
the threat of atomic warfare was to be addressed in moral, and not just 
instrumental, terms.°! The AEC’s Personnel Security Board had ruled that 
Oppenheimer’s opposition to the hydrogen bomb was illegitimate insofar as 
he was an expert advising the state. Now, having been disbarred from that role, 
Oppenheimer found that this kind of technocratic thinking and the fetishism 
of a narrowly constructed scientific objectivity were eliminating any potential 
sphere in which such issues could be meaningfully addressed. 
Oppenheimer’s worries about the culturally fragmenting effects of special- 
ization connected with wider concern and debate on both sides of the Atlantic 
about the relationship between science and the humanities. In 1959, C. P. 
Snow delivered his massively influential Rede Lecture at Cambridge Univer- 
sity, lamenting the division between the “two cultures” of science and the 
humanities and attacking the dominance of a traditionalist literary culture in 
British academic life.*? Also in 1959, historian of ideas Jacques Barzun wrote 
on the divided condition of the “House of Intellect,” criticizing academic 
specialization that had made “abundance of information ... into a barrier 


between one man and the next.”*? 


The Last Intellectual? 265 


Some years later, University of California president Clark Kerr argued for 
a new academic “multiversity”: “The faculty world seems to sense a loss of 
unity—intellectual and communal unity and ... what Robert Oppenheimer 
calls ‘a thinning of common knowledge.’ Knowledge is now in so many bits 
and pieces and administration so distant that faculty members are increasingly 
figures in a ‘lonely crowd,’ intellectually and institutionally.”** Kerr presented 
the multiversity as a pluralistic solution, allowing loose cooperation between 
different knowledge-communities. It was an image strikingly close to Oppen- 
heimer’s portrayal in the Reith Lectures of the many rooms in the ramshackle 
“House of Science.” But there were also worries that the ramshackle structure 
of the multiversity would be, as historian David Kaiser aptly puts it, just a 
sprawling academic “suburb.” Many among the older generation of physicists 
worried that the rapid postwar expansion of their discipline meant that physics 
was no longer the close-knit community they went into, nor the intellectual 
retreat imagined by Oppenheimer, but an increasingly impersonal, routinized 
mass profession—a lonely crowd.*° 

Some months after Snow’s lecture, Oppenheimer gave a talk in Rhein- 
felden, Switzerland, for the Congress for Cultural Freedom in which he 
returned to the theme of the decline of the “public sector” and “public dis- 
course.” The diplomat George Kennan was there, as was sociologist Edward 
Shils, who described Kennan and Oppenheimer as two “icily lofty American 
saints.”*° The French political philosopher and writer Raymond Aron had 
initially asked Oppenheimer to give a talk introducing “Western policy in the 
atomic age.” But Oppenheimer said, “I would prefer the somewhat wider and 
more interesting theme of the effects of contemporary science on Western 
culture and politics, of which the problem of nuclear weapons is a principal 
but a rather special example.”*” 

In contrast to Snow’s call for more science against Oxbridge humanism, 
Oppenheimer argued that public culture had been stunted by “tan overem- 
phasis ... of the role of certitude,” based on the prestige of science. This 
was particularly the case regarding atomic weapons, which were now usually 
addressed in terms of rational-choice models rather than ethics. “What are 
we to think of such a civilization,” he asked, “which has not been able to 
talk about the prospect of killing almost everybody, except in prudential and 
game-theoretic terms?”*S 

Yet it was unclear what, if any, solution Oppenheimer was offering. He 
spoke wistfully of the Hindu dedication to ahimsa, or doing no harm, and the 
nonviolent ethic “which you find in Jesus—as well as . . . in Socrates.” But he 


266 Chapter Eight 


apparently did not see such an ethic as translatable into action in the world. 
He dismissed antinuclear campaigners such as Bertrand Russell by saying, 
“These people want heaven and earth too. They are not in any way talking 
about deep ethical dilemmas, because they deny that there are such dilemmas. 
They say that if we behave in a nice way, we will never get into trouble. But 
that, surely, is not ethics.”*? 

Russell was too superficial because he would not accept the nuclear 
dilemma as intractable, whereas Oppenheimer saw the world as basically 
corrupt and resistant to reform. Oppenheimer offered to weep for the world 
but not to help change it. The philosopher Karl Jaspers, commenting later 
on Oppenheimer’s quasi-religious appeal at the end of “Prospects in the Arts 
and Sciences” to “love one another,” wrote, “In such sentences I can see only 
an escape into sophisticated aestheticism, into phrases that are existentially 
confusing, seductive, and soporific in relation to reality.”°° 

Novelist Mary McCarthy took Oppenheimer’s frequent but vague talk 
about love as a sign that he had finally lost his marbles. Writing to Hannah 
Arendt about the CCF conference “Progress in Freedom,” held in Berlin in 
June 1960, she said, “Another feature of the Congress was Oppenheimer, 
who took me out to dinner and is, I discovered, completely and perhaps even 
dangerously mad. Paranoid megalomania and sense of divine mission.” At 
one point, according to McCarthy, Oppenheimer turned to CCF secretary- 
general Nicolas Nabokov “and said the Congress was being run ‘without love’. 
After he had repeated this several times, I remarked that I thought the word 
‘love’ should be reserved for the relation between the sexes.”?! 

Aron recalled his impressions of Oppenheimer from the 1960 conference: 
“Devoured by an internal flame or by the battles he was fighting with himself, he 
tended to take any episode ofhis existence not seriously but tragically. I can see 
him in his room, with his wife, discussing the latest conference presentations 
with me, as though he were disturbed by their possible banality.”*” To others, 
however, it appeared that Oppenheimer and his compatriots had avoided 
banality by succumbing to melodrama. 

If the CCF’s goal was to engage in cultural cold-warfare, fighting Commu- 
nism on the cultural front and asserting Western hegemony, it seemed to Time 
magazine that it was doing a poor job, particularly when it came to advertising 
the benefits of Western capitalism to African and Asian leaders. Time reported 
from Berlin that “the Afro-Asians came expecting leadership, and found only 
hand-wringing.” They came “want[ing] only some cars and some irrigation 
ditches and some good technical ideas from the gloomy Westerners.” Instead, 
“the spokesmen for the sophisticated societies spent most of their time 


The Last Intellectual? 267 


reproaching themselves or apologizing.” The critic Friedrich Luft announced 
that amid West German affluence, “culture is dead.” Raymond Aron lamented 
the weakness of parliamentary rule in France. Mary McCarthy “moaned” 
that “Western literature is the mirror on the ceiling of the whorehouse,” and 


Oppenheimer “apologized for all the wrongs he said science has done.””” 


DEFENDER OF THE FAITH 


Oppenheimer aimed his criticisms at the condition of the culture, rather than 
at politics or policy. He was leery of any involvement in protest or political 
opposition. David Lilienthal recorded in his diary that in late March 1955, 
at a meeting of the Twentieth Century Fund, chairman Adolf Berle raised 
the issue of the crisis over the islands of Quemoy and Matsu in the Taiwan 
(Formosa) Strait and of the Eisenhower administration’s threats to resort to 
the atomic bomb if China attacked the islands. Berle proposed the circulation 
of a petition warning against nuclear brinkmanship. According to Lilienthal, 


Oppenheimer explained that he didn’t think he should sign the state- 
ment. Though agreeing with it, because of the to-do this would cause. 
But his voice was insistent on the point that we should not take a po- 
sition that war over Formosa was necessarily a worse alternative than 
peace under all circumstances; nor did he believe that using A-bombs 
for tactical purposes was not possible, i.e. that they might be used only 
for a limited military purpose rather than spread, necessarily, into mass 
bombing of cities; nor did he think the statement ought to imply that 
thoughtful and careful and intelligent attention to the relevant issues was 


not already being given, in Washington.” 


Despite his exclusion from government, it seems that Oppenheimer easily fell 
back into the habits of his earlier role as scientific-military strategist of the 
winnable nuclear war and apologist for the powers that be. Oppenheimer’s 
intervention deflated the political hopes ofthe assembled group and prevented 
any action. Lilienthal noted, “All these [arguments] were ameliorative of a 
critical tone in the statement, so much so that it was pointed out that if we said 
that we assumed that the Executive Department was proceeding wisely, was 
there any point in making a statement of caution and concern.” As a result, 
no statement was issued.°° 

Oppenheimer also declined an invitation in 1957 from Bertrand Russell to 
attend the first Pugwash conference. This meeting, billed as an “international 


268 Chapter Eight 


exchange of scientists” aimed at reducing Cold War geopolitical tensions 
by building trust between East and West, surely came close to a realization 
of Oppenheimer’s expressed ideal of scientific internationalism as a path to 
peace. But he told Russell that he found himself “somewhat troubled when I 
look at the proposed agenda.” He thought it included too many problems of 
the sort that, “if they can be answered at all, call for the wisdom of historians 
and philosophers rather than the technical knowledge of scientists.” He also 
apparently took umbrage at what he saw as the antinuclear tenor of the 
meeting’s agenda: “Above all, I think that the terms of reference ‘the hazards 
arising from the continuous development ofnuclear weapons’ prejudges where 
the greatest hazards lie, and what course left open to us by the recent past still 
has the best hope of assuring man’s survival and freedom.” Russell replied that 
he could not understand this latter point. “I can’t think,” he said, “that you 
would deny that there are hazards associated with the continued development 
of nuclear weapons.” Although he had been excommunicated from the inner 
circle of the nuclear state, Oppenheimer remained, it seems, a supporter of 
the fundamental direction of its policies. 

That Oppenheimer’s stance in his later years was essentially conciliatory 
and supportive of the American status quo can be seen also in the way in which 
he acted as a kind of cultural envoy for the United States. Despite the fact that 
the U.S. government viewed him as a dangerous Communist, and FBI and 
CIA agents worried that he might defect to the Soviet Union, Oppenheimer 
presented to the rest of the world the civilized face of American intellect 
and culture. Between April and June 1958, Oppenheimer gave six lectures 
on physics at the University of Paris.°” For French liberals, Oppenheimer 
represented a model of the non-Marxist scientific intellectual. Particularly in 
regard to France, this fit with the CCF’s goal, which political scientist Giles 
Scott-Smith described as being “an effort to bolster the damaged European 
tradition of the free-thinking ‘universal’ intellectual and re-launch it in new 
circumstances,” in opposition to Marxism.°° 

The most significant of Oppenheimer’s foreign trips was to Japan for 
two weeks in September 1960. The trip was sponsored by the Committee for 
Intellectual Interchange (CII) ofthe International House ofJapan. On arrivalin 
Tokyo on September 5, Oppenheimer gave a crowded and chaoticimpromptu 
press conference. When asked by a journalist whether he felt remorse for his 
role in building the bomb, he replied, “I do not regret that I had something to 
do with the technical success of the atomic bomb. It isn’t that I don’t feel bad. 
Itis that I don’t feel worse tonight than I did last night.”°? In reply to questions 
about whether he would be visiting Hiroshima, he said that, though he would 


The Last Intellectual? 269 


like to, he would not have time and that it was not on his itinerary: “I have 
no quasi-official duties in Hiroshima.” The atomic bomb was not what he 
wanted to talk about. Instead, he asked the reporters to “stress that Iam glad 
to be here to talk about the things I know we can work on together: science 
and common cultural problems which underlie political problems.”!° 

Oppenheimer’s trip took place against the recent background of large left- 
wing protests and riots in Tokyo in May and June against the signing of anew 
security treaty with the United States. The treaty brought to the fore nationalist 
sentiments and undercurrents of resentment, largely suppressed since the end 
of the war, over the position of Japan as a U.S. protectorate. This boiled up in 
anti-American street protests. Eisenhower had been planning to make a state 
visit to Japan in June. However, when his press secretary, James Hagerty, 
arrived with an advance party, a crowd of eight to ten thousand demonstrators 
blocked his car on the way out of Tokyo airport. Hagerty was trapped in 
the car while demonstrators hammered on it and shouted for him to go 
home. In mid-June, amid American newspaper reports that Japan was on the 
brink of a Communist revolution, and because of the Japanese government’s 
admission that it could not guarantee his safety, Eisenhower canceled his 
trip. The unpopular treaty was ratified in June; immediately afterward, Prime 
Minister Nobusuke Kishi announced his resignation, leading to a restoration 
of outward calm.!°! But tensions in U.S.-Japanese relations would not have 
been far from the surface during Oppenheimer’s visit less than three months 
later. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that he preferred to avoid the topic 
of the atomic bombings and focused on scientific and “common cultural” 
concerns. 

In addition to this highly symbolic timing, Oppenheimer’s visit was po- 
tentially a direct and painful reminder both of wartime defeat and of postwar 
subordination to the United States. This was especially the case because of 
the central place in postwar Japan’s national consciousness of its being the 
only nation to have been the victim of atomic weapons. The Peace Memorial 
Ceremony, held at Hiroshima on August 6 annually from 1947, expressed 
this postwar consciousness and national identity. The sense of atomic vic- 
timization was reinforced by an incident in 1954 when a Japanese fishing 
boat, the Lucky Dragon, was covered with fallout from an American nuclear 
test at Bikini. Less than three months after the incident, more than a million 
signatures were collected in Japan fora petition calling fora nuclear test ban.!” 

During Oppenheimer’s trip, a twenty-one-year-old American antinuclear 
protestor, Tim Reynolds, traveled from Hiroshima to Osaka to meet the 
physicist and express disappointment that he would not be visiting the city on 


270 Chapter Eight 


which the first atomic bomb had been dropped. Oppenheimer then explained 
that his sponsoring body feared that he would receive a hostile reception 
in the city.!"? The young American was the son of Earle Reynolds, who, 
with his family, had made a landmark protest against nuclear testing by 
sailing their yacht, the Phoenix, into the area around the Marshall Islands 
restricted for American nuclear tests. Tim Reynolds’s appeal to Oppenheimer 
to visit Hiroshima made explicit the connection between Oppenheimer’s visit 
to Japan, the current controversy around nuclear testing, and the atomic 
bombings at the end of World War II. And the issue of nuclear weapons 
was, for the Japanese, inseparable from questions about nationhood and their 
relationship to the United States. 

But Oppenheimer hoped to distance his visit from the issue of the atomic 
bomb. He was welcomed to Japan not as the father of the bomb, but as a 
representative of science, of the “pure science” ideal, and of liberal intellectual 
culture. Science was a key motif in the postwar reconstruction of Japan as 
a Western-oriented democracy, allied with America.!°* Oppenheimer’s visit 
was symbolic of that connection. At a time when Japanese intellectuals had 
been at the forefront of opposition to the security treaty, Oppenheimer put 
forward and embodied a model of the intellectual role fusing scientific moder- 
nity with liberal cultural values.'°° His lectures in Japan repeated the lessons 
of the dangers of cultural fragmentation and mass culture and of the necessity 
of elite intellectual community, which he extrapolated from the American 
experience. While Oppenheimer’s vision of the role of the intellectual was 
ostensibly apolitical, its meaning was in fact highly political in the context of 
Cold War culture and relations between the United States and Japan. 

Oppenheimer gave a two-hour lecture on the physics ofelementary particles 
at the Kyoto Institute for Fundamental Physics, but most of his speeches during 
the trip were on the cultural meaning of science and the relationship between 
science and the broader culture. For example, to a gathering of more than 
a thousand in Osaka, he gave a two-and-a-half-hour talk titled “Tradition 
and Discovery”; in Tokyo, he spoke on “the future of civilization in the 
scientific age.” Oppenheimer was recognized as a spokesman for science 
and an interpreter of scientific culture. He was described by one Japanese 
newspaper as a “slender and somewhat aristocratic scholar.” A student who 
attended Oppenheimer’s Kyoto talk on elementary particles remarked, “He 
spoke in a deep tone as if he were reading a poem.”!0° 

On September 9, Oppenheimer spoke in Tokyo’s Bunkyo Public Hall 
for the International House, on the topic of science and culture. The talk re- 
peated Oppenheimer’s standard themes—the growth and specialization of the 


The Last Intellectual? 271 


sciences, the increasing divorce between science and common understanding, 
and the decline of the “public sector”—and concluded with a discussion of 
“intellectual community” versus “mass culture.” Condemning the cultural 
gluttony of mass society, he said that cultural values needed to be nurtured 
within an intellectual community. This meant, first, protecting communities 
of specialists (scientific or artistic): “We have, all of us, to preserve our compe- 
tence in our own professions . . . This is, in fact, our only anchor in honesty.” 
Second, it meant bridging the divisions between specialists to “reknit” an 
overarching intellectual community. As he began his speech, Oppenheimer 
apologized that he would be talking about what he knew: American and West- 
ern European, rather than Japanese, culture. But he suggested that as science 
and advanced industrialism became global, this Western experience would be 
increasingly generalizable. America’s cultural problems were common ones, 
as were the solutions. Oppenheimer appropriated the discourse of the New 
York intellectuals and American Cold War liberalism and made it a univer- 
sal discourse. As a gift to his Japanese host, CII chairman Yasaka Takagi, 
Oppenheimer sent a copy of the Partisan Review. '° 

The paradox of Oppenheimer as security risk at home and American 
cultural ambassador abroad was partially resolved when he was officially re- 
habilitated during President Kennedy’s term. Oppenheimer was a figure of 
admiration among the young technocrats who flocked to work for the new 
administration. He was granted the AEC’s Fermi Award on December 2, 1963. 
The assassination of Kennedy the previous month meant that the prize was 
conferred by Lyndon Johnson, who called the decision to award it to Op- 
penheimer “one of President Kennedy’s most important acts.”'°’ However, 
though officially rehabilitated, Oppenheimer was still barred from secret gov- 
ernment work. As the New York Herald Tribune put it, the award was “an 
honor, not an indemnity.”!° Nevertheless, it signaled that he was no longer a 
pariah. Oppenheimer described his reaction to being chosen for the award by 
saying, “Most of us look to the good opinion of our colleagues and to the good 
will and confidence of our Government. I am no exception.”!!° Oppenheimer 
never saw himself in an outsider role of critical intellectual. Rather, he saw 
himself as a servant of science, and a servant of power. Looking down from 
Olympian heights on mass society, Oppenheimer aligned himself with the 
elite and courted the powers and the powerful. 

In these final years of his life, Oppenheimer constituted himself‘as a public 
moralist, albeit a highly abstract one when compared with figures such as 
Einstein or Russell. He told a Look magazine journalist in 1958 of his concern 
about “the erosion of the Puritan ethic, which has been replaced by a deeply 


272 Chapter Eight 


complacent view of human nature and of ourselves.”!!! And in 1963, he 
commented on the immorality of war for the same magazine, in an article 
entitled “Morality USA: Have Bigness, the Bomb, and the Buck Destroyed 
Our Old Morality?”!” 

In shaping his persona as a moralist, Oppenheimer looked to the figure 
of Niels Bohr as a source of inspiration. Bohr presented for Oppenheimer 
an example of how the scientist could have an authority beyond the merely 
technical. Bohr was a visionary, but he was not overtly political. He acted 
not as part of a campaign, but on his own, his force deriving from his own 
personal moral authority and intellectual insight. Oppenheimer, socially and 
politically isolated, must have been attracted by this image of a lone figure, 
a philosopher in exile (as Bohr was during the war) who nevertheless wove 
science into a vision of moral and social renewal.!! 

In an article for the New York Review of Books, Oppenheimer emphasized 
Bohr’s prescience during the war in foreseeing an arms race with the Soviet 
Union and his failed attempt to forestall it through the advocacy of an “open 
world.”!'4 Bohr had offered a way to avoid the trap of the Cold War and arms 
race. Oppenheimer wrote, “If we had acted wisely, clearly, and discreetly in 
accordance with his views, at the least we might have been freed of our rather 
blasphemous sense of omnipotence and secrecy. We might have turned our 
society and our life toward a healthier vision of a future worth living for, an 
increased dedication to knowledge and truth.”!"° 

Bohr was misunderstood by the politicians, and therefore this opportu- 
nity was lost. Margaret Gowing’s official history of the British atomic energy 
program, published shortly before Oppenheimer’s article, had revealed that 
Churchill and Roosevelt regarded Bohr as a potential traitor.'!'® The parallel 
between these suspicions and the fate of Oppenheimer was not lost on the 
press at the time of these revelations and as Oppenheimer emerged as Bohr’s 
public champion.!!” Oppenheimer’s views on Bohr were widely reported. 
But Oppenheimer was embittered by what he perceived to be his lack of 
influence. He thought that his views were being suppressed. Despite the 
fact that the New York Review had featured the title of his piece in bold red 
characters on its front page, Oppenheimer wrote to the editor accusing him 
of having done “your best to conceal the Bohr story.” The editor wrote back 
assuring Oppenheimer that it was “the most important thing that we’ve ever 
published” and pointing out that stories about the article had been printed “in 
dozens of papers all over the country.”!!® But although Oppenheimer could 
still make headlines, he lacked a clear a clear sense of what sort of interven- 
tions he should make in public life, what role he could play. He was unwilling 


The Last Intellectual? 273 


to engage in political controversy and instead concerned himself with issues 
of culture and morality. But he seemed unclear about how this role as moralist 
could be related to his professional identity as a scientist. 

In his January 1962 Whidden lecture titled “War and the Nations,” at 
McMaster University in Ontario, Canada, Oppenheimer still regarded the 
responsibility of the scientist as a narrowly restricted ethic of awareness, 
the duty “to give an honest account of what we all know together, know in 
the way in which I know about the Lorentz contraction and wave-particle 
duality, know from deep scientific conviction and experience. We think that 
we should give that information openly whenever that is possible, that we 
should give to our governments in secret when the governments ask for it, 
or, even if the governments do not ask for it, that they should be made aware 
of it.”!!9 As an example of this responsibility, he reminded his audience of 
Einstein’s letter to Roosevelt in 1939 apprising the president of the possibility 
of atomic weapons. It is ironic that Oppenheimer should have taken this as a 
model of responsibility, for Einstein himself deeply regretted even this small 
involvement in the making of the atomic bomb.'”° Einstein’s understanding 
of responsibility led him, after the war, to take on the role of an outsider 
intellectual critic, in open dissent against Cold War politics. In contrast, 
Oppenheimer was skeptical about whether a public sphere in which one 
could participate politically as an intellectual even existed. Portraying public 
culture as anti-intellectual and stultifying, he was instead attracted by the 
notion of retreating into a small and elite circle that could protect and carry 
high culture through a dark time. 

The CCF provided for Oppenheimer some realization of this ideal. Its 
meetings were a key forum for his musings on the relationship between 


science and culture. !*! 


The group actualized his ideal of intimate discussion 
among elites as a way of repairing cultural fragmentation. The most complete 
expression of this was the Seven Springs Farm conferences at the Mount Kisco, 
New York, estate of Agnes Meyer, widow of Eugene Meyer, the former owner 
ofthe Washington Post. Oppenheimer was taken with the “open, hilly country” 
and with the house, which he described to Nicolas Nabokov as “extremely 
fine, in perfect taste, embellished with what can only be regarded as a great deal 
of loot in the way of art from China, and a good deal of modern European art 
as well.”!?? Organized by Oppenheimer and partly supported by the CCF, 
the first “intimate and informal ‘Rencontre’” took place in the summer of 
1963, with the Princeton Jefferson scholar Julian Boyd; philosophers Stuart 
Hampshire from Oxford and Jeanne Hersch from Geneva; University of 
Edinburgh psychiatrist Morris Carstairs; diplomat George Kennan; architect 


274 Chapter Eight 


Wallace K. Harrison; Los Alamos veteran George Kistiakowsky, the first head 
of the presidential Scientific Advisory Committee; the poet Robert Lowell; 
Nicolas Nabokov, who helped plan the event; and hostess Agnes Meyer.'”? 
Numbers were kept below fifteen in order to, as Meyer put it, “maintain in- 
timacy of discussion.” !*4 

The theme of the conference was allusively suggested to invitees with an 


extract of Oppenheimer prose: 


For myself, there are at least two things that I should look for: an image 
of the world that responds to the changing needs and hopes of men 
withoutresort to the institution of war, indeed withoutits possibility; and 
a world in which, despite the vastness, the complexity, the rapid change 
in the circumstances of our life, and the knowledge which underlies it, 
the scope and depth of human responsibility and human nobility grow 


instead of shrinking.'?° 


Oppenheimer chaired the discussion, but, as Hersch put it, he “was hardly a 
‘chairman’ in any conventional sense. He simply, from time to time, suggested 
a neglected aspect of a question, softened a particular dogmatism, cast doubt 
on such and such an alleged bit of evidence or dropped a word indicating a 
complexity which might lie hidden beneath an over-simplification resulting 
from facile hope or impatient pessimism.” Meyer had no doubt that the 
event relied on Oppenheimer’s personal and intellectual “leadership.” And 
Oppenheimer’s talk, in which he dwelled on Bohr and the meanings of 
complementarity, was punctuated by her comments of “That’s lovely Robert” 
and “That’s wonderful Robert.” She wrote to him that when she later read 
and reread the script of his talk, “I re-lived the deep emotions with which I 
heard you speak. And yet, there was something lost because the warmth of 
your voice and personality gave the experience of listening to you an ambience 
which cannot be recaptured.” She later wrote to Kitty about the annual Seven 
Springs Farm event that “I cannot imagine our meeting without Robert.”!”° 
The meetings at Seven Springs Farm instantiated Oppenheimer’s ideal 
of a small and intimate intellectual community in close contact with men 
of power, able to exert behind-the-scenes influence on the cultural-political 
agenda of the times. It was this ideal of intellectual life that was behind the 
critical tone of Oppenheimer’s UNESCO lecture of December 1965, given in 
honor of Einstein on the fiftieth anniversary of the general theory of relativity. 
Oppenheimer began by saying that he wanted to “dispel the clouds of myth” 
that surrounded Einstein. Most of his talk was an attempt to break through 


The Last Intellectual? 275 


the mystique of genius by showing how Einstein’s originality was located in 
and grew out of his appreciation for the tradition of physics as a science. 
Oppenheimer sought to relocate Einstein’s genius within an understanding 
of science as a community with history and traditions. He also discussed 
Einstein’s arguments with Bohr and his skepticism about quantum mechanics; 
in Oppenheimer’s view, this skepticism led him to “failure” in the intellectual 
project of his later years, in which, Oppenheimer argued, Einstein “lost most 
contact with the profession of physics.” His portrait of Einstein was informed 
by his view that science was necessarily the work of community, rather than 
of the individual genius or “lone worker.”!?” 

Even as Oppenheimer paid his respects, it was clear that Einstein was a 
discomforting figure for him. Oppenheimer could not help but come across 
as snobbish and condescending when he said that Einstein “was wholly with- 
out sophistication and wholly without worldliness.” Einstein has often been 
described as having a childlike innocence; coming from someone else, this 
kind of description might have been a compliment. Coming from Oppen- 
heimer, so obviously proud of his own sophistication, the observation about 
Einstein’s lack of worldliness was far from being praise. “I think,” Oppen- 
heimer said, “that in England people would have said that he did not have 
much ‘background’, and in America that he lacked ‘education.’” Pais wrote 
to Oppenheimer that the remarks had made him “slightly uncomfortable.” 
Oppenheimer regretted that “a number of colleagues,” since reading of his 
comments in the New York Times, “have suggested that I had been out of 
my mind.” The executor of Einstein’s estate, Otto Nathan, said that he was 
“seriously disturbed” by the talk. In light of Oppenheimer’s assertion that 
Einstein’s early papers were “full of errata,” Nathan no longer trusted Op- 
penheimer and the Institute for Advanced Study to oversee publication of 
a new edition of Einstein’s papers. The New York Times reported that Op- 
penheimer said that correcting these errors had delayed publication of the 
volume for ten years. Nathan was outraged by the idea that the papers might 
need “correcting.” Oppenheimer wrote to Einstein’s secretary, Helen Dukas, 
that when he saw the New York Times article, “I shuddered for you.”!*° He 
enclosed the original text of his speech, but while it did not include the “ten 
years” remark, it is rather unlikely that reading it would have made her feel a 
great deal better. 

Oppenheimer was wrestling with the example of Einstein, who, for a 
great many people, embodied the moral qualities—particularly the quality of 
ahimsa—that Oppenheimer claimed had vanished from the culture. But Ein- 
stein was, as Oppenheimer put it, “without power”: “He had a deep distrust 


276 Chapter Eight 


of power; he did not have that convenient and natural converse with states- 
men and men of power that was quite appropriate to [Ernest] Rutherford and 
to Bohr.”!”? That, from Oppenheimer, was also a criticism. Einstein was in 
many ways a living contradiction of Oppenheimer’s conception of the role 
of the intellectual. Yet in another sense, the problem was that Einstein was 
the realization of the uncompromised ideal, an ideal that Oppenheimer could 
not himself achieve. Einstein made Oppenheimer’s more ethically equivocal 
example look like a poor compromise. In particular, Oppenheimer was made 
uncomfortable by the fact that Eimstein did not apparently value the thing for 
which Oppenheimer himself had given up so much in order to court—power. 

Bohr had failed to convert the wartime British and American leadership 
to his vision for world order; rather, he had incurred their suspicion. Op- 
penheimer had been humiliated and cast aside by the state that he served. 
Yet Oppenheimer continued to aspire to meaningful and influential “con- 
verse” with the powerful, and this aspiration shaped the intellectual, social, 
and political allegiances of his later years. The portrait of the communitarian 
characteristics of scientific and intellectual life that Oppenheimer painted in 
his writings and speeches was ostensibly apolitical. But its meaning was in fact 
political through and through. Oppenheimer’s view of science fit perfectly 
with pluralism, the form of liberal political thought dominant in American 
academic and intellectual life after the war and at least until the late 1960s. 
To list the key thinkers associated with pluralism is to give a roll call of 
the major American political and social scientists of the period—including 
figures such as Daniel Bell, Nathan Glazer, Richard Hofstadter, William 
Kornhauser, Seymour Martin Lipset, Talcott Parsons, David Riesman, and 
Edward Shils, among others.'”° Pluralism did not mean simply tolerance for 
diversity. Rather, as political theorist Michael Rogin argued, it was a theory 
of social order that expressed the anxieties of a generation of American liberal 
intellectuals, who saw liberal democracy as a fragile accomplishment, threat- 
ened by the totalitarian impulses of mass society. The pluralists were obsessed 
with how to promote a stable capitalist economy and a vibrant civil society 
composed of associations, rather than a more volatile mass.'°! 

In particular, pluralism was a response to the rise of McCarthyism—which 
the pluralists interpreted as a radical movement, deeply rooted historically 
in American populism or agrarian radicalism, and an attack by disgruntled 
“nouveaux” on established elites. The intellectuals saw it as a movement of 
mass society against the establishment and as hostile to the existing social 
order. As in Hofstadter’s famous study of anti-intellectualism, the pluralists 
saw the problem of McCarthyism as one of defending the cultural authority of 


The Last Intellectual? 277 


the elite against the pressures of popular Know-Nothingism. A disinterested 
elite was needed to preserve liberal democracy against the tyranny of the 
majority. The pluralists looked to people like themselves as the vanguards of 
social order and civilized values. !°* 

Oppenheimer’s defensive view of science as a fragile accomplishment of a 
cultural elite, threatened by the homogenizing trends of mass society, meshed 
perfectly with the pluralist worldview. The intimate converse of a cultural 
and political elite, which Oppenheimer found in the CCF and at Seven 
Springs Farm, was the realization of his ideal of an elite preserving cultural 
values against a hostile mass society. Rogin argued that the pluralist view 
of McCarthyism as a populist revolt of the masses was a distortion. In fact, 
McCarthyism drew on traditional American conservatism and relied on the 
acquiescence, and very often the support, of the elite. The Oppenheimer case 
clearly instantiates this elite acquiescence and support. McCarthy lurked in the 
background. But it was Eisenhower who ordered Oppenheimer’s dismissal, 
Admiral Strauss’s Atomic Energy Commission that carried out the purge, and 
scientific colleagues, such as Teller and Alvarez, who twisted the knife. Yet 
almost immediately after the hearings, Oppenheimer wove the event into what 
was essentially the liberal pluralist narrative of the condition of the intellectual, 
besieged by mass society. In so doing, he proceeded both to muddy the 
understanding of his own “case” and to choose a largely conservative rather 
than a critical intellectual role. 

In the pluralist diagnosis, the intellectual, threatened from below, needed 
to be nurtured within the elite. The CCF was the home in which many 
pluralist intellectuals, such as Shils, Riesman, and Bell, among others, found 
this elite community. As Oppenheimer became a spokesman for the cultural 
condition of the intellectual, he also cemented his ties with that organization. 
However, the cultural, political, and military conflicts of the 1960s threatened 
to fragment this liberal elite milieu in which Oppenheimer felt comfortable in 
his later years. !°° 

The Vietnam War gave rise not only to increasing revulsion against Amer- 
ican military might, but also to difficult questions regarding the compact 
between the liberal intelligentsia and American global power, and between 
ideological anti-Communism and aggressive militarism. On April 27, 1966, 
as part of a series of exposé articles on CIA covert operations, the New York 
Times revealed the extent to which the agency had used the distribution of 
funds to influence academic and intellectual activity. Among the revelations 
was that the CCF and its magazine, Encounter, had been bankrolled by the 
CIA. In the ensuing controversy, Oppenheimer came to the defense of the 


278 Chapter Eight 


CCF. In a letter published in the New York Times on May 9, Oppenheimer, 
Kennan, Galbraith, and Schlesinger stated that in their experience with the 
CCF, “there has been no question regarding the independence of its policy, 
the integrity of its officials, or the value of its contribution. In our experi- 
ence the congress ... has been an entirely free body, responsive only to the 
wishes of its members and collaborators and the decisions of its Executive 
Committee.”!>4 The statement gave the impression of denying CIA involve- 
ment without literally doing so. Journalist Dwight Macdonald called it “an 
evasion, not a lie, but not meeting the issue either.” Stuart Hampshire, in 
Princeton at the time, said that “Oppenheimer was amazed that I was amazed, 
and amazed that I was upset at the New York Times revelations ... Oppen- 
heimer wasn’t amazed because he was half in it himself. He knew full well. He 
was part of the apparat [Hampshire’s term for the CCF’s controlling group]. 
I don’t think it bothered him morally. If you’re imperially-minded, which the 
Americans were at the time, you don’t think much about whether it’s wrong or 
not. It’s like the imperial British in the Nineteenth Century. Youjust do it.”!* 

Oppenheimer’s complacency regarding CIA involvement in intellectual 
life is revealing, for the CCF was the closest instantiation for Oppenheimer 
of his ideal of intimate, cohesive, and influential intellectual community. This 
intimacy and cohesiveness was disrupted by the Vietnam War. Agnes Meyer 
worried that the Seven Springs Farm rencontre of 1966, aimed at under- 
standing the “growing lack of sympathy” of European intellectuals toward 
the United States, might be marred by a “knockdown fight about Viet Nam.” 
Since a number of the attendees, most prominently Senator William Ful- 
bright, were against the war, Meyer was worried about the meeting appearing 
“like an anti-administration meeting.” She herself was against the war, but 
she felt unable to speak out because of ties to the Johnson administration. 
Oppenheimer promised her “not to say a word on the subject,” although he, 
too, was uneasy about U.S. involvement in the war.!°° 

In December 1966, in an article for a special edition titled “Europe and 
the United States Today” of the Herald Tribune’s European edition, Op- 
penheimer gave voice to his concerns. Characteristically, his wording was 
oblique, and the argument was framed in terms of culture and morality rather 
than as direct political criticism. His premise was that the cultural problems 
of the age were shared by Europe and America. At a time when the world was 
divided along the Cold War axis of East and West, Oppenheimer traced the 
historical roots of America and American freedom to the cultural and religious 
tradition of Western Europe. But this tradition was now being tested both in 
Europe and in America. Oppenheimer said, “I doubt whether, at this writing, 


The Last Intellectual? 2:79 


there is among us any wide conviction that France, or the United States, 
Germany or England, now has a government even remotely competent to the 
problems of the time, or in fact has available for those problems the human 
resources, the insight, the wisdom and skill, and the underlying stoic confi- 
dence for which they call.” The article was suffused with a sense of entropy 
and decline. So it was with “haunting nostalgia” that Oppenheimer quoted 
Lincoln’s belief that “the past actions and influences of the United States were 
generally regarded as having been beneficial toward mankind.” Oppenheimer 
observed that few were likely to think that about current U.S. foreign policy. 
Vietnam represented both the sacrifice of America’s moral innocence and a 
historical connection between new American and old European colonialism. 
No longer an immaculate “City upon a Hill,” America now shared in the sins 
of the Old World. Oppenheimer said, “The sense of what it is like to live 
with a government held wrong in a moral matter is a new and desperate bond 
between European peoples and those of the United States.”!7 

It was in the cultural and intellectual bond between America and Western 
Europe that Oppenheimer placed his faith. In a reference to the traditional 
role of the intellectual in speaking truth to power, Oppenheimer concluded, 
“This is a time in need, not of delusion but of hope, when we, not least in 
Europe and America, who have taught hope so willingly and widely, must 
bear true witness.” Oppenheimer portrayed the intellectual as a carrier of 
moral values forgotten in a secular world. His article was a reaffirmation of his 
view of the defensive role of an enlightened elite, which had been central to 
his thought since the hearings. '°% 

Oppenheimer accepted a position on the CCF’s board of directors in 
autumn 1966 and was due to attend the board meeting in March of the 
following year. Indeed, he told CCF executive director Michael Josselson, 
“There is nothing to which I more look forward than playing a part in 
the Congress’ new life with you and other friends.” Josselson was eager 
that Oppenheimer’s Herald Tribune article provide a basis for discussion at 
the meeting. In a memorandum, he informed board members that “recently, 
Robert Oppenheimer (in a statement criticizing U.S. involvement in Vietnam) 
castigated most of the Western governments for their ncompetence in the face 
of major problems of our time.” Josselson suggested to Oppenheimer that they 
distribute in advance of the meeting a copy of Oppenheimer’s article and at 
the meeting “have you comment as briefly as you wish on how you see 
the Congress’s role in the framework of your statement.”!°9 By February, 
however, Oppenheimer, undergoing treatment for throat cancer, was in too 
much pain, and his speech and hearing were impaired. On February 13, 


280 Chapter Fight 


only five days before his death, he wrote to Aron, “I think that it would be 
appropriate to regard my seat on the Board as empty, though I hate to put 


these words in writing.” !“° 


KNOWING SIN 


Oppenheimer’s lasting public image has been shaped above all by the notion 
that he suffered from profound guilt and self-reproach for his work on the 
bomb. However, Oppenheimer was always deeply uncomfortable with this 
perception. As guest of honor at a reception hosted by Norris and Lois 
Bradbury at Los Alamos in 1955, Oppenheimer was told to his face by the 
teenage daughter of one of the laboratory’s explosives experts, “I think you’re 
a saint.” When he asked why she would say that, the young woman replied, 
“Well, because you had second thoughts.” As she remembered the incident, 
“He was just stricken. I could see his face change ... The idea that I had 
touched him really scared me.”!4! Oppenheimer was to frequently confront 
the notion that, of all the atomic scientists, it was he who experienced real 
moral pain and who struggled with inner demons. 

Robert Jungk’s account of the building of the atomic bomb, Brighter Than 
a Thousand Suns, which appeared in English in 1958, most widely popularized 
the image of Oppenheimer as regretting his work on the bomb. Oppenheimer 
was the central figure of the book, and the idea that “the physicists have 
known sin” provided the core theme in Jungk’s narrative. The book is also 
most responsible for bringing to public consciousness Oppenheimer’s quo- 
tation “I am become Death,” as an iconic statement of the nuclear age. For 
Jungk, Oppenheimer represented the tragic corruption of science by power. 
Jungk frequently turned to Oppenheimer for a diagnosis of the disease; he 
quoted Oppenheimer as saying, “We did the devil’s work.”!? But he saw 
Oppenheimer—asserting that the scientist must follow what is “technically 
sweet”—also as the chief symbol of that sin. Oppenheimer, for Jungk, symbol- 
ized the duality of modern scientific culture, in the conflict between its liberal 
humanist ideal and its increasingly technological and authoritarian direction. 

In Jungk’s narrative, there was a golden time and place—“the beautiful 
years” of Gottingen in the 1920s. But this was destroyed by the rise of Nazism 
in Germany and the flight of physicists into the hands of the U.S. Army. 
For Jungk, it was the German scientists who remained true to the humanistic 
spirit. In a chapter titled “The Strategy of Prevention,” Jungk uncritically 
presented Werner Heisenberg’s statement that he and his colleagues had 
secretly sabotaged the German effort to produce an atomic bomb. He also 


The Last Intellectual? 281 


published Heisenberg’s claim that on his visit to Copenhagen in the autumn 
of 1941, he had attempted to persuade Bohr to cooperate in what he hoped 
would be an international scientific conspiracy to prevent either side from 
acquiring atomic weapons. The brotherhood of physics would guard its secret 
knowledge from those who would use it for ill. According to Jungk, Heisenberg 
and his colleagues “obeyed the voice of conscience and attempted to prevent 
the construction of atomic bombs, while their professional colleagues in 
the democracies, who had no coercion to fear, with very few exceptions 
concentrated their whole energies on production of the new weapon.”!? 

As part of the research for his book, Jungk met with Haakon Chevalier, then 
living in Paris. On reading the transcript of the security hearings, Chevalier had 
become convinced that the root of his having been blacklisted since 1943 was 
the “cock-and-bull story” that Oppenheimer had told to Manhattan Project 
security officers. What the transcript suggested, and what Chevalier was now 
sure of, was that when Oppenheimer named Chevalier as the intermediary, 
he had not retracted his fabrication that three Manhattan Project scientists 
had been approached for information by this intermediary. In other words, 
Oppenheimer had named Chevalier only to implicate him in a complex 
espionage conspiracy, which Oppenheimer had himself invented. 

Chevalier had all but worshipped Oppenheimer before the war and contin- 
ued to admire him afterward, often seeking the physicist’s advice and help. For 
example, Oppenheimer put him in touch with Jeffries Wyman, who was scien- 
tific adviser to the U.S. embassy in Paris, for advice on his passport situation. 
In December 1953, Chevalier introduced Oppenheimer to André Malraux, 
whom Chevalier had translated into English. Wyman had the impression that 
“Chevalier’s two idols at that time were Malraux and Oppenheimer, and he 
brought them together, as he thought, as an almost astronomical conjunction.” 
The result was disappointing; Oppenheimer said, “Malraux has some under- 
standing as to what science isn’t. But he has no conception of what science 
is.”'4 After the hearings, however, Chevalier was left with a far greater disap- 
pointment. During all the years when Chevalier had sought Oppenheimer’s 
counsel and understanding about his security troubles, joblessness, and mari- 
tal breakdown, Oppenheimer had never told him about the “tissue oflies” that 
had implicated Chevalier in a serious espionage conspiracy. Chevalier was left 
with a smoldering sense of betrayal. He opened to Jungk his correspondence 
with Oppenheimer and gave him his side of the “Chevalier incident.”!* 

Chevalier also channeled his bitterness into two books of his own. The first 
was a novel, The Man Who Would Be God, published in 1959. The protag- 
onist, physicist Sebastian Bloch—clearly modeled on Oppenheimer—was a 


282 Chapter Eight 


Dr. Frankenstein, dehumanized by the atomic “monster” that he had created. 
Chevalier followed this in 1965 with Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friend- 
shup, an account of their relationship that gave his own side of the notorious 
“Chevalier incident” and his own interpretation of Oppenheimer’s “defects 
of character.” Chevalier surmised that buried deep somewhere in Oppen- 
heimer’s youth was the source of his combined insecurity and arrogance, a 
deep-rooted psychological flaw that set him on a tragic path. It was Jungk, 
Chevalier said, “who helped me to achieve the final and decisive insight into 
Oppenheimer’s character ... He forced upon me the recognition that the de- 
fect of character . . . must have existed in him from the beginning.”!“° For both 
Jungk and Chevalier, Oppenheimer was a classic tragic figure. Both aimed to 
find and describe the psychological flaw in Oppenheimer’s personality at the 
same time that they treated Oppenheimer as a symbol of a Faustian tragedy 
of the atomic scientists in general. To understand Oppenheimer, they were 
saying, was to understand the situation of the modern scientist. 

Jungk was also an important influence for Hear Kipphardt, whose play 
Inder Sache }. Robert Oppenheimer (In the matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer) 
first appeared in German in 1964. The play was a dramatization of the hear- 
ings, composed almost entirely of verbatim extracts from the official transcript. 
However, Kipphardt was able to skillfully transform the meaning of the event 
by careful clipping of the transcript, as well as by the interjection of fiction- 
alized soliloquies by the major figures and the addition into the proceedings 
of relevant statements made in other contexts by these figures. Kipphardt 
transformed the hearings from a matter of loyalty and disloyalty to a matter of 
morality. He constructed a trial in which the central issue was the immorality of 
the scientists’ role in producing the bomb and in the destruction of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki. Whereas in the actual proceedings Oppenheimer was driven 
to admit that he had been “an idiot” insofar as he had deceived military se- 
curity officers, more important for Kipphardt was Oppenheimer’s statement, 
now injected into the proceedings themselves, that “we [the physicists] have 
known sin.”!47 

The play ends with a soliloquy by Oppenheimer in which he wonders 
aloud “whether we were not perhaps traitors to the spirit of sclence when we 
handed over the results of our research to the military, without considering the 
consequences.” To Kipphardt’s Oppenheimer, it seemed that “the actions 
the Board hold against me were closer to the idea of science than were the 
services which I have been praised for.” And the playwright had his character 
express deep regret for his work on the bomb: “We have spent years of our 


The Last Intellectual? 283 


lives in developing ever sweeter means of destruction, we have been doing 
the work of the military and I feel in my very bones that this was wrong.”!“ 

Kipphardt therefore transformed Oppenheimer from a relatively passive 
figure, which he appeared to be in the hearings themselves, into a far more 
forceful and powerful character, a humanist critic of the bomb that he himself 
had created. Kipphardt achieved this transformation by using statements that 
Oppenheimer had made in various other contexts. In Kipphardt’s rendition, 
Oppenheimer was placing himself on trial. Oppenheimer the humanist was 
wrestling with, and ultimately exorcising, Oppenheimer the technocrat. 

In a tense correspondence with Kipphardt, Oppenheimer accused the 
playwright of misrepresenting him and of being generally cavalier with the his- 
torical record. Conveying a deferential and respectful tone in formal German, 
the playwright was at pains to win Oppenheimer’s goodwill. Kipphardt in- 
sisted on the difference between a play and a historical document. And he 
tried to impress on Oppenheimer that the playwright’s concern had to be with 
drama and with capturing the essence, rather than all the factual details, of 
the historical events.'4? Above all, Oppenheimer was incensed at the play’s 
soliloquy in which Kipphardt had Oppenheimer express regret for working 
on the bomb. Oppenheimer wrote to Kipphardt, 


You make me say things which I did not and do not believe. Even this 
September in Geneva, during a conference of the Recontres de Genéve, 
I was asked by the Canon van Kamp whether now, knowing the results, 
I would again do what I did during the war: participate in a responsible 
way in the making of atomic weapons. To this I answered yes. When a 
voice in the audience angrily asked “Even after Hiroshima?” I repeated 


my yes. 


And he told the playwright, “It seems to me you may well have forgotten 
Guernica, Dachau, Coventry, Belsen, Warsaw, Dresden, Tokyo. I have not.” 
He also threatened to sue.!°” 

Oppenheimer described Kipphardt’s textas “really dreadful,” “miserable,” 
“sordid,” and even “anti-American.” He was marginally happier with the 1965 
French-language adaptation of the play, Le Dosster Oppenheimer, by Jean 
Vilar; he thought it took less dramatic license. But he nevertheless felt that 
“the playwrights have failed to study the [original security hearings | transcript, 
and that they have been guided more by Robert Jungk’s mendacious book, and 
perhaps by some things Chevalier has written.”!°! He told a Washington Post 


284 Chapter Eight 


interviewer that the play “turned the whole damned farce into a tragedy.”!* 


Oppenheimer’s scientific colleagues and associates from the CCF also pub- 
licly came to his defense. The representation of Oppenheimer was a matter 
in which these groups had a collective stake. Victor Weisskopf, now director 
of the European nuclear physics laboratory CERN, emphasized to Oppen- 
heimer that “your name ... after all is considered a symbol of the scientific 
community.”!° 

By the end of 1965, Oppenheimer’s reaction had mellowed somewhat. 
He told Kipphardt that “the passage of time” had made him regret being 
“unduly harsh and unkind” in his initial reaction, and he acknowledged that 
“you meant me no harm.”!>4 Nevertheless, Oppenheimer continued to be 
privately bitter about the play. 

Oppenheimer’s former student David Bohm wrote to him from England 
late in 1966, expressing concern about Kipphardt’s play (which had recently 
appeared in a London theater) and about the fact that Oppenheimer often 
appeared in public to be suffering from bad conscience: “I have also seen 
some television programmes in which you appeared, in an account of the Los 
Alamos project and its consequences. I was rather disturbed especially by a 
statement you made, indicating a feeling of guilt on your part. I feel it to be 
a waste of the life that is left to you to be caught up in such guilt feelings.” 
Bohm tried to impress on Oppenheimer the futility of this sort of angst, “since 
whatever happens, you are what you are.”!”° 

Oppenheimer replied to Bohm, “The play and such things have also been 
rattling around for a long time. What I have never done is to express regret 
for doing what I did and could at Los Alamos; in fact, on varied and recurrent 
occasions, I have reaffirmed my sense that, with all the black and white, that 
was something that I did not regret.” Oppenheimer drafted but did not send 
a more intimate letter, in which he added, “My principle [sec] remaining 
disgust with Kipphardt’s text is the long and totally improvised final speech I 
am supposed to have made, which indeed affirms such regret. My own feelings 
about responsibility and guilt have always had to do with the present, and so 
far in this life that has been more than enough to occupy me.”!°° 

Oppenheimer projected a generalized guilt without a firm object. In his 
talk at Seven Springs Farm in 1963, he veered from a discussion of Bohr’s 
notion of complementarity to an assessment of his own personal failings: “I 
hardly took any action, hardly did anything, or failed to do anything, whether 
it was a paper on physics, or a lecture, or how I read a book, how I talked toa 
friend, how I loved, that did not arouse in me a very great sense of revulsion 
and of wrong.”!>7 Oppenheimer’s sense of guilt was intensely personal and 


The Last Intellectual? 285 


self-absorbed. He made apparent that he was a man wracked by guilt and 
self-doubt, yet he pulled back from a repudiation of the bomb. It was a guilt 
that he would not allow to be attached to any particular source or site. Hence 
his comment in Japan that he felt no worse on arriving there than previously. 
In 1961, he even went so far as to say, “I carry no weight on my conscience,” 
in reference to the atomic bombings. For, he said, the use of science was a 
problem for government, not for the scientists.!°° 

Oppenheimer seemed to be in a pendulum swing of guilt for the scientist’s 
original sin, periodically assuaged by a sense of the redeeming qualities of the 
scientific vocation. Wyman thought that Oppenheimer in his later years “was 
almost reveling in his feeling of guilt about the bomb.” But at the same time, 
“at was obviously a great achievement and a very important thing in his life . . . 
and there was a kind of play back and forth between these two attitudes.” 15° 
This oscillation is understandable when one considers that it was the public 
identification of Oppenheimer with the bomb that was largely the source of his 
postwar status and power. Even after the hearings, his past role at Los Alamos 
was essential to his status as spokesman for modern science and, more broadly, 
for the condition of humanity in the modern “atomic age.” For that reason, he 
could not, without maiming himself, separate himself from the weapon that 
had so strongly defined who he was. Paradoxically, his professions of guilt 
further cemented his public association with the bomb. As John von Neumann 
observed, “Some people profess guilt to claim credit for the sin.”!©° Yet from 
the end of the war onward, Oppenheimer had also sought to be a spokesman 
for the values of “pure science,” and after the hearings he had laid claim to 
a role as general intellectual and cultural critic. These roles, as spokesman 
for science and for intellectual culture more generally, required that he not 
be identified wholly with the bomb—hence his frequent defenses of a notion 
of vocation that made the “uses” of science a matter for the politician, not 
the scientist. Thus, Oppenheimer both embraced and repudiated the bomb, 
often simultaneously. 

In a CBS television interview to mark the twentieth anniversary of Hi- 
roshima, Oppenheimer reiterated the official justification for the bombing— 
that it was done to prevent “a slaughter of Americans and Japanese on a 
massive scale”—and that the wartime American leaders, such as General Mar- 
shall and Secretary Stimson, had arrived at the decision “in good faith with the 
best evidence that they then had.” When the interviewer suggested that “you 
and many like you who brought the bomb into being still seem to suffer ... 
from [a] bad conscience about it,” Oppenheimer answered by returning to 
his statement that “the physicists have known sin.” “I didn’t mean by that,” 


286 Chapter Eight 


he said, “that the deaths were caused as a result of our work. I meant that we 
had known the sin of pride. We had turned to effect . . . the course of man’s 
history. We had the pride of thinking we knew what was good for man... 
This is not the natural business of a scientist.” Their business was, rather, 
“studying nature, learning the truth about it.”!®' So even while in his later 
years Oppenheimer’s public authority was based on his self-presentation 
as cultivated humanist and general philosopher, when it came to the atomic 
bomb, he retreated into a narrow conception of responsibility as the scientist’s 
responsibility to his vocation. 

A professor of literature who watched the program wrote to Oppenheimer, 
“The depth of your compassion as it came through your voice was such that I 
found myself weeping before a television set as I had not since the assassination 
of President Kennedy.” But he was also surprised at Oppenheimer’s definition 
of sin as pride: “I do not agree; it is inevitable in this scientific age that the 
scientist become a part of government and thus forced to assume responsibility 
for decisions that affect nations. That this has happenedis. . . potentiallya very 
hopeful thing. It is the time indeed for all men to cease to be just specialists, just 
irresponsible cogs in the wheel, and to become fully human, that is responsible 
for the goals and values of his society.”!™ 

In late 1966, journalist Thomas B. Morgan spent an afternoon with Op- 
penheimer at Princeton. He found the physicist in a contemplative mood: 
“Oppenheimer would gaze with pleasure across the deep-green lawn rolling 
down from the Georgian cluster of Institute buildings to the still pond and 
the autumn woods beyond. When J arrived that afternoon, this was the first 
thing he said: ‘We’re having a beautiful season.’” Oppenheimer was dying, 
ravaged by his cancer—an illness that he bore, as Morgan put it, “with stoic 
grace ... He was very frail ... There were deep lines in his face. His hair 
was hardly more than a white mist. And yet, he prevailed with that grace.” 
He had given up his pipe, on his doctor’s orders. Morgan’s visit found Op- 
penheimer ruminating on the question of “responsibility.” When Morgan 
suggested that Oppenheimer’s “devotion” to that word “seemed almost re- 
ligious,” the physicist replied, “The use of the word ‘responsibility’ .. . is 
almost a secular device for using a religious notion without attaching it to a 
transcendent being ... I don’t know how to describe my life without using 
some word like ‘responsibility’ to characterize it, a word that has to do with 
choice and action and the tension in which choices can be resolved.”!™ 

This way of speaking about responsibility contrasted with Oppenheimer’s 
earlier formulations in which he treated responsibility as limited and relative 
to the demands of vocation, in particular the scientist’s responsibility to his 


The Last Intellectual? 287 


science. Now, in the last months of his life, Oppenheimer was groping for 
a way of transcending the specialized ethos of scientific vocation and the 
limitations of office and coming to terms in a more personal and human way 
with his responsibility for the atomic bomb. But despite his contemplative 
mood, Oppenheimer was wary of separating responsibility from the context of 
action in the world; he said that responsibility is always “limited by what one 
can do.” This suggested a paradox. When Oppenheimer was in positions of 
institutional power, he found himself unable to sustain a sense of responsibility 
beyonda narrow bureaucratic or soldierly conception of duty. Now, in his exile 
from state power, he began to formulate a broader and more “fully human” 
conception of moral responsibility. Yet as he defined his responsibility in 
these broader terms, and as in these later years such thoughts were separate 
from political action and consequence, this responsibility seemed indistinct 
and lacking in substance. Oppenheimer’s conclusion was revealing: “There 


is no meaningful responsibility without power.” !°4 


SINNER AND SAINT 


When Oppenheimer died at age sixty-two, on February 18, 1967, he was 
immediately, and by now predictably, labeled the tragic embodiment of the 
cultural crises of the era. In Japan, he was called a “symbol of the tragedy of 
the modern nuclear scientists.” Alfred Friendly wrote in the Washington Post, 
“His tragedy was also the epitome of the tragedy of the age.” His victimization 
during the hearings was central in this narrative. Physicist Hideki Yukawa 
was quoted in one obituary as saying, “He was so sensitive and differences of 
opinion with the Government put him under severe psychological pressure. . . 
I may say that this might have shortened his life.” George Kennan said at the 
memorial service held at Princeton, “I know of nothing more tragic than the 
series of mistakes (in part, no doubt his own, but what small part!) ... that 
obliged him to spend the last decade and a half of his life eating out his 
heart in frustration over the consciousness that the talents he knew himself to 
possess, once welcomed and used by the official establishment of his country 
to develop the destructive possibilities of nuclear science, were rejected when 
it came to the development of the great positive ones he believed that science 
to possess.” At the same service, physicist Henry D. Smyth (the only member 
of the AEC to dissent in favor of Oppenheimer) referred to the AEC’s action: 
“Such a wrong can never be righted, such a blot on our history never erased,” 
adding that “we share his deep regret that a brilliant discovery of science has 
been perverted to an appalling weapon.” Friendly said, “If the bomb was sin, 


288 Chapter Fight 


Oppenheimer, as its chief creator, was presumably chief sinner. But in the 
end he was more sinned against than sinning.”'© 

At the time of Oppenheimer’s death, embroilment in Vietnam was fast 
eroding the optimism and triumphalism of postwar American culture and 
was spurring new questions to be asked by the country’s youth. Obituaries 
of Oppenheimer ran alongside articles on covert CIA funding of cultural 
and educational organizations—including the CCF—and beside photographs 
vividly portraying the violence and brutality of the Vietnam War.'® On 
campuses across the country, faculty and students were beginning to challenge 
the very compact between science and the state that Oppenheimer had helped 


to construct. LG? 


Their far-reaching criticisms of American foreign policy and 
of Cold War culture challenged those institutions to which Oppenheimer 
and the postwar liberal scientific elite had been so careful to accommodate 
themselves. !° 

Oppenheimer’s anxieties about cultural fragmentation took on new mean- 
ing as the scientific and academic elite of the Truman and Eisenhower eras 
found their authority and worldview challenged by rising tides of political 
protest, for which the university was a locus. Publishing in 1967 a revised 
version of his talk “The Gentleman of Culture,” Vannevar Bush added a 
jibe against “our beatniks, who would substitute protest for hard work.”! 
Sputnik-era worries about the “two cultures” continued to resonate for Cold 
War liberals as they responded to the new context of the social and cultural 
struggles of the late 1g60s. The concerns of liberal academics and intellectu- 
als about cultural fragmentation expressed a profoundly conservative obses- 
sion with preserving a cultural elite and maintaining its social and political 
influence.!”° 

For many liberals, Oppenheimer’s appeal was as a living model of the 
“gentleman of culture”’—combining scientific with humanistic elements of 
Western culture and successfully uniting liberal culture with power in the 
Cold War state. The 1954 security hearings helped to shatter this unity. 
Cultural fragmentation and the breach of faith between the state and the 
intellectual classes led, on this view, from the anti-intellectual populism of the 
1950s to the conflicts of the 1960s. In his 1969 collection On Intellectuals, 
sociologist Philip Rieff lamented that “America is without a cultural elite.”!”! 

Oppenheimer’s self-presentation as the last intellectual has been the dom- 
inant mode in which he has been remembered. He came to embody, and to 
stand as a proxy for, a particular vision of liberal cultural and political order. 
Atomic energy and the atomic bomb had represented a great technological 


hope for the resurrection of liberal democratic order after the global crises of 


The Last Intellectual? 289 


the Great Depression and World War II. Atomic fission, as a source of might 
and energy, promised liberal democracy a new era of stability and moder- 
nity. The atomic bomb even promised, briefly, to be a lever toward a new 
international order, one modeled on the social order of science: in Bohr and 
Oppenheimer’s utopian phrase, an “open world.” In Snow’s famous dictum, 
scientists carried “the future in their bones”—an appealing image for a world 
escaping a recent past of fascism and war.!” 

The postwar dawn was quickly darkened by the Cold War, and the security 
of mutually assured destruction was fragile indeed compared with the kind 
of peace that had been hoped for in the immediate aftermath of the war. 
In the paranoid obsession with protecting the (arguably mythical) “atomic 
secret,” scientific openness itself was conceived as a new threat to security. 
The integration of scientists into the apparatus of the state raised the specter 
of undemocratic influence by these unelected advisers and of technocracy 
narrowing the scope of democratic decisions. Above all, the barbarism of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki hung in the background, haunting liberal visions of 
rational, technological, and scientific progress. 

Oppenheimer was a focal point for these senses of “peril and hope.” Despite 
his protestations that he never regretted his role in the atomic bombings, 
Oppenheimer remains imprinted on the collective memory as a tragic figure 
tormented by his sense of moral failure. He could never separate himself from 
the image—seemingly a necessary fiction, but one that he himself helped to 
construct—of the guilt-ridden atomic scientist. The legend of Oppenheimer’s 
guilt and atonement gave dramatic expression to the central tension in Western 
liberal culture between science and humanistic values. His personal struggles 
indicated how science and technology simultaneously promised to realize and 
threatened to undermine postwar liberal dreams. 


APPENDIX: 
INTERVIEWS BY THE AUTHOR 


Argo, Harold, December 16, 1997 
Bagley, Charles H., June 22, 1998 
Balagna, John, January 13, 1998 

Bethe, Hans A., May 12, 1998 

Bradner, Hugh and Marge, October 15, 1997, and August 9, 2001 
Brixner, Berlyn, January 14, 1998 
Dabney, Winston, January 15, 1998 
Davis, Neil, January 13, 1998 

Diven, Benjamin, December 12, 1997 
Francis, William C., January 21, 1998 
Hammel, Edward, December 8, 1997 
Hawkins, David, November 16, 1998 
Hull, McAllister, Jr., January 16, 1998 
Mark, Kathleen, January 14, 1998 
Morrison, Philip, December 19, 2001 
Rasmussen, Roger, December 16, 1997 
Roensch, Arno, January 16, 1998 
Rotblat, Joseph, April 14, 1999 

Rynd, Ed, January 22, 1998 

Schreiber, Raemer, January 15, 1998 
Teller, Edward, June 20, 1998 

Wahl, Arthur, January 20, 1998 
Wechsler, Jacob J., December 18, 1997 
York, Herbert F., March 14, 1998, and October 27, 1998 


NOTES 


ABBREVIATIONS 


AIP American Institute of Physics 

LAHM Los Alamos Historical Museum 
LAHS Los Alamos Historical Society 

LANL Los Alamos National Laboratory 
MED Manhattan Engineer District 

MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology 


PREFACE 


1. J. Robert Oppenheimer, public lecture (1948) to the Rochester Association 
for the United Nations and the Rochester Foreign Policy Association, published as 
“The Open Mind,” in The Open Mind (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1955), 45-57; 
on 49-50; George Sarton, “The History of Science,” in The Life of Science: Essays in 
the History of Civilization (New York: Henry Schuman, 1948), 55; Robert K. Merton, 
“The Normative Structure of Science” (1942), in Merton, The Soctology of Science: 
Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, ed. Norman W. Storer, 267-78 (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1973). See also David A. Hollinger, Sceence, Fews, and 
Secular Culture: Studies in Mid-Twentieth-Century American Intellectual History 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996); and Charles Thorpe, “Violence 
and the Scientific Vocation,” Theory, Culture and Society 21, no. 3 (June 2004): 
59-84. 

2. Vannevar Bush, “Report to the President: OSRD in War” [ca. October 1945], 
Papers of Vannevar Bush, box 139, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Wash- 
ington, DC. 


294 Notes to Pages xti-xvit 


3. Ian Welsh, Mobilising Modernity: The Nuclear Moment (London: Routledge, 
2000), 17-23, 34-67. 

4. Max Weber, “Science as a Vocation,” in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, 
ed. H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills (New York: Oxford University Press, 1958), 
129-56, on 152; Sanford A. Lakoff, “Ethical Responsibility and the Scientific Voca- 
tion,” in Science and Ethical Responsibility: Proceedings of the U.S. Student Pugwash 
Conference, University of California, San Diego, Fune 19-26, 1979, ed. Sanford A. 
Lakoff (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980), 20. 

5. Herbert Marcuse, “Industrialization and Capitalism,” New Left Review 30 
(March-April 1965): 11. 

6. See also Sidney M. Willhelm, “Scientific Unaccountability and Moral Account- 
ability,” in The New Sociology: Essays in Social Science and Social Theory in Honor 
of C. Wright Mills, ed. Irving Louis Horowitz, 181-87 (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1964). 

7. Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1989). 

8. Daniel S. Greenberg, Science, Money, and Politics: Political Triumph and Eth- 
ical Erosion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001). 

g. E-mail to the author from the National Archives, May 20, 2005. 

10. Harold Garfinkel, “Conditions of Successful Degradation Ceremonies,” Amer- 
ican Journal of Sociology 61, no. 5 (March 1956): 420-24. 

11. Chandra Mukerji, A Fragile Power: Scientists and the State (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1989), 190-203, esp. 203. 

12. Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, American Prometheus: The Triumph and 
Tragedy of F. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2005); Priscilla 
McMillan, The Ruin of F. Robert Oppenheimer and the Birth of the Modern Arms Race 
(New York: Viking Press, 2005). 

13. Silvan S. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb: Bethe, Oppenheimer, and 
the Moral Responsibility of the Scientist (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2000), Xv, 23, 93. 

14. David C. Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer and the American Century (New 
York: Pi Press, 2005). 

15. Norbert Elias, The Society of Individuals, ed. Michael Schroter, trans. Edmund 
Jephcott (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991), 75. 

16. Welsh, Mobilising Modernity. 

17. Anthony Giddens, The Giddens Reader, ed. Philip Cassell (London: Macmil- 
lan, 1993), 149-53. 

18. Charles Horton Cooley, “Sociability and Personal Ideas,” in Human Nature 
and the Social Order, rev. ed. (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1922), 95. 

19. Bryan C. Taylor, “The Politics of the Nuclear Text: Reading Robert Oppen- 
heimer’s Letters and Recollections,” Quarterly Fournal of Speech 78 (1992): 431. 


Notes to Pages 2-3 295 


CHAPTER ONE 


1. Vincent C. Jones, Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb (Washington, 
DC: United States Army Center of Military History, 1985), esp. 344; Kevin O’Neill, 
“Building the Bomb,” in Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences of U.S. Nuclear 
Weapons since 1940, ed. Stephen I. Schwartz (Washington, DC: Brookings Insti- 
tution Press, 1998), esp. 53-59; Thomas P. Hughes, American Genesis: A Century 
of Innovation and Technological Enthusiasm, 1870-1970 (New York: Viking, 1989), 
381-442; Peter Bacon Hales, Atomic Spaces: Living on the Manhattan Project (Ur- 
bana: University of Illinois Press, 1997); Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar E. Anderson 
Jr., The New World, 1939/1946, vol. 1 of A History of the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1962); Richard 
Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986); 
Welsh, Mobilising Modernity, chap. 1. 

2. Journalistic accounts, historical studies, and reminiscences include Hans A. 
Bethe, “Oppenheimer: ‘Where He Was There Was Always Life and Excitement,” 
Science 155 (1967): 1080-84; John Mason Brown, Through These Men: Some Aspects 
of Our Passing History (New York: Harper, 1956); Haakon Chevalier, Oppenheimer: 
The Story of a Friendship (New York: George Braziller, 1965); Charles Pelham Cur- 
tis, The Oppenheimer Case: The Trial of a Security System (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1955); Nuel Pharr Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1969); Peter Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981); Gregg Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb: The 
Tangled Lives and Loyalties of Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward 
Teller (New York: Henry Holt and Co., 2002); Robert Jungk, Brighter Than a 
Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the Atomic Scientists, trans. James Cleugh 
(1958; Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1965); J. Alvin Kugelmass, 7. Robert Oppen- 
heimer and the Atomic Story (New York: Julian Messner, 1953); James W. Kunetka, 
Oppenheimer: The Years of Risk (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1982); Re- 
becca Larsen, Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb (New York: F. Watts, 1988); John 
Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing (New York: Stein and Day, 1971); Peter Michel- 
more, The Swift Years: The Robert Oppenheimer Story (New York: Dodd, Mead, 
1969); Isidor I. Rabi et al., Oppenheimer (New York: Charles Scribner, 1969); Mary 
Palevsky, Atomic Fragments: A Daughter’s Questions (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Uni- 
versity of California Press, 2000); Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb; Denise 
Royal, The Story of . Robert Oppenheimer (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1969); 
Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb; Alice Kimball Smith and Charles Weiner, 
eds., Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and Recollections (Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer- 
sity Press, 1980); Philip M. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial, with 
Harold P. Green (New York: Harper and Row, 1969); Thomas Williams Wilson, The 
Great Weapons Heresy (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1970); and Herbert F. York, The 


296 Notes to Pages 3-5 


Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller, and the Superbomb (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 
1976). Novels include Haakon Chevalier, The Man Who Would Be God (1959; Berlin: 
Seven Seas, 1963); Martin Cruz Smith, Stallion Gate (New York: Ballantine Books, 
1986); and Joseph Kanon, Los Alamos (New York: Broadway Books, 1997). The Day 
after Trinity: F. Robert Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb is a documentary film by 
Jon Else (Santa Monica, CA: Pyramid Films, 1980). 

3. See Roslynn D. Haynes, From Faust to Strangelove: Representations of the 
Scientist in Western Literature (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), 
esp. 246-63, 285-88; and John Canaday, The Nuclear Muse: Literature, Physics and 
the First Atomic Bombs (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2000). See also 
Taylor, “Politics of the Nuclear Text.” 

4. Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 295, 266. See also Herbert Knust, 
“From Faust to Oppenheimer: The Scientist’s Pact with the Devil,” fournal of 
European Studies 13, nos. 1-2 (1983), esp. 129; and Shiv Visvanathan, “Atomic Physics: 
The Career of an Imagination,” in Sctence, Hegemony and Violence: A Requiem for 
Modernity, ed. Ashis Nandy, 113-66 (1988; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 

5. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 117. See also Freeman Dyson, quoted in Knust, “From 
Faust to Oppenheimer,” 129. 

6. Lewis S. Feuer, The Scientific Intellectual: The Psychological and Sociological 
Origins of Modern Science (New York: Basic Books, 1963), 394. 

7. Lewis A. Coser, Men of Ideas: A Sociologist’s View (New York: Free Press, 1965), 
309, 311, 312. 

8. Philip Rieff, “The Case of Dr. Oppenheimer,” in On Intellectuals: Theoretical 
Studies, Case Studtes, ed. Philip Rieff (New York: Doubleday/Anchor, 1970), 341-69, 
quoting 346, 369. 

g. Giorgio de Santillana, The Crime of Galileo (London: Heinemann, 1958), viii; de 
Santillana, “Galileo and Oppenheimer,” in Reflections on Men and Ideas (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1968; first published in The Reporter, December 26, 1957); de 
Santillana, “Notes sur la science en Amérique,” La Table Ronde 105 (September 
1956): 62-66; Jerome Ravetz, “Tragedy in the History of Science,” in Changing 
Perspectives in the History of Science: Essays in Honour of Foseph Needham, ed. 
Mikula3 Teich and Robert Young (London: Heinemann, 1973), esp. 214. 

10. Sanford A. Lakoff, “The Trial of Dr. Oppenheimer,” in Knowledge and Power: 
Essays on Science and Government, ed. Sanford A. Lakoff (New York: Free Press, 
1966), 79, 84. 

11. Max Weber, “Bureaucracy,” in From Max Weber, 196-244, on 216, 243. 

12. Weber, “Science as a Vocation,” in From Max Weber, 143, 152. See also Harvey 
Goldman, Politics, Death, and the Devil: Self and Power in Max Weber and Thomas 
Mann (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1992), esp. 9-18, 
51-86; Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 93; and Kathryn Mary Olesko, Physics 
as a Calling: Discipline and Practice in the Kénigsberg Seminar for Physics (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1991). 


Notes to Pages 5-8 297 


13. Michel Foucault, “Truth and Power,” in Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews 
and Other Writings, 1972-1977, ed. Colin Gordon (New York: Pantheon, 1980), 131, 
129, 127-28. See also William Ray Arney, Experts in the Age of Systems (Albuquerque: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1991), esp. 26-27, 151-75; Silvan S. Schweber, 
“Reflections on the Sokal Affair: What Is at Stake?” Physics Today 50, no. 3 (March 
1997): 73-74; Andrew Feenberg, Questioning Technology (London: Routledge, 1999), 
123; and Paul Rabinow, French Modern: Norms and Forms of the Social Environment 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989). 

14. See also Thorpe, “Violence and the Scientific Vocation.” 

15. Gerald Holton and Yehuda Elkana, eds., Albert Einstein: Historical and Cul- 
tural Perspectives (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982); Fred Jerome, 
The Einstein File: F. Edgar Hoover's Secret War against the World’s Most Famous 
Scientist (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2002). 

16. Bohr, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 530. See also 
Martin Sherwin, A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance (New 
York: Vintage Books, 1977), 91-98; Sherwin, “Niels Bohr and the First Principles 
of Arms Control,” in Niels Bohr: Physics and the World; Proceedings of the Niels 
Bohr Centennial Symposium, Boston, MA, USA, November 12-14, 1985, ed. Herman 
Feshbach, Tetsuo Matsui, and Alexandra Oleson, 319-29 (London: Harwood, 1988); 
and Margaret Gowing, “Niels Bohr and Nuclear Weapons,” in Niels Bohr: A Centenary 
Volume, ed. A. P. French and P. J. Kennedy, 266-77 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1985). 

17. Szilard, quoted in Gar Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb (New 
York: Vintage, 1995), 190-91. See also William Lanouette, Genius in the Shadows: 
A Buography of Leo Slard; The Man behind the Bomb, with Bela Silard (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1992); and Alice Kimball Smith, A Peril and a Hope: 
The Scientists’ Movement in America, 1945-1947 (1965; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1970). On the limited character of such opposition within the bomb project, see 
Peter N. Kirstein, “False Dissenters: Manhattan Project Scientists and the Use 
of the Atomic Bomb,” American Diplomacy, March 2001, http://www.unc.edu/ 
depts/diplomat/archives_roll/2001_03-06/kirstein_manhattan/kirstein_manhattan. 
html. 

18. Edward Shils, “Science and Scientists in the Public Arena,” American Scholar 
56 (Spring 1987): 197. 

1g. Susan Landau, “Joseph Rotblat: The Road Less Traveled,” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 52, no. 1 (January-February 1996): 47-54; Joseph Rotblat, “Leaving 
the Bomb Project,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 41 (August 1985): 15-19; Rotblat, 
interviewed by the author, April 14, 1999. 

20. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 149-77, esp. 170. 

21. Edward Teller, “The Role of the Scientist,” in Better a Shield than a Sword: 
Perspectives on Defense and Technology (New York: Free Press, 1987), 234. 

22. Edward Teller, interviewed by the author, June 20, 1998. 


298 Notes to Pages 9-12 


23. Cf. Hugh Gusterson, Nuclear Rites: A Weapons Laboratory at the End of the 
Cold War (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1996), esp. 
38-67. 

24. Albert Einstein, “A Message to Intellectuals,” in Ideas and Opinions, 147-51 
(1954; New York: Crown, 1982), on 148. 

25. Visvanathan, “Atomic Physics,” 113. Cf. Sheldon Ungar, “The Great Collapse, 
Democratic Paralysis and the Reception of the Bomb,” Fournal of Historical Sociology 
5, no. 1 (March 1992): 84-103. 

26. Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies (London: Routledge, 1945); 
Michael Polanyi, Sczence, Faith and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1946). See also David A. Hollinger, “The Defense of Democracy and Robert K. 
Merton’s Formulation of the Scientific Ethos,” in Sctence, Fews, and Secular Culture, 
80-96. 

27. Oppenheimer, “The Open Mind,” in The Open Mind, 49-50. 

28. Oppenheimer, quoted in Gerald Holton, “Heisenberg, Oppenheimer, and the 
Transition to Modern Physics,” in Transformation and Tradition in the Sciences, ed. 
Everett Mendelsohn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 166; Glenn T. 
Seaborg, “Public Service and Human Contributions,” in Rabi et al., Oppenheimer, 
45-59, quoting 55; William L. Laurence, Men and Atoms: The Discovery, the Uses and 
the Future of Atomic Energy (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1959), 118; Goodchild, 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, 279. 

29. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 21, 20; Diracs to Oppenheimers, October 25, 1964 
(written by Dirac’s wife), Papers of J. Robert Oppenheimer, box 30, Manuscript 
Division, Library of Congress; Brown, Through These Men, 286; Thomas B. Morgan, 
“A Visit with J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Look, April 1, 1958, 35-38, on 38. 

30. Isidor I. Rabi, “Introduction,” in Rabi et al., Oppenheimer, 3-8, on 5; Charles 
Critchfield, “The Oppenheimer I Knew,” in Behind Tall Fences: Stories and Expe- 
riences about Los Alamos at Its Beginning, 169-77 (Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos 
Historical Society, 1996), quoting 171. 

31. Chevalier, The Man Who Would Be God, 14-15. 

32. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 21; Victor F. Weisskopf, “The Los Alamos Years,” 
in Rabiet al., Oppenheimer, 23-28, quoting 28; Tuck, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and 
Oppenheimer, 187. 

33. R. R. Wilson to Oppenheimer [ca. 1963], Oppenheimer Papers, box 78; Rabi, 
“Introduction,” 6-7; Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 125. 

34. Canaday, The Nuclear Muse, 183-203; Rhodes, Making of the Atomic Bomb, 
571-72, 676; Richard Rhodes, Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1995), 205-6; James A. Hijiya, “The Gita of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 144, no. 2 (June 
2000): 123-67; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 150; J. Robert Oppenheimer, 
“Physics in the Contemporary World” (1947), in The Open Mind, 81-102, on 
88. 


Notes to Pages 13-14 299 


35. Max Weber, “The Sociology of Charismatic Authority,” in From Max Weber, 
245-52, quoting 245-46; Magali Sarfatti Larson, “The Production of Expertise and 
the Constitution of Expert Power,” in The Authority of Experts: Studies in History 
and Theory, ed. Thomas Haskell (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984), 
esp. 58. See also Donald MacKenzie and Boelie Elzen, “The Charismatic Engineer” 
(1991), in Knowing Machines: Essays on Technical Change, ed. Donald A. MacKenzie 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), esp. 133-34; and Charles Thorpe and Steven 
Shapin, “Who Was J. Robert Oppenheimer? Charisma and Complex Organization,” 
Social Studies of Science 30 (2000), esp. 548-51. 

36. Daniel Bell, The Coming of Post-industrial Society: A Venture in Social Fore- 
casting (New York: Basic Books, 1976), 398, 408. 

37. Rabi, “Introduction,” 8; John S. Rigden, Rabi: Sctentist and Citizen (New 
York: Basic Books, 1987), 243; Robert R. Wilson, “A Recruit for Los Alamos,” 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 31 (March 1975): 45; Seaborg, “Public Service and 
Human Contributions,” 56; Edward Teller (1982 interview), quoted in Rhodes, The 
Making of the Atomic Bomb, 539. See also historians’ descriptions of Oppenheimer as 
“charismatic”: Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 221; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 308, 
206; James G. Hershberg, fames B. Conant: Harvard to Hiroshima and the Making of 
the Nuclear Age (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1993), 165; Rigden, Rabi, 
159; and Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, esp. 14-16. 

38. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 29; Bernice Brode, Tales of Los Alamos: 
Life on the Mesa, 1943-1945 (Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 1997), 
5; Bell, Post-industrial Society, 398; Raymond Aron, Memoirs: Fifty Years of Political 
Reflection (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1990), 175; Robb, quoted in Goodchild, 
7. Robert Oppenheimer, 248. See also Katrina R. Mason, Children of Los Alamos: An 
Oral History of the Town Where the Atomic Age Began (New York: Twayne, 1995), 
146; Eleanor Jette, Inside Box 1663 (Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 
1977), 123; and Rabi, “Introduction,” 5. 

39. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 11; Eleanor (Jerry) Stone Roensch, Life within Limits 
(Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 1993), 32. 

40. Jane S. Wilson, “Not Quite Eden,” in Standing By and Making Do: Women 
of Wartime Los Alamos, ed. Jane S. Wilson and Charlotte Serber (Los Alamos, NM: 
Los Alamos Historical Society, 1988), 43-55, quoting 50; Rabi, “Introduction,” 8; 
Leona Marshall Libby, The Uranium People (New York: Crane Russak, 1979), 109; 
Brown, Through These Men, 286. See also Kugelmass, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 4-5; 
William Lawren, The General and the Bomb: A Biography of General Leslie Groves, 
Director of the Manhattan Project (New York: Dodd, Mead, 1988), 96; and Rhodes, 
The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 444. 

41. Steven Shapin, “The Philosopher and the Chicken: On the Dietetics of Dis- 
embodied Knowledge,” in Sceence Incarnate: Historical Embodiments of Natural 
Knowledge, ed. Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin, 21-50 (Chicago: Univer- 
sity of Chicago Press, 1998). 


300 Notes to Pages 15-16 


42. See, for example, Lawren, The General and the Bomb, 287: “But with his 
figurative death on the sacrificial altar of McCarthyism, the Oppenheimer legend 
began to take on almost mythical proportions.” 

43. In describing Oppenheimer’s role at Los Alamos, including his charismatic 
leadership of the laboratory, it is frequently necessary to rely on reminiscences, written 
later by participants, and other post hoc accounts. It is in the nature of sucha secret and 
highly mission-directed project as Los Alamos was that available archival sources tend 
to be official memoranda, rather than personal reflections. To capture the intimate 
details of life on the project, and for detailed reflections on Oppenheimer’s personal 
characteristics and their consequences, it is therefore necessary to look to post hoc 
sources. These are a rich resource for understanding aspects of everyday life and 
culture not captured in official wartime reports. But the use of reminiscence and oral 
history also raises the question of whether charisma is being ascribed to Oppenheimer 
merely in hindsight, as a result of the success of the wartime project and his later 
persecution. It seems to me, however (from putting together a variety of historical 
sources), that an account of wartime Los Alamos in which Oppenheimer’s charismatic 
authority was real and made a difference is far more plausible than any alternative 
construction in which such charisma is treated merely as post hoc attribution. If one 
is to reject a coherent portrait built up by many oral histories and reminiscences, one 
must assume the burden of giving good reasons for doing so, and of providing an at 
least equally plausible alternative account. For additional comments, see Thorpe and 
Shapin, “Who Was J. Robert Oppenheimer?” 580-81. 

44. Robert Coughlan, “The Equivocal Hero of Science: Robert Oppenheimer,” 
Life, February 1967, 34-34A, on 34. 

45. David Bohm to Miriam Yevick [ca. 1953], quoted in F. David Pleat, Infinite 
Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm (Reading, MA: Helix Books, 1997), 
160; Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 20. 

46. Coughlan, “The Equivocal Hero of Science,” 34; Elting E. Morison, “Bomb- 
Builders,” review of Lawrence and Oppenheimer, by Nuel Pharr Davis, New York 
Times Book Review, October 6, 1968. 

47. Historians Alice Kimball Smith and Charles Weiner point out that Oppen- 
heimer’s postwar correspondence became increasingly formal: “By the end of the war 
Oppenheimer’s defenses were up” (Robert Oppenheimer, 1x-x). 

48. Report by W. Rulon Paxman, “Julius Robert Oppenheimer aka Jerome Robert 
Oppenheimer,” April 3, 1947, in J. Robert Oppenheimer, FBI Security File (Wilm- 
ington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1978), microfilm, 116-2717-313; Coughlan, “The 
Equivocal Hero of Science,” 34A. 

49. Bloch and Rabi, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 228, 229, 231; Abraham Pais, A Tale 
of Two Continents: A Physicist’s Life in a Turbulent World (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1997), 239. See also Bruno Rossi, Moments in the Life of a Scientist 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 70. 


Notes to Pages 16-18 301 


50. Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 324; Richard Rhodes, “‘I Am Become 
Death’: The Agony of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” American Heritage 20, no. 6 (October 
1977): 72; Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, esp. 103, 186. 

51. “Transcript of Hearing before the Personnel Security Board” (hereafter “Tran- 
script”), in United States Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of F. Robert 
Oppenheimer: Transcript of Hearing before Personnel Security Board and Texts of 
Principal Documents and Letters (hereafter Transcript and Texts) (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1971), 710. The transcript of the hearing was originally published in 1954. 

52. Journal entry for July 24, 1946, in David E. Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 
1945-1950, vol. 2 of The Fournals of David E. Lilienthal (New York: Harper and 
Row, 1964), 69; Alfred Friendly, “Drama Packs Amazing Oppenheimer Transcript,” 
Washington Post and Times-Herald, July 25, 1954, reproduced in Oppenheimer, 
FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 47; Heinar Kipphardt, In the Matter of F. Robert 
Oppenheimer: A Play Freely Adapted on the Basis of Documents (1964; New York: Hill 
and Wang, 1968). 

53. Libby, The Uranium People, 105; Rabi, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 221; Jeremy 
Bernstein, The Life It Brings: One Physicist’s Beginnings (New York: Ticknor and 
Fields, 1987), 112. See also Taylor, “Politics of the Nuclear Text,” 443. 

54. On sociological biography, see Steven Shapin, “Personal Development and 
Intellectual Biography: The Case of Robert Boyle,” British Fournal of the History of 
Science 26 (1993), esp. 338; Shapin, “‘A Scholar and a Gentleman’: The Problematic 
Identity of the Scientific Practitioner in Early Modern England,” History of Science 29 
(1991): 279-327; and Shapin, “Who Was Robert Boyle? The Creation and Presenta- 
tion of an Experimental Identity,” in A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in 
Seventeenth-Century England, 126-92 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994). 
See also Norbert Elias, Mozart: Portrait of a Genius (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1993); 
and C. Wright Mills, The Soctological Imagination (1959; Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2000), esp. 6-7. My understanding of the relationship between biography and 
social order, following Shapin, draws on interactionist sociology—in particular Erv- 
ing Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden City, NY: Doubleday 
Anchor, 1959); Howard S. Becker, “Notes on the Concept of Commitment,” Amer- 
ican Fournal of Sociology 66 (1960): 32-40; and Becker, “Personal Change in Adult 
Life,” Soctometry 27 (1964): 40-53. On special issues concerning scientific biography, 
see Michael Shortland and Richard Yeo, eds., Telling Lives in Science: Essays on Sci- 
entific Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996). I also draw on the 
work of the 1998-99 Scientific Personae research group, directed by Lorraine Daston 
at the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science; this group has developed the 
notion of persona as a key concept for studying individual lives in relation to cultures 
of science. 

55. See also the discussion of Oppenheimer as a “nodal signifier” in Taylor, 
“Politics of the Nuclear Text,” 431. 


302 Notes to Pages 19-23 


56. For example, allegations of his disloyalty, however dubious, reemerged in the 
wake of the Cold War. Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoli Sudoplatov, Special Tasks: The 
Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness—a Soviet Spymaster, with Jerrold L. and Leona 
P. Schecter (New York: Little, Brown, 1994). 


CHAPTER TWO 


1. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 10; Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 
42; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 10; Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
1-2. 

2. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 10; Frank Oppenheimer, interviewed by 
Charles Weiner, February 9, 1973, 2, 1, Oral History Collection, Niels Bohr Library, 
American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD (hereafter AIP); Schweber, In the 
Shadow of the Bomb, 42. See also Raymond T. Birge, “History of the [University of 
California, Berkeley] Physics Department,” vol. 3, “1928-1932” (n.d.), chap. 9, p. 26, 
Niels Bohr Library, AIP; and Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 4-11. 

3. “Physicist Oppenheimer,” Time, November 8, 1948, 70-81, on 70; J. Robert 
Oppenheimer, interviewed by Thomas S. Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 10, 3, Archives 
for the History of Quantum Physics, AIP; Frank Oppenheimer, interviewed by 
Weiner, February 9, 1973, 2; Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 7, 66. 

4. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 3. 

5. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 10-11; Paul Horgan, interviewed by Alice 
Kimball Smith, March 3, 1976, 15-16, J. Robert Oppenheimer Oral History Collection, 
box MC 85, Archives and Special Collections of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA (hereafter MIT Archives); “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 
70; Rhodes, “Agony of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 72. 

6. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 107. 

7. “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 70; Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 11; Horgan, 
interviewed by Smith, March 3, 1976, 15; Horgan, quoted in Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 2; Frank Oppenheimer, interviewed by Weiner, February 9, 
1973, 3-4; William C. Boyd, interviewed by Alice Kimball Smith, December 21, 1975, 
11, Oppenheimer Oral History Collection, MIT Archives. 

8. Frank Oppenheimer, interviewed by Weiner, February 9, 1973, 3-4; Oppen- 
heimer, quoted in “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 70; Rhodes, “Agony of J. Robert Op- 
penheimer,” 72; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 13; Cassidy, 7. Robert 
Oppenheimer, 15-18. 

g. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 3; Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 6; Rhodes, “Agony of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 73; Jane Kayser, 
quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 6-7; Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 21. 

10. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 3; Schweber, Jn the 
Shadow of the Bomb, 42. 


Notes to Pages 23-24 303 


11. Frank Oppenheimer, interviewed by Weiner, February 9, 1973, 3; Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 3. 

12. Robert S. Guttchen, Felix Adler (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1974), 153 
Howard B. Radest, Toward Common Ground: The Story of the Ethical Culture 
Societies in the United States (New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 1969), esp. 
97; Benny Kraut, From Reform Fudaism to Ethical Culture: The Religious Evolution 
of Felix Adler (Cincinnati, OH: Hebrew Union College Press, 1979); Schweber, Jn 
the Shadow of the Bomb, 42-53. On the social-reformist agenda of Ethical Culture, 
in the context of the American Progressive era, see Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
23-31. 

13. George L. Mosse, German Fews beyond Fudaism (Bloomington: Indiana Uni- 
versity Press, 1985), 3; W. H. Bruford, The German Tradition of Self-Cultivation: 
‘Bildung’ from Humboldt to Thomas Mann (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1975); Norbert Elias, The Germans (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 
esp. 113-14, 128; Peter Gay, “Encounter with Modernism: German Jews in German 
Culture, 1888-1914,” Midstream 21 (1975): 23-65; Harvey Goldman, Max Weber and 
Thomas Mann: Calling and the Shaping of Self (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univer- 
sity of California Press, 1988); Goldman, Politics, Death, and the Devil; Roy Pascal, 
Culture and the Division of Labour, Occasional Papers in German Studies, no. 5 
(Warwick: University of Warwick, 1974); Fritz K. Ringer, The Decline of the German 
Mandarins: The German Academic Community, 1890-1933 (1969; Hanover, NH: 
University Press of New England, 1990); David Sorkin, “Wilhelm von Humboldt: 
The Theory and Practice of Self-Formation (Bildung), 1791-1810,” Journal of the 
History of Ideas 44 (1983): 55-73; Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 80-85. 

14. Mosse, German Fews beyond Fudaism, 1-54; Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and 
Ambivalence (Oxford: Polity Press, 1991), esp. 102-59, 132-37; Sander L. Gilman, 
Jewish Self-Hate: Anti-Semitism and the Hidden Language of Race (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1986), 270-86. See also the relevant personal reflections 
by Victor Weisskopf in The Foy of Insight: Passions of a Physicist (New York: Basic 
Books, 1991), 1-29, esp. 7, 13, 26-27. 

15. Abraham Barkai, Branching Out: German-fFewish Immigration to the United 
States, 1820-1914 (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1994), 191-222; Reinhard Bendix, 
From Berlin to Berkeley: German-fewish Identities (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Books, 1986); Stephen Birmingham, “Our Crowd”: The Great Fewish Families of 
New York (New York: Harper and Row, 1967); Naomi W. Cohen, Encounter with 
Emancipation: The German Jews in the United States, 1830-1914 (Philadelphia: 
Jewish Publication Society, 1984); Moses Rischin, The Promised City: New York’s 
Jews, 1870-1914 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1962); Irving Howe, 
World of Our Fathers: The fourney of the East European fews to America and the Life 
They Found and Made There (1976; London: Phoenix Press, 2000); Arthur Liebman, 
“Anti-Semitism on the Left?” in Ante-Semitism in American History, ed. David A. 
Gerber, 329-59 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986). 


304 Notes to Pages 25-28 


16. Howard M. Sachar, A History of the Fews in America (New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf, 1992), 85-102, quoting 102; Gilman, Jewish Self-Hate, 354; Nathan C. 
Belth, A Promise to Keep: A Narrative of the American Encounter with Anti-Semitism 
(New York: Times Books, 1979); Leonard Dinnerstein, ed., Antisemitism in the 
United States (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971); Leonard Dinnerstein, 
Antisemitism in America (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994); Robert Singerman, 
“The Jew as Racial Alien: The Genetic Component of American Anti-Semitism,” in 
Gerber, Anti-Semitism in American History, 103-28; Schweber, In the Shadow of the 
Bomb, 44-46; Cassidy, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 11-13. 

17. Quoting Radest, Toward Common Ground, 185. See also Kraut, From Reform 
Judaism to Ethical Culture, 197; Cohen, Encounter with Emancipation, 275. 

18. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 4; quoted also in 
Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 4-5. A note of appreciation that Oppen- 
heimer wrote for Klock is attached to Oppenheimer to Dr. Black, November 7, 1963, 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 43. See also Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 53. 

19. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 17, 66. 

20. Ibid., 5; Oppenheimer to Smith, January 12, 1923, ibid., 18-19, quoting 18. 

21. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 7-8; Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
61-63. 

22. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 10; Horgan, interviewed by Smith, 
March 3, 1976, 7. 

23. Horgan, interviewed by Smith, March 3, 1976, 7-8, 11-12; Oppenheimer to 
Smith, November 2, 1923, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 50-51, on 51. 

24. Fergusson, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 9; Schweber, 
In the Shadow of the Bomb, 54. 

25. Oppenheimer to Smith, February 11, 1923, and February 18, 1923, in Smith 
and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 22-23; Oppenheimer to Fergusson, September 16, 
1923, ibid., 37-38. 

26. Rhodes, “Agony of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 72; Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 1; Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 1-2. That Oppenheimer was given 
his father’s name goes against the usual European Jewish practice, which is to name 
children after a deceased, rather than a living, relative (see also Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 11). 

27. Serrell Hillman to Rob Hagy, “Oppenheimer Cover,” October 22, 1948, Op- 
penheimer Papers, box 294; Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, g. See also 
Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 13-14. 

28. See, for example, Oppenheimer to Smith, October 2, 1922, in Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 13; and Oppenheimer to Fergusson, June 14, 1923, 
ibid., 31. 

29. Oppenheimer, quoted in “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 73. 

30. Rabi and Bloch, quoted in Rigden, Rab, 228-29. Similar observations about 
Oppenheimer were made by the Berkeley philosopher William Dennes in “Philosophy 


Notes to Pages 28-31 305 


and the University since 1915,” Oral History Interview [ca. 1970] by Regional Oral 
History Office, University of California Oral Histories, Bancroft Library, University 
of California, Berkeley, 136-37. See also Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 54. 

31. Rigden, Rabi, 17-29. 

32. See the related discussions in Sander L. Gilman, Smart Fews: The Construction 
of the Image of Fewish Superior Intelligence (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 
1996); and Hollinger, Science, Fews, and Secular Culture. 

33. Sachar, History of the fews in America, 324-34, quoting 329. See also Morton 
Rosenstock, “Are There Too Many Jews at Harvard?” in Dinnerstein, Antisemitism 
in the United States, 102-8, esp. 107; Marcia Graham Synott, “Anti-Semitism and 
American Universities: Did Quotas Follow the Jews?” in Gerber, Anti-Semitism 
in American History, 233-71; Daniel J. Kevles, The Physicists: The History of a 
Scientific Community in Modern America (New York: Vintage Books, 1979), 210-13; 
and Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 66-71. 

34. Oppenheimer, quoted in “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 71; Rabi, quoted in Rig- 
den, Rabi, 32-33; Hawkins, quoted in Palevsky, Atomic Fragments, 103. 

35. Wyman, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 15; Oppenheimer to 
Smith, October 2, 1922. 

36. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 12, 39-40; Fergusson to Smith, Satur- 
day [May 15, 1922] and [ca. fall 1922], Oppenheimer Papers, box 294; Oppenheimer, 
interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 4; Jeffries Wyman, interviewed by Charles 
Weiner, May 28, 1975, 2, Oppenheimer Oral History Collection, MIT Archives. 

37. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 12, 33; Frederick Bernheim, inter- 
viewed by Charles Weiner, October 27, 1975, 2, 6, Oppenheimer Oral History 
Collection, MIT Archives. 

38. Betty Thomas to Smith, November 4, 1921, Oppenheimer Papers, box 294. 
On the intellectual seriousness of the Ethical Culture School, see also Cassidy, 7. 
Robert Oppenheimer, 34. 

39. Fergusson to Smith, January 22, 1922, Oppenheimer Papers, box 294. See also 
Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 74. 

40. Wyman, quoted in Goodchild, 7 Robert Oppenheimer, 15; Oppenheimer, 
interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 9. 

41. Boyd, interviewed by Smith, December 21, 1975, 4. Boyd added, “I don’ think 
he was really worried about his background”; and Smith and Weiner interpret his 
comments to mean that Oppenheimer had, as they put it, “a relaxed attitude toward 
his heritage” (Robert Oppenheimer, 61). 

42. Horgan, interviewed by Smith, March 3, 1976, 16, 5, 20. Eagels’s critically 
acclaimed performance was in 1922-23. 

43. Boyd, interviewed by Smith, December 21, 1975, 19. 

44. Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 71-72; John Edsall, interviewed by Charles 
Weiner, July 16, 1975, 2, 4-7, Oppenheimer Oral History Collection, MIT Archives; 
Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 9; Bird and Sherwin, 


306 Notes to Pages 31-34 


American Prometheus, 33; Oppenheimer to Smith, November 14, 1922, in Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 15-16, quoting 15. 

45. Bernheim, interviewed by Weiner, October 27, 1975, 14; Fergusson to Smith, 
February 19 (?), 1922, Oppenheimer Papers, box 294. 

46. Oppenheimer to Smith, December 1, 1923, in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 52-53, on 53; Oppenheimer to Smith [ca. January 22, 1924], ibid., 
58-60, on 59. 

47. Oppenheimer to Smith [March 1924?], Oppenheimer Papers, box 294. This 
letter is printed, with this sentence omitted, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 
63-64. 

48. Oppenheimer to Smith [winter 1923-24], ibid., 54-55, on 54. See the references 
to Crome Yellow in Oppenheimer to Fergusson, Christmas 1923, ibid., 55-58, on 55; 
and Oppenheimer to Smith, November 14, 1922, 15. 

49. Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 6, 10, 15; Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 60. 

50. Boyd, interviewed by Smith, December 21, 1975, 1. See also Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 33. 

51. Bernheim, interviewed by Weiner, October 27, 1975, 15-16. 

52. Oppenheimer to Smith [winter 1923-24], 54; Oppenheimer to Smith [ca. 
January 22, 1924], 59. 

53. See, for example, his worries about the lack of correspondence from Fer- 
gusson in Oppenheimer to Smith [ca. March 1924?], in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 64. 

54. Oppenheimer to Smith, May 2, 1923, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppen- 
heimer, 25-26, on 25. 

55. See, for example, Oppenheimer to Smith [ca. January 1925], in Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 70-71, on 70. Oppenheimer wrote to Smith asking for 
a letter of recommendation to Cambridge: “The certificate should say that you have 
known me for -?- years and that you believe me to be of good moral character; that 
two assertions so contradictory in sense should be demanded in one certificate is 
additional proof, I think, of the proverbial irrationality of the British.” 

56. Oppenheimer to Smith [winter 1923-24], 54. 

57. Bernheim, interviewed by Weiner, October 27, 1975, 7; Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 26; Oppenheimer to Smith, May 15, 1923, ibid., 27-28, on 
27; Oppenheimer to Smith, Sunday [ca. 1923?], Oppenheimer Papers, box 294; 
Oppenheimer to Smith, February 18, 1923, 23. 

58. Fergusson to Smith, Tuesday [ca. February 1923], Oppenheimer Papers, box 
294. This letter has had the date January 20, 1923, written on it post hoc. But since 
Oppenheimer was not in the infirmary at that time, I believe there is good reason for 
thinking the letter coincides with the infirmary spell in February. 

59. Oppenheimer to Smith, February 18, 1923, 22-23. 


Notes to Pages 34-36 307 


60. Oppenheimer to Smith, November 14, 1922, 15; Oppenheimer to Smith [late 
winter 1924], ibid., 62-63, quoting 62. 

61. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, June 14, 1923, 31; Fergusson letter, quoted in 
Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 16; Horgan, quoted in Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 40. See also Oppenheimer to Horgan, October 6, 1923, and 
Horgan’s commentary, ibid., 43. 

62. Bernheim, interviewed by Weiner, October 27, 1975, 7; Boyd, interviewed by 
Smith, December 21, 1975, 12. Bernheim did not remember ever meeting Fergusson 
(Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 44)—though that is understandable, given 
that Fergusson had gone to England by the time Oppenheimer and Bernheim began 
to room together. 

63. Dinnerstein, Antisemitism in America, 87; David Hollinger, “Academic Cul- 
ture at the University of Michigan, 1938-1988,” in Science, Fews, and Secular Culture, 
121-54, on 122. 

64. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 62; Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppen- 
heimer, 68-69; Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 2. 

65. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 9, 11. See also Maila 
L. Walter, Science and Cultural Crisis: An Intellectual Biography of Percy Williams 
Bridgman (1882-1961) (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1990), 28, 68, 72; 
and Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 68-69. 

66. Percy Bridgman, Reflections of a Physicist (New York: Philosophical Library, 
1955), 81; quoted also in Steven Shapin, “How to Be Antiscientific,” in The One Cul- 
ture? A Conversation about Science, ed. Harry Collins and Jay A. Labinger (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2001), 105; Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, Novem- 
ber 19, 1963, 9. 

67. Bridgman to Rutherford, June 24, 1925, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 77. For similar examples, see Andrew S. Winston, “‘As His Name 
Indicates’? R. S. Woodworth’s Letters of Reference and Employment for Jewish 
Psychologists in the 1930s,” fournal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 32, no. 1 
(January 1996): 30-43. 

68. George D. Birkhoff to Professor Hall, April 12, 1928, folder labeled “Oppen- 
heimer official documents and 1954 clippings,” Raymond Thayer Birge Papers [ca. 
1928-54], BANC MSS 87/147 c, Bancroft Library. On Oppenheimer’s studies with 
Birkhoff, see Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 68-69. 

69. Horgan, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 9; Goodchild, 
4. Robert Oppenheimer, 16; Birkhoff to Hall, April 12, 1928, Birge Papers. 

70. Oppenheimer to Smith, October 6, 1923, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Op- 
penheimer, 46-47, on 47; Oppenheimer to Smith [ca. January 22, 1924], 60; Boyd, 
quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 45; Boyd, interviewed by Smith, 
December 21, 1975, 3. See also Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 13. 

71. See Winston, “‘As His Name Indicates,’” esp. 35. 


308 Notes to Pages 36-39 


72. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 9, 15; quoted also in 
Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 45-46, 69. 

73. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 4-5. Oppenheimer 
was referring to Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathemat- 
aca (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1910). 

74. Oppenheimer to Smith [ca. January 1925], 70. Whitehead gave Oppenheimer 
one of the few B grades he received. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 74. 

75. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 45. 

76. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, Christmas 1923, 57; Oppenheimer, interviewed 
by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 13. 

77. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, April 25 [1925], in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 72-73, quoting 73. See also Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, go. 

78. Bridgman to Rutherford, June 24, 1925, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 77. 

79. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 13-14. 

80. Ibid., 12, 14. See also Silvan S. Schweber, “The Empiricist Temper Reg- 
nant: Theoretical Physics in the United States, 1920-1950,” Historical Studies in the 
Physical and Biological Sciences 17 (1988): 17-98; and Kevles, The Physicists, 168-69. 

81. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, November 1, 1925, in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 86-87, quoting 87; Oppenheimer to Fergusson, January 23, 1926, ibid., 
91-92, quoting 92. On Oppenheimer’s interest in metallic conduction, which began 
during his work under Bridgman, see Oppenheimer to R. E. Priestley [June 1925], in 
Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 76-77; Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, 
November 18, 1963, 14; and Walter, Science and Cultural Crisis, 69. 

82. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer [ca. late spring 1926], in Smith 
and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 95-96, quoting 96. 

83. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, November 1 [1925], in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 86-87; Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, October 7 [1933], 
ibid., 162-65, on 163. 

84. Bernheim, interviewed by Weiner, October 27, 1975, 20. See also Oppen- 
heimer to Fergusson, November 15, 1925, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 
87-88. 

85. Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 19. The incident in Paris 
occurred during Christmas vacation 1925 (Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 
gl). 

86. Wyman’s recollection of Oppenheimer’s words, in Wyman, interviewed by 
Weiner, May 28, 1975, 20-22, quoting 20; Edsall, interviewed by Weiner, July 16, 
1975, 27. See also Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 93-94; Goodchild, 7. 
Robert Oppenheimer, 17-18; and Mary Jo Nye, Blackett: Physics, War, and Politics in 
the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), 44. Bird 
and Sherwin suggest that the poisoned-apple incident may not have been entirely a 
fantasy and may have occurred the previous year, making the panic on Corsica some 


Notes to Pages 39-43 309 


sort of flashback (American Prometheus, 46-47, 50). The story, however, remains 
mysterious. 

87. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 94; Horgan, interviewed by Smith, 
March 3, 1976, 18; Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 21. Horgan remem- 
bered that in his late teens, Oppenheimer was prone to depressive episodes during 
which “he would seem to be incommunicado emotionally for a day or two at a time” 
(Horgan, interviewed by Smith, 17). 

88. Gerald Holton, “Young Man Oppenheimer,” Partisan Review 48 (July 1981): 
380-88. 

89. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 18, 1963, 17, 21; Wyman, 
interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 17; Oppenheimer, quoted in Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 96. See also Holton, “Heisenberg, Oppenheimer, and the 
Transition to Modern Physics.” 

go. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, November 14 [1926], in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 100-101, on 100; Holton, “Heisenberg, Oppenheimer, and the Tran- 
sition to Modern Physics,” 168; Oppenheimer, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 98. See also Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 19. For more on the 
development of Oppenheimer’s physics at Géttingen and elsewhere, before his final 
return to the United States, see Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 109-12. 

gi. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 99; Oppenheimer, interviewed by 
Kuhn, November 20, 1963, 4-5. 

g2. Kennard, quoted in Kevles, The Physicists, 217. 

93. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 103-4; Oppenheimer to Fergusson, 
November 14 [1926], 100; Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 20, 1963, 
4,1, 6. 

94. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “A Science in Change,” in Science and the Common 
Understanding (London: Oxford University Press, 1954), 37-54, on 37; Kevles, The 
Physicists, 162-63; Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 20, 1963, 4; Smith 
and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 98, quoting Kemble on 107; Jungk, Brighter Than 
a Thousand Suns, 33. 

g5. Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 67. 

96. Max Born, My Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate (London: Taylor and 
Francis, 1978), 229, 233-34. See also Kevles, The Physicists, 217. 

97. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 20-21. 

98. Barbara Marshall, “Politics in Academe: Gottingen University and the Grow- 
ing Impact of Political Issues, 1918-33,” European History Quarterly 18, no. 3 (July 
1988), esp. 297-99, 305-7, 309-11; Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 
20, 1963, 5; Oppenheimer to Fergusson, November 14 [1926], 100; transcript of 
conversation between J. Robert Oppenheimer and Edward R. Murrow, recorded 
December 16, 1954, for CBS television program See It Now, broadcast on January 4, 
1955, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 55, quoting 29; Jungk, 
Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 32; Cassidy, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 105. 


310 Notes to Pages 43-48 


99. Goudsmit, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 22. 

100. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 20, 1963, 18; quoted also in 
Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 114. 

101. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 20, 1963, 21-22; Ehrenfest, 
quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 122. Weisskopf’s rendition of 
Ehrenfest’s letter, and Weisskopf’s comments on Pauli, are in Weisskopf, The Joy of 
Insight, 85. See also Cassidy, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 117-18, 126-29. 

102. Rabi, “Introduction,” in Rabi et al., Oppenheimer, 5. 

103. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, November 14 [1926], 100; Dirac, quoted in 
Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 31; Goodchild, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 21. 
See also transcript of conversation between Oppenheimer and Murrow, December 
16, 1954, 28. 

104. Oppenheimer to Fergusson, November 14 [1926], 100. See also, for example, 
Max Weber’s analysis in 1918 of the “Americanization” of German academic life 
(“Science as a Vocation,” esp. 131). 

105. Oppenheimer to W. J. Robbins, May 14 [1929], in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 128-29, on 128. 

106. J.S. Rigden, “J. Robert Oppenheimer—Before the War,” Scientific American 
273 (July 1995), esp. 70-71; Leo Ezaki, “Long Journey into Tunneling,” Nobel Lecture, 
December 12, 1973, http://www-.nobel.se/physics/laureates/1973/esaki-lecture.pdf, 1. 


CHAPTER THREE 


1. Raymond T. Birge, “Professor J. R. Oppenheimer” [ca. 1930], folder labeled 
“Oppenheimer official documents and 1954 clippings,” Birge Papers; Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 130; Kevles, The Physicists, 215-18. 

2. Felix Bloch, interviewed by Charles Weiner, August 15, 1968, 14, Niels Bohr 
Library, AIP; Edward U. Condon, interviewed by Charles Weiner, October 17 and 18, 
1967, 23, Niels Bohr Library, AIP; Frederick Seitz, On the Frontier: My Life in Science 
(New York: American Institute of Physics, 1994), 119-20. See also Schweber, ““The 
Empiricist Temper Regnant”; Charles Weiner, “A New Site for the Seminar: The 
Refugees and American Physics in the Thirties,” in The Intellectual Migration, ed. 
Donald Fleming and Bernard Bailyn, 152-89 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1969); and Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 117-31. 

3. Raymond T. Birge, “Supplementary Remarks on Professor Oppenheimer,” 
January 28, 1936, folder labeled “Oppenheimer official documents and 1954 clip- 
pings,” Birge Papers. See also Rigden, “J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 73; and John L. 
Heilbron and Robert W. Seidel, Lawrence and His Laboratory: A History of the 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, vol. 1 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cal- 
ifornia Press, 1989). For a comprehensive discussion of the work of Oppenheimer 
and his school of theoretical physics at Berkeley, see Schweber, In the Shadow of the 
Bomb, 61-75; and Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 133-80. 


Notes to Pages 48-51 311 


4. Robert Wilson, interviewed by Spencer R. Weart, May 19, 1977, 51-52, Niels 
Bohr Library, AIP. 

5. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 14; Peter J. Kuznick, Beyond the Labora- 
tory: Scientists as Political Activists in 1930s America (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1987), 316 n. 131; Birge, “Professor J. R. Oppenheimer”; Rabi, “Introduction,” 
in Rabi et al., Oppenheimer, 8; Robert Serber, Peace and War: Reminiscences of a Life 
on the Frontiers of Science, with Robert P. Crease (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1998), 42-43. 

6. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 69; David Hawkins, interviewed by 
the author, November 16, 1998; Pauli, quoted in Emilio Segré, A Mind Always in 
Motion: The Autobiography of Emilio Segré (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1993), 138; Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 119; Goodchild, 
7. Robert Oppenheimer, 28; Wilson, interviewed by Weart, May 19, 1977, 46. See also 
Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 22. 

7. Wilson, interviewed by Weart, May 19, 1977, 46-47; Serber, Peace and War, 
36-40. In 1928-29, Robert and Frank Oppenheimer began leasing the New Mexico 
ranch, located near Pecos and Los Alamos, that they named Perro Caliente. They later 
bought it. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 165; Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 72-73. 

8. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 28; Rudolf Peierls, Bird of Passage: Recol- 
lections of a Physicist (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985), 189; Wilson, 
“*A Recruit for Los Alamos,” 45; Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 133; Rhodes, 
The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 444; Stanley A. Blumberg and Gwinn Owens, En- 
ergy and Conflict: The Life and Times of Edward Teller (New York: G. P. Putnam’s 
Sons, 1976), 75; Stanley A. Blumberg and Lewis G. Panos, Edward Teller: Giant of 
the Golden Age of Physics (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1990), 45; Herken, 
Brotherhood of the Bomb, 65. 

g. During the 1954 hearings, Oppenheimer estimated that his salary in 1942 was 
$5,000 and that he made $8,000 in dividends and interest for the year. The AEC’s 
attorney stated, “I have looked at your income-tax return for, I think, 1942, and 
it seemed to me to be about $15,000” (“Transcript,” 184). Schweber puts Oppen- 
heimer’s income even higher than this: upon his father’s death on September 20, 1937, 
Oppenheimer inherited $392,602. He received from this an annual dividend income 
of between $10,000 and $15,000, in addition to an annual academic salary of $6,000. 
Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 209 n. 153. 

10. Serber, Peace and War, 31. 

11. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 27-28; Segré, A Mind Always in Motion, 
138-39. 

12. Thomas Hager, Force of Nature: The Life of Linus Pauling (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1995), 152. 

13. Memorandum, April 20, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, 
sec. 29. Bird and Sherwin outline reasons to be skeptical of these reports (American 


312 Notes to Pages 51-55 


Prometheus, 367). Abraham Pais later thought that “a strong, latent homosexuality was 
an important ingredient in Robert’s emotional makeup” (A Tale of Two Continents, 
241). 

14. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, October 14, 1929, in Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 134-36, quoting 135. 

15. Hytya, “The Gita of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 129-30, 148; Rabi, “Introduc- 
tion,” 5; Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, August 10 [1931], in Smith 
and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 142-43, on 143. 

16. On such models, see Shapin, “The Philosopher and the Chicken." 

17. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, Sunday [ca. January 1932], in 
Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 151-52, quoting 151. 

18. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, March 12 [1932], in Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 154-56, on 155; Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppen- 
heimer, Sunday [ca. fall 1932], ibid., 157-60, on 157. 

19. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, March 12 [1932], 156. 

20. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, October 7 [1933], 165; Kugel- 
mass, f. Robert Oppenheimer, 59; Oppenheimer, quoted in “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 
Time, November 8, 1948, 75; Hijtya, “The Gita of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” esp. 
136-37; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 99-102. 

21. Rabi, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 229. 

22. Rabi, “Introduction,” 4. 

23. Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 1998. 

24. Airtel memorandum on interview with Dr. Harvey Hall (Technical Director, 
Naval Science Division, ONR), April 23, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 
100-17828, sec. 31; “Transcript,” 8; Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 56-57; 
Laura Hein, “Learning about Patriotism, Decency, and the Bomb,” in Living with 
the Bomb: American and Fapanese Cultural Conflicts in the Nuclear Age, ed. Laura 
Hein and Mark Shelden (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1997), esp. 282-84; Kuznick, 
Beyond the Laboratory, 157; Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 32; Oppenheimer to 
Professor Hall, June 5, 1932, and Hall to Oppenheimer, June 14, 1932, folder labeled 
“Oppenheimer. General,” Birge Papers. 

25. Rhodes, “Agony of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 75-76; “Transcript,” 8, 154; 
Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 31; Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 56, 
197 n. 35; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 249-54. 

26. Daily People’s World, April 1938, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, 
sec. 42; Special Agent D. L. Johnson, memorandum, “Subject: Frank Friedman Op- 
penheimer,” section titled “Police Check,” July 22, 1943, Investigation Files, box 
100, General Correspondence, 1943-47, Records of the Office of the Command- 
ing General, Manhattan Project, Records of the Office of the Chief of Engineers, 
Record Group 77, National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, 
MD; American Civil Liberties Union News (San Francisco) 4, no. 1 (January 1939), 
in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 42; “Transcript,” 8; Chevalier, 


Notes to Pages 55-59 313 


Oppenheimer, 22-25; Kuznick, Beyond the Laboratory, 231; Condon, interviewed 
by Weiner, September 11 and 12, 1973, 215, Niels Bohr Library, AIP; Stern, The 
Oppenheimer Case, 22. 

27. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 19; “Transcript,” 159, 10. See also Chevalier to Op- 
penheimer, July 23, 1964, and Oppenheimer to Chevalier, August 7, 1964, Oppen- 
heimer Papers, box 26; “Transcript,” 3, 8-9; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 15; Good- 
child, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 206-7; and Kuznick, Beyond the Laboratory, 140, 316 
n. 132. The strongest case that Oppenheimer was a Communist Party member is pre- 
sented in Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb. See also Daniel J. Kevles, “The Strange 
Case of Robert Oppenheimer,” review of Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, New York 
Review of Books, December 4, 2003, 37-40; and Gregg Herken, “The Oppenheimer 
Case: An Exchange,” with a reply by Kevles, in New York Review of Books, March 25, 
2004, 46-47. 

28. Philip Morrison, interviewed by the author, December 19, 2001. 

29. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 22; Condon, interviewed by Weiner, September 11 
and 12, 1973, 215. 

30. Morrison, interviewed by the author, December 19, 2001. See also Bird and 
Sherwin, American Prometheus, 104. 

31. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 24; Kamen, quoted in Ellen Schrecker, No Ivory 
Tower: McCarthyism and the Universities (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1986), 134. See also Chevalier’s fictionalized description of one of these parties in his 
novel The Man Who Would Be God, 21-42. 

32. “Transcript,” 8; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 29. 

33. Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 56; Nathan Glazer, The Social Basis 
of American Communism (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1961), 168. See 
also the discussion of “cultural radicalism” in Richard H. Pells, Radical Visions and 
American Dreams: Culture and Social Thought in the Depression Years (Middletown, 
CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1973); and see Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 194. 

34. Oppenheimer, quoted in “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 76. 

35. “Transcript,” 8. 

36. Kitty Oppenheimer, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 38. Her 
first marriage had lasted only a few months. See also Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 155-61. 

37. Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 38-40, quoting Kitty Oppenheimer on 39; 
Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 29; Serber, Peace and War, 59-60; “Transcript,” 10. 

38. Steve Nelson, James R. Barrett, and Rob Ruck, Steve Nelson, American Rad- 
ical (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1981), 268-69; Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 162. On Oppenheimer’s reading of Capital, see also Chevalier, 
Oppenheimer, 16; and Kuznick, Beyond the Laboratory, 140. 

39. Jackie Oppenheimer, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 40; Op- 
penheimer, quoted in “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 76. See also Kitty Oppenheimer’s 
testimony during the 1954 hearings, in “Transcript,” 571-77. 


314 Notes to Pages 59-61 


40. Weisskopf, The Foy of Insight, 115. See also “Transcript,” 10; and Cassidy, 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, 189. 

41. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 32. See also Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 25; 
Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 28-29; and Chevalier’s fictionalized account, The 
Man Who Would be God, 66. 

42. Segré, A Mind Always in Motion, 138, 139; Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 36; John- 
son, “Subject: Frank Friedman Oppenheimer,” section titled “Acquaintance Check,” 
July 22, 1943. Herken discusses the pamphlet in Brotherhood of the Bomb, 31. It seems 
likely that the pamphlet in question was Report to Our Colleagues, by the College 
Faculties Committee, Communist Party of California (copy held at Bancroft Library). 
Herken has made the document available on the Web, together with related doc- 
uments: http://www.brotherhoodofthebomb.com/bhbsource/documents.html. See 
also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 144-45. 

43. Morrison, interviewed by the author, December 19, 2001; Oppenheimer, 
quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 41. 

44. “Transcript,” 327; Bethe’s recollection of Oppenheimer’s words, quoted in 
Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 108. See also Bethe’s testimony at the security 
hearings, in “Transcript,” 332; and Carey McWilliams, in Roy Hoopes, Americans 
Remember the Home Front: An Oral Narrative of the World War II Years (New York: 
Berkley Press, 2002), 22. 

45. Herbert Childs, An American Genius: The Life of Ernest Orlando Lawrence 
(New York: E. P. Dutton, 1968), 172-73; Oppenheimer to Lawrence, August 30, 1945, 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 45, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 300-302. 

46. The agents had asked Millikan for information on Frank Oppenheimer, but he 
steered the conversation toward Robert, stating that “Frank Oppenheimer was an ap- 
pendage to his brother Robert.” Johnson, “Subject: Frank Friedman Oppenheimer,” 
section titled “Acquaintance Check,” July 22, 1943. 

47. Birge, “History of the Physics Department,” vol. 5, “The Period 1942-1950,” 
chap. 17, p. 6, quoting from notes made on August 18, 1945; Birge, quoted in Davis, 
Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 83. 

48. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics: A Memoir of the Nuclear Age 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985), 179. Birge said that 
“Lawrence didn’t like bohemians” (quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 83). 
Kamen quotes this statement and says, “I may add that Birge didn’t either” (Radiant 
Science, Dark Politics, 316 n. 2 for chap. 10). On Frank Oppenheimer as “bohemian,” 
see comments by Millikan, William A. Fowler of Caltech, and Frank’s landlady, 
in Johnson, “Subject: Frank Friedman Oppenheimer,” 
tance Check,” “Reference,” and “Residence Check,” July 22, 1943. Physicist Robert 
Wilson, interviewed years later for Jon Else’s film The Day after Trinity, referred to 


sections titled “Acquain- 


Robert Oppenheimer as having been “bohemian” in this Berkeley period. 
49. Condon, interviewed by Weiner, September 11 and 12, 1973, 208. See also 
Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 116-17. Oppenheimer’s association with 


Notes to Pages 61-66 315 


Peters later became a subject of investigation by the House Un-American Activities 
Committee (HUAC) and the AEC. In 1949, Oppenheimer denounced Peters as a 
“Red” in front of HUAC. See also Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 115-30; and 
see the further discussion in chapter 7 of this book. 

50. Oppenheimer to Birge, November 4, 1943, and further correspondence regard- 
ing Feynman, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 268-69, 275-77, 283-84. 

51. Kuznick, Beyond the Laboratory, 40. 

52. Herbert F. York, Making Weapons, Talking Peace: A Physicist’s Odyssey from 
HMiroshima to Geneva (New York: Basic Books, 1987), 25; Childs, An American Ge- 
nius, 266; Morrison, interviewed by the author, December 19, 2001; Sidney and 
Beatrice Webb, Soviet Communism: A New Civilization? vol. 1 (Worker’s Education 
Association, 1935), chap. 11, “Science the Salvation of Mankind,” 944-1016, quoting 
948. On Bernal and other socialists, see Gary Werskey, The Visible College: A Collec- 
tive Biography of British Scientists and Socialists of the 1930s (London: Free Asso- 
ciation Books, 1988); on their influence in the United States, see Helena Sheehan, 
Marxism and the Philosophy of Science: A Critical History (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: 
Humanities Press International, 1993), 409. 

53- On the OSRD and the Rad Lab’s work in 1941 on electromagnetic separation 
of isotopes, see Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 41, 56-60, 75. 

54. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics, 183-85. 

55. Oppenheimer to Lawrence, November 12, 1941, in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 220. Oppenheimer further distanced himself from FAECT in his 
security-hearings testimony (““Transcript,” 131). 

56. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics, 186; see also 161-77. 

57. Lawrence, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 222-23; Hewlett 
and Anderson, The New World, 46, 56-60; Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 203. 
Oppenheimer had initially greeted news of the discovery of fission with some skepti- 
cism. Rhodes, Dark Sun, 370; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 23; Oppenheimer 
to George Uhlenbeck, February 5 [1939], in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 
208-9. 

58. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 223-24; Lillian Hoddeson et al., 
Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years, 
1943-1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 42; Arthur Holly Comp- 
ton, Atomic Quest: A Personal Narrative (New York: Oxford University Press, 1956), 
125-30. 

5g. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 33-35. 

60. Nelson, Barrett, and Ruck, Steve Nelson, 269. See also “Transcript,” 194-95. 

61. Compton, quoted in Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 121; Hoddeson 
et al., Critical Assembly, 42-47; Jones, Manhattan, 73-77. 

62. Jones, Manhattan, 83. 

63. Ibid.; Robert F. Bacher, Robert Oppenheimer, 1904-1967 (Los Alamos, NM: 
Los Alamos Historical Society, 1999), 10-11; “Transcript,” 12, 28. 


316 Notes to Pages 66-70 


64. Jones, Manhattan, 83-85; Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 450-51; 
John H. Dudley, “Ranch School to Secret City,” in Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 
1943-1945, ed. Lawrence Badash, Joseph O. Hirschfelder, and Herbert P. Broida, 1- 
11 (Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1980); Edwin McMillan, “Early Days at Los Alamos,” 
ibid., 13-19, esp. 14-15. 

65. James W. Kunetka, City of Fire: Los Alamos and the Atomic Age, 1943-1945 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978), 64-66; Smith and Weiner, Robert Op- 
penheimer, 238; Goodchild, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 72; Lawren, The General and 
the Bomb, 105; Brode, Tales of Los Alamos, 1; Oppenheimer, quoted in Rhodes, The 
Making of the Atomic Bomb, 452. See also Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 
125. 

66. Kunetka, City of Fire, 59; Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 229; Hewlett 
and Anderson, The New World, 228. 

67. “Transcript,” 561. 

68. Jones, Manhattan, 87-88; Conant and Groves to Oppenheimer, February 25, 
1943, LANL A-84-019 57-27, Los Alamos National Laboratory Archives, Los Alamos, 
NM. 

69. Ellen Schrecker, Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1998), 165; R. E. Mayer, “J. Robert Oppenheimer alias Robert J. 
Oppenheimer,” March 28, 1941, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 
1; Kunetka, Oppenheimer, 31. 

70. “Transcript,” 260. See also Groves’s testimony in “Transcript,” 165. 

71. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 222. See also Hewlett and Anderson, 
The New World, 230. 

72. Conant to Groves, December 21, 1942, quoted in Hershberg, Fames B. Conant, 
167. See also Lawren, The General and the Bomb, 106; Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 186-87, 208; and Cassidy, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 217. 

73. Kenneth D. Nichols, The Road to Trinity (New York: William Morrow, 1987), 
72; Leslie R. Groves, Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project (New 
York: Harper and Brothers, 1962), 61-63; Lawren, The General and the Bomb, 100; 
Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 124. 

74. Luis Alvarez, Alvarez: Adventures of a Physicist (New York: Basic Books, 1987), 
78; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 71; Rabi, quoted in Jeremy Bernstein, Experi- 
encing Science (New York: Basic Books, 1978), 97; Eugene Wigner, The Recollections 
of Eugene P. Wigner as Told to Andrew Szanton (New York: Plenum Press, 1992), 
243; Allison, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 71. 

75. John Manley, “Assembling the Wartime Labs,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
30 (May 1974): 45; Manley, “A New Laboratory Is Born,” in Badash, Hirschfelder, 
and Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 21-38, on 30. 

76. Manley, “Assembling the Wartime Labs,” 45; Wilson, “A Recruit for Los 
Alamos,” 45. 

77. Wilson, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 72. 


Notes to Pages 70-74 317 


78. Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 1998; Oppenheimer, 
quoted in Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 40; Groves, Now It Can Be Told, 61-63; 
Lawren, The General and the Bomb, 102. See also Nichols, The Road to Trinity, 72; 
and Childs, An American Genius, 337. 

79. Nichols, The Road to Trinity, 152; Oppenheimer, quoted in Lawren, The 
General and the Bomb, 102; Wilson, “A Recruit for Los Alamos,” 42-43; Goodchild, 
4. Robert Oppenheimer, 73; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 74-75. 

80. The length of Oppenheimer’s hair in 1941 was discussed in Herbert S. Marks 
and Joseph Volpe, “Memorandum: Interview at Office of Assistant U. S. Attorney, 
William Hitz, Washington D.C., May 20, 1952,” 16, Oppenheimer Papers, box 237. 
Bethe’s description is given, retrospectively, in Herbert S. Marks to Oppenheimer, 
July 8, 1952, Oppenheimer Papers, box 237. Alvarez’s description is in Alvarez, 128. 
Jane Wilson is quoted in Palevsky, Atomic Fragments, 139. See also Charles Thorpe 
and Steven Shapin, “Who Was J. Robert Oppenheimer?” 566. 

81. Rabi, quoted in Lawren, The General and the Bomb, 101. 

82. Nichols, The Road to Trinity, 152; Bacher, quoted in Lawren, The General 
and the Bomb, 103-4; Bacher and Rabi, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 150 (emphasis in 
original); Alvarez, Alvarez, 128. 

83. Oppenheimer to Conant, February 1, 1943, in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 247-48, quoting 247; Conant and Groves to Oppenheimer, February 
25, 1943; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 45. 

84. War Department, “Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” November 12, 
1946, 5, file 322 (Los Alamos), Decimal Files, 1942-48, General Correspondence, 
1942-48, General Administrative Files, Record Group 77, National Archives and 
Records Administration. See also Colonel K. E. Fields to General Groves, January 
30, 1947, attached to this report. 

85. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 452; Robert F. Bacher, interviewed 
by Mary Terrall, June g, 1981, 74, California Institute of Technology Archives, Pasadena. 

86. Oppenheimer to Rabi, February 8, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers, box 59; Rabi, 
“Suggestions for Interim Organization and Procedure,” with covering letter from 
Rabi to Oppenheimer, February 10, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers, box 59; Hans A. 
Bethe, interviewed by the author, May 12, 1998; Oppenheimer to Rabi [ca. December 
(19?), 1944], Oppenheimer Papers, box 59; Bethe, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 149. 

87. “Transcript,” 174, 166; see also Groves, Now It Gan Be Told, 154-55. 

88. Condon to Oppenheimer, April 26, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers, box 27, in 
Groves, Now It Can Be Told, 429-32; “Transcript,” 166, 173-74. 

89. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 45. 

go. The different accounts are neatly summarized in Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 
44; see also Chevalier, Oppenheimer, esp. 52-54. Much of the security-hearings tran- 
script deals with this incident and the different accounts of it that Oppenheimer gave 
Manhattan Project intelligence officers. On Oppenheimer’s recollection of Eltenton 
as having attended the meeting at his home, see “Transcript,” 131. 


318 Notes to Pages 74-76 


gi. “Transcript,” 809, 811-12, 821-23; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 47. See also 
“Findings and Recommendation of the Personnel Security Board in the Matter of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer,” in Transcript and Texts, 999-1021, esp. 1006. 

g2. On Weinberg and Bohm as FAECT members, see Russell Olwell, “Physical 
Isolation and Marginalization in Physics: David Bohm’s Cold War Exile,” Jszs go, no. 
4 (1999): 740-41. Oppenheimer told Colonel Lansdale, “It was just generally obvious 
that [Lomanitz] was a member of the union” (““Transcript,” 206). On the three men’s 
FAECT membership, I am also indebted to Shawn Mullet, personal communication, 
March 19, 2002. See also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 175-76. 

93. “Transcript,” 811. According to Schrecker, Bohm was officially a Communist 
Party member between 1942 and 1943, but Lomanitz, although he attended party 
meetings, was not a member (No Ivory Tower, 135). Weinberg later denied the HUAC 
allegation that he had been a party member. He was charged with perjury on that 
count but was cleared in March 1953. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 57, 60; Herken, 
Brotherhood of the Bomb, 263-64. 

94. Lomanitz, quoted in Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, 135. 

95. Colonel K. D. Nichols to General Groves, “Communist Infiltration,” June 30, 
1943, Investigation Files, box 100, Records of the Office of the Commanding General, 
Manhattan Project. For more detail on the meeting between Nelson and “Joe,” see 
Rhodes, Dark Sun, 122-23, 309. See also Olwell, “Physical Isolation,” 741; Stern, 
The Oppenheimer Case, 48-49, 57; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 87-121; and 
Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 188-92. Weinberg denied that he had ever 
met Nelson, and he was never charged with espionage. For further discussion of the 
Weinberg case, see chapter 7; and Shawn Mullet, “Strong Rope, Leaky Buckets, and 
Atomic Espionage” (manuscript, 2002). I am grateful to Shawn Mullet for helpful 
discussions on the Weinberg case. 

g6. Transcript of conversation between Steve Nelson and “Joe,” attachment to 
John Lansdale to General Strong, “Subject: DSM Communist Infiltration,” June 12, 
1943, 2-6; and Colonel K. D. Nichols to General Groves, “Subject: Joseph Woodrow 
Weinberg,” June 30, 1943, both in Investigation Files, box 100, Records of the Office 
of the Commanding General, Manhattan Project. In the conversation, Oppenheimer 
is mentioned by name once: “Joe” says, “Oppie, for instance, thinks that it [the 
experimental phase] might take as long as a year and a half, ifhandled . . .” (13; ellipsis 
points in original). 

97. Transcript of conversation between Nelson and “Joe,” 8, 19. What actually 
took place between Nelson and Oppenheimer is unknown. Oppenheimer testified 
at the 1954 hearings, “I never discussed anything ... about the atomic bomb with 
Steve Nelson” (“Transcript,” 13). In his autobiography, Nelson denied that he was 
involved in atomic espionage (Steve Nelson, 294-95), and it is important to note that 
he was never found guilty. 

g8. Transcript of conversation between Nelson and “Joe,” 15, 24, 25. For the 
discussion of time estimates, see pp. 9 and 13. On the sensitivity of time schedules, 


Notes to Pages 76-79 319 


see Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash, memorandum, “Subject: D.S.M. Project, Re: 
Transcript of Conversation between Dr. J. R. Oppenheimer, Lt. Col. Boris T. Pash 
and Lt. Lyall Johnson,” August 27, 1943, in “Transcript,” 863-71, on 867. On Pash’s 
suspicions, see also Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 98. 

99. Boris T. Pash to Lieutenant Colonel Lansdale, “Subject: Julius Robert Op- 
penheimer,” June 29, 1943, in “Transcript,” 821-22. Lansdale thought it likely that 
Oppenheimer knew he was under surveillance (““Transcript,” 264). On Hawkins, see 
Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 101-2. 

100. Special agent D. L. Johnson, memorandum, “Subject: Frank Friedman Op- 
penheimer, Re: Covering Memorandum,” July 22, 1943, Investigation Files, box 100, 
Records of the Office of the Commanding General, Manhattan Project. 

101. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 48-51, quoting 49. Lansdale later said that 
“our main row” about Lomanitz and other personnel matters was “with Lawrence” 
(“Transcript,” 272). 

102. “Transcript,” 123, 133; Condon, interviewed by Weiner, September 11 and 
12, 1973, 92-93. See also G. Rossi Lomanitz, interviewed by Shawn Mullet, July 26, 
2001, Niels Bohr Library, AIP. 

103. Colonel Lansdale to General Groves, “Subject: J. R. Oppenheimer,” Au- 
gust 12, 1943, in “Transcript,” 275-76, quoting 276. Lomanitz had complained to 
Oppenheimer that he was being targeted because of his union organizing (Herken, 
Brotherhood of the Bomb, 107, 110). In the spring of 1942, Lomanitz had done important 
theoretical work under Oppenheimer on designing a new electromagnetic separation 
method. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 49; Condon, interviewed by Weiner, Septem- 
ber 11 and 12, 1973, 92. 

104. Lansdale to Groves, “Subject: J. R. Oppenheimer,” August 12, 1943, 276. 

105. Pash, “Transcript of Conversation between Dr. J. R. Oppenheimer, Lt. Col. 
Boris T. Pash, and Lt. Lyall Johnson,” August 27, 1943, 863-65. 

106. Ibid., 864-65. Oppenheimer’s naming of Chevalier was first reported in a 
wire dated December 13, 1943 (“Transcript,” 6, 14, 168, and esp. 153). 

107. “Transcript,” 168. 

108. Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash to General Groves, “Re: DSM Project 
(J. R. Oppenheimer),” September 2, 1943, in “Transcript,” 816. 

109. Peer de Silva to Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash, “Subject: J. R. Oppen- 
heimer,” September 2, 1943, in “Transcript,” 273-75, quoting 274. 

110. Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 198-99, 237-41, 247-48, 356-59. 
In addition, there is the apparent fabrication in Oppenheimer’s account that other 
people who were approached came to talk with him about these approaches. Bird and 
Sherwin speculated that Oppenheimer could have been recalling conversations with 
colleagues who may have been sympathetic to passing information and technology 
to the Russians (239-40). In his memoir, Chevalier described attending a party at 
Oppenheimer’s Berkeley home after the war and mentioned Lawrence as one of the 
physicists among the guests “whom I knew” (Oppenheimer, 72). But it seems that this 


320 Notes to Pages 79-85 


was knowledge at a distance. Even if Chevalier and Lawrence were acquainted via 
Oppenheimer or the university, this was in no way sufficient to make it conceivable 
that Chevalier would have discussed Eltenton’s proposal with Lawrence. Even if 
the Lawrence-Alvarez scenario had merely implanted in Oppenheimer’s mind the 
general and vague idea of three approaches, his account to the security officers was 
nevertheless a fiction. 

111. De Silva to Pash, September 2, 1943, 275. 

112. Bacher, interviewed by Terrall, June 9, 1981, 80-81. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1. Arno Roensch, interviewed by Los Alamos Historical Society (hereafter LAHS), 
March 21, 1992, LAHM-M1g92-112-1-56, Los Alamos Historical Museum (hereafter 
LAHM), Los Alamos, NM. 

2. Rabi, “Introduction,” in Rabietal., Oppenheimer, 8; unnamed source, quoted in 
Howard Gardner, “J. Robert Oppenheimer: The Teaching of Physics, the Lessons of 
Politics,” in Leading Minds: An Anatomy of Leadership (New Y ork: Basic Books, 1995), 
89-109, on 99; Bethe, “Oppenheimer,” 1082; Robert R. Wilson, “The Conscience 
ofa Physicist,” in Alamogordo plus Twenty-five Years, ed. Richard S$. Lewis and Jane 
Wilson, with Eugene Rabinowitch (New York: Viking Press, 1971), 71; Bradbury, 
quoted and paraphrased in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 278; Bradbury, speech 
at Los Alamos, February 1971, 5, LAHM (M) 1856 (b)/72.208; Laura Fermi, Atoms 
in the Family: My Life with Enrico Fermi (1954; Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1982), 205; Enrico Fermi, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 
182; Teller, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 570; Edward Teller, 
The Legacy of Hiroshima, with Allen Brown (1962; Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 
1975), 13- 

3. Untitled address, “Los Alamos Correspondence, 1942-46,” Oppenheimer 
Papers, quoted in Jon Hunner, Inventing Los Alamos: The Growth of an Atomic 
Community (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2004), 94. 

4. See W. I. Thomas, “Situational Analysis: The Behavior Pattern and the Situ- 
ation” (1927), in Thomas, On Social Organization and Social Personality, ed. Mor- 
ris Janowitz, 154-67 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966); Peter McHugh, 
Defining the Situation: The Organization of Meaning in Social Interaction (New York: 
Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1968); Thorpe and Shapin, “Who Was J. Robert Oppenheimer?” 
esp. 547-63; and Steven Shapin, “The House of Experiment in Seventeenth-Century 
England,” Isis 79 (1988), esp. 390. 

5. Alice Kimball Smith, “Los Alamos: Focus of an Age,” in Lewis and Wilson, 
Alamogordo plus Twenty-five Years, 33-46, quoting 34. 

6. Ruth Marshak, “Secret City,” in Wilson and Serber, Standing By and Mak- 
ing Do, 1-19, quoting 5. See also Segré, A Mind Always in Motion, 181; and War 
Department, “Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” 8. 


Notes to Pages 85-87 321 


7. Dudley, “Ranch School to Secret City,” in Badash, Hirschfelder, and Broida, 
Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 3-4. 

8. Hales, Atomic Spaces, 57-60; Peter Bacon Hales, “Topographies of Power: The 
Forced Spaces of the Manhattan Project,” in Mapping American Culture, ed. Wayne 
Franklin and Michael Steiner, 251-90 (Iowa City: University of lowa Press, 1992); Jon 
Hunner, “Family Secrets: The Growth of Community at Los Alamos, New Mexico, 
1943-1957” (PhD diss., University of New Mexico, 1996), 20-22; Hunner, Inventing 
Los Alamos, 16-17; Fermor S. Church and Peggy Pond Church, When Los Alamos 
Was a Ranch School (Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 1974); Hal K. 
Rothman, On Rims and Ridges: The Los Alamos Area since 1880 (Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1992), 209. 

g. Francoise Ulam, interviewed in Jon Else’s film The Day after Trinity; Otto 
Frisch, “Impressions of Los Alamos during the Manhattan Project,” interview tran- 
script, June 19, 1973, LAHM (M) 1845 (b)/68.5, 5. 

10. Phyllis Fisher, Los Alamos Experience (New York: Japan Publications, 1985), 
26. See also Marshak, “Secret City,” 4; and Wilson, “Not Quite Eden,” in Wilson 
and Serber, Standing By and Making Do, 43. 

11. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 253; Gregg Herken, “The University 
of California, the Federal Weapons Labs, and the Founding of the Atomic West,” 
in The Atomic West, ed. Bruce Hevly and John M. Findlay (Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 1998), 130 n. 1. See also Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 
247. 

12. Joseph P. Masco, “Nuclear Borderlands: The Legacy of the Manhattan Project 
in Post-Cold War New Mexico” (PhD diss., University of California, San Diego, 
1999), 68, 97 n. 2, 146-47; Marshak, “Secret City,” 3. 

13. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 444; Peggy Pond Church, The House 
at Otowt Bridge: The Story of Edith Warner and Los Alamos (Albuquerque: University 
of New Mexico Press, 1960), 86; Oppenheimer, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of 
the Atomic Bomb, 451. 

14. Rothman, On Rims and Ridges, 209. See also Brode, Tales of Los Alamos, 15; 
Marshak, “Secret City,” 4; and Canaday, The Nuclear Muse, 151-59. 

15. Elsie Blumer McMillan, The Atom and Eve (New York: Vantage Press, 1995), 5- 

16. Charles H. Bagley, interviewed by the author, June 22, 1998. 

17. Jacob J. Wechsler, interviewed by the author, December 18, 1997. 

18. Marshak, “Secret City,” 2-3. 

19. Dorothy McKibben, “109 East Palace,” in Wilson and Serber, Standing By 
and Making Do, 21-27; Marshak, “Secret City,” 8. 

20. Marshak, “Secret City,” 7-8. See also Rachel Fermi and Esther Samra, Pictur- 
ing the Bomb: Photographs from the Secret World of the Manhattan Project (New York: 
Harry N. Abrams, 1995), 34. The procedure is also discussed in Governing Board 
Minutes, August 19, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-22, Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Archives (hereafter LANL). 


322 Notes to Pages 87-90 


21. This policy was suggested to Groves by Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer to 
Groves, November 2, 1943, Decimal Files, 1942-48, Record Group (RG) 77, Na- 
tional Archives and Records Administration. 

22. Serber, Peace and War, 79. See also Jette, Inside Box 1663, 34. 

23. Alice Kimball Smith, “Law and Order,” in Wilson and Serber, Standing By 
and Making Do, 73-87, quoting 74; Manhattan District History, bk. 8, Los Alamos 
Project (Y), vol. 1, General, 7.15; “Manhattan District History,” 1942-46, Records of 
the Office of the Chief of Engineers, RG 77. 

24. Governing Board Minutes, May 6, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-3; Governing Board 
Minutes, September 30, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-27; Mason, Children of Los Alamos, 
11; Shirley B. Barnett, “Operation Los Alamos,” in Wilson and Serber, Standing By 
and Making Do, 89-101, on 89. 

25. Mason, Children of Los Alamos, 11; “Memorandum on the Los Alamos Project” 
[ca. 1943], in Jette, Inside Box 1663, 125-28; Hedy Dunn, Los Alamos Historical 
Society, personal communication to the author, May 6, 2003. 

26. Governing Board Minutes, May 10, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-4; Governing 
Board Minutes, October 21, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-30. 

27. Governing Board Minutes, October 28, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-31. See also 
Governing Board Minutes, September 23, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-26; “Censorship 
Regulations” [ca. 1943], in Jette, Insede Box 1663, 129-32; Mason, Children of Los 
Alamos, 10; Governing Board Minutes, May 8, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-20; and 
Eleanor Roensch, interviewed by LAHS, March 21, 1992, LAHM-M1992-112-1-55. 

28. McMillan, The Atom and Eve, 15; Wilson, “Not Quite Eden,” 44-45; “Memo- 
randum on the Los Alamos Project,” 127. See also Hales, “Topographies of Power,” 
274; and Smith, “Los Alamos,” 37. 

29. Oppenheimer to Conant, November 30, 1942, in Smith and Weiner, Robert 
Oppenheimer, 240-42, quoting 242. 

30. Bacher, interviewed by Mary Terrall, June 9, 1981, 76; Governing Board 
Minutes, May 3, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-2; Governing Board Minutes, July 15, 1943, 
LANL A-83-013 1-17; Oppenheimer to Bacher, April 28, 1943, in Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 254-55, quoting 255. 

31. Oppenheimer to Ernest Lawrence, May 19, 1942, quoted in Hunner, Inventing 
Los Alamos, 31; Dudley, “Ranch School to Secret City,” 3; Goodchild, 7 Robert 
Oppenheimer, 71; Hales, Atomic Spaces, 57; “Transcript,” 12; Hugh Bradner, personal 
communication to the author, April 2000. See also Peter Goodchild, Edward Teller: 
The Real Dr. Strangelove (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), 75. 

32. Captain Musser to Colonel Tyler, “Post Population,” February 5, 1945, file 
091.4, Peoples (Census), Decimal Correspondence Relating to Los Alamos Labora- 
tory, Records of the Santa Fe (NM) Engineer Office, Records of the Office of the 
Commanding General, Manhattan Project, RG 77. 

33. Manhattan District History, bk. 8, Los Alamos Project (Y), vol. 1, General, 
7.15, and Appendix B-1: “Hospital Statistics—Los Alamos, New Mexico.” See also 


Notes to Pages 90-94 323 


Jones, Manhattan, 502; and see the rougher estimates in “Transcript,” 12; and Fermi, 
Atoms in the Family, 206. 

34. David Hawkins, “Toward Trinity,” part 1 of Project Y: The Los Alamos Story 
(Los Angeles: Tomash Publishers, 1983), 483 (this official history was written in 
1947 and declassified in 1961); Stafford L. Warren, Colonel, Medical Corps, to Major 
General L. R. Groves, June 22, 1944, “Subject: Hospital Requirements at ‘Y,’” 2, Ex 
31, bk. 2, Manhattan District History, bk. 8, Los Alamos Project (Y), series 1, vol. 9, 
bk. 2 (Exhibits), undated, LANL A-85-002 2-2. 

35. Jean Bacher, “Fresh Air and Alcohol,” in Wilson and Serber, Standing By 
and Making Do, 103-15, quoting 103, 112. See also John Balagna, interviewed by the 
author, January 13, 1998. 

36. Quoting Marshak, “Secret City,” 11. See also Barnett, “Operation Los 
Alamos,” 91. 

37. Governing Board Minutes, May 24, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-8. 

38. Eric Kent Clarke, MD, to Colonel S. L. Warren, “Mental Hygiene Survey at 
‘Y, August 23-27, 1944,” August 29, 1944, folder 330.11, Morale, Decimal Correspon- 
dence Relating to Los Alamos Laboratory, 1942-48. See also Hales, Atomic Spaces, 
293-24. 

39. Mason, Children of Los Alamos, 8. See also Hunner, “Family Secrets,” xviii; 
and Hales, Atomic Spaces, 112. 

40. Mason, Children of Los Alamos, 8. 

41. Barnett, “Operation Los Alamos,” 101; Fermi, Atoms in the Family, 229. 

42. Tyler, “Resume of Instructions,” October 1944, quoted in Lenore Fine and 
Jesse A. Remington, The Corps of Engineers: Construction in the United States (Wash- 
ington, DC: Office of the Chief of Military History, United States Army, 1972), 
699. 

43. Smith, “Law and Order”; Weisskopf, The Foy of Insight, 141. 

44. Governing Board Minutes, May 24, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-8. 

45. Ellen Herman, The Romance of American Psychology: Political Culture in the 
Age of Experts (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1995), 
esp. 29, 69-72; Morris Janowitz, “Military Elites and the Study of War,” in War: 
Studies from Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, ed. Leon Bramson and George W. 
Goethals (New York: Basic Books, 1968), esp. 354. See also Samuel A. Stouffer et al., 
The American Soldier, vol. 1, Adjustment during Army Life (1949; New York: Science 
Editions, 1965). 

46. War Department, “Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” 4, 8. 

47. Bradbury, speech at Los Alamos, February 1971, 3, 18; Eric Kent Clarke, 
MD, “Psychiatric Problems in the Community at Y,” May 2, 1945, file 702, Medical 
Examinations, Decimal Correspondence Relating to Los Alamos Laboratory; Clarke, 
“Mental Hygiene Survey at ‘Y.’” 

48. See Albert B. Christman, Target Hiroshima: Deak Parsons and the Creation 
of the Atomic Bomb (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1998). 


324 Notes to Pages 95-99 


49. Jones, Manhattan, 485-86; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 76; War De- 
partment, “Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” 3. 

50. Jones, Manhattan, 502; Hawkins, “Toward Trinity,” 484-86. See also Ruth 
H. Howes and Caroline L. Herzenberg, Their Day in the Sun: Women of the Man- 
hattan Project (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1999), 86, 132, 148-51, 166. 

51. For further discussion of implosion, see chapter 5. 

52. Kistiakowsky to Oppenheimer, “Organization of Field Sites,” July 28, 1944, 
LANL A-84-019 4-1. 

53. Conference with Senior Staff Officers [ca. 1945], 3-4, file 337, Staff Confer- 
ences, Decimal Correspondence Relating to Los Alamos Laboratory; Clarke, “Mental 
Hygiene Survey at ‘Y.”” See also Hoddeson et al., Cretecal Assembly, 98. 

54. McAllister H. HullJr., interviewed by LAHS, March 24, 1992, LAHM-M1992- 
112-1-64; Bagley, interviewed by the author, June 22, 1998; Bagley, interviewed by 
LAHS, October 25, 1991, LAHM-Mi1gg92-112-1-1; Roger Rasmussen, interviewed 
by LAHS, January 11, 1992, LAHM-M1992-112-1-26; Roy Merryman, interviewed 
by LAHS, December 14, 1991, LAHM-M1gg2-112-1-18; Miriam White Campbell, 
interviewed by LAHS, December 9, 1991, LAHM-M1g92-112-1-15. 

55. Clarke, “Mental Hygiene Survey at ‘Y.’” 

56. Conant and Groves to Oppenheimer, February 25, 1943, in Hawkins, “Toward 
Trinity,” 495-97, quoting 495. 

57. Hales, Atomic Spaces, 119. See, for example, the organization chart printed in 
Fine and Remington, The Corps of Engineers, 678. See also Robert S. Norris, Racing 
for the Bomb: General Leslie R. Groves, the Manhattan Project's Indispensable Man 
(South Royalton, VT: Steerforth Press, 2002). 

58. Colonel Nichols, memorandum [to key officers in the District], “Subject: 
Information concerning Compliance with Instructions,” April 22, 1944, box 1, file 
000, Decimal Correspondence Relating to Los Alamos Laboratory, 1942-48. 

59. Groves, interviewed by J. J. Ermenc, November 7, 1967, in Ermenc, Atomic 
Bomb Scientists: Memoirs, 1939-1945 (Westport, CT: Meckler, 1984), 15, 32. See also 
Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 278. 

60. Groves, quoted in Ermenc, Atomic Bomb Scientists, 33-34; Hewlett and An- 
derson, The New World, 333-35; Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 334. 

61. Groves, memorandum, “What Occurred during a Meeting at the White 
House,” December 30, 1944; “Notes to Aid in the Preparation of the Agenda for 
the Meeting between the President and the Secretary of War, with Major General 
Groves,” n.d., both in Correspondence (“Top Secret”) of the Manhattan Engineer 
District, 1942-46, Records of the Office of the Chief of Engineers, National Archives 
Microfilm Publication M150 (hereafter MED Correspondence), microfilm roll 3. See 
also Fine and Remington, The Corps of Engineers, 661-63. 

62. Nichols, The Road to Trinity, 60-61. 

63. Groves and Lawrence, quoted in Edward Teller, Memoirs: A Twentieth- 
Century Fourney in Science and Politics, with Judith L. Shoolery (Oxford: Perseus 


Notes to Pages 99-103 325 


Press, 2001), 204; Hughes, American Genesis, 409-10; Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 
205. 

64. Groves, Now It Can Be Told, 140. See also Stanley Goldberg, “Groves and 
the Scientists: Compartmentalization and the Building of the Bomb,” Physics Today 
48, no. 8 (August 1995): 38-43; Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 227-28; and 
Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 254-60. 

65. Marshall, quoted in Fine and Remington, The Corps of Engineers, 658; Groves, 
Now It Can Be Told, 20. See also Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 228, 256. 

66. Groves, Now It Can Be Told, 140. See also “Transcript,” 164. 

67. Compton, Atomic Quest, 130; Hales, Atomic Spaces, 118. 

68. Groves, quoted in Ermenc, Atomic Bomb Scientists, 41; Sherwin, A World 
Destroyed, 53-63, esp. 61-62. 

69. Szilard to Compton, November 25, 1942, “[Re] Compartmentalization of 
Information and the Effect of Impurities of 49,” in Leo Szilard: His Version of the 
Facts; Selected Recollections and Correspondence, ed. Spencer R. Weart and Gertrud 
Weiss Szilard (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978), 160-61, quoting 160. 

70. Eugene Wigner, “Memoir of the Uranium Project,” in The Collected Works of 
Eugene Paul Wigner, vol. 5, Nuclear Energy, Part A: The Scientific Papers, ed. Alvin 
M. Weinberg with Alfred M. Perry (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992), 79. 

71. Groves, Memorandum for the Secretary of War, “Subject: Leo Szilard,” Octo- 
ber 29, 1945, and attachment, MED Correspondence, microfilm roll 2; Rhodes, The 
Making of the Atomic Bomb, 506. 

72. Stanley Goldberg, “General Groves and the Atomic West: The Making and 
Meaning of Hanford,” in The Atomic West, ed. Bruce Hevly and John M. Findlay 
(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1998), 46; Goldberg, “Groves and the 
Scientists,” 38. 

73. Groves, quoted in Ermenc, Atomic Bomb Scientists, 43. 

74. Cf. Richard Whitley, The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984). 

75. Nichols, The Road to Trinity, 104; “Transcript,” 172. See also Norris, Racing 

for the Bomb, 244-45. 

76. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 228-29. 

77. See, for example, Oppenheimer to Bacher, June 10, 1942, in Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 225. 

78. Sociologist Diane Vaughan calls this de facto compartmentalization “structural 
secrecy.” The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and Deviance 
at NASA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 238-77; Diane Vaughan, “The 
Role of the Organization in the Production of Techno-scientific Knowledge,” Social 
Studies of Science 29 (1999), esp. 916-18. 

79. Governing Board Minutes, November 11, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-33; Minutes 
of the Meetings of the Liaison Committee, January 11 and February 11, 1944, LANL 
A-83-013 3-25. On Teller’s role in liaison, see also Teller, Memoirs, 178. 


326 Notes to Pages 103-112 


80. Governing Board Minutes, May 6, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-3. See also Teller, 
Memoirs, 172. 

81. Governing Board Minutes, August 5, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-20. 

82. Governing Board Minutes, October 28, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-31. 

83. Ibid. 

84. See, for example, Governing Board Minutes, March 23, 1944, LANL A-83-013 
1-45; and Oppenheimer to Groves (teletype), June 19, 1943, Decimal Files, 1942-48. 

85. Governing Board Minutes, June 10, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-12; Governing 
Board Minutes, October 23, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-29; Governing Board Minutes, 
November 4, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-32; Oppenheimer to Groves, “Liaison with Site 
X,” October 4, 1943, file 001, Decimal Files, 1942-48. 

86. Individual exceptions were occasionally made. Berlyn Brixner, interviewed 
by the author, January 14, 1998. 

87. McAllister Hull Jr., interviewed by the author, January 16, 1998. 

88. Wechsler, interviewed by the author, December 18, 1997. 

89. Ibid.; Bagley, interviewed by the author, June 22, 1998; Hull, interviewed by 
the author, January 16, 1998. 

go. Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 1998. 

g1. Governing Board Minutes, May 31, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-10; Governing 
Board Minutes, August 5, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-20; Hawkins, “Toward Trinity,” 
30; Groves, Now It Can Be Told, 167; Philip Morrison, interviewed by the author, 
December 19, 2001; Bethe, “Oppenheimer,” 1082; Victor Weisskopf, interviewed by 
Lillian Hoddeson and Gordon Baym, March 10, 1978, 16-17, LANL TR-78-006. 

g2. Victor Kumin, interviewed by LAHS, July 26, 1995, LAHM-M1995-1-1; Weis- 
skopf, “The Los Alamos Years,” in Rabietal., Oppenheimer, 24; Hawkins, interviewed 
by the author, November 16, 1998. 

93. Bethe, “Oppenheimer,” 1082; Alvarez, Alvarez, 128; Rudolf E. Peierls, Atomic 
Histories (Woodbury, NY: AIP Press, 1997), 51. 

94. Donald E. Hirsch, interviewed by LAHS, May 7, 1997, LAHM-M1997-1-1-1; 
Morrison, interviewed by the author, December 19, 2001. 

95. Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 1998; Joseph O. 
Hirschfelder, “The Scientific and Technological Miracle at Los Alamos,” in Badash, 
Hirschfelder, and Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 67-88, quoting 78; Harold 
Agnew, interviewed by LAHS, November 20, 1991, LAHM-M1992-112-1-5. 

96. Bethe, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 570; Bethe, “Op- 
penheimer,” 1082; Peierls, Atomic Histories, 51; Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppen- 
heimer, 264. 

97. Weisskopf, interviewed by Hoddeson and Baym, March 10, 1978, 2; Stanislaw 
M. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician (New York: Scribner, 1976), 147; Weisskopf, 
“The Los Alamos Years,” 24. 

98. Weisskopf, interviewed by Hoddeson and Baym, March 10, 1978, 2-3. Weis- 
skopf said during this interview that in his later career as director of the European 


Notes to Pages 112-117 327 


nuclear physics laboratory, CERN, he tried to model his leadership style on Oppen- 
heimer’s example. See also Weisskopf, The Foy of Insight, 133, 230. 

gg. Wilson, “A Recruit for Los Alamos,” 45. 

100. Wigner, Recollections, 245-46. 

101. Tuck, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 187; Peierls, Atomic 
Mstories, 51; Bethe, “Oppenheimer,” 1082. 

102. Peierls, Atomic Histories, 59, 51; Hughes, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and 
Oppenheimer, 184; Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 125; Cyril Stanley Smith, 
interviewed by LAHS, May 29, 1992, LAHM-M 1992-112-1-7; Teller, quoted in Davis, 
Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 129; Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 
1998. 

103. Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 128; Ed Doty to his parents, August 
7, 1945, LAHM. 

104. Kunetka, City of Fire, 57-58; Hirschfelder, “Scientific and Technological 
Miracle,” 78; Bernice Brode, “Tales of Los Alamos,” in Badash, Hirschfelder, and 
Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 133-60, quoting 142. The baby was Katherine 
“Toni” Oppenheimer, born in the first year of the project. Goodchild, 7. Robert 
Oppenheimer, 127. 

105. Smith, “Los Alamos,” 38; Brode, Tales of Los Alamos, 97. See also Jungk, 
Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 132. 

106. Hull, interviewed by the author, January 16, 1998. 

107. Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 1998. On the history of 
these dualisms, see Steven Shapin and Barry Barnes, “Head and Hand: Rhetorical 
Resources in British Pedagogical Writing, 1770-1850,” Oxford Review of Education 
2, no. 3 (1976): 231-54. 

108. Cf. Steven Shapin, “Invisible Technicians: Masters, Servants, and the Mak- 
ing of Experimental Knowledge,” in A Soctal History of Truth, 355-407; Chandra 
Mukerji, A Fragile Power: Scientists and the State (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni- 
versity Press, 1989), 125-45; Stephen Barley and Beth Bechky, “In the Backrooms 
of Science: The Work of Technicians in Science Labs,” Work and Occupations 
21 (1994): 85-126; Benjamin Sims, “Concrete Practices: Testing in an Earthquake- 
Engineering Laboratory,” Social Studies of Science 29, no. 4 (August 1999), esp. 
493. 

109. See Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 160; Jennifer Light, “When Comput- 
ers Were Women,” Technology and Culture 40 (1999): 455-83. 

110. Nevertheless, Groves saw such visits as important for maintaining morale 
(“Transcript,” 172-73). 

111. Charles and Jean Critchfield, interviewed by LAHS, November g, 1991, 
LAHM-M1992-112-1-2; Bagley, interviewed by the author, June 22, 1998. 

112. Agnew, interviewed by LAHS, November 20, 1991; Eleanor Roensch, in- 
terviewed by LAHS, March 21, 1992; Bagley, interviewed by the author, June 22, 
1998. 


328 Notes to Pages 118-124 


113. Agnew, interviewed by LAHS, November 20, 1991; Hull, interviewed by the 
author, January 16, 1998. 

114. Groves, quoted in Ermenc, Atomic Bomb Scientists, 44; War Department, 
“Complications of the Los Alamos Project,” 8-9. 

115. George Kistiakowsky, interviewed by LANL, April 1981, LANL TR-81-010; 
Raemer Schreiber, interviewed by LAHS, March 21, 1992, LAHM-M1g92-112-1-57. 

116. Marjorie Ulam, interviewed by LAHS, November 9, 1991, LAHM-M1g92-1-3; 
Robert Serber, The Los Alamos Primer: The First Lectures on How to Build an Atomic 
Bomb, ed. Richard Rhodes (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1992), xxx; Teller, quoted in Stanley A. Blumberg and Gwinn Owens, Energy and 
Conflict: The Life and Times of Edward Teller (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 
1976), 126. See also Goodchild, Edward Teller, 88-91. 

117. Teller to Mayer, n.d., Papers of Maria Goeppert Mayer, Mandeville Special 
Collections Library, University of California, San Diego. The use of the phrase 
“physicist-reservation” suggests that this letter was written after August 1945, since it 
would have been censored during the war. Some of Teller’s postwar letters to Mayer 
are extracted in Teller, Memoirs, 258, 275-76, 279, 283-84, 290, 305-6, 355, 434-35. 

118. Teller to Mayer, n.d., Mayer Papers. 

119. Teller to Mayer, n.d., Mayer Papers. 

120. Teller to Mayer [April 15, 1945], Mayer Papers. 

121. Teller to Mayer, n.d., Mayer Papers. 

122. Teller to Mayer [ca. 1945], Mayer Papers. 

123. Teller and Bethe, quoted in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 
128-29; Weisskopf, The Foy of Insight, 134-35. 

124. Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 128. 

125. Bethe, quoted in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 128; see also 
Teller, Memoirs, 159-61. 

126. Bethe, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 453; Teller, quoted 
in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 126, 135, and in Davis, Lawrence and 
Oppenheimer, 129; Teller, interviewed by the author, June 20, 1998. See also Teller, 
Memoirs, esp. 163, 379. 

127. Teller, quoted in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 136; see also 
Teller, Memoirs, 180-81. 

128. Quoted in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 130. 

129. Edward Teller, “Seven Hours of Reminiscences,” Los Alamos Science 4, 
no. 7 (Winter/Spring 1983): 192; Teller to Szilard, July 2, 1945, in Weart and Szilard, 
Leo Szilard, 208-9; Teller, Memoirs, 204-8; Goodchild, Edward Teller, 102-3. 

130. Teller, interviewed by the author, June 20, 1998. 

131. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 256; Teller to Mayer [ca. early 1947], 
Mayer Papers, printed in part in Teller, Memoirs, 264. 

132. Hawkins, “Toward Trinity,” 184-87; Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 
203-4. 


Notes to Pages 125-132 329 


133. Hawkins, interviewed by the author, November 16, 1998. 

134. Parsons to Oppenheimer, “Organization,” September 7, 1944, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 56. 

135. Oppenheimer to Parsons, “Organization,” September 15, 1944, LANL A-84- 
019 34-12. 

136. Manley, quoted in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 263. 

137. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 380-92; Lawrence Badash, Scientists 
and the Development of Nuclear Weapons: From Fission to the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty, 1939-1963 (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International, 1995), 
53- 

138. Groves, Memorandum for the Secretary of War, “Subject: The Test,” July 18, 
1945, MED Correspondence, microfilm roll 1; Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell, 
quoted in Groves, Memorandum for the Secretary of War, July 18, 1945. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1. Hawkins, Project Y, xvii; Thomas P. Hughes, “Technological Momentum in 
History: Hydrogenation in Germany, 1898-1933,” Past and Present 44 (1969): 106-32; 
Hughes, American Genesis, esp. 381-442, 459-61. 

2. Cf. E. P. Thompson, “Time, Work-Discipline and Industrial Capitalism,” Past 
and Present 38 (1967): 56-97; Eviatar Zerubavel, Hidden Rhythms: Schedules and 
Calendars in Social Life (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981). 

3. Hales, Atomic Spaces. 

4. Bohr, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 500; and Teller, 
Memoirs, 186. 

5. Stanislaw Ulam, H. W. Kuhn, A. W. Tucker, and Claude E. Shannon, “John 
von Neumann, 1903-1957,” in Fleming and Bailyn, The Intellectual Migration, 264. 

6. Roensch, interviewed by LAHS, March 21, 1992. 

7. Groves, Now It Gan Be Told, 167. See also Groves to Tolman, April 16, 1943, 
MED Correspondence, microfilm roll 5. 

8. Hawkins, Project Y, 17. 

g. Hoddeson et al., Cretecal Assembly, 251. 

10. However, the pile was shut down almost immediately because of a problem 
with fission product contamination, which delayed full operation until December. 
Plutonium from Hanford began to arrive at Los Alamos in February 1945. See Rhodes, 
The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 557-60; and Hoddeson etal., Critical Assembly, 290- 
g1. On Hanford, see also Harry Thayer, Management of the Hanford Engineer Works 
in World War Two: How the Corps, DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory Fast 
Tracked the Original Plutonium Works (New York: ASCE Press, 1996). 

11. In July 1944, the work of the Governing Board was divided between an Admin- 
istrative Board and a Technical Board. The work of the Technical Board was quickly 
taken over by other senior committees, and the Administrative Board continued the 


330 ©Notes to Pages 132-136 


Governing Board’s functions of organizational planning and workforce management. 
Hoddeson et al., Critecal Assembly, 247. 

12. Administrative Board Minutes, August 17, 1944, LANL A-83-013 1-54. 

13. Administrative Board Minutes, September 28, 1944, LANL A-83-013 1-56. 
(The minutes refer, in error, to “Colonel Kilpatrick.”) Kirkpatrick’s visit of September 
20-October 1, 1944, was also recorded in the post’s log of arrivals and departures 
(folder 280.2, Visits, Decimal Files, 1942-48, General Correspondence, 1942-48, 
General Administrative Files, Records of the Office of the Commanding General, 
Manhattan Project, RG 77). See also Kunetka, Crty of Fire, 114; Jones, Manhattan, 
526-27; and Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 322-24. The Pacific Mariana island of 
Tinian was chosen in February 1945 as the base from which the atomic bomb attack 
against Japan would be launched (Jones, Manhattan, 524). 

14. Brode, Tales of Los Alamos, 33. 

15. Fermi, Atoms in the Family, 229; Brode, Tales of Los Alamos, 37; Groves, in 
“Transcript,” 167. 

16. Serber, Peace and War, 83; Marshak, “Secret City,” in Wilson and Serber, 
Standing By and Making Do, 10-11. 

17. Marshak, “Secret City,” 10; Mitchell, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppen- 
heimer, 183; Lillian Hoddeson, “Mission Change in the Large Laboratory: The Los 
Alamos Implosion Program, 1943-1945,” in Big Sctence: The Growth of Large-Scale 
Research, ed. Peter Galison and Bruce Hevly (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1992), 286. 

18. Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 169; Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic 
Bomb, 466; Hawkins, Project Y, 10; Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 69-75, 268; 
Serber, The Los Alamos Primer, esp. 59. 

19. Hoddeson etal., Critical Assembly, 87; Hawkins, Project Y, 22; John H. Manley, 
‘““A New Laboratory Is Born,” in Badash, Hirschfelder, and Broida, Reminiscences 
of Los Alamos, 21-38, on 34; Parsons, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic 
Bomb, 479. 

20. Thayer, Hanford Engineer Works, 87; Hawkins, Project Y, 14; Hoddeson 
et al., Critecal Assembly, 87; McMillan, “Early Days at Los Alamos,” in Badash, 
Hirschfelder, and Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 13-19, on 16. 

21. Thompson to Oppenheimer, June 25, 1943, and Thompson to Neddermeyer, 
June 23, 1943, LANL A-84-019 4-1. 

22. George Kistiakowsky, quoted in Goodchild, 7 Robert Oppenheimer, 113; 
William Higinbotham and Neddermeyer, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppen- 
heimer, 169, 172, 219. See also Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 467. See also 
Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 245-46. 

23. Hawkins, Project Y, 125-26; Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 130-31; 
Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 480; Jones, Manhattan, 506. 

24. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 479, 542; Hoddeson et al., Critical 
Assembly, 131, 445 n. 2; Hawkins, Project Y, 125. 


Notes to Pages 136-141 331 


25. Critchfield, quoted in Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 131-32; Nedder- 
meyer, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 217. See also Hawkins, Project 
Y, 124-25. 

26. Governing Board Minutes, October 28, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-31; Governing 
Board Minutes, November 4, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-32; Hoddeson et al., Critical 
Assembly, 134-35; Hawkins, Project Y, 69; Kunetka, City of Fire, 86-87. See also 
““H.E. Program Discussed at Meeting,” October 25, 1943, LANL A-84-019 4-1. 

27. Governing Board Minutes, September 23, 1943, LANL A-83-013 1-26; Gov- 
erning Board Minutes, October 28, 1943. See also Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 
136; and Kunetka, City of Fire, 86. 

28. Oppenheimer to Conant, November 1, 1943, quoted in Hoddeson et al., Crit- 
ical Assembly, 137; Kistiakowsky to Oppenheimer, “E-5 Group,” June 3, 1944, Op- 
penheimer Papers, box 43; Kistiakowsky, “Reminiscences of Wartime Los Alamos,” 
in Badash, Hirschfelder, and Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 49-65, quoting 
49-50. See also Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 218. 

29. Kistiakowsky, “Reminiscences of Wartime Los Alamos,” 50. Such conflicts 
are often present in a field’s transition to “big science”; see Harry Collins, “LIGO 
Becomes Big Science,” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 32, 
no. 2 (2003): 235-96; and Collins, Gravity’s Shadow: The Search for Gravitational 
Waves (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004). 

30. Kistiakowsky to Parsons, November 24, 1943, quoted in Hoddeson et al., 
Critical Assembly, 139; Hoddeson et al., Critecal Assembly, 139-40. 

31. In early 1944, an implosion group within the Theoretical Division was estab- 
lished, headed by Teller (Hoddeson et al., Critzcal Assembly, 157). See also Hoddeson, 
“Mission Change,” 273. 

32. Hans Bethe, interviewed by Lillian Hoddeson, October 1986, LANL TR-86- 
0787. 

33. Kistiakowsky to Oppenheimer, “E-5 Group,” June 3, 1944. 

34. Hawkins, Project Y, 70; Kunetka, City of Fire, 116. 

35. Kistiakowsky to Oppenheimer, “E-5 Group,” June 3, 1944. 

36. Ibid.; Hugh Bradner, interviewed by the author, August 9, 2001. 

37. Neddermeyer, quoted in Davis, Lawrence and Oppenheimer, 219 (see also 
230-31); Kistiakowsky to Oppenheimer, “E-5 Group,” June 3, 1944; Oppenheimer to 
Neddermeyer, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 547 (quoted also 
in Kunetka, City of Fire, 88); Charles Critchfield, “First Implosion at Los Alamos,” 
in Behind Tall Fences, 101-2. 

38. Kistiakowsky to Parsons, “Organization of the H.E. Project,” June 21, 1944, 
LANL A-84-019 4-1. 

39. Kistiakowsky to Oppenheimer, “Delegation of Authority within the H.E. 
Project,” May 30, 1944, LANL A-84-019 4-1. Group E-5 was designated Implosion 
Experimentation. Group E-9, under the leadership of physicist Kenneth Bainbridge, 
was named High Explosive Development. The latter worked on the design and testing 


332 Notes to Pages 141-147 


of full-scale high-explosive assemblies (see Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 139, 
245-46). It is worth noting that Kistiakowsky tended to refer to the entire implosion 
experimentation and engineering program (including the work of E-5) as the HE 
Project or HE Program. I follow Kistiakowsky in this, and my references in the text to 
the HE program or HE research relate to this broader program of activity including, 
especially, the work of E-5. 

40. Hoddeson, “Mission Change,” 274-82; Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 
228-44; Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 540-41. 

41. Hoddeson, “Mission Change,” 279-85. 

42. Administrative Board Minutes, July 20, 1944, quoted in Hoddeson et al., 
Critical Assembly, 243. 

43. Hawkins, Project Y, 208-9, 488. 

44. Kistiakowsky to Bainbridge, Bradbury, and Stevens, “Interim Reports in the 
Explosives Division,” August 21, 1944, LANL A-84-019 40-18. 

45. “Hyman Rudoff’s Memoirs of his Life in Los Alamos during the Manhattan 
Project” (manuscript, 1991, LAHM Migg91-41-1-1). 

46. Hawkins, Project Y, 157; Christman, Target Hiroshima, 85-101, esp. 94. 

47. Parsons to Oppenheimer, “Organization,” September 7, 1944, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 56. 

48. Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 168-69, 294-99; Davis, Lawrence and 
Oppenheimer, 218; Hull, interviewed by the author, January 16, 1998. 

49. Kistiakowsky said that Parsons was not alone in his pessimism about lenses by 
late 1944 (“Reminiscences of Wartime Los Alamos,” 54). 

50. Parsons to Groves via Oppenheimer, “Special Report of Ordnance and Engi- 
neering Activities of Project Y,” September 25, 1944, Papers of Admiral William S. 
Parsons, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress. I am grateful to Al Christman for 
providing me with this document. 

51. Parsons to Oppenheimer, “Design of Non-Lens Assembly,” October 16, 1944, 
and Oppenheimer, quoted in Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 300. 

52. Parsons to Oppenheimer, “‘Home Stretch’ Measures,” February 19, 1945, 
LANL A-84-019 13-3; Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 300. 

53- Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 300. See also John Russell, interviewed 
by Hoddeson, July 16, 1986, LANL OH-133; and Bethe, interviewed by Hoddeson, 
October 1986. 

54. Kistiakowsky, “Reminiscences of Wartime Los Alamos,” 54; Bethe, inter- 
viewed by the author, May 12, 1998. 

55. Parsons to Oppenheimer, ““‘Home Stretch’ Measures,” February 19, 1945, 
LANL A-84-019 13-3. 

56. Hawkins, Project Y, 157-58; Hoddeson et al., Critecal Assembly, 316; Parsons, 
quoted in Christman, Target Hiroshima, 169. The minutes of the Cowpuncher 
Committee remain classified. 


Notes to Pages 147-150 333 


57. Kistiakowsky, quoted in Hoddeson et al., Critical Assembly, 315, and in Hod- 
deson, “Mission Change,” 283. 

58. Peggy Corbett, “29 Years Ago—Los Alamos, New Mexico,” part 9, “Pace at 
Post, Lab Quickens,” Santa Fe New Mexican, October 16, 1973; Hull, interviewed by 
the author, January 16, 1998. 

59. Groves, Now It Can Be Told, 256 n. 2; see also Jones, Manhattan, 519-20. 

60. Parsons, “Description of Work Performed at Y,” June 18, 1945, written in 
longhand in answer to questionnaire, Manhattan District, Scientific Research and 
Development Personnel, Captain William Sterling Parsons, June 18, 1945, Parsons 
Papers; Parsons to Oppenheimer, “Organization,” September 7, 1944. 

61. Parsons to Groves, “Special Report of Ordnance and Engineering Activities of 
Project Y,” September 25, 1944; Christman, Target Hiroshima, 158; Al Christman, 
personal communication to the author, April 3, 2001. The discussions at Chicago 
were formalized in the Committee on Political and Social Problems, chaired by the 
physicist James Franck. Scientist Ralph Lapp noted, “Although historians may date 
the inception of the Franck Committee as June 2, 1945, it was already in existence as 
a loosely organized discussion group at the Metallurgical Laboratory and dated back 
to the previous summer.” Ralph E. Lapp, The New Priesthood: The Scientific Elite 
and the Uses of Power (New York: Harper and Row, 1965), 76. 

62. Oppenheimer to Groves, October 6, 1944, LANL A-84-019 34-11. 

63. Parsons, “Description of Work Performed at Y,” June 18, 1945; Parsons to 
Groves, “Special Report of Ordnance and Engineering Activities of Project Y,” 
September 25, 1944; Christman, Target Hiroshima, 167. 

64. Parsons to Groves, “Special Report of Ordnance and Engineering Activities of 
Project Y,” September 25, 1944; Christman, Target Hiroshima, 158; Parsons, quoted 
in Christman, Target Hiroshima, 164. See also Jones, Manhattan, 496; and Hawkins, 
Project Y, 247-58. 

65. Parsons to Mr. Carter T. Barron, October 21, 1946, Parsons Papers. Parsons 
was here complaining about the script for the postwar movie The Beginning or the 
End, which portrayed a fictional accident on Tinian. Work at Tinian is documented 
in letters from physicist Norman Ramsey to Oppenheimer, in Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 60. See also Jones, Manhattan, 536. 

66. General Groves, [undated] notes on meeting with the Under Secretary of War, 
March 27, 1945, MED Correspondence, microfilm roll 5. On the Manhattan Project 
mission code-named “Alsos,” to gather intelligence on the German atomic bomb 
effort, see Mark Walker, German National Socialism and the Quest for Nuclear Power, 
1939-1949 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 153-60; and Samuel A. 
Goudsmit, Alsos: The Failure in German Science (London: Sigma Books, 1947). For 
the case that Japan had been the official target from early on in the Manhattan Project, 
see Arjun Makhyani, “‘Always’ the Target?” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 31, 
no. 3 (May-June 1995): 23-27. 


334 Notes to Pages 150-155 


67. This is Joseph Rotblat’s recollection of Groves’s comment. Rotblat said, 
“Whatever his exact words, his real meaning was clear.” “Leaving the Bomb Project,” 
Bulletin of the Atomic Screntists 41 (August 1985): 15-19, on 18. See also Norris, Racing 
for the Bomb, 331. Rotblat gave the precise date of the dinner party as March 4, 1944. 
Rotblat, “We Are on a Slippery Slope, Heading for Disaster,” Guardian, January 8, 
2002, http://www.guardian.co.uk/nuclear/article/o,2763,870939,00.html. 

68. Rotblat, “Leaving the Bomb Project,” 18-19. Rotblat’s discounting of the 
possibility of a German bomb was based on his view that “the war in Europe would 
be over before the bomb project was completed .. . If it took the Americans such a 
long time, then my fear of the Germans being first was groundless” (ibid.). 

69. Jones, Manhattan, 528-29; Major J. A. Derry and Dr. N. F. Ramsey, Memo- 
randum for General L. R. Groves, “Summary of Target Committee Meetings on 10 
and 11 May 1945,” May 12, 1945, MED Correspondence, microfilm roll 5. See also 
Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 241, 243-44. 

70. Derry and Ramsey, Memorandum for General L. R. Groves, May 12, 1945. 
When Groves presented the secretary of war with the list of targets, Stimson objected 
to the choice of Kyoto, because of its religious and cultural significance for the 
Japanese. By July 15, Kyoto had been replaced with Nagasaki on the target list (Jones, 
Manhattan, 529-30). 

71. Lapp, The New Priesthood, 68-86, quoting 83; Hewlett and Anderson, The 
New World (AEC official history), quoting 199 (see also 200-201, 365-67, 399-400); 
Matt Price, “Roots of Dissent: The Chicago Met Lab and the Origins of the Franck 
Report,” [sts 86 (1995): 222-44; Compton, Atomic Quest, 233-36; Jones, Manhattan, 
532-33; Robert R. Wilson, “Hiroshima: The Scientists’ Social and Political Reaction,” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 140, no. 3 (September 1996): 350-573 
Smith, A Peril and a Hope, esp. 15-16, 41-59. 

72. Weisskopf, The Foy of Insight, 127-28, 137; Richard Feynman, “The Pleasure of 
Finding Things Out,” The Listener, November 26, 1981, 635-36, on 635, quoted also 
in Brian Easlea, Fathering the Unthinkable: Masculinity, Scientists and the Nuclear 
Arms Race (London: Pluto Press, 1983), 83-84; Rotblat, “Leaving the Bomb Project,” 
18. See also Richard Feynman, “Los Alamos from Below,” in Badash, Hirschfelder, 
and Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 105-32, esp. 132. 

73. Rabi, “Suggestions for Interim Organization and Procedure,” with covering 
letter from Rabi to Oppenheimer, February 10, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers, box 59. 

74. Amey, Experts, 113; Segré, A Mind Always in Motion, 190; Teller to Mayer [ca. 
1945], Mayer Papers. 

75. Norris Bradbury, speech at Los Alamos, February 1971, 8-9, LAHM (M) 1856 
(b)/72.208. 

76. Robert R. Wilson, “Niels Bohr and the Young Scientists,” in Assessing the 
Nuclear Age: Selections from the “Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists,” ed. Len Acklund 
and Steve McGuire (Chicago: Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, 1986), 
38. Wilson said elsewhere that the meeting was held “something like a year after 


Notes to Pages 155-161 335 


Los Alamos had started,” which would put it in mid- to late 1944. He also admitted 
to being “hazy now as to who came or what was said.” The assembled group, he 
said, filled a small meeting room (“Conscience of a Physicist,” 72; see also Wilson, 
interview in Palevsky, Atomic Fragments, 125-50, on 135-36). Weisskopf referred to 
such a meeting having taken place in March 1945 (The Foy of Insight, 145-46). See 
also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 287-89. 

77. Wilson, “Conscience of a Physicist,” 72; Wilson, “Niels Bohr and the Young 
Scientists,” 38-39. 

78. Morrison, quoted in Lynn Margulis, “Sunday with J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 
in Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, Slanted Truths: Essays on Gaia, Symbiosis, and 
Evolution, 5-28 (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1997), 6-7. 

79. Oppenheimer’s Remarks at Memorial Services for President Roosevelt, Los 
Alamos, April 15, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers, box 262; reprinted also in Smith and 
Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 288. 

80. “A Petition to the President of the United States,” July 17, 1945, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 70; Teller to Szilard, July 2, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers, box 71. See also 
Teller to Oppenheimer, attached to Teller to Szilard, July 2, 1945; Szilard to Op- 
penheimer, July 10, 1945; Szilard to Oppenheimer, July 23, 1945, all in Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 70; and Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 55-56. 

81. Edward Hammel, interviewed by the author, December 8, 1997. 

82. Wilson, “Conscience of a Physicist,” 71. 

83. Ibid., 72-73. 

84. Bernard Feld, interviewed by Ian Low, in “Science for Peace,” New Scientist, 
July 24, 1975, 208-9; quoted also in Easlea, Fathering the Unthinkable, 84. 

85. Jette, Inside Box 1663, 42. Cf. Erving Goffman, Asylums: Essays on the Social 
Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates (New York: Doubleday, 1961). 

86. Szilard to Oppenheimer, May 16, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers, box 70. 

87. Emilio Segré, Enrico Fermi, Physicist (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1970), 145; Oppenheimer, in “Transcript,” 32-33; both also quoted 
in Easlea, Fathering the Unthinkable, 84-85. 

88. Wilson, “Niels Bohr and the Young Scientists,” 39. 


CHAPTER SIx 


1. Harold Cherniss, interviewed by Alice Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976, 6, Op- 
penheimer Oral History Collection, MIT Archives. 

2. “Atomic Doldrums,” Time, February 25, 1946, 88. 

3. Oppenheimer, “The Atom Bomb and College Education,” General Magazine 
and Historical Chronicle, University of Pennsylvania General Alumni Society, 1946, 
quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 676. 

4. “Physicist Oppenheimer,” Time, November 8, 1948, 77. On the history of 
Oppenheimer’s use of the quotation, I am indebted to Hijiya, “The Gita of J. Robert 


336 Notes to Pages 161-164 


Oppenheimer,” esp. 123 n. 3 and 132; and Hiya, personal communication to the 
author, December 14, 2002. 

5. Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 183-84. The book was first published 
in German in 1956. Oppenheimer repeated the quotation for a 1965 NBC television 
documentary, The Decision to Drop the Bomb, produced by Fred Freed. It was printed 
in the accompanying book: Len Giovanitti and Fred Freed, The Decision to Drop the 
Bomb (New York: Coward McCann, 1965), 197. The NBC clip was also used in Jon 
Else’s documentary The Day after Trinity. 

6. Laurence, Men and Atoms, 118; William L. Laurence, for the New York Times, 
September 27, 1945, reprinted in Laurence, The Story of the Atomic Bomb (Washing- 
ton, DC: War Department, 1945), 15-17, on 17. 

7. William L. Laurence, Dawn over Zero: The Story of the Atomic Bomb (London: 
Museum Press, 1947), 153- 

8. Frank Oppenheimer, quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 675. 

g. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 344-45. 

10. Ibid., 345; Lapp, The New Priesthood, 73. 

11. Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, 185. See also Makhyani, 
““Always’ The Target?” 

12. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Giovanitti and Freed, October 27, 1964, in The 
Decision to Drop the Bomb, 8, 328; quoted also in Ian Clark, Limited Nuclear War: 
Political Theory and War Conventions (Oxford: Martin Robertson, 1982), 235. 

13. See Interim Committee Minutes, May 31, 1945, in Robert C. Williams and Philip 
L. Cantelon, eds., The American Atom: A Documentary History of Nuclear Policies 
from the Discovery of Fission to the Present, 1939-1984 (Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 1984), 58-63. 

14. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 367-68; Alperovitz, The Decision to 
Use the Atomic Bomb, 17-46. 

15. “Transcript,” 34. 

16. Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, 164-65, quoting 164; and 
448-71, esp. 461-62. See also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 293-97; and 
Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 249-50. 

17. Notes of the Interim Committee Meeting, May 31, 1945, quoted in Alperovitz, 
The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, 170. 

18. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 367. On the Scientific Panel’s delib- 
erations, see also Sherwin, A World Destroyed, 204-6; and Herken, Brotherhood of the 
Bomb, 131-34. 

1g. Truman-Stalin conversation, Potsdam, July 24, 1945, in Cantelon, Hewlett, 
and Williams, The American Atom, 61-62. Stalin, of course, already had information 
from spies at Los Alamos—Klaus Fuchs, David Greenglass, and Theodore Hall. 
Norman Moss, Klaus Fuchs: The Man Who Stole the Atom Bomb (London: Grafton 
Books, 1987); Joseph Albright, Bombshell: The Secret Story of America’s Unknown 
Atomic Spy Conspiracy (New York: Times Books, 1997). 


Notes to Pages 164-167 337 


20. Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, esp. 221-317; Gar Alperowitz, 
Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam; The Use of the Atomic Bomb and the 
American Confrontation with Soviet Power (1965; New York: Penguin Books, 1985); 
Sherwin, A World Destroyed; Barton J. Bernstein, ed., The Atomic Bomb: The Critical 
Issues (Boston: Little, Brown, 1976); Gregg Herken, The Winning Weapon: The 
Atomic Bomb in the Cold War, 1945-1950 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1988); J. S. Walker, “The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb: A Historiographical 
Update,” Diplomatic History 14 (1990): 97-114. 

21. Wallace, diary, October 19, 1945, quoted in Alperovitz, The Decision to Use 
the Atomic Bomb, 429. See also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 330- 
31. 

22. Wilson, “Hiroshima,” 351. See also Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 169- 
73; and Palevsky, Atomic Fragments, 125-50. 

23. Freeman Dyson, Disturbing the Universe (New York: Harper Colophon, 
1979), 53- See also Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 180; and Donald Strick- 
land, Scientists in Politics: The Atomic Scientists Movement, 1945-46 (Lafayette, IN: 
Purdue University Studies, 1968), 8-9. 

24. Brian Balogh, Chain Reaction: Expert Debate and Public Participation in 
American Commercial Nuclear Power, 1945-1975 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1991), 38. See also Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 127; Steven M. Neuse, 
David E. Lilienthal: The Fourney of an American Liberal (Knoxville: University of 
Tennessee Press, 1996), 168; and Paul Boyer, By the Bomb’s Early Light: American 
Thought and Culture at the Dawn of the Atomic Age (New York: Pantheon, 1985), 
109-21. 

25. See Felix Frankfurter-Niels Bohr papers, in Oppenheimer Papers, box 34; 
Sherwin, A World Destroyed, 91-114; Sherwin, “Niels Bohr”; Gowing, “Niels Bohr 
and Nuclear Weapons”; Aage Bohr, “The War Years and the Prospects Raised by 
the Atomic Weapons,” in Niels Bohr: His Life and Work as Seen by His Friends and 
Colleagues, ed. S. Rozenthal, 191-214 (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., 
1967); and Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, 524-38. 

26. Niels Bohr, “Science and Civilization,” Times (London), August 11, 1945, 
reprint in Oppenheimer Papers, box 21; Bohr, “A Challenge to Civilization,” Sczence 
102 (1945): 363-64. 

27. Oppenheimer, unedited version of 1963 lecture “Niels Bohr and His Times.” 
The finished version read, “He made the enterprise seem hopeful, when many were 
not free of misgiving.” Both versions are quoted in Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic 
Bomb, 524. 

28. Strickland, Scientists in Politics, 38; Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 75-122, 128, 
279-81; Alice Kimball Smith, “Scientists and the Public Interest, 1945-46,” Newsletter 
on Science, Technology, and Human Values 24 (June 1978): 24-32; Paul J. Piccard, 
“Scientists and Public Policy: Los Alamos, August-November, 1945,” Western Polit- 
ical Quarterly 18, no. 2 (June 1965): 251-62. See also Edward Shils, “Freedom and 


338 Notes to Pages 167-171 


Influence: Observations on the Scientists’ Movement in the United States,” Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists 8 (January 1957): 13-18. 

29. Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 115-16; Wilson, “Hiroshima,” 353. 

30. Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 117; William Higinbotham, notes on a conversation 
with Oppenheimer, quoted in Piccard, “Scientists and Public Policy,” 255; Strickland, 
Scientists in Politics, 38-43. 

31. Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 116-19. 

32. Oppenheimer to Bradbury, September 28, 1945, quoted in Smith, A Peril and 
a Hope, 118-19. 

33. Ibid., 119. 

34. Higinbotham’s meeting notes, September 28, 1945, quoted in Smith, A Peril 
and a Hope, 119-20; ALAS Papers, quoted in Strickland, Scientests in Polttics, 42. 

35. Wilson, “Hiroshima,” 353. The statement, released to the press on October 
14, 1945, 1s in Oppenheimer Papers, box 171. 

36. Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 128. 

37. Badash, Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons, 64; Hewlett and 
Anderson, The New World, 428-55. 

38. Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 140-41. 

39. Anderson to Higinbotham, October 11, 1945, quoted in Smith, A Peril and 
a Hope, 139-40. See also Higinbotham to Anderson, October 16, 1945, Records of 
the Association of Los Alamos Scientists, Department of Special Collections, Joseph 
Regenstein Library, University of Chicago. 

40. Oppenheimer, Fermi, and Lawrence to Patterson, October 11, 1945, quoted 
in Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 142-43. 

41. Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 310-11. 

42. Strickland, Scientists in Politics, 46-47. 

43. Read into the testimony by Senator Fulbright, Hearings on Science Legislation 
(S. 1297 and Related Bills), Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee on 
Military Affairs, U.S. Senate, 79th Congress, 1st session, pt. 2, October 15, 16, 17, 18, 
and 19, 1945 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1945), 297-318, 
quoting 318; see also Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 310-11. 

44. Jette, Inside Box 1663, 123. 

45. Hearings on Science Legislation, 301. See also Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 
152-55. On the history of postwar science legislation, see Kevles, The Physicists, 
343-64; Daniel J. Kevles, “The National Science Foundation and the Debate over 
Postwar Research Policy, 1942-1945: A Political Interpretation of Sceence—the End- 
less Frontier,” Ists 68 (1977): 5-26; Jessica Wang, “Liberals, the Progressive Left, and 
the Political Economy of Post-war American Science: The National Science Founda- 
tion Debate Revisited,” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 26 
(1995): 139-66; Nathan Reingold, “Vannevar Bush’s New Deal for Research: Or the 
Triumph of the Old Order,” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 
17 (1987): 299-344; and Greenberg, Science, Money, and Politics, 41-58. 


Notes to Pages 172-178 339 


46. Hearings on Science Legislation, 302. 

47. Ibid., 308. 

48. Hearings before the Committee on Military Affairs, House of Representatives, 
Seventy-ninth Congress, First Session, on H.R. 4280, an Act for the Development and 
Control of Atomic Energy, October 9, 18, 1945 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1945), 126-29, on 127. 

49. Hearings on Science Legislation, 309-10. 

50. Hearings before the Committee on Military Affairs, House of Representatives, 
128-29. 

51. Quoted in Strickland, Scientists in Politics, 48. See also Pais, A Tale of 
Two Continents, 241; Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 79-80; Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 356; and Balogh, Chain Reaction, 40. 

52. Cf. Peter Galison, “Physics between War and Peace,” in Science, Technology, 
and the Military, vol. 1, ed. Everett Mendelsohn, Merritt Roe Smith, and Peter 
Weingart, 47-86 (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988). 

53. Hearings on Science Legislation, 300, 301. 

54. Ibid., 300; Hearings before the Committee on Military Affairs, House of Repre- 
sentatives, 126. 

55. Hearings on Science Legislation, 305. 

56. Ibid., 318-33, quoting 321. Robert Wilson from ALAS also testified at this 
session (330-33). 

57. Ibid., 322, 325-26. 

58. Ibid., 322, 325-29. 

5g. See Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 150-56, quoting 155. 

60. Quoted in Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 154. 

61. Quoted in Strickland, Scientists in Politics, 46-47. 

62. Badash, Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons, 66. See also 
Kevles, The Physicists, 351-52; and Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 482-530. 

63. Michael S. Sherry, In the Shadow of War: The United States since the 1930s 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1995), 137; Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
264. 

64. Oppenheimer, “Speech to the Association of Los Alamos Scientists,” Novem- 
ber 2, 1945, in Smith and Weiner, Robert Oppenheimer, 315-25, quoting 317. 

65. Ibid., 319. See also J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Weapons and the Crisis 
in Science,” Saturday Review of Literature, November 24, 1945, 9-11. 

66. Oppenheimer, “Speech to the Association of Los Alamos Scientists,” 319-20. 

67. Ibid., 323. 

68. Robert Gilpin, American Screntists and Nuclear Weapons Policy (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962), 53. The report was published as Chester I. 
Barnard et al., A Report on the International Control of Atomic Energy, Prepared for 
the Secretary of State’s Committee on Atomic Energy by a Board of Consultants (Wash- 
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1946). The report was dated March 16, 


340 Notes to Pages 178-181 


1946, and was made public by the State Department on March 28. Oppenheimer set 
out his individual views on international control in Oppenheimer to David Lilienthal, 
February 2, 1946, Oppenheimer Papers, box 46. 

69. Barnard et al., Report, 31, 61. For background on the report, see Hewlett and 
Anderson, The New World, 531-34. 

70. Bohr to Oppenheimer, April 17, 1946, Oppenheimer Papers, box 21. 

71. See, for example, Federation of Atomic Scientists, “Resolution on Acheson 
Report,” Council Meeting, April 10-21 [1946], Oppenheimer Papers, box 195. 

72. Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 13. 

73. Ibid., 16. 

74. Lilienthal to Herbert Marks, January 14, 1948, Oppenheimer Papers, box 46; 
quoted also in Neuse, David E. Lilienthal, 170. See also Dean Acheson, Present at 
the Creation: My Years in the State Department (New York: W. W. Norton, 1969), 
153. 

75. David E. Lilienthal, “How Can Atomic Energy Be Controlled?” Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists 2 (October 1947): 14-15. See also the journal entry for July 14, 
1948, in Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 67; Lilienthal, TVA: Democracy on the 
March (New York: Pocket Books, 1945); Lilienthal, Thas I Do Believe (New York: 
Harper and Brothers, 1949); Neuse, David E. Lilienthal, esp. 134-38, 177; and Gilpin, 
American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 58. 

76. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The New Weapon: The Turn of the Screw,” in One 
World or None, ed. Dexter Masters and Katharine Way (1945; London: Purnell and 
Sons, 1946), 56. 

77. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The International Control of Atomic Energy,” Mes- 
senger Lecture at Cornell University, May 1946, esp. F-21; “The Atomic Potential,” 
editorial in Cornell Bulletin, May 17, 1946, both in Oppenheimer Papers, box 254. A 
revised version of the lecture was published in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 1, no. 
12 (June 1, 1946): 1-5, and reprinted as “International Control of Atomic Energy,” in 
The Atomic Age: Scientists in National and World Affairs, ed. Morton Grodzins and 
Eugene Rabinowitch, 53-63 (New York: Basic Books, 1963). In the transcript of the 
original lecture, but not in the published version, Oppenheimer follows a discussion 
of the possibilities of cooperation of scientists and engineers of different nationalities 
by saying, “I have seen this work, in little part, at Los Alamos.” 

78. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Physics in Civilization,” Messenger Lecture 
at Cornell University, April 30, 1946, 2, Oppenheimer Papers, box 254. 

79. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Explosives,” in The Open Mind, 3-17, quot- 
ing 12. 

80. Hearings on Science Legislation, 314-15. This justification was essentially the 
same as that which Oppenheimer had used at Los Alamos in dissuading Teller from 
circulating Szilard’s petition. Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 245-46. 

81. David S. McLellan, Dean Acheson: The State Department Years (New York: 
Dodd, Mead, 1976), 80-81; Jordan A. Schwarz, The Speculator: Bernard M. Baruch 


Notes to Pages 181-183 3.41 


in Washington, 1917-1965 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1981), 5, 
490. 

82. Schwarz, The Speculator, 493. See also Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
180; John Newhouse, War and Peace in the Nuclear Age (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1989), 63; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 165; and Norris, Racing for the Bomb, 
482. 

83. Swope, quoted in W. L. White, Bernard Baruch: Portrait of a Citizen (New 
York: Harcourt, Brace, 1950), 111. 

84. Bernard M. Baruch, Baruch: The Public Years (New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1960), 364-65, quoting 364. 

85. Baruch, Baruch, 361; Neuse, David E. Lilienthal, 175; Badash, Scientists and 
the Development of Nuclear Weapons, 69; McLellan, Dean Acheson, 82; Bird and 
Sherwin, American Prometheus, 342-49. 

86. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 581-82; Johnathan M. Weisgall, Op- 
eration Crossroads: The Atomic Tests at Bikini Atoll (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute 
Press, 1994), esp. 252-55; Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, 443; 
Badash, Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons, 69-70; Williams and 
Cantelon, The American Atom, 176. See also W. A. Shurcliff, Bombs at Bikini: The 
Official Report of Operation Crossroads (New York: William H. Wise, 1947). 

87. Norman Cousins, “The Standardization of Catastrophe,” Saturday Review of 
Literature, August 10, 1946, 18. See also William L. Laurence, “The Bikini Tests 
and Public Opinion,” Bulletin of the Atomic Sctentists 2 (1946): 2, 17; and Weisgall, 
Operation Crossroads, 246. 

88. Joseph I. Lieberman, The Scorpion and the Tarantula: The Struggle to Control 
Atomic Weapons, 1945-1949 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1970), 227-412; Cassidy, 7. 
Robert Oppenheimer, 248. See also Oppenheimer to Bernard Baruch, January 10, 
1947, in Oppenheimer Papers, box 195. 

8g. Journal entry for July 24, 1946, in Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 69-70. 
See also Oppenheimer to Lincoln Gordon, April 21, 1947, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
195; and Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 180. 

go. Hewlett and Anderson, The New World, 562; John W. Spanier and Joseph 
L. Nogee, The Politics of Disarmament: A Study in Soviet-American Gamesmanship 
(New York: Praeger, 1962), 58; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 343. 

g1. Bernard Lovell, “Patrick Maynard Stuart Blackett, Baron Blackett of Chelsea, 
18 November 1897-13 July 1974,” Biographical Memorrs of Fellows of the Royal Society 
21 (1975): 1-115; P. M. S. Blackett, Fear, War, and the Bomb: Military and Political 
Consequences of Atomic Energy (New York: Whittlesey House, 1949); Nye, Blackett, 
esp. 89-92. The title of the 1948 British edition of Blackett’s book was Military and 
Political Consequences of Atomic Energy. 

g2. See Paul Boyer’s essays “How Americans Imagined the Bomb They Dropped,” 
“President Truman, the American People, and the Atomic Bomb,” and “Hiroshima 
in American Memory,” in Fallout: A Historian Reflects on America’s Half-Century 


342 Notes to Pages 183-185 


Encounter with Nuclear Weapons (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1998), 
g-16, 17-40, 226-45; Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb, 423-641; and 
Barton J. Bernstein, “A Post-War Myth: 500,000 U.S. Lives Saved,” in Hiroshima’s 
Shadow, ed. Kai Bird and Lawrence Lifschultz, 130-34 (Stony Creek, CT: Pamphle- 
teers Press, 1998). 

93. Blackett, Fear, War, and the Bomb, 131-43, quoting 139. Blackett’s account is 
now supported by revisionist historians; see, above all, Alperovitz, The Decision to 
Use the Atomic Bomb, esp. 128, 573-74. 

94. “Some Observations and Comments on the Book, by Professor P. M.S. Black- 
ett,” and Albin E. Johnson to Oppenheimer, January 28, 1949, both in Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 195. 

95. Blackett, Fear, War, and the Bomb, 139. 

96. Ibid., 142-43. 

97. Ibid., 140-41, 143. The Oppenheimer quotation is from Oppenheimer, “In- 
ternational Control of Atomic Energy,” 53-54. Bird and Sherwin emphasized the 
critical tone and import of Oppenheimer’s statement (American Prometheus, 389). 
However, it is worth noting that the notion that Japan was “essentially defeated” is 
still compatible with the idea that without the atomic bombings, the Japanese could 
have mounted resistance that (though ultimately futile) would have been costly in 
terms of lives and could have significantly delayed the achievement of unconditional 
surrender. As I see it, even here Oppenheimer did not directly contradict the official 
account. 

98. Blackett, Fear, War, and the Bomb, 143. 

99. Ibid., 143-44, 157. Ina later book, Blackett referred to the Acheson-Lilienthal 
report as the “Lilienthal-Oppenheimer Plan” and noted disparagingly its “high- 
flown and idealistic phraseology.” P. M.S. Blackett, Atomic Weapons and East-West 
Relations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1956). For Blackett, with his 
background in operational research and his overtly hard-boiled realist style ofanalysis, 
questions of arms and military strategy were not appropriate subjects for idealism. 
Nevertheless, this later book, which was written after Oppenheimer’s downfall in 
the security hearings and expressed sympathy with Oppenheimer’s’ “ordeal” (73), 
reserved its main criticisms for Baruch’s adaptations. 

100. Blackett, Fear, War, and the Bomb, 158. 

101. I. I. Rabi, “Playing Down the Bomb: Blackett versus the Atom,” Atlantic 
Monthly 183 (April 1949): 23. See also Mary Jo Nye, “What Price Politics? Scientists 
and Political Controversy,” Endeavour 23 (1999): 148-54; Nye, Blackett, 88-92; 
Boyer, By the Bomb’s Early Light, 192; and Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 
389. Philip Morrison was the exception: he wrote an article in the Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists supporting Blackett (see Nye, Blackett, 91; and Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 657). 

102. Lilienthal, however, noted that at a reunion of the members of the Board 
of Consultants, “Oppenheimer got off a rather subtle and fine-spun discussion, the 


Notes to Pages 185-188 3.43 


purport of which was that the ‘just another bomb’ argument is meaningless” (journal 
entry for February 3, 1949, in Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 454). Blackett’s 
argument was often attacked for denying the significance of the atomic bomb. Bird 
and Sherwin suggested that Oppenheimer may have been sympathetic to Blackett’s 
analysis; they noted that Oppenheimer wrote to Blackett in 1956 expressing agreement 
with the “major thesis” (if not all the details) of Blackett’s later (1956) book, Atomic 
Weapons and East-West Relations (see Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 389, 
578). However, it is not clear that this does imply sympathy with Blackett’s specific 
criticisms and analysis of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings. Blackett’s 1956 
book was primarily an exploration of the implications of nuclear parity (following the 
development of the Soviet A-bomb and H-bomb) for military strategic thought. It 
also included a discussion of the H-bomb controversy and the Oppenheimer case. 
The book’s major thesis concerned the fallacy of seeing security as resting on Western 
technological superiority. Blackett’s analysis here fit closely with Oppenheimer’s 
critical stance toward the doctrines of the Strategic Air Command. One can easily 
imagine Oppenheimer agreeing with Blackett that “the goal of permanent Western 
technological superiority is neither attainable nor is it a necessary condition for peace. 
What is a reasonable and attainable goal is approximate technological parity in certain 
essential weapons and weapon systems” (Blackett, Atomic Weapons, 96-97). But 
agreement on that cannot be taken to imply assent, in 1956 or in 1948-49, to Blackett’s 
criticisms of the bombing of Hiroshima or to his views on the origins of the Cold 
War. 

103. For Oppenheimer’s view on the Bikini tests, see Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 349-50. 

104. Frances Stonor Saunders, Who Paid the Piper? The CIA and the Cultural Cold 
War (London: Granta Books, 1999), 24-25, quoting 25. See also Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 354. 

105. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem,” in 
The Open Mind, 21-41, on 25-26. George F. Kennan’s anonymous article, “The 
Sources of Soviet Conduct,” appeared in Foreign Affairs 25, no. 4 (July 1947), esp. 
572. On Kennan’s role in shaping American views of the Soviet Union, see Charles E. 
Nathanson, “The Social Construction of the Soviet Threat: A Study in the Politics 
of Representation,” Alternatives 8 (1988), esp. 454-63. 

106. Oppenheimer, “The Open Mind,” 49-51. 

107. Cf. Paul K. Hoch, “The Crystallization ofa Strategic Alliance: The American 
Physics Elite and the Military in the 1940s,” in Mendelsohn, Smith, and Weingart, 
Science, Technology and the Military, 87-116. 

108. Oppenheimer, “Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem,” 34. 

109. Ibid., 32, 36, 34. 

110. Jessica Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxiety: Scientists, Anticommu- 
nism, and the Cold War (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999), 
234-35; Badash, Screntists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons, 67; Hoch, 


344 Notes to Pages 188-192 


“The Crystallization of a Strategic Alliance,” esp. 93-100; Silvan S. Schweber, “The 
Mutual Embrace of Science and the Military: ONR and the Growth of Physics in the 
United States after World War Two,” in Mendelsohn, Smith, and Weingart, Science, 
Technology and the Military, 1:3-45; Mukerji, A Fragile Power; Naomi Oreskes and 
Paul Rainger, “Science and Security before the Atomic Bomb: The Loyalty Case of 
Harold U. Sverdrup,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 31 (2000): 
309-69; Daniel S. Greenberg, The Politics of Pure Science (1967; Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1999). 

111. See Paul Forman, “Behind Quantum Electronics: National Security as Basis 
for Physical Research in the United States, 1940-1960,” Historical Studies in the 
Physical and Biological Sciences 18 (1987): 149-229; Stuart Leslie, The Cold War and 
American Science: The Military-Industrial-Academic Complex at MIT and Stanford 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1993); Robert Seidel, “The Postwar Political 
Economy of High-Energy Physics,” in Pions to Quarks: Particle Physics in the 1950s, 
ed. Laurie Brown, Max Dresden, and Lillian Hoddeson, 497-507 (Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1989); DanielJ. Kevles, “Cold War and Hot Physics: Science, 
Security, and the American State, 1945-1956,” Historical Studies in the Physical and 
Biological Sciences 20 (1990): 239-64. 

112. Karl Cohen, “A Re-examination of the McMahon Act,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 4, no. 1 (January 1948): 7-10. 

113. “Transcript,” 45; see also Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons 
Policy, 71. 

114. Oppenheimer, quoted in Smith, A Peril and a Hope, 350. On the decline of 
the Federation of Atomic Scientists, see also Coser, Men of Ideas, 308-12. 

115. Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World,” 92, 81, 91. 

116. Hilbert, quoted in Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World,” 89. 
See also J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Need for New Knowledge,” in Symposium 
on Basic Research, ed. Dael Wolfle (Washington, DC: American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 1959), 9. 

117. Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World,” go-91. 

118. Ibid., 88, 83. 

119. “Physicist Oppenheimer,” 77. 

120. Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World,” 83. 

121. Neuse, David E. Lilienthal, 168-69, 177-200; Hershberg, Fames B. Conant, 
332; Lapp, The New Priesthood, 103. 

122. Journal entry for July 29, 1947, in Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 229; 
Oppenheimer, in “Transcript,” 69; Oppenheimer, quoted in Hershberg, ames B. 
Conant, 313. See also Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 70; 
Balogh, Chain Reaction, 60-90; and Lilienthal’s speeches in Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 46. 

123. Harrison S. Brown to Oppenheimer, February 26, 1948, and Oppenheimer 
to Brown, March 5, 1948, Oppenheimer Papers, box 32. 


Notes to Pages 193-196 345 


124. Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 64-161. See also 
Samuel R. Williamson Jr. and Steven L. Rearden, The Origins of U.S. Nuclear 
Strategy, 1945-1953 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1993). 

125. York, The Advisors, 46-56; Richard T. Sylves, The Nuclear Oracles: A Political 
story of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, 1947- 
1977 (Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1987), esp. 142-70; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 
377-81; Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 265, 294. 

126. The comparison of “super” and atomic bombs is from the GAC’s report of 
October 30, 1949, in York, The Advisors, 156, 158. 

127. Journal entry for October 30, 1949, in Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 
582. 

128. Hershberg, James B. Conant, 470-75; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 388-91. See also 
James B. Hershberg, “‘Over My Dead Body’: James Bryant Conant and the Hydrogen 
Bomb,” in Mendelsohn, Smith, and Weingart, Science, Technology and the Military, 
2:379-430. 

129. Journal entry for October 29, 1949, in Lilienthal, The Atomic Energy Years, 
580-81, quoting 581. 

130. See York, The Advisors, 46-56; the GAC report is on 150-59. See also Peter 
Galison and Barton Bernstein, “‘In Any Light’: Scientists and the Decision to Build 
the Hydrogen Bomb,” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 19 
(1989): 267-347. 

131. Rhodes, Dark Sun, 406-7, quoting 406; York, The Advisors, 65-74; Badash, 
Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons, 84-85. 

132. Neuse, David E. Lilienthal, 208-31. 

133. Lilienthal to President Truman, November 21, 1949; “Lilienthal Seen Ready 
to Quit A Commission,” Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, November 12, 1949, both 
in Oppenheimer Papers, box 46. 

134. President Truman to Lilienthal, November 23, 1949, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 46. See also Richard G. Hewlett and Francis Duncan, Atomic Shield, 1947/1950, 
vol. 2 of A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, 1991), 444-45. 

135. Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 73. 

136. Lilienthal, quoted in Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxiety, 237. See 
also David E. Lilienthal, Change, Hope, and the Bomb (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1963), 115. 

137. “Transcript,” 305. 

138. “Transcript,” 251. See also York, The Advisors, 127. 

139. See Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, esp. 156-68. See also Hans A. 
Bethe, “The Technological Imperative,” in Acklund and McGuire, Assessing the 
Nuclear Age, 73-78. 

140. Williamson and Rearden, Origins of U.S. Nuclear Strategy, 168-69; Gilpin, 
American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 112-21. Gilpin pointed out that 


346 Notes to Pages 196-200 


Oppenheimer had argued as early as 1948 for research on tactical nuclear weapons 
(114). See also W. Patrick McCray, “Project Vista, Caltech and the Dilemmas of Lee 
DuBridge,” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 34, no. 2 (2000): 
339-70; and Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 444-45. 

141. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Comments on the Military Value of the Atom,” 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 7, no. 2 (February 1951): 43 (my emphasis); quoted 
also in Gilpin, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 118. 

142. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Atom Bomb as a Great Force for Peace,” New 
York Times Magazine, June 9, 1946, 59; Oppenheimer, “Comments on the Military 
Value of the Atom,” 44-45. These passages are quoted also in Gilpin, American 
Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, 77 n. 16, 118. There is a minor discrepancy 
in that Gilpin transcribed the first quotation as referring to “policy weapons.” In the 
original, it is “police weapons.” 

143. “Transcript,” 470. In a talk at the Council on Foreign Relations in 1953, 
Oppenheimer spoke of the need to look “the tiger in the eye,” but added, “That does 
not mean that I think [preventive war] is a good idea” (quoted in Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 448). 

144. “Scientists Tell SHAPE of Nevada Atom Tests,” New York Herald Tribune, 
December 5, 1951. See also “U.S. Atom Experts Visit West Germany,” New York 
Herald Tribune, December 6, 1951; “Oppenheimer Visits Eisenhower for Hour,” 
New York Times, December 5, 1951; and “Oppenheimer Lands in Paris,” New York 
Times, December 4, 1951. 

145. Williamson and Rearden, Origins of U.S. Nuclear Strategy, 169. See also John 
P. Rose, The Evolution of U.S. Army Nuclear Doctrine, 1945-1980 (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1980); and Steven Leonard Newman, “The Oppenheimer Case: A 
Reconsideration of the Role of the Defense Department and National Security” (PhD 
diss., New York University, 1977), 34-51. Blackett stated that by 1956, Oppenheimer’s 
contributions to Vista had become military orthodoxy (Atomic Weapons, 74). 

146. Freeman Dyson, “The Scholar-Soldier,” in Weapons and Hope (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1984), 137. 

147. Ibid., 144-45. Conant had thought it important that he and Oppenheimer act 
as “good soldiers” by not resigning from the GAC after their defeat on the H-bomb 
(Conant, quoted in Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 429). 

148. Teller, “The Role of the Scientist,” 234. 

149. York, The Advisors, 56. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1. Robert Coughlan, “The Equivocal Hero of Science: Robert Oppenheimer,” 
Life, February 1967, 34-34A. As well as the GAC, Oppenheimer served on, for 
example, the Joint Research and Development Board to the Departments of the Army 
and Navy (which in 1947 became the Research and Development Board of the newly 


Notes to Pages 200-202 347 


established Department of Defense) and on the Scientific Advisory Committee to the 
White House Office of Defense Mobilization (York, The Advisors, 17, 47). 

2. The agent was referring in particular to Oppenheimer’s influence over AEC 
chairman Lilienthal and commissioner Robert F. Bacher. “Re: J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer—Justification for Continuation of Technical or Microphone Surveillance,” 
November 5, 1946, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 6. 

3. Cf. Steven Shapin, foreword to Greenberg, The Politics of Pure Science, xvii. 

4. On the notion of a “file person,” see Rom Harré, Personal Being (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1984). See also Spencer Cahill, “Toward a Sociology 
of the Person,” Sociological Theory 16 (1998), esp. 143. 

5. See the materials in Transcript and Texts, including “Transcript of Hearing 
before Personnel Security Board,” 1-992 (most citations of this transcript in this 
chapter will be given in the text); “Findings and Recommendation of the Personnel 
Security Board in the Matter of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer” (hereafter “Findings”), 
999-1021; “Recommendations of the General Manager to the United States Atomic 
Energy Commission in the Matter of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer” (hereafter “Rec- 
ommendations of the General Manager”), 1041-46; and “Decision and Opinions of 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission in the Matter of Dr. J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer” (hereafter “Decision and Opinions”), 1049-65. Secondary literature includes 
Joseph Alsop and Stewart Alsop, We Accuse! The Story of the Miscarriage of Fustice 
in the Case of F. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1954); Barton 
J. Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Historical Studies in the 
Physical Sciences 12 (1982): 195-252; Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security 
Case Reconsidered,” Stanford Law Review 42 (July 1990): 1383-1484; Curtis, The 
Oppenheimer Case; Galison and Bernstein, “‘In Any Light’”; Harold P. Green, “The 
Oppenheimer Case: A Study in the Abuse of Law,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 33 
(1977): 12-16, 56-61; Rachael L. Holloway, In the Matter of 7. Robert Oppenheimer: 
Politics, Rhetoric and Self-Defense (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1993); Lakoff, “The Trial 
of Dr. Oppenheimer”; John Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing (1971; New York: 
Scarborough Books, 1983); Michelmore, The Swift Years; Richard Polenberg, ed., 
In the Matter of F. Robert Oppenheimer: The Security Clearance Hearing (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2002); Rhodes, Dark Sun; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case; 
Charles Thorpe, “Disciplining Experts: Scientific Authority and Liberal Democracy 
in the Oppenheimer Case,” Social Studies of Sctence 32, no. 4 (August 2002): 525-62; 
and York, The Advisors. 

6. Schrecker, Many Are the Crimes, 165; Kunetka, Oppenheimer, 31, 203. 

7. Chevalier to Oppenheimer [ca. November 1943], and Chevalier to Oppen- 
heimer, December 3, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers, box 26. 

8. J. Edgar Hoover to Major General Leslie R. Groves, June 13, 1946, and Groves 
to Hoover, June 21, 1946, box 99, General Correspondence, 1943-47, Investiga- 
tion Files, Records of the Office of the Commanding General, Manhattan Project, 
RG 77. 


348 Notes to Pages 202-205 


g. Rhodes, Dark Sun, 125-26; Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 61-68; Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 356-59. 

10. Rhodes, Dark Sun, 309; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 352; Cas- 
sidy, F. Robert Oppenheimer, 265, 279. 

u1. H. B. Fletcher to Director, FBI, “Re: Julius Robert Oppenheimer,” May 14, 
1946, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 1; Lapp, quoted in Stern, The 
Oppenheimer Case, 112. See also Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, 240. Oppenheimer’s 
comment to Lapp was made in 1948. Although the FBI had begun to gather informa- 
tion about Oppenheimer from 1941, and although it was indeed tapping his phone at 
Berkeley after the war and was keeping files on his activities at Princeton, the bureau 
did not install phone taps in his home and office at Princeton until the beginning 
of 1954 (Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 344-45, 405, 483). On Oppen- 
heimer’s postwar job offers and academic appointments, see Smith and Weiner, 
Robert Oppenheimer, 298-99, 307-9; and Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 
320, 329-30, 351, 369-71. 

12. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 107-10, quoting 107. 

13. Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 189-90, Thomas quoted on 189; “Red 
Spy’s Plot on U.S. Atomic Secrets Bared,” New York World Telegram, October 30, 
1947; Oppenheimer’s Statement to Associated Press, October 30, 1947, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 236. On HUAC’s interest in the Chevalier incident, see also Schrecker, 
No Ivory Tower, 139, 141; Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 76-78; and Cassidy, 7. Robert 
Oppenheimer, 279-80. A few months after the end of the war, Hoover had forwarded 
to HUAC a report detailing the FBI’s information on atomic espionage (Herken, 
Brotherhood of the Bomb, 145). 

14. Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxtety, 130-47. 

15. Quoted in Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxiety, 132. 

16. Harold C. Urey to Oppenheimer, March 15, 1948, and Oppenheimer to Urey, 
March 15, 1948, Oppenheimer Papers, box 32. 

17. “*Civil Liberties’: from stenotyped report of NAS Business Session, April 27, 
1948 (page 54),” Oppenheimer Papers, box 134. See also Wang, American Science in 
an Age of Anxiety, 184-92, esp. 190. 

18. Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxiety, 192. 

19. E. U. Condon to Martin Kamen, May 24, 1948, and Kamen to Condon, May 
26, 1948, Papers of Martin David Kamen, Mandeville Special Collections Library, 
University of California, San Diego. 

20. Alfred N. Richards to Oppenheimer, November 2, 1948, and Richards to J. B. 
Conant, December 8, 1948, Oppenheimer Papers, box 134; Wang, American Sctence 
in an Age of Anxiety, 193-94. 

21. National Academy of Sciences, “The Problem of Security in Government 
Service: A Statement Adopted by the Council of the National Academy of Sciences 
Authorized for Transmission to the President of the United States,” February 3, 1949, 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 134. 


Notes to Pages 205-207. 349 


22. Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxiety, 194-96, Oppenheimer quoted 
on 194. 

23. Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 192-93. 

24. House Committee on Un-American Activities, 80th Cong., 2d sess., Public 
Law 601, Interim Report on Hearings regarding Communist Espionage in the United 
States (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, August 28, 1948); House 
Committee on Un-American Activities, 80th Cong., 2d sess., Public Law 601, Report 
on Soviet Espionage Activities in Connection with the Atomic Bomb (Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 28, 1948), esp. 182-83; newspaper 
clippings in Oppenheimer Papers, box 236: “Text of Report by House Committee on 
Un-American Activities Relating to Atomic Espionage,” Vew York Times, September 
28, 1948; “Scientist X Sought,” New York Sun, September 28, 1948; William S. 
White, “Indictment of Five Is Urged in Report on Atomic Spying,” New York Times, 
September 28, 1948; James E. Warner, “Atom Inquiry Accuses Five of Espionage: 
Says Two Scientists Sent Data to Russia,” New York Herald Tribune, September 
28, 1948; Ruth Montgomery, “Atom Probers Demand Indictment for Four,” New 
York Daily News, September 28, 1948; Oliver Pilat, “Prosecution of Four in Atom 
Plot Asked,” New York Post, September 28, 1948; “Indictment of 4 as Soviet Spies 
Demanded by Atom Bomb Inquiry,” Vew York Sun, September 28, 1948. See also 
Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, 130-42; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 122-23, 309; and Olwell, 
“Physical Isolation,” 741-44. 

25. Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxtety, 211-12. 

26. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 118-19; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 196. 
For Nixon’s comments, see New York Times, May 11, 1950. 

27. “Dr. Oppenheimer Once Termed Peters ‘Quite Red,’” Rochester Times Union, 
June 15, 1949. Iam grateful to Shawn Mullet for providing me with a copy of the article. 
See also Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 119-20, 124-26; Schweber, In the Shadow of 
the Bomb, 119-29; and Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 394-400. 

28. Weisskopf to Oppenheimer, June 27 [1949], Oppenheimer Papers, box 77 
(emphasis in original); quoted also in Schweber, In the Shadow of the Bomb, 123-24. 
See also “Dr. Peters Denies He Is Communist,” New York Times, April 23, 1954. 

29. Oppenheimer to the Editor, Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, June 30, 1949, 
published July 6, 1949. I am very grateful to Shawn Mullet for providing me with 
the letter, as well as for comments on its significance. The letter is also quoted in 
“J. Robert Oppenheimer: His Life and Times,” Time, April 26, 1954, 19-26, on 21. 
See also Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 281-84. 

30. Condon, quoted in Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 125. 

31. Condon, interviewed by Weiner, September 11 and 12, 1973, esp. 209-14, 
quoting 210, 211, AIP. 

32. Edward Condon to Emilie Condon, June 23, 1949, attached to D. M. Ladd to 
J. Edgar Hoover, December 15, 1953, and [Hoover?] to Admiral Lewis L. Strauss, 
January 14, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 16. Condon’s 


350 Notes to Pages 207-209 


letter to his wife was publicized during the 1954 Oppenheimer hearings, and Condon 
then wrote, “Under stress of difficult conditions, I was led privately to consider doubts 
about Oppenheimer which I never stated publicly, which I soon learned were wholly 
unjustified, and which I now publicly repudiate” (Condon to Editor, Time, published 
May 17, 1954, 8). 

33. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 128-30. 

34. Ibid., 107-8, 130-31; Wang, American Science in an Age of Anxtety, 212, 287; 
Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, 147-48, 272; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 196-97; 
Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 196. 

35. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 78-79; Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 144. 

36. Chevalier to Oppenheimer, February 21, 1950; Oppenheimer to Chevalier (two 
letters), February 24, 1950; Chevalier to Oppenheimer, February 28, 1950; Chevalier 
to Oppenheimer, August 10, 1950; and Chevalier to Oppenheimer, September 8, 
1950, Oppenheimer Papers, box 26; Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 71-84. 

37. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 115; Hershberg, James B. Conant, 425-26; 
Sherry, In the Shadow of War, 172. 

38. C. A. Rolander, Memo to file, “J. R. Oppenheimer—Interview with Col. Boris 
T. Pash,” March 15, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 23. 

39. Quoted in Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 162. See also Ben C. Duniway, 
“Summary of Testimony Given before the California Senate Committee on Unamer- 
ican Activities, Monday, May 8, Tuesday, May 9, and Wednesday, May 10, 1950,” 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 235. 

40. Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, 142; Dan Gillmor, Fear, the Accuser (New York: 
Abelard-Schuman, 1954), 180; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 427-28. 

41. Statement by J. Robert Oppenheimer, May 9, 1950, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
237; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 161-63. 

42. Oakland Tribune, May 9, 1950; New York World-Telegram, May 10, 1950; and 
other clippings, in Oppenheimer Papers, box 236. 

43. Nixon, quoted in “Nixon Defends the Loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, May 11, 1950, and “Nixon Champions Dr. Oppenheimer,” New 
York Times, May 11, 1950, both in Oppenheimer Papers, box 236. See also Stern, The 
Oppenheimer Case, 163. Oppenheimer wrote to thank Nixon for his “good words” 
(Oppenheimer to Richard Nixon, May 15, 1950, Oppenheimer Papers, box 235). 

44. Robert R. Brunn, “Californians Rally to Back Oppenheimer,” Christian Sci- 
ence Monitor, May 16, 1950; “Robert Oppenheimer, Patriot,” editorial, Santa Fe New 
Mexican, May 10, 1950; “The Magic of Ex-Communists,” editorial, Washington Star, 
May 11, 1950; “Sabotage by Slander,” editorial, Washington Post, May 11, 1950; “On 
Growing Up,” editorial, Baltimore Sun, May 11, 1950; “The Oppenheimer Story,” 
editorial, San Francisco Chronicle, May 11, 1950; “And Speaking of Propriety,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, May 12, 1950; “AEC Chiefs Unmoved by Charge against Robert 
Oppenheimer,” Washington Star, May 12, 1950; “An Ungustified Smear of a Loyal 


Notes to Pages 209-210 351 


Scientist,” editorial, San Francisco News, May 12, 1950; Tony Smith, “Red Unwit- 
tingly Verified Oppenheimer’s Loyalty,” Washington Daily News, May 12, 1950; “A 
Man to Trust,” editorial, Washington Daily News, May 12, 1950; “A Defense, as 
Well as an Attack, Is News,” editorial, Baltemore Sun, May 13, 1950, clippings in 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 236. 

45. Lilienthal to Oppenheimer, May 10, 1950, Oppenheimer Papers, box 46; 
Raymond Lawrence, “At Home and Abroad—the Oppenheimer Case,” Oakland 
Tribune, May 10, 1950; “West Coast,” San Francisco Chronicle, This World, May 
14, 1950; Oppenheimer to Robert F. Bacher, May 23, 1950, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 18. 

46. See, for example, “Oppenheimer’s Home Scene of Red Meeting, Court Told,” 
Trenton Evening Times, December 2, 1952; Note by Oppenheimer’s secretary on tele- 
phone call from G. S. Gould of Associated Press, December 2 [1952], Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 237. 

47. Quoting “Summary of Interview between Hitz, Cunningham, Roney, Volpe, 
Marks, Oppenheimer, and, at times, Crouch,” May 21, 1952, 10-11; Herbert S. Marks 
and Joseph Volpe, “Memorandum: Interview at Office of Assistant U. S. Attorney, 
William Hitz, Washington D. C., May 20, 1952,” esp. 11-18, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 237. 

48. Herbert S. Marks and Joseph Volpe Jr. to William Hitz, “Re: United States 
v. Weinberg,” December 1, 1952, Oppenheimer Papers, box 237. See also corre- 
spondence in folders labeled “Weinberg Perjury Trial—1953—Letters to and from 
JR Oppenheimer,” “Weinberg Perjury Trial—1952—Puening Correspondence,” and 
“Weinberg Perjury Trial—1953—Marks and Volpe Memos to RO—1953,” Oppen- 
heimer Papers, box 237. The considerable personal attention that Oppenheimer gave 
to the Weinberg case is suggested by his handwritten notes on the trial, collected 
in the folder labeled “Weinberg, Perjury Trial—1953—RO/KO Hand Notes,” Op- 
penheimer Papers, box 237. Oppenheimer was subpoenaed to appear as a witness 
(see documents in folder labeled “Weinberg Perjury Trial—1953—Subpoena and 
Government Paper,” Oppenheimer Papers, box 237). As it happened, however, the 
Crouches’ testimony was too unreliable for the prosecution to risk using their story, 
so Oppenheimer never had to appear. See Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 251, 
263-64, 398 nn. 87 and 88; and Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 438-43, 
456-60. 

49. Quoted in “Jurors Acquit ‘Scientist X° of Perjury Charge,” New York Herald 
Tribune, March 6, 1953. See also “Weinberg Case Nears Jurors,” Trenton Evening 
Times, March 4, 1953, and “‘Scientist X’ Trial Jury Deadlocks, Tries Again,” New 
York Herald Tribune, March 5, 1953, clippings in Oppenheimer Papers, box 237. See 
also United States v. Weinberg, United States District Court, D. Columbia, November 
21, 1952, Federal Supplement 108 (1953): 567-71. 

50. York, The Advisors, 127-43, quoting 134. 


352 Notes to Pages 210-212 


51. W. A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, “Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” May 19, 1952, 
in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 13. See also Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 443-34. 

52. SAC, Albuquerque to Director FBI, “Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” May 
27, 1952, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 13. For Teller’s own 
exculpatory account of his role in the case, see Teller, Memoirs, 369-84, esp. 372. On 
Teller’s motives and self-justification, see also Goodchild, Edward Teller, 242-43. 

53- Quoted in James R. Shepley and Clay Blair Jr., The Hydrogen Bomb: The Men, 
the Menace, the Mechanism (New York: David McKay, 1954), 111; Newman, “The 
Oppenheimer Case,” 25. 

54. Rhodes, Dark Sun, 537; Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 249, 283, 292. 

55. Souers, paraphrased in Hoover to Mrs. Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, July 10, 
1952, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 13. See also Rhodes, Dark 
Sun, 496-97, 530; and Hewlett and Duncan, Atomic Shield, 518. 

56. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, July 12, 1952, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 237. Truman noted Oppenheimer’s “strong desire, which you expressed 
to me last month, to complete your service [on the GAC] ... with the expiration 
of your present term” (Harry S. Truman to J. Robert Oppenheimer, September 27, 
1952, Oppenheimer Papers, box 73). Herken suggested that Oppenheimer’s fear that 
he would be drawn into the Weinberg trial was a factor in his decision not to seek 
reappointment (Brotherhood of the Bomb, 251). I believe the overriding factor was the 
H-bomb controversy. Bird and Sherwin wrote that Oppenheimer was “generally fed 
up with Washington” (American Prometheus, 448). 

57. See the comments by Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson in J. Edgar Hoover 
to Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, December 2, 1953, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 
100-17828, sec. 15. 

58. Strauss, quoted in A. H. Belmont to D. M. Ladd, “Julius Robert Oppen- 
heimer,” June 5, 1953, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 14; Rhodes, 
Dark Sun, 309-10, 530; Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 114, 128-29. 

59. See, for example, D. M. Ladd to the Director, “J. Robert Oppenheimer,” May 
25, 1953, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 14. Strauss, alongside 
Teller, was a key proponent of the idea that Oppenheimer was deliberately hindering 
the H-bomb program (Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 433-34, 467, 471). 

60. William Borden, interviewed by C. A. Rolander and Roger Robb, February 
20, 1954 (and attachments), in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 27; 
Wilson, quoted in “Regardless of Outcome: Oppenheimer’s Services Ended, Wilson 
Indicates,” New York Herald Tribune, April 15, 1954; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 530-31; 
York, The Advisors, 139. 

61. “The Hidden Struggle for the H-Bomb,” Fortune, May 1953, 109, 110, 230, 
quoting 230. 

62. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 201-4. According to Bird and Sherwin, Strauss 


was Murphy’s “unacknowledged collaborator” (American Prometheus, 468). 


Notes to Pages 212-215 353 


63. “U.S. Atom Bomb Boss Lewis Strauss: The Bomb Race Runs on Moscow 
Time,” Time, September 21, 1953, 25-27, quoting 26. 

64. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Atomic Weapons and American Policy,” Foreign 
Affairs 31, no. 4 (July 1953): 528-29. The article was reprinted in the Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 9, no. 6 (July 1953): 202-5, and in Oppenheimer, The Open Mind, 
61-77. On Oppenheimer’s campaign for “candor,” see Newman, “The Oppenheimer 
Case,” 63-70. At the time of Truman’s H-bomb decision in late January 1950, Conant 
had passed on to Oppenheimer Dean Acheson’s warning that public debate about 
the H-bomb would be “contrary to the national interest.” As early as February, 
Oppenheimer made public remarks critical of the secrecy surrounding the H-bomb 
decision. On this, and on Oppenheimer’s work for the State Department disarmament 
panel as background for his call for “candor,” see Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 429-30, 448-52. 

65. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 204. 

66. [Hoover] to Tolson, Ladd, Belmont, and Nichols, May 19, 1953, in Oppen- 
heimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 14; Hoover to Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, 
December 3, 1953, ibid., sec. 15; Hoover to Tolson and Ladd, June 24, 1953, ibid., 
sec. 14; Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” 1431- 
38; Hoover to Tolson, Ladd, and Nichols, December 2, 1953. Hoover had long 
felt stymied by the protection afforded Oppenheimer because of his perceived im- 
portance to national security (Herken, Brotherhood of the Bomb, 144-45). See also 
Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 471-72; and Goodchild, Edward Teller, 
294. 

67. Ibid., 1-7; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 534-35. 

68. Oppenheimer to Strauss, December 22, 1953, quoted in Newman, “The Op- 
penheimer Case,” 108. See also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 479-84. 

69. Green, “The Oppenheimer Case,” 61. See also Bird and Sherwin, American 
Prometheus, 537. 

70. Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 217; Stern, The Oppen- 
heimer Case, 259-62. 

71. Curtis, The Oppenheimer Case, 2. See also Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer 
Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” 1387, 1461; Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. 
Robert Oppenheimer,” 221; Holloway, In the Matter of 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 111; 
Lakoff, “The Trial of Dr. Oppenheimer,” 70-72; and “Transcript,” 201. 

72. Curtis, The Oppenheimer Case, 2, 42. See, for example, Robb’s interrogation 
of Bethe, in “Transcript,” 331. 

73. Green, “The Oppenheimer Case,” 59, 60; Rhodes, Dark Sun, 536. Before the 
start of the hearings, Evans remarked that from his experience on security boards, he 
believed that nearly all subversives were Jews (Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer,” 217-18; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 539). 

74. Oppenheimer’s attorney, Lloyd Garrison, complained about his lack of access 
to these files (Garrison to Nichols, June 1, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 


354 Notes to Pages 215-222 


100-17828, sec. 44). Rhodes argued that Garrison made an important mistake in not 
applying for security clearance for himself (Dark Sun, 540). 

75. Green, “The Oppenheimer Case,” 59. 

76. McCarthy, quoted in “McCarthy vs. Murrow,” New York Herald Tribune, 
April 11, 1954. See also “McCarthy Says He’ll Show Oppenheimer Was a Red,” New 
York Herald Tribune, April 14, 1954; “Delay and the H-Bomb,” editorial, New York 
Herald Tribune, April 10, 1954; “H-Bomb Held Back, M’Carthy Asserts,” New York 
Times, April 7, 1954; “Eisenhower Sees No Need to Build a Larger H-Bomb,” New 
York Times, April 8, 1954; “McCarthy and the H-Bomb,” New York Times, editorial, 
April 8, 1954; “The H-Bomb Decision,” New York Times, April 9, 1954; Thomas C. 
Reeves, The Life and Times of foe McCarthy: A Biography (London: Madison Books, 
1997), 589-90; and Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 219-21. For 
press clippings on the security hearings, see Oppenheimer Papers, boxes 208-16. 

77. Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 219-21; Bird and Sher- 
win, American Prometheus, 503, 546. 

78. Curtis, The Oppenheimer Case, 10-16, 57; Green, “The Oppenheimer Case,” 
14-15; Bernstein, “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” 1465- 
67; Eleanor Bontecou, “President Eisenhower’s ‘Security’ Program,” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 9, no. 6 (July 1953): 215-17, 220. See also Forman, “Behind Quantum 
Electronics”; Oreskes and Rainger, “Science and Security”; and Lawrence Badash, 
“Science and McCarthyism,” Minerva 38 (2000): 53-80. 

79. Oppenheimer, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 228. 

80. Malraux, quoted in Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 115. 

81. Cf. the discussion of the “documentary method of interrogation” in Michael 
Lynch and David Bogen, The Spectacle of History: Speech, Text, and Memory at the 
Iran-Contra Hearings (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996), esp. 201-35. 

82. However, after Garrison protested, the transcripts of Oppenheimer’s 1943 
interrogations by Pash and Lansdale were made available to Oppenheimer and his 
attorneys. See “Transcript,” 201, 203, 281, 285-93, 871-86; and Curtis, The Oppen- 
heimer Case, 213-18. 

83. For examples, see “Transcript,” 123, 144. 

84. Groves testified that when he had ordered Oppenheimer to tell him the name 
of the intermediary, “I got what to me was the final story” (“Transcript,” 168). 

85. “Transcript,” 152-53. See also Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 165-66. Oppenheimer 
contested the fixing of the date ofhis revelation to Groves by reference to this telegram. 
He said, “I thought it was earlier. It could have been that late. I thought it was earlier” 
(““Transcript,” 153). 

86. “Recommendations of the General Manager,” 1043. 

87. “Decision and Opinions,” 1050-51. 

88. Ibid., 1049. 

8g. The reality was, of course, different. Lilienthal said that Strauss’s role in the 
Oppenheimer case showed “how much the course of events is affected by wholly 


Notes to Pages 222-232 355 


personal quirks, by what seem at the time little personal things” (quoted in Stern, The 
Oppenheimer Case, 130). 

go. “Findings,” 1013. 

g1. Oppenheimer’s wartime appeal concerning Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz’s draft 
deferment was also regarded as fitting this pattern. 

g2. “Findings,” 1018-19. See also “Transcript,” 134, 210-15, 252-53. 

g3. “Findings,” 1015. 

94. See Rieff, “The Case of Dr. Oppenheimer,” in On Intellectuals, 363-64. 

95. Lakoff, “The Trial of Dr. Oppenheimer,” 66. An FBI agent described Oppen- 
heimer as “a master at inuendo [sic] and evasive answers” (W. A. Branigan to A. H. 
Belmont, “Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer,” March 31, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Secu- 
rity File, 100-17828, sec. 29). 

g6. For a general discussion of “denigration through contextualization,” see Adi 
Ophir and Steven Shapin, “The Place of Knowledge: A Methodological Survey,” 
Science in Context 4 (1991): 4. 

97. “Transcript,” 517. On these accounts of Oppenheimer’s role in the GAC, see 
also Wilson, The Great Weapons Heresy, 138-39. 

98. “Transcript,” 461. See also the similar testimony of Walter G. Whitman (496). 

gg. See, for example, the testimony of Thomas Keith Glennan, in “Transcript,” 
256. 

100. “Transcript,” 566-67, 565. See also Vannevar Bush, “If We Alienate Our 
Scientists,” New York Times Magazine, June 13, 1954, 9, 60, 62, 64-65, 67. 

101. Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing, 144-45. 

102. “Transcript,” 385; quoted in part also in Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing, 
145. 

103. Garrison, quoted in Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing, 145. See also Stern, 
The Oppenheimer Case, 510. 

104. “Findings,” 1019 (hereafter cited in text). 

105. Curtis, The Oppenheimer Case, 152. 

106. New York Times columnist James Reston wrote of the PSB opinion, “They 
suggest that a scientist, like a soldier, is expected not only to obey but also to show 
‘enthusiasm’ for Government policies, regardless of his own convictions” (“How 
Expendable Are the Atomic Scientists?” New York Times, June 6, 1954). 

107. “Findings,” 1020-21; Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing, 194. Bizarrely, it 
seems that Evans’s dissent was actually penned by Robb. Evans’s original version 
was apparently so poorly constructed that Gray feared embarrassment to the board 
(Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” 239; Bird and Sherwin, 
American Prometheus, 540). 

108. “McCarthy Skeptical,” New York Herald Tribune, April 10, 1954, 10. Eisen- 
hower’s statement is discussed in A. H. Belmont to L. V. Boardman, “J. Robert 
Oppenheimer,” April 11, 1954, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 31. 

109. “Recommendations of the General Manager,” 1045. 


356 Notes to Pages 232-239 


110. “Decision and Opinions,” 1051 (hereafter cited in text). 

111. Karl K. Darrow to H. A. Bethe and R. T. Birge, June 5, 1954, Birge Papers. 

112. New York Fournal-American, April 17, 1954. 

113. Major, The Oppenheimer Hearing, 276-97. 

114. Columns by David Lawrence in the New York Herald Tribune during this 
period included “Oppenheimer’s Side Gave Publicity to His Suspension” (April 
14), “Drive to Discredit A.E.C. Is Laid to ‘Left Wingers’” (June 17), “Oppenheimer 
Verdict Held Devastating Condemnation” (June 30), “Security Task Complicated 
by Solidarity of Scientists” (June 22), “Oppenheimer Gave to Reds after Hitler- 
Stalin Alliance” (June 24), and “‘Leftist’ Drive to Sabotage Security System Is Seen” 
(December 30). Columns by Joseph and Stewart Alsop in the Herald Tribune in- 
cluded “What Is Security?” (June 4), “Super and Security” (June 7), “The Scientific 
Hornets” (June 18), and “Operation Spill-the-Beans” (July 12). 

115. “The Oppenheimer Case,” editorial, New York Herald Tribune, April 14, 
1954. 

116. “The Gray Report: Findings and Recommendations,” editorial, New York 
Herald Tribune, June 3, 1954. 

117. “The Essence of Law,” editorial, New York Herald Tribune, June 8, 1954. See 
also “The Oppenheimer Documents,” editorial, New York Herald Tribune, June 17, 
1954. 

118. “The A.E.C. Verdict,” editorial, New York Herald Tribune, July 1, 1954. 

119. Ibid. 

120. Arthur Krock, “Verdict on the Criterion of “Trustworthiness,’” New York 
Times, July 1, 1954. 

121. Extracts from editorials, reprinted in “Editorial Views on the Oppenheimer 
Decision,” New York Times, July 2,195.4. See also “Press Comment on Oppenheimer,” 
New York Herald Tribune, July 1, 1954. 

122. “Science Schism Widens: Oppenheimer Debate Impedes Progress in United 
States Military Technology,” New York Times, July 1, 1954. 

123. William L. Laurence, “Oppenheimer Case Recalls Momentous H-Bomb De- 
bate,” New York Times, June 3, 1954. See also E. W. Kenworthy, “The Drama of the 
Hydrogen Bomb—and Dr. Oppenheimer’s Key Role,” New York Times, April 18, 
1954. 

124. Waldemar Kaempffert, “X-Ray of the Scientific Mind,” New York Times 
Magazine, April 25, 1954, 7, 54-56. 

125. “Scientist’s Views Stir Panel Worry,” New York Times, June 2, 1954. 

126. New York Times, September 7, 1954. 

127. “214 Atomic Scientists in Protest,” New York Herald Tribune, June 22, 1954; 
Joseph and Stewart Alsop, “Operation Don’t Argue!” New York Herald Tribune, 
July 14, 1954. 

128. Killian, quoted in Newman, “The Oppenheimer Case,” 181. 


Notes to Pages 239-243 357 


129. Goudsmit, quoted in William L. Laurence, “Oppenheimer Case Divides 
Physicists: Subjecting of Atomic Expert to ‘Security Risk’ Hearing Debated by Col- 
leagues,” New York Times, April 30, 1954. See also Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
328-30. 

130. Joseph and Stewart Alsop, “Gamy Stuff,” Vew York Herald Tribune, October 
3, 1954; “Shepley and Blair Discuss Their Book on the H-Bomb,” New York Herald 
Tribune, October 14, 1954; “Science Fiction,” Santa Fe New Mexican, September 
26, 1954. See also Goodchild, Edward Teller, 253-55. 

131. “Teller Denies Responsibility for ‘Any Part’ of H-Bomb Book,” Santa Fe New 
Mexican, September 26, 1954; Edward Teller, “The Work of Many People,” Sczence, 
February 25, 1955, 267-75; Teller, Memozrs, 401-4. See also “Strauss Tried to Block 
Hydrogen Bomb Book,” New York Herald Tribune, September 27, 1954. 

132. Nat S. Finney, “The Paradox of the H-bomb and the Power Vacuum in 
Washington,” New York Herald Tribune, October 3, 1954. 

133. “Division in the A.E.C,” editorial, New York Herald Tribune, June 7, 1954. 
See also Walter Kerr, “Split over Oppenheimer in A.E.C. Called Likely,” New York 
Herald Tribune, June 3, 1954; and Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 337. 

134. “Critic of Strauss to Quit Atom Post,” New York Times, May 22, 1954. 

135. “Smyth Quits Atom Post, Voted for Oppenheimer,” New York Herald Tri- 
bune, September 21, 1954. 

136. “Nichols to Quit A.E.C., Open Office,” New York Herald Tribune, January 
30, 1955- 

137. This comment was recorded in a memo to Strauss by Charter Heslep, an AEC 
liaison officer with the U.S. Information Agency. Heslep added in parentheses, “This 
last phrase is mine and he [Teller] agrees it is apt” (quoted in Blumberg and Owens, 
Energy and Conflict, 359; Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 532; Goodchild, 
Edward Teller, 240-41). 

138. Alistair Cooke, “Suspension of Dr. Oppenheimer a Test Case,” Guardian 
(Manchester), April 22, 1954. 

139. Max Ascoli, “Editorial: The Jurisprudence of Security,” The Reporter, July 
6, 1954, 8-9. 

140. “Paper, Oppenheimer Continue to Differ,” New York Times, June 5, 1954. 

141. Michael Amrine, “A Generation on Trial,” The Progressive, June 1954, 5-7, 
esp. 5. 

142. Bell, Post-industrial Society, 400. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


1. Coughlan, “The Equivocal Hero of Science: Robert Oppenheimer,” Life, 
February 1967, 34A; Alfred Friendly, “Oppenheimer: Scientist Beset by Political 
Ills,” Washington Post, February 20, 1967. 


358 Notes to Pages 243-247 


2. Victor Weisskopf, interviewed by Los Alamos National Laboratory, ca. 1981, 
LANL TR-81-013 4/81. 

3. Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, 331. 

4. Quoted in Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 298. 

5. Rabi, quoted in Rigden, Rabi, 243. 

6. Jackson and Murray, quoted in Cushing Strout, Conscrence, Science, and Secu- 
rity: The Case of Dr. F. Robert Oppenheimer (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1963), 57-58, 
on 58; Oppenheimer, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 275; Coughlan, 
“The Equivocal Hero of Science,” 34A; Friendly, “Oppenheimer.” 

7. “Oppenheimer Kept in Institute Post,” Mew York Times, April 14, 1954; 
Friendly, “Oppenheimer.” Bird and Sherwin noted that Oppenheimer had turned in 
his resignation the previous year, citing as reasons his poor relations with the faculty 
and his wife’s health problems (American Prometheus, 580). 

8. See, for example, Walter Kerr, “Several Unwitting Distortions Noted in Re- 
porting the Oppenheimer Case,” New York Herald Tribune, Weekly Review, June 
20, 1954; “Keeping the Record Straight,” editorial, New York Herald Tribune, June 
22, 1954; and Roscoe Drummond, “Weakness of the Gray Report,” New York Herald 
Tribune, June 27, 1954. Press clippings relating to the security hearings are in Op- 
penheimer Papers, boxes 208-16; clippings from the New York Herald Tribune and 
New York Times are in boxes 211-13. 

g. Walter Lippmann, “Disorderly Government,” New York Herald Tribune, June 
3, 1954; “J. Robert Oppenheimer: His Life and Times,” Time, April 26, 1954, 19-21, 
quoting 21. See also Walter Lippmann, “The Oppenheimer Case,” New York Herald 
Tribune, June 7, 1954, in Strout, Conscience, Science, and Security, 47. 

10. Joseph and Stewart Alsop, We Accuse! 13, 18-25, 59; Waldo Frank, “Oppen- 
heimer’s ‘Folly’: An Alsop Fable,” The Nation, March 5, 1955, 193-95- 

11. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., “The Oppenheimer Case,” Atlantic Monthly, Oc- 
tober 1954, in Strout, Conscience, Science, and Security, 47-48; Tolman, quoted in 
Murray Illson, “Anti-Intellectual Fever Impeding U.S. Science, Psychologists Told,” 
New York Times, June 8, 1954; Illson, “Tolman Assails Fear of Thinking,” New York 
Times, June 12, 1954. 

12. Cf. Steven Shapin, “Who Is the Industrial Scientist? Commentary from 
Academic Sociology and from the Shop-Floor in the United States, ca. 1900-ca. 
1960,” paper presented to the 123rd Nobel Symposium, “Science and Industry 
in the 20th Century,” Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, November 21-23, 
2002. 

13. Rieff, “The Case of Dr. Oppenheimer,” in On Intellectuals, esp. 368. The 
essay was first published in The Twentieth Century 156, nos. 930-31 (1954). 

14. Trilling, quoted in Richard H. Pells, The Liberal Mind in a Conservative Age: 
American Intellectuals in the 1940s and 1950s (New York: Harper and Row, 1985), 
273, 284; Diana Trilling, “The Oppenheimer Case: A Reading of the Testimony,” 
Partisan Review 21, no. 6 (November-December 1954), 615, 633. 


Notes to Pages 247-249 359 


15. See Hans Meyerhoff, “Through the Liberal Looking Glass—Darkly,” Partisan 
Review 22, no. 2 (Spring 1955): 238-48. 

16. Congress for Cultural Freedom, Sceence and Freedom: The Proceedings of a 
Conference Convened by the Congress for Cultural Freedom and Held in Hamburg 
on July 23rd-26th, 1953 (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955); American Committee for 
Cultural Freedom, press release, November 12, 1954, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
110. 

17. Sol Stein to Oppenheimer, March 5, 1954; memo on telephone conversation 
between Oppenheimer and Sol Stein, March 6, 1954; Oppenheimer, in transcript 
of telephone conversation between Dr. Oppenheimer and Mrs. van Gelder of Mr. 
Leidersdorf’s office, March 5, 1954, Oppenheimer Papers, box 32. See also “2 Scien- 
tists Refuse Bid to Einstein Fete,” New York Post, March 11, 1954; Frederick Woltman, 
“Einstein in Middle of New Commie Hassle,” New York World-Telegram and The 
Sun, March 11, 1954; and Clark Foreman to Oppenheimer, April 7, May 5, and May 
28, 1954, Oppenheimer Papers, box 32. 

18. “‘Refuse to Testify,’ Einstein Advises Intellectuals Called In by Congress,” 
New York Times, June 12, 1953; Abraham Pais, Einstein Lived Here (Oxford: Claren- 
don Press, 1994), 236-42, esp. 241; Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, 326; and esp. Pais, 
‘Subtle is the Lord ...: The Science and Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1982), 10-11. See also “Einstein Backs Oppenheimer,” New York Times, April 
13, 1954. 

19. Oppenheimer, in transcript of telephone conversation between Dr. Oppen- 
heimer and Mrs. van Gelder of Mr. Leidersdorf’s office, March 5, 1954; memo on 
telephone conversation between Oppenheimer and Sol Stein, March 6, 1954; memo 
on telephone conversation with Miss Helen Dukas, March g [1954], Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 32. 

20. American Committee for Cultural Freedom, press release, November 12, 1954. 

21. Pells, Liberal Mind, 343-44, quoting 344. 

22. Robert Gorham Davis to Oppenheimer, July 20, 1954 (Oppenheimer’s sec- 
retary wrote on this document that he sent in his membership card on November 
9, 1954); American Committee for Cultural Freedom, press release, November 12, 
1954, Oppenheimer Papers, box 110. See also Michael A. Day, “Oppenheimer on the 
Nature of Science,” Centaurus 43 (2001), esp. 74, 109 n. 3. 

23. Jane A. Sanders, “The University of Washington and the Controversy over J. 
Robert Oppenheimer,” Pacific Northwest Quarterly 70, no. 1 (January 1979): 8-19; 
Schrecker, No Ivory Tower, 94-112, 267-68, 310-37; Wang, American Science in an 
Age of Anxiety, 271-74; Jane A. Sanders, Cold War on Campus: Academic Freedom at 
the University of Washington, 1946-1964 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 
1979); Pells, Leberal Mind, 287-94; Sigmund Diamond, Compromised Campus: The 
Collaboration of Universities with the Intelligence Community, 1945-1955 (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1992). 

24. Sanders, “University of Washington,” 15. 


360 Notes to Pages 249-252 


25. C. A. G. Wiersma to Arthur W. Martin Jr., March 8, 1955, Papers of Lee A. 
DuBridge, box 94, California Institute of Technology Archives, Pasadena. See also 
“University Cancels Conference: Scientists Shun Meeting that Barred Oppenheimer,” 
New York Herald Tribune, March 24, 1955. 

26. Oppenheimer, quoted in Sanders, “University of Washington,” 15. The pro- 
posal to invite Oppenheimer as a visiting professor was originally made by the physics 
department chairman, Oppenheimer’s former Los Alamos colleague John Manley, 
whom Uehling was replacing while Manley was on leave. 

27. Ibid., 19. 

28. Weisskopf to Oppenheimer, quoted in David Halberstam, The Fifties (New 
York: Villard Books, 1993), 349. 

2g. “Scientists Express Confidence in Oppenheimer,” Bulletin of the Atomic Sci- 
entists 10, no. 7 (September 1954): 283, 286. See also Alan Simpson, “The Re-trial 
of the Oppenheimer Case,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 10, no. 10 (December 
1954): 387-88; “Oppenheimer Suspension Stirs Scientists,” F.4.S. [Federation of 
American Scientists] Newsletter, April 26, 1954, DuBridge Papers, box 33; “Trust in 
Oppenheimer Expressed by Scientists,” New York Herald Tribune, April 14, 1954; 
“Scientists Appeal to Eisenhower: Oppenheimer’s ‘Purge’ is Hit,” New York Herald 
Tribune, June 7, 1954; “Einstein among Signers: Oppenheimer Called Loyal by 26 
Princeton Colleagues,” New York Herald Tribune, July 1, 1954; and “Atom Scientists 
Charge U.S. Broke Faith on Oppenheimer,” New York Herald Tribune, May 21, 
1954. 

30. Editorial, Los Angeles Examiner, June 24, 1954; Arthur Calvin Little to Lee 
DuBridge, June 24, 1954; DuBridge to Little, June 28, 1954, DuBridge Papers, box 
33- 

31. Christy Walsh to Lee DuBridge, July 3, 1954, DuBridge Papers, box 33. This, 
together with other items of public correspondence to DuBridge, is also quoted in 
Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 337. 

32. On these cultural conflicts, see David A. Hollinger, “Jewish Intellectuals and 
the De-Christianization of American Public Culture in the Twentieth Century,” in 
Science, Fews, and Secular Culture, 17-41; and Hollinger, “Science as a Weapon 
in Kulturkémpfe in the United States during and after World War II,” ibid., 155- 
74. 

33. “Oppenheimer a Sermon Topic: President Hears Prayer for a Worthy 
Congress,” New York Herald Tribune, November 1, 1954. 

34. Frances P. Bartlett, “The Atomic Brain Trust,” American Mercury 81 (July 
1955): 75, 78- 

35. DuBridge to Mrs. Gladys G. Dickey, July 16, 1954, DuBridge Papers, box 33. 

36. DuBridge to Edward U. Condon, July 14, 1954, DuBridge Papers, box 33. 

37. DuBridge to the Board of Trustees, California Institute of Technology, July 
12, 1954, DuBridge Papers, box 33. 

38. Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 364-80; Teller, Memoirs, 401. 


Notes to Pages 253-257 361 


39. Teller, quoted in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 380. See also 
H. L. Nieburg, In the Name of Science (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1966), 131-32, 
135-57- 

40. Quoted in Blumberg and Owens, Energy and Conflict, 364. 

41. Ed Regis, Who Got Einstein’s Office? Eccentricity and Genius at the Institute 
for Advanced Study (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987), 139-52; George Johnson, 
Strange Beauty: Murray Gell-Mann and the Revolution in Twentieth-Century Physics 
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1999), 80. See also Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 
268-72. 

42. Johnson, Strange Beauty, 82. 

43. Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, 221-22; Oppenheimer to David E. Lilienthal, 
October 22, 1947, Oppenheimer Papers, box 46. 

44. Bernstein, The Life It Brings, 99; Brown, Through These Men, 290-91. 

45. Robert Oppenheimer to Frank Oppenheimer, July 12, 1952, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 237. 

46. Oppenheimer, interviewed by Kuhn, November 20, 1963, 32, Archives for the 
History of Quantum Physics, AIP. 

47. James B. Conant, Sceence and Common Sense (1951; New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1963), 1. See also Steve Fuller, Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History 
for Our Times (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 150-78, 179-226, esp. 
151-54, 222-23; Hershberg, fames B. Conant; David Hollinger, “Free Enterprise and 
Free Inquiry: The Emergence of Laissez-Faire Communitarianism in the Ideology 
of Science in the U.S.,” in Science, Fews, and Secular Culture, 97-120; and Stephen 
Tumer, Liberal Democracy 3.0: Civil Society in an Age of Experts (London: Sage, 
2003), esp. 15-16, 117-28. 

48. Oppenheimer to James B. Conant, May 13, 1947, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
27. See also James B. Conant, On Understanding Science: An Historical Approach 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1947). 

49. Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World,” in The Open Mind, 97, 
98. 

50. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Science as Action: Rutherford’s World,” in Sctence 
and the Common Understanding, 20-36. 

51. Yaron Ezrahi, “Einstein and the Light of Reason,” in Albert Einstein: Historical 
and Cultural Perspectives, ed. Gerald Holton and Yehuda Elkana (Mineola, NY: 
Dover Publications, 1982), esp. 259-73. 

52. Oppenheimer, “Science as Action,” 36. 

53. Jeffries Wyman, interviewed by Charles Weiner, May 28, 1975, 29, Oppen- 
heimer Oral History Collection, MIT Archives. 

54. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Uncommon Sense,” in Science and the Common Un- 
derstanding, 74-91, esp. 75, 91. On the philosophical background of complementarity, 
see Lewis Feuer, Einstein and the Generations of Science (New York: Basic Books, 
1974), 121-26; Gerald Holton, “The Roots of Complementarity,” in Thematic Origins 


362 Notes to Pages 257-261 


of Scientific Thought (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973), 115-61; and 
David Kaiser, “More Roots of Complementarity: Kantian Aspects and Influences,” 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science and Technology 23, no. 2 (1992): 213-39. 

55. Oppenheimer, “Physics in the Contemporary World,” 92. 

56. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Sciences and Man’s Community,” in Science 
and the Common Understanding, 92-110, on 98, 97. 

57. Ibid., 101-2. 

58. Ibid., 102-3, quoting 103. 

59. “The Message of the New Physics,” review of Oppenheimer, Science and the 
Common Understanding, in Times (London), October 22, 1954. 

60. Brown, Through These Men, 290. 

61. “London Letter,” Manchester Guardian Weekly, April 22, 1954. 

62. Letters to Oppenheimer from BBC listeners, quoted in Ferenc Morton Szasz, 
“Great Britain and the Saga of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” War in History 2, no. 3 
(1995): 324. 

63. J. L. Synge, review of Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding, 
in Universities Quarterly, February 1955, 206, 208. See also Szasz, “Great Britain,” 
32h. 

64. Lewis Gannet, review of Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understand- 
ing, in New York Herald Tribune, June 22, 1954. 

65. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Prospects in the Arts and Sciences,” in The Open 
Mind, 133-46, quoting 144, 145. 

66. Ibid., 140, 138, 142-43. 

67. Cf. José Ortega y Gasset, The Revolt of the Masses (New York: W. W. Norton, 
1932); Clement Greenberg, “Avant Garde and Kitsch,” Partisan Review 6 (1939): 34- 
49; and George Cotkin, “The Tragic Predicament: Post-war American Intellectuals, 
Acceptance, and Mass Culture,” in Intellectuals in Politics: From the Dreyfus Affair to 
Salman Rushdie, ed. Jeremy Jennings and Anthony Kemp-Welch, 284-70 (London: 
Routledge, 1997). 

68. Alistair Cooke, “Isolation of the Specialist in America,” Guardian (Manch- 
ester), December 30, 1954. 

69. “The Scotsman’s Log,” Scotsman, December 30, 1954. 

70. Transcript of conversation between J. Robert Oppenheimer and Edward R. 
Murrow, recorded December 16, 1954, for CBS television program See It Now, 
broadcast on January 4, 1955, in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 
55, quoting 7. For positive press reaction to the Murrow interview, see, for exam- 
ple, John Crosby, “Portrait by Television,” New York Herald Tribune, January 7, 
1955- 

71. Transcript of conversation between Oppenheimer and Murrow, December 
16, 1954, 3, 2. On Einstein’s politics, see also Jerome, The Einstein File. On Oppen- 
heimer’s relationship with Einstein, see also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 
379-82. 


Notes to Pages 262-265 363 


72. However, during the interview, Oppenheimer did criticize immigration re- 
strictions that had prevented many prominent European scientists from visiting the 
United States. “Barring Foreign Scientists Absurd, Oppenheimer Says,” New York 
Herald Tribune, January 5, 1955; “Oppenheimer Assailed for Alien Law Criticism,” 
New York Herald Tribune, January 16, 1955; see also “Bricker Decries Scientists’ Talk: 
Objects to Some Who Seek to Influence Public on Topics outside Their Fields,” 
New York Times, February 6, 1955. 

73. Victor Cohn, “Can a Security Risk Survive?” Minneapolis Sunday Tribune, 
June 16, 1957; Cohn, “Oppenheimer Survives ‘Security Risk’ Branding,” Detroit 
News, June 24, 1957; clippings, and correspondence with Cohn, in Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 208. 

74. John W. Finney, “Hagen Estimates Orbit,” New York Times, October 12, 1957. 

75. Vannevar Bush, “The Gentleman of Culture,” talk delivered at Pingry School, 
Hillside, New Jersey, December 6, 1958, printed (with modifications) in Bush, Sczence 
Is Not Enough (New York: William Morrow, 1967), 31-49, quoting 6. 

76. Ibid., 17, 9, 10, 1, 6. 

77. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Knowledge and the Structure of Culture,” Helen 
Kenyon Lecture, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY, October 29, 1958 (manuscript 
copy), 3. 

78. Ibid., 14. 

79. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Some Reflections on Science and Culture, 1959 lecture 
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1960), 5. 

80. Ibid., 8-9. 

81. Ibid., 22-23. 

82. C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures (1959; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1993). Snow first set out his ideas in an October 1956 New Statesman article. While in 
Japan in 1960, Oppenheimer dismissed Snow with the remark, “Everything he says is 
ofa degree triviality and childishness” (“An Afternoon with Professor Oppenheimer,” 
Science and Man, September 23, 1960, 2, Oppenheimer Papers, box 261). On the 
“two cultures” debate in America and its context, see Michael A. Day, “ II. Rabi: 
The Two Cultures and the Universal Culture of Science,” Physics in Perspective 6, 
no. 4 (2004): 428-76. 

83. Jacques Barzun, The House of Intellect (New York: Harper and Row, 1959), 
11. 

84. Clark Kerr, The Uses of the University (1963; Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1972), 101. These were Kerr’s Godkin Lectures at Harvard University, 
on April 23, 24, and 25, 1963. Kerr was quoting from J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Sci- 
ence and the Human Community,” in Issues in University Education: Essays by Ten 
American Scholars, ed. Charles Frankel (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1959), 
56, 58; and referring to David Riesman, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer, The 
Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1950). 


364 Notes to Pages 265-268 


85. David Kaiser, “The Postwar Suburbanization of American Physics,” American 
Quarterly 56 (2004): 851-88. 

86. Shils, quoted in Peter Coleman, The Liberal Conspiracy: The Congress for 
Cultural Freedom and the Struggle for the Mind of Postwar Europe (New York: Free 
Press, 1989), 121. 

87. Oppenheimer to Nicolas Nabokov, June 3, 1959, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
253. 

88. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “In the Keeping of Unreason,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 16, no. 1 (January 1960): 22. 

89. Ibid. 

go. Karl Jaspers, The Atom Bomb and the Future of Man (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1961), 202. 

g1. Mary McCarthy to Hannah Arendt, September 28, 1962, quoted in Saunders, 
Who Paid the Piper? 332. 

g2. Aron, Memoirs, 175. 

93. “Intellectuals,” Time, July 4, 1960, 17. See also Coleman, The Liberal Con- 
sptracy, 174-76. 

94. Journal entry for March 27, 1955, in David E. Lilienthal, Venturesome Years, 
1950-1955, vol. 3 of The Fournals of David E. Lilienthal (New York: Harper and 
Row, 1966), 618. 

95. Ibid. 

96. Bertrand Russell to Oppenheimer, February 8, 1957; Oppenheimer to Russell, 
February 18, 1957; Russell to Oppenheimer, March 11, 1957, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 59. See also Joseph Rotblat, Sczentists in the Quest for Peace: A History of the 
Pugwash Conferences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972); and Rotblat, Pugwash: The 
First Ten Years; History of the Conferences on Science and World Affairs (London: 
Heinemann, 1967). 

97. FBI Director to Legal Attache, London, August 27, 1954; W. A. Branigan to 
A. H. Belmont, “Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Internal Security,” August 27, 1954, 
in Oppenheimer, FBI Security File, 100-17828, sec. 49; “Oppenheimer to Paris: Will 
Lecture at Sorbonne as Exchange Professor,” New York Times, February 8, 1958; 
“Oppenheimers Return from Europe; Toni Rides Belgian Prince’s Horse,” Princeton 
Packet, July 17, 1958. On FBI surveillance of Oppenheimer after the hearing and the 
bureau’s fear that he might defect, see also Bird and Sherwin, American Prometheus, 
554-55- 

98. Giles Scott-Smith, The Politics of Apolitical Culture: The Congress for Cultural 
Freedom, the CIA and Post-war American Hegemony (London: Routledge, 2002), 105. 

gg. Time, September 19, 1960, 47; quoted also in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppen- 
heimer, 274. The Japanese press reported his comments with a somewhat different 
emphasis: “I feel just as sorry tonight as I felt last night” (“Oppenheimer to Give 
Series of Talks Here,” Asahi Evening News, September 6, 1960). Clippings and 


Notes to Pages 268-272 365 


correspondence relating to Oppenheimer’s trip to Japan are in Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 41. 

100. “Oppenheimer to Give Series of Talks Here.” 

101. Nicholas Evan Sarantakes, “Alliance in Doubt: American Reaction to the 
1960 US-Japanese Security Treaty Crisis,” American Diplomacy 4, no. 3 (Autumn 
1999), http://www.unc.edu/depts/diplomat/AD _Issues/amdipI-13/sarantakes1.html; 
George R. Packard III, Protest in Tokyo: The Security Treaty Crisis of 1960 (Prince- 
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1966), esp. 3-17, 47-52, 258, 288-89, 291, 300- 
303. 

102. John W. Dower, Embracing Defeat: Fapan in the Wake of World War Two 
(London: Allen Lane, 1999), 487-95; Lise Yoneyama, Hiroshima Traces: Time, Space, 
and the Dialectics of Memory (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1999), esp. 14; James J. Orr, The Victim as Hero: Ideologies of Peace and National 
Identity in Postwar Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2001), esp. 36-71; 
John W. Dower, “The Bombed: Hiroshimas and Nagasakis in Japanese Memory,” 
Diplomatic History 19, no. 2 (Spring 1995): 275-95. 

103. “Oppenheimer Met by American Youth,” Mainichi Daily News, September 
18, 1960; Earle Reynolds to Oppenheimer, September 16, 1960, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 41. 

104. Dower, Embracing Defeat, 494. 

105. On the role of Marxist-oriented “progressive intellectuals” in the popular 
movement against the security treaty, see Packard, Protest in Tokyo, 26-31, 138-41, 
270-78. 

106. “Dr. Oppenheimer Gives Lecture In Kyoto Univ.,” Mainichi Daily News, 
September 15, 1960; “Oppenheimer in Kyoto,” Asahi Picture News, September 1960; 
“1,000 Hear Oppenheimer Give Talk,” Asahi Evening News, September 19, 1960; 
“Oppenheimer to Talk in Tokyo on Sept. 21,” Asaht Evening News, September 15, 
1960; “Oppenheimer Stresses Meaning of*Science,’” Asahi Evening News, September 
22, 1960; J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Future of Civilization in the Scientific Age,” 
France-Asie, March-April 1961, 1807-15. 

107. Oppenheimer, “Science and Culture,” International House of fapan Bulletin 
6 (October 1960): 2-10, 21, quoting 10; Oppenheimer to Yasaka Takagi, October 27, 
1960; Yasaka Takagi to Oppenheimer, November 26, 1960, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 41. 

108. Johnson, quoted in Goodchild, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 275. See also Major, 
The Oppenheimer Hearing, 293; and Pais, A Tale of Two Continents, 331. 

109. New York Herald Tribune, April 8, 1963, quoted in Major, The Oppenheimer 
Hearing, 292. 

110. New York Times, April 4, 1963, quoted in Stern, The Oppenheimer Case, 455. 

111. Thomas B. Morgan, “A Visit with J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Look, April 1, 


1958, 35-38, quoting 38. 


366 Notes to Pages 272-274 


112. J. Robert Moskin, “Morality USA: Have Bigness, the Bomb, and the Buck 
Destroyed Our Old Morality?” Look, September 24, 1963, 74-88, quoting 74, 75; 
see also Moskin to Oppenheimer, October 7, 1963, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
47. 

113. Abraham Pais, Nels Bohr’s Times, in Physics, Philosophy, and Polity (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1991). 

114. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “Niels Bohr and Atomic Weapons,” New York Re- 
view of Books, December 17, 1964, 6-8, quoting 6. See also Oppenheimer’s Pegram 
Lectures, delivered at Brookhaven National Laboratory in August 1963, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 247. 

115. Oppenheimer, “Niels Bohr and Atomic Weapons,” 8. 

116. See Margaret Gowing, Britain and Atomic Energy, 1939-1945 (New York: St. 
Martin’s Press, 1964), 358-59. 

117. See, for example, Howard Sims, “Bohr’s Motives Misunderstood, Oppen- 
heimer Says. Danish Physicist’s Wartime Aims Defended,” Washington Post, De- 
cember 7, 1969. 

118. Oppenheimer to R. B. Silvers, December 5, 1964; Silvers to Oppenheimer, 
December 8, 1964, Oppenheimer Papers, box 262. 

119. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “War and the Nations,” in The Flying Trapeze: Three 
Crises for Physicists (London: Oxford University Press, 1964), 54-65, on 64. 

120. Oppenheimer said that “the letter had very little effect, and that Einstein 
himself is not really answerable for all that came later.” J. Robert Oppenheimer, “On 
Albert Einstein,” New York Review of Books, March 17, 1966, 4-5. 

121. Oppenheimer also had an article published in the CCF journal: “The Added 
Cubit,” Encounter 21, no. 2 (August 1963): 43-47. 

122. Oppenheimer to Nicolas Nabokov, April 13, 1962, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 66. Correspondence between Oppenheimer and Agnes Meyer, dating from the 
late 1950s, is in Oppenheimer Papers, box 51. In 1955, Agnes Meyer had made a 
speech in which she asserted that the Oppenheimer case was indicative of “a rising 
‘anti-intellectualism’ in this country [which] was driving brains out of Washington.” 
“Security Program Is Called Vicious,” New York Times, January 21, 1955, clipping in 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 213. 

123. Statement by Oppenheimer attached to draft letter of invitation by Nicolas 
Nabokov, October 12, 1962; and (on Kennan) Oppenheimer to Nabokov, May 14, 
1963, Oppenheimer Papers, box 66. A “trial run” meeting was held at the estate the 
previous summer (in September 1962), with guests including Oppenheimer, Meyer, 
Boyd, and Nabokov, among others, in order to “discuss whether the idea [of such 
meetings] is practical.” See Agnes Meyer to Robert and Kitty Oppenheimer, July 3, 
1962, Oppenheimer Papers, box 66. 

124. Mrs. Eugene Meyer, letters of invitation, February 27, 1963, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 66. 


Notes to Pages 274-279 367 


125. Statement by Oppenheimer attached to draft letters of invitation by Nicolas 
Nabokov, October 12, 1962, and by Mrs. Eugene Meyer, January 1963, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 66. 

126. Jeanne Hersch, “Colloquy on Mount Kisco,” Congress News, Winter 1964, 1- 
2, quoting 1; Mrs. Eugene Meyer to Lester B. Pearson, January 28, 1967, Oppenheimer 
Papers, box 66; Meyer’s comments transcribed within the original transcript of 
Oppenheimer’s Seven Springs Farm talk, 1963, 1-3, Oppenheimer Papers, box 282; 
Mrs. Eugene Meyer to Oppenheimer, July 17, 1963; Mrs. Eugene Meyer to Kitty 
Oppenheimer [ca. March 29, 1966], Oppenheimer Papers, box 66. 

127. Oppenheimer, “On Albert Einstein,” 4-5. The UNESCO talk was delivered 
in Paris on December 13, 1965. See also Day, “Oppenheimer on the Nature of 
Science,” 102-3. 

128. Oppenheimer, “On Albert Einstein,” 5; Abraham Pais to Oppenheimer, De- 
cember 20 [1965]; Oppenheimer, cover letter, n.d., attached to transcript of UNESCO 
talk; Otto Nathan to Oppenheimer, January 14, 1966; Oppenheimer to Helen Dukas, 
January 14, 1966, Oppenheimer Papers, box 285. See also Henry Kamm, “Oppen- 
heimer View of Einstein Warm but Not Uncritical,” New York Times, December 14, 
1965. 

129. Oppenheimer, “On Albert Einstein,” 5. 

130. Michael Paul Rogin, The Intellectuals and McCarthy: The Radical Specter 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1967), 10-11. 

131. Ibid., 9. 

132. Ibid., 19-20; Richard Hofstadter, Antt-intellectualism in American Life (Lon- 
don: Jonathan Cape, 1964); David Riesman and Nathan Glazer, “The Intellectuals 
and the Discontented Classes,” Partisan Review 22, no. 1 (Winter 1955): 47-72. 

133. See also Saunders, Who Pazd the Puper? 359-62. 

134. “C.I.A. Spies from 100 Miles Up; Satellites Probe Secrets of Soviet Union,” 
New York Times, April 27, 1966; J. K. Galbraith, George Kennan, Robert Oppen- 
heimer, and Arthur Schlesinger Jr., “Record of Congress for Cultural Freedom,” 
letter to editor, New York Times, May 9, 1966. See also “Triple Pass: How C.LA. 
Shifts Funds,” Vew York Times, February 19, 1967; and “Units Linked with C.L.A.,” 
New York Times, February 19, 1967. 

135. MacDonald and Hampshire, quoted in Saunders, Who Paid the Piper? 378- 
79; on CCF members’ knowledge of CIA funding, see, 394-95. 

136. Mrs. Eugene Meyer to Oppenheimer, May 26, 1966; Oppenheimer to Mrs. 
Eugene Meyer, June 1, 1966; Mrs. Eugene Meyer to Oppenheimer, May 2, 1966, 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 66. On the topic of the meeting, see Mrs. Eugene Meyer, 
draft letter of invitation, October 1965, Oppenheimer Papers, box 66. 

137. J. Robert Oppenheimer, “The Forbearance of Nations,” New York Herald 
Tribune-Washington Post, Paris edition, December 6, 1966. 

138. Ibid. 


368 Notes to Pages 279-283 


139. Oppenheimer to Josselson, February 13, 1967, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
42; “Exploratory Memorandum. Subject: The Seminar Program of the Congress,” 
enclosed with Josselson to Oppenheimer, January 17, 1967, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 119. See also Josselson to Oppenheimer, February 16, 1967; Josselson to Oppen- 
heimer, December 13, 1966; Josselson to Oppenheimer, December 23, 1966; “Ford 
Fund Helps Paris Art Group,” New York Times, November 2, 1966; and Oppenheimer 
to Minoo Masani, December 7, 1966, Oppenheimer Papers, box 119. 

140. Oppenheimer to Raymond Aron (chairman of the board of directors, CCF), 
February 13, 1967, Oppenheimer Papers, box 119. 

141. Ellen Wilder, quoted in Mason, Children of Los Alamos, 148. 

142. Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 298. The book first appeared in 
German in 1956. 

143. Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand Suns, 83-102, quoting 102. For recent 
historical debate on Heisenberg, see, for example, Thomas Powers, Heisenberg’s 
War: The Secret History of the German Bomb (London: Cape, 1993); Paul Lawrence 
Rose, Heisenberg and the Nazi Atomic Bomb Project: A Study in German Culture 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1998); Michael Frayn, 
Copenhagen (London: Methuen, 1998); Thomas Powers, “What Bohr Remembered,” 
New York Review of Books, March 28, 2002, http://www.nybooks.com/articles/15226; 
and Gerald Holton et al., “Copenhagen: An Exchange,” New York Review of Books, 
April 11, 2002, http://www.nybooks.com/articles/15264. 

144. Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 31-37, quoting 34; Chevalier, 
Oppenheimer, 88. See also Cassidy, 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 318-19. 

145. See Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 176-77; and Jungk, Brighter Than a Thousand 
Suns, 144. 

146. Chevalier, Oppenheimer, 176. See also Chevalier correspondence in Oppen- 
heimer Papers, box 26. 

147. Kipphardt, In the Matter of F. Robert Oppenheimer, 17. See also Knust, “From 
Faust to Oppenheimer,” esp. 135-36; and Haynes, From Faust to Strangelove, esp. 
285-88. 

148. Kipphardt, In the Matter of 7. Robert Oppenheimer, 127. One British news- 
paper reported on the play under the headline “Scientist Who Had Scruples” (Daily 
Telegraph, November 19, 1966, clipping in Oppenheimer Papers, box 42). 

149. Kipphardt made this point repeatedly. See Kipphardt to Oppenheimer, Au- 
gust 31, 1964; Kipphardt’s notes on telephone conversation with Oppenheimer, 
September 8, 1964; and Kipphardt to Oppenheimer, October 24, 1964, in Heinar 
Kipphardt, In der Sache F. Robert Oppenheimer: Ein Stiick und seine Geschichte 
(Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1987), 159, 161-63, 167-70. 

150. Oppenheimer to Kipphardt, October 12, 1964, in Kipphardt, Ein Stick und 
seine Geschichte, 164-65, quoting 165. See also further correspondence printed in 
Kipphardt, Ein Stiick und seine Geschichte, 159-79. On possible legal action, see also 
Robert H. Montgomery Jr. to John Roberts, March 11, 1965, Oppenheimer Papers, 


Notes to Pages 283-285 369 


box 207. See also Kipphardt’s notes on conversation with Professor Nabukow [sic], 
September 5, 1964, in Kipphardt, Ein Stiick und seine Geschichte, 160-61, on 160; and 
Giovanitti and Freed, The Decision to Drop the Bomb, 328. 

151. Oppenheimer to Frangoise Spira, October 12, 1964, and Oppenheimer to 
Spira, November 13, 1964, both in Oppenheimer Papers, box 206; Oppenheimer to 
Josselson, October 12, 1964, Oppenheimer Papers, box 42; Oppenheimer to John 
Roberts, February 22, 1965, Oppenheimer Papers, box 207; Oppenheimer to Father 
Dominique Pire, February 8, 1965, Oppenheimer Papers, box 206. See also Spira 
to Oppenheimer, September 28, 1964; Spira to Oppenheimer, October 19, 1964; 
Oppenheimer to Spira, October 27, 1964, all in Oppenheimer Papers, box 206; 
Oppenheimer to Vilar, November 13, 1964, and Vilar to Oppenheimer, November 14, 
1964, Oppenheimer Papers, boxes 206. See also Jean Vilar, Le Dossier Oppenheimer 
(Geneva: Editions Gonthier, 1965). 

152. Oppenheimer, quoted in Szasz, “Great Britain,” 329; Kipphardt, Evn Stiick 
und seine Geschichte, 171. 

153. Victor Weisskopf and Jeanne Hersch to Oppenheimer, February 17, 1965. 
Weisskopf and Hersch warned Oppenheimer that he was wrong to appear to endorse 
Vilar’s version of the play. According to them, Vilar had “badly distorted” the 
Chevalier incident. See also “Dans une lettre ouverte, Viktor Weisskopf, directeur 
général du CERN et Jeanne Hersch professeur de philosophie al’Université de Genéve 
prennent la défense de Robert Oppenheimer contre Jean Vilar,” Le Tribune de Genéve, 
April 23, 1965; “Jean Vilar a-t-il trahi Oppenheimer? Deux savants genevois accusent 
le théatre—document,” Le Figaro Littératre, April 22-28, 1965; and “Autour du 
Dossier Oppenheimer,” Le Figaro Littéraire, May 6-12, 1965, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 207. Michael Josselson also intervened regarding the plays; see Josselson to 
Oppenheimer, September 18, 1964; Josselson to Oppenheimer, October 12, 1964; 
Peter Hartling to Josselson, October 2, 1964; Josselson to Oppenheimer, October 
5, 1964; Josselson to Oppenheimer, November 3, 1966; Josselson to Oppenheimer, 
November 24, 1966; Josselson, letter to editor, Times (London), December 7, 1966, 
Oppenheimer Papers, box 42. 

154. Oppenheimer to Kipphardt, December 16, 1965, in Kipphardt, Ein Stiick und 
seine Geschichte, 177. See also Kipphardt to Oppenheimer, February 15, 1966, ibid., 
178-79. 

155. David Bohm to Oppenheimer, November 29, 1966, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 20. 

156. Oppenheimer to David Bohm, December 2, 1966, Oppenheimer Papers, box 
20. 

157. Original transcript of Oppenheimer’s Seven Springs Farm talk, 1963, 9- 
10, Oppenheimer Papers, box 282; quoted also in Goodchild, Shatterer of Worlds, 
278. 

158. Oppenheimer statement, 1961, quoted in “Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, ‘Fa- 
ther of the Atomic Bomb,’ Dies in Princeton,” New York Times, February 19, 1967. 


370 Notes to Pages 285-289 


159. Wyman, interviewed by Weiner, May 28, 1975, 41. Wyman was describing 
his impressions from a visit with Oppenheimer in 1958 or 1959. 

160. Von Neumann, quoted in Schweber, Jn the Shadow of the Bomb, 196 n. 23; 
see also Steven Shapin, “Don’t Let That Crybaby in Here Again,” London Review of 
Books, September 7, 2000, http://www.lrb.co.uk/v22/n17/shapo1_.html. 

161. Martin Agronsky, Dr. Oppenheimer interview, excerpt from the CBS Evening 
News, August 5, 1965. 

162. John R. Crowley to Oppenheimer, August 5, 1965, Oppenheimer Papers, 
box 285. 

163. Thomas B. Morgan, “With Oppenheimer, on an Autumn Day: A Thoughtful 
Man Talks Searchingly about Science, Ethics and Nuclear War on a Quiet Afternoon 
during a Bad Time,” Look, December 27, 1966, 61-63, quoting 61, 63. 

164. Ibid., 63. 

165. “World Scientists Mourn Death of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Washington 
Post, February 20, 1967; Friendly, “Oppenheimer: Scientist Beset by Political Ills”; 
Yukawa, quoted in “World Scientists Mourn Death”; Kennan, quoted in Leroy F. 
Aarons, “Affection, Not Tears, Marks Oppenheimer Tributes,” Washington Post, 
February 26, 1967; Smyth, quoted in Aarons, “Affection, Not Tears, Marks Oppen- 
heimer Tributes.” 

166. See, for example, New York Times, February 19, 1967, 1; New York Herald 
Tribune-Washington Post, Paris edition, February 20, 1967, 1, 2; Washington Post, 
February 20, 1967, 1. 

167. Leslie, The Gold War and American Science, 233-49, esp. 241-43. 

168. For an example from a few years later, see Bill Zimmerman et al., Towards a 
Sctence for the People (Brookline, MA: A People’s Press, 1972), esp. 11: “The attitude of 
Oppenheimer and others, justified by the slogan of truth for truth’s sake . . . becomes 
a rationalization for the maintenance of repressive or destructive institutions.” 

169. Bush, “The Gentleman of Culture,” 32. 

170. Cf. G. Pascal Zachary, Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the 
American Century (New York: Free Press, 1997), 402-4. 

171. Rieff, preface to On Intellectuals, x. 

172. Snow, The Two Cultures, 11. Snow also presented a more ambivalent picture 
in his 1960 Godkin Lectures: Snow, Science and Government (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1961). See also Jessica Wang, “Scientists and the Problem 
of the Public in Cold War, 1945-1960,” in “Science and Civil Society,” ed. Lynn K. 
Nyhart and Thomas H. Broman, Osiris 17 (2002), esp. 344-45; and Welsh, Mobilising 
Modernity, chap. 1. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ARCHIVES 


Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley 
* Papers of Raymond Thayer Birge 
* University of California Oral Histories 
California Institute of Technology Archives, Pasadena 
‘ Papers of Lee A. DuBridge 
Department of Special Collections, Joseph Regenstein Library, University of 
Chicago 
- Records of the Association of Los Alamos Scientists 
Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, DC 
- Papers of Vannevar Bush 
- Papers of J. Robert Oppenheimer 
* Papers of Admiral William S. Parsons 
Los Alamos Historical Museum, Los Alamos, NM 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Archives, Los Alamos, NM 
‘ Oral History Collection 
- Wartime Committee Records 
Mandeville Special Collections Library, University of California, San Diego 
- Papers of Martin Kamen 
- Papers of Maria Goeppert Mayer 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Archives and Special Collections, 
Cambridge, MA 
- Papers of Vannevar Bush 
* J. Robert Oppenheimer Oral History Collection 
National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, MD 
- Records of the Office of the Commanding General, Manhattan Project, 


372 Bibliography 


Records of the Office of the Chief of Engineers, Record Group 77 
- Papers of General Leslie R. Groves, Record Group 200 
Niels Bohr Library, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD 
: Archives for the History of Quantum Physics 
- Emilio Segré Visual Archives 
- Oral History Collection 


BOOKS AND ARTICLES 


Acheson, Dean. Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department. New 
York: W. W. Norton, 1969. 

Acklund, Len, and Steve McGuire, eds. Assessing the Nuclear Age: Selections from 
the “Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.” Chicago: Educational Foundation for 
Nuclear Science, 1986. 

Albright, Joseph. Bombshell: The Secret Story of America’s Unknown Atomic Spy 
Conspiracy. New York: Times Books, 1997. 

Alperovitz, Gar. Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam; The Use of the Atomic 
Bomb and the American Confrontation with Soviet Power. New York: Penguin 
Books, 1985. Originally published 1965. 

. The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb. New York: Vintage, 1995. 

Alsop, Joseph, and Stewart Alsop. We Accuse! The Story of the Miscarriage of Fustice 
in the Case of F. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1954. 

Alvarez, Luis. Alvarez: Adventures of a Physicist. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 

Arney, William Ray. Experts in the Age of Systems. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1991. 

Aron, Raymond. Memoirs: Fifty Years of Political Reflection. New York: Holmes 
and Meier, 1990. 

Bacher, Robert F. Robert Oppenheimer, 1904-1967. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos 
Historical Society, 1999. 

Badash, Lawrence. “Science and McCarthyism.” Minerva 38 (2000): 53-80. 

. Scientists and the Development of Nuclear Weapons: From Fission to the 
Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1939-1963. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press 
International, 1995. 

Badash, Lawrence, Joseph O. Hirschfelder, and Herbert P. Broida, eds. 
Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 1943-1945. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1980. 

Balogh, Brian. Chain Reaction: Expert Debate and Public Participation in American 


Commercial Nuclear Power, 1945-1975. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1991. 

Barkai, Abraham. Branching Out: German-fewish Immigration to the United States, 
1820-1914. New York: Holmes and Meier, 1994. 

Barley, Stephen, and Beth Bechky. “In the Backrooms of Science: The Work of 
Technicians in Science Labs.” Work and Occupations 21 (1994): 85-126. 


Bibliography 373 


Barnard, Chester I., J. Robert Oppenheimer, Charles A. Thomas, Harry A. Winne, 
and David E. Lilienthal. A Report on the International Control of Atomic Energy, 
Prepared for the Secretary of State’s Committee on Atomic Energy by a Board of 
Consultants. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1946. 

Bartlett, Frances P. “The Atomic Brain Trust.” American Mercury 81 (July 1955): 
75-78. 

Baruch, Bernard M. Baruch: The Public Years. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1960. 

Barzun, Jacques. The House of Intellect. New York: Harper and Row, 1959. 

Bauman, Zygmunt. Modernity and Ambivalence. Oxford: Polity Press, 1991. 

. Modernity and the Holocaust. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989. 

Baxter, James Phinney. Scientists against Time. Boston: Little, Brown, 1946. 

Becker, Howard S. “Notes on the Concept of Commitment.” American Fournal of 
Soctology 66 (1960): 32-40. 

—. “Personal Change in Adult Life.” Soceometry 27 (1964): 40-53. 

Behind Tall Fences: Stories and Experiences about Los Alamos at Its Beginning. Los 
Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 1996. 

Bell, Daniel. The Coming of Post-industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting. 
New York: Basic Books, 1976. 

Belth, Nathan C. A Promise to Keep: A Narrative of the American Encounter with 
Anti-Semitism. New York: Times Books, 1979. 

Bendix, Reinhard. From Berlin to Berkeley: German-Fewish Identities. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books, 1986. 

Bernal, J. D. The Social Function of Science. London: Routledge, 1939. 

Bernstein, Barton J., ed. The Atomic Bomb: The Critical Issues. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1976. 

. “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” Historical Studtes in the 

Physical Sciences 12 (1982): 195-252. 

. “Oppenheimer and the Radioactive Poison Plan.” Technology Review 88 

(1985): 14-17. 

. “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered.” Stanford Law 

Review 42 (July 1990): 1383-1484. 

. “A Post-war Myth: 500,000 U.S. Lives Saved.” In Hiroshima’s Shadow, 

edited by Kai Bird and Lawrence Lifschultz, 130-34. Stony Creek, CT: 

Pamphleteers Press, 1998. 


Bernstein, Jeremy. Experiencing Science. New York: Basic Books, 1978. 

. The Life It Brings: One Physicist’s Beginnings. New York: Ticknor and 
Fields, 1987. 

Bethe, Hans A. “Oppenheimer: ‘Where He Was There Was Always Life and 
Excitement.’” Sctence 155 (1967): 1080-84. 

—.. “Review of Brighter Than a Thousand Suns.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 14, no. 10 (July 1958): 426-28. 


374 Bibliography 


——.. “The Technological Imperative.” In Acklund and McGuire, Assessing the 
Nuclear Age, 73-78. 

Bird, Kai, and Martin J. Sherwin. American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy 
of F. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: Knopf, 2005. 

Birmingham, Stephen. “Our Crowd”: The Great Fewish Familtes of New York. New 
York: Harper and Row, 1967. 

Blackett, P. M. S. Atomic Weapons and East-West Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1956. 


. Fear, War, and the Bomb: Military and Political Consequences of Atomic 
Energy. New York: Whittlesey House, 1949. 

Blumberg, Stanley A., and Gwinn Owens. Energy and Conflict: The Life and Times 
of Edward Teller. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1976. 

Blumberg, Stanley A., and Lewis G. Panos. Edward Teller: Giant of the Golden Age 
of Physics. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1990. 

Bohr, Aage. “The War Years and the Prospects Raised by the Atomic Weapons.” In 
Niels Bohr: His Life and Work as Seen by His Friends and Colleagues, edited by 
S. Rozenthal, 191-214. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., 1967. 

Bohr, Niels. “A Challenge to Civilization.” Science 102 (October 12, 1945): 363-64. 

Bontecou, Eleanor. “President Eisenhower’s ‘Security’ Program.” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 9, no. 6 (July 1953): 215-17, 220. 

Born, Max. My Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate. London: Taylor and Francis, 
1978. 

Boyer, Paul. By the Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and Culture at the Dawn 
of the Atomic Age. New York: Pantheon, 1985. 

. Fallout: A Historian Reflects on America’s Half-Century Encounter with 
Nuclear Weapons. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1998. 

Bridgman, Percy. Reflections of a Physicist. New York: Philosophical Library, 1955. 

Brixner, Berlyn. “A Scientific Photographer at Project Y.” In Behind Tall Fences, 
g0-100. 

Brode, Bernice. Tales of Los Alamos: Life on the Mesa, 1943-1945. Los Alamos, NM: 
Los Alamos Historical Society, 1997. 

Brown, John Mason. Through These Men: Some Aspects of Our Passing History. New 
York: Harper, 1956. 

Bruford, W. H. The German Tradition of Self-Cultivation: ‘Bildung’ from 
Humboldt to Thomas Mann. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 

Bush, Vannevar. Science Is Not Enough. New York: William Morrow, 1967. 

Cahill, Spencer. “Toward a Sociology of the Person.” Sociological Theory 16 (1998): 
131-48. 

Canaday, John. The Nuclear Muse: Literature, Physics and the First Atomic Bombs. 
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2000. 

Cassidy, David C. 7. Robert Oppenheimer and the American Century. New York: Pi 
Press, 2005. 


Bibliography 375 


Chevalier, Haakon. The Man Who Would Be God. Berlin: Seven Seas, 1963. 
Originally published 1959. 

. Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship. New York: George Braziller, 1965. 

Childs, Herbert. An American Genius: The Life of Ernest Orlando Lawrence. New 
York: E. P. Dutton, 1968. 

Christman, Albert B. Target Hiroshima: Deak Parsons and the Creation of the 
Atomic Bomb. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1998. 

Church, Fermor S., and Peggy Pond Church. When Los Alamos Was a Ranch 
School. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 1974. 

Church, Peggy Pond. The House at Otowt Bridge: The Story of Edith Warner and 
Los Alamos. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1960. 

Clark, Ian. Limited Nuclear War: Political Theory and War Conventions. Oxford: 
Martin Robertson, 1982. 

Cohen, Karl. “A Re-examination of the McMahon Act.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 4, no. 1 (January 1948): 7-10. 

Cohen, Naomi W. Encounter with Emancipation: The German Jews in the United 
States, 1830-1914. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1984. 

Coleman, Peter. The Liberal Conspiracy: The Congress for Cultural Freedom and the 
Struggle for the Mind of Postwar Europe. New York: Free Press, 1989. 

Collins, Harry. Gravity’s Shadow: The Search for Gravitational Waves. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2004. 

. “LIGO Becomes Big Science.” Historical Studies in the Physical and 
Biological Sciences 32, no. 2 (2003): 235-96. 

Collins, Harry, and Jay A. Labinger, eds. The One Culture? A Conversation about 
Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001. 

Compton, Arthur Holly. Atomic Quest: A Personal Narrative. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1956. 

Conant, James B. Modern Science and Modern Man. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1953- 

. On Understanding Science: An Historical Approach. New Haven, CT: Yale 

University Press, 1947. 

. Science and Common Sense. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1963. 

Originally published 1951. 


Congress for Cultural Freedom. Science and Freedom: The Proceedings of a 
Conference Convened by the Congress for Cultural Freedom and Held in 
Hamburg on Fuly 23rd-26th, 1953. Boston: Beacon Press, 1955. 

Cooley, Charles Horton. “Sociability and Personal Ideas.” In Human Nature 
and the Social Order, rev. ed., 81-135. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
1922. 

Coser, Lewis A. Men of Ideas: A Sociologist’s View. New York: Free Press, 1965. 

Cotkin, George. “The Tragic Predicament: Post-war American Intellectuals, 
Acceptance, and Mass Culture.” In Intellectuals in Politics: From the Dreyfus 


376 Bibliography 


Affair to Salman Rushdie, edited by Jeremy Jennings and Anthony 
Kemp-Welch, 248-70. London: Routledge, 1997. 

Cousins, Norman. “The Standardization of Catastrophe.” Saturday Review of 
Literature, August 10, 1946, 16-18. 

Cousins, Norman, and Thomas K. Finletter. “A Beginning for Sanity: A Review of 
the Acheson-Lilienthal Report.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 2 (1946): 11-14. 

Curtis, Charles Pelham. The Oppenheimer Case: The Trial of a Security System. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1955. 

Davis, Nuel Pharr. Lawrence and Oppenheimer. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1969. 

Day, Michael A. “I.I. Rabi: The Two Cultures and the Universal Culture of 
Science.” Physics in Perspective 6, no. 4 (2004): 428-76. 

. “Oppenheimer on the Nature of Science.” Centaurus 43 (2001): 73-112. 

de Santillana, Giorgio. The Crime of Galileo. London: Heinemann, 1958. 


—. “Galileo and Oppenheimer.” In Reflections on Men and Ideas. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1968. First published in The Reporter, December 26, 1957. 

. “Notes sur la science en Amérique.” La Table Ronde 105 (September 
1956): 62-66. 

Diamond, Sigmund. Compromised Campus: The Collaboration of Universities with 
the Intelligence Community, 1945-1955. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1992. 

Dinnerstein, Leonard. Antisemitism in America. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1994. 

, ed. Antisemitism in the United States. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1971. 

Dower, John W. “The Bombed: Hiroshimas and Nagasakis in Japanese Memory.” 
Diplomatic History 19, no. 2 (Spring 1995): 275-95. 

. Embracing Defeat: fapan in the Wake of World War Two. London: Allen 
Lane, 1999. 

Dyson, Freeman. Disturbing the Universe. New York: Harper Colophon, 1979. 

. “The Scholar-Soldier.” In Weapons and Hope, 135-48. New York: Harper 
and Row, 1984. 

Easlea, Brian. Fathering the Unthinkable: Masculinity, Scientists and the Nuclear 
Arms Race. London: Pluto Press, 1983. 

Einstein, Albert. Ideas and Opinions. New York: Crown, 1982. Originally published 
1954. 

Elias, Norbert. The Germans. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996. 

. Mozart: Portrait of a Genius. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1993. 

. The Society of Individuals. Edited by Michael Schroter, translated by 
Edmund Jephcott. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991. 

Else, Jon. The Day after Trinity: F. Robert Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb. 
Documentary film. Santa Monica, CA: Pyramid Films, 1980. 


Bibliography 377 


Ermenc, J. J. Atomic Bomb Scientists: Memoirs, 1939-1945. Westport, CT: Meckler, 
1984. 

Ezrahi, Yaron. The Descent of Icarus: Science and the Transformation of 
Contemporary Democracy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. 

. “Einstein and the Light of Reason.” In Holton and Elkana, Albert Einstein, 
253-78. 

Federal Bureau of Investigation. 7. Robert Oppenheimer, FBI Security File. 
Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1978. Microfilm. 

Feenberg, Andrew. Questioning Technology. London: Routledge, 1999. 

Fermi, Laura. Atoms in the Family: My Life with Enrico Fermi. Albuquerque: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1982. Originally published 1954. 

Fermi, Rachel, and Esther Samra. Picturing the Bomb: Photographs from the Secret 
World of the Manhattan Project. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1995. 

Feshbach, Herman, Tetsuo Matsui, and Alexandra Oleson, eds. Niels Bohr: Physics 
and the World; Proceedings of the Niels Bohr Centennial Symposium, Boston, 
MA, USA, November 12-14, 1985. London: Harwood, 1988. 

Feuer, Lewis S. Eznstein and the Generations of Science. New York: Basic Books, 
1974. 

. The Scientific Intellectual: The Psychological and Sociological Origins of 
Modern Science. New York: Basic Books, 1963. 

Feynman, Richard. 1980. “Los Alamos from Below.” In Badash, Hirschfelder, and 
Broida, Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 105-32. 

. “The Pleasure of Finding Things Out.” The Listener, November 26, 1981, 
635-36. 

Fine, Lenore, and Jesse A. Remington. The Corps of Engineers: Construction in the 
United States. Washington, DC: Office of the Chief of Military History, U.S. 
Army, 1972. 

Fisher, Phyllis. Los Alamos Experience. New York: Japan Publications, 1985. 

Fleming, Donald, and Bernard Bailyn, eds. The Intellectual Migration. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1969. 

Forman, Paul. “Behind Quantum Electronics: National Security as Basis for 
Physical Research in the United States, 1940-1960.” Historical Studies in the 
Physical and Biological Sciences 18 (1987): 149-229. 

. “Fisica, modernidad y nuestra evasion de la responsibilidad.” Arbor: 

Ciencia, Pensamiento y Cultura 147 (1994): 51-74. 

. “Social Niche and Self-Image of the American Physicist.” In The 
Restructuring of Physical Sciences in Europe and the United States, 1945-1960, 
edited by Michelangelo de Maria, Mario Grilli, and Fabio Sebastiani, 96-104. 
Singapore: World Scientific, 1988. 

Foucault, Michel. “Truth and Power.” In Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected 
Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977, edited by Colin Gordon, 109-33. 
New York: Pantheon, 1980. 


378 Bibliography 


Frayn, Michael. Copenhagen. London: Methuen, 1998. 

Fuller, Steve. Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2000. 

Galison, Peter. “Physics between War and Peace.” In Mendelsohn, Smith, and 
Weingart, Science, Technology, and the Military, 1:47-86. 

Galison, Peter, and Barton Bernstein. “‘In Any Light’: Scientists and the Decision to 
Build the Superbomb, 1952-1954.” Historical Studtes in the Physical and 
Biological Sciences 19 (1989): 267-347. 

Gardner, Howard. Leading Minds: An Anatomy of Leadership. New York: Basic 
Books, 1995. 

Garfinkel, Harold. “Conditions of Successful Degradation Ceremonies.” American 
Journal of Sociology 61, no. 5 (March 1956): 420-24. 

Gay, Peter. “Encounter with Modernism: German Jews in German Culture, 
1888-1914.” Midstream 21 (1975): 23-65. 

Gerber, David A., ed. Anti-Semitism in American History. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1986. 

Giddens, Anthony. The Giddens Reader. Edited by Philip Cassell. London: 
Macmillan, 1993. 

Gillmor, Dan. Fear, the Accuser. New York: Abelard-Schuman, 1954. 

Gilman, Sander L. Fewish Self-Hate: Anti-Semitism and the Hidden Language of 
Race. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986. 

. Smart Fews: The Construction of the Image of Fewish Superior Intelligence. 

Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1996. 


Gilpin, Robert. American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1962. 

Giovanitti, Len, and Fred Freed. The Decision to Drop the Bomb. New York: 
Coward McCann, 1965. 

Glazer, Nathan. The Social Basis of American Communism. New York: Harcourt, 
Brace and World, 1961. 

Goffman, Erving. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and 
Other Inmates. New York: Doubleday, 1961. 

. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday 
Anchor, 1959. 

Goldberg, Stanley. “General Groves and the Atomic West: The Making and 
Meaning of Hanford.” In Hevly and Findlay, The Atomic West, 39-89. 

. “Groves and the Scientists: Compartmentalization and the Building of the 
Bomb.” Physics Today 48, no. 8 (August 1995): 38-43. 

Goldman, Harvey. Max Weber and Thomas Mann: Calling and the Shaping of Self. 
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1988. 

. Politics, Death, and the Devil: Self and Power in Max Weber and Thomas 

Manan. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1992. 


Bibliography 379 


Goodchild, Peter. Edward Teller: The Real Dr. Strangelove. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2004. 

. J. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1981. 

Goudsmit, Samuel A. Alsos: The Failure in German Science. London: Sigma Books, 
1947. 

Gowing, Margaret. Britain and Atomic Energy, 1939-1945. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1964. 

. “Niels Bohr and Nuclear Weapons.” In Niels Bohr: A Centenary Volume, 
edited by A. P. French and P. J. Kennedy, 266-77. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1985. 

Green, Harold P. “The Oppenheimer Case: A Study in the Abuse of Law.” Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists 33 (1977): 12-16, 56-61. 

Greenberg, Clement. “Avant Garde and Kitsch.” Partisan Review 6 (1939): 34-49. 

Greenberg, Daniel S. The Politics of Pure Science. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1999. Originally published 1967. 

. Science, Money, and Politics: Political Triumph and Ethical Erosion. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001. 

Groves, Leslie R. Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project. New 
York: Harper and Brothers, 1962. 

Gusterson, Hugh. Nuclear Rites: A Weapons Laboratory at the End of the Cold War. 
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1996. 

Guttchen, Robert S. Felix Adler. New York: Twayne Publishers, 1974. 

Hager, Thomas. Force of Nature: The Life of Linus Pauling. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1995. 

Halberstam, David. The Fifties. New York: Villard Books, 1993. 

Hales, Peter Bacon. Atomic Spaces: Living on the Manhattan Project. Urbana: 


University of Illinois Press, 1997. 


. “Topographies of Power: The Forced Spaces of the Manhattan Project.” 
In Mapping American Culture, edited by Wayne Franklin and Michael Steiner, 
251-90. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1992. 

Harré, Rom. Personal Being. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984. 

Hart, David M. Forged Consensus: Science, Technology, and Economic Policy in the 
United States, 1921-1953. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998. 

Hawkins, David. “Toward Trinity.” Part 1 of Project Y: The Los Alamos Story. Los 
Angeles: Tomash Publishers, 1983. 

Haynes, Roslynn D. From Faust to Strangelove: Representations of the Scientist in 
Western Literature. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994. 

Heilbron, John L., and Robert W. Seidel. Lawrence and His Laboratory: A History 
of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Vol. 1. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press, 1989. 


380 ©Bibliography 


Hein, Laura. “Learning about Patriotism, Decency, and the Bomb.” In Living 
with the Bomb: American and Fapanese Cultural Conflicts in the Nuclear Age, 
edited by Laura Hein and Mark Shelden, 279-86. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 
1997. 
Herken, Gregg. Brotherhood of the Bomb: The Tangled Lives and Loyalties of Robert 
Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward Teller. New York: Henry Holt 
and Co., 2002. 
. “The Oppenheimer Case: An Exchange.” With a reply by Daniel J. Kevles. 
New York Review of Books, March 25, 2004, 46-47. 
. “The University of California, the Federal Weapons Labs, and the 
Founding of the Atomic West.” In Hevly and Findlay, The Atomic West, 119-35. 
. The Winning Weapon: The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War, 1945-1950. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988. 


Herman, Ellen. The Romance of American Psychology: Political Culture in the Age of 
Experts. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1995. 

Hershberg, James G. Fames B. Conant: Harvard to Hiroshima and the Making of the 
Nuclear Age. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1993. 

——.. “‘Over My Dead Body’: James Bryant Conant and the Hydrogen Bomb.” 
In Mendelsohn, Smith, and Weingart, Science, Technology, and the Military, 
2:379-430. 

Hevly, Bruce, and John M. Findlay, eds. The Atomic West. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 1998. 

Hewlett, Richard G., and Oscar E. Anderson Jr. The New World, 1939/1946. Vol. 1 
of A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. University Park: 
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1962. 

Hewlett, Richard G., and Francis Duncan. Atomic Shield, 1947/1950. Vol. 2 of A 
History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, 1991. 

Hyjiya, James A. “The Gita of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Soctety 144, no. 2 (June 2000): 123-67. 

Hoch, Paul K. “The Crystallization ofa Strategic Alliance: The American Physics 
Elite and the Military in the 1940s.” In Mendelsohn, Smith, and Weingart, 
Science, Technology, and the Military, 87-116. 

Hoddeson, Lillian. “Mission Change in the Large Laboratory: The Los Alamos 
Implosion Program, 1943-1945.” In Big Science: The Growth of Large-Scale 
Research, edited by Peter Galison and Bruce Hevly, 265-89. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1992. 

Hoddeson, Lillian, Paul W. Henriksen, Roger A. Meade, and Catherine Westfall. 
Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer 
Years, 1943-1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 

Hofstadter, Richard. Anti-intellectualism in American Life. London: Cape, 1964. 


Bibliography 381 


Hollinger, David A. Science, Fews, and Secular Culture: Studies in 
Mid-Twentieth-Century American Intellectual History. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1996. 

Holloway, Rachael L. In the Matter of f. Robert Oppenheimer: Politics, Rhetoric and 
Self-Defense. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1993. 

Holton, Gerald. “Heisenberg, Oppenheimer, and the Transition to Modern 
Physics.” In Transformation and Tradztion in the Sciences, edited by Everett 
Mendelsohn, 155-73. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 

. “The Roots of Complementarity.” In Thematic Origins of Scientific 

Thought, 115-61. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973. 

. “Young Man Oppenheimer.” Partisan Review 48 (July 1981): 380-88. 

Holton, Gerald, and Yehuda Elkana, eds. Albert Einstein: Historical and Cultural 
Perspectives. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 1982. 

Hoopes, Roy. Americans Remember the Home Front: An Oral Narrative of the 
World War II Years. New York: Berkley Press, 2002. 

Howe, Irving. World of Our Fathers: The fourney of the East European fews to 
America and the Life They Found and Made There. London: Phoenix Press, 
2000. Originally published 1976. 

Howes, Ruth H., and Caroline L. Herzenberg. Their Day in the Sun: Women of the 
Manhattan Project. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1999. 

Hughes, Thomas P. American Genesis: A Century of Innovation and Technological 
Enthusiasm, 1870-1970. New York: Viking, 1989. 

. “Technological Momentum in History: Hydrogenation in Germany, 
1898-1933.” Past and Present 44 (1969): 106-32. 

Hunner, Jon. “Family Secrets: The Growth of Community at Los Alamos, New 
Mexico, 1943-1957.” PhD diss., University of New Mexico, 1996. 

. Inventing Los Alamos: The Growth of an Atomic Community. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 2004. 

Janowitz, Morris. “Military Elites and the Study of War.” In War: Studies from 
Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, edited by Leon Bramson and George W. 
Goethals, 345-57. New York: Basic Books, 1968. 

Jasanoff, Sheila. The Fifth Branch: Science Advisers as Policymakers. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. 

Jaspers, Karl. The Atom Bomb and the Future of Man. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1961. 

Jerome, Fred. The Einstein File: ¥. Edgar Hoover’s Secret War against the World’s 
Most Famous Scientist. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2002. 

Jette, Eleanor. Insede Box 1663. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 
1977. 

Johnson, George. Strange Beauty: Murray Gell-Mann and the Revolution in 
Twentieth-Century Physics. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1999. 


382 Bibliography 


Jones, Vincent C. Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb. Washington, DC: 
United States Army Center of Military History, 1985. 

Jungk, Robert. Brighter Than a Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the Atomic 
Scientists. Translated by James Cleugh. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1965. 
Originally published 1958. 

. The Nuclear State. Translated by Eric Mosbacher. London: J. Calder, 
1979. 

Kaiser, David. “More Roots of Complementarity: Kantian Aspects and Influences.” 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science and Technology 23, no. 2 (1992): 
213-39. 

. “The Postwar Suburbanization of American Physics.” American Quarterly 
56 (2004): 851-88. 

Kamen, Martin D. Radiant Science, Dark Politics: A Memoir of the Nuclear Age. 
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985. 

Kanon, Joseph. Los Alamos. New York: Broadway Books, 1997. 

[Kennan, George F.] “The Sources of Soviet Conduct.” Foreign Affairs 25, no. 4 
(July 1947): 566-82. 

Kerr, Clark. The Uses of the University. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1972. Originally published 1963. 

Kevles, Daniel J. “Cold War and Hot Physics: Science, Security, and the American 
State, 1945-1956.” Hestorical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 20 
(1990): 239-64. 

. “The National Science Foundation and the Debate over Postwar Research 

Policy, 1942-1945: A Political Interpretation of Science—the Endless Frontier.” 

Ists 68 (1977): 5-26. 

. The Physicists: The History of a Scientific Community in Modern America. 

New York: Vintage Books, 1979. 

. “The Strange Case of Robert Oppenheimer.” Review of Brotherhood of 
the Bomb, by Gregg Herken. New York Review of Books, December 4, 2003, 
37-40. 

Kipphardt, Heinar. In der Sache F. Robert Oppenheimer: Ein Stich und seine 
Geschichte. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1987. 

. In the Matter of F. Robert Oppenheimer: A Play Freely Adapted on the Basis 
of Documents. New York: Hill and Wang, 1968. Originally published 1964. 
Kirstein, Peter N. “False Dissenters: Manhattan Project Scientists and the Use of the 
Atomic Bomb.” American Diplomacy, March 2001, http://www.unc.edu/depts/ 

diplomat/archives_roll/2001_03-06/kirstein_manhattan/kirstein_manhattan. 
html. 

Knust, Herbert. “From Faust to Oppenheimer: The Scientist’s Pact with the Devil.” 
Journal of European Studies 13, nos. 1-2 (1983): 122-41. 

Kraut, Benny. From Reform Fudaism to Ethical Culture: The Religious Evolution of 
Felix Adler. Cincinnati, OH: Hebrew Union College Press, 1979. 


Bibliography 383 


Kugelmass, J. Alvin. 7. Robert Oppenheimer and the Atomic Story. New York: Julian 
Messner, 1953. 

Kunetka, James W. City of Fire: Los Alamos and the Atomic Age, 1943-1945. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978. 

. Oppenheimer: The Years of Risk. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1982. 

Kuznick, Peter J. Beyond the Laboratory: Scientists as Political Activists in 1930s 
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987. 

Lakoff, Sanford A. “Ethical Responsibility and the Scientific Vocation.” In Science 
and Ethical Responsibility: Proceedings of the U.S. Student Pugwash Conference, 
University of California, San Diego, Fune 19-26, 1979, edited by Sanford A. 
Lakoff, 19-31. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1980. 

——.. “The Trial of Dr. Oppenheimer.” In Knowledge and Power: Essays on 
Science and Government, edited by Sanford A. Lakoff, 65-86. New York: Free 
Press, 1966. 

Landau, Susan. “Joseph Rotblat: The Road Less Traveled.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 52, no. 1 (January-February 1996): 47-54. 

Lanouette, William. Genius in the Shadows: A Biography of Leo Szilard; The Man 
behind the Bomb. With Bela Silard. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992. 

Lapp, Ralph E. The New Priesthood: The Scientific Elite and the Uses of Power. New 
York: Harper and Row, 1965. 

Larsen, Rebecca. Oppenheimer and the Atomic Bomb. New York: F. Watts, 1988. 

Larson, Magali Sarfatti. “The Production of Expertise and the Constitution of 
Expert Power.” In The Authority of Experts: Studies in History and Theory, 
edited by Thomas Haskell, 28-80. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1984. 

Laurence, William L. 1946. “The Bikini Tests and Public Opinion.” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 2 (1946): 2, 17. 

. Dawn over Zero: The Story of the Atomic Bomb. London: Museum Press, 

1947. 

. Men and Atoms: The Discovery, the Uses and the Future of Atomic Energy. 

New York: Simon and Schuster, 1959. 

. The Story of the Atomic Bomb. Washington, DC: War Department, 1945. 

Lawren, William. The General and the Bomb: A Biography of General Leslie Groves, 
Director of the Manhattan Project. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1988. 

Leslie, Stuart. The Cold War and American Science: The Military-Industrial- 
Academic Complex at MIT and Stanford. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1993. 

Lewis, Richard S., and Jane Wilson, eds. Alamogordo plus Twenty-five Years. With 
Eugene Rabinowitch. New York: Viking Press, 1971. 

Libby, Leona Marshall. The Uraniwm People. New York: Crane Russak, 1979. 

Lieberman, Joseph I. The Scorpion and the Tarantula: The Struggle to Control 
Atomic Weapons, 1945-1949. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1970. 


384 Bibliography 


Light, Jennifer. “When Computers Were Women.” Technology and Culture 40 
(1999): 455-83. 

Lilienthal, David E. The Atomic Energy Years, 1945-1950. Vol. 2 of The fournals of 
David E. Lilienthal. New York: Harper and Row, 1964. 

. Change, Hope, and the Bomb. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 

1963. 

. “How Can Atomic Energy Be Controlled?” Bulletin of the Atomic 

Scientists 2 (October 1947): 14-15, 18. 

. This I Do Believe. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1949. 

. IVA: Democracy on the March. New York: Pocket Books, 1945. 

. Unfinished Business, 1968-1981. Edited by Helen M. Lilienthal. Vol. 7 of 

The Fournals of David E. Lilienthal. New York: Harper and Row, 1983. 

. Venturesome Years, 1950-1955. Vol. 3 of The Fournals of David E. 
Lilienthal. New York: Harper and Row, 1966. 

Lovell, Bernard. “Patrick Maynard Stuart Blackett, Baron Blackett of Chelsea, 18 
November 1897-13 July 1974.” Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal 
Society 21 (1975): 1-115. 

Low, Ian. “Science for Peace.” New Scientist, July 24, 1975, 208-10. 

Lynch, Michael, and David Bogen. The Spectacle of History: Speech, Text, and 
Memory at the Iran-Contra Hearings. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
1996. 

MacKenzie, Donald, and Boelie Elzen. “The Charismatic Engineer.” 1991. In 


Knowing Machines: Essays on Technical Change, edited by Donald A. 
MacKenzie, 131-57. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 

Major, John. The Oppenheimer Hearing. New York: Scarborough Books, 1983. 
Originally published 1971. 

Makhyani, Arjun. “‘Always’ the Target?” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 31, no. 3 
(May-June 1995): 23-27. 

Manley, John. “Assembling the Wartime Labs.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 30 
(May 1974): 43-48. 

Marcuse, Herbert. “Industrialization and Capitalism.” New Left Review 30 
(March-April 1965): 3-17. 

Margulis, Lynn. “Sunday with J. Robert Oppenheimer.” In Lynn Margulis and 
Dorion Sagan, Slanted Truths: Essays on Gaia, Symbiosis, and Evolution, 5-28. 
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1997. 

Marshall, Barbara. “Politics in Academe: Gottingen University and the Growing 
Impact of Political Issues, 1918-33.” European History Quarterly 18, no. 3 (July 
1988): 291-320. 

Masco, Joseph P. “Nuclear Borderlands: The Legacy of the Manhattan Project in 
Post-Cold War New Mexico.” PhD diss., University of California, San Diego, 
1999. 


Bibliography 385 


Mason, Katrina R. Children of Los Alamos: An Oral History of the Town Where the 
Atomic Age Began. New York: Twayne, 1995. 

Masters, Dexter, and Katharine Way, eds. One World or None. London: Purnell and 
Sons, 1946. 

McCray, W. Patrick. “Project Vista, Caltech and the Dilemmas of Lee DuBridge.” 
Mstorical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 34, no. 2 (2000): 
339-70. 

McHugh, Peter. Defining the Situation: The Organization of Meaning in Social 
Interaction. New York: Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1968. 

McLellan, David S. Dean Acheson: The State Department Years. New York: Dodd, 
Mead, 1976. 

McMillan, Elsie Blumer. The Atom and Eve. New York: Vantage Press, 1995. 
McMillan, Priscilla. The Ruin of F. Robert Oppenheimer and the Birth of the Modern 
Arms Race. New York: Viking Press, 2005. 

Mendelsohn, Everett, Merritt Roe Smith, and Peter Weingart, eds. Science, 
Technology, and the Military. Vols. 1 and 2. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1988. 

Merton, Robert K. “The Normative Structure of Science.” 1942. In Merton, 


The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, edited 
by Norman W. Storer, 267-78. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1973. 
Meyerhoff, Hans. “Through the Liberal Looking Glass—Darkly.” Partisan Review 
22, no. 2 (Spring 1955): 238-48. 
Michelmore, Peter. The Swift Years: The Robert Oppenheimer Story. New York: 
Dodd, Mead, 1969. 
Mills, C. Wright. The Sociological Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2000. Originally published 1959. 
. White Collar: The American Middle Classes. London: Oxford University 
Press, 1956. Originally published 1951. 
Moore, Ruth E. Niels Bohr: The Man, his Science, and the World They Changed. 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1966. 
Moss, Norman. Klaus Fuchs: The Man Who Stole the Atom Bomb. London: Grafton 
Books, 1987. 
Mosse, George L. German fews beyond Fudaism. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1985. 
Mukerji, Chandra. A Fragile Power: Scientists and the State. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1989. 


Mullet, Shawn. “Strong Rope, Leaky Buckets, and Atomic Espionage.” Manuscript, 
2002. 

Mumford, Lewis. The Myth of Machine. Vol. 2, The Pentagon of Power. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace, 1970. 


386 Bibliography 


Murdoch, Dugald. Niels Bohr’s Philosophy of Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press, 1987. 

Nathanson, Charles E. “The Social Construction of the Soviet Threat: A Study in 

the Politics of Representation.” Alternatives 8 (1988): 443-83. 

Nelson, Steve, James R. Barrett, and Rob Ruck. Steve Nelson, American Radical. 

Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1981. 

Neuse, Steven M. David E. Lilienthal: The fourney of an American Liberal. 

Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1996. 

Newhouse, John. War and Peace in the Nuclear Age. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 

1989. 

Newman, Steven Leonard. “The Oppenheimer Case: A Reconsideration of the Role 

of the Defense Department and National Security.” PhD diss., New York 

University, 1977. 

Nichols, Kenneth D. The Road to Trinity. New York: William Morrow, 1987. 

Nieburg, H. L. Jn the Name of Science. Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1966. 

Norris, Robert S. Racing for the Bomb: General Leslie R. Groves, the Manhattan 

Project’s Indispensable Man. South Royalton, VT: Steerforth Press, 2002. 

Nye, Mary Jo. Blackett: Physics, War, and Politics in the Twentieth Century. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004. 

——.. “What Price Politics? Scientists and Political Controversy.” Endeavour 23 
(1999): 148-54. 

Olesko, Kathryn Mary. Physics as a Calling: Discipline and Practice in the 


Kénigsberg Seminar for Physics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991. 

Olwell, Russell. “Physical Isolation and Marginalization in Physics: David Bohm’s 
Cold War Exile.” Jsts go, no. 4 (1999): 738-56. 

O’Neill, Kevin. “Building the Bomb.” In Atomic Audit: The Costs and Consequences 
of U.S. Nuclear Weapons since 1940, edited by Stephen I. Schwartz, 33-103. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1998. 

Ophir, Adi, and Steven Shapin. “The Place of Knowledge: A Methodological 
Survey.” Science in Context 4 (1991): 3-21. 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert. 1946. “The Atom Bomb as a Great Force for Peace.” New 
York Times Magazine, June 9, 1946, 7, 59-60. 

———.. “Atomic Weapons and American Policy.” Foreign Affairs 31, no. 4 (July 
1953): 525-35: 

. “Atomic Weapons and the Crisis in Science.” Saturday Review of 

Literature, November 24, 1945, 9-11. 

. “Comments on the Military Value of the Atom.” Bulletin of the Atomic 

Scientists '7, no. 2 (February 1951): 43-45. 

. The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for Physicists. London: Oxford University 
Press, 1964. 

—. “The Forbearance of Nations.” New York Herald Tribune-Washington 
Post, Paris edition, December 6, 1966, 16. 


Bibliography 387 


. “The Future of Civilization in the Scientific Age.” France-Aste, March- 

April 1961, 1807-15. 

. “International Control of Atomic Energy.” In The Atomic Age: Scientists in 

National and World Affairs, edited by Morton Grodzins and Eugene 

Rabinowitch, 53-63. New York: Basic Books, 1963. Originally published in 

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 1, no. 12 (June 1, 1946): 1-5. 

. “In the Keeping of Unreason.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 16, no. 1 

(January 1960): 18-22. 

. “Knowledge and the Structure of Culture.” Helen Kenyon Lecture. Vassar 

College, Poughkeepsie, NY, October 29, 1958. Manuscript copy. 

. “The Need for New Knowledge.” In Symposium on Basic Research, edited 
by Dael Wolfle, 1-15. Washington, DC: American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 1959. 

—. “The New Weapon: The Turn of the Screw.” In Masters and Way, One 
World or None, 53-60. 

. “Niels Bohr and Atomic Weapons.” New York Review of Books, December 

17, 1964, 6-8. 

. “On Albert Einstein.” New York Review of Books, March 17, 1966, 4-5. 

. The Open Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1955. 

. Science and the Common Understanding. London: Oxford University 

Press, 1954. 

. “Science and the Human Community.” In Issues in University Education: 
Essays by Ten American Scholars, edited by Charles Frankel, 48-62. New York: 
Harper and Brothers, 1959. 

— . “Some Reflections on Science and Culture.” Lecture, 1959. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina, 1960. 

Oreskes, Naomi, and Paul Rainger. “Science and Security before the Atomic Bomb: 
The Loyalty Case of Harold U. Sverdrup.” Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Modern Physics 31 (2000): 309-69. 

Orr, James J. The Victim as Hero: Ideologies of Peace and National Identity in 
Postwar Fapan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2001. 

Ortega y Gasset, José. The Revolt of the Masses. New York: W. W. Norton, 

1932. 

Packard, George R., III. Protest in Tokyo: The Security Treaty Crisis of 1960. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1966. 

Pais, Abraham. Einstein Lived Here. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994. 

. Niels Bohr’s Times, in Physics, Philosophy, and Polity. Oxford: Clarendon 

Press, 1991. 

. Subtle is the Lord .. .2: The Science and Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford: 

Clarendon Press, 1982. 

.A Tale of Two Continents: A Physicist’s Life in a Turbulent World. 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997. 


388 Bibliography 


Palevsky, Mary. Atomic Fragments: A Daughter’s Questions. Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, 2000. 

Pascal, Roy. Culture and the Division of Labour. Occasional Papers in German 
Studies, no. 5. Warwick: University of Warwick, 1974. 

Peierls, Rudolf E. Atomic Histories. Woodbury, NY: AIP Press, 1997. 

. Bird of Passage: Recollections of a Physicist. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 


University Press, 1985. 

Pells, Richard H. The Liberal Mind in a Conservative Age: American Intellectuals in 
the 1940s and 1950s. New York: Harper and Row, 1985. 

. Radical Visions and American Dreams: Culture and Social Thought in the 
Depression Years. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1973. 

Piccard, Paul J. “Scientists and Public Policy: Los Alamos, August-November, 
1945.” Western Political Quarterly 18, no. 2 (June 1965): 251-62. 

Pleat, F. David. Infinite Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm. Reading, 
MA: Helix Books, 1997. 

Polanyi, Michael. Sceence, Faith and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1946. 

Polenberg, Richard, ed. In the Matter of 7. Robert Oppenheimer: The Security 
Clearance Hearing. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002. 

Popper, Karl, The Open Society and Its Enemies. London: Routledge, 1945. 

Porter, Theodore M. Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and 
Public Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995. 

Powers, Thomas. Heisenberg’s War: The Secret History of the German Bomb. 
London: Cape, 1993. 

Price, Matt. “Roots of Dissent: The Chicago Met Lab and the Origins of the Franck 
Report.” Isis 86 (1995): 222-44. 

Rabi, Isidor I. “Playing Down the Bomb: Blackett versus the Atom.” Atlantic 
Monthly 183 (April 1949): 21-24. 

Rabi, Isidor I., Robert Serber, Victor F. Weisskopf, Abraham Pais, and Glenn T. 
Seaborg. Oppenheimer. New York: Charles Scribner, 1969. 

Rabinow, Paul. French DNA: Trouble in Purgatory. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1999. 

. French Modern: Norms and Forms of the Social Environment. Cambridge, 

MA: MIT Press, 1999. 

. Making PCR: A Story of Biotechnology. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1996. 

Radest, Howard B. Toward Common Ground: The Story of the Ethical Culture 
Societies in the United States. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., 
1969. 

Ravetz, Jerome. “Tragedy in the History of Science.” In Changing Perspectives in 
the History of Science: Essays in Honour of Foseph Needham, edited by Mikula’ 
Teich and Robert Young, 204-22. London: Heinemann, 1973. 


Bibliography 389 


Reeves, Thomas C. The Life and Times of foe McCarthy: A Biography. London: 
Madison Books, 1997. 

Regis, Ed. Who Got Einstein’s Office? Eccentricity and Genius at the Institute for 
Advanced Study. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987. 

Reingold, Nathan. “Vannevar Bush’s New Deal for Research: Or the Triumph of 
the Old Order.” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 17 
(1987): 299-344. 

Rhodes, Richard. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1995. 

——.. “‘I Am Become Death’: The Agony of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” American 
Heritage 20, no. 6 (October 1977): 72-82. 

. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986. 

Rieff, Philip, ed. On Intellectuals: Theoretical Studies, Case Studies. New York: 
Doubleday/Anchor, 1970. 

Riesman, David, and Nathan Glazer. “The Intellectuals and the Discontented 
Classes.” Partisan Review 22, no. 1 (Winter 1955): 47-72. 

Riesman, David, Reuel Denney, and Nathan Glazer. The Lonely Crowd: A Study of 
the Changing American Character. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1950. 

Rigden, John S. 1995. “J. Robert Oppenheimer—before the War.” Scientific 
American 273 (July 1995): 68-73. 

. Rabi: Scientist and Citizen. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 

Ringer, Fritz, K. The Decline of the German Mandarins: The German Academic 
Community, 1890-1933. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 1990. 
Originally published 1969. 

Rischin, Moses. The Promised City: New York’s Fews, 1870-1914. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1962. 

Roensch, Eleanor (Jerry) Stone. Life within Limits. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos 
Historical Society, 1993. 

Rogin, Michael Paul. The Intellectuals and McCarthy: The Radical Specter. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1967. 

Rose, John P. The Evolution of U.S. Army Nuclear Doctrine, 1945-1980. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press, 1980. 

Rose, Paul Lawrence. Heisenberg and the Nazi Atomic Bomb Project: A Study in 


German Culture. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1998. 

Rosenthal, Debra. At the Heart of the Bomb: The Dangerous Allure of Weapons 
Work. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1990. 

Rossi, Bruno. Moments in the Life of a Scientist. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990. 

Rotblat, Joseph. “Leaving the Bomb Project.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 41 


(August 1985): 15-19. 


390 ©Bibliography 


. Pugwash: The First Ten Years; History of the Conferences on Science and 

World Affairs. London: Heinemann, 1967. 

. Sctentists in the Quest for Peace: A History of the Pugwash Conferences. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972. 

Rothman, Hal K. On Rims and Ridges: The Los Alamos Area since 1880. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1992. 

Royal, Denise. The Story of 7. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
1969. 

Sachar, Howard M. A History of the ews in America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1992. 

Sanders, Jane A. Cold War on Campus: Academic Freedom at the University of 
Washington, 1946-1964. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1979. 


. “The University of Washington and the Controversy over J. Robert 
Oppenheimer.” Pacific Northwest Quarterly 70, no. 1 (January 1979): 8-19. 

Sanger, S. L. Working on the Bomb: An Oral History of WWI Hanford. Portland, 
OR: Continuing Education Press, 1995. 

Sarantakes, Nicholas Evan. “Alliance in Doubt: American Reaction to the 1960 
US-Japanese Security Treaty Crisis.” American Diplomacy 4, no. 3 (Autumn 
1999), http://www.unc.edu/depts/diplomat/AD_Issues/amdipl-13/sarantakes1. 
html. 

Sarton, George. “The History of Science.” In The Life of Science: Essays in the 
History of Civilization, 29-58. New York: Henry Schuman, 1948. 

Saunders, Frances Stonor. Who Paid the Piper? The CIA and the Cultural Cold War. 
London: Granta Books, 1999. 

Schrecker, Ellen. Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1998. 

. No Ivory Tower: McCarthyism and the Universities. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1986. 

Schwarz, Jordan A. The Speculator: Bernard M. Baruch in Washington, 1917-1965. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1981. 

Schweber, Silvan S. “The Empiricist Temper Regnant: Theoretical Physics in the 
United States, 1920-1950.” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological 
Sciences 17 (1988): 17-98. 

. In the Shadow of the Bomb: Bethe, Oppenheimer, and the Moral 

Responsibility of the Scientist. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000. 

. “The Mutual Embrace of Science and the Military: ONR and the Growth 

of Physics in the United States after World War Two.” In Mendelsohn, Smith, 

and Weingart, Science, Technology, and the Military, 1:3-45. 

. QED and the Men Who Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger and 
Tomonoga. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994. 

—.. “Reflections on the Sokal Affair: What Is at Stake?” Physics Today 50, no. 3 
(March 1997): 73-74. 


Bibliography 391 


Scott-Smith, Giles. The Politics of Apolitical Culture: The Congress for Cultural 
Freedom, the CIA and Post-war American Hegemony. London: Routledge, 2002. 

Segré, Emilio. Enrico Fermi, Physicist. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1970. 

.A Mind Always in Motion: The Autobiography of Emilio Segre. Berkeley and 
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993. 

Seidel, Robert. “The Postwar Political Economy of High-Energy Physics.” In Pions 
to Quarks: Particle Physics in the 1950s, edited by Laurie Brown, Max Dresden, 
and Lillian Hoddeson, 497-507. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1989. 

Seitz, Frederick. On the Frontier: My Life in Science. New York: American Institute 
of Physics, 1994. 

Serber, Robert. The Los Alamos Primer: The First Lectures on How to Build an 
Atomic Bomb Edited by Richard Rhodes. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University 
of California Press, 1992. 

. Peace and War: Reminiscences of a Life on the Frontiers of Science. With 
Robert P. Crease. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998. 

Shapin, Steven. “Cordelia’s Love: Credibility and the Social Studies of Science.” 
Perspectives on Science 3 (1995): 255-75. 

. “Don’t Let That Crybaby in Here Again.” London Review of Books, 

September 7, 2000, http://www.lrb.co.uk/v22/n17/shapo1_.html. 

. “The House of Experiment in Seventeenth-Century England.” Jszs 79 

(1988): 373-404. 

. “How to Be Antiscientific.” In The One Culture? A Conversation about 

Science, edited by Harry Collins and Jay A. Labinger. Chicago: University of 

Chicago Press, 2001. 

. “*The Mind Is Its Own Place’: Science and Solitude in Seventeenth- 

Century England.” Science in Context 4 (1991): 191-218. 

. “Personal Development and Intellectual Biography: The Case of Robert 

Boyle.” British Fournal of the History of Science 26 (1993): 335-45. 

. “The Philosopher and the Chicken: On the Dietetics of Disembodied 

Knowledge.” In Science Incarnate: Historical Embodiments of Natural 


Knowledge, edited by Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin, 21-50. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998. 
——. “‘A Scholar and a Gentleman’: The Problematic Identity of the Scientific 
Practitioner in Early Modern England.” History of Science 29 (1991): 279-327. 
. A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in Seventeenth-Century 


England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994. 

. “Who Is the Industrial Scientist? Commentary from Academic Sociology 
and from the Shop-Floor in the United States, ca. 1g00-ca. 1960.” Paper 
presented to the 123rd Nobel Symposium, “Science and Industry in the 2oth 
Century,” Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, November 21-23, 2002. 


392 Bibliography 


Shapin, Steven, and Barry Barnes. “Head and Hand: Rhetorical Resources in 
British Pedagogical Writing, 1770-1850.” Oxford Review of Education 2, no. 3 
(1976): 231-54. 

Sheehan, Helena. Marxism and the Philosophy of Science: A Critical History. 
Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International, 1993. 

Shepley, James R., and Clay Blair Jr. The Hydrogen Bomb: The Men, the Menace, the 
Mechanism. New York: David McKay, 1954. 

Sherry, Michael S. In the Shadow of War: The United States since the 1930s. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1995. 

Sherwin, Martin. “Niels Bohr and the First Principles of Arms Control.” In 
Feshbach, Matsui, and Oleson, Niels Bohr, 319-29. 

. A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1977. 

Shils, Edward. “Freedom and Influence: Observations on the Scientists’ 
Movement in the United States.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 8 (January 
1957): 13-18. 

. “Science and Scientists in the Public Arena.” American Scholar 56 (Spring 
1987): 185-202. 

Shortland, Michael, and Richard Yeo, eds. Telling Lives in Science: Essays on 
Scientific Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 

Shurcliff, W. A. Bombs at Bikini: The Official Report of Operation Crossroads. New 
York: William H. Wise, 1947. 

Simpson, Alan. “The Re-trial of the Oppenheimer Case.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 10, no. 10 (December 1954): 387-88. 

Sims, Benjamin. 1999. “Concrete Practices: Testing in an Earthquake-Engineering 
Laboratory.” Social Studies of Science 29, no. 4 (August 1999): 483-518. 

Smith, Alice Kimball A Peril and a Hope: The Sctentists’ Movement in America, 
1945-1947. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1970. Originally published 1965. 

. “Scientists and the Public Interest, 1945-46.” Newsletter on Science, 
Technology, and Human Values 24 (June 1978): 24-32. 

Smith, Alice Kimball, and Charles Weiner, eds. Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and 
Recollections. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1980. 

Smith, Martin Cruz. Stallion Gate. New York: Ballantine Books, 1986. 

Snow, C. P. Science and Government. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1961. 

. The Two Cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
Originally published 1959. 

Sorkin, David. “Wilhelm von Humboldt: The Theory and Practice of 
Self-Formation (Bildung), 1791-1810.” Fournal of the History of Ideas 44 (1983): 
55-73- 

Spanier, John W., and Joseph L. Nogee. The Politics of Disarmament: A Study in 
Soviet-American Gamesmanship. New York: Praeger, 1962. 


Bibliography 393 


Stern, Philip M. The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial. With Harold P. Green. 
New York: Harper and Row, 1969. 

Stouffer, Samuel A., Edward A. Suchman, Leland C. DeVinney, Shirley A. 

Star, and Robin M. Williams Jr. The American Soldier. Vol. 1, Adjustment 
during Army Life. New York: Science Editions, 1965. Originally published 
1949. 

Strickland, Donald. Scientists in Politics: The Atomic Scientists Movement, 1945-46. 
Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Studies, 1968. 

Strout, Cushing. Conscience, Science, and Security: The Case of Dr. F. Robert 
Oppenheimer. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1963. 

Stuewer, Roger H., ed. Nuclear Physics in Retrospect: Proceedings of a Symposium 
on the 1930s. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1979. 

Sudoplatov, Pavel, and Anatoli Sudoplatov. Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an 
Unwanted Witness—a Soviet Spymaster. With Jerrold L. and Leona P. 
Schecter. New York: Little, Brown, 1994. 

Swann, E. D. “Planning of Science in War.” In Association of Scientific Workers, 
Planning of Science: Report of Proceedings of the Open Conference Held at 
Caxton Hall, fanuary 3oth-31st, 1943, 12-16. London: Association of Scientific 
Workers, 1943. 

Sylves, Richard T. The Nuclear Oracles: A Political History of the General Advisory 
Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, 1947-1977. Ames: Iowa State 
University Press, 1987. 

Szasz, Ferenc Morton. “Great Britain and the Saga of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” War 
in History 2, no. 3 (1995): 320-33. 

Szilard, Leo. Leo Szilard: His Version of the Facts; Selected Recollections and 
Correspondence. Edited by Spencer R. Weart and Gertrud Weiss Szilard. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978. 

Taylor, Bryan C. “The Politics of the Nuclear Text: Reading Robert 
Oppenheimer’s Letters and Recollections.” Quarterly Fournal of Speech 78 
(1992): 429-49. 

Teller, Edward. The Legacy of Hiroshima. With Allen Brown. Westport, CT: 
Greenwood Press, 1975. Originally published 1962. 

. Memoirs: A Twentieth-Century Fourney in Sctence and Politics. With Judith 

L. Shoolery. Oxford: Perseus Press, 2001. 

. “The Role of the Scientist.” In Better a Shield than a Sword: Perspectives 
on Defense and Technology, 229-35. New York: Free Press, 1987. 

—. “Seven Hours of Reminiscences.” Los Alamos Science 4, no. 7 
(Winter/Spring 1983): 190-96. 

. “The Work of Many People.” Science, February 25, 1955, 267-75. 

Thayer, Harry. Management of the Hanford Engineer Works in World War Two: 
How the Corps, DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory Fast Tracked the 
Original Plutonium Works. New York: ASCE Press, 1996. 


394 Bibliography 


Thomas, W. I. “Situational Analysis: The Behavior Pattern and the Situation.” 
1927. In Thomas, On Social Organization and Social Personality, edited by 
Morris Janowitz, 154-67. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966. 

Thompson, E. P. “Time, Work-Discipline and Industrial Capitalism.” Past and 
Present 38 (1967): 56-97. 

Thorpe, Charles. “Against Time: Scheduling, Momentum, and Moral Order at 
Wartime Los Alamos.” Fournal of Historical Sociology 17, no. 1 (March 2004): 
31-55- 

. “Disciplining Experts: Scientific Authority and Liberal Democracy in 

the Oppenheimer Case.” Social Studies of Science 32, no. 4 (August 2002): 

525-62. 

. “Violence and the Scientific Vocation.” Theory, Culture and Soctety 21, 
no. 3 (June 2004): 59-84. 

Thorpe, Charles, and Steven Shapin. “Who Was J. Robert Oppenheimer? 
Charisma and Complex Organization.” Social Studies of Science 30, no. 4 
(2000): 545-90. 

Trilling, Diana. “The Oppenheimer Case: A Reading of the Testimony.” Partisan 
Review 21, no. 6 (November-December 1954): 604-35. 


Trilling, Lionel. “The Leavis-Snow Controversy.” In Beyond Culture, 133-58. 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1966. 

Truslow, Edith C., and Ralph Carlisle Smith. “Beyond Trinity.” Part 2 of Project Y: 
The Los Alamos Story. Los Angeles: Tomash Publishers, 1983. 

Turner, Stephen. Liberal Democracy 3.0: Civil Society in an Age of Experts. London: 
Sage, 2003. 

Ulam, Stanislaw. Adventures of a Mathematician. New York: Scribner, 1976. 

Ulam, Stanislaw, H. W. Kuhn, A. W. Tucker, and Claude E. Shannon. “John von 

Neumann, 1903-1957.” In Fleming and Bailyn, The Intellectual Migration, 

235-69. 

Ungar, Sheldon. “The Great Collapse, Democratic Paralysis and the Reception of 

the Bomb.” Fournal of Historical Sociology 5, no. 1 (March 1992): 84-103. 

United States Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Final Report 

of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press, 1996. 

United States Atomic Energy Commission. In the Matter of f. Robert Oppenheimer: 
Transcript of Hearing before Personnel Security Board and Texts of Principal 
Documents and Letters. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971. Originally 
published 1954. 

Vaughan, Diane. The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and 
Deviance at NASA. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996. 


. “The Role of the Organization in the Production of Techno-scientific 
Knowledge.” Social Studies of Scvence 29 (1999): 913-43. 
Vilar, Jean. Le Dossier Oppenheimer. Geneva: Editions Gonthier, 1965. 


Bibliography 395 


Visvanathan, Shiv. “Atomic Physics: The Career of an Imagination.” In Science, 
Hegemony and Violence: A Requiem for Modernity, edited by Ashis Nandy, 
113-66. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 

Walker, J. S. “The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb: A Historiographical Update.” 
Diplomatic History 14 (1990): 97-114. 

Walker, Mark. German National Socialism and the Quest for Nuclear Power, 
1939-1949. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. 

Walter, Maila L. Sctence and Cultural Crisis: An Intellectual Biography of Percy 
Williams Bridgman (1882-1961). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1990. 

Wang, Jessica. American Science in an Age of Anxiety: Scientists, Anticommunism, 
and the Cold War. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999. 

. “Liberals, the Progressive Left, and the Political Economy of Post-war 


American Science: The National Science Foundation Debate Revisited.” 
Mistorical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sctences 26 (1995): 139-66. 

——.. “Science, Security, and the Cold War: The Case of E.U. Condon.” Jszs 83 
(1992): 238-69. 

—.. “Scientists and the Problem of the Public in Cold War, 1945-1960.” In 
“Science and Civil Society,” edited by Lynn K. Nyhart and Thomas H. 
Broman, Osiris 17 (2002): 323-47. 

Weber, Max. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Edited by H. H. Gerth and C. 
Wright Mills. New York: Oxford University Press, 1958. 

Weiner, Charles. “A New Site for the Seminar: The Refugees and American Physics 
in the Thirties.” In Fleming and Bailyn, The Intellectual Migration, 152-89. 

Weisgall, Johnathan M. Operation Crossroads: The Atomic Tests at Bikini Atoll. 
Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1994. 

Weisskopf, Victor. The Joy of Insight: Passions of a Physicist. New York: Basic 
Books, 1991. 

Welsh, Ian. Mobilising Modernity: The Nuclear Moment. London: Routledge, 

2000. 

Werskey, Gary. The Visible College: A Collective Biography of British Scientists and 
Socialists of the 1930s. London: Free Association Books, 1988. 

White, W. L. Bernard Baruch: Portrait of a Citizen. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 
1950. 

Whitley, Richard. The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1984. 

Wigner, Eugene. “Memoir of the Uranium Project.” In The Collected Works of 
Eugene Paul Wigner, edited by Alvin M. Weinberg with Alfred M. Perry, vol. 5, 
Nuclear Energy, Part A: The Scientific Papers, 23-130. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
1992. 

. The Recollections of Eugene P. Wigner as Told to Andrew Szanton. New 

York: Plenum Press, 1992. 


396 Bibliography 


Willhelm, Sidney M. “Scientific Unaccountability and Moral Accountability.” In 
The New Sociology: Essays in Social Science and Social Theory in Honor of C. 
Wright Mills, edited by Irving Louis Horowitz, 181-87. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1964. 

Williams, Robert C., and Philip L. Cantelon, eds. The American Atom: A 
Documentary History of Nuclear Policies from the Discovery of Fission to the 
Present, 1939-1984. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984. 

Williamson, Samuel R., Jr., and Steven L. Rearden. The Origins of U.S. Nuclear 
Strategy, 1945-1953. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1993. 

Wilson, Jane S., and Charlotte Serber, eds. Standing By and Making Do: Women of 
Wartime Los Alamos. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos Historical Society, 1988. 

Wilson, Robert R. “The Conscience ofa Physicist.” In Lewis and Wilson, 
Alamogordo plus Twenty-five Years, 67-76. New York: Viking Press, 1971. 

. “Hiroshima: The Scientists’ Social and Political Reaction.” Proceedings of 
the American Philosophical Society 140, no. 3 (September 1996): 350-57. 

. “Niels Bohr and the Young Scientists.” In Acklund and McGuire, 

Assessing the Nuclear Age, 35-41. 

. “A Recruit for Los Alamos.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 31 (March 
1975): 41-47. 

Wilson, Thomas Williams. The Great Weapons Heresy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1970. 

Winston, Andrew S. “‘As His Name Indicates’: R. S. Woodworth’s Letters of 
Reference and Employment for Jewish Psychologists in the 1930s.” Fournal of 
the History of the Behavioral Sciences 32, no. 1 (January 1996): 30-43. 

Wrong, Dennis. “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology.” 
American Sociological Review 26 (1961): 183-93. 

Yoneyama, Lise. Hiroshima Traces: Time, Space, and the Dialectics of Memory. 


Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1999. 

York, Herbert F. The Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller, and the Superbomb. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1976. 

. Making Weapons, Talking Peace: A Physicist’s Odyssey from Hiroshima to 
Geneva. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 

Zachary, G. Pascal. Endless Frontier: Vannevar Bush, Engineer of the American 
Century. New York: Free Press, 1997. 

Zerubavel, Eviatar. Hidden Rhythms: Schedules and Calendars in Social Life. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981. 

Zimmerman, Bill, Len Radinsky, Mel Rothenberg, and Bart Myers. Towards a 
Science for the People. Brookline, MA: A People’s Press, 1972. 


INDEX 


AASW (American Association of Scien- 
tific Workers), 63-64, 74 

ACCF (American Committee for Cul- 
tural Freedom), 247-49 

Acheson, Dean, 178, 179, 212 

Acheson-Lilienthal Report, 178-83, 185, 
186, 188, 189 

Adler, Felix, 23, 25, 45, 53,58 

AEC (Atomic Energy Commission): 
effect of security hearing on public 
image of, 236, 238, 240-41, 246; and 
Oppenheimer’s advisory role, 192, 
195, 201, 211; political arguments 
over establishment and civilian vs. 
military control of, 172-76; secrecy 
and security apparatus, xiv, 202, 222. 
See also security hearing 

Agnew, Harold, 110, 116, 117 

air defense, 212 

Air Force, 211-12 

Alamogordo. See Trinity test 

ALAS (Association of Los Alamos Sci- 
entists), 167-69, 176-77, 189 

Allison, Samuel, 69, 123, 133, 
147 

Alperovitz, Gar, 163 


Alsop, Joseph, 235, 239, 245 

Alsop, Stewart, 235, 239, 245 

Alvarez, Luis, 68, 71, 79, 110, 193, 250, 
277; testimony during security hear- 
ing, 224 

American Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, 204 

American Civil Liberties Union, 55 

American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, 250 

American Mercury, 251 

American Physical Society, 60, 204, 234, 
239, 254 

Anderson, Herbert, 170 

anti-Communism. See McCarthyism. 
See also CCF (Congress for Cultural 
Freedom); and under anti-Semitism 

anti-Semitism: and anti-Communism, 
McCarthyism, 248, 251, 353173; at 
Berkeley 61-62; at Gottingen, 42-43; 
at Harvard University, 28-31, 35-36; 
and Oppenheimer’s attitude toward 
his Jewish background, 25, 26, 27- 
28, 45 

Arendt, Hannah, 266 

Argonne National Laboratory, 238 


398 Index 


arms control, 6-7, 166. See also 
Acheson-Lilienthal Report; Baruch 
Plan 

Army Air Forces, 148, 149, 150, 151 

Army Corps of Engineers, 1, 65-66, 89, 
95,99 

Army-Navy “E” Production Award, 116, 
170 

Army Specialized Training Program, 
go, 117 

Arney, William Ray, 153 

Aron, Raymond, 14, 265, 267 

asceticism, 14, 51, 53, 244 

Ascoli, Max, 241 

Ashbridge, Whitney, 104 

assimilation, 21, 24, 26, 27, 31, 45 

Association of Oak Ridge Scientists at 
Clinton Laboratories, 167, 175 

atomic bomb, xi, 1, 183, 185, 186, 270; 
choice of targets for, 151-52; idea of 
nonlethal demonstration of, 163-64; 
remorse over building of, 165-66, 
268, 280, 282-86, 289; symbolism 
of, xii, 3, 161; tactical, 196-99; as 
transcendent power, 5, 18, 166, 180, 
289 

atomic bomb project, 62-63, 64, 65. See 
also Manhattan Project 

Atomic Energy Act, 176 

authority, xi, 1, 12-13; as embodied, 12, 
15, 111-12; and Los Alamos organiza- 
tion, 105-6, 115-16, 119-27; modern 
fragmentation of, 9, 258, 263-65, 
288; of Oppenheimer, 10-15, 109-27, 
202, 258; reputational, 101, 124; of 
scientists and intellectuals, 5-6, 19- 
20, 200, 224-26, 229-31, 238, 243. See 
also charisma 


Bacher, Jean, go 

Bacher, Robert: advice to Oppenheimer 
on organizing Los Alamos, 71, 72, 80, 
gO, 115; membership on Los Alamos 


committees, 104, 147; on militariza- 
tion of Los Alamos laboratory, 71, 97; 
Teller’s opinion of, 123 

Badash, Lawrence, 176 

Bagley, Charles, 86, 96, 108, 117 

Bainbridge, Kenneth, 147 

Baruch, Bernard, 181, 186 

Baruch Plan, 181-83, 185 

Barzun, Jacques, 264 

BBC (British Broadcasting Corpora- 
tion), 255, 259 

Beckerley, James G., 241 

Bell, Daniel, 249, 276, 277; on Oppen- 
heimer’s charisma, 13; on significance 
of security hearing, 242 

Bell Labs, 2, 94 

Berkeley: conference on theoretical 
physics of the atomic bomb at, 65, 
121; left-wing politics in, 55-60 

Berkeley, University of California: con- 
servatism of senior physics faculty at, 
61-62; Oppenheimer’s appointment 
and teaching role at, 43, 47-51; Op- 
penheimer’s postwar return to, 160, 
202 

Berkeley Radiation Laboratory: military 
intelligence investigations at, 67, 
74-76; political activity at, 62-64; 
postwar allegations of espionage at, 
205-7; role in atomic-bomb project, 
62-63 

Berle, Adolf, 267 

Bernal, J. D., 62 

Bernheim, Frederick, 30, 32, 34, 38, 45, 
307n62 

Bernstein, Jeremy, 17, 254 

Bethe, Hans: descriptions of Oppen- 
heimer before the war, 60, 66; and 
implosion program, 136, 138; lead- 
ership of Theoretical Division and 
relationship with Teller, 119, 121-23; 
and Los Alamos Colloquium, 103, 
104, 109; and Los Alamos commit- 


tees, 147, 151; on Oppenheimer’s 
leadership of Los Alamos, 82-83, 111, 
113; Oppenheimer’s recruitment to 
Los Alamos of, 66; response to Op- 
penheimer’s HUAC testimony, 206; 
and responsibility of scientist, xv, 8 

Bhagavad Gita, 3, 11, 12, 52, 53, 156, 161, 
280 

big science, 10; and relationship between 
science and technology, 174-75, 190 

Bikini nuclear tests, 186. See also Opera- 
tion Crossroads 

Bildung, 19, 23-24, 45, 53,58 

biography, sociological approach, xv- 
Xvi, 1, 18-19; and interactionist soci- 
ology, 301n54 

Bird, Kai, xiv, 41, 79, 319n110, 342n97, 
343n102 

Birge, Raymond T., 47, 48, 61, 62, 234, 
314n48 

Birkhoff, George D., 35 

Black, Algernon, 31 

Blackett, Patrick, 38-39, 40, 183-85, 
342ng9Q, 343102 

Blair, Clay, Jr., 239 

Bloch, Felix, 16, 122 

Bohm, David, 205, 248, 284; on Oppen- 
heimer, 15, 74 

Bohr, Niels, 39, 43, 49, 130, 281; influ- 
ence on Oppenheimer of, 256-57, 
272, 274, 276; political ideas and 
conception of responsibility of the 
scientist of, 6-7, 166-67, 178-79. See 
also complementarity 

Borden, William L., 213, 216, 217 

Born, Max, 40, 41 

Boyd, Julian, 273 

Boyd, William Clouser, 29, 31, 32, 34, 36 

Bradbury, Lois, 280 

Bradbury, Norris, 83, 92, 154, 168, 240, 
280 

Bradner, Hugh, 114, 135, 136, 140 

Breit, Gregory, 65 


Index 399 


Bridgman, Percy, 35 

Brighter Than a Thousand Suns 
(Jungk), 3, 161, 280 

Brode, Bernice, 13 

Brode, Robert, 151 

Brookhaven National Laboratory, 239 

Brown, Harrison S., 192 

Brown, John Mason, 14 

Buckley, Oliver E., 193, 204 

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 7, 188, 
204, 250 

bureaucracy, xiil, 4, 13, 201; in contrast 
with Oppenheimer’s authority and 
role, 9-11; and impersonality, 221-22, 
238 

Bush, Vannevar, xii, 179; on the 
“gentleman of culture,” 263, 288; 
and May-Johnson bill, 172; and selec- 
tion of Oppenheimer for Los Alamos 
role, 67, 124; as senior administra- 
tor of wartime research, 62, 66, 165; 
testimony during security hearing, 
227-29 

Byrnes, James, 165, 181 


California, University of, contract for 
operation of Los Alamos laboratory, 
94 

California Institute of Technology 
(Caltech): and DuBridge’s defense 
of Oppenheimer, 252; faculty views 
on Oppenheimer’s politics, 60, 61; 
Oppenheimer’s appointment and 
teaching at, 43, 49, 51, 192, 202; and 
Project Vista, 196 

California Senate Committee on Un- 
American Activities, 208 

California State Assembly, un-American 
activities committee of, 63 

Cambridge University, 26, 35; 
Cavendish Laboratory, 35, 39, 403 
Christ’s College, 35; as disappoint- 
ment to Oppenheimer, 38 


400 Index 


Campbell, Joseph, 232, 233 

candor, 212, 353n64 

Capital (Marx), 59 

Carlyle, Thomas: great man history, 14 

Carstairs, Morris, 273 

Cassidy, David, xiv-xv, 31 

CBS television, 285 

CCF (Congress for Cultural Freedom), 
245, 247, 249, 268, 273, 277, 284; 
Berlin conference on “Progress 
in Freedom,” 266-67; CIA fund- 
ing of, 277-78, 288; Oppenheimer 
on board of directors of, 279-80; 
Rheinfelden conference, 265. See 
also ACCF (American Committee for 
Cultural Freedom) 

Chadwick, James, 150 

Chapin, John H., 205 

charisma, xvi, 4, 12-15, 19, 20, 48, 201, 
242; and boundaries of scientific 
authority, 223-26; as collective ac- 
complishment, 84, 126-27; and 
Oppenheimer’s leadership of Los 
Alamos, 82-84, 109-16, 126-27; 
“serpentine,” 224, 227. See also un- 
der Oppenheimer, J. Robert; Weber, 
Max 

Cherniss, Harold, 160 

Chevalier, Haakon, 74, 77-78, 202-3, 
207-8, 220, 222; and Jungk, 281-82; 
on Oppenheimer, 3, 11, 14, 15, 55- 
56, 57, 60; as possible influence on 
Kipphardt play, 283 

Chevalier incident, 74, 77-79, 319n110; 
Chevalier’s later perspective on, 281; 
postwar investigations of, 202-3, 205; 
public reaction to, following security 
hearing, 235; as topic in security 
hearing, 217, 233 

Chicago (Metallurgical Laboratory), 2, 
7, 120, 205; dissent at, 149, 152, 163, 
333n61 

Chrysler, 2 


Churchill, Winston, 7, 272 

CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 268, 
277, 288 

CII (Committee for Intercultural Ex- 
change, International House of 
Japan), 268, 271 

CIO (Congress of Industrial Organiza- 
tions), 63, 182 

civil society, science and, xili-xiv, 264- 
65, 270-71, 273 

Clarke, Eric Kent, 91, 93, 95-96 

classification. See secrecy 

Cohn, Victor, 262 

Cold War: Blackett on origins of, 184- 
85; challenged in 1960s, 288; cul- 
tural, 263, 266, 271, 278; and decline 
of scientists’ movement and narrow- 
ing of political landscape, 163, 186, 
192, 201, 205; and ideological mobi- 
lization of science, 187-88 

Columbia Broadcasting System, 259 

Columbia University, 259 

Communist Party: and Berkeley left- 
wing milieu, 55-60, 65, 318n93; 
HUAC investigations of, 203, 
205, 207, 208; and liberal anti- 
Communism, 246-47; Oppen- 
heimer’s association with as issue 
in security hearing, 217; wartime se- 
curity officers’ suspicions regarding 
74, 76,77 

compartmentalization: de facto, arising 
from organizational complexity, 102- 
3; of information, 65, 73, 99-102, 
105-6; and managerial hierarchy, 
100, 106-8, 115, 130 

complementarity, 257, 274 

Compton, Arthur H., 64, 65, 68, 70, 
100, 101, 163, 170 

Compton, Karl T., 40 

Conant, James B.: and GAC hydrogen- 
bomb report, 193-94, 211, 225-26, 
346n147; and May-Johnson bill, 172; 


and NAS Committee on Civil Liber- 
ties, 204; relationship to Los Alamos 
laboratory, 71-72, 96, 89, 137, 165; 
on science education, 255; and selec- 
tion of Oppenheimer for Los Alamos 
role, 67, 124; as senior administra- 
tor of wartime research, 63, 66, 136; 
testimony during security hearing, 
227-99 

Conference on Science and Freedom, 
247 

Cooke, Alistair, 241, 260 

Cooley, Charles Horton, xvii 

Condon, Edward, 56, 61, 73, 76, 86, 
203, 204, 206-7, 252, 350n32 

Copenhagen, Institute for Theoretical 
Physics, 43, 281 

Cornell University, 180 

Corps of Engineers. See Army Corps of 
Engineers 

Corsica, 38 

Coser, Lewis, 3 

Coughlan, Robert, 243, 244 

Council on Foreign Relations, 212 

Courant, Richard, 40 

Cousins, Norman, 182 

Crime of Galileo, The (Santillana), 4 

Critchfield, Charles, 11, 116, 135, 136 

Crome Yellow (Huxley), 32, 34 

Crouch, Paul, 208-9 

Crouch, Sylvia, 208-9 

cultivated man, 4-5, 18, 243, 258. See 
also under Weber, Max 

Curtis, Howard J., 175 

cyclotron, 15, 48 


Daily Worker, 58 

Dallet, Joe, 58, 59 

Darrow, Karl, 234 

Dawn over Zero (Laurence), 161 
Dean, Gordon, 195 

Department of Defense, 188, 195 
Department of Justice, 208 


Index 401 


de Silva, Peer, 79, 80-81, 110 

deterrence, as mutually assured destruc- 
tion, 212 

Detroit News, 237 

Dinnerstein, Leonard, 34 

Dirac, Paul, 40; wife of, 11 

documentary biography. See file person 

Donne, John, 12 

Dossier Oppenheimer, Le (Vilar), 283 

Doty, Ed, 114 

DuBridge, Lee, 193, 211, 250-52; testi- 
mony during security hearing, 226 

Dukas, Helen, 275 

DuPont, 2, 101, 130 

Dyson, Freeman, 166, 197, 253, 261 


Eagels, Jeanne, 31 

Edsall, John, 29, 31, 38, 39 

Ehrenfest, Paul, 40, 43 

Einstein, Albert, 9, 204, 247-48, 261, 
273; compared with Oppenheimer, 
4, 13, 14, 17, 271; Oppenheimer’s 
UNESCO lecture on, 274-76; and 
responsibility of scientist, 6-7, 162 

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 196, 211, 244, 
251, 262, 269; and security hearing 
213-15, 277 

Elias, Norbert, xvi 

Eltenton, George, 74, 77, 78, 79, 202, 
203 

Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, 
247 

Emergency Committee of the Atomic 
Scientists, 7, 192, 204 

Encounter, 277 

Enlightenment, the, xi, 256 

Enola Gay (bomber), 150 

Espionage Act, 87 

Ethical Culture, 23, 25, 31, 45, 53,583 
Ethical Culture School, 23, 25, 30, 57 

Evans, Ward, 214, 231, 355n107 

Everson, George, 62 

expert, 4-5, 6, 18, 243 


402 Index 


FAECT (Federation of Architects, En- 
gineers, Chemists and Technicians), 
63, 74, 76, 77 

FAS (Federation of Atomic Scientists; 
Federation of American Scientists), 
7,167 

Fascism, 55, 67, 289 

fast-neutron research, 65, 102 

Faust, 3, 282 

FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation), 
investigations of Oppenheimer, 2, 
16, 51, 54, 59, 67, 200, 201; belief that 
Oppenheimer might defect, 268; 
and espionage at Rad Lab, 75; file 
on Oppenheimer, size of, 202; in- 
terview of Oppenheimer regarding 
Chevalier incident, 79, 220; and se- 
curity hearing, 215, 216, 218; tapping 
Oppenheimer’s phone, 203, 348n11 

Fear, War, and the Bomb (Blackett), 183 

Fergusson, Francis, 29, 30, 32, 33; 345 
38, 307n6Q; family of, 26 

Fermi Award, 2, 12, 124, 244, 271 

Fermi, Enrico, 16, 49, 68, 124, 163, 170, 
193, 194 

Fermi, Laura, 83, 91, 133 

Feuer, Lewis, 3 

Feynman, Richard, 62, 68, 153 

file person, 201, 218, 221 

Finney, Nat, 240 

Fisher, Phyllis, 86 

Foreign Affairs, 186, 212 

Formosa. See Taiwan (Formosa) Strait 

Fortune magazine, 211-12 

Foucault, Michel, 5-6 

Foundation for Religious Action in the 
Social and Civil Order, 251 

Fowler, Ralph, 39 

Franck, James, 7, 40, 152 

Franck Report, 152 

Frank, Waldo, 245 

Franklin, Benjamin, 257 

Friendly, Alfred, 17, 243, 244, 287 


Frisch, Otto, 106-8 
Fuchs, Klaus, 208 
Fulbright, William, 172, 180 


G-2 (military intelligence), 67, 77, 78, 
88, 202 

GAC (General Advisory Committee), 
XIV, 193, 203, 244; Oppenheimer as 
chairman of, 2, 192, 202; report on 
hydrogen bomb program, xiv, 194, 
195, 198, 223-27, 232, 233, 237, 240 

Gad-Fly, 31 

Galbraith, John Kenneth, 248, 278 

Garrison, Lloyd, 218 

Gell-Mann, Murray, 253 

General Electric Research Laboratory, 
64 

Giddens, Anthony, xvi 

Glazer, Nathan, 57, 276 

Goodchild, Peter, 13 

Gottingen, University of, 41-43, 280; 
Institute of Theoretical Physics, 40; 
Oppenheimer’s view of education at, 
44 

Géttinger Tageblatt, 42 

Goudsmit, Samuel, 43, 239 

Gowing, Margaret, 272 

Gray, Gordon, 214, 218, 219, 223, 228, 
229, 230 

Gray Board. See Personnel Security 
Board 

Great Depression, 54, 289 

Green, Harold P., 214, 215, 216 

Greenberg, Clement, 260 

Greenberg, Daniel, xii 

Groves, Leslie R.: and Chevalier inci- 
dent, 78, 202, 217; compartmental- 
ization policy and, 99-102, 110, 130; 
defense of Oppenheimer against 
disloyalty allegations, 209; desire 
for militarized laboratory, 70-72, 
95, 96-97; and implosion, 136; and 
Manhattan Project schedules, 127, 


131-32; Oppenheimer’s alleged in- 
fluence on, 225; personal control 
over Manhattan Project, 94, 97-102, 
105-6; and scientists’ movement, 
165, 168; selection of Oppenheimer, 
66, 67, 68, 70, 73, 80-81; tours of 
Los Alamos site, 116-19; and use of 
atomic bomb, 150-51 

Guardian (Manchester), 241, 258, 260 


Hagerty, James, 269 

Hales, Peter Bacon, 97, 100 

Hall, Harvey, 51, 54 

Hall, Marge (Bradner), 114 

Hampshire, Stuart, 273, 278 

Hanford, 2, 132 

Harrison, Richard, 58 

Harrison, Wallace K., 274 

Harvard University, 26, 28-37, 43, 
66, 136; Liberal Club, 31; quota on 
Jewish students, 28-29 

Hawkins, David: on Groves’ choice of 
Oppenheimer as Los Alamos direc- 
tor, 70; military intelligence suspi- 
cions of, 76; on Oppenheimer, 29, 
49, 54, 113; role at and accounts of 
Los Alamos, 92, 108, 109, 110, 115, 
128 

Heisenberg, Werner, 40, 191, 280, 281 

Herald Tribune (New York), 196, 235- 
36, 240, 245, 271 

Herald Tribune-Washington Post (Paris 
edition), article by Oppenheimer in, 
278-79 

Hersch, Jeanne, 273, 274 

Higinbotham, William A., 168, 
169 

Hilbert, David, 190 

Hilton, James, 85 

Hiroshima: as atomic-bomb target 1, 151, 
164; Peace Memorial Ceremony, 269; 
question of whether Oppenheimer 
would visit, 269; scientists’ reactions 


Index 403 


to bombing of, 159, 183, 196; social, 
historical, and moral significance of 
bombing of, xii, 10, 180-81, 185, 187, 
190, 282, 285, 289 

Hirsch, Donald, 110 

Hiskey, Clarence, 205 

Hiss, Alger, 208, 246 

Hoddeson, Lillian, 134 

Hofstadter, Richard, 276 

Hoover, J. Edgar, 202, 203, 211 

Horgan, Paul, 22, 27, 29, 31, 35 

House Committee on Military Affairs, 
172-73 

HUAC (House Un-American Activities 
Committee), xv, 203-4, 205-7, 208- 
9, 246-48 

Hughes, A. L., 113 

Hull, McAllister, Jr., 106, 108, 115, 117, 
147-48 

Huxley, Aldous, 32 

hydrogen bomb: and divisions in sci- 
entific community, 239-40; GAC 
report on, xiv, 2, 193-95, 223-26; 
as genocidal, 194; idea of discussed 
during war, 121, 124; Oppenheimer’s 
opposition to, 197, 299; Teller-Ulam 
design, 196; as topic in security hear- 
ing, 231-32; Truman announcement 
on, 208 

Hydrogen Bomb, The (Shepley and 
Blair), 239-40 


IBM (International Business Machines), 
138, 168 

implosion, 95, 134-48, 331n39; freezing 
of design, 144-48; lens vs. non-lens 
design, 145-46 

individual, and society. See self, as social 

information flow, at Los Alamos, 102-10; 
and charisma, 111-13, 125. See also 
compartmentalization 

Institute for Advanced Study. See under 
Princeton 


404 Index 


intellectuals, 247, 252-53, 258, 263, 271, 
276, 277, 279, 285, 288; specific and 
universal, 5-6, 18 

Interim Committee, 163-64, 168, 170 

International Congress on Theoretical 
Physics, 250 

International Education Board, 44 

In the Matter of F. Robert Oppenheimer 
(Kipphardt), 17, 282 

Ivanov, Peter, 79 


“JPaccuse” (Zola), 245 

Jackson, Henry M., 244 

Janowitz, Morris, 92 

Japan, 287; as atomic bomb target, 151- 
52, 156, 164, 184, 246, 342ng7; Op- 
penheimer’s 1960 trip to, 268-71; 
security treaty and relationship with 
United States, 269 

Jaspers, Karl, 266 

Jewish identity, 19, 24-28, 31, 45, 57, 
248, 304n26, 305n41; German and 
Eastern European, 24-25, 28 

Johnson, Lyall, 77, 219 

Johnson, Lyndon, 271, 278 

Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 
207, 244 

Jordan, Pascual, 40 

Josselson, Michael, 279 

Journal Club (Berkeley), 48 

Jungk, Robert, 3, 16, 114, 161, 280-83 


Kaempffert, Waldemar, 237 

Kaiser, David, 265 

Kamen, Martin, 57, 63-64, 204, 205, 
314n48 

Kantorowicz, Ernst, 261 

Kapitza Club, 39 

Kemble, Edwin, 41 

Kennan, George F., 186, 273, 278, 287 

Kennard, Earle H., 40 

Kennedy, Joseph, 88, 116 

Kennedy, Robert F., 244, 271, 286 


Kerr, Clark, 265 

Killian, James R., 239 

Kipphardt, Heinar, 17, 282-84 

Kirkpatrick, Elmer E., 132 

Kishi, Nobusuke, 269 

Kistiakowsky, George, 95, 123, 136-43, 
146-47, 274 

Klock, Augustus, 25 

“Knowledge and the Structure of 
Culture” (Oppenheimer), 263 

Korean War, 163, 197 

Kornhauser, William, 276 

Kramers, Hendrik A., 43 

Krock, Arthur, 236 

Kuhn, Thomas, 23, 35, 36, 
254 

Kunetka, James, 114 


Lakoff, Sanford, 4, 224, 227 

Lansdale, John, Jr., 67, 76, 77 

Lapp, Ralph, 152, 156, 203 

Latimer, Wendell, 193; testimony during 
security hearing, 224-26 

Laurence, William L., 10, 161, 237, 
239 

Lauritsen, Charles, 211 

Lawrence, David, 235 

Lawrence, Ernest: and Berkeley Rad 
Lab, 48, 61-62, 64, 314n48; and 
Chevalier incident, 79; and hydro- 
gen bomb, 193, 250; and Interim 
Committee, 163, 170; and Manhattan 
Project, 90, 98; and selection of Op- 
penheimer as Los Alamos director, 
68,70 

Lawrence Livermore National Labora- 
tory, 239 

Lee, T. D., 253 

Leiden, University of, 40, 43 

LeMay, Curtis, 197 

Lerner, Max, 34 

Lewis, Sinclair, 44 

Libby, Leona, 14, 17 


liberalism, 247, 263; and science, xi, 9- 


10, 162, 227-29, 238, 270-71, 288-89. 


See also pluralism 

Life, 17 

Lilienthal, David, 17, 178-82, 192, 193, 
194-95, 209, 254, 267 

Lippmann, Walter, 245 

Lipset, Seymour Martin, 276 

Lomanitz, Giovanni Rossi, 74,75, 76- 
77, 295, 31gn103 

lonely crowd, 265 

longshoremen’s strike, 55 

Look, 11, 17, 271-72 

Los Alamos, and controversy over hy- 
drogen bomb, 239-40 

Los Alamos, formal organization and 
committees: Colloquium, 103-6, 
108-9, 114, 128; Coordinating Coun- 
cil, 104; Cowpuncher Committee, 
147, 158; Governing Board, 104, 132, 
136, 137, 329n11; Liaison Commit- 
tee, 103; organizational chart and 
organizational structure, 69, 124, 
141; reorganization, 142-43; Town 
Council, 92 

Los Alamos, life and work at: civilians 
and military, 70-72, 91, 94-102, 
110-11, 128; censorship at, 88-89; 
community life at, 84-93; HE (high 
explosives) program, 95, 106, 134- 
48; hierarchies at, 106-8, 114-16; 
lack of dissent at, 152-58; norma- 
tive uncertainty at, 84, 93, 105, 1153 
scheduling at, 106, 129-34, 143, 146- 
48; as “Shangri-La,” 85-86; siren at, 
133; wartime population of, 90 

Los Alamos, Oppenheimer as direc- 
tor of. See under Oppenheimer, 
J. Robert, wartime and postwar gov- 
ernment and politics 

Los Alamos Ranch School, 85 

Los Angeles Times, 237 

Lost Horizon (Hilton), 85 


Index 405 


Lowell, Lawrence, 28 

Lowell, Robert, 274 

Lowry, Charles, 251 

loyalty-security hearing. See security 
hearing 

Lucky Dragon (fishing boat), 269 

Luft, Friedrich, 267 


MacDonald, Dwight, 278 

Malraux, André, 218, 281 

Manhattan Project, creation of, 66; scale 
and structure of, 1-2, 129, 1353 se- 
curity in, 73, 80, 89, 99-102, 105-6, 
201-2, 208, 281; Target Committee, 
151-52; and transformation of the 
scientific role, 6 

Manley, John, 65, 69, 102, 126, 168 

Man Who Would Be God, The 

(Chevalier), 11, 281 

Marcuse, Herbert, xii 

Marks, Herbert, 179 

Marshak, Al, 63 

Marshak, Robert, 86 

Marshak, Ruth, 86, 87, 133 

Marshall, George C., 98, 173, 186 

Marshall, James C., 97, 99, 218 

Marx, Karl, 59 

mass culture, 260, 262-63, 265, 270-71, 

273, 276-77 

MAUD Committee, 183 

Mayer, Maria Goppert, 40, 120 

May-Johnson bill, 170-76 

McCarthy, Joseph, 213, 215, 246, 277 

McCarthy, Mary, 266, 267 

McCarthyism, xv, 210, 235, 246, 248, 

251, 276; pluralist account of, 277 

McKibben, Dorothy, 87 

McMahon, Brien, 176 

McMahon bill, 176 

McMaster University, 273 

McMillan, Edwin, 71 

McMillan, Elsie, 86, 89 

McMillan, Priscilla, xiv 


406 Index 


MED (Manhattan Engineer District). 
See Army Corps of Engineers; 
Manhattan Project 

Merryman, Roy, 96 

Merton, Robert K., xi 

Metallurgical Laboratory. See Chicago 
(Metallurgical Laboratory) 

Meyer, Agnes, 273-74, 278 

Meyer, Eugene, 273 

Millikan, Robert, 43, 61, 314n46 
Minneapolis Tribune, 262 

MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology), Radiation Laboratory, 66, 
79, 90; as model for Los Alamos, 72 
Mitchell, Dana, 134 

modernity, xi-xil, xvi, 243; as disen- 
chanted, 5; of Los Alamos, 84 
Molotov-von Ribbentrop pact. See 


Soviet-Nazi nonaggression pact 
momentum, organizational and tech- 
nological, 128-129, 146-147, 158. See 
also scheduling, as social control 
Monsanto, 2 
Morgan, Thomas, 214, 228, 229, 230 
Morgan, Thomas B., 286 
Morrison, Philip, 56, 57, 60, 62, 109, 
110, 155 
Mosse, George, 24 
Mount Kisco. See Seven Springs Farm 
conferences 
Mukerji, Chandra, xiv 
multiversity, 265 
Murphy, Charles J. V., 212 
Murray, Thomas A., 215, 233, 235, 244 
Murrow, Edward R., 261-62 


Nabokoy, Nicolas, 266, 273, 274 
Nagasaki, xii, 1, 10, 159, 164, 180, 190, 
282, 289 

NAS (National Academy of Sciences), 
204-5 

Nathan, Otto, 275 

Nation, 245 


National Archives, xiv 

National Defense Education Act, 262 

NATO, 197 

Nazis, 6, 54, 60, 191, 280 

NDRC (National Defense Research 

Committee), 62-63, 136, 137 

Neddermeyer, Seth, 135-41 

Nelson, Steve, 59, 65, 74, 75, 205, 

318n97 

New Mexico: “Land of Enchantment,” 
86, 120; and Los Alamos site, 66, 85, 
87-88; Oppenheimer’s holiday ranch 
in, 49, 58, 86, 210; Oppenheimer’s 
visits during youth, 26-27; symbolic 
meaning for Oppenheimer, 34, 45 

Newton, Isaac, 256 

New York Fournal American, 235, 237 

New York Mineralogical Club, 23 

New York Review of Books, 272 

New York Times, 161, 169, 237, 238, 
249, 275, 277; Oppenheimer letter 
defending CCF in, 278 

New York Times Magazine, 237 

Nichols, Kenneth D.: and Manhattan 
Project, 66, 68, 97, 101, 102; and 
security hearing, 214, 217, 219-20, 
221, 227, 232, 241 

Nixon, Richard, 206, 208 

NSF (National Science Foundation), 
188, 250 

nuclear weapons, controversy over test- 


ing of, 269-70. See also atomic bomb; 
hydrogen bomb 


Oakland Tribune, 209 

Oak Ridge, 2, 7, 87, 106, 132, 142 

Office of Naval Research, 191 

Office of War Information, 202 

On Intellectuals (Rieff), 288 

On Understanding Science (Conant), 255 

“Open Mind, The” (Oppenheimer) xi 

Open Society and Its Enemies, The 
(Popper), 9 


Operation Crossroads, 182 

Oppenheimer, Ella Friedman, 21-22 

Oppenheimer, Frank: as “bohemian,” 
61, 314n48; Communist Party mem- 
bership of, 76, 203, 207; discussed 
in security hearing, 221; family and 
childhood, 21, 22; letters from Robert 
Oppenheimer, 51-52, 54; and Trinity 
test, 162 

Oppenheimer, Jackie, 59, 207 

Oppenheimer, Julius, 21-22, 54; rela- 
tionship to son Robert, 27 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, scientific and 
cultural role of: as “actor,” 17, 28, 
33; as charismatic, 4, 12-15, 19-20, 
82-84, 108-16, 134, 171, 201, 223-27; 
cultivation of, 10-12, 15, 31, 34, 45, 47; 
50-51, 54, 200, 258; ethical dilemmas 
of, xiii, xv; as fragmented or ambiva- 
lent, xv, 15-18, 28; general intellect 
of, 10-12; as nodal or transitional fig- 
ure, 1, 5, 6, 10, 16, 18, 234-35, 242; 
porkpie hat, 15, 82; on science as a 
vocation, 52, 177, 189-92, 198, 199, 
200, 285-87; as symbol, xvii, 2-4, 
234-35, 241, 270, 284, 289; as tragic 
figure, 2-3, 243, 244, 250, 280, 282, 
287; virtues of, 11-12 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, family and 
early life: childhood of, 22-23; ed- 
ucation at Ethical Culture School, 
25-26; family background, 21-22, 27; 
inherited wealth of, 11, 50, 311ng; and 
Jewish identity, 19, 27-28, 31, 35-36, 
45, 304n26, 305n41; sexual ambiguity 
of, 32-33, 51, 31213; suffering from 
colitis, 26, 27, 33-34, 44; youthful 
psychological troubles of, 38-39, 
308n86, 309n87 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert, early scien- 
tific career and prewar life: devel- 
opment of scientific interests, 34, 
35, 36, 37-38, 40; doctoral studies 


Index 407 


at Gottingen, 40-43; graduate stud- 
ies at Cambridge University, 37-39; 
interest in Hinduism and ascetic self- 
discipline, 51-54; left-wing political 
commitments and activities, 54-65, 
73-74, 246; postdoctoral studies in 
Europe, 43-44; question of Commu- 
nist Party affiliation, 55, 76; students 
of, at Berkeley, 49-50, 55, 56, 573 

as teacher of theoretical physics at 
Berkeley, 47-51, 56; undergraduate 
education at Harvard, 28-37 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert, wartime and 


postwar government and politics: al- 
legations of Communist Party mem- 
bership, 208-9, 216-17; articulating 
meaning of atomic bomb, 161, 177- 
78, 187; “defects of character” of, 217, 
219-20, 231, 232, 233, 236-37, 251-52, 
282; as director of Los Alamos, 66- 
73, 80-81, 86, 102, 109-19, 124-29, 
134, 149, 151; as GAC chairman, 193- 
94, 211, 254, 352n56; investigations 
of, 67, 76-80, 201-3, 213; leaving Los 
Alamos, 170, 202; and Los Alamos 
Colloquium, 104; mediating between 
scientists and state, 159, 167, 169-77, 
195; membership on Scientific Panel 
of the Interim Committee, 163-64; 
opposition to hydrogen bomb, 210, 
211, 212, 217, 223-31, 237; as scientific 
adviser, 200, 211, 212, 223-31, 233, 
253, 264, 346n1; security clearance 
withdrawn, 212-214, 234; suppress- 
ing dissent at Los Alamos, 154-58, 
165, 167; work on Acheson-Lilienthal 
Report, 178-83, 185 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert, later years: 


CCF affiliation of, 249, 265-67, 273, 
279; criticism of Einstein by, 275; 
death of, and memorial service for, 
287; as director of Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study, 253-55, 261 


408 Index 


Oppenheimer, later years (cont.) 
as public speaker, 253-54; remorse 
over building of atomic bomb, 268, 
280, 282-86, 289; response to CIA 
funding of CCF, 278; response to 
Vietnam War, 278-79; on science 
and culture, 255-65, 270-71, 273; and 
Seven Springs Farm conferences, 
273-74; as supporter of status quo, 
268; throat cancer of, 279, 286 

Oppenheimer, Katherine (Kitty) (wife), 
58, 59, 203, 274 

Oppenheimer, Katherine (Toni) 
(daughter), 114 

Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship 
(Chevalier), 282 

Ortega y Gasset, José, 260 

OSRD (Office of Scientific Research 
and Development), 63; S-1 Section, 
63, 64 


Page, Katherine Chaves, 26, 27 

Pais, Abraham, 16, 244, 253, 254, 261, 
275 

Palmer, T. O., 95 

Panofsky, Erwin, 261 

Paris, University of, 268 

Parsons, William S. ‘Deak’, 94, 123, 
125-26, 134-39; and organizational 
discipline at Los Alamos, 144-50, 153 

Parsons, Talcott, 276 

Partial Test Ban Treaty, 7 

Partisan Review, 246, 271 

Pash, Boris, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 208, 
220 

Patterson, Robert P., 150, 170 

Pauli, Wolfgang, 40, 43, 44, 49 

Pauling, Linus, 7, 51; wife of, 51 

Pecos Valley, 34 

Peierls, Rudolf, 49, 110, 111, 113, 119 

Pells, Richard, 248 

Penney, William G., 151 

People’s World, 55 


persona, 301n54. See also role of the 
scientist 

Personnel Security Board, xiii, 213- 
31, 235, 237, 242, 248, 264. See also 
security hearing 

Peters, Bernard, 61, 206-7, 315n49 

physics, 25, 35, 36; American physicists 
studying in Europe, 37, 41; Born- 
Oppenheimer Approximation, 40; of 
Einstein, 275; experimental and theo- 
retical, 37-38, 40, 47, 48; Newtonian, 
256; Oppenheimer’s postwar role in 
physics community, 253-55; Oppen- 
heimer’s research and publication, 
40, 45, 68; “physicist engineers” at 
Los Alamos, 90; quantum electrody- 
namics, 45; quantum mechanics, 37, 
41, 45, 47; tunneling, 45 

Physical Review, 68 

“Physics in the Contemporary World” 
(Oppenheimer), 189, 198 

Physics Today, 15 

Piaget, Jean, 261 

Pingry School, 262 

Placzek, George, 59 

Plato, 8,54 

pluralism, 276-77 

plutonium, 2, 132, 143, 193; spontaneous 
fission in, 142 

Polanyi, Michael, 9, 247 

political eunuchs, scientists as, 
238 

Popper, Karl, 9 

Popular Front, 55-56, 57, 59, 246, 247 

Potsdam Conference, 127, 164, 165 

Princeton, 10, 11, 68; Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study, 16, 203, 244, 248, 253, 
261, 262, 286 

Project Alberta, 150 

Project Vista, 196-97 

Prometheus, legend of, 161 

“Prospects in the Arts and Sciences” 
(Oppenheimer), 259-60 


public. See civil society; mass culture 
Pugwash conferences, 7, 8, 267-68 


Rabi, Isidor: on anti-Semitism at 
Cornell, 29; and hydrogen-bomb 
controversy, 193-94, 196; on Jewish 
identity, 22; on Oppenheimer, 11, 
12, 13-14, 16-17, 28, 44, 48, 53; on 
outcome of security hearing, 244; 
reaction against Blackett, 185; testi- 
mony during security hearing, 221, 
226; tutoring of Oppenheimer on 
leading Los Alamos, 71-73, 80, 115; 
and “ZORC,” 211; at Zurich, 44 

Rabinowitch, Eugene, 7 

Reith Lectures, 255-56, 257-59, 265 

reminiscences, on use of as sources, 
300n43 

Reporter, 241 

Research and Development Board, 
Department of Defense, 211, 346n1 

responsibility of the scientist: competing 
models of, 6-9, 355n106; Oppen- 
heimer on, 189-92, 197-99, 263, 266, 
283, 287, Weber on, xii-xili 

Reynolds, Earle, 270 

Reynolds, Tim, 269-70 

Rhodes, Richard, 16 

Richards, Alfred N., 205 

Riefenstahl, Charlotte, 42, 43 

Rieff, Philip, 4, 246, 288 

Riesman, David, 248, 276, 277 

Robb, Roger, 14, 215, 218-19, 220-21 

Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, 195, 
206 

Roensch, Arno, 82, 131 

Roensch, Eleanor, 116 

Rogin, Michael, 276-77 

role of the scientist, xti-xiii, 3-4, 10, 16, 
18, 20, 200-2, 243, 264, 285 

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 62, 65, 86, 155- 
56, 171, 272, 273 

Rotblat, Joseph, 7, 150-51, 153 


Index 409 


Rothfeld, Stern and Company, 21 
Rothman, Hal, 85, 86 

Rowe, Hartley, 193 

Rudoff, Hyman, 143 

Russell, Bertrand, 6, 266, 267-68, 271 
Russell, Louis J., 203 

Russia. See Soviet Union 

Rutherford, Ernest, 35, 37, 276 
Ryder, Arthur, 52-53 


SAC (Strategic Air Command), 193, 197, 
211 

Sachar, Howard, 25 

San Francisco Chronicle, 209 

Sanskrit, 51, 52, 53, 56 

Santa Fe, 88 

Santillana, Giorgio de, 4 

Sarton, George, xi 

Saunders, Frances Stonor, 186 

scheduling, as social control, 129-30, 
134, 150, 153-54, 156-58 

Schein, Marcel, 59 

Schenken, John R., 238 

Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 245-46, 248, 
278 

Schreiber, Raemer, 119 

Schweber, Silvan S., xiv-xv, 8 

Science, 240 

science, ideological mobilization of, 188, 
237 

Science Advisory Committee, 244 

Science and Common Sense (Conant), 
255 

Science and the Common Understanding 
(Oppenheimer), 258-59 

“Science as a Vocation” (Weber), xil, 5 

Science, Faith and Society (Polanyi), 9 

science legislation, 171. See also NSF 
(National Science Foundation) 

“Sciences and Man’s Community, The” 
(Oppenheimer), 257 

“Scientist X,” transcript of bugged con- 
versation, 75, 205, 318ng6 


410 Index 


Scotsman (Edinburgh), 261 

Scott-Smith, Giles, 268 

Seaborg, Glenn, 10, 13, 193, 232, 244 

secrecy, xiv, 18, 166, 289; and expert au- 
thority, 212-13, 242; at Los Alamos, 
72, 88-89, 99-106. See also compart- 
mentalization 

security hearing: and anxieties over Op- 
penheimer’s influence, 223-26, 231; 
ceremonial quality of, xiv, 234, 2415 
criteria for judging “security risk,” 
216, 233, 235-36, 252; effect on scien- 
tific community of, 238-40, 250, 252- 
533 initiation of, 213-14; and intel- 
lectual role, 4, 288; Oppenheimer’s 
motives and lack of “enthusiasm” for 
hydrogen bomb questioned, 227-31, 
232, 2333 press and public reaction, 
235-42, 250-52; publication of tran- 
script of, 215; quasi-legal character 
of, 214-15; and subordination of lo- 
cal, familiar, and personal, 221-23; 


Teller’s testimony during, 16-17, 220. 


See also Personnel Security Board 

SED (Special Engineer Detachment), 
87, 90, 95-96, 106, 108, 110, 115, 116, 
117, 131, 143, 147 

See It Now (television program), 261-62 

Segré, Emilio, 50, 60, 83, 154; and dis- 
covery of spontaneous fission prob- 
lem, 142 

self, as social, xvi, xvii, 1, 18, 19, 84 

Senate Committee on Military Affairs, 
180 

Senate Investigations Committee, 
213 

Serber, Robert, 48, 133, 135 

Seven Springs Farm conferences, 273- 
74, 277-78, 284, 366n123 

Shapin, Steven, 301n54 

Shell Development Company, 63 

Shepley, James, 239 


Sherry, Michael, 176 

Sherwin, Martin, xiv, 41, 79, 319n110, 
342n97, 343n102 

Shils, Edward, 276, 277 

sin, of the physicists, 3, 12, 190-91, 280, 
282, 285, 287-88 

Smith, Alice Kimball, 175 

Smith, Cyril, 113, 147, 193 

Smith, Herbert: as focus of milieu, 34, 
45; interest in Freud, 33; Oppen- 
heimer’s correspondence with, 25, 
29, 32, 37; Oppenheimer’s trip to 
New Mexico with, 26-27 

Smyth, Henry, 68, 215, 233, 241, 287 

Smythe, William R., 60 

Snow, C. P., 264, 265, 289 

sociological biography. See biography, 
sociological approach 

sociological concepts, xvi 

Souers, Sidney W., 211 

“Sources of Soviet Conduct, The” 
(Kennan), 186 

Soviet-American Science Society, 204 

Soviet Communism: A New Civilization? 
(Webb and Webb), 56, 62 

“Soviet Espionage Activities in Con- 
nection with the Atomic Bomb” 
(HUAC), 205 

Soviet-Nazi nonaggression pact, 59-60 

Soviet Union: atomic bomb developed 
and tested by, 163, 193-94, 197, 198, 
262; espionage by, 74, 79, 203, 205, 
207, 208; Oppenheimer’s postwar 
attitude toward, 187; Oppenheimer’s 
prewar opinion of, 56, 59, 246-47; 
recommendations of Scientific Panel 
of the Interim Committee regard- 
ing, 164; response to Baruch Plan, 
182, 185, 186; Truman’s view of, 195; 
and U.S. decision to use the atomic 
bomb, 183; worries that Oppen- 
heimer might defect to, 268 


Spanish civil war, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 
65, 75 

specialist. See expert; and under Weber, 
Max 

specific intellectual. See under intellectu- 
als 

Sproul, Robert Gordon, 160 

Sputnik, 262, 263 

state, science and, xi, xili-xiv, 1, 17, 18, 
201, 289; national security, xv, 9, 
201 

State Department, 182, 186; Panel of 
Consultants on Disarmament, 212 

Stearns, Joyce C., 151 

Stein, Sol, 248 

Stimson, Henry L., 98, 163, 165, 172, 
178, 183, 184, 285 

stock-market crash. See Great Depres- 
sion 

Strategic Defense Initiative, 8 

Strauss, Lewis L., 2, 207, 211, 213, 215, 
231, 238, 240, 277 

Streib, John, 135, 136 

super bomb. See hydrogen bomb 

Swope, Herbert, 181 

Szilard, Leo, 7, 158, 162; on compart- 
mentalization, 101; petition, 7, 123, 
152, 156, 165 


Taiwan (Formosa) Strait, 267 

Takagi, Yasaka, 271 

Tatlock, Jean, 55,57, 76 

Taylor, Bryan C., xvii 

Teacher’s Union (Berkeley), 55, 56 

technically sweet, nuclear weapons as, 3, 
196, 223-24, 280 

technological imperative, 198 

Teller, Edward, 2, 6, 50, 101, 119, 
136, 156, 239-40, 252-53, 2773 
constructed case against Oppen- 
heimer, 210-11; discontent at Los 
Alamos, 120-24; as hydrogen-bomb 


Index 411 


advocate, 193, 250; and Los Alamos 
colloquium, 103-5; on Oppen- 
heimer, 13, 16, 83, 113; and respon- 
sibility of scientist, 6, 7-9, 198; testi- 
mony during security hearing, 220 

Teller, Mici, 120 

Tennessee Eastman, 2 

Tenney Committee (California Joint 
Fact-Finding Committee on Un- 
American Activities), 203 

Test Ban Treaty. See Partial Test Ban 
Treaty 

Thomas, J. Parnell, 203-4 

Thompson, L. T. E., 135 

Thomson, J. J., 37-38 

Tibbets, Paul W., 148 

Time, 17,54, 160, 161, 191, 212, 
245 

Tinian, 150, 330n13, 333n65 

Tocqueville, Alexis de, 257 

Tokyo: Oppenheimer’s arrival in, 268; 
security treaty riots in, 269 

Tolman, Edward C., 63, 246 

Tolman, Richard, 103, 104, 151 

Tolstoy, Leo, 5, 6 

total war, xii, 2 

Trilling, Diana, 246-47, 248 

Trilling, Lionel, 35 

Trinity test, 12, 110, 127, 146-48, 161, 
162 

Truman, Harry S.: hydrogen-bomb 
decision, 193-95; and legislative 
struggles over formation of AEC, 
169-70; Oppenheimer’s “blood on 
hands” statement to, 12, 166; praised 
by Oppenheimer, 178; and use of 
atomic bomb, 127, 164 

Tuck, James, 12, 113, 144 

Twentieth Century, 246 

Twentieth Century Fund, 267 

“two cultures,” 264, 288 

Tyler, Gerard, 92 


412 Index 


Uehling, Edwin, 249 

Uhlenbeck, George, 40 

Ulam, Francoise, 85 

Ulam, Stanislaw, 85, 111, 130 

Union Carbide, 2 

United Nations, 155, 181-82, 185, 186 
Universities Quarterly, 258 
uranium, 2, 132, 143 

Urey, Harold, 63, 68, 103, 204 
Utrecht, 43 


van Gogh, Vincent, paintings by, 11, 22 

Vassar College, 30, 263 

Vietnam War, 277, 288; Oppenheimer’s 
response to, 278-79 

Vilar, Jean, 283, 369n153 

violence, science and, xi-xiil, 9, 10, 199, 
265, 283, 289 

Visvanathan, Shiv, 9 

vocation: ethics of, xii-xiil, xv, 5-6, 8-9, 
52, 263; in light of the atomic bomb, 
177, 187, 189-92, 198, 199, 200, 285; 
pursuit of science as, 34, 37, 39, 44- 
45, 46, 52, 53 

Volpe, Joseph, 206 

von Neumann, John, 40, 135-36, 138, 
151, 285; testimony during security 
hearing, 221 


WAC (Women’s Army Corps), at Los 
Alamos, 88, 91, 95, 96, 116 

Wallace, Henry, 165 

war, scientization of, xii. See also total 
war 

“War and the Nations” (Oppenheimer), 
273 

Washington, University of, controversy 
over Oppenheimer visit, 249-50 

Washington Post, 244, 273, 283, 
287 

Washington Times-Herald, 203, 
244 


Webb, Beatrice, 56, 62 

Webb, Sidney, 56, 62 

Weber, Max, xii, xv, xvi, 4-5, 6; on 
bureaucracy, 4, 13; on charisma, xvi, 
12-13; on cultivated man and expert, 
4-5; on disenchantment, 5, 13; on 
science as a vocation, xti-xill, Xv, 
5, 8. 

Wechsler, Jacob, 87, 106-8 

Weinberg, Joseph, 74, 75, 205, 209, 
318n9g5; trial of, 209-10, 351n48 

Weisskopf, Victor: disappointed by Op- 
penheimer’s HUAC testimony, 206; 
influence on Oppenheimer’s view of 
Soviet Union, 59; on Kipphardt play 
and Oppenheimer as symbol, 284; 
on moral numbing, 153; on Oppen- 
heimer’s charisma and leadership 
of Los Alamos, 12, 109, 111, 112; on 
Oppenheimer’s studies with Pauli, 
44; place ofin Los Alamos Theoret- 
ical Division, 119, 121; and scientists’ 
movement, 167-68, 176; on security 
hearing, 243, 250 

Wentzel, Gregor, 40 

Westinghouse, 2, 94 

Whidden lecture, 273 

Whitehead, Alfred North, 37 

Wiersma, Cornelius, 249 

Wigner, Eugene, 68, 101, 112 

Wilson, Charles E., 211 

Wilson, Jane, 14, 71, 89 

Wilson, Robert R.: called meeting ques- 
tioning use of bomb, 154-55, 334n76; 
emotional and moral effect of atomic 
bombings on, 165; and Los Alamos 
organization, 68-71; on Oppen- 
heimer at Berkeley, 48, 49; on Op- 
penheimer’s charisma, 12, 13, 83, 112; 
and scientists’ movement, 169; and 
Target Committee, 151 

World War I, xii 


World War II: and atomic bombings, 


183, 187, 289; effect on Oppen- 
heimer’s politics and orientation, 
59-60, 63, 65, 197; effect on social 
and political role of the scientist, 191, 
200, 202; and notion of morale, 92; 
and scientization of warfare, xii 


Wyman, Jeffries, 29, 32, 38, 39, 40, 256- 


57, 281 


Index 413 


Yang, C. N., 253 
York, Herbert F., xiv, 62, 198, 210 
Yukawa, Hideki, 287 


Zacharias, Jerrold, 211 
Zola, Emile, 245 

ZORC, 211-12, 213 
Zuckert, Eugene, 215, 231 
Zurich, 11, 43, 44 


