The Open Mind 


by J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Tus Boox is about two related sub- 
jects: atomic weapons and the rela- 
tionship between science and the 
wider culture of our times. It is 
made up of eight lectures given by 
J. Robert Oppenheimer during the 
decade since the end of the war. It 
contains none of his technical writ- 
ing in the field of physics. Some of 
the material has never been pub- 
lished before; most of it has been 
printed only in journals of limited 
circulation. 

The book begins with a report 
on atomic explosives made in May 
1946, less than a year after the de- 
velopment of the first atomic bomb. 
It closes with the already famous 
view of the world’s arts and sciences 
which was the concluding lecture in 
Columbia University’s Bicentennial, 


delivered in 1955. Together, these 


(continued on back flap) 


(continued from front flap) 


essays make a fascinating record of 
change and growth, over ten years, 
in the thinking of one of the out- 
standing scholars of this generation. 

The entire book is thus an illus- 
tration of its central statement of the 
values to society of the open mind. 
Here is the author’s definition of his 
belief in this: “An indispensable, 
perhaps the indispensable, element 
in giving meaning to the dignity of 
man, and in making possible the 
taking of decision on the basis of 
honest conviction, is the openness 
of men’s minds, and the openness of 
whatever media there are for com- 
munion between men, free of re- 
straint, free of repression, and free 
even of that most pervasive of all 
restraints, that of status and hier- 


archy.” 


Jacket Design by Peter Hollander 


The Open Mind 


by 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


Simon and Schuster + New York 
1955 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
INCLUDING THE RIGHT OF REPRODUCTION 
IN WHOLE OR IN PART IN ANY FORM 
© 1955 BY J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
PUBLISHED BY SIMON AND SCHUSTER, INC. 
ROCKEFELLER CENTER, 630 FIFTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK 20, N. Y. 


FIRST PRINTING 


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 55—10043 
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BY H. WOLFF BOOK MFG. CO., INC., NEW YORK, N. Y. 


Vil 


CONTENTS 


Atomic Explosives—May 1946 

Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 
—September 1947 

The Open Mind—December 1948 

Atomic Weapons and American Policy— 
February 1953 


Physics in the Contemporary World— 
November 1947 

The Encouragement of Science— 
March 1950 

The Scientist in Society—January 1953 

Prospects in the Arts and Sciences— 
November 1954 


105 
119 


133 


AUTHOR’S NOTE 


THE CHAPTERS of this book are eight lectures that I have 
given. Four of them deal with atomic weapons and some re- 
lated questions of policy. The other four bear on the relation- 
ship between science as an intellectual activity and the wider 
culture of our times. The two sets of themes are distinct, but 
there are points at which they are relevant to each other. I 
have not included any papers on physics, either technical or 
popular, nor any papers devoted to the special questions of 
education and patronage in the sciences. 

Each lecture is accompanied by a brief statement of the 
circumstances of its delivery, and by its date. The dates are 
material, for the world has changed a great deal in the years 
during which these talks were given. 


J. Ropert OPPENHEIMER 
auGuUST 1955 


Atomic Explosives 


THIS LECTURE was delivered in 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, before the 
George Westinghouse Centennial Fo- 
rum on May 16, 1946. 


Atomie Explosives 


THIS TALK is to be a brief report on the future of atomic ex- 
plosives. It will have to be a very incomplete and a very one- 
sided talk; I can hope that you will agree with me that the 
part of the matter that I can discuss, if not the most enter- 
taining, is at least the most important. 

When I looked over my notes for this talk, I was reminded 
of a story, very old and not very funny. but relevant. There 
was a professor of zoology at the University of Munich, and 
he had the habit of asking candidates about worms, until it 
came to such a pass that candidates studied no other subject 

3 


The Open Mind 


but worms. And then, one day, he flabbergasted his student 
and said, “Tell me about elephants,” and the candidate said, 
“The elephant is a large animal. It has a wormlike trunk. 
Worms may be divided into the following classes . . .” My 
talk to you this afternoon will be along these lines. 

I cannot tell you of the probable future technical develop- 
ments of atomic explosives. When the war was over we rec- 
ognized that we had only scratched the surface of this prob- 
lem; and no doubt since then some further progress has been 
made, both in development and in understanding. But these 
are things that we cannot talk about here. When, if ever, they 
can be talked about openly, it will be a very different world, 
and to my way of thinking a very much better one. 

As for the uses of atomic explosives, the one that has been 
most widely discussed, the one in which their pre-eminence 
was first established and is most obvious, is the strategic 
bombardment of cities. No doubt there can be important 
tactical applications as well. I have even heard some discus- 
sion of the possibility of using them against naval craft, but 
on these ignorance and inexperience, as well as the require- 
ments of secrecy, keep me from talking. There has even been 
a little talk of possible beneficent applications of atomic ex- 
plosives, such as the blasting of polar ice or the possible 
control of major natural phenomena such as tornadoes, earth- 
quakes, eruptions. There is enough energy in atomic explo- 
sives to give these vague suggestions an air of plausibility; 
even the weapons so far used release an energy about one 
thousandth of that in the San Francisco earthquake. But of 
course the forces produced by an atomic explosion have a 

4 


Atomic Explosives 


very different sort of order from those involved in the great 
natural phenomena of quakes and of tornadoes; and the 
radiation and radioactivities that accompany any major 
atomic explosion must at least complicate its application to 
benign purposes. If men are ever to speak of the benefits of 
atomic energy, I think these applications will at most play 
a very small part in what they have in mind. 

There is only one future of atomic explosives that I can 
regard with any enthusiasm: that they should never be used 
in war. Since in any major total war, such as we have lived 
through in these late years, they will most certainly be used, 
there is nothing modest in this hope for the future: It is that 
there be no such wars again. I should like to speak today on 
some considerations bearing upon the realization of that 
hope. This is a subject that seems to me worthy of careful 
study, and of the best thought of our times. 

Some months ago, I had the privilege of working with a 
group of consultants to the Secretary of State’s Committee on 
Atomic Energy. We spent many weeks exploring this prob- 
lem, which is commonly defined in a sort of code as “The 
International Control of Atomic Energy.” This is a code be- 
cause the real problem is the prevention of war. Since that 
time our conclusions, expurgated of all secret or classified 
matter, have been made public, and may in one way or an- 
other have come to your attention. They were made public 
in order to facilitate public understanding and discussion, a 
discussion made more necessary by the difficulty of the prob- 
lem, made more difficult by the secrecy which has been main- 
tained and is still maintained about many of its technical ele- 

5 


The Open Mind 


ments. What I should like to do today is to add a few com- 
ments which may help to supplement the report that was 
made public, and to make explicit some of the things left 
implicit in it, to restore a balance of emphasis which was 
partially lost, perhaps, in the accidents of its release. 

The heart of our proposal was the recommendation of an 
International Atomic Development Authority, entrusted with 
the research, development, and exploitation of the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy, with the elimination from 
national armaments of atomic weapons, and with the studies 
and researches and controls that must be directed toward that 
end. In this proposal we attempted to meet, and to put into 
a constructive context, two sets of facts, both long recog- 
nized, and commonly regarded as contributing to the diffi- 
culty, if not to the insolubility, of the problem. 

The first of these facts is that the science, the technology, 
the industrial development involved in the so-called bene- 
ficial uses of atomic energy appear to be inextricably inter- 
twined with those involved in making atomic weapons. You 
will hear reports this afternoon on the so-called beneficial 
uses of atomic energy. They come to us not in the form 
of answers but in the form of questions, and that for two 
reasons: In the first place, one of these uses is for the devel- 
opment of power, and this is something that has not been 
effectively done. No one knows to what extent such power 
will be economically profitable; no one knows to what extent 
technical problems may delay or complicate the development 
of atomic power as power. We have here a beginning; but 
we don’t have any answers. We don’t have a tree with fruit 

6 


Atomic Explosives 


ripe on it, for us to shake the fruit down. The other applica- 
tion is in essence to research; and it is in the nature of re- 
search that you pay your “two bits” first, that you go in and 
you don’t know what you are going to see. Therefore, if I 
speak of “beneficial applications,” I want to make it clear 
that I don’t know at all precisely what they are, but I share 
the belief that is widespread in the American people that a 
development of this kind in the hands of intelligent and 
resourceful men will lead to good things. The beginnings of 
these things you will hear described today. 

But one thing I must go into: The same raw material, 
uranium, is needed for the use of atomic energy for power 
as for atomic bombs. The plants of an atomic power program 
may not be ideally suited for the production of bomb mate- 
rials, but in a pinch—and atomic warfare is a pinch—they 
can be made to do. The various fissionable materials derived 
from uranium and thorium that play such a decisive part in 
the power program, or even in the use of atomic energy for 
research reactors and for advancing science and medicine 
and the practical arts, are, or can with more or less effort, be 
made into atomic explosives. The same physics which must 
be learned and studied and extended in the one field will 
help with the other—although there are of course some 
things in the higher art of bomb-making that as yet appear 
to have no other application. It is true that the properties that 
make a fissionable material, that make it useful for reactors 
for power or for research, are not quite the same properties 
that make it useful for bombs. Natural uranium can be used 
in a power plant, but I don’t think a bomb can be made of 

7 


The Open Mind 


it. Uranium considerably enriched in the isotope 235 can be 
more flexibly, more effectively used in a reactor; but I am 
not sure that it can be made explosive, and am fairly con- 
fident that it would be so ineffective as not to warrant the 
effort. Even plutonium can be doctored—not without pro- 
hibitive cost if it is to be completely nonexplosive—but to 
be made a relatively very ineffective explosive, and a difficult 
one to use in the present state of the art. I don’t need to tell 
you that the art may change, and that no kind of control 
is worth anything which doesn’t make provision for such 
change. It’s not only that it can; it probably will, in one way 
or another. These differences in the requirements for con- 
trolled and explosive uses of atomic energy, might, if appro- 
priately recognized in law, keep a group of individuals from 
making atomic weapons out of the materials of peacetime 
industry; they could retard and thus perhaps discourage na- 
tions otherwise prevented from the exploitation of atomic 
energy; but this isn’t the problem; for to any who are ac- 
tively engaged in such exploitation they could provide a 
deterrent so slight as to constitute a most dangerous illusion. 
Thus a mere prohibition on the activities of nations in the 
field of atomic energy sufficiently incisive to inspire confi- 
dence that, if enforced, it would prevent rapid conversion to 
atomic armament, would at the same time close this field to 
the exploitation of any of its benefits. This fact, which further 
technical developments appear unlikely to invalidate, has 
long been regarded as an almost decisive difficulty on the 
path of international control. It might have appeared so to 
us, too, if there had not been a greater one. For even if the 
8 


Atomic Explosives 


course of development of atomic energy for peace were en- 
tirely distinct from its development for war, even if it were 
universally agreed that there were no peaceful applications 
of atomic energy worthy of interest or of effort, we should 
still be faced with the fact that there exists in the world today 
no machinery for making effective a prohibition against the 
national development of atomic armaments. In the light of 
this fact, that to my mind touches upon the heart of the prob- 
lem, the close technical parallelism and interrelation of the 
peaceful and the military applications of atomic energy 
ceases to be a difficulty, and becomes a help. This does not, 
unfortunately, mean that it guarantees a solution. But it does 
mean that it provides a basis for seeking a healthy solution 
that would not otherwise exist. 

If there were nothing to do with atomic energy but make 
bombs, there might still, it is true, be a convention between 
nations not to do so. Such conventions have in the past seldom 
withstood the strain of rivalries between nations preparing 
for war, nor does it seem likely that they could do so in the 
future in the case of a weapon whose effectiveness, especially 
in surprise, is so spectacular. For this reason two proposals 
have long been current for supplementing international con- 
ventions with some form of international action. One of 
these would set up a scheme of multilateral or international 
inspection, whose sole function would be to attempt to estab- 
lish that the conventions were in fact being observed. It is 
conceivable that if the conventions were sufficiently radical, 
comprising, for instance, the total renunciation of all mining 
and refining of uranium, such a procedure might work. But 

9 


The Open Mind 


I doubt this, even in that case. I doubt whether the agency 
entrusted with such inspection could even then have the mo- 
tivation, or the personnel, or the skill, or the experience, or 
the knowledge, or the endurance to carry out such a dreary, 
sterile, and policeman-like job. I doubt whether the relations 
between this agency and the nations and nationals whom it 
was instructed to police would be such as to diminish the 
nationalism leading to war, or to inspire the confidence of 
the nations in each other, or to advance the cause of the 
unification of the world, or to serve as a useful prototype 
for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, perhaps 
equally, perhaps even more terrible. Therefore one may 
perhaps not regret that the door to this sort of international 
action is largely closed by the impossibility of denying to 
the world in any long term an opportunity to explore the 
beneficial possibilities of atomic energy. For once such ex- 
ploration is allowed to the nations, the technical complexi- 
ties and human inadequacies of an international inspection 
scheme as a sole safeguard become manifestly insupportable. 

The second suggestion for international action to sup- 
plement the renunciation by nations of atomic armaments 
has a more affirmative character. It is that an international 
agency be entrusted with the making and possession of 
atomic weapons. Though there has been much in this pro- 
posal that has seemed attractive, it has two weaknesses, and 
probably fatal ones: The more serious is that there is noth- 
ing that an international agency can do, or should do, with 
such weapons. They are not police weapons. They are singu- 
larly unsuited for distinguishing between innocent and guilty 

10 


Atomic Explosives 


or for taking even crudely into account the distinction be- 
tween the guilt of individuals and that of peoples; they are 
themselves a supreme expression in a weapon of the concepts 
of total war. The second difficulty, in some sense inescapable 
in any form of international action, but desperately acute in 
this, is that such stocks of atomic weapons, however earnestly 
they are proclaimed international, however ingeniously they 
are distributed on earth, would nonetheless offer the most 
terrible temptation to national seizure, for the almost im- 
mediate military advantage that their use might afford. 

These two examples do give recognition to the need, in 
any system of outlawing atomic weapons, of international 
action. In this I think they are sound. In fact, in another con- 
text, the study—but not the production—of atomic weapons, 
and inspection to prevent the illegal mining of uranium, both 
would seem to be essential functions of an international au- 
thority. 

It is time to turn to the second of the great difficulties that 
have from the outset been regarded as preventing any effec- 
tive international control. We have already referred to it. It 
is the absence in the world today of any machinery adequate 
to provide such control, any precedent for such machinery, 
or even any adequate patterns of the past to provide such a 
precedent. Just this is the reason why the problem is so much 
of a challenge, why we may be sustained by the hope that 
its solution would provide such precedent, such patteris, for 
a wider application. It did not take atomic weapons to make 
wars, or to make wars terrible, or to make wars total. If 
there had never been and could never be an atomic bomb, 

11 


The Open Mind 


the problem of preventing war in an age when science and 
technology have made it too destructive, and too terrible to 
endure, would still be with us. There would be the block- 
buster, the rocket, the V-2, the incendiary, the M-67, and 
their increase; there would no doubt be biological warfare. 
There would be, and there still are. But the atomic bomb, 
most spectacular of proven weapons, the most inextricably 
intertwined with constructive developments and the least fet- 
tered by private or by vested interest or by long national tra- 
dition is for these and other reasons the place to start. For 
in this field there is possible a system of control that is con- 
sistent with, that is based upon, the technical realities and 
with the human realities in the deep sense. In this field, there 
is a solution that can be made to work. 

Many have said that without world government there could 
be no permanent peace, and without peace there would be 
atomic warfare. I think one must agree with this. Many have 
said that there could be no outlawry of weapons and no pre- 
vention of war unless international law could apply to the 
citizens of nations, as federal law does to citizens of states, or 
have made manifest the fact that international control is not 
compatible with absolute national sovereignty. I think one 
must agree with this. Many have said that atomic energy 
could not be controlled if the controlling authority could be 
halted by a veto, as in many actions can the Security Coun- 
cil of the United Nations. I think one must agree with this too. 
With those who argue that it would be desirable to have 
world government, an appropriate delegation of national 
sovereignty, laws applicable to individuals in all nations, 

12 


Atomic Explosives 


it would seem most difficult to differ; but with those who 
argue that these things are directly possible, in their full and 
ultimately necessary scope, it may be rather difficult for me 
to agree. 

What relation does the proposal of an International 
Atomic Development Authority, entrusted with a far-reach- 
ing monopoly of atomic energy—what relation does this pro- 
posal of ours have to do with these questions? It proposes 
that in the field of atomic energy there be set up a world 
government, that in this field there be renunciation of na- 
tional sovereignty, that in this field there be no legal veto 
power, that in this field there be international law. How is 
this possible, in a world of sovereign nations? There are only 
two ways in which this ever can be possible: one is conquest, 
that destroys sovereignty; and the other is the partial renun- 
ciation of that sovereignty. What is here proposed is such a 
partial renunciation, sufficient, but not more than sufficient, 
for an Atomic Development Authority to come into being, 
to exercise its functions of development, exploitation and 
control, to enable it to live and grow and to protect the world 
against the use of atomic weapons and provide it with the 
benefits of atomic energy. 

Whatever else happens, there is likely to be a discussion 
of the control of atomic energy in the United Nations Com- 
mission set up for that purpose, and not in the very distant 
future, I would say. Should these discussions eventuate in the 
proposal of an International Authority, and in a charter for 
that Authority, these proposals and that charter would in the 
end be presented for ratification to the several nations. Each 

13 


The Open Mind 


nation, the small as well as the great, can exercise its sover- 
eign right to refuse such ratification. Should that happen, 
there would be no Atomic Development Authority, and in my 
opinion probably no trustworthy, effective, international con- 
trol of atomic energy. Should a nation, after the creation of 
the Authority, exercise its sovereign right and withdraw from 
it, or fail with regard to it to carry out the accepted and 
major conditions of the charter, then there will also be no 
Atomic Development Authority; unlike the Security Coun- 
cil, it presumably could not survive the application of the 
veto to its major provisions. But if it comes into existence, 
and insofar as it stays in existence, it will provide, in this 
field, the international sovereignty whose necessity has been 
so generally recognized. 

Perhaps, one will say, no international enterprise can live 
under such conditions. But the conditions themselves will not 
remain unaffected by the enterprise. Its coming into existence 
will be a step that, once learned, can be repeated, a commit- 
ment that, once made in one field, can be extended to others. 
If this is to happen, the Development Authority will have to 
have a healthy life of its own; it will have to flourish, to be 
technically strong, to be useful to mankind, to have a staff 
and an organization and a way of life in which there is some 
pride, and some cause for pride. This would not be possible 
if there were nothing of value to do with atomic energy. This 
would not be possible if the prevention of atomic armament 
were its only concern, if all other activity was technically so 
separable and separate from atomic armament that it could 
remain in national hands. In the long struggle to find a way 

14 


Atomic Explosives 


of reconciling national and international sovereignty, the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy can only be a help. 
It is perhaps doubtful that we should have had a federal 
government had not those functions which could not safely 
nor effectively be carried out by the states had a certain im- 
portance for the people of this country. 

The Board of Consultants to the State Department was 
aware of the supreme necessity for providing the Authority 
with work that could attract men, and consolidate and inspire 
them. It was equally aware of the complementary dangers 
of a too complete, a too absolute monoply. These dangers are 
of two kinds: on the one hand, a monopoly which is not sub- 
ject to criticism is likely to go to seed; it is likely not to be 
on its toes; it is likely in the end to become bureaucratically 
inbred. On the other hand, if you have no living, legitimate 
contact between the operations of an Authority like this, and 
the activities of scientists, engineers, and business men oper- 
ating outside the Authority, in national or in private agen- 
cies, then you have no way of being sure that you are not 
missing many important bets. A too absolute monopoly 
would be dangerous both to the health of the monopoly and 
to the surveillance activities which an Authority of this kind 
must maintain. 

For this reason we found it important to point out that 
there were many activities in the field of atomic energy which 
either in themselves or because they are easy and reliable to 
control and inspect and supervise, could not lend themselves 
to evasive or diversionary developments of atomic weapons. 
An example of this kind is the whole field of the use of 

15 


The Open Mind 


tracers. An example of this kind is the use of reactors for 
research. An example of this kind which is somewhat more 
marginal, is the use of reactors which burn and do not pro- 
duce explosive material for power, and in which the best 
steps you can take to complicate and delay the use of this 
material for explosives have been taken, so that it isn’t a 
thing that can be done in an hour’s effort or in a month’s 
effort or by a few angry individuals. I think the importance 
of this point is this: there are safe activities which you can 
leave, for instance, in the hands of the government of the 
United States or the corporations of the United States or the 
universities of the United States. For this reason, there will 
be good, technical liaison between the Authority and these 
more private agencies. This will, on the one hand, tend to 
correct the bureaucracy that is implicit in monopoly. On the 
other hand, it will give the International Authority some 
method of remaining cognizant of the developments in the 
field which happen not to have been carried out by itself. 
If any great note of confidence or gayety has invested these 
brief words, it would be a distortion of the spirit in which I 
should have wished to speak to you. No thoughtful man can 
look to the future with any complete assurance that the 
world will not again be ravaged by war, by a total war in 
which atomic weapons contribute their part to the ultimate 
wreck and attrition of this our Western civilization. My own 
view is that the development of these weapons can make, if 
wisely handled, the problem of preventing war, not more 
hopeless, but more hopeful, than it would otherwise have 
been, and that this is so not merely because it intensifies the 
16 


Atomic Explosives 


urgency of our hopes, but because it provides new and 
healthy avenues of approach. In developing these avenues 
the fact that there is so far-reaching a technical inseparability 
of the constructive uses of atomic energy from the destructive 
ones—a fact that at first sight might appear to render the 
problem only more difficult—this fact is precisely the central 
vital element that can make effective action possible. If we 
are clear on this, we shall have some guide for the future. 


17 


II 


Atomic Energy as a 
Contemporary Problem 


Tuis ts a lecture given in Washington, 
D.C., to a group of officers in the armed 
services, the Foreign Service, and the 
State Department, on September 17, 
1947. 


II 


Atomic Energy as a 
Contemporary Problem 


IN SPEAKING about a subject with a very pretentious title and 
speaking of some really almost trivial considerations, I can- 
not help being reminded of a story of long ago which comes 
to my mind whenever any general question of what to do 
about atomic energy is raised. I had a colleague at the Uni- 
versity of California, Arthur Ryder. He was a lonely man, 
and he liked to take young children out and entertain them, 
and buy them ice cream. One day he took a little friend of 
mine out; and she appeared bored so he started to wiggle his 
ears for her. She looked at him and said, “Uncle Arthur, 
21 


The Open Mind 


how do you do that?” He thought very hard, and after a 
pause he said, “It’s very hard to describe. You just feel a gen- 
eral sense of strain.” 

This seems to be so much the spirit in which all atomic 
undertakings operate that I would like to say a few words 
about the reason for this sense of strain or—at least some 
of the reasons for the sense of strain. It would not be possible, 
and it would not be profitable, to discuss the technical aspects 
of atomic energy. Nor do I think the technical problems, how- 
ever complex, are the reasons for the difficulties of policy 
decision in this field. They lie in the very objectives which 
must be concurrently pursued, and which to some extent 
contradict each other. We can come at that in two ways, and 
I will illustrate the two ways. 

If we were to ask this group what is important, that we be 
strong in atomic energy—that we have security in the atomic 
age—two years from now or ten years from now or twenty 
years from now, you would answer yes. This is a very difficult 
answer on the basis of which to plan, because the require- 
ments for security at these three different times are not iden- 
tical, and it requires some ingenuity to find those elements in 
the problems of atomic energy which make it possible to rec- 
oncile them. 

Looked at in a little deeper way, there are three planes on 
which we have more or less explicitly asserted that we would 
like to achieve security: One is international control; this 
is the official policy of the United States. It is a very far- 
reaching control which would eliminate the rivalry between 
nations in this field, which would prevent the surreptitious 

22 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


arming of one nation against another, which would provide 
some cushion of time before atomic attack, and presumably 
therefore before any attack with weapons of mass destruc- 
tion, and which would go a long way toward removing atomic 
energy at least as a source of conflict between the powers. 
That kind of security is a kind which I think is nonobtainable 
by any other method. But as is clear to you, and as we shall 
have reason to discuss, the fact that this is the most desirable 
form of security does not also mean that it will be realized. 

Second, there is the path of technical superiority, which 
has a dual purpose. By this superiority I mean that we should 
always be in the forefront as far as ideas, management and 
development are concerned—we should as much as possible 
avoid being taken by surprise as far as technical develop- 
ment goes, we should know our business and have an active 
and flourishing group of people working in the field of 
atomic energy. This has a dual function—on the one hand 
of giving us the opportunity of maintaining a freedom of 
maneuver in this field which we would entirely lose if we 
were outstripped or surprised by some foreign effort, and 
in the second place, it is regarded—and I think rightly re- 
garded—as a strong deterrent to aggression against us. 

The third plane is the plane of actual strength, which in 
this field—and this field is clearly not separate from others 
—has itself a number of elements which need to be spelled 
out. It means among other things effective, maximumly ef- 
fective, defense against probable methods of delivery of 
atomic weapons, proper and necessary dispersion for sur- 
vival in the event of attack, proper schemes for the necessary 

23 


The Open Mind 


and probably extremely difficult effort of mobilization; it 
means having effective and ready means of retaliation; it 
means a detailed strategic co-ordination for the use of our 
atomic facilities. 

The things you would do to achieve international control, 
to achieve a sort of long-term technical superiority, and that 
you would do to achieve a maximum actual relative strength, 
are not always consistent. And the problem arises of find- 
ing a balance that is at all times reasonable and does not 
sell out any one of these three objectives. This means you 
have to look at the detail of what the problems of atomic 
energy are, and see what features there are that lend them- 
selves to achieving three things at once, or work toward three 
things at once, in a way which would not at first seem pos- 
sible. 

This isn’t quite trivial. For instance, if our problem were 
the achievement of the greatest actual military strength two 
years from now, and there were no question at all of longer- 
term objectives, if there were no thought of ultimate interna- 
tional concord, and if there were no thought of the health and 
strength of our scientific and technical development twenty 
years from now, one would be inclined to follow a very close- 
in approach, in which a minimum number of people were 
involved in policy making, a minimum number of people 
were informed about the realities of atomic energy, in which 
minimum development was undertaken because develop- 
ment pays off slowly, in which the concentration was almost 
entirely on expanding and improving slightly the known 
methods of proceeding from raw materials to atomic weap- 

24 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


ons. Our goal would be a large stock, the largest possible 
stockpile, the minimum possible dissemination of informa- 
tion. This would be the short-term program. 

Such a program would match one of the objectives. It 
would not match all three. You may think it strange that I 
have included the achievement of international control as one 
of the things to keep in mind in planning atomic activities. 
This I think—and you have heard it from Dr. Fox and from 
Mr. Osborn—is the only way in which this country can have 
a security comparable to that which it had in the years before 
the war. It is the only way in which we will be able to live 
with bad governments, with new discoveries, with irrespon- 
sible governments such as are likely to arise in the next hun- 
dred years, without living in fairly constant fear of the sur- 
prise use of these weapons, and their surprise development. 

As you also know, the whole notion of international con- 
trol, when you examine it with some care, comes down to 
that of an international co-operative development; even the 
experiences within the United Nations are revealing in this 
respect. On the one hand, the representatives of the nine other 
non-Soviet states who sit in the United Nations Commission 
have, it seems to me, become convinced of the fundamental 
soundness of the United States proposals. They were not all 
so convinced initially, and I do not believe their acquiescence 
is in most cases simply a result of a desire to conform to the 
United States position. I think it results from conviction. The 
vitality of the fundamental ideas of the United States position 
is attested, I think, by its acceptance. 

At the same time, I think no one can take with any serious- 

25 


The Open Mind 


ness the hope or expectation that the Soviet Union will ac- 
cede, or that it will come closer to acceding, to what is now 
the majority plan. That is not too hard to understand. The 
cornerstone of our proposal is an institution which requires 
candidness and great openness in regard to technical realities 
and policy. It involves the working co-operation between peo- 
ples, irrespective of nationality. It involves a maximum ef- 
fort to abolish national rivalries in the field of atomic energy, 
and in all dangerous areas of atomic energy it involves a 
total and genuine international action. It is clear that, even 
for the United States, proposals of this kind involve a very 
real renunciation. Among other things they involve a more 
or less permanent renunciation of any hope that the United 
States might live in relative isolation from the rest of the 
world. I think I am giving away no improper confidences in 
saying that many representatives of other powers were genu- 
inely goggle-eyed when they found out what our proposals 
were, and that we meant them. Initially they thought they 
were radical to a point and hard to justify. But if for the 
United States and the western European powers some sacri- 
fices are required by these proposals, the sacrifices, the renun- 
ciation, required of Russia are of another order of magni- 
tude. That is because the proposed pattern of control stands in 
a very gross conflict to the present patterns of state power in 
Russia. The ideological underpinning of that power, namely 
the belief in the inevitability of conflict between Russia and 
the capitalist world, would be repudiated by a co-operation 
as intense or as intimate as is required by our proposals for 
the control of atomic energy. Thus what we have asked of 
26 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


the Russians is a very far-reaching renunciation and reversal 
of the basis of their state power, and of their state power 
itself. It does not seem to me likely that we have found in- 
ducements, or cajolery, or threats which together are ade- 
quate to make them take this great plunge. That does not 
mean, I suppose, that this will never happen, but it will 
almost certainly not happen as a result of the discussions in 
the United Nations. 

The whole notion of international control presupposes a 
certain confidence, a confidence which may be not inconsist- 
ent with carrying a gun when you sit down to play poker, but 
at least is consistent with sitting down to play poker. In the 
year and a half since the effort on these problems started we 
have found ourselves forced by the Soviet moves, and by the 
changing political situation throughout the world, over and 
over again to take steps which were in essence a repudiation 
of that confidence; and the Soviet has taken even more grave 
steps in repudiation of that confidence. The whole plane on 
which agreement—and agreement is not enough—could be 
negotiated has disappeared; and beyond agreement there are 
the incredibly much more difficult problems of implementing 
the plan and giving life to the plan. 

I therefore think that to believe seriously today that in six 
months, a year, or a year and a half, we will have something 
resembling an Atomic Development Authority, the co- 
operative development of atomic energy, involves a kind of 
schizophrenia which can only lead to very bad political con- 
fusion. I even think the worry—‘“‘What would happen if the 
Russians suddenly reversed their stand, embraced our pro- 

27 


The Open Mind 


posals and started to work to put them in effect?”—is an 
empty worry. It is in the nature of the proposals we have 
made—a protection afforded by our plans for the United 
States—that they cannot be implemented in very bad faith, 
that they presuppose a very large measure of peaceful in- 
tention, of co-operation, of confidence and candor before 
they can get started. 

But before concluding this consideration it is necessary 
to say that a number of people of thoughtful character and 
undoubted devotion to this problem are somewhat less certain 
that we should not settle for less, that in these negotiations 
we have set our sights far too high. We have asked for things 
that cannot be realized; and in view of the privileged posi- 
tion of a police state in the possession of weapons of this 
kind, we might do well to make a cheaper bargain. I have 
had many discussions with Dr. Conant about this. I know 
he is going to talk to you next week; and I believe he will 
speak about this question. He has some suggestions, which 
he thinks have not been taken seriously enough, and which 
come down to a much more modest proposal for internation- 
alization, based essentially on leaving nuclear fuel in the 
ground, and cutting back the scale of technical activity to a 
point where very much less interference with sovereignty, 
and thus very much less international co-operation, would 
be involved. I myself am confident—I am most reluctantly 
confident—that the arguments that were given in the Ache- 
son-Lilienthal report are correct arguments, and that such 
cheap solutions do not exist. But this is a possibility which 
should not be casually dismissed. 

28 


Atomie Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


Under these circumstances it would seem rational to me 
to expect, in the immediate or in the foreseeable future, as 
a result of what goes on in the United Nations or, for that 
matter, in any bilateral or multilateral negotiations that 
might be entered into to supplement the work of the United 
Nations, that neither agreement nor the fruit of agreement 
actually will eventuate in the setting up of international co- 
operative control and development. I don’t think anyone 
knows either a short means of achieving this, or of a sure 
means of achieving it. Yet it would almost certainly not be 
right, looking ahead for a period of time, to write off the 
possibility of this sort of development for good, because it 
has in it, as the original arguments that moved the govern- 
ment of this country to propose such control clearly showed, 
the seeds of a kind of security which is not obtainable in any 
other way, and which we would want even if there did not 
exist the government of the Soviet Union, which we would 
want if political arrangements of the world were very differ- 
ent from what they are today. Some day we will want to come 
back to this. And this means that in our own operations, in 
the way we deal with atomic energy and its related problems 
in this country, in the way in which we deal with the western 
European countries, one of the conditions, not an overriding 
condition, but one of the conditions that needs to be kept in 
mind is that we conform to those plans which would make it 
most likely that in the long term the problem of atomic en- 
ergy could not merely be borne with but could be solved, 
and that means internationalization. 

What does this mean in concrete terms? I don’t think I 

29 


The Open Mind 


can answer that except with a few simple points by way of 
illustration. The first is, as I have said before, that we want 
to keep the initiative, and that means that we do not want 
to find ourselves in a situation in which we are concentrating 
on problems as they appeared at the end of 1945, when in 
other lines, and with other scientific impetus, and other scien- 
tific fortifications there are perhaps new developments which 
make fundamentally obsolete all that we are doing. We don’t 
want to be caught in a bad position. This is a leadership in 
ideas and in men; and of course it involves a maximum ac- 
quaintance with the work that is going on abroad. 

Even in these postwar years where the pattern of civilized 
life in Europe has been worn so very thin, of the two or three 
important experimental discoveries of the last two years, 
two at least come from Europe. One was carried out long be- 
fore its publication in the cellar of an old house in Rome by 
three Italians who were under sentence of death from the Ger- 
mans, because they belonged to the Italian Resistance. They 
were rescued by the uncle of one of the men from a labor 
squad at Cassino, and smuggled into a cellar in Rome. They 
got bored there, and they started to do experiments. These 
experiments were published last spring; and in the field of 
fundamental physics they created a real revolution in our 
thinking. 

The other experiments were carried out under very much 
less dramatic circumstances, but with very modest equip- 
ment, by Powell and Occhialini, in England. I mention this 
only to say that under conditions where one would think that 
technical work abroad would be greatly handicapped, and 

30 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


we in this country would have all the advantages, this would 
be an oversimplified view of what is really taking place. Of 
course, these experiments have nothing whatever to do with 
atomic energy. These are fundamental things which at some 
time may conceivably have something to do with atomic en- 
ergy, but they do not today, and probably never will. 

As an important point, because of the whole pattern of our 
proposed plan of control, and because of the intimate mix- 
ture of constructive and destructive, of explosive and of 
power applications, of atomic energy, it is clear that quite 
apart from their usefulness in our own economy, in our own 
science, the long-term search for an international solution 
puts a very considerable value on developing the constructive 
applications of atomic energy. 

Third, there is the question, to which I have to return over 
and over again, of the proper balance between openness and 
security, and the necessity, if one is to look to a heroic future 
in this field, for cultivating and for training young men, for 
cultivating a corps of people who are informed and knowl- 
edgeable and useful, for establishing appropriate relations 
with the scientists and technical people of other countries. 
There is also a manifest inadequacy in a total and uncom- 
promising policy of security—a policy which this country 
has never adopted from the earliest days—to laying the 
foundation for any future possible internationalization. 

There are other things as well, but they add up to the fact 
that if there is to be a solution along the lines of the United 
States proposals, not this year, not next year, but at some time 
in the future, then this area of work, in atomic energy, and its 

31 


The Open Mind 


closely related fields, must be kept an area of scientific and 
rational co-operative activity, and must not be sewed up so 
tightly that it is not a part of the living culture and develop- 
ment of the country. This means in turn that one will have to 
adopt, for this reason as well as others, a somewhat dynamic 
approach to security. It means, for instance, that the policy 
of sitting tight on our knowledge and on our stockpiles would 
neither be of use to keeping open the door to later interna- 
tionalization, nor be an effective course for maintaining our 
technical superiority. 

In this field I can think of an analogy. There are examina- 
tions which are given with open books, because all the an- 
swers are not to be found in books. The field of atomic en- 
ergy is an open-book examination. It is something where you 
can’t look up the answers, and where your real assets are 
assets of capability, understanding, knowledge and compe- 
tence. 

This brings me to another point. If you talk about pre- 
eminence in atomic energy, there are two separate and not 
at first quite reconcilable views of what pre-eminence means. 
For one thing, if you compare what this country is doing 
with what is going on in England, which is spending ten per 
cent of what we are, or in France, which is spending one per 
cent of what we are, or in Russia, which is spending we don’t 
know how much, if you compare thus, we would perhaps be 
markedly ahead; and that is a pre-eminence which we should 
never willingly sacrifice. There is another pre-eminence 
which comes from comparing what we were doing in 1945 
with what we were doing in 1946 and what we were doing 

32 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


in 1945 with what we will be doing in 1950, from a sense 
of progress. The activities in this field won’t survive if they 
compare favorably only with the activities elsewhere, and not 
favorably with the past activities in this country. There must 
be a sense of progress and achievemeni to give dynamic sta- 
bility to an undertaking of this magnitude. 

All this would be inadequate without one other considera- 
tion. At the present time, and I think in the foreseeable fu- 
ture, it will not be possible to arm atomically very quickly. 
The processes of accumulating fissionable material do not 
appear to lend themselves very well to the kind of speed-up 
which turned out to be so successful before the last war. 
There are two points there: One is a sense of the accelerating 
time schedule, which means that we could not afford so long 
a period of conversion from peace to armament; and the 
second is in the nature of the processes of production of fis- 
sionable material, which probably, if concentrated, let us 
say, into a year to give what we may conceive to be an ade- 
quate stockpile, would put unbearable strains on certain ele- 
ments of our economy. Specifically, I don’t think we could 
spare the power to create a stockpile of this kind in such a 
short time. 

That is an argument which indicates that one cannot neg- 
lect the very short term, the actual status of available arma- 
ment; but at the same time one cannot sit on it, however ade- 
quate, with any total assurance of superiority in this field. 
One has to find a balance; and in essence this is the same 
balance—the challenge with which this country will be faced 
in all other activities, during the coming years—the balance 

33 


The Open Mind 


between freedom on the one hand and security on the other, 
between a dynamic and a static security. 

I have made all this by way of preamble in order to take 
up four or five examples of issues where one might be 
tempted at first sight to give a quick solution, and where a 
consideration of the three planes on which we need to aim 
for security shows that no cheap solution is possible, and that 
on the contrary a certain subtlety of approach is required. 
The first has to do with our relations with other countries in 
this field. You may ask what there is that we want from the 
other countries. What is there that we want? It goes without 
saying that we have an interest in raw materials; but to be 
a little more general, we want the advantage of their brains 
and their work. Western Europe, as I have said, and Japan, 
for that matter—these are places where scientific work of 
extremely high quality is going on, and where it ought to 
continue to go on. We want their good will and we want their 
sympathy. We want the intellectuals of Europe to be friends 
of the United States and not enemies. These are some of the 
obvious things. 

This which I have said of foreign scientists holds true of 
the nonproject scientists in this country. No atomic energy 
authority, no commission, could ever hope, or find it legiti- 
mate, to have most of the scientists of the country working 
on atomic energy. That would be completely out of focus. 
Ten per cent would be a large number, and that only in the 
fields most closely involved. I doubt if you could employ ten 
per cent of the chemists of the country on atomic energy. But 
we could get a great deal from the scientific and technical and 

34 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


industrial strength of those who are not full-time on atomic 
energy. It is a very great disadvantage to have to hire a man 
and tell him what he needs to know to do the job, and then see 
if he has any ideas. In order to progress in technical things 
there must be a fairly free dissemination of information; on 
the basis of this people who are not now professionally con- 
cerned will start thinking about a problem and they will have 
some sort of suggestion. They may write a paper about it, 
or start to make an experiment. This ability to draw on the 
nonco-ordinated resources of this country and of Europe is 
clearly something which we can enjoy to the extent to which 
we can make the realities of atomic energy known to people 
who are not working for the United States authority, the 
Atomic Energy Commission, as it is today. This is an ex- 
tremely strong argument for examining with great care how 
great the area of openness can be, that it may not be merely 
a piece of technical information but an area of technical 
understanding. We must ask what benefit is such openness 
likely to be to a competing effort, and what usefulness may 
come to us from having a set of problems known far more 
widely. 

There is a very good example in recent history of an ac- 
tion of which I most thoroughly approve, and which is the 
beginning of an attempt to make available to wider circles 
some of the instrumentalities and some of the information of 
atomic energy, and that lies in the field of isotope distribu- 
tion. One might say offhand that in our relations with non- 
project work in this country, and in our relations with other 
countries, at least friendly countries of western Europe, we 

35 


The Open Mind 


might be guided by the principle that all those activities 
which would be delineated as “safe” in the field of atomic 
energy, which do not provide a physical basis for atomic 
armament, might well be shared. This would include a very 
great many things. It includes small reactors. It includes iso- 
topes, going far beyond the list that was drawn up for dis- 
tribution abroad. 

Take the isotopes as an example. The distribution of iso- 
topes, all of which can be produced by other methods, and 
which are primarily chosen for their value in biological re- 
search, is an extremely prudent step. These are being made 
available for our own benefit, for the good will involved, for 
the knowledge we hope to obtain, and because this is a decent, 
consistent gesture, painting some slight stroke in the picture 
of the world as we would like to see it in the future. This is 
an extremely prudent step in this picture. There will have 
to be others. But there are in this case also no blanket rules. 

Another example—and I am largely discussing here things 
which always keep turning up about technical problems and 
are referred to the Advisory Committee of the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission—is the apparent conflict between the gen- 
eral support of science, and the pursuit of the immediate 
aims of technical jobs for atomic energy. Most scientists who 
work in universities work on things of rather abstract and 
long-range nature, and if you, let us say, do so harmless a 
thing as provide grants and fellowships for doctorate and 
post-doctorate studies, if you provide funds for the instru- 
ments and equipment, as the Office of Naval Research has 
done so well, you automatically provide an incentive to peo- 

36 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


ple to stay in the university laboratories and stay there longer 
than they might otherwise do. In this way you cut down at 
a time of extremely critical shortage of personnel the number 
of people who may work on the pressing, and sometimes 
horribly pressing, problems of establishing and maintaining 
atomic armament. Nevertheless, here again it would be a 
mistake to give a blanket answer. It is probably not within 
the power of all the agencies of the government of the United 
States combined to draw off into atomic energy activities very 
many more people than are now there working. But if that 
were done at the expense either of the training of young men, 
or the development of new knowledge in fundamental sci- 
ences, it would be an extremely costly bargain, increasing 
our temporary strength and involving a great price for the 
future. 

There is then another area in which problems of this kind 
arise. To keep completely secret the design of the Han- 
ford piles I think has never been a controversial thing. To keep 
secret the fact that we don’t know how to do some things may 
be controversial because it may be that we really need some 
ideas, and the classification, or keeping secret, our ignorance 
of an area in which we haven’t been able to make any 
progress may in some cases be a very serious hindrance to 
getting the insight, the bright ideas and the progress which 
would come if a much wider group of people could be in- 
terested. There are a considerable number of cases of this 
kind, ranging all the way from problems of weapons to 
problems of raw materials, where I myself have the feeling 
that what we are keeping secret are some ideas that aren’t 

37 


The Open Mind 


right, and what we need is to invite, by defining the prob- 
lem, some new ideas that are. But clearly in all such cases an 
extremely close attention needs to be given to whether the 
revelation that we have not solved a problem may be a breach 
of military security or a source of comfort to a rival nation. 

An area even more troublesome is this: The making of 
nuclear fuel, apart from the making of weapons, and a good 
deal of the operations having to do with the discovery and 
the processing of raw materials, are in many ways normal 
industrial operations. And everyone knows that an avid and 
eager participation on the part of industry in these programs 
would give us a strength, a fertility and an over-all compe- 
tence which cannot be obtained if industries are merely as- 
signed certain jobs. But in turn this costs something, because 
it is not reasonable to expect an industry to take an interest 
in a problem of this kind, unless it can see that it can make 
contributions which may turn out, may conceivably turn out, 
to be very profitable. It is not reasonable to ask an industry 
to participate unless it is likely to develop within its own 
staff the competent men, the knowledge, and the policy- 
making functions which it normally enjoys in its day-to-day 
operations in other fields. So if you try to use industry en- 
tirely as an instrument for carrying out the needed programs, 
for getting new plants built, for getting atomic armaments 
increased in the next year or two, you will dry up the interest 
that industry might have in a longer term. If you allow the 
industrial pattern to prevail entirely, that means that you 
will for a long time be doing nothing but building up very 
large and qualified staffs in the various industries, which 

38 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


won’t pay off for many, many years to come. Clearly here 
again a compromise is required if the varied needs of our 
security are to be understood. 

This has a more general application. In order to work 
well, people need to have some sense of participation in 
policy making; in order to make policy they have to know 
things, and in order to know things you have to tell them, 
you have to let them learn. The open approach to atomic 
energy which we would follow ideally if we had no worry 
that there were a competitor anywhere in the world, this open 
approach has the advantage that policy by and large will get 
made by the people who have the best brains, and who work 
hardest, whether it is in the laboratory, in the management 
of an industry, or in the government of the United States. 
This cannot be realized; but the advantages of not keeping 
technical knowledge and technical problems too highly com- 
partmentalized lies in assuring that the policy-making fer- 
tility of the country will be involved. When I speak of policy, 
I don’t of course mean only the highest political policy, but 
rather the question of what you do next, what kind of re- 
actors you build, whether you pursue high-temperature re- 
actors, which would be of interest for aircraft propulsion, 
whether you pursue power on a smaller or a larger scale, 
whether you use enriched fuel—these are typical of questions 
which are policy questions, which no centralized agency will 
in the long term be competent to answer, whose answers must 
emerge from a cognizant and responsible body of technical 
men. 

I think there is another related area, and here I am speak- 

39 


The Open Mind 


ing about matters of which I know even less. It seems to me 
that, both from the point of view of having an effective force 
for retaliation, and from the point of view of proper co- 
ordination of our more specifically defensive activities, quite 
a few people in military circles need to know what atomic 
energy is all about. They need to know the facts of this field, 
and typically they need to know the most highly classified 
facts. It seems to me here again that there is a conflict be- 
tween drawing into the efforts the talent which is needed to 
make a strong and reasonably long-term program, and the 
precautions of security which would give us the greatest rela- 
tive advantage if we felt that only the next year or two years 
or three years were of any consequence. 

I have tried to spell out some of these questions because I 
believe that they are typical of the reason why atomic energy 
is not a trivial subject, even at this time, and why preoccupa- 
tions ranging from the elementary one, how many bombs will 
we have next year, to the remote one, will we so conduct our 
affairs that we will have the power, the insight, the wisdom 
and the discipline to order the atomic energy activities of the 
world as a whole, whenever and as soon as the opportunity 
arises, need to be kept simultaneously in mind. I think there 
is a very high price to only short-term security, which none 
of us will be willing to pay. To those who would say that 
this is no time to be thinking of long-term things, or that it 
is sheer madness, with the “world as it is” to dream about 
international control, or again to those others who say that 
there is no security except in international control and that 
any other precautions are useless, I would quite profoundly 

40 


Atomic Energy as a Contemporary Problem 


disagree; to them I should like to tell a final story. It is a 
story of Confucius. 

One day in a clearing in the forest, Confucius came upon 
a woman in deep mourning, wracked by sorrow. He learned 
that her son had just been eaten by a tiger; and he attempted 
to console her, to make clear how unavailing her tears would 
be, to restore her composure. He left, but had barely re- 
entered the forest, when the renewed sounds of weeping 
recalled him. “That is not all,” the woman said. “You see, 
my husband was eaten here a year ago by this same tiger.” 
Again Confucius attempted to console her and again he left 
only to hear renewed weeping. “Is that not all?” “Oh, no,” 
she said. “The year before that my father too was eaten by 
the tiger.” Confucius thought for a moment, and then said: 
“This would not seem to be a very salutary neighborhood. 
Why don’t you leave it?” The woman wrung her hands. “I 
know,” she said, “I know; but, you see, the government is so 
excellent.” 


41 


Ill 


The Open Mind 


THIS TALK was made on December 11, 
1948, before a joint session of the 
Rochester Association for the United 
Nations and the Rochester Foreign 
Policy Association. 


Ill 


The Open Mind 


A FEW WEEKS ago the president of a college in the prairie 
states came to see me. Clearly, when he tried to look into the 
future, he did not like what he saw: the grim prospects for 
the maintenance of peace, for the preservation of freedom, 
for the flourishing and growth of the humane values of our 
civilization. He seemed to have in mind that it might be well 
for people, even in his small college, to try to take some part 
in turning these prospects to a happier end; but what he 
said came as rather a shock. He said, “I wonder if you can 
help me. I have a very peculiar problem. You see, out there, 
45 


The Open Mind 


most of the students, and the teachers too, come from the 
farm. They are used to planting seed, and then waiting for it 
to grow, and then harvesting it. They believe in time and in 
nature. It is rather hard to get them to take things into their 
own hands.” Perhaps, as much as anything, my theme to- 
night will have to do with enlisting time and nature in the 
conduct of our international affairs: in the quest for peace 
and a freer world. This is not meant mystically, for the nature 
which we must enlist is that of man; and if there is hope in 
it, that lies not least in man’s reason. What elements are 
there in the conduct of foreign affairs which may be con- 
ducive to the exercise of that reason, which may provide a 
climate for the growth of new experience, new insight and 
new understanding? How can we recognize such growth, and 
be sensitive to its hopeful meaning, while there is yet time, 
through action based on understanding, to direct the out- 
come? 

To such difficult questions one speaks not at all, or very 
modestly and incompletely. If there are indeed answers to 
be found, they will be found through many diverse avenues 
of approach—in the European Recovery Program, in our 
direct relations with the Soviet states, in the very mechanisms 
by which our policies are developed and determined. Yet 
you will not find it inappropriate that we fix attention on one 
relatively isolated, yet not atypical, area of foreign affairs— 
on atomic energy. It is an area in which the primary intent 
of our policy has been totally frustrated. It is an area in 
which it is commonly recognized that the prospects for suc- 
cess with regard to this primary intent are both dim and 

46 


The Open Mind 


remote. It is an area in which it is equally recognized ,hat 
this failure will force upon us a course of action in some 
important respects inconsistent with our original purposes. 
It is an area in which the excellence of our proposals, and a 
record in which we may and do take pride, have nevertheless 
not managed quite to quiet the uneasy conscience, nor to 
close the mind to further trouble. 

The history of our policy and our efforts toward interna- 
tional atomic control is public; far more important, it has 
from the first aroused widespread interest, criticism and 
understanding, and has been the subject of debates in the 
Congress and the press, and among our people. There may 
even be some notion of how, if we had the last years to live 
over again, we might alter our course in the light of what we 
have learned, and some rough agreement as to the limits 
within which alternative courses of action, if adopted at a 
time when they were still open to us, could have altered the 
outcome. The past is in one respect a misleading guide to the 
future: It is far less perplexing. 

Certainly there was little to inspire, and nothing to justify, 
a troubled conscience in the proposals that our government 
made to the United Nations, as to the form which the inter- 
national control of atomic energy should take. These pro- 
posals, and some detailed means for implementing them, 
were explored and criticized, elaborated, and recommended 
for adoption by fourteen of the seventeen member nations 
who served on the United Nations Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion. They were rejected as wholly unacceptable, even as a 
basis for further discussion, by the three Soviet states, whose 

47 


The Open Mind 


contributions to policy and to debate have throughout con- 
stituted for us a debasingly low standard of comparison. 

This September, the Commission made its third, and what 
it thought its final, report to the General Assembly, meeting 
in Paris. It recommended to the Assembly that the general 
outlines of the proposed form of international control be 
endorsed, that the inadequacy of the Soviet counterproposals 
be noted, and that the Commission itself be permitted to dis- 
continue its work pending either a satisfactory prior nego- 
tiation between the permanent members of the Security 
Council and Canada, or the finding by the General Assembly 
that the general political conditions which had in the past 
obstructed progress had been so far altered that agreement 
now appeared possible. The Assembly did in fact accept all 
the recommendations but one. It asked the Commission to 
continue meeting. In its instructions to the Commission, how- 
ever, the Assembly failed to provide affirmative indications 
of what the Commission was to do, or to express any confi- 
dence in the success of its further efforts; in fact, one might 
dismiss this action as no more than an indication of unwill- 
ingness on the part of the Assembly to accept as permanent 
the obvious past failures of the Commission to fulfill its 
mandate. 

Yet we may recognize that more is involved in this action, 
that we will come to understand in the measure in which the 
nature and purposes of our own preoccupation with the prob- 
lem become clearer. In part at least the Assembly asked that 
this problem of the atom not be let lapse because it touches 
in a most intimate, if sometimes symbolic, way the profound- 

48 


The Open Mind 


est questions of international affairs; because the Assembly 
wished to reaffirm that these problems could not be dis- 
missed, that these issues could not be lost, whatever the im- 
mediate frustrations and however obscure the prospects. 
The Assembly was in fact asking that we let time and nature, 
and human reason and good example as a part of that nature, 
play some part in fulfilling the age-old aspirations of man for 
preserving the peace. 

In any political action, and surely in one as complex and 
delicate as the international act and commitment made by 
the United States with regard to atomic energy, far more is 
always involved than can or should be isolated in a brief 
analysis. Despite all hysteria, there is some truth to the view 
that the steps which we took with regard to atomic energy 
could be understood in terms of the terror of atomic warfare. 
We have sought to avert this; we have further sought to avert 
the probable adverse consequences of atomic armament for 
our own institutions and our freedom. Yet more basic and 
more general issues are involved, which, though symbolized 
and rendered critical by the development of atomic energy, 
are in their nature not confined to it; they pervade almost 
all the key problems of foreign policy. If we are to seek a 
clue to the misgivings with which we tend to look at ourselves, 
we may, I think, find it just in the manner in which we have 
dealt, in their wider contexts, with these basic themes. 

The first has to do with the role of coercion in human 
affairs; the second with the role of openness. The atomic 
bomb, born of a way of life, fostered throughout the cen- 
turies, in which the role of coercion was perhaps reduced 

49 


The Open Mind 


more completely than in any other human activity, and which 
owed its whole success and its very existence to the possi- 
bility of open discussion and free inquiry, appeared in a 
strange paradox, at once a secret, and an unparalleled instru- 
ment of coercion. 

These two mutually interdependent ideals, the minimiza- 
tion of coercion and the minimization of secrecy, are, of 
course, in the nature of things, not absolute; any attempt to 
erect them as absolute will induce in us that vertigo which 
warns us that we are near the limits of intelligible defini- 
tion. But they are very deep in our ethical as well as in our 
political traditions, and are recorded in earnest, eloquent 
simplicity in the words of those who founded this nation. 
They are in fact inseparable from the idea of the dignity of 
man to which our country, in its beginnings, was dedicated, 
and which has proved the monitor of our vigor and of our 
health. These two ideals are closely related, the one pointing 
toward persuasion as the key to political action, the other 
to free discussion and knowledge as the essential instrument 
of persuasion. They are so deep within us that we seldom 
find it necessary, and perhaps seldom possible, to talk of 
them. When they are challenged by tyranny abroad or by 
malpractice at home, we come back to them as the wardens 
of our public life—as for many of us they are as well 
wardens of our lives as men. 

In foreign affairs, we are not unfamiliar with either the 
use or the need of power. Yet we are stubbornly distrustful 
of it. We seem to know, and seem to come back again and 
again to this knowledge, that the purposes of this country in 

50 


The Open Mind 


the field of foreign policy cannot in any real or enduring way 
be achieved by coercion. 

We have a natural sympathy for extending to foreign 
affairs what we have come to learn so well in our political 
life at home: that an indispensable, perhaps in some ways 
the indispensable, element in giving meaning to the dignity 
of man, and in making possible the taking of decision on 
the basis of honest conviction, is the openness of men’s minds, 
and the openness of whatever media there are for com- 
munion between men, free of restraint, free of repression, 
and free even of that most pervasive of all restraints, that of 
status and of hierarchy. 

In the days of the founding of this republic, in all of the 
eighteenth century which was formative for the growth and 
the explicit formulation of our political ideals, politics and 
science were of a piece. The hope that this might in some 
sense again be so, was stirred to new life by the development 
of atomic energy. In this it has throughout been decisive that 
openness, openness in the first instance with regard to tech- 
nical problems and to the actual undertakings underway in 
various parts of the world, was the one single essential pre- 
condition for a measure of security in the atomic age. Here 
we met in uniquely comprehensible form the alternatives of 
common understanding, or of the practices of secrecy and 
of force. 

In all this I pretend to be saying nothing new, nothing 
that has not been known to all thoughtful men since the days 
of Hiroshima; yet it has seldom come to expression; it has 
been overlaid with other preoccupations, perhaps equally 

51 


The Open Mind 


necessary to the elaboration of an effective international con- 
trol, but far less decisive in determining whether such a con- 
trol could exist. It is just because it has not been possible to 
obtain assent, even in principle, even as an honest statement 
of intent or purpose, to these basic theses that the deadlock in 
attempting to establish control has appeared so serious, so 
refractory, and so enduring. 

These words have an intent quite contrary to the creation 
of a sense of panic or of doom. Yet we need to start with the 
admission that we see no clear course before us that would 
persuade the governments of the world to join with us in cre- 
ating a more and more open world, and thus to establish the 
foundation on which persuasion might so largely replace 
coercion in determining human affairs. We ourselves have 
acknowledged this grim prospect, and responded by adopting 
some of the very measures that we had hoped might be uni- 
versally renounced. With misgivings—and there ought to be 
misgivings—we are rearming, arming atomically, as in other 
fields. With deep misgivings, we are keeping secret not only 
those elements of our military plans, but those elements of 
our technical information and policy, a knowledge of which 
would render us more subject to enemy coercion and less 
effective in exercising our own. There are not many men 
who see an acceptable alternative to this course, although 
there apparently are some who would regard it as a proof of 
the shallowness and insincerity of our earlier renunciation 
of these ways. But whether, among our own people or among 
our friends abroad or even among those who are not our 
friends, these measures which we are taking appear ex- 

52 


The Open Mind 


cessive, or on the whole insufficient, they must have at least 
one effect. Inevitably they must appear to commit us to a 
future of secrecy, and to an immanent threat of war. It is 
true that one may hear arguments that the mere existence of 
our power, quite apart from its exercise, may turn the world 
to the ways of openness and of peace. Yet we have today no 
clear, no formulated, no in some measure credible account 
of how this may come about. We have chosen to read, and 
perhaps we have correctly read, our past as a lesson that a 
policy of weakness has failed us. But we have not read the 
future as an intelligible lesson that a policy of strength can 
save us. 

When the time is run, and that future become history, it 
will be clear how little of it we today foresaw or could fore- 
see. How then can we preserve hope and sensitiveness which 
could enable us to take advantage of all that it has in store? 
Our problem is not only to face the somber and the grim 
elements of the future, but to keep them from obscuring it. 

Our recent election has seemed to touch this deep sense of 
the imponderable in the history of the future, this under- 
standing that we must not preclude the cultivation of any 
unexpected, hopeful turnings. Immediately after the election 
people seemed stirred, less even by the outcome itself, than 
by the element of wonder; they would tend to say things like: 
“Well, after this perhaps we need not be so sure that there 
will be a war.” This sense that the future is richer and more 
complex than our prediction of it, and that wisdom lies in 
sensitiveness to what is new and hopeful, is perhaps a sign 
of some maturity in politics. 

53 


The Open Mind 


The problem of doing justice to the implicit, the imponder- 
able, and the unknown is of course not unique to politics. It 
is always with us in science, it is with us in the most trivial 
of personal affairs, and it is one of the great problems of writ- 
ing and of all forms of art. The means by which it is solved 
is sometimes called style. It is style which complements 
affirmation with limitation and with humility; it is style 
which makes it possible to act effectively, but not absolutely; 
it is style which, in the domain of foreign policy, enables us 
to find a harmony between the pursuit of ends essential to 
us, and the regard for the views, the sensibilities, the aspira- 
tions of those to whom the problem may appear in another 
light; it is style which is the deference that action pays to un- 
certainty; it is above all style through which power defers 
to reason. 

We need to remember that we are a powerful nation. 

We need to remember that when the future that we can 
now foresee deviates so markedly from all that we hope and 
all that we value, we can, by our example, and by the mode 
and the style with which we conduct our affairs, let it be ap- 
parent that we have not abandoned those hopes nor forsaken 
those values; we need to do this even while concrete steps, 
to which we resort to avert more immediate disaster, seem 
to negate them. 

Our past is rich in example. In that other agony, the Civil 
War, where the foundations of our government were proved 
and reaffirmed, it was Lincoln who again and again struck 
true the balance between power and reason. By 1863, the war 

54 


The Open Mind 


and the blockade had deepened the attrition of the South. 
They had also stopped the supplies of cotton to the English 
mills. Early that year Lincoln wrote a letter to the working 
men of Manchester. He wrote: 

“ . . It is not always in the power of governments to en- 
large or restrict the scope of moral results which follow the 
policies that they may deem it necessary for the public safety 
from time to time to adopt. 

“T have understood well that the duty of self-preservation 
rests solely with the American people; but I have at the 
same time been aware that favor or disfavor of foreign 
nations might have a material influence in enlarging or pro- 
longing the struggle with disloyal men in which the country 
is engaged. A fair examination of history has served to 
authorize a belief that the past actions and influences of the 
United States were generally regarded as having been bene- 
ficial toward mankind. I have, therefore, reckoned upon the 
forbearance of nations . . .” 

Fifteen months later, a year before Lincoln’s death, the 
battle had turned. He could say: 

“. . . When the war began, three years ago, neither party, 
nor any man, expected it would last till now. Each looked 
for the end in some way, long ere today. Neither did any an- 
ticipate that domestic slavery would be much affected by the 
war. But here we are; the war has not ended, and slavery has 
been much affected—how much needs not now to be re- 
counted ... 

“But we can see the past, though we may not claim to have 

55 


The Open Mind 


directed it; and seeing it, in this case, we feel more hopeful 
and confident for the future . . .” 

In such magnanimity even Grant, at Appomattox a year 
later, looking beyond the bitter slaughter, looking to nature 
and to time, could speak to Lee: His troops were to keep their 
horses; they would need them for the spring plowing. 

Each of us, recalling our actions in these last critical 
years, will be able to find more than one instance where, in 
the formulation or implementation of policy, we have been 
worthy of this past. Each of us will mourn the opportunities 
that may seem to him lost, the doors once open and now 
closed. Not even in critical times can the sense of style, the 
open mind, be fostered by issuing directives; nor can they 
rest wholly on soliciting great actions not yet taken, great 
words not yet spoken. If they were wholly a matter for one 
man, all could well rest on his wisdom and his sensitiveness 
—they neither are, nor can, nor should be. The spirit in 
which our foreign affairs are conducted will in the large re- 
flect the understanding and the desires of our people; and 
their concrete, detailed administration will necessarily rest 
in the hands of countless men and women, officials of the 
government, who constitute the branches of our foreign serv- 
ice, of our State Department, and of the many agencies which 
now supplement the State Department, at home and abroad. 
The style, the perceptiveness, the imagination and the open- 
mindedness with which we need to conduct our affairs can 
only pervade such a complex of organizations, consisting 
inevitably of men of varied talent, taste and character, if it 
is a reflection of a deep and widespread public understand- 

56 


The Open Mind 


ing. That is why, despite their sketchiness, it has seemed 
appropriate to present these views to a group of interested 
and devoted citizens. It is in our hands to see that the hope 
of the future is not lost, because we were too sure that we 
knew the answers, too sure that there was no hope. 


57 


IV 


Atomic Weapons and 
American Policy 


THIS LECTURE was originally deliv- 
ered before the Council on Foreign Re- 
lations in New York City on February 
17, 1953, and was later published in 
that organization’s quarterly Foreign 


Affairs. 


IV 


Atomic Weapons and 
American Policy 


IT ts possible that in the large light of history, if indeed there 
is to be history, the atomic bomb will appear not very differ- 
ent than in the bright light of the first atomic explosion. 
Partly because of the mood of the time, partly because of a 
very clear prevision of what the technical developments 
would be, we had the impression that this might mark, not 
merely the end of a great and terrible war, but the end of 
such wars for mankind. 

Two years later Colonel Stimson was to write in Foreign 
Affairs: “The riven atom, uncontrolled, can be only a grow- 

61 


The Open Mind 


ing menace to us all . . .” In the same paragraph he wrote, 
“Lasting peace and freedom cannot be achieved until the 
world finds a way toward the necessary government of the 
whole.” * Earlier, shortly after the war’s end, the government 
of the United States had put forward some modest sug- 
gestions, responsive to these views, for dealing with the atom 
in a friendly, open, co-operative way. We need not argue as 
to whether these proposals were stillborn. They have been 
very dead a long, long time, to the surprise of only a few. 
Openness, friendliness and co-operation did not seem to be 
what the Soviet government most prized on this earth. 

It should not be beyond human ingenuity for us to devise 
less friendly proposals. We need not here detail the many 
reasons why they have not been put forward, why it has ap- 
peared irrelevant and grotesque to do so. These reasons 
range from the special difficulties of all negotiation with the 
Soviet Union, through the peculiar obstacles presented by 
the programmatic hostility and the institutionalized secretive- 
ness of communist countries, to what may be regarded as the 
more normal and familiar difficulties of devising instruments 
for the regulation of armaments in a world without prospect 
of political settlement. 

Instead we came to grips, or began to come to grips, with 
the massive evidences of Soviet hostility, and the growing 
evidences of Soviet power, and with the many almost in- 
evitable, yet often tragic, elements of weakness, disharmony 


* “The Challenge to Americans,” by Henry L. Stimson. Foreign 
Affairs, October 1947. 
62 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 


and disunity in what we have learned to call the Free 
World. 

In these preoccupations—one wholly negative, and one 
largely positive though very difficult—the atom, too, was 
given a simple role, and the policy followed was a fairly 
simple one. The role was to be one ingredient of a shield: a 
shield composed also in part of the great industrial power of 
America, and in part of the military and, even more, the po- 
litical weaknesses of the Soviet Union. The rule for the atom 
was: “Let us keep ahead. Let us be sure that we are ahead 
of the enemy.” 

Today it would seem that, however necessary these con- 
siderations and these policies may be, they are no longer 
nearly sufficient. The reason for that one can see when one 
looks at the character of the arms race. The reason for that 
one can see when one compares the time-scale of atomic de- 
velopments here and abroad with the probable time-scale of 
deep political changes in the world. 

It is easy to say “Let us look at the arms race.” I must 
tell about it without communicating anything. I must reveal 
its nature without revealing anything; and this I propose 
to do. 

There are three countries embarked on this race: The 
United Kingdom—and of that we need to note only that it 
is unfortunate that so talented and hard-pressed a country, 
so close to us in history and tradition, should be doing all 
this separately from us—ourselves, and the U.S.S.R. 

As forthe U.S.S.R., it has recently been said officially, and 

63 


The Open Mind 


thus may be repeated with official sanction, that it has pro- 
duced three atomic explosions, and is producing fissionable 
material in substantial quantities. I should like to present 
the evidence for this; I cannot. We do need one word of 
warning: This is evidence which could well be evidence of 
what the government of the U.S.S.R. wants us to think, rather 
than evidence of what is true. I may, however, record my 
own casual, perhaps too rough guess as to how the U.S.S.R. 
stands in relation to us in this field of atomic munitions. This 
does not refer at all to other elements of armament. I think 
that the U.S.S.R. is about four years behind us. And I think 
that the scale of its operations is not as big as ours was four 
years ago. It may be something like half as big as ours then 
was. This is consistent with the facts known to us. It has not 
been proven by them, by any means. 

This sounds comfortably reassuring. It sounds as though 
the job of keeping ahead were being satisfactorily accom- 
plished. But in order to assay what it means, we have to know 
something of what it is that they are four years behind, how 
fast the situation is likely to change, and what it means to be 
half as big as we are. 

When Hiroshima was bombed there was a single plane. 
There was no air opposition. We flew straight in at medium 
height, at rather low speed, over the city of Hiroshima; we 
dropped one bomb with an energy release the equivalent of 
about fifteen thousand tons of TNT. It killed more than sev- 
enty thousand people and produced a comparable number of 
casualties; it largely destroyed a medium-sized city. That 
we had in mind. But we also had in mind, and we said, that 

64 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 


it was not a question of one bomb. It would become a ques- 
tion of ten, and then one hundred, and then a thousand, and 
then ten thousand, and then maybe one hundred thousand. 
We knew—or, rather, we did not know, but we had very 
good reason to think—that it was not a question of ten thou- 
sand tons but of one hundred thousand and then a million 
tons, and then ten million tons and then maybe one hundred 
million tons. 

We knew that these munitions could be adapted, not 
merely to a slow medium bomber operating where we had 
almost complete air supremacy, but to methods of delivery 
more modern, more flexible, harder to intercept, and more 
suitable for combat as it might be encountered today. 

Today all of this is in train. It is my opinion that we should 
all know—not precisely, but quantitatively and, above all, 
authoritatively—where we stand in these matters; that we 
should all have a good idea of how rapidly the situation has 
changed, and of where we may stand, let us say, three, four, 
or five years ahead, which is about as far as one can see. I 
shall revert to the reasons why I think it important that we 
all know of these matters. I cannot write of them. 

What I can say is this: I have never discussed these 
prospects candidly with any responsible group, whether sci- 
entists or statesmen, whether citizens or officers of the gov- 
ernment, with any group that could steadily look at the facts, 
that did not come away with a great sense of anxiety and 
somberness at what they saw. The very least we can say is 
that, looking ten years ahead, it is likely to be small comfort 
that the Soviet Union is four years behind us, and small 

65 


The Open Mind 


comfort that they are only about half as big as we are. The 
very least we can conclude is that our twenty-thousandth 
bomb, useful as it may be in filling the vast munitions pipe- 
lines of a great war, will not in any deep strategic sense 
offset their two-thousandth. The very least we can say is that, 
as Mr. Gordon Dean has emphasized, there will come a time 
when, even from the narrowest technical point of view, the 
art of delivery and the art of defense will have a much higher 
military relevance than supremacy in the atomic munitions 
field itself. 

There are other aspects of the arms race; though they may 
be well known, they are worth mentioning. We developed the 
atomic bomb under the stimulus of the fear that the Germans 
might be at it. We deliberated at length on the use of the 
bomb against Japan; indeed it was Colonel Stimson who 
initiated and presided over these thorough deliberations. We 
decided that it should be used. We have greatly developed 
and greatly increased our atomic activities. This growth, 
though natural technically, is not inevitable. If the Congress 
had appropriated no money, it would not have occurred. We 
have made our decision to push our stockpiles and the power 
of our weapons. We have from the first maintained that we 
should be free to use these weapons; and it is generally 
known we plan to use them. It is also generally known that 
one ingredient of this plan is a rather rigid commitment to 
their use in a very massive, initial, unremitting strategic 
assault on the enemy. 

This arms race has other characteristics. There has been 
relatively little done to secure our defense against the atom; 

66 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 


and in the far more tragic and difficult problem of defend- 
ing our allies in Europe still less has been done. This does 
not promise to be an easy problem. 

Atomic weapons are not just one element of an arsenal 
that we hope may deter the Soviet government, or just one 
of the means we think of for putting an end to a war, once 
started. It is, perhaps, almost the only military measure that 
anyone has in mind to prevent, let us say, a great battle in 
Europe from being a continuing, agonizing, large-scale 
Korea. It is the only military instrument which brings the 
Soviet Union and the United States into contact—a most un- 
comfortable and dangerous contact—with one another. 

Atomic weapons, as everyone knows, have been incorpo- 
rated in the plans for the defense of Europe. They have been 
developed for many tactical military uses, as in the anti- 
submarine campaign, the air campaign, and the ground 
campaign in the European theater; and these potential ap- 
plications continue to ramify and multiply. Yet the Euro- 
peans are rather in ignorance of what these weapons are, how 
many there may be, how they will be used and what they will 
do. It thus needs to be remarked, as we shall need to remark 
again, that for Europe, the atomic weapon is both a much 
needed hope of effective defense and a terrible immediate 
peril, greater even than for this country. 

These are some of the peculiarities of this arms race, 
marked for us by a very great rigidity of policy, and a terri- 
fyingly rapid accumulation, probably on both sides, of a 
deadly munition. When we think of the terms in which we 
in this country tend to talk of the future, the somberness with 

67 


The Open Mind 


which thoughtful men leave a discussion of the subject is not 
wholly ununderstandable. There are two things that everyone 
would like to see happen; but few people, if any, confidently 
believe that they will happen soon. One is a prompt, a hap- 
pily prompt reform or collapse of the enemy. One is a regu- 
lation of armaments as part of a general political settlement 
—an acceptable, hopeful, honorable and humane settlement 
to which we could be a party. 

There is nothing repugnant in these prospects; but they 
may not appear to be very likely in the near future. Most of 
us, and almost all Europeans, appear to regard the outbreak 
of war in this near future as a disaster. Thus the prevailing 
view is that we are probably faced with a long period of cold 
war in which conflict, tension and armaments are to be with 
us. The trouble then is just this: During this period the 
atomic clock ticks faster and faster; we may anticipate a 
state of affairs in which two Great Powers will each be in a 
position to put an end to the civilization and life of the other, 
though not without risking its own. We may be likened to 
two scorpions in a bottle, each capable of killing the other, 
but only at the risk of his own life. 

This prospect does not tend to make for serenity; and the 
basic fact that needs to be communicated is that the time in 
which this will happen is short, compared to the time in 
which reasonable men may have some confidence in a reason- 
able amelioration or even alteration of the great political 
troubles of our time. 

In this prospect, surely, we shall need all the help and 
wisdom and resourcefulness we can muster. This, in all prob- 

68 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 


ability, is a very tough fix. There are three things we need to 
remember, three things that are very sharp. It is perilous to 
forget any one of them. One is the hostility and the power of 
the Soviet. Another is the touch of weakness—the need for 
unity, the need for some stability, the need for armed strength 
on the part of our friends in the Free World. And the third is 
the increasing peril of the atom. 

It is straightforward, if not easy, if we forget the last. It is 
easy if we forget the first. It is hard if we remember all three. 
But they are all there. 

We need the greatest attainable freedom of action. We 
need strength to be able to ask whether our plans for the 
use of the atom are, all things considered, right or wrong. 
We need the freedom of action necessary—and we do not 
have it today—to be able to negotiate, should an opportunity 
for that at some future time appear. 

Much will be needed to bring us this freedom of action. 
Some of it we cannot write about because it has not oc- 
curred to us. Some we cannot write about because it would 
not be proper for anything but official discussion. An ex- 
ample may be the question of whether, under what circum- 
stances, in what manner, and with what purpose to communi- 
cate with the Soviet government on this and related problems. 

But there are three reforms which seem so obvious, so im- 
portant, so sure to be salutary that I should like to discuss 
them briefly. One has to do with making available to our- 
selves, in this tough time, the inherent resources of a country 
like ours and a government like ours. These resources are 
not available today. The second has to do with making avail- 

69 


The Open Mind 


able the resources of a coalition of governments, bound to- 
gether in an alliance, yet at the moment foreclosed from 
discussing one of the principal factors that affects the destiny 
of the alliance and of all its members. The third has to do 
with taking measures to put off, to moderate, to reduce the 
dangers of which we have spoken. I shall deal with each of 
these. 

The first is candor—candor on the part of the officials of 
the United States government to the officials, the representa- 
tives, the people of their country. We do not operate well 
when the important facts, the essential conditions, which 
limit and determine our choice are unknown. We do not 
operate well when they are known, in secrecy and in fear, 
only to a few men. 

The general account of the atomic arms race that has been 
outlined here can, of course, be found in the public press, 
together with a great deal of detailed information, some true, 
and much largely false. This mass of published rumor, fact, 
press release and speculation could yield, upon analysis, a 
fairly solid core of truth; but as it stands, it is not the truth. 
The consequences of such ignorance may seem obvious; but 
we may recall two examples that illustrate well what they are. 

It must be disturbing that an ex-President of the United 
States, who has been briefed on what we know about the 
Soviet atomic capability, can publicly call in doubt all con- 
clusions from the evidence. Perhaps this was primarily be- 
cause it was all so secret that it could not be talked about, or 
thought about, or understood. It must be shocking when this 
doubt, so recently expressed, is compounded by two men, 

70 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 


one of them a most distinguished scientist, who headed one 
of the great projects of the Manhattan District during the 
war, and one of them a brilliant officer, who was in over-all 
charge of the Manhattan District. These two men are not now 
employed by any agency of the government concerned with 
these questions; therefore they did not have access to the 
evidence. Thus their advice is unavailing, their public coun- 
sel wrong. 

A second example may illustrate further. A high officer of 
the Air Defense Command said—and this only a few months 
ago, in a most serious discussion of measures for the con- 
tinental defense of the United States—that it was our policy 
to attempt to protect our striking force, but not really our 
policy to attempt to protect this country, for that is so big a 
job that it would interfere with our retaliatory capabilities. 
Such follies can occur only when even the men who know the 
facts can find no one to talk to about them, when the facts are 
too secret for discussion, and thus for thought. 

The political vitality of our country largely derives from 
two sources. One is the interplay, the conflict of opinion and 
debate, in many diverse and complex agencies, legislative 
and executive, which contribute to the making of policy. The 
other is a public opinion which is based on confidence that 
it knows the truth. 

Today public opinion cannot exist in this field. No respon- 
sible person will hazard an opinion in a field where he be- 
lieves that there is somebody else who knows the truth, and 
where he believes that he does not know it. It is true that 
there are and always will be, as long as we live in danger of 

71 


The Open Mind 


war, secrets that it is important to keep secret, at least for an 
appropriate period, if not for all time; some of these, and im- 
portant ones, are in the field of atomic energy. But knowledge 
of the characteristics and probable effects of our atomic 
weapons, of—in rough terms—the numbers available, and 
of the changes that are likely to occur within the next years, 
this is not among the things to be kept secret. Nor is our gen- 
eral estimate of where the enemy stands. 

Many arguments have been advanced against making pub- 
lic this basic information. Some of these arguments had merit 
in times past. One is that we might be giving vital informa- 
tion to the enemy. My own view is that the enemy has this 
information. It is available to anyone who will trouble to 
make an intelligence analysis of what has been published. 
Private citizens do not do this; but we must expect that the 
enemy does. It is largely available by other means as well. 
It is also my view that it is good for the peace of the world 
if the enemy knows these basic facts—very good indeed, and 
very dangerous if he does not. 

There is another source of worry—that public knowledge 
of the situation might induce in this country a mood of de- 
spair, or a too ready acceptance of what is lightheartedly 
called preventive war. I believe that until we have looked 
this tiger in the eye, we shall be in the worst of all possible 
dangers, which is that we may back into him. More generally, 
I do not think a country like ours can in any real sense sur- 
vive if we are afraid of our people. 

As a first step, but a great one, we need the courage and 
the wisdom to make public at least what, in all reason, the 

72 


Atomie Weapons and American Policy 


enemy must now know: To describe in rough but authorita- 
tive and quantitative terms what the atomic armaments race 
is. It is not enough to say, as our government so often has, 
that we have made “substantial progress.”” When the Ameri- 
can people are responsibly informed, we may not have 
solved, but we shall have a new freedom to face, some of 
the tough problems that are before us. 

There is also need for candor in our dealings at least with 
our major allies. The Japanese are exposed to atomic bom- 
bardment; and it may be very hard to develop adequate 
countermeasures. Space, that happy asset of the United 
States, is not an asset for Japan. It is not an asset for France. 
It is not an asset for England. There are in existence methods 
of delivery of atomic weapons which present an intractable 
problem of interception, and which are relevant for the small 
distances that characterize Europe. It will be some time at 
least before they are relevant for intercontinental delivery. 
These countries will one day feel a terrible pinch, when the 
U.S.S.R. chooses to remind them of what it can do, and do 
very easily—not without suffering, but in a way that the 
Europeans themselves can little deter or deflect. 

There have been arguments for technical collaboration 
with the United Kingdom and Canada; these have often ap- 
peared persuasive. There have been arguments for military 
collaboration with the NATO governments, and with the re- 
sponsible commanders involved; General Bradley and Gen- 
eral Collins both have spoken of this need, partly in order to 
explain to our allies that an atomic bomb will not do all 
things—that it has certain capabilities but it is not the whole 

73 


The Open Mind 


answer. This is surely a precondition for effective planning, 
and for the successful defense of Europe. 

Yet there are much more general reasons. We and our 
allies are in this long struggle together. What we do will 
affect the destiny of Europe; what is done there will affect 
ours; and we cannot operate wisely if a large half of the 
problem we have in common is not discussed in common. 
This does not mean that we should tie our hands. It means 
that we should inform and consult. This could make a healthy 
and perhaps very great change in our relations with Europe. 

It is not clear that the situation even in the Far East would 
be wholly unaffected. It is troublesome to read that a prin- 
cipal reason that we should not use atomic weapons in Korea 
is, that our allies would not like it. We need not argue here 
either that it is right or that it is wrong to use them there. In 
either case, our decisions should rest on far firmer ground 
than that other governments, who know less than we about 
the matter, should hold a different view than ours. It would 
be proper that the Japanese and the British and the many 
other governments immediately involved have a notion of 
what the issues really are. 

Once, clearly, the problem of proper candor at home is 
faced—the problem of a more reasonable behavior toward 
our own people and our representatives and officials with 
regard to the atom—then the problem of dealing with our 
allies will be less troublesome. For it is pretty much the same 
information, the same rough set of facts, that both our people 
and our allies need to have and to understand. 

The third point may seem even more obvious. I do not be- 

74 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 


lieve—though of course we cannot today be certain—that we 
can take measures for the defense of our people, our lives, 
our institutions, our cities, which will in any real sense be a 
permanent solution to the problem of the atom. But that is no 
reason for not doing a little better than we are now doing. 

The current view, as is well known, is not very optimistic. 
Not long ago General Vandenberg estimated that we might, 
with luck, intercept twenty or thirty per cent of an enemy 
attack. That is not very reassuring, when one looks at num- 
bers and casualties, and what it takes to destroy the heart and 
life of our country. For some months now, a highly qualified 
panel, under the chairmanship of Dr. Mervin Kelly, ap- 
pointed by Secretary Lovett and reporting now to Secretary 
Wilson, has studied the complex technical problems of con- 
tinental defense. There are many technical developments 
that have not yet been applied in this field, and that could 
well be helpful. They are natural but substantial develop- 
ments in munitions, in aircraft and in missiles, and in pro- 
cedures for obtaining and analyzing information. Above all, 
there is the challenging problem of the effective use of space; 
there is space between the Soviet Union and the United States. 
This panel, it would appear, has been oppressed and trou- 
bled by the same over-all oppression which any group always 
finds, when it touches seriously any part of the problem of the 
atom. Yet there is no doubt that it will recommend sensible 
ways in which we can proceed to try to defend our lives and 
our country. 

Such measures will inevitably have many diverse mean- 
ings. They will mean, first of all, some delay in the im- 

75 


The Open Mind 


minence of the threat. They will mean a disincentive—a de- 
fensive deterrent—to the Soviet Union. They will mean that 
the time when the Soviet Union can be confident of destroy- 
ing the productive power of America will be somewhat fur- 
ther off—very much further off than if we did nothing. They 
will mean, even to our allies, who are much more exposed 
and probably cannot be well defended, that the continued 
existence of a real and strong America will be a solid cer- 
tainty which should discourage the outbreak of war. 

A more effective defense could even be of great relevance, 
should the time come for serious discussion of the regulation 
of armaments. There will have been by then a vast accumula- 
tion of materials for atomic weapons, and a troublesome 
margin of uncertainty with regard to its accounting—very 
troublesome indeed if we still live with vestiges of the sus- 
picion, the hostility and secretiveness of the world of to- 
day. This will call for a very broad and robust regulation of 
armaments, in which existing forces and weapons are of a 
wholly different order than those required for the destruction 
of one great nation by another, in which steps of evasion will 
be either far too vast to conceal or far too small to have, in 
view of then existing measures of defense, a decisive strategic 
effect. Defense and regulation may thus be necessary comple- 
ments. And here, too, all that we do effectively to contribute 
to our own immunity will be helpful in giving us some 
measure of an increased freedom of action. 

These are three paths that we may take. None of them is a 
wholly new suggestion. They have, over the long years, been 
discussed; but they have not been acted on. In my opinion 

76 


Atomie Weapons and American Policy 


they have not, in any deep sense, been generally understood. 
We need to be clear that there will not be many great atomic 
wars for us, nor for our institutions. It is important that there 
not be one. We need to liberate our own great resources, to 
shape our destiny. 


77 


Physies 
in the Contemporary World 


THIS LECTURE was delivered on 
November 25, 1947, as the second 
Arthur Dehon Little Memorial Lec- 
ture at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology in Cambridge. 


Physies 
in the Contemporary World 


IF I have even in the title of this talk sought to restrict its 
theme, that does not imply an overestimate of physics among 
the sciences, nor a too great myopia for these contemporary 
days. It is rather that I must take my starting point in the 
science in which I have lived and worked, and a time through 
which my colleagues and I are living. 

Nevertheless, I shall be talking tonight about things which 
are quite general for the relations between science and civili- 
zation. For it would seem that in the ways of science, its prac- 
tice, the peculiarities of its discipline and universality, there 

81 


The Open Mind 


are patterns which in the past have somewhat altered, and 
in the future may greatly alter, all that we think about the 
world and how we manage to live in it. What I shall be able 
to say of this will not be rich in exhortation, for this is ground 
that I know how to tread only very lightly. 

But that I should be speaking of such general and such 
difficult questions at all reflects in the first instance a good 
deal of self-consciousness on the part of physicists. This self- 
consciousness is in part a result of the highly critical tradi- 
tions which have grown up in physics in the last half century, 
which have shown in so poignant a way how much the ap- 
plications of science determine our welfare and that of our 
fellows, and which have cast in doubt that traditional opti- 
mism, that confidence in progress, which have characterized 
Western culture since the Renaissance. 

It is, then, about physics rather than of physics that I shall 
be speaking—and there is a great deal of difference. You 
know that when a student of physics makes his first acquaint- 
ance with the theory of atomic structure and of quanta, he 
must come to understand the rather deep and subtle notion 
which has turned out to be the clue to unraveling that whole 
domain of physical experience. This is the notion of comple- 
mentarity, which recognizes that various ways of talking 
about physical experience may each have validity, and may 
each be necessary for the adequate description of the physi- 
cal world, and may yet stand in a mutually exclusive rela- 
tionship to each other, so that to a situation to which one ap- 
plies, there may be no consistent possibility of applying the 
other. Teachers very often try to find illustrations, familiar 

82 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


from experience, for relationships of this kind; and one of 
the most apt is the exclusive relationship between the prac- 
ticing of an art and the description of that practice. Both are 
a part of civilized life. But an analysis of what we do and 
the doing of it—these are hard to bed in the same bed. 

As it did on everything else, the last world war had a 
great and at least a temporarily disastrous effect on the pros- 
ecution of pure science. The demands of military technology 
in this country and in Britain, the equally overriding de- 
mands of the Resistance in much of Europe, distracted the 
physicists from their normal occupations, as they distracted 
most other men. 

We in this country, who take our wars rather spastically, 
perhaps witnessed a more total cessation of true professional 
activity in the field of physics, even in its training, than did 
any other people. For in all the doings of war we, as a coun- 
try, have been a little like the young physicist who went to 
Washington to work for the National Defense Research Com- 
mittee in 1940. There he met his first Civil Service ques- 
tionnaire and came to the questions on drinking: “Never,” 
“occasionally,” “habitually,” “to excess.” He checked both 
“occasionally” and to “to excess.” So, in the past, we have 
taken war. 

All over the world, whether because of the closing of uni- 
versities, or the distractions of scientists called in one way 
or another to serve their countries, or because of devastation 
and terror and attrition, there was a great gap in physical 
science. It has been an exciting and an inspiring sight to 
watch the recovery—a recovery testifying to extraordinary 

83 


The Oper Mind 


vitality and vigor in this human activity. Today, barely two 
years after the end of hostilities, physics is booming. 

One may have gained the impression that this boom de- 
rives primarily from the application of the new techniques 
developed during the war, such as the atomic reactor and 
microwave equipment; one may have gained the impression 
that in large part the flourishing of physics lies in exploita- 
tion of the eagerness of governments to promote it. These 
are indeed important factors. But they are only a small part 
of the story. Without in any way deprecating the great value 
of wartime technology, one nevertheless sees how much of 
what is today new knowledge can trace its origin directly, by 
an orderly yet imaginative extension, to the kind of things 
that physicists were doing in their laboratories and with their 
pencils almost a decade ago. 

Let metry to give a little more substance to the physics that 
is booming. We are continuing the attempt to discover, to 
identify and characterize, and surely ultimately to order, our 
knowledge of what the elementary particles of physics really 
are. I need hardly say that in the course of this we are learn- 
ing again how far our notion of elementarity, of what makes 
a particle elementary, is from the early atomic ideas of the 
Hindu and Greek atomists, or even from the chemical atom- 
ists of a century ago. We are finding out that what we are 
forced to call elementary particles retain neither permanence 
nor identity, and they are elementary only in the sense that 
their properties cannot be understood by breaking them down 
into subcomponents. Almost every month has surprises for 

84 


Physies in the Contemporary World 


us in the findings about these particles. We are meeting new 
ones for which we are not prepared. We are learning how 
poorly we had identified the properties even of our old 
friends among them. We are seeing what a challenging job 
the ordering of this experience is likely to be, and what a 
strange world we must enter to find that order. 

In penetrating into this world perhaps our sharpest tool 
in the past has been the observation of the phenomena of the 
cosmic rays in interaction with matter. But the next years 
will see an important methodological improvement, when 
the great program of ultra-high-energy accelerators begins 
to get under way. This program is itself one of the expensive 
parts of physics. It has been greatly subsidized by the gov- 
ernment, primarily through the Atomic Energy Commission 
and the Office of Naval Research. It is a superlative example, 
of which one could find so many, of the repayment that 
technology makes to basic science, in providing means 
whereby our physical experience can be extended and en- 
riched. 

Another progress is the definement of our knowledge of 
the behavior of electrons within atomic systems, a refine- 
ment which on the one hand is based on the microwave tech- 
niques, to the developments of which the Radiation Lab- 
oratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology made 
unique contributions, and which on the other hand has pro- 
vided a newly vigorous criterion for the adequacy of our 
knowledge of the interactions of radiation and matter. Thus 
we are beginning to see in this field at least a partial resolu- 

83 


The Open Mind 


tion, and I am myself inclined to think rather more than 
that, of the paradoxes that have plagued the professional 
physical theorists for two decades. 

A third advance in atomic physics is in the increasing 
understanding of those forces which give to atomic nuclei 
their great stability, and to their transmutations their great 
violence. It is the prevailing view that a true understanding 
of these forces may well not be separable from the ordering 
of our experience with regard to elementary particles, and 
that it may also turn on an extension to new fields of recent 
advances in electrodynamics. 

However this may be, all of us who are physicists by pro- 
fession know that we are embarked on another great ad- 
venture of exploration and understanding, and count our- 
selves happy for that. 

In how far is this an account of physics in the United 
States only? In how far does it apply to other parts of the 
world, more seriously ravaged and more deeply disturbed 
by the last war? That question may have a somewhat com- 
plex answer, to the varied elements of which one may pay 
respectful attention. 

In much of Europe and in Japan, that part of physics 
which does not rest on the availability of elaborate and radi- 
cal new equipment is enjoying a recovery comparable to our 
own. The traditional close associations of workers in various 
countries makes it just as difficult now to disentangle the 
contributions by nationality as it was in the past. But there 
can be little doubt that it is very much harder for a physicist 
in France, for instance, or the Low Countries, and very much 

86 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


more nearly impossible for him in Japan, to build a giant 
accelerator than it is for the workers in this country. 

Yet in those areas of the world where science has not 
merely been disturbed or arrested by war and by terror, but 
where terror and its official philosophy have, in a deep sense, 
corrupted its very foundations, even the traditional fra- 
ternity of scientists has not proved adequate protection 
against decay. It may not be clear to us in what way and to 
what extent the spirit of scientific inquiry may come to ap- 
ply to matters not yet and perhaps never to be part of the 
domain of science; but that it does apply, there is one very 
brutal indication. Tyranny, when it gets to be absolute, or 
when it tends so to become, finds it impossible to continue to 
live with science. 

Even in the good ways of contemporary physics, we are 
reluctantly made aware of our dependence on things which 
lie outside our science. The experience of the war, for those 
who were called upon to serve the survival of their civiliza- 
tion through the Resistance, and for those who contributed 
more remotely, if far more decisively, by the development 
of new instruments and weapons of war, has left us with a 
legacy of concern. In these troubled times it is not likely that 
we shall be free of it altogether. Nor perhaps is it right that 
we should be. 

Nowhere is this troubled sense of responsibility more 
acute, and surely nowhere has it been more prolix, than 
among those who participated in the development of atomic 
energy for military purposes. I should think that most his- 
torians would agree that other technical developments, no- 

87 


The Open Mind 


tably radar, played a more decisive part in determining the 
outcome of this last war. But I doubt whether that participa- 
tion would have of itself created the deep trouble and moral 
concern which so many of us who were physicists have felt, 
have voiced, and have tried to get over feeling. It is not hard 
to understand why this should be so. The physics which 
played the decisive part in the development of the atomic 
bomb came straight out of war laboratories and our jour- 
nals, 

Despite the vision and the far-seeing wisdom of our war- 
time heads of state, the physicists felt a peculiarly intimate 
responsibility for suggesting, for supporting, and in the end, 
in large measure, for achieving the realization of atomic 
weapons. Nor can we forget that these weapons, as they were 
in fact used, dramatized so mercilessly the inhumanity and 
evil of modern war. In some sort of crude sense which no 
vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement can quite extinguish, 
the physicists have known sin; and this is a knowledge which 
they cannot lose. 

Probably in giving expression to such feelings of concern 
most of us have belabored the influence of science on society 
through the medium of technology. This is natural, since the 
developments of the war years were almost exclusively tech- 
nological, and since the participation of academic scientists! 
forced to be deeply aware of an activity of whose exist: 
ence they had always known but which had been often re. 
mote from them. 

When I was a student at Gottingen twenty years ago, there: 
was a story current about the great mathematician Hilbert 

88 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


who perhaps would have liked, had the world let him, to have 
thought of his science as something independent of worldly 
vicissitudes. Hilbert had a colleague, an equally eminent 
mathematician, Felix Klein, who was certainly aware, if not 
of the dependence of science generally on society, at least of 
the dependence of mathematics on the physical sciences 
which nourish it and give it application. Klein used to take 
some of his students to meet once a year with the engineers 
of the Technical High School in Hanover. One year he was 
ill and asked Hilbert to go in his stead, and urged him, in the 
little talk that he would give, to try to refute the then preva- 
lent notion that there was a basic hostility between science 
and technology. Hilbert promised to do so; but when the time 
came a magnificent absent-mindedness led him instead to 
speak his own mind: “One hears a good deal nowadays of 
the hostility between science and technology. I don’t think 
that is true, gentlemen. I am quite sure that it isn’t true, 
gentlemen. It almost certainly isn’t true. It really can’t be 
true. Sie haben ja gar nichts mit einander zu tun. They have 
nothing whatever to do with one another.” Today the wars 
and the troubled times deny us the luxury of such absent- 
mindedness. 

The great testimony of history shows how often in fact 
the development of science has emerged in response to tech- 
nological and even economic needs, and how in the economy 
of social effort, science, even of the most abstract and recon- 
dite kind, pays for itself again and again in providing the 
basis for radically new technological developments. In fact, 
most people—when they think of science as a good thing, 

389 


The Open Mind 


when they think of it as worthy of encouragement, when they 
are willing to see their governments spend substance upon it, 
when they greatly do honor to men who in science have at- 
tained some eminence—have in mind that the conditions of 
their life have been altered just by such technology, of which 
they may be reluctant to be deprived. 

The debt of science to technology is just as great. Even the 
most abstract researches owe their very existence to things 
that have taken place quite outside of science, and with the 
primary purpose of altering and improving the conditions 
of man’s life. As long as there is a healthy physics, this mu- 
tual fructification will surely continue. Out of its work there 
will come in the future, as so often in the past, and with an 
apparently chaotic unpredictability, things which will im- 
prove man’s health, ease his labor, and divert and edify him. 
There will come things which, properly handled, will shorten 
his working day and take away the most burdensome part of 
his effort, which will enable him to communicate, to travel, 
and to have a wider choice both in the general question of 
how he is to spend his life and in the specific question of how 
he is to spend an hour of his leisure. There is no need to be- 
labor this point, nor its obverse—that out of science there 
will come, as there has in this last war, a host of instruments 
of destruction which will facilitate that labor, even as they 
have facilitated all others. 

But no scientist, no matter how aware he may be of these 
fruits of his science, cultivates his work, or refrains from it, 
because of arguments such as these. No scientist can hope 
to evaluate what his studies, his researches, his experiments 

90 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


may in the end produce for his fellow men, except in one 
respect—if they are sound, they will produce knowledge. 
And this deep complementarity between what may be con- 
ceived to be the social justification of science and what is for 
the individual his compelling motive in its pursuit makes us 
look for other answers to the question of the relation of sci- 
ence to society. 

One of these is that the scientist should assume respon- 
sibility for the fruits of his work. I would not argue against 
this, but it must be clear to all of us how very modest such 
assumption of responsibility can be, how very ineffective it 
has been in the past, how necessarily ineffective it will surely 
be in the future. In fact, it appears little more than exhorta- 
tion to the man of learning to be properly uncomfortable, 
and, in the worst instances, is used as a sort of screen to 
justify the most casual, unscholarly and, in the last analysis, 
corrupt intrusion of scientists into other realms of which 
they have neither experience nor knowledge, nor the patience 
to obtain them. 

The true responsibility of a scientist, as we all know, is to 
the integrity and vigor of his science. And because most sci- 
entists, like all men of learning, tend in part also to be 
teachers, they have a responsibility for the communication of 
the truths they have found. This is at least a collective if not 
an individual responsibility. That we should see in this any 
insurance that the fruits of science will be used for man’s 
benefit, or denied to man when they make for his distress or 
destruction, would be a tragic naiveté. 

There is another side of the coin. This is the question of 

91 


The Open Mind 


whether there are elements in the way of life of the scientist 
which need not be restricted to the professional, and which 
have hope in them for bringing dignity and courage and 
serenity to other men. Science is not all of the life of reason; 
it is a part of it. As such, what can it mean to man? 

Perhaps it would be well to emphasize that J am talking 
neither of wisdom nor of an elite of scientists, but precisely 
of the kind of work and thought, of action and discipline, 
that makes up the everyday professional life of the scientist. 
It is not of any general insight into human affairs that I am 
talking. It is not the kind of thing we recognize in our great- 
est statesmen, after long service devoted to practical affairs 
and to the public interest. It is something very much more 
homely and robust than that. It has in it the kind of beauty 
that is inseparable from craftsmanship and form, but it has 
in it also the vigor that we rightly associate with the simple, 
ordered lives of artisans or of farmers, that we rightly asso- 
ciate with lives to which limitations of scope, and traditional 
ways, have given robustness and structure. 

Even less would it be right to interpret the question of 
what there is in the ways of science that may be of general 
value to mankind in terms of the creation of an elite. The 
study of physics, and I think my colleagues in the other sci- 
ences will let me speak for them too, does not make philoso- 
pher-kings. It has not, until now, made kings. It almost never 
makes fit philosophers—so rarely that they must be counted 
as exceptions. If the professional pursuit of science makes 
good scientists, if it makes men with a certain serenity in 
their lives, who yield perhaps a little more slowly than others 

92 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


to the natural corruptions of their time, it is doing a great 
deal, and all that we may rightly ask of it. For if Plato be- 
lieved that in the study of geometry, a man might prepare 
himself for wisdom and responsibility in the world of men, 
it was precisely because he thought so hopefully that the 
understanding of men could be patterned after the under- 
standing of geometry. If we believe that today, it is in a 
much more recondite sense, and a much more cautious one. 

Where, then, is the point? For one thing, it is to describe 
some of the features of the professional life of the scientist, 
which make of it one of the great phenomena of the con- 
temporary world. Here again I would like to speak of 
physics; but I have enough friends in the other sciences to 
know how close their experience is to ours. And I know too 
that despite profound differences in method and technique, 
differences which surely are an appropriate reflection of the 
difference in the areas of the world under study, what I 
would say of physics will seem familiar to workers in other 
disparate fields, such as mathematics or biology. 

What are some of these points? There is, in the first in- 
stance, a total lack of authoritarianism, which is hard to 
comprehend or to admit unless one has lived with it. This is 
accomplished by one of the most exacting of intellectual dis- 
ciplines. In physics the worker learns the possibility of error 
very early. He learns that there are ways to correct his mis- 
takes; he learns the futility of trying to conceal them. For it 
is not a field in which error awaits death and subsequent 
generations for verdict—the next issue of the journals will 
take care of it. The refinement of techniques for the prompt 

93 


The Open Mind 


discovery of error serves as well as any other as a hallmark 
of what we mean by science. 

In any case, it is an area of collective effort in which there 
is a clear and well-defined community whose canons of taste 
and order simplify the life of the practitioner. It is a field 
in which the technique of experiment has given an almost 
perfect harmony to the balance between thought and action. 
In it we learn, so frequently that we could almost become 
accustomed to it, how vast is the novelty of the world, and 
how much even the physical world transcends in delicacy and 
in balance the limits of man’s prior imaginings. We learn 
that views may be useful and inspiriting although they are 
not complete. We come to have a great caution in all asser- 
tions of totality, of finality or absoluteness. 

In this field quite ordinary men, using what are in the last 
analysis only the tools which are generally available in our 
society, manage to unfold for themselves and all others who 
wish to learn, the rich story of one aspect of the physical 
world, and of man’s experience. We learn to throw away 
those instruments of action and those modes of description 
which are not appropriate to the reality we are trying to dis- 
cern, and in this most painful discipline, find ourselves mod- 
est before the world. 

The question which is so much in our mind is whether a 
comparable experience, a comparable discipline, a com- 
parable community of interest, can in any way be available 
to mankind at large. I suppose that all the professional sci- 
entists together number some one one-hundreth of a per cent 
of the men of the world—even this will define rather gen- 

94 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


erously what we mean by scientists. Scientists as profes- 
sionals are, I suppose, rather sure to constitute a small part 
of our people. 

Clearly, if we raise at all this question that I have raised, 
it must be in the hope that there are other areas of human 
experience that may be discovered or invented or cultivated, 
and to which the qualities which distinguish scentific life may 
be congenial and appropriate. It is natural that serious sci- 
entists, knowing of their own experience something of the 
quality of their profession, should just today be concerned 
about its possible extension. For it is a time when the destruc- 
tion and the evil of the last quarter century make men every- 
where eager to seek all that can contribute to their intellectual 
life, some of the order and freedom and purpose which we 
conceive the great days of the past to have. Of all intellectual 
activity, science alone has flourished in the last centuries, 
science alone has turned out to have the kind of universality 
among men which the times require. I shall be disputed in 
this; but it is near to truth. 

If one looks at past history, one may derive some encour- 
agement for the hope that science, as one of the forms of 
reason, will nourish all of its forms. One may note how in- 
tegral the love and cultivation of science were with the whole 
awakening of the human spirit which characterized the Ren- 
aissance. Or one may look at the late seventeenth and eight- 
eenth centuries in France and England and see what pleasure 
and what stimulation the men of that time derived from the 
growth of physics, astronomy and mathematics. 

What perhaps characterizes these periods of the past, 

95 


The Open Mind 


which we must be careful not to make more heroic because 
of their remoteness, was that there were many men who were 
able to combine in their own lives the activities of a scientist 
with activities of art and learning and politics, and were able 
to carry over from the one into the others this combination 
of courage and modesty which is the lesson that science al- 
ways tries to teach to anyone who practices it. 

And here we come to a point we touched earlier. It is very 
different to hear the results of science, as they may be de- 
scriptively or even analytically taught in a class or in a book 
or in the popular talk of the time; it is very different to hear 
these and to participate even in a modest way in the actual 
attainment of new knowledge. For it is just characteristic of 
all work in scientific fields that there is no authority to whom 
to refer, no one to give canon, no one to blame if the picture 
does not make sense. 

Clearly these circumstances pose a question of great diffi- 
culty in the field of education. For if there is any truth in the 
views that I have outlined, there is all the difference in the 
world between hearing about science or its results and shar- 
ing in the experience of the scientist himself and of that of 
the scientific community. We all know that an awareness of 
this, and an awareness of the value of science as method, 
rather than science as doctrine, underlies the practices of 
teaching to scientist and layman alike. For surely the whole 
notion of incorporating a laboratory in a high school or col- 
lege is a deference to the belief that not only what the sci- 
entist finds but how he finds it is worth learning and teaching 
and worth living through. 

96 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


Yet there is something fake about all this. No one who 
has had to do with elementary instruction can have escaped 
a sense of artificiality in the way in which students are led, 
by the calculations of their instructors, to follow paths which 
will tell them something about the physical world. Precisely 
that groping for what is the appropriate experiment, what 
are the appropriate terms in which to view subtle or complex 
phenomena, which are the substance of scientific effort, al- 
most inevitably are distilled out of it by the natural patterns 
of pedagogy. The teaching of science to laymen is not wholly 
a loss; and here perhaps physics is an atypically bad ex- 
ample. But surely they are rare men who, entering upon a 
life in which science plays no direct part, remember from 
their early courses in physics what science is like or what it 
is good for. The teaching of science is at its best when it is 
most like an apprenticeship. 

President Conant, in his sensitive and thoughtful book On 
Understanding Science, has spoken at length of these matters. 
He is aware of how false it is to separate scientific theory 
from the groping, fumbling, tentative efforts which lead to 
it. He is aware that it is science as method and not as doctrine 
which we should try to teach. His basic suggestion is that we 
attempt to find, in the history of our sciences, stories which 
can be re-created in the instruction and experiment of the 
student and which thus can enable him to see at firsthand 
how error may give way to less error, confusion to less con- 
fusion, and bewilderment to insight. 

The problem that President Conant has here presented is 
indeed a deep one. Yet he would be quite willing, I think, 

97 


The Open Mind 


that I express skepticism that one can re-create the experience 
of science as an artifact. And he would no doubt share my 
concern that science so taught would be corrupt with anti- 
quarianism. It was not antiquarianism but a driving curi- 
osity that inspired in the men of the Renaissance their deep 
interest in classical culture. 

For it is in fact difficult, almost to the point of impossi- 
bility, to re-create the climate of opinion in which substantial 
errors about the physical world, now no longer entertained, 
were not only held but were held unquestioned as part of the 
obvious mode of thinking about reality. It is most difficult 
to do because in all human thought only the tiniest fraction 
of our experience is in focus, and because to this focus a 
whole vast unanalyzed account of experience must be brought 
to bear. Thus I am inclined to think that, with exceptions I 
hope will be many but fear will be few, the attempt to give 
the history of science as a living history will be far more 
difficult than either to tell of the knowledge that we hold to- 
day or to write externally of that history as it may appear 
in the learned books. It could easily lead to a sort of exer- 
cise of mental inventiveness on the part of teachers and stu- 
dents alike which is the very opposite of the candor, the “‘no 
holds barred” rules of Professor Bridgman, that character- 
ize scientific understanding at its best. 

If I am troubled by President Conant’s suggestions, this 
is not at all because I doubt that the suggestions he makes 
are desirable. I do have a deep doubt as to the extent to which 
they may be practical. There is something irreversible about 
acquiring knowledge; and the simulation of the search for it 

98 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


differs in a most profound way from the reality. In fact, it 
would seem that only those who had some firsthand experi- 
ence in the acquisition of new knowledge in some disciplined 
field would be able truly to appreciate how great the science 
of the past has been, and would be able to measure those 
giant accomplishments against their own efforts to penetrate 
a few millimeters farther into darkness that surrounds them. 

Thus it would seem at least doubtful that the spiritual 
fruits of science could be made generally available, either 
by the communication of its results, or by the study of its 
history, or by the necessarily somewhat artificial re-enact- 
ment of its procedures. Rather it would seem that there are 
general features of the scientists’ work the direct experience 
of which in any context could contribute more to this end. 
All of us, I suppose, would list such features and find it hard 
to define the words which we found it necessary to use in our 
lists. But on a few, a common experience may enable us to 
talk in concert. 

In the first instance the work of science is co-operative; a 
scientist takes his colleagues as judges, competitors and col- 
laborators. That does not mean, of course, that he loves his 
colleagues; but it gives him a way of living with them which 
would be not without its use in the contemporary world. The 
work of science is discipline in that its essential inventive- 
ness is most of all dedicated to means for promptly revealing 
error. One may think of the rigors of mathematics and the 
virtuosity of physical experiment as two examples. Science 
is disciplined in its rejection of questions that cannot be an- 
swered and in its grinding pursuit of methods for answering 

99 


The Open Mind 


all that can. Science is always limited, and is in a profound 
sense unmetaphysical, in that it necessarily bases itself upon 
the broad ground of common human experience, tries to re- 
fine it within narrow areas where progress seems possible 
and exploration fruitful. Science is novelty and change. 
When it closes it dies. These qualities constitute a way of life 
which of course does not make wise men from foolish, or 
good men from wicked, but which has its beauty and which 
seems singularly suited to man’s estate on earth. 

If there is to be any advocacy at all in this talk, it would 
be this: that we be very sensitive to all new possibilities of 
extending the techniques and the patterns of science into 
other areas of human experience. Even in saying this we must 
be aware how slow the past development of science has in fact 
been, how much error there has been, and how much in it 
that turned out to be contrary to intellectual health or hon- 
esty. 

We become fully aware of the need for caution if we look 
for a moment at what are called the social problems of the 
day and try to think what one could mean by approaching 
them in the scientific spirit, of trying to give substance, for 
example, to the feeling that a society that could develop 
atomic energy could also develop the means of controlling it. 
Surely the establishment of a secure peace is very much in 
all our minds. It is right that we try to bring reason to bear 
on an understanding of this problem; but for that there are 
available to us no equivalents of the experimental techniques 
of science. Errors of conception can remain undetected and 
even undefined. No means of appropriately narrowing the 

100 


Physics in the Contemporary World 


focus of thinking is known to us. Nor have we found good 
avenues for extending or deepening our experience that 
bears upon this problem. In short, almost all the precondi- 
tions of scientific activity are missing, and in this case, at 
least, one may have a melancholy certainty that man’s in- 
ventiveness will not rapidly provide them. All that we have 
from science in facing such great questions is a memory of 
our professional life, which makes us somewhat skeptical of 
other people’s assertions, somewhat critical of enthusiasms 
so difficult to define and to control. 

Yet the past century has seen many valid and inspiriting 
examples for the extension of science to new domains. As 
even in the case of physics, the initial steps are always con- 
troversial; probably we should not as a group be unanimous 
in saying which of these extensions were hopeful, and which 
not, for the science of the future. But one feature which I 
cannot fail to regard as sound—particularly in the fields of 
biology and psychology—is that they provide an appropriate 
means of correlating understanding and action, and involve 
new experimental procedures in terms of which a new con- 
ceptual apparatus can be defined; above all, they give us 
means of detecting error. In fact, one of the features which 
must arouse our suspicion of the dogmas some of Freud’s 
followers have built up on the initial brilliant works of 
Freud is the tendency toward a self-sealing system, a system, 
that is, which has a way of almost automatically discount- 
ing evidence which might bear adversely on the doctrine. 
The whole point of science is to do just the opposite: to invite 
the detection of error and to welcome it. Some of you may 

101 


The Open Mind 


think that in another field a comparable system has been de- 
veloped by the recent followers of Marx. 

Thus we may hope for an ever-widening and more diverse 
field of application of science. But we must be aware how 
slowly these things develop and how little their development 
is responsive to even the most desperate of man’s needs. For 
me it is an open question, and yet not a trivial one, whether 
in a time necessarily limited by the threats of war and of 
chaos these expanding areas in which the scientific spirit can 
flourish may yet contribute in a decisive way to man’s ra- 
tional life. 

I have had to leave this essential question unanswered: I 
am not at all proud of that. In lieu of apology perhaps I may 
tell a story of another lecturer, speaking at Harvard, a few 
miles from here, two decades ago. Bertrand Russell had given 
a talk on the then new quantum mechanics, of whose wonders 
he was most appreciative. He spoke hard and earnestly in 
the New Lecture Hall. And when he was done, Professor 
Whitehead, who presided, thanked him for his efforts, and 
not least for “leaving the vast darkness of the subject un- 
obscured.” 


102 


VI 


The Encouragement 
of Science 


Tuis was an address made in Wash- 
ington, D. C., on March 7, 1950, to the 
winners of the annual Westinghouse 
Science Talent Search. These were 
high-school students who had shown 
talent in science and who were given 
awards to assist them in further study. 


VI 


The Encouragement 
of Science 


WE ane here tonight to honor you and to celebrate the high 
promise of your future as scientists. We are happy to be 
with you. We think of that future with respect and curiosity. 
We think of the discoveries which you will make. We think 
of the questions to which we today have no answer and to 
which you will come to know an answer. Even more, we 
think of the answers that we have today and of the new 
questions that you will put to those answers. We think of 
how altered and how deepened our knowledge of the world 
will be before you are through with it. My first wish to you 
105 


The Open Mind 


is that you may make and that you may share in the making 
of great and beautiful discoveries which enrich our knowl- 
edge of the world of nature and of man. I have a second wish 
for you; but that must come at the end of my talk. 

I do not propose to talk to you of such topics of the day as 
the hydrogen bomb and the statutory provisions of the Na- 
tional Science Foundation. If these matters are not in a very 
different state when you shall have come to assume the full 
responsibilities of citizenship, you will have reason to re- 
proach your elders for your inheritance. 

Science has profoundly altered the conditions of man’s 
life. During the last centuries, the discoveries in science and 
their applications to practice have changed the material 
conditions of life. They have changed as well many matters 
of the spirit. They have changed the form in which practical 
problems of right and wrong come before us; they have 
changed the focus of moral issues, both for the individual 
and for governments. They have given us new methods for 
defining the meaning of problems that face us and for judg- 
ing whether or not our solutions are just. 

The most manifest of the changes are the material ones. 
Yet even here it takes a certain perspective to see their true 
extent. Advances in the study of man and other living forms 
have extended our life span by decades. Discoveries in physi- 
cal science have immeasurably lightened our toil and en- 
riched our lives. They have given leisure to an ever-widening 
group of men. They have made a reasonable education not 
a special privilege but a common right. They have made the 
world, in its physical dimensions, a small place, and estab- 

106 


The Encouragement of Science 


lished the means by which people in remote parts of the 
earth can communicate with each other, can get to know each 
other, and can learn to work together. They have put at the 
disposal of everyone the resources of physical power, of ease 
and of knowledge that were in the past reserved for the few. 

Not all the changes in material well-being that science 
offers are realities. Yet the very fact that they are possibilities 
has changed the nature of the responsibility which we bear, 
both as individuals and as a community of men and women 
banded together in government. In the Greek cities, political 
democracy and civilization itself appeared possible only on 
the basis of a slave economy. Technology, born of science, 
has altered that; it has enabled mankind, as it has forced 
mankind, to deal with the issues of slavery as a moral issue. 
Poverty has always been an ugly thing, and in its extremes 
a desperate one. Today it is an evil, in the sense that it lies 
within human hands and human hearts to abate it. Science 
can provide us, for the first time in history, with the means 
of abating hunger for everyone on earth. 

Perhaps nowhere has the impact of science more clearly 
altered the specific terms of a great political issue than in 
the effects of scientific development on warfare. This is a can 
of worms with which I have myself unhappily been engaged 
for some years. It would not be honest to say—as it would be 
folly not to hope—that the very terror of modern weapons 
would in itself put an end to war; it would not even be honest 
to say that because of this terror the abolition of war and the 
maintenance of peace have become the one absolute, final 
objective of all political decisions. There are other things in 

107 


The Open Mind 


man’s life—his freedom, his decency, his sense of right and 
wrong—that cannot so lightly be subjected to a single end. 
But what we need to remember is that war today has become, 
and is increasingly becoming, something very different from 
what it was a century ago or a millennium ago. We need to 
recognize the new situation as new; we need to come to it 
with something of the same spirit as the scientist’s when he 
has conducted an experiment and finds that the results are 
totally other than those that he had anticipated. 

Four months before Hiroshima, in the last days of his life, 
President Roosevelt’s thoughts turned to these questions. In 
the last words that he wrote, in words he did not live to speak, 
the President looked to the future, to the atomic age. He 
looked to the past, to the days of the founding of the Re- 
public. He wrote: 

“Thomas Jefferson, himself a distinguished scientist, once 
spoke of the ‘brotherly spirit of science, which unites into 
one family all its votaries of whatever grade, and however 
widely dispersed throughout the different quarters of the 
globe.’ 

“Today science has brought all the different quarters of 
the globe so close together that it is impossible to isolate 
them one from another. 

“Today we are faced with the pre-eminent fact that, if 
civilization is to survive, we must cultivate the science of 
human relationships—the ability of all peoples, of all kinds, 
to live together and work together, in the same world, at 
peace.” 

Science has greatly extended the range of questions in 

108 


The Encouragement of Science 


which man has a choice; it has extended man’s freedom to 
make significant decisions. Is there anything in the methods 
of science itself, or in the spirit of science, which can help in 
the making of these decisions? To what extent is there a play 
on the word science which can mislead us and take us up 
false roads when we speak of this science of human relation- 
ships? Is there anything we can learn from the relevance 
of science to politics? 

If we are to answer these questions and answer them hon- 
estly, we must recognize important and basic differences be- 
tween problems of science and problems of action as they 
arise in personal or in political life. If we fail to recognize 
these differences, we shall be seeking magic solutions and not 
real ones. We shall delude ourselves into laying aside re- 
sponsibility, which it is an essential part of man’s life to bear. 

In most scientific study, questions of good and evil or right 
and wrong play at most a minor and secondary part. For 
practical decisions of policy, they are basic. Without them 
political action would be meaningless. Practical decisions 
and, above all, political decisions can never quite be freed 
from the conflicting claims of special interest. These too are 
part of the meaning of a decision and of a course of action, 
and they must be an essential part of the force of its imple- 
mentation. 

Political decisions are unique acts. In politics there is little 
that can correspond to the scientist’s repetition of an experi- 
ment. An experiment that fails in its purpose may be as good 
or better than one that succeeds, because it may well be more 
instructive. A political decision cannot be taken twice. All 

109 


The Open Mind 


the factors that are relevant to it will conjoin only once. The 
analogies of history can provide a guide, but only a very 
partial one. 

These are formidable differences between the problems of 
science and those of practice. They show that the method of 
science cannot be directly adapted to the solution of prob- 
lems in politics and in man’s spiritual life. Yet there is rele- 
vance of a more subtle but by no means trivial kind. 

In trying more fully to explore this relevance, I should 
like to start with a text. This text is a letter* written by 
Thomas Jefferson to a young man who had inquired of him 
as to the usefulness of his studies of science. It was written 
in the middle of the year 1799, the year in which Napoleon 
abolished the Directory and began to assume dictatorial 
power in France, the year before Thomas Jefferson was 
elected for the first time as President of the United States. 
Jefferson and the diverse brave and hopeful men who with 
him laid the foundations of our own government had learned 
much from the peoples of other nations. Many of their high- 
est political ideals and their most powerful political instru- 
ments were built on the experience, the insight and wisdom 
of European scientists and philosophers. Even today we need 
to remember that this was so, that there may be much we can 
learn from others, and that we should be glad to learn, as in 
turn by example we should be glad to teach. 

Jefferson’s letter starts with a survey of the subjects in 
science which he believes young Munford ought to pursue. 


* Scripta Mathematica 1, 1932, 88-92. 
110 


The Encouragement of Science 


I will quote one characteristic passage which may strike a 
familiar and homely note for you: 

“. . . the science of calculation also is indispensible as 
far as the extraction of the square and cube roots; Algebra as 
far as the quadratic equation and the use of logarithms are 
often of value in ordinary cases: but all beyond these is but a 
luxury; a delicious luxury indeed; but not to be indulged in 
by one who is to have a profession to follow for his subsist- 
ence.” 

But that is not really the part of Jefferson’s letter which I 
commend to you. Here it is: 

“T am among those who think well of the human character 
generally. I consider man as formed for society, and en- 
dowed by nature with those dispositions which fit him for 
society. I believe also, with Condorcet, as mentioned in your 
letter, that his mind is perfectible to a degree of which we 
cannot as yet form any conception. It is impossible for a man 
who takes a survey of what is already known, not to see what 
an immensity in every branch of science yet remains to be 
discovered, and that too of articles to which our faculties 
seem adequate.” 

And later, in the same letter, still more explicitly: 

“. . . and it is still more certain that in the other branches 
of science, great fields are yet to be explored to which our 
faculties are equal, and that to an extent of which we cannot 
fix the limits. I join you therefore in branding as cowardly 
the idea that the human mind is incapable of further ad- 
vances. This is precisely the doctrine which the present des- 

111 


The Open Mind 


pots of the earth are inculcating, and their friends here re- 
echoing; and applying especially to religion and politics; 
‘that it is not probable that any thing better will be discovered 
than what was known to our fathers.’ We are to look back- 
wards then and not forwards for the improvement of science, 
and to find it amidst feudal barbarisms and the fires of 
Spital-fields. But thank heaven the American mind is already 
too much opened, to listen to these impostures; and while 
the art of printing is left to us, science can never be retro- 
grade; what is once acquired of real knowledge can never be 
lost. To preserve the freedom of the human mind then and 
freedom of the press, every spirit should be ready to devote 
itself to martyrdom; for as long as we may think as we will, 
and speak as we think, the condition of man will proceed in 
improvement. The generation which is going off the stage has 
deserved well of mankind for the struggles it has made, and 
for having arrested that course of despotism which had over- 
whelmed the world for thousands and thousands of years. If 
there seems to be danger that the ground they have gained 
will be lost again, that danger comes from the generation 
your cotemporary. But that the enthusiasm which character- 
ises youth should lift it’s parracide hands against freedom 
and science would be such a monstrous phaenomenon as I 
cannot place among possible things in this age and this 
country.” 

To me there are two striking impressions which this letter 
of Jefferson’s makes, even beyond its eloquence and its 
beauty. The first is that the letter is pervaded with the idea of 
progress, that ideal that owes so much to the development of 

112 


The Encouragement of Science 


science and that in turn has provided the great enriching 
human faith in which scientific discovery and invention have 
flourished. Jefferson is confident that an increased under- 
standing of the world will lead to progress; he is convinced 
that the barbarisms of the past cannot stand up against in- 
quiry and understanding and enlightenment; he is confident 
in man and sure that as men know more they will act more 
wisely and live better. In our contemporary expressions of 
hope that catastrophe can be averted and civilization yet 
be saved, that confidence has lost much of its robustness. 
The second point is that for Jefferson there is something 
in the ways of science that is relevant to political life. Even 
in religion and politics, he holds that it is probable that things 
better will be discovered than what was known to our fathers. 
This conviction that new knowledge is possible, and that not 
all the answers are known, is of course the stuff of the day- 
to-day life of the scientist. Science itself does progress; new 
knowledge is possible; and new knowledge, because it does 
not destroy or ignore the old, can only increase our under- 
standing. The very idea of the development of science is an 
example of progress, and of progress which in no true sense 
can ever be reversed. But this is only part of the story. It is 
true, as Jefferson knew, that in the large, science has flour- 
ished in conditions of human freedom, and that its growth is 
parallel to the growth of democratic institutions. Today, 
looking back on more than a century and a half of further 
history, we can be even more sure of this. We have seen not 
only the inspiring example of science and democracy 
flourishing together, but the tragic examples of their found- 
113 


The Open Mind 


ering together. We express the hope that of this tragedy we 
shall soon have seen the end. 

What are these lessons that the spirit of science teaches 
us for our practical affairs? Basic to them all is that there 
may be no barriers to freedom of inquiry. Basic to them all 
is the ideal of openmindedness with regard to new knowl- 
edge, new experience and new truth. Science is not based on 
authority. It owes its acceptance and its universality to an 
appeal to intelligible, communicable evidence that any in- 
terested man can evaluate. 

There is no place for dogma in science. The scientist is 
free to ask any question, to doubt any assertion, to seek for 
any evidence, to correct any error. Where science has been 
used in the past to erect a new dogmatism, that dogmatism 
has found itself incompatible with the progress of science; 
and in the end, the dogma has yielded, or science and free- 
dom have perished together. 

Our own political life is predicated on opennness. We do 
not believe any group of men adequate enough or wise 
enough to operate without scrutiny or without criticism. We 
know that the only way to avoid error is to detect it, that the 
only way to detect it is to be free to inquire. We know that 
the wages of secrecy are corruption. We know that in secrecy 
error, undetected, will flourish and subvert. 

Let me be clear. Science is not skepticism. It is not the 
practice of science to look for things to doubt. It was not by 
a deliberate attempt of skepticism that physicists were led 
to doubt the absolute nature of simultaneity, or to recognize 
that the ideas of strict causality embodied in classical physics 

114 


The Encouragement of Science 


could not be applied in the domain of atomic phenomena. 
There is probably no group of men who take more for 
granted in their daily work than the scientists. Common sense 
and all that flows from it are their principal basis for what 
they do in the laboratory and for what they make of it on 
paper. But for scientists it is not only honorable to doubt; it 
is mandatory to do that when there appears to be evidence in 
support of the doubt. In place of authority in science we have 
and we need to have only the consensus of informed opinion, 
only the guide of example. No scientist needs to order his 
colleagues to use a new technique of experiment or to enter 
a new field of discovery. If he has done this, it will be an 
invitation to his fellows to follow. 

These, then, are some of the attitudes of mind, these are 
some of the disciplines of spirit which grow naturally in the 
scientist’s world. They have grown there in part as a result 
of a humane and liberal tradition in political life and in part 
as a cause of that. The open mind, the reliance on example 
and persuasion rather than on authority—these are the herit- 
age of the centuries in which science has altered the face of 
the earth. Science can help in diverse ways in preserving 
and extending this heritage. Its very universality speaks 
across frontiers to make truth manifest in lands otherwise 
darkened; its material applications create the preconditions 
—in leisure, in education, in means of communication—for 
the converse of men with one another. Science provides the 
material and the intellectual basis for a world in which ex- 
ample and understanding can help all men to improve their 
lot and fulfill their hopes. Today we need to remember that 

115 


The Open Mind 


our country, founded on these practices and grown strong 
by their exercise, owes its strength to them. In this time of 
crisis, we need to cherish that strength. 

And this brings me to my second wish for you. I wish you 
not only the joy of great discovery; I wish for you a world 
of confidence in man and man’s humanity, a world of confi- 
dence in reason, so that as you work you may be inspired by 
the hope that what you find will make men freer and better— 
in which, working as specialists in what may be recondite 
parts of the intellectual life of the time, you are nevertheless 
contributing in a direct and basic way to the welfare of man- 


kind. 


116 


VII 


The Scientist 
in Society 


THIS TALK was given on January 1, 
1953, to a meeting of the Association 
of Princeton Graduate Alumni at 
Princeton, New Jersey. 


VII 


The Scientist 
in Society 


THERE Is something inherently comforting about a panel of 
experts. One knows that the partial and inadequate and 
slanted and personal views that he expresses will be cor- 
rected by the less partial, less personal views of everyone 
else on the panel; it is not unlike the experience of the pro- 
fessor who always is glad that he has to meet his class again 
because he can correct the mistakes that he made the last 
time. It is with such tentativeness that I am going to talk to 
you. 

This is a vast terrain—one full of strange precipices, 

119 


The Open Mind 


chasms and terrors. What I thought I would do first is to run 
over in a quite synoptic way a few general opinions, almost 
words only, which seem to me involved in the relations be- 
tween science and man’s life. It is my hope that I will do this 
with enough baldness so that you will pick up some of these 
words and deal with them more fully and more wisely than 
in this summary. I will then devote a little time to one prob- 
lem which seems to me singularly fit in this hall and in this 
company, which worries me a great deal, and as to a resolu- 
tion for which I have only the most rudimentary notions. 

For one thing, we have changed the face of the earth; we 
have changed the way men live. We may not change the 
condition of man’s life, but we have changed all modes in 
which that condition occurs. I do not by this mean to say that 
from the existence of science, from the discovery, knowl- 
edge, technique and power of science the particularities of the 
present time follow. But we all know that if life today is very 
different from what it was two hundred years ago, if we meet 
our human and political problems in a quite new form, that 
has much to do with the fact that we know how to do a great 
many things, and that there are people who are eager to do 
them, not typically scientists, but people who are glad to use 
the knowledge and with it the control which science has made 
available. 

I need not belittle two points. One is that the effect of sci- 
ence on the condition of man’s life is also in part a cultural 
and intellectual one. I shall return to that because it is my 
persuasion that this is largely a happy symbiosis of the past; 
today we have very little of it. The ideas which have changed 

120 


The Scientist in Society 


the thinking caps of men and which derived from experience 
in science are really not contemporary ideas but go back a 
century or two centuries or more. 

The second, of course, is not to try to give to scientific life 
an autonomy of society. It is possible, manifestly, for society 
so to arrange things that there is no science. The Nazis made 
a good start in that direction; maybe the Communists will 
achieve it; and there is not one of us free of the worry that 
this flourishing tree may someday not be alive any more. 

But nonetheless we have changed the face of the earth; any 
beginning of a talk about science and society must take that 
as a fact. 

There is another theme. This is a time that tends to believe 
in progress. Our ways of thought, our ways of arranging our 
personal lives, our political forms, point to the future, point 
not merely to change, to decay, to alteration, but point with 
a hopeful note of improvement that our progress is inevitable. 
In the acquisition of knowledge, in the very notion of a cumu- 
lative discipline, tomorrow in a certain sense comprises to- 
day and yesterday. How much this built-in sense of progress 
in man’s life—which is, I think, not a religious notion, not 
a Christian notion—how much this derives from the effects 
of science on philosophical and political thought I would 
leave to historians of ideas. It is probably not wholly trivial. 

A third theme is that science in a certain sense is universal. 
It is not universal in the sense that all men participate in it. It 
is universal in the sense that all men can participate in it. 
It is nonnational, nonlocal and, although one would not say 
noncultural, singularly independent of the form of govern- 

121 


The Open Mind 


ment, the immediate tradition, or the affective life of a peo- 
ple. It has to do with humanitas. This universality is not 
a trivial thing at a time when forms of unity, large forms of 
unity in the world, appear to be for other reasons rather 
necessary. This has been very much in all our minds in the 
years since the last war. I remember that on one occasion 
when I was in this hall, at the Bicentennial of the University, 
we were talking about the universality of science; and at that 
very moment the Soviet delegate to the United Nations 
Atomic Energy Commission was imploring his government 
for permission to accept the scientific and technical report of 
the subcommittee of this commission. This, I think, is the last 
time—the last time I remember—that the Soviet government 
has said yes to anything, has said yes to an agreement of fact. 
I know how bitterly disappointing the experiences of these 
years have been as to universality of science, but we all know 
that this is bad politics but not bad science. We all know 
that there is no such thing as German physics or Soviet 
genetics or American astronomy. These fields can open them- 
selves to all reasonable men willing to take the trouble to 
inquire. 

There is also what may first seem like the opposite of uni- 
versality; I hope you will bear that in mind when I talk of 
science as a great and beautiful word. There is a unity to it; 
but there is also an even more striking and immense diversity. 
Both of your speakers this morning are physicists, and I think 
we are very different from our brothers the chemists and our 
brothers the mathematicians. In our values, in our style, we 
are different. Physics is perhaps the branch of science which 

122 


The Scientist in Society 


has been most concerned to keep itself one. The Physical 
Society splits off divisions from time to time but is reluctant 
to do so; and the divisions largely have to do with semi- 
applied science. Physics has a history of close association 
with mathematics, with astronomy, with epistemology and 
cosmology too. And yet we do not know very much about the 
rest of the scientists. I know that it is a very happy occasion 
at the Institute when some piece of work turns up which is 
of interest to both the mathematicians and the physicists. It is 
a very rare occasion and we tend to ring bells when a small 
bit of cement can be found between their interests. I would 
stress especially that there is no systematic unity of tech- 
niques, of appreciation, of values, of style between the many 
things that we call science. There is a lot of difference be- 
tween the nuclear physicist and the agricultural scientist ex- 
ploring the possibility of improving crops in some poor 
island in the Caribbean. They are scientists, and they under- 
stand each other, and we hope love each other. But they are 
not very much alike. 

There are perhaps two or three other general things. One 
I believe may be of more importance to some of the other 
panels than to this. This is one of the by-products of the 
great flowering of science that dates back to the time when 
science did have an effect on culture and ou ideas. We have 
been impressed, and I must say I never stop being impressed, 
by the great sweep of general order in which particulars are 
recognized as united. You know the examples: electricity and 
light, the quantum theory and the theory of valence, places 
where things that appeared to be separate, and each having 

123 


The Open Mind 


its own order, appear as illustrations of a more general 
order. And one may say, I suppose, that science is a search 
for regularity and order in those domains of experience 
which have proven accessible to it. 

I am not sure that the effect of the impressive victory of 
man’s mind in this enterprise has not been to make us a little 
obtuse to the role of the contingent and the particular in life. 
It is true that many particulars can be understood and sub- 
sumed by a general order. But it is probably no less a great 
truth that elements of abstractly irreconcilable general orders 
can be subsumed by a particular. And this notion might be 
more useful to our friends who study man and his life than 
an insistence on following the lines which in natural science 
have been so overwhemingly successful. 

There is another great complex of questions. These I feel 
reassured to mention hardly at all because my friend and 
successor Dr. Waterman has thought so deeply about them; 
he is perhaps as well informed as any man in the world. 
This has to do with the great variety of means whereby so- 
ciety patronizes science, whereby it is possible for the sci- 
entist to operate and live and eat and do his work, get in some 
sense a bit of encouragement and in some sense a bit of 
nourishment. The problem of patronage is a complex one; it 
is changing; it has changed enormously in the last decade in 
this country. I leave it with a good conscience to Alan Water- 
man that he may deal with it wisely. 

What is it, then, that bothers me especially, that I want 
not merely to mention but to worry about here? I think that 
in this matter perhaps this panel is not so different than the 

124 


The Scientist in Society 


panel on the role of the artist, or the panel on the role of the 
philosopher. To put it with great brutality, the point is that 
the scientist is not in society today, any more than is the artist 
or the philosopher. 

Of course, he does get paid, he does get patronized and 
even, for odd reasons that he sometimes does not understand, 
respected. But he is not in society, in the sense that the ideas 
he has, the work he is doing, stop really rather short with the 
limits of his profession. They are not part of the intellectual 
and cultural life of the times. I am over and over again ap- 
palled by how ignorant, how incredibly ignorant of the most 
rudimentary things about my subject are my fellows the 
historians, my acquaintances the statesmen, my friends the 
men of affairs. They have no notion of what cooks in physics; 
I think that they have very little notion of what cooks in any 
other science. And I know that only by good luck and some 
hard work do I have even a rudimentary notion of what cooks 
in other parts of the house called science than the one that I 
live in. I read the Physical Review and work very hard to 
catch up with it every two weeks; and I think maybe I have 
some notion of what is going on in some parts of physics; 
but by and large we know little about one another, and the 
world outside knows nothing about us. I think this may vary 
a little from place to place. Perhaps it is tradition in Britain, 
where there is a sort of deliberate tendency, a national tend- 
ency, to refuse to let things become obscure and recondite, 
that there is a little more effort to see that civilized men have 
a notion of what the mathematicians and astronomers and 
physicists are doing—not merely to know the by-products of 

125 


The Open Mind 


their works, the practical products, but what they are think- 
ing. 

This is in very sharp contrast, this startling general igno- 
rance of scientific ideas and discoveries at the edge of the 
technical disciplines, in very sharp contrast to the state of 
affairs two or three centuries ago; and some of the reasons 
for this are manifest. But I believe that the science of today 
is subtler, richer, more relevant to man’s life and more useful 
to man’s dignity than the science which had such a great 
effect on the age of the enlightenment, had such a great effect, 
among other things, on the forms and patterns, traditions and 
hopes—reflected in our Constitution—of human society. 
Science is not retrograde; and there is no doubt that the 
quantum mechanics represents a more interesting, more in- 
structive, richer analogy of human life than Newtonian me- 
chanics could conceivably be. There is no doubt that even 
the theory of relativity, which has been so much vulgarized 
and so little understood, that even the theory of relativity is 
a matter which would be of real interest to people at large. 
There is no doubt that the findings of biology and astronomy 
and chemistry are discoveries that would enrich our whole 
culture if they were understood. And what is perhaps more 
troublesome, there is a gulf between the life of the scientist 
and the life of a man who isn’t actively a scientist, danger- 
ously deep. The experience of science—to stub your toe hard 
and then notice that it was really a rock on which you stubbed 
it—this experience is something that is hard to communicate 
by popularization, by education, or by talk. It is almost as 
hard to tell a man what it is like to find out something new 

126 


The Scientist in Society 


about the world as it is to describe a mystical experience to 
a chap who has never had any hint of such an experience. 

The enlightenment was a peculiar time; it was hopeful, 
and superficial, and humane; and how much of the ideas of 
the enlightenment derived from an appreciation of science, 
it is perhaps not right for anyone but a careful historian to 
say. But we know that the same men who wrote about politics 
and philosophy—not very good philosophy. and not too good 
politics—also wrote about natural science, about physics, 
and astronomy, and mathematics. We know that on two very 
different planes Franklin and Jefferson managed to span the 
whole way from a living, and in some cases even practicing, 
interest in science to the world of affairs. And we know how 
full their writings are of the illumination which one sheds 
on the other. 

Science in those days was connected with the practical 
arts; it was very close to common sense. Yet always there is 
in science little more than the infinitely diligent and patient 
and unremitting application of the practical arts and common 
sense. By now it has come to be a long chain. The mere proc- 
ess of carrying a boy through the elementary steps of this 
chain consumes so much of his life and is such an exhausting 
operation, to the teacher and student alike, that the simple 
means of communication and understanding, which sufficed 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, are clearly not 
good enough. 

This is a problem that has had the thought of many wise 
people; I do not pretend to be talking of anything new or 
strange. I suppose the notion of having laboratory courses 

127 


The Open Mind 


was an attempt to bring the young man and woman into this 
experience of really discovering something; yet my fear is 
that by the time it gets into the laboratory and the professor 
knows the answer, the whole operation is different; it is an 
imitation and not the real thing. I suppose all of you have 
read the eloquent pleas which a number of scientists, of 
whom perhaps President Conant is the best known, have 
made for attempting to communicate some understanding of 
science by what is essentially the historical method. These 
do, I think, establish the fact that science as a human activity 
is treatable by the historical method. They do not, I think, 
establish that a scientific method, or a scientific discovery, is 
communicable by these means. I have a great anxiety that 
our educational directions, far from making us a part of the 
world we live in, in this very special sense that we share 
ideas and some bit of experience with our fellow men, may 
even be moving rather in the opposite direction. 

This is odd: we live in the world very much affected by 
science, and even our thinking caps, and our ideas and the 
terms in which we tend to talk about things, the notion of 
progress, the notion of a fraternity of scholars and scientists 
which is so familiar to a Christian life and which has a new 
twist because of the spread of science—all of these we can 
see originally at a time when science was understood by men 
of affairs, by artists, by poets. We live today in a world in 
which poets and historians and men of affairs are proud that 
they wouldn’t even begin to consider thinking about learning 
anything of science, regarding it as the far end of a tunnel 
too long for any wise man to put his head into. We therefore 

128 


The Scientist in Society 


have, in so far as we have at all, a philosophy that is quite 
anachronistic and, I am convinced, quite inadequate to our 
times. I think that whatever may have been thought of Carte- 
sian and Newtonian reforms in the intellectual life of Eu- 
rope, the time when these were what the doctor ordered— 
all that the doctor ordered—is long past. Far more subtle 
recognition of the nature of man’s knowledge and of his rela- 
tions to the universe is certainly long overdue, if we are to 
do justice to the wisdom which our tradition has in it and 
to the brilliant and ever-changing flower of discovery which 
is modern science. 

Research is action; and the question I want to leave in a 
very raw and uncomfortable form with you is how to com- 
municate this sense of action to our fellow men who are not 
destined to devote their lives to the professional pursuit of 
new knowledge. 


129 


Vill 


Prospects 
in the Arts and Sciences 


Tus was the concluding lecture in a 
series dedicated to “Man's Right to 
Knowledge and the Free Use Thereof” 
which was part of the celebration of 
Columbia University’s Bicentennial. 
The talk was recorded in November 
1954, and first broadcast by the Co- 
lumbia Broadcasting System on De- 
cember 26, 1954. 


VI 


Prospects 
in the Arts and Sciences 


THE worDs “prospects in the arts and sciences” mean two 
quite different things to me. One is prophecy: What will the 
scientists discover and the painters paint, what new forms 
will alter music, what parts of experience will newly yield 
to objective description? The other meaning is that of a view: 
What do we see when we look at the world today and com- 
pare it with the past? I am not a prophet; and I cannot very 
well speak to the first subject, though in many ways I should 
like to. I shall try to speak to the second, because there are 
some features of this view which seem to me so remarkable, 
133 


The Open Mind 


so new and so arresting, that it may be worth turning our 
eyes to them; it may even help us to create and shape the 
future better, though we cannot foretell it. 

In the arts and in the sciences, it would be good to be a 
prophet. It would be a delight to know the future. I had 
thought for a while of my own field of physics and of those 
nearest to it in the natural sciences. It would not be too hard 
to outline the questions which natural scientists today are 
asking themselves and trying to answer. What, we ask in 
physics, is matter, what is it made of, how does it behave 
when it is more and more violently atomized, when we try 
to pound out of the stuff around us the ingredients which 
only violence creates and makes manifest? What, the chem- 
ists ask, are those special features of nucleic acids and pro- 
teins which make life possible and give it its characteristic 
endurance and mutability? What subtle chemistry, what ar- 
rangements, what reactions and controls make the cells of 
living organisms differentiate so that they may perform func- 
tions as oddly diverse as transmitting information throughout 
our nervous systems or covering our heads with hair? What 
happens in the brain to make a record of the past, to hide it 
from consciousness, to make it accessible to recall? What are 
the physical features which make consciousness possible? 

All history teaches us that these questions that we think 
the pressing ones will be transmuted before they are an- 
swered, that they will be replaced by others, and that the 
very process of discovery will shatter the concepts that we 
today use to describe our puzzlement. 

It is true that there are some who profess to see in matters 

134 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


of culture, in matters precisely of the arts and sciences, a 
certain macrohistorical pattern, a grand system of laws 
which determines the course of civilization and gives a kind 
of inevitable quality to the unfolding of the future. They 
would, for instance, see the radical, formal experimentation 
which characterized the music of the last half-century as an 
inevitable consequence of the immense flowering and enrich- 
ment of natural science; they would see a necessary order in 
the fact that innovation in music precedes that in painting 
and that in turn in poetry, and point to this sequence in older 
cultures. They would attribute the formal experimentation 
of the arts to the dissolution, in an industrial and technical 
society, of authority—of secular, political authority, and of 
the catholic authority of the church. They are thus armed 
to predict the future. But this, I fear, is not my dish. 

If a prospect is not a prophecy, it is a view. What does 
the world of the arts and sciences look like? There are two 
ways of looking at it: One is the view of the traveler, going 
by horse or foot, from village to village to town, staying in 
each to talk with those who live there and to gather something 
of the quality of its life. This is the intimate view, partial, 
somewhat accidental, limited by the limited life and strength 
and curiosity of the traveler, but intimate and human, in a 
human compass. The other is the vast view, showing the earth 
with its fields and towns and valleys as they appear to a 
camera carried in a high-altitude rocket. In one sense this 
prospect will be more complete; one will see all branches of 
knowledge, one will see all the arts, one will see them as part 
of the vastness and complication of the whole of human life 

135 


The Open Mind 


on earth. But one will miss a great deal; the beauty and 
warmth of human life will largely be gone from that 
prospect. 

It is in this vast high-altitude survey that one sees the gen- 
eral surprising quantitative features that distinguish our 
time. This is where the listings of science and endowments 
and laboratories and books published show up; this is where 
we learn that more people are engaged in scientific research 
today than ever before, that the Soviet world and the free 
world are running neck and neck in the training of scientists, 
that more books are published per capita in England than 
in the United States, that the social sciences are pursued 
actively in America, Scandinavia, and England, that there 
are more people who hear the great music of the past, and 
more music composed and more paintings painted. This is 
where we learn thatthe arts and sciences are flourishing. This 
great map, showing the world from afar and almost as to a 
stranger, would show more: It would show the immense di- 
versity of culture and life, diversity in place and tradition 
for the first time clearly manifest on a world-wide scale, 
diversity in technique and language, separating science from 
science and art from art, and all of one from all of the other. 
This great map, world-wide, culture-wide, remote, has some 
odd features. There are innumerable villages. Between the 
villages there appear to be almost no paths discernible from 
this high altitude. Here and there passing near a village, 
sometimes through its heart, there will be a superhighway, 
along which windy traffic moves at enormous speed. The 
superhighways seem to have little connection with villages, 

136 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


starting anywhere, ending anywhere, and sometimes appear- 
ing almost by design to disrupt the quiet of the village. This 
view gives us no sense of order or of unity. To find these we 
must visit the villages, the quiet, busy places, the laboratories 
and studies and studios. We must see the paths that are 
barely discernible; we must understand the superhighways 
and their dangers. 

In the natural sciences these are and have been and are 
likely to continue to be heroic days. Discovery follows dis- 
covery, each both raising and answering questions, each end- 
ing a long search, and each providing the new instruments 
for a new search. There are radical ways of thinking un- 
familiar to common sense and connected with it by decades 
or centuries of increasingly specialized and unfamiliar ex- 
perience. There are lessons of how limited, for all its variety, 
the common experience of man has been with regard to 
natural phenomena, and hints and analogies as to how 
limited may be his experience with man. Every new finding 
is a part of the instrument kit of the sciences for further in- 
vestigation and for penetrating into new fields. Discoveries 
of knowledge fructify technology and the practical arts, and 
these in turn pay back refined techniques, new possibilities of 
observation and experiment. 

In any science there is harmony between practitioners. A 
man may work as an individual, learning of what his col- 
leagues do through reading or conversation; he may be work- 
ing as a member of a group on problems whose technical 
equipment is too massive for individual effort. But whether 
he is a part of a team or solitary in his own study, he, as a 

137 


The Open Mind 


professional, is a member of a community. His colleagues in 
his own branch of science will be grateful to him for the in- 
ventive or creative thoughts he has, will welcome his criti- 
cism. His world and work will be objectively communicable; 
and he will be quite sure that if there is error in it, that error 
will not long be undetected. In his own line of work he lives 
in a community where common understanding combines with 
common purpose and interest to bind men together both in 
freedom and in co-operation. 

This experience will make him acutely aware of how 
limited, how inadequate, how precious is this condition of 
his life; for in his relations with a wider society, there will 
be neither the sense of community nor of objective under- 
standing. He will sometimes find, in returning to practical 
undertakings, some sense of community with men who are 
not expert in his science, with other scientists whose work is 
remote from his, and with men of action and men of art. The 
frontiers of science are separated now by long years of study, 
by specialized vocabularies, arts, techniques, and knowledge 
from the common heritage even of a most civilized society; 
and anyone working at the frontier of such science is in that 
sense a very long way from home, a long way too from the 
practical arts that were its matrix and origin, as indeed they 
were of what we today call art. 

The specialization of science is an inevitable accompani- 
ment of progress; yet it is full of dangers, and it is cruelly 
wasteful, since so much that is beautiful and enlightening is 
cut off from most of the world. Thus it is proper to the role 
of the scientist that he not merely find new truth and com- 

138 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


municate it to his fellows, but that he teach, that he try to 
bring the most honest and intelligible account of new knowl- 
edge to all who will try to learn. This is one reason—it is 
the decisive organic reason—why scientists belong in univer- 
sities. It is one reason why the patronage of science by and 
through universities is its most proper form; for it is here, 
in teaching, in the association of scholars and in the friend- 
ships of teachers and taught, of men who by profession must 
themselves be both teachers and taught, that the narrowness 
of scientific life can best be moderated, and that the analo- 
gies, insights, and harmonies of scientific discovery can find 
their way into the wider life of man. 

In the situation of the artist today there are both analogies 
to and differences from that of the scientist; but it is the 
differences which are the most striking and which raise the 
problems that touch most on the evil of our day. For the artist 
it is not enough that he communicate with others who are 
expert in his own art. Their fellowship, their understanding, 
and their appreciation may encourage him; but that is not 
the end of his work, nor its nature. The artist depends on a 
common sensibility and culture, on a common meaning of 
symbols, on a community of experience and common ways 
of describing and interpreting it. He need not write for every- 
one or paint or play for everyone. But his audience must be 
man; it must be man, and not a specialized set of experts 
among his fellows. Today that is very difficult. Often the 
artist has an aching sense of great loneliness, for the com- 
munity to which he addresses himself is largely not there; 
the traditions and the culture, the symbols and the history, 

139 


The Open Mind 


the myths and the common experience, which it is his func- 
tion to illuminate, to harmonize, and to portray, have been 
dissolved in a changing world. 

There is, it is true, an artificial audience maintained to 
moderate between the artist and the world for which he 
works: the audience of the professional critics, popularizers, 
and advertisers of art. But though, as does the popularizer 
and promoter of science, the critic fulfills a necessary pres- 
ent function and introduces some order and some communi- 
cation between the artist and the world, he cannot add to the 
intimacy and the directness and the depth with which the 
artist addresses his fellow men. 

To the artist’s loneliness there is a complementary great 
and terrible barrenness in the lives of men. They are de- 
prived of the illumination, the light and tenderness and in- 
sight of an intelligible interpretation, in contemporary terms, 
of the sorrows and wonders and gaieties and follies of man’s 
life. This may be in part offset, and is, by the great growth 
of technical means for making the art of the past available. 
But these provide a record of past intimacies between art and 
life; even when they are applied to the writing and painting 
and composing of the day, they do not bridge the gulf be- 
tween a society, too vast and too disordered, and the artist 
trying to give meaning and beauty to its parts. 

In an important sense this world of ours is a new world, 
in which the unity of knowledge, the nature of human com- 
munities, the order of society, the order of ideas, the very 
notions of society and culture have changed and will not 
return to what they have been in the past. What is new is new 

140 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


not because it has never been there before, but because it 
has changed in quality. One thing that is new is the preva- 
lence of newness, the changing scale and scope of change 
itself, so that the world alters as we walk in it, so that the 
years of man’s life measure not some small growth or rear- 
rangement or moderation of what he learned in childhood, 
but a great upheaval. What is new is that in one generation 
our knowledge of the natural world engulfs, upsets, and com- 
plements all knowledge of the natural world before. The 
techniques, among which and by which we live, multiply and 
ramify, so that the whole world is bound together by com- 
munication, blocked here and there by the immense synapses 
of political tyranny. The global quality of the world is new: 
our knowledge of and sympathy with remote and diverse 
peoples, our involvement with them in practical terms, and 
our commitment to them in terms of brotherhood. What is 
new in the world is the massive character of the dissolution 
and corruption of authority, in belief, in ritual, and in tem- 
poral order. Yet this is the world that we have come to live 
in. The very difficulties which it presents derive from growth 
in understanding, in skill, in power. To assail the changes 
that have unmoored us from the past is futile, and in a deep 
sense, I think, it is wicked. We need to recognize the change 
and learn what resources we have. 

Again I will turn to the schools and, as their end and as 
their center, the universities. For the problem of the scientist 
is in this respect not different from that of the artist or of the 
historian. He needs to be a part of the community, and the 
community can only with loss and peril be without him. Thus 

141 


The Open Mind 


it is with a sense of interest and hope that we see a growing 
recognition that the creative artist is a proper charge on the 
university, and the university a proper home for him; that 
a composer or a poet or a playwright or painter needs the 
toleration, understanding, the rather local and parochial pa- 
tronage that a university can give; and that this will protect 
him from the tyranny of man’s communication and profes- 
sional promotion. For here there is an honest chance that 
what the artist has of insight and of beauty will take root in 
the community, and that some intimacy and some human 
bonds can mark his relations with his patrons. For a univer- 
sity rightly and inherently is a place where the individual 
man can form new syntheses, where the accidents of friend- 
ship and association can open a man’s eyes to a part of 
science or art which he had not known before, where parts 
of human life, remote and perhaps superficially incompat- 
ible, can find in men their harmony and their synthesis. 

These, then, in rough and far too general words, are some 
of the things we see as we walk through the villages of the 
arts and of the sciences and notice how thin are the paths 
that lead from one to another, and how little in terms of 
human understanding and pleasure the work of the villages 
comes to be shared outside. 

The superhighways do not help. They are the mass media 
—from the loud-speakers in the deserts of Asia Minor and 
the cities of Communist China to the organized professional 
theater of Broadway. They are the purveyors of art and 
science and culture for the millions upon millions—the pro- 
moters who represent the arts and sciences to humanity and 

142 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


who represent humanity to the arts and sciences; they are the 
means by which we are reminded of the famine in remote 
places or of war or trouble or change; they are the means by 
which this great earth and its peoples have become one to 
one another, the means by which the news of discovery or 
honor and the stories and songs of today travel and resound 
throughout the world. But they are also the means by which 
the true human community, the man knowing man, the neigh- 
bor understanding neighbor, the schoolboy learning a poem, 
the women dancing, the individual curiosity, the individual 
sense of beauty are being blown dry and issueless, the means 
by which the passivity of the disengaged spectator presents 
to the man of art and science the bleak face of unhumanity. 

For the truth is that this is indeed, inevitably and increas- 
ingly, an open and, inevitably and increasingly, an eclectic 
world. We know too much for one man to know much, we live 
too variously to live as one. Our histories and traditions— 
the very means of interpreting life—are both bonds and bar- 
riers among us. Our knowledge separates as well as it unites; 
our orders disintegrate as well as bind; our art brings us to- 
gether and sets us apart. The artist’s loneliness, the scholar 
despairing because no one will any longer trouble to learn 
what he can teach, the narrowness of the scientist—these are 
unnatural insignia in this great time of change. 

For what is asked of us is not easy. The openness of this 
world derives its character from the irreversibility of learn- 
ing; what is once learned is part of human life. We cannot 
close our minds to discovery; we cannot stop our ears so that 
the voices of far-off and strange people can no longer reach 

143 


The Open Mind 


them. The great cultures of the East cannot be walled off 
from ours by impassable seas and defects of understanding 
based on ignorance and unfamiliarity. Neither our integrity 
as men of learning nor our humanity allows that. In this 
open world, what is there, any man may try to learn. 

This is no new problem. There has always been more to 
know than one man could know; there have always been 
modes of feeling that could not move the same heart; there 
have always been deeply held beliefs that could not be com- 
posed into a synthetic union. Yet never before today have the 
diversity, the complexity, the richness so clearly defied hier- 
archical order and simplification; never before have we had 
to understand the complementary, mutually not compatible 
ways of life and recognize choice between them as the only 
course of freedom. Never before today has the integrity of 
the intimate, the detailed, the true art, the integrity of crafts- 
manship and the preservation of the familiar, of the humor- 
ous and the beautiful stood in more massive contrast to the 
vastness of life, the greatness of the globe, the otherness of 
people, the otherness of ways, and the all-encompassing dark. 

This is a world in which each of us, knowing his limita- 
tions, knowing the evils of superficiality and the terrors of 
fatigue, will have to cling to what is close to him, to what he 
knows, to what he can do, to his friends and his tradition and 
his love, lest he be dissolved in a universal confusion and 
know nothing and love nothing. It is at the same time a world 
in which none of us can find hieratic prescription or general 
sanction for any ignorance, any insensitivity, any indiffer- 
ence. When a friend tells us of a new discovery we may not 

144 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


understand, we may not be able to listen without jeopardiz- 
ing the work that is ours and closer to us; but we cannot find 
in a book or canon—and we should not seek—grounds for 
hallowing our ignorance. If a man tells us that he sees dif- 
ferently than we, or that he finds beautiful what we find ugly, 
we may have to leave the room, from fatigue or trouble; but 
that is our weakness and our default. If we must live with a 
perpetual sense that the world and the men in it are greater 
than we and too much for us, let it be the measure of our 
virtue that we know this and seek no comfort. Above all, let 
us not proclaim that the limits of our powers correspond to 
some special wisdom in our choice of life, of learning, or of 
beauty. 

This balance, this perpetual, precarious, impossible bal- 
ance between the infinitely open and the intimate, this time— 
our twentieth century—has been long in coming; but it has 
come. It is, I think, for us and our children, our only way. 

This is for all men. For the artist and for the scientist there 
is a special problem and a special hope, for in their extraor- 
dinarily different ways, in their lives that have increasingly 
divergent character, there is still a sensed bond, a sensed 
analogy. Both the man of science and the man of art live al- 
ways at the edge of mystery, surrounded by it; both always, 
as the measure of their creation, have had to do with the 
harmonization of what is new with what is familiar, with the 
balance between novelty and synthesis, with the struggle to 
make partial order in total chaos. They can, in their work 
and in their lives, help themselves, help one another, and 
help all men. They can make the paths that connect the vil- 

145 


The Open Mind 


lages of arts and sciences with each other and with the world 
at large the multiple, varied, precious bonds of a true and 
world-wide community. 

This cannot be an easy life. We shall have a rugged time 
of it to keep our minds open and to keep them deep, to keep 
our sense of beauty and our ability to make it, and our occa- 
sional ability to see it in places remote and strange and un- 
familiar; we shall have a rugged time of it, all of us, in keep- 
ing these gardens in our villages, in keeping open the mani- 
fold, intricate, casual paths, to keep these flourishing in a 
great, open, windy world; but this, as I see it, is the condition 
of man; and in this condition we can help, because we can 
love, one another. 


146 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


J. RoBerT OPPENHEIMER has been director of the Institute 
for Advanced Study at Princeton, New Jersey, since 1947. 
He is a physicist trained at Harvard, Cambridge and Got- 
tingen who was for eighteen years Professor of Physics at 
the University of California and at the California Institute 
of Technology. Between 1943 and 1945 he was director of 
the laboratory at Los Alamos in New Mexico, where the first 
atomic bombs were made. From 1945 through 1953 he 
served in many advisory positions to the Atomic Energy 
Commission, the White House, and the Departments of State 
and Defense; in the spring of 1954, in a much publicized 
proceeding, he was denied security clearance. He is the 
author of Science and the Common Understanding, puod- 
lished by Simon and Schuster in 1954. 


