UNCOMMON SENSE 


UNCOMMON 


N. Metropolis, Gian-Carlo Rota, and 
David Sharp, Editors 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


SENSE 


Birkhauser 
Boston ° Basel : Stuttgart 


Copyeditor: Harry Newman 


The editors and the publisher would like to thank 
Peter Oppenheimer for his cooperation and 
assistance in the preparation of this collection. 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967. 
Uncommon sense. 


Includes bibliographical references. 

1. Science—United States—History—Addresses, essays, 
lectures. 2. Philosophy—Addresses, essays, lectures. 
8. United States— Politics and government—20th century— 
Addresses, essays, lectures. I. Metropolis, N. (Nicholas), 
1915- . II. Rota, Gian Carlo, 1932— 
III. Sharp, D. H. (David Howland), 1938- IV. Title. 
Q127.U6066 1984 081 84-439 
ISBN-13: 978-1-4684-6737-6  e-ISBN-13: 978-1-4684-6735-2 
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4684-6735-2 


CIP-Kurztitelaufnahme der Deutschen Bibliothek 


Oppenheimer, Julius Robert: 
Uncommon sense / J. Robert Oppenheimer, Ed. 
by N. Metropolis . .. — Boston ; Basel ; 
Stuttgart : Birkhauser, 1984. 
ISBN-13: 978-1-4684-6737-6 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without prior permis- 
sion of the copyright owner. 


© Birkhauser Boston, 1984 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover Ist edition 1984 
ABCDEFGHIJ 


wo =— 


Contents 


Foreword Vil 
Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 1 
The Open Mind 17 
Science in Being 27 
Research and the Liberal University 

The Consequences of Action 41 
I. Uncommon Sense 57 
II. An Open House 67 
Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 79 
An Inward Look 89 
Tradition and Discovery 103 
Progress in Freedom 117 
On Science and Culture 123 
The Power to Act 141 
The Scientific Revolution and its Effects 

on Democratic Institutions 

A World Without War 147 
L’Intime et le Comun—the Intimate and the Open 157 
To Live with Ourselves 169 
Physics and Man’s Understanding 181 
For the Smithsonian Institution Bicentennial 

A Time in Need 191 
Acknowledgements and Bibliography 193 


Foreword 


J. Robert Oppenheimer was born on April 22, 1904 in New York 
City. Abundantly endowed by nature and circumstance, he was 
encouraged to pursue any path that captured his interest. Even as 
avery young man, Oppenheimer delved deeply into literature, the 
humanities, philosophy and languages, as well as the natural 
sciences. His sensitivity to moral and aesthetic concerns devel- 
oped apace with his understanding of the architecture of nature as 
revealed by science. Thus the preoccupations of the young 
Oppenheimer foreshadowed one of the most cherished traits of 
the mature man— his rare ability to interpret, with perception and 
eloquence, the values and traditions of the humanistic and 
scientific cultures, one to the other. 

In 1925 Oppenheimer graduated from Harvard, summa cum 
laude. Thereafter he went to the University of Géttingen where he 
earned his doctorate under Max Born in 1927. In his doctoral 
research and subsequent research with Born, Oppenheimer made 
important contributions to the then new quantum theory. Later 
research was to include contributions of decisive and enduring 
importance to such diverse branches of modern physics as 
astrophysics, the quantum theory of molecules, and elementary 
particle physics. 

He returned to the United States in 1929 to accept teaching 
positions at the California Institute of Technology and the 
University of California at Berkeley. Oppenheimer was an 
inspiring and captivating teacher whose concern for students went 
beyond the purely professional. He worked closely with his 


vii 


Foreword 


students and always seemed to know how to.help them reach their 
greatest potential. For over a decade, these qualities drew many of 
the best young American theoretical physicists to Oppenheimer, 
who was thus singularly responsible for guiding to maturity a 
generation of students who were to lead American physics to 
unprecedented levels of achievement. 

In the spring of 1942 Oppenheimer was asked to join the 
wartime effort to develop an atomic bomb. During that summer 
he called together a small group of theoretical physicists at 
Berkeley and participated with them in an intensive study of the 
properties of nuclear explosions (considering both fission explo- 
sions and the possibility of using thermonuclear reactions) and of 
the problems which would have to be solved. When it was decided 
to establish a new laboratory at Los Alamos early in 1943 to design 
and build the first atomic weapons, Oppenheimer was chosen to 
be director. 

The work on the atomic bomb had been conducted with the 
utmost secrecy, so that it was only after it had been used that the 
existence of such a development—with all its tremendous power 
and significance— became known throughout the country and the 
world. There was urgent need to inform members of the 
government and the American people of the nature of the new 
developments in the field of atomic energy and to assess their 
effects on national and international policies. Oppenheimer was 
renowned for the incisiveness and speed with which he analyzed 
problems and for the precision and elegance of language with 
which he formulated opinions and conclusions, so that he was 
immediately overwhelmed with demands by the executive and 
congressional branches of the government to provide advice on 
atomic energy matters: domestic legislation, classification policy, 
the U.S. proposals to the United Nations, and others. When it was 
first formed, he was appointed by the President to the General 
Advisory Committee of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, and 
he served as its Chairman from 1946 till 1952. In this role, as well 
as in response to requests by other agencies of the government, 
he gave freely of his time and effort to assist with the questions 
which arose concerning atomic energy. 

Oppenheimer’s unique service to the government was term- 
inated in 1953 by its decision to suspend his security clearance 


Viil 


Foreword 


and to conduct the infamous and tragic Security Board Hearings 
of 1954. 

In 1947, Oppenheimer had been named Director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study. There, for nearly 20 years, he 
continued his career as teacher, scholar and valued critic of new 
developments in theoretical physics. He was responsible for 
bringing together outstanding scholars from many disciplines, 
and during his tenure the Institute developed into a leading center 
for theoretical physics. 

For his wartime services, Oppenheimer was awarded the Medal 
of Merit in 1946. Just ten years after the government’s astounding 
decision concerning Oppenheimer in 1953, President Kennedy 
selected him to receive the Enrico Fermi Award of 1963. This 
Award constitutes the highest recognition bestowed by the United 
States for scientific achievement. It was granted Oppenheimer for 
his contributions to science and to the community of. scientists, 
and for his dedicated and enormously effective services to the 
nation. In accepting the Fermi Award from President Johnson, 
Oppenheimer made no reference to his personal ordeal, but 
spoke of Jefferson’s assessment of the “brotherly spirit of science, 
which unites into one family all its votaries of whatever grade and 
however widely dispersed throughout the different quarters of the 
globe.” 

Robert Oppenheimer died in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1967. 


We have collected here some of Oppenheimer’s opinions on 
science, society and mankind, expressed over the years in his 
numerous public lectures and addresses. About half of the 
material reproduced here is previously unpublished. Several years 
after his death, the themes that concerned him throughout his life 
are still the concern of our day. 


The Editors 


Robert Oppenheimer’s hat—constant companion and famous symbol. 
(OMC) 


1 


TRAVELLING TOA LAND 
WE CANNOT SEE 


1948 


One day in a clearing in the forest, Confucius came upon a 
woman in deep mourning, wracked by sorrow. He learned 
that her son had just been eated by a tiger; and he 
attempted to console her, to make clear how unavailing 
her tears would be, to restore her composure. But when he 
left, he had barely reentered the forest, when the renewed 
sounds of weeping recalled him. “That is not all,” the 
woman said. “You see, my husband was eaten here a year 
ago by this same tiger.” Again Confucius attempted to 
console her and again he left only to hear renewed weeping. 
“Is that not all?” “Oh, no,” she said. “The year before that 
my father too was eaten by the tiger.” Confucius thought 
for a moment, and then said: “This would not seem to bea 
very salutary neighborhood. Why don’t you leave it?” The 
woman wrung her hands. “I know,” she said, “I know; but, 
you see, the government is so excellent.” 


THIS WRY TALE COMES TO MIND often when one observes the efforts 
which the Government of the United States is making to turn the 
development of atomic energy to good ends, and the frustrations 
and sorrows of the negotiations within the United Nations Atomic 
Energy Commission to which these efforts toward international 
control have now been reduced. 


Uncommon Sense 


In these notes I should like to write briefly of some of the 
sources of United States policy, and of the formulation of that 
policy in the context of the contemporary world. Against the 
background of present prospects, which manifestly make success 
in any short term seem rather unlikely, to write of these matters 
today must of necessity be difficult. We are beyond advocacy, and 
not yet far enough for history. Yet the effort may not be without 
some slight usefulness in helping us to achieve an appreciation of 
what was sound, what was timely, and what was lasting in the 
policy adopted by the United States, and even more than that, in 
helping us to see why this policy has not been successful. To 
answer simply that we have failed because of noncooperation on 
the part of the Soviet Government is certainly to give a most 
essential part of a true answer. Yet we must ask ourselves why in a 
matter so overwhelmingly important to our interest we have not 
been successful; and we must be prepared to try to understand 
what lessons this has for our future conduct. 

Clearly, such understanding must depend in the first. instance 
on insight into the nature and sources of Soviet policy, and indeed 
into our own political processes. Such an analysis, which in any 
final sense may transcend the collective wisdom of our time, is of 
course wholly beyond the scope of this paper. These notes are 
concerned solely with questions of our intent with regard to 
atomic control, questions which, though necessarily overabstract, 
are yet a part of history. 


II 


The development of atomic energy had none of the other- 
worldliness normally characteristic of new developments in 
science. It was marked from the very first by an extreme self- 
consciousness on the part of all participants, which has given it an 
often heroic, though not infrequently rather comic, aspect. Thus 
when the phenomenon of fission was discovered by Hahn, after 
less than a decade of intensive exploration of nuclear structure 
and nuclear transmutations, we were all very quick to hail it, not as 
a beautiful discovery, but as a likely source of a great technological 
development. Long before it was known that conditions could be 
realized for maintaining a fission chain reaction, long before the 


2 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


difficulties in that enterprise were appreciated or methods for 
their solution sketched out, the phenomenon of fission was 
greeted as a possible source of atomic explosives, and their 
development was urged upon many governments. Thus, it 
happened that when, in the United States, the Manhattan District 
was approaching the completion of its task, and atomic weapons 
were in fact almost ready for use, there was a fairly well-informed 
group of people who in a sort of fraternal privacy had discussed 
what these developments might mean—what problems they 
would raise, and along what lines the solution might be sought. 
After the use of the weapons at the end of the war, much of this 
thinking became public; it achieved a sort of synoptic codification 
because of the joint requirements of easy comprehension and 
military security. 

Yet it should be not without usefulness now to recall how the 
problem appeared to us in the summer of 1945, when it became 
fully apparent that atomic weapons and the large-scale release of 
atomic energy were not only realizable, but were about to be 
realized. Even at that time a good deal of thought had gone into 
what subsequently came to be known as the peaceful use of 
atomic energy. On the technical side this preoccupation was 
natural enough, since many interesting avenues of exploration 
had been sealed off by the overriding requirements of the military 
program, and we were naturally curious to sketch out what might 
lie along these avenues against that time when there should be 
leisure for their pursuit. 

But beyond that there was a political consideration. It was clear 
to us that the forms and methods by which mankind might in the 
future hope to protect itself against the dangers of unlimited 
atomic warfare would be decisively influenced just by the answer 
to the question “Is there any good in the atom?” From the first, it 
has been clear that the answer to this question would have a 
certain subtlety. The answer would be “yes,” and emphatically 
“yes,” but it would be a “yes” unconvincing, conditional, and 
temporizing compared to the categorical affirmative of the atomic 
bomb itself. In particular, the advantages which could come from 
the exploitation of atomic energy do not appear to be of such a 
character that they are likely to contribute in a very short term to the 
economic or technical well-being of mankind. They are among 
the long-range goods. Thus they could not be expected to 


3 


Uncommon Sense 


recommend themselves as urgent to the peoples of countries 
devastated by war, suffering from hunger, poverty, homelessness, 
and the awful confusion of a shattered civilization. The import- 
ance of these limitations was perhaps not adequately recognized 
as a deterrent to the sort of interest in the development of atomic 
energy on the part of other peoples and other governments which 
might have played so great a part in assuring their support for our 
hopes. Only among the professional scientists, for whom the 
interest in the development of atomic energy is rather immediate, 
could we have expected to find, and did we in fact find, an 
enlightened enthusiasm for cooperation in this development. 

Only two classes of peaceful applications of atomic energy were 
then apparent. To the best of my knowledge, only two are 
apparent today. One is the development of a new source of power; 
the other is a family of new instruments of research, investigation, 
technology and therapy. 

Of the former, it was clear two years ago, and it is clear today, 
that although the generation of useful power from atomic sources 
would assuredly be a soluble problem and would under favorable 
circumstances make decisive progress within a decade, the 
question of the usefulness of this power, the scale on which it 
could be made available, and the costs and general economic 
values, would take a long time to answer. As we all know, the 
answers depend on the raw material situation—essentially, that is, 
on the availability and cost of natural uranium and thorium—and 
on the extent to which one could in practice manage to consume 
the abundant isotope of uranium and thorium as nuclear fuels. 
Thus, no honest evaluation of the prospects of power in 1945 
could fail to recognize the necessity of intensive development and 
exploration. Equally, no honest evaluation could give assurances 
as to the ultimate outcome beyond those general assurances which 
the history of our technology justifies. Certainly no evaluation at 
that time, nor for that matter today, could justify regarding atomic 
power as an immediate economic aid to a devastated and fuel- 
hungry world, nor give its development the urgency which the 
control of atomic armaments would be sure to have once the 
nature and ferocity of the weapons had been made clear to all. 

With regard to the use of tracer materials, of radioactive species, 
and of radiations for science, the practical arts, for technology and 
medicine, we were in a better position to judge what might come. 


4 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


The use of tracer materials was not new. The last decade—the 
1930’s—had seen increasingly varied and effective applications of 
them. The use of radiation for the study of the properties of 
matter, for diagnosis, and for therapy was likewise not new. Several 
decades of hopeful and bitter experiences gave us some notion of 
the power and limitations of these tools. What was held in store by 
the development of atomic reactors and of new methods for the 
handling of radioactive materials and the separation of isotopes, 
was a much greater variety and a vastly greater quantity of tracer 
materials, and a far higher intensity of radiation than had been 
available in the past. That this would be a stimulus to physical and 
biological study was clear; that its value would in the first instance 
depend on the skillful development of chemical, physical, and 
biological techniques, and that this development even under the 
circumstances would be a gradual and continuing one, we knew as 
well. 

Thus, our picture of the peaceful uses of atomic energy was 
neither trivial nor heroic: on the one hand, many years, perhaps 
many decades, of development—largely engineering develop- 
ment—with the purpose of providing new sources of power; on 
the other hand, a new arsenal of instruments for the exploratiori 
of the physical and biological world, and in time, for their further 
control, to be added to the always growing arsenal of what 
scientists and engineers have had available. 

Three other matters were clear at that time. On the one hand, 
the development of atomic power could not be separated from 
technological development essential for and largely sufficient for 
the manufacture of atomic weapons. On the other hand, neither 
the development of power nor the effective and widespread use of 
the new tools of research and technology could prosper fully 
without a very considerable openness and candor with regard to 
the technical realities—an openness and candor difficult to 
reconcile with the traditional requirements of military security 
about the development of weapons of war. To these general 
considerations we should add again: although the peaceful use of 
atomic energy might well challenge the interest of technical 
people, and appear as an inspiration to statesmen concerned with 
the welfare of mankind, it could not make a direct appeal to the 
weary, hungry, almost desperate peoples of a war-ravaged world. 
Such an appeal, if made, could hardly be made in honesty. 


Uncommon Sense 


III 


Important though these views as to the peaceful future of 
atomic energy may have been, they were overshadowed then as 
they have been overshadowed since by a preoccupation of quite 
another’ sort. In an over-simplified statement, this is the pre- 
occupation for the “control of atomic energy to the extent 
necessary to prevent its use for destructive purposes.” Two sorts of 
considerations bear on this problem, one deriving from the 
nature of atomic armament, and the other from the political 
climate of the postwar world. The former set of arguments. has 
perhaps been given more relative weight in public discussions. 
Surely it is in the latter that the essential wellsprings of policy 
should have lain. 

Even the weapons tested in New Mexico and used against 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki served to demonstrate that with the 
release of atomic energy quite revolutionary changes had occur- 
red in the techniques of warfare. It was quite clear that with 
nations committed to atomic armament, weapons even more 
terrifying, and perhaps vastly more terrifying, than those already 
delivered would be developed; and it was clear even from a casual 
estimate of costs that nations so committed to atomic armament 
could accumulate these weapons in truly terrifying numbers. 

As the war ended, adequate defenses against the delivery of 
atomic weapons almost certainly did not exist. There would be 
variations, as military developments progressed, in the advantages 
of offense and defense. If effective antiaircraft interception is 
developed before new types of aircraft or rockets, there may even 
be periods during which the delivery of atomic weapons is 
seriously handicapped. But it was clear then that for the most part 
the development of these weapons had given to strategic bom- 
bardment—that form of warfare which peculiarly characterized 
the last war, and contributed so much to the desolation of Europe 
and Asia—a new and important and qualitative increase in ferocity. 
It was not necessary to envisage novel and ingenious methods of 
delivery, such as the suitcase and the tramp steamer, to make this 
point clear to us. To this must be added a preoccupation not 
unnatural for us in the United States. It seemed unreasonable to 
suppose that any future major conflict would leave this country as 


6 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


relatively unharmed as had the last two wars and as totally 
unscathed by strategic bombardment. These points have been so 
commonly made, and with such fervor, that they have perhaps 
obscured to some extent the true nature of the issues involved in 
the international control of atomic energy. 

In this last war, the fabric of civilized life has been worn so thin 
in Europe that there is the gravest danger that it will not hold. 
Twice in a generation, the efforts and the moral energies of a large 
part of mankind have been devoted to the fighting of wars. If the 
atomic bomb was to have meaning in the contemporary world, it 
would have to be in showing that not modern man, not navies, not 
ground forces, but war itself was obsolete. The question of the 
future of atomic energy thus appeared in one main constructive 
context: “What can be done with this development to make it an 
instrument for the preservation of peace and for bringing about 
those altered relations between the sovereign nations on the basis 
of which there is some reason to hope that peace can be 
preserved?” 

Although this may have been the question in principle, a far 
more concrete and immediate problem faced the world. It is true 
that there may be a certain myopia in too great a preoccupation 
with relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. It 
is true that other sources of conflict, other possibilities of war, and 
other problems which must be solved if the world is to achieve 
peace can well be discerned and could well be decisive. But 
although the cooperation—on a scale, with an intimacy and 
effectiveness heretofore unknown—between the Soviet Union and 
the United States may not be sufficient for the establishment of 
peace, it clearly was necessary. Thus, the question naturally 
presented itself whether the cooperative control and development 
of atomic energy might not play a unique and decisive part in the 
program of establishing such cooperation. Clearly, quite widely 
divergent views might be held as to the readiness of the Soviet 
Union to embark on such cooperation—varying from the belief 
that it would be forthcoming if the United States indicated the 
desire for it to the conviction that it was not in our power to bring 
it about. The prevalent view, and, I believe, that on which our 
subsequent policy was based, was that such cooperation would 
represent a reversal of past Soviet policy, and to some extent a 
repudiation of elements of Soviet political theory, very much 


7 


Uncommon Sense 


more incisive in fact than the corresponding attitudes on our part. 
The prevalent view, that is, saw in the problems of atomic energy, 
not an opportunity to allow the leaders of the Soviet state to carry 
out a policy of international cooperation, of openness, candor, and 
renunciation of violence to which they were already committed; 
rather, it saw an opportunity to cause a decisive change in the 
whole trend of Soviet policy, without which the prospects of an 
assured peace were indeed rather gloomy, and which might well 
be, if accomplished, the turning point in the pattern of inter- 
national relations. 

Why did the field of atomic energy appear hopeful for this 
endeavor? It appeared hopeful only in part because of the 
terrifying nature of atomic warfare, which to all peoples and some 
governments would provide a strong incentive to adapt them- 
selves to a changing technology. As such, atomic weapons were 
only a sort of consummation of the total character of warfare as 
waged in this last world war, a sort of final argument, if one were 
needed, a straw to break the camel’s back. But there were other 
points far more specific. The control of atomic weapons always 
appeared possible only on the basis of an intensive and working 
collaboration between peoples of many nationalities, on the 
creation (at least in this area) of supra-national patterns of 
communication, of work and of development. The development 
of atomic energy lay in an area peculiarly suited to such 
internationalization, and in fact requiring it for the most effective 
exploitation, almost on technical grounds alone. The develop- 
ment of atomic energy lay in a field international by tradition and 
untouched by preexisting national patterns of control. Thus the 
problem as it appeared in the summer of 1945 was to use our 
understanding of atomic energy, and the developments that we 
had carried out, with their implied hope and implied threat, to see 
whether in this area international barriers might not be broken 
down and patterns of candor and cooperation established which 
would make the peace of the world. 

It was impossible even at that time not to raise two questions of 
some gravity. One was whether Soviet policy had not already 
congealed into almost total non-cooperation. The difficulties 
during the war years, both in cooperation on technical problems 
which had some analogy to atomic energy, and in the more 
general matters of the coordination of strategy, could certainly be 


8 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


read as a bad augury for a cooperative future. A second and 
related question was whether the development of atomic weapons 
by Great Britain, Canada, and the United States, and the an- 
nouncement of this completed development at the end of the war, 
might not itself appear to cast a doubt upon our willingness to 
cooperate in the future with allies with whom we had not in this 
field been willing to cooperate during the war. 

In any case, these doubts pointed rather strongly to the need for 
discussions between the heads of state and their immediate 
advisors, in an attempt to reopen the issue of far-reaching coop- 
eration. The later relegation of problems of atomic energy to 
discussions within the United Nations, where matters of the 
highest policy could only be touched upon with difficulty and 
clumsily, would appear to have prejudiced the chances of any 
genuine meeting of minds. 

In the field of atomic energy our own security demanded a 
quite new approach to international problems. The security of all 
peoples would be jeopardized by a failure to establish new 
systems of openness and cooperation between the nations; and 
many favorable circumstances made concrete cooperative action 
appear attractive and feasible. Thus atomic energy had a special 
role in international affairs. Yet it should be stressed again that no 
prospect of intimate collaboration in this field appeared likely of 
success unless coupled with a comparable cooperation in other 
fields. It should be stressed again that if atomic energy appeared 
of some importance as an international issue, it was precisely 
because it was not entirely separable from other issues, precisely 
because what was done in that field might be prototypical of what 
could be done in others, and precisely because we appeared to 
have in this a certain freedom of maneuver—which our technical 
developments appeared to have given us—to ask for a considera- 
tion on the highest possible plane of the means by which the 
nations of the world could learn so to alter their relations that 
future wars would no longer be likely. 


IV 


The views which have just been outlined no doubt reflect only 
roughly those current in the closing months of the war, among the 


9 


Uncommon Sense 


people to whom familiarity or responsibility had made the nature 
of atomic energy apparent. That considerations such as these 
should have found expression in the policy of the people and the 
Government of the United States is itself somewhat surprising. 
One must bear in mind that the field of atomic energy was quite 
unfamiliar to the people of this country, that the whole spirit and 
temper of a development of this kind would require explaining 
and reexplaining. One must bear in mind that for reasons of 
security much that was relevant to an understanding of the 
problem could not be revealed and cannot be revealed today. One 
must bear in mind that with the end of the war there was a 
widespread nostalgia among all our people that the efforts and 
tensions of the war years be relaxed and that we return to a more 
familiar and less arduous life. That under these circumstances the 
United States should have developed, and in large part committed 
itself to, a policy of genuine internationalization of atomic energy, 
and that it should have fortified this policy with concrete, if 
sketchy, proposals as to how the internationalization was to be 
accomplished, and indeed that it should have taken the initiative 
in putting these views before the governments of the other 
Powers—this should not be too lightly dismissed as a remarkable 
achievement in the democratic formulation of public policy. 
Nevertheless, this has cost something. 

Perhaps most of all what it has cost is that in our preoccupation 
with determining and clarifying our own policy, we have given far 
too little thought to attempting to influence that of the Soviet 
Union on the only plane where such an influence could be 
effective. We have allowed our own internal preoccupations to 
make us content to put forward our views in the world forum of 
the United Nations, without pursuing early enough, on a high 
enough plane, or with a fixed enough resolution, the objective of 
making the heads of the Soviet state in part, at least, party to our 
effort. Our internal effort has cost delay, it has cost confusion, it 
has cost the injection of some irrelevant and some inconsistent 
elements in our policy with regard to atomic energy. Above all, it 
has cost a sort of schizophrenic separation of our dealings in this 
field from our dealings in all others. In fact, in order to keep pace 
with political developments all over the world, we have found 
ourselves negating in many concrete political contexts the 
possibility of that confidence and that cooperation which we were 


10 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


asking for in the field of atomic energy. It is surely idle to 
speculate, as it may well be meaningless to ask, whether, if this 
country had had its own thoughts in better order in June 1945, 
and had been prepared to act upon them, its policies would have 
met with greater success. Only an historian to whom the 
intimacies of Soviet thinking and Soviet decision are freely 
available would be able to begin to answer such a question. But 
the evidence, as the actual course of events has unfolded it, 
necessarily gives little support to the view that by. prompter, 
clearer and more magnanimous action we might have achieved 
our purposes. 

The history of the development of United States atomic energy 
policy from the first pronounceinents of President Truman and 
Secretary Stimson on August 6, 1945, to the most recent detailed 
working papers of the United States representative on the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission, is of public record, and has 
in large part been summarized by the State Department’s report 
“International Control of Atomic Energy.”’ Two aspects of this 
development need to be specially mentioned. One has to do with 
what may be called the aim of United States policy—the sketch of 
our picture of the world as we would like to see it in so far as. 
atomic energy was concerned. Here, the principles of inter- 
nationalization, openness, candor, and the complete absence of 
secrecy, and the emphasis on cooperative, constructive develop- 
ment, the absence of international rivalry, the absence of legal 
right for national governments to intervene—these are the pillars 
on which our policy was built. It is quite clear that in this field we 
would like to see patterns established which, if they were more 
generally extended, would constitute some of the most vital 
elements of a new international law: patterns not unrelated to the 
ideals which more generally and eloquently are expressed by the 
advocates of world government. It has naturally taken some time 
for it to be clear that more modest attempts at control were likely 
to aggravate rather than alleviate the international rivalries and 
suspicions which it is our purpose to abolish. 

This solution which the United States has proposed and 
advocated is a radical solution, and clearly calls for a spirit of 


1«International Control of Atomic Energy: Growth of a Policy.” Washington: 
Department of State Publication 2702, 1947. 


11 


Uncommon Sense 


mutual confidence and trust in order to give it any elements of 
substance. Only in the field of sanctions—of the enforcement of 
undertakings with regard to atomic energy—has the policy of the 
United States necessarily been somewhat conservative. Here in an 
effort to fit this problem of enforcement into the preexisting 
structure of the United Nations it has had to rely on the prospects 
of collective security to protect complying states against the 
deliberate efforts of another state to evade controls, and to arm 
atomically. 

The second aspect of our policy which needs to be mentioned is 
that while these proposals were being developed, and their 
soundness explored and understood, the very bases for inter- 
national cooperation between the United States and the Soviet 
Union were being eradicated by a revelation of their deep conflicts 
of interest, the deep and apparently mutual repugnance of their 
ways of life, and the apparent conviction on the part of the Soviet 
Union of the inevitability of conflict—and not in ideas alone, but 
in force. For these reasons, the United States has coupled its far- 
reaching proposals for the future of atomic energy with rather 
guarded reference to the safeguards required, lest in our transition 
to the happy state of international control we find ourselves at a 
marked relative disadvantage. 

Many factors have contributed to this background of caution. 
There appears to be little doubt that at the present time our 
unique possession of the facilities and weapons of atomic energy 
constitute military advantages which we only reluctantly would lay 
down. There appears to be little doubt that we yearn for the 
notion of a trusteeship, more or less as it was formulated by 
President Truman in his Navy Day address of late 1945: we would 
desire, that is, a situation in which our pacific intent was 
recognized and in which the nations of the world would gladly see 
us the sole possessors of atomic weapons. As a corollary, we are 
reluctant to see any of the knowledge on which our present 
mastery of atomic energy rests, revealed to potential enemies. 
Natural and inevitable as these desires are, they nevertheless stand 
in bleak contradiction to our central proposals for the renuncia- 
tion of sovereignty, secrecy and rivalry in the field of atomic 
energy. Here again, it is no doubt idle to ask how this country 
would have responded had the Soviet Union approached the 
problem of atomic energy control in a true spirit of cooperation. 


12 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


Such a situation presupposes those profound changes in all of 
Soviet policy, which in their reactions upon us would have altered 
the nature of our political purposes, and opened new avenues for 
establishing international control, unfettered by the conditions 
which in the present state of the world we no doubt shall insist 
upon. Nor should it be forgotten that were there more reality to 
the plans for the internationalization of atomic energy, we 
ourselves, and the governments of other countries as well, would 
have found many difficulties in reconciling particular national 
security, custom, and advantage with an overall international plan 
for insuring the security of the world’s peoples. That these 
problems have not arisen in any serious form reflects the lack of 
reality of all discussions to date. 

Yet despite these limitations the work of the United Nations 
Atomic Energy Commission has established one point: through 
many months of discussion, under circumstances of often 
dispiriting frustration, and by delegates not initially committed to 
it, the basic idea of security through international cooperative 
development has proven its extraordinary and profound vitality. 


Vv 


The view sketched above of the international aspects of the 
problems of atomic energy is thus a history of high, if not 
provably unreasonable hope, and of failure. Questions will 
naturally arise as to whether limited but nevertheless worthy 
objectives cannot be achieved in this field. Thus, there is the 
question of whether agreements to outlaw atomic weapons more 
like the conventional agreements, supplemented by a more 
modest apparatus for inspection, may not give us some degree of 
security. Possibly when the lines of political hostility were not as 
sharply drawn as they are now between the Soviet Union and the 
United States, we might have tried to find an affirmative answer to 
this question. Were we not dealing with a rival whose normal 
practices, even in matters having nothing to do with atomic 
energy, involve secrecy and police control which is the very 
opposite of the openness that we have advocated—and under 
suitable assurances offered to adopt—we might believe that less 
radical steps of internationalization could be adequate. The 
history of past efforts to outlaw weapons, to reduce armaments or 


13 


Uncommon Sense 


to maintain peace by such methods gives little encouragement for 
hopefulness regarding these approaches. 

Nor does it seem reasonable to hope, with the world as it now 
is, and with our policies in fields other than atomic energy as 
clearly predicated as they now are on conflict (which is not the 
same as war) with the Soviet Union, that intermediate solutions 
involving, perhaps, a formal renunciation of atomic armament, 
and some concession with regard to access to atomic facilities on 
the part of international inspectors, will appeal to us as useful. 
They will hardly do so either in the achievement of present 
security or the later realization of cooperative relations. Indeed, it 
has come to be the official position of the Government of the 
United States that palliative solutions along these lines would 
almost certainly give rise to intensified suspicions and intensified 
rivalries, whereas they manifestly would lose for us whatever 
national advantages—and they cannot a priort be dismissed as 
inconsiderable—our prior development and extensive familiarity 
with atomic energy now give us. 

Clearly we may not lightly dismiss consideration of whether 
there are other approaches to the problem of the international 
control of atomic energy which have a better chance of contri- 
buting to our security. In fact, recent literature is replete with 
suggestions along these lines. No one aware of the gravity of the 
situation can fail to advocate what appears to be a hopeful avenue 
of approach; and no one has a right to dismiss these proposals 
without the most careful consideration. 

It is my own view that none of these proposals has any elements 
of hopefulness in the short term. In fact, it appears most doubtful 
if there are now any courses open to the United States which can 
give to our people the sort of security they have known in the past. 
The argument that such a course must exist seems to be specious; 
and in the last analysis most current proposals rest on this 
argument. 

This does not mean that on a lower plane, and with much more 
limited objectives, problems of policy with regard to atomic 
energy will not arise, even in the international field. Clearly, 
arrangements that could be established between the Government 
of the United States and other governments, for the purpose of 
profitably exploiting atomic energy or of strengthening our 
relative position in this field, have some sort of bearing on 


14 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 


security, and have an important, if not transparent, bearing on the 
probabilities for the maintenance of peace. But such arrange- 
ments, difficult though they may be to determine, and significant 
though they may be for our future welfare, cannot pretend, and 
do not pretend, to offer us real security, nor are they direct steps 
toward the perfection of those cooperative arrangements to which 
we rightly look as the best insurance of peace. They belong in the 
same class, in our present situation, as the proper, imaginative, 
and wise conduct of our domestic atomic-energy program. They 
are part of the necessary conditions for the long-range main- 
tenance of peace; but no one would for a moment suppose them 
to be sufficient. 

Thus, if we try to examine what part atomic energy may play in 
international relations in the near future, we can hardly believe 
that it alone can reverse the trend to rivalry and conflict 
which exists in the present-day world. My own view is that only a 
profound change in the whole orientation of Soviet policy, and a 
corresponding reorientation of our own, even in matters far from 
atomic energy, would give substance to the initial high hopes. The 
aim of those who would work for the establishment of peace, and 
who would wish to see atomic energy play whatever useful part it 
can in bringing this to pass, must be to maintain what was sound 
in the early hopes, and by all means in their power to look to their 
eventual realization. 

It is necessarily denied to us in these days to see at what time, to 
what immediate ends, in what context, and in what manner of 
world, we may return again to the great issues touched on by the 
international control of atomic energy. Yet even in the history of 
recent failure, we may recognize elements that bear more 
generally on the health of our civilization. We may discern the 
essential harmony, in a world where science has extended and 
deepened our understanding of the common sources of power for 
evil and power for good, of restraining the one and of fostering the 
other. This is seed we take with us, travelling to a land we cannot 
see, to plant in new soil. 


At Los Alamos around 1945. (LAL) 


2 
THE OPEN MIND 


1948 


A FEW WEEKS AGO the president of a college in the prairie states came 
to see me. Clearly, when he tried to look into the future, he did 
not like what he saw: the grim prospects for the maintenance of 
peace, for the preservation of freedom, for the flourishing and 
growth of the humane values of our civilization. He seemed to 
have in mind that it might be well for people, even in his small 
college, to try to take some part in turning these prospects to a 
happier end; but what he said came as rather a shock. He said, “I 
wonder if you can help me. I have a very peculiar problem. You 
see, out there, most of the students, and the teachers too, come 
from the farm. They are used to planting seed, and then waiting 
for it to grow, and then harvesting it. They believe in time and in 
nature. It is rather hard to get them to take things into their own 
hands.” Perhaps, as much as anything, my theme will have to do 
with enlisting time and nature in the conduct of our international 
affairs: in the quest for peace and a freer world. This is not meant 
mystically, for the nature which we must enlist is that of man; and 
if there is hope in it, that lies not in man’s reason. What elements 
are there in the conduct of foreign affairs which may be conducive 
to the exercise of that reason, which may provide a climate for the 
growth of new experience, new insight and new understanding? 
How can we recognize such growth, and be sensitive to its hopeful 
meaning, while there is yet time, through action based on 
understanding, to direct the outcome? 

To such difficult questions one speaks not at all, or very 
modestly and incompletely. If there are indeed answers to be 


17 


Uncommon Sense 


found, they will be found through many diverse avenues of 
approach—in the European Recovery Program, in our direct 
relations with the Soviet states, in the very mechanisms by which 
our policies are developed and determined. Yet you will not find it 
inappropriate that we fix attention on one relatively isolated, yet 
not atypical, area of foreign affairs—on atomic energy. It is an area 
in which the primary intent of our policy has been totally 
frustrated. It is an area in which it is commonly recognized that 
the prospects for success with regard to this primary intent are 
both dim and remote. It is an area in which it is equally 
recognized that this failure will force upon us a course of action in 
some important respects inconsistent with our original purposes. 
It is an area in which the excellence of our proposals, and a record 
in which we may and do take pride, have nevertheless not 
managed quite to quiet the uneasy conscience, nor to close the 
mind to further trouble. 

The history of our policy and our efforts toward international 
atomic control is public; far more important, it has from the first 
aroused widespread interest, criticism, and understanding, and 
has been the subject of debates in the Congress and the press, and 
among our people. There may even be some notion of how, if we 
had the last years to live over again, we might alter our course in 
the light of what we have learned, and some rough agreement as 
to the limits within which alternative courses of action, if adopted 
at a time when they were still open to us, could have altered the 
outcome. The past is in one respect a misleading guide to the 
future: It is far less perplexing. 

Certainly there was little to inspire, and nothing to justify, a 
troubled conscience in the proposals that our government made 
to the United Nations, as to the form which the international 
control of atomic energy should take. These proposals, and some 
detailed means for implementing them, were explored and 
criticized, elaborated, and recommended for adoption by four- 
teen of the seventeen member nations who served on the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission. They were rejected as 
wholly unacceptable, even as a basis for further discussion, by the 
three Soviet states, whose contributions to policy and to debate 
have throughout constituted for us a debasingly low standard of 


comparison. 


18 


The Open Mind 


This September, the Commission made its third, and what it 
thought its final, report to the General Assembly, meeting in Paris. 
It recommended to the Assembly that the general outlines of the 
proposed form of international control be endorsed, that the 
inadequacy of the Soviet counterproposals be noted, and that the 
Commission itself be permitted to discontinue its work pending 
either a satisfactory prior negotiation between the permanent 
members of the Security Council and Canada, or the finding by 
the General Assembly that the general political conditions which 
had in the past obstructed progress had been so far altered that 
agreement now appeared possible. The Assembly did in fact 
accept all the recommendations but one. It asked the Commission 
to continue meeting. In its instructions to the Commission, 
however, the Assembly failed to provide affirmative indications of 
what the Commission was to do, or to express any confidence in 
the success of its further efforts; in fact, one might dismiss this 
action as no more than an indication of unwillingness on the part 
of the Assembly to accept as permanent the obvious past failures 
of the Commission to fulfill its mandate. 

Yet we may recognize that more is involved in this action, that 
we will come to understand in the measure in which the nature 
and purposes of our own preoccupation with the problem become 
clearer. In part at least the Assembly asked that this problem of 
the atom not be let lapse because it touches in a most intimate, if 
sometimes symbolic, way the profoundest questions of inter- 
national affairs; because the Assembly wished to reaffirm that 
these problems could not be dismissed, that these issues could not 
be lost, whatever the immediate frustrations and however obscure 
the prospects. The Assembly was in fact asking that we let time 
and nature, and human reason and good example as a part of that 
nature, play some part in fulfilling the age-old aspirations of man 
for preserving the peace. 

In any political action, and surely in one as complex and 
delicate as the international act and commitment made by the 
United States with regard to atomic energy, far more is always 
involved than can or should be isolated in a brief analysis. Despite 
all hysteria, there is some truth to the view that the steps which we 
took with regard to atomic energy could be understood in terms 
of the terror of atomic warfare. We have sought to avert this; we 


19 


Uncommon Sense 


have further sought to avert the probable adverse consequences of 
atomic armament for our own institutions and our freedom. Yet 
more basic and more general issues are involved, which, though 
symbolized and rendered critical by the development of atomic 
energy, are in their nature not confined to it; they pervade almost 
all the key problems of foreign policy. If we are to seek a clue to 
the misgivings with which we tend to look at ourselves, we may, I 
think, find it just in the manner in which we have dealt, in their 
wider contexts, with these basic themes. 

The first has to do with the role of coercion in human affairs; 
the second with the role of openness. The atomic bomb, born ofa 
way of life, fostered throughout the centuries, in which the role of 
coercion was perhaps reduced more completely than in any other 
human activity, and which owed its whole success and its very 
existence to the possibility of open discussion and free inquiry, 
appeared in a strange paradox, at once a secret, and an 
unparalleled instrument of coercion. 

These two mutually interdependent ideals, the minimization of 
coercion and the minimization of secrecy, are, of course, in the 
nature of things, not absolute; any attempt to erect them as 
absolute will induce in us that vertigo which warns us that we are 
near the limits of intelligible definition. But they are very deep in 
our ethical as well as in our political traditions, and are recorded 
in earnest, eloquent simplicity in the words of those who founded 
this nation. They are in fact inseparable from the idea of the 
dignity of man to which our country, in its beginnings, was 
dedicated, and which has proved the monitor of our vigor and of 
our health. These two ideals are closely related, the one pointing 
toward persuasion as the key to political action, the other to free 
discussion and knowledge as the essential instrument of persua- 
sion. They are so deep within us that we seldom find it necessary, 
and perhaps seldom possible, to talk of them. When they are 
challenged by tyranny abroad or by malpractice at home, we 
come back to them as the wardens of our public life—as for many 
of us they are as well wardens of our lives as men. 

In foreign affairs, we are not unfamiliar with either the use or 
the need of power. Yet we are stubbornly distrustful of it. We seem 
to know, and seem to come back again and again to this 
knowledge, that the purposes of this country in the field of foreign 


20 


The Open Mind 


policy cannot in any real or enduring way be achieved by 
coercion. 

We have a natural sympathy for extending to foreign affairs 
what we have come to learn so well in our political life at home: 
that an indispensable, perhaps in some ways the indispensable, 
element in giving meaning to the dignity of man, and in making 
possible the taking of decision on the basis of honest conviction, is 
the openness of men’s minds, and the openness of whatever 
media there are for communion between men, free of restraint, 
free of repression, and free even of that most pervasive of all 
restraints, that of status and of hierarchy. 

In the days of the founding of this republic, in all of the 
eighteenth century which was formative for the growth and the 
explicit formulation of our political ideals, politics and science 
were of a piece. The hope that this might in some sense again be 
sO, was stirred to new life by the development of atomic energy. In 
this it has throughout been decisive that openness, openness in 
the first instance with regard to technical problems and to the 
actual undertakings underway in various parts of the world, was 
the one single essential precondition for a measure of security in 
the atomic age. Here we met in uniquely comprehensible form 
the alternatives of common understanding, or of the practices of 
secrecy and of force. 

In all this I pretend to be saying nothing new, nothing that has 
not been known to all thoughtful men since the days of 
Hiroshima; yet it has seldom come to expression; it has been 
overlaid with other preoccupations, perhaps equally necessary to 
the elaboration of an effective international control, but far less 
decisive in determining whether such a control could exist. It is 
just because it has not been possible to obtain assent, even in 
principle, even as an honest statement of intent or purpose, to 
these basic theses that the deadlock in attempting to establish 
control has appeared so serious, so refractory, and so enduring. 

These words have an intent quite contrary to the creation of a 
sense of panic or of doom. Yet we need to start with the admission 
that we see no clear course before us that would persuade the 
governments of the world to join with us in creating a more and 
more open world, and thus to establish the foundation on which 
persuasion might so largely replace coercion in determining 


21 


Uncommon Sense 


human affairs. We ourselves have acknowledged this grim 
prospect, and responded by adopting some of the very measures 
that we had hoped might be universally renounced. With 
misgivings—and there ought to be misgivings—we are rearming, 
arming atomically, as in other fields. With deep misgivings, we are 
keeping secret not only those elements of our military plans, but 
those elements of our technical information and policy, a 
knowledge of which would render us more subject to enemy 
coercion and less effective in exercising our own. There are not 
many men who see an acceptable alternative to this course, 
although there apparently are some who would regard it as proof 
of the shallowness and insincerity of our earlier renunciation of 
these ways. But whether, among our own people or among our 
friends abroad or even among those who are not our friends, 
these measures which we are taking appear excessive, or on the 
whole insufficient, they must have at least one effect. Inevitably 
they must appear to commit us to a future of secrecy, and to an 
immanent threat of war. It is true that one may hear arguments 
that the mere existence of our power, quite apart from its exercise, 
may turn the world to the ways of openness and of peace. Yet we 
have today no clear, no formulated, no in some measure credible 
account of how this may come about. We have chosen to read, 
and perhaps we have correctly read, our past as a lesson that a 
policy of weakness has failed us. But we have not read the future as 
an intelligible lesson that a policy of strength can save us. 

When the time is run, and that future become history, it will be 
clear how little of it we today foresaw or could foresee. How then 
can we preserve hope and sensitiveness which could enable us to 
take advantage of all that it has in store? Our problem is not only 
to face the somber and the grim elements of the future, but to 
keep them from obscuring it. 

Our recent election has seemed to touch this deep sense of the 
imponderable in the history of the future, this understanding that 
we must not preclude the cultivation of any unexpected, hopeful 
turnings. Immediately after the election people seemed stirred, 
less even by the outcome itself, than by the element of wonder; 
they would tend to say things like: “Well, after: this perhaps we 
need not be so surc that there will be a war.” This sense that the 
future is richer and more complex than our prediction of it, and 


22 


The Open Mind 


that wisdom lies in sensitiveness to what is new and hopeful, is 
perhaps a sign of some maturity in politics. 

The problem of doing justice to the implicit, the imponderable, 
and the unknown is of course not unique to politics. It is always 
with us in science, it is with us in the most trivial of personal 
affairs, and it is one of the great problems of writing and of all 
forms of art. The means by which it is solved is sometimes called 
style. It is style which complements affirmation with limitation 
and with humility; it is style which makes it possible to act 
effectively, but not absolutely; it is style which, in the domain of 
foreign policy, enables us to find a harmony between the pursuit 
of ends essential to us, and the regard for the views, the 
sensibilities, the aspirations of those to whom the problem may 
appear in another light; it is style which is the deference that action 
pays to uncertainty; it is above all style through which power 
defers to reason. 

We need to remember that we are a powerful nation. 

We need to remember that when the future that we can now 
foresee deviates so markedly from all that we hope and all that we 
value, we can, by our example, and by the mode and the style with 
which we conduct our affairs, let it be apparent that we have not 
abandoned those hopes nor forsaken those values; we need to do 
this even while concrete steps, to which we resort to avert more 
immediate disaster, seem to negate them. 

Our past is rich in example. In that other agony, the Civil War, 
where the foundations of our government were proved and 
reaffirmed, it was Lincoln who again and again struck true the 
balance between power and reason. By 1863, the war and the 
blockade had deepened the attrition of the South. They had also 
stopped the supplies of cotton to the English mills. Early that year 
Lincoln wrote a letter to the working men of Manchester. He 
wrote: 

“. .. It is not always in the power of governments to enlarge or 
restrict the scope of moral results which follow the policies that 
they may deem it necessary for the public safety from time to time 
to adopt. 

“1 have understood well that the duty of self-preservation rests 
solely with the American people; but I have at the same time been 
aware that favor or disfavor of foreign nations might have a 


23 


Uncommon Sense 


material influence in enlarging or prolonging the struggle with 
disloyal men in which the country is engaged. A fair examination 
of history has served to authorize a belief that the past actions and 
influences of the United States were generally regarded as having 
been beneficial toward mankind. I have, therefore, reckoned 
upon the forbearance of nations...” 

Fifteen months later, a year before Lincoln’s death, the battle 
had turned. He could say: 

“... When the war began, three years ago, neither party, nor 
any man, expected it would last till now. Each looked for the end 
in some way, long ere today. Neither did any anticipate that 
domestic slavery would be much affected by the war. But here we 
are; the war has not ended, and slavery has been much affected— 
how much needs not now to be recounted... 

“But we can see the past, though we may not claim to have 
directed it, and seeing it, in this case, we feel more hopeful and 
confident for the future...” 

In such magnanimity even Grant, at Appomattox a year later, 
looking beyond the bitter slaughter, looking to nature and to time, 
could speak to Lee: His troops were to keep their horses; they 
would need them for the spring plowing. 

Each of us, recalling our actions in these last critical years, will 
be able to find more than one instance where, in the formulation 
or implementation of policy, we have been worthy of this past. 
Each of us will mourn the opportunities that may seem to him 
lost, the doors once open and now closed. Not even in critical 
times can the sense of style, the open mind, be fostered by issuing 
directives; nor can they rest wholly on soliciting great actions not 
yet taken, great words not yet spoken. If they were wholly a matter 
for one man, all could well rest on his wisdom and _ his 
sensitiveness—they neither are, nor can, nor should be. The spirit 
in which our foreign affairs are conducted will in the large reflect 
the understanding and the desires of our people; and their 
concrete, detailed administration will necessarily rest in the hands 
of countless men and women, officials of the government, who 
constitute the branches of our foreign service, of our State 
Department, and of the many agencies which now supplement the 
State. Department, at home and abroad. The style, the percep- 
tiveness, the imagination and the openmindedness with which we 


24 


The Open Mind 


need to conduct our affairs can only pervade such a complex of 
organizations, consisting inevitably of men of varied talent, taste 
and character, if it is a reflection of a deep and widespread public 
understanding. It is in our hands to see that the hope of the future 
is not lost, because we were too sure that we knew the answers, too 


sure that there was no hope. 


25 


In 1947 at the Harvard University Commencement at which 
Robert Oppenheimer was awarded a honorary degree. 
Oppenheimer is seated on the very left; third from the left: C. 
C. Marshall; second from the right: J. B. Conant, then 
President of Harvard University; on his left General O. N. 
Bradley. (OMC) 


3 


SCIENCE IN BEING 
Research and the 
Liberal University 


1949 


THE ROLE OF RESEARCH in the liberal university I take as a serious 
subject, which is in fact closely related to the theme of what the 
possibilities are, what the future is, what the responsibility is in 
regard to the varied and rich traditions of the United States. I take 
that view, though I am not sure that I will be able to make it fully 
clear—I am not even sure that it is quite clear to me—at least in 
part because it seems to me that the only way to think of research 
is as science in being, science in becoming, science as it is: an 
activity rather than a codified result of an activity. When we look at 
the world today we see what profound, deep, far-reaching changes 
science has made. Some of these changes are in the conditions of 
man’s life; many of them are in the alteration of the way in which 
moral problems come to the individual, come to the community 
of individuals banded together in government. As a trivial 
example of this, slavery and poverty did not appear to Greek 
civilization as the same kind of moral problem that they appear to 
us. They did not appear as evils because it was not clear that it lay 
within the power of man to abate them without a sacrifice of 
everything else. 

Science also altered, in ways hard for us to fully appreciate, in 
the nature of our spiritual life, the values by which we judge 
things. It has introduced standards for determining whether we 
are honest men. It has introduced standards for giving meaning to 
questions and to discovering whether we are in agreement about 
what we are talking about. It has pointed again and again to 


27 


‘Uncommon Sense 


human fallibility and to the need to find out when one is wrong 
as the one necessity for a healthy intellectual life. 

It is not my purpose to make a definition of research, and 
certainly not to go into those marginal areas where it is not quite 
clear whether research is or is not a reality or a possibility. It is 
even less my meaning to say what one means by a liberal 
university. I take it that a liberal university is one that devotes at 
least a part of its energies—a major part of its energies—to 
teaching people—not to make them professionals, not to give 
them vocational guidance, but to give them what is called a liberal 
education. It would take a brave man to say what that is, but it is 
certainly at least these things: it is certainly the giving to young 
men and women of a mode of action, a practice, a training, which 
binds them in a community; which gives them an activity which in 
itself is good, irrespective of what professional use they will or will 
not make of it; which gives them new modes of perception, new 
modes of evaluation, modes which will stand by them in the 
future, whether they turn out to be highbrows or lowbrows, 
whether they turn out to be proconsuls, or scientists, or doctors, 
or farmers. 

The learned way to approach this problem would probably be 
to give a history of the presence of research in a liberal university 
as a human institution. But I am, happily, not qualified to do that. 
An almost equally learned way would be to give the comparative 
morphology of the universities and to say by what per cent the 
amount of research had increased and how we compared with the 
universities of Europe, and so on; but I will make only very 
incidental use of this mode. 

I shall, on the contrary, start by acknowledging what appear to 
me to be the facts as far as this country is concerned, and what 
elements of paradox there are in the facts. I would like then to go 
on in a threefold program: first to say some friendly words about 
the situation; then to say some hostile words about the situation; 
and then to try to say some friendly words, which are a little more 
speculative, and I believe of a somewhat deeper character—by 
that I mean they may have a better chance of being wrong. 

The actual state of affairs has two aspects. In the United States at 
the moment, research is carried out very largely in the liberal 
universities. There is a magnificent diversity, however. Research is 
carried out in all kinds of conditions. It is carried out by the 


28 


Science in Being 


federal government, it is carried out in technical schools; it is 
carried out in institutes; it is carried out in industries; it is even in 
cases carried out in the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, 
which is like nothing else. But a great deal of it is in the 
universities; and it is typical that the part that is in the universities 
is rather the basic research: that is, research that is aimed 
primarily at increasing our understanding and our knowledge, 
without too direct a thought of what use this will be in practice. 
That this is typically a university function is true in the natural 
sciences; it is true in the mathematical sciences; and I believe it is 
even more true in those areas, let us say, of anthropology, 
psychology, and economics which are becoming subject to 
research. 

At the same time, although the liberal universities support 
research, there is no well-defined way—there is no clear way—in 
which research is a part of the liberal education. We will talk more 
of this, for there is certainly a relation between the two. The 
relationship is not direct. The young fellow who comes to college 
to get a liberal education probably does not do any research. If he 
does, it is probably fake. He comes in contact with people who do 
research, but in a Jekyll and Hyde relationship. He comes in 
contact with them while they are not doing research, and he is 
told, or he reads in the alumni bulletin, that they are great 
scholars. 

This paradox of the double purpose is one of the characteristic 
improvisations of the country. The primary purpose of the 
college, historically, was to give young men and women a sound 
education, a liberal education; certainly it started very largely as a 
religious education. But it was meant to communicate an 
appreciation of certain forms of literature, a general knowledge of 
the way the world was, the ability to read a few languages, the 
ability to understand the Bible, some.history, some mathematics, 
but not too much. It started in a way very remote from this second 
purpose, which is to provide the home ground, the fountainhead 
for the discovery of new truths; yet this is what the great 
universities of the country have come to be. 

In Europe, a similar situation obtains, but it is a very much less 
acute one, because the number of people who go to the European 
universities is very much smaller. The universities there are not at 
all conceived for the education of ordinary people. They are 


29 


Uncommon Sense 


conceived primarily as places of education for people who in one 
way or another will be specialists. This is changing in Europe; and 
it will change far more. But in this country it has changed already, 
and my guess is that the same development that has taken place in 
the high schools is likely to take place in the colleges. 

Often the role of research in a university presents an extreme 
unbalance. There are universities whose research budgets are 
enormously greater than their academic budgets. There are 
universities in which the research budget of a single department, 
subsidized probably by the government, but sometimes privately, 
may be greater than the budgets of many, many other depart- 
ments. There are examples as extreme as this: it is a great liberal 
university that is the only place in the world, as far as I know, that 
manufactures, under contract with the United States government, 
atomic bombs. This is an extreme example of the development of 
research in the university. I have sometimes asked myself whether 
we can find any analogy to this situation in the practice of the 
monastic orders that devote a part of their attention and derive 
part of their sustenance from the making of their private 
liqueurs. 

The state of affairs we have before us then is this: by and large 
the liberal universities do sustain research, do sustain about the 
best that is done; they do this on a very broad front, sustaining 
characteristically what is basic, where the purpose is the acquisi- 
tion of new knowledge rather than the application of knowledge. 
This is a part of the function of a liberal university. Another 
function may be professional training, training that may be related 
to research, or may, as in the case of law, or in the case of some 
other practical disciplines, be rather remote from it. Another 
function is the maintenance of liberal education. Thus one has a 
great complexity of functions, as in turn one has great complexity 
in the direct support of research. This is certainly useful in 
avoiding abuses, in that no one institution has in this country any 
monopoly on research. Once again, though research and liberal 
education are joint functions of the university, they are functions 
which are not manifestly organically related. 

Now the affirmative things that come to my mind to say about 
this setup—and they certainly are not all-inclusive—are in part at 
least rather deep. The simplest and least deep is that it is 
apparently a setup that appeals to the people who do research. 


30 


Science in Being 


Over and over again a man given the choice of pursuing his work 
at a university or let us say, in an industry or a government 
laboratory, will prefer to stay at the university. Once in a while he 
will find himself so bogged down by academic duties that he will 
leave and, when the situation gets bad enough, the university 
reforms and makes the balance between the claims of instruction 
and research somewhat more favorable. One reason for this, I 
think, is that in the relatively creative fields, the fields where 
imagination is involved, in fields where you can’t have any 
guarantee of success, it is nice to be paid for something different 
from having good ideas. It is nice to be able to get up and say, “I 
will teach class today and be a genius tomorrow.” There has to be 
a kind of rhythm to it; there has to be a kind of freedom, which 
corresponds to the fact that a man, if he is really in trouble, may or 
may not have that fructifying idea, get that point straight which is 
bothering him. And this is one of the reasons that the more 
programmatic institutions, where research is all, are less attractive, 
in spite of the fact that in a university a professor may be called 
away from doing what he wants to do, either to teach a class, or 
more characteristically and more unwelcome, to sit on a com- 
mittee about teaching a class. 

The other point which professors make is that contact with 
students in a classroom is itself something which they find—and 
this I think an important clue—harmonious with, and useful to, 
their own researches. This, I believe, is especially true with the 
social sciences. I have heard man after man in the field of 
economics, for instance, say that he wouldn’t know how to pursue 
his work if it were not for the fructification of the classroom. 

On the institutional side, there are very serious affirmative 
things to be said. The professor who doesn’t know all the answers, 
who is trying to find out something that is not quite obvious to 
him, stands helpless before his problem, part of the time; in a 
certain sense, he is much closer to the student than the man who 
just teaches; because the man who merely teaches knows all the 
answers. The experience of the student is to be puzzled, not to 
understand, to be confused, and gradually to find some sensible 
order, to get a new idea, to find out that what he.had been 
thinking was wrong; this is a typical experience for the man 
engaged in research, and it is a typical experience for the student, 
and this is one point of harmony. This ability of the man who is 


31 


Uncommon Sense 


worrying about a tough problem to be humbled in his own 
impotence with respect to the world that he is trying to explore— 
this is certainly a kind of prototype of how we would like to think 
of a student approaching a new field, even though he may have 
there the help of others in finding out new truths. This is one of 
the reasons why it is a common experience that the most inspiring 
teachers and the best teachers are also people who devote a good 
deal of their time to their own researches. One finds that although 
it is not possible to give a theoretical argument why research and 
education should occur in the same place, a man himself by 
uniting these two functions will make it manifest that it is a good 
idea. This does not always work, but, typically, the fellow who has 
been worrying about what makes a nucleus hang together, or what 
is the cause of the dark reaction in photosynthesis, or some other 
really tough scientific problem, comes to his teaching with a 
respect for learning, with respect for what other people have done 
before, and also with respect for ignorance—all of which makes 
him a far more sympathetic teacher than a fellow who is, by 
profession, a pedagogue. 

Sometimes the universities say that they can get good people 
only by permitting research and thus seem to justify the main- 
tenance of research establishments as a part of the educational 
machinery as a sort of bribe. This seems to me not an adequate 
way to look at it. 

Of the affirmative points beyond that, the first is that in this very 
technical world, in which matters of extreme specialization are 
often matters of life and death, two things are of deep importance 
if there is to be a healthy public life. One is that the expert, the 
fellow who has specialized knowledge, should have some sense of 
community with people who are not experts, that he should be a 
man like the rest of them; being in a university, dealing with 
people who are not committed to a highbrow life, is certainly one 
way and one of the good ways of achieving this. The other is that 
in one way or another, every citizen will be called on to have a 
judgment, and perhaps to have an influence, in matters that have 
a good deal of technical meat to them. And to have lived in a 
community where science is in the making, to have associated 
with people who are helping to make it, is surely one of the ways 
in which a citizen can be sensitive to what is honest and what is 


32 


Science in Being 


right about a technical opinion and be aware of the kind of thing 
which science is.. 

Beyond these things—and I think this is the last of the 
affirmative remarks I can make—there is another: To live in a 
university where great researches are in progress and where 
people are constantly learning the things they didn’t know before, 
learning how wrong they were, learning how much more 
complex, subtle, and interesting the world is than anyone 
imagined it to be, makes the habit of open-mindedness a natural 
thing. The habit of not knowing all the answers, the habit of 
inquiry, the habit—I think research is defined in the dictionary as 
persistent inquiry—anyway, the habit of occasional inquiry, the 
notion of intellectual adventure, the discipline of having it 
manifest that there is such a thing as right and wrong are things 
which flourish in a community where research is going on. They 
are a great part of the intellectual and, I believe, the spiritual 
tradition of our time. There can be little doubt that one of the 
virtues of the present system is that, in a loose way, young people, 
who spend four years in college in the hope of coming out of it 
wiser, better informed, knowing more, and more skilled, live in 
contact with this part of our intellectual life. 

The adverse things that can be said are probably even more 
familiar. They all stem from the fact that the relation between 
research and general education—and here we leave out the 
technical schools and professional education because they are of a 
lesser order of difficulty—is of a subtle, unmanifest, and dis- 
organized form. They all come back to the question: what is it to a 
young man who is taking a series of courses, trying to find out 
what Plato thought, trying to find out what the laws of economics 
are alleged to be, trying to find out what it was that made people 
think that Chaucer was an interesting writer, what is it to him that 
somewhere in a building off by a canyon, or upon a hill—anyway, 
with the best view in town—research is going on which ‘costs 
hundreds of millions of dollars and with which he has really no 
possibility. of coming into contact? He knows it is there. 

This brings with it a whole series of evils which I am not going 
to be able exhaustively to discuss. I think the first of them, the 
most manifest of them is probably seen in the President's office, 
where the gross administrative unbalance, caused by trying to ride 


33 


Uncommon Sense 


simultaneously the elephant of research and the mouse of general 
education, makes a very odd situation. This shows up, for 
instance, in the often-raised question: aren’t we devoting too 
much emphasis in the selection of our faculty on research ability? 
Shouldn’t we get good teachers? Of course, if there is any health in 
the situation, you shouldn’t have to ask this question, because the 
two things, by and large, should be coextensive. There should be 
exceptions, but they should be exceptions. There is the difficulty 
of status. How are you going to balance the activities in a field 
where research either is impossible or should be discouraged 
against the activities in a field where research has enormous 
prestige, and where an enormous amount of money and high 
salaries, and so on, can be commanded? How are you going to 
keep the purpose of the general education big enough in the 
university’s program and honest enough in the university’s 
program so that it will not be submerged by the enthusiasts who 
collect a few hundred thousand dollars from the Office of Naval 
Research and a few hundred thousand dollars from another 
foundation and go off and spend their time away from the 
students, thereby enriching the life of the university? 

This is only one aspect of the trouble; I think that there are far 
greater dangers. One thing I have myself seen is the many 
examples of people who, although they like the university climate, 
abuse it, lose their interest in instruction, in teaching, become 
specialists, become impatient of the interruption of classes, and go 
off by themselves and pursue their own studies. A few people of 
that kind can make a very great difference in a university. To have 
most people in that status would certainly be to make relations 
between research and education not only tenuous, but non- 
existent. 

I have listed three further examples of the kind of trouble which 
research makes in the general education. One of them is in the 
field of the humanities, in which we may, for instance, think of 
literature, literature in all languages that a man cares to read, as a 
typical example. It is not true that there is no research in the 
humanities that makes sense. There are textual matters which 
need to be explored. There are matters of tracing influences that 
are worthy undertakings. But these are of a rather minor kind; and 
above all, they are, by and large, irrelevant to the reason why the 
humanities are useful to general education. The reason why the 


34 


Science in Being 


humanities are useful in general education is that, by learning to 
read, especially by learning to read in a variety of languages and in 
a variety of times, the student is given a power of action and 
evaluation which will stand with him; to know that the text that he 
has read has or has not been challenged is a secondary point, and 
very largely, an irrelevant one. Yet the pressure of competition and 
status with the physical sciences, the natural sciences, and 
ultimately the social sciences, has forced upon many sincere 
scholars in the humanities a quite irrelevant and quite inappro- 
priate enthusiasm for research. And in this case, I believe, this not 
only does not help the humanities as an ingredient in general 
education, but, I believe, it has distracted from their real value. 
Once again: This is not to say that there is no such thing as 
research. But it is certainly a small part of what the humanities are 
good for; and it occupies in literature a role absolutely not of the 
same order as the role that research occupies in, let us say, 
astronomy or in mathematics. 

One finds in social studies a different and very much more 
complicated and subtle case. That is a case where research 
certainly is not impossible, and where the methods of science, in 
one way or another, are sure to be applied; but where their 
application has caused a kind of disintegration of disciplines once 
regarded as unified, which has made it very much harder to make 
these disciplines useful in the general education of the student. 
There was a time when economics, history, and political science 
were not recognized as separate disciplines, when they were all 
part of what might have been called political economy. I have 
heard it argued, and although I am very much out of my depth, I 
think it can be argued, that political economy is a far more 
adequate theme to teach in general education than are its 
component parts, in particular, than are political science or 
economics. The social scientists themselves have recognized the 
price that is being paid in the disintegration, more or less 
inevitably consequent on research; research with its abstract and 
monkeying techniques always breaks things down, always looks at 
pieces, always isolates and rarifies. And I believe that the attempt 
to put social science together again, like Humpty Dumpty, 
characteristically but not solely in what are called area studies, is a 
symptom of the social scientists’ own feeling that something has 
been lost which is of practical value. My purpose here is not to 


35 


Uncommon Sense 


make a critique of the programs of the social sciences, a task for 
which I would feel inadequate, and which would certainly take us 
far beyond the scope and theme of this essay, but only to point out 
that it is another case where the interests of research are, at first 
sight at least, not particularly harmonious with the interests of 
general or liberal education. 

A still more striking case you will find in philosophy, which a 
few centuries ago comprehended most of the subjects which are 
now the object of research, and which today retreats to a narrower 
and narrower domain. Perhaps the last really great philosopher of 
a university, whom I remember, was Whitehead. Yet Whitehead 
himself started one of the great disintegrations of philosophy by 
helping to make, and to make popular, the advance of mathe- 
matical logic, which now lives in the department of philosophy 
but is soon going to move out, leaving even less behind, and 
making an even greater fragmentation. The man who specializes 
in mathematical logic is not necessarily as likely to be as useful in a 
liberal education as the general philosopher. He is less likely to 
have an interest that corresponds to the interest of his students, or 
to be able to give an insight into what philosophical thought has 
been in the past and the role it has played, than is the man who 
has become somewhat less specialized. , 

As you know, many efforts to put these things back together, to 
make a dish for the liberal education out of the components which 
the analytical, experimental, and interfering techniques of science 
have created, are now under way in universities of the country. I 
believe they all, generally speaking, are called general education. 
They all have in common the attempt to apply the historical 
method, rather than the experimental method of scientific 
research, to research itself, namely to the progress of learning as a 
historical process, which may be communicable to the student, 
even though the objects learned, the things learned, are not 
communicable to the student. I have grave doubts as to whether 
this way of interpreting science as a humanity is going to be 
successful, whether this way will put back together what man has 
taken apart. 

I have tried to mention some of the difficulties of the present 
situation. All of them could be met by a kind of balance, by 
saying, “Let us have some research, but let us not have too much; 
let us have some liberal education, but let us not permit it to 


36 


Science in Being 


interfere with research; let us not permit research to interfere with 
liberal education, let us have a kind of harmony. Let us not restrict 
research to the universities, but let us also admit it there.” This 
answer of balance is very likely, in my opinion, to be the one that 
will be followed. It is the one that I suppose most of us, if forced to 
the wall, would advocate, to deal with a paradox of multivalent 
functions in a single human institution. But I would like at least to 
try out a different view of what the future may hold, not because I 
am confident that it will, but because I myself wish that it 
would. 

The deeper view is this: research itself, the life of science, is a 
mode of action. It involves its own values. It involves its own 
community. And the question we really have to ask is whether this 
aspect of science is deeply enough rooted in our community, in 
the political, intellectual, spiritual life of our times so that research 
will not merely be symbiotic with general education but will be a 
large part of its substance. 

If we look at the ingredients of the liberal education of the past, 
it was because the student could learn to do something from his 
teacher that this was included in the curriculum. The saint gave to 
the priest something which the priest could give to everyone. The 
poet gave to the man of letters something which the man of letters 
could give to everyone. The philosopher-king, or, more modestly, 
the statesman, gave to the professor of moral philosophy 
something which he could give to all students, as a mode of 
action, as a way of living, with implicit values. What are the 
modes of action, what are the characteristics of the values, what is 
the community, which science in being brings to us? 

It is above all a world in which inquiry is sacred and freedom of 
inquiry is sacred. It is a world in which doubt is not only a 
permissible thing, but in which doubt is the indispensable 
method of arriving at truth. It is a world in which the notion of 
novelty, of hitherto unexpected experience is always with us, and 
in which it is met by an open-mindedness that comes from having 
known, of having seen over and over again, that one had a great 
deal to learn. It is a way of life in which the discovery of error is 
refined, in which almost all the ingenuity that goes into experi- 
mental, analytical, or mathematical techniques is devoted to 
refining, sharpening, making more effective the way of finding out 
that you are wrong; this is the element that creates discipline. The 


37 


Uncommon Sense 


nature of the discipline of science is its devotion, its dedication to 
finding out when you are wrong, to the detection of error. 

These are ways that at one time appeared to be of very great 
relevance to the political life of democracy. You have only to look 
at the eighteenth century, you have'only to read Condorcet, you 
have only to read Jefferson in our own country, in what he said 
and wrote of our own constitutional system, to recognize that 
these values, that these disciplines, characteristic of science, and 
coupled with the forward-looking character which science always 
has, were regarded as basic to the functioning of political 
democracy. You have only to look back there to see how the dread 
of totalitarianism, the dread of authority, the dread of dogma, was 
a two-valued thing: on the one hand, the indispensable thing for 
science, and therefore for progress; and on the other hand, the 
indispensable condition for democracy, and therefore for free- 
dom. 

The absence of dogma, the absence of authority, the fact that 
even those things in which you most believe are open to doubt— 
and your willingness to doubt even those things to which you are 
most committed—are, it seems-to me, part of the freedom and 
responsibility of America, and the challenge to American institu- 
tions. 

It seems to me that this is a time when the relevance of the 
virtues of science to ordinary human life, to political life, and even 
to personal life could hardly be more manifest. Yet I do not know 
whether the experience of participating in science in being, in one 
way or another, whether this will be, whether it can be made to be, 
a sufficiently general experience, whether it can become an 
inspiring and steadying and unifying feature of our time. The 
decision, I think, on the role of research in a liberal education 
depends on just that question. At the least the two will be together 
in a kind of harmonious symbiosis, of the kind that we have seen 
in the past years. But at the most, science in being, research, may 
be to the liberal education, not an accident, not an ancillary or 
secondary or convenient thing to be held in balance—it may be 
the scripture itself. We will have then to do, not with a talented, 
fortunate, social improvis{atjion, but with a world which hangs 
together far more than the world in which we have been brought 


up. 


38 


Science in Being 


These last views are not a prediction, and of their. wisdom I 
myself feel grave doubts. Yet it is in the hope of stimulating not 
only skepticism, but hope itself, that I have brought them 


forward. 


39 


Robert Oppenheimer and J. Nehru; Kitty Oppenheimer in the back- 
ground; around 1950. (OMC) 


4 


THE CONSEQUENCES 
OF ACTION 


1951 


Bn, vita pvxd, Biov abdvatov oredde, tav 6 éunpaktov avthei waxava' 


[...] IN THE RECENT PAST much has changed. Our troops are at war in 
Korea. We are in a state of emergency, and are mobilizing. Many 
of the views of the American people have sharpened and altered. 
Errors that were prevalent six months ago are obvious as errors 
today. There is a deep anxiety about war, about the prevention 
and limitation of war, and about the defeat of our enemies should 
war break out. I thus thought it only right that I should address 
myself largely, though not exclusively, to the role of the atom in 
military matters, to the public aspects of this question, of which 
obviously not all aspects can be or are public. [ . . . ] This is a field in 
which there are many handouts and many classified lies, in which 
the wholesome give and take of question and answer are much 
needed. Where I can, I shall try to respond to these questions of 
concern and curiosity. 

From the beginning there has been a problem of assimilating 
the atom into the life of the country, and of making its 
development useful for our purposes. One may remember the 
week in August in which we all learned about the development of 
atomic energy; it was quite a remarkable week. It was generally 
thought, in that August of 1945, that the war, though sure of a 
victory, might continue through many months, and with many 
casualties. In that week, Hiroshima was bombed, the Soviet Union 
declared war on Japan, Nagasaki was bombed, and the Japanese 


1 Pindar, Pythian III: “Dear soul, do not pursue immortal life, exhaust the 
practicable technical resources.” 


41 


Uncommon Sense 


Government made it known that it was prepared to sign an 
instrument of surrender. In that week, the most terrible war 
mankind had lived through came to an end; 100,000 people were 
killed by two atomic bombs, and about as many others were 
injured. 

It was not unnatural that one should try to make of this 
spectacular development some useful, constructive application to 
our national life. In the often bizarre efforts to do this, I have been 
reminded of an old, old story, which surely you all have heard, 
about the man who stuttered and for therapeutic purposes, was 
taught to say “Peter Piper,” and so on, and complained afterward 
that although he could say this without stuttering, he could not 
work it into an ordinary conversation. 

We have been engaged in the last five years, in trying to work 
the atom into an ordinary conversation. There are many odd 
examples. No one needs today to explain that the atom does not 
mean world government, nor free power, nor the reform of our 
educational institutions. But there are some areas where the 
struggle to reconcile this development with our traditions, our 
needs, and our intentions has had, it seems to me, some 
importance or some interest. I want to consider three of those 
instances, the first two perhaps rather less than the third. 

The first is the early post-war attempt to build around the atom 
new elements of our relations with the Soviet Union, of inter- 
national relations in general, an attempt which failed almost 
before it started. The second is the effort [ . . . ] toward reconciling 
the administration of the atomic energy program with the 

- traditional processes for maintaining responsibility of our govern- 
ment to our society. The third is the nature of the contribution 
which atomic energy may reasonably be expected to make to our 
military power, to our power to prevent war and win it. 

In all of these, there is the recurring theme of the reconciliation 
of novelty and tradition, of things that are new with things that are 
known. That this would be so was anticipated very early. In 
October of 1945, my friend, the distinguished economist, Pro- 
fessor Jacob Viner, spoke before the National Academy of 
Sciences and the American Philosophical Society at a symposium 
on atomic. energy. He quoted a phrase from the President’s 
message to Congress of October 3rd of that year. The phrase 
reads: “In international relations.as in domestic affairs, the release 


42 


The Consequences of Action 


of atomic energy constitutes a new force too revolutionary to 
consider in the framework of old ideas.” Professor Viner re- 
marked: “Beyond a few facts and a few surmises about the military 
effectiveness and the cost of atomic bombs, however, I unfor- 
tunately have no materials to work with except a framework of old 
ideas, some of them centuries old...I suspect that practically 
every non-scientist is in substantially the same predicament, 
except that many are unfamiliar even with the old ideas...” 

Professor Viner need not have exempted scientists from his 
statement, The problem of dealing wisely with the atom has been 
precisely this problem of using ideas that we had, and not ideas 
that we might hope to have, in order to deal with a quite strange 
new subject. 


We may think back to 1945. At that time the people and 
government of this country were concerned with the building of a 
decent and secure peace. We still are; but the preoccupations 
which were then natural are, alas, not contemporary today. The 
efforts which were made to build around the atom the beginnings 
of a system to secure peace seem to me worth recalling; and I 
think we will be better off for remembering them, even if they are 
not ideas whose application today looks immediately hopeful. 

Our proposals for the International Control of Atomic Energy, 
which were largely based on the technical realities of the field, 
were presented on our behalf to the United Nations by Mr. 
Baruch, and were widely accepted by the non-Communist 
nations. The implementation of these proposals would have 
required a profound alteration in some, at least, of those features 
of the Soviet system which are responsible for the great troubles 
we are in today. The failure to persuade the Soviet Government to 
alter its practices was anticipated by many. Yet we should not 
forget that this is an objective not only of the past but of the future 
as well. 

[...] It was clear that no secure system could be developed for 
protecting people against the abuse of atomic weapons, unless the 
world were open to access, unless it was possible to find out the 
relevant facts everywhere in the world which had to do with the 


48 


Uncommon Sense 


security of the rest of the world. This notion of openness, of an 
open world, is, of course, relevant to other aspects of the Soviet 
system. It is doubtful whether, without the newly terrible, yet 
archaic, apparatus of the Iron Curtain, a government like the 
Soviet Government could exist. It is doubtful whether the abuses 
of that government could persist. 

Nowhere has there been a more eloquent and more general 
account of this ideal of an open world, an ideal in which secrecy 
would not be used for national purposes, in which everything of 
relevance to the common security and common welfare would be 
accessible, than in the efforts and the writings of the beloved and 
eminent physicist, Niels Bohr. If we ever hope to see the world put 
peacefully together again, it will have to involve, as one of its 
essential ingredients, an openness with regard to those parts of life 
which, if held secret, can be a menace to all mankind. 

There is another theme which appeared in the United States 
proposals, which has recurred, and will again. This is the notion of 
cooperation with other nations in the application of science and 
technology for the betterment of the conditions of life. It is 
essentially the theme that has reappeared in the Point IV program. 
It is an expression, appropriate to our time and our country, of a 
universal sense of fraternity. 

I would like to make two comments: The first is that, if we are to 
return to these themes, and I hope we will live to do so, they will 
have to be on a broader basis than in our initial proposals to the 
U.N. A mistake, which was in no way decisive from the point of 
view of Soviet objection to them, was that the atom was treated as 
too special. This is a mistake that we meet again and again when 
we study the brief history of atomic energy. 

Let us consider again the suggestion of a Development 
Authority for cultivating, for the benefit of all, the affirmative 
peaceful advantages of atomic energy. That was a good idea; but it 
was only part of a very good idea. It might have been a large part, 
had practical atomic power become rapidly available. That has not 
happened. I think we all know that the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion is not producing any power; that on the contrary it is setting 
about to become the greatest user of power in the world. This very 
fact will, I hope, provide an incentive to do something at least to 
reduce the power deficit that the atomic enterprise has become. 
But it is clear now that only when taken together with other 


44 


The Consequences of Action 


branches of technology, only when the affirmative things derived 
from the atom are taken as a part of science and technology as a 
whole, is there anything substantial and robust to develop, 
anything whose benefits are worth extending to the rest of the 
world. 

There is an analogous need for broadening the control 
functions of an International Authority. No one today would 
regard the negative and prohibitive aspects of an agreement on 
atomic energy as entirely separate from those applying to other 
arms. When President Truman addressed the General Assembly 
last autumn, he called attention to both points. He asked that the 
two commissions on atomic energy and disarmament be com- 
bined; and asked that the Point IV program be accepted and 
expanded. We know to what an unruly and to what a preoccupied 
world these suggestions were made. I believe that if with an open 
mind we remember what our objectives were, we will find 
opportunities to promote them. We will forget them at our 
peril. 


II 


With the collapse of the efforts to reach international agree- 
ment, it was clear that the atomic energy enterprise in this country 
would be very large, that it would be largely of military interest, 
that it would be largely secret, and that it would be largely 
monopolistic. The question at once arose, in drafting the law, and 
in administration of the law, whether there could be adequate 
safeguards, so that in decisions, administrative decisions as well as 
policy decisions, the powers given to the Commission, and the 
strange, new, and rather perverse definition of secrecy within 
which it operated, would not be abused or misused; so that there 
would be an accountable and responsible administration even 
under the veil of secrecy, so that the decisions taken would reflect 
a full awareness and appreciation of all relevant facts. 

We have often learned of decisions taken in this field in which 
all that has appeared in public’ has been a sort of superficial 
ripple, and it has not been easily possible to conclude as to 
whether the decisions were wisely or foolishly taken. Let me give 
two examples: About a year ago the President said that he was 


45 


Uncommon Sense 


directing the Atomic Energy Commission to proceed with the 
work on all forms of atomic weapons, including the so-called 
hydrogen or thermonuclear weapon. Neither the procedures, nor 
the arguments, nor the consequences of this decision are in the 
public domain. The other is a decision which apparently was 
made, perhaps by default, a little over a year and a half ago. 
Senator McMahon?’ raised the question of how the Congress, how 
anyone, could have any valid notion of whether the Commission 
was or was not doing its job, unless they had some idea of what it 
was producing in the way of atomic weapons. Clearly, a decision 
was reached not to make this information available; but the 
reasons and the arguments are again not, to my knowledge, 
public. 

As a digression on the epiphenomena of secrecy, let me cite a 
public record that has been rather poorly used for public 
understanding. For the last two years, I have seen many estimates 
of how many bombs we have, all allegedly deriving from 
testimony I gave about five years ago before the Special Senate 
Committee on Atomic Energy, estimates differing widely with the 
differing arithmetical practices of the reporter. Even in this last 
week I have heard and seen three such estimates. 

Let me cite the relevant excerpts of the testimony.’ Senator 
Tydings asked: “Assuming that ten years from now atomic energy 
in many countries has been licensed by the Government for 
peacetime manufacture and uses... It if were decided to make 
military bombs from our peacetime atomic energy, how long 
would it take us to complete 200?” I said, “Maybe a little over a 
year.” Senator Tydings said, “How long would it take us to make 
50?” And I said, “Maybe a year.” And then I said, “I think a year is 
too long; maybe nine months.” 

It is clear that these estimates concern the rate of conversion of 
fissionable material into weapons, whereas the pacing factor in the 
making of atomic weapons has for us been the making of 
fissionable material. Nevertheless, this testimony has been quoted 
and requoted as an estimate of our weapons stockpiles, perhaps 
unchallenged—certainly not adequately challenged—for many 
years. 


*Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March, 1949, page 66. 
3senate Resolution 179, Vol. 2, page 215. 


46 


The Consequences of Action 


The Committee of the Bar Association clearly could not address 
itself to a study of all the errors and confusions deriving from 
secrecy, nor to a study of decisions in which real elements of 
secrecy were involved, in which no adequate public record 
existed, and in which it could, at most, have listened to the 
unclassified gossip of those who participated. The Committee has 
instead studied decisions, explanations, and administrative pro- 
ceedings of a less inflammatory, less spectacular nature. It has 
tried to track them down in areas where there is a full public 
record, where there is a detailed account given by the Commis- 
sion, before other agencies, and in hearings before committees of 
the Congress. 

In this way, the Committee of the Bar Association is trying to 
answer the question: To what extent—and to what extent 
inevitably—has there been an abuse of secrecy? To what extent 
has there been an irresponsible use of the powers given to the 
Atomic Energy Commission? To what extent is the system 
working within the framework of responsible, accountable, 
traditional procedure? I shall not try to report on this work. It is 
not finished; and one will have a qualified report from the 
Committee at a later time. This work is another example of the 
contributions which the law is making to the assimilation of a new 
field into a tradition that we need to preserve. 

That this work will be of special relevance in the months and 
years ahead is obvious. The work of the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion is expanding. It is expanding into a general mobilization. 
Materials and power are going to be controlled, and one can 
foresee some major and rather spectacular collisions in the impact 
of. the work of the Commission on the general rearmament 
program. How these are resolved, whether they are resolved to 
make the most of the national economy, whether they are resolved 
to increase the national strength as much as possible, depends 
almost wholly on whether the management of largely secret and 
very powerful agencies is responsible. 


III 


There is another group of problems, in which the assimilation 
of anew and special field and a tradition has, it seems to me, great, 


47 


Uncommon Sense 


immediate importance. That lies in the contribution which one 
may reasonably hope that the atom can make to our military 
power, the power for the prevention of war, the limitation of war, 
and for the defeat of the enemy in the event that war does come. It 
is clear that not all the aspects of this problem are public or can be 
public. What is important is that there are some aspects that are 
public. I need to make some comment on these. 

In the past the debate about the military value of the atom has 
had a singularly empty quality. To the first impression that the 
atomic weapon was so great a thing that it was a decisive, an 
absolute military power, there was a reaction: it is another 
weapon, it is “just another weapon,” or, as in Mr. Hoover’s 
phrase, it is “a less dominant weapon,” than we had thought. 
People close to the work have at times also thought that the atom 
was a bit of a gold brick. But, in fact, one cannot talk in these 
terms. This is the argument of the optimist who thinks that this is 
the best of all possible worlds, and of the pessimist, who knows it. 
This is not an argument that has meaning. 

For our purposes, at this time, there is a very definite thing we 
need to say: the difficulty and the magnitude of the military and the 
political problems which we now face and will continue to face, 
and the extent of our investment in the atomic field, mean that we 
cannot afford to misuse, and we cannot afford to ignore, what the 
atom can do for military purposes. This is a luxury in which we 
should not indulge. 

In what I have said, and shall say, I am limiting myself, and I 
think rightly limiting myself, to one use only of atomic energy, one 
class of uses, the atomic bomb. There have been many references 
in the papers to other projects: to poisons, to other kinds of 
explosives, to propulsion systems for military craft of one kind 
and another. That is enough to indicate that some technical work 
has been done on them. But it is not of them I am speaking, but of 
the atomic bomb. 

There are two sides to our problem, though they are related. 
One side is the technical and the military: questions of what we do 
to make weapons available, what weapons we make available, how 
we plan to use them; the other is the side of policy, the conditions 
under which we might use atomic weapons, their significance in 
the conduct of war, their significance in international relations. It 
is clear that these two sides are related; and yet it will be useful, I 


48 


The Consequences of Action 


think, to separate them; for the role of the public is quite different 
in them. 

With regard to the first group of questions, the technical ones, 
technical both for engineers and scientists and for the military 
people, the public role is probably in the. first instance to 
determine that secrecy and power are not being abused, that the 
right questions are being asked and that reasonably honest men 
are trying to answer them. There is a lot of hard work to do, much 
of which has not been completely done at the moment. There is, 
as I have mentioned, and as the Commission has made clear, an 
increase in the scale on which the explosives are to be manu- 
factured. That will not be a trivial undertaking; for there is not 
only a problem of a balance of the various ways of making 
explosives, but of a balance between them and other military 
efforts, a necessarily tight balance in a period of mobilization. The 
use of electric power and the use of other scarce materials are 
examples. 

There is an obvious need for the development of weapons 
systems, so that one can use atomic bombs in a variety of ways, so 
that one can deliver them in more than one way, and so that one 
can make them for a variety of targets and uses and situations. 
There is need for operational planning, so that one may be 
prepared to anticipate under what conditions they are good 
weapons, and a good use of explosive, and under what conditions 
they are not; and there is need for serious work on such counter- 
measures as exist. Everybody knows that there are no special 
countermeasures against atomic weapons; but if we can intercept 
carriers, we can hope to intercept carriers of atomic bombs. 

These are all major problems. They are not substantially 
different from those which are met in all other branches of the 
mobilization program. There is a bit of novelty; and there is one 
important difference: there is a very great lack of military 
experience. It is doubtful whether the military experience of the 
end of the last war is relevant, and in any case it applies only to a 
special form of delivery and a special target, a high altitude 
delivery of atomic bombs against cities. Nevertheless, I am quite 
confident that good work on all four of these points is being done, 
that more and better work will be done, and that, with vigilance 
and sense, we shall come out with a very considerable increase in 
military capability. 


49 


Uncommon Sense 


The other side, the policy side, is the one where the role of the 
public is rather different and rather deeper. That is, of course, also 
partly a technical question, because one cannot ask whether to 
use, or under what conditions to use, or how to regard a weapon, 
until the weapon is defined. It is also a technical question, in that 
normally and properly these decisions are made by the Chiefs of 
Staff, by the National Security Council, and by the President, and 
not by a Gallup Poll. But I think I am right in saying that public 
opinion on the use of atomic weapons is a most important factor. I 
have been so assured by many military planners. Even without 
that assurance, it is obvious, if only because how we use and 
whether we use atomic weapons in warfare depends a great deal 
on what else is done. It depends a great deal on whether the public 
insists upon, supports, or balks at other military or political 
measures. 

The question comes first, of course, in the crude form: Shall we 
or shall we not use the atomic bomb? I think that before public 
debate can usefully cope with the question, it is necessary to have 
a few distinctions. One of them is this: We normally think not of 
the weapon, but of the specific use which was made of it against 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. We think of it as an instrument of 
strategic bombing, for the destruction of lives and of plants, 
essentially in cities. It is the decisive, even if perhaps not the final, 
step in a development that may have started at Guernica, that was 
characterized by the blitz against London, by the British raids on 
Hamburg, by our fire raids on Tokyo, and by Hiroshima. 

In so far as the prospect of such use may be a deterrent to the 
initiation of war, or an inducement to governments to carry out 
policies which we think are sound, and in our interest, it is a fine 
thing. But the question arises: What happens if the fighting starts? 
What sort of an instrument is this in a real war? At a time when so 
very much of our uncommitted military power is in the form of 
atomic weapons, it is a question that is dangerous not to face. It is 
not anew question. It has been asked before. I have thought that I 
could do little better than to quote comment on strategic bombing 
from the hearings held in October of 1949, before the Armed 
Services Committee of the House, in connection with the so-called 
B-36 program. In those hearings, there were many debates about 
whether the B-36 could ever reach its target, and many debates 
about whether, if it did, the bombardier could hit the target. From 


50 


The Consequences of Action 


time to time the argument took on a more general character. Here 
are some fragments of the testimony of Admiral Ralph A. Ofstie, 
who is now in a Pacific command, who was at that time a member 
of the Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion. 

Admiral Ofstie first said what he meant by strategic bombing. 
“There is no official definition of the term ‘strategic bombing.’ 
The official military term is ‘strategic air warfare,’ defined as: Air 
combat and supporting operations designed to effect, through the 
systematic application of force to a collective series of vital targets, 
the progressive destruction and disintegration of the enemy’s 
warmaking capacity to a point where he no longer retains the 
ability or the will to wage war. Vital targets may include key 
manufacturing systems, sources of raw materials, critical material, 
stockpiles, power systems, transportation systems, communi- 
cation facilities, concentrations of uncommitted elements of 
enemy armed forces, key agricultural areas, and other such target 
systems. 

“This is a very broad field,” he said. “Indeed, it would seem to 
be almost all-inclusive except for the active armed forces of an 
enemy. In fact, however, the major elements, of most of those 
target systems are located where people live and work, in urban 
and industrial areas. Further to inject realism into the picture, we 
must view the tools with which it is proposed the job be done, in 
this instance the heavy bomber of very long range, of modest 
performance, operating at great altitudes, and preferably at night. 
These factors dictate area attack as the means of destroying 
warmaking capacity located within those areas. Therefore, 
whether we speak of the mass bombing of World War II or the 
proposed atomic blitz of today, which are major tenets of the 
strategic bombing concept, we are talking of attacks on cities. This 
is what I mean when I use the colloquial term ‘strategic 
bombing.’ ” 

Then, speaking for himself and “many senior officers in the 
Navy,” Admiral Ofstie says: “We consider that strategic air 
warfare, as practiced in the past and as proposed for the future, is 
militarily unsound and of limited effect, and is morally wrong, 
and is decidedly harmful to the stability of a post-war world.” 

After a technical summary of arguments on the degree of 
effectiveness, and the technical problems of executing strategic 


51 


Uncommon Sense 


missions, Admiral Ofstie continues: “Much emphasis has been 
placed upon the instant character of an offensive using atomic 
bombs. Among laymen this has produced an illusion of power 
and even a kind of bomb-rattling jingoism. Although responsible 
officials of the Government generally do not themselves subscribe 
to it, they must be influenced by the public acceptance of the 
proposal of instant retaliation. The idea that it is within our power 
to inflict maximum damage upon the enemy in a short time 
without serious risk to ourselves creates the delusion that we are 
stronger than we actually are. This, in turn, becomes a constant 
temptation for policymakers to overcommit themselves, to make 
commitments actually impossible to fulfill.” 

There is nothing in the public record which indicates that these 
views had at the time any great effect on military or political 
thought and planning. 

This was all long before the fighting broke out in Korea. Much 
of what was clear to Admiral Ofstie then has become clear to all of 
us today. The action in Korea, furthermore, has raised publicly 
another aspect of the question of the use of atomic weapons .in 
warfare: their use against military targets. The targets commonly 
discussed are troop concentrations, airfields, Naval craft, com- 
munications centers. These are among the targets that are an 
immediate military threat, rather than the basic producing power 
and the population of an enemy. 

I am not qualified, and if I were qualified I would not be 
allowed, to give a detailed evaluation of the appropriateness of the 
use of atomic weapons against any or all such targets; but one 
thing is very clear: It is clear that they can be used only as adjuncts 
in a military campaign which has some other components, and 
whose purpose is a military victory. They are not primarily 
weapons of totality or terror, but weapons used to give combat 
forces help that they would otherwise lack. They are an integral 
part of military operations. Only when the atomic bomb is 
recognized as useful in so far as it is an integral part of military 
operations, will it really be of much help in the fighting of a war, 
rather than in warning all mankind to avert it. 

Just in this connection, of course, it is clear that the mode of use 
and the time of use have a relation to each other. Today we do not 
have very much military strength with which to integrate atomic 
weapons. Two years from now that should be quite different. 


52 


The Consequences of Action 


The question of whether to use or not to use atomic weapons is 
a different question, depending on whether or not one has 
combat forces and is prepared for combat. They are always 
terrible weapons; they may not be effective weapons if they are all, 
or almost all, that we have. 

In fact, one can imagine, in some relation to time, at least three 
different ways in which the atom may serve as military power. The 
first and the easiest to imagine is as the principal, if not the only, 
instrument, whose purpose is to destroy plants and kill people: 
that is the extreme form of the atomic bomb as a strategic 
weapon. 

The second course is the use of atomic bombs primarily against 
military targets, in tactical use, in coordination with more 
conventional forms of warfare, in combat. Whether or not they 
would then be used strategically will depend in part on whether 
non-use can serve as an effective deterrent; it will depend on the 
technical advantages, as they appear at the time, of offense and 
defense. It may not be responsible to anticipate that the strategic 
use of atomic weapons will be renounced as was the strategic use 
of gas warfare, because in any future we can foresee, the atomic 
bomb will offer far vaster prospects of destruction. Such renun- 
ciation could, I think, result only from a considered policy 
decision. 

There is a third course we can imagine, that we need to imagine: 
that, with the obvious horror of a general war, through a 
combination of our efforts and the efforts of others, and through 
some good fortune, we may manage to find our way to a more 
secure and more tolerant and more open world without general 
war. It is as a principal deterrent to such war that the military 
power of atomic weapons may yet be decisive. 

I am painfully aware that it is not entirely in our hands to 
determine which of these three courses does, in fact, take place, or 
which other course. I am also clear that it is not only or primarily a 
question of the atom bomb. But it is partly a question for the 
United States, and partly a public question; and it is partly a 
question of the atom. For if we misjudge what this weapon can or 
cannot do, in our hands or in the hands of the enemy, if we 
misjudge its contribution to military strength, it is clear that we 
will continue to cause our Government, on the basis of our 
illusions, to follow a course whose only end must be disaster. 


53 


Uncommon Sense 


About a year ago the Prime Minister of India visited this 
country. He met with many people and talked with them; and 
shortly before he left the country I asked him whether he had 
found in his visit here any appreciation, in this quite different 
culture, of the Hindu notion of control, of restraint. He answered, 
“Since this, in the last analysis, only rests on a proper evaluation of 
the consequences of action, I cannot believe that any great people 
would be without it.” 

I believe that the American people are a great people. 


54 


With Albert Einstein in LIFE Magazine, 1947. (Photo- 
graph by Alfred Eisenstaedt. Courtesy of LIFE 
Magazine © 1947, Time Inc.) 


5 
I. UNCOMMON SENSE 


1953 


A CENTURY AFTER NEWTON, in 1784, the progress of that century 
was celebrated in an anonymous memorial lodged in the ball of 
the tower of St. Margaret’s church at Gotha, to be found by men of 
future times. It read: 


“Our days comprise the happiest period of the eighteenth 
century ... Hatred born of dogma and the compulsion of 
conscience sink away; love of man and freedom of thought 
gain the upper hand. The arts and sciences blossom, and 
our vision into the workshop of nature goes deep. Artisans 
approach artists in perfection; useful skills flower at all 
levels. Here you have a faithful portrait of our time... Do 
the same for those who come after you and rejoice!” 


Transience is the backdrop for the play of human progress, for 
the improvement of man, the growth of his knowledge, the 
increase of his power, his corruption and his partial redemption. 
Our civilizations perish; the carved stone, the written word, the 
heroic act fade into a memory of memory and in the end are gone. 
The day will come when our race is gone; this house, this earth 
in which we live will one day be unfit for human habitation, as the 
sun ages and alters. 

Yet no man, be he agnostic or Buddhist or Christian, thinks 
wholly in these terms. His acts, his thoughts, what he sees of the 
world around him—the falling of a leaf or a child’s joke or the rise 
of the moon—are part of history; but they are not only part of 
history; they are a part of becoming and of process but not only 


57 


Uncommon Sense 


that: they partake also of the world outside of time; they partake of 
the light of eternity. 

These two ways of thinking, the way of time and history and the 
way of eternity and of timelessness, are both part of man’s effort to 
comprehend the world in which he lives. Neither is compre- 
hended in the other nor reducible to it. They are, as we have 
learned to say in physics, complementary views, each supple- 
menting the other, neither telling the whole story. Let us return to 
this. 

First, we had best review and extend somewhat this account of 
the complementarity of the physicists. In its simplest form it is 
that an electron must sometimes be considered as a wave, and 
sometimes as a particle—a wave, that is, with the continuous 
propagation and characteristic interference that we learn to 
understand in the optics laboratory, or as a particle, a thing with 
well-defined location at any time, discrete and individual and 
atomic. There is this same duality for all matter and for light. In a 
little subtler form this complementarity means that there are 
situations in which the position of an atomic object can be 
measured and defined and thought about without contradiction; 
and other situations in which this is not so, but in which other 
qualities, such as the energy or the impulse of the system, are 
defined and meaningful. The more nearly appropriate the first 
way of thinking is to a situation, the more wholly inappropriate 
the second, so that there are in fact no atomic situations in which 
both impulse and position will be defined well enough to permit 
the sort of prediction with which Newtonian mechanics have 
familiarized us. 

It is not only that when we have made an observation on a 
system and determined, let us say, its position, we do not know its 
impulse. That is true, but more than that it true. We could say that 
we know the position of that system and that it may have any one 
of a number of different impulses. If we try on that basis to predict 
its behavior as a sort of average behavior of all objects which have 
the measured position and which have different and unmeasured 
impulses, and work out the average answer according to Newton’s 
laws, we get a result that is wholly at variance with what we find in 
nature. This is because of the peculiar property, which has no 
analogue in the mechanics of large objects, of interference 
between waves representing the consequences of assuming one 


58 


Uncommon Sense 


impulse and those of assuming another. We are not, that is, 
allowed to suppose that position and velocity are attributes of an 
atomic system, some of which we know and others of which we 
might know but do not. We have to recognize that the attempt to 
discover these unknown attributes would lose for us the known; 
that we have a choice, a disjunction; and that this corresponds to 
the different ways we can go about observing our atom or 
experimenting with it. 

We have a state of affairs completely defined by the nature of 
the observation and by its outcome—the nature determining what 
properties of the system will be well defined in the state and what 
poorly. The outcome then is the determination of the well-defined 
quantities by measurement. This state thus is a summary, 
symbolic and uncomfortably abstract for general exposition, of 
what sort of observation we have made and what we have found 
through it. It codifies those characteristics of the experimental 
arrangement which are reliable, in the sense that the equipment 
we use records something that we know about atomic systems. It 
describes also those characteristics that are indeterminate, in the 
sense that they may not only have been disturbed or altered, but 
that their disturbance cannot be registered or controlled without 
the loss, in the experiment, of all ability to measure what was 
supposed to be measured. 

This state, this description of the atom, is not the only way of 
talking about it. It is the only way appropriate to the information 
we have and the means that we have used to obtain it. It is the full 
account of this information; and if the experiment was properly 
and scrupulously done it tells us all that we can find out. It is not 
all that we could have found out had we chosen a different 
experiment. It is all that we could find out having chosen this. 

This state is objective. We can calculate its properties, re- 
produce it with similar atoms on another occasion, verify its 
properties and its ways of change with time. There is no element 
of the arbitrary or subjective. Once we have done our experiment 
and its result is recorded and the atom disengaged, we know its 
meaning and its outcome; we can then forget the details of how we 
‘got our information. 

But, although the state of the system is objective, a mechanical 
picture of how it was brought into being is not generally possible. 
There is a most vivid example of this, made famous by the 


59 


Uncommon Sense 


prominent part it played in the debates between Einstein and 
Bohr as to the meaning and adequacy of atomic theory. It can be 
put rather simply. Let us suppose that we have two objects; one of 
them may be an electron or an atom, and it will be the one we 
wish to study. The other may be a relatively large piece of 
matter—a screen with a hole through it, or any other body; but it 
should be heavy so that its motion will be unimportant compared 
to that of the electron. Let us suppose that we by measurement 
know the impulse or momentum of both of these objects, and 
have them collide. Let the electron go through the hole, or bounce 
off the other body. If, after the collision, we measure the impulse 
of the heavy body, we will then know that of the electron because, 
as Newton’s third law teaches us,.the sum of the impulses is not 
altered by the collision. In that case we would have a state of the 
electron of well-defined impulse, as precisely defined as we had 
made the precision of our measurements. If, on the other hand, 
we observed the position of the heavy body, we would know 
where the light one had been at the moment of the collision, and 
so would have a quite different description of its state, one in 
which its position and not its impulse had been well defined—or, 
in the language of waves, a spherical wave with its center at the 
point of collision, and not a plane wave with its direction and wave 
length corresponding to the momentum. 

We have thus the option of realizing one or the other of two 
wholly dissimilar states for the electron, by a choice of what we 
observe about the heavy body with which it once was in 
interaction. We are not, in any meaningful sense, physically 
altering or qualifying the electron; we are defining a part of, 
although in this case a late part of, the experimental procedure, 
the very nature of the experiment itself. If we exercise neither 
option, if we let the heavy body go with unmeasured momentum 
and undefined position, then we know nothing of the electron at 
all. It has no state, and we are not prepared to make any 
meaningful predictions of what will become of it or of what we 
shall find should we again attempt an experiment upon it The 
electron cannot be objectified in a manner independent of the 
means chosen for observing or studying it. The only property we 
can ascribe to it without such consideration is our total ig- 
norance. 


60 


Uncommon Sense 


This is a sharp reminder that ways of thinking about things, 
which seem natural and inevitable and almost appear not to rest 
on experience so much as on the inherent qualities of thought and 
nature, do in fact rest on experience; and that there are parts of 
experience rendered accessible by exploration and experimental 
refinement where these ways of thought no longer apply. 

It is important to remember that, if a very much subtler view of 
the properties of an electron in an atomic system is necessary to 
describe the wealth of experience we have had with such systems, 
it all rests on accepting without revision the traditional accounts of 
the behavior of large scale objects. The measurements that we 
have talked about in such highly abstract form do in fact come 
down in the end to looking at the position of a pointer, or the 
reading of time on a watch, or measuring out where on a 
photographic plate or a phosphorescent screen a flash of light or a 
patch of darkness occurs. They all rest on reducing the experience 
with atomic systems to experiment and observation made 
manifest, unambiguous, and objective in the behavior of large 
objects, where the precautions and incertitudes of the atomic 
domain no longer directly apply. So it is that ever-increasing 
refinements and critical revisions in the way we talk about remote 
or small or inaccessible parts of the physical world have no direct 
relevance to the familiar physical world of common experience. 

Common sense is not wrong in the view that it is meaningful, 
appropriate, and necessary to talk about the large objects of our 
daily experience as though they had a velocity that we knew, and 
a place that we knew, and all the rest of it. Common sense is 
wrong only if it insists that what is familiar must reappear in what 
is unfamiliar. It is wrong only if it leads us to expect that every 
country th? we visit is like the last country we saw. Common 
sense, as the common heritage from the millennia of common 
life, may lead us into error if we wholly forget the circumstances to 
which that common life has been restricted. 

Misunderstanding of these relations has led men to wish to 
draw from new discoveries, and particularly those in the atomic 
domain, far-reaching consequences for the ordinary affairs of 
men. Thus it was noted that, since the ultimate laws of atomic 
behavior are not strictly causal, not strictly determinate, the 
famous argument of Laplace for a wholly determinate universe 


61 


Uncommon Sense 


could not be maintained. And there were men who believed that 
they had discovered in the acausal and indeterminate character of 
atomic events the physical basis for that sense of freedom which 
characterizes man’s behavior in the face of decision and respon- 
sibility. 

In a similar lighthearted way it was pointed out that, as the state 
of an atomic system requires observation for its definition, so the 
course of psychological phenomena might be irretrievably altered 
by the very effort to probe them—as a man’s thoughts are altered 
by the fact that he has formulated and spoken them. It is, of 
course, not the fact that observation may change the state of an 
atomic system that gives rise to the need for a complementary 
description; it is the fact that, if the observation is to be 
meaningful, it will preclude any analysis or control of that change, 
that is decisive. 

But these misapplications of the findings of atomic physics to 
human affairs do not establish that there are no valid analogies. 
These analogies will, in the nature of things, be less sharp, less 
compelling, less ingenious. They will rest upon the fact that 
complementary modes of thought and complementary descrip- 
tions of reality are an old, long-enduring part of our tradition. All 
that the experience of atomic physics can do in these affairs is 
to give us a reminder, and a certain reassurance, that these ways of 
talking and thinking can be factual, appropriate, precise, and free 
of obscurantism. 

There are a number of examples which are illuminated by, and 
in turn illuminate, the complementarity of atomic theory. Some 
of them are from quite different parts of human life and some of 
them from older parts of science. There is one from physics itself 
which is revealing, both in its analogies and its points of 
difference. One of the great triumphs of nineteenth-century 
physics was the kinetic theory of heat—what is called statistical 
mechanics. This is both an interpretation and a deduction of 
many of the large-scale properties and tendencies of matter: of the 
tendency, for instance, of bodies that can exchange heat to come 
to acommon temperature, or of the density of a gas to be uniform 
throughout a container, or of work to dissipate itself in heat, or 
quite generally of all of those irreversible processes in nature 
wherein the entropy of systems increases, and forms become 


62 


Uncommon Sense 


more uniform and less differentiated when left to themselves to 
develop. 

The phenomena we deal with here are defined in terms of 
temperature and density and pressure and other large-scale 
properties. The kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, interprets the 
behavior of these systems in terms of the forces acting on the 
molecules and of the motion of the molecules that compose them, 
which are usually quite accurately described by Newton’s laws. 
But it is a statistical theory of this motion, recognizing that in fact 
we do not in general know, and are not in detail concerned with, 
the positions and velocities of the molecules themselves, but only 
with their average behavior. We interpret the temperature of a gas, 
for instance, in terms of the average kinetic energy of its 
molecules, and the pressure as the average of the forces exerted by 
the collision of these molecules on the surface of the container. 
This description in terms of averages, embodying as part of itself 
our ignorance of the detailed state of affairs, is thus in some sense 
complementary to a complete dynamic description in terms of the 
motion of the individual molecules. In this sense kinetic theory 
and dynamics are complementary. One applies to a situation in 
which the individual patterns of molecular behavior are known. 
and studied; the other applies to a situation largely defined by our 
ignorance of these patterns. 

But the analogy to atomic complementarity is only partial, 
because there is nothing in the classical dynamics which underlies 
kinetic theory to suggest that the behavior of a gas would be any 
different if we had performed the immense job of locating and 
measuring what all the molecules were doing. We might then, it is 
true, not find it natural to talk about temperature, because we 
would need no average behavior; we would have an actual one; 
but we could still define the temperature in terms of the total 
kinetic energy of the molecules, and we would still find that it 
tended to equalize between one part of the system and another. 

We have therefore a situation in which there are two ways of 
describing a system, two sets of concepts, two centers of pre- 
occupation. One is appropriate when we are dealing with a very 
few molecules and want to know what those molecules do; the 
other appropriate when we have a large mass of matter and only 
rough and large-scale observations about it. 


63 


Uncommon Sense 


There is, however, no logical or inherent difficulty within the 
framework of classical physics, in combining both descriptions for 
a single system—and classical physics, we repeat, is adequate for 
most, if not all, of these problems of statistical mechanics. It is not 
that we cannot do this without violating the laws of physics; it is 
that it makes no sense to do it, since each description is 
appropriate to a context quite different from the other. It is clear 
that, if we insisted on the detailed description of the motion of 
individual molecules, the notions of probability which turn out to 
be so essential for our understanding of the irreversible character 
of physical events in nature would never enter. We should not 
have the great insight that we now do: namely, that the direction 
of change in the world is from the less probable to the more, from 
the more organized to the less, because all we would be talking 
about would be an incredible number of orbits and trajectories 
and collisions. It would be a great miracle to us that, out of 
equations of motion, which to every allowed motion permit a 
precisely opposite one, we could nevertheless emerge into a world 
in which there is a trend of change with time which is irreversible, 
unmistakable, and familiar in all our physical experience. 

In considering the relations between the various sciences, there 
are similar instances of complementary views. In many cases, it is 
not clear whether this is the sort of complementarity that we have 
between the statistical and dynamic descriptions of a gas, a 
contrast of interest and terminology, but not an inherent inap- 
plicability of two ways of talking; or whether on the contrary the 
situation is in fact more as it is in atomic physics, where the nature 
of the world is such that the two modes of description cannot be 
applied at once to the same situation. Every science has its own 
language. But dictionaries of translation between the languages do 
exist, and mark an ever-growing understanding and unity of 
science as a whole. It is not always clear whether the dictionaries 
will be complete; between physics and chemistry they apparently 
are. Everything the chemist observes and describes can be talked 
about in terms of atomic mechanics, and most of it at least can be 
understood. Yet no one suggests that, in dealing with the complex 
chemical forms which are of biological interest, the language of 
atomic physics would be helpful. Rather it would tend to obscure 
the great regularities of biochemistry, as the dynamic description 
of a gas would obscure its thermodynamic behavior. 


64 


Uncommon Sense 


The contrast becomes even more marked when we consider the 
physico-chemical description of living forms. Here, in spite of the 
miraculous sharpness of the tools of chemical analysis, of the 
extensive use not only of the microscope but of the electron 
microscope to determine fine details of biological structure, in 
spite of the use of tracers to follow changes on a molecular scale, 
questions have still been raised as to whether this description can 
in the nature of things be complete. 

The question involves two points: the first having to do with the 
impossibility of wholly isolating a biological system from its 
physical environment without killing it; the second with the 
possibility that a really complete physico-chemical study of the 
pivotal structures in biological processes—of genes, let us say, in 
the nuclei of dividing cells—might not be compatible with the 
undisturbed course of life itself. It would appear to be the general 
opinion of biologists that no such limitations will prove decisive; 
that a complete description of biology will be possible not only in 
terms of the concepts of biology but in terms reducible to those of 
physics and chemistry. Certainly it is a large part of the aim and 
wonder of biological progress to carry this program as far as 
possible. 

Analogous questions appear much sharper, and their answer 
more uncertain, when we think of the phenomena of conscious- 
ness; and, despite all the progress that has been made in the 
physiology of the sense organs and of the brain, despite our 
increasing knowledge of these intricate marvels both as to their 
structure and their functioning, it seems rather unlikely that we 
shall be able to describe in physico-chemical terms the physiolog- 
ical phenomena which accompany a conscious thought, or 
sentiment, or will. Today the outcome is uncertain. Whatever the 
outcome, we know that, should an understanding of the physical 
correlate of elements of consciousness indeed be available, it will 
not itself be the appropriate description for the thinking man 
himself, for the clarification of his thoughts, the resolution of his 
will, or the delight of his eye and mind at works of beauty. Indeed, 
an understanding of the complementary nature of conscious life 
and its physical interpretation appears to me a lasting element 
in human understanding and a proper formulation of the historic 
views called psycho-physical parallelism. 

For within conscious life, and in its relations with the descrip- 


65 


Uncommon Sense 


tion of the physical world, there are again many examples. There 
is the relation between the cognitive and the affective sides of our 
lives, between knowledge or analysis and emotion or feeling. 
There is the relation between the aesthetic and the heroic, 
between feeling and that precursor and definer of action, the 
ethical commitment; there is the classical relation between the 
analysis of one’s self, the determination of one’s motives and 
purposes, and that freedom of choice, that freedom of decision 
and action, which are complementary to it. 

Whether a physico-chemical description of the material coun- 
terpart of consciousness will in fact ever be possible, whether 
physiological or psychological observation will ever permit with 
any relevant confidence the prediction of our behavior in 
moments of decision and in moments of challenge, we may be 
sure that these analyses and these understandings, even should 
they exist, will be as irrelevant to the acts of decision and the 
castings of the will as are the trajectories of molecules to the 
entropy of a gas. To be touched with awe, or humor, to be moved 
by beauty, to make a commitment or a determination, to 
understand some truth—these are complementary modes of the 
human spirit. All of them are part of man’s spiritual life. None can 
replace the others, and where one is called for the others are in 
abeyance. 

Just as with the @-particles of Rutherford, which were first for 
him an object of study and then became for him a tool of study, a 
tool for investigating other objects, so our thoughts and words can 
be the subject of reflection and analysis; so we can be intro- 
spective, critical, and full of doubt. And so, in other times and 
other contexts, these same words, these same thoughts taken as 
instruments, are the power of human understanding itself, and 
the means of our further enlightenment. 

The wealth and variety of physics itself, the greater wealth and 
variety of the natural sciences taken as a whole, the more familiar, 
yet still strange and far wider wealth of the life of the human spirit, 
enriched by complementary, not at once compatible ways, 
irreducible one to the other, have a greater harmony. They are the 
elements of man’s sorrow and his splendor, his frailty and his 
power, his death, his passing, and his undying deeds. ; 


66 


Il. AN OPEN HOUSE 


1953 


[... ]WE HAVE LOOKED TOGETHER into one of the rooms of the house 
called “science.” This is a relatively quiet room that we know as 
quantum theory or atomic theory. The great girders which frame 
it, the lights and shadows and vast windows—these were the work 
of a generation of our predecessors more than two decades ago. It 
is not wholly quiet. Young people visit it and study in it and pass 
on to other chambers; and from time to time someone rearranges 
a piece of the furniture to make the whole more harmonious ; and 
many, as we have done, peer through its windows or walk through 
it as sightseers. It is not so old but that one can hear the sound of 
the new wings being built nearby, where men walk high in the air 
to erect new scaffoldings, not unconscious of how far they may 
fall. All about there are busy workshops where the builders are 
active, and very near indeed are those of us who, learning more of 
the primordial structure of matter, hope some day for chambers 
as fair and lovely as that in which we have spent the years of our 
youth and our prime. 

It is a vast house indeed. It does not appear to have been built 
upon any plan but to have grown as a great city grows. There is 
no central chamber, no one corridor from which all others 
debouch. All about the periphery men are at work studying the 
vast reaches of space and the state of affairs billions of years ago; 
studying the intricate and subtle but wonderfully meet mech- 
anisms by which life proliferates, alters, and endures; studying the 
reach of the mind and its ways of learning; digging deep into the 
atoms and the atoms within atoms and their unfathomed order. It 


67 


Uncommon Sense 


is a house so vast that none of us know it, and even the most 
fortunate have seen most rooms only from the outside or by a 
fleeting passage, as in a king’s palace open to visitors. It is a house 
so vast that there is not and.need not be complete concurrence on 
where its chambers stop and those of the neighboring mansions 
begin. 

It is not arranged in a line nor a square nor a circle nor a 
pyramid, but with a wonderful randomness suggestive of un- 
ending growth and improvisation. Not many people live in the 
house, relatively speaking—perhaps if we count all its chambers 
and take residence requirements quite lightly, one tenth of one 
per cent, of all the people in this world—probably, by any 
reasonable definition, far fewer. And even those who live here live 
elsewhere also, live in houses where the rooms are not labelled 
atomic theory or genetics or the internal constitution of the stars, 
but quite different names like power and production and evil and 
beauty and history and children and the word of God. 

We go in and out; even the most assiduous of us is not bound to 
this vast structure. One thing we find throughout the house: there 
are no locks; there are no shut doors; wherever we go there are the 
signs and usually the words of welcome. It is an open house, open 
to all comers. 

The discoveries of science, the new rooms in this great house, 
have changed the way men think of things outside its walls. We 
have some glimmering now of the depth in time and the vastness 
in space of the physical world we live in. An awareness of how long 
our history and how immense our cosmos touches us even in 
simple earthly deliberations. We have learned from the natural 
history of the earth and from the story of evolution to have a sense 
of history, of time and change. We learn to talk of ourselves, and 
of the nature of the world and its reality as not wholly fixed in a 
silent quiet moment, but as unfolding with novelty and alteration, 
decay and new growth. We have understood something of the 
inner harmony and beauty of strange primitive cultures, and 
through this see the qualities of our own life in an altered 
perspective, and recognize its accidents as well as its inherent 
necessities. We are, I should think, not patriots less but patriots 
very differently for loving what is ours and understanding a little 
of the love of others for their lands and ways. We have begun to 
understand that it is not only in his rational life that man’s psyche 


68 


An Open House 


is intelligible, that even in what may appear to be his least rational 
actions and sentiments we may discover a new order. We have the 
beginnings of an understanding of what it is in man, and more in 
simple organisms, that is truly heritable, and rudimentary clues as 
to how the inheritance occurs. We know, in surprising detail, what 
is the physical counterpart of the act of vision and of other modes 
of perception. Not one of these new ideas and new insights is so 
little, or has so short a reach in its bearing on the common 
understanding but that it alone could make a proper theme for 
“Science and the Common Understanding.” Yet we have been, 
bearing in mind my limited area of experience, in that one room 
of the part of the house where physics is, in which I have for some 
years worked and taught. 

In that one room—in that relatively quiet room where we have 
been together—we have found things quite strange for those who 
have not been there before, yet reminiscent of what we have seen 
in other houses and known in other days. We have seen that in the 
atomic world we have been led by experience to use descriptions 
and ideas that apply to the large-scale world of matter, to the 
familiar world of our schoolday physics; ideas like the position of 
a body and its acceleration and its impulse and the forces acting 
on it; ideas like wave and interference; ideas like cause and 
probability. But what is new, what was not anticipateca a half- 
century ago, is that, though to an atomic system there is a 
potential applicability of one or another of these ideas, in any real 
situation only some of these ways of description can be actual. 
This is because we need to take into account not merely the atomic 
system we are studying, but the means we use in observing it, and 
the fitness of these experimental means for defining and meas- 
uring selected properties of the system. All such ways of observing 
are needed for the whole experience of the atomic world; all but 
one are excluded in any actual experience. In the specific instance, 
there is a proper and consistent way to describe what the 
experience is; what it implies; what it predicts and thus how to 
deal with its consequences. But any such specific instance 
excludes by its existence the application of other ideas, other 
modes of prediction, other consequences. They are, we say, 
complementary to one another; atomic theory is in part an 
account of these descriptions and in part an understanding of the 
circumstances to which one applies, or another or another. 


69 


Uncommon Sense 


And so it is with man’s life. He may be any of a number of 
things; he will not be all of them. He may be well versed, he may 
be a poet, he may be a creator in one or more than one science; he 
will not be all kinds of man or all kinds of scientist; and he will be 
lucky if he has a bit of familiarity outside the room in which he 


works. 
So it is with the great antinomies that through the ages have 


organized and yet disunited man’s experience: the antinomy 
between the ceaseless change and wonderful novelty and the 
perishing of all earthly things, and the eternity which inheres in 
every happening; in the antinomy between growth and order, 
between the spontaneous and changing and irregular and the 
symmetrical and balanced; in the related antinomy between 
freedom and necessity; between action, the life of the will, 
and observation and analysis and the life of reason; between the 
question “how?” and the questions “why?” and “to what end?”; 
between the causes that derive from natural law, from unvarying 
regularities in the natural world, and those other causes that 
express purposes and define goals and ends. 

So it is in the antinomy between the individual and the 
community; man who is an end in himself and man whose 
tradition, whose culture, whose works, whose words have mean- 
ing in terms of other men and his relations to them. All our 
experience has shown that we can neither think, nor in any true 
sense live, without reference to these antinomic modes. We cannot 
in any sense be both the observers and the actors in any specific 
instance, or we shall fail properly to be either one or the other; yet 
we know that our life is built of these two modes, is part free and 
part inevitable, is part creation and part discipline, is part 
acceptance and part effort. We have no written rules that assign us 
to these ways; but we know that only folly and death of the spirit 
result when we deny one or the other, when we erect one as total 
and absolute and make the others derivative and secondary. We 
recognize this when we live as men. We talk to one another; we 
philosophize; we admire great men and their moments of 
greatness; we read; we study; we recognize and love in a particular 
act that happy union of the generally incompatible. With all of this 
we learn to use some reasonable part of the full register of man’s 
resources. 


70 


An Open House 


We are, of course, an ignorant lot; even the best of us knows 
how to do only a very few things well; and of what is available in 
knowledge of fact, whether of science or of history, only the 
smallest part is in any one man’s knowing. 

The greatest of the changes that science has brought is the 
acuity of change; the greatest novelty the extent of novelty. Short 
of rare times of great disaster, civilizations have not known such 
rapid alteration in the conditions of their life, such rapid flowering 
of many varied sciences, such rapid changes in the ideas we have 
about the world and one another. What has been true in the days 
of a great disaster or great military defeat for one people at one 
time is true for all of us now, in the sense that our ends have little 
in common with our beginnings. Within a lifetime what we 
learned at school has been rendered inadequate by new dis- 
coveries and new inventions; the ways that we learn in childhood 
are only very meagerly adequate to the issues that we must meet in 
maturity. 

In fact, of course, the notion of universal knowledge has always 
been an illusion; but it is an illusion fostered by the monistic view 
of the world in which a few great central truths determine in all its 
wonderful and amazing proliferation everything else that is true. 
We are not today tempted to search for these keys that unlock the 
whole of human knowledge and of man’s experience. We know 
that we are ignorant; we are well taught it, and the more surely and 
deeply we know our own job the better able we are to appreciate 
the full measure of our pervasive ignorance. We know that these 
are inherent limits, compounded, no doubt, and exaggerated by 
that sloth and that complacency without which we would not be 
men at all. 

But knowledge rests on knowledge; what is new is meaningful 
because it departs slightly from what was known before; this is a 
world of frontiers, where even the liveliest of actors or observers 
will be absent most of the time from most of them. Perhaps this 
sense was not so sharp in the village—that village which we have 
learned a little about but probably do not understand too well— 
the village of slow change and isolation and fixed culture which 
evokes our nostalgia even if not our full comprehension. Perhaps 
in the villages men were not so lonely; perhaps they found in each 
other a fixed community, a fixed and only slowly growing store of 


71 


Uncommon Sense 


knowledge—a single world. Even that we may doubt, for there 
seem to be always in the culture of such times and places vast 
domains of mystery, if not unknowable, then imperfectly known, 
endless and open. 

As for ourselves in these times of change, of ever-increasing 
knowledge, of collective power and individual impotence, of 
heroism and of drudgery, of progress and of tragedy, we too are 
brothers. And if we, who are the inheritors of two millennia of 
Christian tradition, understand that for us we have come to be 
brothers second by being children first, we know that in vast parts 
of the world where there has been no Christian tradition, and with 
men who never have been and never may be Christian in faith 
there is nevertheless a bond of brotherhood. We know this not 
only because of the almost universal ideal of human brotherhood 
and human community; we know it at first hand from the more 
modest, more diverse, more fleeting associations which are the 
substance of our life. The ideal of brotherhood, the ideal of 
fraternity in which all men, wicked and virtuous, wretched and 
fortunate, are banded together has its counterpart in the experi- 
ence of communities, not ideal, not universal, imperfect, im- 
permanent, as different from the ideal and as reminiscent of it as 
are the ramified branches of science from the ideal of a unitary, 
all-encompassing science of the eighteenth century. 

Each of us knows from his own life how much even a casual and 
limited association of men goes beyond him in knowledge, in 
understanding, in humanity, and in power. Each of us, from a 
friend or a book or by concerting of the little we know with what 
others know, has broken the iron circle of his frustration. Each of 
us has asked help and been given it, and within our measure each 
of us has offered it. Each of us knows the great new freedom 
sensed almost as a miracle, that men banded together for some 
finite purpose experience from the power of their common effort. 
We are likely to remember the times of the last war, where the 
common danger brought forth in soldier, in worker, in scientist, 
and engineer a host of new experiences of the power and the 
comfort in even bleak undertakings, of common, concerted, co- 
operative life. Each of us knows how much he has been 
transcended by the group of which he has been or is a part; each 
of us has felt the solace of other men’s knowledge to stay his own 


72 


An Open House 


ignorance, of other men’s wisdom to stay his folly, of other men’s 
courage to answer his doubts or his weakness. 

These are the fluid communities, some of long duration when 
circumstances favored—like the political party or many a trade 
union—some fleeting and vivid, encompassing in the time of their 
duration a moment only of the member’s life; and in our world at 
least they are ramified and improvised, living and dying, growing 
and falling off almost as a form of life itself. This may be more true 
of the United States than of any other country. Certainly the 
bizarre and comical aspects impressed de Tocqueville more than 
a century ago when he visited our land and commented on the 
readiness with which men would band together: to improve the 
planting of a town, or for political reform, or for the pursuit or 
interexchange of knowledge, or just for the sake of banding 
together, because they liked one another or disliked someone else. 
Circumstances may have exaggerated the role of the societies, of 
the fluid and yet intense communities in the United States; yet 
these form a common pattern for our civilization. It brought men 
together in the Royal Society and in the French Academy and 
in the Philosophical Society that Franklin founded, in family, in 
platoon, on a ship, in the laboratory, in almost everything but a 
really proper club. 

If we err today—and I think we do—it is in expecting too much 
of knowledge from the individual and too much of synthesis from 
the community. We tend to think of these communities, no less 
than of the larger brotherhood of man, as made up of individuals, 
as composed of them as an atom of its ingredients. We think 
similarly of general laws and broad ideas as made up of the 
instances which illustrate them, and from an observation of which 
we may have learned them. 

Yet this is not the whole. The individual event, the act, goes far 
beyond the general law. It is a sort of intersection of many 
generalities, harmonizing them in one instance as they cannot be 
harmonized in general. And we as men are not only the 
ingredients of our communities; we are their intersection, making 
a harmony which does not exist between the communities except 
as we, the individual men, may create it and reveal it. So much of 
what we think, our acts, our judgments of beauty and of right and 
wrong, come to us from our fellow men that what would be left 


73 


Uncommon Sense 


were we to take all this away would be neither recognizable nor 
human. We are men because we are part of, but not because only 
part of, communities; and the attempt to understand man’s 
brotherhood in terms only of the individual man is as little likely 
to describe our world as is the attempt to describe general laws as 
the summary of their instances. These are indeed two comple- 
mentary views, neither reducible to the other, no more reducible 
than is the electron as wave to the electron as particle. 

And this is the mitigant of our ignorance. It is true that none of 
us will know very much; and most of us will see the end of our 
days without understanding in all its detail and beauty the 
wonders uncovered even in a single branch of a single science. 
Most of us will not even know, as a member of any intimate circle, 
anyone who has such knowledge; but it is also true that, although 
we are sure not to know everything and rather likely not to know 
very much, we can know anything that is known to man, and may, 
with luck and sweat, even find out some things that have not 
before been known to him. This possibility, which, as a universal 
condition of man’s life is new, represents today a high and 
determined hope, not yet a reality; it is for us in England and in 
the United States not wholly remote or unfamiliar. It is one of the 
manifestations of our belief in equality, that belief which could 
perhaps better be described as a commitment to unparalleled 
diversity and unevenness in the distribution of attainments, 
knowledge, talent, and power. 

This open access to knowledge, these unlocked doors and signs 
of welcome, are a mark of a freedom as fundamental as any. They 
give a freedom to resolve difference by converse, and, where 
converse does not unite, to let tolerance compose diversity. This 
would appear to be a freedom barely compatible with modern 
political tyranny. The multitude of communities, the free associa- 
tion for converse or for common purpose, are acts of creation. It is 
not merely that without them the individual is the poorer; without 
them a part of human life, not more nor less fundamental than the 
individual, is foreclosed. It is a cruel and humorless sort of pun 
that so powerful a present form of modern tyranny should call 
itself by the very name of a belief in community, by a word 
“communism” which in other times evoked memories of villages 
and village inns and of artisans concerting their skills, and of men 
of learning content with anonymity. But perhaps only a malignant 


74 


An Open House 


end can follow the systematic belief that all communities are one 
community; that all truth is one truth; that all experience is 
compatible with all other; that total knowledge is possible; that all 
that is potential can exist as actual. This is not man’s fate; this is 
not his path; to force him on it makes him resemble not that 
divine image of the all-knowing and all-powerful but the helpless, 
iron-bound prisoner of a dying world. The open society, the 
unrestricted access to knowledge, the unplanned and uninhibited 
association of men for its furtherance—these are what may make a 
vast, complex, ever-growing, ever-changing, ever more special- 
ized and expert technological world nevertheless a world of 
human community. 

So it is with the unity of science—that unity that is far more a 
unity of comparable dedication than a unity of common total 
understanding. This heartening phrase, “the unity of science,” 
often tends to evoke a wholly false picture, a picture of a few basic 
truths, a few critical techniques, methods, and ideas, from which 
all discoveries and understanding of science derive; a sort of 
central exchange, access to which will illuminate the atoms and 
the galaxies, the genes and the sense organs. The unity of science 
is based rather on just such a community as I have described. All 
parts of it are open to all of us, and this is no merely formal 
invitation. The history of science is rich in example of the. 
fruitfulness of bringing two sets of techniques, two sets of ideas, 
developed in separate contexts for the pursuit of new truth, into 
touch with one another. The sciences fertilize each other; they 
grow by contact and by common enterprise. Once again, this 
means that the scientist may profit from learning about any other 
science; it does not mean that he must learn about them all. It 
means that the unity is a potential unity, the unity of the things 
that might be brought together and might throw light one on the 
other. It is not global or total or hierarchical. 

Even in science, and even without visiting the room in its house 
called atomic theory, we are again and again rerninded of the 
complementary traits in our own life, even in our own profes- 
sional life. We are nothing without the work of others our 
predecessors, others our teachers, others our contemporaries. 
Even when, in the measure of our adequacy and our fullness, new 
insight and new order are created, we are still nothing without 
others. Yet we are more. 


75 


Uncommon Sense 


There is a similar duality in our relations to wider society. For 
society our work means many things: pleasure, we hope, for those 
who follow it; instruction for those who perhaps need it; but also 
and far more widely, it means a common power, a power to 
achieve that which could not be achieved without knowledge. It 
means the cure of illness and the alleviation of suffering; it means 
the easing of labor and the widening of the readily accessible 
frontiers of experience, of communication, and of instruction. It 
means, in an earthy way, the power of betterment—that riddled 
word. We are today anxiously aware that the power to change is 
not always necessarily good. 

As new instruments of war, of newly massive terror, add to the 
ferocity and totality of warfare, we understand that it is a special 
mark and problem of our age that man’s ever-present preoccupa- 
tion with improving his lot, with alleviating hunger and poverty 
and exploitation, must be brought into harmony with the over- 
riding need to limit and largely to eliminate resort to organized 
violence between nation and nation. The increasingly expert 
destruction of man’s spirit by the power of police, more wicked if 
not more awful than the ravages of nature’s own hand, is another 
such power, good only if never to be used. 

We regard it as proper and just that the patronage of science by 
society is in large measure based on the increased power which 
knowledge gives. If we are anxious that the power so given and so 
obtained be used with wisdom and with love of humanity, that is 
an anxiety we share with almost everyone. But we also know how 
little of the deep new knowledge which has altered the face of the 
world, which has changed—and increasingly and ever more 
profoundly must change—man’s views of the world, resulted 
from a quest for practical ends or an interest in exercising the 
power that knowledge gives. For most of us, in most of those 
moments when we were most free of corruption, it has been the 
beauty of the world of nature and the strange and compelling 
harmony of its order, that has sustained, inspirited, and led us. 
That also is as it should be. And if the forms in which society 
provides and exercises its patronage leave these incentives strong 
and secure, new knowledge will never stop as long as there are 
men. 

We know that our work is rightly both an instrument and an 
end. A great discovery is a thing of beauty; and our faith—our 


76 


An Open House 


binding, quiet faith—is that knowledge is good and good in itself. 
It is also an instrument; it is an instrument for our successors, who 
will use it to probe elsewhere and more deeply; it is an instrument 
for technology, for the practical arts, and for man’s affairs. So it is 
with us as scientists; so it is with us as men. We are at once 
instrument and end, discoverers and teachers, actors and ob- 
servers. We understand, as we hope others understand, that in this 
there is a harmony between knowledge in the sense of science, 
that specialized and general knowledge which it is our purpose to 
uncover, and the community of man. We, like all men, are among 
those who bring a little light to the vast unending darkness of 
man’s life and world. For us as for all men, change and eternity, 
specialization and unity, instrument and final purpose, com- 
munity and individual man alone, complementary each to the 
other, both require and define our bonds and our freedom. 


77 


At Los Alamos in 1946. First row from the left: N. Bradbury, J. 
Manley, and Enrico Fermi. Robert Oppenheimer is seated in the 
second row. (LAL) 


6 


PROSPECTS IN THE 
ARTS AND SCIENCES 


1954 


THE WORDS “prospects in the arts and sciences” mean two quite 
different things to me. One is prophecy: What will the scientists 
discover and the painters paint, what new forms will alter music, 
what parts of experience will newly yield to objective description? 
The other meaning is that of a view: What do we see when we look 
at the world today and compare it with the past? I am not a 
prophet; and I cannot very well speak to the first subject, though 
in many ways I should like to. I shall try to speak to the second, 
because there are some features of this view which seem to me so 
remarkable, so new and so arresting, that it may be worth turning 
our eyes to them; it may even help us to create and shape the 
future better, though we cannot foretell it. 

In the arts and in the sciences, it would be good to be a prophet. 
It would be a delight to know the future. I had thought for a while 
of my own field of physics and of those nearest to it in the natural 
sciences. It would not be too hard to outline the questions which 
natural scientists today are asking themselves and trying to 
answer. What, we ask in physics, is matter, what is it made of, how 
does it behave when it is more and more violently atomized, when 
we try to pound out of the stuff around us the ingredients which 
only violence creates and makes manifest? What, the chemists ask, 
are those special features of nucleic acids and proteins which 
make life possible and give it its characteristic endurance and 
mutability? What subtle chemistry, what arrangements, what 
reactions and controls make the cells of living organisms differ- 
entiate so that they may perform functions as oddly diverse as 


79 


Uncommon Sense 


transmitting information throughout our nervous systems or 
covering our heads with hair? What happens in the brain to make 
a record of the past, to hide it from consciousness, to make it 
accessible to recall? What are the physical features which make 
consciousness possible? 

All history teaches us that these questions that we think the 
pressing ones will be transmuted before they are answered, that 
they will be replaced by others, and that the very process of 
discovery will shatter the concepts that we today use to describe 
our puzzlement. 

It is true that there are some who profess to see in matters of 
culture, in matters precisely of the arts and sciences, a certain 
macrohistorical pattern, a grand system of laws which determines 
the course of civilization and gives a kind of inevitable quality to 
the unfolding of the future. They would, for instance, see the 
radical, formal experimentation which characterized the music of 
the last half-century as an inevitable consequence of the immense 
flowering and enrichment of natural science; they would see a 
necessary order in the fact that innovation in music precedes that 
in painting and that in turn in poetry, and point to this sequence 
in older cultures. They would attribute the formal experimenta- 
tion of the arts to the dissolution, in an industrial and technical 
society, of authority—of secular, political authority, and of the 
catholic authority of the church. They are thus armed to predict 
the future. (But this, I fear, is not my dish.) 

If a prospect is not a prophecy, it is a view. What does the world 
of the arts and sciences look like? There are two ways of looking at 
it: One is the view of the traveler, going by horse or foot, from 
village to village to town, staying in each to talk with those who live 
there and to gather something of the quality of its life. This is the 
intimate view, partial, somewhat accidental, limited by the limited 
life and strength and curiosity of the traveler, but intimate and 
human, in a human compass. The other is the vast view, showing 
the earth with its fields and towns and valleys as they appear to a 
camera carried in a high-altitude rocket. In one sense this 
prospect will be more complete; one will see all branches of 
knowledge, one will see all the arts, one will see them as part of the 
vastness and complication of the whole of human life on éarth. 
But one will miss a great deal; the beauty and warmth of human 
life will largely be gone from that prospect. 


80 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


It is in this vast high-altitude survey that one sees the general 
surprising quantitative features that distinguish our time. This is 
where the listings of science and endowments and laboratories 
and books published show up; this is where we learn that more 
people are engaged in scientific research today than ever before, 
that the Soviet world and the free world are running neck and 
neck in the training of scientists, that more books are published 
per capita in England than in the United States, that the social 
sciences are pursued actively in America, Scandinavia, and 
England, that there are more people who hear the great music of 
the past, and more music composed and more paintings painted. 
This is where we learn that the arts and sciences are flourishing. 
This great map, showing the world from afar and almost as to a 
stranger, would show more: It would show the immense diversity 
of culture and life, diversity in place and tradition for the first time 
clearly manifest on a world-wide scale, diversity in technique and 
language, separating science from science and art from art, and all 
of one from all of the other. This great map, world-wide, culture- 
wide, remote, has some odd features. There are innumerable 
villages. Between the villages there appear to be almost no paths 
discernible from this high altitude. Here and there passing near a 
village, sometimes through its heart, there will be a superhighway, 
along which windy traffic moves at enormous speed. The 
superhighways seem to have little connection with villages, 
starting anywhere, ending anywhere, and sometimes appearing 
almost by design to disrupt the quiet of the village. This view gives 
us no sense of order or of unity. To find these we must visit the 
villages, the quiet, busy places, the laboratories and studies and 
studios. We must see the paths that are barely discernible; we 
must understand the superhighways and their dangers. 

In the natural sciences these are and have been and are likely to 
continue to be heroic days. Discovery follows discovery, each both 
raising and answering questions, each ending a long search, and 
each providing the new instruments for a new search. There are 
radical ways of thinking unfamiliar to common sense and 
connected with it by decades or centuries of increasingly special- 
ized and unfamiliar experience. There are lessons of how limited, 
for all its variety, the common experience of man has been with 
regard to natural phenomena, and hints and analogies as to how 
limited may be his experience with man. Every new finding is a 


81 


Uncommon Sense 


part of the instrument kit of the sciences for further investigation 
and for penetrating into new fields. Discoveries of knowledge 
fructify technology and the practical arts, and these in turn pay 
back refined techniques, new possibilities of observation and 
experiment. 

In any science there is harmony between practitioners. A man 
may work as an individual, learning of what his colleagues do 
through reading or conversation; he may be working as a member 
of a group on problems whose technical equipment is too massive 
for individual effort. But whether he is a part of a team or solitary 
in his own study, he, as a professional, is a member of a 
community. His colleagues in his own branch of science will be 
grateful to him for the inventive or creative thoughts he has, will 
welcome his criticism. His world and work will be objectively 
communicable; and he will be quite sure that if there is error in it, 
that error will not long be undetected. In his own line of work he 
lives in a community where common understanding combines 
with common purpose and interest to bind men together both in 
freedom and in co-operation. 

This experience will make him acutely aware of how limited, 
how inadequate, how precious is this condition of his life; for in 
his relations with a wider society, there will be neither the sense of 
community nor of objective understanding. He will sometimes 
find, in returning to practical undertakings, some sense of 
community with men who are not expert in his science, with other 
scientists whose work is remote from his, and with men of action 
and men of art. The frontiers of science are separated now by long 
years of study, by specialized vocabularies, arts, techniques, and 
knowledge from the common heritage even of a most civilized 
society; and anyone working at the frontier of such science is in 
that sense a very long way from home, a long way too from the 
practical arts that were its matrix and origin, as indeed they were 
of what we today call art. 

The specialization of science is an inevitable accompaniment of 
progress; yet it is full of dangers, and it is cruelly wasteful, since so 
much that is beautiful and enlightening is cut off from most of the 
world. Thus it is proper to the role of the scientist that he not 
merely find new truth and communicate it to his fellows, but that 
he teach, that he try to bring the most honest and intelligible 
account of new knowledge to all who will try to learn. This is one 


82 


Prospects in the Arts and Sctences 


reason—it is the decisive organic reason—why scientists belong in 
universities. It is one reason why the patronage of science by and 
through universities is its most proper form; for it is here, in 
teaching, in the association of scholars and in the friendships of 
teachers and taught, of men who by profession must themselves 
be both teachers and taught, that the narrowness of scientific life 
can best be moderated, and that the analogies, insights, and 
harmonies of scientific discovery can find their way into the wider 
life of man. 

In the situation of the artist today there are both analogies to 
and differences from that of the scientist; but it is the differences 
which are the most striking and which raise the problems that 
touch most on the evil of our day. For the artist it is not enough 
that he communicate with others who are expert in his own art. 
Their fellowship, their understanding, and their appreciation may 
encourage him; but that is not the end of his work, nor its nature. 
The artist depends on a common sensibility and culture, on a 
common meaning of symbols, on a community of experience and 
common ways of describing and interpreting it. He need not write 
for everyone or paint or play for everyone. But his audience must 
be man; it must be man, and not a specialized set of experts 
among his fellows. Today that is very difficult. Often the artist has 
an aching sense of great loneliness, for the community to which he 
addresses himself is largely not there; the traditions and the 
culture, the symbols and the history, the myths and the common 
experience, which it is his function to illuminate, to harmonize, 
and to portray, have been dissolved in a changing world. 

There is, it is true, an artificial audience maintained to moderate 
between the artist and the world for which he works: the audience 
of the professional critics, popularizers, and advertisers of art. But 
though, as does the popularizer and promoter of science, the 
critic fulfills a necessary present function and introduces some 
order and some communication between the artist and the world, 
he cannot add to the intimacy and the directness and the depth 
with which the artist addresses his fellow men. 

To the artist’s loneliness there is a complementary great and 
terrible barrenness in the lives of men. They are deprived of the 
illumination, the light and tenderness and insight of an intelligible 
interpretation, in contemporary terms, of the sorrows and 
wonders and gaieties and follies of man’s life. This may be in part 


83 


Uncommon Sense 


offset, and is, by the great growth of techical means for making the 
art of the past available. But these provide a record of past 
intimacies between art and life; even when they are applied to the 
writing and painting and composing of the day, they do not bridge 
the gulf between a society, too vast and too disordered, and the 
artist trying to give meaning and beauty to its parts. 

In an important sense this world of ours is a new world, in 
which the unity of knowledge, the nature of human communities, 
the order of society, the order of ideas, the very notions of society 
and culture have changed and will not return to what they have 
been in the past. What is new is new not because it has never been 
there before, but because it has changed in quality. One thing that 
is new is the prevalence of newness, the changing scale and scope 
of change itself, so that the world alters as we walk in it, so that the 
years of man’s life measure not some small growth or rearrange- 
ment or moderation of what he learned in childhood, but a great 
upheaval. What is new is that in one generation our knowledge of 
the natural world engulfs, upsets, and complements all knowledge 
of the natural world before. The techniques, among which and by 
which we live, multiply and ramify, so that the whole world is 
bound together by communication, blocked here and there by the 
immense synapses of political tyranny. The global quality of the 
world is new: our knowledge of and sympathy with remote and 
diverse peoples, our involvement with them in practical terms, 
and our commitment to them in terms of brotherhood. What is 
new in the world is the massive character of the dissolution and 
corruption of authority, in belief, in ritual, and in temporal order. 
Yet this is the world that we have come to live in. The very 
difficulties which it presents derive from growth in understanding, 
in skill, in power. To assail the changes that have unmoored us 
from the past is futile, and in a deep sense, I think, it is wicked. We 
need to recognize the change and learn what resources we have. 

Again I will turn to the schools and, as their end and as their 
center, the universities. For the problem of the scientist is in this 
respect not different from that of the artist or of the historian. He 
needs to be a part of the community, and the community can only 
with loss and peril be without him. Thus it is with a sense of 
interest and hope that we see a growing recognition that the 
creative artist is a proper charge on the university, and the 
university a proper home for him; that a composer or a poet or a 


84 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


playwright or painter needs the toleration, understanding, the 
rather local and parochial patronage that a university can give; 
and that this will protect him from the tyranny of man’s 
communication and professional promotion. For here there is an 
honest chance that what the artist has of insight and of beauty will 
take root in the community, and that some intimacy and some 
human bonds can mark his relations with his patrons. For a 
university rightly and inherently is a place where the individual 
man can form new syntheses, where the accidents of friendship 
and association can open a man’s eyes to a part of science or art 
which he had not known before, where parts of human life, 
remote and perhaps superficially incompatible, can find in men 
their harmony and their synthesis. 

These, then, in rough and far too general words, are some of the 
things we see as we walk through the villages of the arts and of the 
sciences and notice how thin are the paths that lead from one to 
another, and how little in terms of human understanding and 
pleasure the work of the villages comes to be shared outside. 

The superhighways do not help. They are the mass media— 
from the loudspeakers in the deserts of Asia Minor and the cities 
of Communist China to the organized professional theater of 
Broadway. They are the purveyors of art and science and culture 
for the millions upon millions—the promoters who represent the 
arts and sciences to humanity and who represent humanity to the 
arts and sciences; they are the means by which we are reminded of 
the famine in remote places or of war or trouble or change; they 
are the means by which this great earth and its peoples have 
become one to one another, the means by which the news of 
discovery or honor and the stories and songs of today travel and 
resound throughout the world. But they are also the means by 
which the true human community, the man knowing man, the 
neighbor understanding neighbor, the schoolboy learning a 
poem, the women dancing, the individual curiosity, the individual 
sense of beauty are being blown dry and issueless, the means by 
which the passivity of the disengaged spectator presents to the 
man of art and science the bleak face of unhumanity. 

For the truth is that this is indeed, inevitably and increasingly, 
an open and, inevitably and increasingly, an eclectic world. We 
know too much for one man to know much, we live too variously 
to live as one. Our histories and traditions—the very means of 


85 


Uncommon Sense 


interpreting life—are both bonds and barriers among us. Our 
knowledge separates as well as it unites; our orders disintegrate as 
well as bind; our art brings us together and sets us apart. The 
artist’s loneliness, the scholar despairing because no one will any 
longer trouble to learn what he can teach, the narrowness of the 
scientist—these are unnatural insignia in this great time of 
change. 

For what is asked of us is not easy. The openness of this world 
derives its character from the irreversibility of learning; what is 
once learned is part of human life. We cannot close our minds to 
discovery; we cannot stop our ears so that the voices of far-off and 
strange people can no longer reach them. The great cultures of the 
East cannot be walled off from ours by impassable seas and 
defects of understanding based on ignorance and unfamiliarity. 
Neither our integrity as men of learning nor our humanity allows 
that. In this open world, what is there, any man may try to 
learn. 

This is no new problem. There has always been more to know 
than one man could know; there have always been modes of 
feeling that could not move the same heart; there have always 
been deeply held beliefs that could not be composed into a 
synthetic union. Yet never before today have the diversity, the 
complexity, the richness so clearly defied hierarchical order and 
simplification; never before have we had to understand the 
complementary, mutually not compatible ways of life and 
recognize choice between them as the only course of freedom. 
Never before today has the integrity of the intimate, the detailed, 
the true art, the integrity of craftsmanship and the preservation of 
the familiar, of the humorous and the beautiful stood in more 
massive contrast to the vastness of life, the greatness of the globe, 
the otherness of people, the otherness of ways, and the all- 
encompassing dark. 

This is a world in which each of us, knowing his limitations, 
knowing the evils of superficiality and the terrors of fatigue, will 
have to cling to what is close to him, to what he knows, to what he 
can do, to his friends and his tradition and his love, lest he be 
dissolved in a universal confusion and know nothing and love 
nothing. It is at the same time a world in which none of us can find 
hieratic prescription or general sanction for any ignorance, any 
insensitivity, any indifference. When a friend tells us of a new 


86 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


discovery we may not understand, we may not be able to listen 
without jeopardizing the work that is ours and closer to us; but we 
cannot find in a book or canon—and we should not seek— 
grounds for hallowing our ignorance. If a man tells us that he sees 
differently than we, or that he finds beautiful what we find ugly, we 
may have to leave the room, from fatigue or trouble; but that is 
our weakness and our default. If we must live with a perpetual 
sense that the world and the men in it are greater than we and too 
much for us, let it be the measure of our virtue that we know this 
and seek no comfort. Above all, let us not proclaim that the limits 
of our powers correspond to some special wisdom in our choice of 
life, of learning, or of beauty. 

This balance, this perpetual, precarious, impossible balance 
between the infinitely open and the intimate, this time—our 
twentieth century—has been long in coming; but it has come. It is, 
I think, for us and our children, our only way. 

This is for all.men. For the artist and for the scientist there is a 
special problem and a special hope, for in their extraordinarily 
different ways, in their lives that have increasingly divergent 
character, there is still a sensed bond, a sensed analogy. Both the 
man of science and the man of art live always at the edge of 
mystery, surrounded by it; both always, as the measure of their 
creation, have had to do with the harmonization of what is new 
with what is familiar, with the balance between novelty and 
synthesis, with the struggle to make partial order in total chaos. 
They can, in their work and in their lives, help themselves, help 
one another, and help all men. They can make the paths that 
connect the villages of arts and sciences with each other and with 
the world at large the multiple, varied, precious bonds of a true 
and world-wide community. 

This cannot be an easy life. We shall have a rugged time of it to 
keep our minds open and to keep them deep, to keep our sense of 
beauty and our ability to make it, and our occasional ability to see 
it in places remote and strange and unfamiliar; we shall have a 
rugged time of it, all of us, in keeping these gardens in our 
villages, in keeping open the manifold, intricate, casual paths, to 
keep these flourishing in a great, open, windy world; but this, as I 
see it, is the condition of man; and in this condition we can help, 
because we can love, one another. 


87 


In the late fifties. (OMC) 


7 
AN INWARD LOOK 


1958 


THE CONFLICT WITH COMMUNIST POWER from time to time throws a 
harsh light on our own society. As this conflict continues, and its 
obduracy, scope, and deadlines become increasingly manifest, we 
begin to see traits in American society of which we were barely 
aware, and which in this context appear as grievous disabilities. 
Perhaps the first thus to come to attention is our inability to give 
an account of our national purposes, intentions, and hopes that is 
at once honest and inspiring. It is a long time since anyone has 
spoken, on behalf of this country, of our future or the world’s 
future in a way that suggested complete integrity, some freshness 
of spirit and a touch of the plausible. 

Two other national traits have more recently aroused grave 
concern. Because the conflict with Communist power is taking 
place concurrently with an extreme acceleration of a technological 
revolution, and in particular because these last years have marked 
the maturing of the military phases of the atomic age, public 
attention has been drawn to the relative effectiveness of the Soviet 
system and ours in the training and recruiting of scientists and 
technical people. This comparison has shown that, in a field 
where once we were better than the Russians, we may soon be less 
good. The Soviet system, by combining formidable and rare 
incentives for success in science and technology with a massive 
search for talent and with rigorous and high standards in early 


89 


Uncommon Sense 


education, appears about to attract to scientific work a larger 
fraction of its population than we shall be doing. 

When we learned this, it was natural to turn our attention to its 
causes. Some of these lie in the relatively low esteem in which 
learning is held in this country and, above all, in our indifference 
to the profession of teaching, especially teaching in the schools, a 
low esteem that is both manifested and caused by the fact that we 
pay our teachers poorly and our scientists not too well. The 
grimness of life in Soviet countries makes it easy to translate 
prestige into luxury and privilege. We do not want it so here. Yet 
on closer examination we have seen that in our own schools 
educational standards are far lower for languages, mathematics 
and the sciences than in their Soviet counterparts. We have 
learned that many of our teachers are not really versed in the 
subjects which it is their duty to teach and, in many cases, their 
lack of knowledge is matched by their lack of affection or interest. 
In brief, we have come upon a problem of the greatest gravity for 
the life of our people by matching ourselves against a remote and 
unloved antagonist. 

Something of the same kind appears to be happening in a quite 
different area. This has to do with the ability of our Government— 
in fact, with the ability of our institutions and our people through 
our Government—to determine national policy in those areas that 
have to do with foreign affairs and strategy, military and political. 
To quote Mr. W. W. Rostow in an address to the ‘Naval War 
College late in 1956: 


I do not believe we as a nation have yet created a military 
policy and a civil foreign policy designed to fulfill [our 
purposes] and to exploit the potentials for social and 
political change favorable to our interest within the 
Communist Bloc ... Historically, the United States has 
thrown its energies into the solution of military and foreign 
policy problems only when it faced concrete, self-evident 
dangers. 


Or again, Mr. Henry Kissinger wrote in the April 1957 issue of 
Foreign Affairs: 


By establishing a pattern of response in advance of crisis 
situations, strategic doctrine permits a Power to act 
purposefully in the face of challenges. In its absence a 


90 


An Inward Look 


Power will constantly be surprised by events. An adequate 
strategic doctrine is therefore the basic requirement of 
American security. 


It is now a widely held view that, despite the organization of the 
executive branch of the Government to cope precisely with long- 
range problems, foreign policy and military strategy; despite the 
role assigned to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the National Security 
Council and the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State; 
despite the availability to these organizations of the technical and 
intellectual talent of the whole of this country and, to a more 
limited extent, of the whole free world—despite all this, the 
United States has not developed an understanding of its purposes, 
its interests, its alternatives and plans for the future in any way 
adequate to the gravity of the problems that the country faces. 
There is a widespread impression that we live from astonishment 
to surprise, and from surprise to astonishment, never adequately 
forewarned or forearmed, and more often than not choosing 
between evils, when forethought and foreaction might have 
provided happier alternatives. Why should this state of affairs exist 
in a country rich with wealth and leisure, dedicated to education, 
with a larger part of its citizenry involved in education than in any 
other land at any other time, with more colleges, universities, 
institutes and centers than anyone cares to count, and at a time 
when unparalleled powers in the hands of a dedicated and hostile 
state threaten us more grievously than ever since the early days of 
the Republic? 

There are, of course, other national traits of which we can 
scarcely be proud, on which neither the atomic age nor the 
conflict with Communism has put much emphasis. We may think, 
for instance, of our great wantonness with our country’s resources; 
we may think of the scarcity of instances in which a concern for 
public beauty and harmony has made of the physical environ- 
ment in which we live that comfort to the spirit which the 
loveliness of our land and our great wealth could well make 
possible. 

Indeed, all of the traits in which we judge ourselves harshly 
could have been drawn by historians comparing us with past 
cultures, or observers of the current scene comparing us with 
those contemporary. We should then, perhaps, have noted that no 


91 


Uncommon Sense 


people has ever solved the educational problem which we have 
put to ourselves, and that no government, in a world in which few 
governments succeed for very long, has ever succeeded in a 
problem of the scope and toughness of that which faces ours. 
Indeed we could recognize the traits of weakness in our society in 
terms of a norm or an ideal, and hear of them from the 
philosopher or prophet. I believe, in fact, that these ways are the 
more constructive, because I believe, as will be more evident in 
what follows, that the traits that bother us are signs of a rather 
deep, refractory and quite unprecedented cultural crisis, and that 
in the end they will yield, not to symptomatic therapy, but to 
changes in our life, changes in what we believe, what we do and 
what we value. 

For the problems of our country and our age have hardly in 
historical times arisen in anything like their. present form; 
certainly they have never been resolved. If our adversary appears 
to have solved them better than we, it may be healthy for us to 
note that; it can hardly be healthy for us to adopt his means. He 
knows what he wants, because he has a simple theory of the 
meaning of human life and of his place in it. With the strength of 
that confidence, he has a government prepared to take, at vast 
human cost, all necessary steps to reach his ends. That there is 
only a small, fragmentary, largely obsolete taint of truth to his 
theory, that it excludes the greater part of truth, and the deeper, 
should give us some confidence that he will not succeed. That his 
failure may be marked by a vast if not universal human 
involvement, and an unparalleled devastation and horror, should 
temper our pleasure in this prospect and return us to the solution 
of our problems on our own terms, in our own way, in our own 
good time. 

For the traits of weakness in our society we can see grounds that 
are at once multiple, intelligible, and ironic. I think that the three 
weaknesses—in our education, in our faltering view of the future, 
and in our difficulties in the formulation of policy—have some 
common grounds; but they are not the same, and to follow them 
all is not the purpose of this paper. Certainly egalitarianism and 
our traditionally cherished tolerance of diversity, diversity pre- 
cisely on the most fundamental issues of man’s nature and 
destiny, his salvation and faith, certainly these qualities, long held 
as virtues, have much to do with our troubles in education where 


92 


An Inward Look 


they define, as it were, the insoluble problem; they have much to 
do with the difficulties of prophecy and policy, which traditionally 
rest on consensus precisely with regard to those matters where we 
are dedicated to difference. The good fortune of the country, 
speaking in large terms and over the centuries, and its consequent 
optimism and confidence, have something to do with our 
troubles. Perhaps we would not change these things, but we must 
give weight to them, when we compare ourselves with Athens, 
or Elizabethan England, or Victorian, or seventeenth-century 
France. 

Our weaknesses, of course, have a touch of irony. It is our very 
confidence in education, our determination that it should be 
available to all, our belief that through it man will find dignity and 
freedom, that have played so large a part in reducing our 
educational system to the half-empty mockery that it now is. 
When, for the first time in years of formal peace, we have devoted 
effort, study, thought, and treasure to the quest for military 
security, we have brought about the most fearful insecurity that 
has been known to man in what we know of his history. 


II 


It is commonly said that our national culture favors practice 
over theory, action over thought, invention over contemplation. 
There is some truth to this thesis. It should not be exaggerated. 
For one thing, the balance between operation and reflection must 
always, everywhere, numerically favor the doers as compared to 
the reflectors; even in Athens there were quite a few Sophists for 
one Socrates; and I find it hard to imagine any society in which the 
world’s work does not occupy more people more of the time than 
does an understanding of the world. For another, the balance 
between these aspects of life has been accented by circumstance, 
in that the doers in our country have had great good fortune to 
mark and celebrate their deeds; the country’s wealth, its spacious- 
ness, its wide measure of freedom, and, on the whole, its 
prevailing optimism. It would take quite considerable accom- 
plishments of theory and understanding to match the brilliance, 
often almost the impudence, of our material creations. . 

Our past has always been marked by a few original and deeply 


93 


Uncommon Sense 


reflective minds whose work, though it was part of the intellectual 
tradition of Europe and the world, has nevertheless a peculiarly 
national stamp, as in the four names of Peirce, Gibbs, James, 
Veblen. Today, in almost all fields of natural science, and in some 
others as well, our country is preeminent in theory as it is in 
experiment, invention and practice. This has meant a great 
change in the educational scene, as far as higher education is 
concerned, in the graduate schools, in post-doctoral work, in the 
institutes and universities. Part of this, it is true, has come about 
because of misfortunes abroad: the two wars in Europe, and the 
Nazis, the initial effects of Communist power in Russia, which for 
a time at least made conditions of serious study very difficult. It 
has been brought about in part by the coming to this country of 
scholars in refuge from their regimes, from tyranny and trouble 
abroad. Nevertheless it is true that today a young man wishing the 
best training in theoretical physics or mathematics, theoretical 
chemistry or biology, will be likely to come to this country, as 
three decades ago he would have gone to the schools of Europe. It 
was important, after the end of the Second World War, when there 
was much public interest in the successes in applied science which 
the war years had brought about in this country, to combat any 
exaggerated sense of American superiority by pointing to the great 
contributions for which we were in debt to Europeans and others 
from other lands; but to repeat today that which was only partially 
true then, namely that Americans excel in practical undertakings 
but are weak in theory, is to distort the truth. It should be added, 
of course, that the number of men engaged in theoretical science 
is always small and, even with us today, it is very small. Their work 
and their existence can have little direct bearing on the temper 
and style of the country. 

Having said all this, it does seem to me that in comparison with 
other civilizations—that of classic India surely, that on the 
continent of Europe, and probably even that of England, where 
theory is brilliantly made but largely ignored in practice—ours is a 
land in which practice is emphasized far more. than theory, and 
action far more than contemplation. In the difficult balance of 
teaching, we tend to teach too much in terms of utility and too 
little in terms of beauty. And if and when we “do it ourselves,” it is 
unlikely to be learning and thought. 

To see the bearing of this trait, we should recognize another 


94 


An Inward Look 


feature of the American landscape: in important, deep and 
complex ways, this is a land of diversity; and it tolerates, respects 
and fosters diversity in the form of a true pluralism. There is much 
theory made in the United States: cosmological theory, theory of 
genetic processes, theory about the nature of immunity, theory 
about the nature of matter, theory about learning, about prices, 
about communication; but there is no unifying theory of what 
human life is about; there is no consensus either as to the nature 
of reality or of the part we are to play in it; there is no theory of the 
good life and not much theory of the role of government in 
promoting it. The diverse talents, skills, beliefs, and experience of 
our people contribute effectively to the solution of a concrete 
problem, to answering the well-defined question, to the building 
of a machine, or a structure, or a weapon system; and in such 
concrete and limited exercises, the diversity and strangeness of the 
participants is harmonized by the community of the concrete 
undertaking. The team of experts, sometimes including experts 
from social science, was an immensely successful invention for 
wartime research, and continues to be in many forms of technical 
enterprise. It continues to be inappropriate, and tends to 
languish, in the general undertakings of academic life. 

American pluralism can no doubt in part be understood in 
terms of our history, and those features in which we differ from 
most of the communities of Europe and of much of Asia. We may 
think of the relatively primitive communities in the Indian villages 
of the Southwest, which some of us may still remember from the 
earlier years of this century. The quality of their life was relatively 
static and highly patterned; all of its elements were coherent, and 
were rendered unified and meaningful by religious rites and 
religious doctrine. Change was slow, and communication ade- 
quate to the limited experience of the villages. Such communities 
represent almost an ideal of unity, of common understanding, 
and of a monistic view of the world. There has been little of the 
village in American life. The frontier, the openness of the country, 
and later the immense rapidity of change and the tumult of 
motion and traffic, have given us a very different national 
experience. Probably for two centuries New England had the 
stability of village life; and I believe that we see today, in the 
coherence, firmness and mutual understanding of its survivors, 
one of the most stable and unified elements in our country. 


95 


Uncommon Sense 


Probably, although I know less of this, one could find a similar 
story in the South, though the fortunes of the last hundred years 
have dealt harshly with it. 

Even if we turn our thoughts to Europe, the site of so much of 
the commotion, disillusion, and variety which characterize our 
own land, we see important differences; there is a long past of 
limited mobility, culminating in the thirteenth century in the 
unified view of all matters important to man, in a universe 
determined by God, with God omnipresent, with the unvarying 
natures of all finite things, and the ever-present end and purpose 
of man’s life. When this world began to break, it broke slowly, first 
in the minds of the philosophers and scientists. It was not until the 
seventeenth century that the turn from contemplation to action 
can be seen with any completeness; long after it occurred, its 
consequences were still troubling to John Donne: “’Tis all in 
peeces, all cohaerence gone. All just supply, and all Relation.” 
Man’s awareness of his power came slowly to Europe; it came to 
people bound by a common tongue, a common habit, and 
common traditions in taste, manners, arts, and ways. 

Compared to all this, Americans are nomads. There is, of 
course, much in common in what brought people to this country; 
but in overwhelming measure, what was common was either 
negative or personal and practical: the desire to escape repression, 
or the hope of making a new fortune. In the formative years of our 
history, emptiness, the need and reward for improvisation, 
variety, and the open frontier endowed the differences between 
men with weight and sanction. Our political philosophy under- 
took to reconcile the practical benefits of union with the 
maximum tolerance of diversity. To all of this has come within the 
last century, and complementing the closing of the physical 
frontier, a new source of change, more radical arid in the end 
more universal than those before. This lies, on the one hand, in 
the unprecedented growth of knowledge, whose time scale, 
estimated apprehensively as a half century two hundred years ago, 
could better now be put at a decade; and with this, based partly 
upon it, partly upon accumulated wealth, and partly on the 
tradition of freedom and mobility itself, a technological explosion 
and an economy unlike any the world has seen. 

Early in this century, William James wrote: 


96 


An Inward Look 


The point I now urge you to observe particularly is the 
part played by the older truths... Their influence is 
absolutely controlling. Loyalty to them is the first 
principle—in most cases it is the only principle; for by far 
the most usual way of handling phenomena so novel that 
they would make for a serious rearrangement of our 
preconception is to ignore them altogether, or to abuse 
those who bear witness for them. 


In our time the balance between the old truths and the new has 
been unhinged, and it is not unnatural that most men limit, in the 
severest possible way, the number and the kind of new truths with 
which they will have to deal. This is what makes the intellectual 
scene a scene of specialists, and this is what makes our people, for 
all the superficial evidences of similarity, more varied in their 
experience, more foreign to each other in the tongues which they 
use to talk of what is close to them, than in any time or place which 
comes to mind; this is what limits consensus to statements so 
vague that they may mean almost anything, or to situations so 
stark and threatening and so immediate that no theoretical 
structure, no world view, need intervene. 

Perhaps the most nearly coherent of all our large theoretical 
structures is that of natural science. It is hardly relevant to many of 
the questions of policy and strategy with which our Government 
must be confronted; to some it is. This coherence is, however, of a 
very special sort: it consists by and large in an absence of 
contradiction between any part and any other, and in a pervasive, 
often only potential mutual relevance. It does not consist in a 
structural coherence’ by which the whole can be derived from 
some simple summary, some key, some happy mnemonic device. 
There are thus no fundamentals of science. Its largest truths are 
not definable in terms of common experience; nor do they imply 
the rest. Our knowledge of nature is in no true sense common 
knowledge; it is the treasure of the many flourishing specialized 
communities, often cut off from one another in their rapid 
growth. Never has our common knowledge been so frail a part of 
what is known. Natural science is not known, and probably cannot 
be known, by anyone; small parts of-it are; and in the world of 
learning there is mediation in the great dark of ignorance between 
the areas of light. 


97 


Uncommon Sense 


In assessing the practical import of scientific developments, the 
Government may be faced by a reflection of this situation. Even in 
so relatively limited a field as the peacetime hazards of atomic 
radiation, it cannot turn to an expert for the answer. It turns to the 
National Academy of Sciences, which assembles a series of 
committees, both numerous and populous, whose collective 
knowledge and collective recognition of ignorance is, for the time 
being, our best answer. 

In other aspects of intellectual life, more relevant to policy and 
to strategy, we find a situation not wholly dissimilar, though less 
formalized and less clearly recognized. In our own internal affairs, 
knowledge on the part of the Government of what the situations in 
fact are with which it must deal is complemented by a traditional 
safeguard in our political institutions. If, in fact, the executive and 
legislative branches of the Government have erred in their 
assessment of the problems of Northwestern lumbermen, or of 
maritime labor, or of Marine recruits, there is opportunity for 
those who are specialists in these ways, because they live in them, 
to be heard; and there is an underlying tolerance, sometimes 
violated, sometimes ignored, and most intimately and immedi- 
ately knowledgeable, the grave weight of the doctrine of the 
concurrent majority. In foreign affairs, in matters affecting other 
lands and people, no such protection and no such redress exist. 
Here the Government must rely most heavily on what is 
essentially scholarship: what the historian, the linguist, the artist 
and all others who, with the slowly learned historian’s art of 
judging, evaluating and understanding, can give as an intimate 
glimpse of what goes on in foreign and often very strange lands. 

Faced with all this, faced with the complexity, the variety, and 
the rapid change which characterize both the intellectual scene 
and the world itself, there is a terrible temptation to seek for the 
key that is not there, the simple summary from which all else 
might follow. We have tended to do that in the wars of this 
century, with, it would seem most probable, consequences of 
great trouble when we have come to the end of the war. It was 
probably bad even in the First World War, when our Government 
had a relatively elaborate and learned theory which was widely 
accepted by our people, but which was not quite true. It was 
probably bad in the Second World War, where the theory seemed 
to be very primitive and to consist of the view that evil, however 


98 


An Inward Look 


widely spead in the world, was so uniquely concentrated in the 
governments of the hostile Powers that we could forget it 
elsewhere. 

A government may, for more or less valid reasons, reach a 
conclusion as to what its action should be, as ours does when we 
declare war, or when we adopt such relatively well-defined 
policies as the Truman Doctrine. Such decisions, reflecting the 
best estimate of the evidence available when they are made, are 
acts of will; clearly, further evidence which supports the decisions 
reinforces the will, makes the prosecution of the war or the 
execution of the doctrine more likely to be effective. Evidence that 
the decisions may have been in error or may no longer be timely 
has a contrary effect. The human commitment to its own 
decisions, the human reluctance to learn and to change should 
not be reinforced by any doctrine which deprecates the truth, and 
therefore the value, of what is inconsistent with past evidence and 
past judgment. The danger lies, not so much in that the new and 
conflicting evidence may be weighed and given too little weight; it 
is that it will not even be seen, that our organs of intelligence and 
perception will be coded, much as our sense organs are, by our 
commitment, so that we will not even be aware of inconsistency 
and novelty. . 

I believe that we are now deeply injured by the simplifications 
of this time. The cold war is real, it is bitter, and it is deadly. But it 
is not the only issue in the world, and for countless other peoples 
and their governments it is not the issue they see in the brightest, 
harshest light. Such global views tend to inhibit the reception of 
essential knowledge because in the light of our dominant doctrine 
this knowledge appears irrelevant or somehow does not fit. That 
we are indeed in this danger seems to me clear from the extent to 
which the unfolding of history finds us always surprised. 

There are two features of the situation that I have attempted to 
sketch that need a special comment. It seems to me that both the 
variety and the rate of change in our lives are likely to increase, 
that our knowledge will keep on growing, perhaps at a faster and 
faster rate, and that change itself will tend to be accelerated. In 
describing this world, there will probably be no synopses to spare 
us the effort of detailed learning. I do not think it likely that we are 
in a brief interval of change and apparent disorder which will soon 
be ended. The cognitive problem seems to me unprecedented in 


99 


Uncommon Sense 


scope, one not put in this vast form to any earlier society, and one 
for which only the most general rules of behavior can be found in 
the past. 

It also seems to me that we must look forward to a world in 
which this American problem is more nearly everyone’s problem. 
The beginnings of this are perhaps as important in the present 
moods of Europe as are the history of the two Great Wars, 
Communism, the Nazis, and Europe’s loss of political, military 
and economic power. The problems seem clearly implied in the 
determination of peoples in Africa and Asia, and in Central and 
South America, by means not yet devised and not at all 
understood, to achieve education, learning, technology, and a 
new wealth. They form a part of the unrest, newly apparent in the 
intellectuals of the Soviet world, perhaps especially among their 
scientists, and increase the somberness of any prospect of change 
from tyranny to freedom. 

There are thus the most compelling external reasons why we, in 
this country, should be better able to take thought, and to make 
available in the pressing problems of policy and strategy the 
intellectual resources now so sorely lacking. They are needed in 
the struggle with Communism; they are needed if we are to have 
some understanding and some slight influence, in all the rest of 
the world, in the great changes that lie ahead for it Awareness of 
this need will do us good; and I do not underestimate the value of 
its general recognition by the people of this country nor official 
recognition by their Government. It can only help to make money 
available to education and to teaching; it can only help to make 
the learned as well as the facile welcome in the proceedings of 
government policymaking. But though these measures are 
bitterly necessary, and though they are long overdue, the real 
thing will not, I fear, come from them alone. 

There may be valid grounds for a difference of opinion as to 
whether an official recognition of a need, or even a generally 
understood recognition of a need among our people, will evoke 
the response to that need. What we here need is a vastly greater 
intellectual vigor and discipline; a more habitual and widespread 
openmindedness; and a kind of indefatigability, which is not 
inconsistent with fatigue but is inconsistent with surrender. It is 
not that our land is poor in curiosity, in true learning, in the habit 
of smelling out one’s own self-delusion, in the dedication and 


100 


An Inward Look 


search for order and law among novelty, variety, and contingency. 
There is respect for learning and for expertness, and a proper 
recognition of the role of ignorance, and of our limits, both as 
men and as man; but of none of these is there enough, either 
among us, or in the value with which they are held by us, if indeed 
government by the people is not to perish. 


101 


Robert Oppenheimer with his mother, around 
1906. (OMC) 


8 


TRADITION 
AND DISCOVERY 


1960 


[...] WHEN COLUMBUS SAILED On his first voyage, his first voyage of 
discovery, it is told that the first evening with the ship standing out 
to sea he opened the pages of what would later be the log of this 
voyage, and on it he wrote Jesus cum Maria sit nobis in via. 

This sense that we are entering a new time, that whatever we 
owe to the past, and however all our future is built on it, that we 
have problems unlike those or somewhat unlike those that have 
ever been dealt with, is very deep in my mind. Terror attaches to 
new knowledge. It has an unmooring quality; it finds men 
unprepared to deal with it. Think of the story of Adam, and think 
of the story of Prometheus. They are very different but they have 
this in common. Even in discoveries which affect our ideas and 
which do not immediately or visibly affect the state of men’s lives, 
even in abstract discoveries, there is this same sense of terror. I 
have found it among my colleagues and have recognized it in 
myself. 

This question of what discovery does to tradition and how 
tradition makes discovery possible is, of course, a special case of a 
problem that is very old: the problem of the struggle and the 
conflict and the balance between what is familiar and essentially 
timeless in our lives, and the always manifest- and now over- 
whelming sense of change. For tradition, its whole effort is to 
preserve, to refresh, to transmit, and to increase our insight into 
what men have doneas men, their art, their learning, their poetry, 
their politics, their science, their philosophy. Tradition is no less 
than what makes it possible for us to deal as sentient and thinking 


103 


Uncommon Sense 


beings with our experience, to cope somehow with our sorrows, to 
limit and ennoble somehow our joys, to understand what happens 
to us, to talk to one another, to relate things to one another, to find 
the themes which organize experience and give it meaning, to see 
the relevances of things to one another. It is, of course, what 
makes us human and what makes us civil. It is typically and 
decisively the common heritage, that which men do not have to 
explain to each other, that which in happier days they did explain 
to their children, that which they can rely on as being present, 
each in the other’s head and heart. It points to the connection of 
things. Tradition, of course, is always a very oversimplifying thing, 
since things, in fact, are not completely alike, and not completely 
related. It finds the great human themes which run through 
everything, which we can come back to, which we can recognize, 
which we can communicate. This communication, often verbal, 
but of course, by no means necessarily so, is the heart of a human 
community, and the essence of human life. 

[...] Tradition is also the matrix which makes discovery 
possible. It is the organ of ‘interpretation, of enrichment and 
understanding, that in the arts, in the sciences, and even in our 
common ethical life gives meaning to new discovery. It provides 
the tools of new discovery. It is, of course, the special mark of 
modern European tradition that it has catalyzed, and no one fully 
understands why, an immense outpouring and an immense 
growth of discovery unlike anything which man has known. It is 
an unprecedented use of the past for the future, an unprecedented 
enrichment of the power to find new things, by virtue of the extent 
to which we are in control and have some understanding of the 
old, unprecedented in volume, in weight, in wealth, and in scope, 
unprecedented in many ways even in quality, even if one thinks of 
the highest days of ancient times. 

I regard our situation as grave, interesting, and radically novel, 
something which people have not had to face in man’s history. It 
will put difficult choices to us; it is doing so now. And we can be 
judged, we will be judged by our response. We can be judged both 
in our own countries, in what we make of them, and by the sort of 
example that we set for the larger world. 

Science rests on, intersects with, alters, affects almost all of 
man’s ethical life. The change in the world which its growth has 
made, both material and intellectual, is an unfathomably great 


104 


Tradition and Discovery 


one. I do not propose to address the material changes. I have lived 
through many in my life and those who are young will live 
through many more. They are familiar; they are important. On 
the intellectual side, however, there are three traits which should 
be discussed. One is the growth of knowledge itself; one is the 
question of its structure; and one is a related question, the 
openness of knowledge—its potential infiniteness and the fact that 
it confronts us with choice. [... ] 

All mature men today are really necessarily and deeply quite 
unaware of the greater part of what is known. We did not learn 
about it in school; we have no immediate practice in it. It involves 
away of talking, and a tradition, for which we are barely prepared. 
These have grown out of what was learned, when we last looked at 
the subject. Sometimes we suddenly are shocked by a recognition 
of how fast things move. Someone tells us that as far as an 
understanding of life is concerned, we have learned more in the 
last five years than in all the history of man. Sometimes some 
practical thing like atomic energy shocks the public generally at 
how much was going on, not just in secret but in private; going on 
and nobody knew about it, until it changed the face of the world, 
maybe for the worse, maybe for the better. Of course, we live in a 
time when this problem is compounded—and we hope that this 
will be true quite widely—by an egalitarian and open attitude 
toward the acquisition of knowledge, where accidents of birth and 
fortune—which to some extent will be reduced, and very largely 
have been reduced compared to a hundred years ago—will play 
very little part in deciding how much a man learns, how much he 
studies, what right he has to enter the life of the mind, and to 
spend his life there. 

[Scientific] knowledge is not just a collection of miscellaneous, 
unrelated things. It is not without order; order is what it is about. 
Its purpose is to discover, and in order to discover, to create the 
order which relates things with one another, and to reduce— 
though it certainly never eliminates—the arbitrary in our experi- 
ence. It is not orderly in the sense that there are a few general 
premises from which everything else follows. One cannot say: 
“But of course, I really don’t know about nature and man, but I 
know all the basic principles; the rest I could pick up.” The deep 
things in my science, the deep things in mathematics and 
increasingly the deep things in biology, are not things that one 


105 


Uncommon Sense 


knows about. They are very hard to learn, and they are built on a 
long, long, cumulative structure of a specialized tradition. There is 
a lot of relation in this world of science, and it has structure and 
refers to a world full of order, and it is rich and astonishing and 
subtle. There is order so that things cohere, and general things 
encompass special ones; this means, in fact, that a great deal of 
what was in textbooks a long time ago does not have to be in them 
today. It means that there is a kind of sloughing off, not because 
things stop being true, but because one can remember some 
general rules from which particular things follow. [.. . ] 

There is another sense to this kind of unity, and it is important 
that we be aware of it. No part of science follows, really, from any 
other in any usable form. I suppose nothing in chemistry or in 
biology is in any kind of contradiction with the laws of physics, but 
they are not branches of physics. One is dealing with a wholly 
different order of nature. What is simple in one, is complicated in 
the other. I think that probably over the last decades the great 
synapses which separate one branch of learning from another 
have tended to yield. One sees how the connections can be made, 
for instance, about how life could have originated from inert 
matter, and how it transmits itself. Thus the whole idea that a 
necessary cause, an efficient cause, could be consistent with 
purpose is illuminated with the idea of purpose. It is illuminated 
by this, so that the characteristic features of life—which are that 
life has to be described in terms of ends and purposes—are not in 
conflict with the ideas of necessity, the ideas of efficient causation, 
and the universal validity of the large and lovely laws of physics. 

The receptacle of all this knowledge is, of course, not man in 
general, nor is it quite the individual specialist. Rather, it is the 
specialized communities of interlocking expertise, men who have 
very limited titles so that it may take a lot of words to say what they 
do, like high energy physicists or high polymer physicists. To 
these groups the knowledge comes. They have close professional 
relations; they typically rejoice in any success that anyone else has 
had, even though they may wish that they had had the success 
themselves. This is a hallmark of science. If people are jealous of 
each other more than they rejoice in what the other finds, then 
somehow this has nothing to do with science. 

There is an intimacy in these communities, and it always has 
given me a very high standard for the intimacy of men with each 


106 


Tradition and Discovery 


other, and a forlorn hope that this sort of intimacy could help to 
hold the world together while our political institutions slowly 
adapt to the changed circumstances in the world. We have a sort 
of modern version of the medieval guilds, a kind of syndicalism, 
of cognitive syndicalism. 

[...] Knowledge is twinned with ignorance. Knowledge ex- 
cludes knowledge. When you know something or learn some- 
thing, you in doing that, put aside, lose, perhaps not permanently 
but in the context, the whole opportunity of finding many other 
things. Instead of making a long abstract talk about this, I shall 
give four examples that seem to me to illustrate this. [... ] 

The first is an experiment which was done by Jean Rostand in 
Paris. It has to do with the signals that are tapped off the auditory 
nerve, let us say, of a dog. He did it with many animals, and he 
made a record of these signals. Every time he rang a bell he got a 
recognizable signal. If he put a piece of meat in front of the dog, 
and then rang the bell, there was no signal at all. The higher 
centers instructed the sense organs themselves not to record this 
event of the ringing of the bell. This is instructive when one 
reflects on how people have tried to build their sense of 
objectivity on the sense datum and the immediacy and reliability 
of what one learns from one’s senses. 

A second example is‘a little different. This was done by Hebb 
and his associates at McGill. He was actually preparing to make a 
study of brainwashing during and after the Korean War. He 
wanted to see what happened to people when you did nothing to 
them. His idea of nothing was this: he would put a man in a quiet 
room, a soundproofed room, in which only a low hum was kept 
on all the time. The man’s eyes were covered so he could not see 
anything. His fingers were covered with cotton batting, and a cuff 
to protect his sense of touch. Hebb asked for volunteers among 
medical students and other presumably normal people; and they 
all thought that this was wonderful, that they would get clear all the 
points that they had been puzzled about, and be left alone. He 
told them that he would keep them alive with adequate food, and 
he had no trouble getting volunteers. They stayed in from 
something like a day or day and a half to a maximum of six days. 
When they came out they had lost their rational faculties—not 
permanently, but for a time which was somehow related to the 
length of time they had stayed in this condition. They could not 


107 


Uncommon Sense 


add, they could not subtract, and they could not see an organized 
perspective in which we have sense of where things are, they had 
other troubles with words and so on. Apparently the availability of 
the simplest rational faculties depends on maintaining some kind 
of constant traffic. 

The third example is even more revealing. It was carried out by 
a man called Land, near Boston, also for practical purposes, 
because he is the head of the Polaroid Corporation and he wanted 
to get a film which could be quickly developed and show color; 
thus he studied color vision. The theory we have had in the past is 
that there are three primary colors and that there are pigments in 
the retina which respond: to these colors, and that when the 
corresponding wavelengths of light hit the retina we recognize 
red, or blue, or some combination of them which may be purple. 
This may be true; but Land showed that it is a very small part of 
the story. If you take a multicolored scene and you illuminate it 
with yellow light, say with the sodium line, which is used so much 
in laboratories, and make a black and white print of it, and then if 
you take another yellow line only a few percent different in 
wavelength, a couple of hundred Angstroms different, and take a 
picture of the same multicolored scene and make a black and 
white print of it, and project these with the light that you used to 
take them, then people like you and me see color. We see red, 
green, blue, yellow, everything that was in the scene, although 
none of that light is coming to the eye. As a matter of fact, we see it 
if we put one image on one eye and one image on the other. This 
understanding of the meaning of these two signals in two almost 
identical colors of yellow, is performed, not in the eye, but some 
place further up toward the cortex. 

The last example I cannot explain to you. It has to do with the 
fact that one of the traits which we are familiar with in the simplest 
physics of large-scale bodies suddenly went away. Since before the 
time of Newton, but with much more confidence since the time of 
Newton, we talk about the motion of bodies by giving at some 
time their location and their velocity, and then, if there are no 
forces acting, the conservation of impetus, of momentum says that 
the velocity will not change. If there are forces acting, then an 
orbit will be described like that of a baseball or projectile on earth 
or of the planets circling the sun. Newton managed to unify in his 
laws the enormous experience going from celestial bodies to quite 


108 


Tradition and Discovery 


small terrestrial experience. One cannot go on indefinitely, 
because if one looks at the atoms themselves, at the electrons 
which give them all the properties that we normally notice—their 
color, their chemical properties, their ability to form compounds, 
their ability to form solids, and crystals, and so on—then it is no 
longer true that one can get any kind of agreement with the 
observations of nature, if one makes the assumption that even if 
one does not know it, the electron at some time has some position 
and some velocity, and that if you know one, you may suppose the 
other unknown to you but existent. If one assumes that, one gets 
in gross contradiction with the existence of stationary states, and 
with all the properties of atoms that I have enumerated. The great 
discovery was that you cannot attribute such properties as position 
and velocity and energy to such a system, unless you have taken 
the trouble to make an experiment in which you are prepared to 
measure what this quantity is. It is not that you do not know it; it is 
that you cannot assume that it exists. The attempt to ob jectify this, 
and say, it is there, but I am not clear just what it is, leads to 
disaster. This, which is the heart of quantum theory, the theory of 
complementarity, still further reinforces the sense of option in 
knowledge, the sense that you have a choice as to which study you 
make; the sense that having made that option, there is a kind of 
indivisible whole to the affair. You cannot go back on your bargain 
without spoiling everything. It illustrates further that objectivity 
consists not in the fact that it is there independent of our 
experiment with it; it is there precisely because we can tell each 
other what experiment we did and how it came out. 

I have had extremely bad luck. with this last point in trying to 
make it clear either in the course of a lecture or of many lectures. 
One reason is that it does take a pretty good knowledge of physics 
to know what the words mean and not to misinterpret them— 
indeterminacy, for instance, comes up in this connection, and 
relativity; and they sound very much like a state, a mood that we 
are in most of the time. They do not really mean that. One gets the 
desperate feeling that any words that are familiar will become 
puns, and any words that are unfamiliar will take a very long time 
to explain. : 

[...]Wecan hardly expect that a science as old and mature as 
physics has a very direct, immediate bearing on philosophical 
thought, or on the common discourse on which philosophical 


109 


Uncommon Sense 


thought is based. It seems to me that it needs first to be far more 
intelligible, as for instance, in elementary terms, the three first 
experiments I mentioned seem to me intelligible by ordinary 
people, not highly trained specialists. [ . . . ] 

There is also a second requirement. It is not enough that 
something be intelligible for it, to enter in a major way into the 
philosophy of the times, as one says of Newton’s mechanics that it 
did enter the eighteenth-century idea of man, his place, and even 
his dealings with-his fellows; and, as an even better example, in 
Darwin a hundred years ago. It is also necessary that there be 
a kind of sensed relevance of what has been discovered in science, 
to the aspirations, the interests, the direction and the hope of the 
society. There has to be an entering into the discourse of cul- 
tivated men—and this I hope will mean, more and more, almost 
everybody—a digestion and transmutation and adaptation 
of the new lore about nature or about man. It is likely that it 
will also turn up as something new in philosophical speculation, 
but that, in turn, is historically and typically based on the 
common talk of the time. It can go beyond it, but it cannot be 
unrooted from it. 

[ . .. ]What, then is the relation between the scientific explosions 
of this age and the weight and the excellence that we may all hope 
to achieve in common discourse? I have in mind an image of 
common discourse which is itself blurred by three related 
realities. One is the size of our world and its great communities, 
the number of people. One is the generally egalitarian and 
inclusive view that there be no a priori restrictions on who is to take 
part in the discourse. Not everyone will, but I think our 
civilizations, with all their differences, share the hope that 
everyone may. And the third is the extraordinary rapidity with 
which the preoccupations and the circumstances of our life are 
altered [.. . ]. 

I would like to make a few comments on the nature of the 
relations between rational discourse, culminating, in good times, 
in philosophical discourse on the one hand; and the development 
of science on the other. Of course, I think of the country I know 
best, and the experiences we have had, of how we use our leisure, 
and how we talk, and what we think. I apologize in a way for this 
provincialism. We are further along on the road of very high 
productivity and very high consumption than most countries, and 


110 


‘Tradition and Discovery 


we have gotten there without giving very much thought to the 
quality of public life while we were on our way. I am far from clear 
that some of the more acute troubles which we have at home may 
not be softened or even averted. I see troubles like this coming in 
Europe, and I think the best we can hope, the most we can hope, 
for the Communist world, is that it be free enough for such 
troubles to come there. 

I need hardly bring to mind that the great sciences of today 
arose in a double source, philosophical discourse and speculation, 
and in technical invention. One could not have done without 
both. Different men will trust one or the other. Why has the 
enormous success, unanticipated, not fully appreciated, and never 
fully realizable, success of one sort of intellectual activity, science, 
not had a beneficial effect on the intellectual life of man? In some 
ways it has. It has put an end to many superstitions, much 
darkness. But if we think back to the early days, either of the 
European tradition or of modern society, we see very few people 
in this process, this discourse: the citizenry of Athens, the few 
handfuls of men who concerned themselves with the structures of 
American political power, the participants in the enlightenment in 
Europe in the eighteenth century, from Montesquieu to the 
Revolution. They are not very many men. They have before them 
a relatively well-digested and common language, experience, and 
tradition, and a common basis of knowledge. 

If we look today, we see a very different situation, an alienation 
between the world of science and the world of public discourse, 
which has emasculated, impoverished, and intimidated the world 
of public discourse with only limited countervailing advantage. 
Thus any man may say what he thinks, but what he says is denied 
in public discourse any true element of legitimacy; it has a kind of 
arbitrary unfounded quality. 

There was a relatively stable and a deeply shared tradition, an 
historic experience which was common among the participants in 
the conversation, and sometimes, even a recognition, of a deep 
difference in kind between the kind of use and value which public 
discourse has as its high ideal, and the kind of criteria by which 
the sciences themselves in part must judge themselves, must judge 
their truth. Of course, the sciences are rooted in public discourse. 
They embody taste, a sense of beauty, of simplicity, of order, and 
of depth. These are words you find always in any criticism or 


111 


Uncommon Sense 


appreciation of science. Indeed a lack of recognition of this is one 
of the reasons why the human quality of the great sciences has 
been so little understood. 

[...] There are things important to discuss and analyze, to 
explore, to get in order in a certain sense, things, which are not 
best viewed as propositional truth, which are not assertions, 
verifiable by the characteristic methods of science, as to the 
existence in the world of this or that connection between one 
thing and another. They have rather a normative quality and a 
thematic quality. They assert the connectedness of things, their 
relatedness, their priority; without them, there would be not only 
no science, but no order in our lives. 

We all know how great the gulf is between the intellectual world 
of the scientist and the intellectual world, perhaps hardly existing 
today, of public discourse on fundamental human problems. 
Some of the characteristics in the growth of science have closed it 
off from contributing to our talk with one another. Our usual 
ideas about objectivity may not be right, may not be relevant in 
this context. The fantastic growth, fantastic specialization, and the 
non-hierarchical character of science, means that one cannot 
easily master or compact it. This is a set of circumstances which 
has largely deprived our public discourse of its first requirement: 
a common basis of knowledge. But I believe that in excluding this 
kind of order, and this kind of verifiability, one has impoverished 
such public discourse. It is a very hard thing to say: “I leave out, I 
leave aside, I leave as irrelevant,” something which is as large, as 
central, and as humane, and as moving a part of the human 
intellectual history as the development of the sciences them- 
selves. [...] 

As to the question of a stable, shared tradition, I have, of 
course, been talking about philosophy in a culture like ours, 
which is predominantly secular, and have not talked of revelation 
as a living, present universal thing. It is not that I wish to exclude 
it; in a country which has an explicit separation of church and 
state, and an explicit freedom of religion, and a strong Protestant 
tradition, with its highly individual relation of man to his God, it is 
just not practical to talk in any other terms. Our tradition is 
buffeted by the most appalling and rapid changes. We all know 
how unprepared fifty years ago the world was for the tragedies of 
the twentieth century when it opened, and how bitter, corrosive, 


112 


Tradition and Discovery 


and indigestible many of them have been. I think primarily of the 
two World Wars and the totalitarian revolutions. We certainly live 
in the heritage of a Christian tradition. Many of us are believers; 
but none of us is immune from the injunctions, the hopes and the 
order of Christianity. I am not happy over the fact that one part of 
the Christian tradition seems almost absent. There has been no 
ethical discourse of any excellence or nobility of weight, dealing 
with how one should handle, how one should regard the new 
weapons of war, the atomic weapons. I welcome the fact that there 
is some discussion; but it tends to be discussion of a prudential 
kind: what will the enemy do, if we do that? I am glad that there is 
some talk, because five or ten years ago only those who were very 
close to the subject talked about it. But what are we to make of a 
civilization which has always thought of ethical questions as quite 
essential in human life, and which has always had a deep 
articulate, fervent conviction, probably never a majority convic- 
tion but always there, never absent, that returning of good for evil 
was the right way to behave, what are we to think of such a 
civilization which has not been able to talk about the prospect of 
killing almost everybody, or everybody, except in terms of 
calculation and prudence? That is not in any sense ethics. I would 
go only so far: in all those instances in which the West, and this is 
mostly the United States, has expressed the view that there was no 
harm in using the super weapons, using them massively, provided 
only that they were used against an antagonist whose government 
had done something wrong, we have made a very grave mistake. 
Our lack of scruple, which has its historical origins, not wholly, 
but largely, in the numbing and indifference which the terrible 
conduct of the Second World War brought to us, has been a great 
disservice to the cause of freedom and of free man. 

[...] The attainment of certainty is not always the purpose of 
discourse. Its purpose may be the exploration of meaning. It is 
what we wish, what we intend, what we hope, what we are 
prepared to do, what we cherish, what we love, what we worship. 
My belief is that if the common discourse can be enriched by a 
more tolerant and humane welcome for the growth of science, its 
knowledge, its intellectual virtue, it may be more easily possible to 
accept the role of clarification and of commitment which is its true 
purpose. 

I would think that we could look to a future in which very high 


113 


Uncommon Sense 


on the list of purposes, of that leisure, of that consumption which 
our economies will gradually bring to us, was knowledge and 
thought; a future in which intellectual vigor of man had a greater 
scope than at any time in history, where man is free to love, to live, 
and to know. [ ...] One may hope that we will be unintimidated 
by the growth of knowledge and prepared for change, and ready 
to devote, not four years in college, not six years in graduate 
school, but our whole lives to an intellectual vigor and a true life of 
the mind. One may hope that we will learn again to talk with one 
another and share our sorrows and loves with one another and 
speak of meanings and the great themes of our lives and life. For if 
it is part of our problem today that to know and to discover one 
‘must act and choose, it is also another part of it, that, to act and to 
live, we must speak to one another, and we must hear. 


114 


Ata panel discussion in 1961. (Photograph by P. Karas, courtesy of MIT 
Museum) 


9 
PROGRESS IN FREEDOM 


1960 


[ . .. ]TO ASSESS THE PROSPECTS of progress in liberty of the decade 
ahead, it is appropriate to look at the great changes of the decade 
just past. How great they are, how the very conditions of our lives 
have altered, reminds us of the central feature of our time: in the 
span of a man’s life, we live many lives, in many worlds. A decade 
ago, for instance, Berlin and almost all of Europe, still bore 
everywhere signs of the ravages of war. Berlin, like much of Europe, 
has in some sense recovered. Its economy and prosperity could 
hardly have been anticipated a decade ago. But the greatest 
change in this city is that, in one respect, there has been no 
change. Its citizens live with a government and a style of life very 
largely of their own choice. [ ...] Ten years ago the Korean War, 
surely in the making, had not yet broken out; the guns that were to 
open that limited but most bitter conflict had not yet spoken. Ten 
years ago one could hardly have imagined that this spring and 
summer some dozen newly constituted nations would be on the 
point of seeking membership in the United Nations Organization, 
nor that the quest for national independence, for rapid moderni- 
zation, and for appropriate regional or cultural international 
cooperation could have progressed so far and so fast. [. . . ] 

Ten years ago Stalin ruled Russia; in China the new Communist 
government was at the beginning. of its consolidation of power. 
Ten years ago there was an almost total barrier to cultural and 
technical communication between the scholars of the Communist 
world and the West. Ten years ago it could still be argued what 


117 


Uncommon Sense 


vitality and what promise would lie in the gradual creation of a 
united Europe. 

Among all the changes of this strange decade there are two 
which stand out. One is brutal. Ten years ago my country had 
barely lost, and still effectively had, a monopoly of the great new 
weapons, the atomic weapons. For their use in combat our armed 
forces, and all others, had means of delivery not essentially 
different from those of the Second World War. Yet it was then 
generally held, and I believe correctly, that these armaments 
constituted for all of us a hideous argument against the outbreak 
of general war. Today there can be no talk of monopoly: we are 
deeply into the atomic age, in which many nations will be so 
armed. 

In this decade the deadliness, the destructive power of atomic 
stockpiles has increased far more than a hundredfold—how much 
more, it may be neither permissible nor relevant to tell. Today, 
the new means of delivery and use have made of the command 
and control of these weapon systems a nightmare fully known 
only to those responsible. They have added change to anger as 
another cause of disaster. What some of us know, and some of our 
governments have recognized, all people should know and every 
great government understand: if this next great war occurs, none 
of us can count on having enough living to bury our dead. 

This situation, quite new in human history, has from time to 
time brought with it a certain grim and ironic community of 
interest, not only among friends, but between friends and 
enemies. This community has nothing to do with the injunction 
that we love our enemies, but is a political and human change not 
wholly without hopeful portent. 

The Bhagavad Gita, the great Hindu scripture, is a sustained 
argument on the nature of human life and its meaning, intro- 
duced by Prince Arjuna’s reluctance to engage in fratricidal 
combat. Vishnu describes this combat as a simple and necessary 
duty, whose performance would preserve the way of Arjuna’s 
salvation, and whose evils were of no deep meaning, either for 
him or for those whom he might kill. Can we be thus com- 
forted? 

Traditionally, the national governments have accepted as their 
first and highest duty the defense and security of their peoples. In 
today’s world they are not very good at it. We all know that the 


118 


Progress in Freedom 


steps which we have taken, alone or in concert, have at very best 
an uncertain, contingent, changing, and above all transitory 
effectiveness. This is one. reason, important but perhaps not 
central, for a second change in this past decade. We have come to 
doubt the adequacy of our institutions to the world we live in; 
beyond that, we have come to doubt certain aspects of the health 
of our own culture. In this, I speak with my own country in mind, 
because the traits that have given rise to our anxieties are as 
marked with us as anywhere. Yet I think I see that in the older, 
more traditional societies of Europe, the same problems are 
beginning to appear, and will inevitably grow more grave. I think 
that I see that in the measure in which productivity, education, 
and the modern world come to the peoples that aspire for them, 
these problems in their own form, will come too. 

Compared to any high culture of the past, ours is an enormous 
society. It is for us an egalitarian one, in which we hope—and I 
pray that we may always hope—that there be no irrelevant 
exclusiveness from participation in its highest work, its powers, 
and its discourse. Ours, for special reasons of history, rendered 
more and more acute by the nature of the twentieth-century 
world, is a fluid society, with rapid change its hallmark. Like so 
many others, it is, in its politics, and much of its public life, a 
largely, even an inherently, secular society. We live, as we all 
know, with an expansion of knowledge overpoweringly beautiful, 
vast, ramified, quite unparalleled in the history of men. We live 
with a yearly enrichment of our understanding of nature, and of 
man as part of nature, that doubles every decade; and that is in its 
nature, necessarily, inevitably, and even in part happily an 
enrichment of specialization. This age of ours is the scientific age, 
in which our work, our leisure, our economy, and an increasingly 
large part of the very quality of our lives, are based on the 
application of newly acquired knowledge of nature to practical 
human problems. Size, egalitarianism, flux, are the social hall- 
marks of a continuing cognitive ‘revolution. [... ] 

Living in today’s world is not easy. No human society has ever 
solved problems that now confront us, or has even lived with 
them in dignity. This is for us not so much a time of anger as of 
honest sorrow, of renewal, of effort. Yet there are also great virtues 
in today’s world: the recession of prejudice, of poverty, disease, 
and degradation; the creative, intimate, and lovely communities 


119 


Uncommon Sense 


which thrive; the brilliance and wonder of the sciences. [.. . ] 

If I cannot be comforted by Vishnu’s argument to Arjuna, it is 
because I am too much a Jew, much too much a Christian, much 
too much a‘European, far too much an American. For I believe in 
the meaningfulness of human history, and of our role in it, and 
above all of our responsibility to it. 

Great cultures have flourished without this belief; perhaps they 
will again. If the switches of great war are thrown, in anger or in 
error, and if indeed there are human survivors, there may some- 
day again be high art, perhaps, and some ennobling sense of the 
place of man and his destiny. There may even be great science, 
but there will be no sense of history. There will be no sense of 
“progress in freedom.” 

This belief in progress and dedication to this belief have 
brought us where we are. All high civilizations have had a 
tradition of learning the truth, of contemplation, of under- 
standing. Since Greek times, many have understood as well the 
role of rigor, of proof, of anchoring consequence to hypothesis. 
They have had as well the art of putting questions to nature, of 
experiment; they have had forms of communication, perhaps 
inadequate, but at once robust and intimate. It has taken all these, 
rediscovered and slowly recaptured in the last millenium, to make 
the age of science; but it has taken more. Transfused with these, 
there has been a special sense of progress, not merely in man’s 
understanding, but in the conditions of man’s life, in his civility, 
in the nobility of his institutions and his freedom, a sense of 
progress not for the individual soul alone, but of progress in 
history, in man’s long story. 

We may well have learned that if we of the West do not look to 
our own virtue, and that of our institutions and our life and lives, 
we shall be ill-equipped to bring liberty to our colleagues now 
deprived of it, or to make either our culture or our liberty relevant 
and helpful to the lands newly embarked on unprecedented 
change. Let us in many varied ways turn to this, quite without 
flattery or illusion, but not quite without hope. 


120 


In the late fifties. (OMC) 


10 


ON SCIENCE AND 
CULTURE 


1962 


WE LIVE IN AN UNUSUAL WORLD, marked by very great and irrevers- 
ible changes that occur within the span of a man’s life. We live 
in a time where our knowledge and understanding of the world 
of nature grows wider and deeper at an unparalleled rate; and 
where the problems of applying this knowledge to man’s needs 
and hopes are new, and only a little illuminated by our past 
history. 

Indeed it has always, in traditional societies, been the great 
function of culture to keep things rather stable, quiet, and 
unchanging. It has been the function of tradition to assimilate one 
epoch to another, one episode to another, even one year to 
another. It has been the function of culture to bring out meaning, 
by pointing to the constant or recurrent traits of human life, which 
in easier days one talked about as the eternal verities. 

In the most primitive societies, if one believes the anthropolo- 
gists, the principal function of ritual, religion, of culture is, in fact, 
almost to stop change. It is to provide for the social organism what 
life provides in such a magic way for living organisms, a kind of 
homeostasis, an ability to remain intact, to respond only very little 
to the obvious convulsions and alterations in the world around. 

Today, culture and tradition have assumed a very different 
intellectual and social purpose. The principal function of the most 
vital and living traditions today is precisely to provide the instru- 
ments of rapid change. There are many things which go together 
to bring about this alteration in man’s life; but probably the 
decisive one is science itself. I will use that word as broadly as I 


123 


Uncommon Sense 


know, meaning the natural sciences, meaning the historical 
sciences, meaning all those matters on which men can converse 
objectively with each other. I shall not continually repeat the 
distinction between science as an effort to find out about the world 
and understand it, on the one hand, and science, in its applica- 
tions in technology, as an effort to do something useful with the 
knowledge so acquired. But certain care is called for, because, if 
we call this the scientific age, we make more than one kind of 
oversimplification. When we talk about science today, we are 
likely to think of the biologist with his microscope or the physicist 
with his cyclotron; but almost certainly a great deal that is not now 
the subject of successful study will later come to be. I think we 
probably today have under cultivation only a small part of the 
terrain which will be natural for the sciences a century from now. I 
think of the enormously rapid growth in many parts of biology, 
and of the fact, ominous but not without hope, that man is a part 
of nature and very open to study. 

The reason for this great change from a slowly moving,.almost 
static world, to the world we live in, is the cumulative character, 
the firmness, the givenness of what has been learned about nature. 
It is true that it is transcended when one goes into other parts of 
experience. What is true on the scale of the inch and the 
centimeter may not be true on the scale of a billion light-years; it 
may not be true either on the scale of a one-hundred billionth ofa 
centimeter; but it stays true where it was proven. It is fixed. Thus 
everything that is found out is added to what was known before, 
enriches it, and does not have to be done over again. This 
essentially cumulative irreversible character of learning things is 
the hallmark of science. 

This means that in man’s history the sciences make changes 
which cannot be wished away and cannot be undone. Let me give 
two quite different examples. There is much talk about getting rid 
of atomic bombs. I like that talk; but we must not fool ourselves. 
The world will not be the same, no matter what we do with atomic 
bombs, because the knowledge of how to make them cannot be 
exorcised. It is there; and all our arrangements for living in a new 
age must bear in mind its omnipresent virtual presence, and the 
fact that one cannot change that. A different example: we can 
never have again the delusions about the centrality and impor- 
tance of our physical habitat, now that, we know something of 


124 


On Science and Culture 


where the earth is in the solar system, and know that there are 
hundreds of billions of suns in our galaxy, and hundreds of 
billions of galaxies within reach of the great telescopes of the 
world. We can never again base the dignity of man’s life on the 
special character in space and time of the place where he happens 
to live. 

These are irreversible changes; so it is that the cumulative 
character gives a paradigm of something which is, in other 
respects, very much more subject to question: the idea of human 
progress. One cannot doubt that in the sciences the direction of 
growth is progress. This is true of the knowledge of fact, the 
understanding of nature, and the knowledge of skill, of tech- 
nology, of learning how to do things. When one applies this to the 
human situation, and complains that we make great progress in 
automation and computing and space research but no compara- 
ble moral progress, this involves a total misunderstanding of the 
difference between the two kinds of progress. I do not mean that 
moral progress is impossible; but it is not, in any sense, automatic. 
Moral regress, as we have seen in our day, is just as possible. 
Scientific regress is not compatible with the continued practice of 
science. 

It is, of course, true, and we pride ourselves on it that it is true, 
that science is quite international, and is the same (with minor 
differences of emphasis) in Japan, France, the United States, 
Russia. But culture is not international; indeed I am one of those 
who hope that, in a certain sense, it never quite will be, that the 
influence of our past, of our history, which is for different reasons 
and different peoples quite different, will make itself felt and not 
be lost in total homogeneity. 

I cannot subscribe to the view that science and culture are co- 
extensive, that they are the same thing with different names; and I 
cannot subscribe to the view that science is something useful, but 
essentially unrelated to culture. I think that we live in a time which 
has few historical parallels, that there are practical problems of 
human institutions, their obsolescence and their inadequacy, 
problems of the mind and spirit which, if not more difficult than 
ever before, are different, and difficult. I shall be dealing with 
some traits of the sciences which contribute to the difficulty, and 
may here give a synopsis of what they are. They have to do with 
the question of why the scientific revolution happened when it 


125 


Uncommon Sense 


did; with the characteristic growth of the sciences: with their 
characteristic internal structure: with the relation of discovery in 
the sciences to the general ideas of man in matters which are not 
precisely related to the sciences: with freedom and necessity in the 
sciences, and the question of the creative and the open character 
of science, its infinity: and with what direction we might try to 
follow in bringing coherence and order to our cultural life, in 
doing what it is proper for a group of intellectuals, of artists, of 
philosophers, teachers, scientists, statesmen to do to help re- 
fashion the sensibility and the institutions of this world, which 
need refashioning if we are at all to survive. 

It is not a simple question to answer why the scientific 
revolution occurred when it did. It started, as all serious historians 
would agree, in the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance, and 
was very slow at first. No great culture has been free of curiosity 
and reflection, of contemplation and thought. “To know the 
causes of things” is something that serious men have always 
wanted, a quest that serious societies have sustained. No great 
culture has been free of inventive genius. If we think of the culture 
of Greece, and the following Hellenistic and Roman period, it is 
particularly puzzling that the scientific revolution did not occur 
then. The Greeks discovered something without which our 
contemporary world would not be what it is: standards of rigor, 
the idea of proof, the idea of logical necessity, the idea that one 
thing implies another. Without that, science is very nearly 
impossible, for unless there is a quasi-rigid structure of impli- 
cation and necessity, then if something turns out not to be what 
one expected, one will have no way of finding out where the 
wrong point is: one has no way of correcting himself, of finding 
the error. But this is something that the Greeks had very early in 
their history. They were curious and inventive; they did not 
experiment in the scale of modern days, but they did many 
experiments; they had as we have only recently learned to 
appreciate, a very high degree of technical and technological 
sophistication. They could make very subtle and complicated 
instruments; and they did, though they did not write much about 
it. Possibly the Greeks did not make the scientific revolution 
because of some flaw in communication. They were a small 
society, and it may be that there were not quite enough people 
involved. 


126 


On Science and Culture 


In a matter of history, we cannot assign a unique cause, 
precisely because the event itself is unique; you cannot test, to see 
if you have it right. I think that the best guess is that it took 
something that was not present in Chinese civilization, that was 
wholly absent in Indian civilization, and absent also from Greco-. 
Roman civilization. It needed an idea of progress, not limited to 
better understanding for this idea the Greeks had. It took an idea 
of progress which has more to do with the human condition, 
which is well expressed by the second half of the famous Christian 
dichotomy—faith and works; the notion that the betterment of 
man’s condition, his civility, had meaning; that we all had a 
responsibility to it, a duty to it, and to man. I think that it was 
when this basic idea of man’s condition, which supplements the 
other worldly aspects of religion, was fortified and fructified 
between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries by the rediscovery 
of the ancient world’s scientists, philosophers, and mathemati- 
cians, that there was the beginning of the scientific age. By the 
seventeenth century there were a handful of men involved in 
improving human knowledge, or “useful knowledge” as the 
phrase went, so that new societies like the Royal Society and the 
Academy were formed, where people could talk to each other and 
bring to the prosecution of science that indispensable element of 
working together, of communication, or correcting the other 
fellow’s errors and admiring the other fellow’s skills, thus creating 
the first truly scientific communities. 

Just before Newton, Hobbes wrote: 


The Sciences are small power; because not eminent; and 
therefore, not acknowledged in any man, nor one at all, 
but in a few; and in them, but of a few things. For Science 
is of that nature, as none can understand it to be, but such 
as is good measure have attayned it. 

Arts of publique use, as Fortification, making of En- 
gines, and other Instruments of War; because they 
conferre to Defense, and Victory, are Power. 


It was the next century that put science in a context of fraternity, 
even of universal brotherhood. It encouraged a political view 
which was egalitarian, permissive, pluralistic, liberal—everything 
for which the word “democratic” is today justly and rightly used. 
The result is that the scientific world of today is also a very large 


127 


Uncommon Sense 


one: an open world in which, of course, not everybody does 
everything, in which not everybody is a scientist or a prime 
minister, but in which we fight very hard against arbitrary 
exclusion of people from any works, any deliberation, any 
discourse, any responsibility for which their talents and their 
interests suit them. The result is that we face our new problems, 
created by the practical consequences of technology, and the great 
intellectual consequences of science itself, in the context of a 
world of two or three billion people, an enormous society for 
which human institutions were not really ever designed. We are 
facing a world in which growth is characteristic, not just of the 
sciences themselves, but of the economy, of technology, of all 
human institutions; no one can open a daily paper without seeing 
the consequences. 

One can measure scientific growth in a number of ways, but it is 
important not to mistake things. The excellence of the individual 
scientist does not change much with time. His knowledge and his 
power does, but not the high quality that makes him great. We do 
not look to anyone to be better than Kepler or Newton, any more 
than we look to anyone to be better than Sophocles, or to any 
doctrine to be better than the gospel according to St. Matthew. Yet 
one can measure things, and it has been done. One can measure 
how many people work on scientific questions: one can count 
them. One can notice how much is published. 

These two criteria show a doubling of scientific knowledge in 
every ten years. Casimir calculated that if the Physical Review 
continued to grow as rapidly as it has between 1945 and 1960, it 
would weigh more than the earth during the next century. In 
fifteen years, the volume of chemical abstracts has quadrupled; in 
biology the changes are faster still. Today, if you talk about 
scientists and mean by that people who have devoted their lives to 
the acquisition and application of new knowledge, then 93 per 
cent of us are still alive. This enormously rapid growth, sustained 
over two centuries, means, of course, that no man learned as a boy 
more than a small fraction in his own field of what he ought to 
know as a grown man. 

There are several points to keep in mind. One would naturally 
think that if we are publishing so much, it must be trivial. I think 
that this is not true: any scientific community with sane people 
would protect itself against that: because we have to read what is 


128 


On Science and Culture 


published. The argument not to permit the accumulation of 
trivial, unimportant things which are not really new, which do not 
add to what was known before, is overwhelming. 

The second point is that one may say that every new thing 
renders what was known before uninteresting, that one can forget 
as rapidly as one learns. That is in part true: whenever there is a 
great new understanding, a great new element of order, a new 
theory, or a new law of nature, then much that before had to be 
remembered in isolation becomes connected and becomes, to 
some extent, implied and simplified. Yet one cannot forget what 
went before, because usually the meaning of what is discovered in 
1962 is to be found in terms of things that were discovered in 1955 
or 1950 or earlier. These are the things in terms of which the new 
discoveries are made, the origins of the instruments that give us 
the new discoveries, the origins of the concepts in terms of which 
they are discovered, the origins of the language and the tradi- 
tion. 

A third point: if one looks to the future of something that 
doubles every ten years, there must come a time when it stops, just 
as the Physical Review cannot weigh more than the earth. We know 
that this will saturate, and probably at a level very much higher 
than today; there will come a time when the rate of growth of 
science is not such that in every ten years the amount that is 
known is doubled; but the amount that is added to knowledge 
then will be far greater than it is today. For this rate of growth 
suggests that, just as the professional must, if he is to remain 
professional, live a life of continuous study, so we may find a clue 
here also to the more general behavior of the intellectual with 
regard to his own affairs, and those of his colleagues in somewhat 
different fields. In the most practical way a man will have some 
choice: he may choose to continue to learn about his own field in 
an intimate, detailed, knowledgeable way, so that he knows what 
there is to know about it. But then the field will not be very wide. 
His knowledge will be highly partial of science as a whole, but very 
intimate and very complete of his own field. He may, on the other 
hand, choose to know generally, superficially, a good deal about 
what goes on in science, but without competence, without 
mastery, without intimacy, without depth. The reason for empha- 
sizing this is that the cultural values of the life of science almost all 
lie in the intimate view: here are the new techniques, the hard 


129 


Uncommon Sense 


lessons, the real choices, the great disappointments, the great 
discoveries. 

All sciences grow out of common sense, out of curiosity, 
observation, reflection. One starts by refining one’s observation 
and one’s words, and by exploring and pushing things a little 
further than they occur in ordinary life. In this novelty there are 
surprises; one revises the way one thinks about things to 
accommodate the surprises; then the old way of thinking gets to 
be so cumbersome and inappropriate that one realizes that there 
is a big change called for, and one recreates one’s way of thinking 
about this part of nature. 

Through all this one learns to say what one has done, what one 
has found, and to be patient and wait for others to see if they find 
the same things, and to reduce, to the point where it really makes 
no further difference, the normally overpoweringly vital element 
of ambiguity in human speech. We live by being ambiguous, by 
not settling things because they do not have to be settled, by 
suggesting more than one thing because their co-presence in the 
mind may be a source of beauty. But in talking about science one 
may be as ambiguous as ever until we come to the heart of it. Then 
we tell a fellow just what we did in terms that are intelligible to 
him, because he has been schooled to understand them, and we 
tell him just what we found and just how we did it. If he does not 
understand us, we go to visit him and help him; and if he still does 
not understand us, we go back home and do it over again. This is 
the way in which the firmness and solidity of science is es- 
tablished. 

How then does it go? In studying the different parts of nature, 
one explores with different instruments, explores different ob- 
jects, and one gets a branching of what at one time had been 
common talk, common sense. Each branch develops new in- 
struments, ideas, words suitable for describing that part of the 
world of nature. This treelike structure, all growing from the 
common trunk of man’s common primordial experience, has 
branches no longer associated with the same question, nor the 
same words and techniques. The unity of science, apart from the 
fact that it all has a common origin in man’s ordinary life, if not a 
unity of deriving one part from another, nor of finding an identity 
between one part and another, between let us say, genetics and 


130 


On Science and Culture 


topology, to take two impossible examples, where there is indeed 
some connection. 

The unity consists of two things: first and ever more strikingly, 
an absence of inconsistency. Thus we may talk of life in terms of 
purpose and adaptation and function, but we have found in living 
things no tricks played upon the laws of physics and chemistry. 
We have found and I expect will find a total consistency, and 
between the different subjects, even as remote as genetics and 
topology, an occasional sharp mutual relevance. They throw light 
on each other; they have something to do with each other: often 
the greatest things in the sciences occur when two different 
discoveries made in different worlds turn out to have so much in 
common that they are examples of a still greater discovery. 

The image is not that of an ordered array of facts in which every 
one follows somehow from a more fundamental one. It is rather 
that of a living thing: a tree doing something that trees do not 
normally do, occasionally having the branches grow together and 
part again in a great network. 

The knowledge that is being increased in this extraordinary way 
is inherently and inevitably very specialised. It is different for the 
physicist, the astronomer, the microbiologist, the mathematician. 
There are connections: there is this often important mutual 
relevance. Even in physics, where we fight very hard to keep the 
different parts of our subject from flying apart (so that one fellow 
will know one thing and another fellow will know another, and 
they do not talk to each other), we do not entirely succeed, in spite 
of a passion for unity which is very strong. The traditions of 
science are specialized traditions; this is their strength. Their 
strength is that they use the words, the machinery, the concepts, 
the theories, that fit their subjects; they are not encumbered by 
having to try to fit other sorts of things. It is the specialized 
traditions which give the enormous thrust and power to the 
scientific experience. This also makes for the problem of teaching 
and explaining the sciences. When we get to some very powerful 
general result which illuminates a large part of the world of 
nature, it is by virtue of its being general in the logical sense, of 
encompassing an enormous amount of experience in its concepts; 
and in its terminology it is most highly specialized, almost 
unintelligible except to the men who have worked in the field. The 


131 


Uncommon Sense 


great laws of physics today, which do not describe everything (or 
we would be out of business) but which underlie almost 
everything that is ever noticed in ordinary human experience 
about the physical world, cannot be formulated in terms that can 
reasonably be defined without a long period of careful schooling. 
This is comparably true in other subjects. 

One has then in these specializations the professional commu- 
nities in the various sciences. They are very intimate, work closely 
together, know each other throughout the world. They are always 
excited—sometimes jealous but usually pleased—when one 
member of the community makes a discovery. I think, for 
instance, that what we now call psychology will one day perhaps 
be many sciences, that there will be many different specialized 
communities practicing them, who will talk with one another, 
each in their own profession and in their own way. 

These specialized communities, or guilds, are a very moving 
experience for those who participate. There have been many 
temptations to see analogues in them for other human activities. 
One that we hear much discussed is this: “If physicists can work 
together in countries with different cultures, in countries with 
different politics, in countries of different religions, even in 
countries which are politically obviously hostile, is not this a way 
to bring the world together?” 

The specializing habits of the sciences have, to some extent, 
because of the tricks of universities, been carried over to other 
work, to philosophy and to the arts. There is technical philosophy 
which is philosophy as a craft, philosophy for other philosophers, 
and there is art for the artists and the critics. To my mind, 
whatever virtues the works have for sharpening professional tools, 
they are profound misreadings, even profound subversions of the 
true functions of philosophy and art, which are to address 
themselves to the general common human problem. Not to 
everybody, but to anybody: not to specialists. 

It is clear that one is faced here with formidable problems of 
communication, of telling people about things. It is an immense 
job of teaching on all levels, in every sense of the word, never 
ending. 

It has often been held that the great discoveries in science, 
coming into the lives of men, affect their attitudes toward their 


132 


On Science and Culture 


place in life, their views, their philosophy. There is surely some 
truth in this. * 

If discoveries in science are to have an honest effect on human 
thought and on culture, they have to be understandable. That is 
likely to be true only in the early period of a science, when it is 
talking about things which are not too remote from ordinary 
experience. Some of the great discoveries of this century go under 
the names of Relativity and Uncertainty, and when we hear these 
words we may think, “This is the way I felt this morning: I was 
relatively confused and quite uncertain”: this is not at all a notion 
of what technical points are involved in these great discoveries, or 
what lessons. 

I think that the reason why Darwin’s hypothesis had such an 
impact was, in part, because it was a very simple thing in terms of 
ordinary life. We cannot talk about the contemporary discovery in 
biology in such language, or by referring only to things that we 
have all experienced. 

Thus I think that the great effects of the sciences in stimulating 
and in enriching philosophical life and cultural interests have 
been necessarily confined to the rather early times in the 
development of a science. There is another qualification. Dis- 
coveries will really only resonate and change the thinking of men 
when they feed some hope, some need that preexists in the 
society. I think that the real sources of the Enlightenment, fed a 
little by the scientific events of the time, came in the rediscovery 
of the classics, of classic political theory, perhaps most of all the 
Stoics. The hunger of the eighteenth century to believe in the 
power of reason, to wish to throw off authority, to wish to 
secularize, to take an optimistic view of man’s condition, seized on 
Newton and his discoveries as an illustration of something which 
was already deeply believed in quite apart from the law of gravity 
and the laws of motion. The hunger with which the nineteenth 


*Examples that are usually given include Newton and Darwin. Newton is not a 
very good example, for when we look at it closely we are struck by the fact that in 
the sense of the Enlightenment, the sense of a coupling of faith in scientific 
progress and man’s reason with a belief in political progress and the seculari- 
zation of human life, Newton himself was in no way a Newtonian. His successors 
were. 


133 


Uncommon Sense 


century seized on Darwin had very much to do with the in- 
creasing awareness of history and change, with the great desire 
to naturalize man, to put him into the world of nature, which 
existed long before Darwin and which made him welcome. I have 
seen an éxample in this century where the great Danish physicist 
Niels Bohr found in the quantum theory when it was developed 
thirty years ago this remarkable trait: it is consistent with 
describing an atomic system, only much less completely than we 
can describe large-scale objects. We have a certain choice as to 
which traits of the atomic system we wish to study and measure 
and which to let go; but we have not the option of doing them all. 
This situation, which we all recognize, sustained in Bohr his long- 
held view of the human condition: that there are mutually 
exclusive ways of using our words, our minds, our souls, any one 
of which is open to us, but which cannot be combined: ways as 
different, for instance, as preparing to act and entering into an 
introspective search for the reasons for action. This discovery has 
not, I think, penetrated into general cultural life. I wish it had; it is 
a good example of something that would be relevant, if only it 
could be understood. 

Einstein once said that a physical theory was not determined by 
the facts of nature, but was a free invention of the human mind. 
This raises the question of how necessary is the content of 
science— how much is it something that we are free not to find— 
how much is it something that could be otherwise? This is, of 
course, relevant to the question of how we may use the words 
“objectivity” and “truth.” Do we, when we find something, 
“invent” it or “discover” it? 

The fact is, of course, just what one would guess. We are, of 
course, free in our tradition and in our practice, and to a much 
more limited extent individually, to decide where to look at nature, 
and how to look at nature, what questions to put, with what 
instruments and with what purpose. But we are not the least bit 
free to settle what we find. Man must certainly be free to invent the 
idea of mass, as Newton did and as it has been refined and re- 
defined; but having done so, we have not been free to find that the 
mass of the light quantum or the neutrino is anything but zero. 
We are free in the start of things. We are free as to how to go about 
it; but then the rock of what the world is, shapes this freedom with 
a necessary answer. That is why ontological interpretations of the 


134 


On Science and Culture 


word “objective” have seemed useless, and why we use the word 
to describe the clarity, the lack of ambiguity, the effectiveness of 
the way we can tell each other about what we have found. 

Thus in the sciences, total statements like those that involve the 
word “all,” with no qualifications, are hardly ever likely to occur. 
In every investigation and extension of knowledge we are involved 
in an action; in every action we are involved in a choice; and in 
every choice we are involved in a loss, the loss of that we did not 
do. We find this in the simplest situations. We find this in 
perception, where the possibility of perceiving is coextensive with 
our ignoring many things that are going on. We find it in speech 
where the possibility of understandable speech lies in paying no 
attention to a great deal that is in the air, among the sound waves, 
in the general scene. Meaning is always attained at the cost of 
leaving things out. We find it is the idea of complementarity here 
in a sharp form as a recognition that the attempt to make one sort 
of observation on an atomic system forecloses others. We have 
freedom of choice, but we have no escape from the fact that doing 
some things must leave out others. 

In practical terms, this means, of course, that our knowledge is 
finite and never all-encompassing. There is always much that we 
miss, much that we cannot be aware of because the very act of 
learning, of ordering, of finding unity and meaning, the very 
power to talk about things means that we leave out a great deal. 

Ask the question: Would another civilization based on life on another 
planet very similar to ours in its ability to sustain life have the same physics? 
One has no idea whether they would have the same physics or not. 
We might be talking about quite different questions. This makes 
ours an open world without end. I had a Sanskritist friend in 
California who used to say mockingly that, if science were any 
good, it should be much easier to be an educated man now than it 
was a generation ago. That is because he thought the world was 
closed. 

The things that make us choose one set of questions, one 
branch of inquiry rather than another are embodied in scientific 
traditions. In developed sciences each man has only a limited 
sense of freedom to shape or alter them; but they are not 
themselves wholly determined by the findings of science. They are 
largely of an aesthetic character. The words that we use: simplicity, 
elegance, beauty, indicate that what we grope for is not only more 


135 


Uncommon Sense 


knowledge, but knowledge that has order and harmony in it, and 
continuity with the past. Like all poor fellows, we want to find 
something new, but not something too new. It is when we fail in 
that, that the great discoveries follow. 

All these themes—the origin of science, its pattern of growth, its 
branching reticular structure, its increasing alienation from the 
common understanding of man, its freedom, the character of its 
objectivity and its openness—are relevant to the relations of 
science and culture. I believe that they can be and should be far 
more robust, intimate, and fruitful than they are today. 

I am not here thinking of the popular subject of “mass culture.” 
In broaching that, it seems to me one must be critical but one 
must, above all, be human; one must not be a snob; one must be 
rather tolerant and almost loving. It is a new problem; one must 
not expect it to be solved with the methods of Periclean Athens. In 
the problems of mass culture and, above all, of the mass media, it 
is not primarily a question of the absence of excellence. The 
modest worker, in Europe or in America, has within reach 
probably better music and more good music, more good art, 
more good writing than his predecessors have ever had. It seems 
rather that the good things are lost in such a stream of poor things, 
that the noise level is so high, that some of the conditions for 
appreciating excellence are not present. One does not eat well 
unless one is hungry; there is a certain frugality to the best 
cooking; and something of this sort is wrong with the mass media. 
But that is not now my problem. 

Rather, I think loosely of what we may call the intellectual 
community: artists, philosophers, statesmen, teachers, men of 
most professions, prophets, scientists. This is an open group, with 
no sharp lines separating those that think themselves of it. It is a 
growing faction of all peoples. In it is vested the great duty for 
enlarging, preserving, and transmitting our knowledge and skills, 
and indeed our understanding of the interrelations, priorities, 
commitments, injunctions, that help men deal with their joys, 
temptations, and sorrows, their finiteness, their beauty. Some of 
this has to do, as the sciences so largely do, with propositional 
truth, with propositions which say “If you do thus and so you will 
see this and that”; these are objective and can be checked and 
crosschecked; though it is always wise from time to time to doubt, 


136 


On Science and Culture 


there are ways to put an end to the doubt. This is how it is with the 
sciences. 

In this community there are other statements which “emphasize 
a theme” rather than declare a fact. They may be statements of 
connectedness or relatedness or importance, or they may be in 
one way or another statements of commitment. For them the 
word “certitude,” which is a natural norm to apply in the sciences, 
is not very sensible—depth, firmness, universality, perhaps 
more—but certitude, which applies really to verification, is not the 
great criterion in most of the work of a philosopher, a painter, a 
poet, or a playwright. For these are not, in the sense I have 
outlined, objective. Yet for any true community, for any society 
worthy of the name, they must have an element of community of 
being common, of being public, of being relevant and meaningful 
to man, not necessarily to everybody, but surely not just to 
specialists. 

I have been much concerned that, in this world of change and 
scientific growth, we have so largely lost the ability to talk with one 
another, to increase and enrich our common culture and 
understanding. And so it is that the public sector of our lives, what 
we hold and have in common, has suffered, as have the 
illumination of the arts, the deepening of justice and virtue, and 
the ennobling power of our common discourse. We are less men 
for this. Never in man’s history have the specialized traditions 
more flourished than today. We have our private beauties. But in 
those high undertakings when man derives strength and insight 
from public excellence, we have been impoverished. We hunger 
for nobility, the rare words and acts that harmonize simplicity with 
truth. In this default I see some connection with the great 
unresolved public problems—survival, liberty, fraternity. 

In this default I see the responsibility that the intellectual 
community has to history and to our fellows: a responsibility 
which is a necessary condition for remaking human institutions 
as they need to be remade today that there may be peace, that 
they may embody more fully those ethical commitments without 
which we cannot properly live as men. 

This may mean for the intellectual community a very much 
greater effort than in the past. The community will grow; but I 
think that also the quality and the excellence of what we do must 


137 


Uncommon Sense 


grow. I think, in fact, that with the growing wealth of the world, 
and the possibility that it will not all be used to make new 
committees, there may indeed be genuine leisure, and that a high 
commitment on this leisure is that we reknit the discourse and the 
understanding between the members of our community. 

In this I think we have, all of us, to preserve our competence in 
our own professions, to preserve what we know intimately, to 
preserve our mastery. That is, in fact, our only anchor in honesty. 
We need also to be open to other and complementary lives, not 
intimidated by them and not contemptuous of them (as so many 
are today of the natural and mathematical sciences). As a start, we 
must learn again, without contempt and with great patience, to 
talk to one another; and we must hear. 


138 


Robert Oppenheimer with President Johnson at the Fermi Award 
presentation in 1963. (OMC) 


11 


THE POWER TO ACT 
The Scientific Revolution 
and its Effects on 
Democratic Institutions 


1963 


[...] FROM BACON AND JOHN DONNE through Henry Adams and 
Whitehead to now, wise men have foreseen, been frightened by, 
have applauded what is called the explosion of science. It is true 
that for over two hundred years there has been a constant growth 
in the number of people working on scientific problems and in 
the number of works they have made and published about our 
knowledge of nature, of ourselves as a part of nature, and on the 
applications of science in technology. Indeed, the scientific 
revolution has white hair; but it still has young eyes. 

[...] This is a special time. We have had, as John Donne said, 
the destruction of an order of beliefand of society. We have had, as 
Henry Adams said, a monstrous growth. We have had, as 
Whitehead said, changes that take place within the life of a man, 
even within a small part of the life of a man. We have today such a 
wealth of scientific knowledge that we may even think in terms of 
saturation. We may even think in elementary terms of arithmetic 
that the growth cannot accelerate for many more decades ‘by the 
exponential law of growth characteristic of the past centuries. 
Never have the imminence and sharpness of change, never have 
the range and the vastness of our powers, never have the gravity 
and depth and beauty of the choices open to us, been greater. 

[...] Democratic institutions and the scientific revolution have 
an historic association. Both were conceived in the Europe of the 
thirteenth century; both have continued in Europe and America, 
with a growing robustness, and with a fantastic increase of the 


141 


Uncommon Sense 


sciences, with a felt and understood connection of our knowledge 
and skill, on the one hand, and on the other of man’s progress not 
merely in knowledge but in the civility of his life on earth. This did 
not happen in Greece or in China because there the ingredient of 
looking to human betterment was not so omnipresent. Perhaps 
this has to do with the differences in the Judeo-Christian 
traditions and the religions of the East. Certainly by the time of 
Franklin and Jefferson these relations were articulated. 

It is, of course, not true that democratic institutions are needed 
for science to flourish. Thus, in the Japan of 1935, Yukawa made 
one of the great discoveries of physics. Today in the Soviet Union, 
quite unevenly, but quite seriously, great work in science. is 
underway. The young people in China, though few of us know 
this at first hand, are, with great humility and great sense of 
purpose, building up their scientific tradition. But no matter in 
what culture it occurs, the nature of science is essentially a 
democratic one and we should not underestimate the contagion 
and the power and the strength of the tradition which we have 
inherited: for just this is the measure of our responsibility. 

Although reading Jefferson today, we have a painful, nostalgic, 
and acute sense of the irrelevance of what he said, we do owe a 
surprising measure of our own democratic institutions to him, to 
his life, to his time. He expected that these institutions would 
change rather more than they have; he articulated the connection 
between a free society and the growth of knowledge and its 
application to the alleviation of illness, hunger, tyranny, and 
superstition. [.. . ] 

Jefferson was clear that, as the basis of all democratic institu- 
tions, citizens were informed, were responsible for their conduct, 
and shared, with all variations, some common sense of beauty and 
of virtue. It is in the words, informed and responsible, that we find our 
troubles. The problem of being informed, that is, the problem of 
adequate communication is today one which needs all our help. 
Communication is difficult because the things we took for granted 
are not true today; communication is difficult because the world is 
not only large, but accessible, so that it is on our minds and 
consciences, as it should be. One of the things we are learning is 
that the teaching needed in this time is, as it has always been, a 
difficult intellectual job; we cannot teach things only as they were 
learned, for that is too hard; nor can we teach them only as they 


142 


The Power to Act 


apply, for that is too superficial. We must teach them for the truth 
that is in them, because it is that truth that is beautiful. We know 
that the job of teaching, the use of every kind of medium, the 
honest sharing of what is known and thought and loved, is a 
problem to which we must devote more and better resources. We 
know that in the world of the future what the French call 
permanent education is here to stay, and that no one will ever be 
through, or, rather, that no one need ever be through, and that 
many men will not be through with devoting a substantial part of 
their life, their time, their heart to learning more. 

This ideal of an open, accessible world of knowledge, open and 
connected, is one which will have to be fought for. It is threatened 
by the cheap and the vulgar; it is threatened by all restrictions on 
freedom of communication, such as those that the Chinese 
Communist government and our own have collaborated to erect 
between our two countries; it is not a job for one luncheon or one 
hour. [ . . . The most dangerous errors are made when we imagine 
and act on the basis of what we might know, instead of knowing 
something and recognizing where it stops. [... ] 

In addition to knowledge, there is another requirement of 
democratic institutions, if they are to work, if they are to grow and 
change with the times: the power to act. The power to act is 
coupled with responsibility for actions. This possibility of action is 
never complete, never always exercised rightly; yet it must be very 
widespread, and in terms of laws and institutions, potentially 
quite universal. Let us look at two current constellations of 
questions: peace and social justice. 

[ . .. ]Weall know that just in this country the colored people, the 
permanently unemployed, the young, the ill, the old, the men and 
women living as prisoners in their ugly cities, all are ill cared for 
by our institutions and our practices, which have been made evil 
just by the powers derived from science. They could all be 
remedied. It is clear that our institutions are not nearly adequate 
to receive the great resources of human warmth and dedication 
immanent in our young people. It is clear that our institutions are 
not yet adequate to let men and women do what they would to 
play a responsible part in the betterment and ennobling and 
beauty of our society. That is one reason why we abdicate to sucha 
dismal extent to the one thing whose institutional basis is 
hypertrophic in our society: the dollar. 


143 


Uncommon Sense 


There is another aspect of social justice even greater than our 
injustices at home: the injustice between our land and other lands 
and peoples. We all know with what care such matters must be 
touched, because we are dealing here not just with the creation of 
economies, constitutions, and universities. We are in the begin- 
ning and in the end dealing with people, who must form their 
lives, in some way, in the light of the awesome example of 
European society, yet in their own interests, from where they are 
and not from where we might think they ought to be. Though it is 
hard, though our record shows much bad as well as good, we 
cannot ignore or reject the disparity between the poor and the rich 
without corrupting our own life, without endangering its rightness. 
We cannot ignore them without that danger, because of the 
problem of peace and the problem of war. Here most of us feel 
powerless; most of us, only by a certain rugged, unyielding 
tension, are aware of our responsibility to the whole future of 
man. 

In these times, in these years, the atom bomb and nuclear 
weapons preside over our anxieties. This is an accident. It was, of 
course, done by design, but it was an accident that it could have 
been done when it was. The knowledge that we find of nature, 
whether it is of life, or of ourselves, or of chemistry, this 
knowledge could have produced, has produced, may yet produce 
very terrible instruments of major war different than the bombs, 
perhaps not more terrible, but just as ineluctable. These instru- 
ments will not really go away; I hope they will be dealt with. In a 
society which remembers what it has learned and how to do things 
that it has done, which is incredibly rich in potential and in fact, 
these weapons are as present as the desire to have them and to use 
them. We can only hope that they will increasingly appear 
irrelevant and thus in the end preposterous, that some day we will 
look back ashamed of how stupid we were. These are problems of 
all men and must be dealt with through an openness of 
communication to all men, an openness which is democratic and 
can only be promoted by an extension of democratic institutions 
feo: 

In 1946 we tried a little in sketching a plan for the control of 
atomic energy. We made a pilot suggestion of how that might go, 
stressing a deep community of knowledge, and common con- 
structive goals, as the right framework for averting the dangers of 


144 


The Power to Act 


atomic warfare. That was, of course, very narrow, yet it was 
categorically rejected by the Soviet Union and from talk with the 
delegates of the United Kingdom and France, it was clear that they 
had no great love for this affair, which would get them all mixed 
up with people with whom they did not much want to talk or 
work. Even the United States, which was never called on to see if it 
would fish or cut bait, would, as the published comments on 
Senatorial resistance to a ban on tests of atomic weapons suggest, 
have had very rough going if we had come to try to make an 
international community to deal with broad aspects of the atomic 
problem, and thus the problem of growing knowledge and 
power. 

What we do have is an increasingly wide and deep under- 
standing of the terror and horror and wrongness of war, of the 
irreversibility of the powers acquired by our knowledge of nature. 
We have one other resource, very slow to come and that is a 
recognition that there are in our common tradition some things 
that are relevant to this predicament: for one, our responsibility as 
men alone and as men banded together for the future, not just as 
something good for ourselves, or to preserve and love the past, 
but to preserve and cherish the future; for another, our under- 
standing that evil is the monopoly of no people, that we can and 
must see it in ourselves and even in our own country. For in this 
creation of new institutions on a large, perhaps even world-wide 
scale, we have the great problem of politics in its universal and 
most acute form, to reconcile our detestation of evil as we find it 
abroad and our love of those things we cherish, and to reconcile 
both of these with justice. This is the hardest and highest 
achievement of politics, surely as demanding, as difficult, as the 
creation of the institutions with which our own country has been 
blessed from the beginning. More than in the nuclear weapons, 
more than in the increased ability to cure or alleviate disease, 
more than in the revolutions in communications, travel, automa- 
tion, in abundant food and power, it is in this, and what it recalls 
to us of the strength and relevance of our tradition to a new time, 
that lies my hope, lies our hope, for the impact of the scientific 
revolution on the sources of democratic institutions. 


145 


Feeding son Peter, around 1942. (OMC) 


12 


A WORLD 
WITHOUT WAR 


1963 


[...] INAN IMPORTANT SENSE, the sciences have solved the problem 
of communicating with one another more completely than has any 
human enterprise. To retell an old story, thirty-five years ago, 
Dirac and I were in Gottingen. He was developing the quantum 
theory of radiation, and I was a student. He learned that I 
sometimes wrote a poem, and he took me to task, saying, “In 
physics we try to say things that no one knew before in a way that 
everyone can understand, whereas in poetry...” 

It is one of our old and consistent traditions to be concerned 
with the words we use, and with their purification, and thus with 
the concepts with which we describe nature. It was true of Newton, 
of Lavoisier, of Cauchy, of Mendel, and of course, in our day, of 
Einstein and of Bohr. [...] 

When we tell about our work, we explain what we have done 
and we tell what we have seen, whether we are describing a 
radioastronomical object, a new property of fiber bundles, or the 
behavior of men attempting to solve problems. We are prepared 
to believe that the explicit content of science has its roots in these 
accounts of action, which are often factual, but often fore- 
shortened and synoptic, because they are cast in terms which 
scientific traditions have established long ago. 

Among us there is surely a great and appropriate variation in 
how we describe this foundation for the objectivity of our 
knowledge, and for the lack of ambiguity in the terms we use to 
tell of it. Of course, there is an even wider latitude in what we 
think of the reasons for the success of science, in what attributes of 


147 


Uncommon Sense 


the world of nature in which we find ourselves underlie the 
manifestations of order which are our business. Why can we work 
on the same table and with the same test tube when we cannot 
have the same melancholy or the same resolution? Why does so 
much of the order of the natural world find its expression in 
number and more abstract mathematical structure? 

[...] The foundation for scientific knowledge precludes much 
that is an essential part of man’s life. One cannot be a very effective 
scientist if he is a practicing solipsist. We cannot expect to describe 
a common world of introspection by telling people what we have 
done and what we have seen, though we probably can, and 
increasingly will, describe elements of behavior which may have 
some correspondence to our inner world. Among these things of 
which we cannot talk without some ambiguity, and in which the 
objective structure of the sciences will play what is often a very 
minor part, but sometimes an essential one, are many questions 
which are not private, but which are common questions, and 
public ones: questions of the arts, the good life, the good society. 
There is no reason why we should come to these with a greater 
consensus or a greater sense of valid relevant experience than any 
other profession. They need reason, and-they need a preoccupa- 
tion with consistency, but only insofar as the scientist’s life has 
analogies with the artist’s—and in important ways it does—only 
insofar as the scientist’s life is in some way a good life, and his 
society a good society, have we any professional credentials to 
enter these discussions, and not primarily because of the objec- 
tivity of our communication and our knowledge. It is doubtful 
that we have a special qualification for these matters, and even 
more doubtful that our professional practices should disqualify 
us, or that we should lose interest and heart in preoccupations 
which have ennobled and purified men throughout history, and 
for which the world has great need today. 

[...] The constant concern within the scientific enterprise to 
purify and refine our language is, of course, a sort of parody of 
what we are all about. Scientists do not really do this except in 
moments of crisis, or in order to make way for something very 
new and deep. We come to our new problems full of old ideas and 
old words, not only the inevitable words of daily life, but those 
which experience has shown fruitful over the years. This is an 
inevitable approach to the new; when it is not too new, it gets by. 


148 


A World Without War 


The understanding of scientific knowledge, however, is a very 
different thing from being the recipient of a communication. 
There is an element of action inseparable from understanding: to 
question, to try, to apply, to adapt, to ask new questions, to see if 
one understands, and to test what one has been told. We need, at 
times, to talk about the sources and the springs of this action, 
without which communication would provide the fuel pipes, the 
electrical wiring, the transmission of a car, but not the combustion 
which gives it power and life. 


We do not talk of this very well: imagination, play, curiosity, 
invention, action, these are all involved. They are indeed only 
rarely all combined, and supplemented by skepticism and 
criticism, in any one man in any one moment; one of the charms 
of the scientific enterprise is how deficient we can be in many of 
these qualities and still play some meaningful part in it. 

We know that we love the old words, the old imagery, and the 
old analogies. We keep them for more and more unfamiliar and 
more and more unrecognizable things. Think of “wave,” “in- 
formation,” “relativity.” We know that one can explore and study 
the springs of the movement of science, that it is a fit if very 
difficult subject of study. Today at least we are not able to talk 
about it very well, not at all as well as we can talk of molecules or 
galaxies, or even of the effective definition of the words that we 
use. Yet without a living engagement there is no understanding 
and there is no life of science. We know that we cannot command 
this, or perhaps even learn it, except by apprenticeship, by 
following what others have done, and by listening to the 
mischievous voices of adventure and play and exploration and 
doubt with which we greet a new experience or a new communi- 
cation. This has very much to do with what we can in practice and 
honesty mean by the unity of science. Think, for instance, of 
contemporary mathematics. Up to our time, it has been the 
experience of our enterprise that there have been a good number 
of men who combined creation and wide knowledge of the 
mathematics of their day with a lively interest in those elements of 
the natural sciences in which this mathematical order might be 
embodied. This conversation, as a lively mutual understanding, is 
rather thin today. It is not rare to find a physical scientist who will 
hear of some beautiful new result—in algebra, for instance, or 
topology—with pleasure, with amazement, and with admiration. 


149 


Uncommon Sense 


It is unlikely, though, that he will be deeply engaged by it and try 
to see how it affects other things he may have known, or thought 
to know. It is also true that many mathematicians will accept with 
a certain interest that there are in nature two neutrinos which have 
different properties, or that astronomers believe that they may be 
witnessing evidence of very massive gravitational implosion in 
other galaxies. It is good that we still do tell each other these 
pieces of news, but I would hope that the century-long tradition of 
a felt sense of reciprocal relevance between mathematics and 
natural science soon again find itself embodied in many of us, or, 
far more plausibly, in our successors. 

Thus between us in the scientific professions, there is a partly 
accidental quality to the effectiveness of our converse with one 
another, and thus to the effective unity of our view of the world. 
There are two reasons for deploring this. One is that past 
experience suggests so strongly that among the sciences there are 
elements of relevance and mutual enlightenment which make 
such converse an essential part of deep and rapid progress; the 
other is that we regret for ourselves what we cannot really tell 
them. This is, of course, a reflection, within the internal society of 
the scientific enterprise, of a situation that characterizes our 
relations with human societies as a whole, with the society within 
which we are embedded, and that leaves us with problems, some 
very grave, and by no means all clearly soluble, having to do with 
the communication and comprehension of scientific knowledge. 
These problems rest on human weakness and limitation; but 
more specifically they rest on at least three features of the scientific 
enterprise which it has in common with the world in which its 
whole action takes place: size and saturation, growth and change, 
and specialization. [...] 

Growth and change imply size, and growth and change are very 
deep in the nature of scientific enterprise. Without them we would 
not recognize the rooms in which we were living, or what our days 
were all about. 

As for specialization, it is what sharpens our tools and our 
words, and is the instrument of penetrating deeper and farther 
into the world of nature. 

We can and must live with these problems. Some of us will 
know one thing, some fewer will know many things, and the unity 
of our knowledge, its freedom from contradiction and _ its 


150 


A World Without War 


important and often very deep common relevance, will not 
preclude, but will be enriched by the great and blessed diversity of 
man. 

The limits on the communication and comprehension of 
scientific knowledge which we find among ourselves have their 
analogies in the related but vaster limitations that we have in our 
external relations with those who are not yet, or not ever, involved 
in the scientific enterprise. The first of these is with the young, 
those who may be entering the life of science, and perhaps also, 
perhaps even more importantly, those who may not. [...] We 
have to express an appreciation to those who have been studying 
and practicing the teaching of the sciences in the schools and 
colleges, so that first sight shall not repel, and the institutions not 
resist the natural curiosity and love and joy of the experience, but 
open it, so that as many as can will have an opportunity to 
discover some trait of nature, to see with welcome some sure sign 
of order in nature, with their own hands and their own heads. 

[...] We mostly take it for granted, though it is not quite 
obvious, that we would like to have this opening of the world of 
science, this induction into it, effective not only for those who will 
be of our company, but for as many as may be of all the young, 
and the newly young who are willing to study. There are two 
reasons why we hold this view. On the one hand we increasingly 
feel the need for companionship and for help. I am not speaking 
of the patronage of science, which has not been ungenerous in the 
past years, though it may come to be so. I have in mind rather what 
we all know, that more rapidly than ever before, the sciences have 
been embodied in new technologies, and that these bring on the 
scene new powers and possibilities, now a new need, now a new 
opportunity. These needs and opportunities often are relevant to 
what in us, and in most men, are the most deeply held convictions 
of what is right and good, convictions rooted in a long tradition, 
and integrally a part of our sensibility. Most of us are committed 
to preserving life and health where that is possible. Increasingly, 
and largely because of the effects during the last centuries of 
technology and industrialization on its modes, we are committed 
to limiting, if possible, to eliminating, war. We are committed to 
reducing labor and drudgery, and not only the hard labor of the 
field and the mine and the galley, but the dull labor of the factory. 
We are now clearly engaged in a great enterprise testing whether 


151 


Uncommon Sense 


we can live in a world in which war does not play its traditional 
part, an enterprise in which not only long-inherited human 
institutions, but even older, even other more permanent human 
attitudes of anger, hatred, solidarity, self-importance, self-right- 
eousness, which war has fed, can permit the change. We are in this 
too deeply to let the good news or the bad news of the day or 
month or year affect or limit our hope and, where it is possible for 
us, our engagement in this great, open, unsettled action of man’s 
history. 

With the preservation of life too, and along with it the alteration 
and automation of work, we are concerned not only with the 
inadequacy of our institutions, which were framed for a very 
different world, but with our attitude toward the meaning and 
value and nature and quality of human life, so largely in our past 
built on productive work as its foundation. Here in this country we 
see the mixed fruits of medical and engineering technology first 
with the young and the old. It is reasonable to expect that they will 
spread, and that they will characterize many other technologically 
developed societies. I know of the concern that even the saving of 
children’s lives may have created problems with which no one can 
cope, that have some bearing on the growth and size of the 
human society. 

I do not suppose that a thorough knowledge of science, which is 
essentially unavailable to all of us, would. really be helpful to our 
friends in other ways of life in acting with insight and courage in 
the contemporary world. Such a knowledge would perhaps be 
good in developing a greater recognition of the quality of our 
certitudes, where we are dealing with scientific knowledge that 
really exists, and the corresponding quality of hesitancy and 
doubt when we are assessing the probable course of events, the 
way in which men will choose and act, to ignore or to apply [.. . ] 
the technological possibilities recently opened. Some honest and 
remembered experience of the exploration of nature, of dis- 
covery, and of the way in which we talk to one another about these 
things, might indeed be helpful. It would remove barriers and 
encourage an effective and trusting converse between us, and 
make more fruitful the indispensable role of friendship. [ . . . ] We 
have a modest part to play in history, and the barriers between us 
and the men of affairs, the statesmen, the artists, the lawyers, with 


152 


A World Without War 


whom we should be talking, could perhaps be markedly reduced 
if more of them knew a little of what we were up to, knew it with 
pleasure and some confidence; and if we were prepared to 
recognize both the important analogies between what moves us to 
act and to know, and the extraordinary and special quality of our 
experience and our communication about it with one another. 
ask 

The other reason for hoping that young people who will not be 
professional scientists, and older people who are young in heart, 
could have a greater scientific literacy and some limited experi- 
ence, as ours also is limited, is that we know that the experience of 
scientific discovery is a good and beautiful experience, and an 
unforgettable one. We know that this is true even of little 
discoveries, and we understand that with the great ones it is 
shattering. It was on his seventy-first birthday that Einstein said to 
me, “When it has once been given a man to do some sensible 
things, afterwards his life is a little different.” It seems not really as 
an act of arrogance but simply human, and not in the pejorative 
sense of the word, to wish these pleasures for as many of our 
fellows as can have them. 

In our world, many things that men do rather naturally, that 
they have learned to do long, long ago, have become professions, 
have become part of the market. I think of song and sport and the 
arts, the practical arts and the fine arts. None of these is without 
discipline; and although they are very different from those that 
lead to the sciences, I would be slow to rate them easier. Yet 
people sing and make sport and practice the arts quite apart from 
the market, quite apart from a career. It would be a poorer, 
thinner life without that. Though surely we will not all burst into 
song, or take to skis, or pick up a chisel or a brush, some of us 
have done some of these things, and some of us will. It seems a 
proper hope that in our education, both for the young, and for 
those, in growing number, who like us have kept a lifelong taste 
for it, we do what we can to open the life of science at least as wide 
as that of song and the arts. Not everybody will want our 
pleasures, as among us not everyone can taste the others’, as even 
we Cannot expect an astronomer and a biologist fully to share 
what each has. We think of science as a very high and lovely part of 
life which, with all its discipline, is still directly responsive to a very 


153 


Uncommon Sense 


deep human need. We all know this, and all share it; but each of 
us, I think, must be free to use his own words to sing its praise, 
even to describe it. 

We may be seeing a time in which war will come to play a 
smaller and an increasingly trivial part in man’s life. We may be 
coming to a time in which, for growing parts of the world, the 
production of goods will require a much more minor commit- 
ment of human effort and life, and the market will leave men with 
a far greater measure of freedom. [...] For all this it will clearly 
not be enough that we preserve the integrity of our communi- 
cation and comprehension, either among us, or with our fellows, 
but it is the least that we can do. 


154 


Robert Oppenheimer and General Groves at 
Ground Zero in 1945. (UPI Photo) 


13 


L’INTIME ET LE 
COMMUN—THE 


INTIMATE AND 
THE OPEN 


1964 


4S MY TITLE INDICATES, perhaps somewhat obscurely, I shall talk 
about one aspect of our life which may change very much in the 
times ahead, which has to do with how we will live tomorrow, 
“Comment vivre demain.” [...] I am aware, as we all are, but 
perhaps a little more sharply, that there is still an open question of 
whether we will live tomorrow, whether we can live through the 
threat to life and civilization. 

I think that when one comes to talk about tomorrow, there is a 
sense that the book of the past is closed, that one has a fresh page 
to write on. There is a sense of delight and hope that one is free of 
all that has happened, and able to make it better. I know that in 
1945, after the war was over, not only in Europe, but in the Pacific, 
some of us met to talk about the future. We had a great sense that 
the terrors that had marked the preceding decade, that dreadful 
war, Hitler, blood and death, were past, that we were looking out 
at a future which was ours to hope. We even thought about atoms 
for peace; we thought about them much more gaily than is 
possible now. [... ] 

One has these moods as after a severe illness, a long con- 
valescence, after being in battle, and recovering from wounds, of 
ooking to the future, untrammelled by the past. What Baudelaire 
said of death, we think of tomorrow: “qui refait le lit aux gens 
oauvres et nus.” But it is not really so. Our morality, our politics, 
yur law, our art, and even our revolutionary science are rooted in 


157 


Uncommon Sense 


the past and the present; they do not determine, but they 
condition, what can happen. 

Indeed, the pages are not blank that we have to write.on, that we 
have to read. To me, it is not clear, not in the least, whether we 
shall live tomorrow. I think it only reasonable to welcome the fact 
that we have lived for twenty years without great war and to 
welcome the increasingly wide and deep recognition of the 
danger that lies in war. This recognition has been made formally 
manifest in some arrangements between the Soviet Union, the 
United States, and other powers—the test ban, a few other things, 
and even in the very existence of the Disarmament Commission 
which continues to meet in Geneva. We can very much welcome 
the substantive changes in military policy of the great powers, 
which reject any simplistic view, such as the rather dangerous one 
of massive retaliation. But the dangers continue varied and acute, 
and both they and the measures to reduce them have much to do 
with how we will live in the future. 

There are many other things that we cannot erase from the 
pages when we look toward the future. Now is a time when we are 
aware, I think more acutely than for a long time, perhaps ever, of 
social injustice in all its forms. We are aware of the fact that 
freedom, even by the modest definition which we accept, is by no 
means universal in the world; there are acute injustices within 
countries. I think of the United States, where the signs of this, 
disturbing, are nevertheless also necessary and encouraging. Now 
is a time when there is a new sense of injustice, again welcome, but 
full of danger, between nations. I think of the fact that it is just a 
quarter of a century ago that the planes and tanks moved eastward 
from Germany to Poland, ushering in a disaster which is a 
disgrace to our civilization and our heritage, from which we have 
still not recovered. In trying to help, or in watching other people 
try to help themselves, the cultures with which they have lived, 
fragile, unstable cultures, are being destroyed, and the great 
strong western culture of which we are the representatives often 
has very shallow roots to replace what has been lost. 

Other people would make different lists. I think of the fact that 
we have not come at all to grips with the humanization of work in 
a technical and automated society. We do not know yet what this 
will mean for us. I think of the fact that all about us there are, 
there may always be, signs of savagery and hatred, hardly 


158 


L’Intime et le Commun-The Intimate and the Open 


compatible with what we profess and what we hope. I think of 
Proust’s phrase, that “indifference to the suffering of others . . . is 
the one true permanent form of evil.” [.. . ] 

There is complementary danger in foreseeing the future, and 
trying to foretell it. We are often convinced that yesterday’s 
surprises will determine what happens tomorrow. We are often 
convinced that if we only make it go more so as it has gone in the 
last year or decade, we will see the future. But for good or ill, 
tomorrow is novelty. It is the novelty of chance, things that come 
together in a way one cannot predict. Even more, it is the novelty 
of human imagination, love and design, dedication and purpose. 
What makes tomorrow tomorrow is that it cannot be foretold 
today; it is not implied by today. 

So, doing our best and drawing on history and _ political 
economy, on what we know of psychology, we shall probably miss 
the point. We will give a varied, a plural, an incoherent account, I 
hope illuminating, I am sure honest, assessments of what we see 
today, what we see in the immediate past, that will limit, will help 
to determine—but will not determine—what will happen tomor- 
row. 

My title is an ambiguous one. The word “common,” “le mot 
‘commun’” means what we share, what is for all men or for many 
men. It also means “vulgar,” “vulgaire.” This is a comment on the 
time. One ought to have a word which means “humanitas” and 
does not mean “vulgar.” [.. . ] 

I have in mind in using the word “common,” “commun,” that 
it refers to what is general, accessible common knowledge, neither 
secret, nor restricted to an elite; knowledge that is not private to a 
man, to a family, a profession, or to any of thé many communities 
which span this earth. 

[...] We should be aware that cultures differ in no way more 
radically than in where they decide that something is public 
business, the business of the village or of the community, and 
whether it is the individual’s. Even the most elementary physical 
aspects of life are assigned public or private, solitary or familiar 
roles, in a way which varies from place to place, perhaps described 
by anthropologists, but not easily understood. It is so extreme that 
students of traditional Japan have found in the absence—almost 
total absence—of private life, in the totally public character of 
human existence in Japan, the origin of the custom of suicide for 


99 66 


159 


Uncommon Sense 


reasons of honor. It was an isolated community, with no place to 
go, no place to hide, no place to flee, no place to be private, no 
escape, besides death. In general, I think it is true that the more 
isolated and the more primitive communities have had a great 
common culture and reserved less for private life than we are used 
to or can easily imagine. 

What should be private? What should be public? What should 
be kept secret? [.. . ] 

The fact that knowledge is open, as it normally is in scientific 
things, for instance, or as it normally is in art, the fact that it is 
public, printed, does not really mean that it is shared. It is very 
much a characteristic of our time, of how vast the world is, of how 
fast it changes, of its important and beautiful powers of speciali- 
zation and language, that all channels are overloaded, and all 
spirits struggle for light, clarity, and depth against the flood of the 
information, the creation, the discovery, and the invention that is 
available. This struggle one must not lose. I have often, among 
many others, spoken of this, and especially as it affects the life of 
the arts and the sciences. We all know that something can be and 
is being done about it by education, above all by the sense of 
lifelong education and learning, by teaching in all its manifold 
forms, by the catalysis of friendship and love. We all know that 
these help to keep our spirits at the same-time open, so that we are 
not shut off from what is open knowledge, and still to keep them 
honest and intimate and very deep. [... | 

Science at its best, and really inherently, is both intimate and 
open. It has a remarkable sunniness, a warm quality. It has, of 
course, its rivalries, its agonies, its struggles, its partisans, but not 
really, I believe, any barriers of any apparatus of secrecy. There is 
nothing in it, nothing even marginally relevant to it, involving 
hate, or anything dark or evil. It has no way to suppress and no 
way to exploit. Of course, it has its sorrows, but so does all life. I 
remember what Wolfgang Pauli said when he was very young; he 
was a very early genius. When he was studying in Copenhagen, 
Niels Bohr’s wife asked: “Pauli, Pauli, why are you so unhappy?” 
And he looked at her angrily, and said: “Why shouldn’t I be 
unhappy? I can’t understand the anomalous Zeeman effect.” In 
this sense, science is not always happy, but compared to all other 
life, I think it is. 


160 


L’Intime et le Commun-The Intimate and the Open 


Of this field, I think one can always prophesy in the sense that 
we will know more, and usually that one can identify the growing 
tips of knowledge, that one will find as many new questions as 
answers, that one will be amazed, and when things are really 
good, shocked and filled with wonder and rather shaken. [.. . ] 

Yet once it Comes to the practical powers that come from 
science and its techniques, there are quite other notes sounded. 
Here prophecy is relevant and here, I think, we ought to spend 
our time seeing what we can make of the future. Here there is also 
a sense of responsibility for the future, for choice. Prophecy and 
responsibility are related by complementary modes; the one says: 
“this will happen; it must”; the other says: “this should happen; 
and I will work for it.” [.. . ] ; 

[The ideal of an open world] is very old, but was newly sharp- 
ened and given new meaning some twenty years ago, when the 
first atomic bombs were being developed. At that time, in mid-war, 
I think there were two reasons that one went into this. The first was 
Hitler. I think it was a good reason. The second was also, I think, a 
good reason, and that is that this development would change the 
world, the world of Ypres and Verdun, of Guernica and Warsaw. 
One hoped that it would be changed for the better. Later, in our 
country, as it was clear that Hitler would be defeated, there were I 
think two views of the future, probably shaded and mingled. One 
was that these instruments, if they worked, would help keep the 
peace. The other was that they would lead, that they should lead, 
to an international scientific and technical collaboration, which 
would serve to control their dangers, which would help to 
transcend national powers to prepare and to make war, national 
powers to isolate people and engulf them in lies, as Hitler had 
done, and Stalin. There were many who thought such thoughts 
and hoped such hopes. One man saw somewhat more vividly how 
deep the changes would have to be and struggled to bring them 
about. He was Niels Bohr. Bohr in 1939, after years of work on the 
structure of the atom, came to the conclusion that making bombs 
from fission was a pretty tough job. When, in 1943, he escaped 
from Denmark to England, he learned from Chadwick and Sir 
John Anderson about the bomb development operations taking 
place in the United States. This made a very great impression on 
Bohr, because unknown to him, great industries had been 


161 


Uncommon Sense 


developed to make the bombs; he was persuaded that they would 
succeed. He had a great vision then. He understood that these 
weapons, if they could be made, could be made bigger, and could 
be made plentifully, and that their secret accumulation, their 
accumulation in closed societies, societies that had no converse 
with one another, would pose a threat to the security of the world 
and all its peoples which would be intolerable. He thought an 
atomic arms race, and he was sure that the Soviet Union would be 
the major protagonist, would be intolerable. He did not think that 
we could live through it, as we have for two decades. He did not 
want us to, and in that he was certainly right. But he understood 
immediately that this could not be prevented just by signing 
treaties saying: “We won’t make such things,” or even by having 
commissions of experts meet from time to time to control the 
observance of these treaties. He thought that any real security 
would have to lie in a deep change in the world, a change which 
first of all implied that nations would not try to destroy each other, 
or to conquer one another, and which then implied that all 
nations would be open to each other, insofar as what went on in 
them would concern the security and the welfare of men. Nothing 
of import to that security and welfare should be kept secret. 

Bohr knew, of course, that there are moments in a man’s life 
when things have to be private and secret. Essentially he knew 
from his own experience, as we all do, that when we approach a 
problem, we usually make mistakes. The only way to try out a 
course of action, the only way to see whether an interpretation of 
nature is right, is to talk about it, and not to be held responsible 
for advocating something that one has proposed. This is essential 
in government; this is essential in any group that has respon- 
sibility. Of course it has a deeper and richer meaning in the life of 
the individual man. 

Bohr thus hoped that the allies, the United States, the United 
Kingdom, would approach the Soviet Union—he regarded this as 
the vital step—to see whether they could not be interested in 
attempting a new form of international and national life in which 
these weapons would not be made, in which things would be 
open, and in which we would renounce the use of the weapons, 
the weapons themselves, and offer to help with all the technical 
enterprises which might open up from this and other branches of 
science, working in cooperation in a world in which there would 


162 


L’Intime et le Commun-The Intimate and the Open 


be no secrets, where secrets would indeed be illegal. Bohr talked 
about this with Roosevelt, apparently successfully, and with 
Churchill, obviously not successfully, and with many of their 
advisors. [...] As it turned out, Roosevelt and Churchill— 
Roosevelt by then no longer well—partly misunderstood, partly 
distrusted and indeed thoroughly rejected this suggestion. The 
efforts that were made to revive it after Roosevelt’s death also came 
to nothing whatever. 

It is hard, looking back, to take a very sanguine view of what 
Stalin would have thought of it. Bohr knew enough of dictator- 
ships to assess the great part that secrecy had played, and would 
have to play, in their maintenance. He knew that a contempt for 
truth really played a very large part in the whole nature of the 
Soviet regime, and its stability. He still would have liked to work 
for an open world. 

Today, twenty years have passed, and it seems to me—I speak 
with great timidity of this—that although the political grounds 
within the Soviet Union for being troubled about an open world 
have lessened, they are still quite far from being trivial. I think that 
probably the military grounds are gradually being eroded by 
technical intelligence. Of course, today less than ever is this a 
problem for just two countries alone. 

We may live with the arms race and deterrence, with its very 
great and rather incalculable dangers, dangers of error, of 
accident, of folly. Perhaps the time to avert it has passed, or never 
was; other great catastrophes or changes will have to come. If we 
should ever move, and I think we should not at all give up hope, 
to a less dangerous world, it will indeed have to be an open one. 
From the fact that there are no bombs, it will follow that there will 
also be no great national wars, and no hopes of conquest or 
dominion by force or stealth, and perhaps not even any sanc- 
tioned and even hallowed hatreds of one nation against another. 
There are, even today I think, some limited, very slight signs; I 
think not so much of the formal agreements, limited and tentative, 
symbolic though they are, and welcome though they are, as of 
the obvious intention of the armed powers to reduce the 
probability that they will find themselves engaged in this great 
new slaughter. 

The other side is that there have been some changes, obvious 
when you think about it, but not much described, in the status of 


163 


Uncommon Sense 


the privacy of an individual. It has always been an essential part of 
our lives; and increasingly, as the world has grown, and grown 
larger and faster and louder and windier, we have treasured it. 
Privacy of the person, of the family, of the group of colleagues, of 
the profession, anything that gave intimacy, deep meaning, 
friendship, simplicity to human intercourse. We need it to make 
our errors without disaster; we need it even to find out what we 
mean, to talk with one another freely, and for the health of the 
human spirit. We have always needed it very deeply. 

In conflict, privacy is always invaded. There is the “police 
dossier,” the private detective, the informer, the practices of 
seizure and search and sometimes of torture, whether for power, 
for knowledge, for battle, for money, for love. The most benign 
techniques can be used to invade privacy. Let me give one 
example: for medicine, in order to find out what is happening in a 
man, very small capsules which will for instance measure acidity 
and transmit by radio what they have found, have been devel- 
oped. These are very fine for finding out where a man is, and they 
are very fine for finding out other things about him; you can 
conceal them, so he swallows them without knowing. Another 
example: the tracers, the radioactive products which are the first 
early major scientific and technical by-products of large-scale 
atomic energy, are very readily available and are frequently used 
to follow people when one wants to know where they have gone, 
and does not want to be seen following them. And so it goes. The 
circuitry that has been developed for rocketry, micro-miniaturi- 
zation, information retrieval, have led to the possibilities of 
surveillance which do not reveal themselves to the victim, which 
make it possible to follow, to see, to hear, and often to interpret 
what is going on. These of course are primarily things that one 
would expect to find in intelligence and counterintelligence 
agenices. But they are for sale, and cheaply and abundantly and 
more and more effectively. I do not mean to pretend that there are 
not countermeasures, or that all devices work all the time; but 
generally speaking, privacy is not something that you can have, 
unless-you have rather a good technical apparatus to protect you, 
or unless you are just not interesting, and nobody wants to find 
out about you. There are also medical applications; there are 
drugs which make you say what you would not say if you had not 
taken them; there are effective uses of subliminal perception 


164 


L’Intime et le Commun-The Intimate and the Open 


which make you behave in ways in which you would not if you 
were aware of what was being done to you. This is a very rapidly 
growing affair, and so far in our country rather completely 
uncontrolled. 

There are of course, and with us this is very important, legal 
restrictions on what you can do with evidence like this in a court of 
law. You cannot introduce evidence obtained in many of these 
ways as valid evidence in legal proceedings. There are constitu- 
tional guarantees in most countries of the western world against 
unwarranted search or seizure or detention. But the guarantees 
are of course far from universal; and they are not relevant to the 
private feuds and struggles of a pluralistic society. I do not know 
how widespread and how subject to control these possibilities of 
invasion of privacy will turn out to be; perhaps rather little. Of 
course, no one may be sure that he is without privacy. But if aman 
is interesting, if he has an enemy or is a trouble, I think he will not 
be very sure, unless he is so well equipped, technically, that his 
actions, his word, his appearance, and what one may conclude 
from all of this will be unknown to others. This inspires in most 
people a certain revulsion. 

A decade ago, the Atomic Energy Commission in my country 
did investigate and hold hearings on my trustworthiness; when the 
proceedings were published, many said that my life had become 
an open book. That was not really true. Most of what meant most 
to me never appeared in those hearings. Perhaps much was not 
known; certainly much was not relevant. I did have occasion then 
to think of what it might have been like to be an open book. I have 
come to the conclusion that if in fact privacy is an accidental 
blessing, and can be taken from you, if it is worth anyone’s 
trouble, for a few dollars, and a few hours, it may still not be such 
a bad way to live. We most of all should try to be experts in the 
worst about ourselves; we should not be astonished to find some 
evil there, that we find so very readily abroad and in all others. We 
should not, as Rousseau tried to, comfort ourselves that it is the 
responsibility and the fault of others, that we are just naturally 
good; nor should we let Calvin persuade us that despite our 
obvious duty we are without any power, however small and 
limited, to deal with what we find of evil in ourselves. In this 
knowledge, of ourselves, of our profession, of our country—our 
often beloved country—of our civilization itself, there is scope for 


165 


Uncommon Sense 


what we most need: self knowledge, courage, humor, and some 
charity. These are the great gifts that our tradition makes to us, to 
prepare us for how to live tomorrow. 


166 


At the San Diego Zoo around 1938. Second 
from the right Robert Oppenheimer; on his 
right Luis Alvarez who worked with 
Oppenheimer on the bomb project and later 
was to testify against him. On the very left: 
Robert Serber. (OMC) 


14 


TO LIVE WITH 
OURSELVES 


1965 


[...] | USE THE WORD “SCIENCE” to mean really all those areas of 
human knowledge, still a small part of human life, all those areas 
of human knowledge where we can tell each other what we have 
done and what we have found. This knowledge is historical, 
sociological, economic, mathematical, anthropological, astrono- 
mical, among many other forms. It is in just such fields that you 
have been working. I know that the word “humanities” can be 
used to talk about the whole range of expression that men give to 
their experience. I think the analogies that bind archaeology to 
astronomy are not very much more remote than those that bind 
anthropology to astronomy; I speak to you in this sense as fellow 
scientists. 

You know that great precocity in science is quite rare; there is no 
Mozart; and this is not entirely astonishing, because you have to 
get a lot of partly wrong ideas in your head before you can find out 
that they are wrong, and that is the beginning of scientific inquiry. 
It is true that Galileo, though many of the stories about him are 
not true, was really eighteen years old when, using his pulse as a 
clock, he established the synchronism of the pendulum, saw that 
the time of the oscillations did not depend on the amplitude of the 
oscillations. This was with a lamp. that hung in the cathedral at 
Pisa; then he went home and tried to build somewhat less bizarre 
clocks of his own, with which he later learned to time the water 
clocks that he used in establishing the law of falling bodies. 

Galileo’s life shows that a man is much more than a scientist, 
even when he is wholly and devotedly a scientist. His life was not 


169 


Uncommon Sense 


free of sorrows. The later days, when he lived in some fear and 
suffered the great indignity of his abjuration, and alienation from 
many of his friends, were certainly sad years. But looking over his 
life, rereading what he wrote, even very close to the end, there is a 
quality which I believe to be true of science in the making: a great 
sunniness in the act of finding out new things, things that he had 
not quite expected, things that reflected deeply on beliefs long 
held, and that pointed both in hope and in mystery to the 
future. 

[...] Whatever trouble life holds for you, that part of your lives 
which you spend finding out about things, things that you can tell 
others about, and that you can learn from them, that part will be 
essentially a gay, a sunny, a happy life, not untouched by rivalry, 
maybe not even untouched by an occasional regret that somebody 
else thought of something that you should have thought of first, 
but on the whole, one of those nobler parts of the human 
experience. This makes it true that the life of the scientist is, along 
with the life of the poet, soldier, prophet, and artist, deeply 
relevant to man’s understanding of his situation and his view of 
his destiny. 

It was in 1935 that I took off a little time to go with my brother 
and a friend to a primitive ranch that we have high in the Sangre 
de Cristo Mountains not far from Santa Fe. That summer we 
decided that we should have a look at the San Juan Mountains; so 
we saddled up our horses and rode, in what was a rather naive 
straight line, to where we were going, and it was not until two 
nights later, in what was then a rather poor town, Tierra Amarilla 
near the banks of the Chama, in northwestern New Mexico that I 
got to open the letter. The letter told me of experiments that 
Milton White was conducting, and that had just reached a certain 
stage of clarity. He is now the director of the Pennsylvania- 
Princeton Accelerator in Princeton; but he was then a graduate 
student. We had talked to him about the fact that the law of force 
between two protons should not be exactly Coulomb’s law, the 
inverse square law. This was because by then we understood that 
around the protons there would be a charged cloud of electrons 
and positrons. These were small deviations, and the technique 
that White used would indeed have taken him a long time to find 
these; only much more recently and by much, much subtler 
approaches have they been confirmed. But he had found some- 


170 


To Live with Ourselves 


thing. He had found that there were enormously more large angle 
scatterings of protons by the protons in Hydrogen than the 
electrical forces could explain. This was the first clear demonstra- 
tion of nuclear forces between protons. That some such thing 
must exist was Clear for a long time because nuclei exist; but the 
very great strength of the forces, their short range, all were 
apparent from these first primitive experiments. 

This was one of the many times when the question, “how hard 
is matter?” got a new, fresh answer. At these distances and for 
these energies, matter was very much harder than had been 
known before. This was something Newton speculated about, 
and, talking about what holds the molecules of matter in place, he 
had spoken of the inconceivable hardness of these forces and the 
infinite hardness of these forces. This new discovery paralleled in 
some ways Rutherford’s discovery twenty-five years earlier of the 
existence of the atomic nucleus, and paralleled very much studies 
that are now in progress, and still not conclusive, to see how hard 
the nucleons themselves—the ingredients of nuclei, protons and 
neutrons—are. Do they have something very hard in them? We do 
not know; we have not seen it and it is probably not there. 

Rutherford’s discovery was not, in the first instance, his. You 
may know this story. He had spent two decades unscrambling the 
radioactive radiations and the chemical properties of the heavy 
elements that emitted these. In the course of this, he had gotten 
used to thinking that atoms were not very hard, not at all like 
Newton’s conjectured ones, not like the atom of classical atomists, 
because one of the radiations, the alpha particles, went through 
the atoms without doing very much of anything. They would 
gradually lose their energy, they would be very, very. slightly 
deflected, but they paid no attention to the atoms. They just 
treated them like mush. But Rutherford was not someone to leave 
well enough alone: he had a young student called Marsden, who 
seemed to need a doctorate; thus Rutherford gave him a problem 
which was not, to Rutherford’s mind, very promising. He said, 
“Why don’t you look and see whether alpha particles are ever 
deflected by really large angles? Do they ever really turn very 
much away from their path?” Marsden worked on that, and it did 
not take him very long. The equipment was very simple. He 
worked with Geiger; and they came back very shortly afterward 
and said to Rutherford, “The alpha particles are sometimes 


171 


Uncommon Sense 


scattered back at us.”? Rutherford said at that time, “This is the 
most incredible thing that’s ever happened to me. It is as though 
you fired a sixteen-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it 
turned and came backat you”: so radical was the notion that there 
was something hard at the center of the atom. Everyone had 
thought until then that there were electrons in an atom, that are 
not very hard, and cannot scatter an alpha particle, and that the 
positive charge was diffuse. This was not true. The positive charge 
was highly concentrated; the forces, as Rutherford figured out, 
were not nuclear forces; they were familiar electrical forces. It took 
Rutherford a year and a half, more or less, to figure out what it was 
that Marsden was observing, and to check it out by predicting how 
the scattering should depend on the atomic weight of the material, 
the angle of scattering, the energy of the alpha particle. In 1911 he 
came out with it, and that was of course the start of atomic 
physics. 

I remember that four years after the letter from Milton White I 
was back at Berkeley, and a colleague, Luis Alvarez, came to my 
room, very excited, and with a good deal of blood showing on his 
neck and little pieces of paper stuck to it to stop bleeding; and I 
asked him what was wrong. He said, “I have just been to the 
barber’s, and I read in the paper, uranium comes apart in two 
pieces when it is bombarded with neutrons!” This had just been 
discovered in Europe, and talked about by Bohr, who was then at 
the Princeton Institute. It again looked back into the past, because 
no one had taken seriously this kind of nuclear reaction, radically 
different from all those that had been studied. It looked to the 
future because, although neither Alvarez nor I could then foretell 
or be confident that there would be practical consequences, it 
occurred to us that this might have consequences of the gravest 
interest, gravest importance, and perhaps, I would say, greatest 
hope for man. 

The first time that I had anything like this happen to me is not 
recorded in my citations or biographies, but I remember it. I was 
a student at Godttingen, and it was the first time that something 
came over me which I had not thought about, which nobody else 
had talked to me about, and which I think, in that form, at that 
time, nobody knew. This had to do with what happens to a 
Hydrogen atom in an electric field. It had been discovered long 
before by Stark that the spectral lines are split and slightly 


172 


To Live with Ourselves 


displaced; and the new wave mechanics had given a quantitative 
and correct account of this; but when I tried to see what were the 
stationary states of a hydrogen atom in an electric field, states 
analogous to the ground state of the atom or one of its excited 
states, I found that there were not any and that puzzled me for a 
little. It need not have, because if you have a constant electric 
field, then the potential is represented by a straight line. On one 
side the potential is low for an electron; on the other high. As for 
the hydrogen atom, you may think of it schematically as making a 
deep hole around the position of the proton; the state of the 
hydrogen atom will have an energy that is matched far out where 
the potential is low. The reason that there are no stationary states 
is that the barrier, the high potential mountain which separates 
the two regions of low potential, is not completely opaque; when 
you take into account the wave nature of matter, no barrier is 
ever completely opaque. Thus there is a trickle of probability for 
the electron to emerge and fly off, and that is why the atom is not 
stable. This interested me because I thought it would have to do 
with the conduction of electricity in metals. The first application I 
made of it was to an effect which is not important, but amusing: 
you can pull electrons out of metals with an electric field; and I 
figured out how the current should vary with the electric field. 
When I came to Cal Tech, I found that Millikan and Lauritsen had 
discovered this law as an empirical law. 

That was not the important thing. The important thing was that 
people who had been worrying about nuclear physics realized that 
here was the solution to an old paradox of alpha decay. In alpha 
decay, a nucleus loses an alpha particle; its weight goes down by 
four units, its charge by two. If you bombard the daughter nucleus 
with those alpha particles, nothing happens except that they find 
an electric field. They almost never get back in. Here you have a 
situation in which the alpha particle has a repulsive field around 
the nucleus; obviously something attracts it because it stays in the 
nucleus for a while, so it may have an almost stationary state, 
when there is contact with the rest of the nucleus. Here again is a 
barrier; and the same laws describe the leakage through it. That 
was done by Gamow and Condon and Gurney. Even that was not 
very interesting; but it showed that particles could penetrate into 
nuclei when they did not have energy enough to come over the 
top, when they simply leaked through the barrier of the electrical 


173 


Uncommon Sense 


potential that repelled them. That led to two things: the first was 
insight into what makes the stars shine, because this is what goes 
on in the stars, in the sun and most other stars. It also led people 
to build accelerators, and get protons that could get close enough 
to nuclei to leak in, although it took a long while to get them fast 
enough so they would go over the top and fall in. Here again 
things that had been puzzling for a long time fell into place and, 
rather sharply, something new was open for the future, both in 
astrophysics and in the experimental breaking open of the field of 
nuclear physics. 

There are a number of such examples, even ‘in my life. The 
positron was more or less predicted, and it was found in 1932. 
Then we took quite seriously the question of what would electrons 
or gamma radiation do in cosmic rays, and saw that what would 
happen is that the light would make electron-positron pairs that 
would pass through matter. The electrons and positrons would in 
turn radiate and make gamma rays; starting with a high energy 
particle, one would very soon have an enormous family or cascade 
of particles. It was known that such things happened in the cosmic 
rays; this fit rather well. It had to fit. Yet there are lots of particles 
in cosmic rays, both positive and negative, that do not do this; 
they just do not make cascades. Such particles were not then 
known to exist in nature; so the success of this theory of cascades 
meant clearly that there were new objects in the cosmic radiation 
which men had not seen or identified before. 

We know today that there are hundreds of such objects, but 
only a few found in the cosmic rays. The last time that the cosmic 
rays taught us something new about the structure of matter was 
about fifteen years ago, when another unexpected discovery 
occurred. One would see, pointing up, two divergent tracks in a 
cloud chamber; that. was called a lambda, because it looked like 
one; or one would see a charged particle coming in and then, 
without any scattering, a different charged particle coming off and 
nothing else visible. These were obviously pictures of a neutral 
particle decaying into two charged ones, and of a charge particle 
decaying into a charged and a neutral one (the one you do not 
see). These were soon identified. One for instance could be a kind 
of meson, a kind called pi, and the other a proton. This 
immediately posed a very serious problem: here is an object, the 
neutral parent, which changes, though not very rapidly, since it 


174 


To Live with Ourselves 


has been travelling quite a while, into a proton and a meson. Why 
does it take so long? There is plenty of energy for this; both 
products move fast. There is no potential barrier; the decay is 
caused by a very weak force, very weak compared to electricity. 
Then how could you make a lambda, which is not a normal 
ingredient of matter, does not last very long, could not come in 
from outer space, how could you make it from the materials 
through which the cosmic rays pass, from the protons that they 
themselves are, and the material, air or lead plates or whatever 
things they traverse. If you could make it only so very slowly you 
would never see it. If you make it faster, why does it not come 
apart fast? These -questions led closer to some quite striking 
developments. One learned first that there are hierarchies of 
forces in this game, some a thousand billion to a million billion 
times weaker than others. The strong forces that are involved in 
producing these particles, then called strange, are very much 
stronger than those that produce the decays. One learns some- 
thing deeper, which took quite a while to sort out and is not fully 
sorted out today, and that is that the different order of forces have 
quite different hierarchies of strength, and quite different rules as 
to what processes they allow and do not allow. The strong force 
that produces the lambdas produces another object, often not 
immediately visible, but often detectable, which has a quality 
which compensates for the strangeness of the lambda. In the 
decay process there is no such conservation of this strange quality; 
that process goes on very slowly. 

We are today living in a marvellous and really quite unfinished 
business of trying to understand the order of these forces, the 
relations between them, if any; we do see some. But here was 
another beginning, I think the last subnuclear discovery to be 
made by cosmic rays, which again showed that our views of matter 
had been much too simple, and which multiplied questions for 
the future. 

The history of the sciences, and even today the history of the 
humanities, are full of wonderful stories, many of them legends, 
pure legends of discovery. You will think immediately of Archi- 
medes and his bath and his word “Eureka,’ and of Kekulé 
travelling on the bus in London and thinking of what the benzene 
ring might look like, something that really became intelligible 
only after there was a quantum mechanics. I have a few such 


175 


Uncommon Sense 


things in mind in stressing what I know you must have seen, in 
trying to encourage you to believe that it is the trait of science in the 
making. I think that in all of Galileo’s life what most shook him was 
the discovery of sun spots. It is not the most important thing to us 
today; it was not for the history of science in its development at all 
the most important thing. Just as Newton’s universal law of 
gravitation changed entirely the division between the terrestrial 
and the celestial world, with which scholars had lived for two 
millennia, so the imperfection, the confusion, the chaos of the 
actual sun put an end to the idea that there was anything perfect or 
unmaterial in the heavenly bodies. 

When Mendel found (and we know that his numbers were 
indeed too good, but we attribute that to the benignity of the 
young monks who helped him) that the distribution of popula- 
tions in his peas were the same numbers as the coefficients in the 
binomial expansion, he came upon something which showed an 
element of discreteness in inheritance, and in all life, which is of 
course today one of the richest fields of discovery. 

In 1905 Einstein, working alone, hardly knowing a physicist, 
never having had anything much of a conventional education as a 
physicist, working in the patent office in Bern, that year, discovered 
two things, among several others. He discovered the meaning 
of the velocity of light, as the limiting speed at which signals 
could be sent, and the profound change that this brought as 
to the nature of measurements, of simultaneity, and the effect 
of these changes on the description of relative motion. In the same 
year, by seeing what his other love, thermodynamics, implied for 
the validity of the law of radiation that Planck had found, he 
discovered that for that law to be true there must exist quanta of 
light, with an energy proportional to the frequency, and a 
momentum inversely proportional to the wavelength, and that 
their presence showed itself in the fluctuations about this 
equilibrium in which individual quanta appeared and disap- 
peared and contributed a fluctuation proportional to the square 
root of their number, just as independent atomic events. 

It was in 1911 that Bohr met Rutherford, and found out about 
the atomic nucleus. He also had one of the revelations, full of 
paradox and incomplete for another fifteen years, but again, to a 
certain extent, transcending all that had been thought in the past 
about what an atom looked like, and opening the way to 


176 


To Live with Ourselves 


marvellous developments in the future. Bohr had a look: if the 
nucleus were really there, the electrons had to be somehow 
around it; and the nucleus was very small compared to the region 
they occupy. In classical mechanics and in classical electro- 
dynamics there is no place for such a thing: it does not work; you 
cannot get reproducible atoms; you cannot get stable atoms; you 
cannot get anything like a real atom. Bohr saw at once two things: 
first, that the electrons had one game and the nucleus another, 
and that the two problems were, in very good approximation, 
separate, so that you were free to think about these two orders 
separately. Second, he saw that the atomic problems, the problem 
of what the electrons were doing, granted that there was a nucleus, 
could not be understood unless, as Bohr put it, the quantum, the 
same quantum that Einstein discovered for light quanta, governed 
the laws of motion of atoms and determined their stationary 
states. One can see that you cannot define quantities that are the 
right size to be an atom, or that radiate colors that look like 
atomic colors, without using Planck’s constant to express them. 

I have mentioned mostly physics, in which I have spent much 
of my life. My colleagues at the Institute sometimes tell me their 
stories. It is only in the last years that a tablet was found, quite by 
accident, in a schoolhouse in Troizein, which is a copy, its 
authenticity still debated, but I am partisan, I believe it authentic, 
a copy that the citizens of Athens had made for the citizens of 
Troizein. During the fall of Athens and its occupation, Troizein 
had invited women and children from Athens as refugees; in 
gratitude, after their liberation, after the war was over, the 
Athenians had the order of battle that Themistocles drew up 
before the battle of Salamis recopied for them. This is, perhaps 
more than any other battle, one that determined that there would 
be a European culture, a culture based on Mediterranean 
civilization, a culture of which we are the blessed inheritors. 

Again, a few years ago, there were some diggings in the fields of 
Lavinia, and there came the first hard evidence that the story of 
the trip from Troy to Rome was true. One thing I remember 
seeing is a photograph of an inscription from an altar piece. The 
first three words are in Greek, the next two are hard to read, and 
the last two are in Latin. 

There are discoveries to be made about our past, even about our 
very recent past, which confirm conjectures, which show that we 


177 


Uncommon Sense 


were all wrong about what we thought, and which open up new 
avenues of study and new prospects for human life. Whenever this 
happens, when the discovery has any of the qualities of the great 
ones, it has to reach back into a solid framework of experience and 
understanding and a great tradition; it has to mean something. It 
has not to be just something that could or could not be true, that 
might or might not be true: it has to imply. Often of course it is a 
discovery that confirms what people thought. Sometimes our 
ideas are right; that does happen; but more often and in the 
important cases these discoveries upset what was thought. They 
bring a sense of shock, and when they are very great, or when we 
who make them think they are rather great (that is not the same 
thing), they bring a sense of terror, a sense of terror because of the 
destitution in being cast loose in a new unknown, a sense of terror 
from knowing what is ahead. In the last years of his life Galileo 
wrote about this: He said “With our infinities ... we are adrift at 
sea, and who knows whether, no matter how lone we may dispute, 
we shall reach firm land again.” John Donne wrote about it 
somewhat earlier, “ ‘Tis all in pieces, all coherence gone.” 

I have heard from some of the great men of our time that when 
they found something startling, they knew it was good, because 
they were afraid. Otherwise there is nothing much to say; there are 
so many different ways it happens; a new instrument may lead to a 
discovery, a new accident, a new argument, a new finding, a 
measurement just a little more careful than was made before; 
looking at a problem in a fresh way. What all this does is of course 
to add to what we know and so add to our responsibility when we 
come to use that knowledge. 

What it is which marks this part of human life from, let us say, 
that of the poet, is that science is the business of learning not to 
make the same mistake again. We go on making mistakes; the art 
is to make the most fruitful mistakes we can, and hope that we find 
out soon, and finally do find out. But you do not make the same 
mistake again, because you tell what you have done; people try it 
out; they see if they find what you said; and when this has 
happened then that will be firm. There may be other things that 
one did not think about, that have still to be done. Yet in this sense 
there is an improvement of man, in the sense that he does not 
make the same mistakes again, in what he knows of the world, and 
of his role as a knower. This of course helps to make us more 


178 


To Live with Ourselves 


aware, both of how perpetually faced with problems, with 
ignorance, with darkness, with mystery, we will be, and what it is, 
really to live in the world of nature, and with ourselves as a part of 
it. It helps us to know, though it does not determine for us, what 
we may hope to do, and what we cannot do. It even helps us to live 
a little with one another and, not always, but at best, it helps us to 
live with ourselves. [.. . ] 


179 


At a panel discussion in 1961. (Photograph by P. Karas, courtesy of MIT 
Museum) 


15 


PHYSICS AND MAN’S 


UNDERSTANDING 
For the Smithsonian 
Institution Bicentennial 


1965 


WE ARE CELEBRATING A BIRTHDAY, honoring the foresight of a man 
and the success of a great institution. This makes it fitting that we 
leave to one side the common plaints of our time: that physics is 
corrupted by money; microbiology and mathematics by pride, 
not unrelated to achievement; astrophysics and geophysics by 
access to novel and powerful instruments of exploration; the arts 
by alienation; and all by our lack of virtue. What truth there is, and 
there is some, to these anxieties is not for us today. We could 
begin with Joseph Henry, the first Secretary of this Institution, 
[...who said,] “Knowledge should not be viewed as existing in 
isolated parts but as a whole, each portion of which throws light on 
the other . . . the tendency of all is to improve the human mind... 
for they all contribute to sweeten, to adorn, and to embellish life.” 
When we think back on the prolonged and troubled debates with 
which the Congress moved toward accepting Smithson’s bequest, 
establishing this institution, we can only be moved to celebrate the 
extent to which it has managed to preserve and enlarge, not 
perhaps the unity, but the harmony between the sciences, 
between the arts and sciences, between nature and man, and 
between knowledge and practice, whose conflicts so troubled the 
Congress for almost two decades. 

Physics has played a part in the history of the Smithsonian, as 
indeed it has in the history of the last five centuries. Closely 
related to astronomy, to mathematics, and to philosophy in its 
earlier years, it now has intimate relations also with all branches of 


181 


Uncommon Sense 


science, and plays an increasingly explicit, conscious and visible 
role in the changing conditions of man’s life. [ . . . ] If physics has 
had these extended relations with science and practice, it has still 
maintained a kind of central heart of its own. This is because it 
seeks the ideas which inform the order of nature, and of what we 
know of nature. Countless phenomena which, from the point of 
view of physics, appear calculable and explicable, but not central 
or essential, turn out to be pivots of our understanding in other 
sciences. No a priori study of physics would have been likely to 
explain the accidents that make the synthesis of carbon in the stars 
possible. Yet that has made a difference of some importance to 
man. Most of the miraculous findings of microbiology were not 
invented, and would not have been invented, by physicists, 
though they have played an appropriate part in helping to provide 
the instruments and the language for their discovery. For every 
science, much is accident; for every science sees its ideas and order 
with a sharpness and depth that comes from choice, from 
exclusion, from its special eyes. 

[...] What has happened in this century in physics rivals in its 
technical and intellectual imaginativeness and profundity what 
has happened at any time in human history. Its effects on the way 
we live are even more immediate and manifest than was the use of 
the magnet for navigation, or of electricity for communication and 
power. It has now, however, led to so great a change in man’s 
views, of his place in the world, his function, his nature, and his 
destiny. 

The years from the thirteenth century to the seventeenth saw 
the gradual acceptance of a material world no longer centered on 
man, or on his habitat, the gradual acceptance of an order in the 
heavens that could be described and comprehended, that sharply 
limited and circumscribed, though of course did not eliminate the 
role of God, or indeed of accident. We should ask ourselves why 
the views of Copernicus, the discoveries of Galileo, the under- 
standing and syntheses of Newton, should so greatly have 
resonated through European society, so greatly altered the words 
with which men spoke of themselves and their destiny. Nothing 
like that happened with Einstein’s theory of relativity, which tells 
us the meaning of the velocity of light—or of quantum theory, 
which tells us of the meaning of the quantum. 

[...]There is an analogy, long known to physicists, between the 


182 


Physics and Man’s Understanding 


special theory of relativity and the quantum theory. Each is built 
about a constant of nature and has something to say about how 
the constant, in determining the laws of nature, restricts or 
enlarges our ability to learn about nature. [...] Einstein’s first 
theory of relativity made clear an unexpected meaning of a 
constant of nature long ago determined by the astronomers, the 
velocity with which light propagates in empty space. It was 
Maxwell who showed that this constant was the same as that relat- 
ing fundamental electric and magnetic units, and explained why 
this should be so, by showing that light is an electromagnetic wave. 
Einstein’s role was to recognize that because of the universal 
validity of Maxwell’s equation, and the independence of the 
velocity of light from the velocity of the source emitting it, this 
velocity must, itself, take on the role of what in earlier times was 
regarded as an infinite one, one which could not be surpassed. 
The corresponding limitations, the absence of absolute judgments 
of simultaneity at distant points, struck rather deep at all views of 
space and time ever held before. At the same time, they liberated 
physics to form new and consistent descriptions of nature, and by 
altering and refining Newtonian mechanics, to anticipate new 
interconnections of the most fundamental theoretical and practi- 
cal import. 

In some ways even more remarkable was the interpretation of 
Planck’s constant, the quantum, that emerged from the develop- 
ment of the quantum theory of the atom, the work this time of 
many men, initiated in part by Einstein, in part by Bohr, and 
brought to an essential clarity by Bohr and his Copenhagen 
school. Here, again, physics was given a great liberation, the 
ability to understand the stability of atoms, the atomicity of 
matter, the regularities of chemistry, the atomic and molecular 
requirements for life, most of what physicists and chemists had 
known until the turn of the century. Here, again, it was discovered 
that the role of the quantum in the order of nature limited the 
traditional concepts of what we could learn about nature by 
experience. The quantum defines the irreducible roughness in the 
relations between a system being studied and the physical 
means—light, or beams of particles, or a gravitational field, for 
instance—that are used to study it. Because of this, there is an 
atomicity not only to the atoms and molecules, but to the traffic 
between them and the physical instrument of the laboratory; and, 


183 


Uncommon Sense 


because of this, a complementary relation of mutual incompatibil- 
ity between different sorts of observations of an atomic system. 

From this follow all the well-known features: the ineluctable 
element of chance in atomic physics based, not on our laziness, 
but on the laws of physics; the end of the Newtonian paradigm of 
the certain predictions of the future from the knowledge of the 
present; the element of choice in the approach to atomic 
observation. Yet perhaps the most important lesson is that 
objective—and massively and beautifully successful—science 
could be based on a situation in which many of the traditional 
features of objectivity were absent, and which taught us that for 
scientific progress and understanding, objectivity is more closely 
related to our ability to describe to one another what we have 
done and found, to verify or refute, than to its ontological 
foundation. 

As for particle physics, it is an unfinished story. What we are 
sure of today may not yet be ready to make its contribution to the 
common culture. Just from the requirement that in these new 
domains the general principles embodied in an understanding of 
the quantum and the velocity of light should still apply, it follows, 
as has been known for more than three decades, that atoms, or 
particles, or the ingredients of atoms, could not themselves, as all 
philosophical atomists had thought, be the permanent, un- 
changing elements of nature. They are created, destroyed, 
transmuted, but do not remain unaltered. What do remain 
enduring are certain abstract attributes of particles, of which the 
electric charge is the most familiar, and of which two other 
examples are known: the number of proton-like particles minus 
the number of their antiparticles, and the same number for 
electron-like particles. As for several other abstract quantities— 
such as strangeness or hyperchange, and isotopic spin—that do 
change but remarkably slowly, we are not ready to tell philoso- 
phers what we have made of them. [ . . . ] We have a rather unex- 
pected alteration of the ancient atomist’s answer to the problem of 
permanence and change. What lies ahead, we do not know. In the 
tumult of discovery and conjecture I have great hope; but whether 
we will be led, as has been so long speculated, to some further 
limits on what we can say about events in space and time on the 
scale of the very small, or whether the true shock will be far more 
shocking, I have an open mind. 


184 


Physics and Man’s Understanding 


[ ...]The discoveries of this century, past and still to be made, 
find their way into our schools and become part of the language 
and the insight of new generations, and provide new attitudes and 
new analogies in looking at problems outside of physics, outside 
of science, as has already so largely happened with classical mech- 
anics, and with electricity. But it is clear that these discoveries, 
which were not easy to make, and which, to the professionals 
involved, brought a sense of terror as great as that which touched 
Newton, have clearly not changed our philosophy, either in the 
formal sense or in the homely one. [.. . ] 

I have sometimes asked myself when a discovery in science 
would have a large effect on beliefs which are not, and may 
perhaps never be, a part of science. It has seemed clear that unless 
the discoveries could be made intelligible they would hardly 
revolutionize human attitudes. It has also seemed likely that 
unless they seemed relevant to some movement of the human 
spirit characteristic of the day, they would hardly move the human 
heart or deflect the philosopher’s pen. I now think that it can be 
put more simply. These syntheses, these new discoveries which 
liberated physics, have all rested on the correction of some 
common view which was, in fact, demonstrably in error; they have 
all rested on a view which could not be reconciled with the 
experience of physics. The shock of discovering this error, and the 
glory of being free of it, have meant much to the practitioners. 
Five centuries ago the errors that physics and astronomy and 
mathematics were beginning to reveal were errors common to the 
thought, the doctrine, the very form and hope of European 
culture. When they were revealed, the thought of Europe was 
altered. The errors that relativity and quantum theory have 
corrected were physicists’ errors, shared a little, of course, by our 
colleagues in related subjects. 

A recent vivid example is the discovery of the non-conservation 
of parity. The error which this corrected was limited to a very 
small part of mankind. There is a still more recent example, the 
non-conservation of combined parity, more limited still in the 
number of us who could be shocked by it, not yet understood, but 
with hopeful, though still unpublished and unverified, indications 
of its possible deeper meaning. 

Thus I think it is true that only at the beginnings of a science, or 
only in a society in which an awareness of the problems of science 


185 


Uncommon Sense 


is extraordinarily widespread, can its discoveries start great waves 
of change in human culture. Just possibly if, in years ahead, other 
examples, other forms, other sites of life should be discovered, we 
would: have a valid analogy to the great shock of the last century, 
when the anthropologists showed us the unimagined variety of 
human institutions. Although the nineteenth-century discoveries 
in biology had gone far to relate man to other forms of life, 
although anthropologists had revealed the unanticipated diversity 
of beliefs, values, and practices in different cultures, and the lack 
of universality of the ideals by which our own society had been 
nourished, although the psychologists had brought some supple- 
ment to the great religions in revealing again the universal traits of 
evil in all men, in fact these discoveries were to deepen and not to 
erode the sense of a universal human community. 

If the impact of the developments in physics in this century on 
the general understanding of man has been restricted, their 
practical consequences, along with those of all the natural and 
mathematical sciences, have been unrivaled in their sharpness 
and immediacy. I should like to mention one instance, in which, 
largely by accidents of history, the part of physics has been 
important, that is, the new weaponry, the new situation of the 
nations and of war. It is still not clear in what way, or even 
whether, these developments will turn out to be important for 
human history. I should think it likely that they would be. These 
developments, and problems that they raise, cannot be lived out 
in isolation from all others which characterize our time, but they 
can be talked about in a certain isolation. 

It is [now] twenty years ago that men generally learned of the new 
weapons of a new order of destructiveness. At that time we knew 
and told our government, as no doubt experts in other countries 
knew and told theirs, that the bombs that cruelly, yet decisively, 
ended the Second World War were, from a technical point of view, 
very much a beginning, not an end. We thought of some ideas 
about using deuterium and ordinary uranium to increase their 
power a thousandfold; we thought of the probable appropriate- 
ness of delivering such objects by rocket. We did not know too 
much about it; but within a decade, rather much had been 
learned. 

When I think back to the summer and the autumn of 1945, I 
remember a number of views of the future which were formulated 


186 


Physics and Man’s Understanding 


in this country, and, despite preoccupation with recovery from the 
terrible war, no doubt abroad. The simplest, and the only one 
which has been decisively refuted, was that these weapons would 
remain a monopoly, and thus either play very little part, or put to 
the test only the restraint, compassion, and fortitude of our own 
people and government. This was not my colleagues’ view of 
course, nor mine; but for a time, at least, it was that of many, 
including some of the very highest officers of our government. 

Others pointed to the long history of warfare, and talked of a 
defense against atomic bombs. In no meaningful sense has this 
characterized any period of the last two decades. As long as the 
armaments race continues, we will have to ask and reask whether 
adequate new defenses may be possible. They have not been. 
Thus, we have lived these years with a complementary and 
opposed dependence on preemption and deterrence. 

Others, looking to past history, trying to look to the future, saw 
only the certain eventuality of apocalyptic war, postponed in all 
likelihood by the efforts of statesmanship until it was quite total. 
This is one forecast that history will never totally disprove. And 
still others, looking to the past with their eyes, and trying to 
penetrate the future, held that such self-defeating weapons would 
be put to one side, leaving the nations to war on one another with 
more limited means. [ .. . ] 

Yet there were quite other thoughts. Colonel Stimson wrote of 
the necessary government of the whole and Mr. Grenville Clark, then as 
now, tried to accommodate the needs of world order with the 
freedom, the diversity and the self-interest of the world’s peoples. 
Einstein said simply that world government was the only answer. 
To the Acting Secretary of State, the more importunate appeals led 
him to suggest that it was not always helpful to replace a difficult 
problem by an insoluble one. 

Most of us recognized how central the relations with the Soviet 
Union would be, and, very soon, how ominous their course. Most 
of us recognized that with any government of the whole capable of 
serving as a vehicle for common aspirations, for expressing and 
advancing common interests, the extraordinary diversity of the 
nations and regions and peoples of the world would present hard 
problems. There were rich people, and there were very poor 
people; in any common society these inequalities would more and 
more become inequities, and the inequities more and more the 


187 


Uncommon Sense 


source of grievance and of guilt. Even in that world which had 
long lived with the European heritage with a deep—though 
changing—Christian sensibility, differences of history, differences 
of political practice, conflicting assessments of the value and 
meaning of freedom, made talk of the world’s community of 
interest rather a falsetto clarion. We did not know then, but we 
should have, that in vast parts of the world, in Asia and in Africa, 
the first, the most powerful, and the most spectacular of Europe’s 
legacy would be the lure of technology, the pleasure of privilege, 
and the delights of an often synthetic nationalism. We knew that 
the rich could not, if they would, and perhaps would not, quickly 
reverse the inequities in conditions of life among peoples. We 
knew that for the world’s future the variety of historical experi- 
ence, the differences of tradition, of culture, of language and the 
arts, should be protected and preserved. This left very little of the 
idea of government of the whole, but it did leave something. 

In June of 1945, before the first bomb, Arthur Compton, 
Fermi, Lawrence, and I wrote, in answer to questions put to us by 
Colonel Stimson, the Secretary of War: “To accomplish these 
ends, (the rapid and in human life the least costly of the war, and 
the preservation of the future peace of the world], we recommend 
that before the weapons are used not only Britain, but also Russia, 
France and China be advised that we would welcome suggestions 
as to how we can cooperate in making this development 
contribute to improved international relations.” These views were 
endorsed by the Secretary of War’s Interim Committee on Atomic 
Energy, though the Committee, of course, paid little attention at 
that moment to France, and to China. In fact no meaningful 
communication was made at all, no attempt to enlist our then 
allies in a common responsibility and a common concern. That 
would have been a moment to begin to worry about what is now 
called “nuclear proliferation,” for we and our then allies are the 
five powers that today have a known nuclear military program. I 
think that we will not be very successful in discouraging other 
powers from this course unless we show, by our own example and 
conviction, that we regard nuclear armaments as a transitory, 
dangerous, and degrading phase of the world’s history, that before 
other nations could have competing armament, there is a good 
chance that armament will have become archaic. 

In writing as we did in 1945, and then, of course, very much 


188 


Physics and Man’s Understanding 


more later, we were not unaware of the diversity of condition, 
interest, philosophy, and political institutions even in the great 
powers of the world, and certainly in the world at large. We did 
know one thing from our experience before and even during the 
war; we knew something of the universality of the practice, 
language discourse, and ethos of science. Los Alamos and other 
wartime laboratories, were indeed international institutions. For 
years before the end of the war, those responsible for the 
organization of the scientific effort in this country—Vannevar 
Bush, and James Conant, and many others—had been speaking of 
the hope of an international control of the new weapons, and a 
cooperative exploitation of the new sciences. Similar views were 
widely held in Britain. Most of all, Niels Bohr explored these 
possibilities in depth, recognizing that any such cooperation and 
any such control would have to rest on open access in all 
countries, and recognizing that this was the best guarantee against 
the self-delusion and the cultural and political and human abuses 
of societies that seal themselves off from their fellow men. 

The years since the war have brought many examples of 
effective and fruitful international collaboration, in technology, in 
political economy, and above all in the sciences. My own field just 
in the last years has been enriched by contributions of the greatest 
value from physicists whose countries a century ago were quite 
closed to the scientific tradition in Europe: Korea, Japan, China, 
Indochina, to name a few. We need to be grateful for the strength 
and beauty of this tradition, and to tremble as well as take heart in 
its power. These same years have also shown how modest, how 
fitful and inconstant, how easily overwhelmed has been the effect 
of these international communities on the nations and the 
governments. 

If I recall at this time some notions of two decades ago, it is 
clearly because I believe them essential to our present and our 
future. For I see it as a crucial question of our time whether, in a 
world destined at best slowly to relieve the inequities of rich and 
poor, the exploitation of military technology, of national pride, of 
privilege will be met by the growth of a community of interest and 
understanding. In the discouragements of the day, good example 
must come to be our firmest ground for hope. 


189 


Signed passport photo, taken around 1958. (OMC) 


16 
A TIME IN NEED 


1966 


[...] SURELY BY Now the sciences are for us one common enterprise 
of communities of men who know one another, work with one 
another, and are interrelated by a network of bonds of indebted- 
ness stretching between the continents and are beyond disen- 
tangling. For a long time now the triumphs have been common, 
the frustrations shared, and the new problems of growth, 
specialization, change, novelty, are the shared problems of a 
common undertaking in which we turn to one another and learn 
from one another’s problems and mistakes. 

It is not quite so gay if we talk of culture, or of that domain 
of action which in the old sense, the sense of Aristotle, is politics. 
I doubt whether, at this writing, there is among us any wide 
conviction that France, or the United States, Germany, or 
England, now has a government even remotely competent to 
the problems of the time, or, in fact, has available for those 
problems the human resources, the insight, the wisdom and skill, 
and the underlying stoic confidence for which they call. [ . . . ] This 
loss of confidence at home and in much of the world is shared by 
all of us. 

Some two months ago a group of distinguished French 
scientists, most but not all from Paris, addressed a message of 
condolence and sympathy to some of their American colleagues. 
They explained that they understood what it was like to live in a 
country that was conducting the war today in Viet Nam; had they 
not been through some of the experiences in Viet Nam more than 
a dozen years ago, and again, far more sharply and with more 


191 


Uncommon Sense 


reason in closer analogy, in the long agony of the war in Algeria? 
The analogy was overstated and the vast differences unnoticed, 
[...] but the sense of what it is like to live with a government held 
wrong in a mortal matter is a new and desperate bond between 
European peoples and those of the United States. 

It is not only in the sciences that we have by now so nearly a 
common history, that we in the United States have for so long 
owed so much to Europe and its great men, and in our own way 
have come to play a beneficial part. We are in debt for the two 
millennia during which Europe preserved and cherished the 
Christian tradition and the Christian sensibility; for the millennia 
and then the centuries in which love of freedom and the nurture 
of freedom flourished; for the adventures, the practical intelli- 
gence, the inventions, and their growing and deliberate cultivation 
that distinguish Europe’s culture from the great societies of the 
East. The spread of knowledge, of responsibility, of acceptance of 
change, all these are part of the American inheritance. They have 
been often reshaped, refined, restored, made robust and rather 
more universal in the American experience. We have given each 
other capital, and that most precious capital, men; we have given 
each other technique and knowledge and example, and the forms 
of art. 

We need to help one another maintain a large and common 
insight and wisdom. We need to help one another avoid the errors 
that can hang shame about us for our countries’ misdeeds. We 
need to strengthen one another in our human vision of our 
destiny: This is an extraordinary time, unparalleled, with dangers 
never before known, with a world in need, the more desperately 
and urgently felt for our existence and our intrusions. This is a 
time in need, not of delusion but of hope, when we, not least in 
Europe and America, who have taught hope so willingly and 
widely, must bear true witness. 


192 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Photographs courtesy of Oppenheimer Memorial Committee 
(OMC) or Los Alamos National Laboratory archives (LAL), if not 
otherwise indicated. 


Travelling to a Land We Cannot See 

Reprinted by permission of Foreign Affairs, January 1948 (original 
title: “International Control of Atomic Energy”); © 1948 by the 
Council on Foreign Relations, Inc. 


The Open Mind 
From “The Open Mind”, © 1955 by J. Robert Oppenheimer; 
reprinted by permission of SIMON & SCHUSTER, Inc. 


Science in Being... 
Speech given at Cornell University in the spring of 1949 under the 
title “The Relation of Research to the Liberal University.” 


The Consequences of Action 

Reprinted with permission of the Association of the Bar of the City 
of New York, The Record, Vol. 6 #3, pp. 106-121, March 1951 
(original title: “Contemporary Problems of Atomic Energy”). 


Uncommon Sense 

An Open House 

From “Science and the Common Understanding’, © 1954 by J. 
Robert Oppenheimer, renewed © 1981 by Robert B. Meyner; 
reprinted by permission of SIMON & SCHUSTER, Inc. 


193 


Uncommon Sense 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 
From “The Open Mind”, © 1955 by J. Robert Oppenheimer; 
reprinted by permission of SIMON & SCHUSTER, Inc. 


An Inward Look 
Reprinted by permission of Foreign Affairs, January 1958; © 1958 
by the Council on Foreign Relations, Inc. 


Tradition and Discovery 
Speech given at the University of Puerto Rico, 1960. 


Progress in Freedom 
Speech given at The Tenth Anniversary Conference Congress for 
Cultural Freedom, Berlin, June 1960. 


On Science and Culture 
Reprinted by permission of Encounter (London). 


The Power to Act... 

Speech given at the Symposium on “Challenges to Democracy”, 
sponsored by the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions 
of the Fund for the Republic, Chicago, June 1963, under the title 
“The Scientific Revolution and Its Effects on Democratic 
Institutions.” 


A World without War 

Speech given at the National Academy of Sciences Centennial, 
Washington D.C., October 1963, under the title “Communication 
and Comprehension of Scientific Knowledge.” 


L’Intime et le Commun... 
Speech given at Rencontres Internationales de Genéve, Septem- 
ber 1964, under the title “L’Intime et le Commun” 


To Live with Ourselves 

Reprinted by permission of the U.S. Army Research Office, 
United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.; from 
“Principal Addresses of the 1965 U.S. Army National Junior 
Science and Humanities Symposium”. 


194 


Acknowledgments and Bibliography 


Physics and Man’s Understanding... 
Speech given at the Smithsonian Institution Bicentennial Cele- 
bration, Washington D.C., September 1965. 


A Time in Need 
Speech given at Princeton University, November 1966, under the 
title “The Forbearance of Nations.” 


195 


