The Flying Irapeze 
Three Crises for Physicists 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


THE WHIDDEN LECTURES FOR 1962 


The Flying ‘Trapeze: 
Three Crises for Physicists 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


Director, Institute for Advanced Study 
Princeton, New Fersey 


LONDON 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


NEW YORK TORONTO 


1964 


Oxford University Press, Amen House, London E.C.4 


GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHT LAHORE DACCA 
CAPE TOWN SALISBURY NAIROBI IBADAN ACCRA 
KUALA LUMPUR HONG KONG 


© Oxford University Press 1964 


Printed in Great Britain by The Alden Press Oxford 


Foreword 
The Whidden Lectures were established in 1954 by E. C. 


Fox, B.A., LL.D., of Toronto, the senior member of the 
Board of Governors, to honour the memory of the late 
Reverend Howard P. Whidden, p.p., LL.D., D.C.L., F.R.S.C., 
1871-1952, Chancellor of McMaster University from 1923 
to 1941. Their purpose ts to help students cross the barriers 
separating the academic departments of a modern university. 
The lectures are not restricted as to general theme. 

Dr. Whidden was a member of a family resident in 
Antigonish, N.S., since 1761, after earlier settlement in New 
England in 1700. Born in Nova Scotia, he was educated at 
Acadia University, McMaster University, and the University 
of Chicago, and served as a minister of Baptist churches in 
Ontario, Manitoba, and Ohio. From 1913 to 1923 he was 
President of Brandon College in Manitoba, then affiliated 
with McMaster University, and served in the House of 
Commons in Ottawa from 1917 to 1921 as the Union 
Government member for Brandon. Assuming executive 
responsibility at McMaster in 1923, he directed what was for 
the University practically a second founding, its transfer to 
Hamilton in 1930, from Toronto where it had been established 
in 1887. He is remembered as a man of striking appearance, 
unusual dignity, effective leadership, ready tolerance, deep 
Christian conviction, and broad educational outlook. 


FOREWORD 


The seventh series of Whidden Lectures were delivered in 
January 1962 by the distinguished Director of the Institute 
for Advanced Study at Princeton, N.J., Dr. J. Robert 
Oppenheimer. 

A graduate of Harvard University who has studied and 
lectured at Cambridge, Géttingen, Leyden, Ziirich, and 
many other universities abroad as well as in his own country, 
Dr. Oppenheimer is perhaps best known to the man in the 
street as the Director of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory 
during the Second World War and subsequently as the 
Chairman of the General Advisory Committee to the U.S. 
Atomic Energy Commission. The success of the Los Alamos 
project in wartime was largely due to his genius and to the 
inspiration and leadership he gave to his associates. He is, 
however, more than an atomic physicist. A great humanist 
who is deeply concerned about man and his survival, he is a 
versatile scholar of wide interests and deep culture: his early 
training, indeed, was in the classical languages of ancient 
Greece and Rome. All who had the privilege of hearing the 
Whidden Lectures in 1962 will agree that it is difficult to 
envisage anyone more eminently suitable to deliver them. 


E. ‘T. SALMON 
Principal of University College 
May 1964 McMaster University 


vi 


Preface 


The three lectures, The Flying Trapeze: Three Crises for 
Physicists, were given by Professor Oppenheimer from only 
sketchy outline notes, and were recorded. It was a most 
stimulating experience to hear these lectures, to witness 
Professor Oppenheimer’s occasional search for the precise 
word, and to notice the wealth of illustrations that sprang to 
his mind to illuminate each idea. It was a revelation to me 
when I looked at the word-for-word transcript of the lectures 
to see that such sparkling addresses, so clear to the listener, 
contained so many sentences sufficiently involved to make 
reading difficult. Moreover, the discussion of each of the 
three crises, Space and Time, Atom and Field, and War and 
the Nations, did not fall neatly into the time of one lecture, 
so that Professor Oppenheimer continued the first topic into 
the second lecture, and the second topic into the third; this 
caused him to repeat and summarize certain material. It 
seemed appropriate in a written account to confine each 
topic to one chapter. This caused me to coalesce some of the 
material from the end of one lecture and the start of the next; 
in the process I have discarded very little that was said, but I 
have altered the order of a few passages. 

I hope that this editing has served to make the verbal 
transcript more readable, without removing any of the flavour 
of colloquial verve, and careful phraseology, which combined 


vil 


PREFACE 


to make the original lectures such an exciting and satisfying 
experience. At least the reader may be assured that, although 
they have been occasionally rearranged, all the significant 
words are Professor Oppenheimer’s. 


M. A. PRESTON, M.A., PH.D., F.R.S.C. 


Professor of Theoretical Physics 
McMaster University 


Vill 


III 


Contents 


FOREWORD by E. T. SALMON 
PREFACE by M. A. PRESTON 
SPACE AND TIME 

ATOM AND FIELD 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


54 


I. Space and Time 


This has been a great century in physics, a century of un- 
expected, profound, and moving discoveries, and of applica- 
tions that have changed a great deal in the condition of human 
life. The last years have seen very great progress in the under- 
standing of essential features of life, and I am confident that 
the years ahead will teach us more than all preceding history 
of man about how living organisms perform their miraculous 
functions and about man as a part of nature. We in physics 
are still engaged in what feels at the moment like a very great 
intractable struggle to find out the laws of matter, the nature 
of matter. It is not of that that I want to speak, but of 
chapters that are to some extent closed, although questions 
raised by the answers found earlier in the century are still 
before us, still wide open. I shall, in this and the second lecture, 
speak of increases in our understanding, changes in our 
understanding, of the world of nature. In the third lecture 
I shall speak rather of changes in the human situation brought 
about by the developments in physics and other sciences. 
Our time is marked by the prominence of the sciences. It 
is marked by very rapid change and very great growth— 
growth in science, growth in productivity, growth in popula- 
tion, growth in travel, growth in communication. Almost any 
statistic that you look at shows a sharp curve with a charac- 
teristic of doubling in ten or twenty or thirty years. In the 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


case of the sciences, this doubling occurs in about ten years, 
and there are several quite spectacular figures which mark it. 
If you think of all those people who devote their lives to 
studying nature or applying what has been learned in the 
technical way and call them scientists, then throughout man’s 
history there have been a number of them and of that number 
about 93 per cent are still living today, so rapidly has the 
number of people so engaged increased. A friend of mine, in 
Europe, calculated how fast one of our Journals of fundamental 
physics was growing, and established that if the rate of growth 
were maintained, then next century the volumes would weigh 
more than the whole earth. I was called on, not very long 
ago, by the Scientific Secretary of the Soviet Academy of 
Sciences, who spent a day with me in Princeton. I believe 
that his is an important political office, and we talked a little 
bit about the growth of scientific activity, in which he is 
engaged as an administrator. I asked him how he saw the 
future beyond the next five-year plan, say fifty years from 
now. Without thinking he said, “Then all of us will be 
scientists’; the horror of it came over him slowly and he 
added, ‘No, not quite’. 

Still, in talking of this as a scientific age and thinking of 
this as a time remarkably influenced by science, we need, 
I think, to bear in mind two cautions. One is that we probably 
have no very good idea today of the range of problems which 
will be accessible to science. We do not know how much of 
human behaviour may yield in one way or another to the 
characteristically objective and often rather unexpected study 
that is a science, and we may today live in something of an 
imbalance between what we know of the physical world, 
what we are beginning to know of the living world, and what 
we know of the human world. I, however, am deeply con- 


2 


SPACE AND TIME 


vinced that the scientific knowledge which may be available 
about men—not much today—will always be, as is our 
knowledge of the physical world, very very incomplete and 
partial, and that the sense of having to live and act in response 
totradition, good judgement, and wisdom, which we have now, 
will not ever be alleviated by any development of the sciences. 

I think we needsecondly to remember that a great part of the 
present scene arises not from what we have learned, but by its 
application in technology. This, in turn, rests on an organiza- 
tion of the economy and to a more limited, but still real, 
extent on our political arrangements. Neither of these derives 
from, nor Is In any tight way related to, the sciences, because, 
although the growth of knowledge is largely responsive to 
human needs, it is not fully so. The existence of terrible and 
intractable diseases does cause a very wide and intensive study 
of problems that may be related to the diseases. Problems of 
agricultural productivity, problems of gadgetry, perhaps most 
of all problems of military importance stimulate the vigour 
and increase the support for research. Stillitisa profound and 
necessary truth that the deep things in science are not found 
because they are useful; they are found because it was possible 
to find them. 

Think of the long centuries in which attempts were made 
to change mercury into gold because that seemed like a very 
useful thing to do. These efforts failed and we found how to 
change mercury into gold by doing other things that had quite 
different intentions. And so I believe that the availability of 
instruments, the availability of ideas or concepts—not always 
but often mathematical—are more likely to determine where 
great changes occur In our picture of the world than are the 
requirements of man. Ripeness in science is really all, and 
ripeness is the ability to do new things and to think new 


3 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


thoughts. The whole field is pervaded by this freedom of 
choice. You don’t sit in front of an insoluble problem for ever. 
You may sit an awfully long time, and it may even be the 
right thing to do; but in the end you will be guided not by 
what it would be practically helpful to learn, but by what it is 
possible to learn. 

I think that to those who are far removed from the life of 
the sciences, this sometimes appears to be irresponsible. It 
seems as though having made something potentially pestiferous, 
like nuclear bombs, we ought to go ahead and find something 
potentially helpful in getting rid of them. Indeed we ought; 
but instead it is much more likely that our thoughts will turn 
to things that are easier to do than that, that are more at hand 
than that. It is not irresponsibility; it is characteristic of the 
special way in which one does advance so rapidly in know- 
ledge, for often one may quickly make an irreversible acces- 
sion to knowledge by establishing an error. Having proved 
that something is not right, you do not go back to it again; 
you have learned your lesson. Progress, which in moral and 
human things is a very elusive word applicable, certainly, to 
some aspects of our life, but not to all, is an inevitable thing 
in the sciences. Progress is co-extensive with the existence of 
the scientific world. 

Now the first two of these lectures have to do with just 
such episodes, where previously held, firmly entrenched errors 
were with considerable shock and very great grandeur cor- 
rected—and in such a way that those errors will not be made 
again. Moreover, this progress in learning about the world of 
nature has changed rather profoundly not only what we know 
of nature, but some of the things that we know about our- 
selves as knowers. It has changed, to use an old phrase that is 
beloved of Butterfield, the ‘thinking caps’ of men, as did the 


4 


SPACE AND TIME 


revolutions of the late middle ages and the seventeenth 
century. I may be wrong, but I share with my colleagues, or 
with many of them, a strong conviction that this experience is 
one which we would gladly extend beyond the range of limited 
technical communities. The experience of seeing how our 
thought and our words and our ideas have been confined by 
the limitation of our experience is one which is salutary and is 
in a certain sense good for a man’s morals as well as good for 
his pleasure. It seems to us that this is an opening up of the 
human spirit, avoiding its provincialism and narrowness. 
You may think of the example of what it has meant to all of 
us to learn over the last centuries how different other cultures 
could be from our own and still in some real sense be cultures. 

Progress of this kind is possible only because it blends two 
almost contradictory traits. The one is a great love of adven- 
ture, so that you look for new things and for changed cir- 
cumstances, look far into the sky, look close into matter, do 
all sorts of things that take you away from the familiar human 
experience. That lies on the one hand, and on the other is a 
great adherence to such order and clarity as has already been 
attained. One may describe the latter as a sense of conserva- 
tism about not giving up any understanding that has been 
achieved, so that even though you are about to rewrite 
Newton you are very very reluctant to move very far away 
from Newton, and even though you may realize that every- 
thing that has been said before in physics is only very partially 
true, you will fight very hard to keep that partial truth. You 
will be strong through the tradition, and you will use the tradi- 
tion in describing the new experience until that point comes 
when you simply cannot go on with it and you have to make a 
great break. 


Many of the men who have contributed to the great changes 


5 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


in science have really been very unhappy over what they have 
been forced to do. Kepler, who loved spheres, discovered 
ellipses. Planck, with his famous quantum of action, intro- 
duced an element of discontinuity into physics, which seemed 
to him absolutely intolerably strange and ugly. Einstein, 
who was able to live with the theories of relativity and 
regretted only very few aspects of them, also contributed to 
the development of quantum theory; he proposed the idea of 
light quanta, but never could reconcile himself to the quantum 
theory logically built up from this basis. And de Broglie, 
who discovered that there are waves which are associated with 
material particles, could never reconcile himself to their 
interpretation as waves which only represented information 
and not some disturbance in a corporeal medium. 

These changes are forced on physicists somewhat reluct- 
antly because we are both traditional and conservative and at 
the same time a little too adventurous. In our lifetimes we 
have seen, in a limited area, our beliefs and our experience 
radically altered—the popular word is revolutionized, but that 
is not quite right, for they have been deepened and changed, 
but not completely overthrown. I have the impression that a 
general awareness of this and a general experience of it may 
be of some use in dealing with human problems in a time 
when the world also is changing so very rapidly. 

I have in my enterprise tonight and tomorrow very severe 
limits; one of them is that especially in physics it is often 
believed that without the mathematical forms one cannot 
really say what the discoveries are all about. There is a 
measure of truth in this; the discoveries could probably not 
have been made without the mathematical forms which give 
a quick synoptic and luminous way of representing the order 
that inheres in nature. It is not surprising that mathematics Is 


6 


SPACE AND TIME 


involved in nature; it is really a requirement of consistency 
and the one thing that we are all confident of is that nature 
may be difficult, but she will not be inconsistent. (It is only 
we who can be that.) But I think that some understanding of 
the concepts of physics can be conveyed with very limited 
use of mathematics, and I propose so to restrict myself. 
You may think of an analogy. It is certainly better to see 
Hamlet acted, if it is reasonably well acted, than to read it. 
It was written to be acted, not to be read in a study. Still, if 
you read it, you have, with good will and imagination and 
luck, a good deal of feeling for the meaning of the play. It Is 
certainly a very daring enterprise to try to guess from an 
English translation what Pasternak’s novel is like; but you 
know a good deal more about it reading it in English than not 
reading it at all. And I hope that you may, if not at my hands 
at least in some happier future, feel that mathematics, though 
a help, is not indispensable for some insight into the essentials 
of what has been found in modern physics. 

In the second lecture, I shall be talking about quite profound 
changes in our idea of causality, in what we think of deter- 
minism in the natural world, and most of all of what we mean 
and may mean by objectivity. These changes were necessary 
in order to attain the prize of a reasonable understanding of the 
ordinary properties of matter, those properties which manifest 
themselves even when you are not attacking matter with the 
violence which the great accelerators and the cosmic rays 
make possible. And in this lecture I want to discuss some 
changes in the ideas of space and time. Both of these themes 
are variations on the problem of the consistency of what we 
know about motion in space and about what is in space, about 
its field or content. 

The quantum theory was the work of many people. I 


- Z 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


think that we would all agree that Niels Bohr was the heart 
of this brilliant group. On the other hand, the ideas of 
space and time, though they go back a long way, were 
revolutionized in this century by one man, and in some aspects 
at least it is permissible to think that if he hadn’t lived, the 
revolution would not have occurred. He was Einstein. 

The first theory of relativity, at least in the Western world, 
does not date from the twentieth century. It dates from the 
thirteenth and early fourteenth, from the Paris school of 
natural philosophers, of whom Buridan and Oresme are the 
best known. It was certainly one of the great changes in 
human thought and it is remarkable because, although it is 
physics, it did not rest on any elaboration of observational or 
experimental technique but on analysis and on ordinary 
common-sense knowledge of how things behave. And it was 
the opening without which the future development of science 
is hardly thinkable. This was the discovery: in an analysis of 
the problem of motion, uniform motion—a body moving with 
constant velocity—was not something for which you could 
find or needed to find any explanation or cause; uniform 
motion was a natural state of matter. Of course, this was not 
the schoolman’s view; it was not Aristotle’s view, for whom it 
was obvious that to keep something moving you had to work 
on it, and the only natural state was one of rest. The new 
viewpoint was called the theory of impetus, which we 
would today say was the theory of momentum, namely that 
the constant impetus of a body was something that needed no 
explanation and that all you had to explain was change in its 
impetus, change in its motion, change in its momentum. 
This, as you know, was also Galileo’s view; and we call the 
transformation of co-ordinates, which emphasizes this cause- 
less character of uniform motion, the Galilean transforma- 


8 


SPACE AND TIME 


tion—although without his permission and without any good 
historical ground. The idea behind this transformation is that 
because it involves no cause to have uniform motion there will 
be a similarity in objects which are in motion with respect to 
each other. There will be no inherent difference between 
them. There will be an ability to describe one as analogous to 
the other. This so-called Galilean transformation tells you 
how from the co-ordinates x of an object that is at rest at 
a time ¢, you can derive the co-ordinates, the time, and the 
velocity as seen in a system in which that same object moves 
uniformly with a velocity v. 


x’ =x+ut, 
t=. 


Suppose you have something at rest and it’s at the point x 
and you are looking at it at a time ¢. Now suppose you move 
with respect to it with a velocity —v. Then the co-ordinate of 
the object will be given by x’, the time won’t be changed, and 
any velocity V that may appear in the original system will 
appear as a new velocity V’ in the new system, V’ = V+uv. 
This is the Galilean invariance and it’s Just common sense. 
It says the particle simply moves along with its co-ordinate 
increasing because it is in motion, the time isn’t changed by 
this velocity, and the velocities add. This theory of impetus 
is, of course, Newton’s first law; and Newton’s laws of 
motion, which describe how accelerations are produced by 
forces, are invariant under this simple transformation. You 
cannot distinguish one uniform motion from another by the 
application of Newton’s laws; they are relativistic in the sense 
that relative motion is observable, but absolute motion is not 
as long as it is uniform, that is with no acceleration. 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


From the time of Newton up to the end of the last century, 
physicists built, on the basis of these laws, a magnificently 
precise and beautiful science involving the celestial mechanics 
of the solar system, involving incredible problems in the 
Cambridge Tripos, involving the theory of gases, involving 
the behaviour of fluids, of elastic vibrations, of sound— 
indeed a comprehensive system so robust and varied and 
apparently all-powerful that what was in store for it could 
hardly be imagined. I think the only record I have seen of 
any explicit doubt on the subject of the Galilean transforma- 
tion and of Newtonian mechanics was about a century earlier 
than the theory of relativity in a paper of Euler. Because of 
the relative transverse motion between a fixed star and the 
earth, you see the star at a slightly different angle than the true 
direction. Euler found that he did not get exactly the same 
result when he calculated this variation from the point of 
view of the star and the point of view of the earth. The 
difference was totally insignificant experimentally and he 
didn’t say anything more about it. He just noted it. 

But early in the nineteenth century and increasingly through 
that century another study in physics was under way, not 
having to do with the motion of bodies under gravitational 
forces, but having to do with the domain of light and electro- 
magnetism. It was not necessary—although today it is—to 
decide whether gravity was an action at a distance in which 
one body affected another very far away or whether gravity 
spread from one body to another. And there was at that time 
and is today no really good experimental way of distinguishing 
the two. There are, in principle, very good ways and we feel 
sure that we know the answer, but we have not yet tried it 
out. However, with electromagnetic forces the situation Is quite 
different. I think you have all seen what happens when you 


| Te) 


SPACE AND TIME 


have a simple bar magnet and some iron filings on a piece of 
paper. The iron filings assume quite regular patterns, 
following lines which have something like parabolic shapes 
around the poles of the magnet. Already in the first half of the 
nineteenth century Faraday knew about this and his vision 
was that the space surrounding the magnet, although it had 
no pieces of matter in it, had something which was physically 
important present in it, and that was a magnetic field: the 
power to affect a magnet. Of course, the little iron filings act 
like magnets and are affected and do respond to this field and 
make it manifest. In the same way if you have an electrically 
charged rod or ball and if you come into the near-by area 
with another charged object with the same charge, you will 
feel it pushed away a little; if you present an opposite charge, 
you will feel it pulled in a little. And these are things that 
happen when the two are not in contact: they arise from a 
property of the space surrounding the electric charge or the 
magnet. Faraday talked of these lines and tubes of force, of the 
electric and magnetic potentials—I don’t use this term tech- 
nically—which exist in space, and for him space became 
animated with these fields. They were things which anyone 
could measure: one could measure their directions, one could 
measure their strengths; they were as palpable as the corporeal 
bodies themselves, but they existed in a vacuum. Indeed, they 
exist very well in a vacuum, and have nothing to do with the 
presence of air; they are modified by any matter if it is there, 
but they are present without any matter. This picture, of 
course, is beginning to be the famous aether, the empty space 
that is capable of having properties. 

Faraday showed that if you changed the magnetic field 
rapidly, you would make an electric field and Maxwell 
discerned theoretically that if you changed the electric field 


II 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


rapidly enough you produce a magnetic field. This effect was 
later verified; it is much harder to see than Faraday’s result, 
merely because of practical considerations. In fact, Maxwell 
predicted that, in the absence of any charges and currents, 
field pulsations of this kind, in which electric and magnetic 
fields would generate each other, could propagate freely. He 
calculated the velocity of the pulsations and found that it was a 
rather well-known velocity—that with which light propa- 
gates. 

Thus this field of Faraday’s is busy. It not only has fields 
around charges and magnetic poles—magnetic dipoles really— 
but it transmits electromagnetic waves. It transmits all the 
waves which feed the television sets and instruct the rockets 
and give us our wonderful culture over the radio; it transmits 
light, it transmits heat; it transmits many forms of very high 
energy radiation—forms of light which are very penetrating, 
which play a big part in nuclear physics. (The reality of man- 
generated long wavelength electromagnetic waves was 
established late in the last century by Hertz.) 

This highly peopled space, full of electric and magnetic 
phenomena, is related to particles in motion in the following 
way: if I have a charged object it will, of course, respond to 
gravity (a universal force), but it will also respond to electric 
fields and if it is in motion it will respond to magnetic fields. 
It will feel a supplementary push, the electric field pulling it in 
the direction of the field, and the magnetic field in general 
pushing it at right-angles to the field, and to its own velocity. 
The laws of these effects on charges were reasonably well 
known at the turn of the century, at least for objects that did 
not move too fast. But what was very troublesome is that 
Maxwell’s account of the propagation of electromagnetic 
waves of light and the whole basis of his theory and Faraday’s 


12 


SPACE AND TIME 


intuitive picture of a space filled with fields was not consistent 
with the Galilean invariance property. 

One can see this from a general viewpoint for, if this space 
is full of electric and magnetic fields, it need not appear at 
all the same thing when I move with respect to it. More 
specifically—and this is really the crux of the difficulty— 
according to Maxwell’s theory the velocity of light is some- 
thing that is fixed by his equations. His result was very close 
to the observed measure. But if I move with respect to the 
medium in which these fields are described by Maxwell’s 
equations then I would expect to apply the formula VW’ = 
V +v, that the velocity which I see for the light is the sum of 
the velocity with which I am moving (or its negative) and the 
velocity of light in the medium; it might be bigger or it might 
be smaller, depending on whether I am moving towards the 
source of light or away from it. This is a view which was 
indeed prevalent at the turn of the century, and which was 
shown by many indirect methods and one very direct experi- 
ment, one of the great crucial experiments in history, to be 
simply not so. 

Before this experiment, the situation presented at least 
three alternatives. First, one might say that there is a 
system—the system in which electric and magnetic fields are 
described and exist and obey Maxwell’s equations—which is 
unique, and absolute rest has meaning by reference to that 
system, and anything in motion with reference to it may have 
different physical behaviour because of this motion. To accept 
this alternative is to give up the invariance law and to give up 
the whole idea of relativity, that is the relativity of uniform 
motion. The second possibility was to say that Maxwell’s 
equations, in spite of their describing such an enormous range 
of phenomena, may somehow not be right, and this was 


13 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


extremely hard to do after a half-century of success. And the 
third was to say: “There is relativity and Maxwell is right, 
but the Galilean equations don’t describe the transformations 
of relativity’. No one could do that until the situation got 
really desperate. 

And it was made desperate by the Michelson- Morley experi- 
ment. In preparing for these lectures I looked up Einstein’s 
lectures in 1921 at Princeton; he said of the Michelson- 
Morley experiment: ‘I assume its results are known to you.’ 
I thought I should not quite do that because it was done a 
long time ago. What Michelson did was to measure the 
time taken by light to move a moderate distance back and 
forth in the laboratory and to see whether this was the same 
when parallel to the earth’s motion round the sun and per- 
pendicular to it. The expected differences were quite small, 
and it took a very great technical virtuosity to be able to look 
for them. But Michelson did the experiment and he did it over 
and over again. Now, the earth might just possibly be in the 
preferred rest system of electromagnetic phenomena in 
January, but then in June it is moving in a very different 
direction, and with substantial speed; Michelson’s sensitivity 
was enough to have detected very very easily the motion of the 
earth, by the change in the velocity of light depending on 
whether the earth was moving with or against or not at all in 
this luminiferous aether, the seat of electromagnetic pheno- 
mena. He got a null result. This was so unexpected that the 
experiment, with many refinements and variations, was 
repeated for decades after that as a witness to the traumatic 
character of this answer. 

So we are not allowed to believe that the velocity of light 
depends on the velocity of the source. We are not really 
allowed to doubt that Maxwell’s equations are true in all co- 


14 


SPACE AND TIME 


ordinate systems and we are not really allowed to doubt that 
the equations of the Galilean transformation are not a good 
description—they are only an approximate description—of 
what happens when we observe a system that is in uniform 
motion with respect to us. At this point three people found 
the solution, but only one found its full meaning right away, 
and that was Einstein. 

Einstein said: ‘Let us imagine what the situation would be 
if we could not communicate with a speed greater than a 
light signal.’ That is pretty fast (3 x 1019 centimetres per 
second) by ordinary standards; we would not normally 
notice this limitation. We would not find that our bicycles 
were getting away from us. But it is a finite velocity, and that 
makes a very big conceptual change. If you do not have 
instantaneous communication and if you want to compare 
information at two different places, you must make allowance 
for the time it takes for the message to get back and forth. For 
instance, suppose you want to synchronize two clocks that 
are a long way apart. (They should be clocks of the same 
type, perhaps natural clocks which are more or less guaranteed 
the same—‘atomic clocks’.) A natural way to synchronize 
them so that they read the same time would be to set the clock 
at one place half-way between the time at which the signal 
left the other and the time at which it was received back after 
reflection. The notion of simultaneity, which intuitively 
seems to be something that should not depend on any moving 
around you do, Is indeed a valid notion when things are at 
the same point of space, but is no longer a valid notion over 
substantial distances and when relative motions at all compar- 
able to the velocity of light come into play. 

This means that if it is true that you cannot send signals 
faster than light, and if it isa physical contradiction to imagine 


15 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


it, then you have this relativity of simultaneity, this velocity 
dependence of judgements of simultaneity. Also you have other 
physical effects which are produced for you by the machines 
that you use for measuring distance and for measuring time. 
Let me explain that when I say ‘clock’ I mean something that 
is designed to measure as accurately as possible regular inter- 
vals of time, and when I say ‘distance’ I mean something that 
you measure with a ruler, which has been by remote compari- 
sons calibrated by a standard metre in Paris. The clocks and 
rulers then are physical objects. 

Now, in order to be consistent with the fact that there is a 
limiting velocity which is not infinite, but is the finite velocity 
of light (called by everybody c), the Galilean transformation 
must be abandoned and replaced by a new transformation 
called the Lorentz transformation, after the first man who 
wrote it down. This must provide the co-ordinate of a point 
x and a time ¢, when I look at it from a system uniformly 
moving with a velocity —v. 


This is a very simple Lorentz transformation; wv is the 
relative velocity of the two systems, and y is something which 
is near one when the velocity wu is small compared to the 
velocity of light ¢ and which becomes infinite, marking the 
limit of the applicability of these transformations, as vu 


16 


SPACE AND TIME 


approaches ¢c. Moreover, this clearly indicates the limiting 
character of the velocity of light. You see that it shows that a 
length interval in one co-ordinate system will appear to be 
shrunk by the factor 1/y when examined in a moving co- 
ordinate system. You see that the time Is not told the same in 
the two co-ordinate systems and that the difference not only 
has a difference of scale but depends on the positions of the 
clocks. This is the point about the judgements of simul- 
taneity. And you see further that if you have a process going 
on which takes a time ¢ as measured in the system where the 
object is at rest, then if you move at a velocity v with respect 
to it, the time will be lengthened, being y¢. 

To summarize, motion decreases the measurements of 
length, motion increases the intervals of time, and the two 
facts together are encompassed in the Lorentz transforma- 
tion. Further, the formula for the velocity V’ indicates that 
if you add two velocities that are very close to the velocity of 
light you never get beyond the velocity of light, you Just get a 
little closer to it. This completely consistent system never 
enables you to talk about or to discuss the properties of 
relative motion with a velocity greater than that of light, 
but it does tell you how to talk about real motions in terms of 
the actual behaviour of actual clocks and rods and atoms and 
all the rest of physics. hese equations give an invariant 
description of physical phenomena, a description independent 
of relative uniform motion, one which is as good in one 
system as in another. This formalism re-expresses the ancient 
theme of Buridan, that uniform motion requires no cause, 
but now with this very new wrinkle that couldn’t have been 
anticipated on the basis of ordinary experience, that, because 
objects cannot be accelerated beyond the velocity of light, the 
analogue of an infinite velocity is a finite velocity. 


i? 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


From this viewpoint one naturally asks that not only 
Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism but the equations of 
motion for charged particles and then also for neutral particles 
should be invariant, i.e. that they should have the same content, 
irrespective of the frame of reference in which we describe 
the phenomena, as long as we are talking only about uni- 
form motion. We do that naturally in talking of ordinary 
things. If there is a complete symmetry in a problem, so that 
no direction is singled out, then we certainly would like to 
talk about it in such a way that that symmetry is preserved in 
our description; and if there is nothing in space to make one 
point different from another, we would like to give a descrip- 
tion which is as valid in Chicago as it is in Hamilton. And in 
the same way here we would like a description valid irrespec- 
tive of the relative velocity of the objects we are talking about 
and what we ourselves happen to be doing while we are 
looking at them. 

This was done for mechanics and gave at once the rather 
clear sign that Newton’s equations are wrong. This is clear a 
priori, because if the acceleration is proportional to the force 
and inversely proportional to the mass, there is no reason why 
you cannot make velocities bigger than that of light. Some- 
thing must prevent those forces from being so effective, and 
what it is, to put it a little oversimply, is that the mass of a 
body is not in fact constant. Indeed, if the theory of mechanics 
is to be compatible with the requirement of the constancy of 
the velocity of light and relativity in this restricted sense—the 
mass of a body must increase with its velocity in just this way: 


mo 
7 V(1 —V 02)" 


Here mp is the mass of the body at zero speed and m its mass 


18 


SPACE AND TIME 


at speed VY. This is the origin of much fertile speculation by 
Einstein, because if the mass of a body increases with its 
velocity so does its kinetic energy and it will increase in the 
same way, VIZ: 


AT =c?dm. 


The symbol 4T means the change in kinetic energy and Am 
represents the corresponding change in mass. 

Because the total energy is really something that is not lost 
or gained by a system, but is conserved, what is true of kinetic 
energy must be true of all energy and, therefore, a change of 
energy and a change of mass go hand in hand and the change 
in energy is related to the change in mass by the square of the 
velocity of light. This is something that it would be nice to 
have a little mathematics or more time to show; but it is a 
direct and really quite inescapable consequence of the purely 
kinematic connexions which I have written down as the 
Lorentz transformation. 

Another important point is that these transformations mix 
up space and time very much more than the Galilean ones. 
To a limited extent you cannot interchange space and time. 
They have inherently different character. A watch is a 
watch and a ruler is a ruler and you cannot use the ruler to 
measure the time and the clock to measure the co-ordinates. 
But they do change with relative motion. Of course, you are 
not restricted to move in a straight line with respect to some- 
thing you are studying: you can also turn around or you can 
take another place in space. This whole set of procedures— 
rotation, translation (moving to another origin, that is another 
base point), and moving uniformly in some direction— 
together are a set of operations that are closed and form the 
Lorentz group. You cannot, with these operations, convert 


19 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


any space-like interval into a time-like interval or any time- 
like interval into a space-like one, but you can change the 
‘direction’ of a space-like interval and give it some slightly 
more time-like quality, and you can do the same thing for 
time-like intervals. 

This system, this special theory of relativity, which predicts 
correctly the behaviour of rods and clocks under motion, 
became an absolutely all-pervasive feature of physics. We 
use it literally in almost every branch of nuclear physics and 
many branches of atomic physics, and in all branches of 
physics dealing with the fundamental particles. It has been 
checked and cross-checked and counter-checked in the most 
numerous ways and it is a very rich part of our heritage. For 
instance, many of the particles that are produced in the 
atmosphere by cosmic rays are unstable. They have a natural 
tendency to come apart into others, to decay. But if they 
move very fast, their decay rate is slowed down and the rule 
is simply: 

r= (1 —V c2)U2 — oly 


where 7 is the decay rate when the particles are at rest and 7’ 
is the decay rate when they are moving with speed V. This is 
observed and is a very vivid thing. We have not yet seen 
people stay young, but we have seen particles stay young by the 
billions. 

There is another point, a little out of chronological order. I 
have spoken of rotations, translations, and uniform motions 
as part of the Lorentz group, but there is another part of the 
Lorentz group that is not so simply connected with these 
operations. You cannot rotate your right hand into your left. 
The only way you can get the one to be congruent to the other 
is with a reflection in a mirror. You may try wiggling your 


20 


SPACE AND TIME 


hands about, but it is really not possible to rotate one into the 
other. One would think that if rotation did not make any 
physical difference, reflection would not either, that if space 
were so isotropic that there was no direction singled out in it, 
then it would not matter if something were right-handed or 
left-handed. ‘The two arrangements would be equally 
probable—there is a good deal of this accidental character in 
human asymmetries. This invariance law was believed for at 
least thirty years. Many many brilliant examples turned up 
where you could classify the states of atomic and nuclear 
systems according to whether they were unaltered by reflec- 
tion or whether their symbols changed sign under reflection; 
in both cases you may say that to any allowed motion or 
phenomenon in physics, the mirror image also is allowed. 
If you can have something happen with a wheel turning 
a certain way and an arrow pointing up, then keeping the 
wheel the same, but reversing the arrow, which is what 
happens when you hold up a mirror, will also be allowed. 
Such objects do exist in physics; in fact the neutrino is a very 
good example of one. It is only a few years ago that some 
doubt arose as to whether this rule was strictly true—the 
rule, that is, that to any system found in nature, the mirror 
image must occur, being compatible with the laws of nature. 
The doubts were sufficiently anxious and deep that Lee and 
Yang looked into it and found that no proof of this rule had 
been really given experimentally in a certain class of very 
feeble forces and very slow reactions. And so they looked— 
not they but their friends—and the answer is that nature has, 
in this special manifestation, a most violent and total preju- 
dice in favour of right-handed and against left-handed 
arrangements and the other way round in other cases. It is 
very odd, very unexpected, and possible only because you 


21 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


cannot get from a rotationor atranslation toareflection. What 
we now more or less believe is that if any configuration is 
allowed, then if you take its mirror image and replace all the 
positive charges by negative and vice versa, and let it run 
backward in time, that will also be allowed. But that is all we 
are really confident we know. 

This theory of relativity has been very much mixed up in 
all the developments of physics. I would stress that the 
odd and often seemingly paradoxical things that are em- 
bodied in the special theory of relativity are not paradoxes 
in the sense of being conflicts between different experi- 
ments. They do not involve any contradiction on the part of 
nature; what they do involve is a gross change, a rather sharp 
change, from what learned people and ordinary people thought 
throughout the past centuries, thought as long as they had 
thought about things at all. The simple facts, namely that 
light travels with a velocity that cannot be added to or sub- 
tracted from by moving a source of light, the simple fact that 
objects do contract when they are in motion, the simple fact 
that processes are slowed down when they take place in 
motion, and very much so if they move with velocities com- 
parable to the velocity of light—these are new elements of the 
natural world and what the theory of relativity has done is 
to give coherence and meaning to the connexion between 
them. These contractions of objects and these retardations of 
events are, of course, reciprocal; and that isa little paradoxical. 
It isa little hard to think that, ifa moving chunk of matter gets 
flatter and flatter in the direction in which it is moving, and if 
you happen to be with that chunk of matter, you would get 
flatter and flatter if you looked at yourself where you origi- 
nally were. But it is true; and the same kind of thing is true 
about time; this is the origin of the twin paradox. It is 


22 


SPACE AND TIME 


true also that when there are changes in mass, there is in 
practical terms a corresponding enormously big change of 
energy, as we know, both to our hope and our caution. We 
are not sure that in approaching the domain of the very small 
(and I am here not now talking of ordinary atomic dimensions, 
but dimensions some million times smaller), we know ex- 
actly what it means to say that ‘nothing’ can move faster than 
light. But we are sure that our doubt is not with moving 
faster than light; our ambiguity is with ‘nothing’—we do 
not quite know what that means in this domain. 

I come now to a generalization of the theory of relativity, 
which starts when you begin to think about motions which are 
not uniform, and goes on to consider the nature of gravity. 
General relativity has very very few connexions with any 
other part of physics and, as I said, is something that we might 
Just now be beginning to discover, if Einstein had not done so 
more than forty years ago. This is partly because, compared to 
electricity, gravity is a very weak force and really manifests 
itself only when you are dealing with bodies that are pretty 
substantial, such as the earth, the sun, and smaller things, but 
not on an atomic scale. Consequently, it is rather inaccessible 
to experiment, because the objects you deal with are big and 
not things you can wiggle around very much. You might 
think that gravitation should resemble electricity in producing 
fields which exist in the vacuum, which can be measured, and 
which propagate with the velocity of light. Something like this 
is true, but there are two enormous differences. One sign of a 
difference is that like charges repel each other, like masses 
attract, and this means the two cannot be really quite the same. 
Another is that gravitation is a quite universal phenomenon; 
all bodies follow the same pattern when they are acted on 
only by gravity: this was Galileo’s principle of equivalence. 


Cc 23 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


However, if you follow out the attempt, and this has only been 
done in the last year or so, to make a theory for gravity as 
much like the theory of electricity and magnetism as you can, 
you find that, quite apart from the rigorously predictable 
effects of uniform motion on the measurement of space and 
time, gravitational fields have much deeper and much more 
tangled effects on the behaviour of rods and clocks. 

If you study this further, you have to come to two conclu- 
sions, that in important ways gravitation isa very different thing 
from electricity and magnetism. First, the rods and clocks are 
so affected that the space that they measure out, which Is 
always flat if you look in a small region of space in a small 
interval of time, manifests over bigger regions curvature 
like the surface of a two-dimensional egg. This curva- 
ture may vary from point to point and is itself an expres- 
sion of the gravitational effects which are in this space. 
And second, because gravitation, like electromagnetism, 
involves potential energy and because gravitation is produced 
by all mass, and therefore, by all energy, gravitation produces 
gravitation and gravitational fields are not linear in the sense 
that if you have two gravitational waves they do not merely 
superimpose their effects, but they interact. Also, if you have 
a gravitational wave and a gravitational field around the sun 
they interact. All of this can be found out ina sort of pedestrian 
way by making the analogy with electricity and magnetism. 

But for Einstein it was entirely different. He came at it 
from two points. One was the universality of motion in a 
gravitational field which enabled him to think that this might 
be a geometric thing. The second was the fact that the principle 
of relativity, philosophically, ought not to be limited to 
uniform motion. If there is nothing else around, how can you 
tell if something is being accelerated or not? You can only 


24. 


SPACE AND TIME 


tell that by reference to something that is not being accelerated. 
But we know that accelerated motion differs from uniform 
motion in that we do not have to be told when we are under- 
going it, because we feel it and phenomena do respond to it. 
Einstein observed that a uniform acceleration is exactly the 
same thing as a uniform gravitational field in all its physical 
effects. This is another principle of equivalence. And he, 
therefore, was led to the idea that the problem of dealing with 
non-uniform motions and the problem of explaining gravita- 
tion were related and indeed identical. 

If you are moving in something resembling free space you 
really cannot tell how fast you are moving unless you refer 
your motion to something else, to the earth or the sun or the 
stars. But if you are moving in a jerky way, if you are being 
made to move faster, being accelerated or slowed down, you 
can have all the blinds drawn, you cannot know where any- 
thing else in the world is, but you still can tell that something is 
going on and you can measure it. And, therefore, there can 
be no elementary possibility of talking about general motions, 
motion on a circle, motion which speeds up and slows down, 
motion on a bumpy railroad train being relative, because 
within the moving thing (this railroad car or elevator or 
rocket) you can tell by the way you feel, and you can look at 
gauges to measure that you are being pushed, pulled, hauled 
around, jerked, whatever it is. One could, therefore, say that 
relative uniform motion is indeed relative and no law of 
nature must discriminate in favour of one such motion rather 
than another, but that the elementary fact about accelerated 
motions is that, at least in the part of the universe where we 
live, we can tell whether we are being jerked around or not, 
and such motion is not relative. Nevertheless, Einstein’s 
theory of accelerated motions Is called the general theory of 


25 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


relativity; it is a very unfortunate terminology. One might 
almost say that this should be called the general theory of un- 
relativity, except for one clue, a very deep clue, that was 
known before, but was understood and made very prominent 
by Einstein. 

If you are confined to a box from which you cannot look 
out and in which you can make only internal measurements, 
and if you feel a uniform acceleration, you cannot tell 
whether you are being speeded up by some force acting directly 
on the box, or whether you are feeling a uniform gravitational 
field. The simplest way to confirm this ts to fall freely and 
notice that when you fall freely there is no gravity and there 
is no acceleration; you are, in fact, accelerating, and you are, 
in fact, in a gravitational field, but the two of them cancel. 
You should notachieve this state by jumping out of the window, 
but if you ride in airplanes enough it will be done for you. 
Therefore, Einstein understood that one could deal with a 
more general class of motion only if one also encompassed 
the phenomena of gravitation. I should say that this principle, 
that gravitational fields and accelerations are in large measure 
equivalent to each other, is often called the equivalence 
principle. It is closely related to Galileo’s principle that if the 
only forces involved are gravitational, all bodies move in the 
same way. If Galileo’s principle were not so, you would not 
be able to replace gravitation by an acceleration which clearly 
is the same for all bodies. In the way Einstein did this, 
the theory of gravitation and the theory of general motions 
were indissolubly linked. 

But one could go about it in what appears to be a more 
straightforward way, and, in recent years, this less beautiful 
approach has been developed. One could say that gravitational 
forces, like the electromagnetic forces, are long range, in that 


26 


SPACE AND TIME 


they fall off slowly with distance, and that this suggests that 
one make a theory of gravitation, which is a natural analogue 
of the intuitive pictures of Faraday and the equations of 
Maxwell which describe electromagnetism, electromagnetic 
waves, and the fields around magnets and charges. ‘The princi- 
pal point of difference for which one must allow from the 
beginning is this: that two like charges repel each other, 
whereas all masses attract each other. If you do this you get a 
description which reproduces Newton’s theory of gravity if 
fields are not phenomenally strong—and there may be no 
strong gravitational fields in the world—and if in addition 
they don’t change rapidly with time so that the finiteness of 
the limiting velocity (of light) plays no part. In this theory one 
has both principles of equivalence, both that of Galileo and 
that of Einstein. And one has some famous physical conse- 
quences which also were predicted by Einstein. For instance, 
both theories predict that when light falls in a gravitational 
field it turns bluer; it turns from red to blue, as frequency 
increases, and the wavelength decreases. ‘he most precise and, 
I think, by far the most beautiful example of this is a recent 
experiment conducted at Harvard in which light was simply 
allowed to fall down from the third floor to the basement of 
the Physics Building. One could see how much bluer it had 
become: one part in 1014; not very much. Also, as Einstein 
predicted, and as had been guessed before, light is deflected 
when it passes through a gravitational field, near the sun, or, 
for that matter, near a star. And you also find, as I have 
already mentioned, that a gravitational field induces more 
gravitational field, unlike the standard case of light. 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, if you develop this 
analogy between gravitation and electromagnetism, you find 
one very major and deep difference. This is the point where 


27 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


really to explain where the difference comes in would take not 
a little, but a lot of scribbling on the blackboard, but to 
explain what the difference is, I think, does not. I shall use the 
word ‘space’ to mean both the three-dimensional space that 
we usually mean and the extension in time which we have 
learned to see is not sharply and totally separable from spatial 
intervals, because they get mixed up when you look at things 
in uniform motion. You find that if you explore space with 
ordinary rulers and clocks, this real space is not the space of 
Euclid, it is not the space of the classical geometers, but it has 
some structure and some distortion built into it. This is not 
the space you imagine on paper; it Is the space which you 
measure, typically, with rods. Now it is very hard to think, 
at least for me, about four-dimensional continua, especially 
when one of them is not a distance but a time, but it is 
legitimate to think of an ordinary two-dimensional surface 
and suppose that the four-dimensional affair is just a mathe- 
matically similar abstraction—just as easy to discuss mathe- 
matically but much harder for people to visualize. ‘Then what 
we have been saying is that we are not dealing with the 
analogue of a plane surface, but with the analogue of some- 
thing curved in a rather peculiar way. Locally, in a small 
enough region, any curved surface, if it has no ridge in it, is 
flat and it looks like a plane; but if you move along it for some 
distance, the inherent distortion of the space becomes clear; 
for instance, the sum of the angles of a triangle will not be a 
straight angle and Pythagoras’s theorem will not be true, and 
all sorts of geometrical complications will be induced. When 
you have a sufficiently vigorous and wild gravitational field, 
such distortions will occur in the nature of space and time, and 
can be detected by actual measurement. From this it then 
follows that if you accept the gravitational analogy of electro- 


28 


SPACE AND TIME 


magnetism you are led to things that have no parallel in 
electromagnetism; and, if you have your eyes open, you reach 
Einstein’s theory, or something very like it and close to it. 
But Einstein, forty-five years ago, did not do this. He 
developed his description of gravity on the basis of a few rather 
general ideas. One is that gravitational forces are determined 
by matter and express themselves in the geometry of space and 
time. Now, what are the determining aspects of matter? Not 
its colour, for example, but those aspects that are most clearly 
related to its mass, energy, momentum, or impetus and related 
things which form a unitary description of matter. I 
should say, in this context, that electricity and magnetism, 
because they have energy, also contribute to gravitational 
fields. The second important point is that the inherent proper- 
ties of the geometry wholly determine the gravitational forces 
that act on bodies. We use the word ‘inherent’ to stress that 
we are not concerned with how you describe the geometry in 
terms of co-ordinates, but with those properties which 
constitute the structure of space and time. So that you have 
on the one hand that the inherent geometry is determined by 
the distribution of matter and, on the other, that the response 
of matter to gravity is determined entirely by the geometry. In 
fact, matter moves as nearly in a straight line as the crinkly 
character of the geometry permits. These are the two basic 
points of Einstein, but they would not lead to anything very 
definite. In a way which Is quite characteristic of physics and 
which will recur later in these lectures, Einstein also had in 
mind limiting situations where he knew the right answer. 
One was the gravitational theory of Newton, which is right, 
as I said, when fields do not vary too much with time and 
when they are not overwhelmingly strong. The other is that 
space and time, if you look at a sufficiently small region, must 


29 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


be flat, and in such a region must be described by the Lorentz 
space of special relativity. 

Those are four elements, we may say four of Einstein’s 
postulates; and the fifth one is the one that nobody can ever 
translate: the theory must be a simple thing. And here it 
seems to me we really are faced with the fact that only by 
inventing the right notation and using the right mathematical 
ideas can you say whether something is simple or not. With a 
good deal of fumbling, and many years of unsuccessful trying, 
many years in which the physical ideas which I have Just out- 
lined were clear, Einstein finally came upon a branch of 
mathematics that other people had made and which gave him 
the perfect vehicle for writing down how it goes with gravita- 
tion and what the general theory of relativity is. And no one 
today, plodding along to remake this theory along more 
pedestrian lines, can fail to be overwhelmed by the imagination, 
the daring, and the beauty of what Einstein did. It is a very 
different thing to say whether this is a correct theory. 

It is, of course, correct in all those particulars which I have 
talked about, but there is very little experimental evidence 
about the features of the theory which are peculiar to it, and 
which have nothing in common with electromagnetic theory, 
with flat space time, or with Newton’s theory. We may be a 
long time wishing that we knew, but I have never known a 
physicist who did not think that it was probably a very very 
good guess indeed. And there is not a shred of evidence against 
it. We have for space and time not finished with the story. 
What will come is not my business to try to say, but on two 
fronts there are wide-open questions. 

One is on the scale of the very big, encompassing every- 
thing that we see with telescopes and that we hear with radio 
telescopes. That means more than the distance that light can 


30 


SPACE AND TIME 


travel in five or ten billion years, which is about where the 
present limit lies. We see the universe flying apart; we do not 
see anything very detailed about its spatial structure. And it is 
a completely open question, not answered now and conceiv- 
ably never to be answered, whether the volume of space (I 
am not now talking of time) is a finite or infinite thing. 
Einstein thought it was finite, but that was because he thought 
that everything was steady and static. When we look we see 
that the motion is the characteristic feature; the further away 
we look, the faster things are receding from us, and in such a 
world we have no insight into whether this will stop and there 
is a finite distance to look or whether it will go on for ever and 
ever. 

Another kind of open question I referred to earlier, and 
that is that when we get to dimensions so small that they are 
not of the size of atoms, not even of the size of nuclei, but of 
the size of those objects of which nuclei and atoms are com- 
posed, we cannot really be sure to what extent we can 
discriminate near-by points in space and time and to what 
extent the designation of such points is still meaningful. But 
I will say one thing. Here there is no question of curvature of 
space because gravity is an utterly negligible force, and we 
assume that here, too, the velocity of light is a finite limiting 
velocity imposed on all physical disturbances or signals. 
From this assumption a great deal can be made to follow, and, 
so far, nothing that follows from it has shown itself to be in 
conflict with experience. It is one of the powerful tools of 
modern-day physics. 


31 


II. Atom and Field 


The subject of my lecture tonight is really the quantum 
theory. It has two parallel and even complementary historical 
origins. One is from the properties of electromagnetic radia- 
tion, but from other properties than those which were 
important for relativity. The other is from an attempt to 
understand the structure of atoms. I mean by the structure 
of atoms the atoms of the chemist and the spectroscopist, 
and not the atoms of the physicist who works with a giant 
accelerator and who smashes everything that he looks at 
with his violent collisions. This subject is also interesting but 
it has been opened up really only in the last decades, and is not 
understood, whereas the quantum theory was very much a 
complete theory thirty-five years ago. 

As to the properties of electromagnetic radiation, I need 
first of all to come back with a little more than just words to 
the idea that a changing magnetic field makes an electric one, 
a changing electric one makes a magnetic one, and that this 
pumping cycle produces an electromagnetic wave. These 
waves have certain important, deep, but rather abstract 
properties, in common with everything else that physicists 
call waves. A typical electromagnetic wave may have the 
electric force changing with time periodically, so that it is 
sometimes positive and sometimes negative, that is, sometimes 
pointing, let us say, in the positive direction, sometimes in the 


32 


ATOM AND FIELD 


negative, and going through zero as it changes from one to the 
other; the magnetic force is doing the same thing at right- 
angles to the electric force and out of phase with it, so that 
when the electric force is zero the magnetic force is a maxi- 
mum, and the whole thing is travelling at right-angles both 
to the electric force and the magnetic force with the velocity 
of light. That is one kind of electromagnetic wave and for us 


it is plenty. 


c=vA 


Such a wave is characterized by three numbers: the wave- 
length A, the frequency v, and the velocity. The wavelength is 
the distance from crest to crest of the wave, that is the distance 
from one point where the electric field is a maximum to the 
next point at which it is a maximum. ‘The frequency ts the 
rate at which the electric field changes with time at a given 
point. The product of these two is the velocity of the wave— 
for an electromagnetic wave, this is the velocity of light, and 
we write c =Av. More generally, we can define in a similar 
wave the wavelength and frequency for a sound wave, or a 
water wave, and their product is the velocity of the wave, 
that is the speed of sound and the speed of progress of the 
crest of a water wave respectively. 

Now the important part of a wave motion, which is true of 
electromagnetic waves, sound waves, or water waves, and Is 
indeed very easy to observe with water waves, is that if you 


33 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


have two waves more or less in the same part of space and 
time, they affect each other so that the disturbances add. For 
example, the electric field that comes from having two electro- 
magnetic waves Is the sum of the electric fields of the separate 
waves; so is the magnetic field. That means that I may have 


‘ i’ Vf i , { f *, A’ { [ \ f 
: *, : 4% wo 4% : 


7 ee te 


* ; A § . ay *, TY 
‘or, 2% . . Fy fs ~ fF 
V/A tira > 2 ree a 
Sf J ‘dé NAS \ ‘nf \/ a ‘ve wd % 


(a) Two waves cancelling to give zero disturbances 


(b) Two waves adding to give a disturbance larger than either 


another wave that Is added to a given one in such a way that 
the electric fields add or in such a way that they cancel, 
depending on how they lie with respect to each other. An 
important point is that the intensity of light or electromag- 
netic radiation, the energy it carries, and many of the effects 
it produces are proportional not to the electric field but to its 
square. Looking at the diagram, you see that waves can inter- 
fere with each other both by adding and producing twice the 
height of the wave and therefore four times the intensity, or 
destructively, according to the upper curve (a), so that where 
one wave is big and positive, the other wave is big and negative, 
and you get zero for an answer. These are the general 
phenomena of waves which I need to presume, I hope not 
wholly irresponsibly, that I have told you about, and which 
we shall be using all evening in our discussion. We must 


34 


ATOM AND FIELD 


remember that these properties are true of all waves—water 
waves, sound waves, and all electromagnetic waves, from 
those that one uses for the longest wave radio transmission 
through microwaves, through heat, through light, through 
ultraviolet light, through X-rays, and up to the highest 
frequencies there can be. 

One consequence of this wave property is that light which 
comes through different paths may interfere and I will give 
just two examples of that; one of which we will have to 
return to. 


we Ne 


The sketch shows a source S, a diaphragm with very thin 
slits in it, and out of these slits diverging waves of light. The 
curved lines represent the crests of these waves: where the 
crests coincide you will have particularly intense light; 
where the crest and a trough coincide you will have none at 
all. You see that the presence of the two slits gives rise to a 
pattern of brightness and darkness, which either slit alone 
would not explain and which is characteristic of the wave- 
length and the separation of the slits. If there were a large 
number of slits, all spaced the same distance apart, then light 


35 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


would only move in certain directions from this collection of 
slits, which is called a grating, and these directions are simply 
related to the ratio of the wavelength and the separation of the 
slits. 

Now, a century of experimentation showed how beauti- 
fully the phenomena of the propagation of light—its reflection, 
its passage through slits, its diffraction from gratings, its 
dispersion—could be explained in terms of these simple ideas 
of the interference of waves. There is not to this day the 
slightest doubt that this is a correct description; it is used every 
time a radar antenna Is designed and any time that one really 
wants to deal with electromagnetic radiation and its propaga- 
tion around objects; the light or radio waves from different 
gaps are brought together and give a resultant intensity 
depending on the relative phases of the interacting waves. In 
this case the waves are abstract in the sense that there is no 
matter moving and, by Chapter I, no aether moving either; 
but they are concrete in the sense that there are electric and 
magnetic fields, the ones that Faraday dreamed so much about, 
which you can measure; every one of these crests corresponds 
to a measurement of a big electric field at a certain time, and 
every trough corresponds to a big magnetic field at a certain 
time. (These measurements would be extremely tedious to 
do with light, but with long radio waves it is a straight- 
forward experiment that does not teach you very much, but 
confirms your sanity.) Now, it was exactly at the turn of the 
century that this harmonious picture of the nature of electro- 
magnetic radiation received a sharp Jolt from which it has 
never recovered. T’o explain this, it would be easier to skip 
history entirely, but I will say how Planck discovered it. 

When you have a gas of molecules each molecule has, on 
the average, about the same energy as every other and this 


36 


ATOM AND FIELD 


energy is a simple measure of the temperature of the gas. If 
you have electromagnetic waves in an enclosure you can 
convince yourself that every wavelength should also have 
about the same energy as every other, and this energy is equal 
to the temperature of the matter which forms the enclosure 
and is emitting the waves. This is, on the face of it, absurd, 
because the theory of relativity says that there can be no limit 
on how short wavelengths are since all you have to do to make 
them shorter is get on a fast train, and they will be shorter. 
Therefore, there will be an infinite energy content to any 
piece of space that is allowed to come into thermal equilibrium. 
Energy would simply drain out of matter and everything would 
be absolutely cold, because all the energy would go into the 
electromagnetic field. This, it was known, is not true. In 
struggling to find out why, Planck had a very great advantage. 
He knew that, for very low frequencies of the light waves, this 
rule that all the light waves in the enclosure had the same 
energy was right. He knew that for very high frequencies 
something quite different happened, and the energy that a 
wave had was the energy that would be required if one had to 
create a quantum of energy given by the expression Av. 
He introduced the constant 4 to connect these two régimes 
which had earlier been studied; it has always since been called 
Planck’s constant. It is, as you see, a constant which, when 
multiplied by a frequency, gives one an energy, and it will 
recur; it is the signal, the mark, of atomic physics and is 
called the quantum of action or Planck’s constant. Planck 
was able to derive a formula which reconciled this behaviour 
of the equilibrium properties of the enclosed radiation, and 
also to determine a reasonably accurate value of his constant, 
but only by employing the technically possible assumption 
that light was not emitted continuously as a wave should be, 


37 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


but only in energy packets, which correspond to a multiple of 
the frequency, viz. Av. He did not believe this, and for many 
many years struggled to get his formula without making this 
dreadful assumption which contradicted the whole idea of 
light as a wave. Because here it was being said, not that light 
was emitted, like radio waves, simply by charges moving 
around, but that light was emitted in a whole single operation 
with a unit of energy, and if that amount of energy could not 
be emitted, nothing happened; if that could be emitted, it 
happened; if it could happen more than once, it happened 
more than once. Well, in this very statistical and complex and 
dark area it was possible to suppose that Planck had made a 
mistake, and he lived for years in the confident hope that he 
had made a mistake. 

But he was wrong; and a great blow was struck to his hope 
when, in the same year that Einstein made the special theory 
of relativity, he made another paper, which was to prove even 
more mischievous. The second paper is very closely related to 
Planck’s discovery. If you shine light that is not too red on a 
metal surface, electrons, which are part of the metal, will 
come out of it. The very odd thing which had been found in 
the laboratory was that if you shine the light twice as strongly 
it does not affect the velocity of the electrons; rather, it 
affects their number. But, of course, if you are thinking of 
light as an electromagnetic wave and the wave is more in- 
tense, you would expect that the electrons would have more 
work done on them. But not at all. The energy of the electrons 
is unrelated to the intensity of the light, but very simply 
related to the frequency of the light and to Planck’s constant. 


E=hv-B 
The light energy Ay is the same energy that Planck had 


38 


ATOM AND FIELD 


introduced five years earlier, E is the energy of the electron 
as it moves away from the metal and B is not fundamental: 
it is the work that you have to do to get the electron out of the 
metal in the first place. ‘This formula has been very accurately 
and beautifully confirmed. And Einstein said: “This clinches 
it. Obviously there are units of energy in light.” When light is 
absorbed by an electron, it happens in multiples of these units 
hv, and then the energy is simply carried off by the electron 
and that explains the formula. 

But, of course, this did not do away with the century of 
experiences on wave phenomena. Interferometers and prisms, 
microscopes and radio waves still studied light in terms of the 
propagation of waves. On the other hand, here was this dis- 
continuous particle aspect, at least to phenomena in which 
light was absorbed or emitted, which could not be laughed 
away. Moreover, this was even confirmed by experiments 
with very hard light, viz. X-rays. In fact, when they collide 
with electrons, they act as though they had the energy given 
by & = Av and a momentun, or impulse, p = /A, which is 
just h, the same constant, divided by the wavelength. Thus 
one could see that light acted in collision with electrons like a 
particle with a momentum and an energy related to its 
frequency and wavelength by these very simple rules, consist- 
ent with the rules connecting energy and momentum for an 
electromagnetic wave, but involving both this constant A, 
and a discrete transfer of energy and of momentum from 
light to electron in a collision between the two. This experi- 
ment, called the Compton effect, had led to a very serious and 
critical view as to the dual nature of light by about 1923. 

Probably the situation could not have been readily under- 
stood had it not also been compounded by another and equally 
puzzling aspect: this time not directly the behaviour of light, 


D 39 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


but the behaviour of matter on an atomic scale. Let me 
remind you that, just before this century, Thomson discovered 
the universal ingredient of ordinary matter, the negatively 
charged electron which is very light compared to the atom, 
some 1/2,000th as heavy or less, and which has the unit of 
charge which we find uniquely throughout the atomic world. 
Thomson rightly imagined that the number of electrons in an 
atom was connected with its chemical properties and its 
place in the periodic table, so that atomic hydrogen would 
have one electron, helium two, urantum—g2. He knew the 
atoms were neutral, but he did not know where the neutraliz- 
ing positive charge was; and his best guess was that it was 
probably extended over a volume of the order of the size of 
atoms, that is a sphere 1/100th of a millionth of a centimetre 
in diameter. This was the Thomson model of the atom, and 
it raised no problems, because it was a rather vague model, and 
you could not do very much about it. But Thomson was able 
to show that some regularities, like the occurrence of regular 
numbers and periods, such as occur in the periodic table, 
might be expected from such a model. However, this model 
did not last long, because of the work of Rutherford, which 
started at McGill, continued at Manchester, and was 
finally brought to fruition there. Rutherford showed that 
positive charge of an atom was not spread out over atomic 
dimensions. 

How he did this is itself very beautiful. He had been 
studying naturally radioactive radiations, coming from 
uranium, radium, and related heavy elements; he got their 
family relationships straight and decided which chemical 
elements were produced by the natural decay of which other 
elements and which disintegrations followed which; he had 
distinguished three types of radiation: positively charged and 


40 


ATOM AND FIELD 


heavy, which were the nuclei of helium and which he called 
alpha-particles; negatively charged, and light, which were 
electrons; and neutral, which were very high frequency light. 
He did not at first know that alpha-particles were helium 
nuclei, but he thought they were, and he became interested in 
what happened to them, as they passed through matter. They 
did not do what they would if atoms had a uniform smooth 
positive charge, and very light electrons located within it, as 
suggested by the Thomson model. 

In that case there could never be a big force to deflect the 
alpha-particle, because the smooth charge does not have 
sufficiently concentrated electricity and the electrons have 
much too little mass to knock an alpha-particle around, for it is 
7,000 times as heavy. But he found that indeed the alpha- 
particles were, not often but regularly, deflected through very 
big angles indeed, and from this he concluded that the positive 
charge was concentrated, and that it was concentrated, along 
with most of the mass of the atom, in a region with dimensions 
smaller than 1/10,000th of atomic dimensions. And so he 
discovered the atomic nucleus which has the positive charge 
which gives the atom its chemical and most of its physical 
properties. 

This was a marvellous story, but it was only the beginning 
of really very great puzzles. Think of the simplest of all such 
atoms, the hydrogen atom. It has a proton, one nuclear 
particle, at the centre with a unit positive charge, and some- 
how there is an electron associated with this to make up a 
system which has a well-defined size. The size 1s standard; 
unless the hydrogen atom has been through a wringer or been 
hit over the head, it always is the same. And it emits a certain 
characteristic batch of colours when you bash it. Not one 
of these properties could be intelligible on the basis of Newton’s 


41 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


ideas about motion and the idea of how charged particles 
affect each other, because Rutherford had proved that the 
field around the proton was the electric field. This field is in its 
form exactly like the gravitational field around the sun: the 
forces fall off with the inverse square of the distance and they 
all point towards the proton, for in this case they are attractive, 
since the electron and proton are oppositely charged. Conse- 
quently, it is just the problem of the planetary motions all over 
again. Now, one obvious thing that we know about planetary 
motions Is they can be more or less anything: any ellipse, in 
any plane, with any eccentricity, and any size. Therefore, it 
is most odd that all hydrogen atoms should have the same size 
and act in the same way. There is no trace in classical 
physics of any reason why each hydrogen atom should not be 
of a different size and shape and behaviour than the next or 
any other. 

Furthermore, although I have not gone into this in detail, 
we know that if we have a charged particle describing a 
circular or elliptical orbit, it is accelerated, and an accelerated 
charged particle will make light waves and lose energy. But 
hydrogen, unless it is bashed, does not do anything of the kind. 
It can sit for years and centuries quite content without ever 
changing. It does not lose its energy and the electron does not 
spiral in and disappear into the nucleus. And finally the laws 
relating the colours of light that are emitted from such a 
classical orbit are a little more complicated, but similar in 
form to the laws determining the sound frequencies produced 
by a violin string. There will be a fundamental which is 
connected to the period of revolution of the electron in the 
orbit and there will be overtones or harmonics, i.e. multiples 
of this frequency; whereas the observed frequencies for atomic 
spectra, hydrogen included, are not harmonics or integral 


42 


ATOM AND FIELD 


multiples of a fundamental frequency, but rather complicated 
arrangements of differences between numbers which are not 
harmonically related. To be specific all the observed frequen- 
cies can be written as 
y=vw-—-Vy 

when » and vy are two of a sequence of numbers v1, v2, v3 
.... In the case of hydrogen, these numbers had been recog- 
nized by Balmer, and in general they characterize the atom in 
question. Inother words, the uniqueness of atom systems(which 
isharder to prove, but just as true, foranatom with g2 electrons) 
expressed in the law of the light emitted when they are 
excited, their stability, and the fact that they are all the same 
size, had no roots in any then existing piece of physics. This was 
the very great predicament which caused Bohr to make one 
of those wild guesses which even his own great caution was 
unable to keep from looking very revolutionary. Bohr said: 
‘For reasons which we don’t yet understand, an atom Is not 
characterized by classical orbits, but it is characterized by a 
set of states which are essentially stationary, which don’t 
change in time.’ Of these the most familiar and important is 
the one with the lowest energy, the ground state, and that 
lasts for ever, unless the atom is disturbed. These states have 
different energies and those which have more energy than the 
ground state may not be stable; a transition may occur from 
such a state to a lower one spontaneously. We remember that 
each frequency emitted from a given atomic species can be 
written as vy = vy—v2, and we may make this into an in- 
telligible equation by multiplying it by 4, Planck’s constant: 


hy = hy, —hvz. 


Then each term in this equation is an energy, and we could 
assume that the two quantities, hv; and hve, are the energies of 


43 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


two states in the atom, and the quantity Ar Is the energy of the 
quantum of light that is emitted in the transition between 
them. ‘I cannot’, said Bohr, ‘describe these transitions. ‘They 
are not motions in any classical sense. They are something 
new that I don’t understand.’ Bohr went on to say: ‘I can give 
you a rule, in some cases, for I calculated the energies for 
these states, and this I can do in terms of the properties of the 
corresponding classical orbits.’ But Bohr did ot say, and this 
turned out not to be true, that these states have anything in 
common with orbits. For one thing, an orbit is a motion and 
something changes with time. The stationary state is Just 
what it says: it does not change with time at all. 

We have now reached the crisis of quantum theory; but 
before we get through with this story we will see that we have 
a vast extension of our idea of intelligibility in science, that 
we have a vast generalization of what we mean by objective 
knowledge, and that we have a much better analogue to the 
human predicament than could possibly have been built on 
Newtonian physics. 

Our crisis arose in two studies which, it turns out, are very 
closely related. The first was the discovery that, although all 
electromagnetic waves, including light, are described so 
perfectly as wave phenomena showing interference and giving 
diffraction patterns, nevertheless, in their transactions with 
matter, they have a discrete character, behaving like light 
quanta, with definite energy and definite momentum, and 
that they negotiate with matter by giving up this energy, or 
by taking it from matter or by colliding with matter in an 
elastic collision. Secondly, we had the problem, created by 
Rutherford’s discovery of the atomic nucleus, of what in the 
dickens the electrons were doing in the neighbourhood of the 
nucleus. They were not moving on planetary orbits, they 


44 


ATOM AND FIELD 


were not radiating, they were not behaving like a small solar 
system; but they were, for the most part, in stationary states, 
essentially stable, the lowest one completely stable, as Bohr 
said. When they moved from one state to another, this was 
not a motion which could be pictured in space and time; but 
the energy difference between the energies of the stationary 
states could appear in a form of radiation, the corresponding 
light quantum. There were rules which were not precise and 
not generally applicable and which I shall not write down, 
that Bohr gave for identifying the energy of these states. 

Bohr knew that this was a radical departure and an incom- 
prehensible one and he immediately followed it up with a 
suggestion very much like that which guided Einstein, 
namely that this new scheme, which seemed so wild and un- 
familiar, must, in some situations, reproduce the world we 
knew. Those situations were ones in which very highly 
excited states of the atom were involved, in which many 
stationary states were involved, and where the discreteness of 
the stationary state and the finiteness of Planck’s constant 
would not make very much difference. This he called the 
‘correspondence principle’. The new theory must describe 
the world of Newton and the world of Maxwell when we are 
away from the discrete elements that characterize the quan- 
tum theory. This principle turned out to be a most powerful 
tool; and by 1925 it had been possible to write down laws not 
involving any image of motion, not involving any clear 
connexion with Newton’s laws or with particles in orbits, 
but laws which nevertheless were generalizations of Newtonian 
mechanics and which directly described the connexion 
between transitions between atomic states and the properties 
of the atomic state themselves. 

I am glad that it did not stay at that, because this is very 


45 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


hard to explain without mathematics. I think my first paper 
dealt with a simple problem of a molecule with two atoms by 
this machinery, but it was very hard to interpret what this 
was about and very hard to solve problems. The solution 
which most of us find easiest to explain and which is in fact 
identical with that which the ‘correspondence principle’ led to, 
came in a very different way. It came in a wild idea that was 
very soon generalized and verified, and the wild idea was that 
there should be a wave associated not just with electro- 
magnetism, but also with every kind of particle in nature, 
specifically with an electron. 

These waves are not electric and magnetic disturbances; 
what they are I will say in a minute. But the relations 
which characterize the connexion between the wave prop- 
erties of light and its energy momentum were preserved, 
VIZ: 


E=h 
p= Ar. 


I have used the same letters, v and A for frequency and wave- 
length, E and p for energy and momentum. This was 
proposed by de Broglie, who was able to show that one could 
get a plausible account of the stationary states of the hydrogen 
atom by the requirement that those states would be realized 
in which standing waves could be established which were in 
resonance, that is where the number of wavelengths in the 
circumference of the Bohr ‘orbit’ would be an integer. This 
was pretty shaky and it was thoroughly disbelieved—I 
believe his paper was refused publication. Nevertheless, it was 
right, and within a year one had found evidence that electrons 
are indeed in some way wave-like, because they show inter- 
ference and they diffract just as light does and just as X-rays do. 


46 


ATOM AND FIELD 


Also within a year, one found a less sketchy way of de- 
scribing the relation between the propagation of these waves 
and the simple forces present in something like a hydrogen 
atom, where the electron is simply subject to the electric 
attraction of the proton. This universal wave-particle duality 
immediately did several things. It explained the existence of 
stationary states, not as orbits, but as something new with no 
analogue in classical theory, as things which indeed were 
steady in time. But they were not static in this sense! If 
you measured the kinetic energy or the average square momen- 
tum of an electron in a stationary state it would not be zero, 
but it would be the same at any time as it was at any other. It 
would not change in the course of time. A close connexion 
between the properties of these waves and Bohr’s ‘correspond- 
ence principle’ was very quickly set up. But I will not turn 
to these questions, which are a little mathematical, but rather 
to the way in which the discovery of the universality of wave- 
particle duality gave a clue as to the relations between the 
wave aspects and the particle aspects of light and of all matter. 
It is also true that a brick is associated with a wave, but it is 
not a useful thought, because the brick is very much bigger 
than its wavelength, and we shall never see the interference 
effects that correspond to macroscopic objects. 

The wave-particle duality refers to an individual event and 
that is a very very striking thing. Let us think again of our 
two slits. The source may be a light source, or it may be an 
electron source. The interference acts between the crests of 
the waves to produce a bright spot in the pattern, or destruct- 
ively between a crest and a trough to get very little light. This 
not only describes what happens when you have a lot of 
light coming from a source, but it describes perfectly well 
what happens when the light is very faint and you expose a 


47 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


photographic plate for a long time. It describes,in other words, 
the behaviour of individual quanta of light or individual elec- 
trons leaving the source. That fact tells us that the relation 
of the wave to the finding of the particle is a statistical one: 
where the wave Is strong, we are likely to find the particle, and 
where the wave, because of destructive interference, is weak, 
we are unlikely to find it. More than that, the reconciliation 


. a) 


of the wave-particle problem involves the following con- 
siderations. If you think of this experiment in terms of a light 
quantum going through one of the slits and being affected by 
the other slit through which it does not go, you are led to an 
impossible description of nature, because then things which are 
not involved in an experiment may affect the outcome. Thus, 
our presence here tonight may affect the outcome of an 
experiment in the reactor building a little away; such an idea 
has no end. The point then is this: in such a set-up you will 
observe the interference of the light or the electron waves 
passing through the two slits (or in the more general case, 
you will get the unidirectional character of light transmitted 


48 


ATOM AND FIELD 


through a long grating of slits), but you will only do so as 
long as you leave the experiment as it is with no attempt to 
find out through which hole the light or the electron passed. 
Once you arrange to have a little spring in one of the slits, 
so that when the light is bounced on that slit you notice it, 
you will have destroyed the interference pattern and you will 
get only the pattern that you would have if that slit, and that 
slit alone, were open. How can this be? 

It can be because not just the light and the electron, but the 
slits themselves have the character of being represented by a 
wave field. Now a wave field, however abstract it may be, has 
the property that if you want it concentrated in a little 
region of space you must have different wavelengths present 
which will reinforce each other in that region of space and 
cancel outside it. If 4x is a dimension of the region of space, 
there must be a spread of wavelengths 4A, such that 


I r? 

AWA) F3 Ar> 53 
the smaller the region in which you wish to confine the 
disturbance, the larger must be the spread of the wavelengths. 
But if you look at this formula, and remember that p = h/A, 
you will see that there must be a spread of momenta involved. 
Indeed, the equations show that 4p4x>h. In words, the 
spread in momentum multiplied by the spread in position 
cannot be less than the quantum of action, Planck’s constant. 
This result is true for the light, for the electron, for the slit, 
and for anything else that you want to study. This provides a 
completely consistent restriction on how you may and how 
you may not use the idea of wave and the idea of particle. 
The restriction is consistent, because it is universal in that 
every measuring instrument that you use Is as limited in its 


49 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


ability to define at the same time both position and momentum 
as is the object that you are studying. 

In actual fact, these waves represent not electric or mag- 
netic fields, buta state of information. They represent what you 
have learned by an experiment. Suppose, for instance, that you 
set out to determine that light passed through the upper slit, 
or to determine that it was monochromatic light emitted from 
the source. These two complementary measurements are, in 
fact, mutually exclusive, because by the time that you had 
detected the passage of the light through the slit, you would 
have allowed it to collide with a slit in an effective manner, 
and thereby to destroy your confidence as to its colour (which 
is essentially its wavelength). The colour would have been 
changed by the collision. These waves have a well-defined 
relation to statistical prediction in that, as in the case of light, 
their square determines the intensity, which in this case is the 
probability of finding the particle, either light quantum or 
electron. They also represent in a general way the kind of 
information which you can obtain about an atomic system, 
whether it be its momentum, its position, its energy, or any 
other possible kind of study you may wish to make of it. 

In deciding what measurement is possible, we must take into 
account the fact that not only the system, but everything we 
can use to observe it with, is subject to the limitation of com- 
plementarity, of which this uncertainty relation between the 
definition of the momentum of a particle and the definition of 
its position is the most famous and the most fundamental 
example. If you have an atom, the stationary states are not 
orbits. TI’o produce orbits you must take a whole mass of 
stationary states and build up the waves in a suitable manner 
by adding the waves of stationary states. So an orbit is comple- 
mentary to a stationary state; you can realize one or the other, 


50 


ATOM AND FIELD 


but if you do one, the other is foreclosed. It is also the same 
with a light quantum; you may have a probability wave for a 
light quantum, and that is what we have been talking about 
here; but if you want to build up an electromagnetic wave 
you must have many light quanta and you must superimpose 
the waves from many light quanta to make a good old- 
fashioned electromagnetic wave such as we send and receive. 
We know that there are indeed many quanta in such waves. 

The important point is that it is not merely that we do not 
always know everything that in classical mechanics we thought 
we could know, like the position and momentum of an object; 
if that were so, you could say: ‘Well, I know its momentum 
and I will suppose that it is distributed somehow over different 
possible positions and I will calculate what I’m interested in 
and take the average.” But you must not do that. If you 
suppose that an object whose momentum you have determined 
by experiment has a distribution in positions, no matter what 
the distribution, you will get the wrong answer. It is not that 
you do not know it; it is that it is not defined. The experi- 
ment which gives you the momentum forecloses the possi- 
bility of your determining the position. If you welch on it and 
say, ‘Well, I want to know the position in the first place’, 
then you can, but then you lose the knowledge which the 
earlier experiment had given. 

One is thus led to a view that a good, well-designed observa- 
tion gives information. This will determine a wave field, and 
this wave field develops in time in a quite causal way. That ts, 
if you know it at one time its future will be also known. From 
this wave field, by taking its square, you can determine the 
probability for the outcome of another experiment at the 
future time. These predictions have been checked and checked 
and checked, and in some wonderful cases are right to one 


51 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


part in ten billion, or something like that. When you make 
your new observation to check the prediction you generally, 
but not always, render the old wave function no longer a 
reasonable description of the system. You also have wild 
situations in which you may use one particle to study another 
and in which, depending on what you do with the test particle, 
you may produce a state for the other which either has a well- 
defined momentum, or a well-defined position. You cannot 
do both and you exercise your option by what you do with 
the observing particle rather than with the observed particle. 
This gives in a most vivid way a notion of how limited the 
objectivity of an atomic system is, because apart from a 
description of what you have done to study its properties, it Is 
not logically possible to assign properties to that atomic system. 
You cannot say: ‘I think it is in this part of space and maybe 
it has such and such a velocity. Let me try it out.’ You have 
to take into account, in order to give it any properties at all, 
what you have done to observe it or what you know of its 
history. In other words, you have to take into account the 
relation of this object to the world of nature, not to you as a 
human being, but to you as one of the many physicists who are 
in the game. 

This theory is, therefore, one which has forced us to a 
quite different notion of what we mean by objectivity. All 
over the world, in France, in Japan, in New Zealand, in 
communist countries, we talk about atomic physics, and we 
check each other’s experiments. In that sense it is a most 
objective part of our knowledge, and a most well-verified one. 
These comparisons are possible because we can tell each 
other how we have gone about an experiment and what we 
saw and what we found. Mistakes are made, but they are 
found very quickly. The objectivity which we see in this is 


52 


ATOM AND FIELD 


not a characteristic that you can look up in a book, it is not 
an ontological characteristic of the atom at all. It is a 
characteristic of the way we can talk with each other about it, 
of the lack of ambiguity and of the reproducibility and the 
verifiability of our communication with each other. 

Quantum theory ts, of course, an acausal theory in the 
sense that events happen for which no precise cause can be 
determined or given. A given nucleus disintegrates at three 
o’clock on the afternoon of a certain day. No one in the world 
could find out when that would happen until it did happen, 
but he could give a law saying how many in 100,000 nuclei 
of the same kind would disintegrate in any interval of time. It 
is a non-determinist theory. There is no possibility, as there 
was in Laplace’s nightmare, of knowing everything about the 
world right now—not a very plausible assumption—and 
therefore knowing all about its future—not a very happy out- 
come. In every experiment, in atomic physics, you look at 
something, or have other ways of knowing something about 
the system; it develops according to laws of wave propagation 
which are simpleand well known; thenyou look again and you 
get an answer. Everything about this is quite different from 
the Newtonian picture. You are free in your choice of what 
you are going to look at to begin with. You are free in what 
question you ask later; but the event itself is unique. You 
can try it again and it will not in general give the same answer, 
because the connexion between the two experiments is a 
statistical one, not a necessary one. 


53 


III. War and the Nations 


I have been discussing the idea of complementarity: that it is 
impossible to measure precisely two complementary aspects of 
a physical system. Always when you talk about an atomic 
system it may be big, it may be a crystal, it may be a nucleus, 
it may have billions and billions of atoms in it, but always it is a 
finite part of the world; and in order that you can make an 
observation of it, you must use the rest of the world for the 
machinery with which you do it. Especially Bohr has pointed 
out the analogies between this situation of complementarity 
and familiar traits in life. He has had, I think, a double 
purpose: one to illuminate the situation in physics and one to 
reinforce our interest in complementary aspects of human life. 

A favourite one is this. When I write with the chalk it is 
part of me and I use it without any separation between it and 
my hand. When I look at it and get interested in what it Is 
and put it under a microscope, it is an object of study. I can 
do one or the other, but the effective doing of one obviously 
forecloses the effective doing of the other. I may, as we all 
have to, make a decision and act or I may think about my 
motives and my peculiarities and my virtues and my faults 
and try to decide why I am doing what I am. Each of these 
has its place in our life, but clearly the one forecloses the 
other. We may talk, as we increasingly do, about the physical 
disposition and chemical mechanisms in living objects, but 


54 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


when we talk about living objects we also need to talk about 
the purpose for which these mechanisms have been developed 
and have survived. Both methods of description have a valuable 
part, to give either up is to impoverish our understanding 
of life; but they are not things that can be done at once 
without confusion. 

There are many other examples. Perhaps one of the deepest, 
because it is the most familiar, is that we all encounter situa- 
tions in our life in which we look at the predicament of a 
man, a friend perhaps, or a son, and see it in the light of what 
is good for him and of our love for him. We know that 
others will look at it in the light of what is just and what is 
proper in society. We know that the good societies, if there 
are any, the better societies are those in which this con- 
flict and this dichotomy and this element of complemen- 
tarity is not too terrible. Still, we all know, because of the 
tragic quality of life, that it will always be there. Those who 
have lived through the unravelling of the heart of the atomic 
paradox as it existed twenty-five or thirty years ago believe 
that one has come to a vision of the physical world with far 
more room for the human spirit in it than could have been 
found in the great mechanism of Newton. 

Very soon physicists, pleased with what they had found 
and enormously armed with new theoretical and mathematical 
methods, turned to other problems—not Just atomic physicists, 
but their colleagues in chemistry, in mathematics, and in 
other branches of physics. For instance, very soon after the 
quantum theory was elucidated one began really to make a 
theory of the electron, the first fundamental particle, other 
than light, to be studied in detail. And the positron, the 
counterpart to the electron, which has the same mass, but 
opposite charge, was discovered, and detailed studies were 


E 55 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


made of the beautiful processes of materialization and de- 
materialization, in which a pair of charged particles disappear 
to give two rays of light (two gamma rays), or in which two 
gamma rays collide to make a pair. This is as beautiful an 
example of Einstein’s relation between mass and energy as one 
can ask for. But then we got into another branch of study 
which in the end involved us as a community in politics in 
some sense (I mean it in a good sense—the judgement of the 
good society, not the winning of an election), and in the great 
questions of national and political power. This, of course, is 
not unheard of. Archimedes, in Syracuse, had the same 
troubles, and Hobbes, ten years before Newton’s Principia, 
wrote of them with a dry dispassion. This began to happen 
very slowly and without anyone seeing it, when, armed with 
quantum theory and eager to understand, physicists turned 
their attention not to the behaviour of the atomic electrons 
around the nucleus, but to the nucleus itself. 

This field was very much opened up by two developments. 
One, which occurred in the same year as the discovery of the 
positron, was the discovery of the neutron, the neutral in- 
gredient of atomic nuclei. Thhe second was the design and 
construction of accelerators, machines for giving to charged 
particles sufficient energy to overcome the electric repulsion 
of atomic nuclei, and to get at them and break them up and to 
see what they were made of and how they reacted. By 1939 
we knew quite a lot of how nuclei behaved, of what their 
statlonary states were like, of how they reacted when bom- 
barded, and of what kind of products would be produced. 
Although those were the days of small accelerators, a million 
times less energetic than those now under study, they were 
good enough to give a very good insight into the behaviour of 
atomic nuclei. Rutherford was dead then, in 1939. It was he, 


56 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


who, during the First World War, had produced the first 
artificial transmutation of nuclei, not with an accelerated 
particle, but with one of his beloved alpha-particles. He went to 
his death rather doubtful that large-scale energy releases could 
be practically accomplished on earth, although the energy 
changes were certainly there to be made. We learned more 
of this when, on the basis of studies of nuclei and of what the 
astronomers could tell, it was possible to give a convincing and 
rather detailed account of some of the principal sources of the 
energy of the sun and of many other stars in terms of nuclear 
reactions changing nuclei and releasing energy in the hot 
central regions of these stars. 

Nineteen thirty-nine was the year of fission and was also 
the year of the outbreak of the Second World War; a good 
many changes had come to all people, but also to physicists. 
Early in the 1920s up until the very early 1930s scientists 
from the Soviet Union were welcome and were frequently 
found in the great centres of learning in Europe and warm 
collegial relations were formed then between Russians, 
Englishmen, Germans, Scandinavians, many of which persist 
to this day. That was changed, too, in the 1930s. During the 
1930s very many men of science, like very many other men, 
either had to leave or in conscience did leave Germany. 
Many of them came to Canada, many to the United Kingdom, 
and perhaps most of all to the United States. Some came from 
Italy as well. By 1939 the Western world was no longer a 
suburb of the scientific community, but a centre in its own 
right, and when fission was discovered the first analyses of what 
nuclei were involved and what prospects there were for its 
practical use for the release of energy were largely conducted 
in the United States. I remember that Uhlenbeck, who was 
still in Holland, thought it his duty to tell his government 


57 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


about this development; the Minister of Finance imme- 
diately ordered 50 tons of uranium ore from the Belgian 
mining company, and remarked: ‘Clever, these physicists.’ 

Actually it was very largely the refugee scientists in England 
and in the United States who took the first steps to interest 
their governments in the making of atomic explosives and 
who took some steps, very primitive ones, in thinking out how 
this might be done and what might be involved init. In fact, 
we all know that it was a letter from Einstein, written at the 
suggestion of Szilard, Wigner, and Teller, that first brought 
the matter to President Roosevelt’s attention; in the United 
Kingdom I think it was Simon and Peierls who played this 
early part. Bohr remained in Denmark as long as it was 
humanly possible for him to do so. The governments were 
busy. They had a war on their hands and certainly any 
reasonable appraisal would have suggested that radar, probably 
the proximity fuse, and in principle if not in fact rockets would 
have very much more to do with the outcome of the war 
than would the atomic energy undertaking. It started slowly 
under crazy names like Tube Alloys in the United Kingdom, 
and Department of Substitute Materials in the United States. 
When I came into it my predecessor had the title Co-ordina- 
tor of Rapid Rupture. 

There were really very many questions. Would a bomb 
work and what sort of a thing would it be, how much material 
would it need, what kind of energies would it release; would it 
ignite the atmosphere in nuclear reactions and end us all; could 
it be used to start fusion reactions? There was also the problem 
of producing, in industrial processes that had no previous 
analogue in human history, the very considerable number of 
pounds of the special materials, uranium and plutonium, of 
which the first bombs had to be made. By late 1941 an 


58 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


authorization for production was really given. There was an 
uneasy co-operation between the United Kingdom, Canada, 
and the United States, later substantially to improve, but 
never, I think, to become completely free of trouble, especially 
for our friends from the United Kingdom, though we learned 
much and gained much from all their help. There was also, 
of course, very much secrecy. 

Late in 1942 we decided that we must get to work on how 
to make bombs themselves. On July 16th, 1945, early in the 
morning, the first bomb was exploded. It did a little better than 
we thought it might. One of the guards said: “The long hairs 
have let it get away from them.’ That day, the President of the 
United States, the Prime Minister of England, and Stalin were 
meeting in Potsdam. I believed, because I was told by Dr. 
Bush, that the President would take the occasion to discuss 
this development with Stalin, not in order to tell him how to 
make a bomb, which the President did not know, but to do 
something that seemed important at the time, to treat the 
Russians as allies in this undertaking and to start discussing 
with them how we were going to live with this rather altered 
situation in the world. It did not come off that way. The 
President said something, but it is completely unclear whether 
Stalin understood it or not. No one was present except 
Stalin’s interpreter of the moment and the President, who 
does not know Russian. But it was a casual word and that 
was all. 

The bombs were used against Japan. That had been fore- 
seen and in principle approved by Roosevelt and Churchill 
when they met in Canada and again at Hyde Park. It was 
largely taken for granted; there were questions raised, but I 
believe there was very little deliberation and even less record 
of any deliberation there was. And I would like synoptically, 


59 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


briefly, on the basis of my memory of the timeand of talk with 
many historians who have grappled with it, to tell you what 
little I think about this. I think first of all that we do not know 
and at the moment cannot know whether a political effort to 
end the war in the Far East could have been successful. The 
Japanese Government was deeply divided and stalemated in 
favour of war. The dissident part of the Government had 
made an overture through Moscow to the West. Moscow did 
nothing about it until Potsdam. Stalin told Truman about it. 
Stalin did not seem interested, Truman did not seem interested, 
and nothing happened. This was at the very time when the 
test bomb was successful and a couple of weeks before the 
bombing of Japan. The actual military plans at that time for 
the subjugation of Japan and the end of the war were clearly 
much more terrible in every way and for everyone concerned 
than the use of the bombs. There is no question about that; 
and these plans were discussed with us; they would have 
involved, it was thought, a halfa million or a million casualties 
on the Allied side and twice that number on the Japanese 
side. Nevertheless, my own feeling is that if the bombs were 
to be used there could have been more effective warning and 
much less wanton killing than took place actually in the heat 
of battle and the confusion of the campaign. That ts about all 
that I am clear about in hindsight. That, and one other thing: 
I am very glad that the bomb was not kept secret. I am glad 
that all of us knew, as a few of us already did, what was up and 
what readjustments in human life and in political institutions 
would be called for. Those are the days when we all drank one 
toast only: “No more wars.’ 

When the war was over, the great men of physics spoke 
quite simply and eloquently, Einstein in advocacy of world 
government and Bohr, first to Roosevelt and to Churchill and 


60 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


to General Marshall and then finally quite openly, when 
nobody else listened but the public, of the need to work for a 
world which was completely open. He had in mind that we had 
some very great secrets and that we ought to be willing to 
relinquish them in exchange for the disappearance of secrecy 
from all countries and particularly from the secret-ridden 
communist societies. Stimson, who resigned as Secretary of 
War in September 1945, wrote: ‘Mankind will not be able to 
live with the riven atom, without some government of the 
whole.” Among many reports that we in our innumerable 
commissions produced, I remember two. One of them, which 
remains, I think, to this day Top Secret, ended roughly: 
‘If this weapon does not persuade men of the need for inter- 
national collaboration and the need to put an end to war, 
nothing that comes out of a laboratory ever will.’ The other 
said: ‘If there is to be any international action for the control 
of atomic energy there must be an international community of 
knowledge and of understanding.’ 

All of this was very deep and genuine and I think most of 
our community, and many other people also, believed it 
desirable. It was not exactly what Stalin wanted. And it 
really was not anything to which any government became 
very clearly or deeply or fully committed. In the absence of a 
practical way of getting there, the most that could be done 
was to put forward some tentative and not entirely disin- 
genuous suggestions about the control of atomic energy which, 
if accepted, would have led in the direction of international 
collaboration and in the direction of a suitable beginning of 
world order. That is not how it has worked; and I remind 
you only of two obvious things. We are in an arms race of 
quite unparalleled deadliness—I think this is not the place to 
speak about the amount of devilment that is piled up on both 


61 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


sides, or about the precautions and the difficulties of making 
sure that it does not go off; on the other hand, we have lived 
sixteen and a half years without a nuclear war. In the balance, 
between the very great gravity of the risks we face and the 
obvious restraints that have seen us through this time, I have 
no counsel except that of sobriety and of some hope. 

It may seem wrong to speak of this as an experience of 
physicists. It certainly is not an intellectual challenge like 
that out of which the theory of relativity was born or that 
which gave rise to the solution of the paradoxes of wave- 
particle duality and the quantum theory. I doubt if there is a 
certain specific right idea to be had in the field of how to 
remake the world to live with these armaments and to live 
with our other commitments and our other hopes. But it 1s 
true that we have been marked by our deep implication in this 
development, by the obvious fact that without physics it 
could not have happened, and by the heavy weight which has 
been laid on so many members of this community in counsel- 
ling their government, in speaking publicly and in trying 
above all in the early phases to find a healthy direction. I do 
not think that even our young colleagues, tearing away at the 
new unsolved problems of fundamental physics, are as free of 
preoccupation for their relation to the good life and the good 
society, as we were, long ago, when we were their age. 

There have been, as you know, many deep and painful 
conflicts among technical people, and I think one can pick 
up the paper almost any day and find examples of learned men 
calling their colleagues liars. We are torn by conflicts, and 
this, I think, was not openly and clearly true in 1945 and 
1946. The arms race, the Cold War, the obduracy of the 
political conflict, and the immense and complex and terrifying 
scope of the technological enterprise are not a climate in which 


62 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


the simple discussion of physical problems finds very much 
place. But more than that, of course, these are not physical 
problems and they cannot be settled by the methods of science. 
The question of what our purpose is on earth, the question of 
how we may make a government that will represent these 
purposes, the question of what our own responsibility is, the 
question of what business it is of ours to think about these 
things, are not to be solved in any laboratory or settled by any 
equation or any mathematics. Part of the conflict among 
technical people is like the conflict among all people: it comes 
from conflicting assessments of what our antagonist’s course 
may be, what his behaviour will be—a subject rich in mystery, 
even for the experts. Part of it comes because we are talking 
about a world in which there is no relevant previous ex- 
perience. No world has ever faced a possibility of destruction 
—in a relevant sense annihilation—comparable to that which 
we face, nor a process of decision-making even remotely like 
that which ts involved in this. Those of you who have been 
in battle know how tangled, unpredictable, and unamenable to 
prior planning the course of a battle often turns out to be, 
even when it was well planned. No one has any experience 
with warfare in the nuclear age. ‘These are some of the 
reasons for acrimonious differences as to what fraction of a 
population may survive if you do this or do that, or what you 
may trust our antagonists to do and what you must suspect 
them of doing. In addition, the community of physicists is 
certainly no more than any other free of evil, free of vanity, or 
free of their own glory; we must expect rather ugly things to 
happen and they do. 

But I would really think that on a few rather deep points 
which do not imply the answers to all the questions in which 
we could rightly be interested, we are as a community really 


63 


THE FLYING TRAPEZE 


rather clear as to what our duty Is. It is, in the first place, to 
give an honest account of what we all know together, know in 
the way in which I know about the Lorentz contraction and 
wave-particle duality, know from deep scientific conviction 
and experience. We think that we should give that information 
openly whenever that is possible, that we should give it to our 
governments in secret when the governments ask for it, or, 
even if the governments do not ask for it, that they should be 
made aware of it, when we think it essential, as Einstein did 
in 1939. We all, I think, are aware that it is our duty to 
distinguish between knowledge in this rather special and 
proud, but therefore often abstract and irrelevant, sense, and 
our best guess, our most educated appraisal of proposals which 
rest on things that in the nature of the case cannot yet be 
known, like the little cost of some hundred million to build a 
certain kind of nuclear carrier. We think that it is even more 
important, and even more essential, to distinguish what we 
know in the vast regions of science where a great deal is known 
and more is coming to be known all the time, from all those 
other things of which we would like to speak and should speak 
in another context and in another way, those things for which 
we hope, those things which we value. Finally, I think we 
believe that whenever we see an opportunity, we have the duty 
to work for the growth of that international community of 
knowledge and understanding, of which I spoke earlier, with 
our colleagues in other lands, with our colleagues in com- 
peting, antagonistic, possibly hostile lands, with our colleagues 
and with others with whom we have any community of 
interest, any community of professional, of human, or of 
political concern. 

We think of these activities as our contribution, not very 
different from those of anybody else, but with an emphasis 


64. 


WAR AND THE NATIONS 


conditioned by the experiences of growing, increasing under- 
standing of the natural physical world, in an increasingly 
tangled, increasingly wonderful and unexpected situation. We 
think of this as our contribution to the making of a world 
which is varied and cherishes variety, which is free and 
cherishes freedom, and which is freely changing to adapt to the 
inevitable needs of change in the twentieth century and all 
centuries to come, but a world which, with all its variety, 
freedom, and change, is without nation states armed for war 
and above all, a world without war. 


65 


