Atom and Void 


. | rr 
] ] 
i | | | 4 FF | | 
ry . . a i 
1B) 2 ) | 
Dp, Saeco, ate Ps ee : 
<< orvrr | ~~ > | 
P= a 4] a | 4 | |! [ed 
—_. =F. A a) = » | 
x ~~) — —_ j - 
| | 


Atom and Void 


Atom and Void 


ESSAYS ON SCIENCE 
AND COMMUNITY 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY 


Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540 

Copyright © 1989 by Princeton University Press 

All Rights Reserved 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967 
Atom and void : essays on science and community / 
J. Robert Oppenheimer.—Ist Princeton science library ed. print. 
p. cm.—(Princeton science library) 
Rev. ed. of: Science and the common understanding. 1954 
ISBN 0-691-08547-1 (alk. paper) 
ISBN 0-691-02434-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Science—Philosophy. 2. Science—Social aspects. 
I. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904—1967. Science and the common 
understanding. II. Title. III. Series. 
Q175.065 1989 501—dc20 89-10413 
First Princeton Science Library edition printing, 1989 


10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1, pbk. 


The preface to this volume is © 1989 by Freeman J. Dyson. The first 
six essays were adapted from the 1953 Reith Lectures sponsored by the 
British Broadcasting Corporation. They are © 1953, 1954, by J. Robert 
Oppenheimer, and originally published by Simon & Schuster, Inc., in 
Science and the Common Understanding. They are reprinted here by 
arrangement with Simon & Schuster, Inc. [The seventh essay, “The 
Open Mind,” is © 1955 by J. Robert Oppenheimer; it appeared in The 
Open Mind, published by Simon & Schuster in 1955, and is reprinted by 
arrangement with Simon & Schuster.] The last three essays are edited 
transcripts of lectures delivered in 1962 under the title The Flying 
Trapeze; Three Crises for Physicists, and commissioned by the Whidden 
Lecture Series of McMaster University. The transcriptions are © 1964 
by Oxford University Press, and are reprinted by permission of 
McMaster University, with the approval of Oxford University Press. 


Princeton University Press books are printed on acid-free paper, and 
meet the guidelines for permanence and durability of the Committee 
on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council on 
Library Resources 


Printed in the United States of America by Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, New Jersey 


Contents 


Preface, by Freeman J. Dyson 
CHAPTER ONE 
Newton: The Path of Light 


CHAPTER Two 
Science as Action: Rutherford’s World 


CHAPTER THREE 
A Science in Change 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Atom and Void in the Third Millenium 


CHAPTER FIVE 
Uncommon Sense 


CHAPTER SIX 
The Sciences and Man’s Community 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
The Open Mind 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
Space and Time 


CHAPTER NINE 
Atom and Field 


CHAPTER TEN 
War and the Nations 


Appendix I 
Appendix II 
Acknowledgments 


vii 


143 
154 
157 


Preface 


by Freeman J. Dyson 


WHEN Robert Oppenheimer went to England in 1953 to 
deliver the Reith lectures, the lectures that make up the 
first half of this book, millions of listeners were baffled and 
disappointed. He was then, after Einstein, the second most 
famous living scientist. He had been a prime mover, first 
in the building of atomic bombs, second in the effort to 
establish an international control of nuclear energy, and 
third in the political struggles that raged around the build- 
ing of hydrogen bombs. In 1953 the public already knew 
that he was involved in secret disputes which were to break 
out into the open with the denial of his security clearances 
a few months later. 

The listeners in England expected hot news. They ex- 
pected dramatic statements about the great events and 
great issues of the day. They expected a personal message 
from the man who in those days was widely proclaimed to 
be the conscience of humanity. Instead, they got these lec- 
tures. They got a scholarly and impersonal discussion of 
the history of science. They got a rarified and philosophi- 
cal view of the mysteries of quantum mechanics. They got 
a picture of the human predicament as it might be seen by 
an observer at an immense distance in space and time, 
totally detached from day-to-day events and practical de- 
tails. Barely a word about the bomb. No answers to any of 
the urgent political questions of the 1950s. No glimpse of 
that inner world of action and power in which Oppen- 
heimer had been living for the previous ten years. No won- 
der the listeners were scornful. One of my English friends 
who heard the lectures compared Oppenheimer unkindly 
with the poet Bunthorne in the Gilbert and Sullivan op- 
eretta Patience: 


vili - Preface 


You walk down Piccadilly 
With a poppy or a lily 
In your medieval hand— 
And everyone will say, 
As you walk your mystic way, 
If this young man expresses himself 
In terms too deep for me, 
Why, what a very singularly deep young man 
This deep young man must be. 


Now, thirty-five years later, we can see that Oppen- 
heimer chose his subject-matter wisely. He knew that any 
discussion of current events that attempted to be up-to- 
date would soon be out-of-date. He had no wish to give 
lectures that would cause a political sensation today and be 
obsolete tomorrow. He‘ wanted to speak to the ages, to say 
something of permanent value. As a result, these lectures 
have stood well the test of time. They are as pertinent to 
our situation in 1989 as they were in 1953. The English 
listeners’ loss is our gain. We can now see that Oppen- 
heimer’s sense of history, his awareness of the long past 
and the long future, are the most important part of his 
legacy to mankind. In these lectures, and especially in the 
quotations assembled in the appendix at the end, his sense 
of history shines like a beacon, guiding our footsteps into 
the unknown for centuries to come. 

When he came to give the Whidden lectures in Canada, 
the lectures that make up the second half of this book, less 
was expected of him. Nine years after the Reith lectures 
and eight years after his fall from power, he had become 
a respected elder statesman of science, no longer a worker 
of miracles. Nobody expected political thunderbolts. He 
spoke, as before, quietly, mostly about the history of sci- 
ence. But he allowed himself, in the last lecture, to unbend 
a little, to tell some personal stories about his involvement 
with the bomb and its consequences. His listeners were 
grateful for that last lecture, and we may be grateful too. 

To end this preface I would like to put on record a 
description of Robert Oppenheimer written by Lansing 


Preface - ix 


Hammond in a letter to me in 1979. Hammond was in 
charge of programs and placements for the Common- 
wealth Fund Fellows, young Britons (of which I was one) 
who came to America to study at American universities 
with Fund support. I wrote back, “It is sad that in the 
official memorials to Robert there was never anything said 
or written that gave such a fine impression of Robert in 
action. I hope there may still be a chance sometime to 
make your story public.” Hammond died a few years later 
and this preface gives me the chance that he missed. 

“T’d just received copies of the application papers—60 of 
them—for the 1949 awards. Among them were four or five 
in that, to me, shadowy borderline realm between theoreti- 
cal physics and mathematics. I was in Princeton for a cou- 
ple of days, asking for help on all sides. Summoning all the 
courage I could muster, I made an appointment to see 
Robert Oppenheimer the next morning, leaving the rele- 
vant papers with his secretary. I was greeted graciously, 
asked just enough questions about my academic back- 
ground to put me at ease. One early comment amazed me: 
‘You got your doctorate at Yale in eighteenth-century Eng- 
lish literature—Age of Johnson. Was Tinker or Pottle your 
supervisor?’ How did he know that? 

“Then we got down to business. In less than ten minutes 
I had enough facts to support trying to persuade candidate 
Z that Berkeley was more likely to satisfy his particular 
interests than Harvard; he would fare well at the Institute; 
would be welcome; but Berkeley was really the best choice. 
I was scribbling notes as fast as I could; occasionally a 
proper name produced wrinkles on my forehead. Oppen- 
heimer would flash me an understanding grin and spell 
out the name for me: ‘That may save you some time and 
trouble.’ 

“As I was gathering up my papers, feeling I’d already 
taken up too much of the great man’s time, he asked 
gently: ‘If you have a few minutes you can spare, I’d be 
interested in looking at some of your applications in other 
fields, to see what this year’s group of young Britons are 


x °* Preface 


interested in pursuing over here? I took him at his word, 
and was completely overwhelmed by what ensued: 
‘Umm—indigenous American music—Roy Harris is just 
the person for him, he’ll take an interest in his program. 
Roy was at Stanford last year but he’s just moved to Pea- 
body Teachers College in Nashville. Social psychology, he 
gives Michigan as first choice—umm—he wants a general, 
overall experience. At Michigan he’s likely to be put on a 
team and would learn a lot about one aspect. I'd suggest 
looking into Vanderbilt; smaller numbers; he’d have a bet- 
ter opportunity of getting what he wants.’ (The candidate 
was persuaded to try Vanderbilt for one term, with the 
option of transferring to Michigan if he wasn’t satisfied. He 
spent two years at Vanderbilt, with profit and enthusiasm.) 
‘Symbolic logic, that’s Harvard, Princeton, Chicago or Ber- 
keley; Let’s see where he wants to put the emphasis. Ha! 
Your field, Eighteenth-century English Lit. Yale is an obvi- 
ous choice, but don’t rule out Bate at Harvard, he’s a 
youngster but a person to be reckoned with.’ (My field, and 
I'd not yet even heard of Bate, but I took pains, the next 
time I was in Cambridge, to meet and talk with him.) We 
spent at least an hour, thumbing through all of the 60 
applications. Robert Oppenheimer knew what he was talk- 
ing about. He pleaded ignorance of about two or three 
esoteric programs. Every positive comment or recommen- 
dation was right on target. And so, when it finally came 
time to leave, I couldn’t resist saying that if I could only 
bribe him, once a year, to repeat what he’d just done, it 
would save me months of sweating. He really grinned at 
that. “That wouldn’t be fair to you, Dr. Hammond. It 
would take away the satisfaction and excitement of talking 
with lots of other people and finding out for yourself.’ I 
left, walking on air, head abuzz, most of my problems 
solved. Never before, never since have I talked with such 
a man. No suggestion of trying to impress. No need to. 
Robert Oppenheimer’s was just genuine interest in all 
fields of the intellect; a fantastically up-to-date knowledge 
of what was going on in U.S. graduate schools and research 


Preface - xi 


centers; an intuitive understanding of where a given per- 
son with definite interests would best fit in; and taking 
pleasure in being of help to someone who badly needed it.” 
The Robert Oppenheimer that Hammond saw that 
morning in 1949 was the same Robert Oppenheimer who 
had mastered every detail of the bomb project at Los 
Alamos five years earlier, and had fitted the most appro- 
priate task to each scientist and engineer in his army of 
subordinates. He was equally at home in the world of lit- 
erature and the world of science, in the eighteenth century 
and the twentieth. His listeners in 1953 were surprised to 
hear a voice from the eighteenth century discussing the 
discoveries of the twentieth. Readers of this book need not 
be surprised to find that the continuity of human experi- 
ence over the centuries is its central theme, defining both 
the style and the substance of Oppenheimer’s discourse. 


The Institute for Advanced Study 
Princeton, New Jersey 
April 1989 


Atom and Void 


CHAPTER ONE 


Newton: 
The Path of Light 


SCIENCE HAS changed the conditions of man’s life. It has 
changed its material conditions; by changing them it has 
altered our labor and our rest, our power, and the limits of 
that power, as men and as communities of men, the means 
and instruments as well as the substance of our learning, 
the terms and the form in which decisions of right and 
wrong come before us. It has altered the communities in 
which we live and cherish, learn and act. It has brought an 
acute and pervasive sense of change itself into our own 
life’s span. The ideas of science have changed the way men 
think of themselves and of the world. 

The description of these changes is not simple; it is rich 
in opportunity for error. As for the great material changes 
which science and practical art have made possible—ma- 
chines, for instance, or power, the preservation of life, the 
urbanization of populations, new instruments of war, new 
means of communication and information—these are but 
part of the materials for the analysis of political economy 
and the wisdom and the insight of history. These are 
strands in the tangled affairs of men, and their evaluation 
is no more likely to be final and exhaustive than in any 
other part of history. 

As for the more direct effects of discovery in science on 
the way men think about things which are not themselves 
part of science, the historian of ideas has a similar problem. 
Noting what in actual fact men have said about what they 
thought, who it was that thought it, and why he thought it, 
one finds, as in all history, that the contingent and the 


4 + Chapter One 


unpredictable, the peculiar greatnesses and blindnesses of 
individual men play a determining part. One even finds 
the science of great scientists taken in the name of those 
scientists for views and attitudes wholly foreign and some- 
times wholly repugnant to them. Both Einstein and New- 
ton created syntheses and insight so compelling and so 
grand that they induced in professional philosophers a 
great stir of not always convenient readjustment. Yet the 
belief in physical progress, the bright gaiety, and the rela- 
tive indifference to religion characteristic of the enlighten- 
ment, were as foreign to Newton’s character and preoc- 
cupation as could be; this did not keep the men of the 
enlightenment from regarding Newton as their patron and 
prophet. The philosophers and popularizers who have 
mistaken relativity for the doctrine of relativism have con- 
strued Einstein’s great works as reducing the objectivity, 
firmness, and consonance to law of the physical world, 
whereas it is clear that Einstein has seen in his theories of 
relativity only a further confirmation of Spinoza’s view that 
it is man’s highest function to know and to understand the 
objective world and its laws. 

Often the very fact that the words of science are the 
same as those of our common life and tongue can be more 
misleading than enlightening, more frustrating to under- 
standing than recognizably technical jargon. For the words 
of science—relativity, if you will, or atom, or mutation, or 
action—have been given a refinement, a precision, and in 
the end a wholly altered meaning. 

Thus we may well be cautious if we inquire as to whether 
there are direct connections, and if so of what sort, be- 
tween the truths that science uncovers and the way men 
think about things in general—their metaphysics—their 
ideas about what is real and what is primary; their episte- 
mology—their understanding of what makes human 
knowledge; their ethics—their ways of thinking, talking, 
judging, and acting in human problems of right and 
wrong, of good and evil. 


Newton: The Path of Light - 5 


These relations, the relations between scientific findings 
and man’s general views, are indeed deep, intimate, and 
subtle. If I did not believe that, I should hardly be address- 
ing these lectures to an attempt to elucidate what there is 
new in atomic physics that is relevant, helpful, and inspir- 
ing for men to know; but the relations are not, I think, 
relations of logical necessity. This is because science itself 
is, if not an unmetaphysical, at least a non-metaphysical 
activity. It takes common sense for granted as well as most 
of what has gone before in the specialized sciences. And 
where it adds, alters, or upsets, it does so on the basis of an 
uncritical acceptance of a great deal else. Thus, to the irri- 
tation of many, the assertions of science tend to keep away 
from the use of words like “real” and “ultimate.” The spe- 
cial circumstances of the discovery of scientific truth are 
never very far from our minds when we expound it, and 
they act as a protecting sheath against their unlimited and 
universal acceptance. A few illustrations may make this 
clearer. 


We have discovered atoms. In many ways they act like the 
atoms of the atomists. They are the stutf of which matter 
is made; their constellation and motion account for 
much—in fact, for most of the ordinarily observable prop- 
erties of matter. But neither they nor the smaller, less com- 
posite particles of which they are made are either perma- 
nent, unchanging, or unchangeable. They do not act like 
objects of fixed form and infinite hardness. Such findings 
may be persuasive in discouraging the view that the world 
is made of fixed, immutable, infinitely hard little spheres 
and other shapes; but such findings are not in the nature 
of things conclusive, for one may always hold that the true 
atoms, the immutable, hard atoms, have so far eluded 
physical discovery, but that they are nevertheless there, 
and only when they are found will physics be dealing with 
the ultimate reality. Beyond that, one can hold that, al- 
though they may never be found by physica: experiment, 


6 + Chapter One 


they are the underlying reality in terms of which all else, 
including the world of physics, is to be understood. 

Or, again, we may have discovered that as the nervous 
impulses pass from the retina of the eye toward the brain 
itself their geometric disposition resembles less and less 
that of the object seen. This may complicate or qualify the 
view that the idea is a geometric replica of the object of 
vision. It cannot and need not wholly exorcise it. 

The scientist may be aware that, whatever his findings, 
and indeed whatever his field of study, his search for truth 
is based on communication with other people, on agree- 
ment as to results of observation and experiment, and on 
talking in a common tongue about the instruments and 
apparatus and objects and procedures which he and others 
use. He may be aware of the fact that he has learned almost 
everything he knows from the books and the deeds and 
talk of other people; and, in so far as these experiences are 
vivid to him and he is a thoughtful man, he may be hesitant 
to think that only his own consciousness is real and all else 
illusion. But that view, too, is not by logic exorcised; from 
time to time it may rule his spirit. 

Although any science gives countless examples of the 
interrelation of general law and changing phenomena, and 
although the progress of science has much to do with the 
enrichment of these relations, knowledge of science and 
practice of it and interest in it neither compel nor deny the 
belief that the changing phenomena of the actual world 
are illusion, that only the unchanging and permanent ideas 
are real. 

If, in the atomic world, we have learned—as we have 
learned—that events are not causally determined by a 
strict, efficient, or formal cause; if we have learned to live 
with this and yet to recognize that for all of the common 
experience with ordinary bodies and ordinary happenings 
this atomic lack of causality is of no consequence and no 
moment, neither the one finding nor the other ensures 
that men when they think of the world at large are bound 
to a causal or a non-causal way of thinking. 


Newton: The Path of Light - 7 


These many examples show that there can indeed be 
conflict between the findings of science and what a philoso- 
pher or a school of philosophy has said in great particular 
about some part of experience now accessible to science. 
But they also show that, if there are relationships between 
what the sciences reveal about the world and how men 
think about those parts of it either not yet or never to be 
explored by science, these are not relationships of logical 
necessity; they are not relationships which are absolute and 
compelling, and they are not of such a character that the 
unity and coherence of an intellectual community can be 
based wholly upon it. 

But if these examples indicate, as we should indeed ex- 
pect from the nature and conditions of scientific inquiry, 
that what science finds does not and cannot uniquely de- 
termine what men think of as real and as important, they 
must show as well that there is a kind of relevance—a rele- 
vance which will appear different to different men and 
which will be responsive to many influences outside the 
work of science. This relevance is a kind of analogy, often 
of great depth and scope, in which views which have been 
created or substantiated in some scientific enterprise are 
similar to those which might be held with regard to meta- 
physical, epistemological, political, or ethical problems. 
The success of a critical and sceptical approach in science 
may encourage a sceptical approach in politics or in ethics; 
the discovery of an immensely successful theory of great 
scope may encourage the quest for a simplified view of 
human institutions. The example of rapid progress in un- 
derstanding may lead men to conclude that the root of evil 
is ignorance and that ignorance can be ended. 

All these things have happened and all surely will hap- 
pen again. This means that, if we are to take heart from 
any beneficent influence that science may have for the 
common understanding, we need to do so both with mod- 
esty and with a full awareness that these relationships are 
not inevitably and inexorably for man’s good. 

It is my thesis that generally the new things we have 


8 + Chapter One 


learned in science, and specifically what we have learned in 
atomic physics, do provide us with valid and relevant and 
greatly needed analogies to human problems lying outside 
the present domain of science or its present borderlands. 
Before I talk of what is new I shall need to sketch, with 
perhaps an exaggerated simplicity and contrast, the state 
of knowledge and belief to which these correctives may 
apply. In doing this, we may have in mind that the general 
notions about human understanding and community 
which are illustrated by discoveries in atomic physics are 
not in the nature of things wholly unfamiliar, wholly un- 
heard of, or new. Even in our own culture they have a 
history, and in Buddhist and Hindu thought a more con- 
siderable and central place. What we shall find is an ex- 
emplification, an encouragement, and a refinement of 
old wisdom. We shall not need to debate whether, so al- 
tered, it is old or new. 

There are, then, two sketches that I would like to draw 
of the background for the altered experience of this cen- 
tury. One is the picture of the physical world that began to 
take shape in the years between Descartes’ birth and New- 
ton’s death, that persisted through the eighteenth century, 
and with immense enrichments and extensions still was the 
basic picture at the beginning of our own. 

The second sketch has to do with the methods, the 
hopes, the program, and the style which seventeenth- and 
eighteenth-century science induced in men of learning and 
in men of affairs, with some of the special traits of that 
period of enlightenment which we recognize today as so 
deep in our tradition, as both so necessary to us and so 
inadequate. 

More than one great revolution had ended and had 
been almost forgotten as the seventeenth century drew its 
picture of the physical world. A centuries-long struggle to 
decide whether it were rest or uniform motion that was the 
normal state of an undisturbed body no longer troubled 
men’s minds: the great clarity, so foreign to everyday expe- 
rience, that motion, as long as it was uniform, needed no 


Newton: The Path of Light - 9 


cause and no explaining was Newton’s first law. The less 
deep but far more turbulent Copernican revolution was 
history: the earth revolved about the sun. The physical 
world was matter in motion: the motion was to be under- 
stood in terms of the impetus or momentum of the bodies 
which would change only for cause, and of the force that 
was acting upon it to cause that change. This force was 
immediate and proximate. It produced a tendency for the 
impetus to change, and every course could be analyzed in 
terms of the forces deviating bodies from their uniform 
motions. The physical world was a world of differential 
law, a world connecting forces and motions at one point 
and at one instant with those at an infinitely near point in 
space and point of time; so that the whole course of the 
physical world could be broken down into finer and finer 
instants, and in each the cause of change assigned by a 
knowledge of forces. 

Of these forces themselves the greatest in cosmic af- 
fairs—that which governed the planets in the heavens and 
the fall of projectiles on earth—had been found by Newton 
in the general law of gravity. Was this, too, something that 
spread from place to place, that was affected only instant 
by instant, point by point; or was it a property given as a 
whole, an interaction somehow ordained to exist between 
bodies remote from one another? Newton was never to 
answer this question; but he, and even more than he, Huy- 
gens, studying the propagation of light, were laying the 
foundations for a definite view—a view in which the void 
of the atomists would lose much of its emptiness and take 
on properties from the bodies which inhabited it, which in 
turn would affect bodies far away. 

It was not until the nineteenth century and Faraday that 
the full richness of space began to be understood: how it 
could be the seat not only of gravitational forces produced 
by the mass of material particles but of electric and mag- 
netic forces produced by their charges. Even in Newton’s 
day it was clear that there were very strong forces at work 
in lending to material objects their solidity. Newton wrote: 


10 - Chapter One 


It seems probable to me, that God in the Beginning form’d 
Matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, moveable Particles, 
of such Sizes and Figures, and with such other Properties and 
in such Proportion to Space, as most conduced to the End for 
which he formed them; and that these primitive Particles being 
Solids, are incomparably harder than any porous Bodies com- 
pounded of them; even so very hard, as never to wear or break 
in pieces; no ordinary Power being able to divide what God 
himself made one in the first Creation. 


Newton saw that what held atoms together and made mat- 
ter must be forces of inordinate strength, and he never 
considered their existence without a sense of mystery and 
awe. He did not know, nor do we today know, in what 
subtle way these forces might or might not be related to the 
forces of gravity. 

But for many of his contemporaries and successors these 
questions appeared less pressing than the confidence that, 
once given the forces, the course of nature could be fore- 
told and that, where the laws of gravity could be found, 
other forces would yield to observation and analysis. It is 
only in this century that we have begun to come to grips 
with other instances of antinomy, the apparent irreconcil- 
ability between the differential description of nature, point 
by point, instant to instant, and the total unique law and 
event. It is only in this century that we have had to recog- 
nize how unexpected and unfamiliar that relation between 
bodies and the atoms on the one hand, and that space full 
of light and electricity and gravitational forces on the 
other, could prove to be. 

For the eighteenth century the world was a giant mecha- 
nism. It was a causal world, whether or not gravity and the 
other forces acting on bodies inhered in them by their 
nature or by God’s will or that they, too, grew, through laws 
as rigorous as the laws of motion, from the properties in- 
duced in space by the bodies in it. All that happened had 
its full, complete, immediate, efficient cause. The great ma- 
chine had a determinate course. A knowledge of its pres- 
ent and therefore its future for all time was, in principle, 


Newton: The Path of Light - 11 


man’s to obtain, and perhaps in practice as well. These 
objects with which the world was filled—the heavenly bod- 
ies, the impenetrable atoms and all things composed of 
them—were found by observation and by experiment; but 
it would have occurred to no one that their existence and 
their properties could be qualified or affected by the ob- 
servations that told of them. The giant machine was not 
only causal and determinate; it was objective in the sense 
that no human act or intervention qualified its behavior. 

A physical world so pictured could not but sharpen the 
great gulf between the object and the idea. It would do 
much to bring about that long, critical, and, in its later 
phase, irrational and mystical, view of the relations be- 
tween the knower and the known that started with Locke 
and is perhaps even today not fully or happily ended. 

It is, of course, clear that many developments in science 
that were to flower in the eighteenth and nineteenth centu- 
ries would soon moderate and complicate the harsh basic 
picture of the giant machine and of the vast gulf between 
it and the knowing human mind that thought about it and 
analyzed its properties. This is true of the great develop- 
ment of statistics, which in the end made room for human 
ignorance as an explicit factor in estimating the behavior 
of physical forces. It is true of chemistry, whose phenom- 
ena, whatever their ultimate description, looked so very 
little like the result of matter in motion. It is even more 
true of the biological sciences, where matter in motion, 
ever evident and inevitable, appears both at first sight and 
upon deeper analysis only marginally relevant to what 
makes biological forms interesting. 

But with all of this, and with varying degrees of agree- 
ment and reservation, there was the belief that in the end 
all nature would be reduced to physics, to the giant ma- 
chine. Despite all the richness of what men have learned 
about the world of nature, of matter and of space, of 
change and of life, we carry with us today an image of the 
giant machine as a sign of what the objective world is really 
like. 


12 + Chapter One 


This view of the Newtonian world is oversimplified; per- 
haps any view of what men made of their new sciences, 
their new powers, and their new hopes will be simplified to 
the point of distortion. Science for the eighteenth century 
was not a finished undertaking; and, if men were over- 
whelmed with what they had learned, they were easily re- 
minded of how much was still missing. A rational under- 
standing of the world was not an understanding for one 
generation or one man, as it is alleged that it at one time 
appeared to be to Descartes. The immense discoveries of 
the recent past made it impossible to hold the view that all 
that was really worth knowing had long been known—a 
view that is a sort of parody, in any case, of the Renais- 
sance. 

This was a long journey on which men were embarked, 
the journey of discovery; they would need their wits and 
their resources and their forbearance if they were to get on 
with it. But it was a job in which progress was inevitable, 
and in which the style and success of physical science 
would tend to set the style for all undertakings of man’s 
reason. What there is of direct borrowing from Newtonian 
physics for chemistry, psychology, or politics is mostly 
crude and sterile. What there is in eighteenth-century po- 
litical and economic theory that derives from Newtonian 
methodology is hard for even an earnest reader to find. 
The absence of experiment and the inapplicability of New- 
tonian methods of mathematical analysis make that inevi- 
table. These were not what physical science meant to the 
enlightenment. 

It meant a style of thought, a habit of success, and an 
understanding of community quite typical for the age. 
These are to be found best in the learned communities that 
grew up in Europe and later in America—in the Royal 
Society and in the far more ambitious, far more revolution- 
ary, far more programmatic French Academy. These com- 
munities were infused by a confidence in the power of 
reason and by a sense of improvement constant and almost 
inevitable in the condition of man’s knowledge, and there- 


Newton: The Path of Light - 13 


fore of his actions and his life. They rest on a consensus of 
men, often seeing with their own eyes the crucial experi- 
ment that was to test or to confirm a theory; on the com- 
mon experience of criticism and analysis; on the wide- 
spread use of mathematical methods with all the assurance 
of objectivity and precision that they give us. These were 
communities banded together for the promotion of knowl- 
edge—critical, rapacious to correct error, yet tolerant from 
knowing that error is an inevitable step in acquiring new 
knowledge. These were communities proud of their broad, 
non-sectarian, international membership, proud of their 
style and their wit, and with a wonderful sense of new 
freedom. One may recapture some sense of these commu- 
nities from the writings of the time. The first history of the 
Royal Society is not truly a history but an apology, written 
when the society was only a few years old, explaining it, 
defending it against its critics. Bishop Sprat has this to say: 


Their Purpose is, in short, to make faithful Records of all the 
Works of Nature, or Art, which can come within their Reach; 
that so the present Age, and Posterity, may be able to put a 
Mark on the Errors, which have been strengthened by long 
Prescription; to restore the Truths, that have lain neglected; to 
push on those, which are already known, to more various Uses; 
and to make the way more passable, to what remains unre- 
veal’d. This is the Compass of their Design .. . 

They have tried to put it into a Condition of perpetual In- 
creasing, by settling an inviolable Correspondence between the 
Hand and the Brain. They have studied, to make it not only an 
Enterprise of one Season, or of some lucky Opportunity; but 
a Business of Time; a steady, a lasting, a popular, an uninter- 
rupted Work ... 

It is to be noted, that they have freely admitted Men of 
different Religions, Countries, and Professions of Life. This 
they were oblig’d to do, or else they would come far short of the 
Largeness of their own Declarations. For they openly profess, 
not to lay the Foundation of an English, Scotch, Irish, Popish, or 
Protestant Philosophy; but a Philosophy of Mankind. 


14 + Chapter One 


Reading this today, we can hardly escape a haunting 
sense of its timeliness and a certain nostalgia at how little 
the texture of our life conforms to these agreeable and 
noble ideals. We cannot perhaps wholly forget how much 
these communities owed to the long centuries of Christian 
life and Christian tradition; how much that they then took 
for granted in their inquiries and thoughts, in their whole 
style, derived from a way of life and a history which they 
were about to change beyond all recognition; and how 
deeply this, their program, could alter the very men and 
the very minds to whom their program would in time be- 
come entrusted. 

These, however, were not reflections to darken much 
the eighteenth century or to cast real shadows on that great 
path of light, that renewed hope of men for a growing and 
growingly rational comprehension of their world and of 
themselves. At the very end of the century in another land 
largely nourished and fathered by the enlightenment, a 
gentleman and patriot wrote a letter. He wrote in answer 
to a young friend inquiring about his present course of 
study. He wrote in the last days of the Directorate, when 
the course of history was diverging in alarming and im- 
mense ways from that charted by the men of the French 
Academy. He wrote it about two years before he was to 
assume the Presidency of the United States, there for over 
a century to raise more firmly than ever before the stan- 
dard of man’s freedom, his progress, and his rational 
nature. 


I am among those who think well of the human character 
generally. I consider man as formed for society, and endowed 
by nature with those dispositions which fit him for society. I 
believe also, with Condorcet, as mentioned in your letter, that 
his mind is perfectible to a degree of which we cannot as yet 
form any conception . . . science can never be retrograde; what 
is once acquired of real knowledge can never be lost. To pre- 
serve the freedom of the human mind then and freedom of the 
press, every spirit should be ready to devote himself to martyr- 


Newton: The Path of Light - 15 


dom; for as long as we may think as we will, and speak as we 
think, the condition of man will proceed in improvement. The 
generation which is going off the stage has deserved well of 
mankind for the struggles it has made, and for having arrested 
that course of despotism which had overwhelmed the world for 
thousands and thousands of years. If there seems to be danger 
that the ground they have gained will be lost again, that danger 
comes from the generation your contemporary. But that the 
enthusiasm which characterises youth should lift its parracide 
hands against freedom and science would be such a monstrous 
phaenomenon as I cannot place among possible things in this 
age and country. 


The writer of the letter was Thomas Jefferson. 


CHAPTER TWO 


Science as Action: 
Rutherford’s World 


Ir 1S inherent in the very notion of culture and of tradition 
that there is a cumulative aspect to human life. The past 
underlies the present, qualifies and moderates it, in some 
ways limits it and in some ways enriches it. We understand 
Shakespeare better for having read Chaucer, and Milton 
for having read Shakespeare. We appreciate Trevelyan 
more for knowing Thucydides. We see Cézanne with bet- 
ter eyes for having looked also at Vermeer, and under- 
stand much more in Locke for knowing Aristotle, St. Mat- 
thew for knowing Job. But in actual fact we rather seldom 
bring a knowledge of the earlier to our first acquaintance 
with the later; and if it is true that Job throws light on 
Matthew, it is also true that Matthew throws light on Job. 
We can understand a great deal of what is written today, 
knowing little explicitly of what has been written in the 
past. We can and do know a great deal of what Shake- 
speare means and intends without any knowledge of those 
earlier men who altered and educated his sensibility. 

The cumulative character of science is very different 
and very much more essential. It is one of the reasons for 
the great difficulty of understanding any science in which 
one has not largely become an expert—the science of 
which Hobbes wrote: “Of that nature, as none can under- 
stand it to be, but such as in good measure have attayned 
it.” 

There are at least two reasons for this: one has to do 
with the relation of later discoveries in science to earlier, 
and the other with the use that is made of earlier work in 
science as an instrument of progress. When we find out 


Science as Action + 17 


something new about the natural world this does not su- 
persede what we knew before; it transcends it, and the 
transcendence takes place because we are in a new domain 
of experience, often made accessible only by the full use of 
prior knowledge. The work of Huygens and Fresnel on the 
wave properties of light is as necessary today as it ever was, 
although we know that there are properties of light which 
are left out in their account and their experience, proper- 
ties which, in the context of atomic happenings, are deci- 
sive. Newton’s law of gravitation and his equations of mo- 
tion apply to and underlie immense realms of physical 
experience and are not made wrong by the fact that in 
other and still vaster spheres they must be replaced by the 
broader laws of Einstein. The chemical theory of valency 
has been explained, elucidated, and, to some small degree, 
extended by an understanding, in terms of the behavior of 
electrons and nuclei, of what goes on in chemical bonding; 
but the chemical theory of valency is not superseded and 
will presumably be used as long as man’s interest in chem- 
istry continues. The foundations of solid fact and the laws 
which describe it persevere through the whole course of 
science, to be refined and adapted to new contexts but 
never to be ignored or cast out. 

But this is only a part of the story. It is a recurring 
experience of scientific progress that what was yesterday 
an object of study, of interest in its own right, becomes 
today something to be taken for granted, something un- 
derstood and reliable, something known and familiar—a 
tool for further research and discovery. Sometimes the 
new instrument which is used to extend experience is a 
natural phenomenon, only barely qualified or controlled 
by the experimenter. We are familiar with the use of calcite 
crystals to produce two separate beams of polarized light. 
We know that the cosmic rays are both an object of investi- 
gation in themselves and a tool of hitherto unparalleled 
power for probing the properties and transmutations of 
primordial matter here on earth and in the laboratory. 
Sometimes past knowledge is embodied not in a natural 


18 + Chapter Two 


phenomenon but in an invention, or in elaborate pyramids 
of invention, a new technology. 

There are many well known and major examples of 
technological development during the last war which have 
added to the instruments of the investigator of the physical 
and biological world. We may recall two. Microwave 
radar—the generation, control, and detection of electro- 
magnetic waves of relatively very short length—played a 
heroic part in the Battle of Britain. In the years since, it has 
provided powerful new means of investigating atomic, mo- 
lecular, and even nuclear problems from which in actual 
fact subtle discoveries have been made about the laws of 
interaction of electrons and protons and neutrons. 

The nuclear reactor embodies in its technology very re- 
cently acquired understanding of the fission processes in 
uranium and of the’behavior of neutrons in their collisions 
with atomic nuclei; it is now an important tool whose con- 
trolled and well-understood radiations are telling us about 
properties of matter hitherto barely accessible. Artificially 
radioactive substances made in great profusion by atomic 
reactors enable us to follow the course of individual atoms 
in chemical and biological changes. In biology especially 
they may be an addition to our instrumental facilities and 
techniques comparable in importance with the microscope 
itself. 


It is an oversimplification to say that technologies based 
upon recently discovered natural phenomena are taken as 
wholly for granted and as wholly known, but this is essen- 
tially the truth. They are added to the experimenter as a 
good tool is added to the artisan; as the pencil in the writ- 
er’s hand ceases to be an object in itself and becomes al- 
most a part of the writer; or as a horse under a good 
horseman becomes for the time being not an animal to be 
cared for and thought about but a part of the entity “horse- 
man.” Thus what has been learned and invented in science 
becomes an addition to the scientist, a new mode of percep- 
tion, a new mode of his action. 


Science as Action - 19 


There are some cautions to be added to this. No exper- 
imenter takes his equipment quite so much for granted 
that he fails to check whether in fact it is performing as it 
is supposed to perform; but the notion of how it is sup- 
posed to perform is for him in general a fixed thing not 
calling for further inquiry. This may be true even when 
the invention is a sample of practical art rather than a 
sample of true understanding. The photographic plate has 
served as an instrument of science for decades, during 
which its behavior was only very incompletely understood. 
Any machine can get out of order, and in a laboratory most 
machines do. The horse is shod and bridled and fed before 
he can become part of the horseman. Nevertheless we use 
what we have learned to go further. A perpetual doubting 
and a perpetual questioning of the truth of what we have 
learned is not the temper of science. If Einstein was led to 
ask not “What is a clock?” but “How, over great distances 
and with great precision, do we synchronize clocks?” that 
is not an illustration of the scepticism of science; it exem- 
plifies rather the critical reason creating a new synthesis 
from paradoxes, anomalies, and bewilderments, which ex- 
periments carried on with new precision and in a new con- 
text brought into being. 

All this means that science is cumulative in a quite spe- 
cial sense. We cannot really know what a contemporary 
experiment means unless we understand what the instru- 
ments and the knowledge are that are involved in its de- 
sign. This is one reason why the growing edge of science 
seems so inaccessible to common experience. Its findings 
are defined in terms of objects and laws and ideas which 
were the science of its predecessors. This is why the stu- 
dent spends many long years learning the facts and arts 
which, in the acts of science, he will use and take for 
granted—why this long tunnel, at the end of which is the 
light of discovery, is so discouraging for the layman to 
enter, be he an artist, scholar, or man of affairs. 

This conversion of an object of study into an instrument 
has its classic exemplification in Rutherford and the a- 


20 - Chapter Two 


particle. This is a trail we will follow for some time. It will 
lead us to the heart of atomic physics. The a-particle, emit- 
ted by many naturally radioactive substances, identical with 
the nucleus of helium, was indeed a strong right arm for 
Rutherford and all his school in probing the atomic world. 
Rutherford’s early works had been largely devoted to writ- 
ing the wonderful natural history of the radioactive fami- 
lies—those which start with spontaneous changes in the 
heavy elements uranium and thorium. Part of the natural 
history was to discover the genetic relations between the 
various radioactive substances, some of them growing as a 
result of the decay of others and in turn giving rise to 
daughter products by further transmutation. 

The natural history involves a chemical identification of 
the radioactive substances, the determination of the rapid- 
ity of their decay and of the alternative modes of decay, 
which some of them exhibit. It involves the recognition of 
three fundamentally different kinds of radiation, all of 
which appear at one stage or another in these family histo- 
ries. This identification, which we shall meet again in later 
contexts, means learning some of the basic properties of 
the particles emitted. This identification, as we shall shortly 
see, is made possible by the fact that even a single such 
particle has readily detectable effects. 

These properties include the mass of the particle and its 
electric charge. These have usually been found in the first 
instance by studying their behavior in large-scale electric 
and magnetic fields and applying Newton’s laws to analyze 
their motion. These same methods give one a measure of 
the velocity or energy with which the particles are emitted, 
and of the loss of this energy as the particles pass through 
matter. Sometimes, at a later stage, the products of an 
atomic or nuclear disintegration can be more thoroughly 
studied. They may have more subtle electromagnetic prop- 
erties than charge, such as a small magnetic moment. They 
may have structure or size. But the basic identifications can 
all be made in terms of the response of the radiations to 
familiar, large-scale, experimentally controllable situations 


Science as Action -: 21 


like the classical electric and magnetic fields of our labora- 
tory courses. 

The a-particle of the naturally radioactive substances 
became for the middle years of Rutherford’s life the sharp- 
est experimental tool; it was to be supplemented and to 
some extent superseded only when artificially accelerated 
nuclei became available during the nineteen-thirties. The 
essential features of the experiments that have told us most 
about atoms and nuclei and the ingredients of matter are 
two: one has to do with structure, and the other with scale. 

The structure of the experiment involves three parts: a 
probe, which is an object meant to explore or disturb mat- 
ter in its natural state, typically with some degree of vio- 
lence. This was the role of the a-particle. The second ele- 
ment is the target, which is some form of matter, whether 
pure or of controllable and manageable complications; and 
the third is the detector, which identifies and describes the 
objects emerging from the disturbance, whether they be 
the altered or the unaltered probe, or something knocked 
out of the target, or created in the collision, or something 
appearing long after the collision as evidence of a re- 
arrangement of the collision products consequent upon 
the disturbance. This is not a universal pattern—this 
probe-target-detector assembly. The collision is not the 
only way of learning about atomic systems; but almost all 
of what we have learned has derived at least in part from 
such experiments and can be elucidated in terms of them. 

As to scale, it is the scale that determines the possibility 
of detection. The events that are so studied—the collisions, 
transmutations—can typically be studied event by event, 
atom by atom. The reason for this lies in two circum- 
stances: one is that in nuclear transformations, and even 
more so in transformations induced by cosmic rays and 
superaccelerators, the energy characteristic of a single 
atomic process is enormous compared to the chemical en- 
ergies, and is sufficient to produce recognizable physical 
and chemical changes in hundreds of thousands or even 
millions of atoms. 


22 + Chapter Two 


The second circumstance lies in the art that has been 
devoted toward exploiting these energies in systems of de- 
tection. The detectors for Rutherford’s experiments are by 
now familiar. One is the scintillation screen, where an a- 
particle creates a flash of light easily visible through a mi- 
croscope at the point where it hits the screen. Another is 
the beautiful cloud chamber of C.T.R. Wilson, which is, 
according to legend, an outcome of the inventor’s interest 
in the mist and clouds and rain of his native Scotland. In 
this cloud chamber the track of a charged particle is 
marked by the occurrence of innumerable small yet readily 
visible droplets of water or other liquid close to where the 
particles passed. A third is the counter, in which the electri- 
cal disturbance produced in a gas by the passage of a 
charged particle gives rise to a substantial electrical dis- 
charge, which can be amplified and analyzed by electronic 
circuitry. 

These detectors have been supplemented by many, 
many others; and the precision and power of electronic 
amplification and analysis have been developed into a 
great art. The detector of atomic physics still characteristi- 
cally is designed to take advantage of the very great energy 
involved in the changes of a single atom, and of the power 
to amplify this energy almost at will to make it accessible. 
The clicking counters and flashing lights and occasionally 
even the ringing bells of a modern nuclear laboratory 
make the doings of individual atoms very vivid and imme- 
diate, and make the subtle atoms of Epicurus or of Newton 
seem very private and remote. 


Rutherford and his probing a-particles and detectors are 
old history, dating back roughly some forty years. They are 
basic alike to atomic and nuclear physics, basic as a founda- 
tion for the great revolution in science which it is my prin- 
cipal purpose to describe, and for the further develop- 
ments at the very forefront of contemporary discovery that 
have us today perplexed and bemused. With his a-parti- 
cles, obtained from natural radioactivity, Rutherford dis- 


Science as Action - 23 


covered the atomic nucleus and the nuclear model of the 
atom; with some help from other evidence he discovered 
the mass and the charge of the various atomic nuclei and 
thus rationalized Mendelyeev’s table of the elements. With 
the a-particles, he was able to touch nuclear matter itself 
and measure its dimensions. He showed that it could be 
transmuted; he identified at least some of its ingredients. 

For the most part, a@-particles when they pass through a 
bit of matter are not very much deflected or changed in 
direction; they are gradually slowed down; but occasionally 
a particle will change its direction of motion very greatly. 
It will be scattered through a large angle; it will act as 
though some great force had disturbed it, as though it had 
hit something quite small and quite hard. The law describ- 
ing these deflections is Rutherford’s law; and to it he gave 
a simple meaning: there are forces acting on the a-parti- 
cles; they are not unfamiliar to physics. They are the elec- 
tric repulsion between the charge of the atomic nucleus 
and the charge of the a-particle—the same force which 
manifests itself when two positively charged pith balls push 
each other apart in an elementary demonstration. The 
balls repel each other because the two charges are similar; 
and the repulsion is described by Coulomb’s law—very 
much the same law as Newton’s law of gravitation. The 
repulsion is inversely proportional to the square of the 
separation of the charges. The charge of the atomic nu- 
cleus is a multiple of that of the proton—the nucleus of 
hydrogen. The multiple is the atomic number, which de- 
termines the number of electrons in the atom, and almost 
all the chemical properties of the element, and the position 
in the periodic table of that element. The mass of the nu- 
cleus is almost the whole mass of the atom as expressed by 
its atomic weight. This charge and mass is concentrated in 
a small volume. Everywhere outside it, the a-particle feels 
only the electric field. 

By using a-particles fast enough to overcome the electric 
repulsion, and using light elements for which the charge 
and therefore the repulsion are not too great, Rutherford 


24 + Chapter Two 


found that occasionally a-particles penetrated to a differ- 
ent domain entirely, where very strong forces, not electric 
forces, deflected them. In this way he found the dimen- 
sions of the nucleus itself: roughly one part in 10,000 of 
the dimensions of the atom as a whole. This characterized 
the nucleus as a region of incredibly high density, of many 
millions of tons per cubic inch. Rutherford discovered 
even more: he was able to show that when fast a-particles 
penetrated nuclear matter things other than a-particles 
emerged from the mélée. In experiments undertaken dur- 
ing the First World War, and justified by Rutherford as of 
greater importance than any contribution he could then 
make to the prosecution of that war, Rutherford for the 
first time induced by human action the transmutation of an 
atomic nucleus, knocking out of the nucleus of nitrogen a 
nucleus of hydrogen, or proton, and starting a chain of 
events which led, among many things, to man’s release of 
atomic energy, to what may some day be judged the most 
compelling argument of all for putting an end to war itself. 


The story went on from there. Before we revert to the 
nuclear model of the atom and how oddly different its 
properties are from any we can understand on the basis of 
Newtonian physics, we may follow sketchily and partially 
this course of discovery with probe, target, and detector 
that Rutherford initiated and that has continued until the 
present day. Twenty years ago, using the same a-particles 
as probes, Chadwick managed to identify another survivor 
of the disturbance, another ingredient of the nucleus, the 
neutron, which has roughly the proton’s mass but no 
charge, and thus to lay the foundations for an elementary 
view of nuclear composition. The nucleus is made up of 
neutrons and protons—enough protons to account for its 
charge, the atomic number; enough neutrons to account 
for the excess of its atomic weight over its atomic num- 
ber—held together in their tiny volume by strong forces 
wholly dissimilar from those of electricity and magnetism, 


Science as Action + 25 


whose description even today is a far from completely 
solved problem. 

Chadwick’s neutrons, in their turn, became probes, in- 
ducing nuclear transmutations very copiously, because 
they were not kept away from nuclei by the positive nu- 
clear charge. Their use led, in the years just before the war, 
to Hahn’s discovery that, when uranium was transmuted 
by being hit by neutrons, among the products was barium, 
a large half of the original nucleus, but only about half— 
and thus to nuclear fission. 

Even this was only the beginning. In the very energetic 
particles of cosmic radiation, in the nuclei accelerated by 
giant modern accelerators to energies a hundredfold those 
of Rutherford’s a-particles, we have found new probes to 
elicit new phenomena; the story of sub-nuclear matter 
began to unfold and ramify. A whole new family of hither- 
to unknown, and, for the most part, unrecognized and un- 
expected objects began to emerge from the nuclear en- 
counters. The first of these were the various mesons, some 
charged and some uncharged, about ten times lighter than 
the proton and some hundreds of times heavier than the 
electron. In the last years there have appeared in increas- 
ing variety objects heavier than the mesons, other objects 
heavier even than protons, whose names are still being 
changed, from month to month, by solemn conferences. 
Physicists call them vaguely, and rather helplessly, “the 
new particles.” They are without exception unstable, as in 
the neutron. They disintegrate after a time which varies 
from one millionth to less than a billionth of a second into 
other lighter components. Some of these components are 
in turn unfamiliar to physics and are themselves in turn 
unstable. We do not know how to give a clear meaning to 
this question. We do not know why they have the mass and 
charge that they do; why they and just they exist; why they 
disintegrate as they do; why in most cases they last as long 
as they do, or anything much about them. They are the 
greatest puzzle in today’s physics. 


26 - Chapter Two 


But all this is now; and these were not the puzzles of 
Rutherford’s day. To these we shall turn in the next lec- 
tures. They become manifest when we try to deduce and 
describe the properties of Rutherford’s atom in terms of 
Newtonian mechanics. This attempted description failed. 
The atoms of nature are radically, dramatically, unlike 
atoms, composed as Rutherford found of electrons and 
small nuclei, subject to the forces Rutherford discovered 
and described, and moving according to Newton’s laws. 
The failure of this classical description turned out to be a 
major clue, one of the few major clues, in the atomic story. 
We learned, before the story was finished, that more than 
Newtonian mechanics would have to be modified if we 
were to understand and describe our experience with 
atomic systems. We would have to alter our ideas on very 
fundamental points, on causality, for instance, and even on 
the nature of the objectivity of parts of the physical world. 
We were to be reminded, in a quite unexpected way, of the 
nature and limitations, as well as the power, of human 
knowledge itself. It is largely for this reason that the story 
of atomic discovery has appeared to me so full of instruc- 
tion for us all, for layman as well as specialist. For it has 
recalled to us traits of old wisdom that we can well take to 
heart in human affairs. 

Before these great changes could be completed, and the 
strange situation elucidated, many new ideas and methods 
of description were to be introduced. We learned words 
new for us, like “quantum,” and “state,” words like “corre- 
spondence” and “complementarity,” words with a new 
meaning for physics. Of these the word “correspondence” 
came to stand for the conservative and traditional traits of 
the new physics, that bound it to the physics of the past; 
whereas “complementarity” described, as we shall come to 
see, those new features, unknown to the physics of Newton, 
that have broadened and humanized our whole under- 
standing of the natural world. 

Time and experience have clarified, refined, and en- 
riched our understanding of these notions. Physics has 


Science as Action + 27 


changed since then. It will change even more. But what we 
have learned so far, we have learned well. If it is radical 
and unfamiliar and a lesson that we are not likely to forget, 
we think that the future will be only more radical and not 
less, only more strange and not more familiar, and that it 
will have its own new insights for the inquiring human 
spirit. 


CHAPTER THREE 


A Science in Change 


Our understanding of atomic physics, of what we call the 
quantum theory of atomic systems, had its origins at the 
turn of the century and its great synthesis and resolutions 
in the nineteen-twenties. It was a heroic time. It was not 
the doing of any one man; it involved the collaboration of 
scores of scientists from many different lands, though 
from first to last the deeply creative and subtle and critical 
spirit of Niels Bohr guided, restrained, deepened, and 
finally transmuted the enterprise. It was a period of pa- 
tient work in the laboratory, of crucial experiments and 
daring action, of many false starts and many untenable 
conjectures. It was a time of earnest correspondence and 
hurried conferences, of debate, criticism, and _ brilliant 
mathematical improvisation. 

For those who participated, it was a time of creation; 
there was terror as well as exaltation in their new insight. 
It will probably not be recorded very completely as history. 
As history, its recreation would call for an art as high as the 
story of Oedipus or the story of Cromwell, yet in a realm 
of action so remote from our common experience that it is 
unlikely to be known to any poet or any historian. In other 
ways, there will be such times again. Most of us are con- 
vinced that today, in our present probings in the sub- 
atomic and sub-nuclear world, we are laying the ground- 
work for another such time for us and for our sons. The 
great growth of physics, the vast and increasingly compli- 
cated laboratories of the mid-twentieth century, the in- 
creasing sophistication of mathematical analysis, have al- 
tered many of the conditions of this new period of crisis. 
We do not think that they will have altered its heroic and 
creative character. 


A Science in Change - 29 


When quantum theory was first taught in the universi- 
ties and institutes, it was taught by those who had partici- 
pated, or had been engaged spectators, in its discovery. 
Some of the excitement and wonder of the discoverer was 
in their teaching; now, after two or three decades, it is 
taught not by the creators but by those who have learned 
from others who have learned from those creators. It is 
taught not as history, not as a great adventure in human 
understanding, but as a piece of knowledge, as a set of 
techniques, as a scientific discipline to be used by the stu- 
dent in understanding and exploring new phenomena in 
the vast work of the advance of science, or its application 
to invention and to practical ends. It has become not a 
subject of curiosity and an object of study but an instru- 
ment of the scientist to be taken for granted by him, to be 
used by him, to be taught to him as a mode of action, as we 
teach our children to spell and to add. 

What we must attempt to do in these talks is wholly 
different. This is no school to learn the arts of atomic 
physics. Even those prior arts—the experimental tools, the 
mathematical powers, the theories, inventions, instru- 
ments, and techniques which defined the problems of 
atomic physics, which established the paradoxes, described 
the phenomena, and underlay the need for synthesis—are 
not known to us of our own experience. We must talk of 
our subject not as a community of specialized scientists but 
as men concerned with understanding, through analogy, 
description, and an act of confidence and trust, what other 
people have done and thought and found. So men listen 
to accounts of soldiers returning from a campaign of un- 
paralleled hardship and heroism, or of explorers from the 
high Himalayas, or of tales of deep illness, or of a mystic’s 
communion with his God. Such stories tell little of what the 
teller has to tell. They are the threads which bind us in 
community and make us more than separate men. 


Here, then, we have our atoms. Their ingredients have 
been made manifest by Rutherford and his a-particles, as 


30 - Chapter Three 


have the forces that act between the ingredients, and by 
probing with electrons and with light as well as with a- 
particles. There is the nucleus, with almost the whole of the 
atom’s mass and almost none of its size, and with a charge 
which is measured by the atomic number, equal to the 
number of electrons that surround the nucleus in the nor- 
mal atom. We have the simple laws of attraction and repul- 
sion, familiar from the large-scale, everyday experience 
with electricity. Unlike charges attract and like repel; and 
the forces, like Newton’s, decrease inversely with the 
square of their separation. 

In Rutherford’s day it seemed reasonable, as it no longer 
entirely does today in facing our modern physics, to subdi- 
vide the problem of atomic structure into three questions: 
what are the ingredients of the atom; what are the forces, 
and the laws of force, acting between these ingredients; 
how in response to those forces do the ingredients move? 
We know that even in atomic problems this division is not 
completely rigorous; but the refinements are minor and 
have largely proved tractable. They consist of taking into 
account the effect of the motion of the particles themselves 
on the forces between them and, in some cases, the distor- 
tion of the properties of particles, very small itself in the 
atomic structures, by the presence of other particles and 
the forces that they exert. It is surely not wholly true of the 
nucleus that these distortions are small; and in the strange 
objects which emerge so readily when nuclei undergo vio- 
lent collisions we have persuasive, if indirect, evidence for 
that, 

The atom, then, has a massive charged nucleus; the 
atom as a whole is neutral and 10,000 to 100,000 times as 
far across as its tiny nuclear core. The rest of the atom is 
composed of electrons and electric fields—electrons that 
are the universal ingredients of matter, the determinants 
of almost all its chemical properties and of most of its 
familiar physical properties as well. There will be as many 
electrons in the atom as the atomic number, the nuclear 
charge; this makes the atom as a whole neutral. There will 


A Science in Change - 31 


be one electron in hydrogen and thirteen in aluminum and 
ninety-two in uranium. These are the ingredients; and the 
laws of force, complex only in the last refinements, are 
basically simple. The electron feels an attractive Coulomb 
force exerted by the nucleus, attractive since the electron 
and nucleus are oppositely charged, and once again falling 
off with distance in the same way as gravitational forces 
according to Newton’s law. For hydrogen, this means a 
simple situation: two bodies with a force between them 
identical in structure with that which the sun exerts on the 
planets; two bodies small enough compared to the atom’s 
size so that they almost never touch, and the properties of 
their contact can have little influence. The law of forces has 
been verified not only by probing with particles, by which 
it was originally discovered, but by probing with electrons 
themselves, in the first instances by the beta rays of natu- 
rally radioactive substances. For other atoms there is in 
addition the electrical repulsion between the several elec- 
trons, balancing to some extent the nuclear attraction. And 
there is, further, the well-known mathematical complica- 
tion of describing quantitatively the behavior of a system 
with many particles. 

But with hydrogen this should not be so. Here we have 
essentially a single light body moving in a simple and well- 
known force. The description of this system should be a 
perfect example of Newtonian dynamics, and should, in its 
refinements, be intelligible in terms of all that the nine- 
teenth century had discovered about the behavior of 
charged particles in motion and the electromagnetic radia- 
tion produced when they are accelerated. 


But it did not turn out that way. To what appeared to be 
the simplest questions, we will tend to give either no an- 
swer or an answer which will at first sight be reminiscent 
more of a strange catechism than of the straightforward 
affirmatives of physical science. If we ask, for instance, 
whether the position of the electron remains the same, we 
must say “no”; if we ask whether the electron’s position 


32. + Chapter Three 


changes with time, we must say “no”; if we ask whether 
the electron is at rest, we must say “no”; if we ask whether 
it is in motion, we must say “no.” The Buddha has given 
such answers when interrogated as to the conditions of a 
man’s self after his death; but they are not familiar answers 
for the tradition of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 
science. 

Let us review, then, what a hydrogen atom should be like 
if we could apply Newton’s laws and the whole classical 
picture of matter in motion to the simple model. The elec- 
tron is held to its nucleus as the earth is to the sun, or as 
is Venus. It should revolve in an ellipse, as Kepler found 
and Newton explained. The size of the ellipse could be 
varied from atom to atom as the orbits of the planets are 
different, depending on how it was formed and what its 
history, and so should the shape of the orbits, whether they 
are narrow or round. There should be no fixed size for a 
hydrogen atom and no fixed properties; and when we dis- 
turb one by one of our probings, or when it is disturbed in 
nature, we would not expect it to return to a size and shape 
at all similar to that from which it started. This is not all— 
there are more recondite points. When a charge moves in 
anything but a straight line, it should send out electromag- 
netic radiation. This is what we see in every radio antenna. 
As far as our model goes, this radiation should in time sap 
the energy of the electron to make up for the energy that 
has been sent out in the form of light waves; and the ellip- 
ses on which the electron moves should get smaller and 
smaller as it gets nearer to its attractive sun and loses its 
energy. For a system about the size of the hydrogen atom 
as we know it in nature, a few hundredths of a millionth of 
an inch across, this process should go very rapidly; and the 
atom should become far, far smaller than atomic dimen- 
sions in very much less than a millionth of a second. The 
color of the light that the electron radiates should be deter- 
mined by the period of its revolution; it too should be 
random, differing from orbit to orbit, differing from time 
to time as the orbits shrink and alter. This is, the picture 


A Science in Change - 33 


which classical physics—Newtonian physics—predicts for 
the hydrogen atom, if Rutherford’s model is right. 

It could hardly be further from the truth. By all we 
know, hydrogen atoms if undisturbed are all identical. 
They are the same size and each has the same properties 
as any other, whatever its history, provided only that it has 
had a chance to recover from any disturbance. They last 
indefinitely. We think of them, rightly, as completely stable 
and unchanging. When they are undisturbed, they do not 
radiate light or any other electromagnetic radiation, as in- 
deed they could not if they are to remain unaltered. When 
they are disturbed, they sometimes do radiate, but the 
color of the light that they emit is not random and continu- 
ous but falls in the sharp lines of the hydrogen spectrum. 
The very stability, extent, and definiteness is not at all un- 
derstandable on the basis of classical physics; and indeed 
on the basis of classical physics there is no length that we 
can define in terms of the masses and charges of the ingre- 
dients of the atom, and that is even roughly of the actual 
dimensions of the atom. 

In other respects, too, the atomic system shows a pecu- 
liar lack of continuity wholly at variance with the proper- 
ties of Newtonian dynamics. If we probe atoms with a 
stream of electrons, for instance, the electrons will typically 
lose some of their initial energy, but these losses are not 
random in amount. They correspond to definite, well-de- 
fined energy gaps, characteristic for the atom in question, 
reproducible and not too hard to measure. When an atom 
is irradiated by light, an electron will be ejected, if and only 
if the energy of that light exceeds a certain minimum 
known as the photo-electric threshold. Indeed, it was this 
discovery which led Einstein in the early years of the cen- 
tury to a finding about light almost equally revolutionary 
for our understanding of light and for our understanding 
of atomic systems. This finding, to be more precise, is that 
as one alters the frequency of the light that shines on a 
body, the energy of the electrons ejected increases linearly 
with the frequency; linearly—that means proportionally. 


34 + Chapter Three 


The constant of proportionality, which connects energy 
with frequency, is the new symbol of the atomic domain. It 
is called Planck’s constant, or the quantum of action, and 
it gives a measure of energy in terms of frequency. It is the 
heraldic symbol over the gateway to the new world; and it 
led Einstein to the bold, though at the time hardly compre- 
hensible, conclusion that light, which we know as an elec- 
tromagnetic disturbance of rapidly changing electrical 
fields, which we know as a continuous phenomenon propa- 
gating from point to point and from time to time like a 
wave, is also and is nevertheless corpuscular, consisting of 
packets of energy determined by the frequency of the light 
and by Planck’s constant. When a material system absorbs 
light, it absorbs such a packet, or quantum, of energy, nei- 
ther less nor more; and the discontinuous nature of the 
energy exchanges between an atom and an electron is par- 
alleled by the discontinuous nature of the energy ex- 
changed when radiation is absorbed or emitted. 

We shall have to come back more than once to light as 
waves, and light as quanta; but how radical a problem of 
understanding this presents can be seen at once from all of 
classical optics, from the work of Huygens and its mathe- 
matical elaboration by Fresnel, and even more completely 
from its electromagnetic interpretation by Maxwell. We 
know that light waves interfere. We know, that is, that if 
there are two sources of light, the intensity of the light to 
be found at some other place will not necessarily be just 
composed of the sum of that which comes from the two 
sources; it may be more and it may be less. We know from 
unnumbered attempts how to calculate, and how to calcu- 
late correctly, what the interference of the sources will turn 
out to be. If we have light impinging on a screen which is 
opaque and there are two holes in the screen, not too large 
and not too far apart in the terms of the wave length, the 
wavelets that come from one of the holes will be added to 
those that come from the other. Where two crests of these 
wavelets coincide, we shall have more light than the sum of 
the two. Where acrest and a trough coincide, we shall have 


A Science in Change - 35 


less; and so we observe and understand and predict and 
are quite confident of these phenomena of interference. 

Try for a moment to describe this in the terms of the 
passage of particles of quanta. If one of those quanta which 
characterize both the emission of light at the source and its 
detection—let us say, by the eye or by the photographic 
plate or photocell on the far side of the screen—if a quan- 
tum passes through one of the holes, how can the presence 
of the other hole through which it did not pass affect its 
destiny? How can there be any science or any prediction if 
the state of affairs remote from the trajectory of the quan- 
tum can determine its behavior? just this question and our 
slow answer to it will start us on the unravelling of the 
physics of the atomic world. 


The first great step, taken long before the crisis of quan- 
tum theory, was to find a way of describing atomic behav- 
ior, not forgetting the mechanics and electrodynamics of 
the past, but knowing that one had here to do with some- 
thing new and different, and necessarily postponing the 
question of the connection of that which is new with the old 
laws. This is Bohr’s first theory. It has given us the symbol 
of the atomic world: the nucleus and a series of circles and 
ellipses represent in a pictorial way the states of the atom. 
We use it today, though we know in far more detail and far 
more completely what Bohr knew when he proposed it, 
that it could be at best a temporary and partial analogy. 
This was Bohr’s first postulate: that in every atom there 
were stationary states whose stability and uniqueness could 
not be understood in terms of classical dynamics. The low- 
est one, the one with the least energy, the ground state, is 
truly stable. Unless we disturb it, it will last unaltered. The 
others are called excited states, and they may be excited by 
collision or radiation or other disturbance. They, too, are 
stable in a sense incomprehensible in terms of Newton’s 
theory. Their stability is not absolute though. Just as these 
states could be reached by transition induced by collision 
or disturbance, so an atom may return to states of lower 


36 - Chapter Three 


energy, whether by further collision or spontaneously. In 
these spontaneous changes it gives out that radiation which 
is the analog of the radiation which in classical theory 
would make all motion unstable. In simple cases, the en- 
ergy of these stationary states and some of the properties 
such as their shape are identical with or similar to the 
energy of some of the properties of Newtonian orbits. But 
this stops being true when we go even from hydrogen to 
helium, with its two electrons. It is only partially true in 
hydrogen; and the rules which Bohr laid down for deter- 
mining the character of the orbits that would correspond 
to stationary states, the so-called quantum conditions, were 
from the first recognized by him as incomplete and provi- 
sional. We know now that the states are in fact nothing like 
orbits at all; that the element of change with time, which is 
inherent in an orbit, is missing from these states; and that 
in fact the very notion of an orbit can be applied to the 
motion of matter only when the stationary state is not de- 
fined, and that a stationary state can exist only when there 
is no possibility of describing an orbit at all. 

That was the first rule. And what is the second? The 
second rule is that an atom can change only by passing 
from state to state; that its energy changes by the differ- 
ence in energy between the states; and that, when this ex- 
change of energy occurs in the absorption, emission, or 
scattering of light, the frequency of the light will be related 
to the energy by the relation of Einstein and of Planck. The 
energy will be the frequency multiplied by the quantum 
of action; thus atomic spectra directly reveal energy dif- 
ferences between states, and by this the whole field of 
spectroscopy becomes evidence for the location and the 
properties of atomic states, and we begin to learn what 
properties of these states are like those of classical orbits 
and what are unlike. 

But what are we to think of the transitions themselves? 
Do they take place suddenly? Are they very quick motions, 
executed in going from one orbit to another? Are they 
causally determined? Can we say, that is, when an atom will 


A Science in Change + 37 


pass from one of its states to another as we disturb it; and 
can we find what it is that determines that time? To all 
these questions, the answer would turn out to be “no.” 
What we learned to ask was what determined not the mo- 
ment of the transition but the probability of the transition. 
What we needed to understand was not the state of affairs 
during the transition but the impossibility of visualizing the 
transition—an even more radical impossibility than with 
the states themselves—in terms of the motion of matter. 
We learned to accept, as we later learned to understand, 
that the behavior of an atomic system is not predictable in 
detail; that of a large number of atomic systems with the 
same history, in, let us say, the same state, statistical predic- 
tion was possible as to how they would act if they were let 
alone and how they would respond to intervention; but 
that nowhere in our battery of experimental probings 
would we find one to say what one individual atom would 
in fact do. We saw in the very heart of the physical world 
an end of that complete causality which had seemed so 
inherent a feature of Newtonian physics. 


How could all this be and yet leave the largely familiar 
world intact as we knew it? Large bodies are, of course, 
made up of atoms. How could causality for bullets and 
machines and planets come out of acausal atomic behav- 
ior? How could trajectories, orbits, velocities, accelerations, 
and positions re-emerge from this strange talk of states, 
transitions, and probabilities? For what was true yesterday 
would be true still, and new knowledge could not make old 
knowledge false. Is there a possible unity between the two 
worlds and what is its nature? 

This is the problem of correspondence. Whatever the 
laws which determine the behavior of light or of electrons 
in atoms or other parts of the atomic world, as we come 
closer and closer to the familiar ground of large-scale ex- 
perience, these laws must conform more and more closely 
to those we know to be true. This is what we call the prin- 
ciple of correspondence. In its formulation the key is the 


38 - Chapter Three 


quantum of action, whose finiteness characterizes the new 
features of atomic physics. And so the physicist says that, 
where actions are large compared to the quantum of ac- 
tion, the classical laws of Newton and Maxwell will hold. 
What this tends to mean in practice is that when mass and 
distances are big compared to those of the electron and the 
atom’s size, classical theory will be right. Where energies 
are large and times long compared to atomic energies and 
times, we shall not need to correct Newton. Where this is 
so, the statistical laws of atomic physics will lead to prob- 
abilities more and more like certitudes, and the acausal 
features of atomic theory will be of no moment, and in fact 
lost in the lack of precision with which questions about 
large events will naturally be put. 

In Bohr’s hands and those of the members of his school, 
this correspondence principle was to prove a powerful 
tool. It did not say what the laws of atomic physics were, 
but it said something about them. They must in this sense 
be harmonious with, and ultimately reducible to, those of 
large-scale physics. And when to this principle was added 
the growing conviction that the laws of atomic physics must 
deal not with the Newtonian position, velocity, and accel- 
eration that characterized a particle but with the observ- 
able features of atoms—the energies and properties of sta- 
tionary states, the probabilities of transitions between these 
states—the groundwork was laid for the discovery of quan- 
tum mechanics. 

The principle of correspondence—this requirement that 
the new laws of atomic mechanics should merge with those 
of Newtonian mechanics for large bodies and events—thus 
had great value as an instrument of discovery. Beyond 
that, it illustrates the essential elements of the relation of 
new discovery and old knowledge in science; the old 
knowledge, as the very means for coming upon the new, 
must in its old realm be left intact; only when we have left 
that realm can it be transcended. 

A discovery in science, or a new theory, even when it 
appears most unitary and most all-embracing, deals with 


A Science in Change - 39 


some immediate element of novelty or paradox within the 
framework of far vaster, unanalyzed, unarticulated re- 
serves of knowledge, experience, faith, and presupposi- 
tion. Our progress is narrow; it takes a vast world unchal- 
lenged and for granted. 

This is one reason why, however great the novelty or 
scope of new discovery, we neither can, nor need, rebuild 
the house of the mind very rapidly. This is one reason why 
science, for all its revolutions, is conservative. This is why 
we will have to accept the fact that no one of us really will 
ever know very much. This is why we shall have to find 
comfort in the fact that, taken together, we know more and 
more. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Atom and Void 
in the Third Millennium 


IN EXPLORING the atomic world, we have traveled to a new 
country, strange for those who have lived in the familiar 
world of Newtonian physics, strange even to Newton’s own 
view of wonder and pre-vision. “God in the Beginning,” he 
wrote, “form’d Matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, 
movable Particles. . . .” 

We have our atoms; we are trying to understand them. 
We have the simplest of the atoms, hydrogen, with a single 
proton for its nucleus and a single electron to make it up. 
But the ingredients do not follow Newton’s laws of motion. 
Atoms of hydrogen appear to be all alike; they have a fixed 
size; they are stable and not transitory; the light that they 
emit is not what an electron circling in ever smaller ellipses 
would radiate. They have a stability that does not derive 
from Newtonian mechanics. When they are disturbed by 
light or electrons or other matter, they take up energy in 
definite quanta characteristic for the atom. They are de- 
scribed in terms of states—states that are not orbits, though 
they have some of the properties of some special orbits. 
The states are stable, or almost stable. Transition between 
them, occasioned by disturbance, or occurring spontane- 
ously with the emission of light, occurs by chance. We do 
not know the cause of the individual transition but only, at 
best, their probable distribution in time; nor do we have, in 
terms of space and time and trajectory, any picture what- 
ever of what these transitions may be. These acausal atoms 
compose the familiar world of large bodies, orbits, and 
Newton’s laws. The laws that describe atomic behavior, the 
stationary states and transitions, reduce by correspon- 
dence, when applied to large systems, to Newton’s laws. 


Atom and Void - 41 


The discovery of these laws by Heisenberg could itself 
have led to all we now know of quantum theory, but it was 
supplemented as a matter of history by new discoveries in 
related fields which make the task of understanding and 
exposition simpler and more direct. Yet even these are 
both unfamiliar and abstract; I fear that no exposition can 
be wholly without difficulty. 


Our problem has to do with the so-called duality of wave 
and particle. On the one hand we have light, described in 
detail as a continuous electromagnetic wave with electric 
and magnetic fields, changing with a frequency that deter- 
mines the light’s color, and with an amplitude that deter- 
mines its intensity. The waves of light differ from radio 
waves only in one respect: their wave length is much 
shorter. They differ obviously from the waves we see on 
water, which are the more or less regular displacement of 
matter. But when we talk here of waves, in this account of 
wave-particle duality, as we shall have to, it will mean some- 
thing quite abstract, something common to light, radio, and 
water waves. 

It will mean a state of affairs distributed in space and 
propagating with time, sometimes a harmonic like a pure 
note of sound and sometimes irregular like noise. It will 
mean that these disturbances in general add, so that two 
crests reinforce, and a crest and a trough tend to cancel. It 
will mean that the sum of two effects may not be greater 
than either, but smaller, as the phases of crest and trough 
indicate. It will mean that, if we leave more than one alter- 
native for a particle or for light to go from one place to 
another, the chance of arriving may be greater than the 
sum of the chances or smaller than the sum of the chances, 
because of this interference of the waves that represent the 
alternatives. 

When we deal with light, we deal with such waves; but 
we also deal, as Einstein discovered, with something sharp, 
discrete, and discontinuous—the light quantum. When- 
ever light acts on matter, or is produced by it, we find 
packets of defined energy and impulse, related to their 


42 + Chapter Four 


frequency and their wave number by the universal propor- 
tionality of the quantum of action. How were these quanta 
to be thought of? Were they guided by the waves? Were 
they the waves? Were the waves an illusion, after all? 

This turned out to be a universal quandary. De Broglie 
suggested and later Davison found that there were waves 
associated with electrons. Specifically Davison’s experi- 
ment showed that electrons, too, when they are scattered 
by the regular disturbance of a natural crystal, exhibit the 
same signs of interference, the same unmistakable signa- 
ture of the super-position of waves as light and as X-rays; 
and later experiments showed that this is true of all the 
other particles as well—protons, neutrons, and the atoms 
themselves. It would be true of large objects also were it 
not that their wave length is small, because of smallness of 
Planck’s constant, and becomes completely insignificant 
compared with their dimensions and with any practical 
possibility of determining their location and outline. 

All the questions which puzzled men about the relations 
of Einstein’s quanta and Maxwell’s waves were thus to be 
equally sharp and equally troublesome for the wave and 
particle properties of matter. The resolution of these ques- 
tions is the heart of atomic theory. They were brought to 
the point of crisis by another great discovery—Schroedin- 
ger’s discovery of his wave equation. 

In its original, bold form this was the discovery of a 
simple law for the propagation of electron waves—a natu- 
rai generalization of the connection between wave number 
and impulse, between energy and frequency, a generaliza- 
tion nevertheless adequate to describe the gross features of 
atomic systems and most of the familiar properties of mat- 
ter. This equation had many sorts of solutions. Some were 
stationary, unchanging in time, with a frequency and en- 
ergy that corresponded to the stationary states of atoms. 
This same equation had other solutions of a very different 
kind, representing the trajectory of an electron as it might 
be seen crossing the Wilson cloud chamber. It had still 
other solutions, compounded by addition of several sta- 


Atom and Void - 43 


tionary states with their several proper frequencies. These 
were not stationary but varied in time with frequencies 
corresponding to the spectrum of atoms and molecules. 

But what were these waves? What did they describe? 
How were they related to the ways in which we observe and 
study atomic systems, to Rutherford’s probings, to the colli- 
sions and disturbances of atoms? Schroedinger understood 
that in some sense the world of classical physics would 
emerge from his equation, whenever the wave lengths 
were small enough; then the trajectories for bodies and 
planets would be like the geometric paths of light, the rays 
of optics. But what would the waves mean when this was 
not the case? 

It would have been no answer to this question to attempt 
to interpret the waves as an essentially mechanical distur- 
bance in some underlying mechanical medium; for the 
questions which needed answering had to do with the 
problems of stationary states, and the behavior of elec- 
trons, and not with a sub-stratum inaccessible to observa- 
tion. Nor was such a path followed. The discouraging out- 
come of an analogous attempt with electromagnetic waves 
was conclusive. It did not seem reasonable, nor in fact has 
it ever proved possible, at a time when the very founda- 
tions of classical mechanics were being altered, to reinter- 
pret this revolution in classical mechanical terms. 

There was another false start. It was at one time sug- 
gested that the waves, as they spread and moved, in some 
sense represented the changing shape, extension, and flow 
of the electron itself; when the disturbance grew larger the 
electron grew larger; when the wave moved faster the elec- 
tron moved faster. But to this interpretation there was an 
insuperable obstacle. Whenever we looked for the position 
of the particle, looked not directly with the eye, but with 
the natural extension of looking with a microscope, we did 
not find it spread out; we never found part of it in the 
place where we were looking. Either it was there or it was 
not there—the whole or none of it. Whenever we tried to 
measure the velocity of an electron or its impulse, we never 


44 + Chapter Four 


found that part of it was moving with one speed and part 
with another; there was always one electron, one velocity, 
one answer to an experimental inquiry. The spreading of 
the waves in space thus did not mean that the electron 
itself spread; it meant that the probability or likelihood of 
our finding the electron, when we look for it, spread as the 
wave does. 

And thus it was that these waves were recognized as 
describing a state of affairs, as summarizing information 
we had about the electron, as very much more abstract 
waves indeed than we had hitherto encountered in physics. 
Their interpretation was statistical as well as abstract: 
where a disturbance was large, there we were likely to find 
the electron if we looked for it; where it was small, unlikely. 
If the disturbance had ripples in which a certain wave 
length was prominent, a measurement of the momentum 
would be likely to give us a value corresponding to that 
wave length. This clearly is qualitative talk. Quantitative 
rules for assigning a wave function to describe the outcome 
of an observation—or of other certain forms of knowledge, 
such as that of an atom in its state of lowest energy— 
needed to be, could be, and were developed; and they are 
a part of quantum theory. Their exposition presupposes 
some mathematical talk and calls at least for a blackboard. 
Similarly, the simple rules which relate the magnitude or 
properties of a wave function to the expectations that it 
implies for one or another observation are a rigorous and 
necessary part of the theory. But with these bonds to tie 
the wave to our knowledge and to interpret it for our pre- 
diction, the basis of the new physics has been laid. 


It is a statistical physics, as indeed might have been ex- 
pected from the statistical features of atomic transitions. 
Its predictions are in the form of assertions of probability 
and only rarely and specially in the form of certitudes. 
With this in mind, let us look again at our problem of 
interference, and of the two holes. 


Atom and Void + 45 


Let us think of an opaque screen with two holes in it. Let 
us think of light, if we will; or, better still, let us think of 
electrons of a given velocity and therefore a given wave 
length and direction. We can do two experiments with a 
source of electrons. In one, each hole in turn will be open 
for a little, while the other is closed; in the other, both holes 
will be open together. If we register the electrons on the 
far side of the screen, for instance, with a photographic 
plate, we see that the two patterns are radically different. 
In the one case, we have a transmission through each of 
the holes separately, with the characteristic diffraction pat- 
tern for that wave length and for holes of that diameter. 
These patterns are just added to one another on the photo- 
graphic film. But if both holes are open at the same time, 
something else happens. The waves that come through one 
interfere with those that come through the other; spots 
that were blackened before are now untouched and new 
spots appear where the electrons do arrive. 

If we try to think of this in terms of following the elec- 
trons through one or the other of the holes, we cannot 
understand how it can make any difference whether that 
hole through which the electron did not pass is open or 
shut; yet it does. If we argue that the effect can be traced 
to the interaction of electrons passing through the two 
holes, we can disprove this by noting that the pattern is not 
affected by reducing the number of electrons to the point 
where there almost never are two passing through the two 
holes at the same time. What we are observing is something 
characteristic of the behavior of single particles, not of the 
interaction of several. 

We are thus led to say that in this experiment a knowl- 
edge of which hole the electron passed through is in prin- 
ciple inaccessible to us, that it is just the possibility of its 
passing through one or the other that leads to the charac- 
teristic new interference phenomena, the new light spots 
and the new dark spots on the photographic film. We con- 
clude that, if we should make provision for registering 


46 + Chapter Four 


through which hole the electron went, such as looking for 
it or observing the small push that it gives to the screen as 
it passes through, we would destroy the interference ef- 
fects. We would then have the same result as if we had in 
fact opened and shut the holes successively. 

We see the connection between these conclusions and 
the description of the state of affairs by a wave field in 
qualitative terms, rather closely paralleling the arguments 
that were made quantitative in the uncertainty principle of 
Heisenberg. 

For we note that, if we were sure that the electron passed 
through one of the holes, the wave field would have to be 
restricted to that region; and that, if this were true, it 
would have to be composed not of a single wave length, or 
approximately a single one, but of waves of enough differ- 
ent wave lengths so that they can reinforce each other at 
one hole and vanish at the other; and we know that such 
waves have lost the coherent quality necessary for interfer- 
ence. A little more generally, the waves of a single wave 
length will correspond to an electron of a definite velocity 
or impulse, but in an ill—defined or undefined position; 
the waves that are localized to represent a definition of 
position will be broadly scattered in wave length and repre- 
sent an undefined velocity or impulse. This complemen- 
tary restriction on the degree to which a wave field can 
represent both a well-defined position and a well-defined 
impulse is universal; it is measured by the quantum of 
action. It holds not only for electrons but for the more 
complicated waves that describe complex systems, for 
atoms and nuclei and more composite bits of matter and 
more elementary ones. And the very fact that no wave field 
can give that complete definition of the position and veloc- 
ity of an object which was taken for granted in classical 
physics is also a description of the limitation on the obser- 
vations which in the real world we shall manage to make. 
It represents the fact that, when we study a system, making 
an experiment or an observation on it, we may—and in 
general we will, if we have prior knowledge before the 


Atom and Void - 47 


experiment—be losing in whole or in part that prior 
knowledge. The experiment itself—that is, the physical in- 
teractions between the system and the equipment that we 
are using to study it—will not only alter what we previously 
knew, but will in general alter it in a way which cannot be 
followed without invalidating the measurement or obser- 
vation we have undertaken. 

To cite but one example: if in the problem of the two 
holes we try to detect which hole the electron has passed 
through by noticing the push that it gives to the screen at 
that point, we shall have to leave a part of the screen free 
to respond to the push; and by this we lose all certitude as 
to where that part of the screen was when that electron 
passed through it. Many complex and detailed studies have 
been made of how this limitation of knowledge occurs in 
an experiment; but since the principle of complementarity, 
and the general adequacy of a wave field to describe a state 
of affairs, underlies the description of both the object and 
the instrument of observation, these examples only illus- 
trate and make vivid what must generally be true: the uni- 
versal limitation, in contrast to classical physics, of the ex- 
tent to which all aspects of a physical system can be defined 
for the same system in the same instance. 

In observing atomic systems, in observing a system 
where the finiteness of the quantum of action plays an 
important part, we have a wide range of choice in the kind 
of probe, the kind of experiment, the kind of experimental 
equipment we wish to make. To any of these, if it is a good 
experiment, there will be a meaningful answer which tells 
us what the state of af fairs is. From this, and from the wave 
field which represents it, we can then make statistical pre- 
dictions of what will happen in a subsequent experiment. 
The potentialities of measurement are varied. We can do 
one thing or another; there are no inherent limits on the 
choice of actions on the part of the observer. 

This is a very different view of reality from Newton’s 
giant machine. It is not causal; there is no complete causal 
determination of the future on the basis of available knowl- 


48 + Chapter Four 


edge of the present. The application of the laws of quan- 
tum theory restricts, but does not in general define, the 
outcome of an experiment. This means that every observa- 
tion on a system reveals some new knowledge as to what its 
state is that did not exist before, and could not by analysis 
and mathematical computation have been obtained. It 
means that every intervention to make a measurement, to 
study what is going on in the atomic world, creates, despite 
all the universal order of this world, a new, a unique, not 
fully predictable, situation. 


Even in a brief account other points need to be mentioned. 
We have almost lost the concept of equations of motion, 
having discovered that the very terms in which they are 
formulated—position, velocity, acceleration, and force— 
are not simultaneously applicable and do not, taken to- 
gether, correspond to things that we know about the elec- 
tron with enough accuracy to be meaningful for an atomic 
system. Instead, what we can have is a knowledge of the 
state, summarizing for us what we have found by observa- 
tion; and the analogue of the equation of motion must tell 
us how, in response to forces acting within the system or 
upon it, this state will change with time. This, it turns out, 
is just what Schroedinger’s equation does. And once again 
this equation, when applied to the familiar contexts of mas- 
sive bodies and great distances, where the quantum of ac- 
tion is in fact negligibly small, will describe for us waves so 
reasonably concentrated in space, so little dispersed about 
their average wave length, that the Newtonian orbit reap- 
pears in its unaltered, classical path. 

But this condition—this emergence of an orbit—is a 
long way from the wave that describes the normal state of 
an atom. State and orbit, like position and impulse, are 
complementary notions; where one applies, the other can- 
not be defined, and for a full description we must be able 
to use now one, now the other, depending on the observa- 
tion and the questions that we put. 

When we speak here of observer and object, of instru- 
ment or probe, and system to be probed, we are not talking 


Atom and Void - 49 


of the mind of man. We are talking of a division between 
the object of study and the means used to study it. That 
division can be made in more than one way. We may re- 
gard the a-particles that Rutherford used as an instru- 
ment, and their response as a measure of the state of af- 
fairs. We may regard the a-particle as a part of the system 
we are studying, and the slits that define its path or the 
fields that deflect it and the screens that detect it as the 
instrument. But whichever we do, the observation will al- 
ways be transformed into some large-scale happening— 
some flash of light, some triggering of a circuit, some point- 
ing of a pointer on the dial of an instrument—which is well 
defined and familiar and unambiguous, and where the 
question of our freedom to do one or another observation 
on it no longer is relevant. The atomic world has not lost 
its objective quality; but it attains this by means of those 
interlockings with experiment which we use to define one 
or another of its properties and to measure them. 

It needs to be clear that what is described here is not an 
expression of mood or preference or taste; it is an exact, 
beautiful, quantitative, immensely versatile, and immensely 
successful science. It is what students learn when they pre- 
pare themselves for further researches in physics, or what 
engineers learn whose engineering involves a knowledge 
of the solid state of physical materials, or what chemists 
learn if they wish to understand the subtler features of 
chemical bonding or chemical kinetics, or astronomers if 
they wish to know what things are like in the interior of the 
stars. One could go much farther in describing this disci- 
pline, even without mathematics; but the words would be- 
fore long become cumbersome and unfamiliar and almost 
a misinterpretation of what in mathematical terms can be 
said with beauty and simplicity. 


Even some of the more paradoxical features of quantum 
theory turn out to be related to practical matters of real 
importance. One.of the earliest to be noted and the oddest 
is this: if, in familiar life, we roll a ball up a hill and it does 
not have enough vigor to get over the top, it will roll back 


50 - Chapter Four 


on the same side; it will not get through the hill. But if we 
bombard such a hill with a-particles or electrons they may 
have a small chance of getting through, even when they 
cannot get over. This has a close analogy with the fact that 
very small objects do not cast sharp shadows in a beam of 
light. Light because of its wave nature bends around them. 
It corresponds to the fact that when we let electrons or 
other particles of definite energy encounter a barrier, nei- 
ther the kinetic nor the potential energy alone can be com- 
pletely well defined; and indeed, were we to try to detect 
the electron just as it passes through the hill, we should 
need an experiment that could give the electron enough 
energy to be quite legitimately on top of the hill. This 
penetration of barriers is not without importance. It ac- 
counts for the fact that the a-particles that Rutherford 
used could sometimes, after millions of years, escape from 
the nuclei through a high hill where electrostatic repulsion 
had imprisoned them. It accounts for the fact that in the 
sun and other stars nuclei having only very moderate en- 
ergy occasionally come into contact and react. Thus the 
stars light the heavens, and the sun warms and nourishes 
the earth. 

Another consequence of the wave-like character of all 
matter is that, when particles with very low velocity and 
very long wave length bombard other particles of matter, 
they may interact far more often than if these interactions 
were limited to their coming in contact. The very lack of 
definition of their relative position makes interaction pos- 
sible, in some cases over distances characterized not by 
their dimensions but by their wave length. This is the cir- 
cumstance which, among many others, enables the rare 
Uranium-235, as it occurs in natural uranium, to catch up 
enough of the neutrons which fly about to sustain a chain 
reaction in an atomic reactor. 

There are even some odd things about the identity and 
the identifiability of the electrons themselves. That they 
are all similar we know. Their inherent properties, their 
charge, their mass when at rest, are the same. We wish that 


Atom and Void : 51 


we understood this better; some day, no doubt, we shall; 
but we know that it is true. But if classical physics were the 
whole story, we could still, if we wished, always identify an 
electron, and know that it was the same as the one we had 
seen before. We could follow it, not, it is true, without 
trouble, but without paradox, without inconsistency, from 
where we first found it through its collisions and interac- 
tions and deflections and changes by keeping in touch with 
its trajectory. If it hit another electron, we would know 
which it was that came out in one direction and which in 
another. In fact this is not really true, except in those spe- 
cial instances where the collision is of such low energy that 
the two electrons can be described by waves which never 
overlap at the same place at the same time. As soon as that 
is no longer the case, we lose in principle all ability to tell 
one electron from another; and in atomic physics, where 
the electrons of an atom, and even the electrons of neigh- 
boring atoms, are not well defined in position and can 
often occupy the same volume, we have no way of identify- 
ing the individual particle. This, too, has consequences. 
When two electrons collide, the wave that represents one 
of them and the wave that represents the other may, and 
do, interfere; and this gives rise to novel effects and new 
forms for the interactions produced by their electric repul- 
sion. It is responsible for the permanent magnetism of 
magnets. It is responsible for the bonding of organic chem- 
istry and for the very existence in any form that we can 
readily imagine of living matter and of life itself. 

These examples are not given to perplex and bemuse. 
They are rather illustrations of how even the most para- 
doxical and unexpected consequences of the new mechan- 
ics, of wave-particle duality, and of complementarity are 
involved in an understanding of important and familiar 
features of the natural world, and of how massive is the 
system of understanding and knowledge of which they are 
a part. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Uncommon Sense 


A CENTURY after Newton, in 1784, the progress of that 
century was celebrated in an anonymous memorial lodged 
in the ball of the tower of St. Margaret’s church at Gotha, 
to be found by men of future times. It read: 


“Our days have been the happiest time of the eighteenth cen- 
tury.... Hatred born of dogma and the compulsion of con- 
science sink away; love of man and freedom of thought gain 
the upper hand. The arts and sciences blossom, and our vision 
into the workshop of nature goes deep. Artisans approach art- 
ists in perfection; useful skills flower at all levels. Here you have 
a faithful portrait of our time. ... Do the same for those who 
come after you and rejoice!” 


Transience is the backdrop for the play of human prog- 
ress, for the improvement of man, the growth of his knowl- 
edge, the increase of his power, his corruption and his 
partial redemption. Our civilizations perish; the carved 
stone, the written word, the heroic act fade into a memory 
of memory and in the end are gone. The day will come 
when our race is gone; this house, this earth in which we 
live will one day be unfit for human habitation, as the sun 
ages and alters. 

‘Yet no man, be he agnostic or Buddhist or Christian, 
thinks wholly in these terms. His acts, his thoughts, what he 
sees of the world around him—the falling of a leaf or a 
child’s joke or the rise of the moon—are part of history; 
but they are not only part of history; they are a part of 
becoming and of process but not only that: they partake 
also of the world outside of time; they partake of the light 
of eternity. 


Uncommon Sense - 53 


These two ways of thinking, the way of time and history 
and the way of eternity and of timelessness, are both part 
of man’s effort to comprehend the world in which he lives. 
Neither is comprehended in the other nor reducible to it. 
They are, as we have learned to say in physics, complemen- 
tary views, each supplementing the other, neither telling 
the whole story. Let us return to this. 


First, we had best review and extend somewhat this ac- 
count of the complementarity of the physicists. In its sim- 
plest form it is that an electron must sometimes be consid- 
ered as a wave, and sometimes as a particle—a wave, that 
is, with the continuous propagation and characteristic in- 
terference that we learn to understand in the optics labora- 
tory, or as a particle, a thing with well-defined location at 
any time, discrete and individual and atomic. There is this 
same duality for all matter and for light. In a little subtler 
form this complementarity means that there are situations 
in which the position of an atomic object can be measured 
and defined and thought about without contradiction; and 
other situations in which this is not so, but in which other 
qualities, such as the energy or the impulse of the system, 
are defined and meaningful. The more nearly appropriate 
the first way of thinking is to a situation, the more wholly 
inappropriate the second, so that there are in fact no 
atomic situations in which both impulse and position will 
be defined well enough to permit the sort of prediction 
with which Newtonian mechanics has familiarized us. 

It is not only that when we have made an observation on 
a system and determined, let us say, its position, we do not 
know its impulse. That is true, but more than that is true. 
We could say that we know the position of that system and 
that it may have any one of a number of different im- 
pulses. If we try on that basis to predict its behavior as a 
sort of average behavior of all objects which have the mea- 
sured position and which have different and unmeasured 
impulses, and work out the average answer according to 


54 + Chapter Five 


Newton’s laws, we get a result that is wholly at variance 
with what we find in nature. This is because of the peculiar 
property, which has no analogue in the mechanics of large 
objects, of interference between waves representing the 
consequences of assuming one impulse and those of as- 
suming another. We are not, that is, allowed to suppose 
that position and velocity are attributes of an atomic sys- 
tem, some of which we know and others of which we might 
know but do not. We have to recognize that the attempt to 
discover these unknown attributes would lose for us the 
known; that we have a choice, a disjunction; and that this 
corresponds to the different ways we can go about observ- 
ing our atom or experimenting with it. 

We have a state of affairs completely defined by the 
nature of the observation and by its outcome—the nature 
determining what properties of the system will be well de- 
fined in the state and what poorly. The outcome then is the 
determination of the well-defined quantities by measure- 
ment. This state thus is a summary, symbolic and uncom- 
fortably abstract for general exposition, of what sort of 
observation we have made and what we have found 
through it. It codifies those characteristics of the experi- 
mental arrangement which are reliable, in the sense that 
the equipment we use records something that we know 
about atomic systems. It describes also those characteristics 
that are indeterminate, in the sense that they may not only 
have been disturbed or altered, but that their disturbance 
cannot be registered or controlled without the loss, in the 
experiment, of all ability to measure what was supposed to 
be measured. 

This state, this description of the atom, is not the only 
way of talking about it. It is the only way appropriate to the 
information we have and the means that we have used to 
obtain it. It is the full account of this information; and if 
the experiment was properly and scrupulously done it tells 
us all that we can find out. It is not all that we could have 
found out had we chosen a different experiment. It is all 
that we could find out having chosen this. 


Uncommon Sense - 55 


This state is objective. We can calculate its properties, 
reproduce it with similar atoms on another occasion, verify 
its properties and its ways of change with time. There is no 
element of the arbitrary or subjective. Once we have done 
our experiment and its result is recorded and the atom 
disengaged, we know its meaning and its outcome; we can 
then forget the details of how we got our information. 

But, although the state of the system is objective, a me- 
chanical picture of how it was brought into being is not 
generally possible. There is a most vivid example of this, 
made famous by the prominent part it played in the de- 
bates between Einstein and Bohr as to the meaning and 
adequacy of atomic theory. It can be put rather simply. Let 
us suppose that we have two objects; one of them may be 
an electron or an atom, and it will be the one we wish to 
study. The other may be a relatively large piece of mat- 
ter—a screen with a hole through it, or any other body; but 
it should be heavy so that its motion will be unimportant 
compared to that of the electron. Let us suppose that we 
by measurement know the impulse or momentum of both 
of these objects, and have them collide. Let the electron go 
through the hole, or bounce off the other body. If, after 
the collision, we measure the impulse of the heavy body, we 
will then know that of the electron because, as Newton’s 
third law teaches us, the sum of the impulses is not altered 
by the collision. In that case we would have a state of the 
electron of well-defined impulse, as precisely defined as we 
had made the precision of our measurements. If, on the 
other hand, we observed the position of the heavy body, we 
would know where the light one had been at the moment 
of the collision, and so would have a quite different de- 
scription of its state, one in which its position and not its 
impulse had been well defined—or, in the language of 
waves, a spherical wave with its center at the point of colli- 
sion, and not a plane wave with its direction and wave 
length corresponding to the momentum. 

We have thus the option of realizing one or the other of 
two wholly dissimilar states for the electron, by a choice of 


56 + Chapter Five 


what we observe about the heavy body with which it once 
was in interaction. We are not, in any meaningful sense, 
physically altering or qualifying the electron; we are defin- 
ing a part of, although in this case a late part of, the experi- 
mental procedure, the very nature of the experiment itself. 
If we exercise neither option, if we let the heavy body go 
with unmeasured momentum and undefined position, 
then we know nothing of the electron at all. It has no state, 
and we are not prepared to make any meaningful predic- 
tions of what will become of it or of what we shall find 
should we again attempt an experiment upon it. The elec- 
tron cannot be objectified in a manner independent of the 
means chosen for observing or studying it. The only prop- 
erty we can ascribe to it without such consideration is our 
total ignorance. 

This is a sharp reminder that ways of thinking about 
things, which seem natural and inevitable and almost ap- 
pear not to rest on experience so much as on the inherent 
qualities of thought and nature, do in fact rest on experi- 
ence; and that there are parts of experience rendered ac- 
cessible by exploration and experimental refinement 
where these ways of thought no longer apply. 

It is important to remember that, if a very much subtler 
view of the properties of an electron in an atomic system 
is necessary to describe the wealth of experience we have 
had with such systems, it all rests on accepting without 
revision the traditional accounts of the behavior of large- 
scale objects. The measurements that we have talked about 
in such highly abstract form do in fact come down in the 
end to looking at the position of a pointer, or the reading 
of time on a watch, or measuring out where on a photo- 
graphic plate or a phosphorescent screen a flash of light or 
a patch of darkness occurs. They all rest on reducing the 
experience with atomic systems to experiment and obser- 
vation made manifest, unambiguous, and objective in the 
behavior of large objects, where the precautions and incer- 
titudes of the atomic domain no longer directly apply. So 
it is that ever-increasing refinements and critical revisions 


Uncommon Sense - 57 


in the way we talk about remote or small or inaccessible 
parts of the physical world have no direct relevance to the 
familiar physical world of common experience. 


Common sense is not wrong in the view that it is meaning- 
ful, appropriate, and necessary to talk about the large ob- 
jects of our daily experience as though they had a velocity 
that we knew, and a place that we knew, and all the rest of 
it. Common sense is wrong only if it insists that what is 
familiar must reappear in what is unfamiliar. It is wrong 
only if it leads us to expect that every country that we visit 
is like the last country we saw. Common sense, as the com- 
mon heritage from the millennia of common life, may lead 
us into error if we wholly forget the circumstances to which 
that common life has been restricted. 

Misunderstanding of these relations has led men to wish 
to draw from new discoveries, and particularly those in the 
atomic domain, far-reaching consequences for the ordi- 
nary affairs of men. Thus it was noted that, since the ulti- 
mate laws of atomic behavior are not strictly causal, not 
strictly determinate, the famous argument of Laplace for 
a wholly determinate universe could not be maintained. 
And there were men who believed that they had discov- 
ered in the acausal and indeterminate character of atomic 
events the physical basis for that sense of freedom which 
characterizes man’s behavior in the face of decision and of 
responsibility. 

In a similar light-hearted way it was pointed out that, as 
the state of an atomic system requires observation for its 
definition, so the course of psychological phenomena 
might be irretrievably altered by the very effort to probe 
them—as a man’s thoughts are altered by the fact that he 
has formulated and spoken them. It is, of course, not the 
fact that observation may change the state of an atomic 
system that gives rise to the need for a complementary 
description; it is the fact that, if the observation is to be 
meaningful, it will preclude any analysis or control of that 
change, that is decisive. 


58 + Chapter Five 


But these misapplications of the findings of atomic phys- 
ics to human affairs do not establish that there are no valid 
analogies. These analogies will, in the nature of things, be 
less sharp, less compelling, less ingenious. They will rest 
upon the fact that complementary modes of thought and 
complementary descriptions of reality are an old, long- 
enduring part of our tradition. All that the experience of 
atomic physics can do in these affairs is to give us a re- 
minder, and a certain reassurance, that these ways of talk- 
ing and thinking can be factual, appropriate, precise, and 
free of obscurantism. 

There are a number of examples which are illuminated 
by, and in turn illuminate, the complementarity of atomic 
theory. Some of them are from quite different parts of 
human life and some of them from older parts of science. 
There is one from physics itself which is revealing, both in 
its analogies and its points of difference. One of the great 
triumphs of nineteenth-century physics was the kinetic 
theory of heat—what is called statistical mechanics. This is 
both an interpretation and a deduction of many of the 
large-scale properties and tendencies of matter: of the ten- 
dency, for instance, of bodies that can exchange heat to 
come to a common temperature, or of the density of a gas 
to be uniform throughout a container, or of work to dissi- 
pate itself in heat, or quite generally of all of those irrevers- 
ible processes in nature wherein the entropy of systems 
increases, and forms become more uniform and less differ- 
entiated when left to themselves to develop. 

The phenomena we deal with here are defined in terms 
of temperature and density and pressure and other large- 
scale properties. The kinetic theory, statistical mechanics, 
interprets the behavior of these systems in terms of the 
forces acting on the molecules and of the motion of the 
molecules that compose them, which are usually quite ac- 
curately described by Newton’s laws. But it is a statistical 
theory of this motion, recognizing that in fact we do not in 
general know, and are not in detail concerned with, the 
positions and velocities of the molecules themselves, but 


Uncommon Sense - 59 


only with their average behavior. We interpret the tem- 
perature of a gas, for instance, in terms of the average 
kinetic energy of its molecules, and the pressure as the 
average of the forces exerted by the collision of these mole- 
cules on the surface of the container. This description in 
terms of averages, embodying as part of itself our igno- 
rance of the detailed state of affairs, is thus in some sense 
complementary to a complete dynamic description in 
terms of the motion of the individual molecules. In this 
sense kinetic theory and dynamics are complementary. 
One applies to a situation in which the individual patterns 
of molecular behavior are known and studied; the other 
applies to a situation largely defined by our ignorance of 
these patterns. 

But the analogy to atomic complementarity is only par- 
tial, because there is nothing in the classical dynamics 
which underlies kinetic theory to suggest that the behavior 
of a gas would be any different if we had performed the 
immense job of locating and measuring what all the mole- 
cules were doing. We might then, it is true, not find it 
natural to talk about temperature, because we would need 
no average behavior; we would have an actual one; but we 
could still define the temperature in terms of the total 
kinetic energy of the molecules, and we would still find that 
it tended to equalize between one part of the system and 
another. 

We have therefore a situation in which there are two 
ways of describing a system, two sets of concepts, two cen- 
ters of preoccupation. One is appropriate when we are 
dealing with a very few molecules and want to know what 
those molecules do; the other appropriate when we have 
a large mass of matter and only rough and large-scale ob- 
servations about it. 

There is, however, no logical or inherent difficulty 
within the framework of classical physics, in combining 
both descriptions for a single system—and classical physics, 
we repeat, is adequate for most, if not all, of these problems 
of statistical mechanics. It is not that we cannot do this 


60 - Chapter Five 


without violating the laws of physics; it is that it makes no 
sense to do it, since each description is appropriate to a 
context quite different from the other. It is clear that, if we 
insisted on the detailed description of the motion of indi- 
vidual molecules, the notions of probability which turn out 
to be so essential for our understanding of the irreversible 
character of physical events in nature would never enter. 
We should not have the great insight that we now do: 
namely, that the direction of change in the world is from 
the less probable to the more, from the more organized to 
the less, because all we would be talking about would be an 
incredible number of orbits and trajectories and collisions. 
It would be a great miracle to us that, out of equations of 
motion, which to every allowed motion permit a precisely 
opposite one, we could nevertheless emerge into a world in 
which there is a trend of change with time which is irre- 
versible, unmistakable, and familiar in all our physical 
experience. 


In considering the relations between the various sciences, 
there are similar instances of complementary views. In 
many cases, itis not clear whether this is the sort of comple- 
mentarity that we have between the statistical and dynamic 
descriptions of a gas, a contrast of interest and terminol- 
ogy, but not an inherent inapplicability of two ways of talk- 
ing; or whether on the contrary the situation is in fact 
more as it is in atomic physics, where the nature of the 
world is such that the two modes of description cannot be 
applied at once to the same situation. Every science has its 
own language. But dictionaries of translation between the 
languages do exist, and mark an evergrowing understand- 
ing and unity of science as a whole. It is not always clear 
whether the dictionaries will be complete; between physics 
and chemistry they apparently are. Everything the chemist 
observes and describes can be talked about in terms of 
atomic mechanics, and most of it at least can be under- 
stood. Yet no one suggests that, in dealing with the com- 
plex chemical forms which are of biological interest, the 


Uncommon Sense - 61 


language of atomic physics would be helpful. Rather it 
would tend to obscure the great regularities of biochemis- 
try, as the dynamic description of a gas would obscure its 
thermodynamic behavior. 

The contrast becomes even more marked when we con- 
sider the physico-chemical description of living forms. 
Here, in spite of the miraculous sharpness of the tools of 
chemical analysis, of the extensive use not only of the mi- 
croscope but of the electron microscope to determine fine 
details of biological structure, in spite of the use of tracers 
to follow changes on a molecular scale, questions have still 
been raised as to whether this description can in the nature 
of things be complete. 

The question involves two points: the first having to do 
with the impossibility of wholly isolating a biological system 
from its physical environment without killing it; the second 
with the possibility that a really complete physico-chemical 
study of the pivotal structures in biological processes—of 
genes, let us say, in the nuclei of dividing cells—might not 
be incompatible with the undisturbed course of life itself. 
It would appear to be the general opinion of biologists that 
no such limitations will prove decisive; that a complete 
description of biology will be possible not only in terms of 
the concepts of biology but in terms reducible to those of 
physics and chemistry. Certainly it is a large part of the aim 
and wonder of biological progress to carry this program as 
far as possible. 

Analogous questions appear much sharper, and their 
answer more uncertain, when we think of the phenomena 
of consciousness; and, despite all the progress that has 
been made in the physiology of the sense organs and of 
the brain, despite our increasing knowledge of these in- 
tricate marvels both as to their structure and their func- 
tioning, it seems rather unlikely that we shall be able to 
describe in physico-chemical terms the physiological phe- 
nomena which accompany a conscious thought, or senti- 
ment, or will. Today the outcome is uncertain. Whatever 
the outcome, we know that, should an understanding of 


62 - Chapter Five 


the physical correlate of elements of consciousness indeed 
be available, it will not itself be the appropriate description 
for the thinking man himself, for the clarification of his 
thoughts, the resolution of his will, or the delight of his eye 
and mind at works of beauty. Indeed, an understanding of 
the complementary nature of conscious life and its physical 
interpretation appears to me a lasting element in human 
understanding and a proper formulation of the historic 
views called psycho-physical parallelism. 

For within conscious life, and in its relations with the 
description of the physical world, there are again many 
examples. There is the relation between the cognitive and 
the affective sides of our lives, between knowledge or 
analysis and emotion or feeling. There is the relation be- 
tween the aesthetic and the heroic, between feeling and 
that precursor and definer of action, the ethical commit- 
ment; there is the classical relation between the analysis of 
one’s self, the determination of one’s motives and pur- 
poses, and that freedom of choice, that freedom of decision 
and action, which are complementary to it. 

Whether a physico-chemical description of the material 
counterpart of consciousness will in fact ever be possible, 
whether physiological or psychological observation will 
ever permit with any relevant confidence the prediction of 
our behavior in moments of decision and in moments of 
challenge, we may be sure that these analyses and these 
understandings, even should they exist, will be as irrele- 
vant to the acts of decision and the castings of the will as 
are.the trajectories of molecules to the entropy of a gas. To 
be touched with awe, or humor, to be moved by beauty, to 
make a commitment or a determination, to understand 
some truth—these are complementary modes of the 
human spirit. All of them are part of man’s spiritual life. 
None can replace the others, and where one is called for 
the others are in abeyance. 

Just as with the a-particles of Rutherford, which were 
first for him an object of study and then became for him 
a tool of study, a tool for investigating other objects, so our 


Uncommon Sense - 63 


thoughts and words can be the subject of reflection and 
analysis; so we can be introspective, critical, and full of 
doubt. And so, in other times and other contexts, these 
same words, these same thoughts taken as instruments, are 
the power of human understanding itself, and the means 
of our further enlightenment. 

The wealth and variety of physics itself, the greater 
wealth and variety of the natural sciences taken as a whole, 
the more familiar, yet still strange and far wider wealth of 
the life of the human spirit, enriched by complementary, 
not at once compatible ways, irreducible one to the other, 
have a greater harmony. They are the elements of man’s 
sorrow and his splendor, his frailty and his power, his 
death, his passing, and his undying deeds. 


CHAPTER SIX 


The Sciences 
and Man’s Community 


FOR some moments during these lectures we have looked 
together into one of the rooms of the house called “sci- 
ence.” This is a relatively quiet room that we know as quan- 
tum theory or atomic theory. The great girders which 
frame it, the lights and shadows and vast windows—these 
were the work of a generation our predecessor more than 
two decades ago. It is not wholly quiet. Young people visit 
it and study in it and pass on to other chambers; and from 
time to time someone rearranges a piece of the furniture 
to make the whole more harmonious; and many, as we 
have done, peer through its windows or walk through it as 
sight-seers. It is not so old but that one can hear the sound 
of the new wings being built nearby, where men walk high 
in the air to erect new scaffoldings, not unconscious of how 
far they may fall. All about there are busy workshops 
where the builders are active, and very near indeed are 
those of us who, learning more of the primordial structure 
of matter, hope some day for chambers as fair and lovely 
as that in which we have spent the years of our youth and 
our prime. 

It is a vast house indeed. It does not appear to have been 
built upon any plan but to have grown as a great city grows. 
There is no central chamber, no one corridor from which 
all others debouch. All about the periphery men are at 
work studying the vast reaches of space and the state of 
affairs billions of years ago; studying the intricate and sub- 
tle but wonderfully meet mechanisms by which life prolif- 
erates, alters, and endures; studying the reach of the mind 
and its ways of learning; digging deep into the atoms and 


The Sciences and Man’s Community - 65 


the atoms within atoms and their unfathomed order. It is 
a house so vast that none of us know it, and even the most 
fortunate have seen most rooms only from the outside or 
by a fleeting passage, as in a king’s palace open to visitors. 
It is a house so vast that there is not and need not be 
complete concurrence on where its chambers stop and 
those of the neighboring mansions begin. 

It is not arranged in a line nor a square nor a circle nor 
a pyramid, but with a wonderful randomness suggestive of 
unending growth and improvisation. Not many people live 
in the house, relatively speaking—perhaps if we count all 
its chambers and take residence requirements quite lightly, 
one tenth of one per cent, of all the people in this world— 
probably, by any reasonable definition, far fewer. And 
even those who live here live elsewhere also, live in houses 
where the rooms are not labelled atomic theory or genetics 
or the internal constitution of the stars, but quite different 
names like power and production and evil and beauty and 
history and children and the word of God. 

We go in and out; even the most assiduous of us is not 
bound to this vast structure. One thing we find throughout 
the house: there are no locks; there are no shut doors; 
wherever we go there are the signs and usually the words 
of welcome. It is an open house, open to all comers. 

The discoveries of science, the new rooms in this great 
house, have changed the way men think of things outside 
its walls. We have some glimmering now of the depth in 
time and the vastness in space of the physical world we live 
in. An awareness of how long our history and how im- 
mense our cosmos touches us even in simple earthly delib- 
erations. We have learned from the natural history of the 
earth and from the story of evolution to have a sense of 
history, of time and change. We learn to talk of ourselves, 
and of the nature of the world and its reality as not wholly 
fixed in a silent quiet moment, but as unfolding with nov- 
elty and alteration, decay and new growth. We have under- 
stood something of the inner harmony and beauty of 
strange primitive cultures, and through this see the quali- 


66 - Chapter Six 


ties of our own life in an altered perspective, and recognize 
its accidents as well as its inherent necessities. We are, I 
should think, not patriots less but patriots very differently 
for loving what is ours and understanding a little of the 
love of others for their lands and ways. We have begun to 
understand that it is not only in his rational life that man’s 
psyche is intelligible, that even in what may appear to be 
his least rational actions and sentiments we may discover a 
new order. We have the beginnings of an understanding 
of what it is in man, and more in simple organisms, that is 
truly heritable, and rudimentary clues as to how the inheri- 
tance occurs. We know, in surprising detail, what is the 
physical counterpart of the act of vision and of other 
modes of perception. Not one of these new ideas and new 
insights is so little, or has so short a reach in its bearing on 
the common understanding but that it alone could make a 
proper theme for “Science and the Common Understand- 
ing.” Yet we have been, bearing in mind my limited area 
of experience, in that one room of the part of the house 
where physics is, in which I have for some years worked 
and taught. 

In that one room—in that relatively quiet room where 
we have been together—we have found things quite 
strange for those who have not been there before, yet 
reminiscent of what we have seen in other houses and 
known in other days. We have seen that in the atomic 
world we have been led by experience to use descriptions 
and ideas that apply to the large-scale world of matter, to 
the familiar world of our schoolday physics; ideas like the 
position of a body and its acceleration and its impulse and 
the forces acting on it; ideas like wave and interference; 
ideas like cause and probability. But what is new, what was 
not anticipated a half-century ago, is that, though to an 
atomic system there is a potential applicability of one or 
another of these ideas, in any real situation only some of 
these ways of description can be actual. This is because we 
need to take into account not merely the atomic system we 
are studying, but the means we use in observing it, and the 


The Sciences and Man’s Community - 67 


fitness of these experimental means for defining and mea- 
suring selected properties of the system. All such ways of 
observing are needed for the whole experience of the 
atomic world; all but one are excluded in any actual ex- 
perience. In the specific instance, there is a proper and 
consistent way to describe what the experience is; what it 
implies; what it predicts and thus how to deal with its con- 
sequences. But any such specific instance excludes by its 
existence the application of other ideas, other modes of 
prediction, other consequences. They are, we say, comple- 
mentary to one another; atomic theory is in part an ac- 
count of these descriptions and in part an understanding 
of the circumstances to which one applies, or another or 
another. 

And so it is with man’s life. He may be any of a number 
of things; he will not be all of them. He may be well versed, 
he may be a poet, he may be a creator in one or more than 
one science; he will not be all kinds of man or all kinds of 
scientist; and he will be lucky if he has a bit of familiarity 
outside the room in which he works. 

So it is with the great antinomies that through the ages 
have organized and yet disunited man’s experience: the 
antinomy between the ceaseless change and wonderful 
novelty and the perishing of all earthly things, and the 
eternity which inheres in every happening; in the antin- 
omy between growth and order, between the spontaneous 
and changing and irregular and the symmetrical and bal- 
anced; in the related antinomy between freedom and ne- 
cessity; between action, the life of the will, and observation 
and analysis and the life of reason; between the question 
“how?” and the questions “why?” and “to what end?”; be- 
tween the causes that derive from natural law, from un- 
varying regularities in the natural world, and those other 
causes that express purposes and define goals and ends. 


So it is in the antinomy between the individual and the 
community; man who is an end in himself and man whose 
tradition, whose culture, whose works, whose words have 


68 - Chapter Six 


meaning in terms of other men and his relations to them. 
All our experience has shown that we can neither think, 
nor in any true sense live, without reference to these anti- 
nomic modes. We cannot in any sense be both the observ- 
ers and the actors in any specific instance, or we shall fail 
properly to be either one or the other; yet we know that 
our life is built of these two modes, is part free and part 
inevitable, is part creation and part discipline, is part accep- 
tance and part effort. We have no written rules that assign 
us to these ways; but we know that only folly and death of 
the spirit results when we deny one or the other, when we 
erect one as total and absolute and make the others deriva- 
tive and secondary. We recognize this when we live as men. 
We talk to one another; we philosophize; we admire great 
men and their moments of greatness; we read; we study; 
we recognize and love in a particular act that happy union 
of the generally incompatible. With all of this we learn to 
use some reasonable part of the full register of man’s 
resources. 

We are, of course, an ignorant lot; even the best of us 
knows how to do only a very few things well; and of what 
is available in knowledge of fact, whether of science or of 
history, only the smallest part is in any one man’s knowing. 

The greatest of the changes that science has brought is 
the acuity of change; the greatest novelty the extent of 
novelty. Short of rare times of great disaster, civilizations 
have not known such rapid alteration in the conditions of 
their life, such rapid flowering of many varied sciences, 
such rapid changes in the ideas we have about the world 
and one another. What has been true in the days of a great 
disaster or great military defeat for one people at one time 
is true for all of us now, in the sense that our ends have 
little in common with our beginnings. Within a lifetime 
what we learned at school has been rendered inadequate 
by new discoveries and new inventions; the ways that we 
learn in childhood are only very meagerly adequate to the 
issues that we must meet in maturity. 


The Sciences and Man’s Community + 69 


In fact, of course, the notion of universal knowledge has 
always been an illusion; but it is an illusion fostered by the 
monistic view of the world in which a few great central 
truths determine in all its wonderful and amazing prolif- 
eration everything else that is true. We are not today 
tempted to search for these keys that unlock the whole of 
human knowledge and of man’s experience. We know that 
we are ignorant; we are well taught it, and the more surely 
and deeply we know our own job the better able we are to 
appreciate the full measure of our pervasive ignorance. 
We know that these are inherent limits, compounded, no 
doubt, and exaggerated by that sloth and that complacency 
without which we would not be men at all. 

But knowledge rests on knowledge; what is new is mean- 
ingful because it departs slightly from what was known 
before; this is a world of frontiers, where even the liveliest 
of actors or observers will be absent most of the time from 
most of them. Perhaps this sense was not so sharp in the 
village—that village which we have learned a little about 
but probably do not understand too well—the village of 
slow change and isolation and fixed culture which evokes 
our nostalgia even if not our full comprehension. Perhaps 
in the villages men were not so lonely; perhaps they found 
in each other a fixed community, a fixed and only slowly 
growing store of knowledge—a single world. Even that we 
may doubt, for there seem to be always in the culture of 
such times and places vast domains of mystery, if not un- 
knowable, then imperfectly known, endless and open. 


As for ourselves in these times of change, of ever-increas- 
ing knowledge, of collective power and individual impo- 
tence, of heroism and of drudgery, of progress and of 
tragedy, we too are brothers. And if we, who are the inheri- 
tors of two millennia of Christian tradition, understand 
that for us we have come to be brothers second by being 
children first, we know that in vast parts of the world where 
there has been no Christian tradition, and with men who 


70 + Chapter Six 


never have been and never may be Christian in faith there 
is nevertheless a bond of brotherhood. We know this not 
only because of the almost universal ideal of human broth- 
erhood and human community; we know it at first hand 
from the more modest, more diverse, more fleeting asso- 
ciations which are the substance of our life. The ideal of 
brotherhood, the ideal of fraternity in which all men, 
wicked and virtuous, wretched and fortunate, are banded 
together has its counterpart in the experience of communi- 
ties, not ideal, not universal, imperfect, impermanent, as 
different from the ideal and as reminiscent of it as are the 
ramified branches of science from the ideal of a unitary, 
all-encompassing science of the eighteenth century. 

Each of us knows from his own life how much even a 
casual and limited association of men goes beyond him in 
knowledge, in understanding, in humanity, and in power. 
Each of us, from a friend or a book or by concerting of the 
little we know with what others know, has broken the iron 
circle of his frustration. Each of us has asked help and 
been given it, and within our measure each of us has of- 
fered it. Each of us knows the great new freedom sensed 
almost as a miracle, that men banded together for some 
finite purpose experience from the power of their com- 
mon effort. We are likely to remember the times of the last 
war, where the common danger brought forth in soldier, 
in worker, in scientist, and engineer a host of new experi- 
ences of the power and the comfort in even bleak under- 
takings, of common, concerted, co-operative life. Each of 
us knows how much he has been transcended by the group 
of which he has been or is a part; each of us has felt the 
solace of other men’s knowledge to stay his own ignorance, 
of other men’s wisdom to stay his folly, of other men’s 
courage to answer his doubts or his weakness. 

These are the fluid communities, some of long duration 
when circumstances favored—like the political party or 
many a trade union—some fleeting and vivid, encompass- 
ing in the time of their duration a moment only of the 
member’s life; and in our world at least they are ramified 


The Sciences and Man’s Community - 71 


and improvised, living and dying, growing and falling off 
almost as a form of life itself. This may be more true of the 
United States than of any other country. Certainly the bi- 
zarre and comical aspects impressed de Tocqueville more 
than a century ago when he visited our land and com- 
mented on the readiness with which men would band to- 
gether: to improve the planting of a town, or for political 
reform, or for the pursuit or inter-exchange of knowledge, 
or just for the sake of banding together, because they liked 
one another or disliked someone else. Circumstances may 
have exaggerated the role of the societies, of the fluid and 
yet intense communities in the United States; yet these 
form a common pattern for our civilization. It brought 
men together in the Royal Society and in the French Acad- 
emy and in the Philosophical Society that Franklin 
founded, in family, in platoon, on a ship, in the laboratory, 
in almost everything but a really proper club. 

If we err today—and I think we do—it is in expecting 
too much of knowledge from the individual and too much 
of synthesis from the community. We tend to think of 
these communities, no less than of the larger brotherhood 
of man, as made up of individuals, as composed of them as 
an atom is of its ingredients. We think similarly of general 
laws and broad ideas as made up of the instances which 
illustrate them, and from an observation of which we may 
have learned them. 

Yet this is not the whole. The individual event, the act, 
goes far beyond the general law. It is a sort of intersection 
of many generalities, harmonizing them in one instance as 
they cannot be harmonized in general. And we as men are 
not only the ingredients of our communities; we are their 
intersection, making a harmony which does not exist be- 
tween the communities except as we, the individual men, 
may create it and reveal it. So much of what we think, our 
acts, our judgments of beauty and of right and wrong, 
come to us from our fellow men that what would be left 
were we to take all this away would be neither recognizable 
nor human. We are men because we are part of, but not 


72 + Chapter Six 


because only part of, communities; and the attempt to un- 
derstand man’s brotherhood in terms only of the individ- 
ual man is as little likely to describe our world as is the 
attempt to describe general laws as the summary of their 
instances. These are indeed two complementary views, nei- 
ther reducible to the other, no more reducible than is the 
electron as wave to the electron as particle. 

And this is the mitigant of our ignorance. It is true that 
none of us will know very much; and most of us will see the 
end of our days without understanding in all its detail and 
beauty the wonders uncovered even in a single branch of 
a single science. Most of us will not even know, as a mem- 
ber of any intimate circle, anyone who has such knowledge; 
but it is also true that, although we are sure not to know 
everything and rather likely not to know very much, we 
can know anything that is known to man, and may, with 
luck and sweat, even find out some things that have not 
before been known to him. This possibility, which, as a 
universal condition of man’s life is new, represents today 
a high and determined hope, not yet a reality; it is for us 
in England and in the United States not wholly remote or 
unfamiliar. It is one of the manifestations of our belief in 
equality, that belief which could perhaps better be de- 
scribed as a commitment to unparalleled diversity and un- 
evenness in the distribution of attainments, knowledge, tal- 
ent, and power. 

This open access to knowledge, these unlocked doors 
and signs of welcome, are a mark of a freedom as funda- 
mental as any. They give a freedom to resolve difference 
by converse, and, where converse does not unite, to let 
tolerance compose diversity. This would appear to be a 
freedom barely compatible with modern political tyranny. 
The multitude of communities, the free association for 
converse or for common purpose, are acts of creation. It 
is not merely that without them the individual is the 
poorer; without them a part of human life, not more nor 
less fundamental than the individual, is foreclosed. It is a 
cruel and humorless sort of pun that so powerful a present 


The Sciences and Man’s Community - 73 


form of modern tyranny should call itself by the very name 
of a belief in community, by a word “communism” which 
in other times evoked memories of villages and village inns 
and of artisans concerting their skills, and of men of learn- 
ing content with anonymity. But perhaps only a malignant 
end can follow the systematic belief that all communities 
are one community; that all truth is one truth; that all 
experience is compatible with all other; that total knowl- 
edge is possible; that all that is potential can exist as actual. 
This is not man’s fate; this is not his path; to force him on 
it makes him resemble not that divine image of the all- 
knowing and all-powerful but the helpless, iron-bound 
prisoner of a dying world. The open society, the unre- 
stricted access to knowledge, the unplanned and uninhib- 
ited association of men for its furtherance—these are what 
may make a vast, complex, ever-growing, ever-changing, 
ever more specialized and expert technological world nev- 
ertheless a world of human community. 


So it is with the unity of science—that unity that is far more 
a unity of comparable dedication than a unity of common 
total understanding. This heartening phrase, “the unity of 
science,” often tends to evoke a wholly false picture, a pic- 
ture of a few basic truths, a few critical techniques, meth- 
ods, and ideas, from which all discoveries and understand- 
ing of science derive; a sort of central exchange, access to 
which will illuminate the atoms and the galaxies, the genes 
and the sense organs. The unity of science is based rather 
on just such a community as I have described. All parts of 
it are open to all of us, and this is no merely formal invita- 
tion. The history of science is rich in example of the fruit- 
fulness of bringing two sets of techniques, two sets of ideas, 
developed in separate contexts for the pursuit of new 
truth, into touch with one another. The sciences fertilize 
each other; they grow by contact and by common enter- 
prise. Once again, this means that the scientist may profit 
from learning about any other science; it does not mean 
that he must learn about them all. It means that the unity 


74 + Chapter Six 


is a potential unity, the unity of the things that might be 
brought together and might throw light one on the other. 
It is not global or total or hierarchical. 

Even in science, and even without visiting the room in its 
house called atomic theory, we are again and again re- 
minded of the complementary traits in our own life, even 
in our own professional life. We are nothing without the 
work of others our predecessors, others our teachers, oth- 
ers our contemporaries. Even when, in the measure of our 
adequacy and our fullness, new insight and new order are 
created, we are still nothing without others. Yet we are 
more. 

There is a similar duality in our relations to wider soci- 
ety. For society our work means many things: pleasure, we 
hope, for those who follow it; instruction for those who 
perhaps need it; but also and far more widely, it means a 
common power, a power to achieve that which could not be 
achieved without knowledge. It means the cure of illness 
and the alleviation of suffering; it means the easing of 
labor and the widening of the readily accessible frontiers 
of experience, of communication, and of instruction. It 
means, in an earthy way, the power of betterment—that 
riddled word. We are today anxiously aware that the 
power to change is not always necessarily good. 

As new instruments of war, of newly massive terror, add 
to the ferocity and totality of warfare, we understand that 
it is a special mark and problem of our age that man’s 
ever-present preoccupation with improving his lot, with 
alleviating hunger and poverty and exploitation, must be 
brought into harmony with the over-riding need to limit 
and largely to eliminate resort to organized violence be- 
tween nation and nation. The increasingly expert destruc- 
tion of man’s spirit by the power of police, more wicked if 
not more awful than the ravages of nature’s own hand, is 
another such power, good only if never to be used. 

We regard it as proper and just that the patronage of 
science by society is in large measure based on the in- 
creased power which knowledge gives. If we are anxious 


The Sciences and Man’s Community + 75 


that the power so given and so obtained be used with wis- 
dom and with love of humanity, that is an anxiety we share 
with almost everyone. But we also know how little of the 
deep new knowledge which has altered the face of the 
world, which has changed—and increasingly and ever 
more profoundly must change—man’s views of the world, 
resulted from a quest for practical ends or an interest in 
exercising the power that knowledge gives. For most of us, 
in most of those moments when we were most free of 
corruption, it has been the beauty of the world of nature 
and the strange and compelling harmony of its order, that 
has sustained, inspirited, and led us. That also is as it 
should be. And if the forms in which society provides and 
exercises its patronage leave these incentives strong and 
secure, new knowledge will never stop as long as there are 
men. 

We know that our work is rightly both an instrument 
and an end. A great discovery is a thing of beauty; and our 
faith—our binding, quiet faith—is that knowledge is good 
and good in itself. It is also an instrument; it is an instru- 
ment for our successors, who will use it to probe elsewhere 
and more deeply; it is an instrument for technology, for 
the practical arts, and for man’s affairs. So it is with us as 
scientists; so it is with us as men. We are at once instrument 
and end, discoverers and teachers, actors and observers. 
We understand, as we hope others understand, that in this 
there is a harmony between knowledge in the sense of 
science, that specialized and general knowledge which it is 
our purpose to uncover, and the community of man. We, 
like all men, are among those who bring a little light to the 
vast unending darkness of man’s life and world. For us as 
for all men, change and eternity, specialization and unity, 
instrument and final purpose, community and individual 
man alone, complementary each to the other, both require 
and define our bonds and our freedom. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


The Open Mind 


A FEW WEEKS ago the president of a college in the prairie 
states came to see me. Clearly, when he tried to look into 
the future, he did not like what he saw: the grim prospects 
for the maintenance of peace, for the preservation of free- 
dom, for the flourishing and growth of the humane values 
of our civilization. He seemed to have in mind that it might 
be well for people, even in his small college, to try to take 
some part in turning these prospects to a happier end; but 
what he said came as rather a shock. He said, “I wonder if 
you can help me. I have a very peculiar problem. You see, 
out there, most of the students, and the teachers too, come 
from the farm. They are used to planting seed, and then 
waiting for it to grow, and then harvesting it. They believe 
in time and in nature. It is rather hard to get them to take 
things into their own hands.” Perhaps, as much as any- 
thing, my theme tonight will have to do with enlisting time 
and nature in the conduct of our international affairs: in 
the quest for peace and a freer world. This is not meant 
mystically, for the nature which we must enlist is that of 
man; and if there is hope in it, that lies not least in man’s 
reason. What elements are there in the conduct of foreign 
affairs which may be conducive to the exercise of that rea- 
son, which may provide a climate for the growth of new 
experience, new insight and new understanding? How can 
we recognize such growth, and be sensitive to its hopeful 
meaning, while there is yet time, through action based on 
understanding, to direct the outcome? 

To such difficult questions one speaks not at all, or very 
modestly and incompletely. If there are indeed answers to 
be found, they will be found through many diverse ave- 
nues of approach—in the European Recovery Program, in 


The Open Mind - 77 


our direct relations with the Soviet states, in the very 
mechanisms by which our policies are developed and de- 
termined. Yet you will not find it inappropriate that we fix 
attention on one relatively isolated, yet not atypical, area of 
foreign affairs—on atomic energy. It is an area in which 
the primary intent of our policy has been totally frustrated. 
It is an area in which it is commonly recognized that the 
prospects for success with regard to this primary intent are 
both dim and remote. It is an area in which it is equally 
recognized that this failure will force upon us a course of 
action in some important respects inconsistent with our 
original purposes. It is an area in which the excellence of 
our proposals, and a record in which we may and do take 
pride, have nevertheless not managed quite to quiet the 
uneasy conscience, nor to close the mind to further 
trouble. 

The history of our policy and our efforts toward inter- 
national atomic control is public; far more important, it has 
from the first aroused widespread interest, criticism and 
understanding, and has been the subject of debates in the 
Congress and the press, and among our people. There 
may even be some notion of how, if we had the last years 
to live over again, we might alter our course in the light of 
what we have learned, and some rough agreement as to the 
limits within which alternative courses of action, if adopted 
at a time when they were still open to us, could have altered 
the outcome. The past is in one respect a misleading guide 
to the future: It is far less perplexing. 

Certainly there was little to inspire, and nothing to jus- 
tify, a troubled conscience in the proposals that our gov- 
ernment made to the United Nations, as to the form which 
the international control of atomic energy should take. 
These proposals, and some detailed means for implement- 
ing them, were explored and criticized, elaborated, and 
recommended for adoption by fourteen of the seventeen 
member nations who served on the United Nations Atomic 
Energy Commission. They were rejected as wholly unac- 
ceptable, even as a basis for further discussion, by the three 


78 + Chapter Seven 


Soviet states, whose contributions to policy and to debate 
have throughout constituted for us a debasingly low stan- 
dard of comparison. 

This September, the Commission made its third, and 
what it thought its final, report to the General Assembly, 
meeting in Paris. It recommended to the Assembly that the 
general outlines of the proposed form of international 
control be endorsed, that the inadequacy of the Soviet 
counterproposals be noted, and that the Commission itself 
be permitted to discontinue its work pending either a satis- 
factory prior negotiation between the permanent members 
of the Security Council and Canada, or the finding by the 
General Assembly that the general political conditions 
which had in the past obstructed progress had been so far 
altered that agreement now appeared possible. The As- 
sembly did in fact accept all the recommendations but one. 
It asked the Commission to continue meeting. In its in- 
structions to the Commission, however, the Assembly 
failed to provide affirmative indications of what the Com- 
mission was to do, or to express any confidence in the 
success of its further efforts; in fact, one might dismiss this 
action as no more than an indication of unwillingness on 
the part of the Assembly to accept as permanent the obvi- 
ous past failures of the Commission to fulfill its mandate. 

Yet we may recognize that more is involved in this ac- 
tion, that we will come to understand in the measure in 
which the nature and purposes of our own preoccupation 
with the problem become clearer. In part at least the As- 
sembly asked that this problem of the atom not be let lapse 
because it touches in a most intimate, if sometimes sym- 
bolic, way the profoundest questions of international af- 
fairs; because the Assembly wished to reaffirm that these 
problems could not be dismissed, that these issues could 
not be lost, whatever the immediate frustrations and how- 
ever obscure the prospects. The Assembly was in fact ask- 
ing that we let time and nature, and human reason and 
good example as a part of that nature, play some part in 
fulfilling the age-old aspirations of man for. preserving the 
peace. 


The Open Mind - 79 


In any political action, and surely in one as complex and 
delicate as the international act and commitment made by 
the United States with regard to atomic energy, far more 
is always involved than can or should be isolated in a brief 
analysis. Despite all hysteria, there is some truth to the view 
that the steps which we took with regard to atomic energy 
could be understood in terms of the terror of atomic war- 
fare. We have sought to avert this; we have further sought 
to avert the probable adverse consequences of atomic ar- 
mament for our own institutions and our freedom. Yet 
more basic and more general issues are involved, which, 
though symbolized and rendered critical by the develop- 
ment of atomic energy, are in their nature not confined to 
it, they pervade almost all the key problems of foreign 
policy. If we are to seek a clue to the misgivings with which 
we tend to look at ourselves, we may, I think, find it just in 
the manner in which we have dealt, in their wider contexts, 
with these basic themes. 

The first has to do with the role of coercion in human 
affairs; the second with the role of openness. The atomic 
bomb, born of a way of life, fostered throughout the centu- 
ries, in which the role of coercion was perhaps reduced 
more completely than in any other human activity, and 
which owed its whole success and its very existence to the 
possibility of open discussion and free inquiry, appeared in 
a strange paradox, at once a secret, and an unparalleled 
instrument of coercion. 

These two mutually interdependent ideals, the minimi- 
zation of coercion and the minimization of secrecy, are, of 
course, in the nature of things, not absolute; any attempt 
to erect them as absolute will induce in us that vertigo 
which warns us that we are near the limits of intelligible 
definition. But they are very deep in our ethical as well as 
in our political traditions, and are recorded in earnest, elo- 
quent simplicity in the words of those who founded this 
nation. They are in fact inseparable from the idea of the 
dignity of man to which our country, in its beginnings, was 
dedicated, and which has proved the monitor of our vigor 
and of our health. These two ideals are closely related, the 


80 - Chapter Seven 


one pointing toward persuasion as the key to political ac- 
tion, the other to free discussion and knowledge as the 
essential instrument of persuasion. They are so deep 
within us that we seldom find it necessary, and perhaps 
seldom possible, to talk of them. When they are challenged 
by tyranny abroad or by malpractice at home, we come 
back to them as the wardens of our public life—as for 
many of us they are as well wardens of our lives as men. 

In foreign affairs, we are not unfamiliar with either the 
use or the need of power. Yet we are stubbornly distrustful 
of it. We seem to know, and seem to come back again and 
again to this knowledge, that the purposes of this country 
in the field of foreign policy cannot in any real or enduring 
way be achieved by coercion. 

We have a natural sympathy for extending to foreign 
affairs what we have come to learn so well in our political 
life at home: that an indispensable, perhaps in some ways 
the indispensable, element in giving meaning to the dignity 
of man, and in making possible the taking of decision on 
the basis of honest conviction, is the openness of men’s 
minds, and the openness of whatever media there are for 
communion between men, free of restraint, free of repres- 
sion, and free even of that most pervasive of all restraints, 
that of status and of hierarchy. 

In the days of the founding of this republic, in all of the 
eighteenth century which was formative for the growth 
and the explicit formulation of our political ideals, politics 
and science were of a piece. The hope that this might in 
some sense again be so, was stirred to new life by the devel- 
opment of atomic energy. In this it has throughout been 
decisive that openness, openness in the first instance with 
regard to technical problems and to the actual undertak- 
ings underway in various parts of the world, was the one 
single essential precondition for a measure of security in 
the atomic age. Here we met in uniquely comprehensible 
form the alternatives of common understanding, or of the 
practices of secrecy and of force. 

In all this I pretend to be saying nothing new, nothing 
that has not been known to all thoughtful men since the 


The Open Mind - 81 


days of Hiroshima; yet it has seldom come to expression; 
it has been overlaid with other preoccupations, perhaps 
equally necessary to the elaboration of an effective interna- 
tional control, but far less decisive in determining whether 
such a control could exist. It is just because it has not been 
possible to obtain assent, even in principle, even as an hon- 
est statement of intent or purpose, to these basic theses that 
the deadlock in attempting to establish control has ap- 
peared so serious, so refractory, and so enduring. 

These words have an intent quite contrary to the crea- 
tion of a sense of panic or of doom. Yet we need to start 
with the admission that we see no clear course before us 
that would persuade the governments of the world to join 
with us in creating a more and more open world, and thus 
to establish the foundation on which persuasion might so 
largely replace coercion in determining human affairs. We 
ourselves have acknowledged this grim prospect, and re- 
sponded by adopting some of the very measures that we 
had hoped might be universally renounced. With misgiv- 
ings—and there ought to be misgivings—we are rearming, 
arming atomically, as in other fields. With deep misgivings, 
we are keeping secret not only those elements of our mili- 
tary plans, but those elements of our technical information 
and policy, a knowledge of which would render us more 
subject to enemy coercion and less effective in exercising 
our own. There are not many men who see an acceptable 
alternative to this course, although there apparently are 
some who would regard it as a proof of the shallowness 
and insincerity of our earlier renunciation of these ways. 
But whether, among our own people or among our friends 
abroad or even among those who are not our friends, these 
measures which we are taking appear excessive, or on the 
whole insufficient, they must have at least one ef fect. Inevi- 
tably they must appear to commit us to a future of secrecy, 
and to an immanent threat of war. It is true that one may 
hear arguments that the mere existence of our power, 
quite apart from its exercise, may turn the world to the 
ways of openness and of peace. Yet we have today no clear, 
no formulated, no in some measure credible account of 


82 - Chapter Seven 


how this may come about. We have chosen to read, and 
perhaps we have correctly read, our past as a lesson that a 
policy of weakness has failed us. But we have not read the 
future as an intelligible lesson that a policy of strength can 
save us. 

When the time is run, and that future become history, it 
will be clear how little of it we today foresaw or could 
foresee. How then can we preserve hope and sensitiveness 
which could enable us to take advantage of all that it has 
in store? Our problem is not only to face the somber and 
the grim elements of the future, but to keep them from 
obscuring it. 

Our recent election has seemed to touch this deep sense 
of the imponderable in the history of the future, this un- 
derstanding that we must not preclude the cultivation of 
any unexpected, hopeful turnings. Immediately after the 
election people seemed stirred, less even by the outcome 
itself, than by the element of wonder; they would tend to 
say things like: “Well, after this perhaps we need not be so 
sure that there will be a war.” This sense that the future is 
richer and more complex than our prediction of it, and 
that wisdom lies in sensitiveness to what is new and hope- 
ful, is perhaps a sign of some maturity in politics. 

The problem of doing justice to the implicit, the impon- 
derable, and the unknown is of course not unique to poli- 
tics. It is always with us in science, it is with us in the most 
trivial of personal affairs, and it is one of the great prob- 
lems of writing and of all forms of art. The means by which 
it‘is solved is sometimes called style. It is style which com- 
plements affirmation with limitation and with humility; it 
is style which makes it possible to act effectively, but not 
absolutely; it is style which, in the domain of foreign policy, 
enables us to find a harmony between the pursuit of ends 
essential to us, and the regard for the views, the sensibili- 
ties, the aspirations of those to whom the problem may 
appear in another light; it is style which is the deference 
that action pays to uncertainty; it is above all style through 
which power defers to reason. 


The Open Mind - 83 


We need to remember that we are a powerful nation. 

We need to remember that when the future that we can 
now foresee deviates so markedly from all that we hope 
and all that we value, we can, by our example, and by the 
mode and the style with which we conduct our affairs, let 
it be apparent that we have not abandoned those hopes nor 
forsaken those values; we need to do this even while con- 
crete steps, to which we resort to avert more immediate 
disaster, seem to negate them. 

Our past is rich in example. In that other agony, the 
Civil War, where the foundations of our government were 
proved and reaffirmed, it was Lincoln who again and again 
struck true the balance between power and reason. By 
1863, the war and the blockade had deepened the attrition 
of the South. They had also stopped the supplies of cotton 
to the English mills. Early that year Lincoln wrote a letter 
to the working men of Manchester. He wrote: 

“... It is not always in the power of governments to 
enlarge or restrict the scope of moral results which follow 
the policies that they may deem it necessary for the public 
safety from time to time to adopt. 

“I have understood well that the duty of self-preserva- 
tion rests solely with the American people; but I have at 
the same time been aware that favor or disfavor of foreign 
nations might have a material influence in enlarging or 
prolonging the struggle with disloyal men in which the 
country is engaged. A fair examination of history has 
served to authorize a belief that the past actions and influ- 
ences of the United States were generally regarded as hav- 
ing been beneficial toward mankind. I have, therefore, 
reckoned upon the forbearance of nations . . .” 

Fifteen months later, a year before Lincoln’s death, the 
battle had turned. He could say: 

“, .. When the war began, three years ago, neither party, 
nor any man, expected it would last till now. Each looked 
for the end in some way, long ere today. Neither did any 
anticipate that domestic slavery would be much affected by 
the war. But here we are; the war has not ended, and 


84 - Chapter Seven 


slavery has been much affected—how much needs not now 
to be recounted ... 

“But we can see the past, though we may not claim to 
have directed it; and seeing it, in this case, we feel more 
hopeful and confident for the future .. .” 

In such magnanimity even Grant, at Appomattox a year 
later, looking beyond the bitter slaughter, looking to na- 
ture and to time, could speak to Lee: His troops were to 
keep their horses; they would need them for the spring 
plowing. 

Each of us, recalling our actions in these last critical 
years, will be able to find more than one instance where, in 
the formulation or implementation of policy, we have been 
worthy of this past. Each of us will mourn the opportuni- 
ties that may seem to him lost, the doors once open and 
now closed. Not even in critical times can the sense of style, 
the open mind, be fostered by issuing directives; nor can 
they rest wholly on soliciting great actions not yet taken, 
great words not yet spoken. If they were wholly a matter 
for one man, all could well rest on his wisdom and his 
sensitiveness—they neither are, nor can, nor should be. 
The spirit in which our foreign affairs are conducted will 
in the large reflect the understanding and the desires of 
our people; and their concrete, detailed administration will 
necessarily rest in the hands of countless men and women, 
officials of the government, who constitute the branches of 
our foreign service, of our State Department, and of the 
many agencies which now supplement the State Depart- 
ment, at home and abroad. The style, the perceptiveness, 
the imagination and the openmindedness with which we 
need to conduct our affairs can only pervade such a com- 
plex of organizations, consisting inevitably of men of var- 
ied talent, taste and character, if it is a reflection of a deep 
and widespread public understanding. That is why, despite 
their sketchiness, it has seemed appropriate to present 
these views to a group of interested and devoted citizens. 
It is in our hands to see that the hope of the future is not 
lost, because we were too sure that we knew the answers, 
too sure that there was no hope. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


Space and Time 


THIS has been a great century in physics, a century of 
unexpected, profound, and moving discoveries, and of ap- 
plications that have changed a great deal in the condition 
of human life. The last years have seen very great progress 
in the understanding of essential features of life, and I am 
confident that the years ahead will teach us more than all 
preceding history of man about how living organisms per- 
form their miraculous functions and about man as a part 
of nature. We in physics are still engaged in what feels at 
the moment like a very great intractable struggle to find 
out the laws of matter, the nature of matter. It is not of that 
that I want to speak, but of chapters that are to some extent 
closed, although questions raised by the answers found 
earlier in the century are still before us, still wide open. I 
shall, in this and the second lecture, speak of increases in 
our understanding, changes in our understanding, of the 
world of nature. In the third lecture I shall speak rather of 
changes in the human situation brought about by the de- 
velopments in physics and other sciences. 

Our time is marked by the prominence of the sciences. 
It is marked by very rapid change and very great growth— 
growth in science, growth in productivity, growth in popu- 
lation, growth in travel, growth in communication. Almost 
any Statistic that you look at shows a sharp curve with a 
characteristic of doubling in ten or twenty or thirty years. 
In the case of the sciences, this doubling occurs in about 
ten years, and there are several quite spectacular figures 
which mark it. If you think of all those people who devote 
their lives to studying nature or applying what has been 
learned in the technical way and call them scientists, then 
throughout man’s history there have been a number of 
them and of that number about 93 percent are still living 


86 - Chapter Eight 


today, so rapidly has the number of people so engaged 
increased. A friend of mine, in Europe, calculated how fast 
one of our journals of fundamental physics was growing, 
and established that if the rate of growth were maintained, 
then next century the volumes would weigh more than the 
whole earth. I was called on, not very long ago, by the 
Scientific Secretary of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, who 
spent a day with me in Princeton. I believe that his is an 
important political office, and we talked a little bit about 
the growth of scientific activity, in which he is engaged as 
an administrator. I asked him how he saw the future be- 
yond the next five-year plan, say fifty years from now. 
Without thinking he said, “Then all of us will be scientists’; 
the horror of it came over him slowly and he added, ‘No, 
not quite.’ 

Sull, in talking of this as a scientific age and thinking of 
this as a time remarkably influenced by science, we need, 
I think, to bear in mind two cautions. One is that we prob- 
ably have no very good idea today of the range of problems 
which will be accessible to science. We do not know how 
much of human behaviour may yield in one way or an- 
other to the characteristically objective and often rather 
unexpected study that is a science, and we may today live 
in something of an imbalance between what we know of 
the physical world, what we are beginning to know of the 
living world, and what we know of the human world. I, 
however, am deeply convinced that the scientific knowl- 
edge which may be available about men—not much 
today—will always be, as is our knowledge of the physical 
world, very very incomplete and partial, and that the sense 
of having to live and act in response to tradition, good 
judgement, and wisdom, which we have now, will not ever 
be alleviated by any development of the sciences. 

I think we need secondly to remember that a great part 
of the present scene arises not from what we have learned, 
but by its application in technology. This, in turn, rests on, 
an organization of the economy and to a more limited, but 
still real, extent on our political arrangements. Neither of 


Space and Time - 87 


these derives from, nor is in any tight way related to, the 
sciences, because, although the growth of knowledge is 
largely responsive to human needs, it is not fully so. The 
existence of terrible and intractable diseases does cause a 
very wide and intensive study of problems that may be 
related to the diseases. Problems of agricultural productiv- 
ity, problems of gadgetry, perhaps most of all problems of 
military importance stimulate the vigour and increase the 
support for research. Still it is a profound and necessary 
truth that the deep things in science are not found because 
they are useful; they are found because it was possible to 
find them. 

Think of the long centuries in which attempts were 
made to change mercury into gold because that seemed 
like a very useful thing to do. These efforts failed and we 
found how to change mercury into gold by doing other 
things that had quite different intentions. And so I believe 
that the availability of instruments, the availability of ideas 
or concepts—not always but often mathematical—are 
more likely to determine where great changes occur in our 
picture of the world than are the requirements of man. 
Ripeness in science is really all, and ripeness is the ability 
to do new things and to think new thoughts. The whole 
field is pervaded by this freedom of choice. You don’t sit 
in front of an insoluble problem for ever. You may sit an 
awfully long time, and it may even be the right thing to do; 
but in the end you will be guided not by what it would be 
practically helpful to learn, but by what it is possible to 
learn. 

I think that to those who are far removed from the life 
of the sciences, this sometimes appears to be irresponsible. 
It seems as though having made something potentially pes- 
tiferous, like nuclear bombs, we ought to go ahead and find 
something potentially helpful in getting rid of them. In- 
deed we ought; but instead it is much more likely that our 
thoughts will turn to things that are easier to do than that, 
that are more at hand than that. It is not irresponsibility; 
it is characteristic of the special way in which one does 


88 - Chapter Eight 


advance so rapidly in knowledge, for often one may 
quickly make an irreversible accession to knowledge by 
establishing an error. Having proved that something is not 
right, you do not go back to it again; you have learned your 
lesson. Progress, which in mora] and human things is a 
very elusive word applicable, certainly, to some aspects of 
our life, but not to all, is an inevitable thing in the sciences. 
Progress is co-extensive with the existence of the scientific 
world. 

Now the first two of these lectures have to do with just 
such episodes, where previously held, firmly entrenched 
errors were with considerable shock and very great gran- 
deur corrected—and in such a way that those errors will 
not be made again. Moreover, this progress in learning 
about the world of nature has changed rather profoundly 
not only what we know of nature, but some of the things 
that we know about ourselves as knowers. It has changed, 
to use an old phrase that is beloved of Butterfield, the 
‘thinking caps’ of men, as did the revolutions of the late 
middle ages and the seventeenth century. I may be wrong, 
but I share with my colleagues, or with many of them, a 
strong conviction that this experience is one which we 
would gladly extend beyond the range of limited technical 
communities. The experience of seeing how our thought 
and our words and our ideas have been confined by the 
limitation of our experience is one which is salutary and is 
in a certain sense good for a man’s morals as well as good 
for his pleasure. It seems to us that this is an opening up 
of the human spirit, avoiding its provincialism and narrow- 
ness. You may think of the example of what it has meant 
to all of us to learn over the last centuries how different 
other cultures could be from our own and still in some real 
sense be cultures. 

Progress of this kind is possible only because it blends 
two almost contradictory traits. The one is a great love of 
adventure, so that you look for new things and for changed 
circumstances, look far into the sky, look close into matter, 
do all sorts of things that take you away from the familiar 


Space and Time - 89 


human experience. That lies on the one hand, and on the 
other is a great adherence to such order and clarity as has 
already been attained. One may describe the latter as a 
sense of conservatism about not giving up any understand- 
ing that has been achieved, so that even though you are 
about to rewrite Newton you are very very reluctant to 
move very far away from Newton, and even though you 
may realize that everything that has been said before in 
physics is only very partially true, you will fight very hard 
to keep that partial truth. You will be strong through the 
tradition, and you will use the tradition in describing the 
new experience until that point comes when you simply 
cannot go on with it and you have to make a great break. 

Many of the men who have contributed to the great 
changes in science have really been very unhappy over 
what they have been forced to do. Kepler, who loved 
spheres, discovered ellipses. Planck, with his famous quan- 
tum of action, introduced an element of discontinuity into 
physics, which seemed to him absolutely intolerably 
strange and ugly. Einstein, who was able to live with the 
theories of relativity and regretted only very few aspects of 
them, also contributed to the development of quantum 
theory; he proposed the idea of light quanta, but never 
could reconcile himself to the quantum theory logically 
built up from this basis. And de Broglie, who discovered 
that there are waves which are associated with material 
particles, could never reconcile himself to their interpreta- 
tion as waves which only represented information and not 
some disturbance in a corporeal medium. 

These changes are forced on physicists somewhat reluc- 
tantly because we are both traditional and conservative and 
at the same time a little too adventurous. In our lifetimes 
we have seen, in a limited area, our beliefs and our experi- 
ence radically altered—the popular word is revolutionized, 
but that is not quite right, for they have been deepened 
and changed, but not completely overthrown. I have the 
impression that a general awareness of this and a general 
experience of it may be of some use in dealing with human 


90 - Chapter Eight 


problems in a time when the world also is changing so very 
rapidly. 

I have in my enterprise tonight and tomorrow very se- 
vere limits; one of them is that especially in physics it is 
often believed that without the mathematical forms one 
cannot really say what the discoveries are all about. There 
is a measure of truth in this; the discoveries could probably 
not have been made without the mathematical forms which 
give a quick synoptic and luminous way of representing the 
order that inheres in nature. It is not surprising that 
mathematics is involved in nature; it is really a require- 
ment of consistency and the one thing that we are all confi- 
dent of is that nature may be difficult, but she will not be 
inconsistent. (It is only we who can be that.) But I think 
that some understanding of the concepts of physics can be 
conveyed with very limited use of mathematics, and I pro- 
pose so to restrict myself. You may think of an analogy. It 
is certainly better to see Hamlet acted, if it is reasonably 
well acted, than to read it. It was written to be acted, not to 
be read in a study. Still, if you read it, you have, with good 
will and imagination and luck, a good deal of feeling for 
the meaning of the play. It is certainly a very daring enter- 
prise to try to guess from an English translation what Pas- 
ternak’s novel is like; but you know a good deal more about 
it reading it in English than not reading it at all. And I 
hope that you may, if not at my hands at least in some 
happier future, feel that mathematics, though a help, is not 
indispensable for some insight into the essentials of what 
has been found in modern physics. 

In the second lecture, I shall be talking about quite pro- 
found changes in our idea of causality, in what we think of 
determinism in the natural world, and most of all of what 
we mean and may mean by objectivity. These changes were 
necessary in order to attain the prize of a reasonable un- 
derstanding of the ordinary properties of matter, those 
properties which manifest themselves even when you are 
not attacking matter with the violence which the great ac- 
celerators and the cosmic rays make possible. And in this 


Space and Time - 91 


lecture I want to discuss some changes in the ideas of space 
and time. Both of these themes are variations on the prob- 
lem of the consistency of what we know about motion in 
space and about what is in space, about its field or content. 

The quantum theory was the work of many people. I 
think that we would all agree that Niels Bohr was the heart 
of this brilliant group. On the other hand, the ideas of 
space and time, though they go back a long way, were 
revolutionized in this century by one man, and in some 
aspects at least it is permissible to think that if he hadn’t 
lived, the revolution would not have occurred. He was Ein- 
stein. 

The first theory of relativity, at least in the Western 
world, does not date from the twentieth century. It dates 
from the thirteenth and early fourteenth, from the Paris 
school of natural philosophers, of whom Buridan and 
Oresme are the best known. It was certainly one of the 
great changes in human thought and it is remarkable be- 
cause, although it is physics, it did not rest on any elabora- 
tion of observational or experimental technique but on 
analysis and on ordinary common-sense knowledge of how 
things behave. And it was the opening without which the 
future development of science is hardly thinkable. This 
was the discovery: in an analysis of the problem of motion, 
uniform motion—a body moving with constant velocity— 
was not something for which you could find or needed to 
find any explanation or cause; uniform motion was a natu- 
ral state of matter. Of course, this was not the schoolman’s 
view; it was not Aristotle’s view, for whom it was obvious 
that to keep something moving you had to work on it, and 
the only natural state was one of rest. The new viewpoint 
was Called the theory of impetus, which we would today say 
was the theory of momentum, namely that the constant 
impetus of a body was something that needed no explana- 
tion and that all you had to explain was change in its impe- 
tus, change in its motion, change in its momentum. This, 
as you know, was also Galileo’s view; and we call the trans- 
formation of co-ordinates, which emphasizes this causeless 


92 + Chapter Eight 


character of uniform motion, the Galilean transforma- 
tion—although without his permission and without any 
good historical ground. The idea behind this transforma- 
tion is that because it involves no cause to have uniform 
motion there will be a similarity in objects which are in 
motion with respect to each other. There will be no inher- 
ent difference between them. There will be an ability to 
describe one as analogous to the other. This so-called Gali- 
lean transformation tells you how from the co-ordinates x 
of an object that is at rest at a time ¢, you can derive the 
co-ordinates, the time, and the velocity as seen in a system 
in which that same object moves uniformly with a velocity 
v. 


, 


x =x + ut, 
t' =. 


Suppose you have something at rest and it’s at the point x 
and you are looking at it at a time ¢. Now suppose you move 
with respect to it with a velocity —v. Then the co-ordinate 
of the object will be given by x’, the time won’t be changed, 
and any velocity V that may appear in the original system 
will appear as a new velocity V’ in the new system, V’ = 
V + v. This is the Galilean invariance and it’s just common 
sense. It says the particle simply moves along with its co- 
ordinate increasing because it is in motion, the time isn’t 
changed by this velocity, and the velocities add. This the- 
ory of impetus is, of course, Newton’s first law; and New- 
ton’s laws of motion, which describe how accelerations are 
produced by forces, are invariant under this simple trans- 
formation. You cannot distinguish one uniform motion 
from another by the application of Newton’s laws; they are 
relativistic in the sense that relative motion is observable, 
but absolute motion is not as long as it is uniform, that is 
with no acceleration. 

From the time of Newton up to the end of the last cen- 
tury, physicists built, on the basis of these laws, a magnifi- 
cently precise and beautiful science involving the celestial 
mechanics of the solar system, involving incredible prob- 


Space and Time - 93 


lems in the Cambridge Tripos, involving the theory of 
gases, involving the behaviour of fluids, of elastic vibra- 
tions, of sound—indeed a comprehensive system so robust 
and varied and apparently all-powerful that what was in 
store for it could hardly be imagined. I think the only 
record I have seen of any explicit doubt on the subject of 
the Galilean transformation and of Newtonian mechanics 
was about a century earlier than the theory of relativity in 
a paper of Euler. Because of the relative transverse motion 
between a fixed star and the earth, you see the star at a 
slightly different angle than the true direction. Euler 
found that he did not get exactly the same result when he 
calculated this variation from the point of view of the star 
and the point of view of the earth. The difference was 
totally insignificant experimentally and he didn’t say any- 
thing more about it. He just noted it. 

But early in the nineteenth century and increasingly 
through that century another study in physics was under 
way, not having to do with the motion of bodies under 
gravitational forces, but having to do with the domain of 
light and electromagnetism. It was not necessary—al- 
though today it is—to decide whether gravity was an action 
at a distance in which one body affected another very far 
away or whether gravity spread from one body to another. 
And there was at that time and is today no really good 
experimental way of distinguishing the two. There are, in 
principle, very good ways and we feel sure that we know 
the answer, but we have not yet tried it out. However, with 
electromagnetic forces the situation is quite different. I 
think you have all seen what happens when you have a 
simple bar magnet and some iron filings on a piece of 
paper. The iron filings assume quite regular patterns, fol- 
lowing lines which have something like parabolic shapes 
around the poles of the magnet. Already in the first half 
of the nineteenth century Faraday knew about this and his 
vision was that the space surrounding the magnet, al- 
though it had no pieces of matter in it, had something 
which was physically important present in it, and that was 


94 - Chapter Eight 


a magnetic field: the power to affect a magnet. Of course, 
the little iron filings act like magnets and are affected and 
do respond to this field and make it manifest. In the same 
way if you have an electrically charged rod or ball and if 
you come into the near-by area with another charged ob- 
ject with the same charge, you will feel it pushed away a 
little; if you present an opposite charge, you will feel it 
pulled in a little. And these are things that happen when 
the two are not in contact: they arise from a property of 
the space surrounding the electric charge or the magnet. 
Faraday talked of these lines and tubes of force, of the 
electric and magnetic potentials—I don’t use this term 
technically—which exist in space, and for him space be- 
came animated with these fields. They were things which 
anyone could measure: one could measure their directions, 
one could measure their strengths; they were as palpable 
as the corporeal bodies themselves, but they existed in a 
vacuum. Indeed, they exist very well in a vacuum, and have 
nothing to do with the presence of air; they are modified 
by any matter if it is there, but they are present without any 
matter. This picture, of course, is beginning to be the fa- 
mous aether, the empty space that is capable of having 
properties. 

Faraday showed that if you changed the magnetic field 
rapidly, you would make an electric field and Maxwell dis- 
cerned theoretically that if you changed the electric field 
rapidly enough you produce a magnetic field. This effect 
was later verified; it is much harder to see than Faraday’s 
result, merely because of practical considerations. In fact, 
Maxwell predicted that, in the absence of any charges and 
currents, field pulsations of this kind, in which electric and 
magnetic fields would generate each other, could propa- 
gate freely. He calculated the velocity of the pulsations and 
found that it was a rather well-known velocity—that with 
which light propagates. 

Thus this field of Faraday’s is busy. It not only has fields 
around charges and magnetic poles—magnetic dipoles re- 


Space and Time - 95 


ally—but it transmits electromagnetic waves. It transmits 
all the waves which feed the television sets and instruct the 
rockets and give us our wonderful culture over the radio; 
it transmits light, it transmits heat; it transmits many forms 
of very high energy radiation—forms of light which are 
very penetrating, which play a big part in nuclear physics. 
(The reality of man-generated long wavelength electro- 
magnetic waves was established late in the last century by 
Hertz.) 

This highly peopled space, full of electric and magnetic 
phenomena, is related to particles in motion in the follow- 
ing way: if I have a charged object it will, of course, re- 
spond to gravity (a universal force), but it will also respond 
to electric fields and if it is in motion it will respond to 
magnetic fields. It will feel a supplementary push, the elec- 
tric field pulling it in the direction of the field, and the 
magnetic field in general pushing it at right-angles to the 
field, and to its own velocity. The laws of these effects on 
charges were reasonably well known at the turn of the 
century, at least for objects that did not move too fast. But 
what was very troublesome is that Maxwell’s account of the 
propagation of electromagnetic waves of light and the 
whole basis of his theory and Faraday’s intuitive picture of 
a space filled with fields was not consistent with the Gali- 
lean invariance property. 

One can see this from a general viewpoint for, if this 
space is full of electric and magnetic fields, it need not 
appear at all the same thing when I move with respect to 
it. More specifically—and this is really the crux of the diffi- 
culty—according to Maxwell’s theory the velocity of light 
is something that is fixed by his equations. His result was 
very close to the observed measure. But if I move with 
respect to the medium in which these fields are described 
by Maxwell’s equations then I would expect to apply the 
formula V' = V + v, that the velocity which I see for the 
light is the sum of the velocity with which I am moving (or 
its negative) and the velocity of light in the medium; it 


96 + Chapter Eight 


might be bigger or it might be smaller, depending on 
whether I am moving towards the source of light or away 
from it. This is a view which was indeed prevalent at the 
turn of the century, and which was shown by many indirect 
methods and one very direct experiment, one of the great 
crucial experiments in history, to be simply not so. 

Before this experiment, the situation presented at least 
three alternatives. First, one might say that there is a sys- 
tem—the system in which electric and magnetic fields are 
described and exist and obey Maxwell’s equations—which 
is unique, and absolute rest has meaning by reference to 
that system, and anything in motion with reference to it 
may have different physical behaviour because of this mo- 
tion. To accept this alternative is to give up the invariance 
law and to give up the whole idea of relativity, that is the 
relativity of uniform motion. The second possibility was to 
say that Maxwell's equations, in spite of their describing 
such an enormous range of phenomena, may somehow not 
be right, and this was extremely hard to do after a half- 
century of success. And the third was to say: “There is 
relativity and Maxwell is right, but the Galilean equations 
don’t describe the transformations of relativity. No one 
could do that until the situation got really desperate. 

And it was made desperate by the Michelson-Morley 
experiment. In preparing for these lectures I looked up 
Einstein’s lectures in 1921 at Princeton; he said of the 
Michelson-Morley experiment: ‘I assume its results are 
known to you.’ I thought I should not quite do that because 
it was done a long time ago. What Michelson did was to 
measure the time taken by light to move a moderate dis- 
tance back and forth in the laboratory and to see whether 
this was the same when parallel to the earth’s motion 
round the sun and perpendicular to it. The expected dif- 
ferences were quite small, and it took a very great technical 
virtuosity to be able to look for them. But Michelson did 
the experiment and he did it over and over again. Now, the 
earth might just possibly be in the preferred rest system of 
electromagnetic phenomena in January, but then in June 


Space and Time - 97 


it is moving in a very different direction, and with substan- 
tial speed; Michelson’s sensitivity was enough to have de- 
tected very very easily the motion of the earth, by the 
change in the velocity of light depending on whether the 
earth was moving with or against or not at all in this lu- 
miniferous aether, the seat of electromagnetic phenom- 
ena. He got a null result. This was so unexpected that the 
experiment, with many refinements and variations, was re- 
peated for decades after that as a witness to the traumatic 
character of this answer. 

So we are not allowed to believe that the velocity of light 
depends on the velocity of the source. We are not really 
allowed to doubt that Maxwell’s equations are true in all 
co-ordinate systems and we are not really allowed to doubt 
that the equations of the Galilean transformation are not 
a good description—they are only an approximate descrip- 
tion—of what happens when we observe a system that is in 
uniform motion with respect to us. At this point three peo- 
ple found the solution, but only one found its full meaning 
right away, and that was Einstein. 

Einstein said: ‘Let us imagine what the situation would 
be if we could not communicate with a speed greater than 
a light signal.’ That is pretty fast (3 x 10'° centimetres per 
second) by ordinary standards; we would not normally no- 
tice this limitation. We would not find that our bicycles 
were getting away from us. But it is a finite velocity, and 
that makes a very big conceptual change. If you do not 
have instantaneous communication and if you want to 
compare information at two different places, you must 
make allowance for the time it takes for the message to get 
back and forth. For instance, suppose you want to synchro- 
nize two clocks that are a long way apart. (They should be 
clocks of the same type, perhaps natural clocks which are 
more or less guaranteed the same—‘atomic clocks’.) A 
natural way to synchronize them so that they read the same 
time would be to set the clock at one place half-way be- 
tween the time at which the signal left the other and the 
time at which it was received back after reflection. The 


98 + Chapter Eight 


notion of simultaneity, which intuitively seems to be some- 
thing that should not depend on any moving around you 
do, is indeed a valid notion when things are at the same 
point of space, but is no longer a valid notion over substan- 
tial distances and when relative motions at all comparable 
to the velocity of light come into play. 

This means that if it is true that you cannot send signals 
faster than light, and if it is a physical contradiction to 
imagine it, then you have this relativity of simultaneity, this 
velocity dependence of judgements of simultaneity. Also 
you have other physical effects which are produced for 
you by the machines that you use for measuring distance 
and for measuring time. Let me explain that when I say 
‘clock’ I mean something that is designed to measure as 
accurately as possible regular intervals of time, and when 
I say ‘distance’ I mean something that you measure with a 
ruler, which has been by remote comparisons calibrated by 
a standard metre in Paris. The clocks and rulers then are 
physical objects. 

Now, in order to be consistent with the fact that there is 
a limiting velocity which is not infinite, but is the finite 
velocity of light (called by everybody c), the Galilean trans- 
formation must be abandoned and replaced by a new 
transformation called the Lorentz transformation, after 
the first man who wrote it down. This must provide the 
co-ordinate of a point x and a time ¢, when I look at it from 
a system uniformly moving with a velocity —v. 


x = ¥(x+ vt) 


tsy +2 
ce 


Space and Time - 99 


This is a very simple Lorentz transformation; v is the 
relative velocity of the two systems, and y is something 
which is near one when the velocity v is small compared to 
the velocity of light c and which becomes infinite, marking 
the limit of the applicability of these transformations, as v 
approaches c. Moreover, this clearly indicates the limiting 
character of the velocity of light. You see that it shows that 
a length interval in one co-ordinate system will appear to 
be shrunk by the factor 1/y when examined in a moving 
co-ordinate system. You see that the time is not told the 
same in the two co-ordinate systems and that the differ- 
ence not only has a difference of scale but depends on the 
positions of the clocks. This is the point about the judge- 
ments of simultaneity. And you see further that if you have 
a process going on which takes a time ¢ as measured in the 
system where the object is at rest, then if you move at a 
velocity v with respect to it, the time will be lengthened, 
being yt. 

To summarize, motion decreases the measurements of 
length, motion increases the intervals of time, and the two 
facts together are encompassed in the Lorentz transforma- 
tion. Further, the formula for the velocity V’ indicates that 
if you add two velocities that are very close to the velocity 
of light you never get beyond the velocity of light, you just 
get a little closer to it. This completely consistent system 
never enables you to talk about or to discuss the properties 
of relative motion with a velocity greater than that of light, 
but it does tell you how to talk about real motions in terms 
of the actual behaviour of actual clocks and rods and atoms 
and all the rest of physics. These equations give an invari- 
ant description of physical phenomena, a description inde- 
pendent of relative uniform motion, one which is as good 
in one system as in another. This formalism re-expresses 
the ancient theme of Buridan, that uniform motion re- 
quires no cause, but now with this very new wrinkle that 
couldn’t have been anticipated on the basis of ordinary 
experience, that, because objects cannot be accelerated be- 
yond the velocity of light, the analogue of an infinite veloc- 
ity is a finite velocity. 


100 - Chapter Eight 


From this viewpoint one naturally asks that not only 
Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism but the equations 
of motion for charged particles and then also for neutral 
particles should be invariant, i.e. that they should have the 
same content, irrespective of the frame of reference in 
which we describe the phenomena, as long as we are talk- 
ing only about uniform motion. We do that naturally in 
talking of ordinary things. If there is a complete symmetry 
in a problem, so that no direction is singled out, then we 
certainly would like to talk about it in such a way that that 
symmetry is preserved in our description; and if there is 
nothing in space to make one point different from an- 
other, we would like to give a description which is as valid 
in Chicago as it is in Hamilton. And in the same way here 
we would like a description valid irrespective of the relative 
velocity of the objects we are talking about and what we 
ourselves happen to be doing while we are looking at them. 

This was done for mechanics and gave at once the rather 
clear sign that Newton’s equations are wrong. This is clear 
a priori, because if the acceleration is proportional to the 
force and inversely proportional to the mass, there is no 
reason why you cannot make velocities bigger than that of 
light. Something must prevent those forces from being so 
effective, and what it is, to put it a little oversimply, is that 
the mass of a body is not in fact constant. Indeed, if the 
theory of mechanics is to be compatible with the require- 
ment of the constancy of the velocity of light and relativity 
in this restricted sense—the mass of a body must increase 
with its velocity in just this way: 


™, 


V1 - V7/2) 


Here m, is the mass of the body at zero speed and m its 
mass at speed V. This is the origin of much fertile specula- 
tion by Einstein, because if the mass of a body increases 
with its velocity so does its kinetic energy and it will in- 
crease in the same way, viz: 


AT = c?Am. 


Space and Time - 101 


The symbol AT means the change in kinetic energy and Am 
represents the corresponding change in mass. 

Because the total energy is really something that is not 
lost or gained by a system, but is conserved, what is true of 
kinetic energy must be true of all energy and, therefore, a 
change of energy and a change of mass go hand in hand 
and the change in energy is related to the change in mass 
by the square of the velocity of light. This is something that 
it would be nice to have a little mathematics or more time 
to show; but it is a direct and really quite inescapable con- 
sequence of the purely kinematic connexions which I have 
written down as the Lorentz transformation. 

Another important point is that these transformations 
mix up space and time very much more than the Galilean 
ones. To a limited extent you cannot interchange space 
and time. They have inherently different character. A 
watch is a watch and a ruler is a ruler and you cannot use 
the ruler to measure the time and the clock to measure the 
co-ordinates. But they do change with relative motion. Of 
course, you are not restricted to move in a straight line with 
respect to something you are studying: you can also turn 
around or you can take another place in space. This whole 
set of procedures—rotation, translation (moving to an- 
other origin, that is another base point), and moving uni- 
formly in some direction—together are a set of operations 
that are closed and form the Lorentz group. You cannot, 
with these operations, convert any space-like interval into 
a time-like interval or any time-like interval into a space- 
like one, but you can change the ‘direction’ of a space-like 
interval and give it some slightly more time-like quality, 
and you can do the same thing for time-like intervals. 

This system, this special theory of relativity, which pre- 
dicts correctly the behaviour of rods and clocks under mo- 
tion, became an absolutely all-pervasive feature of physics. 
We use it literally in almost every branch of nuclear physics 
and many branches of atomic physics, and in all branches 
of physics dealing with the fundamental particles. It has 
been checked and cross-checked and counter-checked in 


102 - Chapter Eight 


the most numerous ways and it is a very rich part of our 
heritage. For instance, many of the particles that are pro- 
duced in the atmosphere by cosmic rays are unstable. They 
have a natural tendency to come apart into others, to 
decay. But if they move very fast, their decay rate is slowed 
down and the rule is simply: 


tT =7(1 — Vlc?)* = thy 


where 7 is the decay rate when the particles are at rest and 
t’ is the decay rate when they are moving with speed V. 
This is observed and is a very vivid thing. We have not yet 
seen people stay young, but we have seen particles stay 
young by the billions. 

There is another point, a little out of chronological 
order. I have spoken of rotations, translations, and uni- 
form motions as part of the Lorentz group, but there is 
another part of the Lorentz group that is not so simply 
connected with these operations. You cannot rotate your 
right hand into your left. The only way you can get the one 
to be congruent to the other is with a reflection in a mirror. 
You may try wiggling your hands about, but it is really not 
possible to rotate one into the other. One would think that 
if rotation did not make any physical difference, reflection 
would not either, that if space were so isotropic that there 
was no direction singled out in it, then it would not matter 
if something were right-handed or left-handed. The two 
arrangements would be equally probable—there is a good 
deal of this accidental character in human asymmetries. 
This invariance law was believed for at least thirty years. 
Many many brilliant examples turned up where you could 
classify the states of atomic and nuclear systems according 
to whether they were unaltered by reflection or whether 
their symbols changed sign under reflection; in both cases 
you may say that to any allowed motion or phenomenon in 
physics, the mirror image also is allowed. If you can have 
something happen with a wheel turning a certain way and 
an arrow pointing up, then keeping the wheel the same, 
but reversing the arrow, which is what happens when you 


Space and Time - 103 


hold up a mirror, will also be allowed. Such objects do exist 
in physics; in fact the neutrino is a very good example of 
one. It is only a few years ago that some doubt arose as to 
whether this rule was strictly true—the rule, that is, that to 
any system found in nature, the mirror image must occur, 
being compatible with the laws of nature. The doubts were 
sufficiently anxious and deep that Lee and Yang looked 
into it and found that no proof of this rule had been really 
given experimentally in a certain class of very feeble forces 
and very slow reactions. And so they looked—not they but 
their friends—and the answer is that nature has, in this 
special manifestation, a most violent and total prejudice in 
favour of right-handed and against left-handed arrange- 
ments and the other way round in other cases. It is very 
odd, very unexpected, and possible only because you can- 
not get from a rotation or a translation to a reflection. 
What we now more or less believe is that if any configura- 
tion is allowed, then if you take its mirror image and re- 
place all the positive charges by negative and vice versa, 
and let it run backward in time, that will also be allowed. 
But that is all we are really confident we know. 

This theory of relativity has been very much mixed up 
in all the developments of physics. I would stress that the 
odd and often seemingly paradoxical things that are em- 
bodied in the special theory of relativity are not paradoxes 
in the sense of being conflicts between different experi- 
ments. They do not involve any contradiction on the part 
of nature; what they do involve is a gross change, a rather 
sharp change, from what learned people and ordinary 
people thought throughout the past centuries, thought as 
long as they had thought about things at all. The simple 
facts, namely that light travels with a velocity that cannot 
be added to or subtracted from by moving a source of light, 
the simple fact that objects do contract when they are in 
motion, the simple fact that processes are slowed down 
when they take place in motion, and very much so if they 
move with velocities comparable to the velocity of light— 
these are new elements of the natural world and what the 


104 + Chapter Eight 


theory of relativity has done is to give coherence and 
meaning to the connexion between them. These contrac- 
tions of objects and these retardations of events are, of 
course, reciprocal; and that is a little paradoxical. It is a 
little hard to think that, if a moving chunk of matter gets 
flatter and flatter in the direction in which it is moving, and 
if you happen to be with that chunk of matter, you would 
get flatter and flatter if you looked at yourself where you 
originally were. But it is true; and the same kind of thing 
is true about time; this is the origin of the twin paradox. It 
is true also that when there are changes in mass, there is in 
practical terms a corresponding enormously big change of 
energy, as we know, both to our hope and our caution. We 
are not sure that in approaching the domain of the very 
small (and I am here not now talking of ordinary atomic 
dimensions, but dimensions some million times smaller), 
we know exactly what it means to say that ‘nothing’ can 
move faster than light. But we are sure that our doubt is 
not with moving faster than light; our ambiguity is with 
‘nothing’—we do not quite know what that means in this 
domain. 

I come now to a generalization of the theory of relativity, 
which starts when you begin to think about motions which 
are not uniform, and goes on to consider the nature of 
gravity. General relativity has very very few connexions 
with any other part of physics and, as I said, is something 
that we might just now be beginning to discover, if Einstein 
had not done so more than forty years ago. This is partly 
because, compared to electricity, gravity is a very weak 
force and really manifests itself only when you are dealing 
with bodies that are pretty substantial, such as the earth, 
the sun, and smaller things, but not on an atomic scale. 
Consequently, it is rather inaccessible to experiment, be- 
cause the objects you deal with are big and not things you 
can wiggle around very much. You might think that gravi- 
tation should resemble electricity in producing fields which 
exist in the vacuum, which can be measured, and which 
propagate with the velocity of light. Something like this is 


Space and Time - 105 


true, but there are two enormous differences. One:sign of 
a difference is that like charges repel each other, like 
masses attract, and this means the two cannot be really 
quite the same. Another is that gravitation is a quite uni- 
versal phenomenon; all bodies follow the same pattern 
when they are acted on only by gravity: this was Galileo’s 
principle of equivalence. However, if you follow out the 
attempt, and this has only been done in the last year or so, 
to make a theory for gravity as much like the theory of 
electricity and magnetism as you can, you find that, quite 
apart from the rigorously predictable effects of uniform 
motion on the measurement of space and time, gravita- 
tional fields have much deeper and much more tangled 
effects on the behaviour of rods and clocks. 

If you study this further, you have to come to two con- 
clusions, that in important ways gravitation is a very differ- 
ent thing from electricity and magnetism. First, the rods 
and clocks are so affected that the space that they measure 
out, which is always flat if you look in a small region of 
space in a small interval of time, manifests over bigger 
regions curvature like the surface of a two-dimensional 
egg. This curvature may vary from point to point and is 
itself an expression of the gravitational effects which are in 
this space. And second, because gravitation, like electro- 
magnetism, involves potential energy and because gravita- 
tion is produced by all mass, and therefore, by all energy, 
gravitation produces gravitation and gravitational fields 
are not linear in the sense that if you have two gravitational 
waves they do not merely superimpose their effects, but 
they interact. Also, if you have a gravitational wave and a 
gravitational field around the sun they interact. All of this 
can be found out in a sort of pedestrian way by making the 
analogy with electricity and magnetism. 

But for Einstein it was entirely different. He came at it 
from two points. One was the universality of motion in a 
gravitational field which enabled him to think that this 
might be a geometric thing. The second was the fact that 
the principle of relativity, philosophically, ought not to be 


106 + Chapter Eight 


limited to uniform motion. If there is nothing else around, 
how can you tell if something is being accelerated or not? 
You can only tell that by reference to something that is not 
being accelerated. But we know that accelerated motion 
differs from uniform motion in that we do not have to be 
told when we are undergoing it, because we feel it and 
phenomena do respond to it. Einstein observed that a uni- 
form acceleration is exactly the same thing as a uniform 
gravitational field in all its physical effects. This is another 
principle of equivalence. And he, therefore, was led to the 
idea that the problem of dealing with non-uniform mo- 
tions and the problem of explaining gravitation were re- 
lated and indeed identical. 

If you are moving in something resembling free space 
you really cannot tell how fast you are moving unless you 
refer your motion to something else, to the earth or the sun 
or the stars. But if you are moving in a jerky way, if you are 
being made to move faster, being accelerated or slowed 
down, you can have all the blinds drawn, you cannot know 
where anything else in the world is, but you still can tell 
that something is going on and you can measure it. And, 
therefore, there can be no elementary possibility of talking 
about general motions, motion on a circle, motion which 
speeds up and slows down, motion on a bumpy railroad 
train being relative, because within the moving thing (this 
railroad car or elevator or rocket) you can tell by the way 
you feel, and you can look at gauges to measure that you 
are being pushed, pulled, hauled around, jerked, whatever 
it is. One could, therefore, say that relative uniform motion 
is indeed relative and no law of nature must discriminate 
in favour of one such motion rather than another, but that 
the elementary fact about accelerated motions is that, at 
least in the part of the universe where we live, we can tell 
whether we are being jerked around or not, and such mo- 
tion is not relative. Nevertheless, Einstein’s theory of accel- 
erated motions is called the general theory of relativity; it 
is a very unfortunate terminology. One might almost say 
that this should be called the general theory of unrelativity, 


Space and Time - 107 


except for one clue, a very deep clue, that was known be- 
fore, but was understood and made very prominent by 
Einstein. 

If you are confined to a box from which you cannot look 
out and in which you can make only internal measure- 
ments, and if you feel a uniform acceleration, you cannot 
tell whether you are being speeded up by some force acting 
directly on the box, or whether you are feeling a uniform 
gravitational field. The simplest way to confirm this is to 
fall freely and notice that when you fall freely there is no 
gravity and there is no acceleration; you are, in fact, accel- 
erating, and you are, in fact, in a gravitational field, but the 
two of them cancel. You should not achieve this state by 
jumping out of the window, but if you ride in airplanes 
enough it will be done for you. Therefore, Einstein under- 
stood that one could deal with a more general class of 
motion only if one also encompassed the phenomena of 
gravitation. I should say that this principle, that gravita- 
tional fields and accelerations are in large measure equiva- 
lent to each other, is often called the equivalence principle. 
It is closely related to Galileo’s principle that if the only 
forces involved are gravitational, all bodies move in the 
same way. If Galileo’s principle were not so, you would not 
be able to replace gravitation by an acceleration which 
clearly is the same for all bodies. In the way Einstein did 
this, the theory of gravitation and the theory of general 
motions were indissolubly linked. 

But one could go about it in what appears to be a more 
straightforward way, and, in recent years, this less beautiful 
approach has been developed. One could say that gravita- 
tional forces, like the electromagnetic forces, are long 
range, in that they fall off slowly with distance, and that 
this suggests that one make a theory of gravitation, which 
is a natural analogue of the intuitive pictures of Faraday 
and the equations of Maxwell which describe electromag- 
netism, electromagnetic waves, and the fields around mag- 
nets and charges. The principal point of difference for 
which one must allow from the beginning is this: that two 


108 - Chapter Eight 


like charges repel each other, whereas all masses attract 
each other. If you do this you get a description which 
reproduces Newton’s theory of gravity if fields are not phe- 
nomenally strong—and there may be no strong gravita- 
tional fields in the world—and if in addition they don’t 
change rapidly with time so that the finiteness of the limit- 
ing velocity (of light) plays no part. In this theory one has 
both principles of equivalence, both that of Galileo and 
that of Einstein. And one has some famous physical conse- 
quences which also were predicted by Einstein. For in- 
stance, both theories predict that when light falls in a gravi- 
tational field it turns bluer; it turns from red to blue, as 
frequency increases, and the wavelength decreases. The 
most precise and, I think, by far the most beautiful exam- 
ple of this is a recent experiment conducted at Harvard in 
which light was simply allowed to fall down from the third 
floor to the basement of the Physics Building. One could 
see how much bluer it had become: one part in 10": not 
very much. Also, as Einstein predicted, and as had been 
guessed before, light is deflected when it passes through a 
gravitational field, near the sun, or, for that matter, near a 
star. And you also find, as I have already mentioned, that 
a gravitational field induces more gravitational field, unlike 
the standard case of light. 

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, if you develop 
this analogy between gravitation and electromagnetism, 
you find one very major and deep difference. This is the 
point where really to explain where the difference comes 
in would take not a little, but a lot of scribbling on the 
blackboard, but to explain what the difference is, I think, 
does not. I shall use the word ‘space’ to mean both the 
three-dimensional space that we usually mean and the ex- 
tension in time which we have learned to see is not sharply 
and totally separable from spatial intervals, because they 
get mixed up when you look at things in uniform motion. 
You find that if you explore space with ordinary rulers and 
clocks, this real space is not the space of Euclid, it is not the 
space of the classical geometers, but it has some structure 


Space and Time - 109 


and some distortion built into it. This is not the space you 
imagine on paper; it is the space which you measure, typi- 
cally, with rods. Now it is very hard to think, at least for me, 
about four-dimensional continua, especially when one of 
them is not a distance but a time, but it is legitimate to think 
of an ordinary two-dimensional surface and suppose that 
the four-dimensional affair is just a mathematically similar 
abstraction—just as easy to discuss mathematically but 
much harder for people to visualize. Then what we have 
been saying is that we are not dealing with the analogue of 
a plane surface, but with the analogue of something curved 
in a rather peculiar way. Locally, in a small enough region, 
any curved surface, if it has no ridge in it, is flat and it looks 
like a plane; but if you move along it for some distance, the 
inherent distortion of the space becomes clear; for in- 
stance, the sum of the angles of a triangle will not be a 
straight angle and Pythagoras’s theorem will not be true, 
and all sorts of geometrical complications will be induced. 
When you have a sufficiently vigorous and wild gravita- 
tional field, such distortions will occur in the nature of 
space and time, and can be detected by actual measure- 
ment. From this it then follows that if you accept the gravi- 
tational analogy of electromagnetism you are led to things 
that have no parallel in electromagnetism; and, if you have 
your eyes open, you reach Einstein’s theory, or something 
very like it and close to it. 

But Einstein, forty-five years ago, did not do this. He 
developed his description of gravity on the basis of a few 
rather general ideas. One is that gravitational forces are 
determined by matter and express themselves in the ge- 
ometry of space and time. Now, what are the determining 
aspects of matter? Not its colour, for example, but those 
aspects that are most clearly related to its mass, energy, 
momentum, or impetus and related things which form a 
unitary description of matter. I should say, in this context, 
that electricity and magnetism, because they have energy, 
also contribute to gravitational fields. The second impor- 
tant point is that the inherent properties of the geometry 


110 + Chapter Eight 


wholly determine the gravitational forces that act on bod- 
ies. We use the word ‘inherent’ to stress that we are not 
concerned with how you describe the geometry in terms of 
co-ordinates, but with those properties which constitute the 
structure of space and time. So that you have on the one 
hand that the inherent geometry is determined by the dis- 
tribution of matter and, on the other, that the response of 
matter to gravity is determined entirely by the geometry. 
In fact, matter moves as nearly in a straight line as the 
crinkly character of the geometry permits. These are the 
two basic points of Einstein, but they would not lead to 
anything very definite. In a way which is quite characteris- 
tic of physics and which will recur later in these lectures, 
Einstein also had in mind limiting situations where he 
knew the right answer. One was the gravitational theory of 
Newton, which is right, as I said, when fields do not vary 
too much with time and when they are not overwhelmingly 
strong. The other is that space and time, if you look at a 
sufficiently small region, must be flat, and in such a region 
must be described by the Lorentz space of special relativity. 

Those are four elements, we may say four of Einstein’s 
postulates; and the fifth one is the one that nobody can 
ever translate: the theory must be a simple thing. And here 
it seems to me we really are faced with the fact that only 
by inventing the right notation and using the right mathe- 
matical ideas can you say whether something is simple or 
not. With a good deal of fumbling, and many years of 
unsuccessful trying, many years in which the physical ideas 
which I have just outlined were clear, Einstein finally came 
upon a branch of mathematics that other people had made 
and which gave him the perfect vehicle for writing down 
how it goes with gravitation and what the general theory of 
relativity is. And no one today, plodding along to remake 
this theory along more pedestrian lines, can fail to be over- 
whelmed by the imagination, the daring, and the beauty 
of what Einstein did. It is a very different thing to say 
whether this is a correct theory. 


Space and Time - 111 


It is, of course, correct in all those particulars which I 
have talked about, but there is very little experimental evi- 
dence about the features of the theory which are peculiar 
to it, and which have nothing in common with electromag- 
netic theory, with flat space time, or with Newton’s theory. 
We may be a long time wishing that we knew, but I have 
never known a physicist who did not think that it was prob- 
ably a very very good guess indeed. And there is not a 
shred of evidence against it. We have for space and time 
not finished with the story. What will come is not my busi- 
ness to try to say, but on two fronts there are wide-open 
questions. 

One is on the scale of the very big, encompassing every- 
thing that we see with telescopes and that we hear with 
radio telescopes. That means more than the distance that 
light can travel in five or ten billion years, which is about 
where the present limit lies. We see the universe flying 
apart; we do not see anything very detailed about its spa- 
tial structure. And it is a completely open question, not 
answered now and conceivably never to be answered, 
whether the volume of space (I am not now talking of time) 
is a finite or infinite thing. Einstein thought it was finite, 
but that was because he thought that everything was steady 
and static. When we look we see that the motion is the 
characteristic feature; the further away we look, the faster 
things are receding from us, and in such a world we have 
no insight into whether this will stop and there is a finite 
distance to look or whether it will go on for ever and ever. 

Another kind of open question I referred to earlier, and 
that is that when we get to dimensions so small that they 
are not of the size of atoms, not even of the size of nuclei, 
but of the size of those objects of which nuclei and atoms 
are composed, we cannot really be sure to what extent we 
can discriminate near-by points in space and time and to 
what extent the designation of such points is still meaning- 
ful. But I will say one thing. Here there is no question of 
curvature of space because gravity is an utterly negligible 


112 + Chapter Eight 


force, and we assume that here, too, the velocity of light is 
a finite limiting velocity imposed on all physical distur- 
bances or signals. From this assumption a great deal can be 
made to follow, and, so far, nothing that follows from it has 
shown itself to be in conflict with experience. It is one of 
the powerful tools of modern-day physics. 


CHAPTER NINE 


Atom and Field 


THE SUBJECT of my lecture tonight is really the quantum 
theory. It has two parallel and even complementary his- 
torical origins. One is from the properties of electromag- 
netic radiation, but from other properties than those which 
were important for relativity. The other is from an attempt 
to understand the structure of atoms. I mean by the struc- 
ture of atoms the atoms of the chemist and the spectro- 
scopist, and not the atoms of the physicist who works with 
a giant accelerator and who smashes everything that he 
looks at with his violent collisions. This subject is also inter- 
esting but it has been opened up really only in the last 
decades, and is not understood, whereas the quantum the- 
ory was very much a complete theory thirty-five years ago. 

As to the properties of electromagnetic radiation, I need 
first of all to come back with a little more than just words 
to the idea that a changing magnetic field makes an electric 
one, a changing electric one makes a magnetic one, and 
that this pumping cycle produces an electromagnetic wave. 
These waves have certain important, deep, but rather ab- 
stract properties, in common with everything else that 
physicists call waves. A typical electromagnetic wave may 
have the electric force changing with time periodically, so 
that it is sometimes positive and sometimes negative, that 
is, sometimes pointing, let us say, in the positive direction, 
sometimes in the negative, and going through zero as it 
changes from one to the other; the magnetic force is doing 
the same thing at right-angles to the electric force and out 
of phase with it, so that when the electric force is zero the 
magnetic force is a maximum, and the whole thing is trav- 
elling at right-angles both to the electric force and the 
magnetic force with the velocity of light. That is one kind 
of electromagnetic wave and for us it is plenty. 


114 + Chapter Nine 


A 


c=vA 


Such a wave is characterized by three numbers: the 
wavelength X, the frequency v, and the velocity. The wave- 
length is the distance from crest to crest of the wave, that 
is the distance from one point where the electric field is a 
maximum to the next point at which it is a maximum. The 
frequency is the rate at which the electric field changes 
with time at a given point. The product of these two is the 
velocity of the wave—for an electromagnetic wave, this is 
the velocity of light, and we write c = Av. More generally, 
we can define in a similar wave the wavelength and fre- 
quency for a sound wave, or a water wave, and their prod- 
uct is the velocity of the wave, that is the speed of sound 
and the speed of progress of the crest of a water wave 
respectively. 

Now the important part of a wave motion, which is true 
of electromagnetic waves, sound waves, or water waves, 
and is indeed very easy to observe with water waves, is that 
if you have two waves more or less in the same part of 
space and time, they affect each other so that the distur- 
bances add. For example, the electric field that comes from 
having two electromagnetic waves is the sum of the electric 
fields of the separate waves; so is the magnetic field. That 
means that I may have another wave that is added to a 
given one in such a way that the electric fields add or in 
such a way that they cancel, depending on how they lie with 
respect to each other. An important point is that the inten- 
sity of light or electromagnetic radiation, the energy it car- 
ries, and many of the effects it produces are proportional 
not to the electric field but to its square. Looking at the 
diagram, you see that waves can interfere with each other 


Atom and Field - 115 


(b) Two waves adding to give a disturbance larger than either 


both by adding and producing twice the height of the wave 
and therefore four times the intensity, or destructively, 
according to the upper curve (a), so that where one wave 
is big and positive, the other wave is big and negative, and 
you get zero for an answer. These are the general phenom- 
ena of waves which I need to presume, I hope not wholly 
irresponsibly, that I have told you about, and which we 
shall be using all evening in our discussion. We must re- 
member that these properties are true of all waves—water 
waves, sound waves, and all electromagnetic waves, from 
those that one uses for the longest wave radio transmission 
through microwaves, through heat, through light, through 
ultraviolet light, through X-rays, and up to the highest fre- 
quencies there can be. 

One consequence of this wave property is that light 
which comes through different paths may interfere and I 
will give just two examples of that; one of which we will 
have to return to. 

The sketch shows a source S, a diaphragm with very thin 
slits in it, and out of these slits diverging waves of light. 
The curved lines represent the crests of these waves: 
where the crests coincide you will have particularly intense 
light; where the crest and a trough coincide you will have 
none at all. You sée that the presence of the two slits gives 
rise to a pattern of brightness and darkness, which either 
slit alone would not explain and which is characteristic of 


116 + Chapter Nine 


™ 


the wavelength and the separation of the slits. If there 
were a large number of slits, all spaced the same distance 
apart, then light would only move in certain directions 
from this collection of slits, which is called a grating, and 
these directions are simply related to the ratio of the wave- 
length and the separation of the slits. 

Now, a century of experimentation showed how beauti- 
fully the phenomena of the propagation of light—its 
reflection, its passage through slits, its diffraction from 
gratings, its dispersion—could be explained in terms of 
these simple ideas of the interference of waves. There is 
not to this day the slightest doubt that this is a correct 
description; it is used every time a radar antenna is de- 
signed and any time that one really wants to deal with 
electromagnetic radiation and its propagation around ob- 
jects; the light or radio waves from different gaps are 
brought together and give a resultant intensity depending 
on the relative phases of the interacting waves. In this case 
the waves are abstract in the sense that there is no matter 
moving and, by Chapter I, no aether moving either; but 
they are concrete in the sense that there are electric and 
magnetic fields, the ones that Faraday dreamed so much 
about, which you can measure; every one of these crests 
corresponds to a measurement of a big electric field at a 
certain time, and every trough corresponds to a big mag- 
netic field at a certain time. (These measurements would 


Atom and Field - 117 


be extremely tedious to do with light, but with long radio 
waves it is a straight-forward experiment that does not 
teach you very much, but confirms your sanity.) Now, it was 
exactly at the turn of the century that this harmonious 
picture of the nature of electromagnetic radiation received 
a sharp jolt from which it has never recovered. To explain 
this, it would be easier to skip history entirely, but I will say 
how Planck discovered it. 

When you have a gas of molecules each molecule has, on 
the average, about the same energy as every other and this 
energy is a simple measure of the temperature of the gas. 
If you have electromagnetic waves in an enclosure you can 
convince yourself that every wavelength should also have 
about the same energy as every other, and this energy is 
equal to the temperature of the matter which forms the 
enclosure and is emitting the waves. This is, on the face of 
it, absurd, because the theory of relativity says that there 
can be no limit on how short wavelengths are since all you 
have to do to make them shorter is get on a fast train, and 
they will be shorter. Therefore, there will be an infinite 
energy content to any piece of space that is allowed to 
come into thermal equilibrium. Energy would simply drain 
out of matter and everything would be absolutely cold, 
because all the energy would go into the electromagnetic 
field. This, it was known, is not true. In struggling to find 
out why, Planck had a very great advantage. He knew that, 
for very low frequencies of the light waves, this rule that all 
the light waves in the enclosure had the same energy was 
right. He knew that for very high frequencies something 
quite different happened, and the energy that a wave had 
was the energy that would be required if one had to create 
a quantum of energy given by the expression hv. He intro- 
duced the constant A to connect these two regimes which 
had earlier been studied; it has always since been called 
Planck’s constant. It is, as you see, a constant which, when 
multiplied by a frequency, gives one an energy, and it will 
recur; it is the signal, the mark, of atomic physics and is 
called the quantum of action or Planck’s constant. Planck 


118 + Chapter Nine 


was able to derive a formula which reconciled this behav- 
iour of the equilibrium properties of the enclosed radia- 
tion, and also to determine a reasonably accurate value of 
his constant, but only by employing the technically possible 
assumption that light was not emitted continuously as a 
wave should be, but only in energy packets, which corre- 
spond to a multiple of the frequency, viz. hv. He did not 
believe this, and for many many years struggled to get his 
formula without making this dreadful assumption which 
contradicted the whole idea of light as a wave. Because 
here it was being said, not that light was emitted, like radio 
waves, simply by charges moving around, but that light was 
emitted in a whole single operation with a unit of energy, 
and if that amount of energy could not be emitted, nothing 
happened; if that could be emitted, it happened; if it could 
happen more than once, it happened more than once. 
Well, in this very statistical and complex and dark area it 
was possible to suppose that Planck had made a mistake, 
and he lived for years in the confident hope that he had 
made a mistake. 

But he was wrong; and a great blow was struck to his 
hope when, in the same year that Einstein made the special 
theory of relativity, he made another paper, which was to 
prove even more mischievous. The second paper is very 
closely related to Planck’s discovery. If you shine light that 
is not too red on a metal surface, electrons, which are part 
of the metal, will come out of it. The very odd thing which 
had been found in the laboratory was that if you shine the 
light twice as strongly it does not affect the velocity of the 
electrons; rather, it affects their number. But, of course, if 
you are thinking of light as an electromagnetic wave and 
the wave is more intense, you would expect that the elec- 
trons would have more work done on them. But not at all. 
The energy of the electrons is unrelated to the intensity of 
the light, but very simply related to the frequency of the 
light and to Planck’s constant. 


E=hv-B 


Atom and Field - 119 


The light energy hv is the same energy that Planck had 
introduced five years earlier, E is the energy of the electron 
as it moves away from the metal and B is not fundamental: 
it is the work that you have to do to get the electron out of 
the metal in the first place. This formula has been very 
accurately and beautifully confirmed. And Einstein said: 
‘This clinches it. Obviously there are units of energy in 
light.’ When light is absorbed by an electron, it happens in 
multiples of these units hv, and then the energy is simply 
carried off by the electron and that explains the formula. 

But, of course, this did not do away with the century of 
experiences on wave phenomena. Interferometers and 
prisms, microscopes and radio waves still studied light in 
terms of the propagation of waves. On the other hand, 
here was this discontinuous particle aspect, at least to phe- 
nomena in which light was absorbed or emitted, which 
could not be laughed away. Moreover, this was even con- 
firmed by experiments with very hard light, viz. X-rays. In 
fact, when they collide with electrons, they act as though 
they had the energy given by E = hv and a momentum, or 
impulse, p = h/d, which is just h, the same constant, divided 
by the wavelength. Thus one could see that light acted in 
collision with electrons like a particle with a momentum 
and an energy related to its frequency and wavelength by 
these very simple rules, consistent with the rules connect- 
ing energy and momentum for an electromagnetic wave, 
but involving both this constant h, and a discrete transfer 
of energy and of momentum from light to electron in a 
collision between the two. This experiment, called the 
Compton effect, had led to a very serious and critical view 
as to the dual nature of light by about 1923. 

Probably the situation could not have been readily un- 
derstood had it not also been compounded by another and 
equally puzzling aspect: this time not directly the behav- 
iour of light, but the behaviour of matter on an atomic 
scale. Let me remind you that, just before this century, 
Thomson discovered the universal ingredient of ordinary 


120 + Chapter Nine 


matter, the negatively charged electron which is very light 
compared to the atom, some 1/2,000th as heavy or less, and 
which has the unit of charge which we find uniquely 
throughout the atomic world. Thomson rightly imagined 
that the number of electrons in an atom was connected 
with its chemical properties and its place in the periodic 
table, so that atomic hydrogen would have one electron, 
helium two, uranium—92. He knew the atoms were neu- 
tral, but he did not know where the neutralizing positive 
charge was; and his best guess was that it was probably 
extended over a volume of the order of the size of atoms, 
that is a sphere 1/100th of a millionth of a centimetre in 
diameter. This was the Thomson model of the atom, and 
it raised no problems, because it was a rather vague model, 
and you could not do very much about it. But Thomson 
was able to show that some regularities, like the occurrence 
of regular numbers and periods, such as occur in the peri- 
odic table, might be expected from such a model. However, 
this model did not last long, because of the work of Ruther- 
ford, which started at McGill, continued at Manchester, 
and was finally brought to fruition there. Rutherford 
showed that positive charge of an atom was not spread out 
over atomic dimensions. 

How he did this is itself very beautiful. He had been 
studying naturally radioactive radiations, coming from 
uranium, radium, and related heavy elements; he got their 
family relationships straight and decided which chemical 
elements were produced by the natural decay of which 
other elements and which disintegrations followed which; 
he had distinguished three types of radiation: positively 
charged and heavy, which were the nuclei of helium and 
which he called alpha-particles; negatively charged, and 
light, which were electrons; and neutral, which were very 
high frequency light. He did not at first know that alpha- 
particles were helium nuclei, but he thought they were, and 
he became interested in what happened to them, as they 
passed through matter. They did not do what they would 
if atoms had a uniform smooth positive charge, and very 


Atom and Field - 121 


light electrons located within it, as suggested by the Thom- 
son model. 

In that case there could never be a big force to deflect 
the alpha-particle, because the smooth charge does not 
have sufficiently concentrated electricity and the electrons 
have much too little mass to knock an alpha-particle 
around, for it is 7,000 times as heavy. But he found that 
indeed the alpha-particles were, not often but regularly, 
deflected through very big angles indeed, and from this he 
concluded that the positive charge was concentrated, and 
that it was concentrated, along with most of the mass of the 
atom, in a region with dimensions smaller than 1/10,000th 
of atomic dimensions. And so he discovered the atomic 
nucleus which has the positive charge which gives the atom 
its chemical and most of its physical properties. 

This was a marvellous story, but it was only the begin- 
ning of really very great puzzles. Think of the simplest of 
all such atoms, the hydrogen atom. It has a proton, one 
nuclear particle, at the centre with a unit positive charge, 
and somehow there is an electron associated with this to 
make up a system which has a well-defined size. The size 
is standard; unless the hydrogen atom has been through a 
wringer or been hit over the head, it always is the same. 
And it emits a certain characteristic batch of colours when 
you bash it. Not one of these properties could be intelligi- 
ble on the basis of Newton’s ideas about motion and the 
idea of how charged particles affect each other, because 
Rutherford had proved that the field around the proton 
was the electric field. This field is in its form exactly like the 
gravitational field around the sun: the forces fall of f with 
the inverse square of the distance and they all point to- 
wards the proton, for in this case they are attractive, since 
the electron and proton are oppositely charged. Conse- 
quently, it is just the problem of the planetary motions all 
over again. Now, one obvious thing that we know about 
planetary motions is they can be more or less anything: any 
ellipse, in any plane, with any eccentricity, and any size. 
Therefore, it is most odd that all hydrogen atoms should 


122 - Chapter Nine 


have the same size and act in the same way. There is no 
trace in classical physics of any reason why each hydrogen 
atom should not be of a different size and shape and be- 
haviour than the next or any other. 

Furthermore, although I have not gone into this in de- 
tail, we know that if we have a charged particle describing 
a circular or elliptical orbit, it is accelerated, and an acceler- 
ated charged particle will make light waves and lose en- 
ergy. But hydrogen, unless it is bashed, does not do any- 
thing of the kind. It can sit for years and centuries quite 
content without ever changing. It does not lose its energy 
and the electron does not spiral in and disappear into the 
nucleus. And finally the laws relating the colours of light 
that are emitted from such a classical orbit are a little more 
complicated, but similar in form to the laws determining 
the sound frequencies produced by a violin string. There 
will be a fundamental which is connected to the period of 
revolution of the electron in the orbit and there will be 
overtones or harmonics, i.e. multiples of this frequency; 
whereas the observed frequencies for atomic spectra, hy- 
drogen included, are not harmonics or integral multiples 
of a fundamental frequency, but rather complicated ar- 
rangements of differences between numbers which are not 
harmonically related. To be specific all the observed fre- 
quencies can be written as 


v=vu-y 


when vi and y are two of a sequence of numbers v,, v,, 
U,- ’... In the case of hydrogen, these numbers had been 
recognized by Balmer, and in general they characterize the 
atom in question. In other words, the uniqueness of atom 
systems (which is harder to prove, but just as true, for an 
atom with 92 electrons) expressed in the law of the light 
emitted when they are excited, their stability, and the fact 
that they are all the same size, had no roots in any then 
existing piece of physics. This was the very great predica- 
ment which caused Bohr to make one of those wild guesses 


Atom and Field + 123 


which even his own great caution was unable to keep from 
looking very revolutionary. Bohr said: ‘For reasons which 
we don’t yet understand, an atom is not characterized by 
classical orbits, but it is characterized by a set of states 
which are essentially stationary, which don’t change in 
time.’ Of these the most familiar and important is the one 
with the lowest energy, the ground state, and that lasts 
forever, unless the atom is disturbed. These states have 
different energies and those which have more energy than 
the ground state may not be stable; a transition may occur 
from such a state to a lower one spontaneously. We re- 
member that each frequency emitted from a given atomic 
species can be written as v = v, — v,, and we may make this 
into an intelligible equation by multiplying it by h, Planck’s 
constant: 


hv = hv, - hu,. 


Then each term in this equation is an energy, and we could 
assume that the two quantities, hv, and hv,, are the energies 
of two states in the atom, and the quantity hv is the energy 
of the quantum of light that is emitted in the transition 
between them. ‘I cannot,’ said Bohr, ‘describe these transi- 
tions. They are not motions in any classical sense. They are 
something new that I don’t understand. Bohr went on to 
say: ‘I can give you a rule, in some cases, for I calculated 
the energies for these states, and this I can do in terms of 
the properties of the corresponding classical orbits.’ But 
Bohr did not say, and this turned out not to be true, that 
these states have anything in common with orbits. For one 
thing, an orbit is a motion and something changes with 
time. The stationary state is just what it says: it does not 
change with time at all. 

We have now reached the crisis of quantum theory; but 
before we get through with this story we will see that we 
have a vast extension of our idea of intelligibility in science, 
that we have a vast generalization of what we mean by 
objective knowledge, and that we have a much better ana- 


124 + Chapter Nine 


logue to the human predicament than could possibly have 
been built on Newtonian physics. 

Our crisis arose in two studies which, it turns out, are 
very closely related. The first was the discovery that, al- 
though all electromagnetic waves, including light, are de- 
scribed so perfectly as wave phenomena showing interfer- 
ence and giving diffraction patterns, nevertheless, in their 
transactions with matter, they have a discrete character, 
behaving like light quanta, with definite energy and 
definite momentum, and that they negotiate with matter by 
giving up this energy, or by taking it from matter or by 
colliding with matter in an elastic collision. Secondly, we 
had the problem, created by Rutherford’s discovery of the 
atomic nucleus, of what in the dickens the electrons were 
doing in the neighbourhood of the nucleus. They were not 
moving on planetary orbits, they were not radiating, they 
were not behaving like a small solar system; but they were, 
for the most part, in stationary states, essentially stable, the 
lowest one completely stable, as Bohr said. When they 
moved from one state to another, this was not a motion 
which could be pictured in space and time; but the energy 
difference between the energies of the stationary states 
could appear in a form of radiation, the corresponding 
light quantum. There were rules which were not precise 
and not generally applicable and which I shall not write 
down, that Bohr gave for identifying the energy of these 
states. 

Bohr knew that this was a radical departure and an in- 
comprehensible one and he immediately followed it up 
with a suggestion very much like that which guided Ein- 
stein, namely that this new scheme, which seemed so wild 
and unfamiliar, must, in some situations, reproduce the 
world we knew. Those situations were ones in which very 
highly excited states of the atom were involved, in which 
many stationary states were involved, and where the dis- 
creteness of the stationary state and the finiteness of 
Planck’s constant would not make very much difference. 
This he called the ‘correspondence principle. The new 


Atom and Field - 125 


theory must describe the world of Newton and the world 
of Maxwell when we are away from the discrete elements 
that characterize the quantum theory. This principle 
turned out to be a most powerful tool; and by 1925 it had 
been possible to write down laws not involving any image 
of motion, not involving any clear connexion with New- 
ton’s laws or with particles in orbits, but laws which never- 
theless were generalizations of Newtonian mechanics and 
which directly described the connexion between transitions 
between atomic states and the properties of the atomic 
state themselves. 

I am glad that it did not stay at that, because this is very 
hard to explain without mathematics. I think my first 
paper dealt with a simple problem of a molecule with two 
atoms by this machinery, but it was very hard to interpret 
what this was about and very hard to solve problems. The 
solution which most of us find easiest to explain and which 
is in fact identical with that which the ‘correspondence 
principle’ led to, came in a very different way. It came in 
a wild idea that was very soon generalized and verified, and 
the wild idea was that there should be a wave associated not 
just with electromagnetism, but also with every kind of 
particle in nature, specifically with an electron. 

These waves are not electric and magnetic disturbances; 
what they are I willsay in a minute. But the relations which 
characterize the connexion between the wave properties of 
light and its energy momentum were preserved, viz: 


E=hv 
p= hin. 


I have used the same letters, v and \ for frequency and 
wavelength, E and p for energy and momentum. This was 
proposed by de Broglie, who was able to show that one 
could get a plausible account of the stationary states of the 
hydrogen atom by the requirement that those states would 
be realized in which standing waves could be established 
which were in resonance, that is where the number of 
wavelengths in the circumference of the Bohr ‘orbit’ would 


126 - Chapter Nine 


be an integer. This was pretty shaky and it was thoroughly 
disbelieved—I believe his paper was refused publication. 
Nevertheless, it was right, and within a year one had found 
evidence that electrons are indeed in some way wave-like, 
because they show interference and they diffract just as 
light does and just as X-rays do. 

Also within a year, one found a less sketchy way of de- 
scribing the relation between the propagation of these 
waves and the simple forces present in something like a 
hydrogen atom, where the electron is simply subject to the 
electric attraction of the proton. This universal wave-parti- 
cle duality immediately did several things. It explained the 
existence of stationary states, not as orbits, but as some- 
thing new with no analogue in classical theory, as things 
which indeed were steady in time. But they were not static 
in this sense! If you measured the kinetic energy or the 
average square momentum of an electron in a stationary 
state it would not be zero, but it would be the same at any 
time as it was at any other. It would not change in the 
course of time. A close connexion between the properties 
of these waves and Bohr’s ‘correspondence principle’ was 
very quickly set up. But I will not turn to these questions, 
which are a little mathematical, but rather to the way in 
which the discovery of the universality of wave-particle 
duality gave a clue as to the relations between the wave 
aspects and the particle aspects of light and of all matter. 
It is also true that a brick is associated with a wave, but it 
is not a useful thought, because the brick is very much 
bigger than its wavelength, and we shall never see the in- 
terference effects that correspond to macroscopic objects. 

The wave-particle duality refers to an individual event 
and that is a very very striking thing. Let us think again of 
our two slits. The source may be a light source, or it may 
be an electron source. The interference acts between the 
crests of the waves to produce a bright spot in the pattern, 
or destructively between a crest and a trough to get very 
little light. This not only describes what happens when you 
have a lot of light coming from a source, but it describes 


Atom and Field - 127 


perfectly well what happens when the light is very faint 
and you expose a photographic plate for a long time. It 
describes, in other words, the behaviour of individual 
quanta of light or individual electrons leaving the source. 
That fact tells us that the relation of the wave to the finding 
of the particle is a statistical one: where the wave is strong, 
we are likely to find the particle, and where the wave, be- 
cause of destructive interference, is weak, we are unlikely 
to find it. More than that, the reconciliation of the wave- 
particle problem involves the following considerations. If 
you think of this experiment in terms of a light quantum 
going through one of the slits and being affected by the 
other slit through which it does not go, you are led to an 
impossible description of nature, because then things 
which are not involved in an experiment may affect the 
outcome. Thus, our presence here tonight may affect the 
outcome of an experiment in the reactor building a little 
away; such an idea has no end. The point then is this: in 
such a set-up you will observe the interference of the light 
or the electron waves passing through the two slits (or in 
the more general case, you will get the unidirectional char- 
acter of light transmitted through a long grating of slits), 
but you will only do so as long as you leave the experiment 
as it is with no attempt to find out through which hole the 
light or the electron passed. Once you arrange to have a 


128 - Chapter Nine 


little spring in one of the slits, so that when the light is 
bounced on that slit you notice it, you will have destroyed 
the interference pattern and you will get only the pattern 
that you would have if that slit, and that slit alone, were 
open. How can this be? 

It can be because not just the light and the electron, but 
the slits themselves have the character of being repre- 
sented by a wave field. Now a wave field, however abstract 
it may be, has the property that if you want it concentrated 
in a little region of space you must have different wave- 
lengths present which will reinforce each other in that re- 
gion of space and cancel outside it. If Ax is a dimension of 
the region of space, there must be a spread of wavelengths 
AX, such that 

1 ? 
A(1/A) BA AN 

the smaller the region in which you wish to confine the 
disturbance, the larger must be the spread of the wave- 
lengths. But if you look at this formula, and remember that 
p = A/X, you will see that there must be a spread of mo- 
menta involved. Indeed, the equations show that ApAx = 
h. In words, the spread in momentum multiplied by the 
spread in position cannot be less than the quantum of ac- 
tion, Planck’s constant. This result is true for the light, for 
the electron, for the slit, and for anything else that you 
want to study. This provides a completely consistent re- 
striction on how you may and how you may not use the 
idea of wave and the idea of particle. The restriction is 
consistent, because it is universal in that every measuring 
instrument that you use is as limited in its ability to define 
at the same time both position and momentum as is the 
object that you are studying. 

In actual fact, these waves represent not electric or mag- 
netic fields, but a state of information. They represent 
what you have learned by an experiment. Suppose, for 
instance, that you set out to determine that light passed 
through the upper slit, or to determine that it was mono- 
chromatic light emitted from the source. These two com- 


Atom and Field - 129 


plementary measurements are, in fact, mutually exclusive, 
because by the time that you had detected the passage of 
the light through the slit, you would have allowed it to 
collide with a slit in an effective manner, and thereby to 
destroy your confidence as to its colour (which is essentially 
its wavelength). The colour would have been changed by 
the collision. These waves have a well-defined relation to 
statistical prediction in that, as in the case of light, their 
square determines the intensity, which in this case is the 
probability of finding the particle, either light quantum or 
electron. They also represent in a general way the kind of 
information which you can obtain about an atomic system, 
whether it be its momentum, its position, its energy, or any 
other possible kind of study you may wish to make of it. 

In deciding what measurement is possible, we must take 
into account the fact that not only the system, but every- 
thing we can use to observe it with, is subject to the limita- 
tion of complementarity, of which this uncertainty relation 
between the definition of the momentum of a particle and 
the definition of its position is the most famous and the 
most fundamental example. If you have an atom, the sta- 
tionary states are not orbits. To produce orbits you must 
take a whole mass of stationary states and build up the 
waves in a suitable manner by adding the waves of station- 
ary states. So an orbit is complementary to a stationary 
state; you can realize one or the other, but if you do one, 
the other is foreclosed. It is also the same with a light 
quantum; you may have a probability wave for a light 
quantum, and that is what we have been talking about 
here; but if you want to build up an electromagnetic wave 
you must have many light quanta and you must superim- 
pose the waves from many light quanta to make a good 
old-fashioned electromagnetic wave such as we send and 
receive. We know that there are indeed many quanta in 
such waves. 

The important point is that it is not merely that we do 
not always know everything that in classical mechanics we 
thought we could know, like the position and momentum 
of an object; if that were so, you could say: ‘Well, I know 


130 - Chapter Nine 


its momentum and I will suppose that it is distributed 
somehow over different possible positions and I will calcu- 
late what I’m interested in and take the average.’ But you 
must not do that. If you suppose that an object whose 
momentum you have determined by experiment has a dis- 
tribution in positions, no matter what the distribution, you 
will get the wrong answer. It is not that you do not know 
it; it is that it is not defined. The experiment which gives 
you the momentum forecloses the possibility of your deter- 
mining the position. If you welch on it and say, ‘Well, I 
want to know the position in the first place,’ then you can, 
but then you lose the knowledge which the earlier experi- 
ment had given. 

One is thus led to a view that a good, well-designed 
observation gives information. This will determine a wave 
field, and this wave field develops in time in a quite causal 
way. That is, if you know it at one time its future will be 
also known. From this wave field, by taking its square, you 
can determine the probability for the outcome of another 
experiment at the future time. These predictions have 
been checked and checked and checked, and in some won- 
derful cases are right to one part in ten billion, or some- 
thing like that. When you make your new observation to 
check the prediction you generally, but not always, render 
the old wave function no longer a reasonable description 
of the system. You also have wild situations in which you 
may use one particle to study another and in which, de- 
pending on what you do with the test particle, you may 
produce a state for the other which either has a well de- 
fined momentum, or a well-defined position. You cannot 
do both and you exercise your option by what you do with 
the observing particle rather than with the observed parti- 
cle. This gives in a most vivid way a notion of how limited 
the objectivity of an atomic system is, because apart from 
a description of what you have done to study its properties, 
it is not logically possible to assign properties to that atomic 
system. You cannot say: ‘I think it is in this part of space 
and maybe it has such and such a velocity. Let me try it 


Atom and Field - 131 


out.’ You have to take into account, in order to give it any 
properties at all, what you have done to observe it or what 
you know of its history. In other words, you have to take 
into account the relation of this object to the world of 
nature, not to you as a human being, but to you as one of 
the many physicists who are in the game. 

This theory is, therefore, one which has forced us to a 
quite different notion of what we mean by objectivity. All 
over the world, in France, in Japan, in New Zealand, in 
communist countries, we talk about atomic physics, and we 
check each other’s experiments. In that sense it is a most 
objective part of our knowledge, and a most well-verified 
one. These comparisons are possible because we can tell 
each other how we have gone about an experiment and 
what we saw and what we found. Mistakes are made, but 
they are found very quickly. The objectivity which we see 
in this is not a characteristic that you can look up in a book, 
it is not an ontological characteristic of the atom at all. It 
is a characteristic of the way we can talk with each other 
about it, of the lack of ambiguity and of the reproducibility 
and the verifiability of our communication with each other. 

Quantum theory is, of course, an acausal theory in the 
sense that events happen for which no precise cause can be 
determined or given. A given nucleus disintegrates at 
three o’clock on the afternoon of a certain day. No one in 
the world could find out when that would happen until it 
did happen, but he could give a law saying how many in 
100,000 nuclei of the same kind would disintegrate in any 
interval of time. It is a non-determinist theory. There is no 
possibility, as there was in Laplace’s nightmare, of knowing 
everything about the world right now—not a very plausible 
assumption—and therefore knowing all about its future— 
not a very happy outcome. In every experiment, in atomic 
physics, you look at something, or have other ways of 
knowing something about the system; it develops accord- 
ing to laws of wave propagation which are simple and well 
known; then you look again and you get an answer. Every- 
thing about this is quite different from the Newtonian pic- 


132 - Chapter Nine 


ture. You are free in your choice of what you are going to 
look at to begin with. You are free in what question you ask 
later; but the event itself is unique. You can try it again and 
it will not in general give the same answer, because the 
connexion between the two experiments is a statistical one, 
not a necessary one. 


CHAPTER TEN 


War and the Nations 


I HAVE been discussing the idea of complementarity: that 
it is impossible to measure precisely two complementary 
aspects of a physical system. Always when you talk about 
an atomic system it may be big, it may be a crystal, it may 
be a nucleus, it may have billions and billions of atoms in 
it, but always it is a finite part of the world; and in order 
that you can make an observation of it, you must use the 
rest of the world for the machinery with which you do it. 
Especially Bohr has pointed out the analogies between this 
situation of complementarity and familiar traits in life. He 
has had, I think, a double purpose: one to illuminate the 
situation in physics and one to reinforce our interest in 
complementary aspects of human life. 

A favourite one is this. When I write with the chalk it is 
part of me and I use it without any separation between it 
and my hand. When I look at it and get interested in what 
it is and put it under a microscope, it is an object of study. 
I can do one or the other, but the effective doing of one 
obviously forecloses the effective doing of the other. I may, 
as we all have to, make a decision and act or I may think 
about my motives and my peculiarities and my virtues and 
my faults and try to decide why I am doing what I am. 
Each of these has its place in our life, but clearly the one 
forecloses the other. We may talk, as we increasingly do, 
about the physical disposition and chemical mechanisms in 
living objects, but when we talk about living objects we also 
need to talk about the purpose for which these mecha- 
nisms have been developed and have survived. Both meth- 
ods of description ‘have a valuable part, to give either up is 
to impoverish our understanding of life; but they are not 
things that can be done at once without confusion. 


134 - Chapter Ten 


There are many other examples. Perhaps one of the 
deepest, because it is the most familiar, is that we all en- 
counter situations in our life in which we look at the pre- 
dicament of a man, a friend perhaps, or a son, and see it 
in the light of what is good for him and of our love for him. 
We know that others will look at it in the light of what is 
just and what is proper in society. We know that the good 
societies, if there are any, the better societies are those in 
which this conflict and this dichotomy and this element of 
complementarity is not too terrible. Still, we all know, be- 
cause of the tragic quality of life, that it will always be there. 
Those who have lived through the unravelling of the heart 
of the atomic paradox as it existed twenty-five or thirty 
years ago believe that one has come to a vision of the physi- 
cal world with far more room for the human spirit in it 
than could have been found in the great mechanism of 
Newton. 

Very soon physicists, pleased with what they had found 
and enormously armed with new theoretical and mathe- 
matical methods, turned to other problems—not just 
atomic physicists, but their colleagues in chemistry, in 
mathematics, and in other branches of physics. For in- 
stance, very soon after the quantum theory was elucidated 
one began really to make a theory of the electron, the first 
fundamental particle, other than light, to be studied in 
detail. And the positron, the counterpart to the electron, 
which has the same mass, but opposite charge, was discov- 
ered, and detailed studies were made of the beautiful pro- 
cesses of materialization and dematerialization, in which a 
pair of charged particles disappear to give two rays of light 
(two gamma rays), or in which two gamma rays collide to 
make a pair. This is as beautiful an example of Einstein’s 
relation between mass and energy as one can ask for. But 
then we got into another branch of study which in the end 
involved us as a community in politics in some sense (I 
mean it in a good sense—the judgement of the good soci- 
ety, not the winning of an election), and in the great ques- 
tions of national and political power. This, of course, is not 


War and the Nations - 135 


unheard of. Archimedes, in Syracuse, had the same troub- 
les, and Hobbes, ten years before Newton’s Principia, wrote 
of them with a dry dispassion. This began to happen very 
slowly and without anyone seeing it, when, armed with 
quantum theory and eager to understand, physicists 
turned their attention not to the behaviour of the atomic 
electrons around the nucleus, but to the nucleus itself. 

This field was very much opened up by two develop- 
ments. One, which occurred in the same year as the discov- 
ery of the positron, was the discovery of the neutron, the 
neutral ingredient of atomic nuclei. The second was the 
design and construction of accelerators, machines for giv- 
ing to charged particles sufficient energy to overcome the 
electric repulsion of atomic nuclei, and to get at them and 
break them up and to see what they were made of and how 
they reacted. By 1939 we knew quite a lot of how nuclei 
behaved, of what their stationary states were like, of how 
they reacted when bombarded, and of what kind of prod- 
ucts would be produced. Although those were the days of 
small accelerators, a million times less energetic than those 
now under study, they were good enough to give a very 
good insight into the behaviour of atomic nuclei. Ruther- 
ford was dead then, in 1939. It was he, who, during the 
First World War, had produced the first artificial transmu- 
tation of nuclei, not with an accelerated particle, but with 
one of his beloved alpha-particles. He went to his death 
rather doubtful that large-scale energy releases could be 
practically accomplished on earth, although the energy 
changes were certainly there to be made. We learned more 
of this when, on the basis of studies of nuclei and of what 
the astronomers could tell, it was possible to give a convinc- 
ing and rather detailed account of some of the principal 
sources of the energy of the sun and of many other stars 
in terms of nuclear reactions changing nuclei and releasing 
energy in the hot central regions of these stars. 

Nineteen thirty-nine was the year of fission and was also 
the year of the outbreak of the Second World War; a good 
many changes had come to all people, but also to physicists. 


136 + Chapter Ten 


Early in the 1920s up until the very early 1930s scientists 
from the Soviet Union were welcome and were frequently 
found in the great centres of learning in Europe and warm 
collegial relations were formed then between Russians, 
Englishmen, Germans, Scandinavians, many of which per- 
sist to this day. That was changed, too, in the 1930s. During 
the 1930s very many men of science, like very many other 
men, either had to leave or in conscience did leave Ger- 
many. Many of them came to Canada, many to the United 
Kingdom, and perhaps most of all to the United States. 
Some came from Italy as well. By 1939 the Western world 
was no longer a suburb of the scientific community, but a 
centre in its own right, and when fission was discovered the 
first analyses of what nuclei were involved and what pros- 
pects there were for its practical use for the release of 
energy were largely conducted in the United States. I re- 
member that Uhlenbeck, who was still in Holland, thought 
it his duty to tell his government about this development; 
the Minister of Finance immediately ordered 50 tons of 
uranium ore from the Belgian mining company, and re- 
marked: ‘Clever, these physicists.’ 

Actually it was very largely the refugee scientists in En- 
gland and in the United States who took the first steps to 
interest their governments in the making of atomic explo- 
sives and who took some steps, very primitive ones, in 
thinking out how this might be done and what might be 
involved in it. In fact, we all know that it was a letter from 
Einstein, written at the suggestion of Szilard, Wigner, and 
Teller, that first brought the matter to President Roose- 
velt’s attention; in the United Kingdom I think it was 
Simon and Peierls who played this early part. Bohr re- 
mained in Denmark as long as it was humanly possible for 
him to do so. The governments were busy. They had a war 
on their hands and certainly any reasonable appraisal 
would have suggested that radar, probably the proximity 
fuse, and in principle if not in fact rockets would have very 
much more to do with the outcome of the war than would 
the atomic energy undertaking. It started slowly under 


War and the Nations - 137 


crazy names like Tube Alloys in the United Kingdom, and 
Department of Substitute Materials in the United States. 
When I came into it my predecessor had the title Co-ordi- 
nator of Rapid Rupture. 

There were really very many questions. Would a bomb 
work and what sort of a thing would it be, how much mate- 
rial would it need, what kind of energies would it release; 
would it ignite the atmosphere in nuclear reactions and 
end us all; could it be used to start fusion reactions? There 
was also the problem of producing, in industrial processes 
that had no previous analogue in human history, the very 
considerable number of pounds of the special materials, 
uranium and plutonium, of which the first bombs had to 
be made. By late 1941 an authorization for production was 
really given. There was an uneasy co-operation between 
the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, later 
substantially to improve, but never, I think, to become com- 
pletely free of trouble, especially for our friends from the 
United Kingdom, though we learned much and gained 
much from all their help. There was also, of course, very 
much secrecy. 

Late in 1942 we decided that we must get to work on 
how to make bombs themselves. On July 16th, 1945, early 
in the morning, the first bomb was exploded. It did a little 
better than we thought it might. One of the guards said: 
‘The long hairs have let it get away from them.’ That day, 
the President of the United States, the Prime Minister of 
England, and Stalin were meeting in Potsdam. I believed, 
because I was told by Dr. Bush, that the President would 
take the occasion to discuss this development with Stalin, 
not in order to tell him how to make a bomb, which the 
President did not know, but to do something that seemed 
important at the time, to treat the Russians as allies in this 
undertaking and to start discussing with them how we were 
going to live with this rather altered situation in the world. 
It did not come off that way. The President said some- 
thing, but it is completely unclear whether Stalin under- 
stood it or not. No one was present except Stalin’s inter- 


138 + Chapter Ten 


preter of the moment and the President, who does not 
know Russian. But it was a casual word and that was all. 

The bombs were used against Japan. That had been 
foreseen and in principle approved by Roosevelt and 
Churchill when they met in Canada and again at Hyde 
Park. It was largely taken for granted; there were ques- 
tions raised, but I believe there was very little deliberation 
and even less record of any deliberation there was. And I 
would like synoptically, briefly, on the basis of my memory 
of the time and of talk with many historians who have 
grappled with it, to tell you what little I think about this. I 
think first of all that we do not know and at the moment 
cannot know whether a political effort to end the war in 
the Far East could have been successful. The Japanese 
Government was deeply divided and stalemated in favour 
of war. The dissident part of the Government had made an 
overture through Moscow to the West. Moscow did noth- 
ing about it until Potsdam. Stalin told Truman about it. 
Stalin did not seem interested, Truman did not seem inter- 
ested, and nothing happened. This was at the very time 
when the test bomb was successful and a couple of weeks 
before the bombing of Japan. The actual military plans at 
that time for the subjugation of Japan and the end of the 
war were clearly much more terrible in every way and for 
everyone concerned than the use of the bombs. There is no 
question about that; and these plans were discussed with 
us; they would have involved, it was thought, a half a mil- 
lion or a million casualties on the Allied side and twice that 
number on the Japanese side. Nevertheless, my own feel- 
ing is that if the bombs were to be used there could have 
been more effective warning and much less wanton killing 
than took place actually in the heat of battle and the confu- 
sion of the campaign. That is about all that I am clear 
about in hindsight. That, and one other thing: I am very 
glad that the bomb was not kept secret. I am glad that all 
of us knew, as a few of us already did, what was up and 
what readjustments in human life and in political institu- 
tions would be called for. Those are the days when we all 
drank one toast only: ‘No more wars.’ 


War and the Nations - 139 


When the war was over, the great men of physics spoke 
quite simply and eloquently, Einstein in advocacy of world 
government and Bohr, first to Roosevelt and to Churchill 
and to General Marshall and then finally quite openly, 
when nobody else listened but the public, of the need to 
work for a world which was completely open. He had in 
mind that we had some very great secrets and that we 
ought to be willing to relinquish them in exchange for the 
disappearance of secrecy from all countries and particu- 
larly from the secret-ridden communist societies. Stimson, 
who resigned as Secretary of War in September 1945, 
wrote: ‘Mankind will not be able to live with the riven atom, 
without some government of the whole.’ Among many re- 
ports that we in our innumerable commissions produced, 
I remember two. One of them, which remains, I think, to 
this day Top Secret, ended roughly: ‘If this weapon does 
not persuade men of the need for international collabora- 
tion and the need to put an end to war, nothing that comes 
out of a laboratory ever will” The other said: ‘If there is to 
be any international action for the control of atomic en- 
ergy there must be an international community of knowl- 
edge and of understanding.’ 

All of this was very deep and genuine and I think most 
of our community, and many other people also, believed it 
desirable. It was not exactly what Stalin wanted. And it 
really was not anything to which any government became 
very clearly or deeply or fully committed. In the absence 
of a practical way of getting there, the most that could be 
done was to put forward some tentative and not entirely 
disingenuous suggestions about the control of atomic en- 
ergy which, if accepted, would have led in the direction of 
international collaboration and in the direction of a suit- 
able beginning of world order. That is not how it has 
worked; and I remind you only of two obvious things. We 
are in an arms race of quite unparalleled deadliness—I 
think this is not the place to speak about the amount of 
devilment that is piled up on both sides, or about the pre- 
cautions and the difficulties of making sure that it does not 
go off; on the other hand, we have lived sixteen and a half 


140 + Chapter Ten 


years without a nuclear war. In the balance, between the 
very great gravity of the risks we face and the obvious 
restraints that have seen us through this time, I have no 
counsel except that of sobriety and of some hope. 

It may seem wrong to speak of this as an experience of 
physicists. It certainly is not an intellectual challenge like 
that out of which the theory of relativity was born or that 
which gave rise to the solution of the paradoxes of wave- 
particle duality and the quantum theory. I doubt if there 
is a certain specific right idea to be had in the field of how 
to remake the world to live with these armaments and to 
live with our other commitments and our other hopes. But 
it is true that we have been marked by our deep implica- 
tion in this development, by the obvious fact that without 
physics it could not have happened, and by the heavy 
weight which has been laid on so many members of this 
community in counselling their government, in speaking 
publicly and in trying above all in the early phases to find 
a healthy direction. I do not think that even our young 
colleagues, tearing away at the new unsolved problems of 
fundamental physics, are as free of preoccupation for their 
relation to the good life and the good society, as we were, 
long ago, when we were their age. 

There have been, as you know, many deep and painful 
conflicts among technical people, and I think one can pick 
up the paper almost any day and find examples of learned 
men calling their colleagues liars. We are torn by conflicts, 
and. this, I think, was not openly and clearly true in 1945 
and 1946. The arms race, the Cold War, the obduracy of 
the political conflict, and the immense and complex and 
terrifying scope of the technological enterprise are not a 
climate in which the simple discussion of physical problems 
finds very much place. But more than that, of course, these 
are not physical problems and they cannot be settled by the 
methods of science. The question of what our purpose is 
on earth, the question of how we may make a government 
that will represent these purposes, the question of what our 
own responsibility is, the question of what business it is of 


War and the Nations - 141 


ours to think about these things, are not to be solved in any 
laboratory or settled by any equation or any mathematics. 
Part of the conflict among technical people is like the con- 
flict among all people: it comes from conflicting assess- 
ments of what our antagonist’s course may be, what his 
behaviour will be—a subject rich in mystery, even for the 
experts. Part of it comes because we are talking about a 
world in which there is no relevant previous experience. 
No world has ever faced a possibility of destruction—in a 
relevant sense annihilation—comparable to that which we 
face, nor a process of decision-making even remotely like 
that which is involved in this. Those of you who have been 
in battle know how tangled, unpredictable, and un- 
amenable to prior planning the course of a battle often 
turns out to be, even when it was well planned. No one has 
any experience with warfare in the nuclear age. These are 
some of the reasons for acrimonious differences as to what 
fraction of a population may survive if you do this or do 
that, or what you may trust our antagonists to do and what 
you must suspect them of doing. In addition, the commu- 
nity of physicists is certainly no more than any other free 
of evil, free of vanity, or free of their own glory; we must 
expect rather ugly things to happen and they do. 

But I would really think that on a few rather deep points 
which do not imply the answers to all the questions in 
which we could rightly be interested, we are as a commu- 
nity really rather clear as to what our duty is. It is, in the 
first place, to give an honest account of what we all know 
together, know in the way in which I know about the Lo- 
rentz contraction and wave-particle duality, know from 
deep scientific conviction and experience. We think that we 
should give that information openly whenever that is possi- 
ble, that we should give it to our governments in secret 
when the governments ask for it, or, even if the govern- 
ments do not ask for it, that they should be made aware of 
it, when we think it essential, as Einstein did in 1939. We 
all, I think, are aware that it is our duty to distinguish 
between knowledge in this rather special and proud, but 


142 - Chapter Ten 


therefore often abstract and irrelevant, sense, and our best 
guess, our most educated appraisal of proposals which rest 
on things that in the nature of the case cannot yet be 
known, like the little cost of some hundred million to build 
a certain kind of nuclear carrier. We think that it is even 
more important, and even more essential, to distinguish 
what we know in the vast regions of science where a great 
deal is known and more is coming to be known all the time, 
from all those other things of which we would like to speak 
and should speak in another context and in another way, 
those things for which we hope, those things which we 
value. Finally, I think we believe that whenever we see an 
opportunity, we have the duty to work for the growth of 
that international community of knowledge and under- 
standing, of which I spoke earlier, with our colleagues in 
other lands, with our colleagues in competing, antagonistic, 
possibly hostile lands, with our colleagues and with others 
with whom we have any community of interest, any com- 
munity of professional, of human, or of political concern. 

We think of these activities as our contribution, not very 
different from those of anybody else, but with an emphasis 
conditioned by the experiences of growing, increasing un- 
derstanding of the natural physical world, in an increas- 
ingly tangled, increasingly wonderful and unexpected situ- 
ation. We think of this as our contribution to the making 
of a world which is varied and cherishes variety, which is 
free and cherishes freedom, and which is freely changing 
to adapt to the inevitable needs of change in the twentieth 
century and all centuries to come, but a world which, with 
all its variety, freedom, and change, is without nation states 
armed for war and above all, a world without war. 


Appendix I 


Sir IsAAcC NEWTON 
(Page 10) 


All these ‘things being consider’d, it seems probable to me, 
that God in the Beginning form’d Matter in solid, massy, 
hard, impenetrable, moveable Particles, of such Sizes and 
Figures, and with such other Properties, and in such Pro- 
portion to Space, as most conduced to the End for which 
he form’d them; and that these primitive Particles being 
Solids, are incomparably harder than any porous Bodies 
compounded of them; even so very hard, as never to wear 
or break in pieces; no ordinary Power being able to divide 
what God himself made one in the first Creation. While the 
Particles continue entire, they may compose Bodies of one 
and the same Nature and Texture in all Ages: But should 
they wear away, or break in pieces, the Nature of Things 
depending on them, would be changed. Water and Earth, 
composed of old worn Particles and Fragments of Particles, 
would not be of the same Nature and Texture now, with 
Water and Earth composed of entire Particles in the Begin- 
ning. And therefore, that Nature may be lasting, the 
Changes of corporeal Things are to be placed only in the 
various Separations and new Associations and Motions of 
these permanent Particles; compound Bodies being apt to 
break, not in the midst of solid Particles, but where those 
Particles are laid together, and only touch in a few Points. 

It seems to me farther, that these Particles have not only 
a Vis inerte, accompanied with such passive Laws of Motion 
as naturally result from that Force, but also that they are 
moved by certain active Principles, such as is that of Grav- 
ity, and that which causes Fermentation, and the Cohesion 
of Bodies. These Principles I consider, not as occult Quali- 


144 - Appendix I 


ties, supposed to result from the specifick Forms of Things, 
but as general Laws of Nature, by which the Things them- 
selves are form’d; their Truth appearing to us by Pheno- 
mena, though their Causes be not yet discover’d. ... 


Sir Isaac Newton, Opticks (New York: Dover 
Publications, Inc., 1952), Book 3, Part I, 
Query 31, p. 400. Based on the Fourth Edi- 
tion, London, 1730. 


THOMAS SPRAT 
(Page 13) 


I will here, in the first place, contract into few Words, the 
whole Sum of their Resolutions, which I shall often have 
occasion to touch upon in Parcels. Their Purpose is, in 
short, to make faithful Records of all the Works of Nature, 
or Art, which can come within their Reach; that so the 
present Age, and Posterity, may be able to put a Mark on 
the Errors, which have been strengthned by long Prescrip- 
tion; to restore the Truths, that have lain neglected; to 
push on those, which are already known, to more various 
Uses; and to make the way more passable, to what remains 
unreveal’d. This is the Compass of their Design. And to 
accomplish this, they have endeavour’d, to separate the 
Knowledge of Nature, from the Colours Rhetorick, the De- 
vices of Fancy, or the delightful Deceit of Fables. They have 
labor’d to inlarge it, from being confin’d to the Custody of 
a few, or from Servitude to private Interests. They have 
striven to preserve it from being overpress’d by a confus’d 
Heap of vain and useless Particulars; or from being 
streightned and bound too much up by general Doctrines. 
They have tried to put it into a Condition of perpetual 
Increasing; by settling an inviolable Correspondence be- 
tween the Hand and the Brain. They have studied, to make 
it not only an Enterprise of one Season, or of some lucky 


Appendix I + 145 


Opportunity; but a Business of Time; a steady, a lasting, a 
popular, an uninterrupted Work. They have attempted, to 
free it from the Artifice, and Humors, and Passions of 
Sects; to render it an Instrument, whereby Mankind may 
obtain a Dominion over Things, and not only over one an- 
other’s Judgments: And lastly, they have begun to establish 
these Reformations in Philosophy, not so much, by any 
solemnity of Laws, or Ostentation of Ceremonies, as by 
solid Practice and Examples; not by a glorious Pomp of 
Words; but by the silent, effectual, and unanswerable Ar- 
guments of real Productions. 

This will more fully appear, by what I am to say on these 
four Particulars, which shall make up this Part of my Rela- 
tion, the Qualifications of their Members; the Manner of their 
Inquiry; their Weekly Assemblies; and their Way of Registring. 

As for what belongs to the Members themselves that are 
to constitute the Society: It is to be noted, that they have 
freely admitted Men of different Religions, Countries, and 
Professions of Life. This they were oblig’d to do, or else 
they would come far short of the Largeness of their own 
Declarations. For they openly profess, not to lay the Foun- 
dation of an English, Scotch, Irish, Popish, or Protestant Phi- 
losophy; but a Philosophy of Mankind. 

That the Church of England ought not to be apprehensive 
of this free Converse of various Judgments, I shall after- 
wards manifest at large. For the present, I shall frankly 
assert, that our Doctrine, and Discipline, will be so far from 
receiving Damage by it; that it were the best Way to make 
them universally embrac’d, if they were oftner brought to 
be canvass’d amidst all Sorts of Dissenters. It is dishonor- 
able, to pass a hard Censure on the Religions of all other 
Countries: It concerns them, to look to the Reasonableness 
of their Faith; and it is sufficient for us, to be establish’d in 
the Truth of our own. 


Thomas Sprat, The History of the Royal Society 
of London (3rd ed.; London, 1722), pp. 61-63. 


146 - Appendix I 


THOMAS JEFFERSON 
(Page 14) 


Monticello June 18. 99. 


DEAR SIR, 

I have to acknolege the reciept of your favor of May 14. 
in which you mention that you have finished the 6. first 
books of Euclid, plane trigonometry, surveying and alge- 
bra and ask whether I think a further pursuit of that 
branch of science would be useful to you. There are some 
propositions in the latter books of Euclid, and some of 
Archimedes, which are useful, and I have no doubt you 
have been made acquainted with them. Trigonometry, so 
far as this, is most valuable to every man, there is scarcely 
a day in which he will not resort to it for some of the 
purposes of common life; the science of calculation also is 
indispensible as far as the extraction of the square and 
cube roots; Algebra as far as the quadratic equation and 
the use of logarithms are often of value in ordinary cases: 
but all beyond these is but a luxury; a delicious luxury 
indeed; but not to be indulged in by one who is to have a 
profession to follow for his subsistence. In this light I view 
the conic sections, curves of the higher orders, perhaps 
even spherical trigonometry, Algebraical operations be- 
yond the 2d dimension, and fluxions. There are other 
branches of science however worth the attention of every 
man; Astronomy, botany, chemistry, natural philosophy, 
natural history, anatomy. Not indeed to be a proficient in 
them; but to possess their general principles and outlines, 
so as that we may be able to amuse and inform ourselves 
further in any of them as we proceed through life and have 
occasion for them. Some knowlege of them is necessary for 
our character as well as comfort. The general elements of 
astronomy and of natural philosophy are best acquired at 
an academy where we can have the benefit of the instru- 
ments and apparatus usually provided there: but the oth- 


Appendix I - 147 


ers may well be acquired from books alone as far as our 
purposes require. I have indulged myself in these observa- 
tions to you, because the evidence cannot be unuseful to 
you of a person who has often had occasion to consider 
which of his acquisitions in science have been really useful 
to him in life, and which of them have been merely a mat- 
ter of luxury. 

I am among those who think well of the human charac- 
ter generally. I consider man as formed for society, and 
endowed by nature with those dispositions which fit him 
for society. I believe also, with Condorcet, as mentioned in 
your letter, that his mind is perfectible to a degree of which 
we cannot as yet form any conception. It is impossible for 
a man who takes a survey of what is already known, not to 
see what an immensity in every branch of science yet re- 
mains to be discovered, and that too of articles to which our 
faculties seem adequate. In geometry and calculation we 
know a great deal. Yet there are some desiderata. In anat- 
omy great progress has been made; but much is still to be 
acquired. In natural history we possess knowlege; but we 
want a great deal. In chemistry we are not yet sure of the 
first elements. Our natural philosophy is in a very infan- 
tine state; perhaps for great advances in it, a further prog- 
ress in chemistry is necessary. Surgery is well advanced; 
but prodigiously short of what may be. The state of mede- 
cine is worse than that of total ignorance. Could we divest 
ourselves of every thing we suppose we know in it, we 
should start from a higher ground and with fairer pros- 
pects. From Hippocrates to Brown we have had nothing 
but a succession of hypothetical systems each having it’s 
day of vogue, like the fashions and fancies of caps and 
gowns, and yielding in turn to the next caprice. Yet the 
human frame, which is to be the subject of suffering and 
torture under these learned modes, does not change. We 
have a few medecines, as the bark, opium, mercury, which 
in a few well defined diseases are of unquestionable virtue: 
but the residuary list of the materia medica, long as it is, 


148 - Appendix I 


contains but the charlataneries of the art; and of the dis- 
eases of doubtful form, physicians have ever had a false 
knowlege, worse than ignorance. Yet surely the list of un- 
equivocal diseases and remedies is capable of enlargement; 
and it is still more certain that in the other branches of 
science, great fields are yet to be explored to which our 
faculties are equal, and that to an extent of which we can- 
not fix the limits. I join you therefore in branding as cow- 
ardly the idea that the human mind is incapable of further 
advances. This is precisely the doctrine which the present 
despots of the earth are inculcating, and their friends here 
re-echoing; and applying especially to religion and politics; 
‘that it is not probable that any thing better will be discov- 
ered than what was known to our fathers.’ We are to look 
backwards then and not forwards for the improvement of 
science, and to find it amidst feudal barbarisms and the 
fires of Spital-fields. But thank heaven the American mind 
is already too much opened, to listen to these impostures; 
and while the art of printing is left to us, science can never 
be retrograde; what is once acquired of real knowlege can 
never be lost. To preserve the freedom of the human mind 
then and freedom of the press, every spirit should be ready 
to devote itself to martyrdom; for as long as we may think 
as we will, and speak as we think, the condition of man will 
proceed in improvement. The generation which is going 
off the stage has deserved well of mankind for the strug- 
gles it has made, and for having arrested that course of 
despotism which had overwhelmed the world for thou- 
sands and thousands of years. If there seems to be danger 
that the ground they have gained will be lost again, that 
danger comes from the generation your cotemporary. But 
that the enthusiasm which characterises youth should lift 
it’s parracide hands against freedom and science would be 
such a monstrous phaenomenon as | cannot place among 
possible things in this age and this country. Your college at 
least has shewn itself incapable of it; and if the youth of 
any other place have seemed to rally under other ban- 


Appendix I - 149 


ners it has been from delusions which they will soon dissi- 
pate. I shall be happy to hear from you from time to time, 
and of your progress in study, and to be useful to you in 
whatever is in my power; being with sincere esteem Dear 
Sir 


Your friend & serut 
Th: Jefferson 


Scripta Mathematica, 1 (1932), 88-90. 


THOMAS HOBBES 
(Page 16) 


Good successe is Power; because it maketh reputation of 
Wisdome, or good fortune; which makes men either feare 
him, or rely on him. 

Affability of men already in power, is encrease of Power; 
because it gaineth love. 

Reputation of Prudence in the conduct of Peace or War, 
is Power; because to prudent men, we commit the govern- 
ment of our selves, more willingly than to others. 

Nobility is Power, not in all places, but onely in those 
Common-Wealths, where it has Priviledges: for in such 
priviledges consisteth their Power. 

Eloquence is power; because it is seeming Prudence. 

Forme is Power; because being a promise of Good, it rec- 
ommendeth men to the favour of women and strangers. 

The Sciences, are small Power; because not eminent; 
and therefore, not acknowledged in any man; nor are at 
all, but in a few; and in them, but of a few things. For 
Science is of that nature, as none can understand it to be, 
but such as in a good measure have attayned it. 

Arts of publique use, as Fortification, making of Engines, 
and other Instruments of War; because they conferre to 
Defence, and Victory, are Power: And though the true 
Mother of them, be Science, namely the Mathematiques; 


150 - Appendix I 


yet, because they are brought into the Light, by the hand 
of the Artificer, they be esteemed (the Midwife passing 
with the vulgar for the Mother,) as his issue. 


Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. by A. R. 
Waller (“Cambridge English Classics”; Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1904), 
Part I, Chap. 10, pp. 54—55. 


INSCRIPTION ON STEEPLE 
KNOB OF ST. MARGARET'S 
CHURCH AT GOTHA 


(Page 52) 


Unsere Tage fiillten den gliicklichsten Zeitraum des acht- 
zehnten Jahrhunderts. Kaiser, Konige, Fiirsten steigen von 
ihrer gefiirchteten Héhe menschenfreundlich herab, ver- 
achten Pracht und Schimmer, werden Vater, Freunde und 
Vertraute ihres Volks. Die Religion zerreisst das Pfaf- 
fengewand und tritt in ihrer Gottlichkeit hervor. Aufkla- 
rung geht mit Riesenschritten. Tausende unserer Briider 
und Schwestern, die in geheiligter Unthatigkeit lebten, 
werden dem Staat geschenkt. Glaubenshass und Gewis- 
senszwang sinken dahin; Menschenliebe und Freiheit im 
Denken gewinnen die Oberhand. Kiinste und Wissen- 
schaften bliihen, und tief dringen unsere Blicke in die 
Werkstatt der Natur. Handwerker néhern sich gleich den 
Kiinstlern der Vollkommenheit, niitzliche Kenntnisse Kei- 
men in allen Standen. Hier habt Ihr eine getreue Schil- 
derung unserer Zeit. Blickt nicht stolz auf uns herab, wenn 
Ihr hoher steht und weiter seht als wir; erkennt vielmehr 
aus dem gegebenen Gemalde, wie sehr wir mit Muth und 
Kraft Euren Standort emporhoben und stiitzten. Thut fiir 
Eure Nachkommenschaft ein Gleiches und seid gliicklich! 


Our days have been the happiest time of the eighteenth century. 
Emperors, kings and princes step down from their feared heights, 


Appendix I - 151 


and as friends of men scorn pomp and glitter and become fathers, 
friends and confidants of their people. Religion tears off its popish 
garb and stands forth in its divinity. Enlightenment advances with 
giant steps. Thousands of our brothers and sisters who previously 
spent their lives in holied idleness are given back to the community. 
Hatred born of dogma and the compulsion of conscience sink 
away; love of man and freedom of thought gain the upper hand. 
The arts and sciences blossom, and our vision into the workshop 
of nature goes deep. Artisans approach artists in perfection; useful 
skills flower at all levels. Here you have a faithful portrait of our 
time. Look not proudly down upon us, should you stand higher or 
see farther than we, but rather recognize from this picture how 
with courage and strength we raised and supported your standard. 
Do the same for those who come after you and rejoice! 


Hermann Hettner, Literaturgeschichte des Acht- 
zehnten Jahrhunderts, Vol. III (Braunschweig: 
Friederich Vieweg und Sohn, 1879), Book 2, 
Chap. 1, p. 171. 


ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE 
(Page 71) 


DE L’USAGE QUE LES AMERICAINS FONT DE 
L’ASSOCIATION DANS LA VIE CIVILE 


Je ne veux point parler de ces associations politiques a 
aide desquelles les hommes cherchent a se défendre con- 
tre l’action despotique d’une majorité ou contre les empié- 
tements du pouvoir royal. J'ai déja traité ce sujet ailleurs. 
Il est clair que si chaque citoyen, 4 mesure qu'il devient 
individuellement plus faible, et par conséquent plus inca- 
pable de préserver isolément sa liberté, n’apprenait pas 
lart de s’unir a ses semblables pour la défendre, la tyrannie 
croitrait nécessairement avec l’égalité. I] ne s’agit ici que 
des associations qui se forment dans la vie civile, et dont 
Pobjet n’a rien de politique. 


152 - Appendix I 


Les associations politiques qui existent aux Etats-Unis ne 
forment qu’un détail au milieu de l’immense tableau que 
ensemble des associations y présente. 

Les Américains de tous les ages, de toutes les conditions, 
de tous les esprits, s'unissent sans cesse. Non-seulement ils 
ont des associations commerciales et industrielles aux- 
quelles tous prennent part, mais ils en ont encore de mille 
autres espéces: de religieuses, de morales, de graves, de 
futiles, de fort générales et de trés-particuliéres, d’im- 
menses et de fort petites; les Américains s’associent pour 
donner des fétes, fonder des séminaires, batir des au- 
berges, élever des églises, répandre des livres, envoyer des 
missionaires aux antipodes; ils créent de cette maniére des 
hdpitaux, des prisons, des écoles. S’agit-il enfin de mettre 
en lumiére une vérité, ou de développer un sentiment par 
l'appui d’un grand exemple: ils s’associent. Partout ou, a la 
téte d’une entreprise nouvelle, vous voyez en France le 
gouvernement, et en Angleterre un grand seigneur, comp- 
tez que vous apercevrez aux Etats-Unis une association. 

Jai rencontré en Amérique des sortes d’associations 
dont je confesse que je n’avais pas méme I idée, et j’ai sou- 
vent admiré l’art infini avec lequel les habitants des Etats- 
Unis parvenaient a fixer un but commun aux efforts d’un 
grand nombre d’hommes, et a les faire marcher librement. 


OF THE USE WHICH THE AMERICANS MAKE OF 
PUBLIC ASSOCIATIONS IN CIVIL LIFE 


I do-not propose to speak of those political associations by the aid 
of which men endeavor to defend themselves against the despotic 
action of a majority or against the aggressions of regal power. 
That subject I have already treated. If each citizen did not learn, 
in proportion as he individually becomes more feeble and conse- 
quently more incapable of preserving his freedom singlehanded, to 
combine with his fellow citizens for the purpose of defending it, it 
as clear that tyranny would unavoidably increase together with 
equality. 

Only those associations that are formed in civil lfe without 
reference to political objects are here referred to. The political 


Appendix I - 153 


associations that exist in the United States are only a single feature 
in the midst of the immense assemblage of associations in that 
country. Americans of all ages, all conditions, and all dispositions 
constantly form associations. They have not only commercial and 
manufacturing companies, in which all take part, but associations 
of a thousand other kinds, religious, moral, serious, futile, general 
or restricted, enormous or diminutive. The Americans make asso- 
ciations to give entertainments, to found seminaries, to build inns, 
to construct churches, to diffuse books, to send missionaries to the 
antipodes; in this manner they found hospitals, prisons, and 
schools. If it ts proposed to inculcate some truth or to foster some 
feeling by the encouragement of a great example, they form a 
society. Wherever at the head of some new undertaking you see the 
government in France, or a man of rank in England, in the 
United States you will be sure to find an association. 

I met with several kinds of associations in America of which I 
confess I had no previous notion; and I have often admired the 
extreme skill with which the inhabitants of the United States suc- 
ceed in proposing a common object for the exertions of a great 
many men and in inducing them voluntarily to pursue it. 


Alexis de Tocqueville, De la Démocratie en 
Amérique, Vol. III (l4iéme édition; Paris: Mi- 
chel Levy Fréres, 1864), Deuxiéme Partie, 
Chap. 2, p. 175. English translation from Alexis 
de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Vol. II 
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1948), Book 2, 
Chap. 5, p. 106. 


Appendix II 


Chapters Two to Five deal at some length with atomic 
theory and with some of the experiments that underlie it. 
With the exception of contemporary work on the “new 
particles,” there are many admirable technical text books 
and monographs. 

As for Chapter Two, the interested reader may wish to 
turn to the classic texts of E. R. Rutherford, Radioactive 
Substances and their Radiations (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press; New York: Putnam; 1913), and to Ruther- 
ford, Chadwick, and Ellis, Radiations from Radioactive Sub- 
stances (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1930). 
The “new particles” were discussed at a conference held at 
Bagnéres de Bigorre, July, 1953. The record of this confer- 
ence, issued by the Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, gives a most 
vivid impression of the present state of knowledge, igno- 
rance, and progress. Even for those who do not wish to 
consult the proceedings of the conference, the comment 
following the title may be of interest: “Les particules décrites 
au cours de ce Congrés ne sont pas entiérement fictives, et toute 
analogie avec des particules existant dans la nature n’est pas une 
pure coincidence.” 

There are numerous good technical texts on the quan- 
tum mechanics, the quantum theory of atoms. In particu- 
lar I recommend: 

P.A.M. Dirac. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Ox- 

ford: Clarendon Press, 1930. 
W. Pauli. “Die Allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellen- 
mechanik,” Handbuch der Physik, XXIV (1933), 1, 83. 
L. I. Schiff. Quantum Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., 1949. 
Of these, Schiff’s text is the most elementary. 

No attempt has been made in the lectures to give a full 

historic account of the contributions made to the develop- 


Appendix II - 155 


ment of quantum theory. Where names have been men- 
tioned, it is because they have become generally identified 
with principles or with theories; but any account of the 
history of quantum theory should at least mention Born, 
Dirac, and Pauli, in addition to the names that occur in the 
text. 

As the interpretation of quantum theory, these may 
serve to guide the reader should he want more detailed, 
more original, and more substantive accounts of the mat- 
ters touched on in the lectures: 

W. Heisenberg. The Physical Principles of the Quantum The- 

ory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1930. 

N. Bohr. Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature. New 
York: (Cambridge University Press) The Macmillan 
Co., 1934. 

N. Bohr. “On the Notions of Causality and Complemen- 
tarity,” Dialectica, II (1948), 312. 

N. Bohr. “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological 
Problems in Atomic Physics,” Albert Einstein, Philoso- 
pher-Scientist. Edited by P. A. Schilpp. “Library of 
Living Philosophers”; Evanston, Illinois, 1949. 

W. Pauli. “Die philosophische Bedeutung der Idee der Komple- 
mentaritat,” Experientia, VI (1950), 72. 


Acknowledgments 


THE first six essays in this volume are transcriptions of the 
1953 Reith lectures, commissioned and broadcast by the 
British Broadcasting Corporation; these were first pub- 
lished in 1954 by Simon & Schuster under the title Science 
and the Common Understanding. The seventh essay is 
adapted from a lecture before a joint session of the Roch- 
ester Association for the United Nations and the Rochester 
Foreign Policy Association in 1948; it was published in this 
form by Simon & Schuster in The Open Mind, 1955. 

The last three essays are edited transcriptions of the 
Whidden Lecture Series, entitled The Flying Trapeze: Three 
Crises for Modern Physicists, delivered at McMaster Univer- 
sity in 1962. These were originally published by Oxford 
University Press under the same title. 

The editors of the present volume wish to express grati- 
tude for permission to reprint these essays. 

We also are grateful to Freeman J. Dyson, Professor of 
Physics at The Institute for Advanced Study’s School of 
Natural Sciences, not only for the preface he has contrib- 
uted but also for his decisive endorsement of the breadth 
of the present selection. 

Arthur S. Wightman, Thomas D. Jones Professor of 
Mathematical Physics and Chairman of Princeton Univer- 
sity’s Mathematics Department, believed in this project 
from the start, and gave excellent advice on style and con- 
tent along the way. 

James A. Quitslund, Associate Director of The Institute 
for Advanced Study, offered help and encouragement as 
we researched our sources. 

The cover design is by Laury A. Egan. The cover illus- 
tration, a photograph of Oppenheimer posed with Prince- 
ton University’s Univac II in 1966, is from the archives of 
The Institute for Advanced Study. 


