One of the most dramatic figures of 
this century, J. Robert Oppenheimer 
directed the Los Alamos project, 
where the first atomic bombs were 
designed and built. Only eight years 
after Oppenheimer brought this 
secret mission to a successful conclu- 
sion, his security clearance was 
revoked in a highly publicized epi- 
sode during the anticommunist hys- 
teria of the 1950s. 


In this book, personal letters reveal 
the early, private Oppenheimer. They 
take him from 1922, when he entered 
college, to 1945, when he left Los 
Alamos. Collected and edited by 
Alice Kimball ‘ti, and Charles 


inued on back flap) 


Weiner, thet. :ccuments display the 
enthusiasm, brilliance, and romanti- 
cism of the young scientist, the ripen- 
ing judgment of the successful 
administrator, and later the troubled 
vision of the man who orchestrated 
the construction of the single most 
destructive weapon ever used in war- 
fare. The documentary account is 
enriched by a text that interweaves 
Oppenheimer’s own reminiscences, 
from an unpublished interview with 
him; recollections of people who 
knew him; and the editors’ historical 
insights. An epilogue recounts 
Oppenheimer’s career after Los Ala- 
mos. This book offers unique access 
to the thoughts and personality of the 
young man whose character and pub- 
lic career were to become the subject 
first of daily journalism, then of biog- 
raphy, fiction, and theater. 


Alice Kimball Smith, who has writ- 
ten about the scientists’ movement in 
postwar America, is Dean Emerita of 
the Bunting Institute, Radcliffe Col- 
lege. Charles Weiner is Professor of 
History of Science and Technology 
at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 


Harvard University Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
and London, England 


Jacket: Mike Fender 
Photo: Courtesy of Frank Oppenheimer 


Robert Oppenheimer 


Robert Oppenheimer 


LETTERS AND RECOLLECTIONS 


Edited by 
Alice Kimball Smith 
Charles Weiner 


HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
London, England 1980 


Copyright © 1980 by Alice Kimball Smith and Charles Weiner 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA 


Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967. 
Robert Oppenheimer, letters and recollections. 


“Scientific papers by Robert Oppenheimer”: p. 

Bibliography: p. 

Includes index. 

1. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967 —Correspondence. 2. 
Physicists —Correspondence. 3. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 
1904-1967 —Biography. I. Smith, Alice Kimball. II. Weiner, Charles. 
III. Title. QC16.062A4 1980 530’.092'4 [B] 80-10106 
ISBN 0-674-77605-4 


Preface 


HOWEVER FUTURE GENERATIONS may view Robert Oppenheimer’s 
place in history, in his own time he symbolized one supremely important event 
of the mid-twentieth century, the harnessing of nuclear fission in a devastating 
weapon. In the public mind he personified the newly dramatized link between 
science and national policy. And for students of the tragic theme in human 
history he exemplified the hero fallen from favor, the great man betrayed by 
faults ignored in lesser men. 

To many of his contemporaries Oppenheimer was a brilliant scientist, a 
dedicated public servant, and a fine human being in whom virtue far transcended 
defect and fully compensated for it. Others saw a man of flawed judgment, 
sometimes devious or affected in personal relations or in public posture, whose 
actual contributions did not match his reputation as a physicist. Oppenheimer is 
often described as complex, but complexity is not (in itself) a trait of personality; 
it indicates rather that the observer is puzzled. What can confidently be said on 
the basis of Oppenheimer’s early letters is that, even when he was a young man, 
the world around him, the choices it offered, and the human beings with whom 
he associated were not simple or easily defined. As Oppenheimer’s personality 
became an object of wider interest, he still maintained an air of privacy, 
suggesting an inner self withheld from public view. People reacted to this 
quality with either fascination or displeasure. Throughout his life he sometimes 
showed an uncanny ability to cut through confusion with clarity and precision. 
At other times he groped his way toward answers and spoke and acted with an 
ambiguity that puzzled or antagonized those of a different cast of mind. 


4 


Yet this man —so difficult to classify, so selective in his preoccupations and 
his friendships, most at home in abstruse reaches of mathematical physics, who 
never courted approval outside a small social and intellectual circle, who was 
considered unpredictable and temperamental even by admirers —became the 
disciplined leader of the project that built the atomic bombs dropped on Japan in 
August 1945, thereby revolutionizing warfare and international relations. 
Oppenheimer’s subsequent role as weapons adviser and as a leading architect of 
American nuclear policy was likewise an unexpected one. 

The letters presented here were written by Oppenheimer between the 
autumn of 1922 when he entered Harvard College and the autumn of 1945 when 
he resigned as director of the Los Alamos nuclear weapons laboratory. They help 
to explain this man who played no small part in shaping the events and character 
of an era. One hundred eleven of these letters were written prior to 1942, when 
he became involved in the atomic bomb project. They represent a substantial 
portion of Oppenheimer’s correspondence that survives from the prewar years, 
during which he saved neither letters he received nor copies of those he wrote. 
The prewar letters were collected by the editors specifically for this volume. Few 
were easily accessible; in fact, scholars were previously unaware of the existence 
of most of them. In March 1962 Oppenheimer wrote to Thomas S. Kuhn that 
“in those days I kept nothing. Since I learned different, if not better, during the 
war, I have kept things.” 

From 1942 on, the volume and character of available correspondence 
changes radically. The letters and memorandums in Chapter IV have been 
selected from a large archive of Oppenheimer’s communications to his 
associates in order to illustrate how he carried out his awesome wartime 
responsibilities. 

A few letters addressed to Oppenheimer over the years are also included 
because they show the character of a particular relationship, complete an 
episode, or offer a contrast in epistolary style. 

The editors have not attempted to locate every item of institutional 
correspondence, such as Oppenheimer’s replies to academic job offers and 
references he wrote for his students. We have followed every clue to possible 
sources of personal and scientific letters. Others will be found as scholars explore 
the papers of his contemporaries, but much has apparently been destroyed, 
including letters to his parents. More than half of the pre-1942 letters in this 
volume were preserved by individuals who were close to Oppenheimer during 
portions of the period: his brother Frank, his friend Francis Fergusson, his high 
school English teacher Herbert Winslow Smith, and the physicist George 
Uhlenbeck. The remainder come from other personal files and from institu- 
tional archives. 

It was Herbert Smith’s concern about the disposition of letters 
Oppenheimer had written to him from Harvard that led to consultation with us 
in 1974 and subsequently to the search for more letters and the decision to publish 


V1 


them. For even a preliminary reading confirmed Smith’s view that the early 
letters—spontaneous, articulate, often troubled—revealed a relatively 
unknown Oppenheimer and explained much about the public figure who 
emerged after 1945. When we turned to Frank Oppenheimer and Francis 
Fergusson for advice, they generously turned over to us their own collections. 

Part of Oppenheimer’s attraction, at first for his friends and later for the 
public, was that he did not project the popularly held image of the scientist as 
cold, objective, rational and therefore above human frailty, an image that 
scientists themselves fostered by underplaying their personal histories and the 
disorder that precedes the neat scientific conclusion. Oppenheimer’s foibles, his 
vulnerability, his capacity for enjoyment and affection are fully apparent in the 
early letters. We see a sensitive, sometimes awkward young man growing in 
self-assurance and finding satisfaction in a widening circle of friends, especially 
when personal compatibility strengthened a bond in physics. We note the 
development of Oppenheimer’s legendary versatility —his skill as a linguist, his 
familiarity with literature, his knowledge of history and philosophy —and 
observe how solidly based it was in wide reading, hard study, and in his own 
creative torment as poet and storyteller. The Harvard letters, in fact, suggest a 
literary man in the making rather than a scientist. 

Later letters shed light on Oppenheimer’s role in physics in the 1930s when 
his own interpretation of what he liked to call style in science was influencing 
colleagues and students. They show that certain qualities of Oppenheimer the 
charismatic leader did not appear overnight—an engaging blend of hedonism 
and asceticism, a tough-minded skepticism tempered at times by a compassion 
born of his own struggle into adulthood, and a hard-won capacity for self- 
command. Yet the precocious Harvard freshman and the graduate and postdoc- 
toral student in Cambridge, Gottingen, and Zurich, making a place for himself 
in the new world of quantum physics, was very much father to the distinguished 
theoretical physicist and the successful wartime leader. Many of the prewar 
letters that we have located deal with science. Some of these convey 
Oppenheimer’s sense of excitement and a growing confidence in his ability to 
understand and extend the new physics unfolding all about him; others express 
his frustration in attempting to resolve the difficult problems inherent in the 
theory of quantum mechanics. Mathematics was the powerful tool that pro- 
mised to illuminate the fundamental nature of physical reality, and it was the 
international language spoken and written by Oppenheimer and the other 
young theorists of his generation. A few of these letters and portions of others 
are so highly mathematical that they could be termed technical notes, and we 
have omitted them from this edition. We have retained most of the material 
relating to Oppenheimer’s three principal scientific interests: quantum field 
theory, cosmic rays, and nuclear physics. Evento readers without knowledge of 
science or mathematics these letters will convey some understanding of the 
informal processes of scientific communication as Oppenheimer shares with his 


Vil 


fellow students, mentors, and colleagues his thoughts on physics problems of 
mutual interest, describes his own research, throws out ideas for discussion, and 
passes on news of other physicists’ work. 

But correspondence is not biography. Apart from what these particular 
letters do not say about Oppenheimer’s day-to-day activities, there are signifi- 
cant time gaps and dimensions of his life that we bridge with a minimum of 
biographical information. The most inmaportant one occurs after 1936, when 
Oppenheimer became involved in social and political causes. We have found 
little correspondence relating to this by no means minor hiatus or to a few others 
that knowledgeable readers will readily detect. Oppenheimer himself provided 
some information about his activities and associations of the late 1930s in the 
autobiographical sketch with which he replied in March 1954 to the withdrawal 
of his security clearance by the Atomic Energy Commission and in responses to 
questions directed to him throughout the subsequent hearings. 

A unique autobiographical statement, quite different in character from 
replies to official charges or to inquiries from reporters and commentators, 1s 
contained in a taped interview with Oppenheimer conducted by Thomas S. 
Kuhn in November 1963 for the Archive for History of Quantum Physics. The 
primary purpose was to record Oppenheimer’s recollections of the early days of 
the quantum revolution and its consequences. Kuhn’s skillful questioning 
elicited valuable information about how Oppenheimer’s own scientific interests 
developed and how they were channeled into this new field. Extensive 
excerpts from this interview, published here for the first time, complement the 
correspondence. 

Taken together, the letters and the excerpts from the Kuhn interview 
constitute a previously unpublished collection of primary biographical sources. 
For decades anecdotes have circulated about Oppenheimer as student and 
Berkeley teacher. These stories enliven the pages of popular biographies and 
numerous brief sketches; some are included in our editorial comment. They are 
amusing and often illuminating, but they tend to emphasize the bizarre and 
erratic in Oppenheimer’s behavior and show him through the eyes of others. In 
his own letters and recollections, Oppenheimer speaks for himself. 

To provide background for the letters we have drawn upon published and 
archival sources, including correspondence and oral history interviews with 
physicists of Oppenheimer’s generation which were conducted prior to the 
initiation of this project. However, the letters themselves introduce persons and 
episodes mentioned briefly or not at all in these interviews. In order to explain 
such references we have talked at length with people to whom and about whom 
Oppenheimer wrote. Even when they had no letters to offer, friends and former 
colleagues willingly shared their early impressions, recounted anecdotes, and 
searched their memories to explain Oppenheimer’s comments on people, 
books, and midnight rambles by the sea. Interviews conducted specifically for 
this volume may be biased in Oppenheimer’s favor. Not everyone who knew 


vill 


Robert Oppenheimer longed to be his intimate friend, but those who did not like 
him tended to remain outside the ambience created by his personal correspon- 
dence. By drawing upon recollections, we hope to have made the letters more 
comprehensible, historically more meaningful, and generally more enjoyable 
for most readers. 

In the course of these interviews a substantial archive of taped and 
transcribed material has accumulated that will be useful to historians and future 
biographers of Oppenheimer and his contemporaries. The transcripts are 
deposited in the Institute Archives and Special Collections, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Libraries. (See Sources and Style at the back of this 
volume.) 

Intense intellectual and emotional experiences, as wellas time, separated the 
eighteen-year-old Harvard freshman from the weary forty-one-year-old 
administrator who tried briefly after the war to resume a quiet life of teaching 
and research. Yet Oppenheimer’s view of himself asa private person, even at Los 
Alamos, is reflected in the letters of the intervening years. No matter what 
choices he made after August 1945, this image could not have survived the glare 
of public attention focused upon him once it was known that the bombs that 
destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki had been developed under the direction ofa 
man named J. Robert Oppenheimer. This change markedly affected the toneand 
content of Oppenheimer’s correspondence and is a principal factor in the 
decision to conclude this edition of his letters with the year 1945. 

Our decision was made only after extensive exploration of Oppenheimer’s 
personal papers, which were deposited after his death in the Manuscript 
Division of the Library of Congress. (Oppenheimer’s files as director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study remain in Princeton and are not open to the 
public.) Many papers in the Library of Congress relate to official and public 
activities after late 1945. A small segment consists of correspondence connected 
with his wartime work. In sharp contrast to the surviving letters that 
Oppenheimer wrote before the war, most of the later correspondenceis volumi- 
nous, formal, and guarded. As Oppenheimer came to symbolize not only the 
atomic bomb but problems associated with it, his incoming mail assumed 
awesome proportions. A predictable increase in correspondence relating to 
government committees, to organizations, and to the resumption of basic 
research in physics was further augmented by hundreds of letters from worried 
citizens of the atomic age, including statesmen, school children, and ordinary 
folk seeking Oppenheimer’s views on science, education, and international 
affairs. At first his replies addressed each individual concern; with time the 
answers became brief and formal. 

Not only formal but cautious. By the end of the war Oppenheimer’s 
defenses were up. His duties as director of Los Alamos, the probing into his 
prewar associations by security officers, and the discretion demanded of a 
government consultant combined to make him careful about what he put on 


1x 


paper. As a consequence, the copious materials in the Library of Congress are in 
many respects less revealing than the fortuitously preserved letters in the first 
three chapters of this volume. 

The altered character of the postwar correspondence reinforced our belief 
in the unique quality of the early letters. Therefore, we have chosen to present 
the less familiar Oppenheimer —learning, playing, making friends, doing phys- 
ics, winning recognition —as yet unburdened by the actuality of the bomb, by 
fame, and by public responsibilitits. The ‘wartime letters demonstrate the 
importance of the transition that took place at Los Alamos. 


Acknowledgments 


Many people have participated in the making of this book. Our primary 
indebtedness is to Herbert W. Smith, Frank Oppenheimer, and Francis Fergus- 
son, whose letters form the nucleus of this collection and whose encouragement 
gave us the confidence to expand it. Frank Oppenheimer’s role was crucial as 
donor of letters, as a source of factual information, and as a reader with both a 
deep affection for the subject of the volume and a concern for accuracy. We 
gratefully acknowledge his help and support, as we do that of Robert 
Oppenheimer’s children, Peter Oppenheimer and the late Toni Oppenheimer 
Silber. Throughout the project we have benefited from the knowledgeable 
advice of Robert Serber, Oppenheimer’s student, colleague, and friend. 

George L. Weil initially brought the Harvard letters to Herbert Smith to our 
attention. Names of all individuals who supplied letters will be found in the 
chronological list of letters in the section on Sources and Style at the batk of the 
volume. Our debt to them is obvious, and we appreciate their generosity. The 
list also notes the institutional archives in which we found the remaining letters. 
We are grateful to the archivists responsible for these collections for assistance 
and advice as we consulted the documents in their care and for their courtesy in 
providing copies. We thank particularly Ronald S. Wilkinson and his staff in the 
Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress, Judith Goodstein at the 
California Institute of Technology, and Arthur L. Norberg andJ.R.K. Kantor at 
the Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley. We frequently 
consulted Spencer Weart of the American Institute of Physics Center for History 
of Physics, where Joan N. Warnow and Amy Weiner provided valuable help and 
reference services. Staff members of the Ethical Culture School searched its files 
for information. Harold Argo of the Oppenheimer Memorial Committee at Los 
Alamos was most helpful in locating photographs. 

Thirty-three people were interviewed specifically for this project. To some 
we returned repeatedly for confirmation of details and with further questions. If 
the commentary in this volume contributes to a fuller understanding of the 
young Oppenheimer, those whose names appear in the list of interviews deserve 
much credit. We appreciate their cooperation and their patience. The list also 
includes several earlier interviews with scientists which contain useful informa- 


tion about Oppenheimer and his times. Quotations and observations from these 
sources are attributed to the persons interviewed and are used with their 
permission. 

Oppenheimer’s own recollections fall in a special category. We are grateful 
to Thomas S. Kuhn, who recorded the interviews with Oppenheimer in 1963 for 
the Archive for’ History of Quantum Physics. Kuhn’s dialogue with 
Oppenheimer stimulated the illuminating reflections which provide the context 
for many of the early letters. 

The extent to which we have drawn on the research of others is appar- 
ent in the citations. A brief list of relevant published works is included in the 
Bibliography. 

We deeply appreciate the comments and criticism of those who read the 
manuscript or portions of it: Laurie M. Brown, Francis Fergusson, Hilde Stern 
Hein, Evelyn Fox Keller, Martin J. Klein, Thomas S. Kuhn, John H. Manley, 
Philip Morrison, Frank Oppenheimer, Robert Serber, and Spencer Weart. 

In the long and arduous task of copying letters, transcribing taped inter- 
views, and typing a complicated manuscript we have had the assistance of 
Johanna Kovitz, Roberta Towner, Myriam Barenbaum, Ruth Davidson, and 
Sharon Youland. An efficient system of cross-referencing letters and notes, set 
up by Adele Stanton Croft, greatly facilitated our work. 

We wish to give special thanks to Nancy Seasholes. At a critical stage we 
benefited enormously from her skills in research and editing and from the 
intelligence and dedication with which she applied them. 

Partial support for our research was provided by the Oral History Program 
and the Program in Science, Technology, and Society at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. An American Council for Learned Societies Grant-in- 
Aid to Alice Kimball Smith for 1976 is gratefully acknowledged. 


January 1980 Alice Kimball Smith 
Charles Weiner 


x1 


Contents 


Biographical Chronology 
Introduction 
I | “Work. . . frantic, bad and graded A” 


HARVARD, 1922-1925 


IT | “Making myself for a career” 


EUROPE AND AMERICA, 1925-1929 
III | “Physics and the excellences of the life it brings” 


BERKELEY AND PASADENA, 1929-1941 


IV | “These terrible years of war” 
LOS ALAMOS, 1942-1945 


V | “High promise. . . yet only a stone’s 
throw from despair” 
LOS ALAMOS, AUGUST TO NOVEMBER 1945 
Epilogue 


Notes 

Sources and Style 

Scientific Papers by Robert Oppenheimer 
Bibliography 

Index 


X1V 


130 


221 


293 


327 


337 
353 
359 
363 
365 


Biographical Chronology 


1904, April 22 
1911, September 


1912, August 12 
1917, September 


1921, February 
1921, summer 


1922, summer 
1922, September 
1925, June 


1925, September 


1926, September 
1927, March 


1927-1928 


1928-1929 


Robert Oppenheimer born in New York City. 

Entered the Ethical Culture School in the second 
grade. 

Birth of brother, Frank Friedman Oppenheimer. 

Entered the high school division of the Ethical Culture 
School. 

Graduated from the Ethical Culture School. 

Contracted dysentery while traveling in Europe; spent 
the following year at home recuperating. 

First trip to New Mexico and the West Coast? 

Entered Harvard College. 

Received A.B. summa cum laude in chemistry from 
Harvard College (as of the class of 1926). 


Admitted to Christ’s College, University of Cam- 
bridge; until August 1926 did research at the Caven- 
dish Laboratory under Professor J. J. Thomson. 


Continued graduate study in physics with Professor 
Max Born at the University of Gottingen. 

Received the Ph.D. in physics from the University of 
Gottingen; remained in Europe until July. 

National Research Council Fellow (September— 
December at Harvard University; January—July at 
the California Institute of Technology). 

National Research Council Fellow (September— 
December at the University of Leiden and the Uni- 


versity of Utrecht; January—June at the Eidgenos- 
siche Technische Hochschule, Zurich). 


Xiv 


1929, August 


1931, )ctober 17 
1931, October 
1936, August 


1937, September 20 
1940, November 1 
1941, April 

1941, May 12 

1942, May 

1942, November 
1943, March 

1944, December 7 


1945, May— October 


1945, October 
1945, November 


1946, January— April 


1946, March 4 


1946, June— 1947 


1946, August 


Commenced concurrent appointments as assistant 
professor of physics at the University of Cali- 
fornia, Berkeley, and at the California Institute of 
Technology. 

Death of mother, Ella Friedman Oppenheimer. 

Promoted to associate professor at the University 
of California and the California Institute of 
Technology. 

Promoted to professor at the University of California 
and at the California Institute of Technology. 

Death of father, Julius Oppenheimer. 

Married Katherine Puening Harrison. 

Elected member of the National Academy of Sciences. 

Birth of son, Peter Oppenheimer. 

Appointed coordinator of fast neutron research in the 
United States Government’s S-1 project to develop 
an atomic bomb. 

Appointed director of the proposed laboratory for 
design and fabrication of the atomic bomb. 

Moved with family to the new laboratory at Los 
Alamos, New Mexico. 

Birth of daughter, Katherine Oppenheimer, called 
Toni. 

Member of Scientific Panel of the U.S. War 
Department’s Inter1m Committee on postwar 
atomic policy. 

Resigned as director of the Los Alamos Laboratory 
(effective October 16). 

Moved to Pasadena to resume professorship at the 
California Institute of Technology. 

Member of Board of Consultants to the U.S. State 
Department’s Committee on International Control 
of Atomic Energy. 

Received the U.S. Medal for Merit (Presidential cita- 
tion) for direction of the Los Alamos Laboratory 
and development of the atomic bomb. 

Adviser to U.S. representative to the United Nations 
Atomic Energy Commission. 

Moved to Berkeley to resume professorship at the 
University of California. 


XV 


1947, January 3 


1947, October 


1948 
1952, July 


1953, December 23 
1954, April 12— May 6 
1954, June 29 

1958, spring 

1963, December 2 
1966, Spring 


1967, February 18 


Commenced six-year term as member of the General 
Advisory Committee to the U.S. Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC); elected chairman. 

Assumed directorship of the Institute for Advanced 
Study, Princeton, New Jersey. 

President, American Physical Society. 

At conclusion of term on AEC’s General Advisory 

Committee, appointed consultant to AEC. 

Clearance for access to classified data suspended by 
AEC. 

Participated in hearings before the AEC’s Personnel 
Security Board on his eligibility for clearance. 

AEC confirmed the Personnel Security Board’s 
recommendation that clearance not be renewed. 

Awarded the Legion d’honneur by the French govern- 
ment. 

Received the AEC’s Enrico Fermi Award from Presi- 
dent Lyndon B. Johnson. 

Requested early retirement from directorship of the 

Institute for Advanced Study, effective June 30. 

Died in Princeton, New Jersey. 


“T think that the world in which we shall live these next thirty years 
will be a pretty restless and tormented place; I do not think that there will be 
much of a compromise possible between being of it, and being not of it.” 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 
August 10, 1931 


Introduction 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER was born in New York City on April 22, 
1904, at his parents’ home on West 94th Street. His father, Julius, born in 
Hanau, Germany, in 1871, had come to the United States at the age of sev- 
enteen to work in a textile importing business owned by relatives. He later 
headed his own company, which specialized in imported lining fabrics. On 
March 23, 1903, Julius married a young artist, Ella Friedman of Baltimore, 
whose forebears had come from Germany in earlier generations. Whether 
the ‘J’ in Robert’s name stood for Julius or, as Robert himself once said, 
“for nothing” may never be fully resolved. His brother Frank surmises that 
the “‘J’’ was symbolic, a gesture in the direction of naming the eldest son 
after the father but at the same time a signal that his parents did not want 
Robert to be a “‘junior.’”? 

Robert was too young to remember a brother who died in infancy. He 
was eight when another brother, Frank Friedman Oppenheimer, was born 
on August 14, 1912. The household of Robert’s childhood included his 
Grandmother Friedman and, as a rule, two servants. Shortly before Frank’s 
birth the family moved to a large apartment on the eleventh floor of 155 
Riverside Drive near 88th Street. From its comfortable high-ceilinged 
rooms one looked up and down the Hudson River and over the city to the 
south. There was nothing ostentatious about the Oppenheimers’ style of 
living, but there was money for a summer house on Long Island, family 
trips to Europe when Julius went on business, private schooling for the 
boys, and a small collection of modern paintings of which Julius, and later 


1 


Robert and Frank, were justly proud. There was also money to indulge a 
penchant for generous gestures to friends which passed from father to son. 

The boys’ contemporaries remember Robert’s father as affable and out- 
going, his mother as lovely, though reserved. One friend, Paul Horgan, re- 
called how they appeared to him in the summer of 1923: “She was a very 
delicate person . . . highly attenuated emotionally, and she always pre- 
sided with a great delicacy and grace at the table and other events, but 
a mournful person. Mr. Oppenheimer ‘was . . . desperately amiable, 
anxious to be agreeable, and I think essentially a very kind man . . . The 
household was run with luxury but simplicity at the same time, every com- 
fort and great style and charm . . . anda sadness; there was a melancholy 
tone.” According to Frank, the ‘‘melancholy tone”’ was not typical. If the 
atmosphere was seldom hilarious, it was dominated by “‘a sense of warmth 
and concern for friends and non-friends and by the discovery of recountable 
pleasure in everything that was going on.’’ Another young visitor, Francis 
Fergusson, remembers Julius as a great arguer and talker who loved opening 
up big topics for discussion at the dinner table. His wife sat quietly and lis- 
tened with apparent approval, but did not join the conversation.’ 

Before her marriage Ella Friedman had studied art in Europe and given 
drawing and painting lessons. She taught for a time at Hunter College. Rob- 
ert and Frank thought of their mother as an artist. Occasionally she took out 
paints, brushes, and easel and worked on a canvas for a few days, but her 
talent was expressed chiefly in the careful decoration of the apartment and 
the quiet elegance of her own clothes. If she did not initially kindle Her hus- 
band’s interest in art, it was one of numerous bonds in a successful marriage. 
The mysterious glove that Mrs. Oppenheimer always wore impressed her 
sons’ friends, mysterious because no one alluded to it. Frank explains it sim- 
ply: she was born without a right hand; the glove contained a primitive 
prosthetic device, a spring between the artificial thumb and forefinger.° 

All agree that the Oppenheimers were genuine people, not concerned 
with making an impression. They seemed to be a united family, and what- 
ever the restraints imposed by a maternal sense of order and propriety, Op- 
penheimer hospitality was something that young guests remembered. Mr. 
Oppenheimer’s favorite restaurant was Voisin’s. Robert sometimes spoke 
of it scornfully, but dining there helped to set his standards of good eating 
and of entertaining friends. 

The Oppenheimers were Jewish but maintained no active temple affili- 
ation. They belonged to the Ethical Culture Society, founded by Felix Adler 
in 1876, of which Mr. Oppenheimer was a board member from 1907 to 
1915. Frank remembers family attendance at Sunday morning meetings of 
the society, but this became less regular in his later boyhood. Commitment 
to its nonsectarian ethical principles did not preclude mild teasing: a bio- 
graphical poem written by seventeen-year-old Robert for his father’s fiftieth 


Z 


birthday included the line “‘and he swallowed Dr. Adler like morality com- 
pressed.’”* 

Adjacent to the society’s headquarters on Central Park West near 63rd 
Street was the Ethical Culture School. Robert entered the second grade in 
September 1911; he graduated from the high school division in February 
1921. ; 

A scientific bent developed early. “I have a fairly vivid recollection of 

how this set of interests started,’ Oppenheimer told Thomas Kuhn in 
1963.° ‘I was given a perfectly conventional tiny collection of minerals by 
my grandfather who was living in Germany; I was there at the age of five 
and the age of seven, but I do not know which of these two times it 
was ... He was an unsuccessful business man, born himself in a hovel, 
really, in an almost medieval German village, with a taste for scholarship. 
He gave me also, in addition to the mineral collection, an encyclopedia of 
architecture which I still have. It was clear that one of the great joys in life 
for him was reading, but he had probably hardly been to school. He knew 
that I was interested in architecture and so he gave me these books; what 
caused him to give me the mineral collection I don’t know—perhaps just 
because it was the sort of thing one gave to a very young child. And it was 
nothing; it was a box with maybe two dozen samples labelled in Ger- 
man...” 
‘From then on I became, in a completely childish way, an ardent min- 
eral collector and I had, by the time I was through, quite a fine collec- 
tion . . . This was certainly at first a collector’s interest, but it began to be 
also a bit of a scientist’s interest, not in historical problems of how rocks and 
minerals came to be, but really a fascination with crystals, their structure, 
bi-refringence, what you saw in polarized light, and all the canonical busi- 
ness . . . WhenI was ten or twelve years old, minerals, writing poems and 
reading, and building with blocks still—architecture—were the. three 
themes that I did, not because they were something I had companionship in 
or because they had any relation to school but just for the hell of it. I gave up 
the blocks probably at the age of ten, and the minerals became a charming 
preoccupation. I started trying to understand them. I had very great trouble 
because I didn’t always know the vocabulary; I think it was a month before I 
realized that ‘intercept’ could be used as a noun as well as a verb and this was 
the bane of me.”’ 

While still a schoolboy Robert became by far the youngest member of 
the prestigious New York Mineralogical Club, to which he read a paper 
when he was about twelve. Club members were chiefly interested in show- 
ing new finds, Oppenheimer explained to Kuhn. This inspired him to go to 
diggings and add to his own collection, but his real knowledge about min- 
erals came from books. 

At school Robert’s agile and original mind distinguished him even 


3 


among Ethical Culture’s bright and strongly motivated students from mod- 
erately prosperous upper West Side families. The teachers, who represented 
at this period all that was at once sound and innovative in the progressive 
education movement, recorded their opinion of Robert in consistently high 
grades. But he was more than a good student. ‘“‘Bob was delightful to 
teach,”’ recalled his Greek and Latin instructor, Alberta Newton, after he 
died. “‘He received every new idea as perfectly beautiful.’’ Matilda Auer- 
bach, who taught him math, coped with his restlessness in class by sending 
him to the library to do advanced work, which he was later allowed to ex- 
plain to the other students.® 

Two members of this highly competent staff had special influence upon 
Robert— Augustus Klock in science and Herbert Smith in English. Talking 
to Kuhn some forty-five years later, Oppenheimer emphasized his debt to 
Klock. ‘‘I think the most important change came in my junior year in high 
school ... The teacher of physics and chemistry was Augustus 
Klock . . . He was marvellous; I got so excited that after the first year, 
which was physics, I arranged to spend the summer working with him set- 
ting up equipment for the following year and I would then take chemistry 
and would do both. We must have spent five days a week together; once in a 
while we would even go off on a mineral hunting junket as a reward for 
this. I got interested then in electrolytes and conduction; I didn’t know any- 
thing about it but I did fiddle with a few experiments [although] I don’t re- 
member what they were. I loved chemistry so deeply that I automatically 
now respond when people want to know how to interest people in‘science 
by saying, “Teach them elementary chemistry.’ Compared to physics, it 
starts right in the heart of things and very soon you have that connection 
between what you see and a really very sweeping set of ideas which could 
exist in physics but is very much less likely to be accessible. I don’t know 
what would have happened if Augustus Klock hadn’t been the teacher in 
this school, but I know that I had a great sense of indebtedness to him. He 
loved it, and he loved it in three ways: he loved the subject, he loved the 
bumpy contingent nature of the way in which you actually find out about 
something, and he loved the excitement that he could stir in young people. 
In all three ways he was a remarkably good teacher.”’ 

As he moved from the collection of minerals to crystallography and 
properties like bi-refringence, Oppenheimer did some laboratory work at 
home. “I had a microscope and I had a polarizer; that limited what I could 
do at home except for the most primitive sort of field tests of minerals. | 
think I didn’t complicate physics and chemistry at school very much with 
mineralogy. . . I loved [the laboratory aspect]. This whole bifurcation be- 
longs to a later period. I think if you had asked me then, I would have been 
somewhat doubtful whether there was such a thing as a vocation of science 
apart from mining engineering, chemical engineering or teaching, but if 1 


4 


had thought about it, I’m sure I would have thought that it was inseparable 
from doing experiments because I still thought that three or four years 
later.” 

In the interview with Kuhn, Oppenheimer touched upon other aspects 
of the high school years: “I should admit that . . . I was always formally a 
very good student which I guess I enjoyed but which fogs everything be- 
cause I don’t have any recollection of real difficulty. I wrote an essay for an 
English class and I wrote it about oxygen. My teacher, who was also a re- 
markable man and later became a very prominent educator, said, ‘I think 
your vocation is to be a science writer.’ Well, I didn’t think so, but I found it 
interesting in retrospect.’’ 

This other “remarkable man’’ was Herbert Winslow Smith, who 
joined the English faculty in 1917 as Robert was entering high school. Smith 
had completed his undergraduate work at Harvard in 1911 and obtained the 
master’s degree in English there. He was teaching concurrently at Harvard 
and M.I.T. with his eye on a Ph.D. when he was offered the job at Ethical 
Culture. The philosophy of the school aimed to bring out what students 
were good at and relate it to their course work, and this approach appealed 
to Smith. He had so much fun that he never went back to Cambridge. His 
students had fun, too, especially the freshmen, including Robert, who were 
assigned to Smith’s first homeroom, over which he presided until they 
graduated. Smith was an inspiring teacher. After class students clustered 
around his desk to talk. He invited them to his home in West Orange, New 
Jersey, and encouraged them to write. Later, from Poughkeepsie and Cam- 
bridge poems and short stories came back for his critical appraisal. Francis 
Fergusson, whose letters from Robert form an important part of this vol- 
ume, remembers Smith as “‘very, very kind to his students . . . He took 
on Robert and me and various other people . . . saw them through their 
troubles and advised them what to do next.’”” 

Oppenheimer also spoke of his parents’ role in his intellectual growth. 
“I think my father was one of the most tolerant and human of men. His idea 
of what to do for people was to let them find out what they wanted. I think 
that both he and my mother were pleased that I was a good student, were 
pleased that I was highbrow, were perhaps somewhat mockingly proud of 
my vigor in collecting and learning about minerals, and were quite content 
with that aspect of my life. I think my mother especially was dissatisfied 
with the limited interest I had in play and in people of my own age, and I 
don’t know over what years but I know she kept trying to get me to be 
more like other boys, but with indifferent success. My mother had a 
reasonable education; she was a painter and her real interests were not 
scientific; we never, as far as I know, talked about this. I may sometimes 
have tried to explain something miraculous, but I have no concrete recollec- 
tion.”’ 


Robert’s friend from New Mexico, Paul Horgan, who first visited the 
Oppenheimers after Robert went to Harvard, thought his-parents had han- 
dled their precocious son very well. They knew they had a changeling in 
Robert, and a sometimes moody one at that, he later recalled. They did not 
allow this fact to dominate the household but tried instead to create an en- 
vironment in which independence and talent could flourish. 

Direct impressions of the young Oppenheimer that can now be re- 
trieved date largely from his high school years. Robert did not have a large 
circle of friends at school, but in Herbert Smith’s homeroom group he was 
an easy, even gay, participant. Other contemporaries saw a physically awk- 
ward boy, bushy hair worn long, who blushed easily and seemed different 
and absorbed, traits that were on occasion translated with youthful impreci- 
sion into a common nickname of the day, ““Booby’”’ Oppenheimer.?® 

The shy awkward side of Robert’s personality came to the fore the 
summer he was fourteen when he went to a summer camp run by Dr. Otto 
Koenig, principal of a school for boys in New York City. The boys came 
from well-to-do Jewish families like Robert’s, but his preference for intellec- 
tual over physical activities, his tendency to show off his knowledge, his 
refusal to fight back, so effectively set him apart that he became the butt of 
name calling and physical tormenting well beyond the bounds of normal 
adolescent teasing. Steady harrassment culminated in his being locked 
naked in an icehouse overnight. Robert eventually told Herbert Smith about 
the night in the icehouse. Years later Smith described the episode as retribu- 
tion for Robert’s having written to his parents that he was glad he had come 
to camp because he was learning the facts of life. This news prompted a visit 
from the Oppenheimers and a subsequent crackdown on the circulation of 
dirty stories that was quickly attributed to Robert’s tattling.’® 

In the more sheltered environment of the Ethical Culture School Rob- 
ert could afford to be different. Memories of him as a schoolboy tend to be 
shaded by time and the commanding image of the later Oppenheimer. Not 
so those of his classmate Jane Didisheim, who became the wife of French 
journalist Jacques Kayser. Interviewed in Paris more than fifty years after 
their graduation from high school, Jane Kayser’s memories of Robert “‘at 
something like fifteen’ were far more vivid than those of the famous man 
she later saw in Paris and Princeton. Images of other girlhood friends had 
become pale and flat; the one of Robert was extraordinarily alive: 

‘“He was still a little boy; he was very frail, very pink-cheeked, very 
shy, and very brilliant of course. Very quickly everybody admitted that he 
was different from all the others and very superior. As far as studies were 
concerned he was good in everything . . . Aside from that he was physi- 
cally—you can’t say clumsy exactly—he was rather undeveloped, not in 
the way he behaved but the way he went about, the way he walked, the way 
he sat. There was something strangely childish about him . . . There was a 


6 


sort of deséquilibre. He was abrupt when he came out of his shyness but 
with all that a very polite sort of voice. He never seemed to want to come to 


the front of anything . . . If he did it was because he couldn’t do other- 
wise . . . because he was so extraordinarily gifted and brilliant—that just 
pushed him.’ 


In his last year at Ethical Culture, Robert found a thoroughly compati- 
ble spirit in Francis Fergusson from Albuquerque, New Mexico. To prepare 
for Harvard Francis had attended a public high school in the Bronx, then 
transferred to Ethical Culture for his senior year. Oppenheimer later re- 
called that he shared an interest in poetry and literature with several people 
in his high school years—referring to Jane Didisheim and other members 
of Herbert Smith’s homeroom and English classes—but he made a special 
point of his association with Francis Fergusson: “I had a very good friend 
who came . . . from New Mexico . . . and who at that time had some 
interest in biology. But his main interests were really a young man’s philo- 
sophic interests; he was preoccupied with the old difficulty that if every- 
thing is natural how can something be good, in the form [in] which the 19th 
century writers had sharpened this. He is to this day one of my closest 
friends and our paths have crossed often . . . [He] became a producer, a 
writer of plays, a critic, and a historian of the arts—the theater primarily.”’ 

Robert and Francis saw little of each other in the 1930s and lost touch 
during the war, but they saw each other frequently after 1947, when Op- 
penheimer became director of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton 
and Fergusson became University Professor of Comparative Literature at 
nearby Rutgers. Trying to isolate early impressions, Fergusson remembers 
principally superior intelligence and competence. As a high school senior, 
Robert had lost some of that odd disequilibrium that his friend Jane remem- 
bered. He was, of course, manager of the Science Club, but Fergusson was 
also impressed by the “superhuman efficiency” with which he ran a major 
school affair—probably ‘“The Bazaar’”’ described in an undistinguished bit 
of doggerel that appeared over Robert’s initials in the school paper.” 

Robert graduated from Ethical Culture in February 1921, Francis, in 
June. They expected to enter Harvard together that autumn. As was the cus- 
tom with February graduates, Robert spent the spring on a special project at 
the school; later, he went to Europe with his parents and Frank. ‘I went off 
on a long prospecting trip into Bohemia into the old mines, Joachimsthal, 
and I came down with a heavy, almost fatal case of trench dysentery. That 
and its aftermath kept me out of school fora year . . . I had planned to go 
[to Harvard] immediately, but it was called off because I was sick abed—in 
Europe, actually, at the time.”’ 

Robert spent the year 1921-22 recuperating, first at home in New 
York, then on trips, south in the spring, and west the following summer. 
Jane Didisheim was taking art courses in New York that winter and in a 


/ 


comradely, unromantic way she saw something of Robert during his con- 
valescence. Visiting the Oppenheimer apartment occasionally at his parents’ 
invitation or at the urging of Herbert Smith, she sensed that Robert had 
mellowed and gained assurance. ‘‘He had become less shy. I think he had 
become gayer also . . . In spite of the fact that he must have been ill at the 
time, I remember somebody much more ‘ouvert . . . than he had been 
before.’’ Jane saw him as not really happy, but not as deeply troubled ei- 
ther.’ a = 

This growth in self-confidence that Jane noted as Robert emerged from 
adolescence made possible the friendship with Francis Fergusson and other 
close and significant relationships for which Robert demonstrated so 
marked a talent in the coming years. Some of these developed during the 
summer of 1922 when, in the hope of completing the cure of the colitis that 
followed Robert’s attack of dysentery, his parents asked Herbert Smith to 
serve as his companion on a trip to the Southwest. Smith had made a similar 
expedition the previous year with a nephew of Felix Adler’s. For Robert, a 
seasoned European traveler, the trip opened a new world of natural and 
human experiences. It not only introduced him to the Pecos Valley in New 
Mexico, where a few years later their father leased a small ranch for Robert 
and Frank; it also gave pupil and teacher additional friends and interests in 
common and created the personal attachment so evident in the letters Rob- 
ert wrote to Smith during his three years at Harvard. 

In Albuquerque, Smith and Robert visited Francis Fergusson and his 
family. Robert enjoyed this household of lively young people, including 
Harvey, who had already begun his career as a novelist, and Erna, whose 
books on the Southwest would become classics. Through Francis, Robert 
also met Paul Horgan, their own age, like them intellectually precocious, 
and an avid reader. All three were propelled by as yet unfocussed talents and 
drives that would bring each distinction, Robert as scientist, Fergusson as 
literary scholar, Horgan as novelist and historian. 

It is not clear how much time what Horgan variously describes as ‘‘this 
pygmy triumverate,” “this great troika,”’ all ‘“‘polymaths,”’ actually spent 
together. After two years at Harvard, Fergusson went on to Oxford as a 
Rhodes Scholar. Horgan experimented with music and painting before 
finding his vocation in writing. But until Robert went to England in Sep- 
tember 1925, he and Horgan met whenever possible in New Mexico, Cam- 
bridge, or New York. At least twice, in 1923 and 1925, Horgan visited the 
Oppenheimers’ summer home at Bay Shore. Horgan recalls: ‘““There were 
high spirited goings on all the time. I think it is perfectly right to say that 
even then—and all my life I’ve felt this—he was the most intelligent man 
I’ve ever known, the most brilliantly endowed intellectually. And with this, 
in that period of his life, he combined incredibly good wit and gaiety and 
high spirits.” 

Horgan thought of Robert as special but not odd or unusual, ““because 


79 66 99 


he had this lovely social quality that permitted him to enter into the mo- 
ment very strongly, wherever it was and whenever it was. So one didn’t see 
him as eventually the incredibly great scientist or the celebrity at all. He had 
a great superiority but great charm with it, and great simplicity at that 
time.’’ Horgan also noted Robert’s consideration for others and his ‘‘ex- 
quisite manners .. . I’ve always been puzzled by later reports of his arro- 
gance and his self-centeredness . . . I can’t identify that in him at all.’ 

To Horgan, as to Jane Kayser, the young Oppenheimer was still a vivid 
presence in 1976. While enjoying the stimulation and gaiety of Robert’s 
companionship, Horgan, however, was aware of a basic unhappiness. 
“Robert had bouts of melancholy, deep, deep depressions as a youngster,” 
recalls Horgan. “‘He would seem to be incommunicado emotionally for a 
day or two at a time. That happened while I was staying with him once or 
twice, and I was very distressed, had no idea what was causing it.’’ Horgan 
always had silent or oblique reassurance from Robert’s parents.” 

Herbert Smith too observed the trauma of Robert’s growing up with 
interest and concern. He thought the persistent colitis was psychosomatic 
and while he deplored the prescribed treatment—bed and inactivity —as 
better suited to a tired businessman than to a seventeen-year-old genius, he 
was sure he understood what lay behind the illness, especially after their 
western trip. In the intimacy of travel and campfires Robert had revealed 
what Smith, who was well-versed in the psychological theories then current 
in avant-garde educational circles, interpreted as a pronounced oedipal atti- 
tude toward his father. In Smith’s view, Julius Oppenheimer was often 
maladroit, as in his response to Robert’s report of sex talk at summer camp. 
Smith thought that Mr. Oppenheimer’s outgoing affability embarrassed his 
shy son. And Robert was self-conscious as well about the family’s associa- 
tion with trade (though this cannot have been unusual among Ethical Cul- 
ture families). Once on the western trip Smith was packing in a hurry and 
asked Robert if he would fold a jacket for him. “‘He looked at me sharply,”’ 
Smith later recalled, ‘‘and said, “Oh yes. The tailor’s son would know how 
to do that, wouldn’t he?’”’ Smith realized how deeply Robert felt the fact of 
being Jewish when he asked to travel west as Smith’s brother, a suggestion 
that was firmly turned down. As the surrogate parent that even well-ad- 
justed teenagers often seek, Smith was no doubt privy to anxieties and ten- 
sions that Robert’s contemporaries did not notice. Some of them find this 
story hard to believe. Being Jewish, they say, was not a problem at Ethical 
Culture, where Jews and non-Jews among faculty and students mixed com- 
fortably together. On the other hand, Fergusson believes that Robert may 
have felt “‘his Jewishness and his wealth, and his eastern connections, and 
[that] his going to New Mexico was partly to escape from that.’’*® 

Even in the 1920s escape was not the worst form of youthful rebellion. 
Robert’s friends at school and at Harvard were not aware of special antipa- 
thy toward his father or of abnormal resentment of parental guidelines or 


family folkways. The early letters to Smith from Harvard do indeed indi- 
cate that the process of detachment—of establishing identity, we would 
now call it— was going on. Yet there was always a certain kindness in Rob- 
ert’s references to his parents and, as later letters show, in the years follow- 
ing Mrs. Oppenheimer’s death in 1931, a remarkable willingness on Rob- 
ert’s part to share his life and his friends with his father. 

The New Mexico trip not only initiated Robert’s friendship with Paul 
Horgan and strengthened his ties to Francis Fergusson and to Smith, but 
introduced him to Cowles, a small community twenty miles up the Pecos 
Valley in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains northeast of Santa Fe. There he 
and Smith stayed at Los Pinos, a guest ranch run by Katherine Chaves Page 
and her husband, Winthrop, married the previous year. Friends of the Fer- 
gussons, the Chaveses were an old hidalgo family of which Katherine’s 
father, Don Amado, was the current head. Katherine herself, then twenty- 
eight, is variously described as beautiful, charming, warm, imperious. Paul, 
Francis, and Robert, especially Robert, found her a fascinating and romantic 
figure. With her he developed a warm friendship which, although it de- 
creased in intensity as he formed other attachments, lasted until her death in 
1961. But according to Smith, acceptance of the insecure young New York 
Jew by the aristocratic Chaves circle, in which for “the first time in his 
life . . . [he] found himself loved, admired, sought after,” was an 
important factor in the growing assurance that Robert’s friends observed in 
him at this period.” 

The Cowles visit also opened for Robert the magic world of the high 
country. He became an enthusiastic and expert horseman. With Katherine, 
Smith, and others he explored the slopes and valleys that led west and north 
to Lake Peak, the two Baldys—Santa Fe and Pecos—and the less accessible 
heights of Truchas. Smith was astonished at the endurance of his frail-look- 
ing and supposedly ailing young companion. There and elsewhere on their 
trip Robert displayed a fatalistic attitude toward physical danger that made 
him absolutely intrepid. 

That Robert’s first ride across the Rio Grande and up to the Los 
Alamos Ranch School on the Pajarito Plateau later determined the site of a 
great wartime laboratory has become a familiar part of the Oppenheimer 
legend. Robert’s association with Los Alamos was in fact the dramatic epi- 
logue to a quarter century of deep attachment to people and places in north- 
ern New Mexico. “I first knew the Pajarito Plateau in the summer of 1922,” 
he later recalled, ““when we took a pack trip up from Frijoles and into Valle 
Grande. We came back to it often from our ranch in the Pecos.”’”® 

The freedom and openness of this first western experience left a deep 
impression, and it was with broadened horizons, both geographic and so- 
cial, that the young New Yorker returned to the east coast to commence his 
college education in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 


10 


Robert Oppenheimer, about age six, on a 
visit to Europe with his parents, Julius and 
Ella Oppenheimer. (Courtesy of Frank 
Oppenheimer. ) 


Robert Oppenheimer and his 
brother, Frank, about ages 
fourteen and six. (Courtesy of 
Frank Oppenheimer. ) 


Robert Oppenheimer, 1925, for the Harvard 1926 class album. (Courtesy of Har- 
vard University Archives.) 


I\“Work . . . frantic, bad 
and graded A’’ 


HARVARD, 1922-1925 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER entered Harvard College as a freshman in 
September 1922. He received the A.B. degree in chemistry in June 1925. 
With one exception, the letters that survive from these three undergraduate 
years were written to people with whom he shared literary rather than sci- 
entific interests. Oppenheimer’s contemporary comments on people and 
books, and on the poems and stories he was writing, represent a side of life 
that was very important to him at the time, but for significant information 
about how he learned science one must turn to the retrospective interview 
with Thomas Kuhn.’ These reminiscences lack the immediacy of the letters, 
but Oppenheimer’s searching and tentative replies to Kuhn show a young 
man pursuing a somewhat devious path toward a not yet clearly defined 
goal, a picture consistent with what the early letters have to tell. “I remem- 
ber talking to some older colleagues [at Harvard] as to whether I should 
study chemistry or . . . mineralogy with the idea of becoming a mining 
engineer because I loved that kind of life . . . One of my friends said, 
‘Study chemistry; there are always summer vacations.’”’ 

As to whether he took chemistry on the presumption that he would 
be a teacher, “I expect that wasn’t a question that crossed my mind. It 
was a desire to learn which probably was much, much too uncalculated, but 
what I really wanted was to study physical chemistry because this was the 
thing whose glimmering I liked in elementary chemistry . . . It’s only 
honest to add that at school and at Harvard I learned a lot of things that had 
no immediate connection with chemistry or with physics. I learned Greek at 


11 


school which was even then somewhat exotic . . . and I continued doing 
things like that at Harvard on a quite massive scale so that the notion that I 
was travelling down a clear track would be wrong. I determined to get a 
mastery of French and its literature which I knew very poorly; I had a very 
exciting time reading The Principia with Whitehead.” 

Oppenheimer presumed that apart.from the “‘quirk about mineralogy 
and the abnormality of Greek,”’ he probably had what was then a good high 
school background and not much‘ mort. “I knew what the calculus was, I 
knew what analytical geometry was, but I had had no formal training in it. I 
had probably looked at some texts. About physical chemistry I had read, 
but in a completely unenlightened way, a good deal more than one normally 
would but again with no discipline or coherence.” 

Because the Harvard years were intellectually stimulating, they were 
relatively satisfying, if not always happy, ones for Oppenheimer. They also 
saw the development of greater assurance in personal relationships, as fore- 
shadowed by the experience with Francis Fergusson and Paul Horgan. Dur- 
ing their one overlapping year at Harvard before Fergusson left for Oxford, 
this friendship was very important to Robert—caustic comments to Smith 
notwithstanding. Fergusson, who lived in a non-Harvard house at 96 Pres- 
cott Street while Robert was in a dormitory, recalls that they were in and 
out of each other’s rooms all year.” Through Francis, Robert met a group of 
seniors and graduate students, including John T. Edsall and Jeffries Wyman. 
He joined the Student Liberal Club and a science discussion group. By the 
end of the year he had formed a second triumverate with two scientist 
classmates, Frederick Bernheim and William C. Boyd, which supplemented 
the literary one with Fergusson and Horgan. 


AS HARVARD COLLEGE opened on September 25, Oppenheimer was 
settled in a single room, D 12 Standish Hall, a freshman dormitory facing 
the Charles River. (With the establishment of the house system in 1930, Stan- 
dish became the west unit of Winthrop House.) A week later Robert wrote 
to Herbert Smith who had himself been a Harvard freshman fourteen years 
before. 


1 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


D 12, Standish, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
October 2, 1922. 


My dear Shylock, ' 


Have mercy, great usurer! Here is the next installment of my debt. Then 
it will be for you to fulfill your contract of a letter for every two of mine. I 
hope you will not be tempted to do it as gracelessly as I. But even at that I 
awalt your answer with all the eagerness of those hectic days at [San] 
Diego. ? 

The tragic truth, however, is that I have no other legitimate reason for 
writing than that I hope thereby to elicit a brief but precious epistle from 
you. Harvard has so far been most delightful; it has crushed none of my 
romantic illusions of what it ought to have been; the only thing about which 
I might possibly display any righteous indignation is Dean Briggs’ “‘College 
Life.”’® And the innate tact for which I am famous prevents even that bit of 
enthusiasm. There is no need my recounting to you the Freshman reactions: 
you know well enough the thunderous platitudes of the beginnings of phi- 
losophy and the painful phonetics of French. You may even remember the 
benign Lowell joining the Harvard locomotive,® and certainly you cannot 
have forgotten the disgust of the victim when he discovers to which English 
A instructor he has been assigned. In this, though, my shudders are all antic- 
ipatory: I have [Jess H.] Jackson, and Francis [Fergusson] says that meticu- 
lous spelling and plausible punctuation are all that will save me with him. 
By the way, I have written a theme, and this note is Freudian. 

And you probably know too that I have not suffered from loneliness. 
There are plenty of amusing fellows with whom to read, talk, play tennis 
and make expeditions into the hills and toward the water (Freud again). 

Two other things of which I should like to remind you: our scheme to 
involve Francis in the Yale game, and Mrs. Page’s address. 

As I am still in the hunt and peck stage of typewriting, my index finger is 
getting sore. So most of my brilliant witticisms will have to go unwritten 
(Gratia Dei). 

Most sincere best wishes to you and Mrs. Smith, 


Bob 
You can excuse your delay in writing on the ground that you were waiting 
to tell me how much you disliked the books. The transcontinental alibi 


won’t work. But I forgot; you never apologize. 


A real P. S.—I had a letter from Scurlock at Diego.‘ 


a. The first installment of the “‘debt’’ has not survived. In San Diego the Oppenheimers’ 
friends, the William Templeton Johnsons, had shared with Smith responsibility for deciding 
whether Robert’s colitis permitted a return home via the Canadian Rockies. He seemed much 
better, and the longer route was approved. 

b. The edition of Dean Le Baron Russell Briggs’ College Life current in 1922 contained four 
essays: “The Transition from School to College,” ‘‘The Mistakes of College Life,”’ ‘College 
Honor,” and ‘Routine and Ideals.” 

c. A. Lawrence Lowell was president of Harvard University, 1909-1933. 

d. J. C. Scurlock was a dealer in minetfals in Califdinia. Robert considered his prices exorbi- 
tant. In 1948 Scurlock, manager of Western Engineering Associates, wrote to Oppenheimer 
that he need not have apologized for being late for their recent appointment ‘“‘when I was 
twenty-six years getting you a tourmaline crystal with an ‘unusual terminal’ which you. 
wanted’; Scurlock to Oppenheimer, June 22, 1948, Scurlock File, Box 65, J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 


Throughout the Harvard letters ‘Francis’ is Francis Fergusson, who as 
a freshman had written frequently to Herbert Smith. Although he never ad- 
mitted to Robert’s outright satisfaction with Harvard, their attitudes were 
similar. Francis had hoped for a job on some one of the college papers but 
found that “‘writing’’ meant copying lists of students. ‘I decided that I pre- 
ferred the life of the misanthrope,”’ he told Smith, ‘‘so I now spend the time 
I should otherwise have spent in the competition reading Cabell’s ‘Beyond 
Life’ as an antidote to Briggs’ ‘College Life.’”’* As a sophomore, with Rob- 
ert there to share his disdain for the typical collegian of their day, Francis 
took a more positive view of Harvard. Nevertheless, he diligently pursued 
the Rhodes Scholarship that would take him to Oxford for the remainder of 
his undergraduate work. 

Robert failed to read the fine print in the catalogue which explained 
how to avoid freshman English, described as Rhetoric and English Compo- 
sition. His other first year courses were: Elementary Organic Chemistry, 
followed second semester by Qualitative Analysis; French Prose and Po- 
etry, Corneille through Zola; Analytic Geometry and Introduction to Cal- 
culus; and History of Philosophy.‘ 

That some of these courses filled requirements did not spoil them for 
the young Oppenheimer. He truly did want to know French literature, and 
he remembered Philosophy A with Ralph Eaton, “a wonderful man,”’ as “‘a 
really very good course . . . [I] had a nice time with it.’’ Always, he told 
Kuhn, he audited two or three courses in addition to those listed on his tran- 
script and learned so much in this way that in retrospect he could not distin- 
guish them from those taken for credit.” 


FREDERICK BERNHEIM was a class behind Robert at the Ethical Cul- 
ture School, and they became friends as freshmen in Standish Hall. During 


14 


their remaining two years at Harvard they occupied adjacent rooms in a 
house at 60 Mount Auburn Street. 

By 1922 the Student Liberal Club, formed three years earlier to sponsor 
lectures and discussions, attracted those disillusioned with the postwar set- 
tlement,in Europe and the Harding—Coolidge regime at home. Senior 
John Edsall, dining occasionally with Robert at the club’s rooms at 66 
Winthrop Street, spotted him as an exceptional freshman, more mature in- 
tellectually than socially. Forty years later Oppenheimer remembered only 
that he “felt very much a fish out of water,’’ that he had provided a name for 
the club magazine, and had written something for it. The four surviving 
issues of The Gadfly, first published in December 1922, carry a quotation in 
Greek describing Socrates as the gadfly of the Athenian people. At Edsall’s 
urging, Oppenheimer served as an assistant editor of the first two numbers, 
but his name is not among the later distinguished sons of Harvard who 
signed articles.® 


2 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Standish, D 12. 
Cambridge, Mass. 
November 14, 1922. 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


Fred Bernheim has performed the precarious experiment of entering two 
applications for the Yale game; he has as yet heard no anticipatory rum- 
blings of vengeance, and there is at least a chance that he will get two or 
three tickets. He has promised me that, should this happen, he will give you 
one of them. It is, of course, too bad that we can not be together, but I 
believe that you will not have to search quite as diligently as you feared for 
your seat. If you can procure another ticket without too much difficulty and 
expense, that would surely be the safer course. I shall let you know as soon 
as I have more definite news. 

Harvard has a serene and ridiculous appearance. The assinine pomposity 
of the Liberal club, the methodical expletives of our drunken patriots, the 
creative struggles of Francis’s company and the quiet futility of most of the 
courses are as amusing as Crome Yellow, and are at least delightful in a some- 
what Pecosian way.* Francis expects his Rhodes scholarship. Jackson is al- 
most completely subjugated. And I am planning for next summer. I am hes- 
itating, in my present deliberations, between Bolivia and a laboratory 
course in Cambridge. The proximity of East Brewster is a powerful argu- 
ment in favor of the more conservative plan.” 


15 


I have been writing a good many variably execrable abominations. 
Please tell me about your frivolities. Is the school still in existence after 
your ravages? Good luck to you all. 


Bob 


a. Refers to the Pecos Valley in New Mexico and the new circle of friends at Cowles. 
b. East Brewster was the village on €Cape‘Cod*Where Herbert Smith's Winslow ancestors 
had lived for generations and where Smith and his family usually spent their summers. 


If Robert did not find himself at home in the Liberal Club, he fitted 
easily into the only other recorded extracurricular activity of his undergrad- 
uate years that could conceivably be called organized. He later recalled that 
for two years he had belonged to “‘a little science club which was partly fac- 
ulty but mostly graduate students and which talked about scientific ques- 
tions and philosophical questions related to science.’’’ His letters to Smith 
do not mention the science group, but Francis Fergusson, writing to Smith 
in midautumn of 1922, commented on its origin and participants: 

‘Iam one of four people who are starting a sort of organization whose 
purpose is to get professors to say interesting things . . . We meet Mon- 
days in one of the members’ rooms—a big room, with a fireplace and deep 
chairs. We invite a professor to come and address us on anything he wants. 
When he has finished we discuss. Such at least is the plan . . . [have seen 
something of Robert lately, who is one of our members. His conversation 
this year is a caricature of yours, ornamented with some of Paul’s and my 
more elaborate affectations. I wonder what it will be like after a spell of this 
group, which contains an aberrant Cambridge Puritan, a boy from Atlanta, 
a New York German, learned in chemistry, a Minnesota exquisite, a Greek 
assistant in philosophy, a mathematics genius, and many other diverse and 


highly flavored fishes.’”® 


ROBERT SEEMS regularly to have spent the Christmas holidays, a few 
days after the midyear examinations, and the spring vacation in New York. 
Usually he saw Herbert Smith. Fifty years later Smith displayed his de 
Maupassant volume as an example of the young Robert’s extraordinary 
thoughtfulness. ® 


16 


3 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


D 12 Standish, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
January 6, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, ~ 


Your Maupassant is being assembled. All the available editions were 
bound in ugly and inappropriate yellows and olive and pink mottling; and 
the one I am having made up will be ready in a publisher’s week. As soon as 
I can wrest the Santayana from an aesthetic person from Minnesota— para- 
dox—I shall return it and the even more precious socks; you should be de- 
lighted to learn that I have had the tact not to lend them. 

The scoundrel Scurlock is trying to use me as one of a number of inter- 
mediaries in transferring a five thousand dollar mineral collection from an 
indeterminate Spanish engineer to the Agassiz museum. Fortunately I never 
had intended concentrating in geology. 

For the remainder of this letter I should like to say ‘thank you’ again to 
you and Mrs. Smith. The two delightful days I spent with you were oases of 
civilization in the barren orgies of my vacation. 

If you should have time to write, please do. I shall retaliate. 

Very sincerely, 


Bob 


THE “AESTHETIC INTELLIGENCE TEST” mentioned in the follow- 
ing letter had originated two or three years earlier at a gathering of students, 
including Robert, at Smith’s home. By way of entertainment, Smith had 
produced a set of questions fresh out of Teachers College which attempted 
to test poetic judgment by offering a choice of several selections, only one of 
which was genuine. Saying “‘we can do better than that,”’ the students de- 
veloped their own literary quiz game, which continued to circulate after 
they went to college. Smith thinks that his former students missed the easy 
exchange of their coeducational days at Ethical Culture and used this game 
as a way of keeping in touch.’® 


17 


4 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


D 12, Standish, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
January 12, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


God is most emphatically in his heaven;‘otherwise I should certainly have 
missed the delight of your letters; for they have reached me by the most 
extraordinary orbits. Yesterday there came a mysterious envelope with two 
copies of your aesthetic intelligence test—only that and nothing more. 
Today came a glittering letter of October third, which, even in its abridged 
form, did much to explain the bewildering discontinuities of our correspon- 
dence; and last of all came another consoling note and another challenging 
copy of Innisfree. This last was furnished with an appendix from Francis, 
setting a date for a walk. The interpretation of these remarkable phenomena 
takes a keener scientific brain than mine; all I can do is to say thank you 
again and again, and gloat in the reception of so many papers from your apt 
typewriter. 

The only one of the poems that I very much like is the third. But “‘you are 
so clever, and I am so dull” that I tremble at calling that the original; it is 
really beautiful to my ears, but I do not consider you incapable of such gross 
deception. If, in the fourth, the sense and the verse were not engaged in such 
bitter battle, that would not be impossible. I think the first two are abomi- 
nable. The deed is done. 

In a few days Jane will be in New York. I have just received a letter from 
her; it is so strange that I am sending it to you. Even the queer idiom cannot 
explain it. But I should like it back, later; it is a fitting finale to a very poi- 
gnant series. When you see the lovelorn lass, will you give her my most glib 
and convincing congratulations, please? Of course I shall write as soon as I 
know how to reach her. I suspect that Mama is mad. 

I am again in the toils of a short story. It is not to be as pretentious or 
subtle as the last, and so there is some chance of its not being as vile. At least 
I think you will be interested in the setting. —A young mining engineer is 
starting his career at the Humboldt mine. I introduce the fellow as he dis- 
mounts from his horse and begins the climb. He has courage enough to 
enter the amphitheatre on the cable car; it is good fun to give his first im- 
pressions of the place when the cable gets high enough for him to see. He is 
a sophisticated and introspective person, and the filth, the phosphorescent 
manager, and the miserable, indifferent miners only make him laugh and 
look smugly at the sunset. But, by a simple mechanism, he discovers that 
the superintendent, who is a pretty unprepossessing person, is, like him, a 
graduate of an eastern college; and that he was, at one time, an intimate 


18 


friend of the young fellow’s aunt. He realizes that he, too, is rather likely to 
disintegrate just as the manager has; and his complacency vanishes. He is 
really miserable, and is perfectly willing to listen to a disgusting and dod- 
dering syphilitic, with whom, earlier in the day, he would have nothing to 
do. And he no longer sees anything at all risible in the mine. Observe the 
three unities. Anyway, it is rather fun, and I shall be too busy after this to do 
IC. 

It will take me eons to pay my literary debt to you. But another letter and 
some mangled verses will come soon. Good luck. 

Very sincerely and gratefully, 


Bob 


Robert’s friend Jane Didisheim had returned briefly from France prior 
to her marriage to Jacques Kayser. In 1974, thanking Herbert Smith for 
sending her copies of some of Robert’s early letters, Jane Kayser wrote: 
‘How many, both friends and adversaries who supported, judged, con- 
demned him later on, during his brilliantly successful and desperately tragic 
career, could ever have guessed who Robert really was. To the adjectives 
you used to describe him. . . I should add: ‘vulnerable.’ Half a century 
after the letters were written, they give me food for much thought and 
awaken a consciousness of regret and sorrow—How innocently —or 
stupidly —callous I must have been, never to have sensed the thin-skinned 
delicacy of his attachment.’’” 


5 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


D 12, Standish, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
January 21, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


Your last letter was so tactfully pregnant with catastrophe that I am quite 
unable to conceal my impolite curiosity. Are you again, O fortunate wretch, 
to spend a summer in New Mexico? Are you to assist in chaperoning Mrs. 
Page’s maidens? Or are you about to import a third neurotic freak, even 
more unpresentable than the last two, into the wilds of Sprague’s?4 This im- 
portunate clamour is merely the typographic manifestation of much gloom; 
for I sit here seeking for plans by which to avoid the unavoidable sailboat 
and estate; and I glance with tear-blurred eyes from your poignant sentences 


19 


to the three magnificent photographs on my wall. I fear that you are to 
blame for any signs of romanticism that I may show in future. 

Yet if you had announced that you were on the point of departing for 
Siam, you could not have surprised me more than by your Innisfree pro- 
nouncement. For the second was the only one upon which Francis and I had 
vented our combined disapproval; and though I am lost in shame at the ad- 
mission, I fear that we still do. I have mouthed the deceitful lines time and 
again, yet scarcely a trace of their poetic stenificance has reached my prosaic 
ear; the rhythm annoys me, and the figures seem to me unreal and colorless; 
I can not conceive of peace dropping to where the cricket sings, and I am, 
unfortunately, no doubt, acoustically incapable of hearing the dusk in my 
deep heart’s core, or any where else, I fear. I have tried the wretched thing 
on two friends; one of them chose the third, and the other, mirabile dictu, 
the right one. He claims to have a true sense of poetry, and after a few pro- 
fessional contortions of his mouth, he pointed to the second and said 
“This.’’ But in spite of him, Quiller-Couch, and you, I remain an unrepent- 
ing philistine. 

Next week Francis and I shall concoct a retaliatory quiz. And I shall send 
you my story, which, at present, is complete but illegible. It is certainly ade- 
quate testimony of the mangling that I gave the other one, that it should 
seem untrue. For it is taken with scarcely any colitic revisions from an inci- 
dent of my cousin with my uncle and my aunt. 

Thanks for psychoanalysing Jane. My experience in matters marital is, 
and will always be, alas, so much less fortunate than yours, that I accept 
your dictum without a squirm. 

Please give my best wishes to Mrs. Smith, and write when you have time. 
Very sincerely, 


Bob 


a. According to Herbert Smith, Mrs. Page hoped to recruit some girls as guests at Los Pinos 
to provide company for the boys brought by Smith. However, none came; Smith to Alice 
Kimball Smith, July 28, 1976. Sprague’s was a guest lodge in Estes Park, Colorado. 


“THE PINK THINGS FROM VASSAR” mentioned in the following 
letter related to the aesthetic intelligence game and came from Inez Pollak, a 
classmate of Robert’s at Ethical Culture who was a sophomore at Vassar. In 
January 1923 she and her freshman sister Kitty each reported to Herbert 
Smith the reactions of Vassar friends to the various choices, enclosed their 
own versions of the game, and asked for Francis’s and Robert’s. Kitty con- 
cluded: ““This new game is proving very popular, though the poetic appre- 
ciation isn’t much better than at school.’’” 


20 


The Oppenheimers’ summer home was at Bay Shore on the south side 
of Long Island, where they had first rented a house, then bought one a year 
or so after Frank’s birth in 1912. Robert usually wrote Bay Shore as one 
word, for which Frank has no explanation other than that was the way they 
said it.'° 


6 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Standish D 12, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
January 28, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


This is to be little more than a placard of procrastinations; the story is not 
yet legible; and so far the verses that Francis and I were to send have gone no 
further than a few revengeful mutterings. But after the midyear period,? so 
inappropriate for frivolity and impossible for thought, I may come down to 
the city for a day or so, bearing literary thunderbolts. 

Nor can I say anything more definitely damning about the pink things 
from Vassar. Again I defend myself with a platitudinous and comprehensive 
scorn of the entire lot. But it seems to me less likely that Inez should have 
written about sky-pavilioned land than about Apollo’s steeds, empty joys, 
or spanning skies. So, with the customary hesitation, —the third. Francis 
threatens to show me another set; as yet I have not seen it, but I suspect that 
my unprejudiced judgement would be more fortunate than the later ones 
that take into account such irrelevancies as the excellence of the verses. 

The outlook is so dismal that I can’t be at all successfully flip. Imbecile 
examinations, weeks of slush, tantalizing courses in chemistry that it will 
take me years to reach, and Bayshore threatening to absorb the summer va- 
cation—1is it not sad? But you can’t be sentimental on a typewriter, so so 
long, and good luck. 


Bob 


a. Midyear examinations had begun on January 25. 


ROBERT WENT “down to the city” before the second semester opened 
on February 12. 


21 


7 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


February 11, 1923. 
Train North. 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


Our meeting yesterday was so short, & so much complicated by pleasant 
but Philistine company, that I amnearly as‘tragic as if I had not seen you at 
all. And Mrs. Smith couldn’t come: no, it was a very unsatisfactory family 
reunion. 

So may I be rude and intrusive by mail? For you reminded me more, 
yesterday, of El Paso than of Cowles; and I want to beg you to soothe your 
excitable conscience and work less heroically. If you had anything as annoy- 
ing as this to say, you would, of course, do it tactfully and dynamically. | 
can’t. And yet I would so much rather see all of Ethical go to college bar- 
barously illiterate than know that you were losing weight on anything but 
me! 

Adios; and perhaps it was only your dentist. 


Bob 


8 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Stillman Infirmary 
Harvard University 
February 18, 1923. 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


You were very wrong, really, to infer from my last impertinent note that 
you were not charming at our party; you were, and you scintillated more 
than any of that dismal gathering. Mrs. Page started bravely enough, but 
soon grew silent under the weight of paternal banalities and Ethical gossip; 
and Jane’s sighs of happiness came disastrously near, I thought, to groans of 
despair, when someone asked her if she had ever been out west. No—you 
were the only civilized person there; I apologize for any incompatible imphi- 
cation. 

Francis told me, when he called here yesterday, that you had definitely 
decided to go west with your two new neurotics. F. F. is at present planning 
a trip for you four to the Hopi country, and chortling with much incoherent 
delight. Of course I am insanely jealous. I see you riding down from the 
mountains to the desert at that hour when thunderstorms and sunsets ca- 
parison the sky; I see you in the Pecos “in September, when I'll want my 


ZZ 


friends to comfort me, you know’’, spending the moonlight on Grass 
Mountain; I see you vending the marvels of the upper Loch, of the upper 
amphitheater at Ouray, of the waterfall at Telluride, the Punch Bowl at San 
Ysidro—even the prairies around Antonito—to philistine eyes. Do you re- 
member that first evening in Denver, when we scrambled our luggage? 

Does Mrs. Smith expect to meet you again next summer? And will you 
trust again to the five minute connection at Santa Fe? Wouldn’t Mrs. Smith 
like to spend a few days at the shore, with us? There is lots of water, a sail- 
boat, horses, & all that; & I'll be sure to be there at whatever time she says. 

I have had a terrific fever, and have read another Conrad. So this may 
sound a bit strange. 

But good luck. 

Affectionately, 


Bob 


a. Katherine Page was instructor in Spanish at Finch Junior College in New York City dur- 
ing the academic year 1922—23; Consuelo Chaves Summers to Alice Kimball Smith, October 
29, 1976. 


9 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Mass. 
March 31, 1923 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


This time I can again begin my note with the standard Ethical opening: I 
am sorry that I could not write before, but I was so dreadfully busy; for 
instance — 

But in this time quite a stack of trivial news has managed to get itself col- 
lected; and so I shall sacrifice the proverbial unity and logical lucidity of my 
letter in its favor. 

1. A letter has just come from Mrs. William Templeton Johnson, sending 
regards to you, inviting us both to return, urging California Tech and 
Joyism.? It seems that, among our literary calisthenics, my letter to the 
Johnsons went to the Dead Letter Office but has now been rescued. 

2. A letter from home just before the great event well garnished with in- 
vitation, thanks, regrets, and trepidations. 

3. A letter from Mrs. Page! She is coming down to the shore with Francis 
and the family on the fourteenth. Can’t you possibly manage to tear your- 
self and Mrs. Smith away for a day or so? Again much invitation and la- 
ments. 

4. The Pollaks have camped up here for the week. Francis and I have, ac- 


ap} 


cordingly, been spending most of our hours not claimed by lab and Widener 
[Library] in heterogeneous expeditions up to the Sachs estate.” It’s all over. 

5. You and Francis are going to have a great time. Mrs. Page and Francis 
have spared me none of the harrowing details, and I am dissolving in impo- 
tent jealousy. 

6. Fred and I are about to become landed. gentry. We propose to buy, rent, 
or otherwise appropriate a ramshackle cottage way out on Cape Ann. It lies 
way above the water, amid huge‘cliffs of yellow granite, and looks across a 
miraculously blue ocean to the shore line of Maine. 

7. On the same expedition I received another inspiration to write a story. 
It is very short, exceedingly bad, and only barely justified by the difficulty 
of the thing. If I don’t burn it you may see it. 

And now that all that unpleasantly efficient bit of gossip is disposed of, 
there is time to grow emotional about your summer and verbose about my 
books. I shall spare you the former. 

I am glad that you didn’t find Russell completely piffle; it seems to me 
that what he analyzes is quite distinctly mind and not brain; that, by a few 
magisterial but unconvincing waves of his hand, he dismisses that “‘subcon- 
scious mind” as a going hypothesis, and that he excludes all truly reflex phe- 
nomena and such from his consideration; but yet he seems to have quite a 
valid point in insisting that what distinguishes mental phenomena, and par- 
ticularly the more complex operations, is not consciousness, but rather the 
belief feeling or the Mneme.* Now I disagree with him. And being naturally 
pugnacious, I also disagree with your objection. Not that I like hrs sugges- 
tion that subconscious phenomena are naturally subconscious. It seems to 
me that here he is confusing unconscious with subconscious, and that he 
hopes, by that confusion, to refute the psychoanalytic hypotheses. These, I 
think, have such an ample a posteriori justification that they have, for the 
present, at least, all the value of any scientific theory. But, as you say, more 
later. 

How do you like Katherine Mansfield? And please, we must see each 
other later on. And my best regards to Mrs. Smith. 

I’m sorry that this is such a garrulous, scatterbrained note. But answer it 
in kind, if you can. 

As ever— 


Bob 


a. Alfred H. Joy was an astronomer at the Mount Wilson Observatory near the newly estab- 
lished California Institute of Technology. 

b. Inez Pollak remembers several visits to Cambridge in this period accompanied by her 
brother or sister. The Sachs estate, Shady Hill, was the home of the Pollaks’ uncle, Paul Sachs, 
associate professor of fine arts at Harvard; interview with Inez Pollak by Alice Kimball Smith, 
Apmil 20, 1976. 

c. Bertrand Russell’s Analysis of Mind was published in 1921. 


Consulted in 1976 about the purchase of the ramshackle cottage on 
Cape Ann, Frederick Bernheim replied that it never materialized and that, as 
far as he was concerned, the huge cliffs of yellow granite belong to a mytho- 
logical landscape. However, Cape Ann was a favorite weekend objective. 
He and Robert, joined on occasion by William Boyd, would drive to Glou- 
cester in Bernheim’s Willys Overland and spend Saturday night at an inn at 
Folly Cove where the food was exceptionally good. In those days before 
through roads and route signs, they often got lost in the streets and squares 
of suburban Boston. Finally Robert, who did not yet drive, learned to face 
backward in order to read the signs on the rear end of trolleys going in the 
opposite direction to find where they had come from."* 


10 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Mass. 
May 2, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


Here are the masterpieces. But first of all, and very emphatically this time, 
may I have the other story about the mine? I shall probably use that one for 
Jackson, for it is the kind that is least likely to get a bad grade. If you can’t 
find the silly thing, you might let me know and I shall concoct another 
equally innocuous. 

And here, too, is the apologia that ought to accompany the four things I 
am sending: 

Please don’t read Conquest until the last; I am certain you will dislike it, 
and accuse me of morbidity and neuroticism. Also bad taste and poor 
writing. But there is one thing which you dare not imply; if you do say that 
this is a lot of sentimental drivel our metaphysical and literary intercourse 
will come to an abrupt conclusion. I shall seek death. 

The other stories you will probably object to merely on aesthetic 
grounds. But I feel that you will be able to lacerate them more efficiently if I 
announce 

that “It’s Silly” is not meant for poetry, 

that the Elysée is in New York, not Paris, 

and that, as you also undoubtedly know, Conrad’s Youth is a beautiful 
novelette on the futility of youthful courage and idealism. 

All this sounds as though I were sending you at least a copy of ‘“‘War and 
Peace’’ and the Iliad. But it is merely my trepidation that makes me thus 
apologize at such length in advance. Strangely enough, tho, Francis seemed 
to like the three he has seen. 

I have had several piteous little notes from Mrs. Page. She seems to be 


having a perfectly rotten time of it. Is there anything besides letters and pro- 
miscuous solicitude that I can give or do? 

Moreover, I must thank you again for your Hewes plan. It really may 
work. I went to see Hewes, who agreed with me, and suggested that his 
word would be more effective if it came as an answer to a letter from the 
folks. So I wrote, telling them how much I wanted to be with them for 
some part of the summer, and generally exhausting all arguments but the 
one of health. It was very thorough: Then I suggested that, if they were 
really in doubt about the health question, they should ask someone whom 
they trusted, e.g., Hewes.* I promised to abide by his dictum. 

And in the mean while, how are your plans? Francis has not yet heard 
from Erna [Fergusson]. And has Mrs. Page any maidens? Wouldn’t Helen 
Weil do, in a pinch, for the Los Pinos party?” Well, that is for you. 

Scatterbrainedly but sincerely — 


Bob 


a. Hewes may have been Henry Fox Hewes, M.D., of Marlborough Street, Boston, instruc- 
tor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. 

b. Helen Weil, a classmate of Robert’s at Ethical Culture School, was later singled out by 
Herbert Smith as “the only person . . . [Robert] ever suggested as worthy to be included in 
the Chaves menage’; Smith to Alice Kimball Smith, July 9, 1975. 


If Robert had any daring venture in mind for the summer, it did not 
come off. His vacation included a laboratory job in New Jersey, a month at 
Bay Shore, and a motor trip with his parents. Robert’s health obviously 
continued to be a matter of concern to them. It was not a problem that dom- 
inates the recollections of his contemporaries, though Bernheim thought of 
him as something of a hypochondriac. Robert used to go to bed with an 
electric pad. One night when it overheated he put the smoking pad in the 
bathroom and went back to sleep. There was considerable local damage.'’® 


THERE IS NO EVIDENCE that any of Robert’s fiction was published, or 
survived in manuscript, or indeed left a lasting impression upon its readers. 
George Stevens, later a successful publisher, author, and critic, does not re- 
call reading anything Robert wrote at Harvard.’® 


26 


11 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


D 12 Standish 
Cambridge, Mass. 
May 15, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, - 


I hasten to thank you very vigorously indeed for your long and tolerant 
letter; hasten even more because, after my last supremely unlovely note, 
your answer is a gleaming token of a forgiving soul. I suppose that it is use- 
less to apologize for the increased surliness of the note; but I must assure 
you that it was written in one of those spells of colitic insolence and mis- 
anthropy from which you have already suffered so often. 

With most of what you have to say about my filthy stories I agree quite 
absolutely. I think, though, that what, in Conquest, you so magnanimously 
consider carelessness, is in reality ineptitude; for I thought it necessary to 
show enough of the antecedent circumstances to explain how the situation 
came about, but did not want to elaborate the old fisherman’s motives; 
which, I tried to make it obvious, were very strictly pecuniary. And I have 
to admit, moreover, with the same shamefaced feeling with which I an- 
nounced my mid-year grades, that I can discover no terminus a quo for the 
judge simile. I was almost flattered by your incredulity, for I had to preserve 
that passage against the attacks of Fred and George Stevens, who happened 
to be here when I wrote it. 

Your diagnosis of the troubles with my other things delighted me. For I 
think that it is these, rather than any “conscious imitation of Katherine 
Mansfield”’ or artificiality of emotional situation that account for their utter 
failure. You see, I was no more conscious of imitating anyone in those than 
in any others; and I should not have the hardihood to write a story that was 
not based upon a very real emotional experience. But my things so reek 
with crudity, with unreliable detail and unreinforced implication, that the 
mere mechanics are likely to invalidate anything that I might have to say. 
Half the tragedy, you see, of Le Monde, is that Elisabeth could see in the 
grey sea a cosmic gutter. 

So much for that. When I come down, I may have a few other things to 
show you, if that will not bore you too much. And thanks again. 

Your letter was so spectacularly altruistic that you said nothing at all 
about what you were doing; and really, I should like to know. I have heard 
nothing about the magazine you were working for since I last saw you, and 
I should like to see your article in it. And how is the unsteady brat for next 
summer? 

Your suggestion about dislodging the folks from Bayshore, is slowly and 
uncertainly being carried into effect. In father’s letter this morning —“*Your 


Zi. 


invitation to go west is very tempting. Perhaps we can all manage [it ]””»—So 
you see. 

When I see you I shall say more of the comparatively Elysian life I have 
led here of late. And then we shall talk again with the free garrulity of mid- 
night at Ouray — 

And now a most grateful Adios. 


Bob 


Scurlock detonated again. R 


SOMETHING MORE IMPORTANT than writing and course work took 
place that first year. Robert discovered Widener Library. He talked about 
this experience in 1963: “‘I have a book—I saw it yesterday — which is salt- 
encrusted; it’s Jeans’ Electricity and Magnetism and it’s clear that I studied that 


when I went sailing inthe summer . . . My guess is that it was the arrival 
at Harvard, the free availability of the whole library — which happened very 
soon—that suddenly got me reading very widely . . . I must have started 


reading physics in a major way. I don’t believe [that] I audited a course, I 
don’t believe that I went to any seminars in physics that first, freshman year, 
but I petitioned the physics department for graduate standing.’”"” 

Graduate standing, which did not imply candidacy for an advanced de- 
gree, would permit Oppenheimer to take graduate courses. He submitted 
his request through a junior member of the department, Edwin C. Kemble, 
then engaged in research on molecular spectra in gases. Kemble had 
received the Ph.D. from Harvard in 1917 and was a member of its physics 
department from 1919 until he retired in 1957. 


12 | TO EDWIN C. KEMBLE 


D 12 Standish 
May 24 1923 


Dear Sir: 


I write to apply for permission to take Physics 6a next year, without first 
completing Physics C. In support of this application, let me mention the 
work that I have done which might prepare me for your course. 

In preparatory school I took a full laboratory course in Physics, in which I 
received the grade of A. In addition to the regular work, I performed several 
experiments in mechanics, heat, and light; furthermore, I read rather widely 
in elementary books on optics, the theory of heat, and the physics of the 


28 


molecule. I presented Physics as a subject for entrance, and received a 96 on 
the examination of the College Board. 

This year I have taken Chemistry 2, in which I received a grade of A; 
Chemistry 3, in which my grade, up to the present, has been A; and mathe- 
matics with Professor [Julian L.] Coolidge, in which I have been receiving 
an A. On the advice of Professor Coolidge and Professor [William F.] Os- 
good I am going to take Mathematics 5 next year. During this time I have 
read several works on Thermodynamics and related subjects. A partial list 
follows: 


Ramsay; Lewis: Vol. 1, Kinetic Theory. 
Vol. 2, Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics. 
Vol. 3, Quantum Theory. 
Lewis and Randall: Thermodynamics. 
Crowther (of Thomson’s laboratory): Molecular Physics. 
Poincare: La Physique Moderne. 
Walker: Physical Chemistry. 
Ostwald: Solutions. 
Gibbs: On the Equilibria of Heterogeneous Systems. 
Jeans: The Dynamical Theory of Gases. (part) 
Poincare: Thermodynamique (part) 
Nernst: Thermodynamics and Chemistry. 
(part of) Theoretische Chemie. 
Sommerfeld: Atombau u.Spectral-linien (part) 
Mac Dougall: Thermodynamics and Chemistry. 


Whatever reading or work you may advise, I shall be glad to do; for I 
very sincerely hope that my petition may be granted. 
Very truly, 


J Robert Oppenheimer 


An entry in the minutes of a physics department meeting on June 6 was 
originally typed as follows: “It was voted to allow Mr. J. R. Oppenheimer to 
take Physics 6a without taking Physics C. It appeared that Mr. Oppen- 
heimer, according to his own statement had done considerable reading and 
study in Physics.”’ Pencilled emendations changed the entry to “‘had read 
rather widely in Physics, for one of his age.’”’ Two days later Professor 
Theodore Lyman, the department chairman, informed Robert that his 
petition was granted.’® 

Recalling this episode in 1963, Oppenheimer added: ‘It may be apoc- 
ryphal, but years later I was told that when the faculty met to consider this 


29 


request, George Washington Pierce . . . said, ‘Obviously if he says he’s 
read these books he’s a liar, but he should get a Ph.D. for knowing their 
titles.’ 

The reading list suggests a facility with languages other than English 
which Oppenheimer acquired early and retained. “I had had some French, 
but I didn’t know the literature well and I couldn’t write it fluently .. . I 
learned . . . something of how it sounded from a governess at one point. I 
had studied [German]. We didn’t talkut at Home; my mother didn’t talk it 
well, my father didn’t believe in talking it. But Ihad beento Europe. . . | 
never went back to studying Greek but I continued to read it. Latin I only 
got to read again much later; it’s an old man’s language . . . Scientific 
things I would read in whatever they came in, but literary things I would be 
reading in French and a little in Italian. One of the courses I audited was on 
Vita Nuova.”’*° 


FINAL EXAMINATIONS OVER, Robert left for New York in time to 
keep a date to see the Devil’s Disciple with Smith. In due course he learned 
that his grade in freshman English was B, in all other courses A.”? 


13 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


D 12 Standish 
Cambridge, Mass. | 
May 30, 1923. 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


A hasty note to acknowledge the return of the illbehaved story and to 
confirm our date for the thirteenth. I shall probably be in to school to see 
you and decide where to meet; if not I shall call. 

You know well enough what a futile and “‘ungemutlich”’ time this is: I 
shall not trouble you more with the degenerate dribblings of my Corona. 
The only news is that I shall probably get a C in English because I cut the 
last three classes. 


Adios 
Bob 
FROM NEW YORK, though on Harvard stationery, Robert wrote Francis 


Fergusson the first of a series of letters through which they attempted to 
keep in touch during two years of separation. 


30 


14 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


[New York City] 
June 14 1923. 


Dear Francis, 


Yesterday evening Smith and I saw the Devil’s Disciple. He seemed com- 
paratively cheerful, overflowed with the “‘hullo Bob”’ sort of thing, and re- 
gained with surprising ease the orbit of condescension from which I had so 
arrogantly jarred him. What, I think, was his worst trouble during the win- 
ter, and what accounts for his fits of misanthropy, is the series of Kowtow- 
ings he had to perform for the skinflint Jews whose infant he is to chaper- 
one. But it is all settled now, and he has returned to his normal abnormality. 

His irritation at my stories is not hard to explain, either. It seems that 
Kitty Pollak has recently started writing too, and he is much annoyed at 
having failed to detect and coddle even such puny ability when he could. 
But alas, it is not only that: he said, and if my typewriter were not incapaci- 
tated, I should print this in crimson—he said that he thought that the sort of 
thing we were trying to write was incapable of standing on its own feet, 
that, even with the great, it was scarcely successful, and with us hopeless. 
He excepted your Ralph story and mine about Jane—Alas . . . 

One other thing and my official report will be complete: he thinks that 
you are not Frank enough with him—hear my Mephistophelian chortles — 
he suspects you of not telling either of us your real opinions—he hopes to 
get more out of you next summer. So you had better think up a platoon of 
plausible platitudes to sell as secrets, or your plans may not work so well. I 
hope that you understand the appropriate modesty with which I submit this 
resume, for it would be vain for me to dogmatize to you, my revered master 
and tutor in the science of Smithology; but I am so used to handing over my 
soul to you that I grow uneasy when I discover a few still undelivered frag- 
ments. 

The Russian is coming: I am now at the stage where I can discuss verte- 
brates in the present tense with seeming erudition. As yet no news from 
Paul [Horgan]; and I wait with pronouncing my plans until my campaign 
advances a few more millimicrons. 

Your books are on their way. Poincare is out of print in English and una- 
vailable in French, but you will be able to get him when you are in Europe. 
You know how glad I should be to hear from you, even if you descend to so 
trivial and selfcentered a note as this. 

A bientot. 


[no signature] 


31 


Rereading this letter in 1976, Fergusson was puzzled by the references 
to Smith since he cannot remember a time when he did not hold him in high 
regard and affection. “But of course it’s Robert’s style,’’ he reflected. 
‘Everything he takes up, he exaggerates.’’ Smith himself made a similar 
comment in another connection, and Horgan too noted Robert’s ‘baroque 
tendency to exaggerate.’*? In any case, the temporary rebellion against 
Smith in his quasiparental role did not last. 


AN EFFORT to introduce variety into Oppenheimer vacations was not 
successful. New Mexico was apparently out of the question, and a proposed 
family expedition to the Selkirk Mountains in British Columbia was aban- 
doned. Robert spent a few weeks in a dull laboratory job in New Jersey, 
which he left shortly after writing to Fergusson on July 17. 


15 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


The Brittan 

1025 East Jersey 
Elizabeth, New Jersey 
July 17, 1923. 


Dear Francis, 


This new and vicious George of yours must really be a very magnificent 
person,? and I realize well enough that it is not a bit proper or even natural 
for me not to be jealous of him. For not only has he captured the love and 
adulation of Los Pinos; but he is endowed with all those enticing traits 
which I find most ghastly in man. He is what the world was to me in earlier 
adolescence. And yet, damnabile dictu, I find in my unmanly soul no trace 
of that jealousy, and do not even grudge him the honor of having reduced 
your Bayshore modicum of twelve hours of sleep to three. 

But oh, beloved, how I envy you! Three hours sleep; witty; charming; the 
soul and supporter of Los Pinos; the all but gastronomic consoler to the 
Pecos’ host—successful; doing a little intellectual work on the side; blessed 
with enormous activity —Mon Dieu—Francis, you choke me with anguish 
and despair; all I can do is to admit to my hierarchy of physico-chemical 
immutabilities the Chaucerian “Amour vincit omnia.” 

It was in search of a similarly satisfying adventure that I wandered here. | 
have a job as laboratorian or chemist or something like that, and have 
searched the plant and the hotel for possible persons. Only one wretch have 
I found, and he penniless and dissipated; but he is six foot seven, has fine 
black moustachios, is a Bostonian via Oxford, is properly pessimistic and 
boasts cleverly about the night sort of thing, has read, and well, writes, and 


27 


is a bit of a scientist. He works at a different plant and lives in a different 
city, but has come over for an evening a couple of times. But he has lost his 
job, and is going to South America. He is not a Jew. 

Outre cela, rien. The job and people are bourgeois and lazy and dead; 
there is littke work and nothing to puzzle at; and the establishment has 
among it less than one sixteenth of a sense of humour. So soon I am going 
home again, where, I find, I can read much and write a little. Later we are 
going on a trip, probably to the Selkirks in British Columbia. 

Nothing I can write could be interesting, now. But I hope to cheat you 
into sending me another of your gloating letters. I feel almost as though I 
could say, naively and petulantly, of course, that it was so good to hear from 
you youngsters now and then. But I am not yet even as resigned as Smith— 
whom, by the way—you are now caricaturing quite as grotesquely through 
superiority as you once did in admiration—and I still squirm. That, I am 
afraid, is a sight to make not only Gods but grammarians weep, for my 
moans are always non sequiturs. 

Boyd tells me that he is maintaining his program of selfintellectualization 
with appalling rigor. Smith’s letters have grown affectionate again. Perhaps, 
now that he has seen you, he has decided that I did well to keep as sane as I 
am in your presence. All the rest is groans—and sailing and novels and 
mathematical physics. 

Please, I almost whimper it, please write again. 


[no signature] 


a. George was one of Katherine Page’s paying guests at Los Pinos. 


Boyd was William Clouser Boyd, usually called ““Clowser’’ by Robert, 
who consistently misspelled the name. With Bernheim, Boyd helped to fill 
the gap left by Fergusson’s departure for Oxford. He and Robert had met as 
freshmen in Chem 3, the qualitative analysis course. Boyd had studied 
chemistry in high school in St. Joseph, Missouri, and Robert used to bring 
his tests on his unknowns to him for verification. Another member of the 
class asked Boyd, “‘Who is this guy Oppenheimer who keeps coming to 
you? I think he’s a pest.’’ Boyd reminisced: ‘Well, I didn’t think he was a 
pest. It was obvious . . . that he was a very talented person, very able and 
very sensitive, and we had lots of interests in common aside from science. 
We both tried to write and we wrote poetry, sometimes in French, and we 
wrote stories in imitation of Chekhov .. . and he did a little painting 
which I have done since . . . The chief thing . . . we did not have in 
common was a love of music. I was very fond of music . . . but once a 
year he would go to an opera, with me and Bernheim usually, and he’d 


33 


leave after the first act. He just couldn’t take any more. Totally amusical, I 
thought then. I tested him once, and he was not tone deaf.’’*? | 

In view of Robert’s later intense enjoyment of music, his indifference to 
it at this period is interesting. As a child he had shown a precocious ability to 
recognize themes in classical music but he was bored by piano lessons. He 
once had an illness with flu-like symptoms so severe as to suggest that he 
might have polio. When his mother asked him how he felt, Robert reportedly 
answered, ‘The way I do when Ihave to practice.” The lessons were dis- 
continued.** Herbert Smith, remarking that Robert’s reliable memory failed 
him only under some sort of inhibition, recalled the following conversation. 
Said Smith to Robert, ““You’re the only physicist I’ve ever known who wasn’t 
also musical, and I never heard you refer to music.”’ “I don’t know,”’ Robert 
replied, ‘something must have happened because I used to be devoted to it. 
I just don’t know what happened.’’”® 


ROBERT SOON LEFT the laboratory job and was at the shore with his 
family when he wrote Francis again in mid-August. Once he had experi- 
enced New Mexico’s vast panorama of deserts and mountains and its casual 
social life, the conventional summer house on Long Island seemed a place of 
confinement, despite easy access to the sea and sailing, which he loved. 
Nevertheless, in 1923 Bay Shore was still an important part of the Oppen- 
heimer way of life and gave pleasure to many people, sometimes even to 
Robert. 

To Fred Bernheim, a New Yorker, it was “just an ordinary*kind of 
house.”” The boys from Missouri and New Mexico were more impressed. 
William Boyd remembers it as elegant, Paul Horgan as “‘well staffed with 
maids and people on the grounds . . . a very comfortably spacious es- 
tate . . . It was my first taste as a resident of rather excessive luxury and 
grandeur and comfort on that scale. I enjoyed it enormously.’’*® 

Frank too has clear and happy memories of Bay Shore. At the pier 
below the house were moored the family’s forty-foot sailing yacht, Lorelei, 
with auxiliary motor and other amenities, and the Trimethy, the twenty- 
eight foot sloop used by Robert and Frank, its name shortened from tri- 
methylamine (C3HgN), a colorless liquid which smelled like pickled her- 
ring. “It was lovely on that bay,”’ recalls Frank, ‘“‘seven acres .. . a big 
vegetable garden and lots and lots of flowers.”’ It was a place to share with 
friends and celebrate family festivals. On Frank’s birthday and his mother’s, 
which fell in summer, others in the family went out early to pick flowers 
with which they covered the breakfast table and even the seats of chairs.?’ 


16 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Bayshore N Y 
August 16, 1923. 


Dear Francis, 


At last I see an opportunity for one of those longwinded, tapestried 
apologies whose prospect always delights me. Think of the august and 
pompous genuflections with which I might open this letter; consider the 
glittering array of explanations, the platoons of excuses, the phalanxes of 
apologetics that I might marshal to salute you. Racine himself could have 
conceived no more melodramatic a situation, nor one more prolific of po- 
tential sonorous verbalisms: —It is ten days since your letter arrived. — 
Thus long have I delayed answer, thus brazenly have I neglected to thank 
you—Helas. 

And that in the face of your perfect Pecos panorama, which leaves me, 
even now, with a disconcerting image of “George” and Smith and Katy 
[Katherine Page] mingling oaths and tears and ocote; in the face of your 
promise of Harvard and Los Pinos sagas, prospect which would have 
moved to action anyone less degenerate and callous than I. But really, maes- 
tro, I am terribly—yes, terribly, eager to see your things, and would even 
burn my new Jean’s Electromagnetics for a glimpse of the Pecos one. I can’t 
tell you how I admire the calm intensity with which you say “I shall do a 
big story about that—later on.’’ Quelle patience inattendue et inhumaine! 
voir Herrick. 

But I can keep the news from you no longer, even at the cost of sacrificing 
a more extended salutation: le jour de gloire est arrivé: Paul has been with 
me for the past three weeks. Of course I have been happy. 

It all happened in a most perfectly well managed way. I was just on the 
point of leaving my job in Chrome permanently—for it was too boring 
even for my ascetic soul, and I had written all I wanted at the time—when a 
tornado and cymbal letter came from Paul, effervescing in the most con- 
siderate way with apology and cordiality and excitement. So we have been 
spending a most civilized and unexciting time down here, writing, reading 
enormously, travelling to town from time to time for books and exhibits 
and plays, and sallying every evening in tuxedoes, pathetically to ransack 
Bayshore or Islip for a vestige of adventure. Paul has even been tactful 
enough to sing extended paeans to Katherine Mansfield? and to conquer his 
fear of the sea often enough to permit him an occasional panegyric on sail- 
ing. He sketches with mother, goes riding with father and me, acts for 
Frank, praises my stories, and even brings himself, reluctantly enough, to 
examine Jeans and Poincare. Ce n’est pas* un homme, c’est un monstre. And 
our expeditions to the city—*voir Herrick. 


29 


Later on we are motoring to Niagara with him, and then on to Quebec. 
N.M. was quite impossible, this year, I think. I fear that if I transported 
father and mother to the midst of the desert and dropped them, I should 
jeopardize my puny inheritance; and to chaperone them to Los Pinos would 
insure a new nervous breakdown. All that Smith and Mrs. Page write con- 
firms your dismal account. 

Perhaps, when you come through in the fall, I can arrange to see you. At 
any rate, you must call on mother and get your pictures and address; and 
you must let me see your stories, if you can possibly spare them. I shall re- 
turn them without the Gargantuan promptings which were needed to ex- 
tract them from Smith. 

I have written eight or nine stories, but have worked on only a few. One 
of them satisfies me far better than anything else I have done, and I should 
be only too delighted to let you see it. As soon as I begin to know enough I 
shall not need to resort to these things; but that seems farther off now than 
ever, and this psychic celibacy is too stern a regimen. So I write my stories, 
and send you these notes of drivel. I am back at my moaning again, you see, 
in spite of the plaster of Paris fresco beginning. You must write, anyway, 
and forgive me these reams of tardy and inconsequential twaddle. 

K.M.’s new book “Dove’s Nest’ is heartrending. There are several ex- 
quisite stories, and many lovely fragments. But there 1s so much that is in- 
complete, that is either unfinished or unpolished or fragmentary or insignif- 
icant, that it is a cruel thing to read—as disappointing as if the Hermes of 
Praxiteles were suddenly to develop viscera. You’ve probably seen it by 
now, anyway. 

My corona is dying, too— Adios. 


[no signature] 


Paul’s still on The Press. 


a. Mrs. Oppenheimer admired Mansfield’s writing. 


Horgan looks back upon those weeks in Bay Shore with the same un- 
tarnished delight with which Robert so many years ago announced le jour de 


gloire of his arrival. ““We would go out on the sloop, the Trimethy . . . not 
every day, because some days we did go riding and exploring. Sometimes 
we'd go in to New York . . . He took me to see Jeanne Eagles in “‘Rain.”’ 


I’d never seen that particular play with that wonderful actress. That was a 
great excitement. But we would go out on the boat—he was a very good 
sailor, good navigator—and anchor out in the shallow part of Great South 
Bay, off Bay Shore, and I would be up on the forward deck, working at a 
typewriter, writing desperately bad imitations of Chekhov and other short 


story writers, and Robert would be in the cockpit, sprawled over a book on 
thermodynamics and chuckling with great connoisseurship over it. It al- 
ways impressed me very much. And I'll never forget one day when we were 
out. We sailed too close to the Fire Island Inlet, when the tide was going out, 
and we were carried with it. We could see enormous breakers just at the 
mouth 6f the inlet. It had been a great storm, and this was the aftermath, and 
that little sloop would have had a bad time against the breakers. Well, in 
three minutes we went down the inlet with this very great rush of tide, a 
distance which took us about two hours to recover coming back. He tacked 
magnificently, back and forth, and back and forth, finally got us clear of the 
inlet again, and back into the bay. But that was long after we were due to be 


back, and the family was frantic ... We headed back toward the 
house . . . across the bay and were going very slowly. It was after dark, 
and . . . toward eleven o’clock at night we sighted the big yacht looking 
for us . . . We were rescued and brought on board and fed and cos- 
seted . . . but it was a very exciting day. Robert was a heroic mariner, but 


he simply miscalculated on this tremendous rush of tide. It could have been 
extremely serious. And as a strange footnote to this, in an early novel of 
mine [No Quarter Given] I had an episode which recalls this . . . in which, 
through a kind of stream of consciousness passage, life is leaving the central 
character. And the image I used was being carried out to sea.’””® 

William Boyd, too, remembers Robert as an excellent sailor, but he 
was not a cautious one, and Fred Bernheim, caught in a squall with Robert 
at the helm, had doubts about his seamanship.”® Again, perhaps the New 
Yorker had more exacting standards than the inlanders. 


HORGAN REMEMBERS no tension on the trip to Buffalo which Robert 
described in his next letter to Fergusson. ‘“The parents were extremely kind 
to me and very gentle and solicitous about me as a youngster . . . and ap- 
parently very happy in our friendship . . . but what I did to bring this on 
must have been insufferable.’ 


17 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Bayshore N.Y. 
September 16, 1923. 


My dear Francis, 


You really could not blame me for taking over a week to recover from 
the satiric ravages of your last note. Your attack was cruel enough anyway; 
and at the time it was delivered, particularly cruel because it nearly blighted 
a dinky novelette, a new branch of the calculus, and some half dozen char- 
coals which were getting themselves delivered from the foetal stage. And 


your less shrouded opinion of my Harvard oscillations I hope to find in 
your saga, when you so sketch Otto [Koenig] and me at the Athens, per- 
forming for you the most blatant of the superb series of misunderstandings 
which you propose to exploit. 

But in spite of my wounds I can not wait any longer, lest I be too late to 
urge you again not to neglect me in passing. At least you must write to tell 
me what your plans are; and if it is at all possible, I beg you to allow me to 
receive you in Cambridge. 

I think I told you that we were to motor Paul to Buffalo on our way to 
Quebec. We did. And toward the end there developed such an intricate pan- 
orama of complications that I was regaled with a daily scene. Toward the 
end, you see, mother and father grew a little jealous of Paul, and a little irri- 
tated at the ease with which he disregarded obstacles whose conquests 
formed the central jewels in the Oppenheimer crown. The matter was fur- 
ther embellished by two luscious complexes, oozing ich or: mother’s and 
father’s, which tried to apologize for being Jews; the Horgan’s, which whin- 
nied and shied clumsily about richesse and poverty. Moreover, Paul was, 
because of ‘“‘circumstances I am not at liberty to divulge”’ particularly sensi- 
tive about his painting and writing. I am sure that you will picture the re- 
sults of this explosive agglomeration without more empiric advices. 

On the way down from Quebec we stopped at Cambridge over night. 
This year, I think, I shall be somewhat more comfortable, with an Oriental 
rug, a few little oils and some rather better etchings, an old silver tea urn, 
and a well fenced garden— Still, when I make my alpine way from: Wolcott 
Gibbs [Laboratory] thru the dank blackness of five o’clock Cambridge to 
those positively stinking squash courts, and thence to the equally fragrant 
Georgian [Restaurant], I shall think enviously of you; see you exploring 
London, or closeted with your tutor, or sketching the Gulf of Taranto—“‘I 
shall sit there, serving tea to friends’. And I hope you will come to be the 
first to receive the tea from the sacred urn. 

This week I shall be in town, chaperoning Boyd and getting an oculist to 
rehabilitate (I hear you snicker) my eyes, which have balked at a too rapid 
alternation of the Trimethylamine and Thermodynamics— And I shall 
cherch Smith; I am curious to see the wreck that you and Los Pinos have 
wrought of that gallant little band who went forth so gaily last June, Her- 
bert W. Smith. 

If you will pardon this redundancy, I shall ask you again to try to see me 
on your way through. And when you meet Paul, I wish you would hint to 
him, in your most Smithian way, that my parents are particularly finicky 
about thank-you letters. 

And finally, to conclude these imprecations, will you remember me most 
earnestly to your mother and sister? 


A Cantabrigia. 


[no signature] 


a. Frederick Otto Koenig, son of the director of the summer camp which Robert attended in 
1918, was a graduate student at Harvard in 1923. The Athens Olympia in Boston was a favorite 
restaurant of Robert’s. 


ROBERT WAS BACK at Harvard, which opened on September 24, when 
Fergusson came through New York on his way to Oxford, but he sent a 
nightletter on September 28 to the S.S. Albania. 


18 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Western Union Telegram 


Cambridge Mass Sept 28 


ONE LAST WAVE OF ULULATION APPLAUSE REGRET IT WOULD DELIGHT ME 
TO HEAR FROM TIME TO TIME OF YOUR ACHIEVEMENTS I ADMIT WHAT I 
EXPECT THEM TO BE SORRY MY LETTER MISSED YOU JEFFRIES TOO SEND 
GREETINGS DIOS TE GUARDE 


Robert 


Jeffries Wyman, Harvard ’23, was starting graduate work in biology. 
He and Robert were closer friends than the Harvard letters indicate. Wyman 
surmises that their different backgrounds, old Boston Yankee and new New 
York Jewish, drew them together, each eager to be less parochial. Fergusson 
had commended Robert to Wyman as brilliant and precocious. “Indeed he 
was,’ says Wyman. “The first impression he made was that he was a little 
precious, and perhaps a little arrogant, but very interesting, full of ideas. We 
had a very good time together and talked about many things other than sci- 
ence.” Like Boyd and Smith, Wyman noted a lacuna. “‘He was completely 
blind to music. In fact he told me that music was positively painful to 
him.””*?? 

Wyman and Robert saw much of each other in 1923-24 as Robert 
moved into graduate-level courses. They studied thermodynamics together 
and talked about interrelated problems in physics and biology. At first, 
Wyman found Robert enthusiastic and somewhat naive, despite his good 
school background, but ‘“‘he was very quickly getting a much better picture 
of physics and mastering the basic mathematics of physics and becoming 
more sophisticated all the time.’” Wyman also joined some of the expedi- 
tions on which these serious young men let off steam; he remembers partic- 
ularly days spent on Plum Island off Newburyport. 


THREE LETTERS that Robert wrote to Paul Horgan in the autumn of 
1923 are among the few that survive of a copious correspondence, most of 
which was destroyed when a flood damaged Horgan’s home in Roswell, 
New Mexico. 

‘Rody,’ to whom Robert refers in the first of these letters, was Paul’s 
sister Rosemary, by all accounts a beautiful young woman, blue-eyed, dark- 
haired, delicate, and sensitive, who later developed a serious emotional ill- 
ness. Robert was much attracted to her in‘ these happier days. In fact, as a 
young man he was more moved by her than by anyone, thinks his brother 
Frank, an impression surely based upon Robert’s later confidence, not on 
the direct observation of eleven-year-old Frank. Horgan and others agree 
about the strength of this attachment.** Rosemary later married Alan Grant. 

Horgan himself, not yet settled in his career as a writer, was studying 
singing at the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York. In need of 
a job to support his studies, he had ‘“‘crassly volunteered,” as he put it, to 
become scenic designer of the school’s newly formed Rochester American 
Opera Company. What had most impressed Horgan at their first meeting 
was Robert’s extraordinary vocabulary. ““This awakened something in me,”’ 
he later recalled, ““[We were enchanted] with the notion of great enrichment 
of language so that we often conversed in a baroque lingo . . . [indulging 
in] harmless fancies of curlicued language but all with humor.” Francis Fer- 
gusson too was drawn into this game with words.* 


19 | TO PAUL HORGAN 


60 Mt Auburn Street, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
Sept 28, 1923. 


My dear Paul, 


Once more I am demolished by a wave of envy for your tactics. Simply, 
quietly, in the most natural and charming way in the world, you have cor- 
rected me for my untutored presumptuousness; you have shown me the na- 
ivete of my former ideas, and taught me that a letter from you is something 
to be awaited, hoped, prized, loved, treasured; something to be read and 
reread, lingeringly, with fondness; something even, perhaps, to be 
enshrined; but never, alas, anticipated or expected— If I could paint for you 
my weeks of anxious longing, sinking gradually into despair, if I could but 
paint you that, and then reveal the dissipation of my sorrows as I threaded 
through the intricate mosaic of your cliches and compliments, I am certain 
that you would never thus torture me again. 

Most seriously and earnestly, though, I want to thank you for sending 


4() 


your sketches. I cannot help feeling, ingenuously, I suppose, that even the 
three things you sent me, which certainly are not so pretentious and la- 
borious, say, as the Lodge murals, show a good deal more care and inspira- 
tion in their design than the Van Dyke and Giotto things you defend— I 
like immensely your abstract, particularly, I think, for its obvious but skill- 
ful repetition of cofor and texture, and the corresponding dramatic rapidity. 
Best of all, though, I like the nude, in spite of its technical scraggliness; your 
design in blue and rose, intricate curves and shadows over the faint spectral 
drop, is very good indeed, I think. Your landscape, for me, fails through one 
thing, and that probably as much the fault of the medium: your design isn’t 
echoed at all in textural differences, and it seems a bit too primitive and 
Static to succeed without that in two dimensions— I know that [I] ought to 
return them all at once; but I trust that you will forgive me if I keep them a 
short while longer; and thank you again for letting me see them. 

I wish you would send your story. Is it the “til human voices wake us and 
we drown’’? —Since I left you I have done three more stories and finished 
my novelette; but I am still attacking them from time to time, and shall let 
you see them later. Also the charcoals, which, as yet, are too simple to be 
worth your time. I have spoken to Clowser Boyd about Windows, and he is 
investigating and coming to a decision.? I shall be extremely busy anyway 
this year, and unless someone can do the economics and filthy work I shall 
be unable to work on it at all. But I shall let you know. 

Some time ago I wrote one of my stupid fresco letters to Rody; it will 
doubtless induce her to flee Buffalo at my next approach. But I hope that it 
did not dissuade you and her from the visit which you promised me this fall. 
I earnestly want you to come. Then you may see La Clavel, mistress of my 
chambers, Jeffries Wyman, Boyd, stories, books, sketches to satiety. Then 
too we could cogitate upon Windows— And I shall be positively insulted if 
Rody doesn’t come. 

I have heard twice from Francis, but he has delivered little news. 
Yesterday mother wired that he was sailing on the Albania today. Lorcks 
and away, helas: baton des exiles, lampe des inventeurs! Smith too, gave a 
somewhat distorted account of his summer. I promise you another ha- 
rangue soon, to accompany your pictures— But do write first to tell me 
that you both are coming. 

Please remember me to your mother, and do your most charming bow 
for me to Rody. And may Rochester turn to gold under your fingers. 


[no signature] 


a. Windows was a stillborn avant-garde literary review. Boyd wrote in 1977, “Such projects 
usually lose money and I for one didn’t have any money to lose. So I was glad when the project 
expired before it even breathed.” His only regret was that he never met Horgan; Boyd to Alice 
Kimball Smith, March 19, 1977. 


41 


20 | TO PAUL HORGAN 


60 Mt Auburn, 
Cambridge. 
October 6, 1923. 


My dear Paul, 


This note, hélas, has got to be.as short ‘ind unrhetorical as my inebriate 
soul and the explosive nature of my felicitations can conspire to make it. I 
mean, beloved, that I would like, if I had time and power, to answer your 
splendid epic with one not incomparable to it, and match the intricate pat- 
tern of your quotations, allusions, epigrams, poetics, and flattery in my 
reply. But it is a tragic and overwhelming truism that my paltry successes do 
not come without assiduity and labor; that the Artzibasheffs I conquer de- 
mand a pretentious pertinacity and patience;? that I am, quae cum ita sint, 
hysterically engaged in keeping soul and body from complete disintegration 
and decrepitude; and that, accordingly, I shall be unable to fabricate a mas- 
terpiece fit to stand beside, say, your ‘Now he is on your ocean.”’ 

But certain matters most imperatively demand attention: (atto primo) | 
am—vwell perhaps not surprised—but positively enraptured by your wi- 
zardly and alchemistic transformation of la belle Rochester. You seem to 
have stored within you an infinity of energetic and altogether desirable bits 
of genius, which you periodically regurgitate as expediency suggests. With 
one tiny department of one of the great fields of creative exploit you patron- 
ize you seem to have gained a benison of wealth, honor, stimulus, and 
friends. Quelle consummation inauditee et magnifique, quelle conquete fac- 
ile, incomparable! And, though my knowledge of Artzibasheff’s achieve- 
ments had previously lacked much that a properly educated esthete’s should 
have had, I now pronounce without hesitation that he is one of the most 
talented artists who have yet come to give their attention to the stage, but 
that there may be one or two, not more, who are able to rival him in inspira- 
tion and excellence— 

And I fear that this gilt efflorescence, combined with Knopf’s disconcert- 
ing callousness, will drive you further and further from the inglorious 
realms of writing. But to urge you to continue I shall beg you to send me 
some of your things and promise you, in return, a few of the creations | 
have committed here, steadfast despite the appalling incrustations of ther- 
modynamic and epistomological erudition which are being deposited upon 
me. 

(Atto secondo) I thank you very earnestly and simply for your sketches. 
A little ashamed of robbing of them, yet too weak to send them back — 
Thanks again— And since you demand to know, I must confess that neither 


42 


mother nor I was ever properly irate for your taciturnity. But I admit that I 
wanted to be. But, my dear Paul, you are completely reinstated, I swear to 
you: 


Qui donne a penser que le diable 
Fait toujours bien tout ce qu'il fait. 


That, I know, 1s gross flattery. 

(atto terzo) Again allow me to press you and Rody to come. Even your 
insultingly tourist reflection cannot keep me still. I shall be flattered if you 
come hysterical and enchanted if you come demure, but suicide awaits me if 
you stay. 

(atto quarto) The Francis has treated me quite as snarkily as he did you. 
The customary and lengthy letter, with its usual modicum of flattery, felici- 
tation, farewell, even, perhaps, affection. He is having Frances Keeley send 
me his Harvard saga;” so I will send some of my stories? and write? and 
forgive him for not coming up? —and the tragedy is that I will, that it is his 
own peculiar genius to insult so simply and yet so well. —But out in his 
country, we don’t do that sort of thing; it’s all this Harvard tradition of 
study and indifference. That too is the fault of the Atlantic. It is an ocean 
which says with every sullen breaker and every undulation “It is not with us 
as with those whom small things can annoy.”’ You owe it a bitterer grudge 
for that than for having come so near to drowning you. 

(finale) Fred returns your greeting, perhaps intensified by several milli- 
grams of not too proper envy. 

And even I, after reflecting again on your letter, am forced to this final 
perversion of our overburdened refrain: 


O Satan, prends pitie de MA longue misere—‘ 


Most cordial regards to your mother and Rody. 


R 


a. Boris Artzibasheff, later a well-known portrait painter and Time cover artist, was Hor- 
gan’s competitor for the job of scenic designer with the opera company. Horgan submitted a 
few hastily done drawings and got the job; Horgan to Alice Kimball Smith, February 24, 1977. 

b. Frances Keeley was a friend of Fergusson’s. 

c. The refrain which follows each of fifteen couplets in Charles Baudelaire’s “‘Les Litanies de 
Satan.’’ ““We chanted it to each other in comic commentary on almost anything,” recalled Hor- 
gan; Horgan to Alice Kimball Smith, February 24, 1977. 


SIXTY MOUNT AUBURN STREET from which Robert now wrote 
was an old house opposite the Crimson office where he was settled with his 


43 


oils, etchings, and tea urn. There for the next two years he and Fred Bern- 
heim occupied large adjoining rooms, Fred’s at the front, Robert’s in back 
with the bath next door. They considered themselves roommates, but “‘in 
the evenings when we had to work we just shut the door,” recalls Bern- 
heim. The charcoal in Robert’s samovar did not always burn, and he had to 
resort to Sterno, but the tea was Russian style, a characteristic affectation 
that Bernheim found tolerable because Robert was “really interested in 
doing it.”” Bernheim too found Robert a little bit precious in the way he 
quoted French poetry —Verlaine, Baudelaire—yet it was these broad inter- 
ests and Robert’s articulateness about them that had attracted Fred to him 
the previous year in Standish Hall. ‘‘He wasn’t a comfortable person to be 
around, in a way,” reflected Bernheim, “because he always gave the 1m- 
pression that he was thinking very deeply about things. When we roomed 
together he would spend evenings locked in his room, trying to do 
something with Planck’s constant or something like that. I had visions of 
him suddenly bursting forth as a great physicist, and here I was just trying 
to get through Harvard.” 

Oppenheimer’s influence may have been decisive in changing Bern- 
heim’s objective from the practice of medicine to medical research. “I think 
that he did actually show me how to do science,’’ Bernheim commented 
recently. ‘“‘Not in any specific sense, but [in giving me] a feeling that it was 
an exciting thing to do, that it’s something that you could give your life to. 
And .. . he was able to supply criteria . . . articles that came out in Sci- 
ence and other general magazines that were useful. [I was] inclined at that 
age to accept anything in print as gospel, and he was much more criti- 
cal . . . I certainly wouldn’t have had this career if it hadn’t been for him,”’ 
mused Bernheim, referring to his position as Professor of Pharmacology at 
the Duke University Medical School.*® 

In later life Robert enjoyed bringing congenial people together and 
sharing friendships. At this period he seems to have compartmentalized 
them. With Bernheim, who doubts that he ever met Fergusson, Robert dis- 
played “‘a feeling that we should make a unit.”’ They had little to do with 
other students living in the house. The only person who dropped in often at 
their pleasant suite was William Boyd, who sometimes went out to dinner 
with Robert and Fred or shared their weekend expeditions. Boyd was the 
only person Bernheim could invite more than once without rousing Rob- 
ert’s possessiveness. After all, Boyd was Robert’s discovery, and in those 
days he displayed an antic quality that appealed to the playful side of Rob- 
ert’s nature.°” 

Although Boyd, like Robert and Fred, completed his undergraduate 
degree in three years, he considered himself a plodder compared to Robert, 
who could afford to waste time and never seemed to have to study. At least, 


44 


says Boyd, “‘he was pretty careful not to let you catch him at it.” Dinner at 
Locke-Ober’s on a winter evening, followed by a leisurely walk back to 
Cambridge along the Charles, upset Boyd’s schedule but made no differ- 
ence to Robert. Boyd’s impression that Robert, Bernheim, and he ‘“‘were the 
closest friends any of us had” at Harvard seems borne out as far as Robert 
was concerned by the casual way they appear in his letters to those other 
good friends Fergusson and Smith. 

Before writing again to Horgan, Robert brought Herbert Smith up to 
date on the activities of their mutual friends and referred casually to the con- 
tinuing six-course load that would enable him to graduate in three years. In 
the order in which they appear on his Harvard transcript and as described in 
the 1923-24 “Harvard Descriptive Catalogue’ they were: 


Chemistry 4, Quantitative Analysis, gravimetric and volumetric, a full- 
year course for graduates and undergraduates. 

Chemistry 8, Elementary Theory and Physical Chemistry consisting of 
lectures and reading, spring semester. 

Chemistry 22, Experimental Organic Chemistry, chiefly lab work, fall 
semester. 

French 6, General View of French Literature, a full-year course. 

Mathematics 5, Differential and Integral Calculus (advanced course, Part 
I), fall semester. 

Mathematics 9, Probability, spring semester. 

Philosophy 9c, Theory of Knowledge, a study of judgment, inference, 
truth, and allied topics, fall semester. 

Physics 6a, Heat and Elementary Thermodynamics, lectures and occa- 
sional lab, fall semester. 

Physics 6b, Advanced Thermodynamics, spring semester. 

Physics 16a, Quantum Theory, with Applications to Series Spectra, 
Atomic Structure and the Kinetic Theory of Gases, spring semester. 


By 1963 Oppenheimer could not reconstruct the sequence of his second 
and third year courses but he remembered starting thermodynamics with 
Kemble, the first course he took at Jefferson Physical Laboratory. The 
course in probability was “‘terrible’’; he could not recall everything he au- 
dited.*° 

But if some courses proved disappointing there were other ways of 
learning for a highly motivated undergraduate with an insatiable appetite 
for knowledge. “I can’t recall how it came over me that what I liked in 
chemistry was very close to physics; it’s obvious that if you were reading 
physical chemistry and you began to run into thermodynamical and statisti- 
cal mechanical ideas you’d want to find out about them . . . I can’t empha- 
size strongly enough how much I read and more really just in exploration. 


45 


You see, it’s a very odd picture; I never had an elementary course in phys- 
ics except for a very elementary school course and to this day I get panicky 
when I think about a smoke ring or elastic vibrations. There’s nothing there 
—yust a little skin over a hole. In the same way my mathematical forma- 
tion was, even for those days, very primitive, and this was more than 
evident in the way I went about some of the things I did later . . . It’s 
going to be hard for me to be sure where I learned things, from what book, 
but I’d like to give a clear impressidn of‘a very quick, superficial, eager fa- 
miliarization with some parts of physics with tremendous lacunae and often 
with a tremendous lack of practice and discipline, just because the time was 
limited. And although I liked to work, I spread myself very thin and got by 
with murder; I got A’s in all these courses which I don’t think I should 
have.’’*° 

Before immersing himself in the first semester’s work, Robert wrote 
some gossip to Smith and some nonsense for Horgan. 


21 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


60 Mt. Auburn 
Cambridge, Mass. 
October 6, 1923. 


Dear Mr. Smith, 

Now that we are again within our normal range of a few hundred miles, I 
know that you will yield to a sufficiently violent bombardment and write 
me a letter. So, sans plus en parler, I begin the attack: 

First, I suppose, it is meet that I ask you for more details about Francis. He 
swept by Paul and me with no other gregariousness than he could compress 
into four pages apiece of illtypewritten crowing and flattery. “So busy — 
folks at one end, Rhodes scholars at other, you know —just couldn’t man- 
age it—but we will write? And send your things—”’ He is having his 
Frances Keeley send me his Harvard saga. And then, after a bit of his cus- 
tomary twaddle about my hypothetical achievements, he left me to search 
in vain for his virtues in his friends and attack with new bitterness the grey 
battlements of knowledge. 

And then, in return, I must tell you that I had another coy note from Jane, 
announcing the acquisition of a new sofa and the impending arrival of an- 
other Kayser. Outre cela, rien. Except that Paul has been made Art Director 
of the Eastman Opera Company in Buffalo, attaining that magnificence 
over the head of his rival, the famous Artzibasheff. However, it will doubt- 
less console you to know that Knopf refused his book. 

My labors this year promise to be positively overwhelming. There is an 


46 


imposing little thing in Epistomology; and Physics grows daily grimmer. 
So I have done only one story —a fair one. I am very glad, for I suspect that 
my work, together with such sailing and riding as is necessary to keep me 
from positive physical decrepitude, will leave me little energy — But, if it 
doesn’t bore you, I shall write later— Answer, or you get another. 

Please Temember me affectionately to Mrs. Smith. And write me one of 
those notes of yours which are such fun to read because they positively bris- 
tle with answers. Then I shall do better. 

Adios, 


Bob 


22 | TO PAUL HORGAN 


Cantabrigia. 
[October 1923] 


My dear Paul, 


You will doubtless recognize these dismal enclosures as my desperate and 
puling attempts to rival the glittering spilth of your letters. Of course a few 
hours lucubration would keep me from this obscene disgorgement; but 

a) I haven’t a few hours to lucubrate, and 

b) I think it so important that one should be sincere and uncalculating. 

And so, maxima con magnanimity, you will allow me to proceed 
without more than this unprofessional apology. For I confess that this drivel 
is merely a diluent for the central ascetic doctrine of the thesis: WHAT do 
you expect me to answer to a family that writes me that Rody cannot come 
because you cannot come and that you can come. I see only one possible 
retort; I am delighted that you could both manage to get off; and I beg you 
most solicitously to apprise me of the hour of your arrival, that my cymbals 
may be reassembled and reburnished. Je vous demande donc grace. 

Lacrimae Christi, 1645—And four wax candles in a darkened room?— 
Yes, as you can see, I am having a positively Mephistophelian time. Helas, 
sans Marguerite. 


[no signature] 


a. Robert slightly misquoted T. S. Eliot’s ‘Portrait of a Lady,” the second poem of Prufrock 
(1917) and a favorite of Robert’s and Paul’s; Horgan to Alice Kimball Smith, February 24, 
1977. The line reads: ‘And four wax candles in the darkened room.” 


[Oppenheimer’s “dismal enclosures” follow. ] 


47 


The Shrubs 
Andover, Massachusetts. 


My dear Miss Limpet, 


Your last letter was so beautiful, really. I was deeply interested in the beau- 
tiful sermon you quoted, so well planned, so moving. It was just too 
thoughtful of you. We get so few good sermons here nowadays; just long 
lectures on the details of behavior, nothing general and ennobling like 
John’s old ones before he died. But fortunately I do not need such inspira- 
tion. I know your sermon was really not meant for me. Only the other night 
I told the truth as I saw it under most trying circumstances. She said she 
would never again speak to me if I didn’t take it back, but I wasn’t to be 
bribed. 

And Berengaria has always been one of my favorite books; not one I like 
most, you understand, but one I admire because everybody can understand tt. 
I often used to make John read me it he read so beautifully. And only the 
other night I asked my son Henley to read it and he did. Henley has grown 
to be quite a man now you have no idea how Harvard has changed him. | 
am afraid it is not for the good of his soul to study so hard. He says the most 
terrible things. Only the other night I was arguing with him and I said but 
you believe in God don’t you? And he said I believe in the second law of 
thermodynamics, in Hamilton’s Principle, in Bertrand Russell, and would 
you believe it Siegfried Freud. Think of it. My own son, my John, so help 
me God. After he read me Berengaria he said now here is something else I 
will read you and then he gave it to me. I am sending it to you, because I 
know how interested you are in my boy, having none of your own. I must 
confess I couldn’t make much out of it but I think his descriptions are so 
lovely. And the words he uses, it’s awful. 

But that is not nearly so bad as one could find to tell if they had plenty of 
time. I am afraid he’s getting his head turned by that Horgan hussey, Rodo- 
lanthe, or something like that. Only the other day I found him sitting there 
reading a letter from her, smiling all over as though he were being co (I’m 
loosing my mind no less these days and can’t seem to write what I mean). He 
was saying over and over something I couldn’t quite catch, because I didn’t 
want to spy on him. Something about the Amazon I think. 

But that isn’t anything to the way he is when he gets a letter from that 
Paul person. I guess they’re a nice family and that, but I don’t know, and I 
don’t like for him to be getting too promiscuous, my son. But when he gets a 
letter he just sits there for hours on end reading it back and forth. If I ask 
him what it is he says he says it’s not what he says it’s the way he says it. I 
don’t think that young man was so very clever. He didn’t seem very clever 
to me. I guess he flatters Henley a little. As you once wrote to me and I 


48 


haven’t forgotten there I’ve gone and spoilt it again—pride goes but vanity 
lingers. It’s a great saying. 

Well I hope to have you at Christmas my dear Miss Limpet, if God is 
willing. But Henley is planning to have those Horgan people if they will 
come which please God they won't though it would break his heart. I mean 
Thanksgiving. Anyway please write me another inspiring letter like the last 
and 

remember me 

very fondly 
your beloved 


Celia 


This is Henley’s Poem. 
C. 


Out of the Delphian clarity of the booth 

projects a raw voice, childish, 

cutting the viscid miasmal plexus of uncouth 

and interwoven soot and smoke and steam and ululation: 
“‘Leven ten—Nourn thirteen minits, see?” 

Meticulous, solicitous, precise, epitome 

of excellent advice: efficiency. 


“T have an hour and thirteen minutes to squander, 
youth, and the city, preening for debauch: 

Like Polypheme insensate I shall wander 
glimpsing in passion through the stolid night 
each suspect tumbril and sardonic torch— 

Three minutes I shall harbor for the flight.” 


Tonight she wears a sealskin cape 

glistening black diamonds where the water swathes her thighs 
and noxious glints conspire to surprise 

a pulse condoning eagerness with rape. 

Even the paste tiara she must wear 

to crown the umbrian limbus of her hair 

leers faintly, now, spending its blatancy 

threading black mists and gleaming evilly 

on the wet pavements, sleek and debonair. 

Even the tuneless drone of eager wheels in polychrome 
melts to submundane threnodies, 

serenade of Mephistopheles, 

Stygian palindrome— 


49 


What does it mean?- 
Decaying hag 
shrewish in the wilted sheen 
of a stoop; raucous stag 
boasting loot in flesh and waistcoat, 
pretty penny, Henley, Ascot, 
left em not a rag. 
No, that is not what it means. 


‘Two hundred thousand sages say 
that’s what it 1s if you get gay.”’ 


But isn’t there something more in this wet, quivering city, 
in this assaulting phalanx of limousines, 

in the high festoons of lights, whether they blare or not, 
in the hag, rot or not, 

in the unchaste and vaunting mezzanines, 

than a plucked handful of words to pocket for your pity? 


On the train there will be time for that; 
too much. 


Cambridge, October 


23 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Lowell House 

60 Mt. Auburn 
Cambridge. 
November 2, 1923. 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


In spite of the fact that silence seems to be the most effectual method of 
extracting epigrams from you, I have been promptly detonated by your last 
note (to any one not so beastly literal about figures I should have said ‘‘de- 
tonated into a new efflorescence’’) But I have only uninspired dribblings to 
offer in exchange. I wish that I could rival your list of editors, which has 
impressed me deeply. And on your Review, too, I must congratulate you; it 
has a way of getting itself between the Adelphi and the Nation and Athe- 
naeum at the really charming book shops, and I have often had it urged 
upon me in a store up here as “‘one of the best thoroughly high-brow maga- 
zines.’’ On second thought I have come to the conclusion that often is a trifle 
hyperbolic; but I’m sure you see what I mean, anyway. 

At this point you must permit me an injudicious exultation: I have a pair 
of letters from Francis. It matters not that they say as nearly nothing as one 


50 


can in three pages, or that they contain neither cliches nor diatribes; their 
illegibility proves them authentic and that, Gloria Sancta Dei, is sufficient. 

I am enclosing one of my weekly exudations of bilge. About all these 
things I have the naive terror of hearing “‘Well, is he really like that?” And 
so I gaspingly assert that I am not, not like that or Litany or Conquest, and 
that, of’course, it js just for that reason that I write. It is queer that one 
should feel such solicitude about exposing a self that every wretched bit of 
critical sense in one denies and condemns, that one should show such an 
appalling likeness to all these disreputable people one isn’t. But I suppose 
that anyone really properly impregnated with even the rudiments of psy- 
chology would take all that without such blaring. 

Fortunately I am not at all worried, and the infiltration of thermodynam- 
ics continues undisturbed. I am working very hard now, so hard that I fear 
your epithet of grind. But if you could see the careless way in which I ne- 
glect French 6 or Chem to complete a theory about identity in Tensor Cal- 
culus, or how I flee the entire melange for a weekend in a sailboat off Glou- 
cester, you might forgive me. But then you would see my grades, and your 
accusing finger would return. 

I shan’t be down till Christmas. But at that time I shall journey out to see 
you, even if the expedition entails my speedy disinheritance. And if last fall’s 
saccharine precedent doesn’t prevent, I hope Mrs. Smith will be good 
enough to accompany you to town some evening. 

Doesn’t A Lost Lady remind you, vaguely and sentimentally, of Mrs. 
Page?® Or doesn’t it? You will write, though, please? 

And I think that when you have travelled with a person all summer you 
might desist from blaming the machine. 

A Dios— 


a. Willa Cather’s A Lost Lady was published in 1923. 


BAB, WHO GOT into the next letter through a typographical error in a 
missing letter to Smith, was Babette Oppenheimer (later Mrs. Walter 
Langsdorf), daughter of Robert’s Uncle Emil. Robert’s “disgraceful per- 
formance”’ involved taking her to an Ethical Culture event, then asking 
Smith to see her home. Mrs. Langsdorf remembered only a warm and last- 
ing friendship with her slightly older cousin.*" 


51 


24 | TO HEKBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Sunday. 
[ca. November 1923] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


This note is about to commit all the sins for which yours so neatly apolo- 
gized. It is, first of all, to regret very much that you are going to have your 
throat cut, and, selfishly, but nearly as much, the corresponding curtailment 
of the active part of the holiday. It is, unconditionally, ecstatically, and very 
gratefully going to accept your invitation; it is to thank you for your for- 
giveness, and to announce that I ignore your succinct but cruel allusion to 
the hierarchy of colitic execrabilities. It is furthermore to announce that 
BAB is BOB, and that, ever since my disgraceful performance at gradua- 
tion, my cousin has been most strenuously repressed from consciousness. 
And it is going to close most improperly and abruptly. 

Really, I have many things I should like to talk to you about. But they are 
so eminently unsuited to pollute this note that I wait with them and trust 
that your larynx will not be completely incapacitated on the thirtieth. Your 
larynx, observe, not your ear. The trouble is that Francis’s novel has at last 
arrived, and that, though I have nothing but admiration for the Harvey- 
esque slickness and totally unHarveyesque perspicacity of its opening chap- 
ters,? I am dismayed and rendered hysterical by the notes for its continua- 
tion. , 

When do you return to Orange? 

Good luck 


a. Harvey Fergusson was Francis’s older brother. 


25 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Lowell House, 
Cambridge 
December 1, 1923. 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


I hope that you are now perfectly well again. But I must not forget to tell 
you how flattered I was when I heard that my verses were indistinguishable 
in effect from some millions of streptococci catarrhensae; it’s really most 
consoling. 

And, my dear Mr. Smith, I assure you that I need to be consoled: I might 


string you out a lengthy miserere, telling you with all the beastly and stupid 
details how Francis and I corresponded frantically past each other till we 
were both insulted;# how Jane has frozen, because it was rude to understand 
her dismal notes and unthinkable not to; how my letter to Mrs. Page was 
dictated by home; how the Horgans have spent the fall arguing about what I 
meant; how Jeffries and I miss each other with coy opacity; how my Jan- 
itress spends her evenings in my room, in tears; how I have come, lugu- 
briously, to the conclusion that the two people at Wellesley and the dozen or 
so here that even pretend to pursue me are a sorry and worthless lot; how all 
this has driven me to whorls of stories and notes on the div grad of an elec- 
trical field and French and merely English verses; and how, ina final catastro- 
phe, I projected said verses toward you. But you would be bored by the 
details even more than by the threat; only you must forbear, and remember 
that if you again cast aspersions on the scansion of a perfectly respectable 
sestet, it may be enough to complete my despair and project me into the 
Charles. 

From your note I guess that you are very busy indeed; I hope you are 
enjoying your magazine and its glorious collection of supporters, and 
finding it quite as pleasant to teach garment makers that Keats and not Pope 
wrote the peak in Darien sonnet as to ram elepoquenci (alias eloquence) 
down Paul Kaufmann’s recalcitrant gullet.” Perhaps you will tell me about it 
during the holidays. But I remember the results of a similar suggestion last 
fall: throughout the whole evening you maintained an esoteric but unillu- 
minating silence about your own adventures, while you assiduously ex- 
hausted me of mine. So I shall beware. 

Now that it is beginning to be too cold to go up to the Cape weekends, I 
shall try to be a little more virtuous about writing to you. I see you blink 
with laconic boredom. Well, then, I won’t. 

There are lots of stories and things lying around, and if you would at all 
like to see them, I shall be glad to give them to you at Christmas. But you 
are doubtless sick of the drivel; and in any case I shall dedicate a book to you 
some day, a real book, full of mathematics, by the grace of God and his Ma- 
jesty, the King. 

I have got to stop now and turn to insulting someone else. 

Dios te guarde. 


[no signature] 


And where are those chapters of Francis? Frances Keeley blames you, I 
think. I have not laid eyes on the things. 


a. Neither side of the autumn correspondence with Fergusson has survived. 

b. Paul Kaufmann was a classmate at the Ethical Culture School, president of the Athletic 
Association and of the Student Council in their senior year; ‘““Who’s Who,” Inklings [Ethical 
Culture School publication], February 1921, p. 29. 


26 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge 
Sunday [winter 1923-24] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


You already have my threat to fight my way through a phalanx of parents 
and emerge at Orange; and I now sdleminly swear to execute it. I am not 
quite sure how much of the skimpy holiday I shall be in town; for mother 
and father, preparing for the day when “the Professor had to be hurried to 
his country estate to prevent a nervous breakdown’”’ are planning to insulate 
and isolate me at the shore. If you could manage to spend a few days down 
there I should be appeased and everyone delighted. But if not we shall ar- 
range for another Voisin party, and this time I shall grow hysterical if all of 
the guests do not appear. 

I begin to believe in eternal passions, now, when I see that each note from 
you still sends me into a violent schoolgirl flutter of excitement. I am able, 
though, to assure myself that my delight at your last one was at least half 
due to your magnanimous notes on my verses. I think you are very right 
about them, though, perhaps, a trifle too kind. I detect in your “‘you write 
for the thrill’ the old rebuke of the handshake allegory; but I think the real 
crime lies, not there, but in the shameless exhibitionism which lets me re- 
veal the debauches. Of course, when I do scrawl, I am always able to justify 
my strained figures and racked words; and not infrequently by a puny ety- 
mological device: limbus—limbo (that’s true)—borderland of hell; or even 
worse, palindrome—running both ways—repetition. You see? It’s vile, I 
admit. Generously, you ask what I do. Aside from the activities exposed in 
last week’s disgusting note, I labor, and write innumerable theses, notes, 
poems, stories, and junk; I go to the math lib and read and to the Phil lib and 
divide my time between Meinherr Russell and the contemplation of a most 
beautiful and lovely lady who is writing a thesis on Spinoza—charmingly 
ironic, at that, don’t you think?; I make stenches in three different labs, listen 
to Allard gossip about Racine,® serve tea and talk learnedly to a few lost 
souls, go off for the weekend to distill the low grade energy into laughter 
and exhaustion, read Greek, commit faux pas, search my desk for letters, 
and wish I were dead. Voila. 

Your letters make me feel that you are superhumanly busy. It’s partly, of 
course, the references to attorneys and other such elite appendages; and then 
I can imagine you saying it, and feel myself on edge to hear it all before the 
arrival of the next coy mere. But you don’t tell me what you do, in my 
shameless way; and so, I suppose, I must wait till I can extract it with an 
approximation, the nearest New York affords, to an alligator pear cocktail, 
tincta seraphicorum cum lacrimis. 


54 


Please remember me to Mrs. Smith, and be tolerant. 
R 


At last the ““Bob”’ is wearing off! 


a. Louis Allard, professor of French, was Robert’s instructor in French 6, A General View of 
French Literature. 


Called Bob in high school, Robert had been gradually replacing this 
signature in the Harvard letters by Robert or simply R. In later years to refer 
to Bob Oppenheimer was a sign of very old acquaintance indeed or a slight 
one. Tradition has it that he was christened Opje during a brief stay in Lei- 
den in the winter of 1928-29 in recognition of his success in making a 
speech in Dutch. Usually Americanized to Oppie, this was how he was gen- 
erally known at Los Alamos. By the end of the war word got around that he 
preferred to be called Robert, and thereafter many of his intimates or those 
who wished to be so considered, made the change. Some former students 
and old friends clung to the affectionate Oppie or Opyje. 


27 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Bayshore. 
Christmas 1923. 


My dear Francis, 


For once you have forced me to abjure pomposities; your chapters are 
splendid. You know how hard it is for me to like any novel, and how it 
takes an Une Vie or Crome to extract very much enthusiasm; but I tell you 
quite frankly that I enjoyed the beginning of yours very much indeed, and 
that my only serious trepidation is lest I may not see the remainder. In the 
first place, of course, I am overwhelmed at the ease and directness and liter- 
ary slickness of the thing. Your style is as simple and unstilted as your 
brother’s, but it is supple enough to keep it from seeming grotesque when 
you want to say something unusually neat, or when you are concerned with 
a little modest lyricism. The crudities that struck me were appallingly 
scarce; in fact, the only one I can remember is the “red and brown body”’ 
place on the first page. And at times, as in your elaborate phalanx of thrusts 
against Emerson, you are nothing short of brilliant. But the thing which, 
though not so startling, delighted me most about the opus 1s your skill with 
the people. Your incidents are few enough, and casual enough, to have them 


55 


taken without change: but your results—I grow lyric myself—are marvel- 
lous. If I knew a little more about how you have done it, if I were not quite 
so neophytic in reaction, I might be able to give you a somewhat less nebu- 
lous panegyric. As it is I can only tell you the people I liked best; the mother, 
the doctor, Kline, Emerson, and D’ Amanda. It is with hesitation that I omit 
the hero himself; though you have been very careful to make his intellectual 
and social outlook seem inevitable, though he never acts preposterously, yet 
I find it hard to swallow, in the same'person, such naiveté and such sophisti- 
cation. When it comes to people he seems to have no difficulty at all in giv- 
ing a fairly sophisticated account, and most of the smart things you say are 
made to appear his own. No one unfamiliar with the Cambridge milieu 
could see Emerson as he does; and no one even in the slightest familiar 
therewith, so it seems to me, would try out for the register except to prove 
his advisers wrong, or would, for instance, consider the malformed and 
greasy outcasts of the Cafeteria as even a first approximation to jeunesse 
dorée. I think you verge upon impossibility when you try to telescope an 
education that took even you several years into a few days, and when you 
try to make the same person simultaneously react as you may have, your 
first year in the Bronx, and as you may have, on leaving Harvard. Perhaps, 
really, you are that sort of person; I have always suspected you of hierar- 
chies of profundities stretching out grandly behind your most innocent fa- 
cades. But since the final and important emotion of the thing is going to be 
that of your hero, anyway, I think it is particularly important that you don’t 
impose upon credulity too much. And, by the way, I think the finest thing 
you have in the chapters you let me see is Emerson’s “‘My father is a doctor 

’ and the whole marvellous scene, before and after. That sits not too 
awkwardly at the same bench as the immortal scene in Vanity Fair. So there. 

I suppose it 1s never quite possible for us to understand each other’s layers 
of naiveté. And it is that which keeps [me] from agreeing entirely with what 
you say about the junk I sent you. I think all the snarkiest things you say — 
and, by the way, thank you for troubling —are perfectly true. Even to me it 
is obvious that my women are gargoyles and my lyricism, either absent or 
buried. But what I can’t understand, for instance, is that you should think 
the Rain thing sophisticated, or the hero, in Litany, unnatural. It is merely an 
indictment of my things that what I mean for the febrile disgust of unsatis- 
fied eroticism should look like the senile ravings of a 1910 debauchee, or 
that the Litany situation should entirely miss. What I meant, you see, was 
that the hero was prevented, being not very intelligent in the first place, 
from detecting his trouble, or doing anything but maunder about it, by his 
utterly frivolous and vain and complacent preconceptions which he had so 
diligently constructed in times of other stress. It may be perfectly true that 
no rational man would act that way, and that, to you, a knowledge of ther- 
modynamics and a dilettante dawdling in literature implies a divine 


56 


intelligence in all things. That’s not so. Always you used to insist that a per- 
son was either intelligent or not, and—perhaps I misunderstand—not that 
he might be intelligent here or there, and blind as a fool in everything else. I 
find these awful people in me from time to time, and their expulsion is the 
sole excyise for my writing. I have none of that mere glee in narration, the 
conteur’s delight, which you and Chekhov and your brother seem to have. I 
write to get rid of an ideal and impossible system, and it is, as you so clev- 
erly remark, not writing at all; and it is that which makes the things of so 
exclusively masturbatic a character. I am sorry to have bored you. But you 
didn’t seem to mind. 

And despite such explicit and irrefutable discouragement as that of your 
letter I continue to write. It is strange that it should make no difference to 
me that I know that the stuff is useless, and equally strange that I should 
make no improvements. But I have not the skill or the fortune to find 
enough people, and physics is a stern and uncompromising muse— I wish, 
though, that I could get along without it. And with such alluring creatures 
as your Weir, with an eternal round of opacifying and soothing teas and cig- 
arettes, I am sure I should be consoled. As for your additional mite of en- 
ergy (sic) you ought to know that there is no such thing as insatiable energy, 
and that what most closely resembles it is a boring and exhausting petty 
activity. I appreciate your attempts to spare my Jealous self, though, and 
thank you. 

Your poem has reached my cortex, well enough, but more, I fear, in vir- 
tue of your own cerebral potency and the loveliness of one line, than as a 
result of any very protracted or definite emotional reaction. I am not quite 
certain that I understand the mood at all; but, if I do, it is one of exhaustion, 
of a somewhat drab inanition and placid moroseness. But the mood that I 
mean is certainly not majestic, as your rhythm implies, nor can it possibly 
[be] considered clairvoyant. It is a mood of languor, regret, perhaps apathy. 
Is that what you mean? And the part, accordingly, that I like best is the per- 
haps extravagant but lovely part about your childhood 

‘And the somnolent opulence of its interminable afternoons.”’ 

For the rest, I am not.very much moved, even by the Shakespearian figure 
of the last line. But I suspect that I have totally missed your point. 

Next year I shall certainly be in England. I am not yet sure whether I shall 
go to study at Cambridge or not, but if I don’t I shall spend the summer 
abroad. I have no illusions, I think, about finding anything wonderful in the 
way of supermen or scientific marvels. And I shall only go there if I find it 
impossible to return to Harvard with enough enthusiasm to carry me 
through. This year hasn’t been bad, because there is lots of work, and just 
enough people to keep me from starving. Boyd, as you charitably predicted, 
has improved. He did not get the Rhodes. And so I am ever so much hap- 
pier than last year. But when I approach 96 Prescott I still have a twinge of 


a1 


the old malady. So that I am not at all sure that I shall be able to resist the 
indiscretion of boring you when I go across. ““Oh, no, I’ve never had any 
friendships like that’. I can not forgive you for having wrung that from me, 
Mephistopheles. 

I enclose a verse or two. And I’m having these things forwarded. To Italy, 
I suppose. Adios 


BACK AT HARVARD, Robert wrote in a very different tone to Herbert 
Smith. The letter is headed ““Cambridge Tuesday,”’ a simplified form of dat- 
ing that Robert used all too frequently in the years before he acquired an 
office staff. Reference to the approach of five examinations, which com- 
menced on Thursday, January 24, 1924, makes Tuesday, the twenty-second 
a likely date for this letter. 


28 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge. Tuesday 
[ca. January 22, 1924] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


Immediately upon the arrival of your letter the temperature of Cam- 
bridge, which has maintained itself at a disgraceful distance below zero for 
the last week, rose suddenly; three hours later the first blade of grass re- 
emerged from its hibernal blanket; and by the middle of the afternoon the 
insidious and delightful manuscript had so far undermined my scholarly 
morale that I tore up two dozen thermodynamic equations and one hundred 
and seven unfinished differential equations, forgot the portentous approach 
of five examinations, extracted my typewriter from its berth beneath two 
feet of lyrics, and proceeded to answer: 

There are always a lot of things on which you must be congratulated; and 
this time, I think, most of all for your escape from the Kelly-Thayer men- 
ace.* It doesn’t seem to my unsophisticated sense that a job that made Eu- 
rope impossible, attached you to the school by positively irrefragible bonds, 
swamped you with work, and separated you from almost all of what makes 
the thing you do so much more satisfactory than selling toothbrushes, 
would be any sort of blessing at all, despite the shekels. And I’m awfully 
glad that you feel that way too. I shall meet you and your charges for a week 
at Fecamp, next July— 

And the other good fortune is the Marie eblouissement; I think her thing 


58 


is very nice, though it doesn’t seem to me so extraordinarily good a motif to 
compress into the classic symmetry of an impeccable sonnet.” But I’d for- 
give anything to the 


An arch of storms and the slow wash of sleep. 


Thank¢g ever so much for sending it up, for I never see such things unas- 
sisted. 

It is very good of you to feel that way about Broad;°I should hate to have 
you too regard my obsession with a sadness untouched by at least a little 
sympathy. For you know I should never have ventured the loch alone— 
Your person seems to have been just a trace more unreliable than mine, for 
the Yachting hasn’t as yet fought its way through the snow. I shall let you 
[know] immediately when it comes; and I shan’t thank you now, so that I 
may have ample excuse for another letter, soon. 

And you liked St. Joan! But I still cling to Broun, against you and Shaw, 
that makes it look a sickly battle. But when the epilogue only repeated 
what the play had said, clearly and much more subtly and poignantly, for 
four magnificent acts, when anybody ten days out of his chrysalis could see 
what it was all about, and feel what it was all about, why that pedagogic 
flourish at the end, that Osgood dissertation for those whose chrysalis still 
clung? — Anyway, it is probably only a question of how soon you are satu- 
rated, aesthetically, and not an occasion for this dogmatic ranting at all. 

No word, lately, from Francis or Jane or Inez or Mrs. Page. I met a fool 
poet who saw her in La Jolla earlier in the year, and mother had a card or 
two, but that is all. 

You know Cambridge, and its peculiar examination atrophy. The terrible 
time will be over soon, and if I survive I shall be doing some better work 
next half year. I have found, so far, that twenty thousand words of thesis 
was enough to cripple my skimpy muse of prose completely, and when I 
am inspired I jot down verses. As you so neatly remarked, they aren’t either 
meant or fit for anyone’s perusal, and to force their masturbatic excesses on 
others is a crime. But I shall stuff them in a drawer for a while and, if you 
want to see them, send them on. 

In other respects, tho, all is prosaic. There are a couple of places in town 
where we go a few evenings a week, and that helps. One is a sort of salon 
kept by the Carters up on Beacon Hill, where there are books, and food, and 
a fire. There is a bad artist from Paris and a tech student and a member of the 
London Fabian society, who, for the rest, is an incorrigible aesthete and 
bore. There is a ravishing creature who brings food and writes scenarios and 
verses, and whose charm is pretty largely responsible for my frequent as- 
cents of the hill. And there are several New England women trying to live 
down a congenital primness and psychic sterility. —Then there is another 
place, kept by a boisterous Italian, who tells stories and calls Eva Le Gal- 


59 


lienne and Joseph Hoffmann by their first names, and introduces you to 
Mrs. Morton Prince. —° 

All this is necessary as an antidote to the serious business of life, which 1s 
growing wise. Even in the last stages of senile aphasia I will not say that 
education, in an academic sense, was only secondary when I was at college. I 
plow through about five or ten big scientific books a week, and pretend to 
research. Even if, in the end, I’ve got to satisfy myself with testing tooth- 
paste, I don’t want to know it till it has happened. The other night Fred and 
Clowser and I walked all night from Portsmouth to Newburyport. That 
will tell you how unstable it all 1s. 

I must drag my equations back from the basket, now, or I could rant for- 
ever. I hear you sigh, and bless the exams. Well, you bring it on yourself, 
and, if ever again you should gather courage to write so altogether charm- 
ing a letter, I warn you that you will get one quite as long and quite as 
boring as this in return— 

Affectionately 


R 


a. Kelly and Thayer were members of the Ethical Culture School administration who, ac- 
cording to Smith, were inclined to interfere with his teaching; Smith to Alice Kimball Smith, 
july 28, 1976. 

b. Marie Luhrs, a classmate of Robert’s at the Ethical Culture School, also wrote poetry. 

c. Charlie Dunbar Broad published Scientific Thought in 1923. 

d. A review of the world premiere of Bernard Shaw’s Saint Joan by Heywood Broun, lead- 
ing New York theater critic, had included the following: ‘‘He has written an epilogue which is 
shockingly and painfully unnecessary. Several portions of the play are tedious. A little of it is 
cheap. There is a touch of the maudlin. And it is, in our judgment, the finest play written in the 
English language in our day’’; Heywood Broun, ‘‘Shaw and Shakespeare,” Sitting on the World 
(New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1924), p. 195. 

e. Mrs. Morton Prince was a central figure among Boston’s social and intellectual leaders. 


Apparently neither the ravishing creature nor the two people from 
Wellesley, nor the lovely lady writing a thesis on Spinoza mentioned earlier, 
occupied Robert’s serious attention during his three years at Harvard. Bern- 
heim, Boyd, and Wyman all say that they never knew Robert to take a girl 
out, nor did they have much to do with girls themselves. Says Wyman: “‘We 
were all too much in love with the problems of philosophy and science and 
the arts and general intellectual life to be thinking about girls . . . We were 
all going through a series of love affairs [with ideas] . . . but perhaps we 
lacked some of the more mundane forms of love affairs that make life eas- 
ier.” 

Boyd (‘‘Clowser’’) recalls a cold winter’s walk along the shore with 


60 


Robert and Bernheim when one dared the others to go swimming. They 
stripped, tossed clothes on a snowbank, and plunged into the icy water. 
Bernheim remembers no winter skinny dipping, but sometimes they went 
to North Station, took the first train out, got off when they felt like it, and 
walked most of the night. One of these walks began some twenty miles 
from Worcester where they arrived at 3 a.m., trudging through deep snow 
with strange dogs barking at their heels.** 


THE REFERENCE to Smith’s having captured “the superintency”’ seems 
to place the next letter in the late winter of 1924, when he was appointed 
principal of the Ethical Culture high school. Since the preceding one does 
not seem particularly “beastly” or to reflect unusual distress, one or more 
may be missing. In the 1920s a second-year college student who did not suc- 
cumb shortly after Christmas vacation to at least a mild depression and the 
distaste for study known as sophomore slump risked being considered an 
insensitive clod. Robert’s troubled times were more basic and more fre- 
quent. Looking back over the years, Jeffries Wyman tried to explain them: 
“He found social adjustment very difficult, and I think he was often very 
unhappy . . . I suppose he was lonely and felt he didn’t fit in well with the 
human environment. We were good friends, and he had some other friends, 
but there was something that he lacked, perhaps some more personal and 
deep emotional contact with people than we were having, because our con- 
tacts were largely, I should say wholly, on an intellectual basis. We were 
young people falling in love with ideas right and left and interested in 
people who gave us ideas, but there wasn’t the warmth of human compan- 
ionship perhaps. I don’t mean that we weren’t good friends, but it wasn’t 
perhaps the kind of intimate relation that people sometimes have. I don’t 
really know why he was unhappy.” 

In 1922, a few months before Robert entered college, President Lowell 
had recommended that Harvard adopt a quota for Jewish undergraduates. * 
With cognizance of ethnic background thus officially sanctioned, and in the 
light of Herbert Smith’s conviction that Robert felt handicapped by being a 
Jew, it is natural to wonder whether anti-Semitism contributed to the un- 
happiness that Wyman remembered. Robert’s letters shed no light on this 
question. On the contrary, like his later recollections, they represent his 
close friendships at Harvard as ethnically and socially diverse, formed on the 
basis of intellectual compatibility. Boyd, of Scotch-Irish and German an- 
cestry, recalls Robert’s offhand comment: “‘Well neither one of us came 
over on the Mayflower,” as indicating a relaxed attitude toward his 
heritage. *® 


61 


29 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, 
Immediately. 
[late winter 1924] 


My very dear Mr. Smith, 


Thank you a thousand times fer your letter; it has almost made me glad 
to be unhappy, that I might not miss the relief of your manifold and charm- 
ing consolation. After I had sent my beastly letter I regretted it, and thought 
sorrowfully of the frightful position into which I had thrust you; I was 
afraid that you would not answer, and infinitely more afraid that you 
would; for it was a subject on which it seemed, then, impossible for even 
you to say anything nice— And what has soothed me most, I think, is that 
you perceived in my distress a certain similarity to that from which you had 
suffered; it had never occurred to me that the situation of anyone who now 
appeared to me in all respects so impeccable and so enviable could be in any 
way comparable with my own; and the charity of that admission of yours 
would very largely have sufficed. 

For you are overwhelmingly right, it seems to me, in emphasizing the 
secondary, induced character of many of our cravings. I do not think that it 
makes the cravings any the less real to recognize this; but it certainly makes 
their frustration less bitter to discover their former existence in you. But 
you must see that it is very hard to remain innocent and satisfied, when sci- 
ence and literature and the people you admire—not the inhabitants of Den- 
ver, but those of Los Pinos—all proclaim the beauty and wonder and emo- 
tional and aesthetic wealth of a host of benisons which you haven’t got. If 
we could remain in the patriarchal farmhouse forever, if we could escape 
“Of Human Bondage”’ and “The Wind Blows” and “‘Caesar and Cleopa- 
tra’ and “I’m a Fool’ and “Three Contributions . . .’’, if we could disre- 
gard what Mrs. Page wants and what Francis wants and what Shaw wants, 
if we could limit introspection to the gluttonous reverie of the uncritical, 
perhaps we should seem more reasonable in our complaints. Isn’t that rather 
what Francis means by swearing that he will bring his son up a fool? For me, 
and, I suspect, for you, it was never the opinion merely of the multitude that 
counted so much; it was the opinion and the conduct of the great—I don’t 
mean absolutely, but to us. Abstractly I feel that itis a terrible pity that there 
should be so many good people I shall not know, so many joys missed. But 
you are right. At least for me the desire is not a need; it is an impertinence. 
Cependant, even now, I envy you the favor with which the fates have 
received your impertinences. Do I hear you muttering elan vital? I shall 
change the subject. 

And I land at a far more pleasant one. You seem to have captured the 


62 


superintency —that needs another syllable, I think—and since you have 
taken it gladly I suppose that we may consider it a blessing. I hope that it 
will not keep you from doing what you want, and that it will console you 
for the imposition of new labors by many dinners at the Voisin, many 
wicked extravagances, and the glories of a plutocratic life. But I beg you not 
to overwork. 

If you continue to write so flatteringly about my verses I shall be alto- 
gether too conceited for words. And you know that even were you to pray 
that you might never see another I should soon be sending them again. I 
have a story which I should like you to see, but it is at present both illegible 
and unrevised, and I must wait till I have time to type. 

I am sending you two short books on Relativity which I found clear and 
amusing. They may be insultingly elementary for you, but I hope you will 
enjoy them none the less. 

Aeons and Quaternions of gratitude. 


30 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Sunday. 
[ca. March 1924?] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


No, I have not been permanently silenced by your heresy; nor can I blame 
this scandalous delay entirely upon the ponc _rings you advise. As a matter 
of fact, I think that if I knew quite what you mean by ‘“‘vicious”’ I should 
thoroughly agree with you. But you are too much of a Moliereste for me, 
alas. I cannot think ““Le Misanthrope’ a comedy at all. 

The other morning I found Daisy Neumann lugubriously observing Uni- 
versity Hall in a blizzard. After such civilities as the wind and hail would 
permit she told me that “your Mr. Smith” was actually to be seen, now, 
manipulating the reins in 404.3 I didn’t think that you would be comman- 
deered so very soon; and I sincerely hope that you will cling to your old 
headquarters, too, for, stupidly, I cannot conceive of a friendly, gossipy and 
irrelevant conversation in your new ones .. . 

The reason that I have not written is that I have been using all my spare 
moments of consciousness carrying out calculations and searching data for 
an idea that I had, a couple of weeks back. At present I am brought very 
nearly to a standstill, but I am going to have a long interview with Kemble 
tomorrow, and if possible shall continue. I have had no end of fun working 
on it, though, and even though, as it most certainly must, it gets itself 


63 


thrown into the trash basket, I shall not regret the sleepless nights and the 
criminal neglect of such pleasant matters as classes and dinners and writing 
to you. 

A couple of weeks ago I went down to Provincetown for a few days; and 
I can understand better now than ever your enthusiasm for the Cape. Prov- 
incetown itself, though I don’t think it deserves your comparison with 
Santa Fe, is certainly a charming little place, and even though the Portu- 
guese contribute little to the atmosphere but their dark and wonderful coun- 
tenances and their splendid names and a little squalor and an occasional im- 
puritan scarf, that seems to be enough. And the dunes are nothing less than 
magnificent. You must remember that here we have had several feet of 
snow all year; and to be able to trudge over the hills, and lie on the warm 
sand hills and the beaches, and go swimming in the ocean, and watch a few 
brigantines and fishing schooners glide along the horizon, to climb the 
highest dune for the broadest view, to board a shattered wreck, to sit in the 
lea of the lighthouses, all this was a treat I shan’t soon forget. You must 
beware; I threaten to return. And for some reason or other, I solved just 
enough problems, and had just enough pleasantly ridiculous adventures to 
make my memories altogether delightful. I had not realized before, though, 
how arduous your court [sic] must have been. But even at that I know that I 
too should have found it difficult to stay in Cambridge and do differential 
equations! 

Next Spring, before we come down to go to Europe and domesticity, 
Fred and Clowser and I want to sail for a few days (a l’insu, de par Dieu). 
We thought of taking a seaworthy enough little sloop at Gloucester, sailing 
down to Provincetown in one long stretch, then crossing to Plymouth, and 
then up back. We’d be willing to give it nearly a week. Do you reckon we 
could? And if we get back in time in the fall, perhaps we could arrange some 
such jaunt together. I’d like to, awfully. 

There hasn’t been any word from Francis. Did you tell him to spare me? 
Or has he just naturally gotten bored with me? It’s a little more remarkable 
because I had sent him some stuff, and he isn’t usually rude, at any rate. Per- 
haps he fears that I will pursue him into the haunts of the viscounts, next 
summer. 

My most sincere regards to Mrs. Smith. And, both of you, take this. 
“No, I thought thet thet ministur who marrid them wasn’t a Cape Codder; 
he had sort of a forin accent.’” —And the “‘sound of the surf at Truro.” 


R 


a. Daisy Neumann, in the class behind Robert at the Ethical Culture School, entered Rad- 
cliffe in 1922. She remembers the train trip to Boston with Robert that fall but no encounters 
thereafter; Daisy Neumann Newman to Alice Kimball Smith, February 17, 1977. 


64 


Bernheim and Boyd agree that the spring cruise to Provincetown did 
not take place. Boyd remembers only a day’s sail out of Gloucester in a 
rented boat on which they had to pay a big deposit because they looked so 
unreliable. *’ 


31 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Thursday. 
[ca. April 10, 1924] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


Please don’t suppose that this is to be a letter, or that I hope to atone for 
my tardiness by splendour. I am writing now only to thank you for your 
note, to congratulate you on your plans for the summer, and to beg you for 
a weekend this spring. I shall be down next Thursday, I trust; won’t you 
come out for a highly informal and highly impromptu sail in the Trimethy 
over Saturday and Sunday?— As you know, the place is rented, and we 
shall be forced to forego the luxuries of the shore; but if the weather is fair, 
and you are not too busy with other matters, I think I can assure you a jolly 
cruise. I haven’t yet told my parents, and shouldn’t have written to you had 
I not been anxious to find you free. 

At present I am forced to regard myself as an extremely bad contributor 
to your symposium, for I confess that I am unable to find very much, from 
my stunted point of view, that is wrong with the college. It seems to me 
that, at least on the whole, it allows everyone an appropriate activity; and I 
cannot conceive of an environment which could more skillfully and expedi- 
tiously immerse men in the milieu they deserve. But perhaps I shall be a 
little more amusingly heterodox later on. At present my only grievance is 
against examinations which fall so indecently late. 

Maybe, if Iam good, you will confide some of your draughts or proofs to 
me on our yacht; I should mightily like to see them. And now forgive me if 
I turn to the more menial but more pressing business of the criteria of Ber- 
noulli, Lexis, and Poisson. 


R 


The year’s work was, as usual, rewarded by As except for a B in the 
second semester math course in probability.*° Bernheim well remembers 
Robert’s A in the notoriously tough elementary thermodynamics course. 
According to Bernheim, when Kemble realized that he had given an A toa 


65 


student taking six courses, he decided his course must be too easy and made 
it even stiffer the following year when Bernheim took it.*® 

The Harvard letters, revealing though they are of aspects of Robert 
Oppenheimer’s personal development and of the interests and attitudes of a 
segment of young American intellectuals, give only hints of what was going 
on in his own mind about his most vital concern—a career in science. His 
friends of the period, when asked years later what they had thought his fu- 
ture was going to be, all say that they foresaw distinction of some sort. 
Those who knew him first at Harvard assumed it would be in science. A 
few were not sure how the balance of his interests in science, philosophical 
ideas, and literature would tip. Paul Horgan, knowing Robert 1n a nonaca- 
demic setting, initially saw him as a great humanist and artist and later rec- 
ognized the attributes of both in his style as scientist and administrator. At 
one point, Francis Fergusson, too, expected Robert to become a writer but 
must have sensed how the wind was blowing when Robert commented, 
after a year at Harvard, that as soon as he knew enough he would not need 
to resort to writing stories.”° 


THE OPPENHEIMER FAMILY spent the summer of 1924 in Europe. 
‘“My brother came and went,” recalled Frank Oppenheimer. “‘He was with 
us in Munich and in Zurich and then joined us again in the Swiss Upper 
Engadine. He and I walked in the mountains together remembering our 
walks in the Seibengebirge in 1921.’* 

The first semester of Robert’s third and final year at Picard was not 
far along when he reported to Smith on his summer travels and other mat- 
ters, including the possibility of following his older friends, John Edsall and 
Jeffries Wyman, to the University of Cambridge for graduate study. 


32 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Tuesday. 
[ca. October 1924] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 
This is a very belated thank-you letter about a delightful present of yours, 
ordered so long ago that, doubtless, its problematical existence has long 


since ceased to distress you. Mother has just forwarded the yachting annual. 
Already I have searched it for gratifying confirmation of a certain empirical 


66 


knowledge of shoals; and it promises to save me from my disastrous errors 
in the future. It is a close second to the classic confectionery bearing the 
Chaves coat of arms.? 

I confess that I want very much to write you a long and amusing letter. 
But I have been so scandalously remiss all summer that I find no tentacular 
apostrophes to cling to, and feel reduced to a mere recapitulation of what 
are, im Ganzen, quite a dull lot of odds and ends. But I trust that one of 
them will strike you as deserving of some passing & scornful comment, 
and serve as occasion for one of your brief but cherished notes: 

Last summer I saw neither Jane nor Francis, chiefly because of a shyness in 
such things which I neither understand nor condone. Jane, I hear, oscillates 
back and forth between Lausanne and Paris with an incredible frequency, 
and is quite happy. Francis writes pathetically; he says he is lonely— For 
myself, the summer was inglorious; I worked a lot, with scanty results, 
wrote a little, sailed on the Irish sea, at [illegible], and climbed a few moun- 
tains, icy and splendid, —on the Italian border, in the Bernina & Forno. It 
will doubtless sound to you trite and trivial,—so great is greatness—but 
very often I wished that you were there to climb too, with the full measure 
of vigor and ecstasy which the place deserved. Mostly there were lazy 
people, who breathed. My parents & I got along much better than I should 
have predicted. 

Here I am very busy again, chiefly with the Math. Phys. & Meta. I am 
taking a course with Whitehead of Russell & Whitehead, Cambridge, on the 
Metaphysical presuppositions of science, after which I shall doubtless be fit 
to give battle to you about the lamentable Broad.” I have, by the interven- 
tion of strangely kindly Gods, been unbewusst admitted to Christ’s, at 
Cambridge; but I cannot decide to leave this Puritanical hole, even for all the 
vacuity of my life here, if I can do research next year with Bridgman. I shall 
be glad to bore you with my final decision, when it is born— 

Your book must by now be emerging discreetly from the press. Will you 
send me a copy, or is my investment necessary to the bank? I should appre- 
ciate a little poem, signed. Someday, if God is good, I shall do as much for 
you, poem and all, maybe. 

And really, I should like to hear about your adventures, and Los Pinos, 
and the desert, and Mrs. Page, about all those things that gripe and make me 
notice how blue and sunny the sky is, and what an exquisite filigree the 
chrome and coral leaves make, against it. And if; personatim, you should be 
able to come up for a day or two, and would, out of that, grant me an hour at 
tea, I should be so happy that I should smile slobber on your photographs, 
and talk about Grass Mountain, and Ouray. 

If I am not sending you anything I have done—I hear, through the clear 
autumn, a professorial sigh— it is only that the things are most emphatically 


67 


too pathetic to repay defiguration; if I can get them fixed I shall show you 
some Hiréshu translated, later on. 
Permit me to bow low before your gracious wife. 


Robert 


a. The classic confectionery was a magnificent cake decorated with the Chaves family coat 
of arms which was dispatched to New Mexico at considerable expense for Don Amado’s sev- 
entieth birthday. Smith, who accompanied Robert to a lower Manhattan bakery to order the 
cake, cites the episode as characteristic both of Robert’s thoughtfulness and his pleasure at 
being accepted by the Chaves circle; interview with Smith by Alice Kimball Smith, July 9, 
1975. 

b. Robert’s course with Alfred North Whitehead was Philosophy 20h, described as a Semi- 
nary in Metaphysics: Philosophical Presuppositions of Science, offered in the fall semester. Ac- 
cording to his transcript and the Harvard course catalogue for 1924-25, Robert’s other third 
year courses were: Chemistry 14c, Colloid Chemistry, primarily for graduates, spring semes- 
ter; History 12, History of England from 1688 to the Present Time, a full year course; Mathe- 
matics 8, Dynamics (second course), a full year course; Mathematics 10a, Introduction to the 
Theory of Potential Functions and Laplace’s Equation, fall semester; Mathematics 10b, The 
Analytical Theory of Heat and Problems in Elastic Vibrations—Fourier’s Series, Legendre’s 
Polynomials, Bessel’s Functions, spring semester; Physics 9, Mathematical Theory of Electric- 
ity and Magnetism, a full year course of lectures. 


Three letters to Smith and one to Fergusson—the slender remains of 
Oppenheimer’s third-year Harvard correspondence—show that his 
thoughts focused increasingly on the coming year of graduate study in En- 
gland. Smith, still the object of affectionate banter and an outlet for occa- 
sional bouts of sturm und drang, no longer provided a major intellectual stim- 
ulus. For the past year this had come from courses in physics, principally the 
three taken for credit in 1923-24 with Kemble and Bridgman. Oppen- 
heimer regularly attended ten courses during this third and final year, five 
for credit and, as reported to Smith in February, five as auditor. They left an 
indelible, if not always precise or favorable, imprint upon his memory, as is 
evident in his comment on the course taught by Nobel Laureate Theodore 
W. Richards: “It wasn’t until my third year at Harvard that I did get to take 
physical chemistry and by then it was a great disappointment . . . a very 
meager hick course . . . which would not get by today anywhere. But I 
didn’t know that until I got there . . . It was formal, and tentative and 
timid; Richards was afraid of even rudimentary mathematics and very timid 
about non-phenomenological descriptions of things. I remember it but that 
was not what was really going on by then.” 

According to Oppenheimer in 1963, mathematics too was “‘mostly 
very poorly taught”’ when he was an undergraduate but, he recalled, ‘‘I had 
the very good luck not to take but to audit [a graduate seminar with George 


68 


D.] Birkhoff on Sturm-Liouville equations, because he’d been working on it 
and wanted to talk about it . . . He was a remarkable fellow. He would 
begin: ‘Well, you know, walking across the Yard this morning it occurred 
to me—’. . . This is the only [mathematics course] that I remember with 
happiness.’”** 

What was “really going on’”’ during the latter half of Oppenheimer’s 
undergraduate career had much to do with Professor Percy W. Bridgman, 
the distinguished experimental physicist in whose laboratory he spent many 
hours, beginning with the spring semester of 1924 when he took Bridg- 
man’s course in advanced thermodynamics. “I found Bridgman a won- 
derful teacher because he never really was quite reconciled to things being 
the way they were and he always thought them out; his exercises were a 
very good way to learn where the bones were in these two beautiful parts of 
physics. I think as far as science goes they were the great point of my time at 
Harvard . . . [Bridgman] didn’t articulate a philosophic point of view, but 
he lived it, both in the way he worked in the laboratory, which, as you 
know, was very special, and in the way he taught. He was a man to whom 
one wanted to be an apprentice.” 

Other influences in the classroom and laboratory left a more diffuse im- 
pression. ‘I regarded the courses in physics and some others, but very much 
the courses in physics, as, of course, a master-pupil relation, but as a very 
vivid relation. I enjoyed them; I probably participated, they were small 
classes. They were not the comradeship of people the same age and the 
same interests, but there was a lot of comradeship involved. My friends 
were the same age and they were people who were mostly going into biol- 
ogy, but they were just a few. I lived with. . . a biochemist [Bernheim], 
and we had a very close friend who was also a biochemist [Boyd]. . . I’m 
sure there were [physics] students whom I knew, but in some funny way, by 
this crazily abnormal curriculum, I was doing gas analysis in the chemistry 
department all this time. By never having the same underpinning in physics 
or in collateral preparatory courses I had no ‘co-moving’ coordinates;’ there 
wasn’t anyone else who was having the same lack of preoccupations and the 
same preoccupations, and I couldn’t name with certainty anyone who was in 
Bridgman’s class, for instance.”’®° 


69 


33 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge. 
[ca. January 1925] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


This is a business letter: as nearly, at least, a business letter as I can write to 
you. The Senior Tutor of Christ's has written to me asking for the admis- 
sion fee, and for a certificate from my ‘head-master’ at school, which is you. 
The certificate should say that you have known me for -?- years and that 
you believe me to be of good moral character; that two assertions so contra- 
dictory in sense should be demanded in one certificate is additional proof, I 
think, of the proverbial irrationality of the British. 

I am a little hesitant about writing for even such a trifling official duty; for 
Mother told me that you were working much too hard & much too con- 
scientiously. If you do not look out you will have to spend all of next sum- 
mer getting reacclimated, & wearing your academic & administrative knees 
far enough apart to straddle Lady. Or are you going to the Cape, to get an- 
other good taste of salt, and an honest look at the water? I should think the 
sea would be getting jealous of the desert, with her painted mountains & 
muddy Rio Grande. 

Wherever you are I do hope I shall see something of you; tired evenings & 
the perilous garrulity of a house party are not enough; & if we can we must 
manage to sail or climb or ride together for a few days. Myself, I do not 
know where I shall be, except that there will be a week or so up here til 
Commencement, at lab; a few weeks at Bayshore, where I shall sail & work 
& take an affectionate & efficient farewell of my parents; & if possible a few 
walks in the Mountains, west. I shall sail, I think, about September 2 or 
so— The other night, after a year or so of lethe I dreamt of Mrs. Page. She 
was standing at the porch steps, in the sunlight, in the olive riding jacket she 
used to wear. And the doctor was saying to her “Don’t look at me like that’”’ 
& I wasn’t there, & it was all lovely. So now I keep promising myself to go 
out there again next summer. But I guess I won’t. 

The work goes much as before: frantic, bad, and graded A. I have got to 
debate with Whitehead at the Seminar next week, & am already trembling, 
of course— There are a few books I have read, & some I hope you like. Do 
you?: A Story Teller’s Story, Anna Karenina, The Brothers Kara—, The 
Mysterious Stranger, Daisy Miller. Doesn’t Daisy remind you of Chekhov, 
& particularly the Lady & Dog? 

What a business letter!: far worse, even, than I had imagined. But forgive 
me; and, having reminded yourself that you have known me — years, write 
me, generously, & tell me all. 


In 1962, congratulating Bertrand Russell on his ninetieth birthday, Op- 
penheimer wrote: “It is almost forty years ago that we worked through the 
Principia Mathematica with Whitehead at Harvard. He had largely forgot- 
ten, so that he was the perfect teacher, both master and student. I remember 
how often he would pause with a smile before a sequence of theorems and 
say to us, ‘That was a point that Bertie always liked.’ For all the years of 
my life, I have thought of this phrase whenever some high example of 
intelligence, some humanity, or some rare courage and nobility has come 
our way.””8 

Talking with Kuhn, Oppenheimer again stressed the pleasure of learn- 
ing with Whitehead, who gave this particular seminar only “when people 
came along and asked him . . . We must have been the first . . . there 
were just two of us.’’®’ 


THE TRIPOS, in which Robert predicted failure in the following letter to 
Smith, was the final examination for Cambridge undergraduates. Holders 
of the bachelor’s degree from other institutions were often required to take 
the rigorous two-part mathematical Tripos before commencing graduate 
study in science, but we have found no evidence that Robert took this ex- 
amination.” 


34 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Cambridge, Mass. 
February 25. [1925] 


My dear Mr. Smith, 


Hosanna for the son! And the heartiest of congratulatory greetings to 
Mrs. Smith, who is, I hope, very well, and very happy. To me it seems an 
unusually solemn & splendid affair, because, at least as far as their reason- 
ableness & deportment goes, your children seem, like Minerva, to be born 
full grown. But perhaps I only think that because I do not see with the sensi- 
tive & hypercritical eyes of paternity. 

Thank you very much for the note. Doubtless, when I am ploughed at the 
Tripos, you will be compromised more than you need have been. Have you 
ever seen one of the papers? They are perfectly grisly, really. Rayleigh is the 
only one who got more than a § credit on the Part II, and that, I think, is his 
best title to his peerage.? Even to think of it makes me do a comfortably 
transatlantic shiver. 

I am so glad that you are all going to the Cape next summer! (you may 
say that I am selfish, & jealous, but I am gladder than all of that). For I will 
wager that it will be good to play with such things as logs and waves, after 
a winter of duelling with Mr. Lewis—I am now going regularly to 10 


courses, & doing my research, & I have started to learn Chinese, with 
Clowser. But my muse still craves blood, and I do not know what she will 
allow me, in the way of laziness, next summer. Only this I swear. She shall 
not deprive me of the pleasure of driving a nail into the grand-ducal pavilion 
you are building at Brewster to accommodate the new son— Yes, you are 
perfectly right, it is not the nails that I insist upon. 

Salut! 


Fred sends congratulations. 


a. Lord Rayleigh (John William Strutt), Nobel laureate in physics and director of the Caven- 
dish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge from 1879 to 1884, had inherited his title. 


COMMUNICATION with Francis Fergusson seems to have lagged at 
times since Robert had written him from Bay Shore at Christmas 1923, 
though perhaps not to the extent suggested by the hiatus in surviving 
letters. As Robert wrote on the last day of Harvard’s 1925 spring vacation, 
again from Bay Shore, Francis was nearing the end of the second of his three 
years at Oxford, where he had abandoned biology and fully indulged his 
love for poetry and drama. As a Rhodes Scholar, possessing social graces 
that Robert envied and a mature intelligence that inspired confidence in his 
elders, Francis had access to sophisticated circles such as the one that 
flourished at the Oxfordshire country house of Lady Ottoline Morrell. It 
was doubtless there that Francis had—1in Robert’s mind at least—learned 
how to treat dukes. 


35 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Bayshore 
April 25. [1925] 


Dear Francis, 


It is good to be writing to you again; it will be better still to sit talking 
together. If I were not such an ascetic creature I should not have denied my- 
self so long. You will believe me when I tell you that I was waiting, child- 
ishly, til ] might write you a scintillating letter, radiating well being & splen- 
dour. I have given up hope, now, of attaining to such a state; & I promise 
you I shall not deny myself again. 

I shall not be in England before the end of August or the beginning of 
September; but, even after the preliminary courtesy to Christ’s & Cam- 


TZ 


bridge, I shall have a few weeks before the term opens, which I want to 
spend in Wales, sailing and recuperating from America. Don’t you suppose 
we could manage to go together, & ruminate conjointly on our sins? And 
you will tell me how to treat the tutors & the dukes, & I shall tremble— For 
my plans for next year are not much, & not at all precise. I have been doing a 
problem with Bridgman this year, and that brief excursion convinces me 
that my genre, whatever it is, is not experimental science. But even Harvard 
has failed to extinguish my passion for the purely useless. Can’t you too 
simulate even a mild tepidity for new mathematics, for instance? Perhaps 
the Auerbach set a permanent blight on your mathematical flora.# 

Have you seen Jeffries? I haven’t, of course, heard from him; but Demos 
told me that he was doing very well, but thoroughly tired of laboratory 
work, despite that.” Paul is now in Canada playing Pinafore; he is 
“preparing a book of his poems for his Boston publishers.”’* Smith continues 
to proliferate progeny with unfailing prodigality and vigor. The newest one 
is called Harden, & has already learned to wash dishes & to discourse with 
his father on Freud & Santayana. Smith himself is getting bald; and he no 
longer enjoys his wife’s iconoclasm. 

It is cold here now, & dull, & outside there is mud, mud, mud. There is a 
cold wet wind, & when we go sailing the spray freezes, as it did two years 
ago. And when I think of the first sail, with Mrs. Page, it is pleasant to reflect 
that next Easter I shall not be here. It is not conceivable that anywhere else 
people can talk so incessantly without saying anything, ever, that is not alto- 
gether empty, devoid of meaning. 

Now I have written, & you will be bored; but for God’s sake write again, 
or I shall perish before I see you. Have you seen Miss Lowell’s Keats, & the 
new Chekhov letters? 


Robert 


a. Matilda Auerbach, who taught mathematics at the Ethical Culture School, is generally 
remembered as a fine teacher. 

b. Jeffries Wyman had gone to the University of Cambridge in September 1924 and trans- 
ferred to the University of London a few months later. Raphael Demos was a young instructor 
at Harvard. 

c. Paul Horgan was now production assistant with the Rochester American Opera Com- 
pany and occasionally sang a role as on this Canadian tour of Pinafore. 


There are no letters to Smith or Fergusson between spring vacation and 
commencement. Perhaps none was written in Robert’s last busy weeks at 
Harvard. The previous November he had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa in 
the “Junior Eight,”’ but for the first time his final grades included more than 


73 


one B—in Whitehead’s fall semester “‘Seminary”’ and in the full year mathe- 
matics course in Dynamics.”® 

In June Robert was recommended by the Division of Chemistry for a 
degree with distinction, and his transcript records the A.B. summa cum 
laude in chemistry received “‘at commencement 1925 as of 1926.” (He re- 
mained officially a member of the class of 1926.) With Boyd and Bernheim, 
who also graduated after three years, Robert chose not to attend commence- 
ment but to celebrate privately ‘with laboratory alcohol in Bernheim’s 
room. “Boyd and I got plastered,’ Bernheim recalls. ‘“Robert, I think, only 
took one drink and retired.””™ 


74 


IT | “Making myself for a career”’ 


EUROPE AND AMERICA, 1925-1929 


WHEN OPPENHEIMER GRADUATED from Harvard in June 1925 
still officially a chemist, the real question was what kind of a physicist he 
would be. His comment to Fergusson in April that the work with Bridg- 
man “‘convinces me that my genre, whatever it is, is not experimental sci- 
ence’ suggests that part of the decision had been made. Had he stuck to it, 
he might have spared himself much anguish the following year as a student at 
the University of Cambridge, where the dominant influence in physics 
was Professor Sir Ernest Rutherford, director of the Cavendish Laboratory. 
Under this renowned experimentalist, the Cavendish had become a mecca 
for bright young physicists from around the world. For Oppenheimer, too, 
Rutherford was the chief attraction: “I don’t know why I picked Cam- 
bridge . . . I know I talked to Bridgman about it . . . I wanted to go to 
Cambridge to work in Rutherford’s laboratory, but Rutherford wouldn’t 
have me. He didn’t think much of Bridgman and my credentials were pecu- 
liar and not impressive, and certainly not impressive to a man with Ruther- 
ford’s common sense. But then it was arranged, I think by Rutherford, that 
I could work in Thomson’s lab. . . It didn’t occur to me to go to Ger- 
many. It didn’t occur to me to go to Copenhagen. I don’t even know why I 
left Harvard, but I somehow felt that [Cambridge] was more near the cen- 
ter.””? 

Even for a Harvard summa cum laude, getting ‘‘near the center’’ was 
not easy at this period when Oxford and Cambridge customarily required 
that holders of degrees from other institutions register as undergraduates. 


75 


Although Robert had been admitted to Christ’s College, his status as a de- 
gree candidate had yet to be settled. From Bay Shore he invoked the assist- 
ance of Professor Bridgman. 


36 | TO PERCY W. BRIDGMAN 


Bayshore, N.Y. 
June 13, 1925 


Dear Professor Bridgman, 


Last January I wrote to Sir Ernest Rutherford for permission to work in 
the laboratory at Cambridge; and I have just received the answer, which I 
enclose. It seems that access to the laboratory is only granted to those who 
are far enough along to work on a problem of their own; and it is for this 
reason that some sort of recommendation is necessary. 

I should very much appreciate it if you would let me know whether or 
not you can send the recommendation, as that will probably affect my 
plans. 

Thank you again for your help during the last year. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


Rutherford’s delayed reply must have suggested the course of action 
that Robert followed in an undated letter to the secretary of the Cambridge 
University Board of Research Studies. 


37 | TO R. E. PRIESTLEY (BOARD OF RESEARCH STUDIES) 


Saxons’ Road 
Bay Shore, N.Y. 
[ca. June 1925] 


Dear Sir: 


Next term I expect to start studying at Cambridge for a Ph.D. I have al- 
ready been admitted to Christ’s College; but I am not certain whether | 
should make a further application in order to be allowed to do research. I 
hope to read in Mathematics and Physics, and, if possible, to work at a 
problem in the theory of metallic conduction. 

I have been advised to write to you of my preparation; and, if there are any 


76 


details concerning the work I have done which would be of use, I should be 
glad to give them. This June I took a degree of B.A. summa cum laude at 
Harvard, for which I had studied chiefly in Chemistry, Mathematics, and 
Physics. During my last year I worked at a problem on the pressure effect 
on metallic conduction under Professor Bridgman. I should be glad to wait 
a term before beginning research, if this seems advisable. But I am writing 
now in order to find out if such a plan is at all possible, and I should very 
much appreciate it if you would let me know what application I ought to 
make. 
Very sincerely, 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


FROM HIS SUMMER HOME in New Hampshire, Bridgman complied 
with Robert’s request for a recommendation by writing at length to Ruther- 
ford. He hoped that Oppenheimer might be admitted to the Cavendish Lab- 
oratory, though he confessed to some uncertainty about his future in phys- 
ics. Emphasizing Robert’s brilliant record at Harvard, Bridgman noted his 
“perfectly prodigious power of assimilation,” his vast reading, and the ad- 
vanced courses he had taken: 

“His problems have in many cases shown a high degree of originality 
in treatment and much mathematical power. His weakness is on the experi-. 
mental side. His type of mind is analytical, rather than physical, and he is 
not at home in the manipulations of the laboratory . . . During this last 
year he started with me a small research on the effect of pressure on the re- 
sistance of alloys, and was evidently much handicapped by his lack of famil- 
larity with ordinary physical manipulations. However he stuck at it, and by 
the end of the year had learned much, and obtained some results of value, all 
without being of much trouble to me personally, but he picked up many of 
the tricks of manipulation which he needed from my mechanic.” 

“It appears to me that it is a bit of a gamble as to whether Oppenheimer 
will ever make any real contributions of an important character, but if he 
does make good at all, I believe that he will be a very unusual success, and if 
you are in a position to take a small gamble without too much trouble, I 
think you will seldom find a more interesting betting proposition.”’ 

Bridgman felt compelled to add a final paragraph in which, following 
the custom of the period in letters of recommendation, he referred to the 
candidate’s Jewish background: “‘As appears from his name, Oppenheimer 
is a Jew, but entirely without the usual qualifications of his race. He 1s a tall, 
well set-up young man, with a rather engaging diffidence of manner, and I 
think you need have no hesitation whatever for any reason of this sort in 
considering his application.’” 


77 


To Robert, Bridgman wrote that he had told Rutherford about Rob- 
ert’s ““very unusual equipment for theoretical work.”’ If he was not admitted 
to the Cavendish, Bridgman hoped he would find some other way of pursu- 
ing his studies abroad.* Acknowledging Bridgman’s prompt assistance, 
Robert reported on the research with which he was supplementing the more 
frivolous diversions of summer at Bay Shore. He was exploring the change 


in electrical conductivity of rutile (titanium dioxide) when it is ignited. 


38 | TO PERCY W. BRIDGMAN 


Bayshore [New York] 
June 29, 1925 


Dear Professor Bridgman, 


Thank you very much for your letter, and for making out so good a case 
for me, and for wishing me so well. Our letters may have to lie for another 
few months in Rutherford’s mail box before I hear again; but when I do 
hear, I shall be glad, if I may, to let you know where I shall be working. 

I have just started at the electrical properties of rutile: the phenomenon 
does not seem very complicated. Rutile is a good dielectric (€ = 130). When 
it is heated to 750°—800° C in hydrogen, it turns black, loses 1.6% —1.7% of 
its weight, becomes somewhat soluble (up to 6—7%) in acids, is more easily 
reduced, and becomes a pyroelectric conductor of specific resistance of the 
order of .1 ohm. When the black form is heated above 750° C in the pres- 
ence of oxygen, it gains 1.7% of its weight, & returns to the form of ordi- 
nary rutile. The change of weight increases with the temperature used for 
the conversion. It is always too low to be accounted for by a stoichiometric 
reduction, & too high to be due to impurities. This seems to suggest that, 
whereas the high metallic conductivity requires the participation of nearly 
all the atoms, the much lower conductivity of metallic oxides depends on the 
presence of some atoms only with metal-like electrons. That is all that I 
have been able to find out now; if I should happen to find anything that is 
relevant later on, I shall be glad to tell you of it. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


FROM BAY SHORE Robert also wrote to Francis Fergusson proposing a 
September reunion. The letter, forwarded from Oxford to Heidelberg, fi- 
nally caught up with Fergusson in Munich. 


78 


39 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Bayshore 
July 20. [1925] 


Dear Francis, 


It is a long time since I have heard from you; and I hope that it is only 
because one of our letters miscarried, and not that you have grown weary of 
our Cornish expedition. In any case I shall risk boring you with repetition: 

I shall arrive in England about September 16th; I shall want about 10 days 
or 2 weeks at Cambridge, to see about laboratory facilities and such matters. 
During this time you can reach me at Christ’s College. We might meet at 
Cambridge, or at London; or at Winchester, which is probably the most 
convenient for you. But unless I hear I shall expect you at Christ’s. 

During August I shall be in the mountains, very probably in the Pecos. 
But if you write to Bayshore, I shall get your letter on my return. Paul 
[Horgan] will be down this afternoon. He is to stay a few days. He is pretty 
much unchanged, I think, except for the slightly pontifical assurance which 
success has given him. Smith is at the Cape this summer. He is coming 
down here later, largely, I think, to discuss with father the most effective 
method of obtaining money for the new school. That is your Smith. You 
would not know him. 

I am supposedly working at a problem in electronic conduction at a labo- 
ratory near here. But they are forever short of apparatus, and, as a result, I 
spend most of my time pretending to study, & indolently sailing the Tri- 
methy over the Bay. I am anxious to get away, & more anxious than I can 
tell you to see you again. 

It is impossible to write with any considerable lyricism a letter whose 
arrival is so improbable. But do write. Or I shall drown myself before I get 
to Southhampton. 


Robert 


BEFORE SAILING for England, Robert made his first visit to the Pecos 
Valley in New Mexico since his introduction to it by Herbert Smith in 1922. 
His parents, comfortably housed at Bishop’s Lodge on the outskirts of Santa 
Fe, joined him for a few days at the Pages’ ranch, Los Pinos. 


79 


40 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Los Pinos, Saturday 
[ca. August 8, 1925] 


Dear Mr. Smith, 


Part A: Business. 

The negatives are delivered. It is reported that a few of them are missing, 
but that they are unimportant, and that you will be forgiven. Whereupon 
lament for you and Oateman, who are lost souls. 

I have your eversharp, and shall give it to Frank to take to school. Mean- 
while I have been using it for the construction of the three sets of verses I am 
sending to you. If any of them are useful, don’t hesitate to maltreat them, or 
add others, or anything. I tried to choose really decent things, but things 
whose excellence was not too frightfully obvious. If you have any new 
ones, I should like to see them. 

Part B: Gossip. 

The menage here is a good deal simpler this year, but very nearly as de- 
lightful. Don Amado 1s, of course, not well. But he is very hearty physi- 
cally, and quite as charming as ever. Consuelo [Chaves] is at the Fiesta, 
where, God willing, she will stay a few days more. There is a family called 
Swann, from Massachusetts by the tubercular Tucson-Colorado Springs 
route. Most excellent people, with two daughters, both immensely learned, 
and one ravishing. If you were here Katherine would be jealous; but as it is 
all is sweet. Tonight Mr Page is to bring Mother, Father, Erna [Fergusson], 
and several more “‘perfectly charming people”’ from La Jolla, up from Santa 
Fe. Mrs Page and I hope to induce Erna to take us on a hochst rapid and 
abbreviated trip to the Snake dance.2 Meanwhile Mr Page would take 
Mother and Father to Taos, and Puye. The Parents are really quite pleased 
with the place, and are starting to ride a little. Curiously enough they enjoy 
the frivolous courtesy of the place, and all is well— Of more intimate gossip 
there is very little. Katherine is not well, and probably no more happy than 
before. But she seems to have dominated Page’s jealousy, and chides him 
about it only a few times a day. They are absorbed, together, in the me- 
chanics of the menage, which are at present strained to the elastic limit. Mrs 
Page looks well and rides superbly. Lady is lame, and most of the horses 
underfed. 

We have done only a few expeditions. Pecos Baldy and over toward the 
Truchas; Lake Peak and the divide, which was superb; and a feeble attempt 
to penetrate the caves at the Pancuela. Your trail, a new mine and a great 
expedition to Lake Katherine, and then the Brazos, for the next days. I do 
hope that we shall be able to do Walpi. As we now plan it, we could make it 


80 


between Sunday evening and Thursday morning, with the dream mesas 
thrown in. 

Francis is presenting a paper on America’s place in literature to a learned 
society at Heidelberg — 

Adios. They are calling for a walk. But more some other time. 


R 


a. The 1925 Santa Fe Fiesta was held from August 2 to 6; El Palacio, nos. 2 and 3 (August 1, 
1925): 31-32, information provided by Orlando Romero, New Mexico State Library. Erna 
Fergusson, Francis’ sister, was an authority on Indian dances. A snake dance, the culmination 
of sixteen-day Hopi ceremonies, was performed in the village of Walpi in odd-numbered years. 


At Los Pinos, while Mrs. Page took the boys on long rides, Mrs. Op- 
penheimer sat on the porch and did beautiful petit point despite the awk- 
wardness of her artificial hand.* Oral tradition credits Robert and his riding 
companions with the finding of an unmapped lake on the east side of Santa 
Fe Baldy, which they named in honor of Katherine Page. As Lake Kath- 
erine, it eventually appeared on the survey map of the area. This reference 
suggests that the lake was named on Robert’s earlier visit to the area with 
Smith. 

Paul Horgan recollects vividly everything except the date of a memora- 
ble expedition with Robert, which could have taken place on this 1925 visit 
since the Oppenheimers apparently did not yet own horses. Horgan recalls 
that in Santa Fe “‘we hired two horses with high pommel saddles and took a 
lunch . . . and I had a paint box full of tubes of paint and equipment for 
work because I was certain that somewhere along the line I would toss off a 
landscape. We started up the Lake Peak trail . . . to cross the Sangre de 
Cristos to Cowles. It turned out to be a day-long venture, full of merriment 
and nonsense as we rode. Presently I had a collapse of my paint box. It was 
tied to my pommel with a thong, which broke . . . and everything was 
precipitated on the ground. And idiotically I had to ride the rest of the way 
with it under my arm which was sort of superb. Then we hit the divide at 
the very top of that mountain in a tremendous thunderstorm . . . im- 
mense, huge, pounding rain. We sat under our horses for lunch and ate or- 
anges, [and] were drenched . . . I was looking at Robert . . . and all of a 
sudden I noticed his hair was standing straight up . . . responding to the 
static. Marvelous. Then presently we were able to remount and go down 
the other side and we got to Cowles about seven at night, after dark, and 
Katy Page’s windows were lighted. It was a very welcome sight. She 
received us, and we had a beautiful time for several days there. She referred 
to us always then and afterward as her slaves. ‘Here come my slaves.’’”® 


§1 


THE REPLIES from Rutherford and from the Board of Research Studies 
that awaited Robert’s return from New Mexico prompted three letters 
written before he sailed for England. The first two concerned arrangements 
for his study in England and the third was a report to Bridgman on the re- 
sults of his summer research. 


41 | TO PERCY W. BRIDGMAN 


Bay Shore, New York 
August 29, 1925 


Dear Professor Bridgman, 


Rutherford wrote to me that he already had so many “excellent appli- 
cants’”’ that he could not take me, at least for a time. But the registrar for 
graduate studies wrote to me that he could get me admitted a little later in 
the year. But for that he insists upon recommendation. He 1s particularly 
interested to know whether the applicant has done any original work, ex- 
perimental or theoretical; and whether he has shown any aptitude for this, 
or any originality in his attack upon assigned work. I am very sorry to have 
to bother you with this; I think that I can promise that it will be the last time. 
I am enclosing an envelope. 

I did a few quantitative experiments on the resistance of rutile; the con- 
ductibility is not proportional to the number of reduced atoms, altho these 
are distributed at random; but approximately to the sixth power of this 
number. This certainly is not an agreement with a free electron theory. If 
you would like, at any time, a more detailed report, I shall be glad to send it. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


42 | TO R. E. PRIESTLEY 


Saxons’ Road 
Bayshore, N.Y. 
August 30, 1925 


Dear Sir: 
Thank you for your letter of August 10th, and for the enclosed copy of 
the Regulations concerning the admission of students for research. 


Since I expect, 1n any case, to study at Christ’s College next term, I should 
like to be admitted to the University as a research student as soon as 


§2 


possible; but if admission cannot be granted at once, I should be quite 
willing to wait a term. I expect to be in Cambridge shortly; and I shall then 
submit my formal application. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


43 | TO PERCY W. BRIDGMAN 


Bayshore, N.Y. 
September 5, 1925. 


Dear Professor Bridgman, 


Thank you for your note, and for the letter of recommendation. It is far 
better than anything for which I had hoped; and I feel sure that it will satisfy 
even the jealous guards of the Cavendish laboratory. 

I am sending some of the details of the work I have done this summer. If I 
can get better samples, I shall make this work considerably more precise: 

1) The reduction which rutile undergoes upon ignition in hydrogen does 
not change the external crystal form of the oxide. . . 

2) The reduction is not a surface reduction. . . 

3) The only considerable experimental difficulty is that of obtaining uni- 
form samples... 

4) A conversion of 4% means that the oxide is about 40% Ti,Os, and that, 
roughly, # of the titanium atoms have valence electrons. If a large part of the 
conduction were done by the dissociation and migration of these electrons, 
then the conductibility would be roughly proportional to the loss of weight; 
if the curve were not a straight line, we should expect it to be concave 
downward. But if the valence electrons travelled along the atoms 
themselves, then the chance that an electron could travel, undisturbed, for n 
atoms would be, if the loss of weight w were small enough, proportional to 
w". For larger w I cannot compute this chance without knowing the mecha- 
nism of transfer; but, for fixed n, it would not vary as rapidly as w". . . 

5) There is another thing, which, in this connection, seems very puzzling 
to me. If the conducting electrons are to travel along the atoms, it seems 
probable that they will follow quantum orbits. Yet, by a direct computa- 
tion, from the Ham-Jac. [Hamilton-Jacob] solution for the Stark effect, 
I found that the maximum distance of an electron from its nucleus, in a hy- 
drogen like atom, and an electric field, only changes by 10~’ of itself per 
volt. I did the calculation twice, and could not find the mistake; but I don’t 
think that the result looks very encouraging. 


53 


I hope that you will pardon me the length and the garrulity of this note; 
and that, perhaps, some of it will be interesting to you. 


Very sincerely, 


J R Oppenheimer 


WHEN ROBERT SAILED for Ehgland early in September, Frank and 
the captain of the Oppenheimer’s yacht Lorelei sailed out to wave goodbye 
as the ship passed the Fire Island light. The Atlantic crossing, which took a 
week or more in 1925, gave Robert time to prepare a summary of his aca- 
demic preparation as stipulated in the regulations of the Board of Research 
Studies. Before joining Francis Fergusson for the trip to Comwall, he 
paused long enough in Cambridge to establish a connection with Christ’s 
College and to make formal application for graduate standing. 


44 | TOR. E. PRIESTLEY 


Christ’s College 
Cambridge 
September 16, 1925 


Dear Sir: 

I should like to apply for admission to the University as a graduate stu- 
dent. I hope, at the end of three years, to take a degree of Doctor of Philoso- 
phy at the University. In preparation for this I should like to continue read- 
ing in Physics, in Analysis, and in Physical Chemistry; and I should like, as 
soon as it seems advisable, to undertake a research problem in Physics. I am 
particularly interested in the theory of electronic conduction; the original 
experimental problems which I have worked at were both concerned with 
this theory; and I should be very glad of an opportunity for further experi- 
mental work, and, if possible, for critical advice in the corresponding theo- 
retical problems. I am most interested in those aspects of the theory of con- 
duction which can give an indication of the laws of force to which the 
motion of electrons are subject. 

Almost all of the formal work which I have done in preparation was done 
at Harvard College. A part of this work I did for courses regularly given at 
the College; and I am submitting a list of these courses, omitting those re- 
quired for elementary preparation, and those in other fields. 

I took “‘for credit’ the following courses: 

Analysis (third year). 

Calculus of Probabilities. 


54 


Potential Theory. 

Problems in the flow of heat, hydrodynamics, etc. Introduction to the use 
of Bessel’s functions, ellipsoidal harmonics, Legendre polynomials [etc. ]. 

Capillary Chemistry (a course covering, approximately, Freundlich’s 
““Kapillarchemie’’). 

Physical Chemistry. 

Thermodynamics (two courses). 

Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism. 

Introduction to Statistical Mechanics and the Quantum Theory. 

Seminary on the Presuppositions of Science (Dr. A. N. Whitehead). 

Organic Chemistry. 

Analytical Dynamics (Advanced Course). 

I attended the exercises, and recorded the lectures, in the following courses: 

Problems in the dynamics of the quantum theory. 

Mathematical theory of Relativity. 

Electromagnetic theory of light. 

Sturm-Liouville Methods in Linear Differential Equations. 

The Theory of Complete Electrolytic Dissociation (Professor Debye). 

In addition to this Professor Bridgman allowed me to work at a problem 
in the pressure coefficient of the electrical conductivity of alloys. The object 
of these measurements, which were carried to fifteen thousand atmo- 
spheres, was to [determine] whether the pressure coefficient was a function 
of the composition similar to the temperature coefficient. I succeeded in 
taking measurements on only two types of alloys. This summer, moreover, 
I was allowed to study the conductibility of the mineral rutile. It had pre- 
viously been observed that, upon violent ignition, particularly in a reducing 
atmosphere, rutile became conductive. The object of the experiments was to 
explain this change, and to discover, if possible, the mechanism which it in- 
volved. 

The other work I have done consists largely of reading, and of the prepa- 
ration of the theses required in four of the courses mentioned above. It was 
not necessary that these theses solve new problems; but the treatment was 
supposed to be original. 

In support of this application I am submitting my degree, my grade cards, 
and a few letters from the men with whom I have worked. If any more defi- 
nite information is required, I shall be glad to try to give it. 

I am twenty-one years old. 

Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


85 


[Note appended to letter]: 

Sir Joseph Thomson has expressed his willingness to take me as a research 
student, but advised me to take a course in laboratory manipulation during 
the first term. 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


AFTER A TWO-YEAR SEPARATION, Robert and Francis Fergusson 
had much to talk about. For a week or ten days, Fergusson recalled, ‘“‘we 
walked along the cliffs and talked, of course, about everything under thé 
sun, and that was very pleasant. We always enjoyed that sort of thing.”’ 
Later that year, after he realized how emotionally upset Robert had become, 
Fergusson wondered if these talks were partly responsible, for he had not 
only given a “rather Russian account”’ of what it was like to be an American 
student in Europe but had expounded theories and described adventures — 
social, intellectual, and psychological—about which he had perforce kept 
silent during a summer of travel with his mother.® 

Perhaps Francis’s qualms were partially induced by a letter he received 
that autumn from Herbert Smith. “‘How is Robert doing?”’ Smith enquired. 
“Is frigid England hellish socially and climatically, as you found it? Or does 
he enjoy its exoticism? I’ve a notion, by the way, that your ability to show 
him about should be exercised with great tact, rather than in royal profu- 
sion. Your [two] years’ start and social adaptivity are likely totmake him 
despair. And instead of flying at your throat—as I remember your being 
ready to do for George What’s-his-name. . . when you were similarly awed 
by him—I’m afraid he’d merely cease to think his own life worth living. — 
Forgive the grandfatherliness, please.’’’ 


45 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Cambridge, [England] 
Nov 1. [1925] 


Dear Francis, 


I am sending you some of the Karmeliten peppermints. Woodson wrote 
that I should soon be getting some pinones.? As soon as they come I shall 
send some on. 

There is far too much to tell you in a letter. I do not think that Cambridge 
can be quite so bad as Oxford. But its excellences are just as fantastically 
inaccessible, and there are vast, sloppy strata where there is nothing, abso- 
lutely nothing, to be found. By next term, I think, I may have some people 


86 


to shew you. There are a great many Americans, but they are not as univer- 
sally wretched here as at Oxford. There are quite a lot from Harvard: Edsall, 
Fried, Haile, Castle, Fred [Bernheim], Sterling Dow, Mc Gill.” Did you 
know any of them? Jeff [Wyman] is up here this week end. Most of the sci- 
entists are frightful. There is one who shows hope. But all of them are un- 
commonly skillful at blowing glass and solving differential equations, and 
the academic standard here would depeople Harvard over night. The men 
here seem to have a great respect for American scientists. But they have 
nothing but contempt for the Germans. 

I do not think that I shall be able to come to Oxford this term, but I am 
very anxious to see you, and I hope that it will be possible for us to meet 
very early in the vac. 

I am having a pretty bad time. The lab work is a terrible bore, and Iam so 
bad at it that it is impossible to feel that I am learning anything. I have just 
heard that Thomson is my supervisor, but I have not been to see him yet. 
The lectures are vile. And you know the rest. 

Has Jean been to Oxford?° 


Robert 


a. Woodson was an Albuquerque lawyer friend of Katherine Page’s. 

b. John T. Edsall, A.B. 1923, A.M. 1924, beginning his second year of graduate study in 
biology at Cambridge; Walter Jay Fried, A.B. 1924; Henry P. Haile, A.M. 1925; Edward S. 
Castle, A.B. 1925; Frederick Bernheim, A.B. 1925; Sterling Dow, A.B. 1925; and Frederick T. 
McGill, A.B. 1925. Harvard Alumni Directory, 1926, Harvard University Archives, Pusey Li- 
brary, Cambridge, Mass. 

c. Jean de Menasce was a friend of Fergusson’s whom Robert met some time during this 
year. 


Robert seemed more sanguine when he next wrote Fergusson. 


46 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Cam|bridge, England] 
Nov 15. [1925] 


Dear Francis, 


Thanks for the George. It has a lot of magnificent things in it; but I have 
not found, yet, a tract comparable with the Gezeiten in your book. It is not 
quite so formidable syntactically either, and can mostly be read without the 
help of philologic treatises. 

I shall have quite a lot to tell you. For the place is very rich, and has plenty 


87 


of luscious treasures; and although I am altogether unable to take advantage 
of them, yet I have a chance to see many people, and a few good ones. There 
are certainly some good physicists here—the young ones, I mean; and they 
are very different from the Thomson Larmor generation,® and even more 
different from the Rutherford one. I have been taken to all sorts of meetings: 
High Maths at Trinity, a secret pacifist meeting, a Zionist club, and several 
rather pallid science clubs. But I have seen no one here who is of any use 
who is not doing science. This applies particularly to the Americans. There 
is a great mass of American English students. Most of them want to teach. 
They are a terribly poor lot, and are literally dying off under the rigors of 
disregard, climate, and Yorkshire pudding. When you come here next term 
you must let me take you to a colloquium, or something of that sort. It is 
very neat and precise; there is, really, a new generation, and for the first time 
in seventy years they have got people here who do both experiment and 
theory. 

I am working with Thomson now. He thought my experiments quite 
good, but didn’t help much otherwise. Of him too later. 

There are some terrible complications with Fred, and an awful evening, 
two weeks ago, in the moon. I have not seen him since, and blush when I 
think of him. And a Dostoievskian confession from him. I have not been 
to a dance with a French Swiss. 

Thanks for the book, again. And I hope that you will write. Let me know 
when I can see you, at any rate. I can’t leave here now. 


Robert 


a. Sir Joseph Larmor, an almost exact contemporary of J. J. Thomson, was Lucasian Profes- 
sor of Mathematics at Cambridge. 


Oppenheimer later described what he had in mind when he worked 
with Thomson. “It was not a good idea, but I was puzzled by the conduc- 
tivity business and I thought I would like to study what happened with 
beams of electrons and thin films of metal. This was not electron diffraction; 
it would, if properly done, presumably [have] led to it . . .” 

‘‘As far as I remember I was introduced to Thomson, and he and 
[Ebenezer] Everett worked in one corner of this large basement room and I 
worked in the diagonally opposite corner . . . I did make some beryllium 
films which, I think, [James] Chadwick used for other purposes . . . [I re- 
member] the miseries of evaporating beryllium onto collodion and then 
getting rid of the collodion, and so on. I did some studying . . . I don’t 
remember any formal courses in physics . ms 

‘The business in the laboratory was really quite a sham but it got me 


58 


into the laboratory where I heard talk and found out a good deal of what 
people were interested in. I still had the feeling that I should be able to 
understand what was going on in metals, but, of course, I didn’t, and even 
[Erwin] Schrodinger’s paper, which might have given one ideas, didn’t con- 
nect with this problem forme... ” 

‘TI Was living im a miserable hole . . . Then in the spring I moved out 
to a place along the river half way to Grantchester which was less miserable. 
I dined in college.’”® 

The “terrible complications with Fred,”’ of which Robert wrote Fer- 
gusson, related in some way to the fact that his friendship with Frederick 
Bernheim had not withstood transplanting from one Cambridge to the 
other. Bernheim found this very natural. He and Robert were attached to 
different colleges, lived in different lodgings, and worked in different lab- 
oratories. Bernheim soon met a young woman in the biochemistry lab, his 
future wife, and spent many evenings with her. He found a certain relief in 
less constant exposure to Robert’s intensity and drive, and he thought that 
Robert too was enjoying new contacts and experiences. In the coming 
months Robert himself would be making some rather startling confessions 
of dubious accuracy and may have overdramatized this November confron- 
tation. Bernheim’s memory focuses rather on an occasion in the spring of 
1926 when Robert invited him to his digs for a strawberry and Devonshire 
cream tea and demanded a kind of showdown as to whether their friendship 
was to be revived or ended. At the time Bernheim did not realize that Rob- 
ert’s emotional balance was more precarious than usual. He recalls only one 
more meeting, an uneventful one when Robert visited him and his new wife 
in Munich in 1927.° 


BEFORE CHRISTMAS Robert wrote to Herbert Smith. This letter is the 
last surviving item in the Oppenheimer—Smith correspondence until Au- 
gust 1945. 


47 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


[Cambridge, England] 
Dec 11 [1925] 


Dear Mr Smith, 


Your conscience, I suspect, can not have been quite at ease about our mu- 
tual epistolatory obligations; for not long ago I heard from Father that he 
had seen you, & that you had confessed that you owed me a letter. But I 
appreciate your magnanimity all the same; and if it will encourage you in 
the construction of another such charming letter, I shall be glad to have you 


89 


impute to me any sin, up to & including manslaughter. And in the interests 
of pure science I ought to add that epistolatory simultaneity must be mea- 
sured, not in terms of the velocity of light, but by the more solemn progress 
of the U. S. Mails. 

Nor are you quite right in supposing that it was any such technicality that 
kept me from writing to you: in such things I: always feel so fully head over 
heels in debt to you, that a gross of letters could not make much difference. 
Nor, finally, is it because I have been+busy, as you so charitably put it, 
making a career for myself. (If I seem to be spending all my faculties in con- 
tradicting you, you must remember that that is the subtlest form of flat- 
tery). Really I have been engaged in the far more difficult business of 
making myself for a career. And I have not written, simply because I have 
lacked the comfortable conviction & assurance which are necessary to an 
adequately splendid letter. You see that I have not forgotten how to protract 
& ornament my apologies. 

Francis is going to be in New York next winter, & he will give you a 
much more coherent account of himself than I can. He has changed a great 
deal. Exempli gratia, he is happy. And he is now able to devote his scant 
energies, not, as before, to the precarious maintenance of his intellectual bul- 
warks, but to more adventurous speculations. And you must not pity him. 
He knows everyone at Oxford; he goes to tea with Lady Ottoline Morrell, 
the high priestess of civilized society, & the patroness of [T.S.] Eliot & Berty 
[Bertrand Russell]; & he is a member of a congress of littérateurs who meet 
every summer at Pontigny to talk about “Mysticism & Literature’ & other 
such modest things. You will see for yourself. 

Your irony is perhaps a little too nice to be charitable. Betty Thomas is 
teaching school, & I, who was for long years in love with her shadow, am 
not to care a tinker’s damn! —the only gossip I have is that Jane expects 
another infant about the New Year.? 

Later I am surely coming back to America to live. But now I am too busy 
here for that. I hope to see you, though, next Spring, for I have much to tell 
& a good deal to ask. It is far too much to write; and perhaps when I see you 
my incoherence & garrulity will be somewhat mitigated by my very obvi- 
ous desire to confide in you. 

I shall miss our Xmas party this year. Please give my best greetings to 
Mrs Smith, & have a very jolly time. And do write again, if only a little. 

Your 


Robert 


a. Betty Thomas had been a classmate of Robert’s at the Ethical Culture School. Jane Didi- 
sheim Kayser was living in Paris, where Robert visited her and her husband Jacques while he 
was 1n Cambridge. 


90 


ROBERT’S DESIRE to confide in Smith was not compelling, for the or- 
nate phrases in which he customarily addressed his former English teacher 
told almost nothing of his life in Cambridge or of his state of mind. Robert 
can hardly have realized how arduous the business of making himself for a 
career was to become in the next few months. Although he was indeed 
making flew acquaintances among Cambridge scientists, none had yet be- 
come close friends. Soon after arriving in Cambridge, Robert had dropped 
in on John Edsall at St. John’s College, and this friendship, begun three 
years earlier at Harvard, became stronger as the year progressed. Jeffries 
Wyman often spent weekends in Cambridge, and during the Christmas hol- 
idays Robert joined Francis Fergusson in Paris. 

To Edsall, a biochemist, Robert tried that autumn to convey his tre- 
mendous excitement over new developments in physics and to explain their 
meaning. Edsall was impressed by Robert’s eagerness to become involved 
with, and to contribute to, the new physics and sensed his disappointment 
that he was not two or three years older and ready to participate on an ad- 
vanced level. However, not until after the New Year did Edsall appreciate 
the extent of Robert’s frustration.’® 

Francis Fergusson was alerted to Robert’s abnormal emotional condi- 
tion by a bizarre incident during their holiday reunion in Paris. In the course 
of one of their customary exchanges about intellectual and personal matters, 
Robert suddenly leapt upon Fergusson with the clear intention of strangling 
him. As tall as Robert and more solidly built, Francis had easily warded off 
the attack, but this uncharacteristic display of violence, combined with Rob- 
ert’s despair over his inept performance in the laboratory and confidences 
about unsatisfactory sexual ventures, convinced Francis that his friend was 
seriously troubled."’ Robert was immediately contrite, and on his return to 
Cambridge he tried to account for his strange behavior. 


48 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Cambridge, [England] 
Jan 23. [1926] 


Dear Francis, 


You should have, not a letter, but a pilgrimage to Oxford, made in a hair 
shirt, with much fasting and snow and prayer. But I will keep my remorse 
and gratitude, and the shame I feel for my inadequacy to you, until I can do 
something rather less useless for you. I do not understand your forbearance 
nor your charity, but you must know that I will not forget them. 

I am doing physics now, pretty badly; and I shall, I think, stay on at least 
this year. But I am not well, and I am afraid to come to see you now for fear 


91 


something melodramatic might happen. Perhaps we can see each other a 
day or two next vac. Anyway, if I may, I will pay you a visit early in the 
Easter term. I have a little to tell you, and a great deal to ask. And if you will 
come here I shall shew what I have found. 

Please, if it is all right, tell Frances Keeley greetings from me. 

I am sending you a can of pinons and a noisy poem which I just wrote. I 
have left out, and that is probably where the fun came in, just as I did in 
Paris, the awful fact of excellence;,butas you know, it is that fact now, com- 
bined with my inability to solder two copper wires together, which is prob- 
ably succeeding in getting me crazy. 

Will you drop me a note, with the news? 

Love 


Robert 


John Edsall noted a change in Robert after the holidays and, though not 
the recipient of as intimate revelations as Fergusson, he recognized a severe 
psychological crisis. “It was obvious,”’ said Edsall of the ensuing weeks, that 
“there was a tremendous inner turmoil, in spite of which . . . he kept on 
doing a tremendous amount of work, thinking, reading, discussing things, 
but obviously with a sense of great inner anxiety and alarm . . . [It] cer- 
tainly was partly mixed up with this terrific intensity of activity . . . [and 
with] frustrations going back into the past.’’ Edsall did not observe any self- 
destructive tendency in Robert’s behavior, but Robert did express a fear that 
he might have a mental breakdown and be unable to work. He told Edsall of 
periodic visits to a Cambridge psychiatrist.’ 

Meanwhile, Robert wrote calmly to Fergusson about plans for the long 
spring holiday. 


49 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Cambridge, [England] 
Mar 7. [1926] 


Dear Francis, 
Thanks for your letter. My regret at not having strangled you is now in- 
tellectual rather than emotional. If you want to come here before you go to 


Italy, it will be perfectly safe, & I shall be very glad to see you. If not, will 
you tell me where you will be in Italy? Probably I shall have to stay here 


92 


during the vac, but if I can I will go with Jeff [Wyman] & Edsall to Corsica, 
& in that case would come back by Leghorn. 
It is impossible to write. But I would like to see you before you go back. 


Robert 


In the absence of further correspondence, the principal events of that 
troubled spring must be reconstructed from the recollections of friends. 
Robert did make the projected trip to Corsica with Edsall and Wyman. For 
ten days they walked in the mountains, stayed at small inns, and enjoyed 
French food and wines. Occasionally Robert spoke of feeling depressed, but 
mainly they laughed at minor incidents of travel or talked about serious 
topics including the broad range of French and Russian literature, especially 
Dostoevsky, to which Robert had been introducing Edsall during the previ- 
ous months of growing intimacy. Edsall remembers Robert’s comment 
during one of these conversations about people who had achieved great 
things in literature and science: ““The kind of person that I admire most 
would be one who becomes extraordinarily good at doing a lot of things 
but still maintains a tear-stained countenance.”’”* 

The three friends planned to go on to Sardinia, but at dinner the last 
evening in Corsica the waiter came to Robert with information he had re- 
quested about return boats to Nice. Edsall and Wyman were totally 
surprised by this sudden change. Robert, quite agitated, said he could not go 
to Sardinia; he must return to Cambridge at once. They recall that as he 
relaxed over wine he gave a most improbable explanation: he had left a poi- 
soned apple on the desk of Patrick (P. M. S.) Blackett, an experimental 
physicist at the Cavendish Laboratory, and must make sure Blackett was all 
right. To this day Edsall and Wyman are not sure about the poisoned apple 
story; at the time they assumed it was an hallucination on Robert’s part. 
They did not think it necessary to change their own plans. As Fergusson and 
Edsall both note of this period, in most contexts Robert was functioning 
quite normally. So he went back to England alone." 

Edsall does not recall following up the apple episode when he returned 
to Cambridge in mid-April. Fifty years later he and Wyman both told the 
story as an instance of Robert’s aberrant behavior that spring. Metaphoric 
interpretations, which would have been characteristic of Robert in normal 
moods, should not be excluded. Perhaps the apple symbolized a scientific 
paper containing a suddenly recognized error or merely an unfinished piece 
of research. In any event, in Cambridge Edsall found Robert working 
harder than ever on elaborate numerical calculations relating to quantum 
mechanical energy levels. At Robert’s request, Edsall spent hours one Sun- 


93 


day checking these figures, although as a biochemist he understood little of 
what they meant. Meanwhile, at lunch in one of the colleges Robert casually 
introduced him to Blackett. Edsall believes that while Robert may have 
been a bit jealous of Blackett’s skill as both experimenter and theoretician 
and of his easy social manner, he admired him tremendously.” 

No one of Robert’s friends seems to have been privy to all that hap- 
pened during these difficult months. There is a general impression that 
someone in authority in the laboratory of at Christ’s wrote to Robert’s 
parents, and that a visit they made to Cambridge that spring, natural 
enough in view of their frequent trips to Europe, was largely to straighten 
out problems arising from Robert’s depressed and erratic behavior. When 
Francis Fergusson saw them, he did not mention the strangling episode. 
Robert’s mother was terribly worried. His father was worried but tried to 
say that everything would be all right. They insisted that Robert see a new 
psychiatrist, but the results were no more satisfactory than earlier treat- 
ment.’® 

In June Robert told John Edsall that he had dementia praecox and that 
his psychiatrist had dismissed him because in a case like this further analysis 
would do more harm than good. Fergusson has a different, though not nec- 
essarily conflicting, version of the termination of treatment. In the late 
spring or early summer of 1926, shortly before Fergusson returned to the 
United States from his three years at Oxford, he met Robert by prearrange- 
ment in London outside the office of a Harley Street psychiatrist. The occa- 
sion made a lasting impression on Fergusson: “I [saw him] standing on the 
comer, waiting for me, with his hat on one side of his head, looking abso- 


lutely weird. I joined him . . . and he walked with terrific speed; when he 
walked his feet turned out . . . and he sort of leaned forward, traveled at a 
terrific clip. I asked him how it had been. He said . . . that the guy was too 


stupid to follow him and that he knew more about his troubles than the 
[doctor] did, which was probably true.” 

Fergusson, who had seen Robert in some grim moods in the five years 
of their friendship and who was to be close to him during less private crises 
still far in the future, regarded this moment on a London street as highly 
significant. ““There’s no doubt about it,”’ he said. ‘““Robert had this ability to 
bring himself up, to figure out what his trouble was, and to deal with it.””?” 


A FRAGMENT of correspondence which does not in any way reflect these 
trials opens the engaging series of sixteen surviving letters written by Robert 
to his brother Frank over the next ten years in which, with tact and tender- 
ness and apparently with increasing affection, he proffered advice on per- 
sonal and professional matters. Although the first section is missing and the 
letter does not bear a full date, the enthusiastic recommendation of Corsica 
suggests 1926, and the comment on congratulations, a possible reference to 


94 


Robert’s twenty-second birthday in April. Frank was approaching his four- 
teenth birthday on August 14. 


50 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


[Cambridge, England, 
ca. late spring 1926] 


. . . but you can get a much more complete list from Dr. Kelly. Skillful 
staining will greatly increase the amount you can learn from microscopic 
work, and it is probably pretty good fun to learn. I remember that I once 
borrowed an oil immersion objective from school for a term. It about quad- 
ruples the resolution you can get with your present high power, and still 
gives a reasonable illumination. Perhaps that would interest you. If you 
want an oil immersion you can have it for your birthday, or for any equally 
plausible time you can think of from me. But you had better not be too 
optimistic about the profundity of what you are learning. I don’t think that 
even expert cytologists have established any very obvious connections 
between the form of a cell and its ultimate function; and I’m quite sure that 
you haven’t. And as for the chemical analyses, they wouldn’t be any use to 
you at all. You might as well hope to find out about the nature of a cheese 
cake by finding how much carbon and nitrogen it contained. If you want 
some notion of the complexity of organic things, you might read a simple 
little book by L J Henderson called Fitness of the Environment.? But don’t 
take it too seriously; for I’m told by biochemists that it’s not all right. 

Mr Klock told me that he was enjoying his work with you. 

And still more advice: I don’t think you would enjoy reading about rela- 
tivity very much until you have studied a little geometry, a little mechanics, 
a little electrodynamics. But if you want to try, Eddington’s book is the best 
to start on. I remember that five years ago you were dressed up to act like 
Albert Einstein; in a few years, it seems, they won’t need to disguise you. 
And you'll be able to write your own speech. And now a final word of ad- 
vice: try to understand really, to your own satisfaction, thoroughly and 
honestly, the few things in which you are most interested; because it is only 
when you have learnt to do that, when you realize how hard and how very 
satisfying it is, that you will appreciate fully the more spectacular things like 
relativity and mechanistic biology. If you think I’m wrong please don’t hes- 
itate to tell me so. I’m only talking from my own very small experience. 

Some day you must come with me to Corsica. It’s a great place, with 
every virtue from wine to glaciers, and from langouste to brigantines. Per- 
haps the summer between school and college. 

Do you still see Dr Kenworthy?” What is she like? Does she understand 
your scientific adventures? 


95 


I hope Micky is better.* If he is, give him my greetings, please. And do 
write again, soon, much, and wild. 

Thanks for your congratulations. I feel about as manly as a tadpole or a 
cauliflower. 


Love 


R 


a. Lawrence J. Henderson was a Harvard physiologist known for his wide-ranging intellec- 
tual interests. His The Fitness of the Environment (New York, 1913) was ‘‘an inquiry into the 
biological significance of the properties of matter.”’ 

b. Dr. Marion E. Kenworthy was a psychoanalyst. 

c. Micky was a medical student who tutored Frank one summer. The illness was a fatal case 
of blood poisoning. 


DESPITE HIS FRUSTRATION with the experimental work in the labo- 
ratory, Oppenheimer began to develop his own taste in physics. He heard 
papers presented at the Cavendish colloquium, read avidly in contemporary 
journals, and went to meetings of the Kapitza Club, an informal physics 
discussion group founded by the young Russian physicist Peter Kapitza, a 
long-term visitor at the Cavendish Laboratory. From these sources Robert 
heard about the new quantum mechanics and, as he later recalled, ‘in a rudi- 
mentary way I began to get pretty interested. [Someone] who was extraordi- 
narily . . . kind and helpful was Ray [Ralph] Fowler, who had that gift of 
helping young people.’’”® 

Another stimulus to Robert’s interest in the new physics was the con- 
stant flow of visitors to the Cavendish. “Through Rutherford I met [Niels] 
Bohr and at that point I forgot about beryllium and films and decided to try 
to learn the trade of being a theoretical physicist. By that time I was fully 
aware that it was an unusual time, that great things were afoot . . . When 
Rutherford introduced me to Bohr he asked me what I was working on. I 
told him [it was the two-body problem] and he said, ‘How is it going?’ I 
said, ‘I’m in difficulties.’ He said, “Are the difficulties mathematical or phys- 
ical?’ I said, ‘I don’t know.’ He said, “That’s bad.’ ’’?® 

Robert also met Paul (P. A. M.) Dirac, an important contributor to the 
development of quantum theory. Dirac’s work, said Oppenheimer later, 
‘“‘was not easily understood [and he was] not concerned to be understood. 
I thought he was absolutely grand.’’ By spring Robert and Dirac regarded 
each other as friends.” 

Blackett introduced Robert to Paul Ehrenfest, professor of physics at 
the University of Leiden. “[He] came to Cambridge and we went out on the 
river and talked about collision problems, Coulomb’s law . . . and so on.” 


96 


Ehrenfest was “extraordinarily warm and friendly.’’ Later in the spring 
Robert joined other American physicists for a week at the University of 
Leiden, where he met Ehrenfest’s assistant, George Uhlenbeck, who recalls, 
“We got along very well immediately . . . [Robert] was a very warm per- 
son... and. . . was so involved in physics . . . [that it was] as if we 
were old friends because [we] had so many things in common.”’ Robert’s 
memory of Leiden was that “it was wonderful and I realized then that some 
of the troubles of the winter had been exacerbated by the English cus- 
toms.””?? 

Another visitor to the Cavendish that spring was Max Born, director 
of the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Gottingen. Rob- 
ert was interested in the problem of continuous spectra and accepted Born’s 
invitation to continue his work in Gottingen. 

To Oppenheimer looking back, this year represented his ‘“‘coming into 
physics.” ‘““When I got to Cambridge, I was faced with the problem of 
looking at a question to which no one knew the answer but I wasn’t willing 
to face it. When I left Cambridge I didn’t know how to face it very well but 
I understood that this was my job; this was the change that occurred that 
year. I owe a great deal just to the existence of the place and the people who 
were there; specifically I owe a great deal to Fowler’s sense and kindness. 
. . . [By the time I decided to go to Gottingen] I had very great misgivings 
about myself on all fronts, but I clearly was going to do theoretical physics 
ifI could . . . It didn’t seem to me like foreclosing anything; it just seemed 
to me like the next order of business. I felt completely relieved of the re- 
sponsibility to go back into a laboratory. I hadn’t been good, I hadn’t done 
anybody any good, and I hadn’t had any fun whatever; and here was 
something I felt just driven to try.’’”” 

The fulfillment of that passionate urge to contribute to the new physics 
that Edsall had so astutely observed in Oppenheimer helped him to resolve 
his personal and professional dilemmas. From that miserable year in Cam- 
bridge Oppenheimer emerged a theoretical physicist as well as his own best 
therapist. 

By 1963 when Oppenheimer reminisced, the tentative nature of the 
move to Gottingen had seemingly been forgotten. At any rate, he did not 
burn his bridges when he notified the Board of Research Studies that he was 
leaving Cambridge. 


7] 


51 | TO R. E. PRIESTLEY 


Cambridge, [England] 
August 18, 1926 


Dear Sir: 


I should like to apply to the Board of Research Studies for permission to 
spend two or three terms next year in Goettingen. My supervisor, Prof. Sir 
Joseph Thomson is not at present in Cambridge. But Prof. Sir Ernest Ruther- 
ford has kindly told me that he would be willing to assure you that my work 
here had been satisfactory, and that the work which I intended to do at Goet- 
tingen was an extension of that which I have started here. He also advised 
me to tell you that I would, at Goettingen, be under the supervision of 
Prof. Dr. Max Born, and that Prof. Born was particularly interested in the 
problems at which I hoped to work. It is now my intention to return to 
Cambridge immediately on the conclusion of my work in Goettingen. 

Yours very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


THE YEAR 1926-27 spent at the University of Gottingen was as 
important to Oppenheimer’s personal and professional growth as any com- 
parable period in his young manhood. He shed the depression of the previ- 
ous winter and obtained the Ph. D. and a postdoctoral fellowship for the 
year to follow. More important, his standing in the world of physics was 
transformed by day-to-day discussion with major participants in the de- 
velopment of new theoretical concepts and by his own contributions to this 
work. 

Long after the details had faded he remembered the stimulation of the 
Gottingen experience: “In the sense which had not been true in Cambridge 
and certainly not at Harvard, I was part of a little community of people who 
had some common interests and tastes and many common interests in phys- 
ics. I remember this more than I do lectures or seminars. I think it quite 
probable that I attended some of Born’s lectures, but I don’t remember. I’m 
sure I gave a seminar or two, but I don’t remember. I met [Richard] Cou- 
rant. . . I met [Werner] Heisenberg who came there and I had not met 
him before; [I also met Gregor] Wentzel, and [Wolfgang] Pauli in Hamburg 
or in Gottingen so that something which for me more than most people is 
important began to take place; namely I began to have some conversations. 
Gradually, I guess, they gave me some sense and perhaps more gradually, 
some taste in physics, something that I probably would not have ever 
gotten to. . . if I'd been locked up in a room.” 


9 


Gottingen was at the crossroads of continental physics and burgeoned 
with new ideas. Oppenheimer, along with other young American and Eu- 
ropean students and visitors, was challenged by the possibility that the new 
quantum theory would account for certain physical phenomena that had not 
been satisfactorily explained by the old quantum theory. 

The older theory was a way of describing atomic motion which took 
into account experimental evidence that energy was absorbed and emitted 
by atoms in discrete units of electromagnetic radiation known as quanta. 
This mathematical description of discontinuities was enormously successful, 
but it was fraught with difficulties. 

Between 1924 and 1926, a swift succession of brilliant papers by physi- 
cists at several European centers gave rise to a bold new reformulation of 
quantum theory. The new theory, known as quantum mechanics, opened a 
floodgate of solutions to difficult problems by accounting for the behavior 
of atoms and radiation under specific conditions as observed by experiment. 

What did it mean to be a theorist during this exciting stage in the de- 
velopment of physics? Oppenheimer and others were searching for more 
precise and successful applications of the new theoretical framework, whose 
boundaries were not fully known. Many of the physicists who grappled 
with the implications and applications of quantum mechanics in the late 
1920s and early 1930s were struggling to match their intuition to their 
mathematics so they could formulate concepts in a way that was internally 
consistent while describing the essential things scientists wanted to know 
about the physical world. 

The process was a collaborative one, with scientists from many coun- 
tries sharing their tentative ideas, insights, and calculations. As Oppen- 
heimer later described the period, “‘It was a time of earnest correspondence 
and hurried conferences, of debate, criticism, and brilliant mathematical im- 
provisation.’’*4 

Oppenheimer’s own surviving correspondence with other physicists 
during this period provides only a sporadic view of his day-to-day efforts to 
make physics comprehensible. Individual letters describe fragments of his 
work and these are difficult to understand and place in perspective today, 
even by his students. Some of the ideas he soon abandoned because they 
were wrong or because they did not lead to greater understanding; others 
emerged as publications in the scientific journals. Even much of the work 
that survived to the publication stage is now obsolete. Like most of the sci- 
entific literature more than a decade old, it has been superceded by new ex- 
perimental discoveries and new theoretical formulations. As Robert Serber, 
one of Oppenheimer’s students and close collaborators, recently reflected, 
‘‘Things that are obvious now were not for the people doing it then. It all 
falls out once you know the answer. The problems they struggled through 
do not appear today. But there are other problems now.”’” 


99 


When Oppenheimer discussed physics in his letters from 1926 on, he 
frequently did so in mathematical terms, whether expressed in words or 
equations. Mathematics was, and still is, the language of theoretical physics. 
In later years Oppenheimer was known as an outstanding, and sometimes 
poetic, interpreter of theoretical physics to nonscientific audiences. But he 
was aware of the limitations of ordinary language. In the Reith Lectures in 
1953 he noted: ““One could go much farther in describing this discipline, 
even without mathematics; but the words would before long become cum- 
bersome and unfamiliar and almost a misinterpretation of what in mathe- 
matical terms can be said with beauty and simplicity.”’”® 

Two letters written in November described physics in Gottingen and 
Oppenheimer’s reaction to it in the different languages appropriate to the 
recipients. The one to Francis Fergusson in New York was general and had 
the mildly cynical tone of their usual discourse. Notably absent, however, 
was that note of incompatibility with his surroundings which had often ap- 
peared in letters to Fergusson from Harvard, Bay Shore, or Cambridge. 


52 | TO FRANCIS FERGUSSON 


Gottingen 
Nov 14. [1926] 


Dear Francis, 


Mother wrote that you had found a job with a producer; but she did not 
send any details. Will you write? 

You would like Gottingen, I think. Like Cambridge, it is almost exclu- 
sively scientific, & such philosophers as are here are pretty largely interested 
in epistemological paradoxes & tricks. The science is much better than at 
Cambridge, & on the whole, probably the best to be found. They are work- 
ing very hard here, & combining a fantastically impregnable metaphysical 
disingenuousness with the gogetting habits of a wall paper manufacturer. 
The result is that the work done here has an almost demoniac[?] lack of 
plausibility to it, & is highly successful. Everyone else seems to be con- 
cerned about trying to make Germany a practically successful & sane 
country. Neuroticism is very severely frowned upon. So are Jews, Prussians 
& French. We must return from Van Gogh to Jan Steen. They have an enor- 
mous respect for America, for Ford & Compton & the bogus realism of Sin- 
clair Lewis.* There are about 20 American physicists & such here. Most of 
them are over thirty, Professors at Princeton or California or some such 
place, married, respectable. They are mostly pretty good at physics, but 
completely uneducated & unspoiled. They envy the Germans their intellec- 
tual adroitness & organization, & want physics to come to America. 


100 


I don’t know whether I shall go back to Cambridge before going home 
again or not. I’ll probably get a degree here in March. I find the work hard, 
thank God, & almost pleasant. 

Of course there are lurid stories, but they are bad for our morals. 

Have you read Claudel’s ‘Jeune Fille Violaine’, Holderlin, Stefan Zweig’s 
‘Untergafhg eines Herzens’, Chekhov’s ‘Ivanov’, Fitzgerald’s two stories 
‘The Sensible Thing’ & ‘Winter Dreams’, Paul de Lagarde? Did you like 
Hopkins? 

Catherine Swann’s address is 47 Barrow Street. 

Will you write, please. Yours 


Robert 


a. Arthur Holly Compton, professor of physics at the University of Chicago, had created a 
stir in physics circles in 1922 with his experiments on the interaction of x-rays and electrons. 


THE LETTER to Professor Kemble of Harvard a fortnight later shows 
how thoroughly involved Oppenheimer had become in two months time in 
specific problems then occupying the attention of scientists in Gottingen. 
This and subsequent letters to other physicists demonstrate growing famil- 
larity with the mathematical language of quantum mechanics and the range 
of Oppenheimer’s interest in it. They also provide vivid glimpses of the in- 
formal communication patterns of scientists as they gossiped and as they 
proposed solutions to the problems that concerned them. 


53 | TO EDWIN C. KEMBLE 


Gottingen 
Physikalisches Institut 
Nov 27. [1926] 


Dear Dr Kemble, 


Many thanks for your kind letter. As I shall not see Mr. Fowler for some 
time, I have taken the liberty of quoting a paragraph from your letter in a 
note I sent him. 

This term I am spending at Gottingen. It is a very nice place, and I think 
that you will surely like it. Even now there are quite a few American physi- 
cists here, and some will be staying on until the Spring. I expect to be here 
until March, & then go back to Cambridge; and I hope that I shall have the 
opportunity of seeing you either here or there. 

Almost all of the theorists seem to be working on q-mechanics. Professor 


101 


Born is publishing a paper on the Adiabatic Theorem, & Heisenberg on 
‘“Schwankungen [fluctuations].’’ Perhaps the most important idea is one of 
Pauli’s, who suggests that the usual Schroedinger wW-functions are only spe- 
cial cases, & only in special cases —the spectroscopic ones—give the physi- 
cal information we want.® He considers the W-solutions when any set of ca- 
nonical variables is chosen as independent. But of all this you probably 
know more than I do. People here are also very anxious to apply the q-me- 
chanics to molecules; but so far the only attempt, Alexandrow’s paper on 
the H,* —ion, seems to be completely wrong. 

I have been working for some time on the quantum theory of aperiodic 
phenomena. It is possible to get the intensity distribution in continuous 
spectra on the new theory—and without any special assumption. And in 
fact the theory gives, when applied to a simple Coulomb model, a very 
good approximation to the X-ray absorption law. For K electrons, for in- 
stance, the absorption per electron is of the form A%Z*, where a lies, except 
just near the limit, between 2.5 and 3.1. 

Another problem on which Prof. Born and I are working is the law of 
deflection of, say, an a-particle by a nucleus. We have not made very much 
progress with this, but I think we shall soon have it. Certainly the theory 
will not be so simple, when it is done, as the old one based on corpuscular 
dynamics. 

Please remember me to Professor Bridgman. And thank you again for 
your letter. 


J R Oppenheimer 


a. The w (psi), or wave, function is a term which appears in Schrodinger’s mathematical 
formulation of quantum theory. Physicists of the period debated whether a corresponding en- 
tity really existed or whether psi was simply an abstraction from the probability that certain 
sorts of events would occur. 


ALTHOUGH AT THE END of November Oppenheimer had not yet 
eliminated the possibility of returning to the Cavendish Laboratory, the col- 
laboration with Born was so satisfying and productive that he soon decided 
to complete his doctorate in Gottingen. As indicated in the letter to Kemble, 
Oppenheimer was continuing work started in England on the application of 
quantum theory to transitions in the continuous spectrum, in which radia- 
tion occurs at all frequencies. This research was embodied in the dissertation 
[1927a] for which he received the Ph. D. degree from the University of Got- 
tingen in the spring of 1927. Meanwhile, he also employed quantum me- 
chanics to explain scattering, the changes that occur in the path and velocity 
of two or more atomic particles or systems when they collide. An important 


102 


contribution to theoretical physics was a joint paper with Born [1927d] on 
the quantum theory of molecules. The “Born-Oppenheimer approxima- 
tion’’ remains in use today. 

Born’s favorable view of Oppenheimer is recorded in a letter of Febru- 
ary 1927 to S. W. Stratton, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology. “We have here a number of Americans, five of them working with 
me. One man is quite excellent, Mr. Oppenheimer, who studied at Harvard 
and in Cambridge—England. The other men did not surpass the average, 
but I hope, that not only Oppenheimer, but also some of the other fellows 
will get their doctor’s degree during the next term.’’?’ 

Oppenheimer looked back with mixed feelings upon aspects of the 
Gottingen experience other than physics: “‘Although this society was ex- 
tremely rich and warm and helpful to me, it was parked there in a very miser- 
able German mood. . . bitter, sullen, and, I would say, discontent and angry 
and with all those ingredients which were later to produce a major disaster. 
And this I felt very much.’’”® 

Resentment over Germany’s plight in the years following World War I 
was apparent in the household in which Oppenheimer lived. German uni- 
versities did not provide dormitories. Students and visiting scholars lived in 
the town, usually with families occupying a full floor of a three-story apart- 
ment house. Oppenheimer’s landlord was Dr. Cario, a Gottingen physician, 
and the house was a single-family one. His son, Gunther, an experimental 
physicist, was an assistant in the university’s Institute of Experimental 
Physics headed by James Franck. The Carios, Oppenheimer recalled, “‘had 
been very well off and the inflation had ruined them and they had the typical 
bitterness on which the Nazi movement rested. This is not for a moment to 
say that they were Nazi; I have no knowledge of that. But they had a very 
large house not far from the center of Gottingen, an enormous house and a 
garden . . . surrounded by a wall, and no money; so they took 
in... visitors . . . This was only a few minutes walk from the Institute 
and it was very near the wall around which Dirac and I used to walk.’’?9 

Paul Dirac also lived at the Carios’ from February to June 1927. Daily 
association plus occasional long Sunday walks together cemented their 
friendship begun in Cambridge the previous year.” 

When Karl T. Compton, professor of physics at Princeton, his wife 
Margaret, and their small daughter Jean stayed at the Carios’ for two 
months before Christmas, Robert was the only lodger. Mrs. Compton’s 
recollections round out his own. Frau Cario, the proverbial keys jingling at 
her waist, ran the house. The dinner conversation, directed by Dr. Cario, 
was usually about science. Karl Compton was single-minded in his pursuit 
of physics and found Robert’s versatility slightly intimidating. Mrs. Comp- 
ton could not join the talk about science, but Robert’s gentleness, courtesy, 
and humor kept her from feeling excluded. When he saw two-year old Jean 


103 


pretending to read a small red volume and found that its subject was birth 
control, he looked at her pregnant mother and commented: “A little late.”’ 
He was so enthusiastic about Corsica that the Comptons went there for the 
Christmas holidays.** 

The physicists by whom Robert was most influenced did not display 
the bitterness that he noted elsewhere. James Franck, he reflected, ‘‘was not 
a man to have any resentment and at that time I think he had no foreknowl- 
edge of what was to come. I think he took‘a very sunny view . . . Born of 
course was never a sunny man, but I think he was driven by an ambition to 
do good physics and was very self-confident in this year when I was there; I 
think perhaps he put off some of the Americans by how sure he was that his 
way was the right way.” 

By February Oppenheimer was sufficiently at home with quantum 
mechanics to advise Bridgman on its application. 


54 | TO PERCY W. BRIDGMAN 


Institut fur Theoretische Physik 
Gottingen 
February 12 [1927] 


Dear Professor Bridgman, 


You may remember that when I was at Harvard two years agod was very 
much interested in your theory of metallic conduction. Recently, in the 
course of some work in quantum mechanics, an idea has turned up which 
seems to offer a certain support to your theory. I think it will be some time 
before a complete quantum theory of conduction 1s possible, but perhaps I 
may tell you briefly of this one point. 

On the classical quantum theory, an electron in one of two regions of low 
potential which were separated by a region of high potential, could not 
cross to the other without receiving enough energy to clear the “impedi- 
ment.’’ On the new theory that is no longer true: the electron will spend 
part of its time in one region, & part in the other. If the impediment is not 
very high, the electron will jump back and forth between the two regions 
quite often; if the impediment is higher, it will do so more seldom; but if 
one waits long enough, one can be sure of finding it, at some time, in each of 
the two regions. 

Mathematically the simplest problem of this kind is that of a hydrogen 
atom in an homogeneous electric field. If one solves this problem—not by 
the Epstein-Schrodinger-Wentzel perturbation method, but completely — 
he finds that the field, no matter how weak it be, & provided only that it ex- 
tend indefinitely, will in the course of time ionize the atom. One can com- 


104 


pute how long this ionization is likely to take. For large fields it occurs more 
rapidly, but it will occur eventually even for small ones. 

From the former of these considerations it follows that a valence electron 
in a metal is not to be thought of as associated with any one ion; it wanders 
about from atom to atom, never spending much time in the interstices, 
where the potential is high. In this sense the electron is free. Further, if one 
puts on an electric field, the electrons will tend to be in the part of the metal 
where the potential is lower; eventually they will be sure to get there; & the 
rate at which they wander is great when the potential between two ions is 
not too high, & falls when this rises. Is this not just your “gap” theory? 

On one point the new mechanics suggests a change, however: the elec- 
trons, which are “‘free’’ in the sense defined above, are not “‘free’’ in the 
sense that they are carriers of equipartition thermal energy. In order to ac- 
count for the Wiedemann-Franz law one might have to adopt the sugges- 
tion, due, I think, to Professor Bohr, that when an electron jumps from one 
atom to another the two atoms may exchange momentum. 

With best greetings, 


Yours 


J R Oppenheimer 


Just as Robert’s letter to Bridgman displayed a new assurance, so 
Bridgman’s reply of April 3 indicated that the doubts expressed earlier to 
Rutherford about an erratically brilliant pupil had been resolved. Robert’s 
communication had prompted fruitful discussions with Bridgman’s col- 
leagues and might indeed prove relevant to his own research. After enquir- 
ing about future plans, Bridgman added: ‘‘From what I hear I judge that you 
may have your doctor’s degree already. I saw Fowler in Oxford last August, 
and he gave the most glowing account of the work you had been doing with 
him. Had you thought of applying for a National Research Fellowship for 
next year in case you are getting your degree? If this appeals to you at all I 
am sure that we would all be very glad indeed to have you at Harvard again, 
and together with Kemble and [John] Slater you ought to make a team that 
would get some significant theoretical work done.’’*? 

By the time Bridgman’s invitation reached Gottingen, Oppenheimer 
had already indicated his intention to spend the coming year in Pasadena. 
Years later he recalled that in the spring of 1927 he had received a letter ask- 
ing if he would like one of the postdoctoral fellowships funded by the Rock- 
efeller Foundation and awarded by the National Research Council to prom- 
ising young chemists and physicists.*4 By the time he returned to the United 
States, Oppenheimer had decided to spend the fall term at Harvard before 
proceeding to Pasadena. 


105 


AMONG OPPENHEIMER'’S on-going conversations about physics 
begun during the Cambridge—Gottingen period was a dialogue with 
George Uhlenbeck that was to continue for many years. The two had be- 
come good friends since their meeting in Leiden, and they easily shared 
ideas as they struggled through the intricacies of the new theory. 


55 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


Gottingen 
March 12. [1927] 


Dear Uhlenbeck, 


Many thanks for your good letter. It was a very great pleasure for me to 
meet Dr. Wiersma;? and everyone here, I think, was delighted by his visit. 

I should be very much interested to hear more of your work on statistics 
& quantum mechanics, & I hope that you will write to me of it. My own 
feeling is that, whereas it is often correct to regard W as a probability ampli- 
tude, this interpretation is not the most fundamental one. It seems to me 
that the problem has entered a new stage now, & essentially because of 
Dirac’s last paper. As you know, one can obtain all the previous “‘probabil- 
ity theory” from this, if one makes the single assumption that, for every 
dynamical system, & for some set of variables, the probability of all values of 
the momenta (& the time) is equal, if the values of the coordinates (& the 
Energy) are given. It seems to me that this assumption is (at least in the non- 
relativistic case) certainly justified, if one chooses the action variables as co- 
ordinates, observes that the angle variables increase uniformly with the 
time, & remarks, finally, that by “equally probable’’ one means “‘corre- 
sponding to equal intervals of time.’’ Of course the relativistic problem is 
still unsolved, & so is the choice of “‘range’’ for a dynamical variable. But | 
feel that these difficulties are not critical, & I should very much like to know 
whether you share this opinion. 

Recently I have been working a little on the Q.M. [quantum mechanics] 
of such effects as the polarization & depolarization of mercury resonance 
lines & impact radiation. As you surely know, all these things can be treated 
very simply & unambiguously on the quantum theory; but the results ex- 
plain the observed facts so well that I have written a little paper [1927b] 
about it. Of course I will send you some when they come out. 

Dr Wiersma told me that you were going to Ann Arbor next year, & Iam 
very glad. I shall be going to America (Pasadena) next July, & if you think of 
going at the same time, & have no better plans, perhaps we might arrange to 
go together. 


106 


Please give my best greetings to Prof. Ehrenfest. I hope to see him again 
before I leave for America. 
Yours 


J R Oppenheimer 


a. E. C. Wiersma was an experimental physicist working at the University of Leiden. 


When Edwin Kemble visited Gottingen in June he was able to report to 
his colleague Theodore Lyman that Harvard’s odd duckling was looking 
more and more like a swan. “‘Oppenheimer is turning out to be even more 
brilliant than we thought when we had him at Harvard. He is turning out 
new work very rapidly and 1s able to hold his own with any of the galaxy of 
young mathematical physicists here. Unfortunately Born tells me that he 
has the same difficulty about expressing himself clearly in writing which we 
observed at Harvard.” 


AT THE END of June Oppenheimer and Dirac went to Leiden, where 
they had been invited to visit Ehrenfest’s institute. Oppenheimer sailed for 
the United States from Liverpool in mid-July.*° Uhlenbeck did not accept 
Oppenheimer’s suggestion that they travel together, for in August he 
married Else Ophorst. In September they arrived in New York on the S. S. 
Baltic, accompanied by the physicists Charlotte Riefenstahl and Samuel 
Goudsmit, Uhlenbeck’s collaborator in the recent important discovery of 
electron spin. Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit were on their way to join the fac- 
ulty of the University of Michigan. Oppenheimer was at the dock, with his 
father’s car and uniformed chauffeur, to welcome them. He took the Uhlen- 
becks to their hotel—the Brevoort on lower Fifth Avenue, because he 
thought they would like its European atmosphere—and to dinner at a hotel 
in Brooklyn from which they could see the lighted Manhattan skyline. Rob- 
ert persuaded the Uhlenbecks to delay their departure for Ann Arbor in 
order to meet his parents at tea the next day. Having encountered one nov- 
elty in the form of New York stoplights, Else Uhlenbeck had another 
surprise when they reached the Oppenheimer’s Riverside Drive apartment. 
‘“‘What a very large house,” she thought as they went up in the elevator, for 
tall apartment houses were unknown in Holland. Because her English was 
still poor, her impressions of this first, but by no means last, experience of 
Oppenheimer hospitality were largely visual—the beautifully furnished liv- 
ing room, the Van Gogh and other paintings, Mrs. Oppenheimer’s quiet 
graciousness, and Frank, just turned fifteen, standing shy and a bit awkward 
at the door.*’ 


107 


The Bay Shore house had been sold the previous winter, but the Tri- 
methy was still moored there, and before Robert left for Harvard he and 
Frank had a last sail along the shore of Long Island. They then joined their 
parents on Nantucket. ‘““My brother and I spent most of the days,” recalled 
Frank, “painting with oils on canvas the dunes and grassy hills.’’*° 

From Harvard, where Oppenheimer worked until Christmas, he wrote 
to congratulate Dirac on becoming a Fellow of St. John’s College, Cam- 
bridge, and to give his own version of the extraordinary productivity about 
which Professor Kemble had reported the previous June. Oppenheimer re- 
ferred to a wide range of issues of interest to him and further demonstrated 
that at the age of twenty-three he had mastered the highly developed lan- 
guage of the new quantum mechanics. 


56 | TO PAUL DIRAC 


Jefferson Physical Laboratory 
Cambridge, Mass. 
Nov. 28. [1927] 


Dear Dirac, 


I have just heard that you received the fellowship. My very best felicita- 
tions. 

There has been no direct news of what you have been doing for a long 
time. Did you keep your promise to stop quantum mechanics over the 
summer? I should very much appreciate it if you would let me know what 
you have got. 

Here there is very little to report. Slater is working still at the wave func- 
tions for Helium. I have done quite a lot of little things, but nothing at all 
important. Last summer I sent in a paper [1928a], which is to appear in the 
Jan. Phys. Rev., in which I gave, I think, a simple and general treatment of 
continuous spectra, and showed how stationary solutions of the wave equa- 
tion may be interpreted in aperiodic phenomena. Also I gave a condition for 
the validity of classical formulae in an aperiodic case, and applied it to show 
that for the two body problem the classical formulae hold both when the 
initial relative velocity is very large and when it is very small. I also worked 
out the theory of transitions between almost orthogonal states, giving the 
necessary second order correction. When this is applied to the ionization of 
atoms in a field it gives a period of ionization for H in a field of 1 V/cm equal 
to 10!°" sec. Also I sent Ehrenfest a paper on the Ramsauer effect.* I don’t 
know where this will appear. It is easy to show that, as the electron collides 
with the atom, the atom jumps up and down between its stationary states. 
Further one can show that there is a Ramsf[auer]. Efflect] for all atoms and 


108 


molecules for electron velocity low enough; if the molecule has no dipole 
moment in its normal state one gets the Rayleigh v* law for the intensity, 
and the electrons are uniformly scattered over all angles. Then I did a very 
short paper [1927e], in which the diffraction of the electron beam, and the 
resonance of the colliding electron with those in the atom, are taken more 
completely into accqunt to explain Skinner’s results on the polarization of 
impact radiation.” Just now I have worked out the capture of electrons by 
a-particles. One gets formulae for the probability very much like Fowler’s, 
but which give a free path for capture proportional to v°, and appear to 
agree well with the experiments. I have been trying for a long time to re- 
duce the choice between Pauli and Einstein statistics to a difference in the 
wee . That doesn’t work. 
protons 

Nor does the fact that neutral systems are Einsteinian, and charged ones 
Paulian, follow from any simple experimental conditions. Do you under- 
stand how one must derive this result? 

Please remember me to Sugiura.° I hope to see him at Pasadena when he 
passes through; and I shall be out there after the New Year. And give my 
greetings to Mr. Fowler, when you see him, and to anyone else at the labora- 
tory who remembers me. 

I hope that you will write. With best wishes 


experiments one can make on quanta and on | 


J R Oppenheimer 


a. The manuscript sent to Ehrenfest contained some errors in interpretation and calculation. 
On Ehrenfest’s advice, Oppenheimer revised it and submitted it for publication a few months 
later [1928c]. 

b. H. W. B. Skinner’s paper on polarized light was published in October 1926 when he was 
doing postdoctoral research at the Cavendish. 

c. Yoshikazu Sugiura, a Japanese physicist, was at the University of Copenhagen from 1926 
to 1928. 


Except for the slightly condescending “‘here there is very little to re- 
port,’’ Oppenheimer does not comment on how he felt about his return to 
Harvard with a Gottingen Ph. D. and firsthand knowledge of the latest de- 
velopments in European physics. The reaction of his former teachers was 
demonstrated by the job offer they made him the following spring. To 
someone meeting Oppenheimer for the first time, eccentricity still pre- 
dominated. One of Princeton’s bright graduate students in physics, Philip 
M. Morse, gave a colloquium on molecular vibrations at Harvard that fall. 
Years later Morse recalled meeting ‘‘a thin high-strung postdoctoral fellow 
by the name of Oppenheimer, who gave me a bad case of inferiority by 


109 


talking mysteriously about Dirac electrons and quaternions. I didn’t know 
what he was talking about and his talk didn’t enlighten me. Oppie always 
affected me that way; I never could figure out whether his sibylline declara- 
tions were just a form of one-upmanship or whether he really did see a lot 
more in a theory than I did. Some of both, I finally decided.’’*® 

While producing a steady stream of technical papers, Oppenheimer 
found time to see John Edsall, who had returned to Harvard Medical School 
for a final year before receiving the M..B\ degree, and William Boyd, work- 
ing for the Ph.D. in biochemistry at Boston University Medical School. 
Boyd and Oppenheimer reestablished something of their former intimacy. 
As before, Boyd found Robert good company—sensitive, generous, and 
superbly intelligent. Robert spoke freely about the miseries of his year in 
Cambridge. As they talked Boyd was confirmed in the feeling he had had 
from the beginning of their friendship that along with serious problems of 
temperament Robert possessed the ability to deal with them.” 

Oppenheimer also renewed the interest in poetry which he shared with 
Boyd, at least to the extent of submitting a short poem, “‘Crossing,”’ to the 
avant-garde literary magazine Hound and Horn, which began publication in 
September 1927. This nostalgic piece, which appeared the following June, 
was Oppenheimer’s only contribution to Hound and Horn in the seven years 
of its existence. 


CROSSING 


It was evening when we came to the river 
with a low moon over the desert 

that we had lost in the mountains, forgotten, 
what with the cold and the sweating 

and the ranges barring the sky. 

And when we found it again, 

in the dry hills down by the river, 

half withered, we had 


the hot winds against us. 


There were two palms by the landing; 
the yuccas were flowering; there was 

a light on the far shore, and tamarisks. 
We waited a long time, in silence. 

Then we heard the oars creaking 

and afterwards, I remember, 

the boatman called to us. 

We did not look back at the mountains. 


J. R. Oppenheimer*’ 


110 


AFTER THE CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS Oppenheimer moved to the 
California Institute of Technology. Robert A. Millikan, a commanding fig- 
ure in American physics, had been president of Caltech since its founding in 
1921. Oppenheimer observed the rich experimental work in progress there 
while keeping abreast of new developments in quantum theory and contin- 
uing his own explorations in that field. The research at Caltech and the op- 
portunity to meet visiting physicists from the United States and Europe im- 
pressed Oppenheimer and influenced the outcome when he had to decide 
among several job offers that spring. 

When Oppenheimer wrote Professor Kemble in February, he was 
seemingly acting as talent scout for the Harvard physics department. He 
also wrote about Dirac’s latest contribution, which provided a powerful 
generalization of Schrodinger’s equation and incorporated relativity. 


57 | TO EDWIN C. KEMBLE 


Pasadena 
Feb 16. [1928] 


Dear Dr Kemble, 


Thank you very much for your good letter. You might have upbraided 
me, and with justice, for the Ramsauer fiasco. I worried a long time about 
the theory, and have now, I think, found the correct answer. The full paper 
is not done yet, as it is very heavy algebraically; but I am sending you a 
short note which Epstein sent in to the PNAS [1928c], and which indicates 
the essentials of the work.? It is not diffraction, but resonance, that does it. 

I have asked a few people here about Houston. Everyone has thought a 
great deal of him, and recommended him personally and physically; he 
seems to be very much the man you want. You may have a little trouble 
getting him, as they are very fond of him here. Badger, who is going abroad 
this Spring, is a brilliant experimentalist, and an excellent man. He has been 
working recently in the extreme infra red, on the rotation spectrum of am- 
monia. Perhaps, too, you would be interested in Goetz, from Goettingen; 
but not, of course, for bands. He has been doing difficult and wonderful 
things with thermionics and photoelectrics, and would, I am certain, be a 
joy for Dr Bridgman.” 

Langevin, who was expected this term, has not turned up; and Franck 
will be here, to everyone’s relief, next week. Russell is here now and La- 
porte came through.® Dirac wrote to me that he had “‘explained’’ the 
spin . . . Pauling is starting a ‘systematik’ of non polar bonds.¢ Epstein has 
offered to do some of the refinements of the theory of continuous absorp- 
tion spectra. Very fortunately Millikan and his people have just verified the 


111 


theoretical equation for the autoelectronic emission; and I am writing up a 
short account [1928e] of the quantitative agreement, which is not bad. There 
are a great many people here interested in thermionics and crystals and me- 
tallic conduction; we have talked a good deal, but I have no results that are 
specific enough to interest Bridgman. I hope that he has not grown weary of 
my infinite procrastination. 

I was glad to hear that the rotational distortion comes out so nicely. Did 
Van Vleck use your model?*,I should ‘also be greatly interested, if you 
should have time to write, to hear of the progress in the work with the two 
atoms in resonance. Perhaps that will be connected with Pauling’s — 
tik’. 

The NRC [National Research Council] has written to tell me that, if I 
want the fellowship for next year, I must ask my professor to write them a 
note. I am sorry to keep bothering you with these things; and I hope that it 
will be no great trouble. 

Please give my respects to Mrs Kemble, and to the Slaters, and to Dr 
Bridgman. I miss Harvard very much, and even the admirable Pasadena cli- 
mate is not altogether an adequate compensation. 


With best wishes 
J R Oppenheimer 


a. Paul Epstein was professor of mathematical physics at Caltech. 

b. William V. Houston was assistant professor of physics at Caltech. Richard M. Badger, a 
physical chemist, and Alexander Goetz, an experimental physicist, were fellows at Caltech; 
both joined the Caltech faculty in 1929. 

c. Paul Langevin was professor of physics at the Sorbonne. Henry Norris Russell was re- 
search professor of astronomy and director of the observatory at Princeton. Otto Laporte, a 
German theoretical physicist, was assistant professor at the University of Michigan. 

d. Linus Pauling was assistant professor of theoretical chemistry at Caltech. That spring 
Robert gave him the mineral collection which had been the center of his own boyhood inter- 
est in science. He later recalled that Pauling “was then still stuck with crystals—inorganic crys- 
tals—so that he not only used them but he was very pleased [with] these enormous calcites,”’ 
interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 1. 

e. John H. Van Vleck was professor of theoretical physics at the University of Minnesota. 


THE SECOND LETTER among those preserved by Robert’s brother, 
Frank, was written from Pasadena in the spring of 1928 shortly before their 
parents’ wedding anniversary on March 23. As with the first letter to Frank, 
the opening section is missing, but the topic under discussion is obvious. 


112 


58 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


[Pasadena 
March 1928] 


. ... profession to make you waste your time with her; it is your profession 
to keep clear. But the whole thing is only important for people who have 
time to waste. For you, and for me, it isn’t. And for the last rule: Don’t 
worry about girls, and don’t make love to girls, unless you have to: DON’T 
DO IT AS A DUTY. Try to find out, by watching yourself; what you 
really want; if you approve of it, try to get it; if you disapprove of it, try to 
get over it.—This has all been very dogmatic, and I hope you will forget 
most of it; but some of it may possibly be of use to you, as the fruit and 
outcome of my erotic labours. You are very young, but much more mature 
than I was. 

Mother and Father have been well and happy, and lazy beyond descrip- 
tion; I think it has set them both up. They are going north to San Francisco 
tomorrow, and we will meet near the Mexican border to celebrate their an- 
niversary. Your Jensen thing is lovely. They ought to be delighted. 

I have had trouble getting time to work, for Pasadena is a pleasant place, 
and hundreds of pleasant people are continually suggesting pleasant things 
to do. I am trying to decide whether to take a professorship at the Univer- 
sity of California next year, or go abroad. 

Will you write me your plans for the summer? If you are out here we 
might knock around for a fortnight on the desert. And I hope you will write 
soon. 


your 


r 


Some of the pleasant people whom Oppenheimer found so distracting 
included colleagues at Caltech. Others were congenial young people who 
gravitated to lively hostesses like Maggie Lang, wife of a Caltech economist, 
and Undine Bradley, whose daughter Natalie Raymond would become one 
of Oppenheimer’s close friends. At one of Mrs. Bradley’s Saturday after- 
noon ‘‘at homes” he met Helen Campbell, a Vassar friend of his Ethical 
Culture School classmate Inez Pollak. Helen was engaged to Berkeley phys- 
ics instructor Samuel K. Allison, whom she would marry at the end of May; 
that spring in Pasadena Oppenheimer took her out to dinner and read Bau- 
delaire aloud. On canyon walks they discussed psychoanalysis and New 
Mexico, where Helen had recently explored abandoned pueblos. In the fall 
of 1929 their paths would cross again in Berkeley, where Samuel Allison 
remained for another year before joining the physics faculty at Chicago.* 


113 


IN THE SPRING of 1928, as Oppenheimer later explained, “I. . . had 
many invitations to university positions, one or two in Europe, and perhaps 
ten in the United States.’’ One of the offers came from Harvard. In a letter 
of April 10, Professor Theodore Lyman, director of the department of phys- 
ics, offered him a position as instructor and tutor at a salary of $3,000 with 
responsibility for lectures and individual instruction not to exceed the 
equivalent of two courses. “Though we are not now in a position to make a 
definite promise for the future,’’ wrote Lyman, “‘yet I hope and believe that 
after the first year you would receive the rank of Assistant Professor and a 
permanent place in the Department.’’ Lyman was aware that other institu- 
tions might offer higher rank and a better starting salary but in the long run 
the advantages and opportunities of a Harvard appointment might be equal 
to any.* 

Oppenheimer did not reply immediately to this first, though by no 
means last, gratifying offer from his alma mater, for he was weighing the 
advantages of two other tempting proposals: “I visited Berkeley and I 
thought I’d like to go to Berkeley because it was a desert. There was no 
theoretical physics and I thought it would be nice to try to start something. I 
also thought it would be dangerous because I'd be too far out of touch so I 
kept the connection with Caltech . . . I liked it enough to want to come 
back and enough to feel that it was a place where I would be checked if I got 
too far off base and where I would learn of things that might not be ade- 
quately reflected in the published literature.’’** While concluding arrange- 
ments for the double appointments at the University of California and at 
Caltech, he asked Lyman for time to consider Harvard’s offer and in the end 
refused it. 


59 | TO THEODORE LYMAN 


Pasadena 


April 21, 1928. 


Dear Professor Lyman, 


Thank you for your letter. I appreciate very much your invitation to 
come to Harvard for next year; and I should like to be able to accept. I had, 
however, planned to spend next year in Europe, and I am not quite certain 
that I should abandon this plan. Perhaps you will give me another week to 
make my decision. 

I hope that this delay will not be inconvenient to you. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


114 


60 | TO THEODORE LYMAN 


Pasadena 
May 7. [1928] 


Dear, Professor Lyman, 


You will perhaps have learnt from my telegram that I am unable to accept 
the instructorship for next year. I am sorry that I shall not be able to come; 
and I trust that the delay in my decision has not interfered in any way with 
your plans. 

This delay was largely induced by my desire to accept your offer; I should 
very much have liked to come. But I had previously refused positions for 
next year both here and at Berkeley, on the ground that I wanted to go to 
Europe; and I had promised that, if I should be granted a fellowship abroad, 
and if the two Universities should agree to it, that for the following year I 
would divide my time between them. The fellowship was granted, and the 
people here seemed satisfied with the plan; and I was thus not at liberty to 
accept your offer. 

I hope that it will be possible for me to visit Harvard occasionally. I ap- 
preciate very much the kindness you have shewn me in the past. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


There remained the more difficult task of acknowledging Bridgman’s 
part in the Harvard offer. 


61 | TO PERCY W. BRIDGMAN 


Pasadena 
May 16. [1928] 


Dear Professor Bridgman, 


Thank you for your good letter, and for the off prints. I have waited an 
unconscionable time with answering; I hope that you will excuse me. For it 
was hard to make the decision and harder still to write to you of it. I should 
have liked above all to come to Harvard; and it would have been to me 
some consolation for the fact that I should never be a physicist like you, that 
I could work a little in the same department. I could not come because I had 
made arrangements for the next years which proved to be irreversible. Next 


115 


year I am to go to Europe, and the year after to divide the time between 
Berkeley and here. 

Your opinion of Sommerfeld’s theory I more or less share . . .? 

Perhaps it will be possible for me to visit Harvard again, either on my 
way to Europe, or after I have returned. And if I may, I should like to write 
to you when I have the metal theory in a less foetal state. 

Thank you again for your kindness in writing to me. 


Yours faithfully 
J R Oppenheimer 


a. Arnold Sommerfeld, a leading theoretical physicist, held a professorship at the University 
of Munich. 


ONE OF THE ADVANTAGES of the Berkeley—Caltech arrangement 
was that it could be postponed until the 1929-30 academic year, giving Op- 
penheimer another postdoctoral year and further contacts with European 
centers of theoretical physics. Although his father could no doubt have fi- 
nanced an additional year of travel and research, in 1928 there was not the 
competition for fellowship support that shortly developed under the com- 
bined impact of the Depression and growing interest in the physical sci- 
ences. Oppenheimer therefore requested and received a renewal of his fel- 
lowship, but because it would be used in Europe, he now became 
responsible to the International Education Board in New York City, whose 
postdoctoral fellowships, like those of the National Research Council, were 
funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. However, the NRC screened phys- 
ics applicants for the IEB. 

Oppenheimer spent the first part of the summer of 1928 in Ann Arbor, 
where he participated in the annual summer school for theoretical physics, 
established in 1927 by Harrison Randall, chairman of the physics depart- 
ment at the University of Michigan. The summer sessions were held 
throughout the 1930s, and physicists from all parts of the United States and 
from Europe enthusiastically attended them as lecturers or participants. 
From Ann Arbor Oppenheimer notified the IEB of a change in his plans. 


116 


62 | TO INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION BOARD 


Ann Arbor 
Aug 2. [1928] 


Gentlemen, 


On the recommendation of the National Research Fellowship Board in 
Physics you have granted my application for a fellowship in Physics for 
study in Europe in 1928-29. I had planned to sail early in September, and to 
go at once to Leiden. But it now seems possible that I shall have to abandon 
this plan, and postpone taking my fellowship until later in the year. The 
reason for this is that I have tuberculosis, and that several doctors have told 
me that it would not be very wise to go abroad until I am better. May I 
therefore ask you to allow me to postpone taking the fellowship, and to 
communicate with you as soon as I can set a definite date for sailing. I have 
had assurance from Professor Ehrenfest that he will be glad to have me with 
him, and shall accordingly retain my original plan of going first to Leiden. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


This word was passed on to the National Research Council in Wash- 
ington, which informed Oppenheimer in a letter of August 16 that his fel- 
lowship had been withdrawn but that he might reapply when his health per- 
mitted. Meantime, puzzled staff members at the NRC and the International 
Education Board corresponded in an attempt to discover why his formal 
acceptance of the fellowship, dated June 2, had been mailed without com- 
ment from Colorado Springs on August 12.* 

After two weeks in the mountains Oppenheimer was feeling much 
better—his brother Frank is not sure that the diagnosis of tuberculosis was 
ever confirmed—and, oblivious to the administrative turmoil he had 
created, he addressed the following letter to the NRC’s Fellowship Board in 
Physics. 


117 


63 | TO RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP BOARD IN PHYSICS 


[Cowles, New Mexico?] 
August 25, 1928 


Gentlemen: 


Thank you for your letter of August 16. It now seems certain that I shall 
be able to take the fellowship of the International Education Board, and 
highly probable that I shall be able to sail before the middle of September, as 
originally planned. I therefore very much hope that the withdrawal of the 
fellowship will not prove permanent; and that it will involve no serious 
delay in my sailing. I plan to call at the office of the Board in New York as 
soon as I can get East, but I should appreciate it if you would advise me 
whether I shall have difficulty with the fellowship, if I can obtain the proper 
medical certificate. 

Professor Epstein left Pasadena this summer, and I accepted Professor 
Randall’s invitation to the summer school in theoretical physics at Ann 
Arbor. I remained there working until the second week in August, when it 
became necessary for me to leave. I expect to return to work as soon as I am 
permitted to do so. 


Yours faithfully 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


Fortunately Oppenheimer did not have to wait for the fellowship check 
before buying his steamship ticket, for it was not until October 10 that the 
NRC’s fellowship board voted to recommend Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer 
to the International Education Board “for financial support to enable him to 
pursue his studies on ‘Problems in Quantum Mechanics’ with Professor 
R. H. Fowler at the University of Cambridge, England, and either at the 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, with Professor Niels 
Bohr, or at the University of Leiden, Leiden, Holland, with Professor D. 
[sic] Ehrenfest; such an appointment to be for the period of nine months, 
only, beginning on or about November 1, 1928.’’*® 


BETWEEN AUGUST 2, when Oppenheimer wrote the International 
Education Board from Ann Arbor, and his departure for Europe, he went to 
Colorado, New Mexico, and California. Frank Oppenheimer went to a 
camp in Colorado the summer of 1928 and then joined Robert in the Pecos 
Valley in New Mexico. Together they picked out land with a cabin on it, a 
mile or so from Katherine Page’s guest ranch at Cowles, on which their 


118 


father obtained a lease the following winter. From the Pecos Robert and 
Frank went to Colorado Springs, where they joined their parents at the 
Broadmoor Hotel and took driving lessons. Then they set out for Pasadena. 
Somewhere along the way, with Frank at the wheel, their car turned over, 
and Robert’s arm was broken.*’ 

In addition to Frank’s theme mentioned in the following letter, Herbert 
Smith recalls another in which Frank said he was going to be a scientist. He 
knew it was a hard career. It was like climbing a mountain in a tunnel: you 
wouldn’t know whether you were going to come out above the valley or 
whether you were ever going to come out at all.* 

The 1928 visit to the Pecos was the first of the holidays there with 
Frank which were to mean so much to Robert in the next few years. The 
great closeness that was developing with his sixteen-year-old brother is re- 
flected in a letter written from Utrecht just after Christmas. 


64 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Utrecht 
Dec 30 [1928] 


Dear Frank, 


Thanks for your good letters and the theme. By now I trust that you 
understand the five-four plus one —it was merely an indication that the re- 
productions were to come in two consignments; and only your surprisingly 
hypersensitive conscience could have transmuted it into a reproach for not 
writing. I am hardly in a position to blame anyone for that, for I owe innu- 
merable letters. And I think that it is one’s business to make others want to 
write, and not their obligation to do so against all inclination. 

The difficulty of getting down to work after a summer of such miscella- 
neous debauch I fully appreciate, and share. I am glad that you are over the 
worst of it; I can see by your letter that you are. I cannot say as much for 
myself. And I would give a great deal, now, to have kept to my original 
plans, and never to have gone to the Springs. 

Your theme I am returning, as you suggested. With much of what you 
say I agree—and especially with the thesis that “I like it’ is not an artistic 
judgment. I think that you show a lamentable ignorance of history in the 
matter, but that is almost irrelevant: For in insisting upon the universality 
and objectivity of artistic standards you have found a very important, if ex- 
tremely difficult, point;—one in which I deeply agree, and yet where I 
should be unable to elucidate. For the difficulty lies in this, that appreciation 
of art is in fact neither universal nor objective, that it depends on education, 
experience, taste; that, in its critical aspects, it is defined only by the “I like 


119 


its” of the sensitive and the initiated. A painter is rather an inarticulate per- 
son; more even than the poet, he knows what to do, but knows nothing of 
the reason; one has little warrant that the ex post facto interpretation of the 
critic is either relevant or true. Thus many generations admired the Joconde 
for her ‘‘inscrutable smile’’, which was presumed to express the subtleties of 
the woman qua mother; in recent times one will hear that the line of the 
mouth is used for purposes of design purely, that it has no “literary” signifi- 
cance, but only a plastic one. Leonardo is not to be questioned; but I doubt 
whether, even if he were, his answer would help much. To assert, therefore, 
that the excellence, the beauty, is in the picture, is not relative to the ob- 
server, is false to observation, because there is no such impersonal, absolute 
view of the picture in fact, least of all, perhaps, that of the artist. And yet I 
believe that you are completely right; and my own view is that the value of 
a picture is best defined as relative, not to the person, but to what one may 
vaguely call the civilization: the public, traditional culture and experience of 
the civilization for which it was painted. 

I think that your suggestion that a painting expresses something, or the 
statement that what one gets from a picture could be gotten from reading — 
that these are misleading and in the strict sense false. They suggest that a 
picture communicates a truth, a statement, a knowledge; that it is exposi- 
tory in purpose. I do not believe this. What should the Mt St Victoire or the 
Gezicht op Delft express? It is true that in many pictures the ideational, liter- 
ary element is important; that is so for Rembrandt and sometimes Van 
Gogh and Greco, and preponderantly so for Daumier. But it appears to be 
an accessory phenomenon, and not essential. And I should think that a 
better word than express would be create, or discover, or show: A picture — 
and this is true also of a poem, does not express something beside itself, 
more abstract than itself; it expresses itself, it IS the thing, the something, 
that it shows. It is not the exemplification of a truth, nor a commentary on 
the world; it is something new in the world, which was not there before, 
and which, for some reason—that it 1s for the critic to discover—is 
important. It is something deliberately put into the world by the artist. It 
has no “‘educational”’ value, except as art; it does not teach us anything, ex- 
cept to look at pictures, or, perhaps, to make them. It is neither so important 
nor so “‘intellectual’’ as you pretend, and it is purer. 

I can’t say more now, or I shall bore you. But borrow from Hirschland’s, 
and read seriously, R Fry’s ‘““Transformations’’;? and don’t be deceived by 
his dogmatic manner; he has often changed his mind himself. Your theme 
reveals your ignorance of Italian and Dutch painters. You might try to see 
and study them. The customary appreciations are confused, and to my mind 
often wrong; you will have to decide for yourself. 

Please write again. I haven’t answered everything you wrote, nor given 
you any brotherly advice. That is because it seems to me that you are on the 


120 


right track, and because I think you know pretty well what I should say: 
discipline, work, honesty, and, toward other people, a solicitude for their 
welfare and as complete an indifference as possible to their good opinion. 
—TI wrote M and F that I thought it quite wise for you to be left more or less 
alone when they come across. 

Salut | 


[no signature] 


a. Franz and Beulah Hirschland lived in the same Riverside Drive apartment house as the 
Oppenheimers. The American edition of Roger Fry’s Transformations: Critical and Speculative 
Essays on Art was published in 1927. 


OPPENHEIMER SPENT his second postdoctoral year at three European 
centers of physics, though not the three approved in October by the Inter- 
national Education Board. As he later explained: “‘Ehrenfest wanted me to 
come to Leiden. He was sort of short of people and I was a Fellow but I was 
also to act in part as his assistant . . . I gave a seminar or two in Dutch; I 
don’t think it was very good Dutch but it was [appreciated]. I didn’t do any 
instruction . . . I was a very great admirer of [Ehrenfest]. I thought of 
him, and I think not wholly inappropriately, in semi-Socratic terms, and I 
thought I would learn something from him and indeed certainly did 
. . . [but] I don’t think that I [fully] appreciated [Ehrenfest’s grasp of the 
new physics] until somewhat later. I think that his interest in simplicity and 
clarity was really a very great thing but I probably still had a fascination 
with formalism and complication so that the large part of what had me 
stuck or engaged was not his dish . . . There was not a great deal of life in 
the physics in Leiden at the time. I think Ehrenfest was depressed; I don’t 
think that I was of great interest to him then. I don’t think he told me what 
was on his mind and I have a recollection of quiet and gloom.” 

Because he felt that the situation he found in Leiden “spoiled this pe- 
riod from the point of view of physics,’ Oppenheimer went to Utrecht 
for a month to work with Hendrik (H. A.) Kramers, who at that time held 
the chair of theoretical physics at the University. Oppenheimer had then 
planned to go to Copenhagen to work with Bohr, but was deflected, as he 
put it, by two considerations: the persistent cough that made a drier climate 
desirable, and ‘“‘Ehrenfest’s certainty that Bohr with his largeness and vague- 
ness was not the medicine I needed but that I needed someone who was a 
professional calculating physicist and that Pauli would be right for 
me . . . He thought in other words that I needed more discipline and more 
schooling . . . I did see a copy of the letter he wrote Pauli . . . [and] it 
was clear that he was sending me there to be fixed up.”’* In 1928 Pauli had 


121 


become a professor of theoretical physics at the Eidgenossische Technische 
Hochschule in Zurich, so Oppenheimer requested permission from the 
IEB’s Paris office to alter his plans once more. 


65 | TO INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION BOARD 


Leiden 
January 3, 1929 


Gentlemen: 


I should like to ask for your permission to go to Zuerich to work with 
Pauli. This is not in accordance with my original application to the Board, 
which was for permission to work at Leiden, Cambridge, and Copenhagen. 
The modification in my plans is made at the suggestion of Ehrenfest and of 
Kramers; I should like to work at Zuerich until Easter, and go then to Pro- 
fessor Bohr in Copenhagen. I have, of course, written to Pauli for his con- 
sent. 

I hope that it will be possible for you to grant this permission without 
waiting for the discretion of the American Board; for I should like to leave 
Leiden in the next weeks. I should be much indebted to you if you would 
communicate to [me] your decision. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


The note of January 12, 1929, with which Ehrenfest supported Oppen- 
heimer’s request is preserved in rough translation: ‘Dr. Oppen- 
heimer . . . has been in Leiden up to the present time (and has been con- 
stantly exchanging ideas with our young people during his stay here; he is a 
very ingenious physicist). We discussed where he had better go now. I ad- 
vised him to go to Zurich with Pauli. That seems to be in accordance with 
his views. I also believe that—so long as he keeps that obstinate cough 
which has not been in order since his arrival in Holland —it is better that he 
perhaps remains where the climate is more favourable than it is here. Please 
put this charming, fine—but whose health is questionable—young man 
under medical control, but without letting him know that I wrote you about 
aa 

The institutional link between the International Education Board and 
the Rockefeller Foundation placed Oppenheimer’s affairs under the kindly 
supervision of Dr. W. J. Robbins of the Foundation’s Paris office. Their sub- 
sequent correspondence is informative on a number of points. 


122 


66 | TO W. J. ROBBINS 


Zuerich 
Jan 23, 1929. 


Deas Dr Robbins, 


In accordance with Dr Tisdale’s letter of January seventh, I am sending 
you Professor Pauli’s note. Professor Ehrenfest said that he would write 
directly to you. I am now accordingly beginning work in Zuerich. I plan to 
stay on here until my return to America; but I should like to make, either in 
the Spring vacation, or in the latter part of June, a visit of a fortnight to 
Professor Bohr in Copenhagen. 

I made the trip here at my own expense. I do not know whether the 
Board pays such travelling expenses; the fare was about fifteen dollars; and 
shipping the boxes cost twenty-nine. 

I hope that my movements have been of no inconvenience to you, and 
that you have, or shortly will have, Professor Ehrenfest’s letter. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


67 | TO W. J. ROBBINS 


Zuerich 
Feb 4, 1929. 


Dear Dr Robbins, 


Thank you for your letter. I did not, of course, leave Holland until I had 
assurance from Professor Pauli that I might work with him; but I had no 
letter which I could submit to the Board to indicate his consent. 

I am enclosing the account of my expenses in travelling here from Leiden. 
The luggage was frightfully expensive, because of the weight of the books 
and offprints. I can see no reason, a priori, why the Board should pay for 
this. 

I should be very glad indeed if you could arrange to visit us. There is to be 
a conference on X-rays here during the Summer term; and that might possi- 
bly prove of interest to you. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


123 


SOON AFTER MOVING to Zurich, Oppenheimer wrote to Robert Mil- 
likan, whom he had met the previous spring in Pasadena. Millikan was 
deeply involved in experiments designed to yield information on the high- 
energy radiation coming to earth from outer space, to which he had given 
the name “‘cosmic rays.”’ In 1929 the origin of cosmic rays and the nature of 
their interaction with matter constituted an active field of physics research 
and one to which Oppenheimer himself would contribute significantly in 
the next decade. 

Absorption curves measured the slowing down of cosmic rays as they 
passed through increasing thicknesses of absorbing material. ‘Hard radia- 
tion’’ could penetrate to greater depths of matter than less energetic radia- 
tion. The prevailing view in 1929 was that cosmic rays were made up of 
photons (gamma rays) which lost energy when they collided with electrons 
in the surrounding medium. In 1922 Arthur Compton had demonstrated 
that in such collisions the photon rebounds at an angle and continues to 
move but at a lower energy, while the electron recoils in a different 
direction. This phenomenon became known as the Compton effect, and in 
1926 P. A. M. Dirac proposed a theory which helped in the computation of 
the effect. A more accurate theory was developed by Oskar Klein and Yo- 
shio Nishina in 1929, and it was their work that Oppenheimer conveyed to 
Millikan. 


68 | TO ROBERT A. MILLIKAN 


Physikalisches Institut 
Polytechnicum 
Zuerich 

February 12, 1929 


Dear Professor Millikan, 


Last year, when you were working on the interpretation of the absorption 
curves of the cosmic radiation, you asked me with what certainty the for- 
mulae of Dirac could be accepted. I answered, I think, that they could be 
taken as reliable, and that they could not be appreciably altered except by a 
fundamental change in the equations of physics. As you surely know, I was 
wrong to insist upon this reliability; the fundamental equations of the the- 
ory have in fact been altered; and there is a corresponding change for the 
absorption coefficient of hard radiation. The new formulae have been 
worked out by Klein and Nishina, and shewn, in the region in which you 
are interested, to give an absorption differing by as much as fifty percent 
from that calculated on the older basis. The work refers, still, to scattering 
by free electrons. 


124 


My chief purpose in writing —apart from that of confessing an error—is 
to say that, from a theoretical point of view, the new formula is by no 
means certain. For the equations from which it is derived give a number of 
definite predictions in flagrant contradiction with experiment, and are cer- 
tainly in large part incorrect. Many people have tried to remedy the defects 
in the equations; it has not yet been possible to do this; and the current opin- 
ion is that it will be necessary to wait for new experimental evidence—e.g. 
from the nuclei—before an advance will be possible. 

At present two things seem of particular importance: to try to decide, in 
the region of the hardest gamma rays, which of the Compton formulae is 
the more correct; and to determine definitely whether the absorption of the 
cosmic rays is to be ascribed entirely to the extranuclear electrons. If the nu- 
clei play an appreciable part in the absorption, the coefficient per extranu- 
clear electron should be different, for example, when computed from the 
absorption in lead and when computed from the absorption in air. I believe 
that you found no such difference. I might mention also that the grounds 
adduced by Cassen for an increased probability of collisions in which many 
protons take part are invalid. 

Here we have been working systematically on the problem of supracon- 
ductivity. As yet we have not solved it. 

Please give my respects to Mrs Millikan, and to the men at the Institute. 

Yours faithfully, 


J R Oppenheimer 


Oppenheimer quickly became involved in the work underway at 
Zurich. “When I got to Zurich Pauli told me a little of his work with Hei- 
senberg and I showed, I guess, more than a little interest in it. It was in a 
ghastly state and we did, off and on, work together on that; the part of it I 
got into was something . . . [we] at first thought the three of us should 
publish together; then Pauli thought he might publish it with me and then it 
seemed better to make some reference to it in their paper and let this be a 
separate publication. But Pauli said, “You really made a terrible mess of the 
continuous spectra and you have a duty to clean it up, and besides, if you 
clean it up you may please the astronomers.’ So that’s how I got into 
that...” 

‘But I was then very much interested in field theory, and of course 
quite interested because [Felix] Bloch, apparently from a wholly different 
point of view than anything I had thought about, had got into the conduc- 
tion problem and we talked quite a lot. I think [Rudolf] Peierls came later 
that year. [I. I.] Rabi was there; we were friends but I don’t remember what 
he was doing. I think he was rounding out his education. It was a very use- 


125 


ful time. I got to be not only extremely respectful but also extremely fond of 
Pauli and I learned a lot from him. The time with Ehrenfest had seemed 
terribly inadequate to what was really in Ehrenfest and the time with 
Kramers had seemed good but not very substantial—very good personally, 
very close, but not very substantial. The time with Pauli seemed just very, 
very good indeed.’ | 


BIRTHDAYS in the Oppenheimer family could no longer be celebrated 
with flower-strewn chairs as at Bay Shore, but they were not forgotten, and 
soon after he turned twenty-five on April 22, Robert wrote to thank Frank 
for his present and to advise and plan for the summer. 


69 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Zurich 
May 6. [1929] 


Dear Frank, 


Many thanks for the birthday note and for the delightful book of Degas; I 
am so glad to have it. I can easily understand that you should not care to 
write very much; we shall try to make up for that by word of mouth. I don’t 
write to anyone. You may if you please be disgusted at my negligenee; but I 
don’t want you to be offended. 

Now I am going to interfere with you again; and zwar about your opera- 
tions for the summer. It is so. 

A. The place in the Pecos—house and six acres and stream—are ours for 
four years. There is an allowance of three hundred dollars to be spent for 
restoration. Katherine Page goes out in May. 

B. Mother and Father ought to [be] back by May twentyfifth. They will 
want a few weeks in or near New York. 

C. I shall be back about the middle of July. I must be in Pasadena by Au- 
gust tenth, as I have to drive up to Berkeley, find diggings, and begin work 
on the fifteenth. 

D. You will undoubtedly want to be near Mother and Father for most of 
the summer; also you will doubtless be a little weary and low in morale after 
the close of school. 

E. Cependant, you should not, in my opinion, let the summer float over 
you. 

ERGO, Suggestion: About the middle of June you should take M and F 
West. At first they should stay at the Lodge or some such place; later, when 
F is acclimatized, they should visit Los Pinos from time to time. You and a 
suitable friend should try to open up the place, get horses, learn to cook, 


126 


make the hacienda as nearly habitable as you can, and see the country. You 
could stop for a time with Katherine, as she is mostly empty early in the 
year. You must choose the boy —or there could be two, but not more— 
carefully, as you will be living with him for a good part of the time. I will 
come straight out to the Pecos, and have about three weeks there. You can 
leave the canyon in the rainy season—after the middle of August—if you 
want. 

Let me know your plans. As far as I am concerned, I am determined not 
to spend more than a week or so in the East in any case. 

It has probably been sort of a hard winter for you. You will perhaps be 
glad of it later; but yours is, and may be for a few years yet, a bad age. I wish 
that I could be with you. You had better come to college in California. 

With best love, Frank, 


your 


R 


THE COUGH that had worried Ehrenfest at Christmas did not yield to 
the more salubrious climate of Switzerland. Years later Oppenheimer re- 
called that he had taken a month off that spring for reasons of health.*? After 
a visit to Zurich, Dr. Robbins of the Rockefeller Foundation wrote to Op- 
penheimer: “First and foremost is the question of your health. Permit me 
again to recommend that you should not hesitate to get in touch with us at 
the Paris office at any time . . . We are personally interested in our fel- 
lows, and are only too anxious to assist them in every way we can. We con- 
sider that we represent their friends and relatives during the period while 
they are in Europe.’”** A Berkeley entry in the travel log of Dr. Tisdale of 
the International Education Board in September explains why, although 
Oppenheimer’s health continued to concern others, there is so little refer- 
ence to it in his own letters: “J. R. Oppenheimer—yjust returned from 
Zurich as R. F. [Rockefeller Foundation] fellow —is not too well, and ex- 
presses the opinion that rather than take care of the cough, etc. he prefers to 
live while he is alive.’ 

Robbins’ April letter assured Oppenheimer that it would be appropri- 
ate to terminate his fellowship a month early in order to prepare for the au- 
tumn’s teaching in Berkeley, then went on to say that he had been much 
interested in Oppenheimer’s comments about the difficulties faced by 
Americans studying in Europe and hoped he would suggest solutions.” 
Oppenheimer’s reply shows that he already had some perspective on his 
Cambridge—Gottingen experience. 


127 


70 | TO W. J. ROBBINS 


Zuerich 
May 14. [1929] 


Dear Dr Robbins, 


Thank you very much for your good letter of April thirtieth. It was most 
kind of you to write. 

By now I am fairly certain that J shall be able to continue with the work 
until July. In the latter half of June I hope to visit Professor Bohr at Copen- 
hagen for a fortnight; but I must write to him before I can advise you defi- 
nitely of the details. 

You have asked me to write a little of the complications which afflict 
Americans in Europe. Unfortunately I can not speak from experience ex- 
cept of physicists and a few chemists, but perhaps they may be taken as typ- 
cal. The difficulties are not universal, but seem to be sufficiently frequent to 
deserve attention. They are most acute in men who combine a certain weak- 
ness, timidity, hesitancy of character with a quite robust vanity —or, per- 
haps more accurately —with an urgent desire for excellence. In Europe they 
are removed from their friends, from the pampering of an American univer- 
sity, and from a language which they can control; in many cases they are 
relieved of the main part of their work, of instruction or work in the labora- 
tory; they are introduced to the more critical, more disciplined, more pro- 
fessional science of Europe. All this is no doubt excellent; but too often it 
induces in the victim a state of surrender, and a false metaphysical melan- 
choly which replaces, and makes impossible, an active participation in the 
European scheme, and an honest attempt to learn from it. The melancholy 
is presumably unpleasant; it is usually dissipated by return to America, and 
the consequent renewal of the pampering. But it acts as a protective coating 
for the American against that which he was sent to Europe to learn; almost 
always it is a sterile melancholy. It is the melancholy of the little boy who 
will not play because he has been snubbed. 

There is little by way of remedy that you do not already know. The pres- 
ence of other Americans has the advantage that it tends to sustain the tonus, 
the morale; it provides an ‘outside world’ which cannot quite be ignored; 
and in acute cases that more than compensates the dilution in the European 
setting. But I think that the most useful preventive would be to let the men 
know a little better what their situation will be, and to warn them of the 
collapse, so that they may be on their guard against it, and may make a con- 
scious and specific effort to avert it. Except in cases of preternatural pusilan- 
imity, that should, I think, suffice. 

I hope that you will excuse me for writing at such length of this business. 


128 


I think that you would find others to corroborate what I have said; it is 
pretty obvious. 
With the very best wishes, 
J R Oppenheimer 
I have refrained from posting this in the hope of speaking to you here. I 
might add the suggestion that future candidates for fellowships be asked to 


consult a returned fellow. 


J R Oppenheimer 


129 


III “Physics and the 
excellences of the life 
it brings’’ 


BERKELEY AND PASADENA, 1929-1941 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER aarrived at the University of California in 
Berkeley in the summer of 1929. He was twenty-five years old, fresh from 
the leading centers of theoretical physics in Europe and a recognized partici- 
pant in the quantum theory revolution. 

Berkeley had a distinguished science faculty, but its physics depart- 
ment, like those in most American universities at the time, was weak in the- 
oretical physics and had no one familiar with the new quantum mechanics. 
It was there that Oppenheimer did the major portion of his teaching. His 
reasons for accepting the concurrent appointment at Caltech were different. 
Although only eight years old, Caltech’s faculty had both theorists and ex- 
perimentalists. Oppenheimer found it a lively place and thought that “I 
would learn, there would be criticism, and that would be much better for 
me.’’' His teaching arrangement with Caltech was more flexible than that 
with Berkeley. 

In the decade that followed, the physics departments at Berkeley and 
Caltech were both noted for outstanding discoveries and technical achieve- 
ments. At Berkeley, Ernest Orlando Lawrence, who had joined the faculty 
in 1928 as an associate professor, invented and with his students developed 
the cyclotron, a machine that accelerated atomic particles to high energies 
and used them to bombard nuclei. At Caltech, nuclear disintegrations were 
achieved with another type of particle accelerator, important research was 
done on cosmic rays, and two new subatomic particles were discovered. 


130 


The new data provided constant challenges for theorists like Oppenheimer. 
He had a close working relationship with experimentalists, which was char- 
acteristic of American universities, where all physics was in a single depart- 
ment; in most European institutions, theoretical and experimental physics 
were generally done in separate institutes. 

“ Oppenheimer later reflected on the transition from student to teacher 
and leader of a major school of theoretical physics: 

‘I think that the whole thing has a certain simplicity. I found myself 
entirely in Berkeley and almost entirely at Caltech as the only one who un- 
derstood what this was all about, and the gift which my high school teacher 
of English had noted for explaining technical things came into action. I 
didn’t start to make a school; I didn’t start to look for students. I started 
really as a propagator of the theory which I loved, about which I continued 
to learn more, and which was not well understood and which was very rich. 
The pattern was not that of someone who takes on a course and teaches 
students preparing for a variety of careers but of explaining first to faculty, 
staff, and colleagues and then to anyone who would listen, what this was 
about, what had been learned, what the unsolved problems were.”’ 

“IT think from all I hear [that] I was a very difficult lecturer, I started 
as a lecturer who made things very difficult. I had some help; I remember 
Pauling’s advice, almost certainly in ’28. He said, ‘When you want to give a 
seminar or lecture, decide what it is you want to talk about and then find 
some agreeable subject of contemplation not remotely related to your lec- 
ture and then interrupt that from time to time to say a few words.’ So you 
can see how bad it must have been. In Pasadena I taught all right, but it was 
never an important part of the Caltech curriculum except conceivably that 
first year in the spring of ’30 when I was there a long time and where I prob- 
ably gave a pretty good ‘course of sprouts’ in quantum theory.”’ 

‘In Berkeley I gave what was normally a graduate course and in prac- 
tice usually a second year graduate course which had not been given before 
on quantum theory and quantum mechanics and which varied in content 
but was always all right for someone who had had some background in 
classical physics and preferably at least a qualitative introduction to atomic 
theory, though it didn’t too much matter. I usually gave a seminar on one 
other aspect of theoretical physics, typically statistical mechanics and rela- 
tivity, both things that I loved very much. But these were all with people 
who didn’t have to learn these things [but] wantedto. . . [It] was very rarely 
and only in quite different contexts that I ever worked with undergraduates. 
I think they didn’t think I’d be any good for them and it didn’t occur to me 
to ask to teach freshman physics or anything like that.” 

‘You live in the department and if it’s a growing and active department 
as Berkeley got to be and as Caltech was, there are problems that arise be- 
cause people are doing experiments. I found this a very great source of stim- 


131 


ulation and pleasure and I think actually the beginnings of collaboration 
with graduate students came very early, but the students weren’t very good 
and I picked rather exotic problems. It wasn’t really until the positron [in 
1932] and more or less the full shape of the relativistic debacle, [when] the 
clues of cosmic rays came into the picture, that the collaboration with stu- 
dents began to take a more effective turn.’” 


BEFORE COMMENCING his new career as university teacher, Oppen- 
heimer and his brother Frank had their first holiday together at the newly 
acquired ranch in the upper Pecos Valley in New Mexico. Following Rob- 
ert’s advice, Frank arrived at Cowles early in the summer accompanied by 
two Ethical Culture School friends, a Scots boy, Ian Martin, and Roger 
Lewis. Roger became an indispensable member of the establishment. They 
stayed with Katherine Page while waiting for beds and equipment from 
Sears Roebuck, did some work on the cabin, and moved in shortly before 
Robert’s arrival. The ranch had become Perro Caliente, which was Kath- 
erine Page’s more mellifluous version of the “hot dog!”’ with which Robert 
had greeted her news that it could be leased.? 


71 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Berkeley 
Sept. 7. [1929] : 


Dear Frank, 


Many thanks for the delightful letter. It made me a little envious and 
pleased me awfully to hear of gay times at Perro Caliente. And I can think 
how let down you will feel now that it is so nearly time to close up. I hope 
the business of it won’t be a bore. And what can you do for the horses? It 
would be a pity to have to sell them, I think. 

Your tales of a burro were immensely entertaining —so entertaining in 
fact that I showed them to one or two friends. I hope you don’t mind that. ] 
think that if you could preserve some of the freshness and authenticity of 
your letter in writing themes, that you would find very little trouble with 
the formal difficulties of composition; and that, if you will make it a rule 
never to write of anything which does not immediately and factually 
concern you—which has not, that is, played a real part in your experience 
or thought or feeling, that you will write very well, and enjoy it, and de- 
velop in time a technique fully adequate to what you have to say. And what 
you said, for instance, about Truchas and Ojo Caliente at night was much 
more convincing and honest and in the end communicative of emotion than 
your bits of purple writing about miscellaneous sunsets of the past. 


132 


Mother wrote that you were a wonderful haciendero, and had blazed a 
trail, and had been—for which thanks also from me—awfully good both to 
M and F and to K [Katherine Page]. In some ways you will find it hell to 
have to stop the Perro Caliente life just as it seems to be fullest and most 
satisfactory, and perhaps Fieldston will seem by comparison something of a 
bore.* But I think that you will on the whole find it easier to return to work 
now than after a summer of greater tameness and indolence. I hope that you 
will like chemistry and the bits of calculus; and especially I hope that you 
won't find your friendship with the boys and girls so inadequate as you did 
before. Will you get Carl for next summer?? 

I have been pretty busy, preparing lectures and giving miscellaneous 
counsel and working and getting to know people. The undergraduate col- 
lege here seems not to be worth much, or I should suggest that you come 
here next year. For it is a beautiful place, and the people are pleasant. I think 
that I am going to keep my room at the Faculty Club, but go sometimes to 
live with some boys who have rented a beautiful cabin on the hill, with a 
view and great stone fireplace and balconies and so on. Tomorrow I have 
promised to cook Nasi Goreng on a camp fire, and I have a provision of 
spices that would make Ian squirm. 

I sent you a wrist watch. They say it is a good one; and I hope that it keeps 
very good time. If it doesn’t, have it regulated. The works have an extra 
celluloid case to keep dust out; and the chief trouble I have with my watch is 
that it gets gritty from time to time. 

Please write to me very soon. Say good bye for me to the Pecos, and 
write to K from time to time, gratuitously. 

greetings to Ian and Roger. and God be with you. 


a. Fieldston School was the Ethical Culture high school division which had moved to River- 
dale in 1928. It later included lower grades. 
b. Carl Blumenthal was an Ethical Culture School friend of Frank’s. 


There are many stories about Oppenheimer’s eating habits in this 
period— Spartan indifference to what and how much he ate, which some- 
times left his guests hungry, punctuated by a gourmet’s delight in special 
dishes. Comments on his culinary skills, which he exercised chiefly on spe- 
cial occasions, focus on excessively hot seasoning, especially red pepper. 
Else Uhlenbeck, who probably introduced Oppenheimer to her native In- 
donesian nasi goreng, later learned that young people in Berkeley called his 
version “nasty gory” and avoided it if possible.* 


133 


OPPENHEIMER HAD MET the Tolmans, whose visit to Perro Caliente 
is mentioned in the next letter, in Pasadena in the spring of 1928. Richard 
Tolman was professor of physical chemistry and mathematical physics and 
dean of the Graduate School at Caltech, where he had been a faculty mem- 
ber since 1922. ‘‘He was rightly very highly respected,’” Oppenheimer later 
commented. “‘His wisdom and broad interests, broad in physics and broad 
throughout, his civility, his extremely intelligent and quite lovely wife, all 
made a sweet island in the Southern California [locale?]. . . a friendship 
developed which became very close.’’ Ruth Tolman was a clinical psycholo- 
gist completing her graduate training at the University of California. The 
Tolmans’ friendship quickly extended to Oppenheimer’s family, and Frank 
remembered their first visit to Perro Caliente only as part of ‘‘one lovely, 
lovely record.’” 


72 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Faculty Club 
University of California 
Oct. 14. [1929] 


Dear Frank, 


Many thanks for your last long good letter. I should have written to you 
before this; but I have been very busy; and you are not one of those to 
whom I can write in odd moments. I have also to thank you for your report 
on the summer, and the expenses and storage. Have you sent an account of 
the repairs to Harvey?? If not I shall swear out an affidavit for him. As for 
the orders for next summer, I shall make them later in the year; we can cor- 
respond about that when the time comes. Do you approve of the plan of an 
outside stair? Of course none of the improvements are really essential. 

Let us plan definitely to spend at least a month together on the Pecos next 
summer. I do not think that I shall go to Ann Arbor, and that will leave me 
free at least from mid June to mid August. When should you be able to 
come? The examinations will keep you until July, I should think; and for 
God’s sake do not flunk them, or the summer will be spoiled. I think too 
that it would be good to be alone together for the month; if you want 
friends you can ask them for after August; and if I want people, which I 
rather doubt, I will have them early in the year. The Tolmans, by the way, 
spoke very warmly of their visit, and asked me to send you again their 
thanks, and their greetings —I think that I must miss Perro Caliente—and it 
is in this connection a very bad name and you were right to avoid i1t— nearly 
as much as you do. But we shall plan on another vacation next summer, and 


134 


try to make it just as rich and perhaps a little more industrious and thought- 
ful than the last. 

What you write about your feeling for the horses is very curious. I cannot 
think that your sehnsucht for them is either very abnormal or at all terrible 
really; I can’t think that it would be terrible of me to say—and it is occa- 
sionally true—that I need physics more than friends; and the two assertions 
seem analogous. As for your abuse of horses, that you must know yourself; 
and if the tendency to browbeat them is real, I think that you are right in 
saying that the desire should be watched and disciplined. But it is not easy — 
at least it is not easy for me—to be quite free of the desire to browbeat 
somebody or something; and perhaps it is because, in your relations with 
other people, you do, and infinitely commendably, in my opinion, so little 
brow beating; that it should frighten you so to discover in yourself too the 
traces of that beastliness. 

I do not have much time for diversions; but I ride about once a week. 
There are good horses, and lovely country among the hills overlooking San 
Francisco bay, and there is pleasant company. And from time to time I take 
out the Chrysler, and scare one of my friends out of all sanity by wheeling 
corners at seventy. The car will do seventy five without a tremor. I am and 
shall be a vile driver— Work is coming on the whole pretty well. I don’t get 
enough done, because I am busy and lazy, and have not the strength to let 
other things go to the devil when I should. 

Such counsel as I should give you about the refractory problem of the 
jeunes filles Newyorkaises would probably be unwelcome. I should say that 
you were wrong to let the creatures worry you; and that, if you felt ill at 
ease with them, it meant a) that they were much more important to you 
than you to them, and b) that they were important to you for indeterminate 
and unavowed reasons, and that it was because of this ambiguity of purpose 
that you could come to no understanding. I should say that you should not 
associate with them unless it is for you a genuine pleasure; and that you 
should have truck only with those girls who not only pleased you, but who 
were pleased, and who put you at your ease. The obligation is always on the 
girl for making a go of conversation: if she does not accept the obligation, 
nothing that you can do will make the negotiations pleasant. You have, in 
any case, other business just now; and you should not let yourself be inter- 
rupted in that unless the interruption promises you a real charm and a real 
negotiation. But I do not want to pretend that the matter is altogether triv- 
ial. Everyone wants rather to be pleasing to women; and that desire is not 
altogether, though it is very largely, a manifestation of vanity. But one 
cannot aim to be pleasing to women, any more than one can aim to have 
taste, or beauty of expression, or happiness; for these things are not specific 
aims which one may learn to attain; they are descriptions of the adequacy of 


135 


one’s living. To try to be happy is to try to build a machine with no other 
specification than that it shall run noiselessly. 

I am glad that the work at school is so pleasant; I can remember how 
much I enjoyed [Herbert W.] Smith and Muzzey when I was a senior.” Did 
you know that one could define the sine of an angle A by the infinite sum 


5 7 


A 

3-2 5°4-3-2*% 7*6-5°-4:°3-2 

+ Ss es ie ces 
9-8:-7:6°5°4°-3:2 180 


sin A = x — 


Please do write again. I wish that we had some more satisfactory method 
of communicating. I do not know whether it would be good for you; but 
for me it would be delightful if you could go to school out here. 


your 


r 


a. The Harveys owned the ranch leased by the Oppenheimers. 

b. David Saville Muzzey, professor of history at Columbia University and the author of 
widely-used American history texts, had taught parttime at the Ethical Culture School since 
1900. 


Frank, like Robert, was interested in science. To the classmates with 
whom he would graduate the following June, his destiny seemed clear. The 
1930 class prophesy, entitled “Talks with the Great . . . 1955,” included 
the following: “I next paid a visit to Dr. Frank Oppenheimer, the noted 
physicist, who is doing some experimental work on the structure of the 
electron. I was unfortunately unable to get any statement from him, as he 
had to leave in a great hurry to see about some dynamite that he had left on 
the stove.’”® 


THE BERKELEY academic year started in August; first semester classes 
were over before Christmas, and the second semester ended in April. Op- 
penheimer taught at Berkeley through the fall of 1929, then made what was 
to become for the next decade his annual migration to Pasadena, though the 
date of it varied. His parents visited him in Pasadena as they had done two 
years before when he was there as a postdoctoral fellow. The following 
letter is one of two from Julius Oppenheimer to Frank which are included in 
this volume because they provide glimpses of Robert’s life in Pasadena and 
of family relationships. Within the family Robert was customarily called 
‘“brother.”’ 


136 


Robert Oppenheimer, 1926 or 1927. (Courtesy of Frank Oppenheimer. ) 


. 


a 
7 


ca 


od 


on 


__ 


s 


+o 


Robert Oppenheimer, I. I. Rabi, H. M. Mott-Smith, and Wolfgang Pauli, sailing on Lake 
Zurich, 1929. (Photograph by Rudolf Peierls; courtesy of A.I.P. Niels Bohr Library. ) 


+ 


* 


Robert Oppenheimer, Enrico Fermi, and Ernest O. Lawrence, mid-1930s. (Courtesy of 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. ) 


Peo. Lk 


“hee a : 
b, Re tes 7 | Mot Ineund vue oe, 
“oe Te ab Ky | ty hea Of Oni baie 


| ' 
- | Ow Send ng Melbe tv ax, an outbhy, o Mo Coben gf y 
He Onde 24 berwed det pre We, Cr phceohy 9 lho, : 
: : ; 4euy Wot 
ee 3 er “Cdr Aste y ops 1H, 
fi. fh. ag WoF aay sO | x by fe, . av 
‘adihus , but Wa, mod Ge cls.) 
Kuved; the, HM unto do Mis, 
eth he ee Ee, 


{c ‘ 
#7 < 76 Cab te re, 


} Jorey he he A te (LG ge hes f f P yt aA log rteaf 3 
ae my Aaa cy ‘f ) Khan KA. he, + U-atug A hak poe 
Bin oR -) S the ; Unmte, / hdcig nas ag) ta hak ey 


ecg RA fo Ge lve, Ke, fof, (Nk uF 
: g. 
te Come tery OF 
: doy + ke % Chats And icone gf 4,5 
Sls fbn “Soe & 


hove both & 4, Pathe, sffechn ch 
pel 6 ge ek ee he ok 


Yok, ¥ 
tw 4 4 Poe 


Oppenheimer to Ernest O. Lawrence, spring 1935. (Letter 97.) 


yt tal ig a ee 
eae tome 3 obte 
ee MCL ee Tee pty bt on 


The cabin on the Oppenheimers’ ranch, Perro Caliente, at Coules, | New Mexico, 
1934. (Courtesy of Else Uhlenbeck.) 


Robert Oppenheimer and Ernest O. Lawrence at Perro Caliente, before 1932. 
(Courtesy of Molly B. Lawrence.) 


73 | JULIUS OPPENHEIMER TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Pasadena, Calif. 
March 11, 1930 


Dear Frank, 


We received your letters from Thursday and Saturday, and I know you 
do not like undue praise, but it would be most ungracious to refrain from 
telling you how very much we enjoyed your letters, —both the style and, of 
course, most, of what you have told us was most delightful. Your little chat 
with Dr. [Felix] Adler must have been indeed a fine experience, and if any- 
thing really puzzles you, I am sure he would be glad to see you again. 

As long as we are on that subject, will you let us know how you are get- 
ting on with your history, and all the other studies, and have you arranged 
that your gym work is regular? While it is irksome to you, it would be 
really silly to make a fuss about it, and have it stand against you. 

I must confess, that I miss seeing our paintings around us, but I am so 
glad that you can enjoy them over and over again. Have any of our friends 
come up to see them? The Toscanini concert must have been a rare treat. The 
Beethoven Eroica is, of course, one of the great masterpieces of music, and to 
have it conducted in so fine a way is a treat for a lifetime. You give us a 
poser when you ask what gives the appeal to music. I believe it is one of the 
primitive capacities, and through the ages, has developed into a fine art, and 
for some, into a fine understanding, a great emotion, and wonderful satis- 
faction to the various moods. 

This is not much of a scientific explanation, but it is my own feeling. 

You are right, your little experience, and your description of it, of the taxi 
kiss, did amuse us. Most I enjoyed your footnote, —that you will get the 
fragrance of the powder whenever you think of the evening. You must have 
that from me. Now that you know what this whole desire means, I presume 
you will be most careful not to repeat. 

To have Roger [Lewis] with you is certainly fine, and pleasant for both of 
you. 

Let me tell you a little about our doings. We like it very much at the Flint- 
ridge; it is very beautifully situated, and so far, we have had one evening 
alone. I do not know whether Mother wrote you that we had a delightful 
evening with the Tolmans. Tomorrow afternoon we are going there for tea 
and shall meet a number of the professors and some other of Robert’s 
friends, and on Friday we are going with Mrs. Tolman to Los Angeles to 
hear the Tchaikovsky concert. 

Brother is very busy with conferences, lectures, and his own work, but 
we manage to see him a short time daily. He has been a bit tired, but there 


137 


will be vacation soon, which will come in handy for him. I doubt whether 
we shall go away, because it 1s so very pleasant here. 

The reconstructed Chrysler emitted all sorts of groans, and I thought it 
very unwise for brother to continue driving it. We therefore bought a new 
one against severe protest on the part of brother. They allowed us $750 on 
the old one, which I thought was very wonderful. Now that brother has it, 
he is most delighted with it, and he has reduced his speed about 50% from 
what he used to drive, so we hope no further accidents will occur. I am cer- 
tain you will get a letter very soon. 

We have seen the Goldsmits a great deal, and we are giving a little party 
to them at the Flintridge this evening.* They always want to know about 
you, and send love. 

Mother is anxious to know regarding your vacation, and also whether 
you have managed to see Dr. Poll. Do let us hear soon again, for it is a real 
Joy. 

Lots of love. 


Father 


a. Mrs. Oppenheimer’s sister Clara Goldsmit and her husband lived in Pittsburgh. 


Oppenheimer’s fast driving was legendary. On one occasion in the 
early 1930s he crashed the car while racing the coast train near Lo’ Angeles. 
His passenger was Natalie Raymond, whom Oppenheimer had met at her 
mother’s parties in Pasadena in 1928. Though not seriously injured, she was 
knocked unconscious, and Oppenheimer thought at first that she was dead. 
Mr. Oppenheimer gave her a Cezanne drawing and a small Vlaminck paint- 
ing by way of apology.’ 


ROBERT ALSO RESPONDED to the two letters Frank had written to 
their parents. His reply reveals an interest in music which contrasts sharply 
with the indifference bordering on dislike recalled by friends of the Harvard 
years. 


138 


74 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Pasadena 
March 12. [1930] 


Degr Frank, 


You make it rather hard for me to write to you by assuring me with such 
confidence that I shall be writing to someone I have never known. But it is 
not easy to believe that the Frank I knew is completely vanished; and | 
should be very very sorry if that were so. It has always seemed to me one of 
the inordinate inadequacies of letters—of letters which are not to serve 
some specific purpose, but are more or less gratuitous —that they necessar- 
ily give a pretty partial account of the writer, an account at once trivial and 
misleading. And for that reason I cannot be so desperate about our inability 
to keep flourishing a correspondence. The only letters which I can write 
with any conviction are technical ones, telling of physics, discursive and 
wholly ideational letters, love letters, and informative letters, which give 
geography and chronology and the major external data. It seems to me in- 
trinsic to the act of living seriously that one should not be able to detach 
oneself enough to give a simple reflective account of what it is all about; the 
ability to do that comes only after the events are over, after one has ceased to 
be involved, when, that is, one is no longer the same person— Nevertheless 
I think that you do overestimate the inconstancy and incoherence of per- 
sonal life; for I believe that throughout the variations —and they are wild 
enough, God knows—there is, there should be, and in mature people there 
comes more and more to be a certain unity, which makes it possible to rec- 
ognize a man in his most diverse operations, a kind of specific personal 
stamp, which characterizes not so much the what as the how of a man’s 
business. And this stamp is borne also by the letters, and is to be found, not 
in the contents of the letter, which may refer to a brief mood or a manic 
spell of action, but in the overtones of the attitude that the writer takes 
toward what he is writing — And you must so excuse me for not sending 
you a character sketch, or asking you for one; neither of us, I think, could 
furnish one adequately. For purposes of recognition it will suffice for you to 
know that I am six feet tall, have black hair, blue eyes, and at present a split 
lip, and that I answer to the call of Robert. 

Mother showed me your last two letters. They interested me very much 
indeed, for they were completely charming letters. It is impossible not to 
observe the revolution in diction and style which the last months have made 
for you; and I should take this as evidence of a heightened sensibility and a 
more reflective temper. But what pleased me particularly in the letters was 
your surprising gift for digging up cardinal and leading questions, for re- 


139 


ducing a specific and rather complex situation to its central irreducible ‘Fra- 
gestellung. ’ 

You are right in observing that music is unlike literature or plastic art in 
being essentially nonrepresentative, in being pretty purely evocative. I don’t 
think that this very much aggravates the difficulty of understanding its 
power, because it shares with other art both’a great formal complexity and a 
high symbolic power; and these appear to be the essential conditions for the 
development of art, and the representative—or in your terms perhaps remi- 
niscent—virtue of some art seems to be only a special kind of fortification 
of the symbolic vigour; in music this vigour derives from a more sensuous 
and probably less cortical response. Even in plastic art there are very wide 
variations in the relative importance of the sensual and the representative; 
for Courbet or Rubens or Monet there is very little importance in the repre- 
sentation, and that is eminently true of Cezanne; for Rembrandt and Theo- 
topoulos and Van Gogh there is a definitely literary and non sensuous asso- 
ciation which is essential to an understanding of the picture. Only in music 
it is always, or always with the great and puzzling exceptions of Bach and 
Fauré and a few of the things of Debussy —inferior music which is highly 
representative. Think of Tristan and Scheherezade, and cf with Haydn 
symph in G maj or Debussy’s quartet in G min. —I was grieved, obiter, to 
learn of your desertion of the flute. 

Two other questions in your letters interested me: In how far is it possible 
to formulate ethical rules from which the proper conduct in specific cases 
may be deduced? —and— In how far is it wise to respond to a mood? In 
particular may one take the responsibility of affecting others by that mood? 
The former question I should rather like to talk of to you; it is too hard to 
write about, and in my opinion of high importance. For the second my own 
conviction is that one should use moods, but not be greatly deflected by 
them; thus one should try to use the gay times to do those things one wants 
to do which require gaiety, and the sober moods for the work one wants, 
and the low moods for giving oneself hell. I think that is about what you 
did, and that it was not your mood of amorous dalliance that made you 
make love, but rather that the mood enabled you to do graciously and sim- 
ply what you had for a long time wanted to try. The reason why a bad phi- 
losophy leads to such hell is that it is what you think and want and treasure 
and foster in the times of preparation that determines what you do in the 
pinch, and that it takes an error to father a sin. 

All the news you will have had from Mother and Father. I feel fairly cer- 
tain that they are enjoying the visit here very much, liking the people and 
the place, and feeling well. 

You have more or less committed yourself to answering this; and I 
cannot wholly suppress a malicious pleasure at the trouble you will have in 
doing it. 


140 


God be good to you; and don’t you go and change too much, now; be- 
cause I think you were pretty damn nice before. 


r 


THERE IS NO correspondence to document the quiet period with his 
brother in the Pecos that Oppenheimer had proposed for the summer of 
1930, or to show what advice he may have offered Frank as a freshman at 
Johns Hopkins. When the letters resume, big-brotherly condescension was 
less evident. Robert and Frank were sharing their love of the outdoors and 
their interest in physics on a more equal basis. In the meantime their mother 
had developed leukemia. When Robert wrote to Frank from Berkeley in 
August 1931, he had been to the Pecos, to New York to see his parents, and 
to Ann Arbor, where he lectured at the theoretical physics summer session. 

In Detroit he bought for Frank a secondhand Packard roadster, long 
and sleek and immediately christened Ichabod. Driving Wolfgang Pauli 
around Ann Arbor one evening, Robert lost his way. A police officer to 
whom he appealed for directions could scarcely believe that anyone had 
been in the town for three weeks, as claimed, without mastering its then 
simple geography. Oppenheimer further aroused the officer’s suspicions 
when he was unable to open the special compartment for sporting equip- 
ment which the previous owner had installed. It was late by the time a legit- 
imate relationship was established, and as the car drove up to the fraternity 
house occupied by summer school participants, a flat tire gave a final fillip to 
a typical Oppenheimer outing. Graduate students, hearing a loud crunch of 
rim on gravel, rushed out and changed the tire.® 

A more familiar episode of the 1931 summer session took place during 
an Oppenheimer lecture which Pauli kept interrupting with comments. Fi- 
nally H. A. Kramers shouted, “‘Shut up Pauli and let us hear what Oppen- 
heimer has to say. You can explain how wrong it is afterward.’ 


141 


75 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Berkeley 
August 10. [1931] 


Dear Frank, 


I have just had your marvellous letter opn,my return from a visit south. | 
hope that this will get to you before you leave; but I know the vagaries and 
vicissitudes of Pecos mail, and shall send you a wire, so that you may in any 
case have some word of me. I enjoyed your fine letter very much, and thank 
you for it, with all heart. And I thank you too for sending on the box of 
assorted linen and duderies; the box reminded me a little of those that we 
used to send at Christmas time to Elliott’s poor. I am a little curious too to 
know whether I owe the presents entirely to your own generosity; or is 
there some one else beyond you whom I must thank? The lighter is swell; 
and I put the bridge things away against a very very rainy day. 

You will find Ichabod at the Packard place in A. A. I am afraid that the 
Uhlenbecks will be still away, but you might try (815 Arch Street), for they 
are awfully nice. The repair bill on I is paid, but you might check over it to 
see that the work is done. For two very minor things—adyjusting the gen- 
erator and keeping up the battery —you will have to pay. I hope that he will 
be a lamb for you. 

Some time ago I wrote to father that we should want a new lease drawn 
up. His lawyer —Stern—will do it for us. But I do not know how to find 
Mrs Harvey. She was not at her San Gabriel Place. Did she tell you of her 
plans? It was good that you went at last to Tierra Amarilla; I doubt whether 
you will ever get your plane from the mine; but after our shameful negli- 
gence of last year we must make some atonement. 

I am afraid that you will find mother pretty weak and miserable; the re- 
ports have not been very encouraging. I am glad that you will have a little 
time at home before school begins. Surely when you see mother and father 
so forlorn you will feel a little guilty to have had so marvellous a summer. 
But they will be happy in your happiness, in your strength and huskiness; 
not for the world would they have wanted anything else. I can trust you to 
do everything you can to cheer and comfort them. It might not be a bad idea 
to have F visit you for a few days in Baltimore or Washington, if you can 
persuade him to leave mother for so long. I think it pretty unlikely that M 
will be well enough to come west this winter; but if she can, I shall encour- 
age her to come. Otherwise, and perhaps in any case, I shall be east at 
Christmas. I have a long vacation, and shall plan to spend most of it with 
her. 

School should be fine this year; it is without much solicitude that I wish 
you a rich and deep and happy winter. I think perhaps that after this year 


142 


you will want to leave Hopkins. And because your choice will to some ex- 
tent commit your next years, I think that perhaps you will want soon to fix 
a little the virgin reaches of your future. I think that the world in which we 
shall live these next thirty years will be a pretty restless and tormented place; 
I do not think that there will be much of a compromise possible between 
being of it, and being not of it. 

The nostalgia for New Mexico, for the life we have together there, has 
been acute and constant; your reticent notes about the nine day trip threw 
me into a fit of envy and dejection. I hope that you are planning to go back 
up next summer. There may be practical complications; but they will have 
to be great to keep me away. I have seen Val and the Tolmans and Nat, and 
they all send greetings. Lawrence and Lauritsen would both be glad to have 
you, next year, should you want to do experimental physics. Nat has gone 
east, having worn out the pacific coast; she will be in New York, probably 
at the Cornell medical school or the Rockefeller; probably you will see her. 

Berkeley is good this year. The work is nice, the department honest and 
friendly. I enjoy chaperoning the boys and girls through the first problems 
in physics. I am learning sanskrit, enjoying it very much, and enjoying again 
the sweet luxury of being taught. I have a little house up on the hill, with a 
view of the cities and of the most beautiful harbor in the world. There is a 
sleeping porch; and I sleep under the Yaqui and the stars, and imagine I am 
on the porch at Perro Caliente. I feel well and strong, and have bought an 
alarm clock. 

If you get this before you leave, give my love to Katherine [Page], and 
bless her winter for me. My greetings to Roger [Lewis]; and to you both my 
thanks, and an immoderate and sentimental salutation. I hope you have a 
fine trip east, with the horses and with Ichabod. What are you doing with 
Pal and Baldy? Are you going this time up to Huntsberger’s place?” Write to 
me when you can. I shall answer. 


[no signature] 


a. John Lovejoy Elliott taught ethics classes at the Ethical Culture School and involved some 
of his students in settlement house activities and other good works. 

b. The Huntsberger place was one of the ranches where Oppenheimer horses, currently Pal 
and Baldy, were wintered. 


This letter introduces several close friends of Oppenheimer’s Berkeley 
—Pasadena years. Ruth Valentine (Val), a psychologist in the Los Angeles 
school system, was a friend of the Tolmans. A gate connected their adjoin- 
ing gardens. She was a sensitive person with a rare sense of humor.’® “Nat” 
always refers to Natalie Raymond, a writer and editor. During Oppen- 
heimer’s first five or six years in Berkeley, Ernest Lawrence was his closest 


143 


friend in the physics department. Charles C. Lauritsen, a native of Den- 
mark, had joined the faculty of Caltech in 1930 after receiving the Ph.D. 
there the previous year. His presence in Pasadena was one of its attractions 
for Oppenheimer, as professional affinity rapidly developed into strong per- 
sonal attachment. 


BY EARLY AUTUMN Mrs. Oppenheimer’ s illness had progressed to a 
stage where Robert’s presence was urgently required, in fact so urgently 
that he may have flown from California as implied in the first of two letters 
to Lawrence. 


76 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


New York 
October 12. [1931] 


Dear Ernest, 


It has not been easy to write to you before this; but I want you to have 
some little word from me. I know your understanding and your sympathy; 
and very deeply I appreciate it. 

I found my mother terribly low, almost beyond hope. Every day since I 
have been here she has seemed a little stronger, a little more herself. She is in 
very great pain and piteously terribly weak; but there is a bare chance that 
she may have still a little period of remission. I have been able to talk with 
her a little; she is tired and sad, but without desperation; she is unbelievably 
sweet. 

For my father alone I should have been glad to come. I think that it has 
been something of a comfort. He is brave and strong and gentle beyond all 
telling. He has promised to come out to me as soon as he can. My own de- 
parture is still not certain; it will not be surely before Saturday; I may stay a 
little longer; it will have to depend on how things go with Mother. You 
know that I shall come back as soon as I possibly can, and that, if I stay away 
so long, it is only because what I can do here seems incommensurate with 
the Berkeley duties. 

The trip on was good enough. We had snow in Wyoming, and could not 
get through; that made me nearly a day late. I hardly think that I shall fly 
back. 

I hope things are going well in Berkeley, that you are by now done 
wholly with the administrative horrors, and are having time for work and 
tennis and an occasional ride. I feel pretty awful to be away so long; you will 
do what you can for the fatherless theoretical children, won’t you? 

Affectionately 


Robert 


77 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


New York 
October 16. [1931] 


Dear Ernest, 


Your sweet message, and the lovely roses, came last night, as my father 
and I were sitting together after dinner. Both of us were very much 
touched, Ernest, and grateful to you. My father asked me to tell you from 
him his appreciation and his thankfulness; several times during the evening 
he said ‘“That was such a fine thing of Lawrence to do.”’ 

Things are pretty bad here, now. Mother, after a short respite, has been 
growing rapidly very much worse; she is comatose, now; and death is very 
near. We cannot help feeling now a little grateful that she should not have to 
suffer more, that she should not know the despair and misery of a long 
hopeless illness. She has been always hopeful and serene; and the last thing 
she said to me was ““Yes—California.”’ But even at that it is not very easy. 

I shall try, I think, to get back to Berkeley a week from this next Sunday; 
but I shall not promise that, leaving it a little to time to decide. My father 
will come out as soon as he can get away; there are so many things that he 
must do before leaving. I do not think that I should wait for him. But when 
he comes, we shall do our best. 

You must let me know if there is anything that I can do for you here; and 
if a word from me can be of any help to my deserted students, do not, 
please, hesitate to ask for it. 

As a reminder of your promise of a visit next summer, I am sending you a 
snap of the new shack at Lake Katherine, 12,300 feet above sea. 

With every greeting, and again my thanks 


Robert 


a. Frank and Roger Lewis had built the shack secretly because it was in the National Forest. 
‘The ranger discovered it just as we finished,”’ recalled Frank, “‘but because it was for Kath- 
erine he just shook his head and let us get away with it’; communication from Frank Oppen- 
heimer, June 1979. 


Mrs. Oppenheimer died on October 17. Toward the end Herbert 
Smith spent an afternoon at the Oppenheimer apartment. Oppenheimer’s 
despairing remark, “I am the loneliest man in the world,” confirmed 
Smith’s belief that Robert’s attachment to his mother was exceptionally 
strong. Others who knew him as a boy share this impression. Seemingly 
there had been nothing for him to remember but gentleness and kindness, 
and for a sensitive son this must have been a very bad moment indeed. But 
the bond was not one that had broadened with time. Frank, too, observing 


Robert’s exceptional attentiveness to their mother over the years in the form 
of flowers and carefully selected presents, thought his brother must be 
closer to her than he. Years later he was surprised to hear Robert confess 
that he had had difficulty in finding things to talk about with his mother and 
that the attentions were what he supposed were expected from an affection- 
ate son rather than a sign of deep understanding between them." 


WHATEVER THE EXTENT of the trauma produced by his mother’s 
death, Oppenheimer soon successfully immersed himself in physics again, a 
therapy reinforced by the warmth and common interests outside science 
that enriched several of his close professional friendships. A note of late No- 
vember to George Uhlenbeck demonstrates this point. It accompanied three 
pages of mathematical derivations that are omitted here. 


78 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


Berkeley 
Nov 29, 1931 


Dear George, 


This is no proper answer to your letter: only a note to go with the 
answers to your questions. I think the answer to your point 3) is complete; 
for 2) Ican not do so well, but perhaps what I know will be enough to settle 
your doubts. 

Some time ago there came the delightful Couperin’s ‘Arabesten’; & 
yesterday I found waiting for me a lovely heart warming bottle of sambal 
ikan merah. You must tell Else very many thanks for these, & my love, & 
the promise of a finite letter in finite time. 

Do you plan to come to New Orleans at Christmas? It is a charming 
place; I am meeting my father & brother there ten days or so before the 
meeting; it would be most marvellous to see you. 

Affectionately, & with every greeting 


Robert 


OPPENHEIMER, HIS FATHER, and Frank, then in his second year at 
Johns Hopkins, met in New Orleans as planned. Else Uhlenbeck noted the 
close rapport between Oppenheimer and Ernest Lawrence at the American 
Physical Society meetings on December 29 and 30. One animated conversa- 
tion took place with Lawrence in an elevator and Oppenheimer outside. 


146 


After Lawrence had dashed in and out several times to make another point 
the operator called brusquely, “Break it up, sweethearts.”’” 

As Oppenheimer and his father crossed Texas by train on their way to 
Pasadena, he commented to Lawrence about various aspects of the New 
Orleans meeting. 


79 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


Texas 
Sunday [January 3, 1932] 


Dear Ernest, 


This is an entirely gratuitous little note, written only to compensate for 
the brevity and sketchiness of our time together in New Orleans, and to 
thank you for certain very generous things to which in that time I did not do 
full justice. My brother was very happy at last to meet you, sorry only that 
the times had been so short. He asked me to tell you this, to send you his 
greetings, to tell you too with what eagerness he was looking to your visit 
next summer. We had a fine holiday together; and I think that it settled defi- 
nitely Frank’s vocation for physics. Seeing so together a good number of 
physicists, it is impossible not to conceive for them a great liking and respect, 
and for their work a great attraction. We went Thursday with Uhlenbeck 
and Thomas to a joint session of biochemistry and psychology; it was 
enormously rowdy and very funny; and it discouraged an excessive faith in 
either of these sciences. 

It was like you, Ernest, and very sweet, that you should whisper to me so 
comforting words about the Wednesday meeting. I was pretty much in 
need of them, feeling ashamed of my report [1932a], and distressed rather 
by Millikan’s hostility and his lack of scruple.® Before I left I had with 
Swann a short pleasant talk; I think that he began to see why his arguments 
were not valid. I was glad to have a little time with him; he is very charm- 
ing; and it was easy to understand your great affection.© New Year’s day a 
reporter called me, saying that you had sent him. I did not give him any- 
thing; I hope that in that I did not offend your wishes. 

The week end of the twenty second I shall spend in Berkeley. It is possible 
but not likely that I can get up the week end earlier. In any case I shall make 
the visit as long as possible; and if my father will come, I shall bring him. I 
have heard from Carlson and from Miss Phillips; both of them have been 
doing nicely. Miss Phillips wrote, but not very fully, of some new evidence 
on the degree of dissociation of potassium, which gives 10 times the number 
of molecules assumed by Ditchburn.4 Her paper is nearly written up. About 
the more serious question of next year in Berkeley, I would not want to have 


147 


you misled by Father’s words: My decision, in so far as it can be purely 
mine, is made; if I can come to Berkeley for the whole of next year with- 
out complete rupture with Tech I shall come; otherwise I shall worry a 
little more before deciding. Father I think does not wholly approve; but 
then he knows Pasadena and not Berkeley. 

I hope that in this week before term you will be able to get a good deal of 
work done. I suppose that it is too much to hope that by the beginning of 
term the big magnet will be ready: but perhaps by then your contractors 
will be done. If there are any minor theoretical problems to which you need 
urgently the answer, tell them to Carlson or Nedelsky; and if they are 
stumped let me have a try at them. When you see Sloan please give him my 
wishes for a good recovery; and to Berkeley my greetings. ® 

Thank you again for your fine Christmas present. Let things go well with 
you. a bientot 


Robert 


a. This session was part of the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science held in New Orleans at the same time as the meeting of the American Physical 
Society. Llewellyn (L. H.) Thomas was associate professor of physics at Ohio State University. 

b. Millikan’s hostility had probably been provoked by Oppenheimer’s report suggesting 
that cosmic rays might be formed by a hypothetical particle proposed by Pauli. This theory 
was in conflict with Millikan’s view that cosmic rays were bundles of photons. See Laurie M. 
Brown, “The Idea of the Neutrino,”’ Physics Today, 31 (September 1978): 23—28; see also Op- 
penheimer papers 1931g and 1932a. : 

c. William F. Swann, under whom Lawrence had obtained his doctorate at Yale, was direc- 
tor of the Bartol Research Foundation of the Franklin Institute. 

d. Robert W. Ditchburn was professor of natural and experimental philosophy at the Uni- 
versity of Dublin. 

e. Lawrence’s big magnet was the central component of his cyclotron. It had to be designed 
to produce the appropriate magnetic fields, and Lawrence frequently made use of the comput- 
ing skills of the theoreticians. David H. Sloan, an assistant physicist in Lawrence’s lab, had 
serious back problems. 


By 1932 Oppenheimer had attracted some talented graduate and post- 
doctoral students. Melba Phillips, his first doctoral student, came to Berke- 
ley in 1930. She received her Ph.D. in 1933, was Oppenheimer’s research 
associate in 1933-34, and held an instructorship in physics in 1934-35. 
J. Franklin Carlson, who received his Ph.D. with William H. Williams at 
Berkeley in 1932, was Oppenheimer’s research associate in 1932-33, then 
became an instructor in physics. Each collaborated with Oppenheimer in 
publishing significant papers [1931g, 1932b, 1935e, 1937a]. 

Leo Nedelsky had commenced graduate work in physics in 1928 under 
Samuel Allison. After Allison moved to Chicago in 1930, Nedelsky became 
Oppenheimer’s graduate student, seduced, as he described it, by a course in 


148 


quantum mechanics of which he understood almost nothing. However, all 
the students were in the same boat and consoled each other after class. Op- 
penheimer’s tendency to stammer as he lectured soon disappeared, but his 
blackboard manners were unorthodox. Questioned about a particular equa- 
tion, which he had cited with a gesture toward the blackboard, Oppenheimer 
said, ‘‘No, not that one; the one underneath.” ‘“‘But there isn’t one under- 
neath,” the students exclaimed. “Not below,”’ said Oppenheimer, “‘under- 
neath. I have written over it.”’ In his first years at Berkeley Oppenheimer’s 
real influence was exerted outside the classroom. “‘When you took questions 
to him,” recalled Nedelsky, ““he would spend hours—until midnight per- 
haps—exploring every angle with you. At that personal level he was an 
excellent teacher although he always overestimated what others knew or 
could learn.”’** 

When Oppenheimer went to Pasadena during the Berkeley term, at the 
last moment he sometimes asked Nedelsky to lecture for him. “It won’t be 
any trouble,’’ said Oppenheimer on one such occasion, “‘it’s all in a book.”’ 
Finding that the book was in Dutch, which he could not read, Nedelsky 
demurred. “But it’s such easy Dutch,” said Oppenheimer. “ 

Wendell Furry, a postdoctoral fellow at Berkeley from 1932 to 1934, 
later recalled that Oppenheimer expressed himself “‘somewhat obscurely 
and very quickly with flashes of insight which we couldn’t follow.” Elegant 
language and highbrow allusions made his lectures even more incompre- 
hensible. Nevertheless, students responded with exclamations of “‘Excel- 
lent! Fine! How illuminating!”’ But it was direct contact that really counted. 
“He praised all of our efforts even when we weren't so hot,”’ says Furry. 
Sometimes he seemed impatient with questions but then showed his appre- 
ciation by asking the questioner to collaborate on the problem.” 

Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows began to note a serious ef- 
fort on Oppenheimer’s part to improve his classroom technique.'® In 1967 
Robert Serber reflected upon the qualities that marked Oppenheimer’s style. 
“By this time [the autumn of 1934] Oppenheimer’s course in quantum me- 
chanics was well established. Oppie (as he was known to his Berkeley stu- 
dents) was quick, impatient, and had a sharp tongue. In the earliest days of 
his teaching he was reputed to have terrorized the students. Now, after five 
years of experience, he had mellowed—?f his earlier students were to be be- 
lieved. His course was an inspirational, as well as educational, achievement. 
He transmitted . . . a feeling of the beauty of the logical structure of phys- 
ics and an excitement in the development of the science. Almost everyone 
listened to the course more than once, and Oppie occasionally had difficulty 
in dissuading students from coming a third or fourth time. . .” 

“Oppie’s way of working with his research students was also original. 
His group would consist of eight or ten graduate students and about a half 
dozen postdoctoral fellows. He would meet the group once a day in his of- 


149 


fice. A little before the appointed time its members would straggle in and 
dispose themselves on the tables and about the walls. Oppie would come in 
and discuss with one after another the status of the student’s research prob- 
lem, while the others listened and offered comments. All were exposed to a 
broad range of topics. Oppenheimer was interested in everything, and one 
subject after another was introduced and coexisted with all the others. In an 
afternoon we might discuss electrodynamicg, cosmic rays, astrophysics and 
nuclear physics .. .”’ 

‘‘Many facets of Oppenheimer’s character contributed to his greatness 
as a teacher: his great capacity as a physicist, his wide intellectual interests, 
his astonishing quickness of mind, his great gift for expression, his sensitive 
perception, his social presence, which made him the center of every 
gathering. His students emulated him as best they could. They copied his 
gestures, his mannerisms, his intonations. He truly influenced their lives.’’"’ 

Four years before he died Oppenheimer had given Thomas Kuhn his 
own version of the change that took place in his attitude toward physics and 
toward teaching in the early 1930s. “I would think that the transition 
was . . . from that of a person who had been learning and also explaining 
in European centers and in Harvard and Caltech to someone who couldn’t 
much any longer learn from masters but could learn from the literature and 
from what he did himself, and who had a lot of explaining to do because 
there was no one else. I think it was not such a sudden transition. Living a 
life in which you lecture three hours a week and have a seminar [or] another 
lecture two hours a week leaves you a lot of time for physics and for lots of 
other things and I wasn’t an altered character. I was still primarily a student 
in terms of what I spent time on. . .”’ 

‘‘({Lecturing] took energy, a great deal of energy, but I didn’t have to 
look much up in the book and it was more a question of keeping the presen- 
tation fresh and making it sharper and richer. I would think that the big 
change was that I wasn’t an apprentice any longer and I had decided where 
to make my bed . . . Ina certain sense I had not grown up but had grown 
up a little, and I think if circumstances had been such that I had had to teach 
to make a living earlier it probably would have been better for me. I don’t 
think it would have derailed my interest in physics but I think it would per- 
haps first of all have made it necessary for me to learn what I wanted to 
know.’’?® 


OPPENHEIMER’S CONCERN for his father in the lonely years after his 
mother’s death, combined with Mr. Oppenheimer’s outgoing personality, 
made it possible for Julius to share his son’s life and friends in Pasadena or 
Berkeley for weeks at a time. Some who had known Robert as an adolescent 
felt that he never overcame a sense of incompatibility with his father or 
ceased to be annoyed by Julius’ tendency to boast about his son’s accom- 


150 


plishments. Others, knowing only the more mature Oppenheimer, found 
his concern for his father far from perfunctory. Mr. Oppenheimer was in 
Pasadena in January 1932 when Robert wrote to Frank. The sharing of 
friends now extended to Frank’s circle at Johns Hopkins. 


80 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Pasadena 
Sunday [ca. January 1932] 


Dear Frank, 


No one who learns anything at all from experience could hope that we 
should make for each other much of a correspondence. But there is perhaps 
no reason for a tradition of unconditional silence; and I would urge you 
with all heart to write to me whenever you find together leisure and inclina- 
tion, and to nurse the inclination a little. I want very much to know how, 
now, after your return to school, you find yourself. I should like to think 
that you have found again some of the freshness of last year, the assurance 
and the certainty, and to some extent that delectatio contemplationis which 
is the reward and reason of our way of life. These things are not all 
important, as we both know, and one may not expect always to be visited 
by them. But for that reason we try to do everything to invite them, culti- 
vating a little leisure, and a certain detached solitariness, and a quiet disci- 
pline which uses but transcends the discipline of our duties. Ergo, for you, 
not too hellishly many hours of school; and a mind open and hospitable to 
the angels, even Civa’s angels;# and once in a while for your humility a 
green vegetable. 

We have the lease for Perro Caliente, giving us the summers through ’36; 
the option is signed and on its way. Father has not committed himself yet in 
his summer plans; always in the next years we shall have for them a certain 
solicitude. But I look with confidence and intense nostalgia to many many 
perfect months together in the mountains. 

We are established here in a little house. We had a hell of a time looking in 
this waste for two pleasant places near together; we did not find any; and F 
is very much pleased with this place, liking the cottage—which 1s in fact 
excruciatingly ugly —and not I think sorry to have me under the same roof. F 
looks well, better than in months. The days are necessarily a bit empty; but 
he is studying French—with God knows what ineptitude for any study; he 
is to start driving tomorrow; I have been with him every day for lunch, and 
we have had the evenings together, often with people. There are concerts 
and stammtisches and even a seminar on International affairs; and on the 
whole I think it will be better for him here than we had hoped. The great 


151 


problem of breakfast was solved by Ruth Tolman’s Moline, who every 
morning gets breakfast and fixes; and after I am gone listens with enchant- 
ing patience to F’s reports on high finance. 
The cigarette rolling prospers; it recalls a most marvellous holiday. 
Greetings to Roger, the Boas’, Dieke, Mac,” Ichabod. God keep you; and 


write when you can. 
R 


a. Civa (Siva or Shiva) is a Hindu god who destroys life in order that reproduction can take 
place; he is also associated with asceticism. 

b. Frank’s friends at Johns Hopkins were: Roger Lewis, who had been in part responsible for 
Frank’s decision to go to Hopkins rather than Harvard; George Boas, associate professor of 
philosophy, and his sculptress wife, Simone; Gerhardt Dieke, a spectroscopist; and Donald 
Macfarlane, a psychiatrist. 


UNLIKE HIS SON, Julius Oppenheimer always meticulously headed 
letters with address and full date. The ““Stammtisch”’ to which he and Rob- 
ert both referred (literally “‘table reserved for regular guests’) was a weekly 
dinner meeting at Caltech, an elite affair attended by people in various de- 
partments. Someone made a presentation, and stimulating talk followed. 
According to Frank, his brother’s periodic efforts to steer him toward biol- 
ogy stemmed in par from the exciting new work in genetics eiseassee at 
these Stammtisches. 


81 | JULIUS OPPENHEIMER TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Pasadena, California 
January 18th 1932 


Dear Frank, 


The letters have been a bit delayed and we received your first letter on 
Friday. We also heard from Aunt Clara [Goldsmit] that she had seen you 
during the week and that you were well. She inferred that you were going 
to visit her this weekend. Have you the time for so long a journey? I hope 
you will enjoy the visit. 

Don’t forget to take sufficient funds along. 

We here continue to enjoy our little home. I study a bit of French every 
morning, making slow progress, as it is over forty-five years that I have not 
touched a French book. I also have taken a few lessons driving a car and I 
believe I am getting on quite nicely. I should not want to try it down Park 
Avenue as yet. 


122 


I have been to two Stammtisch Meetings. They are very good fun. We 
have also been at Ruth Valentine’s for an evening meal. Robert fixed the 
odds and ends, and we had a most delightful evening. Clark Millikan and 
his wife, Robert and I entertained going to a theater with them and supper 
and tonight St. Clair and Elizabeth are going to dine with us,* so you see I 
am meeting lots of Robert’s friends and yet I believe that I have not inter- 
fered with his activities. He is always busy and has had a couple of short 
talks with Einstein. Cal Tech impresses me as being very active just now. 
This weekend we may go to Berkeley and meet Lawrence and Ryder.” Rob- 
ert wants me to come along and I may decide to do so. I am trying to give 
you as near as possible a bit of the doings for I know you want to be in- 
formed. 

Ruth Tolman told us that Mrs. Boas received prices on two of her works. 
When you see her will you remember me and tell her I was so glad to hear 
this.° 

I trust you will continue to enjoy your work and if it gets too much that 
you will drop something so as not to over-burden yourself.¢ Take good care 
of your health and let us hear from you very soon again. Lots of love, from 
brother and 


Father 


a. Clark Millikan was the eldest son of Robert A. Millikan. St. Clair and Elizabeth were 
Sinclair Smith, a Caltech astronomer, and his wife. 

b. Arthur W. Ryder was the professor of Sanskrit at Berkeley with whom Oppenheimer 
was reading. 

c. In regard to Mrs. Boas’ sculpture, Mr. Oppenheimer apparently meant “prizes,’’ not 
“*prices.’’ “Julius was one of the kindest men I ever knew,’’ commented Boas. “The first time 
we had lunch with him in New York in his apartment with its two Van Goghs, its head by 
Despiau, and the other exquisite works of art, not many but very choice, we knew at once that 
he was a very rare person”; George Boas to Alice Kimball Smith, November 28, 1976. 

d. Frank, like his brother before him, was taking the extra courses that would enable him to 
graduate from college in three years. 


AS JULIUS OPPENHEIMER prepared to return to New York, Robert 
discussed with Frank how their father should spend the summer, suggesting 
that Julius’ youngest sister Hedwig Stern should come from Germany for a 
visit and that Josephine, the family’s devoted maid, look after them. Oppen- 
heimer did not go to Europe in 1933. In fact, he did not go again until the 
summer of 1948, nineteen years after he returned from the postgraduate 
year in Leiden and Zurich. 

Robert’s advice to Frank about the advantages of studying biology 
before deciding to go on in physics was part of a continuing discussion 
between them about Frank’s education. Frank recalled that in the spring of 


153 


1930 he wrote to his brother saying he would like to come west and study 
under him instead of going to college, but Robert did not think it was a 
good idea. Frank went to Johns Hopkins, where he found the biology 
courses unsatisfactory. He took his brother’s advice seriously but “‘the phys- 
ics and math were so very good at Hopkins (as were philosophy, French, and 
many other things) that I was seduced by it. In addition, I attended the 
spring American Physical Society meetings in Washington with my brother 
and Hopkins faculty and was captivated by what was happening.’’”° 


82 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Pasadena 
March 12 [1932] 


Dear Frank, 


When, within the fortnight, you again see father, he will tell you that for 
days and days I have been making little initial gestures in the act of writing 
to you; he will tell you too, I think, a charitable story of the vicissitudes 
which have delayed the letter. For truly I have wanted to write, have carried 
with me the substance of many long hours of talk with you. Your last letters 
have been marvellous; the reading of them made a deep quiet happiness, a 
suggestion surely of the high moments. I have never been more eager for 
the summer. : 

You will find father well, I think, and pretty fit: at least he is so now. It 
would be good for him to have a little more time here; but he wants to be 
back with his affairs again, and is taking advantage of an offer from a friend 
to keep him company east. He is completely restored now from the opera- 
tion, and better than for many months; but he tires still very easily, and you 
must be prepared to keep him from discouragement if his first efforts in 
New York should exhaust him. He has had I think a genuinely pleasant 
time; I feel that he has had here about all that he could under the circum- 
stances use; and it is with a pretty good conscience that I let him return. | 
have urged him very strongly not to go to Europe alone this summer, rec- 
ommending that he have Hedwig come, and that he keep house with her 
and Josephine near town, perhaps in Westchester, where he could be near 
friends. Only if things should break unexpectedly well: e.g. should he find a 
very good person to travel with, ought he, or will he, go abroad. I have said 
too that next summer I should consider going myself, that in that case we 
could at least cross both ways together. For me this summer is definitely 
out, as I am planning to go to Berkeley in August, and do not get through 
here til some time in June. That time is for Perro Caliente; and neither of us 
would want to deplete it. 


154 


If you have not written to Father of your precise plans for meeting him, 
will you wire? It will comfort him to know. Will you too let me know 
about when you can get out to the mountains? I think that I can arrange to 
be there nearly as early as you; but I should have to know in advance. 

It would seem then that you were not to be distracted from physics. I had 
thought that you might find in the biological sciences things to whet your 
appetite and curiosity, that might, for the time perhaps, call to you. I know 
very well surely that physics has a beauty which no other science can match, 
a rigor and austerity and depth. Only I must urge two precautions: Has the 
biology which you have had been typical enough, has it been good enough, 
to warrant a judgement? There are parts of physiology which seem to me, 
though pretty young, essentially sound: muscle and nerve physiology, em- 
bryology. Genetics certainly involves a rigorous technique, and a construc- 
tive and complicated theory which goes quite a way in enabling us to pre- 
dict. I have a feeling that an elementary course in biology might miss 
entirely the good things; that except from a very good man you would get 
no idea of them. I would urge you not to dismiss this possibility. The other 
point is a simple one: I am sure that you are right in preferring physics as a 
science to study and learn; but should you prefer it as a science at which to 
work, a vocation? By all means, and with my whole blessing, learn physics, 
all there is of it, so that you understand it, and can use it and contemplate it, 
and, if you should want, teach it; but do not plan yet to ‘do’ it: to adopt 
physical research as a vocation. For that decision you should know 
something more of the other sciences, and a good deal more of physics. 

Have you decided what to do next year? Could you spend another year at 
Hopkins with some fruitfulness? Could you take your B A there a year 
from June? (Do they give such things?) It would be in many ways an advan- 
tage to you to come to your next place as a graduate student: Harvard, Eu- 
rope, Pasadena, to some extent even Berkeley would be much better so. But 
to Berkeley, though not here, you could come as an undergraduate. I doubt 
whether my plans can have any relevance: but I am arranging to spend the 
year in Berkeley, until Easter, and then to come down here, for Bohr’s visit, 
until June. 

You put a hard question on the virtue of discipline. What you say is true: I 
do value it—and I think that you do too—more than for its earthly fruit, 
proficiency. I think that one can give only a metaphysical ground for this 
evaluation; but the variety of metaphysics which gave an answer to your 
question has been very great, the metaphysics themselves very disparate: the 
bhagavad gita, Ecclesiastes, the Stoa, the beginning of the Laws, Hugo of St 
Victor, St Thomas, John of the Cross, Spinoza. This very great disparity 
suggests that the fact that discipline is good for the soul is more fundamental 
than any of the grounds given for its goodness. I believe that through disci- 
pline, though not through discipline alone, we can achieve serenity, and a 


155 


certain small but precious measure of freedom from the accidents of incar- 
nation, and charity, and that detachment which preserves the world which it 
renounces. I believe that through discipline we learn to preserve what is es- 
sential to our happiness in more and more adverse circumstances, and to 
abandon with simplicity what would else have seemed to us indispensable; 
that we come a little to see the world without the gross distortion of per- 
sonal desire, and in seeing it so, accept moye.easily our earthly privation and 
its earthly horror— But because I believe that the-reward of discipline is 
greater than its immediate objective, I would not have you think that disci- 
pline without objective is possible: in its nature discipline involves the sub- 
jection of the soul to some perhaps minor end; and that end must be real, if 
the discipline is not to be factitious. Therefore I think that all things which 
evoke discipline: study, and our duties to men and to the commonwealth, 
war, and personal hardship, and even the need for subsistence, ought to be 
greeted by us with profound gratitude; for only through them can we attain 
to the least detachment; and only so can we know peace. 

Are there any Rameau things which would be suitable for a violin and 
piano? Ruth Tolman and Mrs Morgan play together;” and they would ap- 
preciate it very much if you could get for them anything that they could use. 
They would have I suppose to be pretty recent scores; and perhaps nothing 
suitable exists. But if it does, will you send it on to me? 

You might like to try your spanish on Unamuno: Del sentimiento tragico 
de la vida. And Jane Austen; do you know her six marvellous novels? 

con carino 


Robert 


a. Mr. Oppenheimer had minor surgery. 
b. Mrs. Morgan was a Pasadena friend of Ruth Tolman’s. 


OPPENHEIMER JOINED his brother in the Pecos in June as planned and 
stayed until close to mid-August, when he was due back in Berkeley. On 
August 14 from Topock, Arizona, where U.S. 66 crosses the Colorado 
River, he mailed a picture postcard of Needles Peaks with the message: “For 
our first trip into the delectable mountains, con carino’’—a reminder of 
their journey as novice drivers when Robert’s arm was broken, but also of 
long talks, shared adventures, and wonderful country.”’ In Berkeley on a 
Sunday some weeks later he typed a long letter to Frank, now in his third 
and final year at Johns Hopkins. 


156 


83 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Berkeley 
Sunday [ca. fall 1932] 


Dear Frank, 


There has never been so long a time which I have let pass without a letter; 
and never a time when so constantly I have enjoyed your company. Our 
common life last summer left in me a fine deposit which I have been tapping 
all these months, a great repository of your words and gestures and of the 
good hours which we shared. Even now, perhaps, with an answer to your 
marvellous letters so long overdue, I should not be writing to you if I had 
not the hope and project of another common holiday in mind. And that is 
Christmas. I have just written father an elaborate disquisition on the possi- 
bilities, and think that the ultimate decision rests with him. Roughly though 
it is so: if he wants to come out here, or will let himself be persuaded to 
want it, by the New Year, let us meet again about half way. If he is staying 
east til February, let me then, who have such a huge vacation (for my classes 
stop the first week of December and don’t start again til the second in Jan- 
uary) come east, and let us make what we can of Baltimore and New York 
and the Physical Society meeting and such excursions as we can devise. My 
suggestion for a half way meeting is perhaps foolish: but how would New 
Mexico do, that we have neither of us seen in winter, that would be friendly 
and not quite so far for you as this coast? The only certain point for me is 
that we should be together, and that we should make the time as pleasant 
and as right for father as we can. 

Your courses sound swell; only I am distressed by this, that they are cov- 
ering an area very much like the one I cover in my introduction to theoreti- 
cal physics; for I have an arrogant and stubborn wish that you might be 
learning these beautiful things from me. I feel sure that your three courses 
would profit by union: that the reciprocal illumination which function the- 
ory, vector analysis, and potential theory give each other is indispensable to 
a profound understanding of any one of them. Maybe you can try to fill in 
the bridges for yourself; and I shall try to get you a set of notes for next 
summer that will help to anchor them. You know of course that I have 
pretty mixed feelings about this program of yours in which theoretical 
physics plays such a large part: it is the most delightful and rewarding study 
in the world, and I can be only glad that you are enjoying it, glad too that 
we Shall always be able to share this treasure. It is only the implications of 
the course that trouble me: the possibility that you are more and more 
deeply committing yourself to a vocation which you will regret; the possi- 
bility that your motives in this choice—and I wish that I might dismiss this, 
but only you can—are not wholly in physics and your liking for it. I take it 


15/7 


that the biology at Hopkins is abominable—this from many sources: and 
that the only other academic study of any consequence, that of hard lan- 
guages, leaves you pretty cold; that does not leave much but vectors and 
Cauchy’s theorem for you to try. But let me urge you with every earnest- 
ness to keep an open mind: to cultivate a disinterested and catholic interest 
in every intellectual discipline, and in the:non academic excellences of the 
world, so that you may not lose that freshness of mind from which alone 
the life of the mind derives, and that your choice, whatever it be, of work to 
do, may be a real choice, and one reasonably free. Just yesterday I was over 
in Marin, the country on the northern seaward arm of San Francisco bay; it 
was a grey day, with heavy fog blowing in from the sea; and the little light- 
houses at all the perilous points cut off from the world by the mountains 
behind and the fog banks out to sea. I suppose that only very gifted and 
industrious lighthouse keepers get to live in such places; but their mere exis- 
tence makes me wonder how any man of sense can ever adopt any other 
vocation. 

I am glad you liked the strong box. I had myself quite a time finding it, 
but was pleased with this, though the locks were not what they might have 
been. Did you find the English flask? It was sent in memory of one per- 
fect snifter, late one afternoon in the upper meadows of the Baca location, 
where we learned canonically to define man’s superiority over beast by his 
use of flasks. 

Mac is fine: not perhaps the boyish creature that came first to Perro Cali- 
ente; graver and perhaps with the shadow of a chip on his shotlder; but 
full of vigor and lots wiser.” His job is I take it not perfect, but satisfactory. 
We went sailing once, on a fine gentle day in a bird boat, out the gate and up 
the coast; but the winds have dropped now and there will be no decent sail- 
ing until spring. He, and Ruth [Tolman] and Val [Ruth Valentine] and 
Lauritsen and Melber and Lawrence all send you greetings; and Melber, 
who was in a minor way accessory to my discovery of your strong box 
wants due credit for it.© Also, and this will please you less: two friends here 
recognized you when they were east: the chemist Gilbert Lewis spotted you 
in an audience, alarmed at first at my presence hostile to his reflections, 
comforted then by knowing you my brother. And Edward Tolman, Rich- 
ard’s brother, spotted you and Roger [Lewis] on the train from Chicago 
east, but did not speak to you, fearing ‘it might seem impudent.’ Poor lad- 
die, the mark is on you. 

I have ridden a little mare out in the hills toward Diablo, a little five gaited 
blooded mare with the unforgettable roguish temperament of Dixie; and 
roasted green chile over the fire and made the cocktails of lime and honey. 
And when the maid neglects my bed and I must make it myself, I am glad; 
and can almost hear Roger desperately calling me to the late breakfast. Did 
you leave Io with Katherine [Page]?4 I had your letter too late to answer, 


158 


and no great choice in the matter. And is she still in the mountains? There 
has been no breath of word from her; and I am curious to know how she 1s. 
Did you have, when you left, the feeling that there was peace between you? 
And had she forgiven us for whatever she had taken as our offence? 

The work is fine: not fine in the fruits but the doing. There are lots of 
eager students, and we are busy studying nuclei and neutrons and disinte- 
grations; trying to make some peace between the inadequate theory and the 
absurd revolutionary experiments. Lawrence’s things are going very well; 
he has been disintegrating all manner of nuclei, apparently with anything at 
all that has an energy of a million volts. We have been running a nuclear 
seminar, in addition to the usual ones, trying to make some order out of the 
great chaos, not getting very far with that. We are supplementing the paper 
I wrote last summer [1932b] with a study of radiation in electron electron 
impacts, and worrying about the neutron and Anderson’s positively 
charged electrons, and cleaning up a few residual problems in atomic phys- 
ics. I take it that there will be a lull in the theory for a time; and that when 
the theory advances, it will be very wild and very wonderful indeed. —I am 
reading the Cakuntala with Ryder; and at our next meeting shall afflict you 
with clumsy translations of the superb poems. 

I wish that I knew the answer to your solicitude about father. I have 
thought a great deal about him, his need of work, the limitations which 
health and his aptitudes and the times put on its fruition. If I knew of any- 
thing to do I should do it. But I don’t; and I feel that about all that we can do 
is to make the life as it is not too forlorn for him, and to confirm the one 
essential purpose that it still has, which lies in us. I feel very openminded 
about any suggestions; and when we are again together we shall talk to- 
gether of this, and see if together we can make more of it than either of us 
can alone. 

Write to me pretty soon, if only to tell me what plans for the holidays you 
like best. God keep you; and let the days be rich and sweet. 


Robert 


a. The Baca Location was a large land grant which included much of the Valle Grande in the 
Jemez Mountains northwest of Santa Fe. Robert, Frank, and Roger Lewis were riding there one 
summer afternoon when deer flies viciously attacked riders and horses. “‘So we set the horses to 
a full wild run up the two-mile length of the Valle,” recalled Frank, ‘‘overtaking each other 
over and over again to pass on the welcome flask after slowing down to take a swig’’; commu- 
nication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 

b. Donald Macfarlane was on leave from Johns Hopkins. His departure from Perro Caliente 
after his first visit there made an indelible impression upon Frank: “As an ambulance driver in 
France during World War I, Mac had often driven at night with the headlights off. The night he 
left Perro Caliente he wanted to recreate that experience for himself and for us. We drove down 
the tortuous road cut into the side of the Pecos River Canyon on a very black night with the 
lights out. The wisps of cloud that persist after a mountain rain storm would periodically en- 


159 


velop us, even more hair-raisingly shrouding the road. My brother and I were thoroughly 
scared but we did not protest’; communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 
c. ‘Melber’? was the way her friends commonly pronounced the name of Melba Phillips. 
d. Dixie and Io were horses. 


Oppenheimer’s remark about “‘trying to make some peace between the 
inadequate theory and the absurd revolutionary experiments’’ should be 
viewed against a background of important achievements in 1932 that fo- 
cused the attention of the physics community on nuclear and cosmic ray 
research. In January Harold C. Urey at Columbia University discovered a 
heavy isotope of hydrogen (deuterium). In February James Chadwick at the 
Cavendish Laboratory demonstrated the existence of the neutron, anew nu- 
clear particle. In April John Cockcroft and E. T. S. Walton, also of the Ca- 
vendish, disintegrated the nuclei of light elements by bombarding them 
with artificially accelerated protons. In August, at Caltech, Carl D. Ander- 
son’s photographs of cosmic ray tracks showed the existence of the posi- 
tron, the positively charged electron. Soon after, at Berkeley, Ernest 
Lawrence with his students Stanley Livingston and Milton White used their 
new particle accelerator, the cyclotron, to disintegrate nuclei. These discov- 
eries and techniques provided theorists with exciting challenges and oppor- 
tunities. 7” 


THE EXACT DIVISION of Oppenheimer’s time between Berkeley and 
Pasadena was negotiable. In his March 1933 letter to Millikan about ar- 
rangements for the coming year there is evident a growing absorption in the 
teaching at Berkeley as well as concern about the effect of the Depression 
upon academic financing. 


84 | TO ROBERT A. MILLIKAN 


Berkeley 
March 5, 1933 


Dear Dr Millikan, 


When last I was in Pasadena, I spoke to you of coming to the Institute for 
the better part of next year, and asked you whether you could find a job for 
me. Since then, I know, the financial situation has grown only worse; and I 
am sure that it has not been easy for you to find the money. Since then too I 
have learned how much the department here in Berkeley has counted on my 
staying here, and how unwilling they are to see me leave at Christmas. It has 
come to seem to me a little wanton, for me to throw over this job where the 


160 


money is available, and where as the only theoretical physicist I have a cer- 
tain usefulness, to come to Pasadena, where in some ways at least I should 
be a burden, and where many men can do as well and better the things 
which I can do. 

Byt with the third, Spring, term, the situation is different; for I can have 
that in Pasadena, as we have planned it for this year, without interfering es- 
sentially with my work here. I should like if it is at all possible to come to 
the Institute for this third term next year. In this way I should not have to 
sever altogether a connection which seems very precious to me, and should 
be able to work each year for a little time with the Pasadena physicists, and 
give such courses or seminars as would be useful to them. There is no need 
for me to know at once whether this can be arranged for next year; but I do 
very much hope that it will be possible to arrange it. 

With cordial and respectful greetings, 


Robert Oppenheimer 


OPPENHEIMER AND HIS STUDENTS spent time with Niels Bohr at 
Caltech when Bohr lectured there in the spring of 1933. After Bohr’s return 
to Copenhagen, Oppenheimer reported on his own attempt to explain the 
physical process involved in the appearance and disappearance of pairs of 
electrons, one positive and the other negative, and also examined the self- 
consistency of the theory. 


85 | TO NIELS BOHR 


Pasadena 
June 14. [1933] 


Dear Professor Bohr, 


I am sending to you a copy of the letter which Dr Plesset and I have 
written for the Physical Review [1933b].2 As you will see, we have not 
made much progress since you left, and have had to leave a number of 
points quite undecided. Of these the most important still seems to me the 
question of the validity of our calculations for the cosmic rays. We think 
that we have found a method free of all doubtful approximations which will 
give us the answer to this question; but the problem is analytically quite 
hard for us; and it may be some time before we can tell you the answer. We 
want to postpone publishing the details of the calculations until we can clear 
up the doubtful points. 

With regard to the general formulation of the theory, the situation 1s just 


161 


what you had prepared us to expect: there is, 1t appears, a complete corre- 
spondence between the new formalism of the transformation theory, and 
the possibility of observing by necessarily classical experiments the posi- 
tives and the pairs. Thus one can only hope by such experiments to detect 
the positives when one uses an experimental arrangement for which one 
may abstract from their creation and disappearance; and this corresponds 
exactly to the requirements of the transformation theory, according to 
which it is only in ‘coordinate systems’ corresponding to such experimental 
arrangements that one can give any direct physical interpretation of the 
wave functions of the Dirac theory. In the general case the functions can not 
be interpreted in the same simple way as in the Dirac Jordan transformation 
theory. 

It seems now hardly likely that I shall be able to come to Ann Arbor. At 
least I can and shall send you an account of what we are doing; but for me 
that will be a very poor substitute. You must know how happy I was in 
your visit, and how grateful for the generous and fruitful hours which you 
gave to talking with us, and helping us to understand what we were talking 
about. I envy Plesset very much his year in Copenhagen. 


Oppenheimer 


a. Milton Plesset was a National Research Council fellow working with Oppenheimer at 
Caltech; he subsequently spent a year with Bohr in Copenhagen. 


OPPENHEIMER DID NOT GO to Ann Arbor. Instead he spent much of 
the summer of 1933 at the ranch in the Pecos, continuing his work on the 
theory of the positive electron. In the fall he wrote to Frank, who, after re- 
ceiving the B.S. degree from Johns Hopkins in June, followed his brother’s 
footsteps and began graduate study at the University of Cambridge. 


86 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Berkeley 
October seventh [1933] 


Dear Frank, 


A good many hours and miles are between us now; and I write with that 
curious tentativeness which separation gives, with a sense of clumsiness, as 
though one were trying with a very long stick to make at an immense dis- 
tance some very delicate adjustment. But I have had your good letter from 
Baltimore, and seen your last almost asymptotic one to father: and want 


162 


you to have some word of me, and want very much to hear. You know 
how happy I was with your decision to go to Cambridge, and that I have 
very high hopes of the fruitfulness of the year there. I know that it was not 
an easy decision to make; and inevitably there will be hours when you will 
regret going; but I think that these will not be the predominant hours, and 
that in the changed and perhaps fundamentally more rigorous life you will 
find new interest and conviction and competence, learning again and per- 
haps more deeply the taste of work. And particularly I hope that in this and 
in the very simple program you had made you will not be troubled by the 
lateness of your decision, the inevitable and infuriating red tape. Fowler 
wrote that it would at this stage be not at all easy to enter a college; and I 
have forgotten how much depends on that: whether you can get a tutor 
without that, or take the tripos at all. You will know all about that now; and 
I want only to urge you not to stay on in Cambridge unless you can get 
really the simple things for which you went: work in the laboratory and 
some help and direction in the mathematics. I hardly think it worth staying 
in Cambridge for lectures. They are as I remember them abominable; nor 
for the seminars, which however diverting are surely not now what you 
most want. If Cambridge—and I hardly think this will be so—should be a 
washout, why then do you not write to Kramers and, if he can have you, go 
to work with him? The theoretical physics should be awfully good in Cam- 
bridge, with Dirac there and Born;? and I envy you your time there. But 
that will only be valuable to you if first you find the honest schooling which 
you want. And you will let me know? 

Leaving by plane is no less a nostalgic leaving; and this year as always it 
was a very wistful leaving for me: perhaps even a little more wistful, be- 
cause there could be less of that reassurance than before that we should meet 
again in the mountains by the summer. You must have had a hellish time 
getting camp closed on such notice. The whole incident with Art [Winsor] 
has seemed to me shameful and unhappy, and I cannot forgive the skipper 
[Postmaster Viles] for his absurd vindictiveness, nor ourselves for having 
delayed until it was too late getting Mrs Harvey’s permission. She gave us a 
long story, which may have some truth in it, as how Art had once lived at 
their place, and as how they had had to go to law to get him out, and he still 
owed them lots of rent. I take it that you were in some measure able to 
soothe Art; and the fence was a grand idea. As to Viles buying the place, I 
think it unlikely enough, though K [Katherine Page] too wrote of it; but we 
have confirmed our option and have reminded Mrs Harvey of it; and when 
in the next fortnight I go south, I shall see her and find out whether she is 
planning to run out on us. Father thought that if the skipper did not have 
too long nor too inclusive a lease, and if we could get the property for about 
4500, we ought to buy it. But that is still of course open. After I have seen 
Mrs Harvey I shall write to Art; and perhaps I may have something pleasant 


163 


to tell him.” K wrote me a fine long letter, but there was little in it that will 
be new to you. She had then still no plans for the winter, and no more cer- 
tain ones for the horses. She had been riding Io, and asked to keep him over 
the winter if she were in Santa Fe. I told her yes please of course, and asked 
her to have a look at Martinez’ elusive sorrel, and, if he were unsatisfactory, 
to write to her cousin to look about. From Roger [Lewis] I have had a note 
or two, characteristically conscientious, byt{.without reference to Johnson's 
mare. From Gloria not a word, though either Father or I might have 
expected it: Are we to put significance in that silence?* Next to your getting 
camp closed, Ichabod’s faithfulness is the most astonishing item of the au- 
tumn; you must have had a grand trip. 

Father has had a perfect visit here. He has been well and happy and just 
busy enough, finding as I had hoped the life in Berkeley immensely conge- 
nial; living very simply; and achieving an almost unheard of popularity in 
his short visit. He will be leaving in about a fortnight, perhaps coming south 
with me and leaving from there. Even if later he should plan to go to Eu- 
rope, he would have so six weeks at least in New York; and he wants at 
least that. You will be sure won’t you to make your plans for the Christmas 
holidays early enough so that he will know. If you are coming back then, he 
will surely not go abroad until later, if at all; if you are not coming, he might 
well join you for a fortnight on the continent. What I do, though in a much 
more minor way, may depend on this too. They have asked me to make a 
speech in Cambridge about the positive electron—Cambridge here, of 
course. And of course I will not go if you and F are both abroad; but if you 
are here and they will pay, as I think, my trip, then probably I should come. 
Father got me a new Gamaliel. He is called Garuda, after the mechanical 
bird which the carpenter made for his friend the weaver who loved a prin- 
cess. He combines in an unbelievable way the simple faithfulness of Gama- 
liel and Ichabod’s bulky splendour.¢ 

The work with the pairs and the MNtory has gone along nicely; and we 
have answered now all the questions which were still obscure at Perro Ca- 
liente: confirming the result that the theory gives the wrong answer for the 
production of very high energy pairs; showing that to all orders Dirac’s 
equation gives correct energy values for all static fields; showing that the 
wave functions of the pair theory can—by horrible determinants—be 
expressed in terms of a complete set of Dirac solutions for the same prob- 
lem; showing that the theory gives a consistent interpretation of our inabil- 
ity to localize a particle by experiment within hc/E, and yet does allow us to 
determine exactly the charge density of a system with unknown number of 
particles: in general cleaning up the formalism. But quite recently we have 
run into convergence difficulties, not unconnected with the breakdown of 
the theory at high energies, and similar to those of the radiation theory, 
which very seriously limit its applicability. All this will have to get itself 


164 


written and published soon. Of other news in physics the most striking is 
Lawrence’s, who has definitely established the instability of the H2 nucleus. 
It decomposes upon collision into neutron and proton, to the tune of about 
six million volts.* That makes as far as I can see a hopeless obstacle to Hei- 
senberg’s pseudo qm of the nucleus. Born’s letter to Nature I saw; but my 
hunch is that itis empty. If you get to hear more of this, will you let me 
know? Lawrence is going to the Solvay congress on nuclei, and I shall have 
double chores in his absence.'—I have been reading the Bhagavad Gita with 
Ryder and two (2) other sanskritists. It is very easy and quite marvellous. I 
have ridden twice but not enough; I get to be very bad tempered. Have you 
got yourself a bike with three speeds? 

Let me know then how it is, and write to me what you will of your days 
and your self. This year within the limits of the space between us and of my 
procrastination let us keep a word or two between us. You will be lonely 
perhaps and despondent; you will not always feel like writing; the word 
between us will necessarily be partial only; but let us keep it. 

con carino 


Robert 


Val [Ruth Valentine] and Mac [Donald Macfarlane] and Nat [Natalie Ray- 
mond] and Ernest [Lawrence] send you greetings, and many others I have 
forgotten. 


a. After Max Born was dismissed from his Gottingen professorship in April 1933 because he 
was a Jew, he held a temporary appointment as Stokes Lecturer in Cambridge. 

b. The Oppenheimers had been caught up in a feud between two neighbors in Cowles over 
the pasturing of cattle. Mrs. Harvey eventually sold the ranch to the Oppenheimers. 

c. Gloria Kauffman was a college friend of Frank Oppenheimer’s. 

d. Garuda was Oppenheimer’s third car. Gamaliel, its predecessor, was the car bought by his 
father in March 1930, over his protests, to replace the ominously groaning Chrysler. Ichabod 
was Frank’s Packard. 

e. Lawrence’s claim that the nucleus of heavy hydrogen (7H), or the deuteron, disintegrated 
into a neutron and a proton was not in accord with theories of nuclear structure and was widely 
disputed. He later acknowledged that the observations and his interpretations were wrong. 

f. A small group of leading scientists were invited to the Solvay Congress, held in Brussels 
every three years, to present papers on a current topic in physics. The choice of nuclear physics 
as the topic for 1933 and the invitation to Lawrence recognized the importance of the new field 
and his major role in its development. 


The “almost unheard of popularity” with which Oppenheimer cred- 
ited his father later impressed Ruth Uehling, whose husband Edwin was a 
postdoctoral fellow at Berkeley from 1934 to 1936. ‘“‘We had a marvelous 
time together,” recalls Mrs. Uehling of her friendship with Julius Oppen- 
heimer, then some thirty years her senior and to her an elderly and delicate 


165 


man. He stayed at the Hotel Durant, and two or three times a week she and 
two other university wives would join him for lunch and bridge. In the eve- 
ning, if her husband and Robert were doing physics, Mr. Oppenheimer 
would take her out to dinner and sometimes to the theater. He had recently 
had a slight stroke and tired easily. When midway through the play she saw 
his head nod, she would ask, ‘‘Mr. Oppenheimer, do you like this play very 
much?” “I don’t think it is very good,” he would reply, obviously relieved 
to get back early to the Durant where, he said, the old ladies kept him up too 
late. Robert often spent evenings with his father. New friends like Mrs. 
Uehling thought the relationship easy and uncomplicated.”* 

The “‘work with the pairs and MNtory” refers to Oppenheimer’s at- 
tempt to build a full field theory of negative and positive electrons which 
Dirac had so brilliantly begun. Oppenheimer used the letter N to designate 
the number of negatives and the letter M for the number of positives. The 
coined word “‘MNtory,”’ which suggests an inventory of the particles, ap- 
pears only in letters to his brother and not in published papers on the sub- 
ject, though the papers are studded with Ms and Ns. 

Oppenheimer’s commitment to developing a consistent theory is clear 
in his letters to Frank and to George Uhlenbeck. The existing theory was 
adequate for a system with a fixed number of particles, but pairs of particles 
were continually appearing and disappearing. When positive and negative 
electrons meet, they annihilate each other, and their mass is changed into 
energy according to Einstein’s relationship E = mc. This energy is radiated 
in the form of photons. To describe these complex interactions réquired a 
new relativistic quantum mechanics, which became known in general as 
quantum field theory. However, the mathematics of the theory broke down 
when applied to high energies. Instead of converging to produce a finite and 
usable numerical result, the calculations gave an infinite result that could 
not be interpreted. Oppenheimer was convinced that the problems were not 
mathematical and that the trouble was in the theory itself. He believed that 
there was a limit to the applicability of quantum mechanics as a description 
of natural phenomena. 

Even when computation was possible there were other difficulties. 
Some of the data reported by experimentalists were tentative and some 
proved to be erroneous. In addition, the interpretation of data by experi- 
mentalists and theorists alike was based on the assumption that only elec- 
trons and positrons were being observed, whereas other, as yet unidentified, 
particles were also involved. Hence, the new theoretical explanations often 
appeared to disagree with the data. This was discouraging, and efforts to 
improve the calculations did not seem to help. During this period of his 
work, Oppenheimer was keenly aware of these discrepancies. As his student 
Robert Serber later commented: ‘‘His appreciation of experimental results 


166 


and his close association with experimental physicists, a strength in other 
aspects of his work . . . may have been a weakness [in his early cosmic ray 
work].’’?4 


87 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


[Berkeley 
Fall 1933] 


Dear George, 


Thank you very much for your good letters, and for the manuscript of 
the note with Fermi. With your results, even in detail, we are in complete 
agreement. Carlson, who during the summer went through the work, had 
found a different formula; but there was a simple mistake in what he did 
that we found without trouble. With your general conclusions we are also 
absolutely in agreement, in that we too can see no way of accounting for the 
hard scattered radiation. This point puzzled me very much last spring, and 
Plesset and I only wrote so conservatively of it [1933b] because we were not 
sure how relativistic calculations would fall out; we thought too of the pos- 
sibility of initial recombination in the atom in which the positive was born; 
but this too failed to give a large enough result. Now just recently I have 
heard from Plesset that Jacobsen has repeated with Miss Meitner’s strong 
source the experiments on lead, and that he finds sensibly no radiation scat- 
tered except that at about half a million volts: he finds neither the million 
volt nor the unmodified radiation.” I hope this result is right, because it 
would be very hard I think to understand any sensible intensity of high en- 
ergy radiation. 

During the summer and since my return we have been working at two 
things; they are both quite clear now, and perhaps I may write you a little of 
them; they are not yet written up; or I should send you a much more com- 
plete account. For one thing we have wanted to look again at the calcula- 
tions of the absorption coefficient of very hard gamma rays, where our per- 
turbation method appeared so dubious, and the results so definitely in 
disagreement with experiment. We have found a way of calculating this ab- 
sorption which for large enough gamma ray energies appears to be com- 
pletely justified; and the answer is definite. The method rests upon the fact 
that for very high energies the particles are ejected within a very narrow 
range of angles . . . The results are even more definitely in disagreement 
with experiment than those which Plesset and I got; for small enough Z [a- 
tomic number] we get just our old result; whereas for larger Z we get a 
larger result than before, and increasing more rapidly than Z”. I think there- 


167 


fore that the methods of the radiation theory give completely wrong results 
when applied to wave lengths of the order of the electron radius. For radia- 
tion which is not too hard the theory presumably gives the right answer; 
and I understand that in Cambridge they are making more careful and la- 
borious calculations just for this case. 

The other points we have been looking at have to do with the develop- 
ment of a general formalism and its physical interpretation. The formalism 
has some resemblance to Schroedinger’ s earlier attempts .. . The theory 
seems very pretty to me, and is in every way consistent with the possibilities 
of measurement, as long as one neglects the atomicity of the charges 
themselves. 

You must give my love to Else. We have so many charming benefactions 
of hers which I have never acknowledged; no finite apology will ever make 
that up: sambals, and books, and the Kopenhagen Faust,° and the most per- 
fect letters. Do what you can for me, George, in this great fault; I have not 
the effrontery myself to ask for pardon. 

Van Vleck has written me of the projected symposium at Christmas.4 My 
father is with me here, and Frank is in Cambridge; and it is not very likely 
that I will be coming east. You will have then to do the theory all by your- 
self. I shall send you copies of the work we have been doing, if it ever gets 
written up; and we must start at that very soon. 

I have just heard of Ehrenfest’s death.© Knowing your deep affection for 
him, and the close bond there was between you, I know that this will be a 
sorrow, a curiously terrible sorrow, which will stay by you. All of us who 
knew him must feel this; but to you who were so especially his friend, a 
word of deep sympathy. None of us, who were his students, shall be quite 
free of guilt in this his desperation. 


Robert 


a. Enrico Fermi was at that time professor of theoretical physics at the University of Rome. 

b. J. C. Jacobsen was on the staff of Niels Bohr’s Institute for Theoretical Physics at the 
University of Copenhagen. Lise Meitner was head of the radioactive physics department of the 
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry in Berlin-Dahlem. 

c. A humorous parody of Faust, emphasizing current dilemmas in physics, was written and 
performed by physicists in April 1932 at the annual conference at Bohr’s institute. 

d. In 1933 John H. Van Vleck was professor of physics at the University of Wisconsin. 

e. Paul Ehrenfest, with whom Uhlenbeck had studied at Leiden, committed suicide on Sep- 
tember 25, 1933, at the age of fifty-three. 


168 


OPPENHEIMER TALKED ABOUT the positive electron at the Decem- 
ber 28-30 Boston meeting of the American Physical Society. There he 
found George and Else Uhlenbeck and persuaded them to return to New 
York with him and spend a few days at the smaller Park Avenue apartment 
to which Mr. Oppenheimer had moved after his wife’s death. 

Something about the Boston meeting had annoyed Uhlenbeck and 
Oppenheimer, and Uhlenbeck’s description of it as ““abominable”’ launched 
a game of French adjectives which kept them amused for some part of 
the train trip to New York. After a long pause Oppenheimer triumphantly 
concluded the game with “‘zezayant”’ (a form of the verb “‘zezayer,”’ to lisp, 
which is unfamiliar to lexicographers). This was the kind of simple intellec- 
tual fun, mused Else Uhlenbeck, that they enjoyed with Robert in those 
days. The time in New York was gay and busy. The small apartment was 
crowded with a steady flow of guests.”° 

Returning to Califormia by train, Oppenheimer wrote Uhlenbeck a short 
note on January 6 “‘to establish my good heart in the matter of letters,”’ and 
to say how much he and his father had enjoyed the holiday visit. He had 
found Flaubert’s Lettres a sa niece Caroline, would read them on the train and 
send them along. He reported long talks at Columbia and Princeton about 
the electron—positron pairs.”® 

Transcontinental train trips were useful for reading and correspon- 
dence. The following day as the train crossed the prairies, Oppenheimer 
wrote a long letter to Frank on the portable typewriter with which he 
usually traveled. 

Iris, Ichabod, Montauk, and La Cueva, offered to Frank as anchors 
against the disorienting effect of Cambridge, were, respectively, horse, car, 
and places that Robert and Frank had enjoyed together. (Of Montauk, at the 
tip of Long Island, Frank later recalled: “‘It had a wildness that my brother 
and I both loved. He and I drove out there again in 1948 and had the finest 
and longest talk together of all those during the postwar years.’’)*" 


88 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Kansas. 
Jan 7, [1934] 


Dear Frank, 


There has seldom been a time when I have missed you so as in these last 
days, and never I think a more pressing plenty of things to write to you. 
And as always the writing is made a little difficult by my great vagueness of 
your coordinates. From Lawrence I know that, at least to his uncritical eye, 
you were fine and busy and eager; your sweet and master[ly] letters to 


169 


Father tell me only good; and the cables gave us a pleasant suggestion of 
Lourdes and olive trees and the south of France. From these fragments I 
must put you together, and I want very much some direct word of you, 
which shall confirm or disprove the construction. I take it that Cambridge 
has been right for you, and that physics has gotten now very much under 
your skin, physics and the obvious excellences of the life it brings; I take it 
that you have been working very hard, getting your hand in in the labora- 
tory, and learning mathematics at ‘close hand, and finding in this, and in the 
natural austerity of life in Cambridge, at last an adequate field for your unre- 
mitting need of discipline and order. And all this is marvellous, and just 
what together we had hoped of your crossing. What I want to hear is that 
Cambridge, and in particular the quiet and not always sound eclecticism of 
the jeunesse dorée, is not getting too much under your skin: 1s leaving you 
peaceful and with some resources of self assurance, and leaving intact your 
specifically American competences, Iris and Ichabod, Montauk and La 
Cueva— This letter I shall send on from Lamy, of which even the name will 
make for you a mixed nostalgia. I shall be stopping to see Katherine [Page]: 
only for a day, for the time of my prodigious holiday is nearly over. Perhaps 
she and I will go together to visit the horses at Moriarty, or, if the weather is 
very inviting, up the canon, or to Truchas. Then I must go on to California. 

Father, as you know, is planning to come to see you late in February. The 
holiday with him was very sweet, although necessarily so hectic and popu- 
lous that it was not always good for his health. He was in very good spirits, 
content with you and me; less well I think than in Berkeley, but needing 
chiefly rest and quiet. He is going to the doc this week, and from that we 
shall know whether he needs to take even more terrific precautions than 
before. He wants of course to see the German people, and perhaps, against 
all reason, will even go to Germany. He 1s planning to come west again 
early in August, and to come out with me to Berkeley. I hope then that he 
will stay there a long time, because everything in the life there is good for 
him, its ease and simplicity and friendliness and cordial climate. But I hardly 
think that he will abandon his New York apartment before next year. As for 
the summer, it is too early yet for us to be sure of our plans; but I would like 
you to be thinking of it, and would like to hear of any certainties you have. 
Ernest Lawrence told me that you had been thinking seriously of staying 
abroad, and of course there will be some reason for doing that, though I 
rather hope that you will not. If it is irgendwie possible I shall open Perro 
Caliente, though probably, if you do not come, for not more than a month. 
They have asked me to come to Ann Arbor, and would be willing to have 
me come for as short a time as three weeks. And George and Else [Uhlen- 
beck] have looked with great favor, though as yet without certainty, on 
coming with me then to the mountains. I thought that that would be 


170 


equally good whether you were coming or not, for I know how fond you 
are of them. Roger [Lewis] I saw too in New York, though not as much as I 
should have liked. He was happy in his work, sound and marvellous as al- 
ways. He is probably going to the Hopkins medical school next year, and 
spoke with heartening hopefulness of his coming to camp this summer. But 
he is very much worried—and this you must hear from him and not from 
me—about his father, who is drinking constantly heavily abusively and dis- 
astrously. Roger is himself now a l’ombre des jeunes filles en fleur. But the 
jeunes filles are indescribably and mournfully dreadful little bitches. He had 
one along on the New Year’s eve party we gave, with George and Else and 
Nat [Natalie Raymond] and the Ritters: a wild confused, very amusing 
party saddened by Roger’s deplorable bonds. And from what Cherniss and 
Curtis Ritter told me, he has an even more ghastly lady in Baltimore.” But 
this has not spoiled him at all, only given him spells of depression so over- 
whelming that even the disciplined and stable Roger can not hide them. He 
still hates Gloria [Kauffman] with an intransigent hatred, but does not speak 
of her so much. She is apparently well and busy and not unhappy; I should 
have tried to see her if my time east had not been so insanely busy and 
rushed. Of course everyone sends you greetings and love, and we drank 
many toasts to you: Nat, George and Else, Cherniss, many physicisti, all the 
californiacs. George and Else stayed with us, crowding the tiny apartment, 
but perfectly welcome. In Boston we talked on the positive, and everyone 
liked the theory —the now quite overgrown NMtory of the mountains; and 
more technically I spoke at MIT, Columbia and Princeton. I made many 
efforts to get jobs, chiefly for Furry and Wolfe,° and there I think succeeded. 
But for the most part I was met with offers for myself, or requests to come 
to Berkeley. For all his sketchiness, and the highly questionable character of 
what he reports, Lawrence is a marvellous physicist. But I think that he is 
probably wrong about the disintegration of the deuton [deuteron]. 

The work went well all autumn. I sent Dirac a copy of a long discourse on 
MNtory [1934b] but even since the writing we have come on some new and 
simplifying things. I do not know how Dirac liked what we wrote; but if 
you see him you might warn him that we shall send more presently, in 
which, by extending the group of transformations under which positive and 
negative states could be defined, we can greatly shorten some of the proofs, 
treat the gauge invariance much more adequately, and take into account the 
nonobservability of the wave functions of the theory. This extension, while 
it is not absolutely necessary for making a sensible theory, seems to me very 
clarifying. It makes the nonobservability of the susceptibility of the pairs 
even more certain. We also worked a good deal on the specific pair produc- 
tion probabilities. The only ones with which we were quite satisfied when I 
left Berkeley were those which Leo [Nedelsky] and I published for the internal 


171 


conversion. There is no doubt that the theory is quite wrong for cosmic ray 
energies, but it is a devil of a job to see just exactly what it gives. That Born 
approximation which gives the logarithm, we have had of course a long 
time; but it is not right. I had been doing Sanskrit and teaching, and this 
term too will read the Timaeus. The life in Berkeley is quiet and pleasant 
and there is always plenty to do. Garuda 1s a lamb. I have driven him ninety 
five without opening the throttle wide. 

There is wine now everywhere, and the country has a better look. In San 
Francisco one can get for fifty cents a table d’hote vin y compris a discretion. 
The Napa valley vineyards have some lovely things, especially the Beau- 
lieu vineyard at Rutherford: the dryest Chablis, and a fragrant heady Cha- 
teau Yquem, and an airy sparkling burgundy to wash down wild duck. Li- 
queurs are still expensive, but there is good whiskey. And an even greater 
change: Nat has learned to dress. She wears long graceful things in gold and 
blue and black, and delicate long earrings, and likes orchids, and even has a 
hat. To the vicissitudes and anguishes of fortune which have brought this 
change to her I need say nothing. — With books it is not so good, new ones. 
I have reread all Flaubert, with ever growing wonder and delight. We have 
about finished the Gita, and are going to try some more Kalidasa. There are 
each year an immense number of competent and worthy french novels, but 
none that I have seen to write home about. Leo tells me that some of the new 
Russian things are good, and I shall try them. 

This is Kansas, and there is dirty snow on the ground and a dirty sky. But 
the ground is beginning to rise, and there are rolling hills, as we get nearer 
the mountains, and tomorrow before dawn I get to Lamy. I wish that you 
were here with me; and I know that if you can you will come next summer. 
Do not come unless you can come peacefully, the heart good about the 
work. If you feel like it, how would it be to have a week or so in Ann 
Arbor? 

We do not need to buy Perro Caliente. I have seen Mrs Harvey several 
times, and she is not eager to sell, and would not, I think, even if opportu- 
nity offered, which it has not, sell to another. The skipper [Viles] has lost the 
post office to Winsor, and is correspondingly furious. 

con carino 


[no signature] 


a. Lawrence stopped in Cambnidge on his way home from the Solvay Congress in October. 

b. Curtis and Charles Ritter were friends of Frank Oppenheimer’s at Johns Hopkins. Harold 
Cherniss, a classicist on the Cornell faculty since 1930, first met Oppenheimer in Berkeley in 
1929 through his wife, Ruth Meyer, in whose grandmother’s home Julius Oppenheimer stayed 
when he arrived in New York from Germany. The families had remained close friends; Ruth 
Meyer and the Oppenheimer boys grew up together. Interview with Harold Cherniss by Alice 
Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976, pp. 1—2. Interview with Ruth Meyer Cherniss by Alice Kimball 
Smith, November 10, 1976. 


hy 


c. Wendell H. Furry and Hugh C. Wolfe were National Research Council fellows who 
worked with Oppenheimer, Furry from 1932 to 1934, Wolfe from 1929 to 1931. 


INTHE MIDST of the exciting new developments in physics in the early 
1930s, events Were taking place in Europe that would have a profound effect 
on the international community of physicists. Hitler officially came to 
power on January 30, 1933, and by April Jewish university professors were 
being dismissed from their posts. Efforts to aid the displaced scholars were 
immediately made by their colleagues in other countries. A specific appeal 
for help in providing financial support and positions for dismissed German 
physicists was made by Eugene P. Wigner and Rudolf W. Ladenburg, 
both of whom had emigrated from Europe and joined the Princeton physics 
faculty before the Nazis came to power. In December 1933 they circulated a 
letter, in German, to a small group of physicists at American institutions 
who had either emigrated from Germany or been educated there. This 
group was asked to set aside two to four per cent of their income for two 
years to aid “former colleagues in our field”’ who had lost their posts in Ger- 
many and to suggest possible positions. Oppenheimer received the letter 
through Theodore von Karman of Caltech, who had emigrated in 1928. 
Sponsors of the project were reluctant to ask for help from the broader 
community of American physicists because of the scarcity of jobs and be- 
cause native anti-Semitism was sometimes reflected in the hiring policies of 
American universities.” 


89 | TO THEODORE VON KARMAN 


Berkeley 
Sunday [ca. March 1934] 


Dear von Karman, 


Thank you for your good letter, and for the enclosure from Wigner and 
Ladenburg. I shall be glad to contribute to the fund which 1s being raised, 
and think that I could promise three percent of my salary for the next two 
years. My salary is unfortunately not very large, but this would come to 
about a hundred dollars a year. I think that the committee has been wise in 
not asking for help from American physicists, and I appreciate the circuitous 
delicacy with which they have approached me. 

Professor Franck? gave me a message for you. It was to remind you of a 
man called Tiersch, of whom you will already have heard. I believe that 
Franck thought that he might be of use to you in the Institute, and that he 


173 


thought that you would be more solicitous in seeing what could be done 
than would Millikan. He sent you also very warm greetings. 

Before long I shall be again in Pasadena. I shall not in the interval write 
directly to Wigner until I have heard from him. 

With all good wishes 


R Oppenheimer 


a. James Franck moved to the United States in 1935. After three years at Johns Hopkins he 
was appointed professor of physical chemistry at the University of Chicago. 


WRITING TO UHLENBECK about their forthcoming reunion at the 
Ann Arbor physics summer school, Oppenheimer described his latest ef- 
forts to develop a consistent theory of electron—positron pairs. He was at- 
tempting to apply the test of “‘gauge invariance,”’ a technique used by physi- 
cists to determine the internal consistency of any equation involving 
electromagnetic forces. The complicated formulas which Oppenheimer and 
his colleagues had developed in an effort to place Dirac’s fruitful theory on a 
logically defensible basis were still not formally completely sound. These 
difficulties were to plague physicists for more than a decade. 


90 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


Berkeley 
Sunday [ca. March 1934] 


Dear George, 


Professor Randall will have had my wire and letter saying yes to the invi- 
tation. I did not tell him, and perhaps I hardly need to tell you, that the most 
urgent argument of all for my coming is that I should be taking you and 
Else away with me in July. It is marvellous that you will come, and I look to 
the summer with a vast and childish eagerness. Whether Frank will come 
home from England is not yet decided, but I think that he will find it hard to 
resist when he hears that you are to be in the mountains. The Lawrences 
speak of coming too for a short visit; but that will depend a little on how the 
Ann Arbor arrangements can be made. As you will have heard, he would 
much prefer to come in the early part of the summer, when we will be there: 
partly for that, and partly for practical reasons involving long transconti- 
nental journeys. If it could be arranged for him to come the first part of the 
summer, that would be very nice. But I realize that that will destroy the 
symmetry of the summer session. 


174 


First I must write you a little about physics. I am sending you a copy of a 
letter we are adding to our paper [1934b, 1934e], just about these gauge 
questions. For when I returned after Christmas we went into these ques- 
tions, and also the Lorentz invariance, with a gloomy and determined thor- 
oughness, and found to our distress that in spite of our proofs even in the 
simplest cases we did not have the necessary invariance. We then with great 
care went through the Lorentz proof, formulating it in various ways, and 
convincing ourselves—and we would be prepared to present these argu- 
ments before any audience—that the formal proofs were right, and that 
they established all that formally one needs. At this point came a letter from 
Pauli. He told us that he had set Peierls to calculating the magnetic suscepti- 
bility, and that they had found what earlier we had—that it was not inde- 
pendent of gauge® . . . Then came a period of long and arduous searching, 
the details of which, and of our arguments, I must some day tell [you]. The 
search was absolutely sterile, and we are now persuaded, although not be- 
yond conviction, that no classification of states can be found in which the 
number of particles can be given a gauge invariant definition. This, coupled 
with the fact that the difficulties appearing in our formulation are, as far as 
expectation values of physical quantities are concerned, all due to conver- 
gence difficulties and the failure of the theory for high energies, has brought 
us to the point of view formulated in the letter I send you. We are prepared 
to believe that the theory can be improved, but we are skeptical, and think 
that this will not be so on the basis of quantumtheoretic field methods. This 
point should be settled by summer; either Pauli or Dirac will have found the 
improvement, or they will have come with us to share the belief that it does 
not exist. If these points had been as clear to us as they are now, our paper 
would have been written rather differently, and we should have put a good 
deal less emphasis on our configuration space functions. Pauli had in general 
only very friendly things to say of the paper, except for these miseries of 
gauge; Bohr had only a cordial word to say, and the promise of a paper of 
his own on observability in relativistic theory. And from Dirac we have not 
had a murmur . . . Then there is the experimental evidence, and the de- 
pressing proclamations of Gray and Tarrant.” From a careful study we have 
decided that the points which they hold against the theory rest on experi- 
ments inadequately precise to indicate a real discrepancy. Only one thing it 
is hard to discount: the existence, in heavy elements, of a hard scattered 
component . . . So much for the accursed pairs. Of other physics there is 
an important clarification in Lawrence’s results, in the recognition that the 
protons and neutrons observed by him may in almost every case be ac- 
counted for by the capture by the bombarded nucleus of neutron and proton 
respectively from the deuton [deuteron] . . . I have little doubt that all the 
experiments which he originally construed as deuton disintegrations are to 
be interpreted in this way. It is true that this does not explain the disintegra- 


175 


tion of deutons in the target by protons; but these experiments are not 
nearly so trustworthy, and are I should think wrong. Lawrence of course is 
very far from admitting any of this. As for other physics, we have been en- 
joying ourselves with Bohr’s fine but very very difficult paper on field mea- 
surements, Fermi’s charming if wild calculations of beta decay (in which 
Pauli again believes),° and Born’s efforts, which seem to us full of very 
grave errors, useless in the quantum theoretic parts, and very very dubious 
in the classical electrodynamics. 

There are other miseries. Harvard asked Furry at once; but they asked me 
too. I have already said no twice, with long explanations. But Bridgman 
continues to write to me, and has at least half persuaded me, God knows 
how, that it is my duty to go there. I do not want to go, but after Bridg- 
man’s most recent letters I live in a morass of vacillation. Van Vleck will be 
there, you know. He was here for a time, and we saw a good deal of each 
other. I like him immensely, and we talked good solid oldfashioned physics 
to our common edification. I have written again to Stern, asking him to take 
Wolfe; I have not heard whether he will. Weyl wrote that perhaps Dirac 
would come next year to their institute; he asked me to come, but could do 
nothing for our students; they are still mostly without prospects. I console 
myself with the Meghadhuta and the Timaeus, reading them with a painful 
pedantry. Early in April I go to Pasadena. 

This is far too long a letter; and there are no questions to assure an 
answer. I wish you would drop at least a tiny note, and tell me anything that 
you may have learned, thought or felt about the unhappy pairs. And a word 
too of how you are. The visit at Christmas with you and Else was so sweet, 
and I miss you both very much. Then I think of next summer, and of our 
promised weeks in the mountains, and am impatient for the year to pass. 
My love to you both. And please, a word. 


Robert 


a. Rudolf Peierls returned to Zurich as Pauli’s assistant in 1929 after receiving his Ph.D. 
from the University of Leipzig. Peierls was out of Germany on a Rockefeller Foundation fel- 
lowship when the Nazis came to power and decided not to return; in 1934 he was an honorary 
research fellow at the University of Manchester. 

b. L. H. Gray and G. T. P. Tarrant were physicists at Cambridge University. 

c. Fermi’s theory of beta decay explained how electrons could be ejected from radioactive 
nuclei (although electrons do not preexist within the nuclei). 

d. Van Vleck went to Harvard as professor of physics in the fall of 1934. Otto Stern had 
emigrated from Germany in 1933; in 1934 he was a research professor of physics at Carnegie 
Institute of Technology. Wolfe accepted an instructorship at City College of New York in 
1934. Hermann Weyl, a 1933 emigre from Germany, became professor of mathematics at the 
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. 


176 


Furry promptly accepted the Harvard instructorship. He later recalled: 
‘The question was whether anybody would getajob . . . I gotatelegram 
from Harvard . . . while Oppenheimer was away at an eastern meet- 
ing . . . and I telegraphed back right away that I would take the job. Op- 
penheimer came back and was a little miffed with me for having been so fast 
about it. He said, ‘You might have gotten a little bit more if you had played 
coy. But I didn’t feel at all inclined to play coy—Job? Can I have it? Let’s 
make it as definite as possible as quick as possible. —That was my atti- 
tude.’’?9 

Furry’s reaction was far more characteristic of the period than Oppen- 
heimer’s “morass of vacillation,’’ for in 1934 not many academics had the 
luxury of choice. However, in his recollections Oppenheimer did not dwell 
on the miseries of indecision but rather on the sense of fulfillment that tied 
him to Berkeley and Caltech. ““The fact is . . . I hardly left California until 
the war; I went to New Mexico summers . . . I came east to Ann Arbor 
summer school a couple of times. I gave a lecture on the positron at the 
Physical Society. But. . . [I moved] very little; I had really made a bed that 
I was content to be in. . . The fact that I stayed in one place, that I was 
interested in spreading this part of physics and [was] really rather widely in- 
terested in physics as a whole . . . that I felt responsible to my colleagues 
and for such students as came, and a lot of luck and accident, made it flour- 
ish pretty well.’*° 


OPPENHEIMER’S increasing interest in nuclear physics, stimulated by 
new experimental results, is clear in a brief note of April 1934 to Ernest 
Lawrence. Fermi and his co-workers in Rome, using natural radioactive 
sources, had recently demonstrated that when almost any element is bom- 
barded with neutrons, some of the atoms in the target are made artificially 
radioactive. Oppenheimer wondered what could be done with Lawrence’s 
cyclotron, a much more powerful source of neutrons. 


91 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


Pasadena 
Monday [April 30?, 1934] 


Dear Ernest, 


I have just heard with delight the news of your election to the academy: I 
send you the warmest congratulations. ? 

This Friday I shall be driving north with Nordsieck, leaving after my lec- 
ture at four, getting in either Friday midnight or Saturday noon.” Keep a 
little time over the week end for me, for we shall have so many things of 


177 


which to talk: not melodramatic, on my part; but probably pretty exciting 
on yours. Have you done anything on Fermi’s B-activity? That he should 
find it with such a source is marvellous, & it should be relatively easy for 
you. Charlie [Lauritsen] had looked with Li n’s [neutrons] & Al, but not 
carefully; & he found nothing — How does what I sent Malcolm (Hender- 
son] fit your F-data?° 

My love to Molly [Lawrence], & greetings to the laboratory. 


Robert 


a. In April 1934 Lawrence was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. 

b. Arnold T. Nordsieck was one of Oppenheimer’s students; he received his Ph.D. from 
Berkeley in 1935. 

c. Malcolm Henderson was an honorary research fellow in Lawrence’s laboratory. 


SINCE 1929 when Hugh Wolfe, a National Research Council postdoctoral 
fellow, had worked with him at Caltech, Oppenheimer’s growing reputa- 
tion had attracted several NRC recipients. In 1932 when Wendell Furry was 
applying for an NRC fellowship, he was advised that Oppenheimer and 
Gregory Breit, professor of physics at New York University, were the two 
outstanding theoretical physicists with whom to work. Of the seven fellows 
appointed for 1934-35, three chose to work with Oppenheimer in Berke- 
ley. Robert Serber, who had received his Ph.D. at Wisconsin in June and 
was planning to use his fellowship at Princeton, changed his mind after 
hearing Oppenheimer lecture and talking with him at the Ann Arbor sum- 
mer session. Edwin A. Uehling was steered to Oppenheimer by George 
Uhlenbeck, supervisor of his graduate work at the University of Michi- 
gan.*! The third was Frederick W. Brown, who had received his Ph.D. at 
Illinois in 1933. In May Oppenheimer wrote a note of welcome to UVehling. 


92 | TO EDWIN A. UEHLING 


Pasadena 
May 12. [1934] 


Dear Dr Uehling, 


Thank you for your very good letter. I am delighted to hear that you have 
been awarded a research fellowship, and very happy that you are planning 
to come to Berkeley. I shall look forward then to your coming, and we shall 
do all we can to make your year pleasant and fruitful. 

I hope that you do not overestimate my wisdom in matters statistical and 
gaskinetic. I have heard a good deal of your work from Uhlenbeck, and read 


178 


your papers with great interest. But I feel confident that I shall learn more 
from you in these matters than I can teach you; and perhaps at times I shall 
be guilty of trying to distract you with the growing solicitudes of nuclear 
physics. You will be glad to know that Bloch will be at Stanford next year, 
and, that we have already arranged for common weekly seminars. I am 
expecting Brown from Ohio, and probably Lowen and Johnson, in addition 
to the theorists now in Berkeley;? and we ought to have a good year 
of it. 
With cordial greetings, 


J R Oppenheimer 


The housing problem in Berkeley is not at all difficult, and you should have 
no trouble finding a pleasant place to live after your arrival. 


a. Irving S. Lowen and Montgomery H. Johnson, Jr., did not come to Berkeley; both ac- 
cepted instructorships at New York University. 


Felix Bloch, whom Oppenheimer had known in Zurich in 1929, left 
Germany in 1933. In 1934 he went to Stanford as an associate professor and 
with Oppenheimer organized the “‘common weekly seminars’’ for their 
theoretical physics students. One week the seminar was held at Berkeley; 
the next week at Stanford. Former Oppenheimer students remember the 
beautiful drive to Stanford, the stimulation of the seminar, and the social 
evening afterward.” 


ON JUNE 4, as Oppenheimer prepared to leave Berkeley for the 1934 Ann 
Arbor summer session, he wrote a long letter to his brother, who had de- 
cided to stay in Cambridge, England, for a portion of the coming year. In 
the physics part of the letter he suggested variations on Frank’s attempts to 
measure energies from gamma rays given off by heavy radioactive nuclei. 
Just as in an earlier period the properties of atoms had been studied by the 
light they gave off, in this period the properties of nuclei were studied by 
the gamma rays they emitted. 


179 


93 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Pasadena. 
June 4 [1934] 


Dear Frank, 


Only a very long letter can make up for my great silence, and for the 
many sweet things for which I have to thank you, letters and benevolences 
stretching now over many months. Benevolences starting with the precious 
Meghaduta and rather too learned Veda, through the crescendo of the pom- 
erancia to the delightful Petrarch and Dante and the coffee pump, superb in 
chromium and complication. The Meghaduta I read with Ryder, with de- 
light, some ease, and great enchantment; the Veda lies on my shelf, a re- 
proach to my indolence; the curacao once only graced a crepe suzette, and 
was thereafter reserved to solemn drinkings of your health and happiness. 
The little books shall go with me this summer; and the coffee machine has 
performed so splendidly on the available 110 volts—with great obscene 
gushings from its two spouts, —that I hesitate to expose it to the 160 for 
which its label clamours. And not one of the presents but has evoked your 
presence and your tastes, and deepened the nostalgia for you, and made a 
sweet gratitude. 

The nostalgia is very deep indeed, and now, with the coming of summer, 
reaches saturation. Your reasons for staying in Cambridge are wise and 
good, and I must admire you and approve that you give ear to therh. But I 
shall miss you very very much, and comfort myself only with the thought 
that next summer surely you will come back. The summer in Cambridge 1s 
pleasant and casual, and a fine time for work. I hope that your work will go 
very well, and the time pleasantly, rewarding you for your virtue, and that 
you will take time for one good holiday at least before the autumn term. 

I have been entirely delighted by your reversion to experiment, and by 
the problems you have been on. Have you completely abandoned the work 
with Klemperer—the recoil electron range method for gamma ray ener- 
gies? Just recently both Lawrence and Lauritsen have taken to it, in connec- 
tion with the six million volt gamma rays emitted by F and Li under proton 
bombardment. These rays fall on the ascending branch (ascending because 
of pair production) of the absorption curves in Pb, and check the theoretical 
absorption very beautifully; but the curves are quite flat, and it is hard to 
compute the energy within a million volts by absorption measurements 
alone. The Li ray Cockroft could surely get at 600 kilovolts; would you 
want to try it? Use a light absorber for the gamma ray, to get a large ratio 
of Compton recoil electrons to pairs. As for the nuclear energy levels, I am 
pretty much in agreement with your estimate of the difficulty of interpret- 


180 


ing them. But something at least can be learned by correlation of the alpha 
beta and gamma results, and angular momenta assigned to the levels. And it 
was a [long] time after the study of the He spectrum that one came to know 
about the exclusion principle, the spin, and exchange forces. By the way, the 
evidence of Gray and Tarrant for nuclear levels seems to me completely 
vile; in fact Lauritsen and I are just writing a paper [1934g], trying to show 
how one can understand all the discordant results on gamma ray scattering 
by taking into account only Compton effect, annihilation radiation, and the 
continuous Xray spectrum from the secondaries. Have you seen what 
Gamow has done about angular momentum quantum numbers for the 
levels of the radioactive series? It will be wrong in detail but right in princi- 
ple.? My own labors have been largely devoted to disentangling the still ex- 
isting miseries of positron theory; and Furry and I have just published an- 
other manifesto [1934f] after which I hope to be able to forget the subject 
for a time. All of us have been working guite hard, and if you were here I 
should have a good many minor things of which to tell you; but only in 
conversation could I do sufficiently casual justice to them. As you undoubt- 
edly know, theoretical physics— what with the haunting ghosts of neutrinos, 
the Copenhagen conviction, against all evidence, that cosmic rays are pro- 
tons, Born’s absolutely unquantizable field theory, the divergence difficul- 
ties with the positron, and the utter impossibility of making a rigorous cal- 
culation of anything at all—is in a hell of a way.” 

In a fortnight I shall be driving to Ann Arbor, to have three weeks there, 
exposing positrons. Gamow will be there, and Uhlenbeck, and it should be 
pleasant. They asked me next year to go to Princeton, where Dirac will be, 
and permanently to Harvard. But I turned down these seductions, thinking 
more highly of my present jobs, where it is a little less difficult for me to 
believe in my usefulness, and where the good California wine consoles for 
the hardness of physics and the poor powers of the human mind. 

I shall be in Ann Arbor only three weeks, and then go to Perro Caliente. 
As I wrote you, George and Else [Uhlenbeck] have promised to come, but I 
still feel some doubts of whether they will. After Mr Lewis’ death [ wrote 
Roger, asking him to bring his mother to camp if she would like it, and 
spending as long there as he would. He has written that they will come, and 
probably Mike too; the dates are uncertain still, but he speaks of opening 
camp early in July, before I get there. Katherine [Page] is at Los Pinos now 
of course. She brought our horses up with hers, for the country was very 
dry, and the horses only in fair shape. Art [Winsor] has built himself a cabin 
in the meadow below camp where Vixen threw me. I had hoped to stop by 
with Katherine on my way east, but it looks pretty cramped in time for that. 
If she has not already found herself her horse, we shall surely do that this 
summer. We are going to miss you terribly, and it is with very mixed feelings 


181 


that I shall return to the mountains without you. About new horses I shall 
let the possibilities determine me; but with George and Else, who have 
never ridden, Vixen and Dink will have their uses. 

Perhaps I shall see Father when I am at Ann Arbor; but I rather hope that 
he will go to the shore again, as he did last year, and then join me either in 
New Mexico or Berkeley to spend the autumn months. His visit last year 
became him famously, and I hope that he will.stay longer this year. All your 
friends here are well, and ask of you often: Ruth and Richard [Tolman], Val 
[Ruth Valentine], Mac [Donald Macfarlane], Lawrence, and all the people 
who have been to camp. Nat [Natalie Raymond] speaks of stopping by at 
camp next summer. Lauritsen too asks of you, though you do not, I think, 
know each other. But he hopes that you will some day come to work with 
him, listens with eagerness to what you write of your work, and with de- 
Spair sister to mine of your neutron electron cross beam experiment. (White 
in Berkeley by the way is doing a million volt proton on proton scattering — 
and that should be illuminating.)* Tolman’s book you will have seen by 
now. Furry has a job at Harvard for next year, and under the strain of wor- 
rying about positrons has developed a somewhat schizoid sense of humour. 
Finally Garuda does ninetyfive with an unopened throttle, and seventeen 
miles to the gallon. Unlike the lamented Gamaliel he indulges in no solitary 
orgies of gurgling. Robert Brode will be in England on a Guggenheim fel- 
lowship.* He is a good egg, and will look you up. Do I know any of the 
people whom you see in Cambridge? Where do you live? and eat? Do you 
hear music? How is the flute? Do you go often to London? And have you 
heard the Kunst der Fuge? Buhlig played his two piano arrangement, very 
good I thought, at a Bachfest here; in its way 1¢ is not incomparable with the 
B minor mass, and to me as moving. 

There are so many other questions: Do you read? Have you learned Ital- 
ian? And the mathematics? Like you I feel an overwhelming frustration at 
the distance, such a desire to see you and talk to you as makes me play with 
the notion of going to Europe instead of the mountains for the five weeks I 
have. It is inexcusable that I write so little, but perhaps you will understand 
that it is the nostalgia which makes the writing hard. I would give my vaca- 
tion at Perro Caliente for one evening there with you. 

Write to me at the Physics department in Ann Arbor, and later to Cowles. 
I will write back, just such immense disorderly letters as this; there won’t be 
again silences of such an order of magnitude as this. 


[no signature] 


a. Otto Klemperer, a refugee physicist from Germany, was at the Cavendish Laboratory in 
1934. George Gamow had left his post as professor of physics at the University of Leningrad in 
1933. He came to the United States in 1934 and was temporarily at the University of Michigan. 

b. ‘‘Neutrino”’ was the name given by Enrico Fermi to the as yet unobserved particle pro- 


182 


posed in 1930 by Wolfgang Pauli as a solution to an apparent contradiction in the problem of 
conservation of energy in nuclear disintegrations. The “Copenhagen conviction,” advanced by 
Niels Bohr, turned out to be justified; by 1940 it was shown that primary cosmic rays were 
comprised mostly of protons. Max Born’s theory was “‘unquantizable”’ because it extended the 
classical field theory outside the form whose relation to quantum field theory was known. 

c. “Milton White; was a graduate student working with Lawrence in developing the cyclo- 
tron. 

d. Robert Brode was professor of experimental physics at Berkeley. 


EXCEPT FOR Frank’s absence, the 1934 holiday at Perro Caliente was just 
the sort Robert loved best. Frank’s friend Roger Lewis, dependable and 
fondly regarded by everyone, was getting the cabin in order with the help of 
Natalie Raymond when Robert arrived from Ann Arbor, accompanied by 
the Uhlenbecks. 

For Else Uhlenbeck the visit to New Mexico was a delightful and novel 
experience. Two themes run through her recollections: what fun it was to 
be with Robert at this period of his life and what crazy situations he could 
get into. “‘How do you manage to make things so complicated?” she once 
asked. “‘It’s a gift,”” Robert replied succinctly. The gift was fully evident to 
the Uhlenbecks that hot, drought-ridden July as they made their first long 
cross-country drive from Ann Arbor to New Mexico in “Garuda.” With 
the top down, Robert drove the big Chrysler at high speed, racing trains 
across the open prairie. The second day out he got something in his eye. A 
doctor in Hannibal, Missouri, removed a piece of foreign matter, but the 
eyeball was badly scratched, and Robert had to wear a patch and turn the 
driving over to George for the next few hundred miles. As the heat became 
unbearable, they slept during the day and drove all night. Whenever they 
stopped for coffee Robert urged toast and eggs; the nights seemed a 
succession of breakfasts. As they drove into a Colorado town at four a.m. 
looking for a place to wash and relax, Robert again demonstrated his talent 
for doing things the hard way. The Harvey House would be near the rail- 
road, so he asked a policeman the way to the station. “‘But there isn’t a train 
for hours,”’ said the officer. ““But I don’t want the station,’’ said Robert. “‘I 
want the Harvey House.” They settled in the end for an all-night cafe where 
a woman in the next booth, already drunk, sent the tired travelers into a fit 
of giggles by taking a long drink from the catsup bottle. 

The Uhlenbecks enjoyed their stay in the Pecos as much as their host 
enjoyed having them. Else and Roger did most of the cooking, with Else’s 
Indonesian dishes adding variety to the menus. Surprisingly there was no talk 
of physics, but a game of tiddleywinks by the fire—Robert had invented a 
lethally complicated version—was a part of the ritual before everyone 
tucked into cots on the porches beneath piles of Indian blankets. Cooking 
arrangements and plumbing were primitive. Pipes laid on top of the ground 


183 


produced hot water during the day when the sun shone; at night the stove 
heated the water in both cold and hot taps. 

There were expeditions, usually on horseback. Most went smoothly; 
vagaries of mountain weather and minor mishaps made others memorable. 
On one occasion Else, George, Roger, and Robert camped overnight at a 
lake below the Truchas peaks. Arriving in the afternoon, the three men, 
though well acclimated, were seized with altitude sickness. It was very cold 
in their sleeping bags that night, and in the course of keeping a fire going, 
someone lost the axe. By morning two horses had disappeared, leaving two 
mounts and the packhorse for four riders. Undeterred by their recent indis- 
position or the prospect of a slow trip home, the men decided to climb Tru- 
chas, the highest and most exposed summit in the southern Sangre de 
Cristos; they reached the top in a thunderstorm and came down soaking 
wet. The ride back was indeed exhausting, but a drink at Katherine Page’s 
induced such euphoria that Else Uhlenbeck remembers the trip as a high 
point of the summer. Vixen and Iris, the two runaways, reappeared next 
morning, and Robert, clad in pink pajamas, chased them into the corral.*° 

These recollections encompass much that Robert did not need to in- 
clude in his midsummer letter to Frank, who could so readily visualize the 
cabin, its occupants, and the trails over which they rode. 


94 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Cowles 


July 31 [1934] 
Dear Frank, 


Here at Perro Caliente you have been present so perfectly that it would be 
almost profanation to say that we have missed you, desperately. And after 
the constant converse which inevitably I hold with you, every hour, over 
every ride and every incident, there must be a certain strangeness in writing. 
Only for you it can not have been so quite, and you will want at least a 
word, and shall have it for your birthday, if planes and boats are faithful. 
You too will be feeling now a little lonely for us and nostalgic; and for a 
special birthday wish I think most of this, that your next shall be here, and 
with us together. Of the general birthday wishes you know: that you may 
have all your heart wants and all I want for you: peace and beauty and a 
good life, with the world pure in your eyes and unaltered. And now too that 
physics may be going well for you, with the intervals between rewards not 
too long nor lean, and that Cambridge in summer may be sweet, friendly, 
rich in reflection and trust. Very soon now the labs will be closing, and you 
will be having your self something of a vacation. I send you this money 
only as a sort of material witness of my wishes for the vacation. Perhaps you 


would like to go to Georgia. The country is marvellous, I hear, wild with 
great mountains; and it should be a good time of year. 

The local news, sehr sehr stark schematisiert, Roger has sent you: how 
the horses are fine, rolling in fat, well, free, delightful; how Ruth and Nat 
ands Val and George and Else have been here, G and E for the summer. 
Katherine is superb, surer and finer than ever; and now Los Pinos is full be- 
yond capacity. K has had minor griefs with teeth and back; they are gone 
now and she looks fine. On the twelfth we shall take Lady and Io to Jarosa. 
Camp runs like a charm. The chief innovations are kerosene lamps and 
stove, and two army cots, both to meet the better the somewhat fluctuating 
and exorbitant demands of the summer’s hospitality. This week end I expect 
Paul Horgan, grown wise and gentle and disciplined, and a writer of 
something close to high comedy, and his enchanting sister Rosemary. 
Maybe Felix Bloch will come, but otherwise there will be only sporadic fur- 
ther company. George and Else ride competently though hardly macro- 
scopically by now; and at the moment Roger is outwitting George at tid- 
dleywinks. About horses we have not sold nor bought, partly because of the 
very short time I am to be here, partly because this summer more than ever 
we have been grateful for Vixen and Dink, who are fast, completely compe- 
tent, full of spirit, and even of a good deal of sense. We met Patches, Mar- 
tinez’ famous sorrel, near the Pecos Baldy divide the other day. He is five, 
gentle, high bred, straight but well gaited. I think of buying him, for he 
would stand up very well, and is ridiculously cheap. But that will depend a 
little on when Martinez brings him, and how he seems on closer looking. K 
has Midnight now, and I should be glad to get rid of him and Blue if there 
were any takers. K does not want a horse. Her chief problem is again bread 
and business for the winter. Perhaps she will go to New York with Rose- 
mary Horgan. 

I flew to New York for a day to see father. He was well, very well indeed, 
in good spirits, unworried about money, and very very sweet. He 1s in Nan- 
tucket now, and will come to Berkeley about the middle of September, for a 
long stay I hope. G and E are driving out there with me. It will be a busy 
year, and I have a lot of research fellows coming out to work. Ann Arbor 
was hot, strenuous, sterile and pleasant. I send you a snapshot Franz 
[Hirschland] sent me, charming and just, I think, and which you may like. 

What else? A great great deal, but mostly that I miss you like hell, and 
wish you were here, and will not easily again spend a summer on the Pecos 
without you. Write to me, when you are on your vacation, lots about phys- 
ics, your physics specially. Shall we see each other at Christmas? I can 
hardly arrange to come to the International congress in October. 

con carino 

R 


George Roger Else send love. Actuellement. 


AFTER SIX WEEKS at Perro Caliente, the Uhlenbecks went on to Berke- 
ley. Dining with a member of the physics department, they naturally talked 
about the strenuous life they had been leading and about Oppenheimer’s 
prowess as camper and outdoorsman. Their host commented tersely that he 
didn’t know Oppenheimer could do those things. The Uhlenbecks later 
learned that he was not an Oppenheimer admirer and had in fact been advo- 
cating his removal from the faculty with the argument that he had a tend- 
ency to TB and was physically frail.*4 

Complementing the Uhlenbecks’ memories of Perro Caliente are 
equally nostalgic recollections of what it was like to be part of the scarcely 
distinguishable professional and social circles in Berkeley and Pasadena of 
which Oppenheimer was the center. Robert and Charlotte Serber and 
Edwin and Ruth UVehling arrived in Berkeley in August 1934 and became 
his close friends. 

Serber later described the unpredictable merging of physics and social 
life: an evening session in the laboratory might break suddenly for a movie; 
a seminar would adjourn for dinner at Jack’s in San Francisco, where Op- 
penheimer quietly paid the bill, or at some obscure Bay Area restaurant. 
Wives often joined the group. “The world of good food and good wines 
and gracious living was far from the experience of many [students],”’ re- 
called Serber. ““We acquired something of his tastes. We went to concerts 
together and listened to chamber music. Oppie and Arn Nordsieck read 
Plato in the original Greek. There were many evening parties where we 
drank and talked and danced until late.’’* 

Oppenheimer’s kindness and his flair for misadventure are recurrent 
themes in anecdotes of this period. The Uehlings’ first social evening with 
him, shared also by his graduate student Glen Camp, Camp’s wife Ilva, and 
Melba Phillips, was the Berkeley counterpart of the Uhlenbecks’ eventful 
camping trip a few weeks earlier. There was a gracious beginning with mint 
juleps at Oppenheimer’s apartment at 2665 Shasta Road, to which he had 
recently moved from the Faculty Club, then dinner at a small Mexican res- 
taurant in Martinez, where they drank wine and listened to music until after 
midnight. On the drive back to Berkeley, as Oppenheimer’s Chrysler, with 
Ruth Uehling and Melba Phillips as passengers, paused at a stop sign, two 
cars sped past and collided, one of them the Uehlings’ Buick, the other a 
police car, its radio still blaring, “‘Pick up two convertible coupes going sev- 
enty mules an hour.”’ No one was seriously hurt, but the hand of a police- 
man was slightly injured and the side of the police car was crushed. At head- 
quarters, Oppenheimer was booked for speeding. Uehling’s charge of 
careless driving was reduced to the less serious one of not observing due 
caution after the offenders showed courteous concern about the officer’s in- 
jured hand. The Camps’ certified check saved for emergencies paid Uehl- 
ing’s ninety dollar bail. Oppenheimer, assuming full responsibility for the 


186 


unfortunate denouement of his party, was at the Uehling’s door early next 
morning with an offer, which was refused, to pay Edwin’s fine along with 
his own. Three court appearances were required to settle the case, which, 
thanks to cordial relations that developed between the physicists and the po- 
lice, was not reported in the press. This was a great relief to all participants, 
who had in mind the publicity which Oppenheimer had achieved the previ- 
ous year when he took Melba Phillips for a drive in the hills above Berkeley, 
got out for a short walk, and absent-mindedly returned to his room at the 
Faculty Club without her or his car.*® 


AFTER EHRENFEST’S DEATH in the fall of 1933, H. A. Kramers was 
invited to succeed him as professor of theoretical physics at the University 
of Leiden. In due course, George Uhlenbeck was asked to take Kramers’ 
chair at Utrecht. It was a difficult decision for Uhlenbeck and his wife. They 
enjoyed life in Ann Arbor, and Uhlenbeck had become firmly established in 
the American physics community. He did, however, decide to accept the 
Utrecht post and remained there from 1935 to 1939. 


95 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


Berkeley 
Sunday [ca. fall 1934] 


Dear George, 


Else’s good and welcome letter has just come; but it is not of that, but of 
the unwelcome word in your own note, that I must write. The Utrecht 
blow has fallen, now when we were almost persuaded that the danger of it 
was past. I know that you must be very unhappy over this decision; and 
although I have nothing to say that you will not know already, it is of that 
that I must write. 

I think that you will find that you must go, George. I say this with sor- 
row: personal sorrow because it will mean that you are much farther away, 
that we shall see each other rarely, that the American part of you, which has 
grown so big, will gradually disappear; and with a less personal solicitude, 
shared I know by many others, because you have done so much to bring 
order and light and decency into physics in this country, because there will 
be a great hole when you go. I know too in how many ways life in this 
country has been good to you, and for Else even to the point of breaking her 
frailer allegiance to Holland. But for you it has not done that, and in this I 
think lies your obligation to go. You said to me that some day you would 
return to Holland, that it is there that you would grow old. America, for all 
its charm and all that you have taken from it and brought to it, will always 


157 


be your colonial period. You have spoken of the obligation which your 
parents’ wishes would put on you; I think that the obligations are even 
deeper than that: I think that if you were to stay here now, when you are 
wanted in Holland, needed perhaps, asked certainly, you would in a sense 
make an outcast of yourself, and in repudiating this responsibility lose the 
right to return to Holland later, to make it ‘your home, to grow old there. 
These things are vague for me of course, but I have such a feeling about 
America; and I know that they are strong in you, and that by them ulti- 
mately your decision must be made. I think I know how in the end that 
decision must be, must be for all the nostalgia that you will have for 
America. And it is because I think that you can postpone perhaps but cannot 
with peace escape the decision, that I write to you so, urging you to do what 
I hope you will not do. Nostalgia for America you will have, and not only 
for the Truchas Peaks. But if the time has come now when you must leave, 
let us be thankful that before your going we had a summer together, that 
you have ridden the ranges, and slept on spruce boughs. And let us think, if 
you must leave now, that you will come back some time to America; that 
by accepting in full the responsibilities of being a Dutchman, you will have 
earned for yourself the right to be a little of an American too. 

Gamow, as perhaps you know, has a job at George Washington Univer- 
sity; Hall and Johnson are to be at NYU. My brother Frank has been in 
Morocco. He will come to America at Christmas, and unless he has time to 
visit here, I shall go east to see him. My father will not come out til after the 
new year. Katherine Page is still in New Mexico, and her plans for the win- 
ter still open. 

In physics we work hard, but with no spectacular fruit; Uehling, like 
Serber and Brown, spends much time learning, and seems very content, 
though the calculations go very slowly . . . I have been worrying much 
over the high energies, and have started to write down a little for a quiet 
careful paper on these matters. I cannot find any Ansatz which works in the 
quantum theoretical calculations of ionization, though the cut off works fine 
in the classical ones. But this makes it a little hard to know whether the cut 
off is really a sensible procedure, and gives one no chance for detailed quan- 
titative calculations. . . 

Will you let me know, George, when your decision is taken? When 
would you be going: in June, as you had planned, or earlier? Give my love 
to Else, and thank her for her dear letter. 

Affectionately, 


Robert 


a. Harvey Hall received his Ph.D. from Berkeley in 1931 and was an instructor in physics at 
Columbia from 1931 to 1934. 


188 


FRANK OPPENHEIMER returned from England to spend the Christmas 
holiday of 1934 with his father and brother in New York. Returning to Cal- 
ifornia, Robert wrote to Frank as the train crossed Nevada, starting with 
physics, then shifting to news of family and friends. 

,Frank’s studies at Johns Hopkins, which had long been a center for 
spectroscopy, hid influenced his choice of nuclear spectroscopy as a research 
topic at the Cavendish Laboratory. He was working with C. D. Ellis, de- 
veloping techniques to measure the intensity of the radiation emitted from 
radioactive nuclei, either directly or indirectly through interaction of the ra- 
diation with objects in its path. The problem was to get consistent results no 
matter which way the measurements were made, and theory was needed as 
a guide. Robert was working on the theory and offered ideas and sugges- 
tions to his brother. Some of the calculations involved were also indirectly 
needed for Robert’s study of the pair production process. 


96 | TO FRANK OPPENHEIMER 


Nevada 
Jan. 11 [1935] 


Dear Frank, 


First of the physics: It seems that my memory of the discrepancy between 
theory (using Dirac equation, retardation, H-like wave functions) & experi- 
ment for the K photoelectric discontinuity was right. The theoretical values 
are about 20-25% too low for the heaviest elements. Rabi, Hall, & (most 
authoritatively) Stobbe confirmed this, & agreed with me that an error in 
the same sense & of comparable magnitude might be expected in the inter- 
nal conversion. How this error will vary with Z & V is still not clear to me, 
but offhand I should expect it to be most important near the threshold. As 
soon as I get to Berkeley Melber & I will have a careful look at the calcula- 
tions, & see whether we cannot give you a sound estimate of the correction. 
It may be quite difficult to do tidily. At the moment I feel that this discrep- 
ancy which you have found is not to be taken too seriously, & that it is 
likely that the greater part of it can be explained by the inadequacies of the 
theoretical model. What did Hulme say? It is hard for me to judge how 
important your proposed geiger counter calibration is. Gurney’s values 
might well be off by 15-20%; could you do much better than that? 

Just now the most pressing problems suggested by your level scheme 
seem to me—this just repeats what we said before—these: 

1) Where does the level which, according to you, lies just below the j = 0 
upper level of the totally converted line really belong? Not, surely, where 
It 1s? 


189 


2) Can one accept Bacher’s suggestion of separate normal states for the two 
systems?” One might then expect the very soft combination line j} = 0 > 
j = 0 to be wholly internally converted, but hardly by the k-electrons: Can 
one make anything of this? 

3) Is it really impossible to devise a scheme—even involving more levels — 
in which one can see, in general at least—why the added levels give no 
alpha-particles? This point seems to me the saddest of all, & the strongest 
argument against the essential soundness of your.scheme. Would it be 
worth looking for a weak a-line where according to you one has most to 
expect one? (high energy, low j). Or has all been done in this connection 
that can be? 

Tant pour ¢a; you will hear of the internal conversion as soon as we have 
anything to tell you. 

It was bad, having you go, & the hour of your going completely desolat- 
ing. There have been far worse partings, though, with less behind them and 
far less ahead. I sent the books the next day; have they come? Father—very 
naturally—was a bit wearied by the emotion of your leaving; but since 
then, in the pretty busy days in town, on the trip, has been very well, serene, 
& rather touchingly cheerful to be on his way with me. It has occurred to 
me that the lost art of writing letters might fill for him the empty mornings, 
& lessen the separation from New York. Tuesday he & Franz [Hirschland] 
& I had lunch. Franz was really enchanted by our records—had played them 
all—the variations & the quartet for the first time. 

I had a good day at Columbia, but was glad, after talking with Aim, that 
you were not committed to Dunning —not a bad egg, but you would not 
like him. Bacher went down & back with me to Princeton, kept talking of 
the Picasso. Princeton is a madhouse: its solipsistic luminaries shining in 
separate & helpless desolation. Einstein is completely cuckoo; Dirac was still 
in Georgia. I could be of absolutely no use at such a place, but it took a lot of 
conversation & arm waving to get Weyl to take ano. George & Else I saw 
briefly but with the old intimacy & sweetness; & some sadness, at the un- 
welcome future. Their plans for the summer are still uncertain; & it is 
possible that they will be then in Cambridge. If so it is possible—though it 
is not to that that I look forward—that you will see them. George was in- 
terested & duly wretched over RaC’. He has found a cute thing: the Fermi 
B-decay distribution curves come much better if one takes the coupling pro- 
portional to the neutrino-momenta—i.e. the Hvector « %-%..; this pulls 
the maximum back to lower energies for electron & positron decay distri- 
butions. He has also checked internal conversion (by pairs) & low energy 
pair production; with surprising agreement with published values. Else era- 
dicated the excess of sambal with a lunch of chile verde con queso. Both of 
them just about cried over Perro Caliente. 


190 


The last days were impregnated with Nat [Natalie Raymond]; her always 
new & always moving miseries. We heard Samuel together: that helpless 
pathetic idiotic smirking & convulsive creature, like a frog’s leg on some 
very celestial circuit, making—or rather having made through him—the 
most marvellous Bach I hope ever to hear. Later we sat in a rose & violet fog 
on fop of radio: city, drinking —o horror—champagne cocktails & not lis- 
tening to the mascara-eyed violinist wailing Home on the Range & Liebes- 
tod. Nat & I in an undesperate mood decided to get Val [Ruth Valentine] a 
superior but reasonably transportable phonograph. Chick [Ritter] said—& 
by his enthusiasms—showed—that he would like to make us one. He was 
fine, but Curtis [Ritter] still a bit enrhumeée. The phonograph you will profit 
by next year. 

The Ronsard has stayed with me. And on the train, as an alternative to 
making lectures & playing a newly fantastic variation of Rummy with 
father—I have slaughtered it by translation. The hexameter of the original 
was too heavy in English. I send it to you, gruesome though it is—for your 
malicious content. 

Marion, the shrewd eyed wench, said “What happened to Frank on his 
trip: he was so changed.’ But father noticed nothing. And I thought myself 
that you were pretty close to perfect. 

The Napoleon is with me, & the Chartreuse. Within me battle concu- 
piscence & a sense of desecration. 

What a letter this has turned to be. But you must write to me. Our coor- 
dinates redefined by this meeting, I feel less helpless about letters. Watch it 
with the flying. 

I have asked Nat to discourage Rosemary [Horgan]’s tropism for Perro 
Caliente. I shall think of your coming unless I am forced by cruel fact to 
abandon it. 


R 


a. Martin H. Stobbe, a German physicist, was a member of the Institute for Advanced Study 
in Princeton from 1934-1937; Henry R. Hulme and Ronald Gurney were physicists at the 
University of Cambridge. 

b. Robert F. Bacher held a one-year appointment in 1934-35 as instructor in physics at Co- 
lumbia before joining the Cornell faculty in the autumn. 

c. John R. Dunning was an instructor in physics at Columbia. 


Asked years later to comment on the description of Princeton and its 
solipsistic luminaries, Frank Oppenheimer smiled. “It’s a kind of youthful 
cockiness,”’ he said, “‘and some of it stayed with my brother a little longer 
than it should have.’’*’ Robert expressed a more considered view in a 1939 


191 


radio talk celebrating Einstein’s sixtieth birthday, lauding his contributions 
to science and “‘those personal qualities that are the counterpart of great 
work: selflessness, humor, and a deep kindness.’’#® 

‘The shrewd eyed wench” was Marion Cassidy, who had for some 
years been Julius Oppenheimer’s secretary and continued to assist him with 
financial matters after he sold his textile business: In 1951, when she tried to 
return a contingency fund that Mr. Oppenheimer had deposited years ear- 
lier for her use, Robert wrote to her that the money was his father’s, who 
regarded her as almost a member of the family, and should be accepted as 
‘repayment from people who have much to thank you for.’’*? 

This is the last surviving letter to Frank until 1948. Soon after he re- 
turned to England in January, Frank left Cambridge for Florence, where he 
remained until he came back to the United States in September 1935 to 
work toward the Ph.D. in physics under his brother’s good friend Charles 
Lauritsen at the California Institute of Technology. 


DURING THE 1935 spring term at Caltech Oppenheimer wrote to Ernest 
Lawrence about the theoretical work he and Melba Phillips were doing to 
explain the results of the Berkeley cyclotron experiments in which elements 
were sometimes made radioactive by bombardment with deuterons. They 
found that this occurred when the deuteron, which consists of a neutron and 
a proton, gives up the neutron to the bombarded nucleus. The proton 
comes out of the reaction separately, and the nucleus which captures the 
neutron is transmuted into a new radioactive atom. The paper describing 
their work was submitted for publication in late June 1935 [1935e]. What 
has become known as the Oppenheimer—Phillips process is still recognized 
as an important contribution to the understanding of nuclear reactions. 

Oppenheimer also reported the puzzling results of measurements of the 
absorption of cosmic rays by various materials. He and other theorists were 
interested in the fact that the rate at which showers occurred varied in differ- 
ent substances. The data were confusing to them because they were unaware 
that some of the effects were caused by a cosmic ray particle, the meson, 
whose existence was not firmly established until spring 1937. 


192 


97 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


Pasadena. Sunday 
[ca. early spring 1935] 


Dear Ernest, 


There is a good deal to tell you, & I wish that I might run in to see you in 
the radiation lab, instead of writing. 

I am sending Melba [Phillips] today an outline of the calculations & plots I 
have made for the deuteron transmutation functions. The analysis turned 
out pretty complicated, & I have spent most of the nights of this week with 
slide rule & graph paper. The results are not very different from the earlier 
ones, & altogether credible, but they need to be checked carefully & perhaps 
extended; I hope M. will do that soon. For I = 2.2 x 108, Z = 13, the curve I 
get is a fine straight line, cutting the axis (when extrapolated) at 1.49 x 10° 
volts. This is probably a little too high. If your extrapolated threshold is y, 
then the best value to take for I is 3y/2. Unless I have made bad mistakes that 
should be right to better than 10%, I think. But you must give M time to 
work it over. I did not replot the Cu curve but it will be little altered. 

Nye came over Friday, & he & Charlie [Lauritsen], [Carl] Anderson & I 
had quite a good talk.* His absorption measurements seem right now; they 
give a 4, decreasing systematically but slightly with increasing Z, which 
will agree quite beautifully with Bloch’s formula for energy loss to complex 
atoms if one chooses a reasonable energy 10°—10"° volts. We all thought 
these results good, intelligible & quite satisfactory, & I gave Nye the refer- 
ence to the theory. 

Of the results on showers (off line counts) we were less sure. Nye himself 
distrusts his coal measurements, & only in the case of BaSO, do his data 
really indicate an increase in showers. Anderson says that C is definitely 
known not to give many showers; & except for Ba Nye’s points are so scat- 
tered & the counts so few that no influence can be established. 

With Ba there is an effect, & it is this which has troubled us. For Nye finds 
a large increase when he fills his bin from % full to full. But 

1) Shower particles have a range of at most a few inches of BaSO,; 

2) In Pb the first few cm’s increase the showers; but more Pb reduces 
them again, & after 10 cm there is practically no effect (a slight increase per- 
haps over no Pb, but far less than with 2 cm). 

3) Nye’s own experiment \J° — shows that showers produced in the 
upper part of the bin do not get through to the bottom. 

Therefore, if Nye’s results are right, they have in my opinion to be inter- 
preted as showing that the Ba produces a fairly penetrating shower-producing 
radiation. This must be able to get through the greater part of the bin; surely 
all registered showers are formed in the bottom 10 inches. We considered 


193 


also the possibility that the counts came from extranuclear high energy sec- 
ondaries; but a simple estimate shows that these are far too infrequent. In 
view of the unexpected character of these results, & the great importance 
they would have if confirmed, we suggested urgently to Nye that he repeat 
his BaSO, off line measurements, & see whether the former shower-increase 
could still be detected. I rather doubt it myself; but he agreed to look . . . 

I sent Fleming a wire Thursday, sayjng that I could not come.” Houston is 
going east (& perhaps to Copenhagen); I have taken: one of his classes; & it 
seemed a long trip to take & a bad time to be away from here. But in a way I 
should have liked to go. 

My love to Molly [Lawrence], & my Father’s affectionate greetings to 
you both. I wish I could be at journal club tomorrow night. 


Robert 


a. Arthur W. Nye was conducting experiments on the absorption and shower producing 
effects of cosmic radiation in coal, water, barium sulphate, and other materials. Although he 
had been a professor of physics at the University of Southern California since 1907, he pursued 
graduate work at Berkeley, where he received his Ph.D. in 1935 under Lawrence. 

b. John A. Fleming was director of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. 


The Berkeley physics department Journal Club met every Monday 
night to hear preassigned reviews of recent articles in physics journals. The 
meetings were well attended and are remembered as exciting occasions be- 
cause so many changes were occurring in the field.*° 

Throughout the 1930s Oppenheimer continued to divide his time 
between the University of California and Caltech. He spent occasional 
weekends in Pasadena in the fall and winter, but the formal move took place 
in April. As Robert Serber later recalled: “‘Many of his students made the 
annual trek with him. Some things were easier in those days. We thought 
nothing of giving up our houses or apartments in Berkeley, confident that 
we could find a garden cottage in Pasadena for twenty-five dollars a month. 
We didn’t own more than could be packed in the back of a car. In Pasadena, 
in addition to being exposed to new information on physics, we led an ac- 
tive social life. The Tolmans were good friends, and we had very warm re- 
lations with Charlie Lauritsen and his group . . . We spent many evenings 
at the Mexican restaurants on Olvera Street and many nights partying in 
Charlie Lauritsen’s garden.’”*! 

The Uehlings joined the migration the two years they were in Berkeley. 
Their first arrival coincided with a Tolman party for Oppenheimer’s birth- 
day, a dinner which began with avocados brimming with caviar and ended 
with apple pie topped by lighted candles.* 

After Frank Oppenheimer came to Pasadena in the autumn of 1935, he 


194 


too was swept into the warm and lively circle created by the Tolmans, 
Lauritsens, Ruth Valentine, and Robert’s other friends. Across the street 
from the Caltech campus the Tolmans had built a one-storey Spanish-style 
house, white-walled inside and out, shaded and cool with tile floors and a 
large study at one end known as “‘Richard’s folly.’”’ Across a small but lushly 
blooming garden was a one-room guest house and bath which Robert often 
occupied on his weekend visits and sometimes for longer periods. He and 
Tolman talked a lot, and together they went over the manuscript of a book 
Tolman was writing and had wonderful arguments about it. Ruth Tolman 
and Frank often played the flute together and once gave a concert for the 
benefit of the Spanish loyalists. ** 


NINETEEN THIRTY-SIX was an important year in Robert Oppen- 
heimer’s life, marked by a new interest in social and political questions. He 
later emphasized how little attention he had paid to current events prior to 
1936, and friends of the period confirm his lack of interest in economics 
and politics.** Leo Nedelsky describes Oppenheimer as not so much naive 
about politics in those days as ignorant of it. He once said to Nedelsky, “Tell 
me, what has politics to do with truth, goodness and beauty?”’ Yet Nedelsky 
recalled that, at a time when overt expressions of patriotism were definitely 
out of fashion among American intellectuals, Oppenheimer never made a 
secret of his love for America. 

Oppenheimer began to develop social and political concerns in part as a 
response to the Depression, the consolidation of fascism in Germany, and 
the Spanish Civil War. These concerns were shared by his brother and by 
many academic and professional friends and colleagues. Oppenheimer did 
not shy away from these discussions and interests of the late 1930s, which 
involved labor unions, Marxism, university politics, civil liberties, and in- 
ternational affairs. As in physics, his style was to move from idea to idea and 
person to person, contributing to the evolving discussions. 

Very few letters have been found which document this shift in interests 
and the new associations with individuals that accompanied them. Frank, 
Robert’s most intimate correspondent of the previous decade, was now in 
Pasadena. On September 15, 1936, Frank married Jacquenette Quann, who 
was studying in Berkeley. “The three of us saw each other a great deal in 
Pasadena, Berkeley, and Perro Caliente,”’ recalled Frank, “‘and between my 
brother and me there was the continuing sharing of ideas, enterprises, and 
friends, and the continuing mutual influencing of each other that was gradu- 
ally becoming more symmetric.’’*® These frequent meetings removed the 
need for the long letters that had cemented their friendship. 

Had there been occasion to write, letters to Frank would, in some mea- 
sure at least, have reflected Robert’s new interests. In the absence of this 
contemporary source, we turn to the information provided by Oppen- 


195 


heimer eighteen years later when he replied to the United States Atomic En- 
ergy Commission’s charges that his activities and associations of the later 
1930s disqualified him to continue as adviser on nuclear policy with access 
to official secrets. Oppenheimer’s 1954 response, influenced by the circum- 
stances under which it was given, peeonericte? some aspects of his life dur- 
ing that period: 

‘I spent some weeks each summer with my brother Frank at our ranch 
in New Mexico. There was a strong bond of affection between us. After my 
mother’s death, my father came often, mostly in Berkeley, to visit me; and 
we had an intimate and close association until his death.”’ 

‘‘Beginning in late 1936, my interests began to change. These changes 
did not alter my earlier friendships, my relations to my students, or my de- 
votion to physics; but they added something new. I can discern in retrospect 
more than one reason for these changes. I had had a continuing, smoldering 
fury about the treatment of Jews in Germany. I had relatives there, and was 
later to help in extricating them and bringing them to this country. I saw 
what the depression was doing to my students. Often they could get no 
jobs, or jobs which were wholly inadequate. And through them, I began to 
understand how deeply political and economic events could affect men’s 
lives. I began to feel the need to participate more fully in the life of the com- 
munity. But I had no framework of political conviction or experience to 
give me perspective in these matters.”’ 

“In the spring of 1936, I had been introduced by friends to Jean Tat- 
lock, the daughter of a noted professor of English at the university; and in 
the autumn, I began to court her, and we grew close to each other. We were 
at least twice close enough to marriage to think of ourselves as engaged. 
Between 1939 and her death in 1944 I saw her very rarely. She told me about 
her Communist Party memberships; they were on again, off again affairs, 
and never seemed to provide for her what she was seeking. I do not believe 
that her interests were really political. She loved this country and its people 
and its life. She was, as it turned out, a friend of many fellow travelers and 
Communists, with a number of whom I was later to become acquainted.” 

“IT should not give the impression that it was wholly because of Jean 
Tatlock that I made leftwing friends, or felt sympathy for causes which 
hitherto would have seemed so remote from me, like the Loyalist cause in 
Spain, and the organization of migratory workers. I have mentioned some 
of the other contributing causes. I liked the new sense of companionship, 
and at the time felt that I was coming to be part of the life of my time and 
country.” 

“In 1937, my father died; a little later, when I came into an inheritance, 
I made a will leaving this to the University of California for fellowships to 
graduate students.”’ 

“This was the era of what the Communists then called the United 


196 


Front, in which they joined with many non-Communist groups in support 
of humanitarian objectives. Many of these objectives engaged my interest. I 
contributed to the strike fund of one of the major strikes of Bridges’ union; I 
subscribed to the People’s World; I contributed to the various committees 
and organizations which were intended to help the Spanish Loyalist cause. I 
was invited to hélp establish the teacher’s union, which included faculty and 
teaching assistants at the university, and school teachers of the East Bay. I 
was elected recording secretary. My connection with the teacher’s union 
continued until some time in 1941, when we disbanded our chapter.”’ 

‘During these same years, I also began to take part in the management 
of the physics department, the selection of courses, and the awarding of fel- 
lowships, and in the general affairs of the graduate school of the university, 
mostly through the graduate council, of which I was a member for some 
years...” 

“The matter which most engaged my sympathies and interests was the 
war in Spain. This was not a matter of understanding and informed convic- 
tions. I had never been to Spain; I knew a little of its literature; I knew 
nothing of its history or politics or contemporary problems. But like a great 
many other Americans I was emotionally committed to the Loyalist cause. I 
contributed to various organizations for Spanish relief. I went to, and helped 
with, many parties, bazaars, and the like. Even when the war in Spain was 
manifestly lost, these activities continued. The end of the war and the defeat 
of the Loyalists caused me great sorrow.’’*? 


IN 1937 OPPENHEIMER and his associates were continuing to work on 
the theory of cosmic rays and their interaction with matter. In a letter to 
Millikan he attempted to relate the theory to data on the intensity of cosmic 
radiation at different latitudes as determined by the amount of ionization 
produced at different altitudes. The letter demonstrates that Oppenheimer 
thought the discrepancy between theory and data could be due to the exis- 
tence of a new, as yet undetected, particle in cosmic rays. At a Caltech collo- 
quium in November 1936 Carl Anderson and Seth Neddermeyer had pre- 
sented evidence for the existence of such a particle.*® Stimulated by these 
results Oppenheimer and Carlson had included this possibility in an 
important paper they wrote on cosmic ray showers in December 1936: 
‘One can conclude, either that the theoretical estimates of the probability of 
these processes are inapplicable in the domain of cosmic-ray energies, or 
that the actual penetration of these rays has to be ascribed to the presence of 
a component other than electrons and photons. The second alternative is 
necessarily radical; for cloud chamber and counter experiments show that 
particles with the same charge as the negative electron belong to the pene- 
trating component of radiation; and if these are not electrons, they are parti- 
cles not previously known to physics.’’*® 


197 


98 | TO ROBERT A. MILLIKAN 


[Pasadena] 
April 19, 1937 


Dear Professor Millikan: 


Bowen and Neher have shown me the beautiful data on the altitude-lati- 
tude ionization, and we have talked ‘of the interpretation of these results. @ 
Since some of the conclusions to which Bowen and Neher had come seem 
to me quite misleading, I should like to write to you briefly of how things 
stand at present. 

(1) If one compares the latitude-difference curves with the curves given 
by Carlson and me with unaltered constants, the fit is quite good for depths 
up to 4 m. [meters of water equivalent]. Compared to the experimental 
curves, the theoretical ones are shifted a little (0.3 m) to greater depths, but 
this discrepancy is of just the sort to be expected from the approximations in 
the theoretical treatment, and can be almost eliminated by choosing a some- 
what larger, and equally plausible value, for the ionization loss constant B. 

(2) For depths greater than 4 m. the theoretical curves fall definitely below 
the experimental, and between 5 m. and sea level the theoretical absorption 
coefficient is about 23 times the experimental. This discrepancy is just like 
that which we found with Pfotzer’s counter data, but we know now that no 
part of it can be ascribed to very high energy radiation. Can this very defi- 
nite and large discrepancy be ascribed to any approximations in the formu- 
lae of Bethe and Heitler or of Carlson and me? One must be careful not to 
give too final an answer to such a question; yet a careful reconsideration of 
the whole question, and comparison with the work of Bhabha and Heitler 
has convinced me that the discrepancy cannot be traced to the inadequacy of 
the theoretical treatment of known processes, but points to the fact that our 
picture of the mechanisms involved 1s still incomplete, and that the discrep- 
ancy is worthy of serious attention.” 

(3) The attempt of Bowen and Neher to save the situation by altering the 
fundamental constants seems to me for several reasons fruitless. For one 
thing these constants ought to be reliable to within 20%; for another, the 
assumption used by Bowen and Neher of a considerable reduction in the 
probability of radiation and pair production even for radiation of low en- 
ergy (for it is the partially degraded radiation which determines the curve at 
great depths) seems to me peculiarly untenable theoretically. But the 
strongest argument is that it is not possible by any change of this sort to fit 
the absorption curve near sea level without spoiling completely the agree- 
ment near the top of the atmosphere, and pushing the theoretical maximum 
to depths 2-3 times those actually observed. The fact that Bowen and 
Neher did not find this rests upon a misunderstanding of some of our equa- 


198 


tions, and no conclusions whatever may legitimately be drawn from the ap- 
parent good agreement which they found. The good check on the observed 
and expected positions of the maxima suggests quite strongly that there is 
nothing seriously wrong with the theoretical formulae for pair production 
and radiation even at very high energies. 

(4) It seems to’me that the relatively high incidence of large showers at sea 
level, and the many anomalies observed in the cloud chamber, make one 
more ready to believe that the discrepancy is real, and comes from the exis- 
tence of processes and types of radiation ignored in our simple treatment. It 
can perhaps not yet be decided whether these are associated with a nonelec- 
tronic primary radiation, or whether they are secondary radiations and pro- 
cesses induced by the electron-photon component; but the fact that accord- 
ing to Anderson the nuclear disintegrations increase in incidence with 
altitude roughly as do the electron-photon showers, makes me favor the 
second alternative, and suggests that the increased penetration of the radia- 
tion is closely connected with the production of less absorbable secondaries 
in these nuclear encounters. In any case, I think that if one takes the theoreti- 
cal work at all seriously one cannot say that between 5 m. and sea level elec- 
trons and photons alone are enough to account for even the latitude sensi- 
tive part of the cosmic radiation. 

With every respectful and cordial greeting, 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. In April 1937 Ira S. Bowen was professor of physics at Caltech and H. Victor Neher was 
an instructor there. 

b. George Pfotzer’s curves of data relating ionization to altitude, published in 1936 while he 
was at the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart, were widely used in cosmic ray research. Hans 
A. Bethe and Walter H. Heitler, physicists who had left Germany in 1933, were at the Univer- 
sity of Bristol in 1934-35 and there developed the quantum theory of interaction processes 
most important at high energy. Homi J. Bhabha was at Cambridge University in 1936 when he 
published papers with Heitler on cosmic ray showers, parallel to the work of Carlson and Op- 
penheimer at about the same time. 


Oppenheimer wrote more briefly to Lawrence about what he had 
found in Pasadena. 


199 


99 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


Pasadena 
Sunday. [April 1937] 


Dear Ernest, 


Thank you for the Birge-money; I had stopped by at my landlady’s to say 
goodbye & was sorry to miss you.? 

Laslett & Van [Voorhis] came Friday night to our nuclear seminar,” & 
told me of the fine proton results with the Rochester cyclotron, & also, 
but not very explicitly, of the new Ir[?] developments; you know how eager 
I am to hear of these things when they are straightened out. 

Charlie [Lauritsen]’s plans are still unsettled, & since Millikan has left they 
are likely to stay so. The only exciting physics is some beautiful cosmic ray 
work of Bowen & Neher, which shows just how far our shower work can 
explain the altitude-latitude curves, & suggests that new & probably nuclear 
effects play an important part, except in the first few meters in the atmo- 
sphere. 

Come through here on your way if you possibly can. All greetings 


Robert 


a. Raymond T. Birge joined the Berkeley physics department in 1918 and became professor 
of physics in 1926. In 1933 he commenced what was to be a twenty-two year term as,chairman. 

b. L. Jackson Laslett was a doctoral candidate and S. N. Van Voorhis an NRC fellow at 
Berkeley; both worked with Lawrence. 


Within a week after Oppenheimer’s April 1937 letters to Millikan and 
Lawrence, the definitive evidence for the existence of a new particle in pho- 
tographs of cosmic ray tracks was publicly announced. On the heels of the 
discovery Oppenheimer and Serber wrote a paper [1937c] connecting these 
results with the particle of mass intermediate between the electron and pro- 
ton suggested by the Japanese theorist Hideki Yukawa in his theory of the 
forces between particles within the nucleus, published in February 1935. 
The new cosmic ray particle was first called the mesotron and later became 
known as the meson. 

For about a decade physicists assumed that the mesotron was identical 
with the particle proposed by Yukawa. Only in the late 1940s was it defi- 
nitely established, due to the discovery of yet another new particle, that the 
cosmic ray mesotron was not Yukawa’s particle, but rather a product of its 
radioactive decay. As a result the mesotron or meson was renamed the 
muon or mu-meson to distinguish it from the pion or pi-meson, the true 


200 


Yukawa particle identified in cosmic rays in 1947. In the intervening years 
Oppenheimer and other physicists struggled with the problem of reconcil- 
ing the observed mesotron with the role it should play in Yukawa’s theory 
of nuclear forces. Nevertheless, the belief that they were observing Yu- 
kawa's mesons opened up a fruitful field of inquiry in cosmic ray physics 
and provided a viable theoretical framework that made experimental phys- 
ics intelligible. As Oppenheimer wrote in 1966, ‘““The imagined existence of 
these particles makes it for a time somewhat easier to describe important 
regularities that we do observe among particles known to exist.’ 


IN A LETTER to George Uhlenbeck, who was visiting the United States 
to participate in the Michigan summer school of theoretical physics, Op- 
penheimer suggested a reunion and shared some news of work on nuclear 
theory. 


100 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


Cowles 
June 29. [1937] 


Dear George, 


You & Else are in America again, near enough so that I would like to 
break the long silence, near enough so that I hope that soon we shall see each 
other. What most of all I hope is that when summer school is over you will 
come for a visit to California—it will I think be too late for the Pecos. But 
in August it will be fine in San Francisco: we shall be getting started in 
Berkeley, & Fermi & Bloch & Nordsieck will still be in Stanford;? it will be 
very beautiful; & it is with all heart that I ask you to come: not for work 
surely, but for a holiday & only a little friendly talk of physics. I have a fine 
house on the hill in Berkeley, where you & Else would probably be com- 
fortable & surely so very welcome. 

Ann Arbor tempted me very much, & the certainty of seeing you there. 
If still I felt that I should not come, it was because by the summer I was 
fairly well worn out with a long & in some ways a hard year, & thought that 
some weeks here in the mountains were more than ordinarily a good idea. I 
ought to be back in California not later than August first, & that would 
leave woefully little time for the trip east & a fortnight in Ann Arbor. But I 
do want so very much to see you. If you could get away before the end of 
July, perhaps you could have a few days here & then go west with us. 

Of physics, I think I shall not try to write, but rather hope that our meet- 
ing will make that unnecessary. Bohr was in Berkeley for a month last 
spring, & Kalckar stayed on in Pasadena til June; & we came so to go a little 


201 


more closely just into the questions of probabilities of formation & decom- 
position of compound nuclei, & into the conditions under which elementary 
statistical arguments can be applied to connect decay rates & collision cross 
sections . . . But I think that this will not be of a specially pressing interest 
to you, & we can talk it over later on. 

For really the purpose of this letter is to get word from you of your plans, 
& to urge you as strongly as I can to include in them a visit west; to say 
welcome again to this country, & to say that we must not let this chance go 
by without seeing each other. 

Affectionately 


Robert 


Roger [Lewis] & Frank [Oppenheimer] send you both all greetings. 


a. Nordsieck was an NRC fellow at Stanford in 1937; Fermi lectured there that summer. 
b. Bohr was accompanied to the United States by his wife Margrethe, one of his sons, Erik, 
and his young assistant, Fritz Kalckar. 


JULIUS OPPENHEIMER died of a heart attack on September 20, 1937.*! 
A few days later his youngest sister, Hedwig Stern, and other relatives emi- 
grating from Germany arrived by boat. Mrs. Stern had planned to live with 
Julius in New York; she settled instead in Berkeley with her physician son 
Alfred and his wife Lotte. Oppenheimer established warm relations with 
the Stern family and was particularly devoted to his Aunt Hedwig. When 
Hedwig Stern died in 1966, her son Alfred wrote Oppenheimer about her 
active, purposeful life and added: “‘Your closeness has made it richer still. As 
long as she could think and feel, she was all for you.’’®” 

Oppenheimer reported on the family’s progress to his cousin Louise 
Oppenheimer Singer, daughter of Julius Oppenheimer’s brother Emil. 
Alfred Stern, like other physicians trained abroad, had to repeat his intern- 
ship and residency in the United States. 


202 


101 | TO LOUISE OPPENHEIMER SINGER 


Berkeley 
October 21 [1937] 


Dear Louise, 


Thank you for your good wire. 

Alfred & Lotte are making out well. Alfred’s work is arranged: he is to 
start work tomorrow, as extern to one Berkeley & one Oakland hospital. 
Everyone has been friendly & helpful, & the work itself promises well. 
Alfred & Lotte have found a fine house up in the hills north of Berkeley, big, 
with a garden & a view of the bay; negotiations for it are not quite closed, 
but will be, I think, soon. Berkeley has been at its most beautiful, & I think 
they are not sorry now that it is to be their home. 

Will you come to visit us again? 


Affectionately 
Robert 


WHEN NIELS BOHR was in Berkeley in March 1937 to deliver the Hitch- 
cock Lectures, he and Fritz Kalckar worked with Oppenheimer on several 
problems, including Bohr’s theory of the compound nucleus. A letter Bohr 
wrote to Oppenheimer from Copenhagen the following December is an 
early example of the frequent exchange of news and of expressions of fond 
regard that took place between the two men over the next quarter century. 
On this occasion Bohr shared with Oppenheimer his sorrow over the recent 
death of Rutherford. Three weeks later, the sudden and untimely death of 
young Kalckar was to be the subject of another letter from Bohr.* 


102 | NIELS BOHR TO ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


[Copenhagen] 
December 20, 1937 


Dear Oppenheimer, 


With these lines I want to bring you my very best wishes for the New 
Year and the warmest thanks for all your kindness during our stay in Berke- 
ley last spring. It was a very great pleasure to me indeed to get opportunity 
of coming into still closer connection with you and to feel how, in spite of 
all differences as regards points of approach, we sympathize with each other 
so thoroughly in physics as well as in many other things. I am also very 


203 


grateful to you for your kindness and helpfulness towards Kalckar, for 
whom his stay in California, above all due to you, has been a most instruc- 
tive and encouraging experience indeed. 

Both my wife and I read with the greatest pleasure the books you gave us 
on our departure from San Francisco and they have given me much occa- 
sion to think of your fine judgement in art as well as in science. I would have 
written to you long before, but on account of accumulated duties I have had 
a very busy time ever since my return. First a few weeks ago I saw that the 
paper, in the translation of which you took so kind and helpful an interest, 
did actually appear in the July-number of “Philosophy of Science’. I am 
sorry not to have any reprints and therefore not to be able to send you even 
such a small reminding of all your work with it. As a little greeting I en- 
close, however, a reprint of the article in “‘Science”’ with which you helped 
Kalckar so kindly, and the appearance of which as a remembrance of my 
stay in Berkeley has been a special pleasure to me.? 

As I hope, you will already have received the general article of Kalckar 
and myself which under the circumstances we just let appear with a small 
addendum. We hope, however, soon to continue the work with a more de- 
tailed discussion of the experimental evidence which is so rapidly increas- 
ing. In the last weeks I have been occupied with the problem of the selectiv- 
ity of the nuclear photo effects disclosed by the continuation of Bothe’s 
beautiful researches.” I think it can be explained quite naturally by realizing 
that the excitation of the nucleus due to the absorption of the photon will 
for a short but appreciable interval not be distributed among the various 
modes of oscillation in the manner corresponding to a thermal equilibrium. 
I am preparing a little note about it and shal! send you a copy of the manu- 
script as soon as it is finished. 

Like anyone else who has had the privilege of coming into personal con- 
tact with Rutherford you will surely have been much affected by the sad 
news of his sudden death in the midst of his work. I remember so clearly the 
first time I met you, when as a quite young man you came into Rutherford’s 
office in the Cavendish Laboratory, while I was sitting and talking with him 
there. When you went out, I remember, that Rutherford said some warmly 
appreciating words regarding his expectations about you. Life is poorer 
without him; but still every thought about him will be a lasting encourage- 
ment to us all. 

Thinking of the future I hope very much that we here in Copenhagen 
shall keep up the close connection with your group in Berkeley and espe- 
cially that we shall once have the pleasure of welcoming yourself here 
among us for a while. 

With the very kindest regards from us all, 


Yours, 


Niels Bohr 


a. As aresult of their collaboration during this visit, Oppenheimer, Serber, and Kalckar pub- 
lished two joint papers [1937d, 1937e]. 

b. Walther Bothe was director of the Institute for Physics, Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for 
Medical Research in Heidelberg. 


ONE OF THE nonscientific organizations that Oppenheimer joined in the 
latter half of the 1930s was Consumers Union, founded in 1936. “For per- 
haps a year,’” Oppenheimer later testified, “I was a member of the western 
council of the Consumers Union which was concerned with evaluating in- 
formation on products of interest on the west coast.’’ The following letter is 
part of a slender record of Oppenheimer’s participation in Consumers 
Union activities which began, at least, on a practical level. The other two 
Oppenheimer letters in the Consumers Union files explain that he was too 
busy to attend council meetings.™ 


103 | TO MILDRED EDIE (WESTERN CONSUMERS UNION) 


Pasadena 
May 29 [1938] 


Dear Boss, 


Thank you for your good letter. If you will let me know where and when 
to find you, Ill call for you and have you meet Borsook, Emory Ellis who 
can probably take care of the milk testing, and anyone I can dig up on the 
poison oak and dark glasses. So far I’ve found no one for either of these. At 
least one buyer I think I have found you: Jane Muir. She said she would be 
very glad to do that work, has the time, and I believe the reliability. She is 
up north this weekend and you may have seen her. The market surveyor is 
beyond me. 

The April issues came, and I thank you for them, and am putting them to 
work. The membership books did not come. 

Please let me know when you want me. A phone message at the Norman 
Bridge Laboratory or the Athenaeum of C I T will get me. 


Faithfully, 
Robert Oppenheimer 


IN THE SPRING of 1937 Oppenheimer had suggested that the newly dis- 
covered meson was radioactive. Referring to the paper that he and Serber 
published [1937c] linking the new particle with Yukawa’s theory, Oppen- 
heimer later explained: “We did not, as we originally intended, include evi- 


dence of the radioactivity of the mesons, for Bohr persuaded us that that 
was a logically quite separable point, as indeed it was; but within a year 
Blackett published that, with better evidence than we had found.”’ Serber 
recalls that Mullikan had discouraged Oppenheimer from publishing the 
work in 1937 because it disagreed with Millikan’s ideas on the subject. After 
Blackett’s publication in December 1938, Millikan, apparently reversing his 
position, wanted Oppenheimer to get credit for the earlier discussion.*° In 
response, Oppenheimer wrote a diplomatic note. 


104 | TO ROBERT A. MILLIKAN 


Berkeley 
Jan 1 [1939] 


Dear Dr Millikan, 


Thank you for your good note. I shall be in Pasadena again by the elev- 
enth, and shall come to see you right away. 

You are right about the radioactivity of the mesotron; I have been think- 
ing of it for two years now, and gave a seminar on it here while Bohr was 
with us. The only evidence we had at that time came from Rossi’s work in 
Eritrea, which he has just recently interpreted in this sense in a letter to Na- 
ture.? We felt that the extension of your own earlier work on air and water 
absorption would provide a so much cleaner and less ambiguous test of the 
idea (which as you can guess rests on no very sure theoretical basis) that, 
perhaps mistakenly, we did not publish it, but just urged Bowen to get the 
air-water experiment done. I do hope that next summer that will be 
possible. It would put this whole subject on a much firmer foundation. 

With all good greetings, 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. Bruno B. Rossi had been professor of physics at the University of Padua. He left Italy in 
1938 and after brief stays in Copenhagen and Manchester came to the United States in the 
spring of 1939. During the 1930s he made major contributions to cosmic ray research through 
his experiments and development of new instruments and techniques. 


OPPENHEIMER’S CLOSE scientific and personal ties to the Caltech nu- 
clear physics group were evident in letters written in the late 1930s to Wil- 
liam Fowler. Fowler received his doctorate at Caltech in 1936, worked as a 
research fellow with Charles Lauritsen, and joined the faculty in 1939. Op- 
penheimer often wrote Fowler brief undated technical notes about the ex- 
periments on nuclear reactions at the Pasadena laboratory.” 


206 


The following letter to Fowler was written two days after Oppen- 
heimer and the other Berkeley physicists learned of the discovery of nuclear 
fission. After the German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann had 
demonstrated in December 1938 that the nucleus of uranium, one of the 
heaviest of the elements, could be split into two or more parts, the news 
traveled rapidly’ throughout the world. Physicists familiar with nuclear 
reactions immediately attempted to confirm the experiment and extend and 
explore its implications. The response at Berkeley was later described by 
Glenn T. Seaborg, then an instructor in chemistry: “I remember .. . a 
seminar in January 1939 when new results . . . on the splitting of uranium 
with neutrons were excitedly discussed; I do not recall ever seeing Oppie 
so stimulated and so full of ideas.’’*” 

In his letter to Fowler, Oppenheimer reviewed the history of the dis- 
covery and the experiments undertaken at Berkeley in the few days since the 
arrival of the news. His interest in how many neutrons “‘come off during the 
splitting’’ was shared by scientists in several countries, who saw that if 
enough neutrons were produced, an energy producing chain reaction would 


be feasible. 


105 | TO WILLIAM A. FOWLER 


Berkeley, Saturday 
January 28?, 1939] 


Dear Willie, 


. . . The U business is unbelievable. We first saw it in the papers, wired for 
more dope, and have had a lot of reports since. You know it started with 
Hahn’s finding that what he had taken for Ra in one of the U activities frac- 
tionally crystallized with Ba. And then the recognition that the ekauranium 
series was chemically compatible with a series starting with Ma, running on 
through Rhe and Os and Pd. And then understanding suddenly why there 
were such long chains of beta decay, to get rid of the neutron excess with 
which half a U nucleus would start; and why one had ‘isomeric’ chains that 
were really isotopic; and then remembering how a drop when it is charged 
up elongates, becomes less and less stable to longitudinal oscillations, final[ly] 
ruptures. At that point there were a lot of experimental things done here: 
recording the pieces when U is slow neutron bombarded on a differential 
chamber; seeing them, with about 2 cm maximum range and unbelievable 
ionization, in a cloud chamber at reduced pressure, and only during the neu- 
tron bombardment; measuring their range by the activities left in foils be- 
hind the bombarded U; measuring their energy by collecting ions, with a 
maximum of about 60 mv, as one could expect from the Coulomb field; 


207 


showing that the 72 hr activity goes chemically with Te, leads to an X ray 
which is the K alpha and beta of Iodine, is followed by an Iodine activity. 
Many points are still unclear: where are the short lived high energy betas 
one would expect? Are there strong gammas as one would think from the 
big dipole moments of the pieces? In how many ways does the U come apart? 
At random, as one might guess, or only in-certain ways? And most of all, 
are there many neutrons that come off during the splitting, or from the ex- 
cited pieces? If there are then a 10 tm Cube of U deuteride (one would need 
the D to slow them without capture) should be quite something. What do 
you think? It is I think exciting, not in the rare way of positrons and meso- 
trons, but in a good honest practical way. 
The rest will keep. hasta luego 


Robert 


NEWS OF RESEARCH on nuclear fission and interest in the enormous 
amounts of energy that might be released were also the focus of a letter to 
Uhlenbeck, who had returned to the University of Michigan faculty in 
1939. 

At the same time, Oppenheimer was working on the application of 
general relativity and nuclear physics to theoretical astrophysics. The signif- 
icance of his work on neutron stars and gravitational contraction [1938b, 
1939a, 1939c] became evident in the 1960s and 1970s when the rtality of 
neutron stars, pulsars, and black holes was established through new astro- 
nomical research techniques. This work and his continuing interest in the 
radioactivity of the mesotron is also mentioned in the letter. 


106 | TO GEORGE UHLENBECK 


Berkeley 
Feb. 5 [1939] 


Dear George, 


I want to answer your fine long very welcome letter at once, partly to 
show how happy I was to have it, partly to say a word of my own personal 
celebration of your staying in America... . 

Here too there is further evidence for the bursting U. They have recorded 
the heavy tracks in a differential chamber, and seen them, very prominent 
over the haze of recoil protons and the faint alpha tracks, from a U foil bom- 
barded by neutrons in a very low pressure cloud chamber. Also Abelson 
showed that the 72 hour period follows chemically Te, and emits an Xray 


208 


which by differential critical absorption can be positively identified as the K 
alpha, and a little K beta, of Iodine.* The next activity after Te separates out 
with I chemically. We too of course have been thinking of the 10'® ergs per 
gram. It seems to me that the pieces after parturition must be highly excited, 
if omy because of their anomalous charge distribution. Some of that must 
go into radiation, but one would expect neutrons too. So I think it really not 
too improbable that a ten cm cube of uranium deuteride (one should have 
something to slow the neutrons without capturing them) might very well 
blow itself to hell. 

There would be much physics to tell, in exchange for your good account, 
perhaps too much for a letter . . . We have been working here too on 
static and nonstatic solutions for very heavy masses that have exhausted 
their nuclear energy sources: old stars perhaps which collapse to neutron 
cores. The results have been very odd, will be in part out so soon that I 
won't bother to write them here—I have gradually talked myself into 
believing the mesotron decay, although the evidence is not much better than 
it was two years ago when we first were thinking of it. The Pasadena people 
promise to do a really clean experiment with ionization chambers in lakes 
4000 m apart next summer. 

Two more points, and I shall write soon again. For the first, we have been 
hoping to get to Perro Caliente quite early in June this year. It is a very 
beautiful month there, without rain, but with snow on the peaks and very 
green. How is it: could you and Else come? Don’t forget: not the time nor 
the place nor your welcome . . . 

Say a warm greeting from me to Else, whose generosity reopened this 
long dormant correspondence; tell her to take good care of herself so she can 
ride a horsie next June. 

hasta luegito 


Robert 


a. Philip H. Abelson, a doctoral candidate at Berkeley, was an assistant in the Radiation Lab. 
When the news of fission reached Berkeley, Abelson immediately saw that the research he was 
doing for his dissertation might have led to the discovery. As he later recalled, “I almost went 
numb as I realized that I had come close but had missed a great discovery’; Philip H. Abelson, 
‘‘A Graduate Student with Ernest O. Lawrence,” in All in Our Time: The Reminiscences of 
Twelve Nuclear Pioneers, ed. Jane Wilson (Chicago: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 1975), pp. 
28-29. Abelson’s account provides further information on the Berkeley fission work. 


OPPENHEIMER CONTINUED to share with his New York cousin a 
concern for the welfare of their Aunt Hedwig and her family in Berkeley. 
Hilde was the seven-year-old daughter of Alfred and Lotte Stern. 


209 


107 | TO LOUISE OPPENHEIMER SINGER 


Berkeley 
April 26 [1939] 


Dear Louise, 


Thank you for your dear warm birthday letter. It was good to have that 
word of you, & to know, as much from the feeling as from anything you 
said, how rich & serene your life has been. 

Alfred is getting on wonderfully well: not that he has as yet anything like 
enough patients, but that he has some, & thinks that it is going to go. Hed- 
wig has been well all winter, & you will need no telling to know how beau- 
tiful she is. And from Hilde every few days there comes one of those sharp 
gems of truth that only a few children can find. 

Frank is really getting his degree this June. His plans for next year are not 
settled, but he may be at Stanford. We are going to New Mexico this sum- 
mer, & if I come east it will be early in July. 

My love, & every wish for you both 


Robert 


AFTER WRITING about Fowler’s work on nuclear energy levels, Oppen- 
heimer commented on the nonaggression pact between Nazi Germany and 


the U.S.S.R. which was signed in August 1939. 


108 | TO WILLIAM A. FOWLER 


Berkeley, Saturday 
[September 9, 1939] 


Dear Willie, 


Thanks for your fine letter. The situation with N13 etc is not at all what I 
expected but what Frank tells me of your work and his is pretty convincing. 
How similar are the three positron spectra? Is that known at all? Can Tom- 
linson work on them?" I suppose that it is SURE that no one Fermi curve 
can fit them. It is theoretically a little strange that they should not be com- 
plex, as Wigner will have told you. Of course the intensity 1s a pretty sensitive 
function of the energy, and one can’t make too good an estimate of where the 
higher levels in the daughter nucleus should lie. I feel that the conclusions 
you have reached are very critical, and that you should be sure to make your 
account of them public and convincing . . 


210 


I’ll be down next week end, the 16, and we can talk of all this. Berkeley is 
very crowded with physicists and there is a little gossip of physics that will 
keep. 

I know Charlie [Lauritsen] will say a melancholy I told you so over the 
Nazisoviet pact, but I am not paying any bets yet on any aspect of the ho- 
cuspocus except maybe that the Germans are pretty well into Poland. Ca 
stink. 

Til a few days then 


Robert 


a. Everett P. Tomlinson was a doctoral student at Caltech. 


BY 1940 university jobs for physicists were somewhat more numerous than 
in the Depression years. Still, the placing of his students was a matter of 
deep concern to Oppenheimer, as shown in a letter to F. Wheeler Loomis, 
chairman of the physics department at the University of Illinois, on behalf 
of Sidney M. Dancoff. Dancoff obtained the one-year appointment and re- 
mained at Illinois. 


109 | TO F. WHEELER LOOMIS 


Pasadena 
May 13, 1940 


Dear Dr. Loomis, 


Serber tells me that there will be a one year instructorship at Illinois next 
year, because Bartlett will be on leave of absence.* There is a man in Berke- 
ley, Dr. Dancoff, whom I would very much like to see get that position. 
Serber knows him well, his work and character; but I thought that it might 
be helpful to have a word or two of recommendation from me. Dancoff 
took his degree in Berkeley last fall: this year he has had a research and 
teaching job in our department. Lawrence has suggested taking him on for 
the ‘theoretical’ staff of the Radiation Laboratory next year, but we are all 
agreed that that is not the ideal place for him, and would like to see him in a 
position where he could do more teaching and have greater responsibilities 
than are possible in Berkeley. 

Dancoff’s research will be known in part to you, and more fully to 
Serber: with Morrison (and he did surely his full share) he did the important 
work on internal conversion of gamma rays that has borne such good fruit 
in unscrambling isomeric and radioactive transitions.» He gave the most 
complete solution we have, going far beyond that of Pauli and of Bloch and 


211 


Nordsieck, on the quantum theory of the effect of radiation reaction in colli- 
sions, that was a difficult and expert piece of work. He has been much in- 
terested in spin orbit coupling; published a brief note on the Hes doublet, 
and has now in press a long paper dealing exhaustively with this and related 
problems. He has made calculations on the stopping of cyclotron neutrons 
and gamma rays by the water tanks, that should be published in conjunction 
with the observations they confirm. It would be impossible to detail all the 
many questions into which he has looked, on which he has reported or 
toward which he has made helpful contributions: he is a good physicist, 
well trained and with good ideas and great technical facility in calculation. 

During his years in Berkeley, with the exception of the time he held a 
University Fellowship, Dancoff has constantly been teaching elementary 
courses. He is a good teacher, clear, interesting, painstaking; I have heard 
only good reports of this phase of his work. His more advanced teaching (he 
has occasionally lectured in my course) and his seminars, are uniformly ex- 
cellent. He has occasionally spoken to seminars at Stanford and Cal. Tech. 
as well, and has always done a fine job. 

I have found, and I know that Serber will confirm this experience, that 
Dancoff was a very pleasant man to work with: modest, considerate, scru- 
pulous and very friendly. I think he would fit in well in any department, and 
know of nothing that would make him unwelcome in any way. He is like- 
able, married for two years now, and happily. 

You may wonder that so good a man is not already placed. Jobs for 
theorists are not too common, and he has had the competition of older men 
of greater reputation: Schiff, Schwinger, Snyder for instance in Berkeley, to 
meet.° There is a good chance that for the year after this an opening for him 
will be available at UCLA, but this is alas not sure. In any case I think that 
with the added opportunities of a year in Urbana he will probably have no 
great trouble finding a satisfactory place for the following year. Thus I think 
that you will not be incurring an essential responsibility by taking him on. 

I hope that this note will help to supplement and confirm what Serber can 
tell you. If 1 can give you any other information that would be of use, either 
by mail or wire, please do not hesitate to ask me. 

With all cordial good wishes to you and to Mrs. Loomis and to your 
thriving department. 


Robert Oppenheimer 
I ought to add, though it is a point more properly Serber’s, that I think that 


Dancoff and Serber will make a very good team, and that from this point of 
view too it would be a good thing for them and for your department. 


212 


a. Serber was appointed assistant professor of physics at Illinois in 1938. James H. Bartlett 
was associate professor of theoretical physics there. 

b. Philip Morrison, a graduate student of Oppenheimer’s, received his Ph.D. from Berkeley 
in 1940. 

c. Leonard I. Schiff was a research associate, Julian S. Schwinger an NRC fellow, and Hart- 
land Snyder a doctoral candidate. 


FROM JUNE 18 TO 21, 1940, Oppenheimer attended the American Physi- 
cal Society meeting in Seattle. The afternoon session on June 20 consisted of 
an informal symposium on theoretical physics which Oppenheimer opened 
with a talk on “‘The Present Crisis in the Quantum Theory of Fields.’’*® 

The meeting took place the week France capitulated to the Germans, 
and the physicists gathered in Seattle, many of whom were already involved 
in war research, were especially concerned about the implications of this 
event. Oppenheimer’s note acknowledging the Uehlings’ hospitality, which 
he had shared with former Berkeley associate J. Franklin Carlson and his 
wife, was written from the Tolmans’ address. 


110 | TO RUTH AND EDWIN A. UEHLING 


Pasadena 
July 4 [1940] 


Dear Ruth & Ed, 


It is time now that I wrote a word to you of the sweet days together in 
your home. You will have come to Ann Arbor, with the confusion of pack- 
ing & leaving, & the long drive, behind you. But I hope you will still have 
warm memories of a visit which was to your visitor so sweet. For it was not 
the fine house alone, nor the trip to Rainier, nor your friends, nor all your 
graciousness: but above all the sense of renewing & deepening, after some 
years, the affection & understanding between us. For that thanks is a poor 
word, but still I would use it. 

Our trip south was very fine, the coast lovely & the company friendly & 
cheerful. For Wenonah [Nedelsky] too it was a rest & restoration. The day I 
left Berkeley she was talking to the red cross about a job: the other, house- 
mothership in S.F., seemed not to be panning out. 

About July 15 I think Frank & Jackie & Judith & I will go to Perro Ca- 
liente.? There is a very good chance camp will be open when you return: 
perhaps you can still arrange to come that way. 

Have a sweet time & fruitful in Ann Arbor, & give my love to George & 
Else, & good greetings to Betty & Wendell & Willis & Melber & the 


213 


Serbers & Wigner & everyone else you think of.” And again, for the visit & 
all its goods, my hand in thanks. 


Robert 


a. Frank Oppenheimer was completing a two-year appointment as a research-teaching asso- 
ciate in physics with Felix Bloch at Stanford. Judith, his eldest child, was born in Berkeley, 
May 25, 1940. 

b. Wendell Furry was now associate professor at Harvard. Willis Lamb, a former Oppen- 
heimer student at Berkeley, was an instructor at Columbia. Melba Phillips was an instructor at 
Brooklyn College. 


OPPENHEIMER SPENT much of the summer of 1940 at Perro Caliente 
with Frank, Jacquenette, and their baby daughter, Judith. Among the guests 
was Katherine Puening Harrison, wife of Stewart Harrison, an English phy- 
siclan engaged in cancer research at Caltech. Over the past year Oppen- 
heimer and Katherine Harrison, always known as Kitty, had developed a 
deep attachment. Early in 1934 Kitty had interrupted undergraduate studies 
at the University of Wisconsin to marry Joe Dallet, a Communist Party or- 
ganizer in Youngstown, Ohio. She also became a member, but her lack of 
enthusiasm for the cause was largely responsible for a separation from Dal- 
let two years later. He joined the Loyalist forces in the Spanish Civil War, as 
one of the large contingent of American volunteers comprising the Abra- 
ham Lincoln Brigade. Still in love with Dallet, Kitty undertook to meet him 
in Spain and was in Paris in October 1937 waiting for instructions when she 
learned of his death. Kitty returned to the United States to complete her 
undergraduate work in biology at the University of Pennsylvania. Toward 
the end of 1938 she married Stewart Harrison, whom she had met in En- 
gland a few years earlier. Shortly thereafter he returned to Pasadena; Kitty 
followed him when she received her bachelor’s degree in June 1939.°° 

Before the first anniversary of her marriage to Harrison, Kitty and 
Robert Oppenheimer had fallen in love. In the autumn of 1940 she filed for a 
Nevada divorce. On November 1 she and Oppenheimer were married in 
Nevada and proceeded to Berkeley, where they were welcomed by Ernest 
and Molly Lawrence.® In Berkeley the Oppenheimers lived first in Robert’s 
apartment on Shasta Road, then at 10 Kenilworth Court until August 1941, 
when they bought a house, 1 Eagle Hill, in the Berkeley hills. 

Two months after the Oppenheimers’ marriage, in January 1941, John 
Edsall and his wife Margaret, who were spending the year in Pasadena, vis- 
ited Berkeley and dined with them. The other guests were the physicist 
Ronald Gurney and his wife Natalie. The talk was mainly about science at 
Berkeley —Edsall recalled the admiration with which Oppenheimer spoke 
of Lawrence—and to some extent about the war in Europe. Edsall remem- 


214 


bered the occasion for more personal reasons: ““The house was up on a high 
hill, and it was a very stormy night, with a driving rain and high winds; it 
was quite dramatic, the feeling of the wind and rain all around 
us . . . [Oppenheimer was] quite outgoing and friendly; on the other 
hand, you felt that he was very deeply absorbed in his thoughts and what he 
was doing, so that I didn’t feel a kind of close contact with him at that time 
that I had during that year we had been in Cambridge together. Which was 
not surprising. After all, we hadn’t seen each other really for over a decade. I 
felt that he obviously was a far stronger person, that [the] inner crises that he 
had been through in those earlier years he had obviously worked out and 
achieved a great deal of inner resolution of them. I felt a sense of confidence 
and authority, although still tension and lack of inner ease in some respects, 
and yet this extraordinary power and sense of authority at the same time, 
and a feeling of such an extraordinarily brilliant and rapidly moving and 
scintillating mind that was beyond the power of most of us to follow. He 
could reach and see intuitively things that most people would be able to fol- 
low only very slowly and hesitatingly, if at all. This was not only in physics, 
but in other things as well.” 


OPPENHEIMER’S SERIES of notes on physics to Fowler seems to have 
ended early in 1941 after Fowler obtained leave from Caltech to serve as 
assistant director of research for the National Defense Research Committee. 
The previous August he had married Ardiane Olmsted. 

This letter to Fowler notes an impending investigation by a California 
state legislative committee on “un-American activities.”’ 


111 | TO WILLIAM A. FOWLER 


Berkeley 
Saturday [spring 1941] 


Dear Willie, 


We were so glad to have your good letter, to know that things were 
going pretty well with you—and now that Ardiane has come I expect more 
than pretty well—and that you’d thought friendly of us as we so often do of 
you. I expect that as time goes on you'll have more and more a feeling of 
confidence and conviction in the work you are doing; and I don’t think you 
could ever have felt right about not going. I have a lot more misgivings 
even than you ever had about what will come of all this; but even so I think 
surely if I were asked to do a job I could do really well and that needed 
doing I'd not refuse. I’d worry a lot, perhaps more even than you. But we 
worry anyway... 


215 


Gamow asked me to the nuclear congress in Washington in April, on the 
elementary particles. I said I’d come, and shall, if the meeting is held and 
nothing too serious comes up; maybe Kitty will come too but we're not 
sure. It sure will be fine to see you again. I may be out of a job by then, 
because UC is going to be investigated next week for radicalism and the 
story is that the committee members are no gentlemen and that they don’t 
like me. We'll do the best we can. 

Kitty is fine, and she sends you her love, and she does remember the good 
time in Oregon. Our best to Ardiane and to you, and write us whenever 
you can. 


Robert 


DESPITE THE DISRUPTION that the war was causing in the physics de- 
partments at Pasadena and Berkeley by the spring of 1941, Oppenheimer, 
accompanied by his wife, made the usual move to Pasadena, where their son 
Peter was born on May 12. 


112 | TO EDWIN A. AND RUTH UEHLING 


Pasadena 
May 17 [1941] 


Dear Ed & Ruth, 


It was fine to get your warm long good letter. If there has been a little delay 
in my answer, that is for 2 reasons: one good, one not so good. I’ve been sick, 
in Berkeley of pneumonia, & here of a miserable but not at all lethal disease 
called mononucleosis — 

A week ago Kitty, unexpectedly & two months early, had us our baby: a 
very small little boy called Peter, who is doing fine. Kitty herself is getting 
along well, should be home in about a week now. We'll be staying here 
about a month after that, then going north— 

I remember the wonderful visit of last June so warmly: it is easy to think 
of that as initiating this year, whose fortunes, so evil for the world, have 
been so good for me. It was such a sweet visit, & even now a year later | 
want to say thank you for it again. 

Your desire for a spectroscopist at the University I’d heard about. You 
are going I think to find it pretty hard to get any decent physicist these days, 
with the demand suddenly exceeding the supply so violently . . . If you 
are ever interested in theoretical people, there will be some first rate ones 
coming up next year. This year’s crop is pretty well spoken for already. The 


216 


situation in Berkeley & here in Pasadena is in some ways very gloomy: here 
specially almost all the men active in physics have been taken away for war 
work. Those left are swamped in administrative & teaching duties & their 
own defense problems. The number of graduate students too is way down: 
the losses heaviest among the men about to finish, in nuclear physics, but 
noticeable all along the line. In Berkeley we’ve lost Alvarez, McMillan, 2/3 
Lawrence, Brode, Loeb.# Only the last is not missed. I expect, unless there is 
a drastic change in policy on the part of the research boards, that physics in 
our sense will just about stop by next year. 

Our own work—on all sorts of minor things—has gone well enough, & 
I am real hopeful about some relatively new ‘“‘strong coupling” theories of 
the mesotron field, & the light they throw on ‘Heisenberg’ showers, proton 
isobars, scattering, & other such recondite matters. I’m supposed to be in 
Washington this week at the Nuclear Congress, but am having a conflict 
deciding whether or not to fly on—? 

I felt the greatest sympathy with what you wrote of the war. My own 
views could, im Kleinem, hardly be gloomier, either for what will happen 
locally & nationally, or in the world. I think we'll go to war—that the Roo- 
sevelt faction will win over the Lindbergh. I don’t think we’ll get anywhere 
near the Nazis. Later I think the Hearst-Lindbergh side will kick the admin- 
istration ‘humanitarians’ out. I see no good for a long time; & the only 
cheerful thing in these parts is the strength & toughness & political growth 
of organized labor. 

Let us know when to expect you both in Berkeley — 

Thanks again for your letter, from Kitty too— 

Affectionately 


Robert 


a. Luis W. Alvarez and Edwin M. McMillan, both promoted to associate professor effective 
the next academic year, were on leave for war work on radar at the Radiation Laboratory at 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Lawrence was working for the recently formed Na- 
tional Defense Research Committee. Robert Brode was at the Applied Physics Laboratory at 
Johns Hopkins, and Leonard B. Loeb, professor of physics, was in the Naval Reserve. 

b. The Seventh Annual Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics, May 22-24, 1941, 
was on the topic of the theory of elementary particles. The annual conferences were sponsored 
jointly by George Washington University and the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism of the 
Carnegie Institution of Washington. On May 22 Oppenheimer led the discussion on the theory 
of the meson. For a report of the conference see Science, 94 (July 25, 1941): 92-94. 


OPPENHEIMER’S POLITICAL CONCERNS during this period are 
evident in his letter of protest to Senator F. R. Coudert, Jr., co-chairman of 
the State of New York Joint Legislative Committee to Investigate the Pub- 
lic Educational System. Since the beginning of 1941 the committee had been 


217 


conducting a highly publicized probe into alleged subversive influence in 
the New York City college system, at a time when the Teachers’ Union was 
making gains in its organizational efforts. The style, familiar to those who 
remember the subsequent techniques of Senator Joseph McCarthy, was 
characterized by public accusations or innuendos that various faculty mem- 
bers had communist ties or sympathies. The New York City Board of 
Higher Education set up “‘trial’’ committees which often recommended the 
dismissal of the accused. In one such case "John Kenneth Ackley, registrar of 
City College, was dismissed in June 1941 “‘after being found guilty of con- 
duct unbecoming a member of the college staff.’’ An analysis of the case was 
made by Harlow Shapley and Donald Menzel of Harvard and Ernest M. 
Patterson of the University of Pennsylvania for the American Committee 
for Democracy and Intellectual Freedom (ACDIF), which condemned the 
motives and procedures of the investigating committees in a statement pub- 
lished in the New York Times on September 25. By that time, twenty-eight 
staff members had been dismissed at City College alone. Coudert re- 
sponded by attacking the ACDIF, accusing them of communist ties and co- 
operation with the Teachers’ Union, and his position was supported by a 
New York Times editorial.** Oppenheimer was a member of the teachers’ 
union in California and of the ACDIF. His letter to Coudert clearly identi- 
fied the fundamental issues at stake. 


113 | TO F. R. COUDERT, JR. 


Berkeley, California 
October 13, 1941 


Dear Senator Coudert: 


Thank you for your letter of October 3, for the interesting clipping from 
the Times, and for your long reply. 

As a remote and not very active member of the American Committee for 
Democracy and Intellectual Freedom, I should like to answer two points in 
your statement that seem, at this distance, not without interest. 

1) It was, I suppose, the immediate purpose of your investigation to dis- 
cover, expose, and force the dismissal from the school system of commu- 
nists, and communist sympathizers. It will have been said, assuredly not 
without justice, that men have been dismissed because of the activities of 
your committee who do not in fact belong in that category; it will also have 
been said, and perhaps also with justice, that the purposes of your investiga- 
tion went far beyond this avowed purpose. It is not with these points that I 
am concerned, but rather with your contention that this investigation was 
compatible in spirit as well as in letter with the Bill of Rights. You state that 


218 


your committee has not challenged the right of a teacher to any beliefs, 
however radical. But the Bill of Rights guarantees not the right to a belief, 
but the right to express that belief, in speech or in writing —and this right 
has been held to include (subject to restrictions having to do with libel) the 
right of anonymity. The Bill of Rights also guarantees (here with restric- 
tions on the “‘clear and present danger’”’) freedom of assembly. I think it a 
reasonable presumption—and one that no evidence of your committee that 
has come to my attention would disprove—that the activities of teachers 
who were communists or communist sympathizers consisted precisely in 
meeting, speaking their views, and publishing them (often anonymously), 
in engaging, that is, in practices specifically protected by the Bill of Rights. 
Under these circumstances your statement that the investigation committee 
denied to no teacher his freedom of belief seems to me of an extreme and 
vicious disingenuity. 

2) The second point concerns the procedure of your committee, about 
which I have read grave and well substantiated charges, and the procedure at 
the “trial” of Ackley and others. The careful and, I assure you, quite 
disinterested studies of my colleagues Shapley and Menzel could hardly 
leave any doubt about the “trial” procedure; but it took your own state- 
ment, with its sanctimonious equivocations and its red baiting, to get me to 
believe that the stories of mixed cajolery, intimidation and arrogance on the 
part of the committee of which you are chairman, are in fact true. 


Faithfully, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


THE FOLLOWING NOTE to Lawrence refers to the American Associa- 
tion of Scientific Workers, established in 1938 on the model of an older Brit- 
ish organization concerned with social relations of science in general and in 
particular with salaries, hours, and conditions of laboratory work. 

In 1954 Oppenheimer testified at the hearing before the Personnel Se- 
curity Board that “some time after we moved to Eagle Hill, possibly in the 
autumn of 1941, a group of people came to my house one afternoon to dis- 
cuss whether or not it would bé a good idea to set up a branch of the Asso- 
ciation of Scientific Workers. We concluded negatively, and I know my 
Own views were negative. ’™ 

With the exception of a few senior scientists, including Arthur H. 
Compton, members of the AASW were mostly young, and Berkeley was 
not the only place where its union-like claims were discouraged as war ap- 


proached. 


219 


114 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


Berkeley 
November 12, 1941 


Dear Ernest, 


I had hoped to see you before you left, but.will write this to assure you 
that there will be no further difficulties at any time with the A.A.S.W. I 
think that your own feeling about the men working directly with you will 
have a good deal of weight also with those scientists whose defense efforts 
are not in the Radiation Laboratory, and I doubt very much whether anyone 
will want to start at this time an organization which could in any way em- 
barrass, divide or interfere with the work we have in hand. I have not yet 
spoken to everyone involved, but all those to whom I have spoken agree 
with us; so you can forget it. 

Have a good trip and come back soon! 


Robert 


220 


1 4 


eB OR RET ico BBA A a es ers ala 


‘ 


I. I. Rabi, Dorothy McKibbin, Robert Oppenheimer, Victor Weisskopf at the Oppen- 
heimers’ home in Los Alamos, New Mexico, about 1944. (Courtesy of Los Alamos Scientific 
Laboratory. ) 


eo ee 4 
ee 


5 


Robert Oppenheimer and Major W. A. Stevens on a trip to select 
a site for the first atomic bomb test, early May 1944. (Courtesy of 
Kenneth T. Bainbridge. ) 


“a } » ¢ ' Me AAs gill vy : od ~* oes ~~ 


Robert Oppenheimer and General Leslie R. Groves revisiting the Alamogordo, New Mexico, 
test site. They are at the base of the steel tower on which the atomic bomb had been mounted in 
July 1945. The blast had vaporized most of the tower and fused the surface of the surrounding 
sands into a jade green glass-like material. (United Press International Photo.) 


IV “These terrible years of war’’ 


LOS ALAMOS, 1942-1945 


THE SECRECY that shrouded Oppenheimer’s wartime activities fostered 
the legend of an ivory-towered scientist and aesthete with leftwing political 
sympathies suddenly and miraculously transformed into an outstanding ad- 
ministrator and an influential member of the scientific establishment. The 
change did not happen overnight and was not a miracle. True, many who 
knew the prewar Oppenheimer would not have predicted it, but in the 
leader of the unprecedented undertaking they recognized familiar traits: the 
quick and omnicompetent intellect, the capacity for hard work, the personal 
charisma, the thoughtfulness for others. What had not always been obvious 
was the self-discipline that enabled Oppenheimer to apply these talents to 
the problems of a large and multifaceted project. 

Writer Paul Horgan, in no way privy to Oppenheimer’s wartime occu- 
pation, was not surprised to learn what role his old friend had played. “‘A 
true relation to the imaginative art,” explains Horgan, “‘[involves] a sense of 
design and order in affairs . . . Robert was a first class manipulator of the 
imagination and interpreter of it. It doesn’t amaze me at all—it didn’t at the 
time—that he should create this immense organization and have it run to 
his wishes, to his design.’”* 

Whatever the reaction of his friends, Oppenheimer emerged from the 
Los Alamos experience with a new self-image. Letters from the war period 
illustrate this, the most dramatic of several transitions in his life. These 
letters, which have been selected from a huge corpus of correspondence and 
memorandums, illustrate Oppenheimer’s style as director: his determina- 


aa | 


tion to pick the best people, his persuasiveness as a recruiter, his involve- 
ment in the varied aspects of the enterprise, and his concern for the well- 
being of his oddly assorted charges. From the beginning Oppenheimer rec- 
ognized that he was dealing in all areas with the highly unpredictable, 
though like others he failed to foresee the scale of operations and the size of 
the community needed to sustain them. 

Although Oppenheimer eventually came to symbolize the scientific 
achievement represented by the atomic bomb, by the time he played a sig- 
nificant part in it the project had ascomplicated administrative and diplo- 
matic history and much research had already been done in laboratories in 
Britain, France, and America.” Of the nearly one hundred papers on topics 
related to fission that appeared prior to the scientists’ self-imposed ban on 
publication, none bears Oppenheimer’s name, but he constantly engaged in 
theoretical speculation and discourse. In early 1941, when Ernest Lawrence 
began to develop the electromagnetic process for separating the uranium 
isotope 235, Oppenheimer and a group of theoretical physicists worked 
directly with him. 

Since October 1939 a presidential Committee on Uranium had been 
trying to coordinate research directed to the separation of isotopes and to 
the achievement of a sustained chain reaction, but many scientists consid- 
ered these efforts woefully inadequate in view of the probability that the 
Germans were working on an atomic weapon. Their concern led to major 
reorganization of the United States project in June 1941 through which the 
Committee on Uranium became the Section on Uranium (S-1) in the newly 
established Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) headed 
by Vannevar Bush and his deputy James B. Conant. Oppenheimer was 
aware, aS were many nuclear physicists and chemists, of the debate over 
which method of separating isotopes should be developed—gaseous diffu- 
sion, thermal diffusion, or Lawrence’s electromagnetic process—and of the 
final decision that, in the interest of speed, pilot plants for all three, plus a 
graphite pile for the production of plutonium, must be built. It was well 
known, too, that Bush had delegated the building of these plants, which in- 
volved site acquisition and recruitment of personnel and equipment, to the 
Army. 

Bush and his military counterparts were still trying to settle thorny 
questions relating to major plant construction when America’s entry into 
war in December 1941 provided the incentive for more rigorous organiza- 
tion of the fission-related research under way in civilian laboratories. Arthur 
H. Compton was assigned the task of coordinating and expanding theoreti- 
cal and experimental studies relating to fissionable materials and the produc- 
tion of a weapon. In January 1942 he organized the work in progress in Chi- 
cago under the code name of the Metallurgical Laboratory (or Met Lab) and 
recruited new staff. Compton also supervised work in laboratories across 


L22 


the country, including Fermi’s slow neutron graphite pile at Columbia, later 
moved to Chicago, and research on fast neutron reactions for eventual ap- 
plication to explosives under way in several locations under the direction of 
Gregory Breit. 

Robert Oppenheimer’s direct participation in these critical develop- 
ments began late and then only when Ernest Lawrence insisted that he be 
invited to a conference in Schenectady, New York, on October 21, 1941, to 
discuss fast neutron reactions. ““Oppenheimer has important new ideas,”’ 
Lawrence wired Compton on October 14, and in a follow-up letter, “I have 
a great deal of confidence in Oppenheimer.” In Schenectady Oppenheimer 
offered his estimate of the amount of U?* required for a bomb. On Decem- 
ber 8 he sent Compton some more figures and explained why these did not 
agree with Compton’s.® In January 1942, as Compton reordered his sprawl- 
ing command, he made Oppenheimer responsible for the fast neutron re- 
search at Berkeley. Soon thereafter Oppenheimer acquired regular secretar- 
ial help and began keeping a file of official correspondence, though some 
letters have a distinctly personal cast as do earlier ones primarily about 
physics. 


OPPENHEIMER’S RESPONSIBILITIES as head of the fast neutron 
work in Berkeley, combined with the general dislocation in normal routines 
of teaching and research that had taken place since Pearl Harbor, prompted a 
letter to President Millikan at Caltech. 


115 | TO ROBERT A. MILLIKAN 


Berkeley 
March 20. [1942] 


Dear Dr Millikan, 


The wholly altered character of our work, both in Pasadena and in Berke- 
ley, during these war years, has made it seem wise for us to reconsider 
whether my customary visits to the Institute, and my work there during the 
Spring semester, might not with reason be abandoned. It is I think certain 
that the arguments that have in the past justified my work in Pasadena no 
longer apply, and that new and compelling reasons have arisen for my 
leaving Berkeley as little as possible. I have appreciated too deeply the op- 
portunities for research and collaboration that my connection with the Insti- 
tute has afforded to be willing to see that connection lightly or irreparably 
broken. Would it be possible for us to discuss this question, in Pasadena, at 
your convenience, at some not too distant time? It would be possible for me 


223 


to be in Pasadena any Saturday. Would you let me have a note to say when 
you will be there, and when it will be most convenient for us to have a few 
minutes together? 

With all cordial greetings 


Robert Oppenheimer 


Millikan replied that he and his associate’ would also be loathe to see 
the Caltech tie broken. “It is of course true,” he continued, “‘that the emer- 
gency has thrown all of us here completely out of our normal orbits and 
thus changed very radically our activities and the theoretical needs of our 
jobs. Charley [Lauritsen]’s nuclear physics work has been dropped com- 
pletely because he is so extraordinarily useful and effective in producing tan- 
gible results on short order war-time devices.’’* This exchange, plus what- 
ever conversation followed, severed Oppenheimer’s formal connection 
with Pasadena for the duration of the war. 

In May, when Breit resigned as director of the fast neutron research 
being done under S-1 Committee auspices, Compton asked Oppenheimer 
to take his place. Oppenheimer’s task was to coordinate theoretical calcula- 
tions on basic nuclear reactions with experimental data in order to estimate 
both the critical mass of material needed for fission and the efficiency of the 
proposed weapon. Oppenheimer accepted the assignment on condition that 
an experimental physicist could assist him. Compton chose John H. Man- 
ley, professor of physics at the University of Illinois, who had joined the 
Metallurgical Laboratory the previous January. Manley had once met Op- 
penheimer casually and doubted that he could communicate at all with such 
a “‘high-powered and erudite theoretical physicist.’” However, Manley was 
persuaded to accept the appointment, and for the next nine months, until he 
joined Oppenheimer at Los Alamos on April 4, 1943, they were in constant 
touch through conferences and correspondence.” 

Once Manley’s assistance was assured, Oppenheimer began seeking 
advice from scientists who had done research in neutron physics, even 
though some were currently employed on other war projects. One of those 
consulted was Robert Bacher, since 1940 on leave from his professorship of 
physics at Cornell to work on development of radar at the M.I.T. Radiation 
Laboratory. The conference that prompted the following letter to consul- 
tants and research directors was one of several convened by Oppenheimer 
in the pre-Los Alamos period.® 


224 


116 | TO ROBERT F. BACHER 


[Chicago, Illinois] 
June 10, 1942 


Dear Dr. Bacher: 


As a result of our discussion in Chicago last Saturday, it has I think be- 
come clear to all of us how very far we are from the solution of our essential 
problems; what I am writing about is to suggest some minor organizational 
steps which I hope will help to assure the two things that we most need: 
reliability and speed. I think that probably some trouble has arisen in the 
past because too much work has gone on without detailed consultation. It 
would seem to me that all directors of projects in this field should recognize 
the importance of communicating at once either with Dr. Manley, or with 
me, or with other authorized persons, if they run into a problem which 
worries them or which promises to delay their work. In the same way, I 
think that if other materials, if made available, would facilitate the work, 
project directors should communicate their needs at once to this office. In 
fact, if the difficulties in the work appear serious enough, there is no reason 
why we should not call a conference to discuss them either in the laboratory 
where the specific project is in progress, or here in Chicago. It seems certain 
that on some of the projects which are being pursued simultaneously along 
parallel lines in more than one laboratory, we shall want to get together the 
people involved for a critical discussion at not too infrequent intervals. 

Dr. Manley will make his headquarters in this laboratory but he will be 
free when the need arises to come to any of the laboratories where our work 
is in progress. I would like to urge you to take advantage of the possibility 
of discussion and help which this will afford us. In general, the purpose of 
this letter is only to ask you not to count the inconveniences of communica- 
tion, travel, and the time of Dr. Manley and myself as very valuable in com- 
parison with the actual progress of the work. You will receive from Dr. 
Manley an outline of the work now in progress which may help to clarify 
what we are really after. Finally, both Dr. Manley and I should like copies of 
your fortnightly progress reports. In order to fix our responsibilities, Dr. 
Manley and I would appreciate it if all correspondence were addressed, ei- 
ther specifically to him, or specifically to me; but that in all cases copies be 
sent to both of us. 

Cordially yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


ZZ5 


Meanwhile, Oppenheimer was organizing a summer session in Berke- 
ley to explore the theoretical aspects of nuclear explosions for which he was 
directly responsible. One of his first recruits was John Van Vleck of Har- 
vard, whose help he then sought in securing the presence of Hans Bethe. 
Bethe had moved to the United States in 1935 and joined the faculty at Cor- 
nell University, where he became professor of physics in 1937. 


117 | TO JOHN H. VAN VLECK 


[Berkeley, California] 
June 10, 1942 


Dear Van: 


Compton talked yesterday to DuBridge;? apparently that end of it is quite 
clear. Bethe’s contract is not with the Radiation Laboratory directly but at 
Cornell. He is at the Radiation Lab for a month only, to gain experience, 
and DuBridge indicated that it would be quite appropriate for him to spend 
the summer with us, if that is what seems to him the best way to put in his 
time. This means, therefore, that there are no formal difficulties and that the 
essential point is to enlist Bethe’s interest, to impress on him the magnitude 
of the job we have to do, and thus the fact that a week’s consultation would 
not be enough, and to try to convince him, too, that our present plans, the 
organization which we have set up, are the appropriate machinery. I know 
that you will be more successful in this than anyone else who could attempt 
it. 

Mostly I am busy with the experimental side now, but every time I think 
about our problem a new headache appears. We shall certainly have our 
hands full. I should like to tell you again how glad I am that we are going to 
be working together. 

Please do not hesitate to let me know if anything comes up where I can be 
of use or comfort. 

Cordially, 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


a. Lee A. DuBridge was director of the Radiation Laboratory at M.I.T., on leave from the 
chairmanship of the physics department at the University of Rochester. 


Van Vleck met Bethe in an empty spot in Harvard Yard to obtain his 
consent, then sent word to Oppenheimer via a twenty-five cent ‘“‘kiddy- 
gram’’ containing some prearranged code message such as “Brush your 
teeth.”’” Others who attended all or part of the Berkeley sessions were Ed- 


226 


ward Teller, nominally of George Washington University but temporarily 
at Columbia, Emil Konopinski of Indiana University, Felix Bloch of Stan- 
ford, and three of Oppenheimer’s former students: Stanley S. Frankel, 
Eldred C. Nelson, and Robert Serber. All but Van Vleck would later join 
the Los Alamos staff. 

While assembling what he described as the “‘luminaries,’’” Oppenheimer 
replfed to John Manley’s reports with comments of his own. He questioned 
the value of two proposed pieces of research; one of the men suggested was 
reputedly difficult to work with. There were problems in several laborato- 
ries: equipment improperly designed, similar samples yielding conflicting 
data, delay in completion of a contract which in turn affected priorities in 
obtaining supplies. It was hard to settle such matters by correspondence, but 
Oppenheimer hoped to postpone a trip to Chicago until the end of July, 
when the theoretical group in Berkeley had completed its report. As for 
himself and Serber, ““We are up to our ears in every kind of work,”’ said 
Oppenheimer, noting especially the fission neutron yields obtained from 
uranium bombarded with neutrons of various energies. He worried about 
the effect of U88.® 


THE BERKELEY CONFERENCE absorbed Oppenheimer’s attention 
during much of July. Reviewing the experimental data and the theoretical 
calculations available from British and American sources, the group con- 
cluded “‘that the development of the fission bomb would require a major 
scientific and technical effort.’’® 

The Berkeley group also made theoretical calculations relating to a far 
more powerful explosion that might result from a thermonuclear reaction 
in deuterium, a possibility that had been discussed before the war. At a cer- 
tain point in the Berkeley deliberations, when figures seemed to indicate 
that an atomic explosion might trigger an uncontrolled reaction in the at- 
mosphere, Oppenheimer went to Chicago and pursued Compton to his 
cottage on a remote lake in northern Michigan to warn him that such an 
event seemed theoretically possible. They agreed that the Berkeley theorists 
must continue their calculations. If these failed to provide absolutely con- 
clusive evidence that an atomic explosion could be contained, the bomb 
project must stop.”° 

Final results from Berkeley satisfied Compton and his associates, but 
one participant in the summer session continued to think about a more 
powerful, though controlled, device. 


22) 


118 | TO EDWARD TELLER 


[Berkeley, California] 
September 11, 1942 


Dear Edward: 


Your fine letter came yesterday. We are planning to leave here on the 
streamliner September 17. That brings us to Chicago September 19. I am so 
informing Kski.? Our plans are to spend five days to a week in Chicago and 
it is possible that I shall stay on longer myself. 

Your worries certainly differed very much from ours over this past week 
and, in fact, the suggestions that you make have by now for us a pretty fan- 
tastic sound. We have been reexamining, especially Hans [Bethe] of course, 
the question of conductivity and the first result of this is that very high tem- 
peratures will be extremely hard to reach and that the edge of the deuter1um 
will always be quite cool. At a half a million volts temperature the electron 
mean free path is 40 c.m.; the albedo really does not help much and there- 
fore unless one has huge volumes, temperatures will certainly be limited to 
something under this value. Even if one does have huge receptacles the tem- 
perature near any body which can radiate effectively will be very much 
lower. For this reason, too, in addition to those we spoke of before, no other 
thermo-nuclear reactions will occur. We are satisfied, however, with the 
uranium. 

Of course, this big conductivity further complicates the initial detonation 
and it seems likely that somewhat larger disks of 25 [uranium 235] and fairly 
careful wall design will really have to be used. We have some rough ideas on 
these subjects. 

We spent one afternoon looking at the wedges and are willing to guaran- 
tee that they will be a lot of trouble and not worth it. The rest can wait until 
we get to Chicago, except all our cordial greetings and our good wishes to 
you both. 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. “‘Kski’ was the contraction generally employed by Emil Konopinski’s friends. 


OPPENHEIMER AND JOHN MANLEY exchanged frequent reports. 
They made a good team, but, in Manley’s words, “it was really no way to 
run a program.’’"’ At the highest level of what had become the Develop- 
ment of Substitute Materials (or DSM) project, Bush and Conant were 
reaching the same conclusion. A June 1942 reorganization, designed to de- 
fine lines of authority between OSRD and the Army, had not prevented ar- 


228 


guments over contracts, priorities, and construction sites for the pilot plants 
to produce fissionable materials which would eventually make up the huge 
installations at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and Hanford, Washington. 

Progress in resolving these problems was speeded up immeasurably 
after September 17, when General Leslie R. Groves took charge of the Man- 
hattan Engineer District (so-called because Groves’ predecessor had 
operated out of a New York City office). To assure the continued influence 
of scientists, Bush proposed a military policy committee to work closely 
with Groves. This three-member committee began to function immedi- 
ately. Bush represented OSRD, with Conant as his alternate; the other two 
were Army and Navy officers. Major decisions had yet to be made; policies, 
programs, and time tables were constantly revised. But from the time of 
Groves’ appointment, he and the Military Policy Committee directed the 
multifarious activities of the Manhattan Project. Conant, backed by Bush, 
served as liaison in matters relating to scientific research and bomb develop- 
ment. 

One of the first decisions made by Groves and the new committee was 
to centralize the work that Oppenheimer and Manley were supervising, for 
if the Allies were to win what was then assumed to be a race with Germany 
to develop a fission weapon, certain scientific and engineering problems had 
to be solved quickly. A new weapons laboratory might be attached to the 
Chicago Met Lab, but attention there was focusing on Fermi’s experiments 
with slow neutron reactions in a graphite pile; besides, security was difficult 
to enforce in a large city. Another possible site was Oak Ridge, where re- 
search relating to production of fissionable materials was being concen- 
trated, but Oppenheimer, among others, was opposed to making the weap- 
ons laboratory an appendage to the giant production plants.” 

Plans were still tentative when he wrote Manley about the proposed 
changes. “‘Ed’’ was Edwin McMillan, on leave from the Berkeley physics 
department, first at the M.I.T. Radiation Laboratory, then briefly at the 
U.S. Navy Radio and Sound Laboratory in San Diego. In the autumn of 
1942 he returned to Berkeley to help Oppenheimer plan the new labora- 
tory.'° 

Oppenheimer also reported to Manley on a typical set of personnel 
problems and on the progress of certain research projects. Most of the scien- 
tists for whose work they were responsible were studying nuclear reactions. 
The investigators were using as targets a variety of substances which they 
bombarded with atomic “‘projectiles”’ accelerated to high energies in a cy- 
clotron, a Van de Graaff (electrostatic) generator, or a Cockcroft— Walton 
accelerator. The results of the reaction were observed with one of several 
available counting devices and expressed numerically as cross-sections. (The 
cross-section represents the probability that a given type of reaction will 
occur and is obtained by dividing the observed number of events by the 


Zod 


number of incident particles and the number of target nuclei per square cen- 
timeter.) Oppenheimer and Manley were receiving a great deal of useful ex- 
perimental data, but in assuring themselves that results obtained at different 
laboratories were truly consistent and accurate, they faced complicated lo- 
gistics problems, including exchange of samples and procedural informa- 
tion. The difficulties in establishing the quantitative basis for the design of 
an atomic weapon became an important argument for a central laboratory. 

Nuclear physicists employed a shorthand to indicate the substance used 
in a given experiment, the type of pa?ticlé with which it was bombarded, 
and the type of particle resulting from the bombardment. In the following 
letter, Li (p, n) referred to an event in which lithium had absorbed a proton 
and emitted a neutron (or, more colloquially, proton in, neutron out). D-D 
indicated that deuterons had been bombarded with deuterons (producing 
high energy neutrons). Oppenheimer was not always meticulous in using 
the comma, the hyphen, and the parentheses, but his correspondents under- 
stood the type of reaction to which he referred. 

The numbers 49, 25, and 23 were Project codes for certain fissionable 
isotopes and were formed by combining the last digits of the atomic num- 
ber and of the atomic weight. For example, plutonium 239, atomic number 
94, became 49; uranium 235, atomic number 92, became 25; uranium 233, 
atomic number 92, became 23. 

When news of uranium fission broke in 1939, scientists began to specu- 
late about other, as yet unidentified, elements that might be fissionable. In 
June 1940 Edwin McMillan and Philip Abelson (a visitor at Berkeley from 
the Carnegie Institution of Washington) published results of experiments 
which identified element 93 (neptunium) and indicated the presence of yet 
another transuranic element. When McMillan left to work on radar at 
M.I.T., Glenn Seaborg carried on McMillan’s research. Using a Berkeley 
Radiation Laboratory cyclotron to bombard uranium 238 with neutrons, 
early in 1941 Seaborg’s team produced measurable quantities of element 94, 
which they named plutonium. In April 1942 Seaborg moved to Chicago as a 
section chief at the Met Lab. 

A contributor to the plutonium experiments was Emilio Segre.'* Segre 
had come to the United States from Italy in 1938, and in 1941 held a research 
appointment at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory. When the Los Alamos 
laboratory was organized in 1943 he became a group leader in the Experi- 
mental Physics Division. 


230 


119 | TO JOHN H. MANLEY 


[Berkeley, California] 
October 12, 1942 


Dear John: 


I sKall answer your fine letter at some length, in spite of the fact that I may 
be in Chicago about as soon as this answer. The reason for that is that I may 
want to sit in on a conference Thursday for the planning of our laboratory. I 
did see General Groves when he was here and we discussed the problem of 
the laboratory rather fully, and by this means managed to undo such cer- 
tainty as had before been reached. I think that he was convinced of the ne- 
cessity for proceeding immediately with the construction of the laboratory 
and the reorganization of our work, but I think that he was much less 
willing than he had been before to see it at the same site as the production. 
For this reason some rather far reaching geographical change in plans seems 
to be in the cards and I do not know to what extent this will bring jurisdic- 
tional changes with it; that is, I do not know whether plans for this labora- 
tory will still be cleared through Chicago or whether we shall need some 
new machinery for these problems. In the former case I will probably come 
to Chicago for the Thursday meeting. 

Because of these complications I am not quite sure who should do the 
approving and checking of our temporary plans, but I think that everything 
that you have done to get some sketches into the hands of Stone and Web- 
ster 1s to the good.? I think our plans are quite modest as far as space is con- 
cerned and Ed [McMillan] seems to share this view. If there is any revision 
in the number of rooms I think it should be a revision upward; from 38, say, 
to 50. I am afraid that if we postpone expansion for another year it will be 
much harder for us to get the buildings up. 

Now for some of the other questions: 

1. I was pleased to get Holloway’s report and hope that he will make up 
his mind as to the relative virtues of Rochester and Yale. Probably by the 
time this gets to you, you will have settled it. I think that Rochester would 
have the advantage of being a little bit less far from Chicago and I have a 
little bit more confidence in the technical qualities of their cyclotron. Also, it 
is nearer Cornell. If the personnel problem can be solved, let us push for 
Rochester.” 

2. Langer seems a good solution for Auger. In any case, we should start 
now on a policy of absolutely unscrupulous recruiting of anyone we can lay 
hands on. It will pay us well later.° 

3. I have had no answer from Urey on the depleted carbon. You might 
check with Mrs. Tracy to see whether the letter ever got to him. If it did and 
we don’t hear from him I will follow up with something more urgent. 


231 


4. I have also discussed with Seaborg the desirability of testing the 49 and 
23 but think that we should use Li(pn) and DD for this work. I am a little 
reluctant to turn over these materials to any of our outlying laboratories and 
wonder whether it could be arranged to make comparative runs with DD in 
Chicago. We have already arranged to investigate them with the Berkeley 
photo neutron sources. The evidence now is that 49 at least is appreciably 
better than 25. 

5. I think that the problem of McKibben’s fugacity will probably remain 
unsolved until Ed gets on the job I should hate to see you spend your time 
there and think that it would on the whole be a greater loss than it would 
benefit. But I do think that if you could plan to run up there even a few hours 
a fortnight you might do a lot of good. Is it possible to establish contact also 
with Hanson? Is he a more steady, responsible fellow? I think it will do 
nothing but make trouble if Williams comes down there.® 

6. The nD cross sections from Williams’ runs seem quite reasonable to us, 
perhaps a bit on the low side. The errors still are too large. I think that we 
will have to be willing to use the theoretical n,p cross sections and as you 
know, we are preparing a report on them which will be something of an 
improvement over Kittell and Breit.‘ It is obvious that any really valid check 
on this theory would be very helpful and therefore my answer to your ques- 
tion about oxygen is that if Williams can do it in such a way that the mea- 
surement has any meaning it would be a fine thing. Is there a possibility of 
working with liquid oxygen? I don’t see that it will do us any good to intro- 
duce a new uncertainty such as would arise in the work if we used an oxide. 
Also, I think that it will be of no use to us unless the oxygen cross section 
can be known to within 10 or 20 per cent, and even this I believe will in- 
volve an error greater than in the theory. 

7. 1am going down to Stanford Wednesday to see Bloch’s set-up. He is 
delighted with the performance of his icebox and feels full of confidence 
that their work will go along rapidly and well. I need give you no report on 
developments here since Segre is in Chicago and nothing new has arisen. 

8. That leaves only one question unanswered: how to get you out of the 
mad house and to California. I think it will be easy to get you out of that 
mad house and that we will be doing that very soon now, but I am afraid 
that what you will be getting into will be a good deal worse; at least, a good 
deal grimmer. 

How 1s Snell’s experiment?® If I’m not coming on next week let me hear 
from you soon. 


Good luck — 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


ao 


a. Stone & Webster Engineering Corporation was a principal contractor for the DSM 
Project. 

b. Marshall G. Holloway, a member of the Cornell physics department, worked with the 
cyclotron at the Purdue Research Foundation until he and his group went to Los Alamos in 
1943. 

c. Lawrence M. Langer, a physicist from Indiana University, went to Los Alamos in 1943 
as an alternate group leader. Pierre Auger, a French experimental physicist, had been a research 
associate at the University of Chicago since 1941. 

d. Harold Urey, professor of chemistry at Columbia and a member of the S-1 Executive 
Committee, was in charge of work on the gaseous diffusion method of separating uranium 
235. 

e. Joseph L. McKibben and Alfred O. Hanson were young physicists at the University of 
Wisconsin who went to Los Alamos in 1943. Oppenheimer’s long-distance judgment about 
McKibben’s volatility was not a final one. McKibben proved so reliable that he was entrusted 
with a critical last-minute task at the 1945 Alamogordo test. John H. Williams, associate profes- 
sor of physics at the University of Minnesota, was an early arrival at Los Alamos. Initially a 
group leader in the Experimental Physics Division, he later held other responsible administra- 
tive positions. 

f. Charles Kittel, Breit’s collaborator, was a 1941 Ph.D. at Wisconsin. 

g. Arthur H. Snell was chief of the cyclotron section of the Met Lab. 


Neither the official history of the Manhattan Project nor that of the Los 
Alamos Laboratory (soon to be designated Site Y) assign a precise date to 
Oppenheimer’s appointment as director of the new laboratory. Groves later 
stated that he first met Oppenheimer in Berkeley on October 8 and that, 
after careful consideration of all available candidates, he concluded that Op- 
penheimer was the best qualified although he lacked the administrative ex- 
perience of other Manhattan Project leaders and the prestige of a Nobel 
prize.'® If Oppenheimer’s comments to Manley about the tentative state of 
planning reflect his own ambiguous position, this did not halt his vigilant 
watch over detail. 

Meanwhile, the process of selecting a site for the new laboratory got 
under way, the principal consideration being isolation. Oppenheimer, no 
less than Groves, was concerned about security of information, but security 
from whom? Letters of the summer and autumn of 1942 show how many 
angles Oppenheimer had to keep in mind. In addition to the obvious threat 
of foreign spying, there were strict rules regarding compartmentalization of 
information within the Manhattan Project. And with Bush’s concurrence, 
the Army had decreed that British scientists, who had provided so much 
information basic to the development of an atomic weapon, should not be 
given figures relating to energy release and demolition areas—no great 
problem, Oppenheimer confided to one of his correspondents, since these 
figures were not known anyway.’ Still, the restriction, though temporary, 
enlarged the concept of “‘the enemy”’ from which the new laboratory had to 
be secured. 


233 


THE NEXT TWO LETTERS, one of them from Seaborg to Oppen- 
heimer, relate to one of the most serious problems that arose in the course of 
developing an atomic weapon and give a sense of the complexity of the 
problems that regularly confronted Oppenheimer as director of the weap- 
ons project. Scientists in Berkeley and Chicago, as well as in Britain, were 
beginning to realize that alpha particles formed by the natural radioactive 
decay of plutonium would react with any traces of light elements present as 
impurities. Neutrons produced in such a reaction could in turn cause a low- 
level explosion before assembly of a bomb was complete. The problem was 
eventually solved less by development of chemical and metallurgical tech- 
niques that achieved the necessary extreme purity than by developing a 
wholly new and much faster method of assembling the critical mass of fis- 
sionable material, largely eliminating the predetonation problem.’ 


120 | GLENN T. SEABORG TO ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


[Chicago, Illinois] 
November 3, 1942 


Dear Robert: 


There is one point that has been worrying me quite a good deal since the 
discussion that we had in Berkeley the early part of last month. This relates 
to the number of neutrons that it is permissible to have present in the final 
49 product in order not to cause complications in its control. You have 
stated that it would be ideal if the spontaneous fission rate were as long as 
10'° years. If this figure is a desirable limit, and if you can not get around it 
any other way, this creates a formidable chemical problem because of the 
possibility of forming neutrons from the a,n reaction on light element im- 
purities. Since the alpha-emitting life of 49 is about 10* years, 10*° alphas 
must not produce an undesirable neutron. Assuming that an element like 
boron, for example, has a cross section for the a,n reaction of about 1 in 10%, 
this would mean that boron must be absent in the final product to the extent 
of 1 part in 10”. 

You can see why I am disturbed if this calculation is correct and if you are 
actually limited by this requirement. Even if you can stand 10° times as 
many neutrons as this, making the limits of light impurities which are per- 
missible one part in about a million, the final chemical purification is still a 
formidable problem. In fact, if these requirements are going to be placed 
upon our chemical procedures, I should like to know definitely about it as 
soon as possible since this will require a great deal of development work 
along lines which so far have never been attempted. 


234 


I have discussed this matter somewhat with Dr. Manley and Dr. Teller 
and I believe that they also consider it a rather serious problem. 
With best regards, 


Cordially, 
Glenn T. Seaborg 


121 | TO GLENN T. SEABORG 


[Berkeley, California] 
November 6, 1942 


Dear Glenn: 


Thanks for your fine letter. The problem you raise is not a new one, nor is 
it limited to the 49. I’ve thought about it a little in connection with the 25- 
24, and it is probably time to get possibilities clear. 

With the 25 alone matters would not be so bad: a concentration of light 
impurities (B Be Al, C N) of 107~* would give us the more than ideal 10° 
years equivalent. If, as in our present set up, almost all the 24 goes along 
with the 25, then things are about 25 times worse. I believe that we can 
probably get along with 10°” years equivalent if we have to. Therefore I 
should say that the chemical problem with 24-25 mixture was hard but 
probably soluble. Do you agree in this? 

With the 49, even allowing a factor 10 in your estimate of yield and a fac- 
tor 100 in our requirements, it still comes to a purity of about 10~®. Is this 
hopeless? 

It would be a help to know what you think on these points fairly soon, 
since if your answers are in the negative it will mean not only rather radical 
and I am afraid rather inefficient redesign, but also the immediate prospect 
of some new production problems for other materials. 

How bad is 23? 

Thanks again for your letter, and let me know what your ideas re this 
chemistry are as soon as you can. 


With all good greetings, 
Robert Oppenheimer 


235 


WITH ISOLATION UPPERMOST in mind, Lt. Col. W. H. Dudley, to 
whom Groves assigned the preliminary survey of laboratory sites, nar- 
rowed the choice to the southern Rockies and finally to a site near the village 
of Jemez Springs on the western side of the Jemez Mountains northwest of 
Santa Fe, New Mexico. Presumably Oppenheimer’s status as director had 
been clarified when he wrote Manley enthusiastically about the prospective 
location which he had visited on pack trips from the Pecos.'® 

This letter illustrates the importance to the bomb project of prewar re- 
search in nuclear physics and chemistry in laboratory facilities at universities 
throughout the United States. Joseph W. Kennedy, an instructor at Berke- 
ley, collaborated with Seaborg in carrying to a conclusion the work that led 
to the discovery of plutonium. Kennedy became director of the Chemistry 
and Metallurgy Division at Los Alamos. 


122 | TO JOHN H. MANLEY 


[Berkeley, California] 
November 6, 1942 


Dear John: 


I have still to thank you for your good letter and for the copy of the plans. 
Ed [McMillan] and I made no changes in these and they will be used as the 
basis for the actual drawings as soon as the question of terrain is settled. 

Dudley and Groves were here and the question of site is well along 
toward settlement. It is a lovely spot and in every way satisfactory, and the 
only points which now have to be settled are whether the human and legal 
aspects of the necessary evacuations make insuperable difficulties. Ed and | 
plan to go down and have a look next week, and will probably spend a few 
days there getting some of the important questions settled. I know that you 
will be very pleased with the site if we can really get this one. 

I have written to Conant requesting the immediate transfer to our work 
of Herb, Bacher and Kurie.? We thought that with this group, together with 
you and Ed and me, we could really get started. I have no idea what success 
Conant will have, or whether the men themselves will be fully cooperative, 
but I think that Conant will bring a very sympathetic attitude to our person- 
nel problems and that we may find fewer difficulties in all this than we an- 
ticipated. Conant’s wire, by the way, was effective and Ed is with us. 

There are some developments locally. The most pleasing is that the direct 
calibration of Segre and Kennedy raised their cross sections by about 40 per 
cent. This corresponds to a manganese-hydrogen ratio of 36 and on re- 
examining the literature we found no shred of support for the 26 that 
[Herbert] Anderson gave me. Their cross sections are now in reasonable ac- 


236 


cord with Heydenburg and with the results that McKibben has been send- 
ing. 

The second development is this. Ed and I went down to Stanford where 
they were just beginning to detect the fission neutrons. Ed made the very 
useful suggestion of reducing the fast neutron effects by a monitoring fast 
neutron chamber put on the grid of their first tube with an appropriate neg- 
ative amplification. This will cut down very much the time they need to 
wait. Segre and Kennedy went down there too, and are helping them set up 
an enriched fission chamber which they can use to measure directly their 
fast neutron densities. This not only has the advantage of rendering their 
spectrum absolute, but will throw some at present needed light on whether 
their hydrogen chamber is really performing as it should. 

As for Minneapolis, the problem is rendered difficult because we are not 
yet sure how soon it will be appropriate to move people into the new labo- 
ratory. But there is one point it would be worth their looking at if they can 
do it in a reasonable time: that is to get an idea of the angular distribution of 
the n-D scattering at their higher energies. If you remember our program, 
we will be principally interested in energies of 5 Mev and above, and I 
thought it would be some time before the Minnesota results would be avail- 
able there. The angular distribution work need not be very precise. 

We have the curves for the n,p scattering and they are being reproduced 
now. They will be accompanied by a short explanatory article on the uncer- 
tainties and approximations. Actually, these curves are about the most cer- 
tain thing we have in the whole work. I shall send you a few copies of these 
curves and might leave it to you to find out whether we need any further 
authorization before sending them around to the laboratories concerned. 

Kamen has decided that it would be better to make our He® by devoting 
the cyclotron to D-D bombardment for a few days, and is doing that now.° 
We will have time to increase the amounts to what is needed before the Pur- 
due people are ready. 

I had to re-refer Simon’s request to Bush since he was unwilling to have 
me invite Peierls.4 I hope it will come out all right, but am quite worried. 

I am not sending a copy of this to Compton since there are some parts of 
it that do not immediately concern him, but I should be glad to have you tell 
him anything about the developments in physics that you think he would 
like to hear. Don’t tell him about our laboratory. We will leave that to other 
people. 

I still don’t know when I'll get East, but it certainly won’t be after De- 
cember 1, and may be much sooner. 


Yours, 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


257 


a. Bacher joined the project; Raymond G. Herb of the University of Wisconsin and Franz N. 
D. Kurie, doing war research at Berkeley, did not. 

b. The amount of fissile material which would have to be made for each weapon was very 
dependent on the values of these various nuclear cross sections being measured. Herbert L. 
Anderson was a graduate student at Columbia. Norman P. Heydenburg was making cross sec- 
tion measurements at the High Voltage Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington's 
Department of Terrestrial Magnetism. 

c. The physical chemist Martin Kamen was at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory. 

d. Franz E. (Francis) Simon, professor of physics at Oxford, and Rudolf Peierls, pro- 
fessor of physics at Birmingham, were members of{.the British atomic weapons project's 
technical committee. At the time of Peierls’ proposed visit Bush was engaged in delicate nego- 
tiations about exchange of atomic information with the British. For the context of these discus- 
sions, see pp. 266—267 below. 


Oppenheimer and McMillan visited Jemez Springs with Colonel Dud- 
ley on November 16."® By the time Groves arrived in the afternoon, the two 
scientists had decided that the deep canyon, while certainly remote, was 
much too constricted for laboratories and housing and that boundary fences 
atop the steep rock walls could not be properly patrolled. Dudley was not 
convinced. ‘““We were arguing about this when General Groves showed 
up,’’ McMillan later recalled. ‘‘As soon as Groves saw the site he didn’t like 
it; he said, “This will never do,’ and I never had a chance to make my fine 
arguments about it.”” At that point Oppenheimer remarked that on up the 
canyon, on the east side of the Jemez range, was a boys’ school on a flat 
mesa; this might be a possible site. “So we all got into cars,’’ cantinued 
McMillan, “‘we didn’t ride horses, as some people have said (that’s too far), 
and. ..went... to Los Alamos Ranch School. . . [It] was late in the 
afternoon. There was a slight snow falling . . . It was cold and there were 
the boys and their masters out on the playing fields in shorts. . . As soon 
as Groves saw it, he said, in effect, ‘This is the place’ . . . I think Oppen- 
heimer privately wanted that site anyhow but he didn’t put it forward until 
this occasion.” It is McMillan’s recollection that none of the party went in- 
side the school that day, but Groves immediately instituted inquiries about 
acquisition. Oppenheimer and McMillan accompanied him to Washington 
for further discussion, but returned four days later (on November 20) for 
careful inspection of the site and buildings.” 

The Los Alamos Ranch School occupied the broad mountain end of a 
two-mile long mesa. Steep canyons formed the north and south boundaries. 
Open places could be fenced or guarded. Nearby canyons and mesas offered 
seclusion for nuclear experiments and test explosions. The school buildings 
—a dining lodge, dormitory, houses for seven or eight married teachers and 
a dozen maintenance staff, plus miscellaneous workshops, sheds, and store- 
houses— provided a nucleus around which laboratories and housing could 


238 


be built for the thirty or so scientists and their families that early plans envi- 
sioned. 

The nearest railroad stop was some sixty miles away, and the bad roads 
which isolated the mesa also made it hard of access, but by the time the gen- 
eral’s car had descended the ten-mile track to the Rio Grande, with its hair- 
pin turns and precipitous drops, his engineer’s eye had constructed a wider 
and safer road. (The new road would carry load after load of building sup- 
plies, gravel for roads, laboratory equipment, including the large Harvard 
cyclotron magnet, and furniture, not to mention cars filled with wide-eyed, 
sometimes frightened, women and children before it in turn gave way to a 
paved and more gently curving highway.) 

As for the “necessary evacuations,”’ enrollment at the Ranch School 
had declined from a high of forty-two boys as the war restricted travel, but 
the comforting rumor that it must soon have closed for lack of students is 
not repeated in published accounts of its history.24 On December 7, 1942, 
the formal eviction notice was received from the War Department; in Feb- 
ruary 1943, a month before the first scientists arrived, the school closed. 


OPPENHEIMER’S NOVEMBER 30 report to Conant reflected the swift 
accumulation of data, such as that relating to tolerable levels of impurities in 
plutonium, that was making the new laboratory essential. It also demon- 
strated Oppenheimer’s place in the hierarchy of information gathering, 
evaluation, and decision making within the Manhattan Project. 

As the complexity of engineering a weapon became apparent, recruit- 
ment of staff absorbed much of Oppenheimer’s attention. He had already 
developed a certain toughness in rejecting unsuitable candidates: one was 
eliminated because he was slow to adopt new ideas. Now he became more 
aggressive in filling gaps in his new staff. Scouts were on the lookout for 
needed talent; Conant could arrange release from prior commitments, but it 
often took an interview with Oppenheimer, in which he cautiously but elo- 
quently described a project that would end the war and have peacetime ap- 
plications of untold benefit to mankind, to persuade a man to uproot his 
family and join the adventure in the New Mexico mountains. 


239 


123 | TO JAMES B. CONANT 


Berkeley 
November 30, 1942 


Dear Dr. Conant: 


Your letter reached me with some delay since I returned to Berkeley only 
a day or so ago. I should like to answer first your P.S. You are quite right 
that the purities listed in Groves’ compulsory memo are a little misleading. 
The reason for this is that Groves defined a satisfactory bomb as one that had 
a 50 per cent chance of exceeding a 1,000-ton TNT equivalent. The absolute 
requirements are figured on this basis. It is, of course, my opinion that we 
should be wanton to strive for such a low goal, but I believe that some good 
was in fact done by indicating at that time that the purity requirements are 
not fantastic. The desirable requirements are equally undefined since the 
purer the material (up to a purity of about 100-fold that given) the less must 
we be worried about getting the maximum speed for the firing mechanism 
of the detonator; and this will make for simplicity and reliability in opera- 
tion. In the Washington memo all impurities were listed on the assumption 
that not more than five elements would reach the tabulated values. I have, in 
the meantime, given a much more careful account of what the actual situa- 
tion is to the committee. I met with them one day in Chicago, came out 
with them on the train, and have spent two days with them here in Berke- 
ley, and we have had ample opportunity to discuss the purity question and 
many other aspects of our problem. The information which I have given 
them now is contained in a Chicago report on the feasibility of the 49 
project and is as follows: If the concentrations by weight are as given in the 
accompanying table, then the chance of pre-detonation is 5 per cent, if only 
one element is present in the listed amount. If n elements are present in the 
listed amount the chance of pre-detonation is 5n per cent. The chance of a 
pre-detonation in which the energy release is less than 10,000 tons TNT 
equivalent is 0.5n per cent. In this range the effects of impurities are addi- 
tive, and from the actual concentrations and figures listed one can figure out 
the probability of any given energy release. In any case, unless the firing 
mechanism fails completely the energy release will be more than sufficient 
to destroy the material and to make its recovery impossible. The figures 
given in the table are in part based on experimental values. In the case of O 
and C the figures represent highly conservative estimates based on the as- 
sumption that those isotopes which are dangerous will be as dangerous as 
the worst element, namely, Be. 


240 


Element Concentration by Weight 


Be 1077 F 5 x 10-6 

Li 5 x 1077 Na 2x 10° 

B 2x 1077 Mg 10“ 

C 2x 10° Al 2x 10° 

© | 10-4 Si 5 x 1074 
Pp 10-4 


(Some purity requirements on elements between P and Fe; none beyond Cu) 


The only essential changes since the Washington memo are that we have 
sufficiently examined the experiments on elements between Na and P to be 
sure that we may relax the requirements somewhat; and that we have stud- 
ied the case of N carefully enough to be positive that there are no purity 
requirements on that element. The committee was of the opinion that the 
purity requirements as they now stand could, with a very high probability, 
be met. In fact, the Chicago uranium is good enough except for C and O, 
and they have made no effort at all to solve this problem. If it were neces- 
sary it would be possible to work with depleted C and O and so consider- 
ably relax the chemical conditions on these elements. In fact, the commit- 
tee was of the opinion that the major extraction processes which have to 
be handled automatically and the removal of traces of active material, cou- 
pled with the necessity for working in lots of less than 100 grams or of in- 
troducing suitable neutron absorbers as “‘safers,’’ would present greater 
technical difficulties than the purification. Nevertheless, in our last discus- 
sions they seemed convinced that the helium-cooled graphite pile was a 
good bet. 

Now to the second point, the main subject of your letter, where I feel 
myself on less secure ground. It is, of course, natural that the men we are 
after will leave a big hole. I may though, in this connection, remind you that 
when McMillan himself left the Radiation Laboratory for San Diego there 
were the same dire predictions of disastrous disruption. Nevertheless, the 
Radiation Laboratory has not only survived but has, as you know, 
flourished and expanded. In view of this and of the very large number of 
men of the first rank who are now working on that project, I am inclined 
not to take too seriously the absolute no’s with which we shall be greeted. I 
believe that it is important to emphasize that we should in any case be 
willing to let these men have time enough in their old positions to try to 
minimize the disruption of their leaving. I also agree that a fundamental 
clarification on this personnel problem, which can hardly be complete 
without Dr. Bush’s participation, will be necessary. The job we have to do 
will not be possible without personnel substantially greater than that which 
we now have available, and I should only be misleading you and all others 


241 


concerned with the S-1 project if I were to promise to get the work done 
without this help. 

The suggestion of Eckhardt as a substitute for Kurie is a welcome one and 
we Shall arrange to talk with him on our next trip east.2 There are, however, 
two reasons more substantial than prejudice why the limitation to men who 
are known to us is sound: 1) that the technical details of this work will in 
large part have to do with atomic physics so that any man whose experience 
has been in another field will necessarily be of more limited usefulness; 
Kurie, for instance, would have had as dne Of his responsibilities the installa- 
tion and servicing of the cyclotron. The second reason is that in a tight iso- 
lated group such as we are now planning, some warmth and trust in per- 
sonal relations is an indispensable prerequisite, and we are, of course, able to 
insure this only in the case of men whom we have known in the past. You 
will have had from me a note on possible alternatives to Kurie. If none of 
our suggestions seem practicable we shall see whether Dr. Eckhardt could 
fill the bill. 

With all good wishes, 


Very sincerely yours, 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. Probably E. A. Eckhardt, a physicist who was vice president of Gulf Research and De- 
velopment Company in 1942. 


OPPENHEIMER’S PERSONAL RAID on the Rad Lab took place in 
mid-December, probably in conjunction with a conference in Washington 
with Groves on the fourteenth. In Cambridge he had a long talk with Hans 
Bethe and his wife Rose about the terms of employment and the living con- 
ditions that might entice Bethe and others away from rewarding Rad Lab 
research and the civilized life of Cambridge. On December 22 Bethe for- 
warded a list of questions. Rose Bethe offered to run an employment agency 
and information center until professional staff could be hired (an offer that 
brought her the thankless task of housing assignments for the first busy 
months). Bethe raised two additional points: to avoid delays, procurement 
should be independent of the Army and some effort should be made to 
equalize salaries. He had worked on recruiting two physicists on leave from 
Columbia: Norman R. Ramsey would come if Isidor (I. I.) Rabi came. Rabi, 
associate director of the Rad Lab, was wavering but not yet convinced.” 


242 


124 | TO HANS AND ROSE BETHE 


[Berkeley, California] 
December 28, 1942 


Dear Hans and Rose: 


THank you for your fine letters and documents. I would like to answer as 
many of the questions that you raise as I now can so that you may be in- 
formed about the present state of affairs. Some of the points have not yet 
been settled and one or two of them have not even been raised. I shall keep 
your lists as a reminder of what we shall have to do. 

First, the points of your letter: 

1. We are trying now to put the laboratory, as distinct from the town, on 
the basis of an OSRD contract with a dummy contracting agent, say Cal 
Tech or Harvard. This will give us the flexibility in salary and procurement 
that we all so much desire. I am, however, assured that the Army procure- 
ment procedure has quite recently been radically altered. It is no longer nec- 
essary to obtain the conventional three bids; procurement can be carried out 
by our agent in Pasadena without any authorization and on the unique basis 
of getting what we need as fast as possible. It is our plan to pay all civilians 
4 of their university salary and for the younger men to pay on the M.I.T. 
salary scale. It is not yet clear what we shall do about subsistence. We may 
pay it and charge for rent, utilities, schools, hospitals, etc. On the other hand 
we may not pay subsistence and provide housing, utilities and normal ser- 
vices in the town without charge. It seems to me that either of these schemes 
will be satisfactory. It is largely a question of whether we wish to keep some 
form of control on the services (how much electricity and fuel is used, for 
instance) which procedure we shall follow. 

2. We looked into the question of Dana P. Mitchell and were unable to get 
anywhere with it. At present there is a good possibility that Allison will 
come to us from Chicago; in fact, he visited the school with me on my last 
trip.* I also understand that Kurie is very anxious to come and as soon as we 
have given Conant and Bush a chance to live up to their commitments we 
will look into this. In the meantime, McMillan, Kennedy and I will try to 
get the rudiments of the procurement problem outlined. 

3. I do not think that I can at this time refer Ramsey’s name to Conant 
because of my promise, but one of the reasons that I am so optimistic about 
our future is that if we really get the men promised us there will be many 
others who will want to come and that should immensely simplify the job 
of getting them released. 

Now to Rose’s questions. There will be a sort of city manager who will 
be distinct from Colonel Harmon.” Harmon was trying to find a man for 
this job and there is a man in New Mexico, a civilian, whom we could ob- 


243 


tain if he is not successful. There will also be a city engineer and together 
they will take care of the problems outlined by you. We hope to persuade 
one of the teachers at the school to stay on to be our professional teacher. It 
is true that both Kay Manley and Elsie McMillan are professional school 
teachers and there will no doubt be others, but it seems to me unlikely that 
anyone with a very young child will be able to devote very much time to 
the community. There will be two hospitals, one in the town and one in the 
M.P. camp. The one in the town will be run by our doctor or doctors and 
she will be paid a regular salary so thatshe ‘will be independent of our fees. I 
believe we shall have a group health plan of some kind but this is one of the 
questions that is tied up with how we handle subsistence. 

Room is being provided for a laundry; each house will have its washtub; 
and we shall be able to send laundry to Santa Fe regularly. It may be neces- 
sary for us to provide the equipment for the group laundry since this is now 
frozen, but this is a point that is not yet settled. 

We plan to have two eating places. There will be a regular mess for un- 
married people which will be, when we are running at full capacity, just 
large enough to take care of these. The Army will take care of the help for 
this and I do not know whether the personnel will be Army or civilian. We 
will also arrange to have a cafe where married people can eat out. This will 
probably be able to handle about twenty people at a time and will be a little 
fancy, and may be by appointment only. We are trying to persuade one of 
the natives to operate this and we have a good building for it. 

There will be a recreation officer who will make it his business to see that 
such things as libraries, pack trips, movies, and so on are taken care of, and 
he will no doubt welcome the help of as many of us as are willing. The 
bachelor apartments will be run by the Army and will be completely served. 
The store will be a so-called Post Exchange which is a combination of 
country store and mail order house. That is, there will be stocks on hand 
and the Exchange will be able to order for us what they do not carry. There 
will be a vet to inspect the meat and barbers and such like. There will also be 
a cantina where we can have beer and cokes and light lunches. 

The employment agency is something which we have not made any offi- 
cial provision for although we have discussed it with Harmon. I think it 
would be fine if you planned to help out with this as soon as you get there, 
and provision will be made to pay you for that work. 

Iam a little reluctant to do too much writing about the details of our life 
there until people are actually on the job, but I agree with you that some 
rudimentary information about the nature of the life and possibilities of 
work should be made available to everyone. I am answering as well as I can 
your questionnaire on the enclosed sheet. 

That will have to be all for the moment. But I would appreciate it if you 
would get in touch with me if any new problems arise which we ought to 
consider, or if you think any of the arrangements that we have made so far 


are definitely unsatisfactory. Our best guarantee that they can be made satis- 
factory is in the great effort and generosity that Harmon and Groves have 
both brought to setting up this odd community and in their evident desire 
to make a real success of it. In general they are not interested in saving 
money, but are interested in saving critical materials, in cutting down per- 
sonnel, and in doing nothing which would attract Congressional attention 
to our hi-jinks. I found that there were 1800 people working at the school to 
get things built fast. 
With all good greetings— 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


QUESTION ANSWER 
I. Housing 
1. Type of house 2 and 4-family units; bachelor quarters 
Number of rooms 3, 4, 6 rooms (1, 2, 3 bedrooms) 
Size of rooms Kitchen, 10 X 14; livingroom 14 x 18 
2. Type of heat Hot air—one furnace for unit; wood fuel 
Hot water heater One heater for unit; wood fuel 
Type of stove Insulated wood & coal range, electric plate 
Electricity? Yes 
Phone? No 
3. What furniture will 
be furnished? Shelves, kitchen table, beds, chairs .. . 
Ice box Electric refrigerator 
Ironing boards Probably 
Fireplace Yes 
4. Rent? Free for Army;? for civilians* 
What price utilities? ee 7 
5. Will there be servants 
available for occa- 
sional help, 
especially for 
heavy work? Yes 
6. Small garden? Yes; water limited in Spring and Fall 
II. Geography and clothing 
1. Will it be permissible 
to describe location 
in letter? Altitude 7300; in Southwest 
2. Mean temperatures Monthly means from 27.1 in January to 
66.7 in July 
Rain and snow fall Heavy rain in summer; light snow in 


winter; temperate summers. 


3. Type of clothing 
needed Warm clothing; informal 
4. Shoes Boots for occasional use; skis 
II. Community Services 
1. Publiclaundry charge Probably a small charge 


2. Garbage collection Yes 
3. Carpenters and other 

crafts Yes 
4. Store Army Post ‘Exchange 
5. Hospital Run by doctor | 
6. Mess hall or cafeteria Mess hall and cafe 
7. City tax Probably not 


* For Army, most services free. For civilians, may be included in rent to 
make $150/mo. subsistence. Not yet decided. 


a. Dana P. Mitchell was a physicist at Columbia University, where he had charge of pur- 
chases and lab service. Samuel Allison, at this ime director of the Met Lab, did not come to Los 
Alamos until 1944. 

b. Colonel J. M. Harmon was the first commanding officer of Post Administration which 
had charge of the construction and management of the town. 


The prime contracting agent was not Caltech or Harvard but the Uni- 
versity of California, which assumed responsibility early in 1943 and even- 
tually opened a special office in Los Angeles for Los Alamos business. The 
proposal about salaries was generally followed. For married scientific and 
technical staff; rent was geared to salary regardless of whether the family 
occupied a former Ranch School house on Bath Tub Row (so christened by 
an envious apartment dweller who disliked showers), a three-bedroom 
apartment in the four-unit frame buildings in adjacent “Snob Hollow,” a 
duplex for couples without children, or less desirable variants of instant 
shelter that went up as the population of the mesa climbed. 

To comment adequately on the remainder of Oppenheimer’s letter and 
the Bethes’ questionnaire would be to write a domestic history of Los 
Alamos.”* Wartime residents have their own vivid recollections of the mir- 
ror-image apartments, the acrid smoke that pourea from ventilators at 5 
a.m. as Spanish-American janitors, accustomed to pinon logs in adobe fire- 
places, shoveled on the soft coal, of the communal laundry, of competition 
among working wives for maid service, of shopping and eating facilities 
that never quite kept pace with demand. The men and women employed in 
the heavily guarded Technical Area, especially those who bore major re- 
sponsibility, will think of long hours, of six- and seven-day weeks, of prob- 


246 


lems unprecedented in magnitude and challenge, and of frontiers of techni- 
cal competence and scientific knowledge crossed almost daily. They will 
also remember mountains and canyons explored with old and new friends. 
For most of its new residents, Los Alamos became, as it had been for hun- 
dreds of schoolboys, a magic place. If the magic sometimes vanished in the 
construction and blowing dust of that first summer or the mud of the ensu- 
ing winter, to retrieve it one had only to walk eastward along the 
pinon-covered promontory to look over the Pajarito Plateau and the Rio 
Grande Valley to the Sangre de Cristos, or climb the old trails westward 
toward the Valle Grande, or simply watch the sun set behind the Jemez sky- 
line. 


WHILE PLANNING an environment conducive to productive work and 
compatible with a minimum standard of comfort for what was, at this 
point, viewed as a small community of academic families, Oppenheimer 
dealt with the more basic question of militarization of the new laboratory. 
In his willingness to agree to Army commissions for himself and other sen- 
lor scientists, he was a minority of one among the advisers and potential 
colleagues he had recruited. In Washington on February 1, using the letter- 
head of the National Defense Research Committee (which had become part 
of the Office of Scientific Research and Development), he summarized for 
the committee’s chairman his interpretation of a conference they had 
attended two days earlier at which Luis Alvarez of the M.I.T. Rad Lab had 
joined other consultants. 


125 | TO JAMES B. CONANT 


Washington, D.C. 
February 1, 1943 


Dear Dr. Conant: 


The discussions of which you were a witness in the early stages with 
Rabi, McMillan, Bacher, and Alvarez continued all Saturday. Rabi, with the 
full concurrence of the other three men, formulated the following indis- 
pensable conditions for the success of the project: 

(1) That the Laboratory must demilitarize: the arguments here were first 
that a divided personnel would inevitably lead to friction, and to a collapse 
of Laboratory morale, complicated in our case by social cleavage, and, more 
important, that in any issue in which we were instructed by our military 
superiors, the whole Laboratory would be forced to follow their instruc- 
tions and thus in effect lose its scientific autonomy. My efforts to persuade 
the men that such a situation would not arise were unsuccessful. 


247 


(2) That the execution of the security and secrecy measures should be in 
the hands of the military, but that the decision as to what measures should 
be applied must be in the hands of the Laboratory. On this point I fully con- 
cur with the other men because I believe it is the only way to assure the 
cooperation and the unimpaired morale of the scientists. 

(3) That we should be able to supplement Army procurement by OSRD 
contract procurement in order to expedite the solution of an intrinsically 
very serious problem. 

(4) That in our limited but urgent petsonnel needs we should have a high 
priority; in particular, we need at the present time a procurement man of 
experience and real power. Dana Mitchell of Columbia is the only man we 
know adequate to this job. In the second place we need a man capable of 
organizing the mechanics of the Laboratory, and A. Allen of the Radiation 
Laboratory is the man suggested.* We need the services of these men most 
urgently in the immediate future, and it is possible that within six months, 
we should be adequately organized to survive without them. Our other per- 
sonnel needs at the present time are modest. 

The first two of these points I discussed with General Groves, making 
only casual reference to the last two. I believe that he realizes the seriousness 
of these requests, but I am not sure that he feels that they can be met. He will 
discuss these questions with you on his return to Washington Thursday. I 
also at your suggestion discussed these problems briefly with Dr. Bush. | 
should say that he agreed with all four points. He 1s, however, completely 
unwilling to take jurisdiction over these considerations since General 
Gxoves has been given the authority to deal with them. He, furthermore, is 
unwilling to ask for the release of any men for our project until these funda- 
mentals have been clariffed. 

Dr. Rabi will be in town this week, and I have suggested that he come to 
discuss these matters with you. I shall be in Berkeley from Thursday on, 
and shall be glad to come back as soon as I can be helpful. 

It seems to me that with some sacrifice and considerable delay we might 
have been able to make a Laboratory go, more or less, without fulfilling the 
conditions listed above. I believe that a real delay in our work would, 
however, have been inevitable. At the present time I believe that the solidar- 
ity of physicists is such that if these conditions are not met, we shall not only 
fail to have the men from M.I.T. with us, but that many men who have 
already planned to join the new Laboratory will reconsider their commit- 
ments or come with such misgivings as to reduce their usefulness. I there- 
fore regard the fulfillment of these conditions as necessary if we are to carry 
on the work with anything like the speed that is required. 


Very sincerely yours, 


Robert Oppenheimer 
248 


a. Alexander Allen did not go to Los Alamos; Dana Mitchell did and made an invaluable 
contribution as head of procurement. 


A solution to the militarization issue evolved as part of an organization 
plan for town and laboratory which was formally communicated to Oppen- 
heinrer in a letter of February 25, 1943, from Conant and Groves.** During 
the experimental stage of work, civilian administration of the laboratory 
would continue. When large-scale trials commenced, though not before 
January 1, 1944, at the earliest, members of the scientific and engineering 
staff would become commissioned officers and take their orders from mili- 
tary superiors. The shift never took place. Bacher, from the beginning a di- 
vision leader and member of the Governing Board of the laboratory, 
believes that General Groves never raised the militarization question, nor 
did the Atomic Energy Commission’s official historians find evidence that 
he did so.” 

The overall administrative arrangements of which the Conant—Groves 
letter officially apprised Oppenheimer are summarized in the official history 
of Los Alamos as follows: ““The Los Alamos site, together with a large sur- 
rounding area, was established as a military reservation. The community, 
fenced and guarded, was made an army post. The laboratory, in turn, was 
built within an inner fenced and guarded area, called the ‘Technical Area.’ 
Both the military and technical administrations were responsible to Major 
General L. R. Groves, who had over-all executive responsibility for the 
work. The Commanding Officer [of Post Administration] reported directly 
to General Groves; he was responsible for the conduct of military personnel, 
the maintenance of adequate living conditions, prevention of trespass, and 
special guarding. Oppenheimer, as Scientific Director, was also responsible 
to General Groves, who had as his technical adviser J. B. Conant. In addi- 
tion to his technical responsibilities, the Director was made responsible for 
the policy and administration of security. This provision represented a guar- 
antee that there would be no military control of the exchange of informa- 
tion among scientific staff members, and at the same time fixed responsibil- 
ity for the maintenance of security under these conditions. In carrying out 
his responsibilities for security, the Director was to be given the assistance 
and advice of a Military Intelligence Officer.” 

Knowing that some aspects of this plan would not appeal to those he 
was most eager to have as colleagues, Oppenheimer hastened to invoke the 
aid of Rabi, his most influential consultant and also one of the staunchest 
opponents of a militarized laboratory. 


249 


126 | TO L. I. RABI 
February 26, 1943 


Dear Rabi: 


I made in Washington a strong and extremely painful attempt to have our 
project transferred to O.S.R.D. under a special committee established for 
that purpose. I did not get to first base. The reasons which make this seem 
so difficult will in part be clear to you from'the Groves-Conant letter to me, 
a copy of which should be in your hands by the time you get this. The set- 
up as we have it was established pretty directly under a Presidential directive 
by the Secretary of War, and Dr. Bush is reluctant to change it in our case, 
which is in some ways the heart of the project, not only for organizational 
reasons, but because he feels that the position of the O.S.R.D. is not at the 
present time strong enough for him to be willing to undertake that respon- 
sibility. I do not know whether the arrangements as now outlined will 
work, for that will take in the first instance the good will and cooperation of 
quite a few good physicists; but I did not draw out from my position, and I 
am willing to make a faithful effort to get things going. I think if I believed 
with you that this project was “the culmination of three centuries of phys- 
ics,’’ I should take a different stand. To me it is primarily the development 
in time of war of a military weapon of some consequence. I do not think 
that the Nazis allow us the option of carrying out that development.? 

I know that you have good personal reasons for not wanting to join the 
project, and I am not asking you to do so. Like Toscanini’s violinist,-you do 
not like music. I am asking two things of you, within the limits set by your 
own conscience. 

(1) I hope that we can have a conference on the physics ahead of us in 
April, perhaps from the 10th to the 30th, at Los Alamos. The theoretical 
people I should like to have there at that time, and some of the experimental 
ones will be there too, though they may be busy with installation. I should 
like to have you come to that to talk over the physics, and to give us the 
benefit of your advice at a critical time. This is not a method of tricking you 
into the project, and it is not for the purpose of talking politics. It is just for 
the physics, and such relatively simple arrangements as we have to make at 
that time to see that the physics gets done. 

(2) There are two men whom! should be more than reluctant not to have 
on the project: Bethe and Bacher. I think that you know the reasons in each 
case, and agree with them. You have a great deal of influence with these two 
men, and they in turn on many others who are involved in the project. I am 
asking that you use that influence to persuade them to come rather than to 
stay away. 


250 


I am sending a copy of this letter to Dr. Conant and General Groves to 
keep the record straight. 


Yours, 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. Oppenheimer’s argument appears to require insertion of the word not in this sentence 
(‘the option of [not] carrying out that development’’), but the carbon copy reads as above. The 
editors have not located the original. 


FROM ROOM 325, Le Conte Hall, the office of Edwin McMillan in the 
physics building on the Berkeley campus, which had become the organiz- 
ing center for the new laboratory, Oppenheimer planned the April confer- 
ence that was to launch Los Alamos.”’ One whose presence he was eager to 
secure was the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi. In December 1938 Fermi had 
used the trip to Stockholm to accept a Nobel prize as an excuse to emigrate 
from Italy, where racial laws posed a threat to his Jewish wife. With his fam- 
ily Fermi continued on to the United States and a professorship at Columbia 
University. With the Hungarian physicist Leo Szilard and their assistants, 
Fermi developed a graphite pile to produce a chain reaction using slow neu- 
trons. In the spring of 1942 this work was moved to the Chicago Metallur- 
gical Laboratory where, under Fermi’s supervision, the first controlled nu- 
clear chain reaction took place on December 2, 1942. Fermi’s extraordinary 
competence as both theorist and experimentalist, as well as unique qualities 
of personal and intellectual leadership, made his participation in the new en- 
terprise highly desirable. 


127 | TO ENRICO FERMI 


Berkeley, California 
March 11, 1943 


Dear Dr. Fermi: 


We are planning to hold a three-week conference at Los Alamos, starting 
probably about April 15. The purpose of the conference is to discuss the 
scientific problems of the Los Alamos laboratory and to define its schedules 
and its detailed experimental program. The background of our work is so 
complicated, and information in the past has been so highly compartmenta- 
lized, that it seems that we shall have a good deal to gain from a leisurely 
and thorough discussion. My own view is that this is likely to contribute 


251 


essentially toward our carrying out our directive in the simplest and fastest 
way. I want very much to have you present at the conference, whether or 
not you will have moved permanently to the site by that time. 

We are still a little vague on how complete the living arrangements at the 
site will be and how soon we can get things going there. For this reason it 
may be necessary to delay the conference a little. But I shall make every ef- 
fort to have things comfortable enough so that we can meet and work effec- 
tively from the middle of April on. I will let you know at a later time just 
what the timing is. There will be some twenty people invited to this confer- 
ence, of whom the majority will already be in residence at the site. If the 
pressure of other work makes it impossible for you to be there during the 
whole three weeks, will you nevertheless plan to come for as much of that 
time as possible. I should suggest that it would be better to come in the later 
rather than the earlier half. 


Very sincerely yours, 


Opje 


Fermi attended the April conference and eventually moved to Los 
Alamos. Meanwhile, he visited the laboratory and was often consulted in 
Chicago. 

On March 16 Oppenheimer and his wife took the train to Santa Fe, 
leaving two-year-old Peter with his nurse and Oppenheimer’s secretary, 
Priscilla Greene, to follow a few days later. Working at the Berkeley Radia- 
tion Laboratory, Priscilla, for the past few months, had been “‘loaned”’ part- 
time to help Oppenheimer with the fast neutron project. His correspon- 
dence and ecstatic description of the new laboratory site so stirred her inter- 
est that, to Lawrence’s dismay, she accepted Oppenheimer’s offer of a job 
there. She remained one of his most valued assistants until the spring of 
1945, having meanwhile met and married the chemist Robert Duffield. Be- 
cause of her expert help, and later that of Shirley Barnett, wife of the Los 
Alamos pediatrician, the old Corona typewriter or its successor, on which 
so many letters in this volume were typed, no longer accompanied Oppen- 
heimer on transcontinental journeys. Years later Priscilla Duffield was 
surprised to learn that he knew one key from another.”® 

Oppenheimer stayed a few days at La Fonda in Santa Fe to help recruit 
prospective staff members. Among them was Dorothy McKibbin, who.soon 
took charge of the laboratory’s Santa Fe office. It was one of Oppenheimer’s 
inspired appointments. World-famous scientists and travel-weary families 
stopped for gate passes and directions at her tiny office in the shaded court- 
yard at 109 East Palace Avenue, then continued to their mysterious destina- 
tion refreshed and reassured by her warmth and humor. A Smith graduate, 


252 


widowed and with a young son to support, Mrs. McKibbin had previously 
worked for. the Spanish and Indian Trading Company. She knew every 
pueblo and Spanish village, every artist, rancher, scenic wonder, and ancient 
ruin for miles around. Like Oppenheimer, she had first come to New Mexico 
for reasons of health. They became great friends. Throughout the war 
Dorothy McKibbin knew almost everything about Los Alamos except its 
exact’ purpose, but from the moment she met Robert Oppenheimer in the 
La Fonda lobby she felt that whatever he was doing must be worthwhile.”® 

The Oppenheimers moved to the laboratory site at Los Alamos as soon 
as the Ranch School headmaster’s house was ready for them. It was a simple 
one-story log and stone building close to what would remain the center of 
wartime Los Alamos but on a quiet road, partly shielded by shrubbery and 
garden. They lived there until early November 1945. 


THE APRIL GATHERING brought together the few scientists already 
living at the site, others temporarily housed with their families at ranches in 
the valley, and those who would soon join the laboratory. Consultants and 
members of a special reviewing committee appointed by Groves to evaluate 
progress also attended. Because most participants had at best a partial view 
of the project, the first order of business was a course of lectures by Robert 
Serber summarizing theoretical calculations and experimental data. Among 
the topics covered were energy release, chain reaction, critical size, cross 
sections, possible ways of assembling fissionable materials, the deuterium 
bomb or “super,” and finally, damage.®*° A copy of Serber’s lectures, known 
as the Los Alamos primer, continued to serve as an introductory manual for 
new recruits. 

After Serber’s briefing, conference members turned to the planning of 
programs for each of the divisions into which the laboratory was initially 
organized: theoretical physics, experimental physics, chemistry and metal- 
lurgy, and ordnance. Each division was subdivided into groups. The pro- 
grams were examined by Groves’ reviewing committee: the two least de- 
veloped areas—chemistry and metallurgy, and ordnance development and 
engineering—should be emphasized and would require additional staff. 
The investigation of theoretical aspects of a thermonuclear bomb should 
continue, but the atomic weapon was to have priority. The committee 
strongly commended Oppenheimer’s performance as director and sug- 
gested appointment of three assistants to lighten his load.** 

The opening up of so many scientific and technical frontiers would 
alone have made the conference memorable. There was also an exhilarating 
sense of mission and of comradeship. One evening the Oppenheimers gave 
a party. Edward U. Condon picked up a copy of The Tempest and sat in a 
corner reading aloud passages appropriate to intellectuals in exotic isolation. 
As the days went by, Oppenheimer saw his new colleagues, most of them at 


253 


any rate, succumb to the spell of his beloved New Mexico. In time some 
found the arid beauty of the landscape a stimulant, not a distraction, and 
claimed they could never have worked so hard and effectively in any other 
environment. 

Robert Bacher’s contributions to the April planning sessions made Op- 
penheimer more than ever anxious to lure him away from the radar project 
at M.I.T. Before Bacher returned to Cambridge, he received a statement of 
why his presence was essential and what his responsibilities would be. The 
ornate language of Oppenheimer’s earlier (and later) correspondence is no- 
tably absent from his wartime memorandums, of which this one to Bacher 
is a typical example. The direct no-nonsense tone reflects his own total com- 
mitment as he turned from planning to implementation. 


128 | MEMORANDUM TO ROBERT BACHER 


Los Alamos 
Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
April 28, 1943 


After our discussion of yesterday, I took up some of the points raised in 
your letter of April 26 with Wilson, Williams, Bloch, Segre, Rabi, Tolman 
and Fermi, and I think that as a result of this I am in a position to make a few 
clear statements which may help to get your relations to the project better 
defined than they have been in the past.? ; 

1. You know that I have been extremely eager to have your help in this 
work. I think perhaps that you have not fully realized how much I appreci- 
ate your administrative experience and obvious administrative wisdom, nor 
how aware I am of our need for just this in the present project. Perhaps too 
you do not evaluate highly enough the fact that you have worked so much 
in neutron physics and that you are so well informed about the last year’s 
developments at M.I.T. These three qualifications make you, in my opin- 
ion, very nearly unique, and that is why I have pursued you with such dili- 
gence for so many months. In addition, I want to express in writing my 
own confidence in your stability and judgement, qualities on which this 
stormy enterprise puts a very high premium. 

2. I should like to offer you the direction of the experimental physical 
work at Los Alamos. I think that you will find the men with whom you 
have to work and who are here now extremely cooperative. They are all 
well aware of the need for such direction and no one of them believes that he 
is able to provide it. I know that you will so organize the work that the 
leaders of projects who are now here will have a real sense of responsibility 
and a maximum freedom compatible with the effective coordination of the 


254 


work. You would be responsible, as director of experimental physical re- 
search, to the governing board of the laboratory, and to the director, but 
neither would interfere in any way with your freedom of action as long as 
you held the position. 

3. The governing board of the laboratory does not yet exist, but I should 
like to start it by appointing you as a member. 

4. You have my unqualified support in trying to develop an adequate 
physics-engineering group and in initiating at the earliest possible date the 
design and ordnance work which we both recognize to be our main prob- 
lem. I should like to have your help in bringing here a group of men whom 
you would call physicist engineers, and would want to give you a good deal 
of freedom in selecting these men. I should also want your help, both in 
establishing contacts and in general organization to get the new work 
started in an effective and prompt way. I do not have any doubt that we 
shall have support for an expansion program roughly of the order of that 
which seems appropriate to us. The issue seems to me of enough impor- 
tance so that I am willing to let my direction of the laboratory stand or fall 
on whether or not we get these things going in the near future. 

5. I believe it is essential if you wish to undertake, under the conditions 
sketched above, work in this laboratory, that you accept without further 
delay. I know that you cannot leave M.I.T. before the middle of June at the 
earliest, and that in itself will be a disadvantage and will make some difficul- 
ties for the men who will be under your immediate direction. However, if 
they can be assured that you will accept this position, and if you can by con- 
sultation and correspondence, and by personnel work elsewhere, help to 
give some structure to this group, I believe that the problems when you ar- 
rive here later will not be as serious as they would be if you postponed ac- 
ceptance for another two months. Furthermore, I think that a good deal of 
the work on supplementing our staff must be done in the near future and 
cannot be done here. I hope that your duties at M.I.T. would leave you 
some time for this, and that you and Rabi together will get to work on it at 
your earliest convenience. You will understand why, in our present disor- 
ganized state, it would be impossible for me to regard any long continuance 
of your indeterminate relations to the laboratory as healthy or constructive, 
and I am sure that the men with whom you will be working would share 
this view and feel even more strongly about it than I. 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. Robert R. Wilson, an experimental physicist with a Ph.D. from Berkeley in 1940, had 
been in charge of the isotron development project at Princeton. At Los Alamos he was head of 
the cyclotron group, the youngest group leader there. 


255 


Bacher agreed to join the project, but he remained so strongly opposed 
to military control of the laboratory that his letter of acceptance stipulated 
that it was also his letter of resignation effective the day the Army took over. 
As already indicated, that day never came. Bacher stayed at Los Alamos 
through the war as one of Oppenheimer’s most trusted associates, serving at 
times as scapegoat when policy decisions proved unpopular. 

A note to General Groves touched upon one of the many topics dis- 
cussed at the April meetings. 


r vi: 


129 | MEMORANDUM TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


Los Alamos 


April 30, 1943 


In accordance with our discussion of last week, I have given some 
thought to the question of a story about the Los Alamos Project which, if 
disseminated in the proper way, might serve somewhat to reduce the curi- 
osity of the local population, and at least to delay the dissemination of the 
truth. 

We propose that it be let known that the Los Alamos Project is working 
on a new type of rocket and that the detail be added that this is a largely 
electrical device. We feel that the story will have a certain credibility; that 
the loud noises which we will soon be making here will fit in with the sub- 
ject; and that the fact, unfortunately not kept completely secret, that we are 
installing a good deal of electrical equipment, and the further fact that we 
have a large group of civilian specialists would fit in quite well. We further 
believe that the remoteness of the site for such a development and the se- 
crecy which has surrounded the project would both be appropriate, and that 
the circumstance that a good deal of work is in fact being done on rockets, 
together with the appeal of the word, makes this story one which is both 
exciting and credible. 

This question has been discussed with the governing board of the labora- 
tory who approve it and who further recommend that the technical staff of 
the laboratory be specially warned neither to contradict nor to support a 
story of this kind if they should run into it. 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


At about this time John Manley and Charlotte Serber, the librarian of 
the laboratory, were authorized to visit a bar or two in Santa Fe “for the 
purpose of deliberately spilling something about an electromagnetic gun.’” 
But no “official” story could stem local speculation as the project’s growing 


256 


and highly varied population searched Santa Fe stores for scarce items of 
food and clothing, visited museums and curio shops, and replaced peace- 
time tourists at Indian dances. WAC and Navy uniforms on the streets in- 
spired the more imaginative explanations of activity at Los Alamos: a home 
for pregnant WACS or the building of a large submarine in the Ranch 
School pond. Dorothy McKibbin used her wide acquaintance to spread the 
word that gossip was out of order. 


OPPENHEIMER EXPLORED another angle of the security problem 
with his former Zurich mentor, Wolfgang Pauli, who spent the years 1940 
to 1945 at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. 

Victor F. Weisskopf had attended the April conference at Los Alamos 
and was appointed a group leader in the Theoretical Division, of which 
Hans Bethe was head. Weisskopf had been Pauli’s assistant in Zurich from 
1934 to 1937 before joining the physics faculty at the University of Roches- 
ter. Teller headed a group working on the ‘“‘Super”’ in the Theoretical Divi- 
sion. 


130 | TO WOLFGANG PAULI 


[Los Alamos ] 
May 20, 1943 


Dear Pauli: 


Weisskopf was here not long ago and he spoke to us of your uncertainties 
as to whether you should or not go into research directly connected with the 
war. It is hard to give an answer to this question that has more than a tem- 
porary validity, but my feeling is that at the present time it would be a waste 
and an error for you to do that. You are just about the only physicist in the 
country who can help to keep those principles of science alive which do not 
seem immediately relevant to the war, and that is eminently worth doing. 

In addition to this there is the practical argument that there have been and 
will be some men who because of legal complications cannot work on mili- 
tary problems and for whom your guidance is likely to be decisive. In this 
way one may hope that when the war is over there will be at least some 
people in the country who know what a mesotron is and who have a habit 
of study which is not directed toward a very immediate objective. This is 
only my personal opinion and I think that in time pressure may be brought 
to bear on you to help with a war problem, but certainly I should regard 
that as something not to be looked for but to be guarded against. 

There is one suggestion that many of us have made from time to time and 
that I think deserves to be taken seriously, although I know that you will 


227 


laugh at it. One of the things that worries us is that none of the people in our 
field are publishing work in the Physical Review for the very good reason 
that they are not doing anything that can be published. It must be apparent 
to the enemy that we are finding good uses for our physicists and in some 
cases I think that this is in itself a piece of information on the nature of the 
work we are doing. We have often wondered whether your great talents for 
physics and for burlesque could not appropriately be put to use by your 
publishing some work in the names of a few of the men who are now en- 
gaged on things that they cannot publish: Yt would give you a chance to 
express in the most appropriate way possible your evaluation of their quali- 
ties and you would have a delicious opportunitity to argue with yourself in 
the public press without any interference. I think that you should not under- 
take this without getting the permission of your victims, but I know that 
Bethe, Teller, Serber and I would be delighted to grant you that and I have 
no doubt that there would be many others. Do not dismiss this thought too 
lightly. 

I am looking forward to seeing your report on Dirac and also the recent 
work on the process and the weak coupling. I have a feeling that this is too 
cheap a way out, but if it is right it will at least show that to get any further 
with the problem of the nature of the fundamental particles lies beyond not 
only our present theoretical ideas, but any present experimental evidence. 
Just that, namely the fact that nothing that we know about nuclei and little 
that we know about mesotrons helps to clarify the deeper questions, would 
be something of a disappointment to me. Will I have to believe it? 

With the very warmest greetings to Franca and to you from Kitty too. 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


Pauli’s reply, like the earlier letter in this volume from Niels Bohr, doc- 
uments an enduring professional and personal friendship. After Oppen- 
heimer became director of the Institute for Advanced Study in 1947, Pauli, 
an always welcome visitor, had no reason to complain, as he did in this 
letter, of reluctant institute support. 


258 


131 | WOLFGANG PAULI TO ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


Princeton, New Jersey 
June 19, 1943 


Dear Oppenheimer: 


Many thanks for your letter of May 20th. I appreciate very much that you 
stressed the value of the continuation of a pure scientific work so much. 
While I heard a similar view also from other scientists, the non-scientists 
who give me the money (the Rockefeller Foundation and the Director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study) are becoming more and more, lets say, reluc- 
tant with it. This is a source of practical difficulties to carry out your propo- 
sal, that is to publish my papers under other names. Although I would be 
glad to be helpful in the suggested way, I am afraid I should publish the few 
things which I have at present to say with my own name to prove to the 
quoted money-givers that after all I am working something for their 
money, fearing their sense for burlesque to be rather undeveloped. More- 
over I don’t think that your proposal would really reach the purpose. to 
make the enemy believe that the persons whose names figure as authors are 
not occupied beside some scientific work also with war problems—and the 
whole Don-Quichotery would be in vain. 

I hope my report on Dirac’s theory will appear soon while I am just going 
to write the paper on the A-process and the weak coupling. I have no doubt 
that this can only be a preliminary stage of the whole problem. I consider it 
as logically very disturbing that in the case of the coincidence of two parti- 
cles the order of the limiting processes \ — 0 and r — 0 (r being the distance 
of the two particles) is relevant. With Dirac’s “hypothetical world” I was run- 
ning into serious troubles (troubles of physics not of mathematics) in apply- 
ing it to the problem of the emission of many low frequency photons (the 
problem treated by Bloch and Nordsieck). Whatever this may be, it is not 
satisfactory that in the meson theory one needs a vector-meson, which is 
not derived in the theory itself, besides the pseudo scalar meson to explain 
the nuclear forces. In a reasonable theory there should not be so many arbi- 
trary assumptions and just this circumstance may justify the hope to clarify 
also some deeper questions with our empirical knowledge about mesotrons 
and nuclei even if the weak-coupling theory with the A-process works to a 
certain extent. 

Many greetings to Kitty and to you, also from Franca. 


W. Pauli 


259 


INTO OPPENHEIMER’S new world of crucial decisions, formalities oc- 
casionally obtruded. Early in July he received a letter from President Roose- 
velt asking him to assure the scientists working with him that their efforts 
were appreciated. “I am sure we can rely on their continued wholehearted 
and unselfish labors,’”’ continued the President. ‘‘Whatever the enemy may 
be planning, American science will be equal to the challenge. With this 
thought in mind, I send this note of confidence and appreciation.’’** Oppen- 
heimer read the letter at the colloquium held each Tuesday evening for the 
scientific staff, then he replied in kind? 


132 | TO FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 


[Los Alamos] 
July 9, 1943 


Dear Mr. President: 


Thank you for your generous letter of June 29th. You would be glad to 
know how greatly your good words of reassurance were appreciated by us. 
There will be many times in the months ahead when we shall remember 
them. 

It is perhaps appropriate that I should in turn transmit to you the assur- 
ance that we as a group and as individual Americans are profoundly aware 
of our responsibility, for the security of our project as well as for its rapid 
and effective completion. It is a great source of encouragement to us that we 
have in this your support and understanding. 


Very sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


IT WAS A HAPPY COINCIDENCE for Oppenheimer that one of the 
Manhattan Project’s top advisers was his good friend Richard C. Tolman of 
Caltech. As vice-chairman of the National Defense Research Committee, 
Tolman shared with its chairman, James Conant, supervision of scientific 
and technical aspects of bomb development. Among his many contribu- 
tions to the work at Los Alamos was keeping its staff informed about ballis- 
tics research relating to the gun component of the bomb at laboratories with 
which security prevented direct contact.** 


260 


133 | TO RICHARD C. TOLMAN 


[Los Alamos] 
July 23, 1943 


Dear Richard: 


Gerferal Groves has just sent me a copy of your letter of acceptance which 
formalizes the de facto help that you have been giving to this project. You 
will not need to be told, but I should like nevertheless to tell you, how 
pleased I am by this. I know that in the difficult days of scientific and practi- 
cal development ahead your association with the project will be of the very 
greatest help, and that by accepting this responsibility you have really con- 
tributed to the probabilities of our timely success. 

I know that your responsibilities go very much beyond the work at Los 
Alamos, but I would like to put in a special claim on your time because I 
think that the newness of our project and our isolation mean that we will 
have special need of your help. In particular, the state of our work now is 
such that I think a visit from you in the near future would prove profitable 
to us and perhaps not uninteresting to you, and I hope that before long we 
may expect you. 


Cordially yours, 
[Robert Oppenheimer] 


As Oppenheimer turned felicitous phrases for the President and Tol- 
man, he was undergoing a real crisis in self-confidence. The heady experi- 
ence of creating a new laboratory and pulling together the disparate parts of 
the scientific work had been stimulating and euphoric. Then came a reac- 
tion. On several occasions in the early summer of 1943 Bacher found Op- 
penheimer depressed by the magnitude and complexity of the director’s 
task. He told Bacher he could not go through with it, but Bacher’s advice 
was simple: Oppenheimer had no alternative, for no one else could do the 
job.” 

Launching the science and engineering was an intellectual challenge. 
Providing basic necessities for simple living amidst the beauties of New 
Mexico had the romance of Perro Caliente writ large, but Oppenheimer 
was highly vulnerable on the nontechnical side of administration. He had 
never even chaired a physics department, and there was no one person on 
the staff that first summer who was qualified to coordinate the support ser- 
vices that so quickly outstripped all projections in scale and variety. Oppen- 
heimer found himself making decisions regarding housing, security, sal- 


261 


aries, draft deferment, the business office, procurement of supplies, classi- 
fied documents, health and safety, technical workshops, construction and 
maintenance of the plant, and a patent office. Others, including two philos- 
ophers from the University of California, developed unexpected compe- 
tence in these areas, but not until January 1944, when a young New York 
lawyer, David Dow, became assistant director for nontechnical administra- 
tion, was Oppenheimer’s burden of day-to-day decision making substan- 
tially reduced.*® 

Meanwhile, external factorscorttribtted to Oppenheimer’s slump in 
morale. Following a trip to San Francisco in mid-June 1943, when he visited 
his former fiancee, Jean Tatlock, security officers began persistent question- 
ing about his relations with suspected communists. In particular they 
wanted to know more details about the account he had volunteered of a 
conversation six months earlier with a friend in Berkeley who mentioned 
that a third party had offered to relay technical information to the Rus- 
sians.*’ The questioning often took place at the end of exhausting travel or 
all-day meetings. Constantly faced with major decisions at Los Alamos, 
Oppenheimer failed to resolve the dilemma posed by this incident, which 
seemed minor to him, and gave inconsistent and sometimes evasive 
answers. 


OPPENHEIMER WAS ALSO FINDING that among the mesas and 
mountains where he had once ridden and camped with carefree delight he 
had constructed for himself a kind of privileged prison. The following com- 
munication from General Groves made this quite clear. 


134 | LESLIE R. GROVES TO ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
July 29, 1943 
Dear Dr. Oppenheimer: 


In view of the nature of the work on which you are engaged, the knowl- 
edge of it which is possessed by you and the dependence which rests upon 
you for its successful accomplishment, it seems necessary to ask you to take 
certain special precautions with respect to your personal safety. 

It is requested that: 

(a) You refrain from flying in airplanes of any description; the time saved 
is not worth the risk. (If emergency demands their use my prior consent 
should be requested. ) 

(b) You refrain from driving an automobile for any appreciable distance 
(above a few miles) and from being without suitable protection on any 
lonely road, such as the road from Los Alamos to Santa Fe. On such trips 


262 


you should be accompanied by a competent, able bodied, armed guard. 
There is no objection to the guard serving as chauffeur. 

(c) Your cars be driven with due regard to safety and that in driving about 
town a guard of some kind should be used, particularly during hours of 
darkness. The cost of such guard is a proper charge against the United 
States. , 

I realize that these precautions may be personally burdensome and that 
they may appear to you to be unduly restrictive but I am asking you to bear 
with them until our work is successfully completed. 


Sincerely 


L. R. Groves 
Brigadier General, C. E. 


The complexity of Oppenheimer’s job did not lessen as work picked 
up momentum. Long known as a late sleeper, he was now at his desk before 
the eight o’clock whistle blew; he continued to work late. At the very time 
he was questioning his own ability, a signal capacity for leadership was be- 
coming obvious to others. John Manley, who had watched from the 
beginning, says Oppenheimer grew with the job. He never observed the 
notorious Oppenheimer “put-down”’ at Los Alamos; he marveled rather at 
Oppenheimer’s control of his emotions and reactions. “I think he had no 
great reluctance about using people,” says Manley. “But . . . it was an en- 
joyable experience because of the character of Robert to do it so adroitly. 
And I think that he . . . realized that the other person knew that this was 
going on. . . It was like a ballet . . . each one knowing the part and the 
role he’s playing, and there wasn’t any subterfuge in it.””*® 

Priscilla Duffield, who welcomed office visitors and took notes on 
phone calls (unless the general said, “Get her off the line!’’), sometimes 
heard the brutal note in Oppenheimer’s voice but thinks it only bothered 
those with an exposed nerve. Leadership seemed to come naturally; some- 
times he had to work at it when a particular program or a touchy personal- 
ity was involved.*” 

Oppenheimer learned to finesse awkward situations such as the tend- 
ency of certain colleagues to converse publicly in German or Italian. When 
individual admonition was ignored, he addressed a collective reminder to 
seven distinguished physicists requesting that they and their families speak 
only English in public places. The restriction did not, of course, apply to 
their homes or wide open spaces, but use of a foreign language, if overheard 
by those not immediately connected with the project, aroused comment.” 

Oppenheimer often dropped in unannounced at division and group 


263 


meetings. He once joined a metallurgy session during an inconclusive argu- 
ment over the type of refractory container to be used for melting pluton- 
ium. Although this was hardly familiar ground to a theoretical physicist, 
after Oppenheimer had listened for a time, he summed up the discussion so 
clearly that the right answer, though he did not provide it, was immediately 
apparent.*! 

Aspects of the phenomenon of leadership that correspondence does not 
reflect were summed up by Hans Bethe when he spoke at the memorial ser- 
vice for Oppenheimer in 1967. “Los Alamos might have succeeded without 
him, but certainly only with much greater strain, less enthusiasm, and less 
speed. As it was, it was an unforgettable experience for all the members of 
the laboratory. There were other wartime laboratories of high achieve- 
ment . . . ButI have never observed in any one of these other groups quite 
the spirit of belonging together, quite the urge to reminisce about the days 
of the laboratory, quite the feeling that this was really the great time of their 
lives.”’ 

“That this was true of Los Alamos was mainly due to Oppenheimer. 
He was a leader. It was clear to all of us, whenever he spoke, that he knew 
everything that was important to know about the technical problems of the 
laboratory, and he somehow had it well organized in his head. But he was 
not domineering, he never dictated what should be done. He brought out 
the best in all of us, like a good host with his guests. And because he clearly 
did his job very well, in a manner all could see, we all strove to do our job as 
best we could.”’ 

‘One of the factors contributing to the success of the laboratoty was its 
democratic organization. The governing board, where questions of general 
and technical laboratory policy were discussed, consisted of the division 
leaders (about eight of them). The coordinating council included all the 
group leaders, about 50 in number, and kept all of them informed on the 
most important technical progress and problems of the various groups in 
the laboratory. All scientists having a B.A. degree were admitted to the col- 
loquium in which specialized talks about laboratory problems were given. 
Each of these three assemblies met once a week. In this manner everybody 
in the laboratory felt a part of the whole and felt that he should contribute to 
the success of the program. Very often a problem discussed in one of these 
meetings would intrigue a scientist in a completely different branch of the 
laboratory, and he would come up with an unexpected solution.”’ 

‘This free interchange of ideas was entirely contrary to the organiza- 
tion of the Manhattan District as a whole . . . Oppenheimer had to fight 
hard for free discussion among all qualified members of the laboratory. But 
the free flow of information and discussion, together with Oppenheimer’s 
personality, kept morale at its highest throughout the war.’ 


264 


For those who never saw Oppenheimer at work inside the Tech Area 
fence, the mystique of his leadership included an element of his personal 
concern. He seemed to understand the uprooted feeling that afflicted new- 
comers, many of whom had left homes as pleasant as the Oppenheimers’ 
own house in Berkeley. Dismayed by lack of privacy and recurrent milk, 
water, and power shortages, they were somewhat appeased by the knowl- 
edge that it was Oppenheimer who had included fireplaces and large closets 
in the original house plans. He no longer came to dinner bearing bouquets 
of flowers, the gesture for which he was famous among Berkeley hostesses, 
but he gave both employed and nonworking wives a sense that their pres- 
ence and participation in the collective enterprise was important. He shared 
the anxiety over a rash of illnesses that afflicted the mesa as families from all 
over the country pooled regional germs and adjusted to local food and 
water and to the 7,300 foot altitude. When anxiety reached a peak in the 
autumn of 1943 with the death of a young chemist, wife of a group leader, 
from an unidentified form of paralysis, it was somewhat reassuring to know 
that Oppenheimer himself had been the first to visit the bereaved husband. 

He also took a personal interest in happier events. An atmosphere not 
unlike that associated with shipboard romances resulted in several marriages 
after a few months’ acquaintance, including that of Oppenheimer’s secre- 
tary, Priscilla Greene, and Robert Duffield. “Robert worried a lot about 
marriages like ours,”’ recalls Mrs. Duffield. When an abrupt summons to 
meet security officers in Cheyenne, Wyoming, prevented Oppenheimer 
from attending the Duffields’ wedding, he asked Priscilla to drive him as far 
as Santa Fe so they might talk without interruption. She was touched by his 
fatherly advice, based as it was on less than three years’ experience of 
marriage. * 


OPPENHEIMER GRADUALLY ACQUIRED a competent administra- 
tive staff, but many questions needed his personal attention. One of these 
was salaries. At the beginning, established academic scientists received 
twelve-tenths of their university salary, usually based on ten months of 
teaching. Younger scientists were paid according to the OSRD scale, tech- 
nicians at prevailing rates. Not every new recruit fitted these neat categories, 
and the personnel officer had to make exceptions** To make sure that his 
Own case was not among them, Oppenheimer wrote to R. G. Sproul, presi- 
dent of the University of California. 


265 


135 | TO RORERT G. SPROUL 


[Los Alamos ] 
September 18, 1943 


Dear President Sproul: 


At the time when the special project in New Mexico was opened, my sal- 
ary was set by the University, in consultation with representatives of the 
War Department, at $10,000 a year. f appreciated the action of the Univer- 
sity in thus recognizing the very serious responsibilities which a director of 
such an undertaking would assume, and I think that you would agree that 
they are indeed considerable. 

In peacetime I was, both at the University of California and at California 
Institute of Technology, a professor of physics and not a director of any- 
thing. Thus my present salary exceeds by a little over $200 a month that 
which I would get if we applied our usual formula to my peacetime salaries. 
I think that neither the University or I would want to regard work done for 
the Government of the United States in time of war as the occasion for any 
essential increase in income, and I am therefore suggesting that in the future 
my salary might be reduced in accordance with the procedure which we in 
general follow. In an enclosure I am giving the figures on the basis of which 
this should be determined. 

I should like to take this opportunity to express to you on behalf of the 
workers on this project their appreciation for the support which the Univer- 
sity has given it, under circumstances which have not always been easy and 
which have required so much both of judgment and of good will. 


Very sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


After consulting the university official in charge of the Los Alamos 
contract, Sproul replied that a salary reduction was up to the War Depart- 
ment, which had set the figure in the first place, though he and his colleague 
agreed that heavy responsibilities justified the higher figure. Groves ac- 
knowledged a copy of Oppenheimer’s letter to Sproul with the comment: 
‘I do wish to tell you how much I personally approve your attitude.’’* 


IN THE AUTUMN of 1943 Oppenheimer and his staff were preparing 
for an event of international significance, the arrival of scientists associated 
with Britain’s atomic weapons project known by the code name of Tube 
Alloys. In the period immediately following the discovery of fission, when 
nuclear research in the United States still lacked coherent direction, British 


266 


physicists and their refugee colleagues were doing important theoretical and 
experimental work. 

The outbreak of war and the mobilization of all Britain’s resources for 
defense precluded development of a major atomic project, and in June 1942 
Churchill and Roosevelt reached an informal agreement that the “‘research 
plant’”’ for the atomic weapon should be located in the United States. There 
followed months of hard bargaining between Bush and Conant and their 
British counterparts over the degree of access that British scientists should 
have to research centers in the United States. Finally at Quebec in 1943 
Churchill and Roosevelt decreed “full and effective collaboration” in bring- 
ing bomb development to a successful conclusion. A Combined Policy 
Committee was placed in charge, and James Chadwick was designated 
Head of the British Mission in Washington. Working with General Groves, 
Chadwick planned the transfer of many of Britain’s highly qualified nuclear 
scientists to the parts of the Manhattan Project where they could be most 
useful. Those assigned to Los Alamos began arriving in December 1943. 
Eventually this group numbered nineteen, plus Chadwick and G. I. Taylor as 
consultants. *° 

Niels Bohr and his physicist son, Aage, were also nominally part of the 
British Mission by virtue of Bohr’s appointment as consultant to Tube 
Alloys after he arrived in London in October 1943 following his escape 
from Nazi-occupied Denmark. 

A brief note to Groves dealt with a minor aspect of the British delega- 
tion’s arrival. 


136 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
November 2, 1943 


Dear General Groves: 


After you gave me the list during your last visit of the men whom we 
may expect from the United Kingdom, it occurred to me that it might be 
wise before they arrive here to give them new names. This refers especially 
to Niels Bohr. I am thinking of the fact that mail will be addressed to them, 
that they may on occasion originate or receive long-distance calls, that they 
will be making some local purchases, and that for all these routine matters it 
would be preferable if such well known names were not put in circulation. 

It has, in fact, troubled us some that we are forced to place calls for Dr. 
Conant, Fermi, Lawrence, etc. This does not happen very often, but in view 
of the fact that we try not to use these names over the telephone, the placing 
of the calls themselves seems to us rather unwise. I doubt whether at this 


267 


late date it would be practicable to assign new names to those who have 
been associated with the project in the past. In the case of Bohr and Chad- 
wick I think it would be advisable to do so before they get here. 


Sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


Fermi refused to take seriously his pseudonym of Henry Farmer, and 
the only aliases consistently used were Nicholas Baker for Bohr (or “‘Uncle 
Nick” to his former students) and James, or Jim Baker, for his son. 


LOS ALAMOS, with its constant challenges to ingenuity and adaptability, 
proved to be a fine place to assess new talent, of which there was a good deal 
on hand. In May 1945 the average age of the scientific staff was 29.4 years; 
the age distribution curve peaked sharply at twenty-seven.*’ The newness of 
the field had attracted the young, and the policy of draft deferment for es- 
sential workers made them available when older men were already commit- 
ted to other war research. Los Alamos also brought together people in fields 
that did not ordinarily overlap and was therefore a good recruiting ground 
for university departments and for the interdisciplinary research centers that 
proliferated after the war. The competition began early. Oppenheimer was 
still trying to lure people to Los Alamos when he tried to interest the chair- 
man of the Berkeley physics department in a promising young theorist. 


137 | TO RAYMOND T. BIRGE 


[Los Alamos] 
November 4, 1943 


Dear Professor Birge: 


In these war times it is not always easy to think constructively about the 
peace that is to follow, even in such relatively small things as the welfare of 
our department. I would like to make one suggestion to you which 
concerns that, and about which I have myself a very sure and strong convic- 
tion. 

As you know, we have quite a number of physicists here, and I have run 
into a few who are young and whose qualities I had not known before. Of 
these there is one who is in every way so outstanding and so clearly recog- 
nized as such, that I think it appropriate to call his name to your attention, 
with the urgent request that you consider him for a position in the depart- 
ment at the earliest time that that is possible. You may remember the 


268 


name because he once applied for a fellowship in Berkeley: it is Richard 
Feynman. He is by all odds the most brilliant young physicist here, and ev- 
eryone knows this. He is a man of thoroughly engaging character and per- 
sonality, extremely clear, extremely normal in all respects, and an excellent 
teacher with a warm feeling for physics in all its aspects. He has the best 
possible relations both with the theoretical people of whom he is one, and 
with the experimental people with whom he works in very close harmony. 

The reason for telling you about him now is that his excellence is so well 
known, both at Princeton where he worked before he came here, and to a 
not inconsiderable number of “‘big shots”’ on this project, that he has already 
been offered a position for the post war period, and will most certainly be 
offered others. I feel that he would be a great strength for our department, 
tending to tie together its teaching, its research and its experimental and the- 
oretical aspects. I may give you two quotations from men with whom he 
has worked. Bethe has said that he would rather lose any two other men 
than Feynman from this present job, and Wigner said, “He is a second 
Dirac, only this time human.’”? 

Of course, there are several people here whose recommendation you 
might want; in the first instance Professors Brode and McMillan.” I hope 
you will not mind my calling this matter to your attention, but I feel that if 
we can follow the suggestion I have made, all of us will be very happy and 
proud about it in the future. I cannot too strongly emphasize Feynman’s re- 
markable personal qualities which have been generally recognized by 
officers, scientists and laity in this community. 

With every good wish, 


Robert Oppenheimer 


a. Eugene Wigner was on the staff of the Met Lab from 1942 to 1945. 
b. Robert Brode of the Berkeley physics department was a group leader at Los Alamos. 


Birge replied that he could not make permanent appointments while so 
many tenured professors were still on leave. The department had a lot of 
lower division students, and he had hired people to teach them. However, 
he requested further information about Feynman.* 


IN DECEMBER 1943 the Bohrs arrived for the first of their wartime 
visits to Los Alamos. The British regarded Bohr’s attachment to their mis- 
sion as helpful in implementing the Quebec agreement but were not sure 
that Groves would allow him full access to American laboratories unless he 
joined the Manhattan Project. Bohr himself wished to keep the British affili- 
ation. Groves proved more tractable than expected, and Bohr was allowed 


269 


to visit all parts of the project.*” Nevertheless, Oppenheimer made sure that 
his contribution at Los Alamos was a matter of record. 


138 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
January 17, 1944 


Dear General Groves: 


Dr. Baker [Niels Bohr] has left today and I think it appropriate to report 
to you briefly on his visit. 

1. On the technical side Dr. Baker concerned himself primarily with the 
correlation and interpretation of the many new data on nuclear fission and 
related topics which have been obtained by this project. He left with us a 
brief report on the theoretical understanding of these data. It has been the 
point of view of this laboratory that in matters of such great importance, 
and where theories were involved which were new and unproven, all 
important quantities would have to be determined by experimental mea- 
surement, and I believe this policy was and is sound. Nevertheless, the ad- 
vantage of some theoretical insight into the phenomena is very great indeed 
in that it enables us to evaluate experiments critically, to determine the rela- 
tive priority of experiments, and in general to reduce the amount of futile 
discussion and waste motion. For all these reasons the work that Baker did 
for us should prove of very great value in the months to come. Baker con- 
cerned himself very little with the engineering problems of our program al- 
though he is of course aware of their importance and their difficulty. 

2. By arrangement with Chadwick and me, Baker is to remain on the 
British payroll and all his expenses are to be paid by the British. A change in 
this arrangement will only be made if you or Dr. Chadwick see strong 
reasons to alter it. 

3. I should like in a formal way to express my hope that Baker’s collabo- 
ration with this project will continue, since it has been of great help to us 
and is likely to be so throughout the year. 

4. By word and deed Dr. Baker has done everything he could to support 
this project and to indicate that he is sympathetic not only with its purposes 
and general method of procedure, but with the policies and achievements of 
the project’s overall direction. I should like to make it quite clear that the 
effect of his presence on the morale of those with whom he came in contact 
was always positive and always helpful, and that I see every reason to antici- 
pate that this will be true in the future. 


Very sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


What Oppenheimer did not mention to Groves were the hours spent 
discussing Bohr’s conviction that the successful development of an atomic 
weapon would require a radical change in international relations and that 
Britain and the United States must make a generous offer to share its con- 
trol if they hoped to avoid a disastrous arms race. Lecturing in 1963 on 
‘Niels Bohr and his Times,’’ Oppenheimer recalled: “He made the enter- 
prise, which ofteri looked so macabre, seem hopeful . . . [he spoke of] his 
own high hope that the outcome would be good, and that in this the role of 
objectivity, friendliness, cooperation, incarnate in science, would play a 
helpful part: all this was something we wished very much to believe.’ 

This first visit to Los Alamos lasted a few weeks; then Bohr and his son 
left for Washington and London. An April interview with Churchill was a 
painful failure. Bohr returned to the United States for a July talk with 
Roosevelt, which he mistakenly thought went much better, but when the 
two leaders met in September they not only dismissed Bohr’s proposal to 
tell other Allied leaders about the bomb but directed that Bohr’s move- 
ments be closely watched. 

Bohr’s views deeply influenced Oppenheimer and a few others to 
whom he talked at Los Alamos. They became gospel to most Los Alamos 
scientists as soon as the successful test of July 16, 1945, relieved the pressure 
of work and freed them psychologically to ponder its meaning. 


EARLY IN 1940 Rudolf Peierls and Otto R. Frisch, who was working 
with Peierls at Birmingham, had calculated the critical size of a uranium 
bomb and suggested ways of separating U***. Peierls had a broad 
understanding of all aspects of Britain’s Tube Alloys project. He had come 
to the United States in September 1943 to help decide how British scientists 
could best expedite bomb development and had stayed on as consultant to a 
research group at Columbia working on the gaseous diffusion process for 
separating U?**. Oppenheimer knew that Groves would respect the sound 
judgment of this brilliant, unassuming man. 


139 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
February 14, 1944 


Dear General Groves: 


Dr. Peierls spent two and a half days at Site Y. Almost all of this time was 
taken up by conferences with members of the Theoretical Division and with 
the other members of the British mission. 

1. One of the main purposes of Peierls’ visit was to reach a decision on 
what parts of the work now being carried out in Britain should be contin- 


ued. There was therefore a rather careful comparison of the methods and 
results of the British workers with ours, in so far as the British have been 
working on the same problems. No important discrepancies in results were 
revealed by this comparison. It was agreed that British analytical work on 
critical masses, multiplication rates and efficiencies could best be discon- 
tinued. 

It was further agreed that their work on the optical analogy, although 
probably not of a character to justify its initiation at this time, might profit- 
ably be continued and should preferably‘be transferred to this laboratory. 
This would mean bringing Marshall, who has been in charge of the work in 
Britain, to this laboratory.2 We should have him work under the general 
supervision of O. R. Frisch. Plans to effect this have been initiated. 

It was further agreed that the detailed numerical calculations on the blast 
wave now in progress in Britain should be continued for some time. These 
are more laborious and less perspicuous than the methods used here, but 
should provide a reliable check. 

2. The chief contribution made by Peierls to the work of this laboratory 
lay in the following. The methods used by the British for integrating the 
blast wave equations in all their complexity are applicable to the physically 
different but formally similar problem of the hydrodynamics of implosion. 
Since I am not satisfied with the adequacy of the methods now in use in this 
laboratory for studying this latter problem, we went into the technical as- 
pects of the British methods 1n considerable detail with Peierls, and are plan- 
ning to attack the implosion problem along these lines with the highest 
possible urgency. : 


Sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


a. Frisch was already at Los Alamos. D. G. Marshall soon joined the British Mission there. 


At Los Alamos the British scientists worked on many problems but 
principally on the implosion method of assembling the bomb. Implosion 
involved a sudden compression of a subspherical critical mass of fissionable 
material by detonating a surrounding high explosive layer. At the April 
1943 conference, Seth H. Neddermeyer had offered a theoretical analysis 
which demonstrated the feasibility of the implosion technique. He had been 
encouraged by Oppenheimer to carry on experiments, although at the time 
the theoretical physicists and the explosives experts preferred to push work 
on the gun device. The “‘optical analogy” was that between the diffusion of 
neutrons and the behavior of light scattered from white particles dispersed 
in a transparent medium. Oppenheimer’s concern about hydrodynamics 


VA 


was relieved by the arrival in May 1944 of British consultant G. I. Taylor, 
whose new theory of interface instability was useful in several areas. 

Oppenheimer’s comment on the laborious British method of calculat- 
ing the blast wave reflected a general difference in approach. According to the 
historian of the British project, ““The Americans had tended to obtain as 
many and as detailed results as possible with rather questionable methods 
while the British had erred in the opposite direction, obtaining too few re- 
sults by fairly reliable methods.’’®? In September 1943, when scientists were 
again allowed to compare progress, they found that the different approaches 
had, in fact, complemented each other. 

A month after this report of Oppenheimer’s, Peierls also moved to Los 
Alamos and soon became deputy head of the British group there, while 
Chadwick from Washington supervised all the British scientists working in 
the United States. Peierls noted with satisfaction that no distinction was 
made between members of the British and American teams and that the 
work was guided “‘by the necessity to get the best answer in the shortest 
possible time rather than by questions of formal organization and pres- 
tige.”>* 

Peierls also enjoyed the resumption of personal contact with Oppen- 
heimer which had begun as members of Pauli’s group in Zurich in the 
spring of 1929. “‘Robert was one of those people,” Peierls recalled recently, 
‘“‘who takes his job, but not himself, seriously.’”” When the Oppenheimers 
gave a party for Lord Cherwell, Churchill’s scientific adviser, Peierls unac- 
countably failed to receive an invitation. In Peierls’ office next day, Oppen- 
heimer apologized for this terrible mistake. “‘But,’’ he added, “‘there is an 
element of relief in this situation: It might have happened with Edward 
Teller.” 


UNDERSTANDABLY, Oppenheimer wrote few personal letters during 
the war. Los Alamos mail was censored, and residents were expected to cor- 
respond only with relatives and friends who would be alarmed by complete 
silence. Frank Oppenheimer, working at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory 
and at Oak Ridge, knew what his brother was doing, and there was no one 
else who would expect regular letters. But in the spring of 1944 Oppen- 
heimer acknowledged good news from members of a family—a mother 
and four daughters, not Oppenheimer relatives—whose migration from 
Germany he had assisted. A note written by one of the sisters in 1962 re- 
minded him that “in 1940 you brought us all over and we could save our 
lives thanks to you.””” 


273 


140 | TO ANNE AND HILDE MEYERS 


[Los Alamos] 
April 5, 1944 


Dear Anne and Hilde, 


Thank you for your very good letters which I was extremely glad to 
have. The news of Anne’s citizenship is indeed good, and I share your wel- 
come for this and understand your pride.* ‘ 

It was very good of you to send back to me the money. I hope it has not 
meant a hardship for you and appreciate very much your wanting to do it. I 
hope that there will not be a time in the future when you will need it, but if 
that happens please let me know and I will try to make it available to you. 

I have not written earlier because I have been away from Berkeley and 
probably shall be for the duration. I doubt whether I shall get to see you 
until the war is over, but I am looking forward to it then. 

With all warm greetings and best wishes, 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


MAJOR PEER DE SILVA, to whom Oppenheimer addressed the fol- 
lowing stern note, was the intelligence officer assigned to assist him in en- 
forcing security regulations applying to civilians under laboratory jurisdic- 
tion. In April 1944 Arthur L. Hughes was personnel director, though he 
would soon return to his post as chairman of the department of physics, 
Washington University, St. Louis. David Hawkins, a philosopher from the 
University of California, was responsible for liaison with the local repre- 
sentative of the Army, known as Post Administration. He gradually as- 
sumed broader responsibilities in the area of personnel and immediately 
after the war wrote the official history of Project Y. 


141 | MEMORANDUM TO PEER DE SILVA 


[Los Alamos] 
April 21, 1944 


It has come to my attention that you have on numerous occasions in the 
past offered your advice to Dr. Hughes on the form of his letters and on 
procedures adopted by him. I am informed by him and by Dr. Hawkins that 
the suggestions made by you have been incompatible with the effective 
functioning of his office. It would appear desirable to me that whenever in 
the future you wish to advise personnel of this laboratory on matters of se- 


27/4 


curity, you discuss the questions involved either with Dr. Hawkins or me. 
This, of course, does not apply to those many cases where individuals may 
wish to consult you, or to those specific problems which we have asked you 
to undertake. 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


IF OPPENHEIMER had any inclination to forget the quieter world of aca- 
demic physics where he had felt so much at home, he would have been re- 
minded by the active recruitment going on at Los Alamos. His strong rec- 
ommendation of Richard Feynman for a postwar appointment at Berkeley 
was still being discussed six months later. 


142 | TO RAYMOND T. BIRGE 


[Los Alamos] 
May 26, 1944 


Dear Professor Birge: 


Thank you for your long and explicit letter of May 11. I was very much 
interested in some of the more general remarks on the state of our depart- 
ment and the education of physicists generally. You must know that I feel a 
very deep concern at the almost total paralysis of academic scientific train- 
ing. It will be many years before we shall have recovered from the ill effects 
of present policy and I can only wish you and the colleagues associated with 
you the very best of success in your efforts. It is true that as far as men of 
graduate standing are concerned, projects like the one with which I am con- 
nected and many others are providing a real training, but the highly orga- 
nized and highly integrated character of the work of these projects will 
probably fail to give men that deep and independent curiosity and vision on 
which the best of research has in the past been based. 

I must say that I am not nearly so much in sympathy with the attitude 
expressed toward Feynman. It is not an unusual thing for universities to 
make commitments to young men whom they wish to have after the war. I 
surely do not know of all the cases where such commitments have been 
made, even to members of this project, but there are three which come to 
mind: Christy has been offered an assistant professorship by Compton at 
the University of Chicago although he had no connection with the univer- 
sity before the war. Ramsey has been offered a position by Columbia Uni- 
versity, to become effective after the termination of this project. Feynman, 


275 


as you know, has been offered an assistant professorship by Cornell.? In 
every case I believe that the university is willing to make a definite commit- 
ment and regards the acceptance of the scientist as a commitment. In every 
case I believe the scientist appreciates that the extension of an invitation to 
him is an act of generosity which in turn demands some loyalty on his part. 
The fact that this was not the case for Condon has been well known to me, 
but I have preferred to regard it as atypical.” It seems to me that commit- 
ments so made not only have precedent but have some sense since by them a 
relationship can be established between a:man and an institution in which 
the elements of loyalty and confidence in the future play an appropriate part. 
It seems to me that this 1s one of the few ways in which institutions of learn- 
ing which are devoted to the public good can distinguish themselves from 
more competitive and more predatory organizations. It also seems to me 
one of the ways in which a department can exercise an enlightened self- 
interest by offering a certain security to a man who has a great deal to offer it. 
If it is a policy of the University of California never to make such commit- 
ments, I believe that this policy is in error. It is true that the future of a state 
university is necessarily uncertain. It is true too that ours is a department 
which has justified a reputation as one of the great centers of physics in the 
country, and which has every reason to believe that its usefulness to society 
has been great enough to warrant continued support. It is also true that no 
additions have been made to the department during the war years. It would 
seem to me that under these circumstances too much of courage was not 
involved in making a commitment to a young scientist. It is thus with the 
greatest disappointment that I learn that our university and our department 
cannot follow this policy. 

As for Feynman himself, I perhaps presumed too much on the excellence 
of his reputation among those to whom he is known. I know that Brode, 
McMillan, and Alvarez are all enthusiastic about him, and it 1s small won- 
der.° He is not only an extremely brilliant theorist, but a man of the greatest 
robustness, responsibility and warmth, a brilliant and a lucid teacher, and an 
untiring worker. He would come to the teaching of physics with both a rare 
talent and a rare enthusiasm. We have entrusted him here with the giving of 
a course for the staff of our laboratory. He is one of the most responsible 
men I have ever met. He does not regard himself as a privileged artist but as 
one of a group of hard working men for whom the development of physical 
science is an obligation, and the exposition both an obligation and a plea- 
sure. He spends much of his time in the laboratories and is always closely 
associated with the experimental phases of the work. He was associated 
with Robert Wilson in the Princeton project and Wilson attributes a great 
part of the success of that project to his help. We regard him as invaluable 
here; he has been given a responsibility and his work carries a weight far 
beyond his years. In fact he is just such a man as we have long needed in 


276 


Berkeley to contribute to the unity of the department and to give it technical 
strength where it has been lacking in the past. 


With every good wish, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


a. Robert Christy received his Ph.D. from Berkeley in 1941, came to Los Alamos from the 
Met Lab, and went to Chicago after the war. Ramsey returned to Columbia, and Feynman 
went to Cornell. 

b. Edward U. Condon received a Ph.D. from Berkeley in 1926, then spent a postgraduate 
year abroad. Condon joined the physics department at Princeton in 1928. He and Birge differed 
as to whether he had reneged on a firm commitment to Berkeley. 

c. Brode, McMillan, and Alvarez, on leave from Birge’s department, all held responsible 
posts in the Ordnance Division at Los Alamos. 


EACH STEP ACCOMPLISHED brought new problems. Chemists and 
metallurgists had been working for six months in a specially constructed 
building with air-conditioning and meticulous dust control when Oppen- 
heimer reassured Groves about the handling of highly toxic plutonium and 
its compounds. 


143 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
June 27, 1944 


Dear General Groves: 


Thank you for your letter of June 19 in which you ask me to point out to 
the responsible workers in chemistry and metallurgy the necessity for the 
greatest care and scruple in handling the active materials we are now receiv- 
ing. I have shown your letter to Dr. Kennedy and asked him again to bring 
this matter to the attention of his staff. 

You will of course appreciate that we have taken the responsibility for 
this material, both because of its immense value and because of the great 
toxicity of some forms of it, with the greatest seriousness, and that all work 
in chemistry and metallurgy is being carried out in such a way as to mini- 
mize the danger of loss and contamination. We are trying to steer a course 
which insures the greatest safety compatible with technical progress and I 
hope that it will prove that our judgment in this has been sound. 


Very sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


vag 


One of the minor miracles of the Los Alamos venture was the mutual 
respect that developed between those two seemingly incompatible 
characters, Oppenheimer and Groves. Unlike some of his colleagues, Op- 
penheimer early learned not to quail during the general’s periodic inspec- 
tions. Groves’ forthright defense of Oppenheimer in 1954 is well known, 
and in later years, he often used news items about Oppenheimer as an ex- 
cuse to write a friendly note and remind him of their past association. 


AN ALWAYS WELCOME VISITOR was James Conant who, as scien- 
tific adviser to the entire Manhattan Project, came to Los Alamos every 
three or four weeks during the final year of the war. 

Charles A. Thomas, research director of the Monsanto Chemical Com- 
pany, had coordinated research on the chemistry and purification of pluton- 
ium 239 at the Chicago Met Lab, Iowa State College at Ames, Berkeley, and 
Los Alamos. As the chemistry and metallurgy of plutonium became con- 
centrated at Los Alamos, Thomas’s role was less crucial.*® 

The focus of attention in mid-summer 1944 was on several ambitious 
experiments to study the implosion method of bomb assembly, but it is not 
obvious to which particular experiment this letter refers. 


144 | TO JAMES B. CONANT 


[Los Alamos] 
August 3, 1944 


Dear Dr. Conant: 


We are looking forward to your visit on the seventeenth and will plan to 
meet you at the Chief at Lamy. I think it will be a good time for you to 
come and with luck we shall even have a rather important experiment going 
on in the days you are here. Your confidence in our future success is 
something that I would like to have checked against realities just as often as 
possible and I think that the next months will inevitably be a time when we 
shall value your advice and help to a very special degree. 

I have the impression that we are not going to get very far with Charles 
Thomas, and that his own reluctance to become further involved in this 
project and the pressure put on him by his company will combine to keep 
him from very active participation in this work. I think that if anyone can 
change his mind on this it will be you. 

We have had the first positive indications as far as our main program 
goes, and although the results have not been checked, they do lend some 


278 


encouragement. By the time you are out we should know pretty well how 
sound they are. 


Very sincerely yours, 


Oppie 


TOWARD THE END of the summer Oppenheimer had occasion to con- 
gratulate a second set of new citizens, this time in his Aunt Hedwig’s family. 
He also had news of his own to report. 


145 | TO HEDWIG STERN 


[Los Alamos ] 
August 25, 1944 


Dear Hedwig, 


We were so happy to learn of the successful outcome on the citizenship. 
Kitty and I send you all our warmest congratulations. We know how much 
it means to you to have this settled after the long periods of uncertainty and 
trouble. I wish that we could be with you for a celebration but we will have 
to postpone that until our return to Berkeley. 

Perhaps you know that we are expecting a child in November. Kitty has 
been very well and everything is good with us except that life is a little bit 
too busy for our taste. 

My love to Alfred and to Lotte and my special love to you. 


[Robert] 


The Oppenheimers’ daughter, Katherine, always called Toni, was born 
December 7, 1944, in the one-story frame hospital a quarter of a mile from 
her parents’ home. Her birth certificate, like those of other Los Alamos war 
babies, listed the place of birth as Box 1663, Sandoval County Rural. 

Within Los Alamos, the Oppenheimers lived much as did their neigh- 
bors, but with a difference: because they entertained many visitors, Kitty’s 
name was high on the list at the maid service office which assigned the In- 
dian and Spanish-American women who arrived each weekday morning by 
bus from the valley. 

Even before a fence went up around their house, with a military patrol 
inconspicuously on duty, the Oppenheimers had more physical privacy 
than families in the four-unit apartments but even less time to enjoy it. Sel- 


279 


dom did they get to Perro Caliente, hidden tantalizingly behind the Sangre 
de Cristos, a thirty-mile crow’s flight to the east. For Oppenheimer, even a 
short ride up into the Jemez with his wife on the horses they kept in the 
Ranch School stables was a luxury. Other couples exchanged dinners or 
went to so-called parties two or three evenings a week, but when Oppen- 
heimer was not traveling or working late there was official entertaining, 
more pleasant but no less time consuming when the guests were old friends 
like Tolman, Lauritsen, Bohr, or Rabi. 

Sometimes the Oppenheimers took -their friends, or slipped away 
alone, down to the bridge at the Rio Grande for a dinner prepared by 
Edith Warner. Oppenheimer and Miss Warner, a quiet Pennsylvania 
Quaker and a dozen years his senior, had something in common. In 1922 
both had come to New Mexico for their health, he to the Pecos, she to the 
Pajarito Plateau. Returning in 1928 determined to find a livelihood, Miss 
Warner became custodian of the Ranch School supplies deposited by the 
train that ran once or twice a day along the narrow gauge tracks on the west 
bank of the Rio Grande. Gradually she renovated the small adobe house that 
went with her job, filled it with Indian pots, Spanish rugs, and natural 
objects from nearby mesas; in it she opened a small store and tearoom. Some- 
times friends or paying guests occupied a nearby house built for the pur- 
pose. Oppenheimer had stopped there on pack trips from Perro Caliente. In 
1941 he took his wife to meet Miss Warner, and these brief encounters laid 
the basis for one of those special friendships for which he—and she—had 
such talent. They also met Tilano, a former governor of San Ildefonso 
Pueblo, two miles east across the river, who for some years had been Miss 
Warner’s companion and helper with chores and garden. 

The tracks of the “‘chili line’”” were removed in 1941. Gas rationing kept 
tourists away, and Miss Warner was wondering how she could manage fi- 
nancially when she learned that the Ranch School would close and that even 
the trickle of strangers still crossing the Rio Grande to her tearoom must 
stop. One evening Oppenheimer and General Groves dropped in. Discus- 
sing proposed eating facilities on the hill, Groves suggested that Miss 
Warner might run the dining room in the former School Lodge or the cafe- 
teria for unmarried dormitory residents. In desperation she agreed to con- 
sider the proposal. Oppenheimer and Groves went away. In a few mo- 
ments there was a knock on the door. Oppenheimer stood on the step, a tall 
figure in the winter moonlight. ““Don’t do it,’’ he said, then turned and went 
back to the car.” 

Shortly thereafter Oppenheimer made another proposal. By serving 
dinner to eight or ten people three evenings a week, Edith Warner could 
earn enough for her simple needs, but this was not what Oppenheimer 
stressed. Scientists and their wives would have few opportunities for eve- 
ning diversion away from “The Hill’’; she would be making a real contribu- 


280 


tion to the war effort. Miss Warner and General Groves agreed. The Op- 
penheimers had first choice of dates. By a thoroughly undemocratic and 
mysterious process, others were notified when their turn came to take 
guests there. All became in some measure her friends, and, as Oppenheimer 
had foreseen, returned to their thin-walled apartments refreshed in spirit by 
contact with Miss Warner, Tilano, and the peace of the little house by the 
river. 


MOST MANHATTAN PROJECT scientists of draft age had been de- 
ferred through regular Selective Service procedures. After early 1944 the 
Los Alamos staff was augmented by members of the Army’s Special Engi- 
neer Detachment (SED) composed of young men with technical training or 
experience who for a variety of reasons had not received draft deferment. 
This group, including college graduates and Ph.D.s, performed desperately 
needed services but presented laboratory personnel officers and the Post 
Command with new problems to adjudicate—housing for married SEDs, 
jobs for the wives, and conflicts between laboratory working hours and bar- 
rack duties. These disparities in privilege between civilian and military labo- 
ratory staff disturbed all concerned, including Oppenheimer. 


146 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
August 30, 1944 


Dear General Groves: 


We have so often come to you with our troubles that I would like to tell 
you of one case in which they appear to be solved. The command of the 
SED, in the hands of Captain [T. O.] Palmer and under the general supervi- 
sion of Major de Silva appears to have been in every way successful. I have 
had no complaints of the relations between the detachment and the labora- 
tory and only words of appreciation ever since this arrangement has been in 
effect. My own opinion is that the tensions which had developed in the past 
are rapidly abating, with a corresponding gratifying improvement in the 
morale and effectiveness in the detachment and its work. 

I should like you to know that all of us appreciate the actions which you 
took to bring this about. 


Sincerely yours, 


J R Oppenheimer 


281 


A day later Oppenheimer again wrote to Groves, this time about a sig- 
nificant technical accomplishment. The X-10 stocks referred to the pluton- 
ium from the small production unit at the Clinton Laboratories at Oak 


Ridge. 


147 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
August 31, 1944 


Dear General Groves: 


I should like you to have a report on the status of our X-10 stocks. Our 
records show, according to Dr. Kennedy’s recent study, that we have 
received a total of 51 grams of this material. The material has been used for 
approximately 2500 separate experiments. The overall loss per experiment 
has been about 1 per cent. The result is that we now have in stock or ac- 
counted for by loan to other laboratories, 36 of the original 51 grams. 

I believe that on the whole the mastery of the techniques necessary for 
handling the product which we have obtained in the last months has 
justified the use to which the material has been put and the losses incurred 
therein. This is also the opinion of Dr. Kennedy. Some further loss is to be 
anticipated during the experimental phase of our studies of this material, 
and perhaps another 5 or 10 grams will disappear in this way, although I 
confidently hope that this is an overestimate. On the other hand, we are 
now in a position to carry through the operations necessary for final fabrica- 
tion with a very high yield (99%) and to recover almost all that is not in- 
cluded in the yield. I therefore believe that the material which we have dissi- 
pated will be paid for many times over by the effectiveness with which we 
can deal with production lots when they become available. 


Sincerely yours, 


J R Oppenheimer 


IN SEPTEMBER Oppenheimer received from Chairman Birge a long 
letter about staffing problems in the Berkeley physics department caused by 
uncertainty as to how long the Los Alamos contingent would be away. Sub- 
stitutes on temporary appointments were getting restive. Oppenheimer’s 
former student Joseph W. Weinberg had been approached about a tenured 
post elsewhere. He was doing an excellent job and could not be spared until 
Oppenheimer returned. Birge feared that the eventual termination of gov- 


282 


ernment projects would result in increased competition for peacetime jobs 
and that the untenured members of the department would leave before the 
tenured ones returned. 


148 | TO RAYMOND T. BIRGE 


[Los Alamos] 
September 27, 1944 


Dear Professor Birge: 


Thank you for your letter of September 23. I appreciate the gravity of the 
problem which you raise and wish that I might offer an easy solution. This, 
however, [is] not the case, and your most gloomy forebodings have a signif- 
icant chance of being fulfilled. 

First, as to the plans of the members of the department who are now 
here, — Alvarez, Brode, McMillan and Oppenheimer, —I cannot of course 
speak with certainty of what their future personal preferences and hopes 
may be. I believe that this project will continue with essentially undimin- 
ished priority for the duration, that is, for some months after hostilities 
cease. I know that during that time it will be hard for me to acquiesce in the 
release of anyone who is bearing a vital responsibility for the work, and that 
this is true of all the men in question. Miracles are of course possible, such as 
a decision by higher authority to discontinue the prosecution of this work, 
but I think that only a miracle could affect the status of the men with whom 
you are concerned. There is no point in my trying to estimate what the du- 
ration will be; you are in as good a position to do that as I. I may tell you 
that in my own planning I do not expect to be able to leave this work before 
the Spring of 1946, but this is merely based on what I read in the Albuquerque 
Tribune and the Denver Post. 

As for the specific problem of Weinberg, it would be my feeling that we 
would either have to be prepared to continue his employment in the future 
at a salary not less than that which he is now receiving, and until such time 
as he accepted a new position, or we should have to allow him at the present 
time to accept any position which he regarded as satisfactory and likely to 
be permanent. I realize that this puts you in a very difficult position but Iam 
sure that you will agree with me that it is the only honorable course. I do 
not wish to recommend that we make a commitment of the kind suggested 
above to Weinberg, but if in your opinion this is necessary for the welfare of 
the department, I shall understand and I shall make no objection. 

I believe that your views about the OSRD will probably turn out to be 
justified. The point of view expressed by Dr. Bush is that after the defeat of 
Germany only such projects will be continued as are likely to contribute 


283 


directly to the Japanese War. Knowing the natural conservatism of research 
organizations I believe that it will be sometime before there are marked cut- 
backs in the OSRD. When these do occur there may be something of an 
avalanche of scientists seeking re-employment. 

It would seem to me that there is only one solution to the present difficul- 
ties which may reduce the temporary havoc in the department. If it can be 
anticipated that a somewhat larger department will be required in the post- 
war years, I should recommend very strongly adding members to the de- 
partment at an early date. I am sure that at ‘this time men who can now, or 
shortly, be released from their wartime duties will be glad to join us. In this 
way it may be possible to provide some continuity over the difficult months 
ahead. 

This letter contains no information which bears on the program of the 
project here; nevertheless, since a false construction could be put on it I wish 
that you would regard it as classified and written to you for your guidance 
only. 


Sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


The impatience detectable in Oppenheimer’s response can be attributed 
in part to Birge’s earlier refusal to commit the department to so exceptional 
a candidate as Feynman. Oppenheimer was preoccupied with a recently 
completed reorganization of the Los Alamos Laboratory beside which the 
Berkeley problems seemed momentarily unimportant. The reply to Birge’s 
next letter was less testy in tone. 


149 | TO RAYMOND T. BIRGE 


[Los Alamos] 
October 5, 1944 


Dear Professor Birge: 


Thank you for your good letter of October 2. I am glad that you are 
going to take steps to increase the strength of the department, and feel confi- 
dent that we will all appreciate the wisdom of this in days to come. 

Several months ago Dr. Feynman accepted a permanent appointment 
with the Physics Department at Cornell University. I do not know details 
of salary and rank, but they are presumably satisfactory to him. I shall of 
course do my best to call to your attention any men who are available and 
whom we should want to recommend strongly for the department. I am 


284 


afraid that at the present time this may involve some conflict since we are 
still eager to add to our personnel here and since in the nature of things I 
tend to go after the men in whom I have the greatest overall confidence. It is 
true that I do from time to time learn of cut-backs in OSRD projects and I 
am in a rather good position to find out about personnel. I shall do the very 
best I can. 


With all good wishes, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


BY EARLY SUMMER 1944 scientists developing the gun mechanism of 
bomb assembly were reasonably sure of success, but it was doubtful how 
soon there would be enough uranium for more than one bomb. Therefore, 
those who set laboratory priorities, that is, General Groves and the Military 
Policy Committee, decided that the implosion method employing pluton- 
ium, expected soon in sizeable quantities from the plant at Hanford, Wash- 
ington, promised more bombs at an earlier date and should be pushed as an 
alternative. This decision prompted a major reorientation of the work of the 
laboratory which involved the rearrangement of divisions and the 
appointment of two associate directors, Captain William S. Parsons, USN, 
head of the Ordnance Division since May 1943, and Enrico Fermi, who 
lived at Los Alamos after September 1944.°° 

Some think Fermi arrived too late to have a marked effect on develop- 
ment of the bomb, although his broad understanding provided a valuable 
check on the work of others. Oppenheimer hoped that Fermi’s common- 
sense and tempered judgment would mediate conflicting views that threat- 
ened occasionally to disrupt the generally harmonious atmosphere of the 
project. Two differences of opinion about priorities had left a residue of bit- 
terness. One was Edward Teller’s dissatisfaction with the small effort ex- 
pended on developing a hydrogen weapon, “‘the Super.’’ This was tempo- 
rarily resolved by allowing Teller to pursue his own thoughts with support 
from anyone particularly eager to work on the problem. The other less pub- 
licized source of tension was between those taking a largely traditional ord- 
nance approach to the problem of detonation and the theoretical and experi- 
mental physicists working on the novel implosion device. Oppenheimer’s 
ability to understand divergent viewpoints and then reach his own 
conclusion was evident in the covering letter with which he forwarded to 
Groves an early autumn report from Captain Parsons. 


285 


150 | TO LESLIE R. GROVES 


[Los Alamos] 
October 6, 1944 


Dear General Groves: 


I am glad to transmit the enclosed report of Captain Parsons, with the 
general intent and spirit of which I am in full sympathy. There are a few 
points on which my evaluation differs somewhat from that expressed in the 
report and it seems appropriate to mention them at this time. 

1. I believe that Captain Parsons somewhat misjudges the temper of the 
responsible members of the laboratory. It is true that there are a few people 
here whose interests are exclusively ‘‘scientific’’ in the sense that they will 
abandon any problem that appears to be soluble. I believe that these men are 
now in appropriate positions in the organization. For the most part the men 
actually responsible for the prosecution of the work have proven records of 
carrying developments through the scientific and into the engineering stage. 
For the most part these men regard their work here not as a scientific adven- 
ture, but as a responsible mission which will have failed if it is let drop at the 
laboratory phase. I therefore do not expect to have to take heroic measures 
to insure something which I know to be the common desire of the over- 
whelming majority of our personnel. 

2. I agree completely with all the comments of Captain Parsons’ memo- 
randum on the fallacy of regarding a controlled test as the culmination of 
the work of this laboratory. The laboratory is operating under a directive to 
produce weapons; this directive has been and will be rigorously adhered to. 
The only reason why we contemplate making a test, and why I have in the 
past advocated this, is because with the present time scales and the present 
radical assembly design this appears to be a necessary step in the production 
of a weapon. I do not wish to prejudge the issue: it is possible that informa- 
tion available to us within the next months may make such a test unneces- 
sary. I believe, however, that the probability of this is extremely small. 

3. The developmental program of the laboratory, whether or not it has 
been prosecuted with intelligence and responsibility, is still far behind the 
minimal requirements set by our directive. This fact, which rests on no per- 
fectionist ideals for long-range development, means that there must inevita- 
bly be some duplication of effort and personnel if the various phases of our 
program, —scientific, engineering and military,—are to be carried out 
without too great mutual interference. It is for this reason that I should like 
to stress Captain Parsons’ remark that a very great strengthening in engi- 


286 


neering is required. The organizational experience which the last year has 
given us is no substitute for competent engineers. 


Sincerely yours, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


One person who did not require explanations and understood Oppen- 
heimer’s need for moral support was James Conant. “‘Just a line to tell you 
once again how satisfactory I think everything is going at Y,”’ he wrote on 
October 20, 1944. “In all seriousness, you are to be congratulated on the 
progress made and the organization as it now stands. I enjoyed my trip im- 
mensely, and I am particularly grateful to you and your wife for your hospi- 
tality.’ 


PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT died suddenly on April 12, 1945. Philip Mor- 
rison recently reconstructed the impact of the shattering event on the iso- 
lated, tightly-knit mesa community: 

“By Thursday afternoon the news was everywhere. We had lost FDR. 
Now there was no one we knew up there at the top, where the view ought 
to be clearer. The war raged on in the Pacific, though it was smoldering to 
an end in Europe. The United Nations was assembling, evidently ignorant 
of fission weapons. Los Alamos could see ahead only a little way, out to the 
first test, for which we were urgently at work. The usual Sunday services at 
the movie theater would be heavily attended even by the unchurched scien- 
tists, for The Director would offer remarks in memorial for the man who 
had been our leader ‘in an old and unperverted sense.’ ”’ 

‘Sunday morning found the mesa deep in snow. A night’s fall had cov- 
ered the rude textures of the town, silenced its business, and unified the 
view in a soft whiteness, over which the bright sun shone, casting deep blue 
shadows behind every wall. It was no costume for mourning, but it seemed 
recognition of something we needed, a gesture of consolation. Everybody 
came to the theater, where Opje spoke very quietly for two or three minutes 
out of his heart and ours.’’®! 


287 


REMARKS AT MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR 
PRESIDENT FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 


Los Alamos, April 15, 1945 


When, three days ago, the world had word of the death of President 
Roosevelt, many wept who are unaccustomed to tears, many men and 
women, little enough accustomed to prayer, prayed to God. Many of us 
looked with deep trouble to the future; many of us felt less certain that our 
works would be to a good end; all of us were reminded of how precious a 
thing human greatness is. 

We have been living through years of great evil, and of great terror. 
Roosevelt has been our President, our Commander-in-Chief and, in an old 
and unperverted sense, our leader. All over the world men have looked to 
him for guidance, and have seen symbolized in him their hope that the evils 
of this time would not be repeated; that the terrible sacrifices which have 
been made, and those that are still to be made, would lead to a world more 
fit for human habitation. It is in such times of evil that men recognize their 
helplessness and their profound dependence. One is reminded of medieval 
days, when the death of a good and wise and just king plunged his country 
into despair, and mourning. 

In the Hindu scripture, in the Bhagavad-Gita, it says, ““Man is a creature 
whose substance is faith. What his faith is, he 1s.’’ The faith of Roosevelt is 
one that is shared by millions of men and women in every country of the 
world. For this reason it is possible to maintain the hope, for this reason it is 
right that we should dedicate ourselves to the hope, that his good works 
will not have ended with his death. 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


FROM LATE 1944 until the end of the war Oppenheimer was preoccu- 
pied with correlating the interlocking parts of the bomb project and with 
preparations for the July test of the implosion device. Technical memoran- 
dums of the period shed little new light on how he handled his job, and his 
correspondence file yields virtually no nontechnical letters. One exception is 
a reply to an apologetic letter from Wolfgang Pauli, whose secretary had 
mistakenly mailed an earlier request for a contribution to a proposed Bohr 
festschrift to Frank instead of to Robert.™ As director of Project Y, Oppen- 
heimer had acquired a vastly broadened knowledge of ballistics, metallurgy, 
procurement, and security, not to mention how to deal with people, but he 
was well aware how effectively the experience had removed him from the 
cutting edge of theoretical physics. 


288 


151 | TO WOLFGANG PAULI 


[Los Alamos ] 
April 16, 1945 


Dear Pauli: 


It was very good to have your letter and to know a little of what you are 
thinking and doing. 

I have not been at all distressed about the Bohr-Festschrift and I am not 
completely sure that I should do anything about it. In the first place, I have 
never been in Copenhagen and therefore I am not probably one of those 
who should be writing, although like everyone else who has ever done any 
Physics, the debt to Bohr is beyond evaluation. In the second place, for the 
last four years I have had only classified thoughts and anything I could write 
would be somewhat antiquated and somewhat trivial, so that it is very far 
from clear to me that it could in any sense be regarded as an honor to Bohr 
to have it written. I don’t know how other people are responding to this 
invitation, and if it is a matter of a token only, and you think it appropriate, I 
would be glad to do what I can. I could write a few pages, maybe less, on 
the analogy between the sensitization of photosynthesis on the one hand, 
and the internal conversion of gamma rays on the other, but it would not be 
very hot stuff. Would you let me have a word as to what you think I should 
do. My own thought is that it would be better for me not to contribute. 

It was good to have your word of greeting for Kitty, and she sends both 
you and Franca her warmest greetings and her love. All of us are beginning 
to look forward to the time when we can get back to a little more normal 
way of living and to a little bit of Physics, which looks if anything more 
seductive for the fact that it has been cultivated so little in the last few years. 

With all warm greetings, 


Sincerely yours, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 
A note from Birge in May, congratulating Oppenheimer on election to 
the American Philosophical Society, was another reminder of a world not 


dedicated to lethal weaponry. Oppenheimer replied that he would soon be 
‘sufficiently old and respectable properly to qualify for membership.’’™ 


OPPENHEIMER PLACED responsibility for the test of the implosion de- 
vice, scheduled for mid-July, in the capable hands of the Harvard physicist 
Kenneth T. Bainbridge. Back in May 1944, he had accompanied Bainbridge 


289 


and two Army officers on the first of several expeditions to select a test site. 
In two weapons carriers the group explored a remote area to the southwest 
of Los Alamos, getting caught in mountain snowdrifts and lost on the open 
desert. Oppenheimer enjoyed every moment of the rugged three-day trip, 
but he was too busy to go on any others.®™ Finally, a site was chosen in the 
desolate Jornado del Muerto near Alamogordo, New Mexico, some three 
hundred miles south of Los Alamos. Oppenheimer supplied the code name 
for the test: Trinity. In 1962, replying to.General Groves’ query about the 
origin of the name, Oppenheimer wrote: “‘I did suggest it. . . Why I 
chose the name is not clear, but I know what thoughts were in my mind. 
There is a poem of John Donne, written just before his death, which I know 
and love. From it a quotation: 


.. . As West and East 
In all flatc Maps—and I am one—are one, 
So death doth touch the Resurrection. 


That still does not make Trinity; but in another, better known devotional 
poem Donne opens, ‘Batter my heart, three person’d God.’ Beyond this, I 
have no clues whatever.”’® 

Bainbridge’s aide was Frank Oppenheimer, transferred from Oak 
Ridge, he later explained, because there “I got to be a pretty good expe- 
diter.’’® The reunion brought satisfaction to Robert, but he was busy, and 
Frank was often away at Alamogordo. 

The pressure and momentum of work, already great, intensified as 
preparations for the test moved forward. Los Alamos scientists now cite this 
as the principal reason why, after German defeat was imminent, they did 
not challenge the use of the bomb in Japan as did those at the Met Lab and, 
to a lesser extent, at Oak Ridge. There had been at least two abortive discus- 
sions. Robert Wilson remembers convening an “impact of the gadget” 
meeting, probably in the spring of 1944, but thereafter he yielded to Oppen- 
heimer’s plea that attention should not be distracted from completing the 
bomb. In March 1945, some forty-five people, among them former mem- 
bers of the American Association of Scientific Workers, discussed the post- 
war economic prospects for scientists and the social impact of atomic en- 
ergy, but Oppenheimer conveyed his opinion that scientists restricted by 
security could not accomplish much, and the group disbanded after ap- 
pointing a committee to revive the discussion as soon as secrecy was lifted.® 

Oppenheimer cannot have relished this repressive role. He and Niels 
Bohr had discussed international ramifications by the hour, but he avoided 
specific planning for future applications of the sort embodied by scientists at 
Chicago and Oak Ridge in the “Prospectus on Nucleonics”’ of November 
1944.8 In September 1944, when Tolman, as chairman of the War Depart- 
ment’s Committee on Postwar Recommendations, asked what Los Alamos 


290 


people he should talk to, Oppenheimer gave him a dozen names but 
expressed doubt that any of them had very coherent thoughts about post- 
war work. “I can say this of certainty of myself,” he added.® 

But in the spring of 1945, as Groves’ reports to the War Department 
became increasingly optimistic about the probability that two types of fis- 
sion weapon would be ready for use against Japan in midsummer, Oppen- 
heimer was drawn into decisions relating to their use and into the role of 
adviser on atomic policy. As a member of the Target Committée of civilian 
consultants, Air Corps officers, and Manhattan Project scientists, he was 
host to meetings at Los Alamos on May 10 and 11 at which the committee 
recommended that criteria for selection of targets should give priority to 
two considerations: maximum psychological effect to induce prompt Japa- 
nese surrender and proof of the devastating power of atomic weapons so 
that all nations would see the need for international cooperation.” 

Oppenheimer also served on a scientific advisory panel to the War De- 
partment’s Interim Committee, which was appointed in early May to plan 
postwar atomic policy. With the other panel members—A. H. Compton, 
Fermi, and Lawrence—Oppenheimer attended an Interim Committee 
meeting in Washington on May 31.71 Correspondence does not document 
what Oppenheimer was thinking as he made the transition from technical 
administrator to consultant on national policy, but the minutes of this In- 
terlim Committee meeting partially fill the gap. In addition to providing 
technical data and estimates ‘Dr. Oppenheimer strongly urged that num- 
bers of the present staff should be released to go back to their universities 
and research laboratories in order to explore the many ramifications of this 
field, to avoid the sterility of the present orientation to specific problems 
only, and to develop cheaper and simpler methods of production . . . Fun- 
damental knowledge of this subject was so wide spread throughout the 
world that early steps should be taken to make our developments known to 
the world. He thought it might be wise for the United States to offer to the 
world free interchange of information with particular emphasis on the de- 
velopment of peace-time uses. The basic goal of all endeavors in the field 
should be the enlargement of human welfare. If we were to offer to ex- 
change information before the bomb was actually used, our moral position 
would be greatly strengthened.”’” 

Panel members were not present the next day when the Interim Com- 
mittee authorized the use of the bomb on a combined military and civilian tar- 
get in Japan, but before leaving Washington they drafted a memorandum on 
the organization of a domestic atomic energy agency and agreed to meet at 
Los Alamos on Saturday, June 16, to make recommendations for postwar 
research and development. As was to happen repeatedly in the next eight 
years, Oppenheimer’s gift for succinct summary made him the obvious per- 
son to formulate the committee’s conclusions. The panel’s Los Alamos 


291 


meeting produced three reports: one on long-range planning, another rec- 
ommending that the Manhattan Engineer District continue operations 
pending establishment of a peacetime authority, and a third, drafted in re- 
sponse to a last-minute request from Interim Committee chairman George 
L. Harrison. On behalf of Secretary Stimson, Harrison asked the panel’s 
opinion as to the technical feasibility of a proposal presented in a long mem- 
orandum dated June 11 which James Franck of the Met Lab had brought to 
Washington, urging that an atomic weapon be demonstrated to Japanese 
leaders in an uninhabited area prior to full military use. According to all 
accounts, this was the topic that chiefly occupied panel members during the 
weekend of June 16, with Lawrence being the last to abandon the search for 
an acceptable alternative to military use. Without waiting to complete the 
other reports, Oppenheimer informed Harrison that the panel was not per- 
suaded that a demonstration would ensure a quick end to the Pacific war.” 

The implosion bomb was tested at Alamogordo on July 16.4 Teams 
of Los Alamos scientists took the components of the two bombs to the Pa- 
cific. The uranium bomb was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, the plu- 
tonium implosion bomb on Nagasaki on August 9, and on August 15 hos- 
tilities ceased.” 

Los Alamos tried to celebrate one of these events with a big party. Am- 
bivalence accompanied success: not only was the party a dismal flop but 
people later disagreed about when it took place. Some said everyone was 
too exhausted after Alamogordo; others that no one celebrated Hiroshima. 
In after years, Oppenheimer recalled only that he had dropped by briefly, 
found a usually cool-headed young group leader vomiting in the bushes 
outside, and thought, ‘‘The reaction has begun.”’”® 


272 


V “High promise . . . yet 
only a stone’s throw 


from despair”’ 


LOS ALAMOS, AUGUST 
TO NOVEMBER 1945 


WHILE WAITING FOR NEWS of Japan’s capitulation after the bombing 
of Nagasaki, Oppenheimer worked on the final draft of the report on post- 
war planning which the Interim Committee’s Scientific Panel was preparing 
for the secretary of war. Lawrence joined him at Los Alamos for the week- 
end to discuss the report. He found Oppenheimer weary, harrassed, and not 
optimistic.’ Shortly thereafter Oppenheimer took the report to Washington 
and submitted it to Secretary Stimson with a covering letter. 


152 | TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR 
August 17, 1945 


Dear Mr. Secretary: 


The Interim Committee has asked us to report in some detail on the scope 
and program of future work in the field of atomic energy. One important 
phase of this work is the development of weapons; and since this is the 
problem which has dominated our war time activities, it is natural that in 
this field our ideas should be most definite and clear, and that we should be 
most confident of answering adequately the questions put to us by the com- 
mittee. In examining these questions we have, however, come on certain 


293 


quite general conclusions, whose implications for national policy would 
seem to be both more immediate and more profound than those of the de- 
tailed technical recommendations to be submitted. We, therefore, think it 
appropriate to present them to you at this time. 

1. We are convinced that weapons quantitatively and qualitatively far 
more effective than now available will result from further work on these 
problems. This conviction is motivated not alone by analogy with past de- 
velopments, but by specific projects‘to improve and multiply the existing 
weapons, and by the quite favorable technical prospects of the realization of 
the super bomb. 

2. We have been unable to devise or propose effective military counter- 
measures for atomic weapons. Although we realize that future work may 
reveal possibilities at present obscure to us, it is our firm opinion that no 
military countermeasures will be found which will be adequately effective 
in preventing the delivery of atomic weapons. 

The detailed technical report in preparation will document these 
conclusions, but hardly alter them. 

3. We are not only unable to outline a program that would assure to this 
nation for the next decades hegemony in the field of atomic weapons; we 
are equally unable to insure that such hegemony, if achieved, could protect 
us from the most terrible destruction. 

4. The development, in the years to come, of more effective atomic weap- 
ons, would appear to be a most natural element in any national policy of 
maintaining our military forces at great strength; nevertheless we have 
grave doubts that this further development can contribute essentially or per- 
manently to the prevention of war. We believe that the safety of this nation 
—as opposed to its ability to inflict damage on an enemy power— cannot lie 
wholly or even primarily in its scientific or technical prowess. It can be 
based only on making future wars impossible. It is our unanimous and ur- 
gent recommendation to you that, despite the present incomplete exploita- 
tion of technical possibilities in this field, all steps be taken, all necessary 
international arrangements be made, to this one end. 

5. We should be most happy to have you bring these views to the atten- 
tion of other members of the Government, or of the American people, 
should you wish to do so. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 
For the Panel 


294 


When Oppenheimer returned to Los Alamos a week or so later, hall- 
ways, offices, and living rooms teemed with talk: war was now so terrible 
that effective steps to control it would have to be taken. He recognized the 
flowering of seeds that he and Niels Bohr had planted even though he had 
felt duty-bound to discourage organized discussion until the laboratory’s 
mission was accomplished. Out of his hearing, much of the talk was pre- 
faced by, “Oppie says .. .” 

Oppenheimer also found a pile of mail, including official congratula- 
tions and letters from old friends surprised to have found his name so prom- 
inently associated with the weapons that had ended the war. These also 
were laudatory, in keeping with the mood of a country suddenly at peace. A 
prompt reply went to the provost of the University of California. 


153 | TO MONROE E. DEUTSCH 
August 24, 1945 
Dear Dr. Deutsch, 


Thank you for your generous and thoughtful letter. You will well 
understand that for all of us this enterprise of the atomic bomb has been 
heavy with misgiving and concern, and that your words of encouragement 
were very specially welcome. We must share the hope that in the years to 
come men will be glad of this development, and find ways to adapt it to the 
great human problems of our time. 

It will scarcely be news to you that the administration of the Los Alamos 
Project has been a constant and often fantastic misery to the University of 
California. Many circumstances of security, remoteness, and the inevitable 
mismatch of personalities, have contributed to this; and I know that I must 
often have seemed to be making a disproportionate contribution myself. 
You will understand that in this I was going no further than seemed to me 
essential for the prompt and effective fulfillment of our directives, and that I 
did not come lightly or irresponsibly to a position of feud with the officers 
of the University. Nevertheless I wish that you would express to them my 
profound regret that the project could not be operated in a spirit of greater 
mutual confidence and cordiality. 

With every warm good wish, 


[Robert Oppenheimer] 


295 


The differences between the university and the Los Alamos administra- 
tion for which Oppenheimer apologized had revolved principally around 
personnel policies and procurement. Los Alamos staffing required many ex- 
ceptions. If supplies and equipment did not arrive promptly, impatient sci- 
entists complained of inefficiency; university agents, coping with priorities 
and shortages, had found demands unreasonable. When recriminations be- 
came most bitter, Oppenheimer had intervened.’ 


WITHIN A FEW DAYS of his return from Washington, Oppenheimer and 
his wife drove to Santa Fe, then around the southern slopes of the Sangre de 
Cristos, and up the Pecos Valley to Perro Caliente for the nearest approxi- 
mation to privacy and a holiday that they had enjoyed in three years. He 
took with him letters reestablishing links with the outside world and an- 
swered some of the more personal or pressing ones by hand or on the type- 
writer. One of the first replies was to his cousin, Lee Oppenheimer, son of 
his Uncle Emil. 


154 | TO LEE OPPENHEIMER 


Cowles [New Mexico] 
August 25 [1945] 


Dear Lee, 


Thank you for your good letter, and its wise & generous words. Apart 
from the note of thankfulness, there are two things I’d want to say in 
answer: I’d no longer argue with you about the social sciences: I’d pray 
maybe, that you would have wisdom in this most difficult, most critical field 
of human thought. And as for what comes of these things we’ve been work- 
ing on—hope, & if you have the opportunity, work —that they may come 
to a good end. Liberals or no, it is not in the bag. 

It was sweet to hear from you; perhaps before long we'll see one another 
again. I hope so. 


Robert 


Another prompt reply—with fewer misspellings than in the Harvard 
days but typed in the same casual format—went to Herbert Smith, now 
headmaster of the Francis W. Parker School in Chicago. There had been 
enough contact since Oppenheimer’s last surviving letter to Smith, from 
Cambridge, England, in 1926, to allow a first-name salutation. 


296 


155 | TO HERBERT W. SMITH 


Perro Caliente 
August 26 [1945] 


Dear Herbert, 


It seemed appropriate, & very sweet, that your good note should reach 
me on the Pecos—we had come over for a few days after the surrender. 
Like so many of the beautiful things of which I learned first from you, the 
love of it grows with the years. 

Your words were good to have. You will believe that this undertaking 
has not been without its misgivings; they are heavy on us today, when the 
future, which has so many elements of high promise, is yet only a stone’s 
throw from despair. Thus the good which this work has perhaps contrib- 
uted to make in the ending of the war looms very large to us, because it is 
there for sure. 

There is some chance that after this we may be in the East—that would 
have the clear good that we might see one another more than over these last 
years. If I can at all, I shall come to visit you. 

With all warm greetings to you & to May, and with my thanks for your 
wise kind letter. 


Robert 


Another old friend who preserved the note Oppenheimer wrote from 
Cowles was his Harvard classmate, Frederick Bernheim. 


156 | TO FREDERICK BERNHEIM 


Cowles, N.M. 
August 27 [1945] 


Dear Fred, 


It was good to have your note, singularly and pleasantly unaltered by the 
two decades. It was in Muenchen I saw you last, I think, one hell of a long 
time ago for Muenchen, even if not for you or me. 

I’d like to come see you, & if I knew where to say, would most warmly 
return the invitation. Kitty—who is the vague marriage—read your note & 
said as how you must be a lovely fella. 

We are at that ranch now, in an earnest but not too sanguine search for 
sanity. It ought to be, but it isn’t, like the spring days when the paving 


271 


would make a tentative show through the slush of Mt. Auburn St. There 
would seem to be some great headaches ahead. 
Yours 


Robert 


IN THE ACADEMIC RECRUITING at Los Alamos, Oppenheimer him- 
self was prime quarry. Through talks with Richard Tolman and Charles 
Lauritsen he knew they were eager that he should convert his prewar annual 
visits to Caltech into a full-time appointment. He was less sure about Cal- 
tech’s official attitude or about its future direction with Robert Millikan 
preparing to retire after twenty-four years as president. Soon after Oppen- 
heimer arrived at Perro Caliente, he communicated his reservations to his 
friend Lauritsen. 


157 | TO CHARLES C. LAURITSEN 


[Cowles, New Mexico 
ca. August 27, 1945]° 


Dear Charlie, 


In these days in the mountains we have had a chance to think a little of the 
personal things in the future. More and more we recognize how strong the 
personal arguments are for coming to Pasadena. But there are as you know 
many things which are vague in my mind about the Institute. Some of them 
no doubt must remain vague for a while, and some would be less vague if 
my past connections there had been less tenuous. Almost none of the ques- 
tions I am writing are in themselves “‘conditions”’; but I think it will be ap- 
parent that what we do will be affected by the answers collectively. The 
reason that I am looking this gift horse in the mouth is of course that the 
decisions now I am taking at least with the intention of permanence. For the 
Institute too that is necessary. I have talked a little with Willie [Fowler] and 
with Richard [Tolman] and am sending him a copy of this note. Millikan 
asked me to let him know before making up my mind. I am writing to you 
rather than to him, because we have been so close in all this, and you will 
understand what I have in mind. But please show him all or any parts of this 
letter, and enlist his aid if you want it in answering. Beyond this letter there 
will be nothing much I can say at this time. 

1) What provisions will exist, what provisions do we hope may exist, for 
the support of graduate students? Since teaching such students is the only 
thing J can really “‘guarantee”’ of the future, this makes a lot of difference. In 


298 


the 30’s the situation at the institute was not satisfactory I thought. How 
many graduate fellowships of one sort or another can there be in all physics? 
What sort of stipends will be available? What can we do to improve the situ- 
ation if it needs improvement? 
2) I proposed twice getting Rabi to the institute thinking it a good thing 
generally, and for us in particular a great source of strength. Has this fallen 
through? If so, is it lack of money, is it reluctance to add another jew to the 
faculty, is it a general feeling that he would not fit in? How would these 
things look a little later? Don’t you yourself think it would be a good idea to 
bring a man, not ingrown in the institute, of such rare qualities as scientist 
and man? 
3) Is it known or guessed who will be in charge of the institute, who will be 
chairman of the physics department, how institute policies may be made, 
whether and how I might be expected to participate? 
4) How tight is the situation financially? Could we if we thought it wise go 
in for an electron acceleration program, or a boiler, or a big cyclotron? (I 
know we should not do everything, but these are just examples.) 
5) What would the institute policy be in regard to salary? I want two things 
at this time: a salary that is good enough to stay put the rest of the days, 
without haggling, and one that expresses a certain enthusiasm about hiring 
me. I’ve had an offer from Columbia, seemingly very attractive in all its 
provisions about work. They would pay me 15000, and 2500 more for a 
research assistant of my choosing. I realize that the salary is quite out of line 
for the institute, but what would an in line salary be? The stipend for the 
assistantship I had in Berkeley before the war, and is one of the few definite 
things without which I would not take a job, even though in the first 
months I might not use it. What could be done about that? From Conant 
and Neumann I know that the Princeton Institute and Harvard are both 
working up to offering me jobs.? I have not encouraged them and think it 
most unlikely I’d go to those places. The Berkeley situation is peculiar as 
you know: my feeling is that it lies between the institute and Columbia. 
6) Would the institute welcome and support, if in conscience we thought it 
right, my advisory participation in future atomic national policy? I am 
plenty worried about this, far more of course than about the personal 
things; and if there were a real chance of helping would want to feel that this 
was welcome. Of course there are many reasons why this might not be. 
That is a long list of questions, some trivial and some as you can tell more 
profound: I don’t expect complete or completely satisfactory answers to 
them all, but without a little help I certainly could not say yes: I would have 
a pleasant life, surely, but with such a high chance that it would turn use- 
less before many years had passed. Do let me hear from you, either officially 
if that is possible, or in any other way, but before too long. If you could 
bring an answer to Los Alamos that would be good. I must leave there for 


299 


the east toward the middle of the month, and by then ought in all probabil- 
ity to have things settled. Are you coming to Chicago for the panel meeting 
the 20th? I have many profound worries in that field, and would hope to 
have you there so very much. 

Affectionately, 


[Robert ] 


a. John von Neumann, noted mathematician and professor at the Institute for Advanced 
Study, was a Los Alamos consultant. 


When Millikan wrote to Oppenheimer on August 31 about the keen 
“desire to have you an important part of the big job of the next three dec- 
ades here’”’ (which prompted an almost unprecedented salary offer), he ad- 
dressed the questions about opportunities for individual work and collabo- 
ration that Oppenheimer had raised with Lauritsen. However, it was six 
weeks before Oppenheimer was ready to give Caltech a definite answer. 
Millikan had needed some persuading. A month earlier he had written Tol- 
man questioning whether Caltech should offer Oppenheimer a job, on the 
grounds that he was not a good teacher, that his future contribution to theo- 
retical physics was doubtful, that possibly Caltech had enough Jews on its 
faculty, and that two promising young men might be had for the same 
price. * 


STILL AT PERRO CALIENTE, Oppenheimer replied to a letter from 
Lawrence about citations conferred by the city of Berkeley upon its two 
now world-famous citizens. After taking the Scientific Panel’s report to 
Washington, he was far from optimistic. Reporting to Lawrence on what he 
had learned there, he also reflected upon the not entirely amicable exchange 
of views about his possible return to Berkeley that had occurred during 
Lawrence’s last visit to Los Alamos. 


158 | TO ERNEST O. LAWRENCE 


Cowles [New Mexico] 
August 30, [19]45 


Dear Ernest, 


Thank you for sending me your fine letter to the Mayor of Berkeley. I 
had earlier answered the note and resolution on behalf of the Berkeley 
people at Los Alamos, in the same vein of course as your answer, but not I 
think so good. 

After our meetings I had a few days in Washington; it was a bad time, too 


early for clarity. I took our letter, after the revisions, to Bush and to Harri- 
son—Conant, Stimson, [Karl] Compton were all away—and had an op- 
portunity with them to explain in more detail than was appropriate in a 
letter what our common feelings were in this all important thing. I empha- 
sized of course that all of us would earnestly do whatever was really in the 
national interest, no matter how desperate and disagreeable; but that we felt 
reluctant to promise that much real good could come of continuing the 
atomic bomb work just like poison gasses after the last war. To some extent 
the problems of the future are sharpened and made immediate by the situa- 
tion at Y. All of us are willing to wait for a bit, and help with any plan that 
looks reasonable. But in the end this will have to be based on a national pol- 
icy which is intelligible in its broad outlines to the men who are doing the 
work. I had the fairly clear impression from the talks that things had gone 
most badly at Potsdam, and that little or no progress had been made in in- 
teresting the Russians in collaboration or control. I don’t know how 
seriously an effort was made: apparently neither Churchill nor Attlee nor 
Stalin was any help at all, but this is only my conjecture. While I was in 
Washington two things happened, both rather gloomy: the President issued 
an absolute Ukase, forbidding any disclosures on the atomic bomb—and 
the terms were broad—without his personal approval. The other was that 
Harrison took our letter to [James] Byrnes, who sent back word just as I 
was leaving that ‘in the present critical international situation there was no 
alternative to pushing the MED [Manhattan Engineer District] program full 
steam ahead’. This may have been somewhat garbled in transmission, but I 
fear not. I shall try before our next meeting in Chicago to get the situation a 
little better in mind; perhaps you have already done that. But I do not come 
away from a profound grief, and a profound perplexity about the course we 
should be following. 

We have been at the ranch some days now, and I’m beginning to recover 
a little of the sanity that had all but vanished by the weekend you visited Y. I 
have very mixed and sad feelings about our discussions on Berkeley. I 
meant them in a far more friendly, tentative and considerate spirit than they 
appeared to you; and was aware and tried to make you aware at the time 
that fatigue and confusion gave them a false emphasis and color. It may 
seem odd and wrong to you that the lack of sympathy between us at Y and 
the California administration over the operation of the project could make 
me consider not coming back: I think it would not have seemed so odd if 
you had lived through the history as we did, nor so hard to understand if 
you remembered how much more of an underdogger I have always been 
than you. That is a part of me that is unlikely to change, for I am not 
ashamed of it; it is responsible for such differences as we have had in the 
past, I think; I should have thought that after the long years it would not be 
new to you. In any case it seemed little more than honorable to tell you of 
the misgivings, however unfortunate the timing. My own thoughts and 


plans have not come clear, though they no doubt will. But it must be ap- 
parent that your own very strong, very negative reactions would, if con- 
firmed, and quite apart from the views of others involved, tend to carry a 
considerable weight with me, since any fruitful future in Berkeley would 
have to depend, not on identity certainly, but on a certain mutual respect for 
non identical points of view. 

Affectionately, 


Robert 


Oppenheimer the underdog had surfaced at least once at a prewar 
Berkeley physics department meeting. After a favorable vote on Lawrence’s 
proposed expenditures for ever larger equipment, Oppenheimer remarked 
acidly, “‘Now I suppose I may order a gross of pencils.’’ Lawrence’s biogra- 
pher, who tells this story, observes that something of the old camaraderie 
returned as the two men worked together in Washington on atomic energy 
legislation in the autumn of 1945, but their discussion at Los Alamos in the 
tense days following the Japanese bombings dramatized the deterioration of 
a once meaningful friendship.°® 

On his return to Berkeley following the conversation with Oppen- 
heimer, Lawrence immediately reported its substance to Birge. Notes made 
by Birge at the time summarized Oppenheimer’s reasons for not retuming 
as follows: He had been foolish years ago and “got in bad” with Sproul and 
Deutsch; more recently there had been constant fighting with the univer- 
sity ’s representative over the running of Los Alamos; Birge had always been 
out of sympathy with him and with what he wanted to do and furthermore 
Birge should be replaced as chairman. Lawrence had angrily told Oppen- 
heimer that he ought not to come back if he felt that way.® 

Oppenheimer could afford to be cavalier, even a shade paranoid, about 
the return to Berkeley, for in addition to the pressure from Caltech, he had 
also been the object of a number of informal job feelers through which 
prestigious academic institutions avoid the stigma of outright rejection. In 
these weeks after Hiroshima, Oppenheimer was not the only Los Alamos 
scientist poised uneasily between the familiar and the unknown, nor was he 
the only one to conclude after a year or two that his first decision had been 
wrong. But his physical and spiritual exhaustion was deeper than most; on 
his shoulders rested more directly the burden of destruction in Japan, and 
his brief experience in Washington left him deeply worried about how his 
government would use its new power. Preoccupation with global problems 
contributed to the difficulty of deciding his personal future. 


302 


BEFORE RETURNING to Los Alamos Oppenheimer dashed off a hand- 
written note to an old friend, Marcelle Meyer Bier, a member of the family 
that had befriended his father as a teenage immigrant. 


159 | T@ MARCELLE BIER 


Cowles, N.M. 
August 31, 1945 


Dear Marcy 


Thank you for your sweet note—it was very good of you & good to 
have. Certainly it has been our hope, as it must now be for many others, 
that this work on the atomic bomb, coming after these terrible years of war, 
may serve as a real instrument in the establishment of peace. That is almost 
the only thing right now that seems to matter. 

With every warm good wish 


Robert Oppenheimer 


IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING HIROSHIMA and Nagasaki, scientists at 
all Manhattan Project sites began discussing the need to educate policy 
makers and the American public about the implications of atomic energy in 
order to prepare the way for establishment of a system of international con- 
trol that would avoid an atomic arms race. With intersite communication 
still restricted, groups at the Met Lab, Clinton Labs at Oak Ridge, and Los 
Alamos produced almost identical statements of principles and purpose. 
Unexpectedly prompt publication on August 12 of Henry de Wolfe 
Smyth’s report, Atomic Energy for Military Purposes, gave scientists reason to 
think that this campaign could begin at once, and when they learned of the 
presidential injunction against public discussion, which Oppenheimer had 
mentioned to Lawrence, they were puzzled and indignant. To members of 
the newly formed Association of Los Alamos Scientists (its acronym, 
ALAS, was stressed on the first syllable), Oppenheimer seemed the logical 
emissary to get their statement cleared for publication.’ 


303 


160 | TO GECRGE L. HARRISON 


[Los Alamos] 
September 9, 1945 


Dear Mr. Harrison: 


During my recent absence from the laboratory a group of scientists pre- 
pared the enclosed statement, which they would like to have presented to 
the press. I have been informed that the views expressed in the statement are 
held very nearly unanimously; that of all the civilian scientists (something 
over three hundred) who could be reached, only three felt that they could 
not sign the statement. 

Although I had no part in the organization of the group or the preparation 
of the statement, you will probably recognize that the views presented are in 
closest harmony with those I have discussed with the Interim Committee. It 
seemed to me desirable to give the Committee an opportunity to examine 
this statement, and at my suggestion it is being transmitted to you for that 
purpose. I should wish to subscribe to the opinion of the scientists here that 
freer and more enlightened public discussion of the problems raised by 
atomic power and atomic weapons would itself be in the public interest, and 
should therefore like to encourage the Committee to approve the publica- 
tion of the enclosed statement. Nevertheless, I am aware that there may be 
circumstances unknown to me which could make a public discussion at this 
time a source of embarrassment to the Government, and that the Commit- 
tee may feel that the publication of such a statement at this time would ham- 
per rather than advance the efforts of the Government to secure an enduring 
peace. 


With every good wish, 
J. R. Oppenheimer 


The letter to Harrison reflects none of the outrage over the President’s 
ban on discussion of atomic energy publicly expressed in early September 
by some prominent Manhattan Project scientists, for example Harold Urey 
and Samuel Allison.® Oppenheimer was becoming what would, a few years 
hence, be called ‘‘an inside scientist.’ In the course of his work on the In- 
terim Committee’s Scientific Panel he had developed great confidence in the 
judgment of Secretary of War Stimson and his aide George Harrison and, 
despite his skepticism about Potsdam, he did not realize, with Stimson on 
the point of retirement, how rapidly their influence was being supplanted by 
that of advocates of a cold war posture. In any case, the ALAS statement 


304 


was shown to the Cabinet, after which it became a state paper and could not 
be published. 

ALAS members learned the fate of their carefully worded document 
only after Oppenheimer left on September 18 for a two-week stay in Wash- 
ington. To angry letters and teletype messages from the ALAS chairman, he 
replied’ with assurances that ALAS views were fully shared by those in a 
position to influence policy. Meanwhile, ALAS members watched help- 
lessly while the Clinton Labs group leaked its statement of purpose to the 
New York Herald Tribune for publication on September 26 and the Atomic 
Scientists of Chicago made a similar release immediately following the 
President’s October 3 atomic energy message to Congress. When at last a 
revised ALAS statement did appear on October 14, it made the front page of 
the Sunday New York Times under the headline ‘‘400 Experts Decry Lone 
Atom Policy.” 

Oppenheimer joined ALAS as soon as he retired as director of the labo- 
ratory. Later he gave much tacit support to the national federation formed 
by the original site groups, but he continued to feel that he could work most 
effectively for international control of atomic energy as an adviser to the 
policy makers.? 


IN WASHINGTON, when not answering aggrieved communications 
from his colleagues at Los Alamos, Oppenheimer was principally engaged 
in conveying the views of the Scientific Panel to members of the War De- 
partment staff who were drawing up legislation to establish a domestic 
atomic energy authority. His Los Alamos secretary, Anne Wilson (Priscilla 
Duffield’s successor), went along to help him get out the panel’s final re- 
port. “It was a very exhausting and exciting time,”’ she later wrote Charles 
Lauritsen, “‘and I found myself at all times covered with admiration at what 
I thought to be the magnificent job he did there.’’”® 

Oppenheimer had already announced his intention to resign the direc- 
torship of Los Alamos as soon as a satisfactory successor could be found, 
but continued uncertainty about what he would do after that is reflected in 
letters written from Washington on September 29. 


305 


161 | TO ROBERT G. SPROUL 


Washington, D.C. 
September 29, 1945 


Dear President Sproul: 


It is not unnatural that in the last weeks several institutions should have 
approached me with invitations to join their faculties. These invitations 
have been in many ways attractive, in offering freedom and opportunity for 
effective work in my field of theoretical physics, research assistance, salaries 
ranging from two to three times my salary in the Physics Department in 
Berkeley, and the furtherance of associations grown cordial in common 
work on the atomic bomb projects. 

It is not easy for me to know in what spirit to consider these invitations. 
Long years of collaboration and friendship in Berkeley have made ties of 
real strength. Yet I am aware of a certain lack of confidence on the part of 
the University for what it must inevitably have regarded as my indiscre- 
tions of the past. I am likewise aware of the conflicts which arose between 
me and officers of the University when I was in charge of the Los Alamos 
project. It would be wrong for me to return to Berkeley unless it seemed, to 
the administration of the University as well as to the Physics Department, 
that this was truly and unreservedly in their best interests, that I might play 
a useful part as scientist, teacher, and member of the academic community. 
It would seem wrong to me to return at a salary so out of proportion to 
those of the other institutions. 

It is clearly in the interests of the University of California, as it is in those 
of all the others involved, that a decision be reached without delay, so that 
constructive plans may be made. I should therefore very much appreciate a 
frank expression of your views. I can well understand that these may be 
rather negative, and in that case should not want you to feel obligated to 
write an answer. 

I am sending a copy of this note to Professor Birge, for his plans too are 
inevitably involved. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


306 


162 | TO RAYMOND T. BIRGE 


Washington, D.C. 
September 29, 1945 


Dear Professor Birge: 


The enclosed somewhat melancholy letter will tell you as well as I can 
what the present state of my thoughts is about Berkeley, and my own fu- 
ture. I think you know how hard it would be for me not to return; I want 
you to have a word of assurance that if I do come back it will be with full 
confidence in you as Chairman of the Department and in the cordiality and 
effectiveness of our collaboration. 

As you can see, Iam worried about the wild oats of all kinds which I have 
sown in the past; nor am I quite willing in the future to be part of an institu- 
tion which has any essential distrust or any essential lack of confidence in 
me. I think that only harm can come from ignoring this concern; and I hope 
that you will agree with me that in writing this letter to President Sproul I 
am laying a reasonable basis for all our futures, whatever they may be. 


With warmest personal 
greetings, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


Enclosure 


THOUGH STILL UNSURE about his welcome at Berkeley, Oppen- 
heimer firmly closed the door, not for the first or last time, on an offer from 
his alma mater, a decision made difficult by his growing admiration and af- 


fection for its president, whom he addressed on less formal occasions as 
“Uncle Jim.” 


307 


163 | TO JAMES B. CONANT 


Washington, D.C. 
September 29, 1945 


Dear Dr. Conant: 


Your good letter was here in Washington for me when I arrived, but I did 
not want to answer it precipitately. It wag certainly as thoughtful, con- 
siderate, and understanding a letter as I have ever had; I no longer want to 
delay an answer in which I have an increasing sense of certainty. 

Surely no situation could be more attractive than that which you outline 
at Harvard; but I know now, as I should have known earlier had not fatigue 
and confusion played too great a part, that I would like to go back to Cali- 
fornia for the rest of my days; that I have a sense of belonging there which I 
will probably not get over. I should have told you this a month ago, but | 
didn’t know it then. I hope that the trouble to which this has put you will 
not have been entirely wasted, and that the delays will not have hurt the 
plans which Harvard is so wisely making for the future. 

I should like to thank you for the extraordinarily friendly way in which 
you have come to this question, and assure you of my regret that I shall not 
have you as my boss in the times to come. That was one of the hardest 
things to say no to. 


Very sincerely, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


Though seemingly committed to California, Oppenheimer had yet to 
decide between institute and university. Birge’s reply of October 6, singu- 
larly magnanimous in view of his correspondent’s expressed desire to un- 
chair him, tried to dispel any notion that Oppenheimer was not wanted in 
Berkeley. Segre too seemed to feel unwanted, said Birge, adding, “‘I cannot 
understand how such misconceptions could have arisen. Is there something 
about the climate at Los Alamos that breeds them?’’ Oppenheimer seemed 
to do a lot of traveling; couldn’t he come to Berkeley and discuss these mat- 
ters?! 

On October 16 Oppenheimer sent a nightletter to William Houston, 
chairman of physics at Caltech, which said in part: ‘‘Am formally and grate- 
fully accepting professorship of physics at the Institute. Planning to arrive in 
Pasadena first week of November . . . Appreciated your fine letter.’ 

The tone of finality was deceptive. Still hopeful, Sproul and Birge ex- 
tended Oppenheimer’s leave of absence, and, indeed, by February 1946 he 
was negotiating his return to Berkeley. This took place the following Au- 


308 


gust, with three days each month to be spent in Pasadena. Certainly Oppen- 
heimer had spent too much time in Washington to give Pasadena a fair trial; 
perhaps the questions about Caltech raised earlier with Lauritsen had not 
been resolved. Possibly a phone call had something to do with it, in which 
Lawrence is quoted as saying, “Robert, when you get through wandering 
around; come on back home. Your old office is waiting, your old hat is on 
the rack, your desk hasn’t been cleaned out.’’! 

In April 1947 when Birge announced to his Berkeley colleagues that 
Oppenheimer had accepted the directorship of the Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton, he described this loss as “‘the greatest blow ever suffered 
by the department.’’** 

In retrospect Oppenheimer viewed the move as inevitable: ‘I think that 
the charm went out of teaching after the great change of the war . . . For 
one thing I was always called away and distracted because I was thinking 
about other things, but actually I don’t think I ever taught well after the 
war. I have a feeling that... my job. . . was to get a part of the next 
generation brought up and that job was done when I came [to Princeton].’’*® 


EVEN AFTER the first flood of congratulations had subsided, Oppen- 
heimer’s correspondence reflected his new status as a statesman of science. 
On September 29 Albert Einstein wrote from Princeton recommending 
Emery Reves’ Anatomy of Peace, which proposed a world federation with a 
strong military force as a means of preserving peace. To Einstein it was 
“unthinkable that we can achieve peace without a genuine supranational or- 
ganization to govern international relations.”’'® 


164 | TO ALBERT EINSTEIN 
October 10, 1945 


Dear Dr. Einstein: 


Thank you for your good letter of September 29th. I am in complete 
agreement with the views expressed by you, and in general agreement with 
those expressed in the accompanying letter of Mr. Reves’. 

If I say ‘“‘general agreement”’ I mean only this: the history of this nation up 
through the Civil War shows how difficult the establishment of a federal 
authority can be when there are profound differences in the structure and 
values of the societies it attempts to integrate. I therefore view the problem 
as more, rather than less, difficult than Mr. Reves suggests. 

The statements attributed by you to me are not mine; nor, as a matter of 
fact, have I ever seen them. I have known, of course, of the existence of such 
views, and have attempted where possible to point out their inadequacies. 


309 


These views do not correspond to the advice which I, or my immediate col- 
leagues, have given to the Government of the United States. We have been 
concerned rather with the problem of initiating those negotiations which 
might establish confidence and form the basis for a real unity. We have, I 
believe, from the first recognized the essentially political character of this 
problem, and regarded the development of the atomic bomb as of inciden- 
tal, but perhaps decisive, importance in two respects: 

1) Focusing more sharply the attention.of the public on the dangers of 
international anarchy (and in particular on the dangers of competitive arma- 
ment between two all-powerful nations). 

2) Providing a new and specific point of discussion where agreement 
might be less difficult to achieve. | 

I should appreciate it very much if you could send us as many copies of 
Mr. Reves’ book as you conveniently can. Very many of my associates at 
Los Alamos are profoundly concerned with these problems and would be 
grateful for help. 


With every warm good wish, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


The statement disclaimed by Oppenheimer was that of the Association 
of Oak Ridge Scientists, which called not for world government but for an 
international agency to control atomic energy. The Oak Ridge scientists 
claimed that their views were held by hundreds of scientists who had 
worked on the bomb, including Manhattan Project leaders; this led Einstein 
to assume that Oppenheimer was a signer. Within three months Oppen- 
heimer became a principal contributor to the Acheson-Lilienthal Report on 
which the United States international control proposal was based." 

There is no large body of correspondence between Einstein and Op- 
penheimer, nor did they become intimate friends during the eight years they 
were colleagues in Princeton. 


OCTOBER 16 was Oppenheimer’s last day as director of the Los Alamos 
Laboratory. Under a brilliant New Mexico sky, virtually the entire popula- 
tion of the mesa assembled for an outdoor ceremony. On behalf of the labo- 
ratory, Oppenheimer accepted from General Groves the Secretary of War’s 
Certificate of Appreciation and made a short speech: “‘It is our hope that in 
years to come we may look at this scroll, and all that it signifies, with 
pride.’”’ 

‘“Today that pride must be tempered with a profound concern. If atomic 
bombs are to be added as new weapons to the arsenals of a warring world, 


310 


or to the arsenals of nations preparing for war, then the time will come 
when mankind will curse the names of Los Alamos and of Hiroshima.” 

“The peoples of this world must unite, or they will perish. This war, 
that has ravaged so much of the earth, has written these words. The atomic 
bomb has spelled them out for all men to understand. Other men have spo- 
ken them, in other times, of other wars, of other weapons. They have not 
prevailed. There are some, misled by a false sense of human history, who 
hold that they will not prevail today. It is not for us to believe that. By our 
works we are committed, committed to a world united, before this com- 
mon peril, in law, and in humanity.’’® 

Each person on the payroll of Project Y received a dime-sized sterling 
silver pin stamped with a large “A”’ and a small “BOMB.” President Sproul 
was there from Berkeley to accept his institution’s by-no-means minor 
share of credit. Despite the university comptroller’s signature on their pay- 
checks, most of those present, unless they had struggled with personnel and 
procurement, had thought of themselves as working for their country —or 
for Oppenheimer. A perceptible titter swept the crowd when the Army 
chaplain concluded the final prayer with a booming, “Oh God, bless all 
schools and colleges, and especially the University of California.”’ 

Before Oppenheimer flew to Washington for a Senate committee hear- 
ing next morning, he dictated the nightletter accepting the professorship at 
the California Institute of Technology. On October 17 Norris E. Bradbury, 
Stanford University physicist, became director of the Los Alamos Labora- 
tory. A commander in the Naval Reserve, Bradbury had been in charge of 
implosion research in the Explosives Division since September 1944. 

Oppenheimer stayed in Washington for the remainder of the week, one 
of intense activity on the part of representatives of newly formed scientists’ 
organizations who had gathered there to protest the military flavor of the 
War Department’s May—Johnson bill establishing a domestic atomic energy 
commission which Oppenheimer and other panel members had endorsed. 
In addition to testifying at Senate and House committee hearings, Oppen- 
heimer was occupied in trying to reconcile dissenting scientists to the bill. 
At the same time he was working with the War Department on amend- 
ments which would placate critics. In neither effort was he fully successful. 
However, along with Arthur Compton, who was equally concerned about 
this well-publicized revolt among their colleagues, Oppenheimer made sure 
that before the week was out the new secretary of war, Robert P. Patterson, 
publicly stated that with due regard to security, American scientists ‘‘should 
feel that it is proper for them as citizens to join actively in public 
consideration” of the political and social implications of atomic energy.’® 

Among remaining tasks awaiting Oppenheimer at Los Alamos was ac- 
knowledgment of the loyal and unstinting help he had received from key 


311 


members of his staff. Into each letter went the note of personal solicitude 
that had marked the Oppenheimer style as leader. A particularly warm one 
went to David Dow, whose arrival in January 1944 had relieved the director 
of many nontechnical administrative burdens. 


165 | TO DAVID DOW 
October 29, 1945 


Dear Dave: 


Our association during the past two years has been so close, and my debt 
to you so varied and so great, that I think it right to send you a letter of 
appreciation. 

Unlike most of the people at Los Alamos, you can have had little if any 
intellectual or technical satisfaction in your work. Helping to keep the place 
from running on the rocks, trying to find a common ground of 
understanding for all the many strong and disparate personalities, contribut- 
ing your experience and your training as a lawyer, to a situation that came as 
near to defying legal control as any—all this has not been a bed of roses. 
You and I know that the loyalty and intelligence of all the people who made 
up the laboratory might well have been wasted, and the atomic bomb not 
been made, had we not worked together to provide an administration. 

I know that in years to come you will think back at our miserjes with 
contracts, with construction, with transportation, with personnel, and won- 
der how we could have lived through it. I know that for you, as for me, it 
was because of devotion to the purposes of the laboratory, to our country, 
and to those ideals of the scientists here, which made it possible to have the 
spirit of unity despite all personal difficulties and conflicts. I myself do not 
think that we would have survived at all without your help, and if it is any 
comfort to you to have those words written on paper you should have 
them. 

I most earnestly hope that now that the emergency is over you will find it 
possible to return to the study of law and to have some of that academic 
tranquillity for which you yearn and for which the struggles of the last 
years, in my opinion, have made you rather rarely eligible. 


With every warm good wish, 


J. R. Oppenheimer 


312 


The letter to Charlotte Serber, wife of Oppenheimer’s former student 
and colleague, herself a close friend in the Berkeley years, included some 
project history as well as recognition of an outstanding contribution. 


166 | TO CHARLOTTE SERBER 
November 2, 1945 


Dear Charlotte: 


It corresponds to my desires as a friend, and to my duties as the Director 
of the Los Alamos laboratory, to give you a word of appreciation for the 
work which you have done. 

When we first discussed the formation of this laboratory we all knew that 
it would be peculiarly dependent on an adequate library, and on a library 
organized in the interests (the sometimes inconsiderate interests) of the sci- 
entists who would be the staff. We also knew of the problem—but I think 
we underestimated it—that would be presented by the necessity for main- 
taining a very complete file of classified documents, both those describing 
the work of the laboratory, and reports from elsewhere which might prove 
essential or helpful. Finally, we knew that the laboratory could not be run 
unless there was effective machinery for putting out the reports, the memo- 
randa, and all of the other communications on which the understanding and 
the unity of the laboratory staff so largely depended. All of these have in- 
deed presented real problems, not made easier by the absolute isolation 
which rendered us completely dependent on how the Library and Docu- 
ment Room were operated. They were not made easier by the frantic time 
schedules, which meant that it was never possible to wait for obtaining in- 
formation, nor by the extraordinary technical variety and complexity of the 
matters in which we had an inevitable interest. 

Perhaps the best way of saying how well you have discharged the respon- 
sibilities involved is this: I have never had a complaint of how the Library or 
Document Room were run, and in this large and often chaotic laboratory I 
have found that there was no reluctance on the part of the staff to enter such 
complaint at the slightest provocation. I think this is a tribute, not only to 
your administrative effectiveness, but to your good judgment, your fore- 
sight, and above all to your understanding of the problems with which we 
were faced and of the scientists who made up the laboratory. I think no single 
hour of delay has been attributed by any man in the laboratory to a malfunc- 
tioning, either in the Library or in the classified files. To this must be added 
the fact of the surprising success in controlling and accounting for the mass 
of classified information, where a single serious slip might not only have 
caused us the profoundest embarrassment but might have jeopardized the 


313 


successful completion of our job. I know that in carrying out these duties 
you have had the services of many able and loyal workers, but I also know 
that neither their ability nor their loyalty would have been effective without 
the guidance, support, and the good judgment which you gave them; and if 
they were loyal they had reason to be, because of your concern for them and 
for the work they were doing. 

I do not know whether in any future time a job quite like this will exist 
anywhere in the world—it 1s a little hard to think that it will—but I know 
that the work that you have done will have seasoned you for many other 
perhaps easier undertakings, and increased your confidence in your own 
ability. Certainly it would be right that you take pride in a job well done— 
an integral part, and a most important one, in this strange, but rather heroic, 
undertaking. 


Cordially, 
Opye 


314 


ON THE EVENING of November second, Oppenheimer spoke to the 
members of the Association of Los Alamos Scientists. Some five hundred 
people packed the largest movie theater on ““The Hill’ to hear him. Years 
later, when former ALAS members were asked about postwar political ac- 
tivity, the answer invariably began (and sometimes ended) with “I remem- 


ber Oppie’s speech. . .”’ 


SPEECH TO THE ASSOCIATION OF LOS ALAMOS SCIENTISTS 
Los Alamos, November 2, 19457 


I am grateful to the Executive Committee for this chance to talk to you. I 
should like to talk tonight—1if some of you have long memories perhaps 
you will regard it as justified—as a fellow scientist, and at least as a fellow 
worrier about the fix we are in. I do not have anything very radical to say, 
or anything that will strike most of you with a great flash of enightenment. 
I don’t have anything to say that will be of an immense encouragement. In 
some ways I would have liked to talk to you at an earlier date—but I 
couldn’t talk to you as a Director. I could not talk, and will not tonight talk, 
too much about the practical political problems which are involved. There 
is one good reason for that—I don’t know very much about practical poli- 
tics. And there is another reason, which has to some extent restrained me in 
the past. As you know, some of us have been asked to be technical advisors 
to the Secretary of War, and through him to the President. In the course of 
this we have naturally discussed things that were on our minds and have 
been made, often very willingly, the recipient of confidences; it is not 
possible to speak in detail about what Mr. A thinks and Mr. B doesn’t think, 
or what is going to happen next week, without violating these confidences. 
I don’t think that’s important. I think there are issues which are quite simple 
and quite deep, and which involve us as a group of scientists—involve us 
more, perhaps than any other group in the world. I think that it can only 
help to look a little at what our situation is—at what has happened to 
us—and that this must give us some honesty, some insight, which will be a 
source of strength in what may be the not-too-easy days ahead. I would like 
to take it as deep and serious as I know how, and then perhaps come to more 
immediate questions in the course of the discussion later. I want anyone 
who feels like it to ask me a question and if I can’t answer it, as will often be 
the case, I will just have to say so. 

What has happened to us—it is really rather major, it is so major that I 
think in some ways one returns to the greatest developments of the twen- 
tieth century, to the discovery of relativity, and to the whole development 
of atomic theory and its interpretation in terms of complementarity, for 
analogy. These things, as you know, forced us to re-consider the relations 


315 


between science and common sense. They forced on us the recognition that 
the fact that we were in the habit of talking a certain language and using 
certain concepts did not necessarily imply that there was anything in the real 
world to correspond to these. They forced us to be prepared for the inade- 
quacy of the ways in which human beings attempted to deal with reality, for 
that reality. In some ways I think these virtues, which scientists quite reluc- 
tantly were forced to learn by the nature of the world they were studying, 
may be useful even today in preparing us for somewhat more radical views 
of what the issues are than would be natural or easy for people who had not 
been through this experience. 

But the real impact of the creation of the atomic bomb and atomic weap- 
ons—to understand that one has to look further back, look, I think, to the 
times when physical science was growing in the days of the renaissance, and 
when the threat that science offered was felt so deeply throughout the 
Christian world. The analogy is, of course, not perfect. You may even wish 
to think of the days in the last century when the theories of evolution 
seemed a threat to the values by which men lived. The analogy is not perfect 
because there is nothing in atomic weapons—there 1s certainly nothing that 
we have done here or in the physics or chemistry that immediately preceded 
our work here—in which any revolutionary ideas were involved. I don’t 
think that the conceptions of nuclear fission have strained any man’s at- 
tempts to understand them, and I don’t feel that any of us have really 
learned in a deep sense very much from following this up. It is in a quite 
different way. It is not an idea—it is a development and a reality — but it has 
in common with the early days of physical science the fact that the very ex- 
istence of science is threatened, and its value is threatened. This is the point 
that I would like to speak a little about. 

I think that it hardly needs to be said why the impact is so strong. There 
are three reasons: one is the extraordinary speed with which things which 
were right on the frontier of science were translated into terms where they 
affected many living people, and potentially all people. Another is the fact, 
quite accidental in many ways, and connected with the speed, that scientists 
themselves played such a large part, not merely in providing the foundation 
for atomic weapons, but in actually making them. In this we are certainly 
closer to it than any other group. The third is that the thing we made— 
partly because of the technical nature of the problem, partly because we 
worked hard, partly because we had good breaks—really arrived in the 
world with such a shattering reality and suddenness that there was no op- 
portunity for the edges to be worn off. 

In considering what the situation of science is, it may be helpful to think a 
little of what people said and felt of their motives in coming into this job. 
One always has to worry that what people say of their motives is not ade- 
quate. Many people said different things, and most of them, I think, had 


316 


some validity. There was in the first place the great concern that our enemy 
might develop these weapons before we did, and the feeling —at least, in the 
early days, the very strong feeling—that without atomic weapons it might 
be very difficult, it might be an impossible, it might be an incredibly long 
thing to win the war. These things wore off a little as it became clear that the 
war weuld be won in any case. Some people, I think, were motivated by 
curiosity, and rightly so; and some by a sense of adventure, and rightly so. 
Others had more political arguments and said, ‘Well, we know that atomic 
weapons are in principle possible, and it is not right that the threat of their 
unrealized possibility should hang over the world. It is right that the world 
should know what can be done in their field and deal with it.’’ And the 
people added to that that it was a time when all over the world men would 
be particularly ripe and open for dealing with this problem because of the 
immediacy of the evils of war, because of the universal cry from everyone 
that one could not go through this thing again, even a war without atomic 
bombs. And there was finally, and I think rightly, the feeling that there was 
probably no place in the world where the development of atomic weapons 
would have a better chance of leading to a reasonable solution, and a smaller 
chance of leading to disaster, than within the United States. I believe all 
these things that people said are true, and I think I said them all myself at 
one time or another. 

But when you come right down to it the reason that we did this job is 
because it was an organic necessity. If you are a scientist you cannot stop 
such a thing. If you are a scientist you believe that it is good to find out how 
the world works; that it is good to find out what the realities are; that it is 
good to turn over to mankind at large the greatest possible power to control 
the world and to deal with it according to its lights and its values. 

There has been a lot of talk about the evil of secrecy, of concealment, of 
control, of security. Some of that talk has been on a rather low plane, lim- 
ited really to saying that it is difficult or inconvenient to work in a world 
where you are not free to do what you want. I think that the talk has been 
justified, and that the almost unanimous resistance of scientists to the impo- 
sition of control and secrecy is a justified position, but I think that the reason 
for it may lie a little deeper. I think that it comes from the fact that secrecy 
strikes at the very root of what science is, and what it is for. It is not possible 
to be a scientist unless you believe that it is good to learn. It is not good to be 
a scientist, and it is not possible, unless you think that it is of the highest 
value to share your knowledge, to share it with anyone who is interested. It 
is not possible to be a scientist unless you believe that the knowledge of the 
world, and the power which this gives, 1s a thing which is of intrinsic value 
to humanity, and that you are using it to help in the spread of knowledge, 
and are willing to take the consequences. And, therefore, I think that this 
resistance which we feel and see all around us to anything which is an at- 


317 


tempt to treat science of the future as though it were rather a dangerous 
thing, a thing that must be watched and managed, is resisted not because of 
its inconvenience—I think we are in a position where we must be willing to 
take any inconvenience—but resisted because it is based on a philosophy 
incompatible with that by which we live, and have learned to live in the 
past. | 

There are many people who try to wiggle out of this. They say the real 
importance of atomic energy does nat lie.m the weapons that have been 
made; the real importance lies in all the great benefits which atomic energy, 
which the various radiations, will bring to mankind. There may be some 
truth in this. I am sure that there is truth 1n it, because there has never in the 
past been a new field opened up where the real fruits of it have not been 
invisible at the beginning. I have a very high confidence that the fruits —the 
so-called peacetime applications—of atomic energy will have in them all 
that we think, and more. There are others who try to escape the immediacy 
of this situation by saying that, after all, war has always been very terrible; 
after all, weapons have always gotten worse and worse; that this is just an- 
other weapon and it doesn’t create a great change; that they are not so bad; 
bombings have been bad in this war and this is not a change in that — it just 
adds a little to the effectiveness of bombing; that some sort of protection 
will be found. I think that these efforts to diffuse and weaken the nature of 
the crisis make it only more dangerous. I think it is for us to accept it as a 
very grave crisis, to realize that these atomic weapons which we have 
started to make are very terrible, that they involve a change, that they are 
not just a slight modification: to accept this, and to accept with it the neces- 
sity for those transformations in the world which will make it possible to 
integrate these developments into human life. 

As scientists I think we have perhaps a little greater ability to accept 
change, and accept radical change, because of our experiences in the pursuit 
of science. And that may help us—that, and the fact that we have lived with 
it—to be of some use in understanding these problems. 

It is clear to me that wars have changed. It is clear to me that if these first 
bombs—the bomb that was dropped on Nagasaki—that if these can de- 
stroy ten square miles, then that is really quite something. It is clear to me 
that they are going to be very cheap if anyone wants to make them; it is 
clear to me that this is a situation where a quantitative change, and a change 
in which the advantage of aggression compared to defense—of attack com- 
pared to defense—is shifted, where this quantitative change has all the 
character of a change in quality, of a change in the nature of the world. I 
know that whereas wars have become intolerable, and the question would 
have been raised and would have been pursued after this war, more ardently 
than after the last, of whether there was not some method by which they 
could be averted. But I think the advent of the atomic bomb and the facts 


318 


which will get around that they are not too hard to make—that they will be 
universal if people wish to make them universal, that they will not consti- 
tute a real drain on the economy of any strong nation, and that their power 
of destruction will grow and is already incomparably greater than that of 
any other weapon—I think these things create a new situation, so new that 
there issome danger, even some danger in believing, that what we have is a 
new argument for arrangements, for hopes, that existed before this develop- 
ment took place. By that I mean that much as I like to hear advocates of a 
world federation, or advocates of a United Nations organization, who have 
been talking of these things for years— much as I like to hear them say that 
here is a new argument, I think that they are in part missing the point, be- 
cause the point is not that atomic weapons constitute a new argument. 
There have always been good arguments. The point is that atomic weapons 
constitute also a field, a new field, and a new opportunity for realizing pre- 
conditions. I think when people talk of the fact that this is not only a great 
peril, but a great hope, this is what they should mean. I do not think they 
should mean the unknown, though sure, value of industrial and scientific 
virtues of atomic energy, but rather the simple fact that in this field, because 
it is a threat, because it is a peril, and because it has certain special character- 
istics, to which I will return, there exists a possibility of realizing, of 
beginning to realize, those changes which are needed if there is to be any 
peace. 

Those are very far-reaching changes. They are changes in the relations 
between nations, not only in spirit, not only in law, but also in conception 
and feeling. I don’t know which of these is prior; they must all work to- 
gether, and only the gradual interaction of one on the other can make a real- 
ity. I don’t agree with those who say the first step is to have a structure of 
international law. I don’t agree with those who say the only thing is to have 
friendly feelings. All of these things will be involved. I think it is true to say 
that atomic weapons are a peril which affect everyone in the world, and in 
that sense a completely common problem, as common a problem as it was 
for the Allies to defeat the Nazis. I think that in order to handle this com- 
mon problem there must be a complete sense of community responsibility. 
I do not think that one may expect that people will contribute to the solu- 
tion of the problem until they are aware of their ability to take part in the 
solution. I think that it is a field in which the implementation of such a com- 
mon responsibility has certain decisive advantages. It is a new field, in 
which the position of vested interests in various parts of the world is very 
much less serious than in others. It is serious in this country, and that is one 
of our problems. It is a new field, in which the role of science has been so 
great that it is to my mind hardly thinkable that the international traditions 
of science, and the fraternity of scientists, should not play a constructive 
part. It is a new field, in which just the novelty and the special characteristics 


319 


of the technical operations should enable one to establish a community of 
interest which might almost be regarded as a pilot plant for a new type of 
international collaboration. I speak of it as a pilot plant because it is quite 
clear that the control of atomic weapons cannot be in itself the unique end of 
such operation. The only unique end can be a world that is united, and a 
world in which war will not occur. But those things don’t happen over- 
night, and in this field it would seem that one could get started, and get 
started without meeting those insuperable obstacles which history has so 
often placed in the way of any effort of cooperation. Now, this is not an 
easy thing, and the point I want to make, the one point I want to hammer 
home, is what an enormous change in spirit 1s involved. There are things 
which we hold very dear, and I think rightly hold very dear; I would say 
that the word democracy perhaps stood for some of them as well as any 
other word. There are many parts of the world in which there is no democ- 
racy. There are other things which we hold dear, and which we rightly 
should. And when I speak of a new spirit in international affairs I mean that 
even to these deepest of things which we cherish, and for which Americans 
have been willing to die—and certainly most of us would be willing to 
die—even in these deepest things, we realize that there is something more 
profound than that; namely, the common bond with other men every- 
where. It is only if you do that that this makes sense; because if you ap- 
proach the problem and say, ““We know what is right and we would like to 
use the atomic bomb to persuade you to agree with us,”’ then you are in a 
very weak position and you will not succeed, because under those condi- 
tions you will not succeed in delegating responsibility for the survival of 
men. It is a purely unilateral statement; you will find yourselves attempting 
by force of arms to prevent a disaster. 

I want to express the utmost sympathy with the people who have to 
grapple with this problem and in the strongest terms to urge you not to 
underestimate its difficulty. I can think of an analogy, and I hope it is not a 
completely good analogy: in the days in the first half of the nineteenth cen- 
tury there were many people, mostly in the North, but some in the South, 
who thought that there was no evil on earth more degrading than human 
slavery, and nothing that they would more willingly devote their lives to 
than its eradication. Always when I was young I wondered why it was that 
when Lincoln was President he did not declare that the war against the 
South, when it broke out, was a war that slavery should be abolished, that 
this was the central point, the rallying point, of that war. Lincoln was se- 
verely criticized by many of the Abolitionists as you know, by many then 
called radicals, because he seemed to be waging a war which did not hit the 
thing that was most important. But Lincoln realized, and I have only in the 
last months come to appreciate the depth and wisdom of it, that beyond the 
issue of slavery was the issue of the community of the people of the country, 


320 


and the issue of the Union. I hope that today this will not be an issue calling 
for war; but I wanted to remind you that in order to preserve the Union 
Lincoln had to subordinate the immediate problem of the eradication of 
slavery, and trust—and I think if he had had his way it would have gone 
so—to the conflict of these ideas in a united people to eradicate it. 

These-are somewhat general remarks and it may be appropriate to say one 
or two things that are a little more programmatic, that are not quite so hard 
to get one’s hands on. That is, what sort of agreement between nations 
would be a reasonable start. I don’t know the answer to this, and I am very 
sure that no a priori answer should be given, that it is something that is 
going to take constant working out. But I think it is a thing where it will not 
hurt to have some reasonably concrete proposal. And I would go a step fur- 
ther and say of even such questions as the great question of secrecy — which 
perplexes scientists and other people—that even this was not a suitable sub- 
ject for unilateral action. If atomic energy 1s to be treated as an international 
problem, as I think it must be, if it is to be treated on the basis of an interna- 
tional responsibility and an international common concern, the problems of 
secrecy are also international problems. I don’t mean by that that our pres- 
ent classifications and our present, in many cases inevitably ridiculous, pro- 
cedures should be maintained. I mean that the fundamental problem of how 
to treat this peril ought not to be treated unilaterally by the United States, or 
by the United States in conjunction with Great Britain. 

The first thing I would say about any proposals is that they ought to be 
regarded as interim proposals, and that whenever they are made it be under- 
stood and agreed that within a year or two years—whatever seems a 
reasonable time—they will be reconsidered and the problems which have 
arisen, and the new developments which have occurred, will cause a rewrit- 
ing. I think the only point is that there should be a few things in these pro- 
posals which will work in the right direction, and that the things should be 
accepted without forcing all of the changes, which we know must ulti- 
mately occur, upon people who will not be ready for them. This is anyone’s 
guess, but it would seem to me that if you took these four points, it might 
work: first, that we are dealing with an interim solution, so recognized. Sec- 
ond, that the nations participating in the arrangement would have a joint 
atomic energy commission, operating under the most broad directives from 
the different states, but with a power which only they had, and which was 
not subject to review by the heads of State, to go ahead with those construc- 
tive applications of atomic energy which we would all like to see devel- 
oped—energy sources, and the innumerable research tools which are 1m- 
mediate possibilities. Third, that there would be not merely the possibility 
of exchange of scientists and students; that very, very concrete machinery 
more or less forcing such exchange should be established, so that we would 
be quite sure that the fraternity of scientists would be strengthened and that 


321 


the bonds on which so much of the future depends would have some rein- 
forcement and some scope. And fourth, I would say that no bombs be 
made. I don’t know whether these proposals are good ones, and I think that 
anyone in this group would have his own proposals. But I mention them as 
very simple things, which I don’t believe solve the problem, and which I 
want to make clear are not the ultimate or even a touch of the ultimate, but 
which I think ought to be started right away; which I believe—though I 
know very little of this—may very well he acceptable to any of the nations 
that wish to become partners with us in this great undertaking. 

One of the questions which you will want to hear more about, and which I 
can only partly hope to succeed in answering, is to what extent such views— 
essentially the view that the life of science is threatened, the life of the world is 
threatened, and that only [by] a profound revision of what it is that consti- 
tutes a thing worth fighting for and a thing worth living for can this crisis 
be met—to what extent these views are held by other men. They are cer- 
tainly not held universally by scientists; but I think they are in agreement 
with all of the expressed opinions of this group, and I know that many of 
my friends here see pretty much eye to eye. I would speak especially of 
Bohr, who was here so much during the difficult days, who had many dis- 
cussions with us, and who helped us reach the conclusion that [it was] not 
only a desirable solution, but that it was the unique solution, that there were 
no other alternatives. 

I would say that among scientists there are certain centrifugal tendencies 
which seem to me a little dangerous, but not very. One of them js the at- 
tempt to try, in this imperilled world, in which the very function of science 
is threatened, to make convenient arrangements for the continuance of sci- 
ence, and to pay very little attention to the preconditions which give sense 
to it. Another is the tendency to say we must have a free science and a strong 
science, because this will make us a strong nation and enable us to fight 
better wars. It seems to me that this is a profound mistake, and I don’t like 
to hear it. The third is even odder, and it is to say, ““Oh give the bombs to 
the United Nations for police purposes, and let us get back to physics and 
chemistry.”’ I think none of these are really held very widely, but they show 
that there are people who are desperately trying to avoid what I think is the 
most difficult problem. One must expect these false solutions, and overeasy 
solutions, and these are three which pop up from time to time. 

As far as I can tell in the world outside there are many people just as quick 
to see the gravity of the situation, and to understand it in terms not so differ- 
ent from those I have tried to outline. It is not only among scientists that 
there are wise people and foolish people. I have had occasion in the last few 
months to meet people who had to do with the Government—the legisla- 
tive branches, the administrative branches, and even the judicial branches, 
and I have found many in whom an understanding of what this problem is, 


IL2 


and of the general lines along which it can be solved, is very clear. I would 
especially mention the former Secretary of War, Mr. Stimson, who, perhaps 
as much as any man, seemed to appreciate how hopeless and how impracti- 
cal it was to attack this problem on a superficial level, and whose devotion 
to the development of atomic weapons was in large measure governed by 
his understanding of the hope that lay in it that there would be a new world. 
I know this is a surprise, because most people think that the War Depart- 
ment has as its unique function the making of war. The Secretary of War has 
other functions. 

I think this is another question of importance: that is, what views will be 
held on these matters in other countries. I think it is important to realize that 
even those who are well informed in this country have been slow to 
understand, slow to believe that the bombs would work, and then slow to 
understand that their working would present such profound problems. We 
have certain interests in playing up the bomb, not only we here locally, but 
all over the country, because we made them, and our pride is involved. I 
think that in other lands it may be even more difficult for an appreciation of 
the magnitude of the thing to take hold. For this reason, I’m not sure that 
the greatest opportunities for progress do not lie somewhat further in the 
future than I had for a long time thought. 

There have been two or three official statements by the President which 
defined, as nearly as their in some measure inevitable contradictions made 
possible, the official policy of the Government. And I think that one must 
not be entirely discouraged by the fact that there are contradictions, because 
the contradictions show that the problem is being understood as a difficult 
one, is temporarily being regarded as an insoluble one. Certainly you will 
notice, especially in the message to Congress, many indications of a sym- 
pathy with, and an understanding of, the views which this group holds, and 
which I have discussed briefly tonight. I think all of us were encouraged at 
the phrase “‘too revolutionary to consider in the framework of old ideas.” 
That’s about what we all think. I think all of us were encouraged by the 
sense of urgency that was frequently and emphatically stressed. I think all of 
us must be encouraged by the recognition, the official recognition by the 
Government of the importance—of the overriding importance— of the free 
exchange of scientific ideas and scientific information between all countries 
of the world. It would certainly be ridiculous to regard this as a final end, 
but I think that it would also be a very dangerous thing not to realize that it 
is a precondition. I am myself somewhat discouraged by the limitation of 
the objective to the elimination of atomic weapons, and I have seen many 
articles—probably you have, too—in which this is interpreted as follows: 
‘Let us get international agreement to outlaw atomic weapons and then let 
us go back to having a good, clean war.” This is certainly not a very good 
way of looking at it. I think, to say it again, that if one solves the problems 


323 


presented by the atomic bomb, one will have made a pilot plant for solution 
of the problem of ending war. 

But what is surely the thing which must have troubled you, and which 
troubled me, in the official statements was the insistent note of unilateral 
responsibility for the handling of atomic weapons. However good the mo- 
tives of this country are—I am not going to argue with the President’s de- 
scription of what the motives and the aims are—we are 140 million people, 
and there are two billion people living on.earth. We must understand that 
whatever our commitments to our own views and ideas, and however con- 
fident we are that in the course of time they will tend to prevail, our abso- 
lute—our completely absolute—commitment to them, in denial of the 
views and ideas of other people, cannot be the basis of any kind of agree- 
ment. 

As I have said, I had for a long time the feeling of the most extreme ur- 
gency, and I think maybe there was something right about that. There was a 
period immediately after the first use of the bomb when it seemed most nat- 
ural that a clear statement of policy, and the initial steps of implementing it, 
should have been made; and it would be wrong for me not to admit that 
something may have been lost, and that there may be tragedy in that loss. 
But I think the plain fact is that in the actual world, and with the actual 
people in it, it has taken time, and it may take longer, to understand what 
this is all about. And Iam not sure, as I have said before, that in other lands 
it won’t take longer than it does in this country. As it is now, our only 
course is to see what we can do to bring about an understanding qn a level 
deep enough to make a solution practicable, and to do that without undue 
delay. 

One may think that the views suggested in the President’s Navy Day 
speech are not entirely encouraging, that many men who are more versed 
than we in the practical art of statesmanship have seen more hope in a radi- 
cal view, which may at first sight seem visionary, than in an approach on a 
more conventional level. 

I don’t have very much more to say. There are a few things which scien- 
tists perhaps should remember, that I don’t think I need to remind us of; but 
I will, anyway. One is that they are very often called upon to give technical 
information in one way or another, and I think one cannot be too careful to 
be honest. And it is very difficult, not because one tells lies, but because so 
often questions are put in a form which makes it very hard to give an 
answer which is not misleading. I think we will be in a very weak position 
unless we maintain at its highest the scrupulousness which 1s traditional for 
us in sticking to the truth, and in distinguishing between what we know to 
be true from what we hope may be true. 

The second thing I think it right to speak of is this: it is everywhere felt 
that the fraternity between us and scientists in other countries may be one of 


324 


the most helpful things for the future; yet it is apparent that even in this 
country not all of us who are scientists are in agreement. There is no harm in 
that; such disagreement is healthy. But we must not lose the sense of frater- 
nity because of it; we must not lose our fundamental confidence in our fel- 
low scientists. 

I think that we have no hope at all if we yield in our belief in the value of 
science, in the good that it can be to the world to know about reality, about 
nature, to attain a gradually greater and greater control of nature, to learn, to 
teach, to understand. I think that if we lose our faith in this we stop being 
scientists, we sell out our heritage, we lose what we have most of value for 
this time of crisis. 

But there is another thing: we are not only scientists; we are men, too. We 
cannot forget our dependence on our fellow men. I mean not only our ma- 
terial dependence, without which no science would be possible, and without 
which we could not work; I mean also our deep moral dependence, in that 
the value of science must lie in the world of men, that all our roots lie there. 
These are the strongest bonds in the world, stronger than those even that 
bind us to one another, these are the deepest bonds—that bind us to our 
fellow men. 


A FEW DAYS after his farewell speech, Oppenheimer and his family left 
for Pasadena. 

Down by the Rio Grande Edith Warner read Oppenheimer’s talk. 
Until the war ended she and Tilano had asked no questions of their Los 
Alamos guests as they quietly served the simple dinners, but there had been 
intuitive understanding in that Quaker-Indian household that the activity 
on the Los Alamos mesa involved more than science and technology. The 
letter that followed Oppenheimer to Pasadena was at once a reminder of 
what he had accomplished and of the task that lay ahead. 


167 | EDITH WARNER TO ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
November 25, 1945 
Dear Mr. Opp, 


Tilano’s name for you is used with deep feeling. I have thought of you 
frequently and wished that your last visit had been less surrounded and in- 
terrupted by people. So it was especially satisfying to read your recent 
speech to the ALAS. I hope you do not mind my having it. 

As I read, it seemed almost as though you were pacing my kitchen, talking 
half to yourself and half to me. And from it came the conviction of what 


325 


I’ve felt a number of times—you have, in lesser degree, that quality which 
radiates from Mr. Baker [Bohr]. It has seemed to me in these past few months 
that it is a power as little known as atomic energy, which has greatly in- 
creased man’s need for it. It also seems that even recognition of it involves 
responsibility. 

There are many things for which I would express my gratitude. Your 
trust in me not only solved an economic problem but greatly broadened my 
horizon. Your hours here mean much to me and I appreciate, perhaps more 
than most outsiders, what you have given of yourself in these Los Alamos 
years. Most of all I am grateful for your bringing Mr. Baker. I think of you 
both, hopefully, as the song of the river comes from the canyon and the 
need of the world reaches even this quiet spot. 

May you have strength and courage and wisdom, 


Edith Warner 


Enclosed are a note for Kitty and a feather for Peter. Thank you. 


326 


Bohr and Robert Oppenheimer in the 1950s. (Courtesy of Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen. ) 


Kitty and Robert Oppenheimer at the Rochester Conference on 
High Energy Physics, about 1951. (Courtesy of Oppenheimer 


Memorial Committee, Los Alamos, New Mexico.) 


Robert Oppenheimer with his children, Toni and Peter, in Princeton, New Jersey, 1948 
(Courtesy of Oppenheimer Memorial Committee, Los Alamos, New Mexico.) 


Epilogue 


Attachment to California had played a part in Oppenheimer’s immediate 
postwar plans, but in October 1947 he assumed the prestigious post of 
director of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. Ap- 
parently he had changed his mind since his 1935 visit to Princeton, when he 
wrote his brother, Frank, that the place was ‘‘a madhouse, its solipsistic lu- 
minaries shining in separate and helpless desolation.”’ In Princeton he and 
Kitty, with their children, Peter and Toni, lived at Olden Manor, the direc- 
tor’s residence on the edge of the Institute grounds. The spacious rooms of 
the large white frame house provided the right background for the Van 
Gogh that Robert had inherited; less imposing possessions, acquired over 
the years in California and New Mexico, gave an air of informal comfort. 
Robert had his library, Kitty a greenhouse, Peter, in due course, a photo- 
graphic studio, and Toni a stall for her pony, to whom a visitor once found 
her feeding hot cocoa from a delicate French porcelain cup. Francis Fergus- 
son, seeing his old friend for the tirst time as head of a family, watched in 
amazement as Robert, surrounded by adults conversing brilliantly, shifted 
his attention the moment Peter or Toni entered the room. Not every father 
could do that, thought Fergusson.’ 

During part of two summers after moving to Princeton, Oppenheimer 
lectured in Berkeley, and for a few years he made regular visits to the Pecos 
Valley in New Mexico. The Christmas holidays of 1951 were spent in 
the Virgin Islands, where Oppenheimer shared with Kitty and the children 
his youthful enthusiasm for sailing. The New Mexico ranch was not sold, 
but the Caribbean, and eventually a house of their own on the island of St. 
John, became the Oppenheimers’ winter and summer holiday retreat. 

In many respects Oppenheimer’s postwar career followed a pattern 
common among successful scientists of his generation. He became an ad- 
ministrator and a consultant on national policy. He received appropriate 
honors and awards. He traveled in the United States and abroad, usually to 
attend meetings and give lectures. He enjoyed the contacts and the amenities 
of life in an academic community. Decreased scientific output could be ex- 
plained by the time-consuming nature of administration and committee 
work and rationalized by the then widely accepted myth that a scientist’s 
productive life ends at thirty. 

In Oppenheimer’s case, this typical pattern was affected throughout, 
and at certain points radically, by his personal history and by his special rela- 
tionship to the atomic bomb. After the war many scientists who had been 
employed in war research and development engaged in vigorous campaigns 


to educate American voters: they stressed the need for international control 
of atomic energy and rallied public support for the legislation that estab- 
lished a domestic atomic energy commission controlled by civilians. Op- 
penheimer was often consulted by the younger men who organized these 
efforts, but, avoiding open advocacy, he preferred to take advantage of his 
direct access to decision makers. In the belief that nuclear weapons would 
henceforth dominate international relations and that a rational nuclear pol- 
icy could be developed only on the basis of:technical information, he contin- 
ued to serve as a confidential adviser to those who made policy, as he had 
done in the final months of the war. He was not alone among prominent 
scientists in adopting this role, so gratifying to self-esteem, but for a time he 
was the most visible and probably the most influential of the insiders. 
When Oppenheimer gave the informal talk to the Association of Los 
Alamos Scientists in November 1945, his advice was already being sought 
by State Department officials who were negotiating with Great Britain and 
the Soviet Union on exchange of atomic information and the establishment 
of a United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC). In early 1946 
he served on the Board of Consultants to the secretary of state’s Committee 
on Atomic Energy, where his ideas—and, through him, those of Niels 
Bohr—strongly influenced the so-called Acheson-Lilienthal report, on 
which was based the international control plan presented by the United 
States to the UNAEC in June 1946. He was a member of a UNAEC sub- 
committee of scientists which reported unanimously in September 1946 that 
effective international control was technically feasible, but this was the only 
significant agreement in the long, politically dominated control negotia- 
tions. By the end of 1947, when Oppenheimer resigned as science adviser to 
the United States representative to the UNAEC, he was admitting privately 
that international control was a hopeless cause. He continued to support the 
principle and in 1952-53 he chaired a State Department panel on disarma- 
ment. ; 
At the same time, Oppenheimer served on committees and panels deal- 
ing with domestic policy in which atomic energy was a factor. By far the 
most important of these appointments was his six-year term on the General 
Advisory Committee (GAC) to the United States Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion (AEC), which succeeded the Manhattan Engineer District on January 
1, 1947. He was elected chairman at the GAC’s first meeting on January 3 
and held this post until his term expired in July 1952. He was concurrently a 
member of the atomic energy committee of the Research and Development 
Board of the Department of Defense and chaired panels on long-range ob- 
jectives and on military objectives in the field of atomic energy. He servec 
on advisory and review panels for the Air Force and on the Science Advis- 
ory Committee of the Office of Defense Mobilization.” In fact, Oppen- 
heimer became a kind of Pooh-Bah of atomic energy: because he sum- 


328 


marized discussions so succinctly and was often staying in Washington for 
another meeting next day, fellow panel members gladly delegated report 
writing to him; sometimes this meant that Oppenheimer was reporting to 
Oppenheimer. After his term on the GAC ended in 1952, he became an 
AEC consultant without specific assignment. 

By -1954 Oppenheimer was a highly respected figure, admired for his 
unique wartime contribution and for unstinting service to his country in 
time of peace. As director of the Institute for Advanced Study, he was re- 
garded as the archetypical intellectual, identified with the pursuit of knowl- 
edge. His talks and articles on atomic energy and the place of science in the 
realm of ideas had reached a large audience. So firmly established was his 
position as a symbol of leadership and service that news of the suspension of 
his security clearance by the United States Atomic Energy Commission, 
first published in the New York Times on April 12, 1954, was greeted with 
shocked disbelief within the scientific community and by the general public. 
The Times article also stated that a hearing was beginning that day before a 
special three-member AEC personnel security board to determine the valid- 
ity of charges that Oppenheimer’s leftwing activities and associations in the 
late 1930s made it unwise to trust him with classified information. 

For years Oppenheimer had been aware of this Damoclean sword; 
it fell on December 21, 1953, four and a half months before the Times an- 
nouncement, when he was summoned to Washington and told of the 
AEC’s plans. A letter of December 23 from AEC General Manager Kenneth 
D. Nichols informed him that his clearance, which was due to expire or be 
renewed the following July, would be withdrawn in thirty days unless he 
requested a hearing. The letter set forth the charges in detail, adding to the 
points about undesirable prewar associations the charge that after 1949, 
when the AEC rejected the General Advisory Committee’s unanimous rec- 
ommendation against a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb, his 
lack of enthusiasm for the project had deterred some scientists from work- 
ing on it. 

During the holidays Oppenheimer and his wife consulted at length 
with lawyers and friends, and he decided to ask for a hearing. On March 4, 
1954, he submitted a formal reply to Nichols’ letter. The Personnel Security 
Board, chaired by Gordon Gray, began to survey the record on April 5 and, 
with Oppenheimer as the first witness, commenced closed sessions on April 
12. The hearing ended on May 6. On May 27 the board conveyed to the 
AEC its two-to-one recommendation that Oppenheimer’s clearance should 
not be reinstated. On June 28 the commission, by a vote of four to one, con- 
firmed this conclusion, making clear that although they regarded Oppen- 
heimer as a security risk, his loyalty was not in doubt. His clearance was 
revoked three days before it was due to expire. 

Meanwhile, on June 15 the Government Printing Office released copies 


329 


of the transcript of the hearing and related documents—over one thousand 
pages of small print.*° Of the scientists called to testify, a few had expressed 
doubts about Oppenheimer’s judgment and discretion and agreed that he 
had not encouraged work on the H-bomb. The majority of witnesses, in- 
cluding distinguished past and present colleagues in science and govern- 
ment, had testified unequivocally to his loyalty and to his positive role as an 
adviser. 

The transcript also revealed the lengthy questioning to which Oppen- 
heimer himself had been subjected. The antagonism infused into the pro- 
ceedings by AEC counsel had been so obvious that Oppenheimer’s usual 
command of language and of the mot juste had deserted him at critical junc- 
tures. He was especially disconcerted by questions relating to the contents of 
surreptitiously recorded conversations between him and security investiga- 
tors during the war and to his testimony before the House Un-American 
Activities Committee in 1949. During these inquiries about the loyalty of 
other scientists, he had acknowledged that several of his family members, 
prewar intimates, associates, and acquaintances had been leftwingers or 
communists in the 1930s. In response to probing into his earlier statements, 
Oppenheimer sometimes gave awkward and ambiguous replies. 

Defense witnesses had not heard Oppenheimer’s testimony, but they 
began to talk privately about the inquisitorial atmosphere of the proceed- 
ings. Subsequent disclosures would document the more concrete forms of 
inequity that converted an informal hearing into a trial without due process: 
information available to government lawyers had been withheld from de- 
fense counsel, there had been delays in providing Oppenheimer’s lawyers 
with transcripts of testimony, and offices in which he sought legal advice 
had been bugged.* 

Even before the full story was known, the attempt to discredit Oppen- 
heimer was vigorously denounced, not only by his admirers, but by people 
who had never really liked him. He was seen by some observers as a martyr 
to McCarthyism, by others as partner to a kind of Faustian bargain. His pre- 
dicament suggested that scientists, or indeed intellectuals in any field, did 
not belong in government. However, scientists did not disappear from 
Washington. Rather, new administrators, whose values and priorities dif- 
fered from those of the officials who had so consistently enlisted Oppen- 
heimer’s advice, gradually assumed control of atomic policy and sought out 
scientists with views more congenial to their own. This phenomenon had 
already been apparent in the tapering off of Oppenheimer’s committee 
appointments before his clearance was suspended. Under earlier AEC man- 
agement, “the Oppenheimer case’’ might never have come up. 

To friends who saw him during and after this ordeal, Oppenheimer 
made no secret of the anguish it caused him and his family, though he never 
discussed this publicly. The standardized acknowledgment with which he 


330 


replied to scores of letters expressing sympathy and outrage was brief and 
noncommital. Perspective, if not solace, came with time. His reaction to 
Heinar Kipphardt’s play based on the transcript of the hearing was that the 
author tried to convert a farce into a tragedy.” 

Two Princeton friends, one of whom saw Oppenheimer almost daily 
for years, agree that he rode the crisis surprisingly well and that if it changed 
him the change was for the better. He did not become a model of humility, 
but he was less often arrogant and showed more understanding of other 
people. Physically, he changed less than photographs sometimes suggest. 
One day he looked haggard and drawn; the next he appeared robust and 
attractive, the way he had as a young man.°® 

Some commentators have portrayed Oppenheimer as defeated or dis- 
graced, but the dignity with which he conducted himself after the AEC ver- 
dict and the absence of bitterness from any public statement refutes either 
judgment. In November 1963, just before John F. Kennedy was killed, Op- 
penheimer learned that he would receive the AEC’s Enrico Fermi Award 
for outstanding contributions to atomic energy. On December 2, when the 
award was presented by President Johnson, his words of thanks had been 
carefully phrased. “‘I think it is just possible, Mr. President, that it has taken 
some charity and some courage for you to make this award today. That 
would seem to be a good augury for all our futures. These words I wrote 
down almost a fortnight ago. In a somber time, I gratefully and gladly speak 
them to you.’”’ 

Oppenheimer’s productivity in theoretical physics diminished sharply 
in the postwar years. He published few papers after 1942, and in the absence 
of this rudimentary indicator, the significance of his postwar contribution is 
not easily established. Encouragement and criticism had been hallmarks of 
his teaching. Although he taught no courses after 1947, he continued to en- 
courage, criticize, and help others to recognize solutions. To the Institute for 
Advanced Study he brought successive groups of brilliant young people 
who met in his office to discuss problems in theoretical physics as profound 
and intractable as those he had tackled with his students in the 1930s. Some 
of these recruits received permanent institute appointments. 

In 1947 Oppenheimer helped initiate a series of small annual confer- 
ences on fundamental problems in physics which expanded by demand into 
the successful Rochester conferences on high-energy physics. A significant 
segment of Oppenheimer’s postwar papers in the Library of Congress con- 
sists of correspondence with younger physicists who sent him for comment 
the drafts of articles on topics he had opened up years earlier. Many of his 
contemporaries continued to defer to his judgment and to value his analytic 
skills. Hans Bethe recalled that ““Oppenheimer was always there [at the in- 
stitute] to stimulate, to discuss, to listen to ideas. Even when he was busiest 
with public affairs, he knew what was most important in physics. It was 


331 


forever astonishing how quickly he could absorb new ideas and single out 
the most important point.”® Some members of the new generation, 
however, found his influence on physics less constructive. Encouragement 
and criticism were both infused with a personal style that tended to promote 
his own viewpoint, which sometimes seemed intolerant of others’ and too 
‘“philosophical’”’ or even “‘irrelevant’’ to the young theorists grappling with 
current problems in a rapidly changing field. This modus operandi evoked 
varied responses which are still being sorted out by the participants. 

During the first two decades of what Oppenheimer and many others 
termed “‘the atomic age,’’ he emerged as an eloquent interpreter of the im- 
plications of atomic energy and of the cultural value of science. In at least 
120 public lectures, commencement addresses, radio and television talks and 
interviews, and magazine articles, Oppenheimer expanded on the theme of 
his farewell talk at Los Alamos, that atomic energy constituted both a peril 
and a hope. He also explained, philosophically and poetically, the principles 
of the physics of fundamental matter he had helped to formulate in the 
1920s and 1930s, and he explored the relation of these ideas to knowledge 
derived from the arts and the humanities. His ideas reached wide audiences 
through publication of his 1953 Reith Lectures for the British Broadcasting 
Company as a book, Science and the Common Understanding, and a collection 
of eight lectures delivered between 1946 and 1954, The Open Mind.* Oppen- 
heimer combined this public role of interpreter of science with his less visi- 
ble role as critic and nurturer of scientists, and prior to 1954, as government 
adviser. 

Friendship continued to play an important part in Robert Oppen- 
heimer’s life. In addition to the large parties that his position at the institute 
entailed, there was much informal entertaining at Olden Manor. His letters 
contained cordial invitations for lunch, dinner, or the weekend. Among the 
school and college friends who came from time to time were Jane Didi- 
sheim Kayser, William Boyd, and John Edsall. Francis Fergusson, living on 
the outskirts of Princeton, again became an intimate friend. The classicist 
Harold Cherniss was a permanent institute member; the link with him went 
back to 1929, that with his wife, Ruth, to childhood. Robert Serber and I. I. 
Rabi were nearby at Columbia University. Oppenheimer kept in touch also 
with California friends, especially the Lauritsens and Tolmans. Richard Tol- 
man died in 1948, but Ruth remained a cherished confidante. After her death 
in 1957 the Pasadena house, which held so many happy memories for Op- 
penheimer, belonged to Robert and Jean Bacher, who offered him the same 
warm welcome he had always found there. The home of Dorothy McKib- 
bin in Santa Fe was another haven of warmth and renewal. 

Niels Bohr, H. A. Kramers, Wolfgang Pauli, and Hans Bethe were but 
a few of the longtime associates in physics who enjoyed Oppenheimer’s 
hospitality, officially at the institute, as friends at Olden Manor. His already 


332 


wide acquaintance was greatly enlarged by contacts in Washington, at the 
United Nations, and the institute. Among the valued new friends were Jus- 
tice Felix Frankfurter and the poet Archibald MacLeish. 

Not all of his former associates felt as comfortable with Oppenheimer 
the man of affairs as they had with the charming companion in Berkeley or 
the unpredictable host at Perro Caliente. Those who had been with him at 
Los Alamos adapted most easily to the transformation. 

By mid 1965 Oppenheimer began to think about retiring as director of 
the Institute for Advanced Study. He submitted his resignation early in 1966 
when a malignant throat tumor required surgery and radiation therapy. 
Letters he wrote in the ensuing months show a realistic appraisal of the 
progress of his illness, the guarded optimism with which he welcomed a 
brief remission in the summer, and throughout a determination to maintain 
as long as possible his connection with physics at the institute, his commit- 
ments to other organizations, and communication with his friends. Robert 
Oppenheimer died at his home in Princeton on February 18, 1967. 


333 


Notes 
Sources and Style 


Scientific Papers 
by Robert Oppenheimer 


Bibliography 
Index 


Notes 


Introduction 


1. New York City records contain a birth certificate for “Julius R. Oppen- 
hiemer [sic],”” born April 22, 1904; Philip M. Stern with Harold P. Green, The Op- 
penheimer Case: Security on Trial (New York: Harper & Row, 1969), p. 7n. The head- 
ing on Oppenheimer’s Harvard College transcript reads: ‘J (initial only) Robert 
Oppenheimer’’; Office of the Registrar of Harvard College, Cambridge, Mass. In- 
terview with Frank Oppenheimer by Alice Kimball Smith, April 14, 1976. 

2. Interview with Paul Horgan by Alice Kimball Smith, March 3, 1976, pp. 16, 
17. Communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. Interview with Francis 
Fergusson by Alice Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976. 

3. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. 

4. Ibid. 

5. Interview with J. Robert Oppenheimer by Thomas S. Kuhn, November 18, 
1963. All quotations from Oppenheimer in this chapter are taken from this inter- 
view, pp. 1-4. Excerpts from the Oppenheimer interview in this volume have been 
verified with the original tape and may differ slightly from the transcript. In some 
instances sentence order has been rearranged to relate to points mentioned in the 
letters and commentary. See Sources and Style at the back of this volume. 

6. “Remembering J. Robert Oppenheimer,” editorial in The Reporter [Ethical 
Culture School publication], 15, no. 4 (April 1967). 

7. Interview with Herbert W. Smith by Charles Weiner, August 1, 1974. Inter- 
view with Jane Didisheim Kayser by Charles Weiner, June 4, 1975. Interview with 
Fergusson, April 21, 1976. Herbert W. Smith remained on the staff of the Ethical 
Culture School as teacher and high school principal until 1938. 

8. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, pp. 16, 17. 

9. Interview with Herbert W. Smith by Alice Kimball Smith, July 9, 1975. 

10. Denise Royal, The Story of J Robert Oppenheimer (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1969), pp. 22—23. Interviews with Smith, August 1, 1974, July 9, 1975. 

11. Interview with Kayser, June 4, 1975. 

12. Robert] Ol[ppenheimer] ’21, “The Bazaar,” Inklings, February 1921, p. 28. 
Interview with Fergusson, April 21, 1976. 

13. Interview with Kayser, June 4, 1975. 

14. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, pp. 1, 4, 5, 28, 37. 

15. Ibid., p. 17. 

16. Interviews with Smith, August 1, 1974, July 9, 1975. Interview with Kayser, 
June 4, 1975. Interview with Fergusson, April 21, 1976. 

17. Interview with Smith, August 1, 1974. 

18. Oppenheimer to Mrs. Fermor S. [Peggy Pond] Church, November 21, 
1958, Warner File, Box 76, J. Robert Oppenheimer Papers, Manuscript Division, Li- 
brary of Congress, Washington, D.C. 


Notes to Pages 11-32 


I. ‘“‘Work .. . frantic, bad and graded A’”’ 


1. Interview with J. Robert Oppenheimer by Thomas S. Kuhn (hereafter cited 
as interview with JRO), November 18, 1963, pp. 3-6. 

2. Interview with Francis Fergusson by Alice Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976. 

3. Fergusson to Smith, Thursday, ca. November 1921, made available to the 
editors through the courtesy of Herbert W. Smith. 

4. Interview with William C. Boyd by Alice Kimball Smith, December 21, 
1975, p. 20. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Harvard College transcnpt, Office of the Regis- 
trar of Harvard College, Cambridge, Mass. ‘‘Harvard University Descriptive Cata- 
logue,’ Harvard College Catalogue, 1922-23, Harvard University Archives, Pusey L1- 
brary, Cambridge, Mass. 

5. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, pp. 5, 7, 8. 

6. Interview with John T. Edsall by Charles Weiner, July 16, 1975, pp. 1-2, 
4—6. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 9. Harvard Student Liberal Club 
File, Harvard University Archives. 

7. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 7. 

8. Fergusson to Smith, fall 1922, made available to the editors through the cour- 
tesy of Herbert W. Smith. 

9. Interview with Herbert W. Smith by Alice Kimball Smith, July 9, 1975. 

10. Interview with Herbert W. Smith by Charles Weiner, August 1, 1974. Inter- 
view with Smith, July 9, 1975. 

11. Kayser to Smith, June 13, 1974, made available to the editors through the 
courtesy of Herbert W. Smith. 

12. Inez Pollak to Smith, January 14, 1923. Kitty and Inez Pollak to Smith, 
January 28, 1923. Made available to the editors through the courtesy of Hefbert W. 
Smith. 

13. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer by Alice Kimball Smith, April 14, 
1976. 

14. Frederick Bernheim to Alice Kimball Smith, August 3, 1976. Interview 
with Bernheim by Charles Weiner, October 27, 1975, pp. 8, 27. 

15. Interview with Bernheim, October 27, 1975, pp. 7-8. 

16. Interview with George Stevens by Alice Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976. 

17. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, pp. 6, 7. 

18. “‘Minutes of Physics Department meeting, June 6, 1923,”’ Division of Phys- 
ics Record, and Lyman to Oppenheimer, June 8, 1923, Correspondence of the 
Director of the Physics Laboratory, Harvard University Archives. The editors are 
grateful to Katherine R. Sopka for drawing attention to this quotation in her thesis. 
‘Quantum Physics in America, 1920-1935” (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1976). 
n. 3.118. 

19. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 8. Pierce was professor o!} 
physics at Harvard. 

20. Ibid., p. 10. 

21. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Harvard transcript. 

22. Interview with Fergusson, April 21, 1976. Interview with Smith, August 1. 
1974. Interview with Paul Horgan by Alice Kimball Smith, March 3, 1976, p. 18. 


Notes to Pages 34-69 


23. Interview with Boyd, December 21, 1975, pp. 1-2. 

24. Denise Royal, The Story of J] Robert Oppenheimer (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1969), pp. 15, 19. Communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 

25. Interview with Smith, August 1, 1974. 

26. Interview with Bernheim, October 27, 1975, p. 12. Interview with Boyd, 
December 21, 1975, p. 10. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, p. 18. 

27. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. 

28. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, pp. 13-15. Frank Oppenheimer was 
also on this memorable voyage. 

29. Interview with Boyd, December 21, 1975, p. 10. Interview with Bernheim, 
October 27, 1975, p. 10. 

30. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, pp. 19, 21. 

31. Interview with Jeffries Wyman by Charles Weiner, May 28, 1975, pp. 10, 
2-4. 

32. Ibid., pp. 2—3, 14. 

33. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. Interview with Hor- 
gan, March 3, 1976, p. 3. Interview with Fergusson, April 21, 1976. 

34. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, pp. 24, 34-35. 

35. Interview with Bernheim, October 27, 1975, pp. 7, 14-15. 

36. Ibid., pp. 34-35. 

37. Ibid., pp. 14, 15-16. 

38. Interview with Boyd, December 21, 1975, pp. 3-4, 9. 

39. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, pp. 8, 9. 

40. Ibid., pp. 7, 9, 10. 

41. Interview with Babette Oppenheimer Langsdorf by Alice Kimball Smith, 
December 1, 1976. 

42. Interview with Wyman, May 28, 1975, pp. 7, 16. Interview with Bernheim, 
October 27, 1975, p. 30. Interview with Boyd, December 21, 1975, p. 15. 

43. Interview with Boyd, December 21, 1975, p. 9. Interview with Bernheim, 
October 27, 1975, p. 8. Bernheim to Alice Kimball Smith, August 3, 1976. 

44. Interview with Wyman, May 28, 1975, pp. 10-11. 

45. For reference to President Lowell’s recommendation and for a discussion of 
the position of Jews in American physics at this time, see Daniel J. Kevles, The 
Physicists (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978), pp. 210-213; see also Samuel Eliot 
Morison, Three Centuries of Harvard, 1636-1936 (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1936), pp. 417, 421-422. 

46. Interview with Boyd, December 21, 1975, p. 10. 

47. Bernheim to Alice Kimball Smith, August 3, 1976. Interview with Boyd, 
December 21, 1975, pp. 9-10. 

48. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Harvard transcript. 

49. Interview with Bernheim, October 21, 1975, pp. 28-29. 

50. Interview with Horgan, March 3, 1976, pp. 23-24, 33. Interview with 
Francis Fergusson by Alice Kimball Smith, April 23, 1975. 

51. Communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 

52. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, pp. 6, 7. 

53. Ibid., p. 5. 


Notes to Pages 69-94 


54. Ibid., p. 9. 

55. Ibid., p. 15. 

56. Oppenheimer to Lord Russell, April 18, 1962, Bertrand Russell File, Box 62, 
Oppenheimer Papers. 

57. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 5. 

58. In medieval times the term tripos referred to the three-legged stool on which 
the examiner sat; later it applied to the candidate, and finally to the examination; En- 
cyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed., s.v. ‘Cambridge,’ fEngland]” and ‘‘Examinations.”’ 

59. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Harvard transcript. 

60. Ibid. 

61. Interview with Bernheim, October 27, 1975, p. 14. 


II. ‘‘Making myself for a career”’ 


1. Interview with J. Robert Oppenheimer by Thomas S. Kuhn (hereafter cited 
as interview with JRO), November 18, 1963, pp. 13, 14. J. J. Thomson was pro- 
fessor of experimental physics and until 1919 had been director of the Cavendish 
Laboratory, where he continued to do research. He had been master of Trinity Col- 
lege since 1918. 

2. Bridgman to Rutherford, June 24, 1925, Percy W. Bridgman Papers, 
Harvard University -Archives, Pusey Library, Cambridge, Mass. The Bridgman-— 
Oppenheimer correspondence included or cited in this volume was located by 
Katherine R. Sopka and made available to the editors through the courtesy of 
Gerald Holton. 

3. Bridgman to Oppenheimer, June 24, 1925, Bridgman Papers. 

4. Consuelo Chaves Summers to Alice Kimball Smith, October 29, 1976. 

5. Interview with Paul Horgan by Alice Kimball Smith, March 3, 1976, pp. 
6-8. 

6. Interviews with Francis Fergusson by Alice Kimball Smith, April 23, 1975, 
and April 21, 1976. 

7. Smith to Fergusson, ca. early fall 1925, made available to the editors through 
the courtesy of Francis Fergusson. 

8. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, pp. 14-16. Ebenezer Everett was 
Thomson’s mechanic and laboratory assistant. James Chadwick was then assistant 
director of radioactive research at the Cavendish. Erwin Schrodinger, who at that 
time was professor of physics at the University of Zurich, was the inventor of wave 
mechanics. 

9. Interview with Frederick Bernheim by Charles Weiner, October 27, 1975, 
pp. 19-21. 

10. Interview with John T. Edsall by Charles Weiner, July 16, 1975, pp. 13-14, 
17. 

11. Interviews with Fergusson, April 23, 1975, and Apmil 21, 1976. 

12. Interview with Edsall, July 16, 1975, p. 18. 

13. Ibid., pp. 26, 29, 30-31. 

14. Ibid., pp. 20, 26-27, 30, 31. Interview with Jeffries Wyman by Charles 
Weiner, May 28, 1975, pp. 21-22. 

15. Interview with Edsall, July 16, 1975, pp. 24, 27. Denise Royal relates the 


Notes to Pages 94-103 


poisoned apple story to a Christmas holiday trip to Corsica with Wyman and to 
Robert’s refusal to return to England by way of Rome: ‘‘A twinkle shown [sic] in 
Robert’s eyes. ‘I left a poison apple on Blackett’s table. I have to get back before he 
does,’ was Robert’s whimsical way of saying he had some work to do for Blackett’; 
Denise Royal, The Story of J Robert Oppenheimer (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
1969), pp. 35-36. 

16. Interview with Fergusson, April 21, 1976. 

17. Interview with Edsall, July 16, 1975, p. 19. Interview with Fergusson, April 
21, 1976. 

18. Interview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 16. Ralph Howard Fowler, a 
mathematical physicist, was a lecturer at Cambridge. He was Rutherford’s son-in- 
law. 

19. Ibid., pp. 17, 21. Niels Bohr, a central figure in world physics and a major 
contributor to quantum theory, was director of the Institute for Theoretical Physics 
at the University of Copenhagen. 

20. Ibid., p. 18. 

21. Interview with George Uhlenbeck by Charles Weiner, January 8, 1977. In- 
terview with JRO, November 18, 1963, p. 18. 

22. Ibid., pp. 18, 21. 

23. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 4. Richard Courant was direc- 
tor of the mathematics institute at the University of Gottingen. In 1926-27 Werner 
Heisenberg was a lecturer at the University of Copenhagen, working with Niels 
Bohr. He had previously been Born’s assistant at Gottingen. When Robert met him 
Heisenberg was only twenty-five, yet he had already made fundamental contribu- 
tions to the development of quantum mechanics. Gregor Wentzel was professor of 
physics at the University of Leipzig. Wolfgang Pauli, another major figure in the 
development of quantum mechanics, was a privat dozent at the University of Ham- 
burg. 

24. J. Robert Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding (New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1953), p. 35. 

25. Interview with Robert Serber by Charles Weiner, May 25, 1978. 

26. Oppenheimer, Science and the Common Understanding, p. 64. 

27. Born to Stratton, February 13, 1927, Office of the President File, Institute 
Archives and Special Collections, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Libraries, 
Cambridge, Mass. The editors are grateful to Katherine Sopka for drawing attention 
to this quotation in her thesis, ““Quantum Physics in America, 1920-1935” (Ph.D. 
diss., Harvard University, 1976), p. 3.46. Referring to Oppenheimer, Dirac, and Pas- 
cual Jordan, the physicist Earle H. Kennard wrote a Cornell colleague that “there 
are three young geniuses in theory here, each less intelligible to me than the others”; 
Kennard to R. C. Gibbs, March 3, 1927, quoted in Daniel J. Kevles, The Physicists 
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978), p. 217. 

28. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 5. 

29. Ibid., p. 4. 

30. P. A. M. Dirac, “Recollections of an Exciting Era,”’ in History of Twentieth 
Century Physics, ed. Charles Weiner, Proceedings of the International School of Phys- 
ics “Enrico Fermi,’’ Course 57 (New York: Academic Press, 1977), pp. 139-140. 


Notes to Pages 104-127 


31. Interview with Margaret Compton by Alice Kimball Smith, April 3, 1976. 

32. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 5. 

33. Bridgman to Oppenheimer, April 3, 1927, Bridgman Papers. John Slater 
was an assistant professor of physics at Harvard. 

34. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 18. 

35. Kemble to Lyman, June 9, 1927, Folder K 1927, Box 8, Correspondence of 
the Director of the Physics Laboratory, Harvard University Archives. Quoted in 
Sopka, “Quantum Physics,” p. 3.47 and n.3.1234° 

36. Dirac, ‘Recollections,’ p. 140. Oppenheimer to George Uhlenbeck, June 
18, 1927, made available to the editors through the courtesy of George Uhlenbeck. 
Oppenheimer to Samuel Goudsmit, July 16, 1927, Microfilm 61, Section 5, Archive 
for History of Quantum Physics, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, Pa., 
and other repositories cited in Sources and Style, at the back of this volume. 

37. Interview with Else Uhlenbeck by Alice Kimball Smith, April 20, 1976. 

38. Communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 

39. Philip M. Morse, In at the Beginnings: A Physicist’s Life (Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 1977), p. 87. 

40. Interview with Edsall, July 16, 1975, p. 34. Interview with William C. Boyd 
by Alice Kimball Smith, December 21, 1975, pp. 7, 19. 

41. Hound and Horn: A Harvard Miscellany, 1, no. 4 June 1928): 335. 

42. Interview with Helen C. Allison by Alice Kimball Smith, December 7, 
1976. 

43. Oppenheimer to Maj. Gen. Kenneth D. Nichols, March 4, 1954, in U.S. 
Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of 
Hearing before Personnel Security Board, Washington, D.C., April 12, 1954, through May 
6, 1954 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1954), p. 7. Lymah to Op- 
penheimer, April 10, 1928, Corr., Dir. of Physics Lab., HUA. 

44. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, pp. 18, 19. 

45. Neva E. Reynolds to Oppenheimer, August 16, 1928. Reynolds to Wallace 
Lund, August 29, 1928. Copies in International Education Board Papers, Rockefeller 
Archive Center, Pocantico Hills, N.Y. 

46. Neva E. Reynolds to W. W. Brierley, October 15, 1928, International Edu- 
cation Board Papers. 

47. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer by Alice Kimball Smith, April 14, 
1976. 

48. Interview with Herbert W. Smith by Charles Weiner, August 1, 1974. 

49. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, pp. 19-21. 

50. Ehrenfest to W. E. Tisdale, January 12, 1929, International Education Board 
Papers. Tisdale was secretary of the International Education Board. 

51. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 22. In 1927 Heisenberg had be- 
come professor of theoretical physics at the University of Leipzig; Felix Bloch and 
Rudolf Peierls both studied with him. In Zurich Peierls and Oppenheimer became 
friends: they sailed together on the lake and discussed many matters other than phys- 
ics. Interview with Rudolf Peierls by Alice Kimball Smith, March 4, 1975. 

52. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 22. 

93. W. J. Robbins to Oppenheimer, April 30, 1929, International Education 
Board Papers. 


Notes to Pages 127-173 


54. Log of W. E. Tisdale, September 4, 1929, International Education Board 
Papers. 

55. Robbins to Oppenheimer, April 30, 1929, International Education Board 
Papers. 


III. ‘‘Physics and the excellences of the life it brings”’ 


1. Interview with J. Robert Oppenheimer by Thomas S. Kuhn (hereafter cited 
as interview with JRO), November 20, 1963, p. 18. 

2. Ibid., pp. 30-31. 

3. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer by Alice Kimball Smith, April 14, 1976. 
Denise Royal, The Story of J] Robert Oppenheimer (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
1969), p. 44. 

4. Interview with Else Uhlenbeck by Alice Kimball Smith, April 20, 1976. 

5. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 19. Interview with Frank Op- 
penheimer, April 14, 1976. 

6. The Fieldglass [Fieldston School yearbook], 1930, p. 50. 

7. Interview with Helen C. Allison by Alice Kimball Smith, December 7, 1976. 

8. Interview with Else Uhlenbeck, April 20, 1976. 

9. Interview with Wendell H. Furry by Charles Weiner, August 9, 1971. 

10. Jean Bacher to Alice Kimball Smith, December 1, 1976. 

11. Bureau of Vital Records, City of New York, to Charles Weiner, January 13, 
1978. Interview with Herbert W. Smith by Charles Weiner, August 1, 1974. Inter- 
view with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. 

12. Interview with Else Uhlenbeck, April 20, 1976. 

13. Interview with Leo Nedelsky by Alice Kimball Smith, December 7, 1976. 

14. Ibid. 

15. Interview with Furry, August 9, 1971. 

16. Interview with Edwin and Ruth Uehling by Charles Weiner and Alice 
Kimball Smith, October 10, 1975. 

17. Robert Serber, ““The Early Years,” in I. I. Rabi et al., Oppenheimer (New 
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1969), pp. 17-20. 

18. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 31. 

19. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. 

20. Communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 

21. Postcard made available to the editors through the courtesy of Frank Op- 
penheimer. 

22. Charles Weiner, 1932— Moving into the New Physics,” Physics Today, 25 
(May 1972): 40-49. Daniel J. Kevles, The Physicists, pp. 222-235. 

23. Interview with Edwin and Ruth Uehling, October 10, 1975. 

24. Serber, ‘““The Early Years,” p. 14. 

25. Interview with Else Uhlenbeck, April 20, 1976. 

26. Oppenheimer to Uhlenbeck, January 1934, Archive for History of Quan- 
tum Physics, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, Pa., and other reposi- 
tories cited in Sources and Style at the back of this volume. 

27. Frank Oppenheimer to Alice Kimball Smith, November 29, 1976. 

28. See Charles Weiner, “A New Site for the Seminar: The Refugees and 
American Physics in the Thirties,” in The Intellectual Migration: Europe and America, 


Notes to Pages 173-202 


1930-1960, ed. Donald Harnish Fleming and Bernard Bailyn (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1969), pp. 190-234. 

29. Interview with Furry, August 9, 1971. 

30. Interview with JRO, November 20, 1963, p. 31. 

31. Interview with Furry, August 9, 1971. Interview with Robert Serber by 
Charles Weiner and Gloria Lubkin, February 10, 1967, pp. 6-7. Interview with 
Edwin and Ruth Uehling, October 10, 1975. 

32. Interview with Edwin and Ruth Vehling, October 10, 1975. Serber, ‘““The 
Early Years,”’ p. 19. Interview with Felix Bloch by Charles Weiner, August 15, 1968, 
pp. 17-20. 

33. Interview with Else Uhlenbeck, Apmil 20, 1976. 

34. Ibid. 

35. Serber, ““The Early Years,” p. 19. 

36. Interview with Edwin and Ruth Vehling, October 10, 1975. 

37. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. 

38. “Celebration of the Sixtieth Birthday of Albert Einstein,’’ Science, 89 (April 
14, 1939): 335. 

39. Oppenheimer to Cassidy, January 15, 1951, Cassidy File, Box 26, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 

40. Interview with Edwin and Ruth Uehling, October 10, 1975. Interview with 
Philip Morrison by Charles Weiner, February 7, 1967, pp. 13-14. Interview with 
Furry, August 9, 1971. 

41. Serber, ““The Early Years,”’ pp. 19-20. 

42. Interview with Edwin and Ruth Uehling, October 10, 1975. 

43. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer, April 14, 1976. 

44. Oppenheimer to Maj. Gen. Kenneth D. Nichols, March 4, 1954, in U.S. 
Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of 
Hearing before Personnel Security Board, Washington, D.C., April 12, 1954, through May 
6, 1954 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1954), p. 8 (hereafter cited 
as AEC, Hearing). 

45. Interview with Nedelsky, December 7, 1976. 

46. Communication from Frank Oppenheimer, June 1979. 

47. Oppenheimer to Nichols, March 4, 1954, in AEC, Hearing, pp. 8, 9. 

48. Science—Supplement, 84 (November 20, 1936): 9; [Carl Anderson], “‘Con- 
cerning Mesotrons,’”” memorandum [to Millikan?], December 29, 1943, and R. A. 
Millikan to A. Westgren, January 6, 1944, Nobel Prize Folders, Box 12, Millikan 
Papers, California Institute of Technology Archives; interview with Carl D. Ander- 
son by Charles Weiner, June 30, 1966, pp. 19-29. Expenments by J. C. Street and 
E. C. Stevenson at Harvard also provided evidence for the existence of the meson. 

49. J. R. Oppenheimer and J. F. Carlson, “On multiplicative showers,” Physical 
Review, 51 (February 15, 1937): 220 (received December 8, 1936). 

50. Robert Oppenheimer, ‘‘Thirty Years of Mesons,” Physics Today, 11 (No- 
vember 1966): 52. 

51. Bureau of Vital Records, City of New York, to Charles Weiner, January 13, 
1978. 

52. Stern to Oppenheimer, October 14, 1966, H. Stern File, Box 69, Oppen- 
heimer Papers. 


Notes to Pages 203-224 


53. Bohr to Oppenheimer, January 7, 1938, Bohr Scientific Correspondence, 
Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen, and Reel 24, BSC, Archive for History of Quan- 
tum Physics. 

54. Oppenheimer to Nichols, March 4, 1954, in AEC, Hearing, p. 9. Oppen- 
heimer to Robert Brady, June 10, 1938, and June 23, 1938, Center for the Study of 
the Consumer Movement, Consumers Union, Mount Vernon, New York. 

55. Oppenheimer, ‘“Mesons,” p. 55. Interview with Robert Serber by Charles 
Weiner, May 25, 1978. Note handwritten by Millikan on Oppenheimer to Millikan, 
January 1, 1939 (letter 104). 

56. Six of these notes located by the editors are not included in this volume. 
They are in the possession of William A. Fowler and will be deposited in the Califor- 
nia Institute of Technology Archives. 

57. Glenn T. Seaborg, “Public Service and Human Contributions,”’ in Rabi et 
al., Oppenheimer, pp. 48-49. 

58. “Minutes of the Seattle, Washington, Meeting, June 18-21, 1940,” Physical 
Review, 58 (July 15, 1940): 187. 

59. Oppenheimer to Nichols, March 4, 1954, and testimony by Katherine Op- 
penheimer, AEC, Hearing, pp. 10, 571-574. Communication from Robert Serber, 
August 1979. 

60. Myer Solis-Cohen, “‘The American Descendants of Samuel Binswanger’”’ 
(n.p., 1957), p. 9, Coa-Com File, Box 24, Oppenheimer Papers. Harvard College, 
Class of 1926, Twenty-fifth Anniversary Report (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Printing Office, 1951). Telegram from Molly and Ernest Lawrence to Oppenheimer, 
November 1, 1940, Folder 9, Carton 14, Ernest O. Lawrence Papers, Bancroft Li- 
brary, University of California, Berkeley, Cal. 

61. Oppenheimer to Nichols, March 4, 1954, and testimony by Katherine Op- 
penheimer, AEC, Hearing, pp. 11, 921. 

62. Interview with John T. Edsall by Charles Weiner, July 16, 1975, p. 40. 

63. New York Times, September 25, 1941, p. 27; September 26, 1941, p. 25; Sep- 
tember 28, 1941, p. 8; October 2, 1941, p. 27. 

64. Testimony by J. Robert Oppenheimer, AEC, Hearing, p. 131. 


IV. ‘‘These terrible years of war’’ 


1. Interview with Paul Horgan by Alice Kimball Smith, March 3, 1976, p. 33. 

2. This history is covered in the early chapters of Richard G. Hewlett and Oscar 
E. Anderson, Jr., A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, vol. 1: The 
New World, 1939-1946 (University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press, 
1962). 

3. Lawrence to Compton, October 14, 1941, and October 17, 1941, Folder 19, 
Carton 27, Ernest O. Lawrence Papers, Bancroft Library, University of California, 
Berkeley, Cal. Oppenheimer to Compton, December 8, 1941, Folder 19, Carton 27, 
Lawrence Papers. 

4. Millikan to Oppenheimer, March 25, 1942, Box 25.1, Robert A. Millikan 
Papers, California Institute of Technology Archives, Millikan Library, Pasadena, 
Cal. 

5. Interview with John H. Manley by Alice Kimball Smith, December 30, 1975, 


pp. 1-3. 


Notes to Pages 224-246 


6. Interview with Robert F. Bacher by Alice Kimball Smith, March 16, 1978. 

7. Conversation with John H. Van Vleck, May 30, 1978. 

8. Oppenheimer to Manley, July 1, 1942, Manley Correspondence from Op- 
penheimer File, Box 50, J. Robert Oppenheimer Papers, Manuscript Division, Li- 
brary of Congress, Washington, D.C. 

9. Manhattan District History: Project Y, the Los Alamos Project, vol. 1: David 
Hawkins, Inception until August 1945 (Los Alamos: Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 
Report LAMS-2532, vol. 1, December 1, 1961);1.3 (hereafter cited as Los Alamos 
Project, vol. 1). 

10. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, p. 104. Arthur H. Compton, Atomic 
Quest (New York: Oxford University Press, 1956), pp. 127-128. 

11. Interview with Manley, December 30, 1975, p. 3. 

12. For a detailed discussion of the planning and operation of the Los Alamos 
Laboratory, see Hewlett and Anderson, New World, chap. 7; Los Alamos Project, vol. 
1, chap. 1. 

13. Edwin M. McMillan and Elsie B. McMillan, “‘Early Days at Los Alamos” 
(unpublished manuscript of talks given at the University of California at Santa Bar- 
bara, February 20, 1975), pp. 2-3. 

14. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, pp. 34, 41-42. 

15. Leslie R. Groves, Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1962), pp. 61-63. 

16. Oppenheimer to Hans A. Bethe, October 19, 1942, Bethe File, Box 20, Op- 
penheimer Papers. 

17. For the background of the Seaborg—Oppenheimer exchange see Hewlett 
and Anderson, New World, pp. 109-110. 

18. According to McMillan, when Groves and Dudley were in Berkeley on 
November 1 and again on November 4, the Los Alamos site had not been selected; 
McMillan and McMillan, “Early Days,”’ p. 4. 

19. Groves’ account places the trip in October; Now It Can Be Told, pp. 63-67. 
The November 16 date was established by McMillan on the basis of Dudley’s travel 
records; McMillan and McMillan, ‘“‘Early Days,” p. 5. The Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion’s historians also place it in mid-November (Hewlett and Anderson, New World, 
p. 229), which fits Oppenheimer’s statement to Manley that he and McMillan were 
going ‘‘next week.”’ 

20. McMillan and McMillan, “Early Days,’’ pp. 6-9. Groves later wrote 
McMillan that he had never heard of the Los Alamos site until Oppenheimer sug- 
gested it on November 16; ibid., p. 7. Hewlett and Anderson state that Los Alamos 
was already on Dudley’s list; New World, p. 229. 

21. Peggy Pond Church, The House at Otowi Bridge: The Story of Edith Warner 
and Los Alamos (Albuquerque, N.M.: University of New Mexico Press, 1959), chaps. 
1, 12. Roland A Pettitt, Los Alamos —Before the Dawn (Los Alamos, N.M.: Pajarito 
Publications, 1972), pp. 47-58. 

22. Bethe to Oppenheimer, December 22, 1942, Bethe File, Box 20, Oppen- 
heimer Papers. 

23. Bernice Brode, ‘‘Tales of Los Alamos,’’ Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory 
Community News, June 2, 1960, through September 22, 1960. Laura Fermi, Atoms in 


Notes to Pages 246-266 


the Family: My Life with Enrico Fermi (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1954), 
chaps. 20-23. Eleanor Jette, Inside Box 1663 (Los Alamos, N.M.: Los Alamos His- 
torical Society, 1977) McMillan and McMillan, “Early Days.’’ Unless otherwise 
indicated, comments on community life at Los Alamos are based on the recollec- 
tions of one of the editors, Alice Smith, who lived there from July 1943 to January 
1946. 

24. This letter is printed in full in Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, app. 1, pp. 313-315. 

25. Interview with Bacher, March 16, 1978. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, 
pp. 230-232. 

26. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 1.10. 

27. McMillan and McMillan, “Early Days,”’ p. 3. 

28. Interview with Priscilla Duffield by Alice Kimball Smith, January 2, 1976. 

29. Interview with Dorothy McKibbin by Alice Kimball Smith, January 1, 


30. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 1.26—1.51. 

31. Ibid., 1.52—1.93. 

32. Communication from John H. Manley, June 11, 1979. 

33. Roosevelt to Oppenheimer, June 29, 1943, F.D. Roosevelt File, Box 62, Op- 
penheimer Papers. 

34. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 1.26, 3.16, 7.21. 

35. Interview with Bacher, March 16, 1978. 

36. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 3.20. 

37. See especially memorandum from Lt. Col. Boris T. Pash to Lt. Col. John 
Lansdale, Jr., June 29, 1943, in U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of J. 
Robert Oppenheimer: Transcript of Hearing before Personnel Security Board, Washington, 
D.C., April 12, 1954, through May 6, 1954 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing 
Office, 1954), pp. 821-822 (hereafter cited as AEC, Hearing). For Oppenheimer’s 
1954 testimony and records of the 1943 interrogations, see ibid., pp. 143-149, 845- 
886; and Haakon Chevalier, Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship (New York: 
George Braziller, 1965), pp. 44-47. For a discussion of the security angle of the June 
1943 trip to Berkeley, see Philip M. Stern with Harold P. Green, The Oppenheimer 
Case: Security on Trial (New York: Harper & Row, 1969), pp. 47-48. 

38. Interview with Manley, December 30, 1975, p. 8. 

39. Interview with Duffield, January 2, 1976. 

40. Memorandum from Oppenheimer to Bethe, Bloch, Rossi, Segre, Staub, 
Teller, Weisskopf, August 9, 1943, Folder 380.01, Military Records, MED, National 
Archives, Washington, D.C. 

41. Conversation with Cyril S. Smith. 

42. Hans A. Bethe, ““Oppenheimer: ‘Where He Was There Was Always Life 
and Excitement,’”’ Science, 155 (March 3, 1967): 1082. 

43. Interview with Duffield, January 2, 1976. 

44. On salaries at Los Alamos see Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 3.37-3.41, 3.56— 
3.58. 

45. Sproul to Oppenheimer, October 4, 1943, President’s Files, University Ar- 
chives, Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley, Cal. Groves to Oppen- 
heimer, September 24, 1943, Groves File, Box 36, Oppenheimer Papers. A memo 


Notes to Pages 266-290 


from Oppenheimer to Groves, October 13, 1943, suggests that the salary remained 
unchanged; R. G. Sproul File, Box 69, Oppenheimer Papers. 

46. Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action (New York: William Morrow & Co., 
1970), p. 282. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, chap. 8. Margaret Gowing, Britain 
and Atomic Energy, 1939-1945 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1964), chaps. 4, 5, 9, 
and app. 4, ‘‘Articles of Agreement Governing Collaboration between the Author- 
ities of the U.S.A. and the U.K. in the matter of Tube Alloys.” 

47. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, graph 1, p. 297. 

48. Birge to Oppenheimer, November 26, 1943, Birge File, Box 20, Oppen- 
heimer Papers. 

49. Gowing, Britain and Atomic Energy, pp. 248-250. 

50. Quoted in Alice Kimball Smith, A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’ Movement 
in America, 1945-1947 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965), p. 6. 

51. Ibid., pp. 6-13. Gowing, Britain and Atomic Energy, pp. 347-366. Martin J. 
Sherwin, A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1975), pp. 105-110. 

52. Gowing, Britain and Atomic Energy, p. 261. 

53. Quoted in ibid., p. 262. 

54. Interview with Rudolf Peierls by Alice Kimball Smith, March 4, 1975. 

55. Ilse Meyers to Oppenheimer, May 20, 1962, Me file, Box 48, Oppenheimer 


56. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 8.4-8.14 

57. Sometime before her death in 1951 Miss Warner told this story to Dorothy 
McKibbin; interview with McKibbin, January 1, 1976. See also Church, House at 
Otowi Bridge, pp. 29-31. 

58. Birge to Oppenheimer, September 23, 1944, Raymond T. Borge Folder, 
General File, Lawrence Papers. 

59. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 9.1-—9.17. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, pp. 
246-254. 

60. Conant to Oppenheimer, October 20, 1944, Record Group 227, OSRD, S-1 
Committee, Bush—Conant File, Box 3033, National Archives, Washington, D.C. 

61. Communication from Philip Morrison, August 1979. Remarks at Memorial 
Service for President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Los Alamos, April 15, 1945, Folder 9, 
Carton 14, Lawrence Papers. 

62. Pauli to Oppenheimer, April 16, 1945, W. Pauli File, Box 56, Oppenheimer 
Papers. 

63. Birge to Oppenheimer, May 9, 1945, and Oppenheimer to Birge, May 14, 
1945, University of California: 1943-47 File, Box 230, Oppenheimer Papers. 

64. Kenneth T. Bainbridge, “‘Orchestrating the Test,”’ in All in Our Time: The 
Reminiscences of Twelve Nuclear Pioneers, ed. Jane Wilson (Chicago: Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, 1975), pp. 209-211. 

65. Oppenheimer to Groves, October 20, 1962, Groves File, Box 36, Oppen- 
heimer Papers. Lansing Lamont states that one evening when Bainbridge phoned 
Oppenheimer that the Alamogordo site had been chosen and a code name was 
needed, Oppenheimer happened to be reading a John Donne sonnet which begins: 
‘Batter my heart, three person’d God: for you/ As yet but knock, breathe, shine, and 


Notes to Pages 290-305 


seek to mend.”’ Lamont does not give his source; Day of Trinity (New York: Athe- 
neum, 1965), p. 70. As of January 9, 1979, Bainbridge in a conversation with Alice 
Kimball Smith was unable to confirm the story of the phone call. 

66. Interview with Frank Oppenheimer by Charles Weiner, February 9, 1973, 
p. 87. 

67. Smith, A Peril, pp. 60-62. 

68. For portions of this, known as the Jeffries Report, see ibid., app. A. 

69. Oppenheimer to Tolman, September 20, 1944, OSRD Committee on Post 
War Policy, Box 186, Oppenheimer Papers. 

70. Sherwin, A World Destroyed, pp. 229-230. 

71. Ibid., pp. 202—209. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, pp. 356-359. 

72. Sherwin, World Destroyed, app. L, “‘Notes of the Interim Committee Meet- 
ing, May 31, 1945,” p. 299. 

73. Ibid., pp. 202—216 and app. L. Hewlett and Anderson, New World, pp. 356- 
360, 365-369. Smith, A Peril, pp. 41-50. 

74. Principal sources for descriptions of the test are the eyewitness accounts of 
well-briefed New York Times reporter William L. Laurence and Brig. Gen. Thomas 
F. Farrell of Groves’ staff; New York Times, September 26, 1945, pp. 1, 16; Groves, 
Now It Can Be Told, app. 8, ““Memorandum for the Secretary of War, July 18, 1945,” 
pp. 435-438. 

75. For a well-documented account of decisions and diplomacy relating to these 
events, see Sherwin, A World Destroyed, passim. 

76. On the reaction at Los Alamos, see Smith, A Peril, pp. 76-77. 


V. ‘‘High promise . . . yet only a stone’s throw from despair”’ 


1. Herbert Childs, An American Genius: The Life of Ernest Orlando Lawrence 
(New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., 1968), p. 366. 

2. Manhattan District History: Project Y: the Los Alamos Project, vol. 1: David 
Hawkins, Inception until August 1945 (Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory Report, 
LAMS-2532, vol. 1, December 1, 1961), 3.59-—3.81 passim. 

3. The approximate date assigned to this letter is based on the internal evidence 
that it was written during the Perro Caliente vacation and in time for Millikan to 
respond to its contents in a letter of August 31. 

4. Millikan to Oppenheimer, August 31, 1945 (p. 1 dated 1941, p. 2 correctly 
dated 1945), California Institute of Technology: 1941-47 File, Box 230, Oppen- 
heimer Papers. Millikan to Tolman, July 31, 1945, Box 28.8, Millikan Papers. 

5. Childs, American Genius, pp. 371-373, 376. 

6. Raymond T. Birge, “History of the Physics Department,’’ mimeographed 
(Berkeley, Cal.: University of California, n.d.), vol. 5: ‘““The Period 1942—1950,”’ 
chap. 17, p. 6. 

7. For an extended account, see Alice Kimball Smith, A Peril and a Hope: The 
Scientists’ Movement in America, 1945-1947 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1965), chap. 2. 

8. Ibid., pp. 88-90. 

9. Ibid., pp. 116-120, 144. 

10. Wilson to Lauritsen, October 24, 1945, carbon copy in Box 1.9, Charles C. 


9 


Notes to Pages 308 —332 


Lauritsen Papers, California Institute of Technology Archives, Millikan Library, 
Pasadena, Cal. 

11. Quoted in Birge, “Physics Department,” vol. 5, chap. 17, p. 9. 

12. Telegram from Oppenheimer to Houston, October 16, 1945, California In- 
stitute of Technology: 1941-47 File, Box 230, Oppenheimer Papers. 

13. Millikan to Oppenheimer, February 20, 1946, California Institute of Tech- 
nology: 1941-47 File, Box 230, Oppenheimer Papers. Childs, American Genius, pp. 
375-376. — 

14. Birge, “Physics Department,” vol. 5, chap. 17, p. 11. 

15. Interview with J. Robert Oppenheimer by Thomas S. Kuhn, November 20, 
1963, p. 32. 

16. Einstein to Oppenheimer, September 29, 1945, as quoted in Einstein on 
Peace, ed. Otto Nathan and Heinz Norden (London: Methuen & Co., 1963), pp. 
338-339. 

17. Ibid., p. 338. New York Herald Tribune, September 26, 1945, pp. 1, 12. 
Smith, A Peril, pp. 451-460. 

18. Los Alamos Project, vol. 1, 20.7. 

19. For a fuller discussion of Oppenheimer’s involvement with the May—John- 
son bill and the initial stages of the postwar scientists’ movement, see Smith, A Peril, 
chap. 3 passim. 

20. An eight-page, undated, printed copy is entitled, ‘‘A Speech Given by J. R. 
Oppenheimer at a Meeting of the Association of Los Alamos Scientists, Los Alamos, 
New Mexico, November 2, 1945.’ Los Alamos Scientists, Association of, Novem- 
ber 2, 1945 File, Box 262, Oppenheimer Papers. Below the title was printed the 
following: ‘‘This material is not for public release. A revised version will probably 
appear soon in one of the scientific journals.’’ The editors have found no evidence 
of such publication. 


Epilogue 


1. Interview with Francis Fergusson by Alice Kimball Smith, April 23, 1975. 

2. A list of government committees and panels on which Oppenheimer served 
was prepared for the Atomic Energy Commission’s Personnel Security Board in 
1954; see Security Case File, 1953-1967, Boxes 198 and 199, J. Robert Oppenheimer 
Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 

3. U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: 
Transcript of Hearing before Personnel Security Board, Washington, D.C. April 12, 1954, 
through May 6, 1954 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1954). 

4. Philip M. Stern, with the collaboration of Harold P. Green, The Oppenheimer 
Case: Security on Trial (New York.: Harper and Row, 1969). 

5. Ibid, p. 457. Kipphardt’s play, written in German, was first performed in 
Germany in 1964. An English translation, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer, was 
published in New York in 1968 by Hill and Wang. 

6. Interview with Fergusson by Alice Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976. Interview 
with Harold Cherniss by Alice Kimball Smith, April 21, 1976, pp. 23-24. 

7. Oppenheimer’s original words, jotted down when he thought the award 


Notes to Page 332 


would come from President Kennedy, read “some charity, some courage, and some 
humor.” He showed this draft to Alice Kimball Smith the evening after Kennedy 
was shot. 

8. Hans A. Bethe, “Oppenheimer: ‘Where He Was There Was Always Life and 
Excitement,’’’ Science, 155 (3 March 1967): 1081. Freeman Dyson provides illuminat- 
ing perspectives on Oppenheimer’s style and role at the institute in his autobiography, 
Disturbing the Universe (New York: Harper and Row, 1979), pp. 69-83. 

9. Science and the Common Understanding (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1954). The Open Mind (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1955). 


Sources and Style 


Letters 


Letters appearing in this volume are listed below by number, recipient, date, and 
source. Unless otherwise indicated, all letters were written by Robert Oppenheimer. 
If no source is given, letters were obtained from the recipient; copies of most of 
them have been deposited as a supplement to the Oppenheimer collection in the 
Library of Congress. 


. Herbert W. Smith, October 2, 1922 

. Herbert W. Smith, November 14, 1922 

. Herbert W. Smith, January 6, 1923 

Herbert W. Smith, January 12, 1923 

Herbert W. Smith, January 21, 1923 

. Herbert W. Smith, January 28, 1923 

. Herbert W. Smith, February 11, 1923 

. Herbert W. Smith, February 18, 1923 

. Herbert W. Smith, March 31, 1923 

. Herbert W. Smith, May 2, 1923 

. Herbert W. Smith, May 15, 1923 

12. Edwin C. Kemble, May 24, 1923, Physics Laboratory Papers, Harvard 
University Archives 

13. Herbert W. Smith, May 30, 1923 

14. Francis Fergusson, June 14, 1923 

15. Francis Fergusson, July 17, 1923 

16. Francis Fergusson, August 16, 1923 

17. Francis Fergusson, September 16, 1923 

18. Francis Fergusson, September 28, 1923 

19. Paul Horgan, September 28, 1923 

20. Paul Horgan, October 6, 1923 

21. Herbert W. Smith, October 6, 1923 

22. Paul Horgan, [October 1923] 

23. Herbert W. Smith, November 2, 1923 

24. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. November 1923] 

25. Herbert W. Smith, December 1, 1923 

26. Herbert W. Smith, [winter 1923-24] 

27. Francis Fergusson, Christmas, 1923 

28. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. January 22, 1924] 

29. Herbert W. Smith, [late winter 1924] 

30. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. March 1924?] 

31. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. April 10, 1924] 

32. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. October 1924] 

33. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. January 1925] 


— — 
POWOMINIAMAWNE 


Sources and Style 


. Herbert W. Smith, February 25, [1925] 

. Francis Fergusson, April 25, [1925] 

. Percy W. Bridgman, June 13, 1925, Bridgman Papers, Harvard Archives 

. R. E. Priestley, [ca. June 1925], Board of Graduate Studies, University of 


Cambridge 


. Percy W. Bridgman, June 29, 1925, Bridgman Papers, Harvard Archives 
. Francis Fergusson, July 20, [1925] 

. Herbert W. Smith, [ca. August 8, 1925] ; 

. Percy W. Bridgman, August 29, 1925, Bridgman Papers, Harvard Archives 
. R. E. Priestley, August 30, 1925, Board of Graduate Studies, Cambridge 
. Percy W. Bridgman, September 5, 1925, Bndgman Papers, Harvard 


Archives 


. R. E. Priestley, September 16, 1925, Board of Graduate Studies, Cambridge 
. Francis Fergusson, November 1, [1925] 

. Francis Fergusson, November 15, [1925] 

. Herbert W. Smith, December 11, [1925] 

. Francis Fergusson, January 23, [1926] 

. Francis Fergusson, March 7,[1926] 

. Frank Oppenheimer, [ca. late spring 1926] 

. R. E. Priestley, August 18, 1926, Board of Graduate Studies, Cambridge 

. Francis Fergusson, November 14, [1926] 

. Edwin C. Kemble, November 27, [1926], Archive for History of Quantum 


Physics (AHQP) 


. Percy W. Bridgman, February 12, [1927], Bridgman Papers, Harvard 


Archives 


. George Uhlenbeck, March 12, [1927], AHQP 
. Paul Dirac, November 28, [1927], Dirac Papers, Churchill College Library, 


University of Cambridge 


. Edwin C. Kemble, February 16, [1928], AHQP 

. Frank Oppenheimer, [March 1928] 

. Theodore Lyman, April 21, 1928, Physics Papers, Harvard Archives 

. Theodore Lyman, May 7, 1928, Physics Papers, Harvard Archives 

. Percy W. Bridgman, May 16, 1928, Bridgman Papers, Harvard Archives 

. International Education Board, August 2, [1928], International Education 


Board Papers (IEB), Rockefeller Archive Center 


. Research Fellowship Board in Physics, August 25, 1928, IEB Papers 

. Frank Oppenheimer, December 30, [1928] 

. International Education Board, January 3, 1929, IEB Papers 

. W. J. Robbins, January 23, 1929, IEB Papers 

. W. J. Robbins, February 4, 1929, IEB Papers 

. Robert A. Millikan, February 12, 1929, Millikan Papers, California Institute 


of Technology Archives 


. Frank Oppenheimer, May 6, [1929] 

. W. J. Robbins, May 14, [1929], IEB Papers 

. Frank Oppenheimer, September 7, [1929] 

. Frank Oppenheimer, October 14, [1929] 

. Frank Oppenheimer (from Julius Oppenheimer), March 11, 1930 


103. 


104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 


110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 


Letters 


. Frank Oppenheimer, March 12, [1930] 
. Frank Oppenheimer, August 10, [1931] 
. Ernest O. Lawrence, October 12, [1931], Lawrence Papers, Bancroft Li- 


brary, University of California, Berkeley 


. Ernest O. Lawrence, October 16, [1931], Lawrence Papers 

. George Uhlenbeck, November 29, 1931 

. Ernest O. Lawrence, January 3, 1932, Lawrence Papers 

. Frank Oppenheimer, [ca. January 1932] 

. Frank Oppenheimer (from Julius Oppenheimer), January 18, 1932 

. Frank Oppenheimer, March 12, [1932] 

. Frank Oppenheimer, [ca. fall 1932] 

. Robert A. Millikan, March 5, 1933, Millikan Papers 

. Niels Bohr, June 14, 1933, Niels Bohr Scientific Correspondence, Niels 


Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen 


. Frank Oppenheimer, October 7, [1933] 

. George Uhlenbeck, [fall 1933], AHQP 

. Frank Oppenheimer, January 7, [1934] 

. Theodore von Karman, [ca. March 1934], von Karman Papers, California 


Institute of Technology Archives 


. George Uhlenbeck, [ca. March 1934], AHQP 

. Ernest O. Lawrence, [April 30?, 1934], Lawrence Papers 

. Edwin A. Uehling, May 12, [1934] 

. Frank Oppenheimer, June 4, [1934] 

. Frank Oppenheimer, July 31, [1934] 

. George Uhlenbeck, [ca. fall 1934], AHQP 

. Frank Oppenheimer, January 11, [1935] 

. Ernest O. Lawrence, [ca. early spring 1935], Lawrence Papers 
. Robert A. Millikan, April 19, 1937, Millikan Papers 

. Ernest O. Lawrence, [April 1937], Lawrence Papers 

. George Uhlenbeck, June 29, [1937] 

101. 
102. 


Louise Oppenheimer Singer, October 21, [1937] 

Robert Oppenheimer (from Niels Bohr), December 20, 1937, Niels Bohr 
Scientific Correspondence 

Mildred Edie, May 29, [1938], Center for the Study of the Consumer Move- 

ment, Consumers Union, Mount Vernon, N.Y. 

Robert A. Millikan, January 1, [1939], Millikan Papers 

William A. Fowler, [January 28?, 1939] 

George Uhlenbeck, February 5, [1939] 

Louise Oppenheimer Singer, April 26, [1939] 

William A. Fowler, [September 9, 1939] 

F. Wheeler Loomis, May 13, 1940, Physics Department Records, Archives, 
University of Illinois, Urbana 

Ruth and Edwin Uehling, July 4, [1940] 

William A. Fowler, [spring 1941] 

Edwin and Ruth Uehling, May 17, [1941] 

F. R. Coudert, Jr., October 13, 1941, Franz Boas Papers, American Philo- 
sophical Society Library 


Sources and Style 


114. Ernest O. Lawrence, November 12, 1941, Lawrence Papers 

115. Robert A. Millikan, March 20, [1942], Millikan Papers 

116. Robert F. Bacher, June 10, 1942, J. Robert Oppenheimer Papers, Manuscript 
Division, Library of Congress 

117. John H. Van Vleck, June 10, 1942, Oppenheimer Papers 

118. Edward Teller, September 11, 1942, Oppenheimer Papers 

119. John H. Manley, October 12, 1942, Oppenheimer Papers 

120. Robert Oppenheimer (from Glenn T..Seaborg), November 3, 1942, Op- 
penheimer Papers 

121. Glenn T. Seaborg, November 6, 1942, Oppenheimer Papers 

122. John H. Manley, November 6, 1942, Oppenheimer Papers 

123. James B. Conant, November 30, 1942, Records of the Office of Scientific 
Research and Development (OSRD), Record Group 227, National 
Archives 

124. Hans and Rose Bethe, December 28, 1942, Oppenheimer Papers 

125. James B. Conant, February 1, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

126. I. I. Rabi, February 26, 1943, OSRD Records 

127. Enrico Fermi, March 11, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

128. Robert Bacher, memorandum, April 28, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

129. Leslie R. Groves, memorandum, April 30, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

130. Wolfgang Pauli, May 20, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

131. Robert Oppenheimer (from Wolfgang Pauli), June 19, 1943, Oppenheimer 
Papers 

132. Franklin D. Roosevelt, July 9, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

133. Richard C. Tolman, July 23, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

134. Robert Oppenheimer (from Leslie R. Groves), July 29, 1943, Oppénheimer 
Papers 

135. Robert G. Sproul, September 18, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

136. Leslie R. Groves, November 2, 1943, Oppenheimer Papers 

137. Raymond T. Birge, November 4, 1943, Lawrence Papers 

138. Leslie R. Groves, January 17, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

139. Leslie R. Groves, February 14, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

140. Anne and Hilde Meyers, April 5, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

141. Peer de Silva, April 21, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

142. Raymond T. Birge, May 26, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

143. Leslie R. Groves, June 27, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

144. James B. Conant, August 3, 1944, OSRD Records 

145. Hedwig Stern, August 25, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

146. Leslie R. Groves, August 30,1944, Manhattan Engineer District, Military 
Records, National Archives 

147. Leslie R. Groves, August 31, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

148. Raymond T. Birge, September 27, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

149. Raymond T. Birge, October 5, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

150. Leslie R. Groves, October 6, 1944, Oppenheimer Papers 

151. Wolfgang Pauli, April 16, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

152. Secretary of War, August 17, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

153. Monroe E. Deutsch, August 24, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 


Interviews 


154. Lee Oppenheimer, August 25, [1945] 

155. Herbert W. Smith, August 26, [1945] 

156. Frederick Bernheim, August 27, [1945] 

157. Charles C. Lauritsen, [ca. August 27, 1945], Oppenheimer Papers 

158. Ernest O. Lawrence, August 30, 1945, Lawrence Papers 

159. Marcelle Bier; August 31, 1945 

160. George L. Harrison, September 9, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

161. Robert G. Sproul, September 29, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

162. Raymond T. Birge, September 29, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

163. James B. Conant, September 29, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

164. Albert Einstein, October 10, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

165. David Dow, October 29, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

166. Charlotte Serber, November 2, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 

167. Robert Oppenheimer (from Edith Warner), November 25, 1945, Oppen- 
_ heimer Papers 

Speech by Robert Oppenheimer to Association of Los Alamos Scientists, No- 

vember 2, 1945, Oppenheimer Papers 


Some of Robert Oppenheimer’s pre-1942 letters were handwritten; others he 
typed himself. Almost all of the letters after 1942 were typed by a secretary; most of 
those from the Library of Congress collection are carbon copies. Misspellings and 
typographical errors have been silently corrected, and punctuation has been changed 
in some instances. Oppenheimer’s British usage, Germanic word order, and French, 
Spanish, and German words have been retained. Deletions of portions of letters are 
indicated by ellipses; brackets have been used around dates, surnames, signatures, 
and other information supplied by the editors. Oppenheimer’s scientific writings are 
identified in the letters and commentary by year and order of publication, for exam- 
ple: [1927e]. Full citations are given in the list of Scientific Papers. 


Interviews 


Some of the interviews conducted for this edition were intended as a permanent 
oral history archive which will be useful to scholars working on related topics. These 
interviews were tape recorded, transcribed, sent to the interviewee for review and 
correction, and returned with permission to deposit the final typed copy in the oral 
history collection of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Libraries. In addi- 
tion, use has been made of oral history interviews conducted in the early 1960s for 
the Archive for History of Quantum Physics and in the period 1964-1974 for the 
Center for History of Physics of the American Institute of Physics. 

Interviews deposited in archives and used in preparing the commentaries in this 
volume are: * 


Carl D. Anderson by Charles Weiner (CW), June 30, 1966, AIP 

Frederick Bernheim by CW, October 27, 1975, MIT 

William C. Boyd by Alice Kimball Smith (AKS), December 21, 1975, MIT 
Harold Cherniss by AKS, April 21, 1976, MIT 

John T. Edsall by CW, July 16, 1975, MIT 

Paul Horgan by AKS, March 3, 1976, MIT 

John H. Manley by AKS, December 30, 1975, MIT 


Sources and Style 


Philip Morrison by CW, February 7, 1967, AIP 

Frank Oppenheimer by CW, February 9, 1973, AIP 

J. Robert Oppenheimer by Thomas S. Kuhn, November 18, 1963, and No- 
vember 20, 1963, AHQP 

Robert Serber by CW and Gloria Lubkin, February 10, 1967, AIP 

Jeffries Wyman by CW, May 28, 1975, MIT 


*AHQP: Archive for History of Quantum Physics, available at the following repositories: 
American Institute of Physics, New York; American Philosophical Society Library, Philadel- 
phia; Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley; Tate Laboratory of Physics, Uni- 
versity of Minnesota, Minneapolis; Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen. 

AIP: Center for History of Physics, American Institute of Physics, New York. 

MIT: Institute Archives and Special Collections, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Libraries, Cambridge. 


In addition, interviews were conducted by the editors during the period 
1975-1978 with the following persons (transcripts or notes are retained by the 
editors): 


Helen C. Allison 
Robert F. Bacher 
Ruth Meyer Cherniss 
Margaret H. Compton 
Priscilla Duffield 
Francis Fergusson 
Jane Didisheim Kayser 
Babette Oppenheimer Langsdorf 
Dorothy McKibbin 
Jeannette Mirsky 
Philip Morrison 

Leo Nedelsky 

Frank Oppenheimer 
Peter Oppenheimer 
Yvonne Blumenthal Pappenheim 
Rudolf Peierls 

Melba Phillips 

Inez Pollak 

Robert Serber 

Herbert W. Smith 
George Stevens 
Edwin A. Uehling 
Ruth Vehling 

Else Uhlenbeck 
George Uhlenbeck 


Ellipses in quotations from interviews indicate omissions 1n the interviewee’s 
statements; brackets indicate substitutions or additions to clarify meaning or to pro- 
vide continuity. Page numbers are cited when a typed transcript of the interview has 
been deposited. 


1926a 


1926b 
1926c 
1926d 
1927a 
1927b 
1927c 
1927d 


1927e 


1928a 
1928b 
1928c 


*1928d 
1928e 


1928f 
1929 

*1930a 
1930b 


1930c 


Scientific Papers by 
Robert Oppenheimer 


On the quantum theory of vibration-rotation bands. Proceedings of the Cam- 
bridge Philosophical Society, 23 (1925-1927): 327-335 (received May 24, 
1926). 

On the quantum theory of the problem of the two bodies. Proc. Camb. Phil. 
Soc., 23 (1925-1927): 422—431 (read July 26, 1926). 

Quantum theory and intensity distribution in continuous spectra. Nature, 
118 (November 27, 1926): 771 (dated October 30, 1926). 

Quantentheorie des  kontinuierlichen Absorptionsspecktrums. Natur- 
wissenschaften, 14 (December 24, 1926): 1282 (dated November 1, 1926). 

Zur Quantentheorie kontinuierlicher Spektren. Zeitschrift fur Physik, 41 
(1927): 268-293 (received December 24, 1926). 

Zur Quantenmechanik der Richtungsentartung. Zeit. f. Phys., 43 (1927): 
27-46 (received March 8, 1927). 

Bemerkung zur Zerstreuung der a-Teilchen. Zeit. f. Phys., 43 (1927): 
413-415 (received Apmil 30, 1927). 

Zur Quantentheorie der Molekeln (with M. Born). Annalen der Physik, 4th 
ser., 84 (1927): 457-484 (received August 25, 1927). 

On the quantum theory of the polarization of impact radiation. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 13 (December 15, 1927): 800-805 (com- 
municated October 26, 1927). 

Three notes on the quantum theory of aperiodic effects. Physical Review, 31 
(January 1928): 66-81 (dated August 1927). 

On the quantum theory of the capture of electrons. Phys. Rev., 31 (March 
1928): 349-356 (dated December 1927). 

On the quantum theory of the Ramsauer effect. Proc. N. A. S., 14 (March 
15, 1928): 261-262 (communicated February 21, 1928). 

On the quantum theory of field currents. Phys. Rev., 31 (May 1928): 914. 

On the quantum theory of the autoelectric field currents. Proc. N. A. S., 14 
(May 15, 1928): 363-365 (communicated March 28, 1928). 

On the quantum theory of electronic impacts. Phys. Rev., 32 (September 
1928): 361-376 (dated May 1928). 

Uber die Strahlung der freien Elektronen im Coulombfeld. Zeit. f. Phys., 
55 (1929): 725-737 (received May 6, 1929). 

Why does molecular hydrogen reach equilibrium so slowly? (with H. Hall). 
Phys. Rev., 35 (January 1, 1930): 132-133. 

Note on the theory of the interaction of field and matter. Phys. Rev., 35 
(March 1, 1930): 461-477 (received November 12, 1929). 

On the theory of electrons and protons. Phys. Rev., 35 (March 1, 1930): 
562—563 (dated February 14, 1930). 


* Abstract of paper presented at meeting of the American Physical Society. 


1930d 
*1931la 


*1931b 
1931c 


1931d 


*1931e 
1931f 
1931g 

*1932a 
1932b 

*1933a 
1933b 
1933c 

*1934a 
1934b 
1934c 

*1934d 
1934e 
1934f 
1934 ¢ 
1935a 


1935b 


Scientific Papers by Robert Oppenheimer 


Two notes on the probability of radiative transitions. Phys. Rev., 35 (April 
15, 1930): 939-947 (received March 4, 1930). 

Selection rules and the angular momentum of light quanta. Phys. Rev., 37 
(January 15, 1931): 231. 

Note on the statistics of nuclei. Phys. Rev., 37 (January 15, 1931): 232-233. 

Note on the statistics of nuclei (with P. Ehrenfest). Phys. Rev., 37 (February 
15, 1931): 333-338 (received December 23, 1930). 

Relativistic theory of the photegelectric effect, part II: Photoelectric absorp- 
tion of ultragamma radiation (with H. Hall). Phys. Rev., 38 (July 1, 1931): 
57-59, 71-79 (received May 7, 1931). 

Photoelectric absorption of ultra-gamma radiation (with H. Hall). Phys. 
Rev., 38 (August 1, 1931): 589. 

Note on light quanta and the electromagnetic field. Phys. Rev., 38 (August 
15, 1931): 725-746 (received June 26, 1931). 

On the range of fast electrons and neutrons (with J. F. Carlson). Phys. Rev., 
38 (November 1, 1931): 1787-1788 (dated October 9, 1931). 

On the range of fast electrons and neutrons (with J. F. Carlson). Phys. Rev., 
39 (March 1, 1932): 864-865. 

The impacts of fast electrons and magnetic neutrons (with J. F. Carlson). 
Phys. Rev., 41 (September 15, 1932): 763-792 (received July 18, 1932). 
The disintegration of lithium by protons of high energy. Phys. Rev., 43 

(March 1, 1933): 380. 

On the production of the positive electron (with M. S. Plesset). Phys. Rev., 
44 July 1, 1933): 53-55 (dated June 9, 1933). 

The production of positives by nuclear gamma-rays (with L. Nedelsky). 
Phys. Rev., 44 (December 1, 1933): 948-949 (dated November 18, 1933). 

On the production of positives by nuclear gamma-rays (with L. Nedelsky). 
Phys. Rev., 45 (January 15, 1934): 136. 

On the theory of the electron and positive (with W. H. Furry). Phys. Rev., 
45 (February 15, 1934): 245-262 (received December 1, 1933). 

The production of positives by nuclear gamma-rays—errata (with L. Ne- 
delsky). Phys. Rev., 45 (February 15, 1934): 283. 

The theory of the electron and positive. Phys. Rev., 45 (February 15, 1934) 
290. 

On the theory of the electron and positive (with W. H. Furry). Phys. Rev., 
45 (March 1, 1934): 343-344 (dated February 12, 1934). 

On the limitations of the theory of the positron (with W. H. Furry). Phys. 
Rev., 45 (June 15, 1934): 903-904 (dated June 2, 1934). 

On the scattering of the Th C” y-rays (with C. C. Lauritsen). Phys. Rev., 4€ 
(July 1, 1934): 80-81 (dated June 12, 1934). 

Are the formulae for the absorption of high energy radiations valid? Phys. 
Rev., 47 January 1, 1935): 44-52 (received November 12, 1934). 

Note on charge and field fluctuations. Phys. Rev., 47 (January 15, 1935): 
144-145 (received December 3, 1934). 


* Abstract of paper presented at meeting of the American Physical Society. 


1935c 


1935d 


1935e 


*1936a 


*1936b 


1937a 


1937b 


1937c 


1937d 


1937e 


1938a 


1938b 


1939a 


1939b 


1939c 


1939d 


1940a 


*1940b 


1941a 


Scientific Papers by Robert Oppenheimer 


Note on the production of pairs by charged particles. Phys. Rev., 47 (Jan- 
uary 15, 1935): 146-147 (received December 3, 1934). 

The disintegration of the deuteron by impact. Phys. Rev., 47 (June 1, 1935): 
845-846 (received March 29, 1935). 

Note on the transmutation function for deuterons (with M. Phillips). Phys. 

“Rev., 48 (September 15, 1935): 500-502 (received July 1, 1935). 

On the elementary interpretation of showers and bursts. Phys. Rev., 50 (Au- 
gust 15, 1936): 389. 

The density of nuclear levels (with R. Serber). Phys. Rev., 50 (August 15, 
1936): 391. 

On multiplicative showers (with J. F. Carlson). Phys. Rev., 51 (February 15, 
1937): 220-231 (received December 8, 1936). 

The disintegration of high energy protons (with G. Nordheim, L. W. Nord- 
heim, and R. Serber). Phys. Rev., 51 (June 15, 1937): 1037-1045 (received 
March 22, 1937). 

Note on the nature of cosmic-ray particles (with R. Serber). Phys. Rev., 51 
(June 15, 1937): 1113 (dated June 1, 1937). 

Note on nuclear photoeffect at high energies (with F. Kalckar and R. 
Serber). Phys. Rev., 52 (August 15, 1937): 273-278 (received May 19, 
1937). 

Note on resonances in transmutations of light nuclei (with F. Kalckar and 
R. Serber). Phys. Rev., 52 (August 15, 1937): 279-282 (received May 19, 
1937). 

Note on boron plus proton reactions (with R. Serber). Phys. Rev., 53 (April 
15, 1938): 636-638 (received February 1, 1938). 

On the stability of stellar neutron cores (with R. Serber). Phys. Rev., 54 (Oc- 
tober 1, 1938): 540 (dated September 1, 1938). 

On massive neutron cores (with G. M. Volkoff). Phys. Rev., 55 (February 
15, 1939): 374-381 (received January 3, 1939). 

Discussion— Behavior of high energy electrons in cosmic radiation by C. G. 
Montgomery and D. D. Montgomery. Reviews of Modern Physics, 11 
(July-October 1939): 264-266. 

On continued gravitational contraction (with H. Snyder). Phys. Rev., 56 
(September 1, 1939): 455-459 (received July 10, 1939). 

On pair emission in the proton bombardment of flourine (with J. S. 
Schwinger). Phys. Rev., 56 (November 15, 1939): 1066-1067 (dated Oc- 
tober 29, 1939). 

The production of soft secondaries by mesotrons (with R. Serber). Phys. 
Rev., 57 (January 15, 1940): 75-81 (received November 3, 1939). 

On the applicability of quantum theory to mesotron collisions. Phys. Rev., 
57 (February 15, 1940): 353. 

On the spin of the mesotron. Phys. Rev., 59 (March 1, 1941): 462 (dated Feb- 
ruary 14, 1941). 


* Abstract of paper presented at meeting of the American Physical Society. 


1941b 
1941c 


*1941d 
*1941e 


*1941f 


"19419 
1941h 


*1942 


1946 


1948a 


1948b 


1949 


1950 


Scientific Papers by Robert Oppenheimer 


On the selection rules in beta-decay. Phys. Rev., 59 (June 1, 1941): 908 
(dated Apmil 25, 1941). 

On the interaction of mesotrons and nuclei (with J. Schwinger). Phys. Rev., 
60 July 15, 1941): 150-152 (received June 19, 1941). 

Internal conversion in photosynthesis. Phys. Rev., 60 (July 15, 1941): 158. 

The high energy soft component of cosmic rays (with R. F. Christy). Phys. 
Rev., 60 (July 15, 1941): 159. 

Multiple production of mesotrons by protons (with E. C. Nelson). Phys. 
Rev., 60 (July 15, 1941): 159-160. 

On the internal pairs from oxygen. Phys. Rev., 60 (July 15, 1941): 164. 

The mesotron and the quantum theory of fields. In Enrico Fermi et al., Nu- 
clear Physics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. Pp. 39-50. 

Pair theories of meson scattering (with E. C. Nelson). Phys. Rev., 61 (Feb- 
ruary 1 and 15, 1942): 202. 

Reaction of radiation on electron scattering and Heitler’s theory of radiation 
damping (with H. A. Bethe). Phys. Rev., 70 (October 1 and 15, 1946): 
451-458. 

The multiple production of mesons (with H. W. Lewis and S. A. Wouthuy- 
sen). Phys. Rev., 73 (January 15, 1948): 127-140 (received October 2, 
1947). 

Note on stimulated decay of negative mesons (with S. T. Epstein, R. J. Fin- 
kelstein). Phys. Rev., 73 (May 15, 1948): 1140-1141 (received February 5, 
1948). 

Discussion on the disintegration and nuclear absorption of mesons: re- 
marks on p-decay. Rev. Mod. Phys., 21 (1949): 34-35. 

Internal conversion in the photosynthetic mechanism of blue green algae 
(with W. Arnold). Journal of General Physiology, 33 (1950): 423-435. 


* Abstract of paper presented at meeting of the American Physical Society. 


Bibliography 


BeTtHE, HANns A. Oppenheimer: where he was there was always life and excitement. 
Science, 155 (March 3, 1967): 1080-1084. 

. J. Robert Oppenheimer 1904-1967. Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of The 
Royal Society, 14 (1968): 391-416. 

BirceE, RAYMOND T. History of the Physics Department. Vols. 3—5 (1928-1950). 
Berkeley: University of California, n.d. (mimeographed). 

CHILDS, HERBERT. An American Genius: The Life of Ernest Orlando Lawrence. New 
York: E. P. Dutton, 1968. 

CHURCH, PEGGY POND. The House at Otowi Bridge: The Story of Edith Warner and Los 
Alamos. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1959. 

COMPTON, ARTHUR H. Atomic Quest. New York: Oxford University Press, 1956. 

GOwING, MARGARET. Britain and Atomic Energy: 1939-1945. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1964. 

Groves, LEstiE R. Now It Can Be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1962. 

HEILBRON, JOHN L. Quantum historiography and the Archive for History of Quan- 
tum Physics. In History of Science: An Annual Review of Literature, Research and 
Teaching, vol. 7. Cambridge: W. Heffer & Sons, 1968. Pp. 90-111. 

HEWLETT, RICHARD G., AND OSCAR E. ANDERSON, JR. The New World, 1939-1946. 
Vol. 1 of A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. University Park: 
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1962. 

KEvLes, DANIEL J. The Physicists. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1978. 

KUHN, THOMAS S., JOHN L. HEILBRON, PAUL FORMAN, AND LINI ALLEN, EDS. Sources 
for History of Quantum Physics: An Inventory and Report. Philadelphia: The American 
Philosophical Society, 1967. 

LAMONT, LANSING. Day of Trinity. New York: Atheneum, 1965. 

Manhattan District History: Project Y: The Los Alamos Project. Vol. 1, David Hawkins, 
Inception until August 1945. Los Alamos: Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory Report 
LAMS-2532, December 1, 1961. 

MICHELMORE, PETER. The Swift Years: The Robert Oppenheimer Story. New York: 
Dodd, Mead, 1969. 

OPPENHEIMER, J. ROBERT. Science and the Common Understanding. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1954. 

. The Open Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1955. 

PEIERLS, RUDOLF. J. Robert Oppenheimer. In Dictionary of Scientific Biography, vol. 10. 
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1974. Pp. 213-218. 

RasI, [.I., ROBERT SERBER, VICTOR F. WEISSKOPF, ABRAHAM PAIS, AND GLENN T. SEA- 
BORG. Oppenheimer. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1969. 

Rossi, BRUNO. Cosmic Rays. New York: McGraw Hill, 1964. 

RoYAL, DENISE. The Story of J Robert Oppenheimer. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
1969. 


Bibliography 


SEIDEL, ROBERT W. Physics research in California: the rise of a leading sector in 
American physics. Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1978. 

SHERWIN, MarTIN J. A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1975. 

SMITH, ALICE KIMBALL. Los Alamos: focus of an age. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
June 1970, pp. 15-20. 


. A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’ Movement in America, 1945-1947. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1965. 


SOPKA, KATHERINE R. Quantum physics in ‘America, 1920-35. Ph.D. diss., Harvard 
University, 1976. 

STERN, PHILIP M., WITH HAROLD P. GREEN. The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 

UNITED STATES ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION. In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: 
Transcript of Hearing before Personnel Security Board, Washington, D.C., April 12, 
1954, through May 6, 1954. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1954. 
Paperback edition, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1971. 

WEINER, CHARLES, ED. History of Twentieth Century Physics. Proceedings of the Inter- 
national School of Physics “Enrico Fermi,”’ course 57. New York: Academic 
Press, 1977. 

. A new site for the seminar: the refugees and American physics in the 1930s. 
In Donald Harnish Fleming and Bernard Bailyn, eds., The Intellectual Migration: 
Europe and America, 1930-1960. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969. 

WILSON, JANE, ED. All in Our Time: The Reminiscences of Twelve Nuclear Pioneers. Chi- 
cago: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 1975. 


Index 


Abelson, Philip H., 208-209, 209n, 230 

Acheson-Lilienthal Report, 310, 328 

Ackley, John Kenneth, 218, 219 

Adler, Felix, 2-3, 8, 137 

Agassiz Museum, Harvard, 17 

Alamogordo, N.M.,see Trinity test 

Albuquerque, N.M.,8 

Allard, Louis, 54,55n 

Allen, Alexander, 248, 249n 

Allison, Samuel K.., 148, 243, 246n, 304 

Alvarez, Luis W., 217 and n, 247, 276, 277n, 
283 

American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, 148n 

American Association of Scientific Workers, 
219, 220, 290 

American Committee for Democracy and 
Intellectual Freedom (ACDIF), 218 

American Philosophical Society, 289 

American Physical Society, 146, 154, 169, 213 

Analysis of Mind (Russell) , 24 

Anatomy of Peace (Reves) , 309 

Anderson, Carl D., 160, 193, 197, 199 

Anderson, Herbert L., 236, 238n 

Ann Arbor, see University of Michigan at Ann 
Arbor 

Anna Karenina (Tolstoy), 70 


365 


Army, U.S.: and contracts for Los Alamos, 
243, 248; living facilities provided by, 
244-245; on commissions for senior scien- 
tists, 247, 249, 256; role of defined, 247-249; 
Special Engineer Detachment, 281. See also 
Groves, Gen. Leslie R.; Military Policy 
Committee 

Artzibasheff, Boris, 42, 43n, 46 

Association of Los Alamos Scientists (ALAS), 
303; statement by, 304-305; JRO’s farewell 
speech to, 315-325, 328 

Association of Oak Ridge Scientists, 305, 310 

Atomic bomb: preliminary work on, 222; and 
OSRD,, 222-223; fast neutron research, 
223-228; centralized laboratory for research 
on, 229, 231; predetonation and problem of 
impurities, 234-235, 239-241; gun device, 
260, 272, 285; implosion, 272-273, 278, 285; 
test of implosion device, 286, 288, 289-290, 
292; views on use of, 290-291; choice of tar- 
gets, 291; proposal to demonstrate only, 292; 
bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 292; 
question of postwar work on, 301; JRO’s 
ALAS talk on impact of, 315-325. See also 
Fission; Los Alamos Laboratory; Trinity test 

Atomic energy, postwar policy on, 293-294, 
JRO’s trips to Washington on, 300-301; 


Index 


differing views on, 303-305, 309-311; JRO's 
views on, 318-322 

Atomic Energy Commission, U.S.: Personnel 
Security Board of, JRO’s 1954 testimony 
cited, 196-197, 219; historians of cited, 249; 
General Advisory Committee of (GAC), 
JRO as chairman, 328-329; JRO's security 
hearing , 329-330; JRO’s clearance with- 
drawn by, 329-330 

Atomic Energy for Military Purposes (Smythe), 
303 

Atomic Scientists of Chicago, 305 

Attlee, Clement R., 301 

Auger, Pierre, 231, 233n 

Austen, Jane, 156 

Auerbach, Matilda, 4, 73 


Baca Location, 158, 159n 

Bach, Johann Sebastian, 140, 182, 191 

Bacher, Jean, 332 

Bacher, Robert F,, 190, 191n, 224, 236, 238n, 
247, 250, 256, 332; onJRO as director of Los 
Alamos, 261; letters to, 225, 254-255 

Badger, Richard M., 111, 112n 

Bainbridge, Kenneth T. , 289-290 

Baker, Dr. Nicholas (pseudonym for Niels 
Bohr), 268, 326 

Barnett, Shirley, 252 

Bartlett, James H., 211, 213n 

Baudelaire, Charles, 43n, 44, 113 

Bay Shore, L.I., Oppenheimer summer home 
at, 8, 21, 26,27, 34, 70, 78; JRO's reaction to, 
34; Horgan’s memories of, 36-37; sold, 108 

Berkeley, Cal.; JRO's houses in, 143, 214; cita- 
tion from, 300. See also California, Univer- 
sity of 

Berkeley Radiation Laboratory, 230, 241 

Bernheim, Frederick, 12, 14-15, 24, 25, 27, 33, 
34,37, 44, 60, 64, 65-66, 69, 74, 87-89; letter 
to, 297-298 

Bethe, Hans, 198, 199n, 226, 228, 242, 250, 
257, 258, 269, 332; on JRO's leadership at 
Los Alamos, 264; on JRO and postwar 
physics, 331; letter to Rose and, 243-246 

Bethe, Rose, 242; letter to Hans and, 243-246 

Bhabha, HomiJ., 198, 199n 

Bhagavad-Gita, 165, 288 

Bier, Marcelle Meyer, 303 

Biology, 152, 153-154, 155 

Birge, Raymond T., 200 and n, 289; on prob- 
lems of Berkeley physics departmental 


staffing , 282-285; on postwar position for 
JRO, 302, 307, 308, 309; letters to, 268-269, 
275-277 , 283-284 , 284-285, 307 
Birkhoff, George D., 68-69 
Blackett, Patrick , 93-94 , 206 
Bloch, Felix, 125, 179, 185, 193, 201, 211, 227, 
232, 254, 259 
Blumenthal, Carl, 133 
Boas, George, 152n, 153n 
Boas, Simone, 152n; 153 
Bohr, Aage, 267, 268 
Bohr, Erik, 202n 
Bohr, Margrethe, 202n 
Bohr, Niels, 96, 105, 155, 326, 332; JRO’s plan 
to do research with, 118, 121; visit delayed, 
122-123 , 128; at Caltech, 161; on field mea- 
surements, 176; on cosmic rays, 183n, 206; 
on theory of compound nucleus, 203-204; at 
Berkeley, 201, 202, 203; in British mission, 
267; as Dr. Baker, 268; visits to Los Alamos, 
269-270, 280; on peacetime atomic research, 
271; Festschrift for, 288-289; on interna- 
tional impact of bomb, 290, 295, 328; on 
future of science, 322; letter to, 161-162; 
letter from 203-204 
Born, Max, 97, 98, 101-102, 104, 107, 163, 
165n, 172; JRO’s doctoral work with, 
102-103; difficulties with theory of, 165, 176, 
181, 183n : 
Bothe, Walther, 204, 205n 
Bowen, IraS., 198, 199n, 206 
Boyd, William Clouser (“Clowser”), 12, 25, 
33-34, 37, 41, 44-45, 57, 60-61, 64, 69, 72, 
74; renewed friendship with, 110, 332 
Bradbury, Norris E., 311 
Bradlcy, Undine, 113 
Breit, Gregory, 178, 223, 224, 232 
Bridges, Harry, 197 
Bridgman, Percy W., 67, 73, 75,77, 102, 111, 
112: influence of, 68, 69; recommendation 
from, 77-78; invitations to Harvard from, 
105, 176; letters to, 76, 78, 82, 83, 104-105, 
115-116 
Briggs, Le Baron Russell, 13 
British atomic weapon research (Tube Alloys), 
233, 237, 238n, 266-267; coordinated by 
Peierls , 271-272; on implosion, 272-273; 
complementary to American, 273 
Broad, Charlie Dunbar, 59, 60n, 67 
Brode, Robert, 182, 183n, 217 and n, 269, 
277n, 283 


Index 


Brothers Karamazov (Dostoevsky), 70 

Broun, Heywood, 59, 60n 

Brown, Frederick W., 178, 179 

Brown, Laurie, 148n 

Buffalo, trip to, 36, 37; JRO's account of, 38 

Buhlig, 182 

Bush, Vannevar, 222 , 228 , 229 , 233, 238n, 243, 
248 , 250, 283-284 

Byrnes, James, 301 


Cabell, James Branch, 14 

California Institute of Technology (Caltech), 
23; first stay at (1928), 111-114; concurrent 
appointment at, 130, 136, 148, 160-161, 194; 
work in physics at, 130-131, 160; Tolman 
at, 134; continued connection with, 177; 
Frank Oppenheimer studying at, 192; JRO’s 
work at in 1935, 193; wartime withdrawal 
from, 223-224; postwar relations with, 
298-299 , 308; professorship at, 308, 311 

California, University of, at Berkeley: job 
offer from, 114, 115, 116; arrival of JRO as 
teacher, 130; state of physics at, 130-131; 
JRO's teaching at, 131, 136; life at, 137, 145; 
renewal of appointment at, 147-148; JRO’s 
methods of teaching at, 149; return to (1932), 
156; state of physics at, 159, 160, 166-168; 
continued residence at, 177, 194; mingling of 
physics and social life, 186-187; investigated 
for unAmerican activities, 215, 216; fast 
neutron research at, 223; summer confer- 
ence on fast neutron research (1942) , 226; 
contracting agent for Los Alamos, 246; 
work on plutonium at,-278; problems of 
staffing physics department, 282-285; letter 
to Provost, 295; postwar situation, 299, 
308-309; JRO’s relations with, 301-302, 306, 
308 

Cambridge, Mass. , 242; JRO’s residences in, 
12, 14-15, 38, 43-44 

Cambridge, University of, 66, 168; JRO's 
admission to Christ’s, 67, 70; conditions for 
study, 75-76; Board of Research Studies 
(Priestley), 76-77 , 82-83, 84-85 , 97-98; 
applications to Rutherford, 76-78; JRO's 
adjustment to, 86-88, 91-94; JRO’s work 
with Thomson at, 88-89; JRO’s shift to 
theoretical physics at, 97; later work at, 118; 
Frank Oppenheimer at, 162, 170, 179, 180, 
192; JRO’s advice concerning, 163 

Camp, Glen, 186 


Camp, Ilva, 186 

Campbell, Helen, 113 

Cape Ann, Mass., 24, 25 

Cape Cod, Mass., 64, 71 

Cario, Dr. (of Gottingen), 103 

Cario, Gunther, 103 

Carlson, J. Franklin, 147, 148, 167, 213; work 
with JRO, 197, 198 

Cassen, Benedict, 125 

Cassidy, Marion, 191, 192 

Castle, Edward S., 87 andn 

Cather, Willa, 5in 

Cavendish Laboratory, 75, 83, 88-89, 96, 160; 
Frank Oppenheimer at, 189. See also Cam- 
bridge, University of 

Cezanne, Paul, 138, 140 

Chadwick, James, 88; discovery of the neu- 
tron, 160; head of British Mission on atomic 
weaponry, 267 , 270, 273 

Chaves, Consuelo, see Summers, Consuelo 
Chaves 

Chaves, Don Amado, 10, 67, 68n, 80 

Chaves, Katherine, see Page, Katherine 
Chaves 

Chekhov, Anton, 33, 36, 57, 70, 73,101 

Chemistry: boyhood interest in, 4; at Harvard, 
11,14, 29, 33, 45, 68n; JRO’s reading in, 
45-46 

Cherniss, Harold, 171, 172n, 332 

Cherniss, Ruth Meyer, 172n, 332 

Cherwell, Lord, 273 

Chicago, University of, 222, 229. See also 
Metallurgical Laboratory 

Christ’s College, 67, 70, 79. See also Cam- 
bridge, University of 

Christy, Robert, 275, 277n 

Churchill, Winston, 267; Bohr’s talk with, 271; 
at Potsdam, 301 

City College (New York), 218-219 

Civa (Siva, Shiva), 151, 152n 

Civil liberties, 195, 217-219 

Claudel, Paul, 101 

Clinton Laboratories, Oak Ridge: plutonium 
from, 282; on postwar atomic research, 303; 
statement by group at, 305 

Cockcroft, John, 160, 180 

Cockcroft-Walton accelerator, 229 

College Life (Briggs), 13, 14n 

Colorado Springs, 117, 118 

Columbia University, 171; offer to JRO from, 
299 


Index 


Combined Policy Committee, for British and 
American atomic research, 267 

Committee on Postwar Recommendations 
(War Dept.), 290-291 

Committee on Uranium, 222 

Compton, Arthur Holly, 100, 101n, 275; work 
on physics, 124; in AASW, 219; organized 
atomic bomb research, 222-223, 224-237; 
on possible noncontainment of atomic 
explosion, 227; on Interim Committee, 291; 
on public discussion of atomic energy, 311 

Compton, Karl T., 103, 301 

Compton, Margaret H., 103-104 

Compton effect, 124 

Conant, James B., 222, 228, 229, 260; role in 
Military Policy Committee, 229; on person- 
nel problems, 236, 239, 243; on militariza- 
tion, 249; visits to Los Alamos, 278, 287; 
note of encouragement from, 287; invita- 
tion to Harvard from, 299, 307-308; on 
postwar atomic research, 301; letters to, 
240-242 , 247-248, 278-279, 308 

Condon, Edward U., 253, 276, 277n 

“Conquest” (JRO), 25, 27 

Conrad, Joseph, 23, 25 

Consumers Union, 205 

Continuous spectra, 97,125 

Coolidge, Julian L., 29 

Copenhagen, University of, 118, 121, 162 

Corsica, 95, 104; trip to (1926), 93 

Cosmic rays, 124-125, 148n, 161, 192-194, 197, 
200-201. See also Research, JRO’s 

Coudert, Senator F R., Jr. , 217-218; letter to, 
218-219 

Courant, Richard, 98 

Courbet, Gustave, 140 

Cowles, N. M., 10, 81. See also Pecos Valley 

Crimson, Harvard, 43 

Crome Yellow (Huxley), 15 

Cross sections of nuclear reactions, 229-230, 
236-237; significance of, 238n; topic in Los 
Alamos primer, 253 

“Crossing” (poem by JRO), 110 

Crowther, James A., 29 

Crystallography, 3-4 

Cyclotron, 130, 148, 160, 192, 200, 229, 230, 
239, 255n 


Daisy Miller (James), 70 
Dallet, Joe, 214 
Dancoff, Sidney M., 211 


Dante Alighieri, 180 

Daumier, Honore, 120 

Da Vinci, Leonardo, 120 

Debussy, Claude, 140 

Demos, Raphael, 73 andn 

De Silva, Major Peer, 281; letter to, 274-275 

Despiau, Charles, 153n 

Deuterium: discovery of, 160; thermonuclear 

. reaction in, 227. See also Thermonuclear 

bomb 

Deuteron (deuton), 171, 175-176, 192, 193 

Deutsch, Monroe E., 302; letter to, 295 

Development of Substitute Materials (DSM), 
228 

Devil’s Disciple (Shaw), 30 

Didisheim, Jane, 18, 19, 22, 46, 53,59, 67, 90, 
332; memories of JRO as schoolboy, 6-8 

Dieke, Gerhardt, 152n 

Dirac, P. A. M., 96,103, 106, 110, 111, 124, 162, 
163, 164, 166, 171, 175, 176, 181, 258, 259, 
269; letter to, 108-109 

Ditchburn, Robert W., 147, 148n 

Donne, John, 290 

Dostoevski, Feodor, 70, 93 

Dove’s Nest (Mansfield) , 36 

Dow, David, 262; letter to, 312 

Dow, Sterling, 87 andn 

Du Bridge, Lee A., 226 and n . 

Dudley, Lt. Col. W. H., 236, 238, 245 

Duffield, Priscilla, 263,265. See also Greene, 
Priscilla 

Duffield, Robert, 252, 265 

Dunning, John R., 190, 191n 


Eagles, Jeanne, 36 

Eaton, Ralph, 14 

Eckhardt, E. A., 242 

Eddington, Arthur S., 95 

Edie, Mildred, 205 

Edsall, John T., 12, 15, 66; contacts with JRO at 
University of Cambridge, 87, 91, 92, 97; 
trip to Corsica, 94; renewed friendship, 110, 
214-215, 332 

Edsall, Margaret, 214 

Ehrenfest, Paul, 96-97, 107; paper sent to, 108; 
host at Leiden, 117, 121, 122-123, 126; death 
of, 168, 187 

Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule 
(Zurich), 122 

Einstein, Albert, 109, 153, 166, 190; remarks on 
60th birthday of, 192; on international rela- 


Index 


tions, 309; letter to, 309-310 

Electricity and Magnetism (Jeans), 28 

El Greco, 120 

Eliot, T. S., 47, 90 

Elizabeth, N.J., 32,34 

Elliott, John Lovejoy, 142, 143n 

Ellis, C. D., 189 | 

Ellis, Emory, 265 

Enrico Fermi Award (AEC), toJRO, 331 

Epstein, Paul, 111, 112n, 118 

Ethical Culture School: JRO’s interests at, 3; 
teachers at, 4-5; friends at, 6-7; graduation, 
7; and Fieldston School, 133n 

Ethical Culture Society, 2 

Everett, Ebenezer, 88 


Farmer, Henry (pseudonym for Fermi), 268 

Faure, Gabriel, 140 

Fergusson, Erna, 8, 26, 80, 81n 

Fergusson, Francis, 39; and Herbert Smith, 5, 
14, 16; school friend of JRO, 7, 8-10; at Har- 
vard, 12,13, 14,15, 20, 22, 24, 25; on Rhodes 
scholarship, 15, 72; summer in New Mexico 
(1923), 22, 24, 32, 35; at Oxford, 43, 46, 
50-51, 67, 81, 90; novel by, 52, 53, 55-56; on 
JRO's career choice, 66; reunions in England 
and Paris, 79, 86, 91-92, 94: in Princeton, 
327 , 332; letters to, 30-31, 32-33, 35-36, 
37-38, 39, 55-58, 72-73, 79, 86-87, 87-88, 
91-92, 92-93, 100-101 

Fergusson, Harvey, 8,52, 55,57 

Fermi, Enrico, 167, 168n, 176 and n, 177, 178, 
182n, 190, 201, 229, 251, 252, 254, 285, 291; 
letter to, 251-252 

Feynman, Richard, 269, 275-277, 284 

Fieldston School, 133 

Fission, nuclear: discovery of, 207; early 
Berkeley work on, 208-209; JRO’s early 
work on, 222; of elements other than ura- 
nium, 230; controlled chain reaction, 251. 
See also Atomic bomb 

Fitness of the Environment (Henderson), 95 

Fitzgerald, Scott, 101 

Flaubert, Gustave, 169, 172 

Fleming, John A., 194 

Ford, Henry, 100 

Fowler, Ardiane (Olmsted), 215 

Fowler, Ralph, 96, 97,101, 105, 118 

Fowler, William A., 206, 298; letters to, 207- 
208, 210-211, 215-216 

Franck, James, 103, 104, 111, 173-174, 292 


Frankel, Stanley S., 227 

Frankfurter, Felix, 333 

Fried, Walter J.,87 andn 

Friedman, Ella, 1. See also Oppenheimer, Ella 
Friedman 

Frisch, Otto Robert, 271, 272 andn 

Fry, Roger, 120 

Furry, Wendell, 149, 171, 173n, 176, 177, 178, 
181, 182, 213, 214n 


Gadfly, The (Harvard), 15 

Gamaliel, 164, 182 

Gamow, George, 181, 182n, 216 

Garuda, 164, 165n, 172, 182, 183 

Germany: origin of JRO’s parents, 1; atmo- 
sphere of in 1926, 103-104; dismissal of Jew- 
ish academics in, 173; effect of fascism in, 
195; nonaggression pact with Soviet Union, 
210-211; defeat of, 290 

Gibbs, J. Willard, 29 

Giotto, 41 

Goetz, Alexander, 111, 112n 

Goldsmit, Clara, 138, 152 

Gottingen, University of: invitation to, 97-98; 
significance of, 98-99; described, 100; quan- 
tum mechanics at, 101-102; JRO’s degree 
from, 102, 103; departure from, 107 

Goudsmit, Samuel, 107 

Grant, Alan, 40 

Gray, Gordon, 329 

Gray, L.H.,175, 181 

Greene, Priscilla, 252. See also Duffield, 
Priscilla 

Groves, General Leslie R. , 253, 266, 280-281; 
in charge of Manhattan Engineer District, 
229; on planning for centralization, 231; on 
JRO’s appointmentas director of Los Ala- 
mos, 233; on site for atomic laboratory, 236, 
238; on level of impurities, 240; on setting 
up Los Alamos community, 245; on Army 
role, 248, 249, 281; onJRO’s security, 
262-263; and the British mission, 267; report 
to on Bohr, 270; report to on Peierls, 
271-272; on care in handling materials, 277; 
relations with JRO, 278; on method of 
implosion, 285; on bomb test, 290, 291; 
Secretary of War’s Certificate presented by, 
310; letters to, 256, 267-268, 270, 271-272, 
277, 281, 286-287 

Gurney, Natalie, 214 

Gurney, Ronald, 189, 191n, 214 


Index 


H-bomb, see Thermonuclear bomb 

Hahn, Otto, 207 

Haile, Henry P.,87andn 

Hall, Henry, 188 and n, 189 

Hanford, Wash. , 229, 285 

Hanson, Alfred O., 232, 233n 

Harmon, Col.].M., 243, 246n 

Harrison, George L., 292, 301; letter to, 304 

Harrison, Katherine Puening, 214. See also 
Oppenheimer, Katherine Puening 

Harrison, Stewart, 214 

Harvard College: JRO’s entrance delayed by 
illness, 7; studies at, 11-12, 28-30; comments 
on, 13, 65, 66; first-year courses, 14; use of 
Widener Library, 28; grades at, 30, 65, 
73-74; sophomore year, 39-65; second-year 
courses, 45; third year, 66-74; third-year 
courses, 68n; degree from, 74; JRO’s sum- 
mary of work at, 84-85 

Harvard University: JRO’s research at (1927), 
108-109; job offers from, 114-116, 176,177, 
181, 299 

Harvey, Mr. and Mrs., 134, 142, 163, 172 

Hawkins, David, 274,275 

Haydn, Franz Josef, 140 

Hearst, William Randolph, 217 

Heisenberg, Werner, 98, 102, 125, 165 

Heitler, Walter H., 198, 199n 

Henderson, L.J.,95 

Henderson, Malcolm, 178 

Herb, Raymond G., 236, 238n 

Herrick, Robert, 35 

Hewes, Henry Fox,M.D.,26andn 

Heydenburg, Norman P., 237, 238n 

Hireshu, 68 

Hiroshima, 292, 303, 311 

Hirschland, Beulah, 120, 121n 

Hirschland, Franz, 120, 121n, 185, 190 

Hitler, Adolf, 173 

Hoffmann, Joseph, 60 

Holderlin, Friedrich, 101 

Holloway, Marshall D., 231, 233n 

Hopkins, Gerard Manley, 101 

Horgan, Paul, 2, 6, 31, 46, 73, 79; early friend- 
ship with JRO, 8-9, 10; at Bay Shore, 34, 35, 
36-37; on trip to Buffalo, 38, 43; on JRO’s 
career choice, 66; in New Mexico, 81, 185; 
onJRO at Los Alamos, 221; letters to, 40-43, 
47 

Horgan, Rosemary, 40, 41, 43, 47, 48, 185, 191 

Hound and Horn, 110 


House UnAmerican Activities Committee 
(HUAC), 330 

Houston, William V., 111, 112n, 194, 308 

Hughes, Arthur L., 274 

Hulme, Henry R., 189 

Huntsberger’s, horses wintered at, 143 


Ichabod, 141, 142, 164, 169, 170 

Innisfree (Yeats), 18, 20 

Institute for Advanced Study: visit to (1934), 
190, 191-192: Pauli at, 257, 258, 259; offer to 
JRO from, 299; JRO to directorship of, 309, 
327; JRO as director, 329, 331-332, 333 

Interim Committee (War Dept.), 291-292, 
293-294 , 304, 305 

International control of atomic energy, 310, 
311, 315-325, 328 

International Education Board, 116, 117, 122 

Iowa State College, Ames, 278 


Jackson, Jess H., 13,15, 25 

Jacobsen, J. C., 167, 168n 

Japan, 290, 292 

Jeans, James Hopwood, 28, 29, 35 
Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Harvard, 45 
Jemez Springs, N. M., 236, 238 
Joachimsthal, 7 

Johns Hopkins University, 141, 142-143, 155 
Johnson, Lyndon B., 331 

Johnson, Montgomery H.., Jr., 179, 188 
Johnson, William Templeton, 14n 
Johnson, Mrs. William Templeton, 14n, 23 
Journal Club (Berkeley Physics Dept.), 194 
Joy, Alfred H., 23, 24n 


Kalckar, Fritz, 201, 202n, 203, 204, 205n 

Kamen, Martin, 237, 238n 

Kapitza, Peter, 96 

Karman, Theodore von, 173; letter to, 173-174 

Kauffman, Gloria, 164, 165n, 171 

Kaufmann, Paul, 53 

Kayser, Jacques, 6, 19 

Kayser, Mrs. Jacques, see Didisheim, Jane 

Keats (Lowell), 73 

Keeley, Frances, 43, 46,53, 92 

Kelly (of Ethical Culture School), 58 

Kemble, Edwin C., 28, 45, 63, 65-66, 68, 105, 
107; letters to, 101-102, 111-112 

Kennedy, John F,, 331 

Kennedy, Joseph W., 236, 237, 243, 277, 282 

Kenworthy, Marion E., 95 


Index 


Kipphardt, Heinar, 331 

Kittel, Charles, 232, 233n 

Klein, Oskar, 124 

Klemperer, Otto, 180, 182n 

Klock, Augustus, 4 

Koenig, Frederick Otto, 38, 39n 

Koenig, Otto, 6 | 

Konopinski, Emil, 227, 228 

Kramers, Hendrik, 121, 126, 143, 163, 187, 
332 

Kuhn, Thomas S.: 1963 interview with JRO 
cited, 3, 4-5, 7,11, 14,15, 16, 28, 29-30, 
45-46, 68-69, 71, 75, 89, 96, 97, 98, 103, 104, 
105, 114, 121, 126, 127, 130, 131-132, 134, 150, 
177, 309 

Kurie, Franz N. D., 236, 238n, 242, 243 


Ladenburg, Rudolf W., 173 

Lagarde, Paul de, 101 

Lake Katherine, N. M., 81, 145 

Lake Peak, 10, 80 

Lamb, Willis, 213, 214n 

Lamy, N.M.,170,172 

Lang, Maggie, 113 

Langer, Lawrence M.., 231, 233n 

Langevin, Paul, 111, 112n 

Laporte, Otto, 111, 112n 

Larmor, Sir Joseph, 88 andn 

Laslett, L. Jackson, 200 andn 

Lauritsen, Charles C., 143, 144, 158, 178, 180, 
181, 182, 192, 193, 195, 200, 280, 298, 305, 
309, 332; letter to, 298-300 

Lawrence, Ernest Orlando, 130, 143-144, 
146-147, 153, 158, 159, 160, 165 and n, 169, 
171, 175-176, 180, 182, 211, 214, 217 andn, 
222, 223, 291, 292, 300-302, 309; letters to, 
144, 145, 147-148, 177-178, 193-194, 200, 220, 
300-302 

Lawrence, Molly B., 178, 214 

Le Gallienne, Eva, 59-60 

Leiden, University of, 97, 107, 117, 118 

Lewis, Gilbert N., 29, 158 

Lewis, Roger, 132, 137, 143, 145n, 152, 158, 
159n, 164, 171, 181, 183, 185 

Lewis, Sinclair, 100 

Lewis, William C. M., 29 

Lincoln, Abraham 320-321 

Lindbergh, Charles, 217 

Livingston, Stanley, 160 

Loeb, Leonard B., 217 andn 

Loomis, F. Wheeler, 211; letter to, 211-212 


Lorelei, 34, 84 

Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon, 175 

Los Alamos Laboratory (Site Y): JRO’s style as 
director of, 221, 239, 263-265, 312; planning 
for, 229-233; security for, 233, 248, 256-257, 
274, 275; JRO appointed director, 233, 249; 
personnel problems of, 236, 239, 241-242, 
253; site chosen, 238-239; salaries at’, 243, 
246, 265-266; living facilities, 243-246; pos- 
sible militarization of, 247-249, 256; plan- 
ning conference on, 250, 251, 253-254; 
JRO's move to, 252-253; Los Alamos 
primer, 253; technical divisions of, 253, 254, 
257,277; “cover” for, 256-259; administra- 
tion of, 261-262, 274, 312, 313; arrival of Brit- 
ish contingent, 266-267; handling of fission- 
able materials, 277; social life at, 279-280; 
Special Engineer Detachment, 281; reor- 
ganization of, 285; preparations for bomb 
test, 286, 287, 288; effect of death of Roose- 
velt, 287; reaction to use of bombs, 292: 
question of future for, 301; relations with 
U. of California, 295 , 296, 301, 302, 306; 
JRO’s resignation, 305, 310; remarks at award 
ceremony, 310-311; letters to staff mem- 
bers, 312-314; JRO’s farewell speech, 315-325 

Los Alamos Ranch School, 10, 238-239, 280 

Lost Lady, A (Cather), 51 

Lowell, A. Lawrence, 13, 61 

Lowell, Amy, 73 

Lowen, Irving S.,179 

Luhrs, Marie, 58-59, 60n 

Lyman, Theodore, 29, 107, 114; letters to, 114, 
115 


Macfarlane, Donald, 152n, 158, 159n, 165, 182 

MacLeish, Archibald, 333 

Manhattan Engineer District: Military Policy 
Committee of, 229; unification of work 
under, 229-230; choice of site for new labo- 
ratory, 233, 238-239; R. Tolman’s role in, 
260-261; lack of free interchange in, 264; 
Conant as scientific adviser to, 278; in peace- 
time, 292, 301, 303, 328. See also Groves, 
General Leslie R. 

Manley, John H., 224, 225, 228, 229-230, 235, 
256; onJRO as Los Alamos director, 263; 
letters to, 231-232, 236-237 

Manley, Kay, 244 

Mansfield, Katherine, 24, 27, 35, 36 

Marshall, D.G.,272andn 


Index 


Martin, Ian, 132, 133 Murr, Jane, 205 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 171; Munich, 66, 89, 297 
Radiation Laboratory (radar) at, 217n, 224, Music: JRO's interest in, 33-34, 39, 138, 
226, 230; personnel from at Los Alamos, 242 140 
Mathematics: JRO’s high-school knowledge Muzzey, David Saville, 136 and n 
of, 12; Harvard courses in, 14, 45, 68n, 74; 
JRO on teaching of, 68-69; and physics, 100 Nagasaki, 292, 303, 318 


Maupassant, Guy de, 16-17 National Academy of Sciences, 177, 178n 
May-Johnson Bill, 311 ‘National Defense Research Committee, 215, 
McCarthy, Senator Joseph, 218 217n, 247-248, 260 
McGill, Frederick T., 87 andn National Research Council, 116, 117, 178 
McKibben, Joseph L., 232, 233n, 237 National Research Fellowship, JRO’s, 105, 
McKibbin, Dorothy, 252-253, 257, 332 112, 116-118, 121-123; JRO on problems of 
McMillan, Edwin M.., 217 and n, 230, 231, Americans in Europe, 127-129 
236, 237, 238, 241, 243, 247, 269, 276, 283 Nature, 165 
McMillan, Elsie B., 244 Neddermeyer, Seth H., 197, 272 
Meghadhuta (Meghaduta), 176, 180 Nedelsky, Leo, 148, 171,172, 195 
Meitner, Lise, 167, 168n Nedelsky, Wenonah, 213 
Menasce, Jean de, 87 andn Neher, H. Victor, 198, 199n 
Menzel, Donald, 218, 219 Nelson, Eldred C., 227 
Meson (mesotron), 192, 197, 200-201, Nernst, Walther, 29 
205-206, 209, 217, 259. See also Research, Neumann, Daisy, 63 
JRO's Neumann, John von, 299, 300n 
Metallic conduction, see Research, JRO's New Mexico, 8-9, 10, 79-81, 118-119; site for 
Metallurgical Laboratory (Met Lab), Chicago, atomic bomb research, 236. See also Los 
222, 224, 229, 230, 251, 278, 290, 303 Alamos Laboratory, Pecos Valley, Perro 
Meyer, Ruth, 172n. See also Cherniss, Ruth Caliente 
Meyer New York Herald Tribune, 305 
Meyers, Anne and Hilde, letter to, 274 New York Mineralogical Club, 3 
Michigan, University of, at Ann Arbor: New York Times, 218, 305, 329 
Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck move to, 106-107; | Newton, Alberta, 4 
summer school for theoretical physics at, Nichols, Kenneth D., 329 
116, 118, 141, 162, 170, 174, 177, 179, 181, 185, Nishina, Yoshio, 124 
201, 213; Uhlenbeck at, 187, 208 No Quarter Given (Horgan), 37 
Military Policy Committee (of Manhattan Nordsieck, Arnold T., 177, 178n, 186, 201, 
Project), 229, 285 202n, 212, 259 
Millikan, Clark, 153 Nuclear physics: at Berkeley, 159, 165 andn, 
Millikan, Robert A., 111, 124, 147, 148n, 174, 175-176; focus of attention on, 160; topic of 
198, 200, 206, 298, 300; letters to, 124-125, Solvay Congress, 165n; JRO's increasing 
160-161, 197, 198-199 , 223-224 interest in, 177; Frank Oppenheimer’s 
Mineralogy, 3, 4,5, 7, 11,12, 112n research on, 179-181, 189-190; 
Minnesota, University of, 237 Oppenheimer-Phillips process, 192-193; 
Mitchell, Dana P., 243, 246n, 248, 249n Bohr’s theory of compound nucleus, 203, 
Moliere, Jean Baptiste, 63 204. See also Research, JRO’s 
Monet, Claude, 140 Nye, Arthur W., 193-194, 194n 
Monsanto Chemical Co., 278 
Montauk, L.I., 169, 170 Oak Ridge, Tenn. , 229, 282, 290 
Morgan, Mrs., 156 Of Human Bondage (Maugham), 62 
Morrell, Lady Ottoline, 72, 90 Office of Scientific Research and Development 
Morrison, Philip, 211, 213n (OSRD), 222, 247, 250, 283-284 


Morse, Philip M., 109-110 Olden Manor (Princeton, N.J.), 327, 332 


Index 


Olmsted, Ardiane, see Fowler, Ardiane 

Open Mind, The (JRO), 332 

Ophorst, Else, 107. See also Uhlenbeck, Else 

Oppenheimer, Babette (Mrs. Walter Langs- 
dorf), 51,52 

Oppenheimer, Ella Friedman, 1, 2, 35, 36n, 
107; and fRO, 5, 26, 67, 145-146; travels, 80, 
81, 94, 113, 136; illness of, 141, 142, 144, 145 

Oppenheimer, Emil, 51, 202 

Oppenheimer, Frank Friedman, 1, 35, 66, 84, 
107, 146; on Bay Shore, 34, 108; on JRO’s 
health, 117; and cabin in Pecos Valley, 118- 
119, 132; building of shack by, 145; vocation 
in physics, 147, 154, 170; and biology, 152, 
153-154, 153n, 155; at Cambridge Univer- 
sity, 162, 179, 180; at Christmas (1934), 188, 
189; in Pasadena, 194-195; marriage, 195; 
references to in JRO’s testimony, 196; degree 
granted, 210; daughter of, 214n; during the 
war, 273; aide to Bainbridge, 290; letters to, 
94-96, 113, 119-121, 126-127 , 132-133, 
134-136, 139-141, 142-143, 151-152, 157-159, 
162-165, 169-172, 180-182, 184-185, 189-191; 
letters from father to, 137-138, 152-153 

Oppenheimer, Jacquenette Quann, 213, 214 

Oppenheimer, Judith, 213, 214 

Oppenheimer, Julius, 1-2, 5; relations with 
JRO, 9-10, 67, 150-151, 166; concern for 
JRO’s health, 14n, 26; travels, 79, 80, 94, 113, 
136, 151-152; during wife's illness, 142, 144, 
145; after wife’s death, 146-147, 150-151, 
153n, 157, 159; summer plans for, 153, 154, 
182, 185; winters in Berkeley, 164, 165-166, 
170, 190, 196; death of, 196, 202; letters to 
Frank Oppenheimer, 137-138, 152-153 

Oppenheimer, Katherine Puening (Kitty), 
214, 280, 296, 326, 327; birth of Peter, 216; 
birth of Toni, 279 

Oppenheimer, Katherine (Toni), 279, 327 

Oppenheimer, Lee, letter to, 296 

Oppenheimer, Peter, 216, 252, 326, 327 

Oppenheimer-Phillips process, 192 

Osgood, William F,, 29 

Ostwald, Wilhelm, 29 


Page, Katherine Chaves, 10, 19, 22, 23, 25-26, 
35, 51, 53,59, 67, 70, 79, 80, 143, 145, 159, 
164,170, 181, 185, 188; lake named for, 81; 
Oppenheimer ranch leased near, 118, 
126-127 , 132; on purchase of ranch, 163 

Page, Winthrop, 10, 80 


Pajarito Plateau, 10, 247, 280 

Palmer, Capt. T. O., 281 

Parsons, Capt. William S., USN, 285, 
286-287 

Pasadena, Cal., 105, 106, 194, 216-217. See also 
California Institute of Technology 

Patterson, Ernest M., 218 

Patterson, Robert P., 311 

Pauli, Franca (Mrs. Wolfgang) , 258, 259 

Pauli, Wolfgang, 98, 109, 141, 211, 332; JRO's 
graduate work with, 121-122, 125-126, 273; 
and the neutrino, 148n, 183n; on gauge in- 
variance, 175; on beta decay, 176; relation to 
war work, 257; pseudonymous publication 
proposed to, 257-258; letter from, 259; letter 
to, 257-258 

Pauling, Linus, 111, 112 and n, 131 

Pecos Valley, N. M., 10, 22, 141, 327; JRO’s 
early trips to, 8, 79-81, 280; cabin rented in, 
118-119; Frank Oppenheimer to, 126-127; 
summers in, 132, 156, 162. See also Perro 
Caliente 

Peierls , Rudolf, 125, 175, 176n; on atomic 
weapon research, 237, 238n, 271; deputy 
head of British group at Los Alamos, 273 

People’s World, 197 

Perro Caliente, 132, 133, 134,145, 154,170, 
333; rental of, 142, 151; ownership of, 163, 
165n, 172; summers in, 181, 183, 209, 213, 
214; postwar visits to, 296, 327 

Personnel Security Board, see Atomic Energy 
Commission, U.S. 

Petrarch, 180 

Pfotzer, George, 198, 199n 

Phillips, Melba, 147, 148, 158, 186, 187, 189, 
192,193, 213 

Physical chemistry, at Harvard, 11-12 

Physical Review, 161 

Physics: JRO’s first course in, 4; at Harvard, 
28-29, 45-46, 68n, 69; at Univ. of Cam- 
bridge, 96-97; at Gottingen, 98-99; advice to 
Frank Oppenheimer on, 155, 157 

Pierce, George Washington, 30 

Plato, 186 

Plesset, Milton, 161, 167 

Plutonium, 230, 232; and predetonation prob- 
lem, 234-235; impurities in, 239-241; 
research on purification of, 278; minimal 
loss of, 282. See also Atomic bomb 

Poetry: JRO’s writing of, 33, 54, 59, 63, 80; 
Horgan’s, 73; publication of, 110 


Index 


Poincare, Jules Henri, 29, 31, 35 

Politics: JRO’s concern with, 195-197; and 
investigation of academics, 217-219 

Pollak, Inez, 20, 21, 23-24 andn, 113 

Pollak, Kitty, 20 

Positron (positive electron): discovery of, 160. 
See also Research, JRO's 

Potsdam, 301 

Priestley, R. E., 84-85, 98; letters to, 76-77, 
82-83, 84-85, 98. See also Cambridge, Uni- 
versity of 

Prince, Mrs. Morton, 60 

Princeton University, 171, 181, 190 

Principia (Newton), 12 

“Prospectus on Nucleonics,” 290 

Prufrock (Eliot), 47n 


Quann, Jacquenette, 195. See also 
Oppenheimer, Jacquenette 

Quantum field theory, 166. See also Research, 
JRO's 

Quantum mechanics, 99, 101-102, 131. See also 
Research, JRO's 

Quantum theory, 45, 99 

Quebec agreement, 267, 269 

Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur, 20 


Rabi, I. I., 125, 189, 242, 247-248, 249, 254, 
280, 299, 332; letter to, 250-251 

Racine, Jean, 54 

Rameau, Jean-Philippe, 156 

Ramsauer effect, 108-109, 111 

Ramsay, Sir William, 29 

Ramsey, Norman R., 242, 243, 275, 277n 

Randall, Harrison, 116, 118, 174 

Randall, Merle, 29 

Rayleigh, Lord, 71 

Raymond, Natalie, 113, 138, 143, 165, 171, 172, 
182, 183, 184, 191 

Reith Lectures, 332, quoted, 100 

Rembrandt, 120, 140 

Research, JRO’s (1925-1939): metallic conduc- 
tion, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83, 104-105; quantum 
theory and quantum mechanics, 96-97, 
99-100, 101-103, 104-105, 106, 108-109, 118, 
121; quantum field theory, 124-125, 147, 148; 
quantum field theory of positrons and 
electron-positron pairs, 159, 161-162, 164, 
166-168, 169, 171-172, 174-175, 181, 188, 189, 
193; nuclear physics, 159, 177-178, 180-181, 
192, 193, 202, 203, 206, 210; mesons, 197, 


198-199, 200-201, 205-206, 217; astrophysics 
and neutron stars, 208 , 209 

Reves, Emery, 309 

Richards, Theodore W., 68 

Riefenstahl, Charlotte, 107 

Rio Grande, 10, 280 

Ritter, Charles, 171, 191 

Ritter, Curtis, 171, 191 

Robbjrs, W. J., 122; letters to, 123, 128-129 

Rochester, University of, 231 

Rochester American Opera Company, 40, 42, 
73 

Rockefeller Foundation, 116, 122, 127, 259 

Romero, Orlando, 81n 

Ronsard, Pierre de, 191 

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 217, 257, 270, 287; 
JRO’s remarks on at memorial service, 288; 
letter to, 260 

Rossi, Bruno B., 206 andn 

Rubens, Peter Paul, 140 

Russell, Bertrand, 24, 54, 67, 71, 90 

Russell, Henry Norris, 111, 112n 

Rutherford, Sir Ernest, 75, 76, 82, 96, 98, 203; 
Bridgman’s recommendation of JRO to, 
77-78 

Ryder, Arthur W., 153 and n, 159, 165, 180 


S-1 Committee, 222, 224 

Sachs, Paul, 24andn 

St. Joan (Shaw), 59 

St. John (Virgin Islands) , 327 

San Diego, Cal., 13, 14n 

Sangre de Cristo Mountains, 10, 81, 247, 296 

Santa Fe, N. M., 10, 23, 79, 81, 252 

Santayana, George, 17 

Sardinia, 93 

Schiff, Leonard I., 212, 213n 

Schrodinger, Erwin, 89, 102, 168 

Schwinger, Julian S., 212, 213n 

Science: implied threat of , 316; as search 
for knowledge, 317; continuance of, 322; 
belief in value of, 325; JRO as interpreter 
of , 332 

Science, 44 

Science and the Common Understanding (JRO, 
Reith Lectures), 100, 332 

Science club, Harvard, 16 

Scientific Panel, see Interim Committee 

Scurlock, J. C., 14n, 17, 28 

Seaborg, Glenn, 207, 230, 232; letter from, 
234-235; letter to, 235 


Index 


Section on Uranium S-1 (in OSRD), 222, 224 

Segre, Emilio, 230, 232, 236, 237, 254, 308 

Serber, Charlotte, 186, 256; letter to, 313-314 

Serber, Robert, 99, 149, 211, 212, 214, 258, 332; 
on JRO’s work in quantum field theory, 
166-167; NRC Fellow withJRO, 178, 186, 
205n, 206; on life in Pasadena, 194; at session 
on nuclear explosions, 227; lectures at plan- 
ning conference (Los Alamos primer), 253 

Shapley, Harlow, 218, 219 

Shaw, George Bernard, 30, 59, 60n, 62 

Showers, cosmic ray, 193, 198, 199n, 200. See 
also Research, JRO’s 

Simon, Franz E., 237, 238n 

Singer, Louise Oppenheimer, 202; letters to, 
203, 210 

Site Y, see Los Alamos Laboratory 

Skinner, H. W. B., 109 

Slater, John, 105, 108, 112 

Sloan, David H.,148andn 

Smith, Elizabeth, 153 

Smith, Harden, 73 

Smith, Herbert Winslow, 4,5, 35, 73; JRO's 
summer trips with, 8-10, 22-23; gift to, 16- 
17; JRO’s reports to Fergusson on, 31, 33; 
appointed principal, 61, 62-63; JRO’s lessen- 
ing reliance on, 68, 79, 91; onJRO in 
Europe, 86; on Frank Oppenheimer, 119; on 
JRO's mother, 145; letters to, 13, 15-16, 17, 
18-19, 19-20, 21, 22, 22-23, 23-24 , 25-26, 
27-28, 30, 46-47, 50-51, 52, 52-53, 54-55, 
58-60, 62-63 , 63-64, 65-66, 66-68, 70, 71-72, 
80-81 , 89-90 , 297 

Smith, May, 22, 23, 73 

Smith, Sinclair, 153 

Smythe, Henry de Wolfe, 303 

Snell, Arthur H., 232, 233n 

Snyder, Hartland, 212, 213n 

Solvay Congress, Brussels, 165 andn 

Sommerfeld, Arnold, 29, 116 

Spanish Civil War, 195, 196, 197, 214 

Special Engineer Detachment (SED), at Los 
Alamos, 281 

Sproul, Robert G., 265, 302, 311; letters to, 
266, 306 

Stalin, 301 

Stammtisch, 151, 152, 153 

Stanford University, 179, 237 

Stern, Alfred, 202, 203, 210, 279 

Stern, Hedwig, 153, 154, 202, 210; letter to, 
279 


Stern, Hilde, 210 

Stern, Lotte, 202, 203,279 

Stern, Otto, 176 andn 

Stevens, George, 26, 27 

Stimson, Henry L., 292, 293, 301, 304, 323; 
letter to, 293-294 

Stobbe, Martin H., 189 

Stone & Webster Engineering Corp., 231, 
233n 

Stories and fiction, JRO’s writing of, 18-19, 20, 
21, 24, 25, 26, 36, 41, 42, 47, 51; Smith’s criti- 
cisms of, 27, 31; Horgan’s, 41, 42; 
Fergusson’s, 55-56; JRO on writing, 56-57, 
66 

Strassmann, Fritz, 207 

Stratton, S. W., 103 

Student Liberal Club, Harvard, 12,15 

Sugiura, Yoshikazu, 109 

Summers, Consuelo Chaves, 23n, 80 

“Super” bomb, see Thermonuclear bomb 

Swann, William F,, 147, 148n 

Szilard, Leo, 251 


Taos, N. M., 80 

Target Committee, 291 

Tarrant, G. T. P., 175, 181 

Tatlock, Jean, 196, 262 

Taylor, G.1., 267,273 

Teachers Union, 197, 218 

Teaching: JRO’s methods of, 149; work with 
research students, 149-150; changes in style 
of, 150; postwar, 309 

Teller, Edward, 227, 228, 235, 257, 258, 273, 
285; letter to, 228 

Thayer (of Ethical Culture School), 58 

Theotopoulos (El Greco), 140 

Thermodynamics, 37, 38; Harvard courses in, 
39, 45, 51, 65-66, 69 

Thermonuclear bomb, 227-228, 253, 257, 285, 
294, 330 

Thomas, Betty, 90 

Thomas, Charles A.,278 

Thomas, Llewellyn L. H., 147,148n 

Thomson, Sir Joseph, 75, 86, 87, 98; JRO’s 
work with, 88-89 

Tiersch, 173 

Tilano, 280, 325 

Tisdale, W. E., 127 

Tolman, Edward, 158 

Tolman, Richard, 134, 137, 143, 182, 195, 254, 
260-261, 280, 290-291, 298, 332 


Index 


Tolman, Ruth, 134, 137, 143, 152, 153, 156, 158, 
182,194,195, 332 

Tomlinson, Everett P., 210, 211n 

Toscanini, Arturo, 137 

Trimethy, 34, 36-37, 38, 65, 79, 108 

Trinity test, 286, 287, 288, 289-290, 292 

Truchas Peak, 10, 184, 188 

Truman, Harry S., 301, 303, 304, 305, 323 

Tschaikowsky, Peter Ilich, 140 

Tube Alloys, see British atomic weapon 
research 


Vehling , Edwin, 165, 194; NRC Fellow with 
JRO, 178, 186-187; letter to, 178-179; letters 
to Ruth and, 213-214, 216-217 ' 

Vehling, Ruth, 165-166, 186, 194; letters to 
Edwin and, 213-214, 216-217 

Uhlenbeck, Else, 146, 168, 169, 170, 174, 176, 
183-184 , 186, 187, 190, 209. See also Ophorst, 
Else 

Uhlenbeck, George, 97, 106, 107, 142, 146-147, 
169, 170, 178, 181, 183-186, 187-188, 190, 201, 
208; letters to, 106-107, 146, 167-168, 
174-176, 187-188 , 201-202 , 208-209 

Unamuno, Miguel de, 156 

U.S.S.R., 210-211, 301 

United Nations, 319, 322; Atomic Energy 
Commission of (UNAEC), 328 

Uranium, 207-208, 230, 232, 235, 285 

Uranium 235: 230, 235, 271, 292 

Uranium 238: 223 , 227 , 230. See also Atomic 
Bomb 

Urey, Harold C., 160, 231, 233n, 304 

Utrecht, 121, 187 


Valentine, Ruth, 143, 153, 158, 165, 182, 185, 
191,195 

Valle Grande, 159n, 247 

Van de Graaff generator, 229 

Van Dyke, Anthony, 41 

Van Gogh, Vincent, 120, 140, 153, 327 

Van Vleck, John H., 112 and n, 168, 176; letter 


to, 226 
Van Voorhis, S. N., 200 andn 
Vassar College, 20, 21 
Veda, 180 
Verlaine, Paul, 44 
Viles (postmaster), 163, 172 
Vita Nuova (Dante), 30 
Vlaminck, Maurice de, 138 


Wagner, Richard, 140 

Walker, James, 29 

Walton, E. T. S., 160 

Warner, Edith, 280-281; letter from, 325- 
326 

Washington Conference on Theoretical 
Physics, 217n 

Weil, Helen, 26 

Weinberg, Joseph W. , 282, 283 

Weisskopf, Victor F., 257 

Wentzel, Gregor, 98 

Wey!l, Hermann, 176 and n, 190 

White, Milton, 160, 182, 183n 

Whitehead, Alfred North, 12,67, 70, 71, 74 

Widener Library, Harvard, 28 

Wiersma, E. C., 106, 107n 

Wigner, Eugene P., 173, 210, 214, 269 

Williams, John H., 232, 233n 252 

Williams, William H., 148 

Wilson, Anne, 305 

Wilson, Robert R., 254, 255n, 276, 290 

Windows, 41andn 

Winsor, Art, 163,172, 181 

Wolfe, Hugh C., 171,173n, 176 andn, 178 

Woodson (New Mexico lawyer), 86 

Wyman, Jeffries, 12; JRO’s friendship with, 
39-40, 41, 53, 60, 61, 66, 73, 91, 93 


Youth (Conrad), 25 
Yukawa, Hideki, 200, 205 


Zurich, 66, 122,273 
Zweig, Stefan, 101 


