INTHE MATTER OF 


|, ROBERT 
OPPENHEIMER 


HISTORY | U.S. | TWENTIETH CENTURY 


“This book is very valuable because it gives the full arguments of the Personnel 
Security Board and of the Atomic Energy Commission leading to their decision 
against Oppenheimer. It also gives the more important testimony during the hearings. 
Richard Polenberg in his introduction shows how hopelessly the cards were stacked 
against Oppenheimer.” —HANS BETHE, Professor Emeritus, Cornell University 


“The Oppenheimer hearing was one of the great dramas of the Cold War at home. Its 
outcome still affects the relationship between scientists and the state. Richard 
Polenberg’s skillfully edited transcript proves once again that history reads better 
than fiction.” 
—GREGG HERKEN, author of 
The Winning Weapon: The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War, 1945-50 


At the end of World War Il, J. Robert Oppenheimer was one of America’s preeminent 
physicists. For his work as director of the Manhattan Project, which developed the 
atomic bomb, he was awarded the Medal for Merit, the highest honor the U.S. govern- 
ment can bestow on a civilian. Yet, in 1953, Oppenheimer was denied security clear- 
ance amidst allegations that he was “more probably than not” an “agent of the 
Soviet Union.” Determined to clear his name, he insisted on a hearing before the 
Atomic Energy Commission’s Personnel Security Board. /n the Matter of J. Robert 
Oppenheimer contains an edited and annotated transcript of the 1954 hearing, as 
well as the various reports resulting from it. Drawing on recently declassified FBI 
files, Richard Polenberg’s introductory and concluding essays situate the hearing in 
the Cold War period, and his thoughtful analysis helps explain why the hearing was 
held, why it turned out as it did, and what that result meant, both for Oppenheimer 
and for the United States. 


RICHARD POLENBERG is Goldwin Smith Professor of American History 
at Cornell University. Among his previous books is Fighting Faiths: The 


Abrams Case, the Supreme Court, and Free Speech, also from Cornell. 


CORNELL PAPERBACKS 


Cornell University Press 
www.cornellpress.cornell edu 574-0-6014-a8bb1- 


9000 7 
Author photo: Photo by Nicola Kountoupes, Cornell University Photography 


Gover photograph: J. Robert Oppenheimer walking with his attorney, Lloyd K. Garrison. Ralph 
Morse/TimePix. 


In the Matter of 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


J. Robert Oppenheimer. Reproduced from the Collections of the Library of 
Congress. 


IN THE MATTER OF 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


THE SECURITY CLEARANCE HEARING 


Edited by Richard Polenberg 


Cornell University Press Ithaca and London 


Copyright © 2002 by Cornell University 


All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this 
book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced in any form without 
permission in writing from the publisher. For information, address 
Cornell University Press, Sage House, 512 East State Street, Ithaca, 
New York 14850. 


First published 2002 by Cornell University Press 
First printing, Cornell Paperbacks, 2002 


Printed in the United States of America 


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 


In the matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer : the security clearance hearing 
/ edited by Richard Polenberg. 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-8014-3783-0 (cloth) — ISBN 0-8014-8661-0 (pbk.) 

1. Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 1904-1967—Trials, litigation, etc. 2. 
Hydrogen bomb—History. 3. Internal security—United States. 4. United 
States—Politics and government—1953-1961. 5. Physicists—United 
States—-Biography. |. Polenberg, Richard. 

QC16.062 15 2002 
530'.092—dc21 2001047165 


Cornell University Press strives to use environmentally responsible 
suppliers and materials to the fullest extent possible in the 
publishing of its books. Such materials include vegetable-based, low- 
VOC inks and acid-free papers that are recycled, totally chlorine- 
free, or partly composed of nonwood fibers. Books that bear the 

logo of the FSC (Forest Stewardship Council) use paper taken from 
forests that have been inspected and certified as meeting the highest 
standards for environmental and social responsibility. For further 
information, visit our website at www.cornellpress.cornell.edu. 


Cloth printing 10 98765 43 2 +1 
Paperback printing 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 


CONTENTS 


List of Illustrations xi 
Preface xiii 
Introduction: “All the Evil of the Times” xv 
The Setting and the Participants xxix 


PART | THE HEARING 


Monday, April 12 3 


KENNETH D. NICHOLS: “The Commission has no other 
recourse ... but to suspend your clearance until the matter has 
been resolved” 3 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “The items of so-called derogatory 
information ... cannot be fairly understood except in the 
context of my life and my work” 10 


GORDON Gray: “An inquiry and not... atrial” 29 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Exploding one of these things as a 
firecracker over a desert” 30 

Tuesday, April 13 35 
GORDON Gray: “Strictly confidential” 35 
GORDON Gray: “Those who are not cleared . . . will necessarily be 
excused” 38 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “When you see something that is technically 
sweet, you go ahead and doit” 41 


vi CONTENTS 


Wednesday, April 14 49 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Both an older brother and in some ways per- 
haps...afather” 49 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “In the case of a brother you don’t 
make tests” 53 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Then I invented a cock-and-bull story” 61 
ROGER Ross: “You spent the night with her, didn’t you?” 72 


Thursday, April 15 75 
GENERAL LESLIE R. GROvES: “I would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer 
today” 75 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “One can be mistaken about anything” 81 
ROGER ROBB AND J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Your memory is not 
refreshed by what I read you?” “No, on the whole it is 
confused by it” 85 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Of the known leakages of information, 

Fuchs is by far the most grave” 93 


Friday, April 16 94 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I would have done anything that 
I was asked to do... if I had thought it was technically 
feasible” 94 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I am not sure the miserable thing will 
work .. . [but it] would be folly to oppose the exploration of this 
weapon” 99 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “The program in 1951 was technically so 
sweet that you could not argue about that” 108 
JOHN LANSDALE: “We kept him under surveillance whenever 
he left the project. We opened his mail. We did all sorts 
of nasty things” 111 


Monday, April 19 120 
GorDON DEAN: “A very human man, a sensitive man, ... a man of 
complete integrity” 120 
Hans A. BETHE: “Only ... when the bomb dropped on Japan, ... did 
we start thinking about the moral implications” 126 


Tuesday, April 20 139 
GEORGE F. KENNAN: “It is only the great sinners who become 
the great saints” 139 
JAMES B. Conant: “Dr. Oppenheimer’s appraisal of the Russian 
menace .. . was hard headed, realistic, and thoroughly 
anti-Soviet” 148 


CONTENTS vii 


ENRICO FERMI: “My opinion . .. was that one should try to 

outlaw the thing before it was born” 153 

Davin E. LILIENTHAL: “Here is a man of good character, integrity, and 
of loyalty to his country” 156 


Wednesday, April 21 166 
Iswor I. Rasr: “He is a consultant, and if you don’t want to 
consult the guy, you don’t consult him period. ... We have an 


A-bomb...* * * and what more do you want, mermaids?” 166 


Thursday, April 22 179 
Norris E. BRADBURY: “A scientist wants to know. He wants to 
know correctly and truthfully and precisely” 179 
HARTLEY Rowe: “I don’t like to see women and children killed 
wholesale because the male element of the human race are so 
stupid that they can’t... keep out of war” 185 
LEE A. DuBRIDGE: “Dr. Oppenheimer . . . was a natural and 
respected and at all times a loved leader” 188 


Friday, April 23 194 
ROGER Ross: “Mr. Chairman, unless ordered to do so by the board, 
we shall not disclose to Mr. Garrison in advance the names of the 
witnesses we contemplate calling” 194 
VANNEVAR Busu: “Here is a man who is being pilloried because he 
had strong opinions, and had the temerity to express them” 199 


Monday, April 26 207 
KATHERINE OPPENHEIMER: “I was emotionally involved in the 
Spanish cause” 207 
CHARLES C. LAURITSEN: “I think there is a great deal of difference 
between being a Communist in 1935 and being a Communist in 
1954” 216 
JERROLD R. ZACHARIAS: “I am afraid that wars are evil... . But the 
question of morality ... you do not have time for when you are 
trying to think how you fight” 221 
ROBERT F. BACHER: “Dr. Oppenheimer’s individual contribution 
was the greatest of any member of the General Advisory 
Committee” 225 


Tuesday, April 27 228 
JOHN VON NEUMANN: “All of us in the war years .. . got suddenly in 
contact with a universe we had not known before . . . ; we suddenly 


were dealing with something with which one could blow up the 
world” 228 


viii CONTENTS 


WENDELL M. LATIMER: “I kept turning over in my mind... what 
was in Oppenheimer that gave him such tremendous power over 
these men” 237 


Wednesday, April 28 244 
ROSCOE C. WILsoNn: “My feeling is that the masters in the Kremlin 
cannot risk the loss of their base. This base is vulnerable only to 
attack by air power” 244 
KENNETH S. Pitzer: “I would not rate Dr. Oppenheimer’s importance 
in this field very high for the rather personal reason . . . that I have 
disagreed with a good many of his important positions” 249 
EDWARD TELLER: “I feel that I would like to see the vital interests of 
this country in hands which I understand better, and therefore trust 
more” 252 


Thursday, April 29 265 
JOHN J. McCLoy: “He used the graphic expression like two scorpions 
in a bottle, that each could destroy the other” 265 
Davip TRESSEL Griccs: “ZORC are the letters applied by a member 
of this group to the four people: Z is for Zacharias, O for 
Oppenheimer, R for Rabi, and C for Charlie Lauritsen” 271 


Luis W. ALvaREz: “I realized that the program that we were 
planning to start was not one that the top man in the scientific 
department of the AEC wanted to have done” 276 


Friday, April 30 283 
LLoyp K. GARRISON: “The adversary process which we seem to be 
engaged in should be carried out to the fullest extent” 289 


Boris T. Pasu: “Dr. Oppenheimer knew the name of the man, and it 
was his duty to report ittome” 291 


WILLIAM L. BORDEN: “More probably than not, J. Robert Oppenheimer 
is an agent of the Soviet Union” 298 


Monday, May 3 309 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I wish I could explain to you better why I 
falsified and fabricated” 311 

Tuesday, May 4 327 


KATHERINE OPPENHEIMER: “I left the Communist Party. I did not leave 
my past, the friendships, just like that” 327 


Wednesday, May 5 333 
J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I felt, perhaps quite strongly, that having 
played an active part in promoting a revolution in warfare, I 


needed to be as responsible as I could with regard to what came of 
this revolution” 333 


CONTENTS ix 


Thursday, May 6 346 
Lioyp K. GARRISON: “His life has been an open book” 346 


PART Il THE DECISION 


The Personnel Security Board Reports, May 27 355 
GORDON GRAY AND THOMAS A. MorGaN: “We have . . . been unable to 
arrive at the conclusion that it would be clearly consistent with the 
security interests of the United States to reinstate Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
clearance” 355 
Warn V. Evans: “Our failure to clear Dr. Oppenheimer will be a 
black mark on the escutcheon of our country” 362 


Lloyd K. Garrison’s Reply to Kenneth D. Nichols, June 1 366 
LLoyD K. GARRISON: “How can this be?” 366 


Kenneth D. Nichols’s Recommendations to the AEC, June 12 371 
KENNETH D. NICHOLS: “I have given consideration to the nature of 
the cold war ... and the horrible prospects of hydrogen bomb 
warfare if all-out war should be forced upon us” 371 


Publishing the Transcript, June 13-15 376 


Decision and Opinions of the AEC, June 29 378 
Lewis L. Strauss: “We find Dr. Oppenheimer is not entitled to the 
continued confidence of the Government . . . because of the proof 
of fundamental defects in his ‘character’” 378 
EUGENE M. ZUCKERT: “This matter certainly reflects the difficult times 
in which we live” 383 
JOSEPH CAMPBELL: “The General Manager has arrived at the only 
possible conclusion available to a reasonable and prudent 
man” 385 
THOMAS E. Murray: “Dr. Oppenheimer failed the test. . .. He was 
disloyal” 386 
Henry DE WoLF Smytu: “There is no indication in the entire 
record that Dr. Oppenheimer has ever divulged any secret 
information” 388 


Conclusion: “An Abuse of the Power of the State” 395 


Suggested Reading 399 
Index 401 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


J. Robert Oppenheimer at his desk frontispiece 


Gordon Gray, chairman of the Personnel Security Board 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, 1945 


J. Robert Oppenheimer at home in Princeton, with his children, 
Peter and Toni, and his dog, Buddy, 1948 


J. Robert Oppenheimer walking with his lawyer Lloyd K. Garrison, 
April 1954 


Frank Oppenheimer after testifying before the House Committee on 
Un-American Activities, 1949 


Haakon Chevalier, 1930s 


Leslie R. Groves with J. Robert Oppenheimer at Los Alamos, August 
1945 


Roger Robb at a Senate hearing, July 1958 

Hans A. Bethe, January 1957 

Isidor I. Rabi and Lee A. DuBridge, Washington, D.C. 
Vannevar Bush, November 1957 

Katherine (Kitty) Oppenheimer 


J. Robert Oppenheimer and John von Neumann in front ofan early 
computer, 1952 


Edward Teller and Enrico Fermi, Chicago, 1951 
Thomas A. Morgan, a member of the Personnel Security Board 
J. Robert Oppenheimer, 1954 


4 
18 


26 


40 


57 
66 


80 
95 
128 
167 
200 
213 


230 
254 
301 
348 


xii ILLUSTRATIONS 


Ward V. Evans, a member of the Personnel Security Board 363 
President Eisenhower and Lewis L. Strauss, March 1954 377 
Henry De Wolf Smyth, 1957 390 


PREFACE 


On June 15, 1954, the Government Printing Office (GPO) published Jn the 
Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer, a transcript of the famous physicist’s hear- 
ing before the Atomic Energy Commission’s Personnel Security Board. More 
than thirty witnesses testified at the hearing, which was held over a four-week 
period in April and May. The text came to 992 densely printed pages. Shortly 
thereafter, the GPO published the reports of the board and the commission, 
along with pertinent correspondence, comprising an additional 55 pages. The 
transcript contained a number of typesetting errors, although surprisingly few 
considering the haste with which publication was arranged. All discussions 
of classified matters were deleted, and the deletions—of words, phrases, and 
sometimes entire pages—were indicated by asterisks. 

The demand from libraries, scholars, and other interested parties soon ex- 
hausted the supply of the GPO’s edition. In 1970, the MIT Press reprinted the 
transcript and the accompanying reports with a foreword by Philip M. Stern, 
the author of an exceptionally fine book on the subject, The Oppenheimer 
Case: Security on Trial (1969), and with a highly useful index. But the MIT 
edition, too, has long been out of print. 

The version presented here consists of about one-fourth of the original tran- 
script. I include much of the testimony of the centrally important figures— 
Oppenheimer, Hans A. Bethe, Edward Teller, Leslie R. Groves, Isidor I. Rabi, 
Enrico Fermi, and George F. Kennan—but provide briefer excerpts from testi- 
mony that was less significant. To convey the underlying rancor, I include 
some of the angry exchanges between the opposing lawyers, and between Op- 
penheimer’s attorneys and members of the board. I omit, however, lengthy 
discussions of such matters as whether a transcript of a 1943 interview be- 
tween Oppenheimer and an army security officer accurately reflected the lan- 


xiv PREFACE 


guage on the tape recording. I leave out much that pertains to the past radical 
affiliations of Oppenheimer’s friends and students in order to include most of 
the testimony that focuses on broad questions concerning ethics, morality, 
politics, loyalty, security, and international diplomacy. 

My interest in J. Robert Oppenheimer goes back to the late 1970s, when I 
first read the four microfilm reels of the FBI file on the case. I have lectured on 
“The Ethical Responsibilities of the Scientist: The Case of J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer” at Fermilab, the University of Illinois, the University of Notre Dame, 
Haifa University, the Weizmann Institute, Tel Aviv University, and at the Cor- 
nell University Department of Physics and Peace Studies Program, and have 
received many valuable suggestions from those in attendance. Hans A. Bethe 
and Dale R. Corson generously shared with me their recollections of Oppen- 
heimer. I am indebted to Peter Agree who first encouraged me to undertake 
this project. I am particularly grateful for the sound advice I received from 
Sheryl A. Englund and Ange Romeo-Hall at Cornell University Press. I have 
had the good fortune to have had the index prepared by Jane Marsh Dieck- 
mann. I also wish to thank my research assistants, Lauren Eisenstein and 
Charlotte Landers, who provided indispensable help. 

I hope that this abridged version will do justice to the original, for no docu- 
ment better explains the America of the cold war—its fears and resentments, 
its anxieties and dilemmas—than In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer. The 
Oppenheimer hearing also serves as a reminder of the fragility of individual 
rights and of how easily they may be lost. 


RICHARD POLENBERG 


September 2001 


INTRODUCTION: “ALL THE 
EVIL OF THE TIMES” 


1. 


On May 6, 1954, weary and disheartened after a grueling month-long hear- 
ing to assess his “loyalty” and, therefore, his eligibility for security clearance, 
Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer left Washington, D.C., and returned home to 
Princeton, New Jersey. Although Oppenheimer had headed the program to 
build an atomic bomb during World War II, and had chaired the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission’s (AEC) General Advisory Committee from 1947 to 1952, 
neither his past service nor his eminence had shielded him from suspicion or 
from the snooping that so often accompanied it. While his case was before the 
AEC’s Personnel Security Board, his telephone had been tapped, his mail 
tracked, and his whereabouts noted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI). The surveillance, which had begun before the hearing started, remained 
in place even after it ended, which accounts for the report filed on May 7 de- 
scribing his reaction to the ordeal. Oppenheimer was overheard to say that it 
would take many weeks for the board to reach a decision and for the AEC to 
render final judgment, “but he believes he will never be through with the sit- 
uation. He does not believe the case will come to a quiet end as all the evil of 
the times is wrapped in this situation.”? 

If we construe his phrase—“all the evil of the times”—to refer to the mani- 
fold ways in which, in the 1950s, a virulent strain of cold war anti-commu- 
nism undermined ideals of decency, justice, and fair play, then Oppenheimer 
was surely right. Taken in combination, the various aspects of the case—Pres- 


1. “Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer: Summary for May 7, 1954.” FBI Security File: J. Robert Op- 
penheimer (Scholarly Resources Microfilm), hereafter cited as FBI File. 


xvi INTRODUCTION 


ident Dwight D. Eisenhower’s initial decision to suspend his clearance, the 
tactical maneuvering that preceded the hearing, the manner in which the in- 
quiry was conducted, the process by which ostensibly secret testimony was 
made public, and the justifications offered by the board and the AEC for vot- 
ing to deny clearance—provide a classic illustration of what is meant by 
“McCarthyism.” 

Use of the term is appropriate even though Senator Joseph McCarthy 
played virtually no personal role in the outcome. In the spring of 1954, the 
junior senator from Wisconsin was preoccupied with a different set of hear- 
ings: the Senate’s permanent Subcommittee on Investigations was investi- 
gating his allegations that the United States Army had been engaged in 
“promoting, covering up, and honorably discharging known Communists.”? 
The Army-McCarthy hearings began on April 22 and ended on June 17, 
thus coinciding almost exactly with the AEC deliberations in the Oppen- 
heimer case. But where the Army-McCarthy contest took place in a gaudy 
atmosphere, replete with reporters, microphones, flash bulbs, and tele- 
vision cameras, the Oppenheimer hearing was conducted behind closed 
doors, with a civility that barely cloaked its contentiousness. Although 
newspapers printed the AEC’s charges against Oppenheimer and his reply, 
and told their readers that an inquiry was under way, not a word of actual 
testimony was made public until mid-June, after the hearing had con- 
cluded. 

If McCarthy’s eventual downfall may be traced to his crude and offensive 
behavior during the Senate hearing, his continued influence was never more 
apparent than in the AEC’s handling of the Oppenheimer case. Yet Oppen- 
heimer was not merely a casualty of McCarthyism. He was, to a considerable 
degree, also the victim of his own stubborn pride. He insisted that the hearing 
go forward because he feared that if he acquiesced in the loss of his consul- 
tant’s contract he would be conceding that he was “unworthy.” He wanted to 
believe that the many contributions he had made to making the United States 
a nuclear power would outweigh his earlier radical associations; that his lofty 
standing in the scientific community would protect him from retaliation by a 
government anxious not to alienate members of that community; and that his 
personal friendship with many trusted leaders of the foreign policy, business, 
and educational establishments would compensate for the doubts he had ex- 
pressed about developing the hydrogen bomb. 


2. 


The origins of the Oppenheimer hearing are usually traced to the letter that 
William L. Borden (formerly the chief of staff of the Joint Committee on 
Atomic Energy) wrote to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover on November 7, 1953, in 


2. Cited in Robert Griffith, The Politics of Fear: Joseph R. McCarthy and the Senate (New 
York, 1970), 249. 


INTRODUCTION xvii 


which he asserted that the physicist was “more probably than not .. . an agent 
of the Soviet Union.” Hoover forwarded the letter to the AEC and to the 
White House, and on December 3 President Eisenhower secretly erected a 
“blank wall” between Oppenheimer and national security information. It was 
not until December 21, however, a week after Oppenheimer’s return from a 
trip to Europe, that AEC chairman Lewis L. Strauss and general manager Ken- 
neth D. Nichols met with him to explain that his clearance had been sus- 
pended. They also handed him a draft of the charges on which the suspension 
was based. Shaken and distraught, Oppenheimer, who had been given no 
inkling of what was in store for him, was informed that he could either contest 
the suspension or quietly terminate his consultant’s contract and thereby 
avoid a hearing. Given only a day to decide, Oppenheimer, on the morning of 
December 23, informed Strauss that he wanted the opportunity to clear his 
name. 

At this stage the Eisenhower administration was motivated less by a belief 
that Oppenheimer’s continued clearance imperiled national security than by 
a fear that failure to act would expose it to attack from Senator McCarthy. As 
early as May 19, 1953, McCarthy and his aide Roy Cohn had visited FBI di- 
rector J. Edgar Hoover to ask how he would react to an investigation of Op- 
penheimer. Hoover tried to dissuade McCarthy from proceeding, not because 
he wished to protect Oppenheimer, whom he distrusted, but because he 
thought the senator could bungle the investigation and antagonize scientists 
throughout the nation. In June, it was Lewis L. Strauss’s turn to warn the Sen- 
ate’s Republican leadership that an investigation by McCarthy of Oppen- 
heimer would be “a most ill-advised and impolitic move.”* But by December, 
with Borden’s letter circulating within the executive branch and likely to fall 
into McCarthy’s hands, the Eisenhower administration thought it had to do 
something. The strategy succeeded: in April 1954, when McCarthy finally got 
around to denouncing Oppenheimer for having delayed work on the hydro- 
gen bomb, he said he had decided against an investigation because of assur- 
ances “from top Administration officials that this matter would be gone into 
in detail.”5 

At the time, those who sympathized with Oppenheimer regarded a hearing 
by the AEC’s Personnel Security Board as infinitely preferable to an inquiry 
by Senator McCarthy. A mudslinger if there ever was one, McCarthy was 
known for browbeating witnesses, scandal-mongering, and making wild alle- 
gations. By contrast, the New York Herald Tribune editorialized, the AEC 
hearing, which “should be in good hands and under sound procedures,” 
would be “conducted with complete fairness.” The board would be able to as- 
sess the scientist’s life and work in their broad context, the argument went; “If 


3. See 305. 

4. Cited in Barton J. Bernstein, “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Historical Stud- 
ies in the Physical Sciences 12 (1982): 207. 

5. The Washington Post, April 14, 1954. 


xviii INTRODUCTION 


the case had been taken up by Senator McCarthy, such perspective and judg- 
ment would have been impossible.”® 

The proceedings before the Personnel Security Board had all the outward 
trappings of just such an impartial hearing. Oppenheimer was represented by 
a team of eminent attorneys headed by Lloyd K. Garrison. He was permitted to 
answer the charges against him in whatever way and at whatever length he 
wished. His lawyers were allowed to call as many witnesses as they wanted in 
his behalf, and the board made efforts to accommodate their schedules. His 
lawyers were allowed to cross-examine all the hostile witnesses to the extent 
they thought desirable. The discourse in the hearing room was ordinarily 
quite polite, punctuated only infrequently by harsh comments or bitter rejoin- 
ders. Oppenheimer’s attorney complimented the members of the board for 
their courteousness, and they in turn thanked him for his cooperation. With- 
out fail, the board members and the AEC attorney addressed Oppenheimer 
deferentially, either as “Dr. Oppenheimer” or, more simply, as “Doctor.” 

Yet if the “odious courtesies,” as Kafka would have called them, were fully 
observed, the hearing in truth lacked fundamental elements of due process, 
the most egregious example being the surveillance of Oppenheimer by the 
FBI, which began on January 1, 1954. At the urging of Lewis L. Strauss, FBI 
agents observed Oppenheimer’s home and office, listened in on his telephone 
conversations, and had him tailed wherever he went. The telephone taps were 
particularly useful in providing information about his travel plans, thus mak- 
ing it easier for informants to follow him. As the historians of the AEC report, 
“The only privacy accorded Oppenheimer by the FBI were conversations 
within his own home.”? 

What made this surveillance particularly sinister was that it inevitably 
picked up information concerning Oppenheimer’s discussions with his attor- 
neys, information that was passed on to Strauss who then passed it on to 
Roger Robb, the attorney retained by the AEC to present the case against Op- 
penheimer. So patently unethical was this aspect of the surveillance that it 
troubled the FBI agent in Newark who was in charge. He questioned the pro- 
priety of the coverage “in view of the fact that it might disclose attorney-client 
relations.” He was told that the “rather full spot surveillances and the techni- 
cal surveillance” were “of great assistance.” Not only was the surveillance jus- 
tified on the grounds that “there is no criminal action pending against Oppen- 
heimer,” but the FBI also wished to guard against the danger that he might 
defect: “Our chief concern is to know immediately of any indication that Op- 
penheimer might flee.”® 

A preposterous fear, indeed, and a telling reflection of the times, it never- 
theless helped rationalize continued surveillance. The bugs and wiretaps 


6. Editorial, New York Herald-Tribune, April 14, 1954. 

7. Richard G. Hewlett and Jack M. Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, 1953-1961: Eisenhower 
and the Atomic Energy Commission (Berkeley, 1989), 80. 

8. Cited ibid., 81. 


INTRODUCTION xix 


were kept in place, and it is also possible that the FBI “had successfully se- 
cured an informant among Oppenheimer’s inner circle of friends and associ- 
ates.”® Consequently, Strauss received reports, almost daily, regarding Oppen- 
heimer’s efforts to obtain legal counsel, to develop a defense strategy, and to 
line up witnesses in his behalf. The FBI even forwarded information about the 
meetings of partners in the law firm Oppenheimer retained—Paul, Weiss, 
Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison—at which they discussed the conditions under 
which they would handle the case, and the degree to which various members 
of the firm would participate in it. 

Any acquaintance of Oppenheimer’s, no matter how prominent or re- 
spectable, could be caught in the spidery web of surveillance. Here, for ex- 
ample, is what the FBI discovered as it followed Oppenheimer during one 
twenty-four-hour period. On the afternoon of January 10, 1954, Oppenheimer 
flew from New York City to Boston to attend a meeting of the Harvard College 
Board of Overseers, which was scheduled for the following morning, and he 
returned to New York City later that afternoon. The FBI obtained reports on 
his doings from four confidential sources “of known reliability.” These in- 
formants observed Oppenheimer as he arrived at the airport terminal in 
Boston at 6:15 P.M., overheard the arrangements he made to share a taxicab, 
followed him to a 7:00 P.M. dinner party in Cambridge, waited outside until 
midnight when he left, trailed him as he was driven to the Harvard faculty 
club, noted that he attended the Board of Overseers meeting at 11 A.M. the 
next morning, reported that his return flight was canceled because of a snow- 
storm but that Oppenheimer boarded a 3 P.M. train to New York City after tele- 
phoning his wife to let her know that he would arrive at Pennsylvania Station 
at 7:20 P.M. The FBI report noted that the dinner party was hosted by U.S. Dis- 
trict Court judge Charles E. Wyzanski, that one of the guests, Robert Fiske 
Bradford, was a former Republican governor of Massachusetts, and that an- 
other guest, McGeorge Bundy, was dean of the faculty of arts and sciences at 
Harvard.?° 

On April 7, as the date of the hearing approached, the FBI agent in Newark 
again inquired as to whether the surveillance at Princeton ought to be termi- 
nated. He noted that the telephone tap had periodically furnished Strauss 
with information “mainly bearing on the relationship between Oppenheimer, 
his attorneys, and potential witnesses for Oppenheimer at the forthcoming 
AEC hearing. Absolutely no information of security interest has been obtained 
from the technical.” All the charges against Oppenheimer, the agent contin- 
ued, related to his activities in the period before 1943 and to his alleged op- 
position to the hydrogen bomb. “We have no substantial information of a pro- 
communist nature concerning Oppenheimer subsequent to 1943.” Since 
Oppenheimer would be in Washington once the hearing began, “there appears 


9. Ibid., 85. 
10. Special Agent, Boston, Report, January 13, 1954, FBI File. 


xXx INTRODUCTION 


to be no logical reason for continuing the technical surveillance.” But a note 
at the bottom of the agent’s wire reads: “Strauss requested tech be continued 
for about 2 weeks till after hearing.”!1 And on April 13, a day after the hearing 
began, Strauss agreed that while physical surveillance of Oppenheimer in 
Washington was unnecessary, the telephone tap in Princeton ought to be con- 
tinued “as it has been most helpful.”?2 

Although Oppenheimer had reason to suspect his telephone was tapped, he 
did not know how extensive the surveillance was or how fatally it under- 
mined the principle of attorney-client confidentiality. He and his lawyers 
were all too aware, however, of another objectionable aspect of the proceed- 
ings. For a week before the hearing began, the members of the Personnel Se- 
curity Board—Gordon Gray, Thomas A. Morgan, and Ward V. Evans—im- 
mersed themselves in the secret files that the FBI and other agencies had 
compiled on Oppenheimer over the years. Worse still, the board members ex- 
amined the files in the presence of Roger Robb, the AEC attorney who would 
soon present the case against Oppenheimer. Far from facing a panel that had 
no preformed opinion, Oppenheimer would appear before men whose minds, 
to some extent, had already been made up by the reading of dossiers that con- 
tained (as secret dossiers always do) derogatory information, much of it un- 
substantiated. Meanwhile, Robb had an opportunity to put a negative spin on 
the files, an opportunity, it must be assumed, he did not let pass. At the very 
least, as a result of a week’s socializing with the board members, Robb “be- 
came their close associate, not an attorney presenting material before an im- 
partial panel.” 

Oppenheimer’s attorney, Lloyd K. Garrison, could not contain the damage 
because the AEC rejected his requests either to see the secret files or to meet 
with the board in advance to respond, even in general terms, to concerns 
raised by information contained in them. Garrison remembered having “a 
kind of sinking feeling” when he realized that the board had “a week’s im- 
mersion in FBI files which we would never have the privilege of seeing, and 
of coming to the hearings with that intense background of study of the 
derogatory information.” As a result of the board’s “preliminary immersion in 
the secret files,” Garrison realized, “a cloud of suspicion hung over Robert 
Oppenheimer.”4 

That cloud would not have been dispelled even if Garrison had succeeded 
in obtaining security clearance since he still would not have been granted ac- 
cess to secret FBI files. But, in fact, he never obtained clearance and his failure 
to do so placed Oppenheimer at a serious disadvantage. On January 18, 1954, 
the AEC informed Garrison that it was willing to expedite his application for 
a “Q” clearance, but he insisted that two of his colleagues, Herbert Marks and 


11. W. A. Branigan to A. H. Belmont, April 7, 1954, ibid. 

12. J. E. Hoover to the Attorney General, April 13, 1954, ibid. 

13. Bernstein, “In the Matter,” 218. 

14. Philip M. Stern, The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial (New York, 1969), 527-28. 


INTRODUCTION xxi 


Samuel Silverman, also be cleared. When the AEC balked, Garrison decided 
to withdraw his own request, explaining, “We felt that unless all three of us 
were given clearance, none of us should be. .. . [W]e would be working con- 
stantly together, and it would be impractical for one of us to be privy to docu- 
ments and testimony whose nature he would have to conceal from the oth- 
ers.” Not until March 26, two weeks before the hearing opened, did Garrison 
reconsider and request clearance as “a precautionary measure to ensure that 
at all times there would at least be one person who could be at Robert’s 
side.”15 By then it was too late. At four different times during the course of the 
hearing Oppenheimer’s attorneys were asked to leave the room, and at no 
time were they permitted to see any material in Oppenheimer’s dossier that 
remained classified. 


3. 


The surveillance, suspicion, and secrecy all rendered Oppenheimer partic- 
ularly vulnerable, and Roger Robb was quick to exploit his advantage. As 
Robb understood, he did not have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that 
Oppenheimer was a security risk; rather, Oppenheimer had to persuade the 
board that he was not one. To do this, Oppenheimer thought, required that he 
be cooperative, even to the extent of answering questions about the political 
affiliations of friends and former students. In effect, he played the role of an 
informer, however distasteful he found it. At one point, after listing a number 
of names, Oppenheimer was asked, “would you break them down? Would 
you tell us who the Communists were and who the fellow travelers were?” 
Oppenheimer finally exclaimed, “Is the list long enough?” His embarrass- 
ment at having named the names of men and women who trusted him was 
made all the more acute in mid-June when the AEC suddenly decided to pub- 
lish the transcript of the hearings, which, it had been assumed, would remain 
secret. 

There was, however, one person about whom Oppenheimer refused to ex- 
press doubts: his younger brother, Frank. One of the more insidious aspects of 
Robb’s questioning was his attempt to use Robert’s loyalty to Frank to under- 
mine his credibility. By 1954, Frank Oppenheimer’s past membership in the 
Communist Party was a matter of record, and he had paid a high price for it. 
Frank joined the Party (along with his wife, Jacquenette) in 1937 when he was 
a graduate student in physics at the California Institute of Technology; he left 
the Party in 1941, shortly before being employed at the Radiation Laboratory 
at Berkeley. After the war he joined the physics department at the University 
of Minnesota. In 1947, when a newspaper report asserted he had been a Com- 
munist, he issued a denial. But in 1949, subpoenaed to testify under oath be- 
fore the House Committee on Un-American Activities, Frank admitted his 


15. Ibid., 509-14. 
16. See 75. 


xxii INTRODUCTION 


past membership; he agreed to talk about his own involvement although not 
to implicate anyone else. He submitted his resignation to the University, not 
anticipating it would be accepted, but in fact it quickly was. Frank moved to 
Colorado, where he became a sheep rancher, and that is what he was doing at 
the time of his older brother’s security hearing. 

Even after all these years, it remains excruciatingly painful to observe 
Robb’s effort to turn brother against brother. Having gotten Robert to admit 
that even in the 1940s he believed that membership in the Communist Party 
“was inconsistent with work on a secret war project,” Robb then asked 
whether the same was true for former members of the Party, such as Frank. 
When Oppenheimer replied that it all depended “on the character and the to- 
tality of the disengagement and what kind of a man he is, whether he is an 
honest man,” Robb asked what test he applied in the 1940s to “satisfy yourself 
that a former member of the party is no longer dangerous?” “In the case of a 
brother, you don’t make tests,” he answered. His brother, Oppenheimer said, 
had told him he left the Party in 1941. “You were satisfied at that time that 
your brother was not a member of the party any more?” “Yes.” “How did you 
reach that conclusion?” “He told me.” “That was enough for you?” “Sure.” 
Had Oppenheimer informed security officers at Berkeley about Frank’s past 
membership? “Did you tell [them] he had been a member of the Communist 
Party?” “I don’t think so.” Finally, having gotten Oppenheimer to agree that 
the fact that a person says he is no longer a Party member “does not show that 
he is no longer dangerous as a security risk,” Robb asked, “Do you think your 
brother today would be a good security risk?” “I rather think so.”?” 

Oppenheimer’s desire to protect his brother may well explain his unwill- 
ingness, during and after the war, to tell the whole truth about the “Chevalier 
incident,” which played a central role at the hearing. In February or March 
1943, just before leaving California for Los Alamos, Oppenheimer had a con- 
versation with Haakon Chevalier, a left-wing friend and a professor of French 
at Berkeley. Chevalier reported that a mutual acquaintance, George Eltenton, a 
British engineer, had said there might be a way to get information about 
atomic research at the Radiation Laboratory to the Russians. That would be 
terribly wrong, Oppenheimer said, and the matter was quickly dropped, but 
he neglected to report it to security officers at Los Alamos, and when he fi- 
nally did he invented a partly fictitious story. Indeed, at first he refused even 
to provide Chevalier’s name. The FBI believed it had credible evidence—and 
so informed the AEC—that Oppenheimer failed to divulge all the details be- 
cause to do so would have implicated his brother, Frank. 

Whether Chevalier had approached each brother separately, or had spoken 
to Frank who then spoke to Robert, remains unclear. What is certain is that 
Robert had informed General Leslie R. Groves, the head of the Manhattan 
Project, that Frank was involved, but only after extracting a promise from 
Groves not to tell anyone. According to the historians of the Atomic En- 


17. See 56-58. 


INTRODUCTION xxiii 


ergy Commission, “Oppenheimer secured Groves’s pledge not to report his 
brother’s name to the FBI, thereby incredibly implicating the head of the Man- 
hattan Project in his story.”18 A man of his word, Groves did not mention 
Frank’s name in any report he made during the war. At the 1954 hearing, how- 
ever, Groves said of Oppenheimer: “It was always my impression that he 
wanted to protect his brother, and that his brother might be involved in hav- 
ing been in this chain, and that his brother didn’t behave quite as he should 
have, or if he did, he didn’t even want to have the finger of suspicion pointed 
at his brother, because he always felt a natural loyalty to him, and had a pro- 
tective attitude toward him.”!9 There were no follow-up questions from Robb 
about Groves’s covering up of Oppenheimer’s “cock-and-bull” story during 
the war. 

But Robb pursued Oppenheimer relentlessly for having concocted the story. 
Relying on the transcripts of Oppenheimer’s conversations with an army 
counterintelligence officer, Lt. Col. Boris T. Pash, Robb made it appear that 
Oppenheimer was a habitual, inveterate liar. Robb’s first question: “Did you 
tell Pash the truth about this thing?” “No,” Oppenheimer said. Robb’s second 
question: “You lied to him?” “Yes,” Oppenheimer replied. Robb’s third ques- 
tion: “What did you tell Pash that was not true?” Oppenheimer answered 
truthfully: “That Eltenton had attempted to approach members of the proj- 
ect—three members of the project—through intermediaries.” Robb’s fourth 
question: “What else did you tell him that wasn’t true?” When Oppenheimer 
said, “That is all I really remember,” Robb, referring to the transcript, asked a 
fifth question: “That is all? Did you tell Pash ... ,” and then implied that Op- 
penheimer’s failure to remember everything he had said in a decade-old inter- 
view amounted to purposeful deception. When Oppenheimer again admitted 
making up the story, Robb asked, “Why did you do that, Doctor?” One would 
have thought Oppenheimer’s reply—“Because I was an idiot”—would have 
sufficed. But Robb was not done: “Is that your only explanation, Doctor?”2° 

Not only did Robb pillory Oppenheimer for having lied about the Chevalier 
incident; he also exploited the “fabrication and tissue of lies”’—an inaccurate 
description, perhaps, but one that Robb at one point induced Oppenheimer to 
accept—to shake the credibility of witnesses testifying in Oppenheimer’s be- 
half. When, for example, friendly witnesses maintained that Oppenheimer’s 
lack of truthfulness in the Chevalier incident was insignificant in view of his 
overall record and, in any case, had no sinister connotations, Robb asked 
whether they would have reported a suspicious overture under similar cir- 
cumstances, a question that naturally allowed only one answer. When James 
B. Conant (who was formerly president of Harvard University and was then 
serving as United States High Commissioner to Germany) appeared, it was 
board member Ward V. Evans who asked: “Wouldn’t you have reported it just 


18. Hewlett and Holl, Atoms for Peace and War, 96. 
19. See 78. 
20. See 67-68. 


Xxiv INTRODUCTION 


as quickly as you could?” “I think I would have, yes. I hope I would have; let 
us put it that way.” At this point, Robb injected: “When you did report it, Doc- 
tor, you would have told the whole truth about it?” “I hope so.” “Iam sure you 
would.”21 

Robb also raised another subject designed to humilitate Oppenheimer—his 
overnight visit to his former fiancée, Jean Tatlock, in Berkeley, in June 1943. 
Although Oppenheimer had admitted seeing her, his statement had not men- 
tioned staying at her apartment. Now he said that Tatlock had wanted to see 
him “because she was still in love with me.” Robb’s questions were pitiless: 
“You have no reason to believe she wasn’t a communist, do you?... You 
spent the night with her, didn’t you? ... That is when you were working on a 
secret war project? ... Did you think that consistent with good security?... 
You didn’t think that spending a night with a dedicated Communist . . .?” 
Robb’s questions were presumably designed to show that Oppenheimer was 
careless about security; but by reiterating the suggestive phrase “spending the 
night,” he was characterizing Oppenheimer as an adulterer.?2 

Yet Robb wanted more from Oppenheimer than an admission that he had 
once lied to security officials or had behaved indiscreetly. One of the AEC’s 
chief allegations was that Oppenheimer had opposed a crash program to de- 
velop the hydrogen bomb in 1949, and had slowed progress toward the 
weapon by letting other physicists know his position. Robb therefore wanted 
Oppenheimer to confess that, having worked on the atomic bomb, his opposi- 
tion to the hydrogen bomb could not have been based on moral scruples. The 
implication was clear: if Oppenheimer’s reservations about the hydrogen 
bomb were not ethically derived, they must have been motivated by pro- 
Russian sentiment. 

Partly to avoid the trap Robb was setting, Oppenheimer, when asked 
whether he had “moral scruples” about the use of the atomic bombs against 
Japanese cities, replied, “terrible ones,” although as Robb well knew, and Op- 
penheimer had earlier admitted, he had voiced no such doubts before the 
bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This colloquy then followed: “But you 
supported the dropping of the atom bomb on Japan, didn’t you?” “What do you 
mean support?” “You helped pick the target, didn’t you?” “I did my job which 
was the job I was supposed to do. I was not in a policymaking position at Los 
Alamos. I would have done anything that I was asked to do, including making 
the bombs in a different shape, if I had thought it was technically feasible.”25 


4. 


In view of the many disadvantages Oppenheimer faced during Robb’s hos- 
tile cross-examination, and the admissions he made, the outcome was never 


21. See 152-53. 
22. See 74. 
23. See 97. 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


in doubt. Just a week into the proceeding, well before most of Oppenheimer’s 
witnesses had even appeared, Lewis L. Strauss told an FBI agent “that he was 
most happy with the way the Oppenheimer hearing was going and said he 
had been in conference each day with Rolander and Robb who are handling 
the matter before the board and was convinced that in view of the testimony 
to date the board could take no other action but to recommend the revoking of 
Oppenheimer’s clearance.” The hearing concluded on May 6 and three 
weeks later, on May 27, the board issued just such a report. Filled with sanc- 
timonious self-praise—“the Board has allowed sympathetic consideration for 
the individual to go hand in hand with an understanding of the necessities for 
a clear, realistic, and rugged attitude toward subversion, possible subversion, 
or indeed broader implications of security”—the majority report, signed by 
Gordon Gray and Thomas A. Morgan, concluded that Oppenheimer was “a 
loyal citizen” but that his “continuing conduct and associations” reflected a 
disregard for security requirements, and that his views regarding the hydro- 
gen bomb program were “sufficiently disturbing as to raise a doubt as to 
whether his future participation . .. would be clearly consistent with the best 
interests of security.”25 

Now Oppenheimer and his attorneys faced a truly Kafka-esque situation. 
The board’s report went to the AEC’s general manager, Kenneth D. Nichols, for 
his use in formulating a recommendation to the full commission, which 
would make the final determination. By this point, however, none of Oppen- 
heimer’s judges were saying what they really believed. Gray and Morgan did 
not believe Oppenheimer was a loyal citizen, but only that the evidence did 
not prove conclusively that he was not loyal. Ward V. Evans submitted a mi- 
nority report that he did not write: his draft was so embarrassingly inadequate 
that Roger Robb—of all people!—rewrote it, which may explain why it was 
long on rhetoric and short on facts. Oppenheimer’s lawyers labored over a re- 
sponse defending him against the board’s charge that he had delayed produc- 
tion of the hydrogen bomb, even as Nichols was drafting a letter of “transmit- 
tal” to the AEC—again, with the assistance of Roger Robb—that reformulated 
the charges, eliminating any criticism of Oppenheimer for the advice he had 
given on the hydrogen bomb. Neither Nichols nor Robb, however, really 
thought that Oppenheimer was blameless on this count; they merely feared 
alienating the scientific community if he were to be condemned for having 
given his honestly considered opinion on a technical matter. 

If ever a person charged with impartially weighing evidence and making an 
evenhanded ruling ought to have recused himself, it was AEC chairman Lewis 
L. Strauss. From the outset, he had masterminded the crusade against Oppen- 
heimer. He had been instrumental in arranging for the intrusive FBI surveil- 
lance. He had offered Robb advice on how to cross-examine witnesses. He had 
put pressure on witnesses reluctant to appear if he thought their testimony 


24. A. H. Belmont to L. V. Boardman, April 17, 1954, FBI File. 
25. See 355, 360. 


XXxvi INTRODUCTION 


would work to Oppenheimer’s disadvantage. He had resolved to vote against 
restoring Oppenheimer’s security clearance long before he read the transcript 
of the hearing, the Personnel Security Board’s report, Garrison’s brief filed in 
Oppenheimer’s behalf, or Kenneth D. Nichols’s letter of transmittal. Accord- 
ing to the historian Barton Bernstein, Strauss’s opinion, which was joined by 
commissioners Eugene Zuckert and Joseph Campbell, “was simply a way of 
expressing Strauss’s suspicion and hostility without moving so far beyond the 
evidence to invite full-scale attacks on Strauss himself, the AEC, the loyalty- 
security system, and the Eisenhower administration.”26 

Roger Robb, who had a hand in drafting the Personnel Security Board’s ma- 
jority and minority reports, and Nichols’s letter of transmittal, also helped 
Strauss write the AEC’s final opinion. Returning to the theme of Oppen- 
heimer’s “fundamental defects in character,” Strauss and Robb cited several 
examples that they thought had been adequately documented in the hearing, 
but then went on to suggest, without offering any proof, that the work of mili- 
tary intelligence, the FBI, and the AEC “all at one time or another have felt the 
effect of his falsehoods, evasions, and misrepresentations.”2” At the end as in 
the beginning there was the implication that secret information, stored in sen- 
sitive files, available only to those with the highest-level security clearance, 
supported a conclusion that, to those not having access to the information, 
may well have seemed unreasonable. 

On learning of the AEC’s four-to-one vote against Oppenheimer, President 
Eisenhower, his press secretary noted, “personally called Strauss to congratu- 
late him on the fine job he had done in handling a most difficult situation. The 
president expressed hope that handling of the Oppenheimer case would be 
such a contrast to McCarthy’s tactics that the American people would imme- 
diately see the difference.”28 Notwithstanding the president’s belief that the 
procedures followed in the Oppenheimer hearing contrasted sharply with 
McCarthy’s inquisitorial tactics, those procedures were marred by personal 
bias, political partisanship, and procedural irregularities. Lewis L. Strauss, 
Kenneth D. Nichols, Roger Robb, and J. Edgar Hoover had an instinct for the 
jugular no less sure than Joe McCarthy’s. 

They also had an instinct for public relations that would have done 
McCarthy proud. Given Oppenheimer’s eminence, Borden’s letter, the presi- 
dent’s “blank wall,” and the rather complicated logistics of the Personnel Se- 
curity Board hearing, it was only a matter of time before the story broke. 
From the outset, therefore, both sides realized it would be advantageous to 
place its version before the public in the most favorable light possible. In this 
contest, however, Oppenheimer was overmatched, hampered by a fear of 


26. Bernstein, “In the Matter,” 242-43. 
27. See 383. 
28. James Hagerty Diary, June 29, 1954, cited in Bernstein, “In the Matter,” 241. 


INTRODUCTION XXxVii 


alienating those who sat in judgment on him, while Strauss, of course, had no 
such concerns. 

In January 1954, New York Times reporter James Reston found himself, by 
chance, in a seat next to Oppenheimer on a flight from Washington to New 
York City. Reston described him as “thin and slightly stooped, with short gray 
hair and startling blue eyes,” but more importantly, sensed that Oppenheimer 
seemed “unaccountably nervous in my presence and obviously under some 
strain.” So Reston, on his return to the Capital, began “snooping around and 
asking ‘What’s wrong with Oppenheimer these days?’ ”29 The trail soon led to 
Lloyd K. Garrison who eventually turned over the AEC’s letter suspending the 
physicist’s clearance but got Reston to agree not to publish anything, at least 
until Oppenheimer had prepared his reply. At about the same time, Joseph 
and Stewart Alsop of the New York Herald Tribune, ardent admirers of Op- 
penheimer, also discovered what had been going on. Strauss knew about 
Reston’s contact with Garrison (from an FBI report) and of the Times's 
arrangement to withhold publication (from its publisher). 

On April 9, three days before the hearing was to begin, both sides became 
alarmed at the prospect that Joe McCarthy—who made a statement darkly al- 
luding to an eighteen-month delay in producing the hydrogen bomb—was 
going to break the news of the charges against Oppenheimer and the suspen- 
sion of his clearance. Both Oppenheimer and Strauss, for different reasons, 
preferred that the first public account be a responsible one, that is, Reston’s in 
the Times, although neither wanted the onus of having breeched the agreed- 
upon confidentiality. At a White House meeting on April 9, Eisenhower's 
press secretary James Hagerty and Strauss devised a strategy they hoped 
would induce the Times to publish the story. Strauss had pledged to let the 
newspaper know if the story was going to break elsewhere; he now retracted 
that pledge; that led the Times to tell Garrison the story was about to break, 
and he, in turn, authorized the Times to release the text of the documents and 
Reston’s article. When the story appeared on the morning of April 13, Gordon 
Gray, knowing nothing of the intrigue, sharply rebuked Garrison and Oppen- 
heimer for going public. 

This was only the first of several attempts to use the press for the purposes 
of influencing public opinion. On June 1, Oppenheimer’s camp released the 
text of the Personnel Security Board report and Lloyd K. Garrison’s rebuttal, 
thereby infuriating Eisenhower, who remarked: “This fellow Oppenheimer is 
sure acting like a Communist. He is using all the rules that they use to try to 
get public sentiment in their corner on some case where they want to make an 
individual a martyr.”2° Then, on June 15, the AEC decided to release the full 
transcript of the hearings. That decision, which violated assurances of confi- 
dentiality given to all the witnesses, was made after Strauss received two FBI 


29. James Reston, Deadline: A Memoir (New York, 1991), 221-26. 
30. James Hagerty Diary, June 1, 1954, cited in Bernstein, “In the Matter,” 240. 


xxviii INTRODUCTION 


surveillance reports, one claiming that Oppenheimer was considering releas- 
ing only those parts of the transcript favorable to himself, the other that Op- 
penheimer’s attorneys had been overheard saying that publication of the en- 
tire transcript “would have a devastating effect on Oppenheimer’s image.” 
The accidental, if temporary, loss of a classified document by one of the AEC 
commissioners permitted Strauss to obtain approval for publication. 

Publication of the transcript did not have a devastating effect on Oppen- 
heimer but it certainly embarrassed him. There, for all to see, were his con- 
fessions of wrongdoing, his willingness to inform on his former students and 
colleagues, his discomfort when asked about the night with Jean Tatlock, 
and, above all, his seemingly inexplicable timidity in the face of Robb’s bull- 
dog-like cross-examination. To make doubly certain that releasing the tran- 
script would have the desired effect, the AEC provided the press with a 
Memorandum drawing attention to the passages in the 992-page document 
in which Oppenheimer admitted that the original story he told security offi- 
cers about the Chevalier incident in 1943 was “a tissue of lies.” 

“Had we anticipated the way in which the Commission was to present the 
transcript to the public,” Lloyd K. Garrison recalled, “we might have pub- 
lished it first ourselves, through Mr. Reston.” Garrison explained that Oppen- 
heimer had decided against releasing the document partly because of the as- 
surances of secrecy given to witnesses, and partly because the case was still 
pending before the AEC. There was still a chance, however remote, that the 
commission would find in his favor, Garrison explained, but “if we were to 
publish the transcript in advance of the decision, we might disturb the Com- 
mission and perhaps prejudice the outcome.”2? 

The immediate response to the publication of the transcript focused on the 
merits of the AEC’s decision. A few who had sympathized with Oppenheimer 
were now persuaded that the evidence justified the action, while others, like 
Joseph and Stewart Alsop, thought the testimony demonstrated a miscarriage 
of justice as notorious as that in the infamous Dreyfus case.33 Unfortunately, 
not nearly as much attention was paid at the time to the broader significance 
of the transcript, which provided an invaluable source of information about 
the history of nuclear development during the war, the debate among scien- 
tists over the hydrogen bomb, the conflict between the foreign policy and mil- 
itary establishments over national defense, the controversy over the proper 
standards to apply in assessing an individual’s loyalty, and the ethical and 
moral dilemmas involved in combating the perceived menace of communism. 
Like a latter-day Greek tragedy, the transcript also offered insight into such 
timeless traits of human character as honor, fortitude, and humility, and, 
sadly enough, their less admirable counterparts: treachery, timidity, and 
pride. 


31. Ibid., 241. 

32. Stern, Oppenheimer Case, 522. 

33. Joseph and Stewart Alsop, We Accuse! The Story of the Miscarriage of American Jus- 
tice in the Case of J. Robert Oppenheimer (New York, 1954). 


THE SETTING AND 
THE PARTICIPANTS 


In March 1947, the Atomic Energy Commission moved its headquarters to a 
building located at Nineteenth Street and Constitution Avenue N.W., which 
had been used during World War II by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But the AEC re- 
tained space in Building T-3, a “temporary” structure, located three blocks 
away, at Sixteenth and Constitution, not far from the Washington Monument, 
and that is where the Personnel Security Board held its month-long hearing in 
the case of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 

Room 2022, in which the testimony was taken, was rectangular-shaped. It 
was “a sort of long dark room,” participants recalled, “all very bare.” Three 
tables in the center were arranged in the form of a “T,” with the head table 
parallel to the right side of the room as one entered it. The members of the 
board were seated at that table: Gordon Gray in the middle, flanked by Ward 
V. Evans to his left and Thomas A. Morgan to his right. The recorder, Albert J. 
Gasdor, was positioned in front of them. Two long, narrow tables, perpendi- 
cular to the head table, were reserved for the attorneys. To the board members’ 
right, their backs to the windows, were the AEC’s lawyers: Roger Robb and 
Carl Arthur Rolander Jr., and a classification officer. Opposite them, facing the 
windows, were Oppenheimer’s attorneys: Lloyd K. Garrison, Herbert S. 
Marks, Samuel J. Silverman, and Allan B. Ecker. Witnesses were seated when 
they testified in a chair, located at the base of the “T,” facing the members of 
the board. 

Behind the chair was a leather sofa on which Oppenheimer sat when he 
was not testifying. Witnesses therefore would see him as they entered the 
room, but would have their backs to him as they testified. 

In selecting the Personnel Security Board, Lewis L. Strauss, the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission chairman, and William Mitchell, the general counsel, had 


XXX THE SETTING AND THE PARTICIPANTS 


certain considerations in mind. For obvious reasons, they wanted one of the 
members to be a lawyer and another to be a scientist. They sought individuals 
whose stature was such that their decision would carry weight. They pre- 
ferred that one and possibly two of the board members be Democrats to avoid 
the risk that a ruling might appear to be politically motivated. In fact, how- 
ever, they wanted individuals who were likely to rule against Oppenheimer, 
although there was no way to guarantee that outcome. According to an FBI 
memorandum, Strauss told Mitchell that “if this case is lost the atomic energy 
program and all research and development connected thereto will fall into the 
hands of ‘left-wingers.’ . . . [I}f Oppenheimer is cleared, then ‘anyone’ can be 
cleared regardless of the information against them.” 

Gordon Gray, forty-five years of age, president of the University of North 
Carolina since 1950, had exactly the right credentials, Strauss and Mitchell 
believed, to serve as the board chairman. Born to a wealthy Winston Salem, 
North Carolina, family—his father was head of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Com- 
pany—Gray went to a private preparatory school in Virginia, attended the 
University of North Carolina, and then entered Yale Law School, receiving his 
degree in 1933. Elected a state senator in 1939 and 1941, he enlisted in the 
army as a private during World War II, rose to the rank of captain, later served 
as Assistant Secretary of the Army, and wound up, in 1949, as President Harry 
S. Truman’s Secretary of the Army. He was a Democrat, although a conserva- 
tive one who had refused to support Adlai Stevenson in 1952 because he con- 
sidered the nominee soft on communism. 

Joining Gray on the board was Thomas A. Morgan, who had recently retired 
as president and chairman of the board of the Sperry Corporation. Like Gray, 
he hailed from North Carolina, but the two men’s backgrounds could not have 
been more dissimilar. The son of an impoverished tobacco farmer, Morgan 
had to walk three miles every day to get to public school, earned money while 
attending high school by working as a carpenter and traveling salesman, and 
in 1908, at the age of nineteen, enlisted in the navy. While serving as an ap- 
prentice electrician on a battleship, he met Elmer Sperry, the inventor of the 
gyrocompass, and made such a favorable impression that when he was dis- 
charged from the service in 1912 Sperry invited him to join his company. By 
the late 1920s Morgan had become its president. He retired in 1952, but con- 
tinued, among other things, to chair the United Negro College Fund drive in 
New York City. He was described as “a baldish man with gray eyes who bore 
a rose tattoo on his left arm.” 

Both Gray and Morgan were Democrats, but the third member of the board, 
Dr. Ward V. Evans, was a rock-ribbed conservative Republican who was 
quoted as saying, “The closest I ever came to being a Communist was voting 
for Franklin Roosevelt in 1932.” Born in Pennsylvania in 1883, he attended 
Franklin and Marshall College, taught for a few years at a private school near 
Poughkeepsie, New York, and eventually decided to study for a doctorate in 
chemistry, which he received from Columbia University in 1916. He served in 
the army during World War I, and afterward he taught chemistry and served 


THE SETTING AND THE PARTICIPANTS XXxi 


as department chairman at Northwestern University. After his retirement, he 
moved to Loyola University of Chicago, where he taught from 1947 to 1951. 
He had previously served on AEC hearing boards in Chicago. 

In security clearance hearings, typically, the Atomic Energy Commission 
utilized its own lawyers who tried to present all the evidence, pro and con, to 
the members of the board. But the highly unusual circumstances of the Op- 
penheimer hearing led the agency to depart from this practice. Reaching out- 
side the counsel’s office, Strauss selected an attorney who would, in truth, act 
as a prosecutor. Roger Robb’s name was suggested to Strauss by Deputy Attor- 
ney General William P. Rogers. The forty-seven-year-old Robb was a Yale grad- 
uate who had gone on to receive a law degree at Yale in 1931, and then spent 
seven years as an Assistant United States Attorney in Washington, D.C. Since 
1938 he had engaged in private practice, handling a number of high-profile 
cases and earning a reputation as a skilled, combative trial lawyer. 

Assisting Robb in preparing the case, although he did not question any of 
the witnesses, was Carl Arthur Rolander Jr. Born in Kansas in 1920, Rolander 
did not attend college; instead, at the age of twenty, he went to work for the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. He remained with the FBI until 1944, when 
he entered the army, and in 1947 he joined the staff of the Atomic Energy 
Commission. Meanwhile, he attended Catholic University, working toward a 
law degree, which he received in 1949. Given his background, it was only log- 
ical for him to become the AEC’s deputy director of security, and at the hear- 
ing he would sometimes decide whether or not certain documents could be 
declassified. 

One of the reasons why Strauss turned to Roger Robb was his fear that the 
AEC’s own staff lacked the courtroom experience to deal with the high- 
powered legal team Oppenheimer was assembling. To handle his defense, the 
physicist selected Lloyd K. Garrison, whom he had met in April 1953, when 
Garrison became a member of the board of trustees of the Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study. A great-grandson of the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, 
and scion of a wealthy New York City family known for its contributions to 
literature as well as the law, Garrison, born in 1897, served in the navy during 
World War I, attended Harvard College, class of 1919, and went on to Harvard 
Law School, receiving his degree in 1922. He signed on with a prominent 
Wall Street law firm, but left after a few years to branch out on his own. In 
1932 he became dean of the University of Wisconsin Law School, where he re- 
mained until 1945, taking leaves as necessary to serve the federal government 
in the area of labor-management relations: he was chairman of the National 
Labor Relations Board in 1934, and later general counsel, executive director, 
and eventually chairman of the National War Labor Board from 1942 to 1945. 
When the war was over, he became a partner in the New York City firm of 
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, but he still found time for social 
causes, serving, for example, as president and director of the National Urban 
League. 

Oppenheimer’s friend and trusted adviser, Herbert S. Marks, also partici- 


XXxxii THE SETTING AND THE PARTICIPANTS 


pated in his defense. Marks at first resisted any formal involvement because of 
his prior association with the Atomic Energy Commission, but as the hearing 
progressed he assumed an ever larger role. Forty-seven years of age, Marks 
was a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and Harvard Law School, 
class of 1932. Like many other Harvard Law graduates of his generation, he 
went to Washington to participate in the New Deal. He served as attorney and 
also general counsel for the Tennessee Valley Authority from 1934 to 1939, 
and the Bonneville Power Administration from 1939 to 1940. When the 
United States entered World War II, Marks became counsel to the War Pro- 
duction Board from 1941 to 1945. In 1946 he advised Under Secretary of State 
Dean Acheson on problems relating to atomic energy, and in 1947 he served 
as the AEC’s general counsel. Since then he had been a partner in Marks and 
Trowbridge. 

Two members of Garrison’s law firm also aided in the defense. Samuel J. Sil- 
verman, whose parents had emigrated to the United States from Russia in 
1913 when he was five years old, was a graduate of Columbia Law School. 
Like both Garrison and Marks, he served in various federal agencies, working 
as an attorney for the United States Railroad Retirement Board in 1936 and 
1937, and for the Foreign Economic Administration in 1944. After the war he 
joined Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, where he acquired extensive 
trial experience. The final member of the defense team, Allan B. Ecker, a re- 
cent graduate of Harvard Law School, was present throughout the hearing, al- 
though he did not examine any of the witnesses. 

The members of the Personnel Security Board, the attorneys representing 
the Atomic Energy Commission, and those defending Oppenheimer were, for 
the most part, accustomed to spending their working days in comfortable, 
well-appointed offices or boardrooms. But for four weeks in the spring of 1954 
they appeared, each morning, in a small room in a shabby two-story building 


in downtown Washington, D.C., where J. Robert Oppenheimer’s fate was to be 
decided. 


THE HEARING 


Monday, April 12 


KENNETH D. NiICHOLs: “The Commission has no other 


recourse . . . but to suspend your clearance until the matter 
has been resolved” 


[As the proceedings begin, Gordon Gray reads into the record the AEC’s let- 
ter to Oppenheimer written by General Manager Kenneth D. Nichols, which 
raised questions about his continued security clearance.] 


Dr. Gray. The hearing will come to order. 

This board, appointed by Mr. K. D. Nichols, General Manager of the 
Atomic Energy Commission, at the request of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, is 
composed of the following members: Gordon Gray, chairman, Ward V. 
Evans and Thomas A. Morgan. All members of the board are present, and 
board counsels Roger Robb and C. A. Rolander. Dr. and Mrs. Oppenheimer 
are present. Present also are Mr. Lloyd K. Garrison, counsel for Dr. Oppen- 
heimer. Would you identify your associates? 

Mr. GarRIsON. Samuel J. Silverman, my partner, and Allen B. Ecker, associate 
of my firm. 

Dr. Gray. An investigation of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer conducted under the 
provisions of section 10 (b) (5) (B) (i-iii) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 
has revealed certain information which casts doubt upon the eligibility of 
Dr. Oppenheimer for clearance for access to restricted data as provided by 
the Atomic Energy Act of 1946. This information is as follows: 

This is a letter addressed to Dr. J. R. Oppenheimer, the Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study, Princeton, N.J., dated December 23, 1953, reading as follows: 


Dear Dr. Oppenheimer: 

Section 10 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 places upon the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission the responsibility for assuring that individuals are em- 
ployed by the Commission only when such employment will not endanger 
the common defense and security. In addition, Executive Order 10450 of 
April 27, 1953, requires the suspension of employment of any individual 


4 THE HEARING 


i een 


Gordon Gray, chairman of the Personnel Security Board. North Carolina Collection, University 
of North Carolina Library at Chapel Hill. 


where there exists information indicating that his employment may not be 
clearly consistent with the interests of the national security. 

As a result of additional investigation as to your character, associations, and 
loyalty, and review of your personnel security file in the light of the require- 
ments of the Atomic Energy Act and the requirements of Executive Order 
10450, there has developed considerable question whether your continued 
employment on Atomic Energy Commission work will endanger the common 
defense and security and whether such continued employment is clearly con- 
sistent with the interests of the national security. This letter is to advise you of 
the steps which you may take to assist in the resolution of this question. 

The substance of the information which raises the question concerning 
your eligibility for employment on Atomic Energy Commission work is as 
follows: 


Let the record show at this point that Mr. Garrison asked to be excused for 
a few minutes. 


It was reported that in 1940 you were listed as a sponsor of the Friends of 
the Chinese People, an organization which was characterized in 1944 by the 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


House Committee on Un-American Activities as a Communist-front orga- 
nization. It was further reported that in 1940 your name was included on a 
letterhead of the American Committee for Democratic and Intellectual Free- 
dom as a member of its national executive committee. The American Com- 
mittee for Democracy and Intellectual Freedom was characterized in 1942 
by the House Committee on Un-American Activities as a Communist front 
which defended Communist teachers, and in 1943 it was characterized as 
subversive and un-American by a special subcommittee of the House Com- 
mittee on Appropriations. It was further reported that in 1938 you were a 
member of the Western Council of the Consumers Union. The Consumers 
Union was cited in 1944 by the House Committee on Un-American Activi- 
ties as a Communist front headed by the Communist Arthur Kallet. It was 
further reported that you stated in 1943 that you were not a Communist, but 
had probably belonged to every Communist-front organization on the west 
coast and had signed many petitions in which Communists were interested. 

It was reported that in 1943 and previously you were intimately associ- 
ated with Dr. Jean Tatlock, a member of the Communist Party in San Fran- 
cisco, and that Dr. Tatlock was partially responsible for your association 
with Communist-front groups. 

It was reported that your wife, Katherine Puening Oppenheimer, was for- 
merly the wife of Joseph Dallet, a member of the Communist Party, who was 
killed in Spain in 1937 fighting for the Spanish Republican Army. It was fur- 
ther reported that during the period of her association with Joseph Dallet, 
your wife became a member of the Communist Party. The Communist Party 
has been designated by the Attorney General as a subversive organization 
which seeks to alter the form of Government of the United States by uncon- 
stitutional means, within the purview of Executive Order 9835 and Execu- 
tive Order 10450. 

It was reported that your brother, Frank Friedman Oppenheimer, became a 
member of the Communist Party in 1936 and has served as a party organizer 
and as educational director of the professional section of the Communist 
Party in Los Angeles County. It was further reported that your brother’s wife, 
Jackie Oppenheimer, was a member of the Communist Party in 1938; and 
that in August 1944, Jackie Oppenheimer assisted in the organization of the 
East Bay branch of the California Labor School. It was further reported that 
in 1945 Frank and Jackie Oppenheimer were invited to an informal recep- 
tion at the Russian consulate, that this invitation was extended by the Amer- 
ican-Russian Institute of San Francisco and was for the purpose of introduc- 
ing famous American scientists to Russian scientists who were delegates to 
the United Nations Conference on International Organization being held at 
San Francisco at that time, and that Frank Oppenheimer accepted this invi- 
tation. It was further reported that Frank Oppenheimer agreed to give a 6- 
weeks course on The Social Implications of Modern Scientific Development 
at the California Labor School, beginning May 9, 1946. The American- 
Russian Institute of San Francisco and the California Labor School have 
been cited by the Attorney General as Communist organizations within the 
purview of Executive Order 9835 and Executive Order 10450. 


THE HEARING 


It was reported that you have associated with members and officials of the 
Communist Party including Isaac Folkoff, Steve Nelson, Rudy Lambert, 
Kenneth May, Jack Manley, and Thomas Addis. 

It was reported that you were a subscriber to the Daily People’s World, a 
west coast Communist newspaper, in 1941 and 1942. 

It was reported in 1950 that you stated to an agent of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation that you had in the past made contributions to Communist- 
front organizations, although at the time you did not know of Communist 
Party control or extent of infiltration of these groups. You further stated to an 
agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation that some of these contributions 
were made through Isaac Folkoff, whom you knew to be a leading Commu- 
nist Party functionary, because you had been told that this was the most ef- 
fective and direct way of helping these groups. 

It was reported that you attended a housewarming party at the home of 
Kenneth and Ruth May on September 20, 1941, for which there was an ad- 
mission charge for the benefit of The People’s World, and that at this party 
you were in the company of Joseph W. Weinberg and Clarence Hiskey, who 
were alleged to be members of the Communist Party and to have engaged in 
espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union. It was further reported that you in- 
formed officials of the United States Department of Justice in 1952 that you 
had no recollection that you had attended such a party, but that since it 
would have been in character for you to have attended such a party, you 
would not deny that you were there. 

It was reported that you attended a closed meeting of the professional 
section of the Communist Party of Alameda County, Calif., which was 
held in the latter part of July or early August 1941, at your residence, 10 
Kenilworth Court, Berkeley, Calif., for the purpose of hearing an explana- 
tion of a change in Communist Party policy. It was reported that you de- 
nied that you attended such a meeting and that such a meeting was held in 
your home. 

It was reported that you stated to an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investi- 
gation in 1950, that you attended a meeting in 1940 or 1941, which may have 
taken place at the home of Haakon Chevalier, which was addressed by 
William Schneiderman, whom you knew to be a leading functionary of the 
Communist Party. In testimony in 1950 before the California State Senate 
Committee on Un-American Activities, Haakon Chevalier was identified as a 
member of the Communist Party in the San Francisco area in the early 1940’s. 


Let the record show that Mr. Garrison has returned to the hearing room. 


It was reported that you have consistently denied that you have ever been 
a member of the Communist Party. It was further reported that you stated to 
a representative of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 1946 that you had 
a change of mind regarding the policies and politics of the Soviet Union 
about the time of the signing of the Soviet-German Pact in 1939. It was fur- 
ther reported that during 1950 you stated to a representative of the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation that you had never attended a closed meeting of the 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


Communist Party; and that at the time of the Russo-Finnish War and the 
subsequent break between Germany and Russia in 1941, you realized the 
Communist Party infiltration tactics into the alleged anti-Fascist groups and 
became fed up with the whole thing and lost what little interest you had. It 
was further reported, however, that: 

(a) Prior to April 1942, you had contributed $150 per month to the Com- 
munist Party in the San Francisco area, and that the last such payment was 
apparently made in April 1942, immediately before your entry into the 
atomic-bomb project. : 

(b) During the period 1942-45 various officials of the Communist Party, 
including Dr. Hannah Peters, organizer of the professional section of the 
Communist Party, Alameda County, Calif., Bernadette Doyle, secretary of the 
Alameda County Communist Party, Steve Nelson, David Adelson, Paul Pin- 
sky, Jack Manley, and Katrina Sandov are reported to have made statements 
indicating that you were then a member of the Communist Party; that you 
could not be active in the party at that time; that your name should be re- 
moved from the party mailing list and not mentioned in any way; that you 
had talked the atomic-bomb question over with party members during this 
period; and that several years prior to 1945 you had told Steve Nelson that 
the Army was working on an atomic bomb. 

(c) You stated in August of 1943 that you did not want anybody working 
for you on the project who was a member of the Communist Party, since ‘one 
always had a question of divided loyalty’ and the discipline of the Commu- 
nist Party was very severe and not compatible with complete loyalty to the 
project. You further stated at that time that you were referring only to pres- 
ent membership in the Communist Party and not to people who had been 
members of the party. You stated further that you knew several individuals 
then at Los Alamos who had been members of the Communist Party. You did 
not, however, identify such former members of the Communist Party to the 
appropriate authorities. It was also reported that during the period 1942-45 
you were responsible for the employment on the atom-bomb project of indi- 
viduals who were members of the Communist Party or closely associated 
with activities of the Communist Party, including Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, 
Joseph W. Weinberg, David Bohm, Max Bernard Friedman, and David 
Hawkins. In the case of Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, you urged him to work on 
the project, although you stated that you knew he had been very much of a 
Red when he first came to the University of California and that you empha- 
sized to him that he must forego all political activity if he came to the proj- 
ect. In August 1943, you protested against the termination of his deferment 
and requested that he be returned to the project after his entry into the mili- 
tary service. 

It was reported that you stated to representatives of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation on September 5, 1946, that you had attended a meeting in the 
East Bay and a meeting in San Francisco at which there were present per- 
sons definitely identified with the Communist Party. When asked the pur- 
pose of the East Bay meeting and the identity of those in attendance, you de- 


8 


THE HEARING 


clined to answer on the ground that this had no bearing on the matter of in- 
terest being discussed. 

It was reported that you attended a meeting at the home of Frank Oppen- 
heimer on January 1, 1946, with David Adelson and Paul Pinsky, both of 
whom were members of the Communist Party. It was further reported that 
you analyzed some material which Pinsky hoped to take up with the legisla- 
tive convention in Sacramento, Calif. 

It was reported in 1946 that you were listed as vice chairman on the let- 
terhead of the Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences, and 
Professions, Inc., which has been cited as a Communist front by the House 
Committee on Un-American Activities. 

It was reported that prior to March 1, 1943, possibly 3 months prior, Peter 
Ivanov, secretary of the Soviet consulate, San Francisco, approached George 
Charles Eltenton for the purpose of obtaining information regarding work 
being done at the Radiation Laboratory for the use of Soviet scientists; that 
George Charles Eltenton subsequently requested Haakon Chevalier to ap- 
proach you concerning this matter; that Haakon Chevalier thereupon ap- 
proached you, either directly or through your brother, Frank Friedman Op- 
penheimer, in connection with this matter; and that Haakon Chevalier 
finally advised George Charles Eltenton that there was no chance whatso- 
ever of obtaining the information. It was further reported that you did not re- 
port this episode to the appropriate authorities until several months after its 
occurrence; that when you initially discussed this matter with the appropri- 
ate authorities on August 26, 1943, you did not identify yourself as the per- 
son who had been approached, and you refused to identify Haakon Cheva- 
lier as the individual who made the approach on behalf of George Charles 
Eltenton; and that it was not until several months later, when you were or- 
dered by a superior to do so, that you so identified Haakon Chevalier. It was 
further reported that upon your return to Berkeley following your separation 
from the Los Alamos project, you were visited by the Chevaliers on several 
occasions; and that your wife was in contact with Haakon and Barbara 
Chevalier in 1946 and 1947. 

It was reported that in 1945 you expressed the view that ‘there is a reason- 
able possibility that it (the hydrogen bomb) can be made,’ but that the feasi- 
bility of the hydrogen bomb did not appear, on theoretical grounds, as cer- 
tain as the fission bomb appeared certain, on theoretical grounds, when the 
Los Alamos Laboratory was started; and that in the autumn of 1949 the Gen- 
eral Advisory Committee expressed the view that ‘an imaginative and con- 
certed attack on the problem has a better than even chance of producing the 
weapon within 5 years.’ It was further reported that in the autumn of 1949, 
and subsequently, you strongly opposed the development of the hydrogen 
bomb: (1) on moral grounds, (2) by claiming that it was not feasible, (3) by 
claiming that there were insufficient facilities and scientific personnel to 
carry on the development, and (4) that it was not politically desirable. It was 
further reported that even after it was determined, as a matter of national 
policy, to proceed with development of a hydrogen bomb, you continued to 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


oppose the project and declined to cooperate fully in the project. It was fur- 
ther reported that you departed from your proper role as an adviser to the 
Commission by causing the distribution separately and in private, to top 
personnel at Los Alamos of the majority and minority reports of the General 
Advisory Committee on development of the hydrogen bomb for the purpose 
of trying to turn such top personnel against the development of the hydro- 
gen bomb. It was further reported that you were instrumental in persuading 
other outstanding scientists not to work on the hydrogen-bomb project, and 
that the opposition to the hydrogen bomb, of which you are the most experi- 
enced, most powerful, and most effective member, has definitely slowed 
down its development. 

In view of your access to highly sensitive classified information, and in 
view of these allegations which, until disproved, raise questions as to your 
veracity, conduct and even your loyalty, the Commission has no other re- 
course, in discharge of its obligations to protect the common defense and 
security, but to suspend your clearance until the matter has been resolved. 
Accordingly, your employment on Atomic Energy Commission work and 
your eligibility for access to restricted data are hereby suspended, effec- 
tive immediately, pending final determination of this matter. 

To assist in the resolution of this matter, you have the privilege of appear- 
ing before an Atomic Energy Commission personnel security board. To avail 
yourself of the privileges afforded you under the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion hearing procedures, you must, within 30 days following receipt of this 
letter, submit to me, in writing, your reply to the information outlined above 
and request the opportunity of appearing before the personnel security 
board. Should you signify your desire to appear before the board, you will 
be notified of the composition of the board and may challenge any member 
of it for cause. Such challenge should be submitted within 72 hours of the 
receipt of notice of composition of the board. 

If no challenge is raised as to the members of the board, you will be noti- 
fied of the date and place of hearing at least 48 hours in advance of the date 
set for hearing. You may be present for the duration of the hearing, may be 
represented by counsel of your own choosing, and present evidence in your 
own behalf through witnesses, or by documents, or by both. 

Should you elect to have a hearing of your case by the personnel security 
board, the findings of the board, together with its recommendations regard- 
ing your eligibility for employment on Atomic Energy Commission work, in 
the light of Criteria for Determining Eligibility for Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion Security Clearance and the requirements of Executive Order 10450, 
will be submitted to me. 

In the event of an adverse decision in your case by the personnel security 
board, you will have an opportunity to review the record made during your 
appearance before the board and to request a review of your case by the 
Commission’s personnel security review board. 

If a written response is not received from you within 30 days it will be as- 
sumed that you do not wish to submit any explanation for further consider- 


10 THE HEARING 


ation. In that event, or should you not advise me in writing of your desire to 
appear before the personnel security board, a determination in your case 
will be made by me on the basis of the existing record. 

I am enclosing herewith, for your information and guidance, copies of the 
Criteria and Procedures for Determining Eligibility for Atomic Energy Com- 
mission Security Clearance and Executive Order 10450. 

This letter has been marked ‘Confidential’ to maintain the privacy of this 
matter between you and the Atomic Energy Commission. You are not pre- 
cluded from making use of this letter as you may consider appropriate. 

I have instructed Mr. William Mitchell, whose address is 1901 Constitu- 
tion Avenue NW., Washington, D.C., and whose telephone number is Ster- 
ling 3-8000, Extension 277, to give you whatever further detailed informa- 
tion you may desire with respect to the procedures to be followed in this 
matter. 

Very truly yours, 

K. D. Nichols, General Manager. 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “The items of so-called derogatory 
information . . . cannot be fairly understood except in the 
context of my life and my work” 


[Gray then reads Oppenheimer’s reply, a document on which the physicist 
had labored over for a period of two months. Although Garrison collabo- 
rated in the writing, he recalled that “the language of the answer in its final 
form was Robert's, as befitted a document so intensely personal.” 


(Dr. Gray, cont.] I think at this time, then, it would be appropriate for the 


record to reflect Dr. Oppenheimer’s reply of March 4, 1954. I shall now read 


Dr. Oppenheimer’s reply. 


This is a letter addressed to Maj. Gen. K. D. Nichols, General Manager, 


United States Atomic Energy Commission, Washington 25, D.C. 


Dear General Nichols: 

This is in answer to your letter of December 23, 1953, in which the question 
is raised whether my continued employment as a consultant on Atomic En- 
ergy Commission work ‘will endanger the common defense and security and 
whether such continued employment is clearly consistent with the interests 
of the national security.’ 

Though of course I would have no desire to retain an advisory position if 
my advice were not needed, I cannot ignore the question you have raised, 
nor accept the suggestion that Iam unfit for public service. 

The items of so-called derogatory information set forth in your letter can- 
not be fairly understood except in the context of my life and my work. This 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


answer is in the form of a summary account of relevant aspects of my life in 
more or less chronological order, in the course of which I shall comment on 
the specific items in your letter. Through this answer, and through the hear- 
ings before the personnel security board, which I hereby request, I hope to 
provide a fair basis upon which the questions posed by your letter may be 
resolved. 


THE PREWAR PERIOD 


I was born in New York in 1904. My father had come to this country at the 
age of 17 from Germany. He was a successful businessman and quite active 
in community affairs. My mother was born in Baltimore and before her mar- 
riage was an artist and teacher of art. I attended Ethical Culture School and 
Harvard College, which I entered in 1922. I completed the work for my de- 
gree in the spring of 1925. I then left Harvard to study at Cambridge Univer- 
sity and in Goettingen, where in the spring of 1927 I took my doctor’s de- 
gree. The following year I was national research fellow at Harvard and at the 
California Institute of Technology. In the following year I was fellow of the 
international education board at the University of Leiden and at the Techni- 
cal High School in Zurich. 

In the spring of 1929, I returned to the United States. I was homesick for 
this country, and in fact I did not leave it again for 19 years. I had learned a 
great deal in my student days about the new physics; I wanted to pursue this 
myself, to explain it and to foster its cultivation. I had had many invitations 
to university positions, 1 or 2 in Europe, and perhaps 10 in the United 
States. I accepted concurrent appointments as assistant professor at the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology in Pasadena and at the University of Califor- 
nia in Berkeley. For the coming 12 years, I was to devote my time to these 2 
faculties. 

Starting with a single graduate student in my first year in Berkeley, we 
gradually began to build up what was to become the largest school in the 
country of graduate and postdoctoral study in theoretical physics, so that as 
time went on, we came to have between a dozen and 20 people learning and 
adding to quantum theory, nuclear physics, relativity and other modern 
physics. As the number of students increased, so in general did their quality; 
the men who worked with me during those years hold chairs in many of the 
great centers of physics in this country; they have made important contribu- 
tions to science, and in many cases to the atomic-energy project. Many of my 
students would accompany me to Pasadena in the spring after the Berkeley 
term was over, so that we might continue to work together. 

My friends, both in Pasadena and in Berkeley, were mostly faculty people, 
scientists, classicists, and artists. I studied and read Sanskrit with Arthur 
Ryder. I read very widely, just mostly classics, novels, plays, and poetry; and 
I read something of other parts of science. I was not interested in and did not 
read about economics or politics. I was almost wholly divorced from the 
contemporary scene in this country. I never read a newspaper or a current 
magazine like Time or Harper’s; I had no radio, no telephone; I learned of the 


11 


12 


THE HEARING 


stock-market crack in the fall of 1929 only long after the event; the first time 
I ever voted was in the presidential election of 1936. To many of my friends, 
my indifference to contemporary affairs seemed bizarre, and they often 
chided me with being too much of a highbrow. I was interested in man and 
his experience; I was deeply interested in my science; but I had no under- 
standing of the relations of man to his society. 

I spent some weeks each summer with my brother Frank at our ranch in 
New Mexico. There was a strong bond of affection between us. After my 
mother’s death, my father came often, mostly in Berkeley, to visit me; and 
we had an intimate and close association until his death. 

Beginning in late 1936, my interests began to change. These changes did 
not alter my earlier friendships, my relations to my students, or my devotion 
to physics; but they added something new. I can discern in retrospect more 
than one reason for these changes. I had had a continuing, smoldering fury 
about the treatment of Jews in Germany. I had relatives there, and was later 
to help in extricating them and bringing them to this country. I saw what the 
depression was doing to my students. Often they could get no jobs, or jobs 
which were wholly inadequate. And through them, I began to understand 
how deeply political and economic events could affect men’s lives. I began 
to feel the need to participate more fully in the life of the community. But I 
had no framework of political conviction or experience to give me perspec- 
tive in these matters. 

In the spring of 1936, I had been introduced by friends to Jean Tatlock, the 
daughter of a noted professor of English at the university; and in the au- 
tumn, I began to court her, and we grew close to each other. We were at least 
twice close enough to marriage to think of ourselves as engaged. Between 
1939 and her death in 1944 I saw her very rarely. She told me about her 
Communist Party memberships; they were on again, off again affairs, and 
never seemed to provide for her what she was seeking. I do not believe that 
her interests were really political. She loved this country and its people and 
its life. She was, as it turned out, a friend of many fellow travelers and Com- 
munists, with a number of whom I was later to become acquainted. 

I should not give the impression that it was wholly because of Jean Tatlock 
that I made left-wing friends, or felt sympathy for causes which hitherto 
would have seemed so remote from me, like the Loyalist cause in Spain, and 
the organization of migratory workers. I have mentioned some of the other 
contributing causes. I liked the new sense of companionship, and at the time 
felt that I was coming to be part of the life of my time and country. 

In 1937, my father died; a little later, when I came into an inheritance, I 
made a will leaving this to the University of California for fellowships to 
graduate students. 

This was the era of what the Communists then called the United Front, in 
which they joined with many non-Communist groups in support of human- 
itarian objectives. Many of these objectives engaged my interest. I con- 
tributed to the strike fund of one of the major strikes of Bridges’ union; I sub- 
scribed to the People’s World; I contributed to the various committees and 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


organizations which were intended to help the Spanish Loyalist cause. I was 
invited to help establish the teacher’s union, which included faculty and 
teaching assistants at the university, and school teachers of the East Bay. I 
was elected recording secretary. My connection with the teacher’s union 
continued until some time in 1941, when we disbanded our chapter. 

During these same years, I also began to take part in the management of 
the physics department, the selection of courses, and the awarding of fel- 
lowships, and in the general affairs of the graduate school of the university, 
mostly through the graduate council, of which I was a member for some 
years. 

I also became involved in other organizations. For perhaps a year, I was a 
member of the western council of the Consumer’s Union which was con- 
cerned with evaluating information on products of interest on the west 
coast. I do not recall Arthur Kallet, the national head of the Consumer’s 
Union; at most I could have met him if he made a visit to the west coast. I 
joined the American Committee for Democracy and Intellectual Freedom. I 
think it then stood as a protest against what had happened to intellectuals 
and professionals in Germany. I listed, in the personal security question- 
naire that I filled out in 1942 for employment with the Manhattan District, 
the very few political organizations of which I had ever been a member. I say 
on that questionnaire that I did not include sponsorships. I have no recol- 
lection of the Friends of the Chinese People, or of what, if any, my connec- 
tion with this organization was. 

The statement is attributed to me that, while I was not a Communist, I 
‘had probably belonged to every Communist-front organization on the west 
coast and had signed many petitions in which Communists were interested.’ 
I do not recall this statement, nor to whom I might have made it, nor the cir- 
cumstances. The quotation is not true. It seems clear to me that if I said any- 
thing along the lines quoted, it was a half-jocular overstatement. 

The matter which most engaged my sympathies and interests was the war 
in Spain. This was not a matter of understanding and informed convictions. 
I had never been to Spain; I knew a little of its literature; I knew nothing of 
its history or politics or contemporary problems. But like a great many other 
Americans I was emotionally committed to the Loyalist cause. I contributed 
to various organizations for Spanish relief. I went to, and helped with, many 
parties, bazaars, and the like. Even when the war in Spain was manifestly 
lost, these activities continued. The end of the war and the defeat of the Loy- 
alists caused me great sorrow. 

It was probably through Spanish relief efforts that I met Dr. Thomas 
Addis, and Rudy Lambert. As to the latter, our association never became 
close. As to the former, he was a distinguished medical scientist who be- 
came a friend. Addis asked me, perhaps in the winter of 1937-38, to con- 
tribute through him to the Spanish cause. He made it clear that this money, 
unlike that which went to the relief organizations, would go straight to the 
fighting effort, and that it would go through Communist channels. I did so 
contribute; usually when he communicated with me, explaining the nature 


13 


14 


THE HEARING 


ofthe need, I gave him sums in cash, probably never much less than a hun- 
dred dollars, and occasionally perhaps somewhat more than that, several 
times during the winter. I made no such contributions during the spring 
terms when I was in Pasadena or during the summers in New Mexico. 
Later—but I do not remember the date—Addis introduced me to Isaac 
Folkoff, who was, as Addis indicated, in some way connected with the Com- 
munist Party, and told me that Folkoff would from then on get in touch with 
me when there was need for money. This he did, in much the same way that 
Addis had done before. As before, these contributions were for specific pur- 
poses, principally the Spanish War and Spanish relief. Sometimes I was 
asked for money for other purposes, the organization of migratory labor in 
the California valleys, for instance. I doubt that it occurred to me that the 
contributions might be directed to other purposes than those I had intended, 
or that such other purposes might be evil. I did not then regard Communists 
as dangerous; and some of their declared objectives seemed to me desirable. 

In time these contributions came to an end. I went to a big Spanish relief 
party the night before Pearl Harbor; and the next day, as we heard the news 
of the outbreak of war, I decided that I had had about enough of the Spanish 
cause, and that there were other and more pressing crises in the world. My 
contributions would not have continued much longer. 

My brother Frank married in 1936. Our relations thereafter were in- 
evitably less intimate than before. He told me at the time—probably in 
1937— that he and his wife Jackie had joined the Communist Party. Over the 
years we saw one another as occasions arose. We still spent summer holi- 
days together. In 1939 or 1940 Frank and Jackie moved to Stanford; in the 
autumn of 1941 they came to Berkeley, and Frank worked for the Radiation 
Laboratory. At that time he made it clear to me that he was no longer a mem- 
ber of the Communist Party. 

As to the alleged activities of Jackie and Frank in 1944, 1945, and 1946: I 
was not in Berkeley in 1944 and 1945; I was away most of the first half of 
1946; I do not know whether these activities occurred or not, and if I had 
any knowledge of them at the time it would have been very sketchy. After 
Christmas of 1945 my family and I visited my brother’s family for a few days 
during the holidays, and I remember that we were there New Year’s Eve and 
New Year’s Day in 1946. On New Year’s Day people were constantly drop- 
ping in. Pinsky and Adelson, who were at most casual acquaintances of 
mine, may have been among them, but I cannot remember their being there, 
nor indeed do I remember any of the others who dropped in that day or what 
was discussed. 

It was in the summer of 1939 in Pasadena that I first met my wife. She was 
married to Dr. Harrison, who was a friend and associate of the Tolmans, Lau- 
ritsens, and others of the California Institute of Technology faculty. I learned 
of her earlier marriage to Joe Dallet, and of his death fighting in Spain. He 
had been a Communist Party official, and for a year or two during their brief 
marriage my wife was a Communist Party member. When I met her I found 
in her a deep loyalty to her former husband, a complete disengagement from 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


any political activity, and a certain disappointment and contempt that the 
Communist Party was not in fact what she had once thought it was. 

My own views were also evolving. Although Sidney and Beatrice Webb’s 
book on Russia, which I had read in 1936, and the talk that I heard at that 
time had predisposed me to make much of the economic progress and gen- 
eral level of welfare in Russia, and little of its political tyranny, my views on 
this were to change. I read about the purge trials, though not in full detail, 
and could never find a view of them which was not damning to the Soviet 
system. In 1938 I met three physicists who had actually lived in Russia in 
the thirties. All were eminent scientists, Placzek, Weisskopf, and Schein; 
and the first two have become close friends. What they reported seemed to 
me so solid, so unfanatical, so true, that it made a great impression; and it 
presented Russia, even when seen from their limited experience, as a land of 
purge and terror, of ludicrously bad management and of a long-suffering 
people. I need to make clear that this changing opinion of Russia, which was 
to be reinforced by the Nazi-Soviet Pact, and the behavior of the Soviet 
Union in Poland and in Finland, did not mean a sharp break for me with 
those who held to different views. At that time I did not fully understand— 
as in time I came to understand—how completely the Communist Party in 
this country was under the control of Russia. During and after the battle of 
France, however, and during the battle of England the next autumn, I found 
myself increasingly out of sympathy with the policy of disengagement and 
neutrality that the Communist press advocated. 

After our marriage in 1940, my wife and I for about 2 years had much the 
same circle of friends as I had had before—mostly physicists and university 
people. Among them the Chevaliers, in particular, showed us many acts of 
kindness. We were occasionally invited to more or less obviously leftwing 
affairs, Spanish relief parties that still continued; and on two occasions, 
once in San Francisco and once in Berkeley, we attended social gatherings of 
apparently well-to-do people, at which Schneiderman, an official of the 
Communist Party in California, attempted, not with success as far as we 
were concerned, to explain what the Communist line was all about. I was 
asked about the Berkeley meeting in an interview in 1946 with agents of the 
FBI. I did not then recall this meeting, and in particular did not in any way 
connect it with Chevalier, about whom the agents were questioning me; 
hence it seemed wholly irrelevant to the matter under discussion. Later my 
wife reminded me that the Berkeley meeting had occurred atthe house of the 
Chevaliers; and when I was asked about it by the FBI in 1950, I told them so. 

Wesawa little of Kenneth May; we both liked him. It would have been not 
unnatural for us to go to a housewarming for May and his wife; neither my 
wife nor I remember such a party. Weinberg was known to me as a graduate 
student; Hiskey I did not know. Steve Nelson came a few times with his fam- 
ily to visit; he had befriended my wife in Paris, at the time of her husband’s 
death in Spain in 1937. Neither of us has seen him since 1941 or 1942. 

Because of these associations that I have described, and the contributions 
mentioned earlier, I might well have appeared at the time as quite close to 


15 


16 THE HEARING 


the Communist Party—perhaps even to some people as belonging to it. As I 
have said, some of its declared objectives seemed to me desirable. But I 
never was a member of the Communist Party. I never accepted Communist 
dogma or theory; in fact, it never made sense to me. I had no clearly formu- 
lated political views. I hated tyranny and repression and every form of dic- 
tatorial control of thought. In most cases I did not in those days know who 
was and who was not a member of the Communist Party. No one ever asked 
me to join the Communist Party. 

Your letter sets forth statements made in 1942-45 by persons said to be 
Communist Party officials to the effect that I was a concealed member of the 
Communist Party. I have no knowledge as to what these people might have 
said. What I do know is that I was never a member of the party, concealed or 
open. Even the names of some of the people mentioned are strange to me, 
such as Jack Manley and Katrina Sandow. I doubt that I met Bernadette 
Doyle, although I recognize her name. Pinsky and Adelson I met at most ca- 
sually, as previously mentioned. 

By the time that we moved to Los Alamos in early 1943, both as a result of 
my changed views and of the great pressure of war work, my participation in 
leftwing organizations and my associations with leftwing circles had ceased 
and were never to be reestablished. 

In August 1941, I bought Eagle Hill at Berkeley for my wife, which was the 
first home we had of our own. We settled down to live in it with our new 
baby. We had a good many friends, but little leisure. My wife was working in 
biology at the university. Many of the men I had known went off to work on 
radar and other aspects of military research. I was not without envy of them; 
but it was not until my first connection with the rudimentary atomic-energy 
enterprise that I began to see any way in which I could be of direct use. 


Let the record show that Mr. Oppenheimer has asked to be excused 
briefly. 


THE WAR YEARS 


Ever since the discovery of nuclear fission, the possibility of powerful ex- 
plosives based on it had been very much in my mind, as it had in that of 
many other physicists. We had some understanding of what this might do 
for us in the war, and how much it might change the course of history. In the 
autumn of 1941, a special committee was set up by the National Academy 
of Sciences under the chairmanship of Arthur Compton to review the 
prospects and feasibility of the different uses of atomic energy for military 
purposes. I attended a meeting of this committee; this was my first official 
connection with the atomic-energy program. 

After the academy meeting, I spent some time in preliminary calculations 
about the construction and performance of atomic bombs, and became in- 
creasingly excited at the prospects. At the same time I still had a quite heavy 
burden of academic work with courses and graduate students. I also began to 
consult, more or less regularly, with the staff of the Radiation Laboratory in 
Berkeley on their program for the electromagnetic separation of uranium 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 17 


isotopes. I was never a member or employee of the laboratory; but I attended 
many of its staff and policy meetings. With the help of two of my graduate 
students, I developed an invention which was embodied in the production 
plants at Oak Ridge. I attended the conference in Chicago at which the Met- 
allurgical Laboratory (to produce plutonium) was established and its initial 
program projected. 

In the spring of 1942, Compton called me to Chicago to discuss the state of 
work on the bomb itself. During this meeting Compton asked me to take the 
responsibility for this work, which at that time consisted of numerous scat- 
tered experimental projects. Although I had no administrative experience 
and was not an experimental physicist, I felt sufficiently informed and chal- 
lenged by the problem to be glad to accept. At this time I became an em- 
ployee of the Metallurgical Laboratory. 

After this conference I called together a theoretical study group in Berke- 

ley, in which Bethe, Konopinski, Serber, Teller, Van Fleck, and I partici- 
pated. We had an adventurous time. We spent much of the summer of 1942 
in Berkeley in a joint study that for the first time really came to grips with 
the physical problems of atomic bombs, atomic explosions, and the possibil- 
ity of using fission explosions to initiate thermonuclear reactions. I called 
this possibility to the attention of Dr. Bush during the late summer; the tech- 
nical views on this subject were to develop and change from them until the 
present day. 
After these studies there was little doubt that a potentially world-shatter- 
ing undertaking lay ahead. We began to see the great explosion at Alamo- 
gordo and the greater explosions at Eniwetok with a surer foreknowledge. 
We also began to see how rough, difficult, challenging, and unpredictable 
this job might turn out to be. 

When I entered the employ of the Metallurgical Laboratory I filled out my 
first personnel security questionnaire. 


Let the record show that Dr. Oppenheimer has returned to the hearing 
room. 


Later in the summer, I had word from Compton that there was a question 
of my clearance on the ground that I had belonged to left-wing groups; but 
it was indicated that this would not prove a bar to my further work on the 
program. 

In later summer, after a review of the experimental work, I became con- 
vinced, as did others, that a major change was called for in the work on the 
bomb itself. We needed a central laboratory devoted wholly to this purpose, 
where people could talk freely with each other, where theoretical ideas and 
experimental findings could affect each other, where the waste and frustra- 
tion and error of the many compartmentalized experimental studies could 
be eliminated, where we could begin to come to grips with chemical, metal- 
lurgical, engineering, and ordnance problems that had so far received no 
consideration. We therefore sought to establish this laboratory for a direct at- 
tack on all the problems inherent in the most rapid possible development 
and production of atomic bombs. 


J. Robert Oppenheimer, 1945. Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, courtesy AIP Emilio Segré 
Visual Archives. 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


In the autumn of 1942 General Groves assumed charge of the Manhattan 
Engineer District. I discussed with him the need for an atomic-bomb labora- 
tory. There had been some thought of making this laboratory a part of Oak 
Ridge. For a time there was support for making it a Military Establishment in 
which key personnel would be commissioned as officers; and in preparation 
for this course I once went to the Presidio to take the initial steps toward ob- 
taining a commission. After a good deal of discussion with the personnel 
who would be needed at Los Alamos and with General Groves and his ad- 
visers, it was decided that the laboratory should, at least initially, be a civil- 
ian establishment in a military post. While this consideration was going on, 
I had showed General Groves Los Alamos; and he almost immediately took 
steps to acquire the site. 

In early 1943, I received a letter signed by General Groves and Dr. Co- 
nant, appointing me director of the laboratory, and outlining their con- 
ception of how it was to be organized and administered. The necessary 
construction and assembling of the needed facilities were begun. All of us 
worked in close collaboration with the engineers of the Manhattan Dis- 
trict. 

The site of Los Alamos was selected, in part at least, because it enabled 
those responsible to balance the obvious need for security with the equally 
important need of free communication among those engaged in the work. 
Security, it was hoped, would be achieved by removing the laboratory to a 
remote area, fenced and patrolled, where communication with the outside 
was extremely limited. Telephone calls were monitored, mail was censored, 
and personnel who left the area—something permitted only for the clearest 
of causes—knew that their movements might be under surveillance. On the 
other hand, for those within the community, fullest exposition and discus- 
sion among those competent to use the information was encouraged. 

The last months of 1942 and early 1943 had hardly hours enough to get 
Los Alamos established. The real problem had to do with getting to Los 
Alamos the men who would make a success of the undertaking. For this we 
needed to understand as clearly as we then could what our technical pro- 
gram would be, what men we would need, what facilities, what organiza- 
tion, what plan. 

The program of recruitment was massive. Even though we then underesti- 
mated the ultimate size of the laboratory, which was to have almost 4,000 
members by the spring of 1945, and even though we did not at that time see 
clearly some of the difficulties which were to bedevil and threaten the enter- 
prise, we knew that it was a big, complex and diverse job. Even the initial 
plan of the laboratory called for a start with more than 100 highly qualified 
and trained scientists, to say nothing of the technicians, staff, and mechan- 
ics who would be required for their support, and of the equipment that we 
would have to beg and borrow since there would be no time to build it from 
scratch. We had to recruit at a time when the country was fully engaged in 
war and almost every competent scientist was already involved in the mili- 
tary effort. 

The primary burden of this fell on me. To recruit staff I traveled all over 


19 


20 


THE HEARING 


the country talking with people who had been working on one or another as- 
pect of the atomic-energy enterprise, and people in radar work, for example, 
and underwater sound, telling them about the job, the place that we were 
going to, and enlisting their enthusiasm. 

In order to bring responsible scientists to Los Alamos, I had to rely on 
their sense of the interest, urgency, and feasibility of the Los Alamos mis- 
sion. I had to tell them enough of what the job was, and give strong enough 
assurance that it might be successfully accomplished in time to affect the 
outcome of the war, to make it clear that they were justified in their leaving 
other work to come to this job. 

The prospect of coming to Los Alamos aroused great misgivings. It was to 
be a military post; men were asked to sign up more or less for the duration; 
restrictions on travel and on the freedom of families to move about to be se- 
vere; and no one could be sure of the extent to which the necessary techni- 
cal freedom of action could actually be maintained by the laboratory. The 
notion of disappearing into the New Mexico desert for an indeterminate pe- 
riod and under quasi military auspices disturbed a good many scientists, 
and the families of many more. But there was another side to it. Almost 
everyone realized that this was a great undertaking. Almost everyone knew 
that if it were completed successfully and rapidly enough, it might deter- 
mine the outcome of the war. Almost everyone knew that it was an unparal- 
leled opportunity to bring to bear the basic knowledge and art of science for 
the benefit of his country. Almost everyone knew that this job, if it were 
achieved, would be a part of history. This sense of excitement, of devotion 
and of patriotism in the end prevailed. Most of those with whom I talked 
came to Los Alamos. Once they came, confidence in the enterprise grew as 
men learned more of the technical status of the work; and though the labora- 
tory was to double and redouble its size many times before the end, once it 
had started it was on the road to success. 

We had information in those days of German activity in the field of nu- 
clear fission. We were aware of what it might mean if they beat us to the 
draw in the development of atomic bombs. The consensus of all our opin- 
ions, and every directive that I had, stressed the extreme urgency of our 
work, as well as the need for guarding all knowledge of it from our enemies. 
Past Communist connections or sympathies did not necessarily disqualify a 
man from employment, if we had confidence in his integrity and depend- 
ability as a man. 

There are two items of derogatory information on which I need to com- 
ment at this point. The first is that it was reported that I had talked the 
atomic-bomb question over with Communist Party members during this pe- 
riod (1942-45). The second is that I was responsible for the employment on 
the atomic-bomb project of individuals who were members of the Commu- 
nist Party or closely associated with activities of the Communist Party. 

As to the first, my only discussions of matters connected with the atomic 
bomb were for official work or for recruiting the staff of the enterprise. So far 
as I knew none of these discussions were with Communist Party members. I 
never discussed anything of my secret work or anything about the atomic 
bomb with Steve Nelson. 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


As to the statement that I secured the employment of doubtful persons on 
the project: Of those mentioned, Lomanitz, Friedman, and Weinberg were 
never employed at Los Alamos. I believe that I had nothing to do with the 
employment of Friedman and Weinberg by the Radiation Laboratory; I had 
no responsibility for the hiring of anyone there. During the time that I con- 
tinued to serve as a consultant with the Radiation Laboratory and to advise 
and direct the work of some of the graduate students, I assigned David 
Bohm and Chaim Richman to a problem of basic science which might prove 
useful in analyzing experiments in connection with fast neutrons. That 
work has long been published. Another graduate student was Rossi Lo- 
manitz. I remember vaguely a conversation with him in which he expressed 
reluctance to take part in defense research, and I encouraged him to do what 
other scientists were doing for their country. Thereafter he did work at the 
Radiation Laboratory. I remember no details of our talk. If I asked him to 
work on the project, I would have assumed that he would be checked by the 
security officers as a matter of course. Later, in 1943, when Lomanitz was in- 
ducted into the Army, he wrote me asking me to help his return to the proj- 
ect. I forwarded a copy of this letter to the Manhattan District security offi- 
cers, and let the matter rest there. Still later, at Lomanitz’ request, I wrote to 
his commanding officer that he was qualified for advanced technical work 
in the Army. 

I asked for the transfer of David Bohm to Los Alamos; but this request, like 
all others, was subject to the assumption that the usual security require- 
ments would apply; and when I was told that there was objection on security 
grounds to this transfer, I was much surprised, but of course agreed. David 
Hawkins was known to the personnel director at the laboratory, and I had 
met and liked him and found him intelligent; I supported the suggestion of 
the personnel director that he come to Los Alamos. I understand that he had 
had left-wing associations; but it was not until in March of 1951, at the time 
of his testimony, that I knew about his membership in the Communist Party. 

In 1943 when I was alleged to have stated that ‘I knew several individuals 
then at Los Alamos who had been members of the Communist Party,’ I knew 
of only one; she was my wife, of whose disassociation from the party, and of 
whose integrity and loyalty to the United States I had no question. Later, in 
1944 or 1945, my brother Frank, who had been cleared for work in Berkeley 
and at Oak Ridge, came to Los Alamos from Oak Ridge with official approval. 

I knew of no attempt to obtain secret information at Los Alamos. Prior to 
my going there my friend Haakon Chevalier with his wife visited us on Eagle 
Hill, probably in early 1943. During the visit, he came into the kitchen and 
told me that George Eltenton had spoken to him of the possibility of trans- 
mitting technical information to Soviet scientists. I made some strong re- 
mark to the effect that this sounded terribly wrong to me. The discussion 
ended there. Nothing in our long standing friendship would have led me to 
believe that Chevalier was actually seeking information; and I was certain 
that he had no idea of the work on which I was engaged. 

It has long been clear to me that I should have reported the incident at 
once. The events that led me to report it—which I doubt ever would have be- 
come known without my report—were unconnected with it. During the 


21 


22 


THE HEARING 


summer of 1943, Colonel Lansdale, the intelligence officer of the Manhattan 
District, came to Los Alamos and told me that he was worried about the se- 
curity situation in Berkeley because of the activities of the Federation of Ar- 
chitects, Engineers, Chemists, and Technicians. This recalled to my mind 
that Eltenton was a member and probably a promoter of the FAECT. Shortly 
thereafter, I was in Berkeley and I told the security officer that Eltenton 
would bear watching. When asked why, I said that Eltenton had attempted, 
through intermediaries, to approach people on the project, though I men- 
tioned neither myself nor Chevalier. Later, when General Groves urged me to 
give the details, I told him of my conversation with Chevalier. I still think of 
Chevalier as a friend. 

The story of Los Alamos is long and complex. Part of it is public history. 
For me it was a time so filled with work, with the need for decision and 
action and consultation, that there was room for little else. I lived with my 
family in the community which was Los Alamos. It was a remarkable 
community, inspired by a high sense of mission, of duty and of destiny, 
coherent, dedicated, and remarkably selfless. There was plenty in the life 
of Los Alamos to cause irritation; the security restrictions, many of my 
own devising, the inadequacies and inevitable fumblings of a military 
post unlike any that had ever existed before, shortages, inequities, and in 
the laboratory itself the shifting emphasis on different aspects of the tech- 
nical work as the program moved forward; but I have never known a 
group more understanding and more devoted to a common purpose, more 
willing to lay aside personal convenience and prestige, more understand- 
ing of the role that they were playing in their country’s history. Time and 
again we had in the technical work almost paralyzing crises. Time and 
again the laboratory drew itself together and faced the new problems and 
got on with the work. We worked by night and by day; and in the end the 
many jobs were done. 

These years of hard and loyal work of the scientists culminated in the test 
on July 16, 1945. It was a success. I believe that in the eyes of the War De- 
partment, and other knowledgeable people, it was as early a success as they 
had thought possible, given all the circumstances, and rather a greater one. 
There were many indications from the Secretary of War and General Groves, 
and many others, that official opinion was one of satisfaction with what had 
been accomplished. At the time, it was hard for us in Los Alamos not to 
share that satisfaction, and hard for me not to accept the conclusion that I 
had managed the enterprise well and played a key part in its success. But it 
needs to be stated that many others contributed the decisive ideas and car- 
tried out the work which led to this success and that my role was that of un- 
derstanding, encouraging, suggesting and deciding. It was the very opposite 
of a one-man show. 

Even before the July 16 test and the use of the bombs in Japan, the mem- 
bers of the laboratory began to have a new sense of the possible import of 
what was going on. In the early days, when success was less certain and tim- 
ing unsure, and the war with Germany and Japan in a desperate phase, it 
was enough for us to think that we had a job to do. Now, with Germany de- 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


feated, the war in the Pacific approaching a crisis, and the success of our un- 
dertaking almost assured, there was a sense both of hope and of anxiety as to 
what this spectacular development might portend for the future. This came 
to us a little earlier than to the public generally because we saw the techni- 
cal development at close range and in secret; but its quality was very much 
the same as the, public response after Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 

Thus it was natural that in the spring of 1945 I welcomed the opportunity 
when I was asked by Secretary Stimson to serve, along with Compton, 
Lawrence, and Fermi, on an advisory panel to his Interim Committee on 
Atomic Energy. We met with that committee on the ist of June 1945; and 
even during the week when Hiroshima and Nagasaki were being bombed, 
we metat Los Alamos to sketch out a prospectus of what the technical future 
in atomic energy might look like: atomic war heads for guided missiles, im- 
provements in bomb designs, the thermonuclear program, power, propul- 
sion, and the new tools available from atomic technology for research in sci- 
ence, medicine, and technology. This work absorbed much of my time, 
during September and October; and in connection with it I was asked to 
consult with the War and State Departments on atomic-energy legislation, 
and in a preliminary way on the international control of atomic energy. 

I resigned as director of Los Alamos on October 16, 1945, after having se- 
cured the consent of Commander Bradbury and General Groves that Brad- 
bury should act as my successor. 

There were then on the books at the laboratory, embodied in memoranda 
and reports and summarized by me in letters to General Groves, develop- 
ments in atomic weapons, which could well have occupied years for their 
fulfillment, and which have in fact provided some, though by no means all, 
of the themes for Los Alamos work since that time. It was not entirely clear 
whether the future of atomic weapons work in this country should be con- 
tinued at or confined to Los Alamos or started elsewhere at a more accessi- 
ble and more practical site, or indeed what effect international agreements 
might have on the program. But in the meantime Los Alamos had to be kept 
going until there was created an authority competent to decide the question 
of its future. This was to take almost a year. 


THE POSTWAR PERIOD 


In November 1945, I resumed my teaching at the California Institute of 
Technology, with an intention and hope, never realized, that this should be 
a full-time undertaking. The consultation about postwar matter which had 
already begun continued, and I was asked over and over both by the Execu- 
tive and the Congress for advice on atomic energy. I had a feeling of deep re- 
sponsibility, interest, and concern for many of the problems with which the 
development of atomic energy confronted our country. 

This development was to be a major factor in the history of the evolving 
and mounting conflict between the free world and the Soviet Union. When I 
and other scientists were called on for advice, our principal duty was to 
make our technical experience and judgment available. We were called to do 


23 


24 


THE HEARING 


this in a context and against a background of the official views of the Gov- 
ernment on the military and political situation of our country. Lnmediately 
after the war, I was deeply involved in the effort to devise effective means 
for the international control of atomic weapons, means which might, in the 
words of those days, tend toward the elimination of war itself. As the 
prospects of success receded, and as evidence of Soviet hostility and grow- 
ing military power accumulated, we had more and more to devote ourselves 
to finding ways of adapting our atomic potential to offset the Soviet threat. 
In the period marked by the first Soviet atomic explosion, the war in Korea 
and the Chinese Communist intervention there, we were principally preoc- 
cupied, though we never forgot long-term problems, with immediate mea- 
sures which could rapidly build up the strength of the United States under 
the threat of an imminent general war. As our own atomic potential in- 
creased and developed, we were aware of the dangers inherent in compa- 
rable developments by the enemy; and preventive and defensive measures 
were very much on our minds. Throughout this time the role of atomic 
weapons was to be central.... 

A quite different and I believe unique occurrence is cited as an item of 
derogatory information—that in 1946 I was ‘listed as vice chairman on the 
letterhead of the Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences, and 
Professions, Inc. * * * cited as a Communist front by the House Committee 
on Un-American Activities.’ The fact is that in 1946, when I was at work on 
the international control of atomic energy, I was notified that I had been 
nominated and then elected as vice chairman of this organization. When I 
began to see that its literature included slogans such as ‘Withdraw United 
States troops from China’ and that it was endorsing the criticism enunciated 
by the then Secretary Wallace of the United States policy on atomic energy, I 
advised the organization in a letter of October 11, 1946, that I was not in ac- 
cord with its policy, that I regarded the recommendations of Mr. Wallace as 
not likely to advance the cause of finding a satisfactory solution for the con- 
trol of atomic energy, and that I wished to resign. When an effort was made 
to dissuade me from this course I again wrote on December 2, 1946, insisting 
upon resignation.... 

I need to turn now to an account of some of the measures which, as Chair- 
man of the General Advisory Committee, and in other capacities, I advo- 
cated in the years since the war to increase the power of the United States 
and its allies to resist and defeat aggression. ... 

In these years from early 1947 to mid-1952 the Committee met some 30 
times and transmitted perhaps as many reports to the Commission. Formu- 
lation of policy and the management of the vast atomic-energy enterprises 
were responsibilities vested in the Commission itself. The General Advisory 
Committee had the role, which was fixed for it by statute, to advise the Com- 
mission. In that capacity we gave the Commission our views on questions 
which the Commission put before us, brought to the Commission’s attention 
on our initiative technical matters of importance, and encouraged and sup- 
ported the work of the several major installations of the Commission. 

At one of our first meetings in 1947 we settled down to the job of forming 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


our own views of the priorities. And while we agreed that the development 
of atomic power and the support and maintenance of a strong basic scientific 
activity in the fields relevant to it were important, we assigned top priority to 
the problem of atomic weapons. At that time we advised the Commission 
that one of its first jobs would be to convert Los Alamos into an active center 
for the development and improvement of atomic weapons. In 1945—46 dur- 
ing the period immediately following the war, the purposes of Los Alamos 
were multiple. It was the only laboratory in the United States that worked on 
atomic weapons. Los Alamos also had wide interests in scientific matters 
only indirectly related to the weapons program. We suggested that the Com- 
mission recognize as the laboratory’s central and primary program the im- 
provement and diversification of atomic weapons, and that this undertaking 
have a priority second to none. We suggested further that the Commission 
adopt administrative measures to make work at Los Alamos attractive, to as- 
sist the laboratory in recruiting, to help build up a strong theoretical division 
for guidance in atomic-weapons design, and to take advantage of the avail- 
ability of the talented and brilliant consultants who had been members of the 
laboratory during the war. In close consultation with the director of the Los 
Alamos Laboratory, we encouraged and supported courses of development 
which would markedly increase the value of our stockpile in terms of the de- 
structive power of our weapons, which would make the best use of existing 
stockpiles and those anticipated, which would provide weapons suitable for 
modern combat conditions and for varied forms of delivery and which in 
their cumulative effect would provide us with the great arsenal we now 
have.... 

In view of the controversies that have developed I have left the subject of 
the super and thermonuclear weapons for separate discussion—although 
our committee regarded this as a phase of the entire problem of weapons. 

The super itself had a long history of consideration, beginning, as I have 
said, with our initial studies in 1942 before Los Alamos was established. It 
continued to be the subject of study and research at Los Alamos throughout 
the war. After the war, Los Alamos itself was inevitably handicapped pend- 
ing the enactment of necessary legislation for the atomic energy enterprise. 
With the McMahon Act, the appointment of the Atomic Energy Commission 
and the General Advisory Committee, we in the committee had occasion at 
our early meetings in 1947 as well as in 1948 to discuss the subject. In that 
period the General Advisory Committee pointed out the still extremely un- 
clear status of the problem from the technical standpoint, and urged encour- 
agement of Los Alamos’ efforts which were then directed toward modest ex- 
ploration of the super and of thermonuclear systems. No serious controversy 
arose about the super until the Soviet explosion of an atomic bomb in the 
autumn of 1949. 

Shortly after that event, in October 1949, the Atomic Energy Commission 
called a special session of the General Advisory Committee and asked us to 
consider and advise on two related questions: First, whether in view of the 
Soviet success the Commission’s program was adequate, and if not, in what 
way it should be altered or increased; second, whether a crash program for 


25 


26 THE HEARING 


J. Robert Oppenheimer at home in Princeton, with his children, Peter and Toni, and his dog, 
Buddy, 1948. Mrs. J. Robert Oppenheimer, courtesy AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


the development of the super should be a part of any new program. The 
committee considered both questions, consulting various officials from the 
civil and military branches of the executive departments who would have 
been concerned, and reached conclusions which were communicated in a 
report to the Atomic Energy Commission in October 1949. 

This report, in response to the first question that had been put to us, rec- 
ommended a great number of measures that the Commission should take the 
increase in many ways our overall potential in weapons. 

As to the super itself, the General Advisory Committee stated its unani- 
mous opposition to the initiation by the United States of a crash program of 
the kind we had been asked to advise on. The report of that meeting, and the 
Secretary’s notes, reflect the reasons which moved us to this conclusion. The 
annexes, in particular, which dealt more with political and policy consider- 
ations—the report proper was essentially technical in character—indicated 
differences in the views of members of the committee. There were two an- 
nexes, one signed by Rabi and Fermi, the other by Conant, DuBridge, Smith, 
Rowe, Buckley and myself. (The ninth member of the committee, Seaborg, 
was abroad at the time.) 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 


It would have been surprising if eight men considering a problem of ex- 
treme difficulty had each had precisely the same reasons for the conclusion 
in which we joined. But I think I am correct in asserting that the unanimous 
opposition we expressed to the crash program was based on the conviction, 
to which technical considerations as well as others contributed, that be- 
cause of our overall situation at that time such a program might weaken 
rather than strengthen the position of the United States. 

After the report was submitted to the Commission, it fell to me as chair- 
man of the committee to explain our position on.several occasions, once at a 
meeting of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. All this, 
however, took place prior to the decision by the President to proceed with 
the thermonuclear program. 

This is the full story of my ‘opposition to the hydrogen bomb.’ It can be 
read in the records of the general transcript of my testimony before the joint 
congressional committee. It is a story which ended once and for all when in 
January 1950 the President announced his decision to proceed with the pro- 
gram. I never urged anyone not to work on the hydrogren bomb project. I 
never made or caused any distribution of the GAC reports except to the 
Commission itself. As always, it was the Commission’s responsibility to de- 
termine further distribution. 

In summary, in October 1949, I and the other members of the General Ad- 
visory Committee were asked questions by the Commission to which we had 
a duty to respond, and to which we did respond with our best judgment in 
the light of evidence then available to us. 

When the President’s decision was announced in January 1950, our 
committee was again in session and we immediately turned to the techni- 
cal problems facing the Commission in carrying out the President’s direc- 
tive. We sought to give our advice then and in ensuing meetings as to the 
most promising means of solving these problems. We never again raised 
the question of the wisdom of the policy which had now been settled, but 
concerned ourselves rather with trying to implement it. During this pe- 
riod our recommendations for increasing production facilities included 
one for a dual-purpose plant which could be adapted to make materials 
either for fission bombs or materials useful in a thermonuclear program. 
In its performance characteristics, the Savannah River project, subse- 
quently adopted by the Commission, was foreshadowed by this recom- 
mendation. 

While the history of the GAC opposition to a crash program for the super 
ended with the announcement of the President’s decision, the need for eval- 
uation and advice continued. There were immense technical complications 
both before and after the President’s decision. It was of course a primary 
duty of the committee, as well as other review committees on which I 
served, to report new developments which we judged promising, and to re- 
port when a given weapon or family of weapons appeared impractical, un- 
feasible or impossible. It would have been my duty so to report had I been 
alone in my views. As a matter of fact, our views on such matters were al- 
most always unanimous. It was furthermore a proper function for me to 


27 


28 


THE HEARING 


speak my best judgment in discussion with those responsibly engaged in 
the undertaking. 

Throughout the whole development of thermonuclear weapons, many oc- 
casions occurred where it was necessary for us to form and to express judg- 
ments of feasibility. This was true before the President’s decision, and it was 
true after the President’s decision. In our report of October 1949, we ex- 
pressed the view, as your letter states, that ‘an imaginative and concerted at- 
tack on the problem has a better than even chance of producing the weapon 
within 5 years.’ Later calculations and measurements made at Los Alamos 
led us to a far more pessimistic view. Still later brilliant inventions led to the 
possibility of lines of development of very great promise. At each stage the 
General Advisory Committee, and I as its Chairman and as a member of 
other bodies, reported as faithfully as we could our evaluation of what was 
likely to fail and what was likely to work. 

In the spring of 1951 work had reached a stage at which far-reaching deci- 
sions were called for with regard to the Commission’s whole thermonuclear 
program. In consultation with the Commission, I called a meeting in Prince- 
ton in the late spring of that year, which was attended by all members of the 
Commission and several members of its staff, by members of the General Ad- 
visory Committee, by Dr. Bradbury and staff of the Los Alamos Laboratory, 
by Bethe, Teller, Bacher, Fermi, von Neumann, Wheeler, and others respon- 
sibly connected with the program. The outcome of the meeting, which 
lasted for 2 or 3 days, was an agreed program and a fixing of priorities and ef- 
fort both for Los Alamos and for other aspects of the Commission’s work. 
This program has been an outstanding success. 

In addition to my continuing work on the General Advisory Committee 
there were other assignments that I was asked to undertake. Late in 1950 or 
early in 1951 the President appointed me to the Science Advisory Commit- 
tee to advise the Office of Defense Mobilization and the President; in 1952 
the Secretary of State appointed me to a panel to advise on armaments and 
their regulation; and I served as consultant on continental defense, civil de- 
fense, and the use of atomic weapons in support of ground combat. Many of 
these duties led to reports in the drafting of which I participated, or for 
which I took responsibility. These supplement the record of the General Ad- 
visory Committee as an account of the counsel that I have given our govern- 
ment during the last eight years. 

In this letter, I have written only of those limited parts of my history 
which appear relevant to the issue now before the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion. In order to preserve as much as possible the perspective of the story, I 
have dealt very briefly with many matters. I have had to deal briefly or not at 
all with instances in which my actions or views were adverse to Soviet or 
Communist interest, and of actions that testify to my devotion to freedom, or 
that have contributed to the vitality, influence and power of the United 
States. 

In preparing this letter, I have reviewed two decades of my life. I have re- 
called instances where I acted unwisely. What I have hoped was, not that I 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 29 


could wholly avoid error, but that I might learn from it. What I have learned 
has, I think, made me more fit to serve my country. 
Very truly yours, 
J. Robert Oppenheimer. 
Princeton, N.J., March 4, 1954. 


GorDON Gray: “An inquiry and not .. . a trial” 


[Having completed the reading of the two documents, Gray lays down the 
ground rules for the hearing.] 


Dr. Gray. This board is convened to enable Dr. Oppenheimer to present any 
information he considers appropriate having a bearing on the documents 
just read and the information contained in them, this information being, of 
course, the same as that disclosed to Dr. Oppenheimer in Mr. K. D. 
Nichols’s letter of December 23, 1953 to Dr. Oppenheimer and Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s reply of March 4, 1954, and to provide a record as a basis for a rec- 
ommendation to the General Manager of the Atomic Energy Commission as 
to Dr. Oppenheimer’s eligibility for access to restricted data. 

At this point, I should like to remind everyone concerned that this pro- 
ceeding is an inquiry and not in the nature of a trial. We shall approach our 
duties in that atmosphere and in that spirit. 

Dr. Oppenheimer, have you been given an opportunity to exercise the 
right to challenge any or all of the members of this Board? 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. I have, indeed. 

Dr. Gray. I should point out to you, sir, that if at any time during the course of 
this hearing it appears that grounds for challenge for cause arise, you will 
exercise your right to challenge for cause and the validity of the challenge 
will be determined in closed session by the members of the Board. 

The proceedings and stenographic record of this board are regarded as 
strictly confidential between Atomic Energy Commission officials partici- 
pating in this matter and Dr. Oppenheimer, his representatives and wit- 
nesses. The Atomic Energy Commission will not take the initiative in pub- 
lic release of any information relating to the proceeding before this board. 

Now, at this time, Dr. Oppenheimer, you will be given the opportunity to 
present any material relevant to the issues before the board. At this point I 
think we shall find it necessary to exclude all witnesses except the one 
whose testimony is being given to the board under the provisions of the 
procedures which we must follow in this inquiry. ... 

I should like to ask Dr. Oppenheimer whether he wishes to testify under 
oath in this proceeding? 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. Surely. 


30 THE HEARING 


Dr. Gray. You are not required to do so. 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. I think it best. 

Dr. Gray. I should remind you, then, of the provisions of section 1621 of title 
18 of the United States Code, known as the perjury statute, which makes it 
a crime punishable by a fine of up to $2,000 and/or imprisonment of up to 5 
years for any person stating under oath any material matter which he does 
not believe to be true. 

It is also an offense under section 1001 of title 18 of the United States 
Code, punishable by a fine of not more than $10,000 or imprisonment for 
not more than 5 years, or both, for any person to make any false, fictitious, 
or fraudulent statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdic- 
tion of any agency of the United States. 

I think that before you proceed, Mr. Garrison, that it would be well to ad- 
minister the oath to Dr. Oppenheimer. 

J. Robert Oppenheimer, do you swear that the testimony you are to give 
the board shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so 
help you God? 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. I do. 

Dr. Gray. May [also point out that in the event that it is necessary for anyone 
to disclose restricted data during his statements before this board shall ad- 
vise the Chairman before such disclosure in order that persons unautho- 
rized to have access to restricted data may be excused from the hearing. 

Now, Dr. Oppenheimer, you may proceed, and I gather from what Mr. 
Garrison said, that he will at this point make a statement to the Board. 


J. RoBeRT OPPENHEIMER: “Exploding one of these things as a 
firecracker over a desert” 


[Oppenheimer’s attorney, Lloyd K. Garrison, makes an opening statement and 
then gives Oppenheimer an opportunity to describe more fully his work at 
Los Alamos and his views concerning atomic energy in the postwar years.] 


Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, members of the board, I would like to say at the 
outset that far from having thought of challenging any member of the board, 
we appreciate very much the willingness of men of your standing and re- 
sponsibilities to accept this exacting and onerous job in the interests of the 
country. I express my appreciation to you. 

We cannot help but be conscious of the fact that for the past week the 
members of the board have been examining a file containing various items 
about Dr. Oppenheimer to which we have had, and to which we shall have 
no access at all. I have been told that this is a large file, and I suppose a great 
deal of time has been spent on it. I am sure that it goes without saying that 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 31 


we are confident that the minds of the members of the board are open to re- 
ceive the testimony that we shall submit. 

If, as a result of going through the file, there are troublesome questions 
which have arisen, any items of derogatory information not mentioned in 
the Commission’s letter of December 23, I know we can count on you to 
bring those to our attention so that we may have an adequate opportunity to 
reply to them. ... 

Dr. Gray. I think you need have no concern on that score, Mr. Garrison. 

Mr. GARRISON. I am sure not. I would like at this point to read into the record 
a letter from Dr. Oppenheimer to Chairman Strauss of the Atomic Energy 
Commission, dated December 22, 1953. I would be glad to give copies to the 
members of the board. 

I shall explain the purpose in a moment of reading this letter to you. 

This letter is addressed to Adm. Lewis L. Strauss, Chairman of the 
Atomic Energy Commission, Washington, D.C., and is dated December 22, 
1953, and reads as follows: 


Dear Lewis: 

Yesterday, when you asked to see me, you told me for the first time that 
my clearance by the Atomic Energy Commission was about to be suspended. 
You put to me as a possibly desirable alternative that I request termination of 
my contract as a consultant to the Commission, and thereby avoid an ex- 
plicit consideration of the charges on which the Commission’s action would 
otherwise be based. I was told that if I did not do this within a day, I would 
receive a letter notifying me of the suspension of my clearance and of the 
charges against me, and I was shown a draft of that letter. 

I have thought most earnestly of the alternative suggested. Under the cir- 
cumstances this course of action would mean that I accept and concur in the 
view that I am not fit to serve this Government, that I have now served for 
some 12 years. This I cannot do. If I were thus unworthy I could hardly have 
served our country as I have tried, or been the Director of our Institute in 
Princeton, or have spoken, as on more than one occasion I have found my- 
self speaking, in the name of our science and our country. 

Since our meeting yesterday, you and General Nichols told me that the 
charges in the letter were familiar charges, and since the time was short, I 
paged through the letter quite briefly. I shall now read it in detail and make 
appropriate response. 

Faithfully yours, 


Robert Oppenheimer. 


I have presented that, Mr. Chairman, simply to show that there has been 
no disposition on Mr. Oppenheimer’s part to hold onto a job for the sake of 
a job. It goes without saying that if the Commission did not wish to use his 
services as a consultant that was all right with him. The point of this letter 
is that he felt that he could not in honor and integrity of his person simply 
resign and leave these questions unadjudicated. Fully realizing the terrible 


32 THE HEARING 


burden of going forward with this matter, and the natural risks in any pro- 
ceeding of this character, including what may go on outside of these walls, 
nevertheless went forward... . 

Far from being to his discredit, far from casting doubt on his desire to 
serve his country as best he sees how to do it, I think our witnesses will per- 
suade you beyond any doubt that his conduct in the hydrogen bomb matter 
was beyond any reproach; that it was an exercise of the most honest judg- 
ment done in the best interests of the country, and that his whole record 
since the war is rather astonishingly filled with a continuous series of ef- 
forts to strengthen the defenses of the United States in a world threatened 
by totalitarian aggression. 

I was surprised to find that about half of his working time since 1945 has 
been devoted to service on Government boards and committees, from 1945 
on, as a volunteer citizen, placing his talents at the service of the country. 
The richness and the variety of the services that he rendered in those ca- 
pacities will be vividly brought out in the testimony. 

I would like to say that everything he has done since the war, the hydro- 
gen bomb and all the rest, has been done in a blaze of light. There has been 
not one thing that has not been done in the full daylight of the work of the 
Government and subjected to the most searching criticism of the ablest men 
in science and government, all doing each in their own way what they 
could do to serve the country. 

I believe this record will be one which will persuade this board that to ex- 
clude Dr. Oppenheimer from the capacity that he continue to serve the Gov- 
ernment as he has in the past would be contrary to the best interests of all of 
uS.... 


Whereupon J. Robert Oppenheimer was called as a witness and, having 
been previously sworn, was examined and testified as follows: 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. I would like to begin, Dr. Oppenheimer, with the war years... 

THE WiTNgss. Now, there are a few points I might make about this period. 
After the test but before the use of the bombs in Japan, I had a meeting with 
General Groves in Chicago to get some last minute arrangements fixed for 
the combat use of the weapon. I asked him at that time, how do you feel 
about this super—the super was our code name for what we then thought of 
the hydrogen bomb, and we don’t know any more than we did when he 
came up, there was a little work but very inconclusive. As a matter of fact, 
the decisive measurements on the behavior of tritium were on my desk 
when I got home— 

Dr. Evans. What, sir? 

THE WITNESS. The decisive measurements on the tritium—these are declassi- 


MONDAY, APRIL 12 33 


fied now, as you know—were on my desk when I got back from Trinity, Gen- 
eral Groves was unclear whether his mandate and therefore mine extended 
to fiddling with this next project. I so reported to the people in the labora- 
tory, who were thinking about it. 

The second point I would not think to mention except that Mr. Garrison 
has asked me and that is whether there was any change in tempo after the 
war against Germany ended. There was, but it was upward. It was upward 
simply because we were still more frantic to have the job done and wanted 
to have it done so that if needed, it would be available. 

In any case, we wanted to have it done before the war was over, and noth- 
ing much could be done. I don’t think there was any time where we worked 
harder at the speedup than in the period after the German surrender and the 
actual combat use of the bomb. 

The third thing is that I did suggest to General Groves some changes in 
bomb design which would make more efficient use of the material; and they 
have long since been done, of course. He turned them down as jeopardizing 
the promptness of the availability of bombs. He and I may not entirely agree 
about how long a delay would have been involved, but the very fact that 
any delay was involved was unacceptable. 

Finally, there was, of course, a great deal of discussion—and I will return 
to the formal aspects of that—about the desirability of using the bombs in 
Japan. I think the hotbed of this discussion was in Chicago rather than in 
Los Alamos. At Los Alamos I heard very little talk about it. We always as- 
sumed, if they were needed, they would be used. But there were places 
where people said for the future of the world it would be better not to use 
them. 

This problem was referred to me in a capacity different than director of 
Los Alamos. We did everything we could to get them out there and as fast 
and smooth as possible. 

There was, however, at Los Alamos a change in the feel of people. Iam 
talking vaguely because this is a community now of seven or eight thousand 
people, of whom maybe 1,000 or more are scientists and very close to each 
other, talking all the time. This was partly a war measure, but it was also 
something that was here to stay. There was a great sense of uncertainty and 
anxiety about what should be done about it. 

The generation of that kind of public—of a concern very similar to the 
public concern—that followed Hiroshima and one natural outgrowth of 
which was our abortive effort to establish quite a new relation among na- 
tions in the control of atomic energy; that was not something that had its 
roots very far back; it started toward the end when the war was about over. 

Hiroshima was, of course, very successful, partly for reasons unantici- 
pated by us. We had been over the targets with a committee that was sent 
out to consult us and to consider them, and the targets that were bombed 
were among the list that seemed right to us. 

The Secretary of War deleted one target, and I have always been glad he 


34 THE HEARING 


did. That was the unbombed and culture capital of Japan, Kyoto. He struck 
that off. The two that were hit were among the targets selected. We sent a 
mission on out from Los Alamos to assemble, test the bombs on Tinian, and 
to fly with the B—29’s that went out over the targets, and also to go in as soon 
as they could get clearance from General MacArthur. ... to see what mess 
we made of those two towns. 

...In May I was asked to serve on the interim committee which Mr. 
Stimson set up. 

Q. This prevented your leaving. 

A. Yes; this was before I left Los Alamos. Lawrence, Fermi, and Arthur Comp- 
ton were the other members of this panel. We met with the interim commit- 
tee I think on the 1st of June—I am not certain—of 1945 for a very prolonged 
discussion which was attended by all members of the committee, all mem- 
bers of the panel, and for most of the time General Marshall. 

Apart from trying to make as vivid as we could the novelty, the variety, 
and the dynamic quality of this field, which we thought very important to 
get across, that this was not a finished job and there was a heck of a lot we 
didn’t know, much of the discussion resolved around the question raised by 
Secretary Stimson as to whether there was any hope at all of using this de- 
velopment to get less barbarous relations with the Russians. 

The other two assignments which the panel had—one was quite slight. 
We were asked to comment on whether the bomb should be used. I think 
the reason we were asked for that comment was because a petition had been 
sent in from a very distinguished and thoughtful group of scientists: “No, it 
should not be used.” It would be better for everything that they should not. 
We didn’t know beans about the military situation in Japan. We didn’t 
know whether they could be caused to surrender by other means or 
whether the invasion was really inevitable. But in back of our minds was 
the notion that the invasion was inevitable because we had been told that. I 
have not been able to review this document, but what it said I think is char- 
acteristic of how technical people should answer questions. 

We said that we didn’t think that being scientists especially qualified us 
as to how to answer this question of how the bombs should be used or not; 
opinion was divided among us as it would be among other people if they 
knew about it. We thought the two overriding considerations were the sav- 
ing of lives in the war and the effect of our actions on the stability, on our 
strength and the stability of the postwar world. We did say that we did not 
think exploding one of these things as a firecracker over a desert was likely 
to be very impressive. This was before we had actually done that. The de- 
struction on the desert is zero, as I think Mr. Gray may be able to remember. 
He had seen all these tests. 


[After citing lavish testimonials to Oppenheimer’s wartime contribution from 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt and General Leslie R. Groves, Garrison pro- 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 35 


vides excerpts from various public statements of Oppenheimer’s regarding 
the control of nuclear energy. Then the hearing is adjourned for the day.] 


Tuesday, April 13 


GorDON Gray: “Strictly confidential” 


[When the hearing opens, Gordon Gray expresses his anger that the AEC’s 
letter to Oppenheimer and his reply have been leaked to the press. Garrison 
and Oppenheimer explain the circumstances under which James Reston of 
the New York Times and Joseph and Stewart Alsop of the New York Herald 
Tribune obtained the material.] 


Mr. Gray. I would like to call the proceeding to order. 

The chairman of the board has a few observations to make, and I have a 
few questions to ask on behalf of the board. 

I should like to read again for the record a statement which I made yes- 
terday, that the proceedings and stenographic record of this board are re- 
garded as strictly confidential between Atomic Energy Commission officials 
participating in this matter, and Dr. Oppenheimer, his representatives, and 
witnesses. The Atomic Energy Commission will not take the initiative in 
public release of any information relating to proceedings before this board. 

The board views with very deep concern stories in the press which have 
been brought to the attention of members of the board. I personally have not 
had time to read the New York Times article, but I am told that both the 
Nichols letter to Dr. Oppenheimer, of December 23, and his reply of March 
4, are reprinted in full. Without having any information whatsoever, I have 
to assume that this was given to the New York Times. 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. It says so in the paper. 

Mr. Gray. I do not suggest that represents a violation of security. I have a seri- 
ous question about the spirit in keeping with the statement we made for the 
record yesterday about these proceedings being a matter of confidential re- 
lationship between the Commission and the board representing the Com- 
mission, and Dr. Oppenheimer and his representatives and witnesses. 

We were told yesterday before this hearing began that you were doing all 
you could to keep this out of the press. You said you were late yesterday be- 
cause you had “fingers in the dike,” I believe was your expression, which I 
found somewhat confusing against subsequent events in the day when you 
say that you gave everything that you had to the press. We agreed yesterday 


36 THE HEARING 


that it would be very unfortunate to have this proceeding conducted in the 
press. There was no dissent from that view which was expressed, I believe, 
by all of us. 

I think that it should be perfectly apparent, particularly to the attorneys 
involved, that this board faces real difficulties if each day matters about this 
proceeding appear, not on the basis of rumors or gossip, but on the basis of 
information handed directly to the press. I think it only fair to say for the 
record that the board is very much concerned. 

I should like to ask some questions for the record about the authorized 
spokesman for Dr. Oppenheimer. I assume in addition to Dr. Oppenheimer 
that Mr. Garrison, Mr. Silverman, and Mr. Ecker are actively and officially 
associated in this proceeding. 

I should like to ask who else is working on this who may be talking to the 
press? 

Mr. Garrison. Mr. Chairman, perhaps you could let me answer that question 
by a little history. The letter from the Commission was given on December 
23. I came into the case early in January. Almost immediately, or perhaps 
the middle of January, it became quite apparent from inquiries that Mr. Res- 
ton addressed both to the Atomic Energy Commission and to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer, that he already had information that clearance had been suspended, 
and that proceedings were going forward against Dr. Oppenheimer. He was 
most anxious to obtain background information from us. 

We explained to him the nature of the proceedings and our earnest desire 
that this not be the subject— 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. May I correct that. Was this your conversation with Reston, 
because I believe the initial conversations were with me. He called and he 
was very persistent in calling. I tried to evade it. I knew what it would be 
about. After about 5 or 6 days of persistent telephoning, he talked to my 
wife, and said that he had this story and he wished I would talk to him. 

I talked to him on the phone. I said I thought it contrary to the national in- 
terest that the story should be published, that I did not propose to discuss it 
with him, but if the time came when it was a public story, I would be glad to 
discuss it with him. 

That was mid-January. I don’t remember the date. I am depending on 
counsel’s memory. I believe that was the substance of our talk. He told me 
two things. First, that my clearance had been revoked. That was the story he 
had heard. That this had been cabled, telegraphed, and broadcast to subma- 
rine commanders throughout the fleet and Army posts throughout the 
world, and second, that Senator McCarthy was fully aware of this and 
thought I ought to know that. That was the end of that discussion. 

I was given to understand by proffers of kindness but not other sign that 
the Alsops knew the situation. Later this was confirmed by one of the 
prospective witnesses. 

Mr. Gray. You did not talk with either one of the Alsops? 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. I have not talked to either one of the Alsops until very re- 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 37 


cently, and I will describe those conversations. This was long ago, and it 
was my affair, and I thought my memory would be more vivid than yours. 

Mr. GARRISON. Why don’t you tell of your conversation with the Alsops? 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. That is not until very recently. Stewart Alsop called co- 
counsel, that is Herbert Marks, whose name should be in these proceed- 
ings—when would that have been, Saturday, Friday—quite recently, saying 
that they had the story and were frantic to publish, and that I should call Joe 
Alsop, who is up in Connecticut at a rest home. 

Mr. GARRISON. In Garrison, N.Y. 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. I did call him there. I put on my spiel, the thing that I have 
said to everyone, that I thought this story coming out before the matter was 
resolved could do the country no good. Either I was a traitor and very, very 
important secrets had been in jeopardy over the last 12 years, or the Gov- 
ernment was acting in a most peculiar way to take proceedings against me 
at this moment. This is the impression that I feared would be made. Neither 
impression could be good. Having both of them could be only doubly bad. 

Therefore, not as far as I was concerned, but as far as what I thought was 
right, I urged Joe Alsop to hold his story, not to publish it. We did not dis- 
cuss any substantive things except that Alsop told me how apprehensive he 
was that Senator McCarthy would come out with it. I believe that was all I 
said to Joe Alsop. He said he thought I was making a great mistake, but I 
said it was my mistake. 

I recognized of course that he could publish any moment that he wanted 
to. 

Mr. Gray. May Iask, as of this time or 10 o’clock yesterday morning, had you 
given the New York Times these documents? 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. These documents were given to Reston by my counsel Fri- 
day night, I believe, without any instruction as to what he was to do with 
them, as background material. 

Mr. Gray. So that you knew when you made the statement here yesterday 
morning that you were keeping the finger in the dike that these documents, 
dated December 23, and March 4, were already in the possession of the New 
York Times. 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. Indeed we did. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, they were given to Mr. Reston with instructions 
not to be used unless it became essential for the Times to release the story 
because others were going to do likewise. We hoped even as of yesterday— 
the last word we had with Mr. Reston was after lunch—we hoped even as of 
yesterday that this could be held off, although I told you at the start that it 
might be only a matter of hours. 

Mr. Gray. You didn’t indicate to me in any way—if you attempted to do so, it 
is a matter of my misinterpretation—that you had given documents which 
relate to these confidential proceedings and are part of these proceedings. 

You mentioned Mr. Marks. Who else is authorized to speak for you, Dr. 
Oppenheimer? 


38 THE HEARING 


Mr. GarRISON. No one else. Mr. Marks is not counsel of record in this pro- 
ceeding. He has been associated with us from the start because of his 
knowledge of past history. I am still seeking his guidance and help. 

Mr. Gray. He is assisting, I take it, in preparing these documents which you 
present? 

Mr. GARRISON. No; we did all that work ourselves. 

Mr. Gray. May I ask specifically for the record who prepared the excerpts 
about which I asked the question yesterday? 

Mr. GarRISON. We did in our own office. I did. Mr. Ecker worked on them. 

Mr. Gray. I should like to know, Mr. Garrison, why it was yesterday that not 
one of the three of you could answer the question as to whether these para- 
graphs were consecutive or came from consecutive pages. It is apparent that 
someone else had prepared them. 

Mr. GARRISON. No, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Gray. I have drawn a conclusion. If I am wrong— 

Mr. GARRISON. I am very sorry that such thoughts should even occur to you. 
What happened was that some weeks ago I went through Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
writings and I marked particular sections and passages from a lot of them 
that seemed to me to be worthy of presentation to the board, and I asked 
that they be extracted and copied out. I have not been over them for some 
time. To be frank with you, I have had so much else to do. 

Mr. Gray. My point in raising all this is that if there are a good number of 
people who are not appearing here who are going to be talking to the press, 
I would like to know what control or lack of control there may be in this 
situation. That is why I am raising this thing. 

MR. GARRISON. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. I think these stories are very prejudicial to the spirit of inquiry that 
I tried to establish as an atmosphere for this hearing as we started yesterday. 
I would very much regret that what would appear to be to the board pos- 
sible lack of cooperation in conducting these proceedings in the press if 
that were prejudicial to what are the basic fundamental issues involved. 


GorRDON Gray: “Those who are not cleared . . . will necessar- 
ily be excused” 


[Dr. Mervin J. Kelly, a physicist who serves as president of the Bell Telephone 
Laboratory in New York City, now testifies, explaining that he first met Op- 
penheimer in 1946, and later served on a research and development board 
panel that Oppenheimer chaired. When his testimony deals with classified 
information, Oppenheimer’s attorneys, who lack security clearance, must 
leave the room.] 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 39 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison: ... 


Q. What would you say as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s reputation for straightfor- 
wardness, directness, veracity? 

A. Among his peers, he is, first, known and recognized for his accuracy of 
thought and cleanness of expression. His words are considered generally 
well weighed and meaningful because of their accuracy and temperate. I 
would know of no one that knew him as well as I that would feel that he 
overstated his position. 

As to his veracity and dedication, I know of no one in the program, with 
the high clearances that he has had, and that I have, Q and top secret, every- 
thing he has done and said gives a full appearance to a great dedication, as 
full an appearance as any of us that are in and still cleared. 

Q. Would you say that as chairman of this panel he made a contribution to 
the national welfare? 

A. Iam sure that he did. In the form that he writes all of his things, getting the 
views of the full committee that he shared, as to what the forward looking 
program should be, getting it clean, orderly, and well placed was a great 
contribution, as anyone working in the atmosphere of the Pentagon knows 
the great need for, that is, of getting direction and aim and purpose well 
spelled out. It was in this report of the panel which was his fine, clean writ- 
ing, but which was the views of all of us which he shared. 

Q. What have you to say as to his reputation for integrity and patriotism and 
your own personal feeling about that? 

A. Among his peers, those who know him and know his work, I would say 
his reputation is the highest. As to my own personal belief, I know of no one 
in the program that I would have any more confidence in their integrity and 
dedication than I would of Dr. Oppenheimer... . 


By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Did you make any comment in your report on the matter of thermonuclear 
warheads or fusion weapons? 

A. Ihave not seen the report since it was issued. I would feel confident it was 
not there because it was not a matter of discussion. If it was, that is 4 years 
ago. I can’t remember. It is three and a quarter years ago. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I would like to read the witness something from the 
report, which is classified. 

THE WITNESS. I have Q clearance; I can look at it. 

Mr. Gray. In that event, those who are not cleared in this hearing room will 
necessarily be excused. 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. Since this is a report I wrote, is this one I may listen to? 

Mr. Ross. Absolutely, Doctor. 


. Robert Oppenheimer walking with his lawyer Lloyd K. Garrison, April 1954. Ralph Morse/TimePix. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 41 


Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, we hoped that this might not arise, but if it is 
the feeling of the board that it is important to its own understanding of the 
case to put this kind of question, of course it is entirely acceptable to us, 
and we shall withdraw. 

Mr. Gray. I believe that would be best, Mr. Garrison. 

(Counsel for Dr. Oppenheimer withdrew.) 
(Classified transcript deleted.) 

Mr. Gray. Would you excuse me— 

Mk. Ross. I think counsel can come back now. 

Mr. Gray. That is what I was thinking. I don’t want them excluded any more 
than necessary. 

(Counsel for Dr. Oppenheimer returned to the hearing room.) ... 


J. RoBeRT OPPENHEIMER: “When you see something that is tech- 
nically sweet, you go ahead and do it” 


[When Oppenheimer resumes testifying, Garrison asks him to discuss his 
work as chairman of the AEC’s General Advisory Committee (GAC) from 
1947 to 1952. Oppenheimer explains the nature of the reservations he ex- 
pressed in 1949 when the GAC considered a crash program to develop the 
hydrogen bomb, and denies that he later tried to dissuade physicists from 
working on the weapon.] 


Whereupon, J. Robert Oppenheimer resumed the stand as a witness, and 
having been previously sworn, was examined and testified further as follows: 


DIRECT EXAMINATION (continued) 


THE Witness. I had a communication. I can’t find it as a letter, and I don’t 
know whether it was a letter or phone call. It was from Dr. Conant. He said 
that this would be a very great mistake. 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. What would be a great mistake? 

A. To go all out with the super. Presumably he also will testify to this. He did 
not go into detail, but said if it ever came before the General Advisory Com- 
mittee, he would certainly oppose it as folly. 

The General Advisory Committee was called to meet in Washington, and 
met on two questions which were obviously related. The first was, was the 
Commission doing what it ought to be doing. Were there other things which 
it should now be undertaking in the light of the Soviet explosion. 

The second was the special case of this; was it crash development, the 


42 THE HEARING 


most rapid possible development and construction of a super among the 
things that the Commission ought to be doing. 

Now I have reviewed for you in other connections some of the earlier hy- 
drogen-bomb tale. The work on it in the summer of 1942, when we were 
quite enthusiastic about the possibility, my report on this work to Bush, the 
wartime work in which there were 2 discoveries, 1 was very much casting 
doubt on the feasibility, and 1 which had a more encouraging quality with 
regard to the feasibility. Of the talks with General Groves in which he had 
indicated that this was not something to rush into after the war. Of the early 
postwar work, prior to the establishment of the Commission. Of our en- 
couragement to the Commission and thus to Los Alamos and also directly 
to Los Alamos to study the problem and get on with it in 1947 and 1948. 

The GAC record shows I think that there were some thermonuclear de- 
vices that we felt were feasible and sensible and encouraged. I believe this 
was in 1948. But that we made a technically disparaging remark about the 
super in 1948. This was the judgment we then had. I remember that before 
1949 and the bomb, Dr. Teller had discussed with me the desirability of his 
going to Los Alamos and devoting himself to this problem. I encouraged 
him to do this. In fact, he later reminded me of that, that I encouraged him 
in strong terms to do it. 

Now, the meetings on— 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. The meeting of October 19? 

A. The meeting of October 19, 1949. Have we the date right? 

Mr. Ross. October 29. 

THE Witness. October 29. I think what we did was the following. We had a 
first meeting with the Commission at which they explained to us the double 
problem: What should they do and should they do this? We then consulted 
a number of people. * * * 

We had consultations not with the Secretary of State, but with the head of 
the policy planning staff, who represented him, George Kennan, as to what 
he thought the Russians might be up to, and where our principal problems 
lay from the point of view of assessment of Russian behavior and Russian 
motives. We had consultations with the Military Establishment, .. . 

Prior to this meeting there had been no great expression of interest on the 
part of the military in more powerful weapons. The atomic bomb had of 
course been stepped up some, but we had not been pressed to push that de- 
velopment as fast as possible. There had been no suggestion that very large 
weapons would be very useful. The pressure was all the other way; get as 
many as you can. 

We discussed General Bradley’s analysis of the effects of the Russian ex- 
plosion, and what problems he faced and with the staff, of course. 

Then we went into executive session. I believe I opened the session by 
asking Fermi to give an account of the technical state of affairs. He has al- 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 43 


ways been interested in this possibility. I think it occurred to him very early 
that the high temperatures of a fission bomb might be usable in igniting 
lighter materials. He has also an extremely critical and clear head. I asked 
others to add to this. Then we went around the table and everybody said 
what he thought the issues were that were involved. There was a surprising 
unanimity—to me very surprising—that the United States ought not to take 
the initiative at that time in an all out program for the development of ther- 
monuclear weapons. 

Different people spoke in different ways. I don’t know how available to 
you the actual record of this conversation is or even whether it fully exists. 
But there was not any difference of opinion in the final finding. I don’t 
know whether this is the first thing we considered or whether we consid- 
ered the Commission’s other question first. I imagine we went back and 
forth between the two of them. 

To the Commission’s other question, were they doing enough, we an- 
swered no. Have you read this report, because if you have, my testimony 
about it will add nothing. ... 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. I think you better say what you recollect of it. 

A. I recollect of it that the first part of the report contained a series of affirma- 
tive recommendations about what the Commission should do. I believe all 
of them were directed toward weapons expansion, weapons improvement 
and weapons diversification. Some of them involved the building of new 
types of plant which would give a freedom of choice with regard to 
weapons. Some of them involved just a stepping up of the amount. I don’t 
think that this expressed satisfaction with the current level of the Commis- 
sion effort. 

On the super program itself, I attempted to give a description of what this 
weapon was, of what would have to go into it, and what we thought the de- 
sign would be. I explained that the uncertainties in this game were very 
great, that one would not know whether one had it or not unless one had 
built it and tested it, and that realistically one would have to expect not one 
test, but perhaps more than one test. That this would have to be a program 
of design and testing. 

We had in mind, but I don’t think we had clearly enough in mind, that we 
were talking about a single design which was in its essence frozen, and that 
the possibility did not occur to us very strongly that there might be quite 
other ways of going about it. Our report had a single structure in mind—or 
almost a single structure—whose characteristics in terms of blast, of dam- 
age, of explosive force, of course, and certainly we tried in the report to de- 
scribe as faithfully as we knew how. I think in the report itself we were 
unanimous in hoping that the United States would not have to take the ini- 
tiative in the development of this weapon. ... 

I find that the report has a letter of transmittal, that it has a section on af- 


44 THE HEARING 


firmative actions to be taken, that it has a section on super bombs and that it 
has these two annexes of which you have heard. 

As far as length is concerned, the section on affirmative actions and the 
section on super bombs are about equal, and I guess I can’t tell you what is 
in the one on affirmative actions except in the very general terms I used be- 
fore. 

The first page of the page-and-a-half of the report on the super bomb is an 
account of what it is supposed to be, what has to be done in order to bring it 
about, and some semiquantitative notions of what it would take, what kind 
of damage it would do, and what kind of a program would be required. The 
essential point there is that as we then saw it, it was a weapon that you 
could not be sure of until you tried it out, and it is a problem of calculation 
and study, and then you went out in the proper place in the Pacific and 
found out whether it went bang and found out to what extent your ideas 
had been right and to what extent they had been wrong. 

It is on the second page that we start talking about the extent of damage 
and the first paragraph is just a factual account of the kind of damage, the 
kind of carrier, and I believe I should not give it—I believe it is classified, 
even if it is not possibly entirely accurate. 

I would like to state one conclusion which is that for anything but very 
large targets, this was not economical in terms of damage per dollar, and 
then even for large targets it was uncertain whether it would be economical 
in terms of damage per dollar. I am not claiming that this was good fore- 
sight, but I am just telling you what it says in here. 

I am going to read two sentences: 

“We all hope that by one means or another, the development of these 
weapons can be avoided. We are all reluctant to see the United States take 
the initiative in precipitating this development. We are all agreed that it 
would be wrong at the present moment to commit ourselves to an all-out ef- 
fort towards its development.” 

This is the crux of it and it is a strong negative statement. We added to 
this some comments as to what might be declassified and what ought not to 
be declassified and held secret if any sort of a public statement were con- 
templated. If the President were going to say anything about it, there were 
some things we thought obvious and there would be no harm in mentioning 
them. Actually, the secret ones were out in the press before very long. 

The phrase that you heard this morning, “We believe that the imaginative 
and concerted attack on the problem has a better than even chance of pro- 
ducing the weapon * * * ”—I find that in this report, and in this report 
there is, therefore, no statement that it is unfeasible. There is a statement of 
uncertainty which I believed at the time was a good assessment. You would 
have found people who would have said this was too conservative, it could 
be done faster and more certainly, and you would find other people who 
would say that it could not be done at all; but the statement as read here, no 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 45 


member of the General Advisory Committee objected to, and I have heard 
very little objection to that as an assessment of the feasibility at that time. 

This is the report itself, and there are parts of it which I think you should 
read but, for the record, there are parts that I cannot get into here. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I think it might be well for the record to show at this 
point that the board has read the entire report. ... 

THE WiTNEss. One important point to make is that lack of feasibility is not the 
ground on which we made our recommendations. 

Another point I ought to make is that lack of economy, although alleged is 
not the primary or only ground, the competition with fission weapons is ob- 
viously in our minds. The real reason, the weight, behind the report is, in 
my opinion, a failing of the existence of these weapons would be a disad- 
vantageous thing. It says this over and over again. 

I may read, which I am sure has no security value, from the so-called mi- 
nority report, Fermi and Rabi. 

“The fact that no limits exist to the destructiveness of this weapon makes 
its very existence and the knowledge of its construction a danger to human- 
ity as a whole. It is necessarily an evil thing considered in any light. For 
these reasons, we believe it important for the President of the United States 
to tell the American public and the world that we think it is wrong on fun- 
damental ethical principles to initiate the development of such a weapon.” 

In the report which got to be known as the majority report, which Conant 
wrote, DuBridge, Buckley and I signed, things are not quite so ethical and 
fundamental, but it says in the final paragraph: “In determining not to pro- 
ceed to develop the super bomb, we see a unique opportunity of providing 
by example some limitations on the totality of war and thus of eliminating 
the fear and arousing the hope of mankind.” 

I think it is very clear that the objection was that we did not like the 
weapon, not that it couldn’t be made. 

Now, it is a matter of speculation whether, if we had before us at that 
time, if we had had the technical knowledge and inventiveness which we 
did have somewhat later, we would have taken a view of this kind. These 
are total views where you try to take into account how good the thing is, 
what the enemy is likely to do, what you can do with it, what the competi- 
tion is, and the extent to which this is an inevitable step anyway. 

My feeling about the delay in the hydrogen bomb, and I imagine you want 
to question me about it, is that if we had had good ideas in 1945, and had we 
wanted to, this object might have been in existence in 1947 or 1948, perhaps 
1948. If we had had all of the good ideas in 1949, I suppose some little time 
might have been shaved off the development as it actually occurred. If we 
had not had good ideas in 1951, I do not think we would have it today. In 
other words, the question of delay is keyed in this case to the question of in- 
vention, and I think the record should show—it is known to you—that the 
principal inventor in all of this business was Teller, with many important 


46 THE HEARING 


contributions * * * other people, * * * It has not been quite a one-man show, 
but he has had some very, very good ideas, and they have kept coming. It is 
probably true that an idea of mine is embodied in all of these things. It is not 
very ingenious but it turned out to be very useful, and it was not enough to 
establish feasibility or have a decisive bearing on their feasibility. 

The notion that the thermonuclear arms race was something that was in 
the interests of this country to avoid if it could was very clear to us in 1949. 
We may have been wrong. We thought it was something to avoid even if we 
could jump the gun by a couple of years, or even if we could outproduce the 
enemy, because we were infinitely more vulnerable and infinitely less 
likely to initiate the use of these weapons, and because the world in which 
great destruction has been done in all civilized parts of the world is a harder 
world for America to live with than it is for the Communists to live with. 
This is an idea which I believe is still right, but I think what was not clear to 
us then and what is clearer to me now is that it probably lay wholly beyond 
our power to prevent the Russians somehow from getting ahead with it. I 
think if we could have taken any action at that time which would have pre- 
cluded their development of this weapon, it would have been a very good 
bet to take that, Iam sure. I do not know enough about contemporary intel- 
ligence to say whether or not our actions have had any effect on theirs but 
you have ways of finding out about that. 

I believe that their atomic effort was quite imitative and that made it quite 
natural for us to think that their thermonuclear work would be quite imita- 
tive and that we should not set the pace in this development. I am trying to 
explain what I thought and what I believe my friends thought. I am not ar- 
guing that this is right, but I am clear about one thing: if this affair could 
have been averted on the part of the Russians, I am quite clear that we 
would be in a safer world today by far. 

Mr. Gray. Would you repeat that last sentence. I didn’t quite get it. 

THE Witness. If the development by the enemy as well as by us of thermonu- 
clear weapons could have been averted, I think we would be in a somewhat 
safer world today than we are. God knows, not entirely safe because atomic 
bombs are not jolly either. 

I remember a few comments at that meeting that I believe it best that 
people who are coming here to testify speak for themselves about; I am not 
sure my memory is right—comments of Fermi, of Conant, of Rabi, and of 
DuBridge as to how they felt about it... . 

I think we have to keep strictly away from the technical questions. I do 
not think we want to argue technical questions here, and I do not think it is 
very meaningful for me to speculate as to how we would have responded 
had the technical picture at that time been more as it was later. 

However, it is my judgment in these things that when you see something 
that is technically sweet, you go ahead and do it and you argue about what 
to do about it only after you have had your technical success. That is the 


TUESDAY, APRIL 13 47 


way it was with the atomic bomb. I do not think anybody opposed making 
it; there were some debates about what to do with it after it was made. I can- 
not very well imagine if we had known in late 1949 what we got to know by 
early 1951 that the tone of our report would have been the same. You may 
ask other people how they feel about that. I am not at all sure they will con- 
cur: some will and some will not. ... 

I believe that in every subsequent GAC report where we gave advice on 
the thermonuclear program, on the super part of it or the other parts of it, 
that the problem before us was what to do and how to get on with it, what 
made sense and what did not make sense, and that the moral and ethical 
and political issues which are touched on in these two annexes were never 
again mentioned, and that we never again questioned the basic decisions 
under which we were operating. 

We tried, I think, throughout to point out where the really critical ques- 
tions were. There was a tendency in this job, as in many others, to try to 
solve the easy problems and try to leave the really tough ones unworried 
about, and I think we kept rubbing on the toughest one, that this had to be 
looked into. That was done not completely; perhaps it is not absolutely 
done completely today, but the situation developed in a most odd way be- 
cause, by the spring and summer of 1951, things were not stuck in the sense 
that there was nothing to do, but they were stuck in the sense that there was 
no program of which you could see the end. 

Now, different people responded differently to that. Teller also pointed 
out quite rightly that there were other possibilities that might turn up and 
other people took a very categorical view that the whole business was non- 
sense. 

Mr. GarRISON. Scientifically nonsense. 

THE WITNESS. Scientifically nonsense. I believe my own record was one that 
it looked sour but we have had lots of surprises and let’s keep open- 
minded.... 

It is also alleged that I kept people from working on the hydrogen bomb. 
If by that it is meant that a knowledge of our views which got to be rather 
widespread had an effect, I cannot deny it because I don’t know, but I think 
I can deny that I ever talked anybody out of working on the hydrogen bomb 
or desired to talk anybody out of working on the hydrogen bomb. You will 
have some testimony on this, but since I don’t know who the people are 
who are referred to in the General Manager’s letter, what I say might not be 
entirely responsive. ... 

In the late summer and autumn of 1950, I had an obvious personal worry. 
I had made as chairman, and had participated in, the recommendation 
against the development of the super. The super was a big item on the pro- 
gram. It wasn’t going very well, and I wondered whether another man might 
not make a better chairman for the General Advisory Committee. I dis- 
cussed it with several physicists. I remember discussing it with Teller and 


48 THE HEARING 


Bacher. Teller says that he does not remember discussing it with me. The 
general advice was: Let’s all stick together as well as we can and don’t re- 
sign and don’t change your position. 

Mr. Ross. What was that date? 

THE Witnzss. In the summer of 1950. 

When I got back in the autumn of 1950, the first meeting, I went tosee Mr. 
Dean, who was Chairman of the Commission, and Commissioner Smyth 
and told them about my problem, and they said that obviously the chair- 
man should be someone who would be comfortable with them—what 
would be their suggestions? They protested in very forceful terms that I 
should not quit as chairman, and that they would be very unhappy if I did, 
that I ought to carry on. 

I also took the thing up with our committee, but our committee was not a 
very responsive group when it came to electing other chairmen, and I got no 
place. I did not feel that I ought to resign as chairman or refuse to serve. I 
thought I ought to do what was comfortable for the Commission and the 
committee, and I tried to ascertain what that was... . 

I would like to summarize a little bit this long story I think you will hear 
from people who believed at the time, and believe now that the advice we 
gave in 1949 was wrong. You will hear from people who believed at the 
time and who even believe now that the advice we gave in 1949 was right. I 
myself would not take either of these extreme views. 

I think we were right in believing that any method available consistent 
with honor and security for keeping these objects out of the arsenals of the 
enemy would have been a good course to follow. I don’t believe we were 
very clear and I don’t believe we were ever very agreed as to what such 
course might be, or whether such a course existed. I think that if we had had 
at that time the technical insight that I now have, we would have concluded 
that it was almost hopeless to keep this resource out of the enemy hands 
and maybe we would have given up even suggesting that it be tried. I think 
if we had had that technical knowledge, then we should have recom- 
mended that we go ahead full steam, and then or in 1948 or 1946 or 1945. 

I don’t want to conceal from you, and I have said it in public speeches so 
it would not make much sense to conceal from you the dual nature of the 
hopes which we entertained about the development of bigger and bigger 
weapons, first the atomic bomb, and then its amplified version, and then 
these new things. 

On the one hand, as we said at the time, and as I now firmly believe, this 
stuff is going to put an end to major total wars. I don’t know whether it will 
do so in our lifetime. On the other hand, the notion that this will have to 
come about by the employment of these weapons on a massive scale against 
civilizations and cities has always bothered me. I suppose that bother is 
part of the freight I took into the General Advisory Committee, and into the 
meetings that discussed the hydrogen bomb. No other person may share 
that view, but I do. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 49 


[Garrison presents an affidavit from Dr. John H. Manley, chair of the physics 
department at the University of Washington, who served as secretary of the 
General Advisory Committee from 1946 to 1951, stating that Oppenheimer 
“is in no sense whatever a security risk.” Garrison then introduces further 
testimonials to Oppenheimer’s varied contributions from former president 
Harry S. Truman and former AEC chairman, Gordon Dean, after which the 
hearing adjourns.] 


Wednesday, April 14 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Both an older brother and in some 
ways perhaps . . . a father” 


[Garrison concludes his direct examination by asking Oppenheimer to de- 
scribe his relationship with his brother, Frank, who has admitted that he was 
once a member of the Communist Party.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION (continued) 
By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. Dr. Oppenheimer, will you tell the board something about your brother 
Frank, your relations with him? 

A. He was 8 years my junior. 

Q. It was just you and Frank in the family? 

A. We were the only children. I think I was both an older brother and in some 
ways perhaps part of a father to him because of that age difference. We were 
close during our childhood, although the age gap made our interests differ- 
ent. We sailed together. We bicycled together. In 1929 we rented a little 
ranch up in the high mountains in New Mexico which we have had ever 
since, and we used to spend as much time there as we could in the summer. 
For my part that was partly for reasons of health, but it was also a very nice 
place. 

My brother had learned to be a very expert flutist. I think he could have 
been a professional. He decided to study physics. Since I was a physicist 
this produced a kind of rivalry. He went abroad to study. He studied at Cam- 
bridge and at Florence. He went to college before that at Johns Hopkins. 

When he came back to this country; he did take his doctor’s degree at the 
California Institute of Technology. 

We were quite close, very fond of one another. He was not a very disci- 
plined young man. I guess I was not either. He loved painting. He loved 


50 THE HEARING 


music. He was an expert horseman. We spent most of our time during the 
summer fiddling around with horses and fixing up the ranch. 

In the very first year he had two young friends with him who were about 
his age, and I was the old man of the party. He read quite widely, but I am 
afraid very much as I did, belles lettres, poetry. 

Dr. Evans. Was your father there at that time? 

THE WITNESS. My father was alive. He did occasionally visit at the ranch. His 
heart was not very good. This is almost 10,000 feet high, so he did not 
spend much time there. We could not put him up. It was a very primitive 
sort of establishment. There was of course the tension which a very inti- 
mate family relation of this kind always involves, but there was great affec- 
tion between us. 

He worked fairly well at physics but he was slow. It took him a long time 
to get his doctor’s degree. He was very much distracted by his other inter- 
ests. 

In 1936, I guess it was, he met his present wife and married. I am not 
completely sure of the date, but I could check it. After that, a good deal of 
the warmth of our relations remained, but they were less intimate and occa- 
sionally perhaps somewhat more strained. His wife had, I think, some 
friends and connections with the radical circles in Berkeley. She was a stu- 
dent there. She had a very different background than Frank. She certainly 
interested him for the first time in politics and left-wing things. It was a 
great bond between them. 

As I wrote in my answer, not very long after their marriage they both 
joined the Communist Party. This was in Pasadena. I don’t know how long 
thereafter, but not very long thereafter, Frank came to Berkeley and told me 
of this. We continued to be close as brothers are, but not as it had been be- 
fore his marriage. 

He once asked me and another fellow to come visit one of the meetings 
that he had in his house, which was a Communist Party meeting. It is, I 
think, the only thing recognizeable to me as a Communist Party meeting 
that I have ever attended.... 

Dr. Evans. This was not a closed meeting of the Communist Party? 

THE WITNESS. It was not closed because it had visitors. I understood the rest of 
the people were Communists. This was on the occasion of one of my visits 
to Berkeley and Pasadena. The meeting made no detailed impression on 
me, but I do remember there was a lot of fuss about getting the literature 
distributed, and I do remember that the principal item under discussion 
was segregation in the municipal pool in Pasadena. This unit was con- 
cerned about that and they talked about it. It made a rather pathetic impres- 
sion on me. It was a mixed unit of some colored people and some who were 
not colored. 

I remember vividly walking away from the meeting with Bridges and his 
saying, “What a sad spectacle” or “What a pathetic sight,” or something 
like that. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 51 


Mr. Gray. Did you give the approximate date of this, Doctor? 

THE Witness. I can give it roughly. 

Mr. Gray. I mean within a year. 

THE Witness. It would have been not before 1937 or after 1939. I think I ought 
to stress that although my brother was a party member, he did a lot of other 
things. As I say, he was passionately fond of music. He had many wholly 
non-Communist friends, some of them the same as my friends on the fac- 
ulty at Caltech. He was working for a doctor’s degree. 

He spent summers at the ranch. He couldn’t have been a very hard work- 
ing Communist during those years. 

I am very foggy as to what I knew about the situation at Stanford but my 
recollection is that I did not then know my brother was still in the party. He 
has testified that he was, and that he withdrew in the spring of 1941. He lost 
his job at Stanford. I never clearly understood the reasons for that, but I 
thought it might be connected with his communism. 

We spent part of the summer of 1941 together at the ranch, about a month. 
That was after my marriage. He and his wife stayed on a while. Then they 
were out of a job. Ernest Lawrence asked him to come to Berkeley in the fall, 
I don’t remember the date, but I think it is of record, and work in the radia- 
tion laboratory. That was certainly at the time not for secret work. He and I 
saw very little of each other that year. 

My brother felt that he wanted to establish an independent existence in 
Berkeley where I had lived a long time, and didn’t want in any sense to be 
my satellite. He did become involved in secret work, I suppose, shortly after 
Pear] Harbor. I don’t know the precise date. 

He continued with it and worked terribly hard during the war. I have 
heard a great many people tell me what a vigorous and helpful guy he was, 
how many hours he spent at work, how he got everybody to put their best to 
the job that was his. He worked in Berkeley. He worked in Oak Ridge. He 
came for a relatively brief time to New Mexico, where his job was as an as- 
sistant to Bainbridge in making the preparations for the test of July 16. 

This was a job that combined practical experience, technical experience, 
a feeling for the country, and I think he did very well. He left very early— 
left long before I did—and went back to Berkeley. We did not see him again 
until the New Year’s holidays in 1945 and 1946. After that, when we came 
back to Berkeley, we saw something of them, quite a little of them, until 
they moved to Minnesota. 

As you probably know, he resigned from the University of Minnesota— 
his assistant professorship there—in the spring of 1949 at the time he was 
testifying before the House committee that he had been a member of the 
Communist Party. The university accepted his resignation. He has not been 
able to get a job since, or at least not one that made sense. 

He had in the summer of 1948, maybe, or the winter of 1948-49, acquired 
a piece of property in southwest Colorado. It is also fairly high. It is in the 
Blanco Basin. I think he got it because it was very beautiful, and thought it 


52 THE HEARING 


would be nice to spend summers there. In any case, he and his wife and 
children moved up there, and have been trying to build it up as a cattle 
ranch ever since. They have been there, I think, with no important excep- 
tions, from 1949 until today. This life is not what he was cut out for and I 
don’t know how it will go. 

I try to see him when I can. It does not come out to being much more than 
once a year. I think the last time I saw him was in late September or October 
of last year. Usually he would come down to Santa Fe, and we would have 
an evening together or something like that. I had the feeling the last time 
that I saw him that he was thoroughly and wholly and absolutely away from 
this nightmare which has been going on for many, many years. 

These are at least some of the things that I wanted to say. I would like to 
say one more thing. 

In the Commission’s letter— 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. Perhaps I could ask you about that. 

On page 6 of the Commission’s letter, which talks about Haakon Cheva- 
lier, there is a statement, I am quoting, “that Haakon Chevalier thereupon 
approached you either directly or through your brother, Frank Friedman 
Oppenheimer, in connection with this matter.” 

Was your brother connected with this approach by Chevalier to you? 

A. I am very clear on this. I have a vivid and I think certainly not fallible 
memory. He had nothing whatever to do with it. It would not have made 
any sense, I may say, since Chevalier was my friend. I don’t mean that my 
brother did not know him, but this would have been a peculiarly round- 
about and unnatural thing. 

Q. You spoke about attending at your brother’s invitation that little Commu- 
nist Party meeting in Pasadena somewhere in the late thirties, and that re- 
minds me to ask you about another portion of the Commission’s letter. 

On page 3, I will just read a paragraph: 

“It was reported that you attended a closed meeting of the professional 
section of the Communist Party of Alameda County, Calif., which was held 
in the latter part of July or early August, 1941, at your residence, 10 Kenil- 
worth Court, Berkeley, Calif., for the purpose of hearing an explanation of 
the change in Communist party policy. It was further reported that you de- 
nied that you attended such a meeting and that such a meeting was held in 
your home.” 

Dr. Oppenheimer, did you attend a closed meeting of the professional sec- 
tion of the Communist Party of Alameda County which is said to have been 
held in your house in the latter part of July or early August, 1941? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you ever attend at any time or place a closed meeting of the profes- 
sional section of the Communist Party of Alameda County? 

A. No. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 53 


Q. Were you ever asked to lend your house for such a meeting? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you ever belong to the professional section of the Communist Party of 
Alameda County? 

A. I did not. I would be fairly certain that I never knew of its existence. 

Q. Did you ever belong to any other section or unit of the Communist Party or 
to the Communist Party? 

A. No. 

Q. Apart from the meeting in Pasadena, to which we have just referred, have 
you ever attended a meeting which you understood to be open only to Com- 
munist Party members, other than yourself? 

A. No. 

Q. Have you ever had in your house at any time any meeting at which a lec- 
ture about the Communist Party has been given? 

A. No. 

Q. Do you recall any meeting in your house at any time at which a lecture 
about political affairs of any sort was given? 

A. No.... 


J. RoBerT OPPENHEIMER: “In the case of a brother you don’t 
make tests” 


[Roger Robb begins his cross-examination of Oppenheimer and quickly 
moves to the issue of Robert's left-wing affiliations and Frank’s membership 
in the Communist Party. He then questions Oppenheimer about several for- 
mer students whom he knew to hold radical views yet recommended for po- 
sitions at Los Alamos.] 


CROSS-EX AMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Doctor, in your opinion, is association with the Communist movement 
compatible with a job on a secret war project? 

A. Are we talking of the present; the past? 

Q. Let us talk about the present and then we will go to the past. 

A. Obviously not. 

Q. Has that always been your opinion? 

A. No. I was associated with the Communist movement, as I have spelled out 
in my letter, and I did not regard it as inappropriate to take the job at Los 
Alamos. 

Q. When did that become your opinion? 

A. As the nature of the enemy and the nature of the conflict and the nature of 
the party all became clearer. I would say after the war and probably by 1947. 


Ma) 
> 


THE HEARING 


Was it your opinion in 1943? 

No. 

You are sure about that? 

That association— 

With the Communist movement. 

The current association? 

Yes. 

I always thought current association— 

You always thought that? 

That is right. 

There had never been any question in your mind that a man who is closely 
associated with the Communist movement or is a member of the Commu- 
nist Party has no business on a secret war project; is that right? 

A. That is right. 

Q. Why did you have that opinion? What was your reason for it? 

A. It just made no sense to me. 

Q. Why not. 

A. That a man who is working on secret things should have any kind of loy- 
alty to another outfit. 

Q. Why did you think that the two loyalties were inconsistent? 

A. They might be. 

Q. Why? 

A. Because the Communist Party had its own affairs, and its own program 
which obviously I now know were inconsistent with the best interests of 
the United States, but which could at any time have diverged from those of 
the United States. 

Q. You would not think that loyalty to a church would be inconsistent with 
work on a secret war project, would you? 

A. No. 

Q. And of course that was not your view in 1943, was it? 

A. No. 

Q. Doctor, what Iam trying to get at is, What specifically was your reason for 
thinking that membership or close association with the Communist Party 
and the loyalties necessarily involved were inconsistent with work on a se- 
cret war project? 

A. The connection of the Communist Party with a foreign power. 

Q. To wit, Russia. 

A. Sure. 

Q. Would you say that connection with a foreign power, to wit, England, 
would necessarily be inconsistent? 

A. Commitment would be. 

Q. No; I said connection. 

A. Not necessarily. You could be a member of the English speaking union. 

Q. What I am getting at, Doctor, is what particular feature of the Communist 

Party did you feel was inconsistent with work on a secret war project? 


DPR PO PO PL eo 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 55 


A. After the Chevalier incident I could not be unaware of the danger of espi- 
onage. After the conversations with the Manhattan District security officers, 
I could not be but acutely aware of it. 

Q. But you have told me, Doctor, that you always felt that membership or 
close association in the Communist Party was inconsistent with work on a 
secret war project. What I am asking you, sir, is why you felt that. Surely 
you had a reason for feeling that, didn’t you? 

A. Iam not sure. I think it was an obviously correct judgment. 

Q. Yes, sir. But what I am asking you is to explain to me why it was obvious 
to you. 

A. Because to some extent, an extent which I did not fully realize, the Com- 

munist Party was connected with the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union was a 

potentially hostile power, it was at that time an ally, and because I had been 

told that when you were a member of the party, you assumed some fairly 
solemn oath or obligation to do what the party told you. 

. Espionage, if necessary, isn’t that right? 

I was never told that. 

Who told you, Doctor? 

My wife. 

When? 

I don’t remember. 

. Prior to 1943? 

Oh, yes. 

. Doctor, let me ask you a blunt question. Don’t you know and didn’t you 
knoe certainly by 1943 that the Communist Party was an instrument or a 
vehicle of espionage in this country? 

A. I was not clear about it. 

Q. Didn’t you suspect it? 

A. No. 

Q. Wasn’t that the reason why you felt that membership in the party was in- 
consistent with the work on a secret war project? 

A. I think I have stated the reason about right. 

Q. I am asking you now if your fear of espionage wasn’t one of the reasons 
why you felt that association with the Communist Party was inconsistent 
with work on a secret war project? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Your answer is that it was? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What about former members of the party; do you think that where a man 
has formerly been a member of the party he is an appropriate person to 
work on a secret war project? 

A. Are we talking about now or about then? 

Q. Let us ask you now, and then we will go back to then. 

A. Ithink that depends on the character and the totality of the disengagement 
and what kind of a man he is, whether he is an honest man. 


PPO>POPO>O 


56 THE HEARING 


Q. Was that your view in 1941, 1942, and 1943? 

A. Essentially. 

Q. What test do you apply and did you apply in 1941, 1942, and 1943 to sat- 
isfy yourself that a former member of the party is no longer dangerous? 

A. As I said, I knew very little about who was a former member of the party. 
In my wife’s case, it was completely clear that she was no longer dangerous. 
In my brother’s case, I had confidence in his decency and straightforward- 
ness and in his loyalty to me. 

Q. Let us take your brother as an example. Tell us the test that you applied to 
acquire the confidence that you have spoken of? 

A. In the case of a brother you don’t make tests, at least I didn’t. 

Q. Well— 

A. I knew my brother. 

Q. When did you decide that your brother was no longer a member of the 
party and no longer dangerous? 

A. I never regarded my brother as dangerous. I never regarded him—the fact 
that a member of the Communist Party might commit espionage did not 
mean to me that every member of the Communist Party would commit es- 
pionage. 

Q. I see. In other words, you felt that your brother was an exception to the 
doctrine which you have just announced? 

A. No; I felt that though there was danger of espionage that this was not a gen- 
eral danger. 

Q. In other words, you felt—I am talking now about 1943—that members of 
the Communist Party might work on a secret war project without danger to 
this country; is that right? 

A. Yes. What I have said was that there was danger that a member of the Com- 
munist Party would not be a good security risk. This does not mean that 
every member would be, but that it would be good policy to make that rule. 

Q. Do you still feel that way? 

A. Today I feel it is absolute. 

Q. You feel that no member of the Communist Party should work on a secret 
war project in this country, without exception? 

A. With no exception. 

Q. When did you reach that conclusion? 

A. I would think the same timing that I spoke of before as the obvious war be- 
tween Russia and the United States began to shape up. 

Q. Could you give us the dates on that? 

A. Sure. I would have thought that it was completely clear to me by 1948, 
maybe 1947. 

Q. 1946? 

A. Iam not sure. 

Q. Doctor, let me return a bit to the test that you might apply to determine 
whether a member of the Communist Party in 1943 was dangerous. What 
test would you apply, or would you have applied in 1943? 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 57 


A. Only the knowledge of the man and his character. 

Q. Just what you yourself knew about him? 

A. I didn’t regard myself as the man to settle these questions. I am stating 
opinions. 

Q. That is what I am getting at. You have testified that your brother, to your 
knowledge, became a member of the Communist Party about 1936; is that 
right? 

A. Yes, 1937, 1 don’t know. 

Q. When is it your testimony that your brother left the party? 

A. His testimony, which I believe, is that he left the party in the spring of 

1941. 

. When did you first hear that he left the party? 

. I think in the autumn of 1941. 

. In the autumn? 

Yes. 


Is that when he went to Berkeley to work in the Radiation Laboratory? 
Yes, on unclassified work. 

. But he shortly began to work on classified work, is that right? 

The time interval, I think, was longer. 

Shortly after that. Shortly after Pearl Harbor? 

. Iam not clear about that. It was within a year certainly, probably about 6 
months. 


>O>OPOPO>O 


Frank Oppenheimer after testifying 
before the House Committee on Un- 
American Activities, 1949. Popperfoto/ 
Archive Photos. 


58 THE HEARING 


Q. You were satisfied at that time that your brother was not a member of the 
party any more? 
Yes. 

. How did you reach that conclusion? 

. He told me. 

. That was enough for you? 

. Sure. 

. Did you know that your brother at that time and for quite a while after that 

denied both publicly and officially that he had ever been a member of the 

Communist Party? 

A. I remember one such denial in 1947. 

Q. Did you know that your brother’s personnel security questionnaire, which 
he executed when he went to work at Berkeley, failed to disclose his mem- 
bership in the Communist Party? 

A. No, I knew nothing about that. 

Q. Did you ask him about that? 

A. No. 

Q. You knew, didn’t you, sir, that it was a matter of great interest and impor- 

tance to the security officers to determine whether or not anyone working 

on the project had been a member of the Communist Party? 

. I found that out somewhat later. 

. Didn’t you know it at that time? 

. It would have made sense. 

. In 1941? 

. It would have made sense. 

. Yes. Did you tell anybody, any security officer or anybody else, that your 

brother had been a member of the Communist Party? Did you tell them that 

in 1941? 

A. I told Lawrence that my brother—I don’t know the terms I used—but I cer- 
tainly indicated that his trouble at Stanford came from his Red connections. 

Q. Doctor, I didn’t ask you quite that question. Did you tell Lawrence or any- 
body else that your brother, Frank, had actually been a member of the Com- 
munist Party? 

A. I doubt it. 

Q. Why not? 

A. I thought this was the sort of thing that would be found out by normal se- 

curity check. 

. You were not helping the security check, were you, sir? 

. I would had if I had been asked. 

Otherwise not? 

I didn’t volunteer this information. 

. Youthink your brother today would be a good security risk? 

. Irather think so. 

. Beg pardon? 

. Ithink so. 

. Doctor, will you agree with me that when a man has been a member of the 


O>OProO> O>PO>O> 


O>OPO>PO?PO 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 59 


Communist Party, the mere fact that he says that he is no longer a member, 
and that he apparently has no present interest or connections in the party, 
does not show that he is no longer dangerous as a security risk? 

A. lL agree with that. 

Q. Beg pardon? 

A. Ll agree with that. 

Q. You agree with that. 

A. I would add the fact that he was in the party in 1942 or 1938, did not prove 
that he was dangerous. It merely created a presumption of danger. This is 
my view, and I am not advocating it. 

Q. In other words, what you are saying is that a man’s denial that he is a 
member and his apparent lack of interest or connections is not conclusive 
by any means; is it? 

A. No. 

Q. Did you feel that way in 1943? 

A. I would think so. 

Q. Or 1942? 

A. I would think so. I need to state that I didn’t think very much about the 
questions you are putting and very little in the terms in which you are put- 
ting them. Therefore, my attempt to tell you what I thought is an attempt at 
reconstruction. 

Q. Yes, but you couldn’t conceive that you would have had a different opin- 
ion in 1943 on a question such as that, would you, Doctor? 

A. No. 

Q. Have you ever been told, Doctor, that it was the policy of the Communist 
Party, certainly as early as 1943, or say certainly as early as 1941, that when 
a man entered confidential war work, he was not supposed to remain a 
member of the party? 

A. No. 

Q. No one has ever told you that? 

A. No. 

Q. Can you be sure about that, sir? Does that statement come as a surprise to 
you? 

A. I never heard any statement about the policy of the party. 

Q. Doctor, I notice in your answer on page 5 you use the expression “fellow 
travelers.” What is your definition of a fellow traveler, sir? 

A. It is a repugnant word which I used about myself once in an interview 
with the FBI. I understood it to mean someone who accepted part of the 
public program of the Communist Party, who was willing to work with and 
associate with Communists, but who was not a member of the party. 

Q. Do you think though a fellow traveler should be employed on a secret war 
project? 

A. Today? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. No. 

Q. Did you feel that way in 1942 and 1943? 


60 THE HEARING 


A. My feeling then and my feeling about most of these things is that the judg- 
ment is an integral judgment of what kind of a man you are dealing with. 
Today I think association with the Communist Party or fellow traveling 
with the Communist Party manifestly means sympathy for the enemy. In 
the period of the war, I would have thought that it was a question of what 
the man was like, what he would and wouldn’t do. Certainly fellow travel- 
ing and party membership raised a question and a serious question. 

Q. Were you ever a fellow traveler? 

A. I was a fellow traveler. ... 

Q. Doctor, do you think that social contacts between a person employed in se- 
cret war work and Communists or Communist adherents is dangerous? 

A. Are we talking about today? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Certainly not necessarily so. They could conceivably be. 

Q. Was that your view in 1943 and during the war years? 

A. Yes; I think it would have been. My awareness of the danger would be 
greater today. 

Q. But it is fair to say that during the war years you felt that social contacts 
between a person employed in secret war work and Communists or Com- 
munist adherents were potentially dangerous; is that correct? 

A. Were conceivably dangerous. I visited Jean Tatlock in the spring of 1943. I 
almost had to. She was not much of a Communist, but she was certainly a 
member of the party. There was nothing dangerous about that. There was 
nothing potentially dangerous about that. 

Q. But you would have felt then, I assume, that a rather continued or constant 
association between a person employed on the atomic-bomb project and 
Communists or Communist adherents was dangerous? 

A. Potentially dangerous; conceivably dangerous. Look, I have had a lot of se- 
crets in my head a long time. It does not matter who I associate with. I don’t 
talk about those secrets. Only a very skillful guy might pick up a trace of in- 
formation as to where I had been or what I was up to. Passing the time of 
day with a Communist—I don’t think it is wise, but I don’t see that it is nec- 
essarily dangerous if the man is discreet and knows what he is up to. 

Q. Why did you think that social contacts during the war years between per- 
sons on the project—by the project, I mean the atomic-bomb project—and 
Communists or Communist adherents involved a possibility of danger? 

A. We were really fantastic in what we were trying to keep secret there. The 
people who were there, the life, all of us were supposed to be secret. Even a 
normal account of a man’s friends was something that we didn’t want to get 
out. “I saw the Fermis last night”—that was not the kind of thing to say. 

This was a rather unusual kind of blanket of secrecy. I don’t think, if a 
Communist knows that I am going to Washington to visit the AEC, that is 
going to give him any information. But it was desired that there be no know!1- 
edge of who was at Los Alamos, or at least no massive knowledge of it. 

Q. Did you have any talk with your brother, Frank, about his social contacts 
at the time he come on the project? 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 61 


A. When he came to work for Ernest Lawrence, before there was any classi- 
fied work, before I knew about it and before he was involved in it, I warned 
him that Ernest would fire him if he was not a good boy. That is about all I 
remember. 

. You didn’t discuss with him his social contacts? 

No. 

. Either at that time or subsequently? 

. If you mean did he ever tell me that he had seen So-and-So, I don’t know. 
No. 

. I don’t believe we had a systematic discussion. 

. Did you ever urge him to give up any social contacts who might have been 
Communists or Communist adherents? 

A. I don’t know the answer to that. It doesn’t ring a bell. 

Q. If you did, it made no impression on you? 

A. Not enough to last these years. .. . 


ay oly Ogee o) 


J. RoBeRt OPPENHEIMER: “Then | invented a cock-and-bull story” 


[Robb now directs his questions to Oppenheimer’s failure to notify the secu- 
rity forces at Los Alamos in 1943 after his friend Haakon Chevalier men- 
tioned that a mutual acquaintance, George Eltenton, had suggested it might 
be possible to obtain secret information for the Soviet Union.] 


Q. ... Doctor, on page 22 of your letter of March 4, 1954, you speak of what 
for convenience I will call the Eltenton-Chevalier incident. 

A. That is right. 

Q. You describe the occasion when Chevalier spoke to you about this mat- 
ter. Would you please, sir, tell the board as accurately as you can and in 
as much detail as you can exactly what Chevalier said to you, and you 
said to Chevalier, on the occasion that you mention on page 22 of your 
answer? 

A. This is one of those things that I had so many occasions to think about that 
I am not going to remember the actual words. I am going to remember the 
nature of the conversation. 

Q. Where possible I wish you would give us the actual words. 

A. Iam not going to give them to you. 

Q. Very well. 

A. Chevalier said he had seen George Eltenton recently. 

Mr. Gray. May I interrupt just a moment? I believe it would be useful for Dr. 
Oppenheimer to describe the circumstances which led to the conversation, 
whether he called you or whether this was a casual meeting. 

Mr. Ross. Yes, sir. 

THE WITNESS. He and his wife— 


62 THE HEARING 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. May I interpose, Doctor? Would you begin at the beginning and tell us ex- 
actly what happened? 

A. Yes. One day, and I believe you have the time fixed better than I do in the 
winter of 1942-43, Haakon Chevalier came to our home. It was, I believe, 
for dinner, but possibly for a drink. When I went out into the pantry, Cheva- 
lier followed me or came with me to help me. He said, “I saw George E]l- 
tenton recently.” Maybe he asked me if I remembered him. That Eltenton 
had told him that he had a method, he had means of getting technical infor- 
mation to Soviet scientists. He didn’t describe the means. I thought I said 
“But that is treason,” but I am not sure. I said anyway something, “This is a 
terrible thing to do.” Chevalier said or expressed complete agreement. That 
was the end of it. It was a very brief conversation. 

Q. That is all that was said? 

A. Maybe we talked about the drinks or something like that. 

Q. I mean about this matter, Doctor, had Chevalier telephoned you or com- 
municated with you prior to that occasion to ask if he might see you? 

A. I don’t think so. I don’t remember. We saw each other from time to time. If 
we were having dinner together it would not have gone just this way. 
Maybe he called up and said he would like to come. 

Q. It could have been that he called you and you said come over for dinner; is 
that correct? 

A. Any of these things could have been. 

Q. You said in the beginning of your recital of this matter that you have de- 

scribed that occasion on many, many occasions; is that right? 

Yes. 
Am Itoconclude from that that it has become pretty well fixed in your mind? 

. Iam afraid so. 

. Yes, sir. It is a twice told tale for you. 

. It certainly is. 

. It is not something that happened and you forget it and then thought about 

it next, 10 years later, is that correct? 

A. That is right. 

Q. Did Chevalier in that conversation say anything to you about the use of mi- 
crofilm as a means of transmitting this information? 

A. No. 

Q. You are sure of that? 

A. Sure. 

Q. Did he say anything about the possibility that the information would be 
transmitted through a man at the Soviet consulate? 

A. No; he did not. 

Q. You are sure about that? 

A. Iam sure about that. 

Q. Did he tell you or indicate to you in any way that he had talked to anyone 
but you about this matter? 


O>OPrO> 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 63 


A. No. 

Q. Youare sure about that? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you learn from anybody else or hear that Chevalier had approached 
anybody but you about this matter? 

A. No. 

Q. You are sure about that? 

A. That is right. 

Q. You had no indication or no information suggesting to you that Chevalier 
had made any other approach than the one to you? 

A. No. 

Q. You state in your description of this incident in your answer that you 
made some strong remarks to Chevalier. Was that your remark, that this is 
treasonous? 

A. It was a remark that either said—this is a path that has been walked over 

too often, and I don’t remember what terms I said this is terrible. 

Didn’t you use the word “treason”? 

. Ican tell you the story of the word “treason.” 

. Would you answer that and then explain? 

I don’t know. 

You don’t know now? 

No, I don’t know. 

Did you think it was treasonous? 

I thought it was terrible. 

Did you think it was treasonous? 

Totake information from the United States and ship it abroad illicitly, sure. 

. In other words, you thought that the course of action suggested to Eltenton 

was treasonous. 

. Yes. 

Q. Since Eltenton was not a citizen, if it was not treasonous, it was criminal; 
is that correct? 

A. Of course. 

Q. In other words, you thought that the course of conduct suggested to E]- 
tenton was an attempt at espionage; didn’t you? 

A. Sure. 

Q. There is no question about it. Let me ask you, sir: Did you know this man 
Eltenton? 

A. Yes; not well. 

Q. How had you come to know him? 

A. Perhaps “know” is the wrong word. I had met him a couple of times. 

Q. How? 

A. I remember one occasion which was not when I met him, but when I re- 
member seeing him. I don’t remember the occasion of my meeting him. Do 
you want me to describe the occasion I saw him? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. I am virtually certain of this. Some time after we moved to Eagle Hill, 


> O>O>PO>PO>O>O 


64 THE HEARING 


possibly in the autumn of 1941, a group of people came to my house one 
afternoon to discuss whether or not it would be a good idea to set up a 
branch of the Association of Scientific Workers. We concluded negatively, 
and I know my own views were negative. I think Eltenton was present at 
that meeting. 

Dr. EvANs. What was that? 

THE Witness. I think Eltenton was present at that time. That is not the first 
time I met him, but it is one of the few times I can put my finger on. 


By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. What did you know about Eltenton’s background in 1943 when this 
Eltenton-Chevalier episode occurred? 

A. Two things, three things, four things: That he was an Englishman, that he 
was a chemical engineer, that he had spent some time in the Soviet Union, 
that he was a member of the Federation of Architects, Engineers, Chemists, 
and Technicians—five things—that he was employed, I think, at Shell De- 
velopment Co. 

Q. How did you know all those things? 

A. Well, about the Shell Development Co. and the Federation of Architects, 
Engineers, Chemists, and Technicians, I suppose he told me or someone 
else employed there told me. As for the background in Russia, I don’t re- 
member. Maybe he told me; maybe a friend told me. That he was an Eng- 

lishman was obvious. 

Why? 

. His accent. 

You were fairly well acquainted with him, were you not? 

No. I think we probably saw each other no more than 4 or 5 times. 

Did you see Eltenton after this episode occurred? 

No. 

Have you ever seen him since? 

No. 

. Could that have been on purpose on your part? Have you avoided him? 

Ihave not had to, but I think I would have. 

. You have mentioned your conversation with Colonel Lansdale which I be- 

lieve you said took place at Los Alamos? 

. Yes. 

. In which he told you he was worried about the security situation at Berkeley. 

I believe we agreed that worry would naturally include a fear of espionage? 

That is right. 
Did he mention any names in connection with that worry? 
Lomanitz was obviously in the picture, and I believe that is the only one. 

. Weinberg? 

. I don’t think he did. 

. But Lomanitz obviously? 

. Lomanitz. 


D> _ PPO>POPO>PO>O 


>O>O>O> 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 65 


Q. When did you first mention your conversation with Chevalier to any secu- 


rity officer? 
A. I didn’t do it that way. I first mentioned Eltenton. 
Q. Yes. 
A. Ona visit to Berkeley almost immediately after Lansdale’s visit to Los Alamos. 
Q. Was that to Lieutenant Johnson; do you remember? 
A. I don’t remember, but it was to a security officer there. 
Q. At Berkeley? 
A. That is right. 
Q. If the record shows that it was to Lieutenant Johnson on August 25, 1943, 


you would accept that? 

A. I would accept that. 

Q. You mentioned the Eltenton incident in connection with Lomanitz, didn’t 
you? 

A. The context was this. I think Johnson told me that the source of the trouble 
was the unionization of the radiation laboratory by the Federation of Archi- 
tects, Engineers, Chemists, and Technicians. Possibly I had heard that from 
Lansdale. The connection that I made was between Eltenton and this orga- 
nization. 

Q. In your answer at page 22 you say, referring to the Eltenton episode: “It has 
long been clear to me that I should have reported the incident at once.” 

A. Itis. 

Q. “The events that lead me to report it, which I doubt ever would have be- 
come known without my report, were unconnected with it.” 

You have told us that your discussion with Colonel Lansdale encom- 
passed the subject of espionage. Of course, you have told us also that the El- 
tenton matter involved espionage; is that correct? 

A. Let us be careful. The word “espionage” was not mentioned. 

Q. No? 

A. The word “indiscretion” was mentioned. That is all that Lansdale said. In- 
discretion was talking to unauthorized people who in turn would talk to 
other people. This is all I was told. I got worried when I learned that this 
union was connected with their troubles. 

Q. But, Doctor, you told us this morning, did you not, that you knew that 
Lansdale was worried about espionage at Berkeley; is that correct? 

A. I knew he was worried about the leakage of information. 

Q. Isn’t that a polite name for espionage? 

A. Not necessarily. 

Q. I will ask you now, didn’t you know that Lansdale was concerned about 
the possibility of espionage at Berkeley? 

A. About the possibility; yes. 

Q. Yes. 

A. That is right. 

Q. So, Doctor, it is not quite correct to say that the Eltenton incident was not 
connected with your talk with Lansdale, is it? 


> 
Ac} 
o 
x 
~ 
o 
co 
Sg 
c 
£ 
£ 
os 
oO 
- 
° 
> 
ra) 
7) 
2 
o 
2 
c 
=) 
a 
(a 
o 
is 
2 
4 
= 
2 
is) 
c 
Gs 
co 
= 
va 
° 
> 
n 
o 
hes 
5 
° 
Oo 
wa 
j=) 
isa) 
a 
- 
io 
2 
oS 
> 
o 
ec 
Oo 
ic 
° 
x 
S 
© 
a 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 67 


A. I didn’t mean it in that sense. I meant that it had nothing to do with Cheva- 
lier or Eltenton with respect to the events that aroused this. 

Q. But your talk with Lansdale did have to do with the subject which in- 
cluded Chevalier and Eltenton, didn’t it? 

A. I have described it as well as I can. Chevalier’s name was not mentioned; 
Eltenton’s name was not mentioned; and espionage was not mentioned. 

Q. I didn’t say that. But it had to do with the subject which involved Cheva- 
lier or at least Eltenton? 

A. Sure; that is why I brought it up. 

Q. What did you tell Lieutenant Johnson about this when you first mentioned 
Eltenton to him? 

A. I had two interviews, and therefore I am not clear as to which was which. 

Q. May I help you? 

A. Please. 

Q. I think your first interview with Johnson was quite brief, was it not? 

A. That is right. I think I said little more than that Eltenton was somebody to 
worry about. 

Yes. 

Then I was asked why did I say this. Then I invented a cock-and-bull story. 

Then you were interviewed the next day by Colonel Pash, were you not? 

That is right. 

Who was he? 

He was another security officer. 

That was quite a lengthy interview, was it not? 

. I didn’t think it was that long. 

. For your information, that was August 26, 1943. 

Right. 

Then there came a time when you were interviewed by Colonel Lansdale. 

I remember that very well. 

That was in Washington, wasn’t it? 

That is right. 

That was September 12, 1943. 

Right. 

Would you accept that? 

Surely. 

Then you were interviewed again by the FBI in 1946; is that right? 

In between I think came Groves. 

Pardon? 

In between came Groves. 

. Yes. But you were interviewed in 1946; is that right? 

. That is right. 

. Now let us go back to your interview with Colonel Pash. Did you tell Pash 
the truth about this thing? 

A. No. 

Q. You lied to him? 


OPOPOPOPO>POPO>OPOPO>POPOPO 


68 THE HEARING 


A. Yes. 
Q. What did you tell Pash that was not true? 
A. That Eltenton had attempted to approach members of the project—three 
members of the project—through intermediaries. 
Q. What else did you tell him that wasn’t true? 
A. That is all I really remember. 
Q. That is all? Did you tell Pash that Eltenton had attempted to approach 
three members of the project— 
A. Through intermediaries. 
Q. Intermediaries? 
A. Through an intermediary. 
Q. So that we may be clear, did you discuss with or disclose to Pash the 
identity of Chevalier? 
A. No. 
Q. Let us refer, then, for the time being, to Chevalier as X. 
A. All right. 
Q. Did you tell Pash that X had approached three persons on the project? 
A. I am not clear whether I said there were 3 X’s or that X approached 3 
people. 
. Didn’t you say that X had approached 3 people? 
. Probably. 
. Why did you do that, Doctor? 
. Because I was an idiot. 
Is that your only explanation, Doctor? 
I was reluctant to mention Chevalier. 
Yes. 
No doubt somewhat reluctant to mention myself. 
Yes. But why would you tell him that Chevalier had gone to 3 people? 
I have no explanation for that except the one already offered. 
. Didn’t that make it all the worse for Chevalier? 
I didn’t mention Chevalier. 
No; but X. 
It would have. 
. Certainly. In other words, if X had gone to 3 people that would have 
shown, would it not— 
That he was deeply involved. 
That he was deeply involved. That it was not just a casual conversation. 
Right. 
. And you knew that, didn’t you? 
Yes. 
. Did you tell Colonel Pash that X had spoken to you about the use of mi- 
crofilm? 
A. It seems unlikely. You have a record, and I will abide by it. 
Q. Did you? 
A. I don’t remember. 


PPOPO> LPOPOPOPOPOPO?PO 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 69 


Q. If X had spoken to you about the use of microfilm, that would have shown 
definitely that he was not an innocent contact? 

A. It certainly would. 

Q. Did you tell Colonel Pash that X had told you that the information would 
be transmitted through someone at the Russian consulate? 

(There was no response.) 

Q. Did you? 

A. I would have said not, but I clearly see that I must have. 

Q. If X had said that, that would have shown conclusively that it was a crim- 

inal conspiracy, would it not? 

. That is right. 

. Did Pash ask you for the name of X? 

. Limagine he did. 

Don’t you know he did? 

Sure. 

. Did he tell you why he wanted it? 

In order to stop the business. 

. He told you that it was a very serious matter, didn’t he? 

. I don’t recollect that, but he certainly would have. 

. You knew that he wanted to investigate it, did you not? 

. That is right. 

Q. And didn’t you know that your refusal to give the name of X was impeding 
the investigation? 

A. In actual fact I think the only person that needed watching or should have 
been watched was Eltenton. But as I concocted the story that did not emerge. 

Q. That was your judgment? 

A. Yes. 

Q. But you knew that Pash wanted to investigate this? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And didn’t you know, Doctor, that by refusing to give the name of X you 

were impeding the investigation? 

. I must have known that. 

You know now, don’t you? 

Well, actually— 

. You must have known it then? 

. Actually the only important thing to investigate was Eltenton. 

. What did Pash want to investigate? 

. I suppose the 3 people on the project. 

. You knew, didn’t you, Doctor, that Colonel Pash and his organization 

would move heaven and earth to find out those 3 people, didn’t you? 

A. It makes sense. 

Q. And you knew that they would move heaven and earth to find out the 
identity of X, didn’t you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And yet you wouldn't tell them? 


>O>PO>POPO?PO> 


O>FOPO>O> 


N 
(—) 


>OPOPOPOPLPO>PO> 


>OPOPO 


>OPOPOPO>O> OPOPOPOP>O 


THE HEARING 


. That is true. 


So you knew you were impeding them, didn’t you? 


. That is right. 


How long had you known this man Chevalier in 1943? 
For many years. 
How many? 
Perhaps 5; 5 or 6, probably. 
How had you known him? 
As a quite close friend. 
Had you known him professionally or socially? 
He was a member of the faculty, and I knew him socially. 
What was his specialty? 
He was a professor of French. 
How did you meet him; do you remember? 
Possibly at one of the first meetings of the teachers union, but I am not cer- 
tain. 
Were you a frequent visitor at his house? 
Yes. 
And your wives were also friendly? 
Right. 
Had you seen him at the meeting of leftwing organizations? 
Yes. I think the first time I saw him I didn’t know him. He presided at a 
meeting for Spanish relief at which the French writer Malraux was the 
speaker. 
Where was that meeting held? 
In San Francisco. 
At whose house? 


. It was a public meeting. ... 


Did you know Chevalier as a fellow traveler? 

I so told the FBI in 1946 and I did know him as a fellow traveler. 
He followed the party line pretty closely, didn’t he? 

Yes, I imagine he did. 

Did you have any reason to suspect he was a member of the Communist 
Party? 

At the time I knew him? 

Yes, sir. 

No. 

Do you know? 

No. 

You knew he was a quite a “red”, didn’t you? 

Yes. I would say quite Pink. 

Not Red? 


. I won’t quibble. 
. You say in your answer that you still considered him a friend. 


Ido. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 71 


Q. When did you last see him? 

A. On my last trip to Europe. He is living in Paris, divorced and has been re- 
married. We had dinner with them one evening. The origin of this, or at 
least part of the origin— 

Q. May I interpose? That was in December 1953? 

A. Yes, December. 

Q. Go ahead. 

A. He wrote me a note saying that he had been at UNESCO and had run into 
Professor Bohr who told him I was coming to Europe—we were coming to 
Europe. 

Q. Professor who? 

A. B-o-h-r. He asked us to look him up if we got to Paris. We planned to do so. 
My wife called. He was out of town on a job. He got back and we had dinner 
together, the four of us. 

The next day he picked us up and drove us out to visit with Malraux, who 
has had rather major political changes since 1936. We had a conversation of 
about an hour and he drove us back to the hotel.... 

Q. Doctor, just so the record will be complete, do you recall in 1950 getting a 
letter from Dr. Chevalier who was then in San Francisco asking you to assist 
him by telling him what you testified before the House committee about the 
Chevalier-Eltenton incident? 

A. Yes, I remember. 

Q. Do you recall answering that letter? 

A. I did answer it. I think I did not tell him what I testified, because it was in 
executive session, but referred him to a press account of what I testified. I 
am not quite certain on this point. 

Q. At that time he was attempting to get a passport to leave the United States, 
was he? 

A. Ithought that was later, but Iam not sure. 

Q. That may have been. You did hear about it when he was attempting to get 
a passport; did you? 

A. Yes. 

Q. We will come to that later. 

I will read you and ask you if this is the letter that you wrote to him. I am 
sorry I haven’t a copy of it. On the stationery of the Institute for Advanced 
Study, Princeton, N.J., office of the director, February 25, 1950: 


Dr. Haakon Chevalier 
3127 Washington Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 


Dear Haakon: 

Thank you for your good letter of February 21. I can understand that an ac- 
count of my testimony before the House committee could be helpful to you in 
seeking a suitable academic position at this time. I cannot send it to you be- 


72 THE HEARING 


cause I have never myself had a transcript, and because the committee ruled 
at the time that they desired to keep, and would keep, the hearings secret. But 
I can tell you what I said. I told them that I would like as far as possible to 
clear the record with regard to your alleged involvement in the atom busi- 
ness. I said that as far as I knew, you knew nothing of the atom bomb until it 
was announced after Hiroshima; and that most certainly you had never men- 
tioned it or anything that could be connected with it to me. I said that you 
had never asked me to transmit any kind of information, nor suggested that I 
could do so, or that I consider doing so. I said that you had told me of a dis- 
cussion of providing technical information to the U.S.S.R. which disturbed 
you considerably, and which you thought I ought to know about. There were 
surely many other points; but these were, I think, the highlights; and if this 
account can be of use to you, I hope that you will feel free to use it. 

As you know, I have been deeply disturbed by the threat to your career 
which these ugly stories could constitute. If I can help you in that, you may 
call on me. 

Sincerely yours, 

Robert Oppenheimer. 


Did you write that letter? 

A. Oh, sure. I didn’t recollect it. 

Q. Was the account of your testimony which you gave there an accurate one? 

A. I think it is fairly accurate. 

Q. Dr. Chevalier thereafter used that letter in connection with his passport ap- 
plication. 

A. I didn’t know that. 

Q. Did you talk to him about his passport application? 

A. I did. He came to Princeton at the time and I referred him to counsel to 
help him with it.... 

Q. Dr. Chevalier came to Princeton to see you about the matter? 

A. He came and stayed a couple of days. I don’t think it would be right to say 
he came to see me about the passport problem. He had just been divorced. 
He talked of nothing but his divorce. But he was worried about whether to 
use an American passport or his French passport. 

Q. About when was that, Doctor? 

A. Could it have been the spring of 1951? 

Q. I don’t know. 

A. It was immediately at the time he left the country. 


Rocer Ross: “You spent the night with her, didn’t you?” 


[Although Oppenheimer has already alluded to his friendship with Jean Tat- 
lock, who was at one time a member of the Communist Party, he is suddenly 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14 73 


asked to explain why he spent a night at her apartment in June 1943. Robb’s 
purported concern is Oppenheimer’s willingness to flout security regula- 
tions, but in fact, he is raising the acutely embarrassing issue of marital infi- 
delity.] 


By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Doctor, may we again refer to your answer, please, sir. On page 4: “In the 
spring of 1936, I had been introduced by a friend to Jean Tatlock, the daugh- 
ter of a noted professor of English at the university, and in the autumn I 
began to court her, and we grew close to each other. We were at least twice 
close enough to marriage to think of ourselves as engaged. Between 1939 
and her death in 1944, I saw her very rarely. She told me about her Commu- 
nist Party memberships. They were on-again, off-again affairs and never 
seemed to provide for her what she was seeking. I do not believe that her in- 
terests were really political. She was a person of deep religious feeling. She 
loved this country, its people, and its life. She was, as it turned out, a friend 
of many fellow travelers and Communists, a number of whom I later was to 
become acquainted with.” 

Doctor, between 1939 and 1944, as I understand it, your acquaintance 
with Miss Tatlock was fairly casual; is that right? 

A. Our meetings were rare. I do not think it would be right to say that our ac- 
quaintance was casual. We had been very much involved with one another, 
and there was still very deep feeling when we saw each other. 

Q. How many times would you say you saw her between 1939 and 1944? 

A. That is 5 years. Would 10 times be a good guess? 

Q. What were the occasions for your seeing her? 

A. Of course, sometimes we saw each other socially with other people. I re- 
member visiting her around New Year’s of 1941. 

Q. Where? 

A. I went to her house or to the hospital, I don’t know which, and we went 
out for a drink at the Top of the Mark. I remember that she came more than 
once to visit our home in Berkeley. 

Q. You and Mrs. Oppenheimer? 

A. Right. Her father lived around the corner not far from us in Berkeley. I vis- 
ited her there once. I visited her, as I think I said earlier, in June or July of 
1943. 

Q. Ibelieve you said in connection with that that you had to see her. 

A. Yes. 

Q. Why did you have to see her? 

A. She had indicated a great desire to see me before we left. At that time I 
couldn’t go. For one thing, I wasn’t supposed to say where we were going or 
anything. I felt that she had to see me. She was undergoing psychiatric 
treatment. She was extremely unhappy. 

Q. Did you find out why she had to see you? 


N 
> 


THE HEARING 


. Because she was still in love with me. 

. Where did you see her? 

At her home. 

Where was that? 

. On Telegraph Hill. 

When did you see her after that? 

She took me to the airport, and I never saw her again. 

That was 1943? 

Yes. 

Was she a Communist at that time? 

We didn’t even talk about it. I doubt it. 

You have said in your answer that you knew she had been a Communist? 

Yes. I knew that in the fall of 1937. 

Was there any reason for you to believe that she wasn’t still a Communist 

in 1943? 

No. 

. Pardon? 

. There wasn’t, except that I have stated in general terms what I thought and 

think of her relations with the Communist Party. I do not know what she 

was doing in 1943. 

You have no reason to believe she wasn’t a Communist, do you? 

No. 

. You spent the night with her, didn’t you? 

Yes. 

That is when you were working on a secret war project? 

Yes. 

. Did you think that consistent with good security? 

. It was, as a matter of fact. Not a word—it was not good practice. 

. Didn’t you think that put you in a rather difficult position had she been the 

kind of Communist that you have described . . .? 

A. Oh, but she wasn’t. 

Q. How did you know? 

A. I knew her. 

Q. You have told us this morning that you thought that at times social con- 
tacts with Communists on the part of one working on a secret war project 
was dangerous. 

. Could conceivably be. 

. You didn’t think after spending a night with a dedicated Communist— 

. I don’t believe she was a dedicated Communist. 

. You don’t? 

No. 

. Did she go over to Spain? 

No. 

Ever? 

. Not during the time I knew her. 


PP>O>O>OPOPOPO> 


>O> 


P>POPOPOPO 


>OPOPO>PO> 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 75 


Q. What was the occasion of her telling you about her Communist Party 
membership? 

A. She would talk about herself rather freely, and this was one aspect of her 
life. She would tell me that she had been with a medical unit—I am making 
it up—with some kind ofa unit, and it had been frustrating. 

Q. What do you mean, you are making it up? 

A. Imean I don’t remember what kind of a unit, but she had been with some 
sort of a Communist unit and had left it. It had been a waste of time, and so 
on. 

Q. By a medical unit, you mean a medical cell? 

A. That is what I would have meant. 

Q. You say here she was as it turned out a friend of many fellow travelers and 
Communists. Who were they? 

A. Well, Addis was a friend of hers. Lambert was a friend of hers. 

Q. Doctor, would you break them down? Would you tell us who the Commu- 
nists were and who the fellow travelers were? 

A. Lambert was a Communist. Addis is reported to be a Communist in the 
Commission’s letter. I did not know whether he was a member of the party 
or not. 

Q. You knew he was very close, didn’t you? 

A. Yes. Among fellow travelers, Chevalier. Among Communists or probable 
Communists, a man and his wife who wrote for the People’s World. 

Q. Who were they? 

A. John Pitman and his wife. A lawyer called Aubrey Grossman, his wife she 
had known. 

Q. Was she a Communist? 

A. I don’t know in the sense of party membership. 

Q. But very close. 

A. Close. Is the list long enough? 


[After Robb presses Oppenheimer to name other individuals whom he took 
to be Communist Party members or fellow travelers, the hearing adjourns.] 


Thursday, April 15 


GENERAL Leste R. Groves: “1! would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer 
today” 


[General Leslie R. Groves, who headed the Manhattan District project dur- 
ing the war and is at the time of the hearing a vice president and director of 
Remington Rand, is the first to testify.] 


76 THE HEARING 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. You appointed Dr. Oppenheimer to be the director of the work at Los 
Alamos? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. You devolved great responsibility upon him? 

A. Yes.... 

Q. How would you rate the quality of his achievement as you look back on it? 

A. Naturally I am prejudiced, because I selected him for the job, but I think he 
did a magnificent job as far as the war effort was concerned. In other words, 
while he was under my control—and you must remember that he left my 
control shortly after the war was over. 

Q. If you had to make the decision again, would you make it in the same way 
with respect to the selection of Dr. Oppenheimer and devolving the respon- 
sibilities on him which you did? 

A. I know of no reason why not. Assuming all the conditions are the same, I 
think I would do it. 

Q. You saw him very closely during those years? 

A. I saw him on the average, I would say, of anywhere from once a week to 
once a month. I talked to him on the phone about anywhere from 4 to 5 
times a day to once in 3 or 4 days. I talked on all possible subjects of all va- 
rieties. During the time I spent a number of days, for example, on trains 
traveling where we might be together for 6 or 8 or 12 hours at a time. 

Q. You were aware of his leftwing associations at the time—his earlier left- 
wing associations? 

A. Was I or am I? 

Q. Were you at the time you appointed him? 

A. At the time I appointed him to the project, I was aware that there were 
suspicions about him, nothing like what were contained—and I might say 
I read the New York Times, the letter of General Nichols and Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s letter. I was not aware of all the things that were brought out in 
General Nichols’ letter at the time of the appointment, but I was aware 
that he was or that he had, you might say, a very extreme liberal back- 
ground. 

I was also aware of another thing that I think must be mentioned, that he 
was already in the project, that he had been in charge of this particular type 
of work, that is, the bomb computations, and that he knew all that there was 
to know about that. In general, my policy was to consider the fact that the 
man was already in the project, and that made it very questionable whether 
I should separate him and also whether I should separate him under what 
might be termed unpleasant conditions, because then you never know what 
you are going to do to him. Are you going to drive him over to the other side 
or not? As far as what I knew at the time of his actual selection, I knew 
enough to tell me that I would have considered him an extreme liberal with 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 77 


a very liberal background. Just how many of the details I knew at the time I 
don’t know. I did know them all later. 

Q. Based on your total acquaintance with him and your experience with him 
and your knowledge of him, would you say that in your opinion he would 
ever consciously commit a disloyal act? 

A. I would be amazed if he did.... 

Q. You had complete confidence in his integrity? 

A. During the operation of Los Alamos, yes, which was where I really knew 
him. 

Q. And you have that confidence today? 

A. As far as that operation went, yes. As I say, as far as the rest of it goes, I am, 
you might say, not a witness. I am really ignorant on that, excepting what I 
read in the papers. 

Q. As the war neared its end, there was an even greater urgency to produce 
the bomb in time to use it, was there not? 

A. No, because no one in this country conceived of the Japanese war ending 
as soon as it did, no one in responsible positions today, no matter what they 
say today or said since. There is not a soul that thought that the war was 
going to end within a reasonable time. 

Q. Did Dr. Oppenheimer work as hard as a man could to produce that bomb 
in accordance with the deadline dates that you had projected? 

A. Oh, yes, yes. In fact, he worked harder at times than I wanted him to, be- 
cause I was afraid he would break down under it. That was always a danger 
in our project. I think it is important to realize in the case of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer because I had a physical taken of him when we were talking about 
making it a militarized affair, and I knew his past physical record, and I was 
always disturbed about his working too hard. But I never could slow him 
down in any way. 

Q. Do you recall your conversation with him about the Chevalier incident? 

A. Yes, but I have seen so many versions of it, I don’t think I was confused be- 
fore, but I am certainly starting to become confused today. I recall what I 
consider the essential history of that affair. As to whether this occurred this 
time, where I was at the moment, I can’t say that I recall it exactly. I think I 
recall everything that is of vital interest, as far as would be necessary to 
draw a conclusion as to that affair. 

Q. Would you say what your conclusion was? 

A. My conclusion was that there was an approach made, that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer knew of this approach, that at some point he was involved in that 
the approach was made to him—I don’t mean involved in the sense that he 
gave anything—I mean he just knew about it personally from the fact that 
he was in the chain, and that he didn’t report it in its entirety as he should 
have done. When I learned about it, and throughout, that he was always 
under the influence of what I termed the typical American schoolboy atti- 
tude that there is something wicked about telling on a friend. I was never 
certain as to just what he was telling me. I did know this: That he was doing 


78 THE HEARING 


what he thought was essential, which was to disclose to me the dangers of 
this particular attempt to enter the project, namely, it was concerned with 
the situation out there near Berkeley—I think it was the Shell Laboratory at 
which Eltenton was supposedly one of the key members—and that was a 
source of danger to the project and that was the worry. I always had the very 
definite impression that Dr. Oppenheimer wanted to protect his friends of 
long standing, possibly his brother. It was always my impression that he 
wanted to protect his brother, and that his brother might be involved in hav- 
ing been in this chain, and that his brother didn’t behave quite as he should 
have, or if he did, he didn’t even want to have the finger of suspicion 
pointed at his brother, because he always felt a natural loyalty to him, and 
had a protective attitude toward him. 

I felt at the time that what Oppenheimer was trying to tell me and tell our 
project, once he disclosed this thing at all—as I recall I had the feeling that 
he didn’t disclose it immediately. In other words, he didn’t come around 
the next day or that night and say to our security people, “Listen, some 
things are going on.” I think he thought it over for some time. I am saying 
what I thought now, and not what we could prove, because we could never 
prove anything definite on this thing, because it all depended on the testi- 
mony of a man who was concerned in it.... 

I felt that was wrong. If I had not felt it was important not to have any 
point of issue on what after all was a minor point with respect to the suc- 
cess of the project, I might have had quite an issue with him right then and 
there. As he told me very early in my conversation with him, he said, “Gen- 
eral, if you order me to tell you this, I will tell you.” I said, “No, I am not 
going to order you.” 

About 2 months later or some time later, after much discussion in trying 
to lead him into it, and having then got the situation more or less adjusted, 
I told him if you don’t tell me, I am going to have to order you to do it. Then 
I got what to me was the final story. I think he made a great mistake in that. 
I felt so at the time. I didn’t think it was great from the standpoint of the 
project, because I felt that I was getting what I wanted to know which, after 
all, I did know already, that this group was a source of danger to us. I didn’t 
know that this group had tried to make this direct approach and pinpoint it 
that way, but I knew they were thoroughly capable of it, and I knew we had 
sources of danger in the Berkeley project. 

I think that really was my impression of it, that he didn’t do what he 
should have done. The reasons why were desire to protect friends and pos- 
sibly his brother, and that he felt that he had done what was necessary in 
pinpointing. As far as I was concerned, while I didn’t like it, after all it was 
not my job to like everything my subordinates did, or anybody in the proj- 
ect did. I felt I had gotten what I needed to get out of that, and I was not 
going to make an issue of it, because I thought it might impair his useful- 
ness on the project. 

I think that gives you the general story. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 79 


Mr. GARRISON. I think that is all that I would like to ask. 
Mr. Gray. Mr. Robb. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. General, did your security officers on the project advise against the clear- 
ance of Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. Oh, I am sure that they did. I don’t recall exactly. They certainly were not 
in favor of his clearance. I think a truer picture is to say that they reported 
that they could not and would not clear him. 

Q. General, you were in the Army actively for how many years? 

A. I don’t know. 1916 to 1948, and of course raised in it, also. 

Q. And yourose to the rank of lieutenant general? 

A. That is right. 

Q. During your entire Army career, I assume you were dealing with matters of 
security? 

A. Never before this thing started. We didn’t deal with matters of security in 
the Army, really, until this time. The Army as a whole didn’t deal with mat- 
ters of security until after the atomic bomb burst on the world because it 
was the first time that the Army really knew that there was such a thing, if 
you want to be perfectly frank about it. 

Q. Certainly with your work in the Manhattan project you dealt intensively 

with matters of security? 

. I would say I devoted about 5 percent of my time to security problems. 

. You did become thoroughly familiar with security matters. 

. [think that I was very familiar with security matters. 

. In fact, it could be said that you became something of an expert in it? 

I am afraid that is correct. 

. I believe you said that you became pretty familiar with the file of Dr. Op- 

penheimer? 

A. I think I was thoroughly familiar with everything that was reported about 
Dr. Oppenheimer; and that included, as it did on every other matter of im- 
portance, personally reading the original evidence if there was any original 
evidence. In other words, I would read the reports of the interviews with 
people. In other words, I was not reading the conclusions of any security of- 
ficer. The reason for that was that in this project there were so many things 
that the security officer would not know the significance of that I felt I had 
to do it myself. Of course, I have been criticized for doing all those things 
myself and not having a staff of any kind; but, after all, it did work, and I 
did live through it. 

Q. General, in the light of your experience with security matters and in the 
light of your knowledge of the file pertaining to Dr. Oppenheimer, would 
you clear Dr. Oppenheimer today? 

A. I think before answering that I would like to give my interpretation of what 


OPOPro> 


80 THE HEARING 


Leslie R. Groves with J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer at Los Alamos, August 1945. 
Marie Hansen/TimePix. 


the Atomic Energy Act requires. I have it, but I never can find it as to just 
what it says. Maybe I can find it this time. 

Q. Would you like me to show it? 

A. I know it is very deeply concealed in the thing. 

Q. Do you have the same copy? 

A. Ihave the original act. 

Q. It is on page 14, I think, where you will find it, General. You have the same 
pamphlet I have. 

A. Thank you. That is it. The clause to which I am referring is this: It is the 
last of paragraph (b) (i) on page 14. It says: 

“The Commission shall have determined that permitting such person to 
have access to restricted data will not endanger the common defense or se- 
curity,” and it mentions that the investigation should include the character, 
associations, and loyalty. 

My interpretation of “endanger’—and I think it is important for me to 
make that if I am going to answer your question—is that it is a reasonable 
presumption that there might be a danger, not a remote possibility, a tor- 
tured interpretation of maybe there might be something, but that there is 
something that might do. Whether you say that is 5 percent or 10 percent or 
something of that order does not make any difference. It is not a case of 
proving that the man is a danger. It is a case of thinking, well, he might be a 
danger, and it is perfectly logical to presume that he would be, and that 
there is no consideration whatsoever to be given to any of his past perfor- 
mances or his general usefulness or, you might say, the imperative useful- 
ness. I don’t care how important the man is, if there is any possibility other 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 81 


than a tortured one that his associations or his loyalty or his character might 
endanger. 

In this case I refer particularly to associations and not to the associations 
as they exist today but the past record of the associations. I would not clear 
Dr. Oppenheimer today if I were a member of the Commission on the basis 
of this interpretation. 

If the interpretation is different, then I would have to stand on my inter- 
pretation of it. 

Mr. Ross. Thank you, General. That is all. 


J. Ropert OPPENHEIMER: “One can be mistaken about anything” 


[When Oppenheimer resumes his testimony, Robb picks up where he left off 
the previous afternoon, cross-examining him on his involvement in radical 
causes in the 1930s and on friends and associates from that era. Robb has 
alluded to more than a dozen of Oppenheimer’s acquaintances by the time 
he comes to Dr. Joseph W. Weinberg.] 


CROSS-EXAMINATION (resumed) 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. How did you come to know Dr. Weinberg? 

A. In the most normal way. I knew all the graduate students who studied the- 
oretical physics in the department of physics in Berkeley. I believe I called 
them all by their first names. 

Q. Did you have any relationship with Weinberg other than that of professor 
and student? 

A. I think I need to say several things in answer to that. The first simple an- 
swer is “No,” until after the war when he was not a student but an instruc- 
tor and when he and his wife—we saw them once or twice as was proper for 
dinner or tea or something. 

The second thing is that with most of my students it would not be an un- 
common thing for me to have dinner with them or to have lunch with them 
while we were working. I think my relations to Weinberg were much less 
close than with most of my graduate students. 

Q. What was the occasion for you meeting with him and his wife after the 
war? 

A. He was an instructor in the physics department in Berkeley. I think we 
probably had dinner or tea or something with every member of the depart- 
ment.... 

Q. When did you first hear that Weinberg had been a Communist? 

A. At the time of the 1946 interview with the FBI, the agents told me—they 


82 THE HEARING 


questioned me about Weinberg, Lomanitz and so on—and I said, “What is 
wrong with them?” He said, “There is a question of their membership in the 
Communist Party.” 

Q. Were you surprised to hear that? 

A. A little bit but not much in the case of Weinberg. 

Q. You are quite sure that is the first time you ever heard or had been told he 
was a Communist? 

A. No. Ihad heard an earlier rumor. 

Q. When? 

A. When he came to Berkeley that he had been a member of the YCL, the 
Young Communist League in Madison, but it was hearsay. 

Q. Who told you that? 

A. I don’t remember. 

Q. Did you hear anything more about him at that time? 

A. No. 

Q. Did Weinberg and Lomanitz come to you to talk about Lomanitz’ draft de- 
ferment? 

A. No. 

Q. Are you sure? 

A. Let’s see. The only time this might have been would have been at the 
time I talked to Lomanitz at the same time we talked so much of yesterday 
in the summer of 1943. I have no recollection of Weinberg being involved 
in that. 

Q. Do you recall an occasion in Dr. Lawrence’s office when you talked to both 
Weinberg and Lomanitz? 

A. No, I don’t. 

Q. In all events, doctor, you are sure that until 1946, except for the rumor that 
you mentioned, you had no information to the effect that Weinberg was or 
had been a Communist? 

A. No. I think that is right. 

Q. You could not be mistaken about that? 

A. One can be mistaken about anything. This is my best recollection. .. . 

Q. When did you first meet Steve Nelson? 

A. I don’t know whether it was before my marriage to my wife or not. I think 
it was. She thinks that it was after our marriage. 

Q. When did you think you met him, and what were the circumstances under 
which you met him? 

A. I think it may have been in connection with a big Spanish party in the fall 
of 1939. 

Q. Where? 

A. In San Francisco. 

Q. Do you recall talking to him on that occasion? 

A. No. 

Q. What is there about the occasion that makes Steve Nelson stand out in 
your mind? 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 83 


. He was a hero and there was either talk of him orI saw him, I don’t know. 

. What was he a hero for? 

. For his alleged part in the Spanish War. 

. You knew he was a Communist Party functionary? 

. I knew he was a Communist and an important Communist. 

. Thereafter, Steve Nelson was at your home on various occasions, was he 

not? 

A. That was much later. 

Q. When was that? 

A. The times I remember—and I think they are the only times—were in the 
winter of 1941-42. 

. What is the last date that you recall him being at your home? 

. I don’t recall the dates. It probably was in 1942. 

1942? 

Yes. 

. Summer, fall, spring, or when? 

I don’t know. 

. Were you at that time working on the secret war project? 

. I was thinking about it if it was in the winter, and I was employed on it if 

it was the summer. 

Q. I beg your pardon? 

A. If it was in the winter I was thinking about it, and consulting about it; if it 
was in the summer, I was actually employed on it. 

Q. In all events whether it was in the winter or summer, at the time Steve 

Nelson was at your house you had some connection with this project, did 

you not? 

. Oh, yes. 

. How many times did Steve Nelson come to your house? 

. I would say several, but I do not know precisely. 

Did you ever go to his house? 

. Iam not clear. If so, it was only to call for him or something like that. 

. Call for him? 

Yes. 

. Why would you have called for him? 

. To bring him up to our house. 

. Who else was present at your house on the occasions when Nelson was 

there? 

A. I have no memory of this. These were very often Sundays and people 
would drop in. 

Q. The occasions when he was there were not occasions when there was a 
large group of people? 

A. No. We would be out in the garden having a picnic or something like that. 
It is quite possible that my brother and sister-in-law would come, but I have 
no memory of this. 

Q. Can you give us any idea how long these visits were with Nelson? 


Oe oe og 


>OPO>POPL 


OPOPOPOPO> 


84 THE HEARING 


A. 
Q. 
A. 


>OPOPOPOPOPOPOPOPOPOPOPOPO?O 


>OPOPOPOPA 


A few hours. 

Each time? 

The ones I am thinking of, and I think they are the ones you are referring 
to, and the only ones that occurred, are when he and his wife and his baby 
would come up. 


. What did you have in common with Steve Nelson? 
. Nothing, except an affection for my wife. 
. Did you find his conversation interesting? 


The parts about Spain, yes. 

Was he a man of any education? 

No. 

What did you talk about? 

We didn’t talk about much. Kitty and he reminisced. 
Reminisced about what? 

My wife’s former husband, people they had known in the party. 
Communist Party activities? 

Past Communist friendships. 

Did Nelson tell you what he was doing in California? 

No. I knew he was connected with the Alameda County organization. 
Did Nelson ever ask what you were doing? 

No. 

Are you sure? 

Positive. He knew I was a scientist. 

He knew that? 

Yes. 

How did he know that? 

It was well known in the community and we talked about it. 


. Did you call him Steve? 


I think so. 


. Did he call you Oppy? 


I don’t remember. 


. Probably? 


I don’t remember. He and my wife—she will tell you about it. They had 
close affectionate relationships and I was a natural bystander. .. . 

Who are the Morrisons? 

Philip Morrison was a student of mine and was very far left. 

He was very far left? 

Yes. 

Was he a Communist? 


. I think it probable. 
. Did he go to work on the project? 


He did. 


. With your approval? 
. With no relation to me. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 85 


Q. Did you ever make known to anyone that you thought that Philip Morrison 
was probably a Communist? 

A. No. 

Q. Why not? 

A. Well, let me say he was on the project in another branch quite indepen- 
dent of me. When he came to Los Alamos, General Groves let me under- 
stand that he knew Morrison had what he called a background and I was 
satisfied that the truth was known about him. 

Q. Morrison came to Los Alamos? 

A. That is right. When he came to Los Alamos we had this discussion. 

Q. He was so far left-wing that you thought that the mere fact that Hawkins 
was a friend of his stigmatized Hawkins, too, did you not? 

A. Not stigmatized him; gave him a left-wing association. 

Q. What did Morrison do at Los Alamos? I don’t mean in detail but in general. 

A. He came late and he worked in what was called the bomb physics divi- 
sion. He worked with the reactor we had there. Then after the war he built a 
quite ingenious new kind of reactor. 


ROGER ROBB AND J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “Your memory is not 
refreshed by what I read you?” “No, on the whole it is confused 
by it” 


[Robb now turns to the transcript of a September 12, 1943, interview, 26 
pages in length, between Oppenheimer and Lt. Col. John Lansdale, who was 
in charge of security at Los Alamos. Only after insistent protests from Garri- 
son is he permitted to have a copy of the transcript as the questioning pro- 
ceeds. Oppenheimer faces especially awkward moments when indiscreet, 
off-the-cuff remarks made in a supposedly confidential setting more than a 
decade earlier are exhumed, and he is asked about them.] 


Q. Doctor, we spoke yesterday of your interview with Colonel Lansdale. I 
want to read you some extracts from the transcript of that interview, sir. 
Colonel Lansdale said to you, according to this transcript— 

Mr. GARRISON. May we have the date? 

Mr. Ross. September 12, 1943. This is the interview that took place at the 
Pentagon. Colonel Lansdale said to you: 

“We know, for instance, that it is the policy of the Communist Party at 
this time that when a man goes into the Army his official connections with 
the Party are thereupon ipso facto severed.” 

You answered: “Well, I was told by a man who came from my—a very 
prominent man, who was a member of the Communist Party in the Middle 


86 THE HEARING 


West, that it was the policy of the party there that when a man entered con- 
fidential war work, he was not supposed to remain a member of the party.” 
Who told you that? 

A. [have no recollection at all, I will think, if you wish. 

Q. I wish you would, sir. 

A. From the Middle West. 

Mr. Gray. “Read that again. 

Mr. Ross. I was told by a man who came from my—a very prominent man 
who was a member of the Communist Party in the Middle West that it was 
the policy of the party there that when a man entered confidential war work 
he was not supposed to remain a member of the party.” 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Who was that man? 

A. Irecollect nothing about it. I will be glad to think about it. 

Q. Do you want to think now? 

A. I would prefer not to. If I can think about it and tell you tomorrow. It sim- 
ply rings no bell. 

Q. You don’t recall anybody ever told you that? 

A. No, I said yesterday I didn’t recollect. 

Q. I know you did. Does this serve to refresh your recollection in any way? 

A. Quite to the contrary. From the Middle West? 

Q. You then spoke about your brother. 

Mr. Marks. May I inquire, Mr. Chairman, if these transcripts are taken from 
recordings, just so we can understand what is being read? 

Mr. Ross. Yes. I have every reason to believe it is accurate. 

Mr. Marks. I don’t question that, I just wondered what the origin was. 

Mr. Ross. I don’t think that is necessarily a question counsel should have to 
answer. 

Mr. Marks. I asked the Chairman, sir. 

Mr. Gray. My answer is “I don’t know.” If you wish to discuss it further I 
would be glad to. 

Mr. Marks. I thought it was a matter that could be answered simply. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. You spoke of your brother and said, “It is not only that he is not a member, 
I think he has no contact.” Do you recall that? 

A. No; I don’t recall it, but that I can imagine saying. 

Q. Lansdale said: “Do you know about his wife, Jackie?” 

You answered: “I know I overwhelmingly urged about 18 months ago 
when we started that she should drop social ones which I regarded as dan- 
gerous. Whether they have in fact done that, I don’t know. 

Lansdale said, “Well, I am quite confident that your brother Frank has no 
connection with the Communists. I am not so sure about his wife.” 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 87 


You answered, “I am not sure either, but I think it likely some of its im- 
portance has left her. Also, I believe it to be true that they do not have any— 
I don’t know this for a fact—but if they had, I didn’t know it, any well es- 
tablished contacts in Berkeley. You see they came from Palo Alto, and they 
had such contacts there. Then my brother was unemployed for three very, 
very salutory months, which changed his ideas quite a lot, and when they 
started in Berkeley it was for this war job. I do not know but think it quite 
probable that his wife Jackie had never had a unit or group to which she 
was attached in any way. The thing that worried me was that their friends 
were very left wing and I think it is not always necessary to call a unit meet- 
ing for it to be a pretty good contact.” 

Doctor, who were the friends and social contacts that you might have had 
in mind when making that statement? 

A. My sister-in-law in Berkeley? 

Q. And your brother. 

A. Iam not sure who I did have in mind. My sister-in-law had a very old 
friend called Winona Nedelsky. 

Q. Who was she? 

A. She was the wife of a physicist who left here-—quite Russian—who had 
once been my student. She was a good friend of Jackie’s. She earned her liv- 
ing in some Federal Housing Agency or Social Security Agency. 

Q. Was she a Communist? 

A. I believe so. 

Q. Was she a friend of your sister-in-law in 1943? 

A. I would think so. She was a friend. I don’t know how much they saw each 
other. 

Q. But in all events, you thought it cause for worry. 

A. I would not have thought that a special cause for worry. I am having 
trouble in remembering what I could have had in mind and what I did have 
in mind. 

Q. Can you think of anyone else that you might have had in mind as danger- 
ous social contacts of your sister-in-law and your brother? 

A. I don’t know much about the life in Berkeley. I am afraid I can’t. 

Q. Lansdale said again, “To refer again to this business concerning the party, 
to make it clear the fact a person says they have severed connections with 
the party, the fact that they have at present no apparent interest or contact 
in it does not show where they have unquestionably formerly been mem- 
bers that they are dangerous to us.” 

You said, “I agree with that.” 

You still agree with that, do you? 

A. Yes. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, I repeat the same request I made with respect to 
the previous transcript, that we would like to see a copy of the full tran- 
script. 


88 THE HEARING 


Mr. Gray. May I say with respect to that that Dr. Oppenheimer will be given 
an opportunity to see documents reflecting conversations. They cannot be 
taken from the building. 

Mr. GARRISON. We appreciate that. When may we have that opportunity? 

Mr. Gray. When the board and counsel have finished with the questioning. 

Mr. GARRISON. You mean this afternoon? 

Mr. Gray. Whenever this is concluded. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Lansdale said to you, according to this transcript, speaking of your reluc- 
tance to disclose the name of Professor X: “I don’t see how you can have any 
hesitancy of disclosing the name of the man who has actually been engaged 
in an attempt of espionage in time of war. I mean my mind does not run 
along those channels.” 

You said, “I know itis a tough problem and Iam worried about it a lot.” 

That was a correct statement of your attitude, wasn’t it? 

A. I would assume so. 

Q. Lansdale, referring again to your reluctance to disclose the name, says, 
“Well, if you won’t do it, you won’t do it, but don’t think I won’t ask you 
again. Now I want to ask you this, And again, for the same reason which im- 
plies you’re here, you may not answer. Who do you know on the project in 
Berkeley who are now, that’s probably a hypothetical question, or have been 
members of the Communist Party?” 

You answered, “I will try to answer that question. The answer will, how- 
ever, be incomplete. I know for a fact, I know, I learned on my last visit to 
Berkeley that both Lomanitz and Weinberg were members. I suspected that 
before, but was not sure. I never had any way of knowing. I will think a 
minute, but there were other people.... 

“Oppenheimer. In the case of my brother it is obvious that I know. In the 
cases of the others, it’s just things that pile up, that I look at that way. I’m 
not saying that I couldn’t think of other people, it’s a hell of a big project. 
You can raise some names.” 

Doctor, having heard me read those lines, will you now concede that you 
knew at that time that both Lomanitz and Weinberg had been members of 
the Communist Party? 

A. Evidently. Was I told by the security officers? 

Q. I don’t know. I have just read what you said. So when you wrote that letter 
of October 19, 1943, forwarding Lomanitz’s request to be a transferred back 
to the project from military service, you knew that he had been a Commu- 
nist Party member, didn’t you? 

A. So it appears. 

Q. And you knew as early as 1943 that Weinberg had been, too. 

A. So it appears. 

Q. Yes, sir. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, what troubles me about this whole method of 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 89 


examination is that counsel is reading from a transcript bits and parts with- 
out the full course of the conversation which took place to a witness whose 
memory at best, as anyone of ours would be, is very, very hazy upon all 
these things, and picking here a sentence and there a sentence out of con- 
text, and then holding him to the answer. I do think that this is a method of 
questioning that seems to me to be very unfair. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I don’t mean to make any argument about the mat- 
ter, but I assume that this Board is following this transcript. If the Board 
feels I am being unfair at any point, I suppose the Board will interpose. 

Mr. Garrison. Why shouldn’t counsel be allowed to follow as any court of 
law, and this is not even a trial? 

Mr. Ross. As you no doubt know, I have tried a good many cases, and I don’t 
think it would be in the ordinary course of a trial. 

Mr. GARRISON. I disagree with you. 

Mr. Ross. I resent counsel’s statement that I am trying to be unfair with this 
witness, because I assure you that I have made every attempt to be fair with 
him. In fact, were I trying to be unfair, I would not ask this witness any of 
these questions, but would leave it in the file for the Board to read. I am giv- 
ing this witness a chance to make whatever explanation he wishes to make. 

Mr. GARRISON. I still think that the fair thing would be to read the whole con- 
versation and ask him what parts you want, instead of to pick isolated ques- 
tions. 

Mr. Gray. On the point of picking isolated questions, without trying to look at 
this whole question at this moment, I think it is clear that this interview 
concerned itself with matters which are involved in the questions Mr. Robb 
has been putting to the witness, and which are generally, I think, not new 
material. General Nichols’ letter of December 23, and Mr. Oppenheimer’s 
reply of March 4, I think both address themselves in one way or another to 
these individuals, Lomanitz, Weinberg, Bohm, which have been the subject 
of these questions. 

I would say, Mr. Garrison, that I don’t think it would be helpful to you at 
this point to have the transcript. I have said, however, that Dr. Oppenheimer 
and his counsel will be entitled to examine it and certainly after examina- 
tion if you wish to reopen any of this testimony, you will be given every op- 
portunity to do so. J think it is the feeling of the chairman of the board that 
things are not taken here out of context in a way which is prejudicial. I 
think also that the board has heard Dr. Oppenheimer say that with respect 
to some of these matters he has no recollection, which at least to me is per- 
fectly understandable, many of these things having taken place many years 
ago. I do not think that it is the purpose of counsel to develop anything be- 
yond what the facts are in this case. At least that is my interpretation. 

Mr. Ross. That is my endeavor, Mr. Chairman. ... 

(Brief recess.) 

Mr. Garrison. Mr. Chairman, forgive me for coming back to the same point, 
but during the recess I discussed this problem with my partner, Mr. Silver- 


90 THE HEARING 


man, who has spent his life trying cases in the State of New York—I am not 
a trial lawyer, sir—our practice I am informed up there universally is that 
when counsel is cross examining a witness on a transcript he has never 
seen, counsel for the other side, if he asks the court for a copy, so he may 
read along with it, that request is granted. So if nothing else—I would not 
think of impugning this to Mr. Robb, and I hope he won’t misunderstand 
me—I think it is the basis of the rule. That is the only reason I mention it. In 
other words, to make sure that the questions are in fact being read accu- 
rately from the transcript, and there are no interlineations or marks or mat- 
ters of that sort that might perhaps raise a question as to the accuracy of 
what is there quite apart from the method by which the transcript was ar- 
rived at, and also to understand what the thread and continuity of the mat- 
ter is. ] merely report that to the Chairman. I don’t want to put this on the 
basis of rules of law, because God knows, it is the rule here that this not a 
trial, but an inquiry, and I should suppose that a fortiori, what is proper in 
court of law would be accorded to us here in an inquiry. I do not labor the 
point. I present it to you and I will rest upon it. 

THE WITNESS. May I make a comment? 

Mr. Gray. Surely. 

THE WITNESS. This last quotation... strikes me as so bizarre that I am 
troubled about the accuracy of the document. I am not certain— 

Mr. GARRISON. Do you know, Mr. Robb, whether this was taken down by a ste- 
nographer or was it from a tape? 

Mk. Ross. Colonel Lansdale will be here. I might ask him. He is the one who 
conducted the interview. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to be excused with counsel for the Board for a mo- 
ment, if you please. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I don’t agree at all with the statement of law which 
has been made by Mr. Garrison although I confess I am not a New York trial 
lawyer. It has always been my understanding that when a witness is ques- 
tioned about inconsistent statements, he is read the statements and he is 
asked if he made them. However, it is entirely immaterial to me whether 
counsel follows this statement or not. If the Chairman wants to have coun- 
sel have a copy of it, it is all right with me. 

Mr. GARRISON. We would appreciate that. 

Mr. Ross. Very well. 

Mr. Gray. I am about to make the ruling that Mr. [Garrison] follow reading 
this transcript as Mr. Robb reads it. Have you got a copy of it, Mr. Rolan- 
der? 

Mr. ROLANDER. I just went out and asked the secretary to try to locate a copy 
from the original files. Ithough that might be most helpful. 

Mr. Ross. May the record now show, Mr. Chairman, that we are handing to 
Mr. Garrison the photostat copy of the interview with Dr. Oppenheimer by 
Lt. Col. Lansdale, 12 September 1943, consisting of 26 pages. 

Mr. GarRRISON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 91 


By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. The next question and answer: 
“Now, have you yourself ever been a member of the Communist Party?” 

You answered, “No.” 

“Lansdale. You’ve probably belonged to every front organization on the 
coast. 

“Oppenheimer. Just about.” 
Doctor, do you recall that question and answer? 

. No, I don’t. I don’t recall this interview. 

. If you said that to Colonel Lansdale, were you jocular? 

. I don’t think I could have been jocular during this interview. 

. “Lansdale. Would you in fact have considered yourself at one time a fel- 

low traveler? 

“Oppenheimer. IJ think so. My association with these things was very brief 
and very intense.” 

Do you recall that at all? 

A. Iam not recollecting anything. You may find a phrase that I do recollect. 

Q. In all events, Doctor, your answer, “I think so. My association with these 
things was very brief and very intense,” it is now your testimony that was a 
correct statement of fact? 

A. It was very intense; brief is a relative word. 

Q. Colonel Lansdale said: “I should imagine the latter anyway.” 

Now, on page 11, you said, “It was historically quite brief and quite intense, 
and I should say I was—” 

“Lansdale. Now I have reason to believe that you yourself were felt out, I 
don’t say asked, but felt out to ascertain how you felt about it, passing a 
little information, to the party. 

“Oppenheimer. You have reason?” 

“Lansdale. I say I have reason to believe, that’s as near as I can come to stat- 
ing it. Am I right or wrong? 

“Oppenheimer. If it was, it was so gentle I did not know it. 

“Lansdale. You don’t know. Do you have anyone who is close to you, no 
that’s the wrong word, who is an acquaintance of yours, who may have per- 
haps been a guest in your house, whom you perhaps knew through friends 
or relatives who is a member of the Communist Party. By that I mean— 

“Oppenheimer. My brother, obviously. 

“Lansdale. Well, no, I don’t mean him. 

“Oppenheimer. I think probably you mean someone who just visited for a 
few hours. 

“Lansdale. Yes. 

“Oppenheimer. Yes, certainly, the answer to that is certainly, yes. ... 

“Lansdale. Now, you have stated to me and also I think to General Groves 
that in your opinion membership in the party was incompatible with 
work on the project from a loyalty standpoint. 


RDPOP 


92 THE HEARING 


“Oppenheimer. Yes.” 

That was your viewpoint, wasn’t it? 

A. Yes. 

Q. “Lansdale. Now, do you also go so far as to believe that persons who are 
not actually members but still retain their loyalty to the party or their ad- 
herence to the party line are in the same category? 

“Oppenheimer. Let me put it this way. Loyalty to the party, yes, adher- 
ence to the party line, maybe no. In that it need not necessarily, although it 
often is, be the sign of subservience. At the present time I don’t know what 
the party line is in too much detail, but I’ve heard from Mrs. Tolman, Tol- 
man’s wife, that the party line at present is not to discuss postwar affairs. I 
would be willing to say that anyone who, well let me put it this way, whose 
loyalty is above all else to the party or to Russia obviously is incompatible 
with loyalty to the United States. This is, I think, the heart of it. The party 
has its own discipline.” 

Do you recall saying that? 

A. No, I don’t recollect much about this. This, however sounds like what I 
thought. 

Q. You have no doubt that was your view at that time? 

A. Substantially that was my view. 

Q. Is there any difference between what I have read and what your view was 
at that time? 

A. I don’t know. It is a long couple of paragraphs. It is a long time ago. I think 
it is substantially what I then thought. 

Q. Lansdale then continued: “Now, I was coming to that. I would like to hear 
from you your reasons as to why you believe, let’s stick to membership in 
the party, is incompatible to complete loyalty to the project. When, to state 
something a little bit foolishly membership in the Democratic Party cer- 
tainly wouldn’t be. 

“Oppenheimer. It’s an entirely different party. For one thing * * * I think 
I'd put it this way. The Democratic Party is the framework of the social 
customs * * * of this country, and I do not think that is true of the Com- 
munist Party. At least, I think that there are certainly many Communists 
who are above all decent guys, but there are also some that are above all 
Communists. It’s primarily that question of personal honor that I think is 
involved. I don’t know whether that answers the question but my idea is 
that being a Democrat doesn’t guarantee that you're not a four-flusher, 
and also it has no suggestion just by virtue of your being a Democrat that 
you would think it would be all right to cheat other people for a purpose, 
and I’m not too sure about this with respect to the Communist Party.” 

Do you recall saying anything like that? 

A. I don’t. 

Q. Would you say that did represent your views at that time? 

A. I find nothing incompatible between it and what I remember. This is for 
me not a very easy line of questioning because I don’t recollect what I said 
and I remember what I thought only in general terms. ... 


THURSDAY, APRIL 15 93 


Q. And your memory is not refreshed by what I read you? 
A. No, on the whole it is confused by it. 


J. RoBert OpreNueimer: “Of the known leakages of informa- 
tion, Fuchs is by far the most grave” 


[After Robb raises other issues, including the unproven allegation that Op- 
penheimer attended a closed Communist Party meeting at his home in 
Berkeley in July 1941, chairman Gordon Gray asks a follow-up question 
just prior to adjourning the day’s proceedings.] 


Mr. Gray. I don’t know whether you know the answer to this question, Dr. 
Oppenheimer, but in reading the files, there appear references to closed 
meetings of the Communist Party. There also appear many references to 
meetings of people who were Communists or fellow travelers, which were 
referred to as social gatherings. Without implying that you are an expert in 
these matters, but from conversations with your brother, perhaps, or Mrs. 
Oppenheimer and others, is there any real difference between a closed 
meeting and a social gathering if the same people are involved? 

THE WiTNEss. Let me tell you what I mean by the words. The words “closed 
meeting” mean to me one to which only members of the Communist Party 
can come. I think that is a rather sharp distinction if you are trying to iden- 
tify who is and who isn’t a member of the Communist Party. I should sup- 
pose that the difference between a meeting and social gathering was rather 
wide. In a meeting it was business and it was transacted and there was 
probably a chairman and there might be dues collected and there might be 
literature. Anyway, this happened at the little meeting I saw at my brother’s. 
I should think that a social gathering would be a lot of talk which could in- 
deed be very bad talk, but which would not be organized or programmatic. 
This is the sense in which I would interpret the words. 

Mr. Gray. So these two meetings which have been the subject of some dis- 
cussion at both of which I believe Mr. Schneiderman spoke, in the terms of 
the definitions which you have given, they would really have been social 
gatherings? 

THE WiTNEss. I would say they were neither. They were social gatherings or- 
namented by a special feature, namely, this lecture or speech. An ordinary 
social gathering I don’t think has a lecture even in Communist jargon. 

Mk. Gray. I just had the impression about these functions that many of those 
that we referred to were social gatherings may have been meetings. That 
doesn’t concern your attendance at all. 

There is one question I have which relates to the security of the project it- 
self. Very early in your testimony in some discussion about procedures or 
security measures which were taken after very careful thought, you made 


94 THE HEARING 


the observation obviously they did not succeed. Again this is not a direct 
quote. Do you mind amplifying on that just a moment? 

THE Wrrness. Yes. I think of the known leakages of information, Fuchs is by 
far the most grave. It occurred out of Los Alamos. I won’t attempt to assess 
responsibility for the surveillance of personnel who moved around there. 
Facilities for surveillance were available, and they could well have been 
used in following Fuchs rather than somebody else. That would not have 
prevented his prior espionage, but it would have prevented the espionage at 
that time. I can’t imagine any more pinpointed leakage than if Fuchs had 
simply communicated what he was working on. I don’t mean that this was 
the only secret, but I can’t imagine any single little point that would be 
more helpful to an enemy than the job he had himself. While not wishing to 
debate with General Groves either the necessity, the desirability, or the dan- 
gers of compartmentalization, I would like to record that if Fuchs had been 
infinitely compartmentalized, what was inside his compartment would 
have done the damage. 


Friday, April 16 


J. RoBerT OPPENHEIMER: “I would have done anything that | was 
asked to do... if | had thought it was technically feasible” 


[Robb now turns to the charge that Oppenheimer opposed the hydrogen 
bomb in 1949, and that his opposition slowed down the weapon’s develop- 
ment. To lay the groundwork, Robb queries Oppenheimer about his enthusias- 
tic support for the atomic bomb, and his willingness, even during the war, to 
facilitate research on a thermonuclear device at Los Alamos. The obvious in- 
sinuation is that Oppenheimer’s opposition to a crash program for building a 
hydrogen bomb in 1949 reflected pro-Soviet sympathies rather than moral 
qualms.] 


CROSS-EXAMINATION (resumed) 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Did you subsequent to the President’s decision in January 1950 ever ex- 
press any opposition to the production of the hydrogen bomb on moral 
grounds? 

A. I would think that I could very well have said this is a dreadful weapon, or 
something like that. I have no specific recollection and would prefer it, if 
you would ask me or remind me of the context or conversation that you 
have in mind. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 95 


Roger Robb at a Senate hearing, July 
1958. Paul Schutzer/TimePix. 


Q. Why do you think you could very well have said that? 

A. Because I have always thought it was a dreadful weapon. Even from a 
technical point of view it was a sweet and lovely and beautiful job, I have 
still thought it was a dreadful weapon. 

Q. And have said so? 

A. I would assume that I have said so, yes. 

Q. You mean you had a moral revulsion against the production of such a 

dreadful weapon? 

. This is too strong. 

Beg pardon? 

That is too strong. 

Which is too strong, the weapon or my expression? 

Your expression. I had a grave concern and anxiety. 

You had moral qualms about it, is that accurate? 

Let us leave the word “moral” out of it. 

You had qualms about it. 

How could one not have qualms about it? I know no one who doesn’t have 

qualms about it... . 


>OPOPO>O> 


96 THE HEARING 


Q. Doctor, in your work and discussions in 1942, in your work on the ther- 

monuclear weapon at Los Alamos in 1943 to 1945 and in your application 

for the patent of 1944, and in your advice which you as chairman of the 

GAC gave to the Commission to get on with the work on this thermonuclear, 

at all those times and on all of those occasions, were you suffering from or 

deterred by any moral scruples or qualms about the development of this 
weapon? 

. Of course. 

. You were? 

. Of course. 

. But you still got on with the work, didn’t you? 

. Yes, because this was a work of exploration. It was not the preparation of a 
weapon. 

You mean it was just an academic excursion? 

A. It was an attempt at finding out what things could be done. 

Q. But you were going to spend millions of dollars of the taxpayers’ money 
on it, weren’t you? 

A. It goes on all the time. 

Q. Were you going to spend millions if not billions of dollars of the taxpayers’ 
money just to find out for yourself satisfaction what was going on? 

A. We spent no such sums. 

Q. Did you propose to spend any such sums for a mere academic excursion? 

A. No. It is not an academic thing whether you can make a hydrogen bomb. It 
is a matter of life and death. 

Q. Beginning in 1942 and running through at least the first year or the first 
meeting of the GAC, you were actively and consciously pushing the devel- 
opment of the thermonuclear bomb, weren’t you? Isn’t that your testimony? 

A. Pushing is not the right word. Supporting and working on it, yes. 

Q. Yes. When did these moral qualms become so strong that you opposed the 
development of the thermonuclear bomb? 

A. When it was suggested that it be the policy of the United States to make 
these things at all costs, without regard to the balance between these 
weapons and atomic weapons as a part of our arsenal. 

Q. What did moral qualms have to do with that? 

A. What did moral qualms have to do with it? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. We freely used the atomic bomb. 

Q. In fact, Doctor, you testified, did you not, that you assisted in selecting the 
target for the drop of the bomb on Japan? 

A. Right. 

Q. You knew, did you not, that the dropping of that atomic bomb on the target 
you had selected will kill or injure thousands of civilians, is that correct? 

A. Not as many as turned out. 

Q. How many were killed or injured? 

A. 70,000. 


POPO SP 


(2) 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 97 


Q. Did you have moral scruples about that? 

A. Terrible ones. 

Q. But you testified the other day, did you not, sir that the bombing of Hi- 
roshima was very successful? 

A. Well, it was technically successful. 

Q. Oh, technically. 

A. It is also alleged to have helped end the war. 

Q. Would you have supported the dropping of a thermonuclear bomb on Hi- 
roshima? 

A. It would make no sense at all. 

Q. Why. 

A. The target is too small. 

Q. The target is too small. Supposing there had been a target in Japan big 
enough for a thermonuclear weapon, would you have opposed dropping it? 

A. This was not a problem with which I was confronted. 

Q. Iam confronting you with it now, sir. 

A. You are not confronting me with an actual problem. I was very relieved 
when Mr. Stimson removed from the target list Kyoto, which was the largest 
city and the most vulnerable target. I think this is the nearest thing that was 
really to your hypothetical question. 

Q. That is correct. Would you have opposed the dropping of a thermonuclear 
weapon on Japan because of moral scruples? 

A. I believe I would, sir. 

Q. Did you oppose the dropping of the atom bomb on Hiroshima because of 

moral scruples? 

. We set forth our— 

. Iam asking you about it, not “we.” 

. I set forth my anxieties and the arguments on the other side. 

You mean you argued against dropping the bomb? 

. I set forth arguments against dropping it. 

. Dropping the atom bomb? 

. Yes. But I did not endorse them. 

. You mean having worked, as you put it, in your answer rather excellently, 

by night and by day for 3 or 4 years to develop the atom bomb, you then ar- 

gued it should not be used? 

A. No;I didn’t argue that it should not be used. I was asked to say by the Sec- 
retary of War what the views of scientists were. I gave the views against and 
the views for. 

Q. But you supported the dropping of the atom bomb on Japan, didn’t you? 

A. What do you mean support? 

Q. You helped pick the target, didn’t you? 

A. I did my job which was the job I was supposed to do. I was not in a policy- 
making position at Los Alamos. I would have done anything that I was 
asked to do, including making the bombs in a different shape, if I had 
thought it was technically feasible. 


O>FOPO>PO>D 


98 THE HEARING 


Q. You would have made the thermonuclear weapon, too, wouldn't you? 

A. I couldn't. 

Q. I didn’t ask you that, Doctor. 

A. I would have worked on it. 

Q. If you had discovered the thermonuclear weapon at Los Alamos, you 
would have done so. If you could have discovered it, you would have done 
so, wouldn’t you? 

A. Oh, yes. 

Q. You were working toward that end, weren’t you? 

A. Yes. I think I need to point out that to run a laboratory is one thing. To ad- 
vise the Government is another. 

Q. I see. 

A. I think I need to point out that a great deal that happened between ’45 and 
’49—I am not supposed to say to what extent—but to a very, very massive 
extent, we had become armed atomically. The prevailing view was that 
what we had was too good—too big—for the best military use, rather than 
too small. 

Q. Doctor, would you refer to your answer, please, sir? One further question 
before we get into that. 

Am I to gather from your testimony, sir, that in your opinion your func- 
tion as amember and chairman of the GAC included giving advice on polit- 
ical policies as well as technical advice? 

A. Ihave testified as to that. 

Q. Would you repeat it for me, sir? 

A. I will repeat it. Our statutory function was to give technical advice. 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. We were often asked questions which went outside of this narrow frame, 
sometimes we responded, sometimes we didn’t. The reason why the gen- 
eral advice, I would call it, editorializing rather than political advice, con- 
tained in our annexes was in the annexes and not in the report because it 
did not seem a proper function for the General Advisory Committee to re- 
spond in these terms to the question that had been put to them. 

Q. Doctor, is it a fair summary of your answer—and I refer you to page 37, and 
the following pages of your answer—that what the GAC opposed in its Oc- 
tober 29, 1949, meeting was merely a crash program for the development of 
the super? . 

A. Yes. Ithink it would be a better summary to say we opposed this crash pro- 
gram as the answer to the Soviet atomic bomb. 

Q. What did you mean by a crash program? 

A. On the basis of what was then known, plant be built, equipment be pro- 
cured and a commitment be made to build this thing irrespective of further 
study and with a very high priority. A program in which alternatives would 
not have an opportunity to be weighed because one had to get on and be- 
cause we were not going to sacrifice time. 

Q. Doctor, isn’t it true that the report of the GAC you wrote, didn’t you— 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 99 


A. I wrote the main report; yes. 

Q. Isn’t it true that the report of the GAC and the annex to which you sub- 
scribed unqualifiedly opposed the development of the super at any time? 

A. Atthat time. 

Q. At any time? 

A. No. At least, let us say we were questioned about that in a discussion with 
the Commission, and we made it quite clear that this could not be an un- 
qualified and permanent opposition. I think that in the reading of the report 
without the later discussions and reports it could be read that way. But in 
the light of what was later said, it could not be read that way. 

Q. Didn’t the annex to which you subscribed say in so many words, “We be- 
lieve a superbomb should never be produced”? 

A. Yes; it did. 

Q. It did say that? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you interpret that as opposing only a crash program? 

A. No. It opposed the program. Obviously if we learned that the enemy was 
up to something, we could not prevent the production of a super bomb. 

Q. What did you mean by “never”? 

A. I didn’t write those words. 

Q. You signed it, though, didn’t you? 

A. I believe what we meant—what I meant was that it would be a better 
world if there were no hydrogen bombs in it. That is what the whole con- 
text says. 

Q. Doctor, don’t you think a fair interpretation of the record and the annex 
which you signed was an unqualified opposition to the production of super 
at any time or under any circumstances? 

A. No. I don't. 

Q. That is your view? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Inall events, Doctor, you did say in your report that no one could tell with- 
out an actual test whether the super would work or whether it wouldn't, is 
that right? 

A. Yes. 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I am not sure the miserable thing will 
work . . . [but it] would be folly to oppose the exploration of 
this weapon” 


[Oppenheimer’s assertion that he had no communication from Glenn T. 
Seaborg prior to the October 1949 GAC meeting provides another opening 
for Robb, who has proof that Seaborg had indeed expressed his view in a 


100 THE HEARING 


letter; the implication is that Oppenheimer, by withholding the letter, had 
deceived the other members of the committee.] 


Q. You testified that you had no intimation from Dr. Seaborg prior to the GAC 
meeting of October 29, 1949, as to what his views on the subject were. I am 
going to show you a letter taken from your files at Princeton, returned by 
you to the Commission, dated October 14, 1949, addressed to you, signed 
Glenn Seaborg, and ask you whether you received that letter prior to the 
meeting of October 29, 1949. 

A. Iam going to say before I see that that I had no recollection of it. 

Q. I assumed that. May I interrupt your reading of it a moment? 

A. Yes. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I have been told by the classification officer that 
there are two words here that I must not read. They are bracketed, and I am 
showing them to Dr. Oppenheimer, and when I read the letter I shall leave 
them out, but I want Dr. Oppenheimer to see them. 

THE Witngss. I would be sure of one thing, and that is if that letter reached me 
before the meeting, I read it to the committee. 


By Mr. Robb: 

The letter was dated October 14, 1949. | 

. So it almost certainly reached me. 

. So presumably unless it came by wagon train, it reached you, didn’t it? 
Right. 

. I will read this letter: 


O>O>reo 


University of California, 
Radiation Laboratory, 
Berkeley 4, Calif., October 14, 1949. 
Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, 
The Institute for Advanced Study, 
Princeton, N. J. 
Dear Robert: 

I will try to give you my thoughts for what they may be worth regarding 
the next GAC meeting, but I am afraid that there may be more questions than 
answers. Mr. Lilienthal’s assignment to us is very broad; and it seems to me 
that conclusions will be reached, if at all, only after a large amount of give 
and take discussion at the GAC meeting. 

A question which cannot be avoided, it seems to me, is that which was 
raised by Ernest Lawrence during his recent trip to Los Alamos and Wash- 
ington. Are we in a race along this line and one in which we may already be 
somewhat behind so far as this particular new aspect is concerned? 


He was talking about the thermonuclear, wasn’t he? 
A. It would be obvious to me he was. 
Q. Continuing: 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 101 


Apparently this possibility has begun to bother very seriously a number of 
people out here, several of whom came to this point of view independently. 
Although I deplore the prospects of our country putting a tremendous effort 
into this, I must confess that I have been unable to come to the conclusion 
that we should not. Some people are thinking of a time scale of the order of 
3 to 5 years which may, of course, be practically impossible and would 
surely involve an effort of greater magnitude than that of the Manhattan 
project. My present feeling would perhaps be best summarized by saying 
that I would have to hear some good arguments before I could take on suffi- 
cient courage to recommend not going toward such a program. 

If such a program were undertaken, a number of questions arise which 
would need early answers. How would the National Laboratories fit into the 
program? Wouldn’t they have to reorient their present views considerably? 
The question as to who might build neutron producing reactors would arise. 
I am afraid that we could not realistically look to the present operators of 
Hanford to take this on. It would seem that a strong effort would have to be 
made to get the duPont Company back into the game. It would be imperative 
that the present views of the reactor safeguard committee be substantially 
changed. 

I just do not know how to comment, without further reflection, on the 
question of how the present ‘reactor program’ should be modified, if it 
should. Probably, after much discussion, you will come to the same old con- 
clusion that the present four reactors be carried on, but that an effort be 
made to speed up their actual construction. As you probably know, Ernest is 
willing to take on the responsibility for the construction near Berkeley of a— 
and then I omit the two words—heavy water natural uranium reactor prima- 
rily for a neutron source and on a short time scale. I don’t know whether it is 
possible to do what is planned here, but I can say that a lot of effort by the 
best people here is going into it. If the GAC is asked to comment on this pro- 
posal, it seems to me clear that we should heartily endorse it. So far as Ican 
see, this program will not interfere with any of the other reactor building 
programs and will be good even if it does not finally serve exactly the pur- 
pose for which it was conceived; I have recently been tending toward the 
conviction that the United States should be doing more with heavy water re- 
actors (we are doing almost nothing). In this connection, it seems to me that 
there might be a discussion concerning the heavy water production facilities 
and their possible expansion. 

Another question, and one on which perhaps I have formulated more of a 
definite opinion, is that of secrecy. It seems to me that we can’t afford to con- 
tinue to hamper ourselves by keeping secret as many things as we now do. I 
think that not only basic science should be subject to less secrecy regulation 
but also some places outside of this area. For example, it seems entirely 
pointless now to hamper the construction of certain types of new piles by 
keeping secret certain lattice dimensions. In case anything so trivial as the 
conclusions reached at the recent international meeting on declassification 
with the British and Canadians at Chalk River is referred to the GAC I might 
just add that I participated in these discussions and thoroughly agree with 


102 THE HEARING 


the changes suggested, with the reservation that perhaps they should go fur- 
ther toward removing secrecy. 

I have great doubt that this letter will be of much help to you, but I am 
afraid that it is the best that I can do at this time. 


Sincerely yours, Glenn 
Glenn T. Seaborg. 


So, Doctor, isn’t it clear to you now that Dr. Seaborg did express himself on 
this matter before the meeting? 

A. Yes, it is clear now. Not in unequivocal terms, except on one point, and on 
that point the General Advisory Committee I think made the recommenda- 
tion that he desired. 

Q. But he did express himself, didn’t he? 

A. Absolutely. 

Q. In a communication to which he apparently had given some thought, is 
that correct? 

A. Right, and to which no doubt at the time I gave some thought. 

Q. That is right. You have no doubt that you received this before the General 
Advisory Committee meeting, is that correct? 

A. I don’t see why I should not have. 

Q. Why did you tell the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy 
when you testified on January 29, 1950, that Dr. Seaborg had not expressed 
himself on the subject prior to the meeting? 

A. Iam sure because it was my recollection. 

Q. That testimony was given in January 1950, wasn’t it? 

A. That is right. 

Q. And this letter had been received by— 

A. Let me add one point. We had a second meeting on the hydrogen bomb 
which Seaborg attended and we asked him how he felt about it, and he said 
he would prefer not to express his views. 

Q. But weren’t you asked, Doctor, or didn’t you tell the joint committee that 
Dr. Seaborg had not expressed himself on this subject prior to the meeting 
of October 29, 1949? 

A. I would have to see the transcript. I don’t remember that question and the 
answer. 

Q. If you did make that statement, it was not true, was it? 

A. It is clear that we had an expression, not unequivocal, from Seaborg, be- 
fore the meeting of October 29. 

Q. Doctor, did you hear my question? 

A. [heard it, but I have heard that kind of question too often. 

Q. Iam sure of that, Doctor, but would you answer it, nevertheless? 

Mr. Marks. Isn’t Dr. Oppenheimer entitled to see the testimony which is 
being referred to, instead of answering a hypothetical question? 

Mr. Ross. It is not a hypothetical question. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 103 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. If you told the joint committee, sir, that Dr. Seaborg had not expressed 
himself prior to the meeting of October 29, 1950, that was not true, was it? 

A. It would depend, entirely. 

Q. Yes or no. 

A. I will not say yes or no. It would depend entirely on the context of the 
question. The only two things in this letter that Seaborg is absolutely clear 
about is that we ought to build certain kinds of reactors and we ought to 
have less secrecy. On the question of the thermonuclear program he can’t 
find good enough arguments against it, but he does have misgivings. 

Q. Allright, Doctor. You told this Board this morning that Dr. Seaborg did not 
express himself prior to the meeting of October 29, 1949. 

A. That is right. That was my recollection. 

Q. Was that true? 

A. No, that was not true. 

Q. You told the board this morning— 

Mr. Gray. Are you pursuing the Seaborg matter now? 

Mr. Ross. I thought I would come back to it, sir. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, I think it would be fair since the question was 
raised, because of the implications that may be left that the actual questions 
put to Dr. Oppenheimer by the joint committee about Dr. Seaborg should be 
read into the record with sufficient context to show what it was about. Oth- 
erwise, we are left with a possible misapprehension as to what really did 
take place. I don’t know. I have never seen the transcript. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, that is impossible unless we have a meeting of the 
joint committee and they authorize that to be done. But Dr. Oppenheimer 
this morning as the board no doubt heard, recalled that he had so testified 
before the joint committee. 

THE WITNESS. I had testified; I had not so testified. 

Mk. Ross. The record will show what the doctor testified. 

THE Wrrnsss. If I testified that I recall so testifying, I would like to correct the 
transcript. 

Mr. Ross. That was not correct, either? 

Mr. SILVERMAN. He didn’t say it. 

Mr. Ross. All right. The record will show what he testified to. 

Mr. GARRISON. What is the procedural requirement for reading into the record 
the questions from that transcript? 

Mr. Ross. That transcript will not be released, as I understand it, without the 
vote of the committee to do so, Mr. Garrison, which is why I was not able to 
read Dr. Oppenheimer what he said. 

THE Witness. I think a lot depends on the nature of the question. Had Dr. 
Seaborg made up his mind, had he concurred with your view, or so on. It is 
clear from this letter he wanted to hear a discussion about it. That he saw it 
was a very tough question. 


104 THE HEARING 


Mr. Ross. May I ask the doctor one more question before we take a break on 
this Seaborg matter. 
MR. Gray. Yes. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, are you sure that you read Dr. Seaborg’s letter to your committee, 
the GAC committee, at the meeting of October 29, 1949? 

A. SinceI forgot the existence of the letter, obviously I cannot remember read- 
ing it. lalways read communications on matters before us to the committee. 

Q. Is there any reflection in the report of the committee that Dr. Seaborg had 
expressed himself in any way about this matter? 

A. No, there certainly is not. 

Q. I beg your pardon? 

A. There isn’t. 

Mk. Ross. All right. 

Mr. GARRISON. May I ask the chairman whether the board has before it the 
transcript of the joint committee testimony? I ask merely because of the fact 
that if it has been released to the board— 

Mr. Gray. Let me respond to your question this way, Mr. Garrison, and say 
that after recess, which I propose to call in a moment, I should like to re- 
spond to that. 

We will now recess. 

(Brief recess.) 

Mr. Gray. I would like to pursue the question which Mr. Garrison raised just 
before the recess. 

The board does not have before it a complete transcript of the testimony 
which was under discussion. 

(Mr. Marks not present in the room.) 

Mr. Gray. However, I can say to Dr. Oppenheimer and his counsel that the 
board does understand from a source it believes to be reliable that Dr. Op- 
penheimer was asked a question with respect to the extent of unanimity of 
the views of the members of the GAC with respect to what we have been de- 
scribing as the crash program. I am not sure whether it was so referred to in 
the testimony, but there was this question. 

In response to the question Dr. Oppenheimer stated that he thought it was 
pretty unanimous view, that one member of the committee, Dr. Seaborg, 
was away when the matter was discussed, and that he had not expressed 
himself on it, and further saying that the other members will agree with 
what he has said. 

THE Witness. That is a little different from what I was told I said. I was told I 
said explicitly that Seaborg had said nothing about the matter before the 
meeting. This was several months after the meeting and I was asked 
whether Seaborg had expressed his views in connection with this meeting. 
I would think that the proper answer to that was not so far from what you 
quoted me as saying. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 105 


Mr. Gray. We are trying to develop what actually the facts were in the case, 
and I believe you did testify that youhad no communication with respect to 
this matter from Dr. Seaborg or at least you said you did not recall a com- 
munication, I believe. 

THE Witness. Is that what it says in the transcript? 

Mr. Gray. No; I think that is what you said earlier this morning. 

THE Witnzss. I would like to make a general protest. I am told I have said cer- 
tain things. I don’t recall it. I am asked if I said these what would that be. 
This is an extremely difficult form for me to face a question. I don’t know 
what I said. It is of record. I had it in my own vault for many years. It is not 
classified for reasons of national security, this conversation, and I have no 
sense that I could have wished to give any impression to the joint congres- 
sional committee other than an exposition because when I testified I knew 
for a fact that the decision had been taken. I testified in order to explain as 
well as I could to the committee the grounds for the advice, the color of the 
advice, the arguments that we had in mind. It was not an attempt to per- 
suade them. It was not in any way an attempt to alter the outcome. It was an 
attempt to describe what we had in mind. A few minutes after I testified, I 
believe, or shortly after I testified, the Presidential announcement came out, 
and I knew what it was going to be. So this was not a piece of advocacy. It 
was a piece of exposition. 

I would like to add one other thing. Having no recollection of the Seaborg 
letter, I cannot say that I did this. But it would have been normal practice 
for me at one of the meetings with the Commission not merely to read the 
letter to the committee, but to read the letter or parts of it relevant to our 
discussion to the Commission and the committee. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. In other words, Doctor, if you didn’t read this Seaborg letter to your com- 
mittee, it would have been quite unusual? 

A. Yes.... 

Q. Doctor, I want to show you a copy ofa letter also taken from your files that 
you had at Princeton and turned back to the Commission. This is a copy of 
a letter dated October 21, 1949, bearing the typewritten signature Robert 
Oppenheimer, addressed to Dr. James B. Conant, president, Harvard Uni- 
versity: ... 


Dear Uncle Jim: 

We are exploring the possibilities for our talk with the President on Octo- 
ber 30th. All members of the advisory committee will come to the meeting 
Saturday except Seaborg, who must be in Sweden, and whose general views 
we have in written form. Many of us will do some preliminary palavering on 
the 28th. 

There is one bit of background which I would like you to have before we 
meet. When we last spoke, you thought perhaps the reactor program offered 


106 THE HEARING 


the most decisive example of the need for policy clarification. I was inclined 
to think that the super might also be relevant. On the technical side, as far as 
I can tell, the super is not very different from what it was when we first 
spoke of it more than 7 years ago: a weapon of unknown design, cost, delib- 
erability and military value. But a very great change has taken place in the 
climate of opinion. On the one hand, two experienced promoters have been 
at work, i.e., Ernest Lawrence and Edward Teller. The project has long been 
dear to Teller’s heart; and Ernest has convinced himself that we must learn 
from Operation Joe that the Russians will soon do the super, and that we had 
better beat them to it. 


What was Operation Joe, the Russian explosion? 
A. Right. 
(Mr. Marks entered the room.) 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Of September 1949? 

A. Right. 

Q. Continuing your letter: “On the technical side, he proposes to get some 
neutron producing heavy water reactors built; and to this, for a variety 
of reasons, I think we must say amen since”’—now would you para- 
phrase? 

A. There were three military applications other than the super which these 
reactors would serve. 


Q. * * * and many other things will all profit by the availability of neutrons. 

But the real development has not been of a technical nature. Ernest spoke 
to Knowland and McMahon, and to some at least of the joint chiefs. The joint 
congressional committee, having tried to find something tangible to chew on 
ever since September 23d, has at least found its answer. We must have a 
super, and we must have it fast. A subcommittee is heading west to investi- 
gate this problem at Los Alamos, and in Berkeley. The joint chiefs appear in- 
formally to have decided to give the development of the super overriding 
priority, though no formal request has come through. The climate of opinion 
among the competent physicists also shows signs of shifting. Bethe, for in- 
stance, is seriously considering return on a full time basis; and so surely are 
some others. I have had long talks with Bradbury and Manley, and with von 
Neumann. Bethe, Teller, McCormack, and LeBaron are all scheduled to turn 
up within the next 36 hours. I have agreed that if there is a conference on the 
super program at Los Alamos, I will make it my business to attend. 

What concerns me is really not the technical problem. I am not sure the mis- 
erable thing will work, nor that it can be gotten to a target except by ox cart. It 
seems likely to me even further to worsen the unbalance of our present war 
plans. What does worry me is that this thing appears to have caught the imag- 
ination, both of the congressional and of military people, as the answer to the 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 107 


problem posed by the Russian advance. It would be folly to oppose the explo- 
ration of this weapon. We have always known it had to be done; and it does 
have to be done, though it appears to be singularly proof against any form of 
experimental approach. But that we become committed to it as the way to 
save the country and the peace appears to me full of dangers. 

We will be faced with all this at our meeting; and anything that we do or 
do not say to the President, will have to take it into consideration. I shall feel 
far more secure if you have had an opportunity to think about it. 

I still remember my visit with gratitude and affection. 

Robert Oppenheimer 


Doctor, would it appear to you from that letter that you were in error in 
your previous testimony that you had not expressed your views to Dr. Co- 
nant before the meeting of October 29, 1949? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Beg pardon? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you wish now to amend your previous answer that Dr. Conant reached 
the views he expressed to you without any suggestion on your part? 

A. I don’t know which preceded which. 

Q. Is there any indication to you in this letter which I have just read that Co- 
nant had previously expressed any views to you? 

A. I would say there is an indication that there had been discussion between 

us. I am not clear. 

. Why were you writing to Dr. Conant before the GAC meeting on this thing? 

. I think the letter explains that. 

. You were not trying to propagandize him, were you? 

No. 

. Do you agree with me that this letter is susceptible of that interpretation 

that you were trying to influence him? 

A. Not properly; not properly so susceptible. 

Q. Younotice in this letter, Doctor, that you referred to Dr. Seaborg’s letter, so 
you had it at that time, didn’t you? 

A. Right. 

Q. And that must have been the letter we read this morning, is that correct? 

A. I would assume so. 

Q. Would you agree, Doctor, that your references to Dr. Lawrence and Dr. 
Teller and their enthusiasm for the super bomb, their work on the super 
bomb, that your references in this letter are a little bit belittling? 

A. Dr. Lawrence came to Washington. He did not talk to the Commission. He 
went and talked to the joint congressional committee and to members of the 
Military Establishment. I think that deserves some belittling. 

Q. So you would agree that your references to those men in this letter were 
belittling? 


P>O>n 


108 THE HEARING 


A. No. I pay my great respects to them as promoters. I don’t think I did them 
justice. 

Q. You used the word “promoters” in an invidious sense, didn’t you? 

A. I promoted lots of things in my time. 

Q. Doctor, would you answer my question? When you use the word “promot- 
ers” you meant it to be in a slightly invidious sense, didn’t you? 

A. Ihave no idea. 

Q. When you use the word now with reference to Lawrence and Teller, don’t 
you intend it to be invidious? 

A. No. 

Q. You think that their work of promotion was admirable, is that right? 

A. I think they did an admirable job of promotion. 

Q. Do you think it was admirable that they were promoting this project? 

A. I told you that I think that the methods—I don’t believe Teller was in- 
volved, Lawrence promoted it—were not proper. 

Q. You objected to them going to Knowland and McMahon? 

A. I objected to their not going to the Commission. 

Q. Knowland and McMahon, by that you meant Senator Knowland and Sen- 
ator McMahon. 

A. Of course. ... 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “The program in 1951 was technically 
so sweet that you could not argue about that” 


[As Robb tries unsuccessfully to get Oppenheimer to admit that he impeded 
work on the hydrogen bomb, Gordon Gray pursues his own line of question- 
ing in the same area.] 


MR. GRAY: .... 

My next question is one which was not fully developed, I think, in the 
questioning of counsel. I don’t think it is a new matter, and I think it is per- 
tinent to the whole problem. 

Is it your opinion, Doctor, that the Russians would not have sought to de- 
velop a hydrogen bomb unless they knew in one way or another, or from 
one source or another, that this country was proceeding with it? 

THE Witness. That was my opinion in 1949. As of the moment I have no opin- 
ion. I don’t know enough about the history of what they have been doing. 
Mr. Gray. I don’t think my question relates so much to historical events as to 

a view of the international situation and the problems with which this 

country was confronted. Would it not have been reasonable to expect at any 

time since the apparent intentions or the intentions of the U.S.S.R. were 

clear to us that they would do anything to increase their military strength? 
THE Witness. Right. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 109 


Mr. Gray. Whatever it might be. 

THE Witness. Oh, sure. 

Mr. GRAY. So you don’t intend to have this record suggest that you felt that if 
those who opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb prevailed that 
would mean that the world would not be confronted with the hydrogen 
bomb? 

THE WITNEsS. It would not necessarily mean—we thought on the whole it 
would make it less likely. That the Russians would attempt and less likely 
that they would succeed in the undertaking. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to pursue that a little bit. That is two things. One, the 
likelihood of their success would we all hope still be related to their own 
capabilities and not to information they would receive from our efforts. So 
what you mean to say is that since they would not attempt it they would not 
succeed? 

THE WITNESS. No. I believe what we then thought was that the incentive to do 
it would be far greater if they knew we were doing it, and we had suc- 
ceeded. Let me, for instance, take a conjecture. Suppose we had not done 
anything about the atom during the war. I don’t think you could guarantee 
that the Russians would never have had an atomic bomb. But I believe they 
would not have one as nearly as soon as they have. I think both the fact of 
our success, the immense amount of publicity, the prestige of the weapon, 
the espionage they collect, all of this made it an absolutely higher priority 
thing, and we thought similar circumstances might apply to the hydrogen 
bomb. We were always clear that there might be a Russian effort whatever 
we did. We always understood that if we did not do this that an attempt 
would be made to get the Russians sewed up so that they would not either. 

Mr. Gray. Further with respect to the hydrogen bomb, did in the end this turn 
out to be a larger weapon than you felt it might be when it was under dis- 
cussion and consideration in 1942 and 1943? 

THE WITNESS. We were much foggier in 1942 and 1943. I think your imagina- 
tions ranged to the present figures. 

Mr. Gray. I think I should disclose to you what I am after now. I am pursuing 
the matter of the moral scruples. Should they not have been as important in 
1942 as they might have been in 1946 or 1948 or 1949? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. Iam trying to get at at what time did your strong moral convictions 
develop with respect to the hydrogen bomb? 

THE WITNESS. When it became clear to me that we would tend to use any 
weapon we had. 

Mr. Gray. Then may I ask this: Do you make a sharp distinction between the 
development of a weapon and the commitment to use it? 

THE Witngss. I think there is a sharp distinction but in fact we have not made 
it. 

Mr. Gray. I have gathered from what you have said, this was something that 
underlay your thinking. The record shows that you constantly, with greater 
intensity at varying times perhaps, encouraged the efforts toward some sort 


110 THE HEARING 


of development, but at the point when it seemed clear that we would use it 
if we developed it, then you said we should not go ahead with it. I don’t 
want to be unfair, but is that it? 

THE Witness. That is only a small part of it. That is a part of it. The other part 
of it is, of course, the very great hope that these methods of warfare would 
never have to be used by anybody, a hope which became vivid in the fall of 
1949. The hope that we would find a policy for bringing that about, and 
going on with bigger and bigger bombs would move in the opposite direc- 
tion. I think that is apparent in the little majority annex to the GAC report. 

Mr. Gray. Was it your feeling when you were concerned officially and other- 
wise with a possible disarmament program that the United States and its al- 
lies would be in a better bargaining position with respect to the develop- 
ment of some sort of international machinery if it did not have the hydrogen 
bomb as a weapon in the arsenal, or is that relevant at all? 

THE Witness. The kind of thing we had in mind is what one would do in 1949 
and 1950. 

Mr. Gray. This is quite a serious line of questioning as far as Iam concerned, 
because it has been said—I am not sure about the language of the Nichols 
letter—at least in this proceeding and later on in the press, that you frus- 
trated the development of the hydrogen bomb. That has been said. There 
have been some implications, I suppose, that there were reasons which 
were not related to feasible, to cost, et cetera. 

THE Witness. Right. I think I can answer your question. 

Mr. Gray. Very well. 

THE Wrtness. Clearly we could not do anything about the nonuse or the elim- 
ination of atomic weapons unless we had nonatomic military strength to 
meet whatever threats we were faced with. I think in 1949 when we came to 
this meeting and talked about it, we thought we were at a parting of the 
ways, a parting of the ways in which either the reliance upon atomic 
weapons would increase further and further or in which it would be re- 
duced. We hoped it would be reduced because without that there was no 
chance of not having them in combat. 

Mr. Gray. Your deep concern about the use of the hydrogen bomb, if it were 
developed, and therefore your own views at the time as to whether we 
should proceed in a crash program to develop it—your concern about this— 
became greater, did it not, as the practicabilities became more clear? Is that 
an unfair statement? 

THE Witness. I think it is the opposite of true. Let us not say about use. But 
my feeling about development became quite different when the practicabil- 
ities became clear. When I saw how to do it, it was clear to me that one had 
to at least make the thing. Then the only problem was what would one do 
about them when one had them. The program we had in 1949 was a tor- 
tured thing that you could well argue did not make a great deal of technical 
sense. It was therefore possible to argue also that you did not want it even if 
you could have it. The program in 1951 was technically so sweet that you 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 111 


could not argue about that. It was purely the military, the political and the 
humane problem of what you were going to do about it once you had it.... 

Mr. Gray. I suppose my final question on that is related to the view you held 
at one time that a cessation—correct me if I mistake this—of Communist ac- 
tivities, as distinguished from Communist sympathies, was important in 
considering a man for important classified work. Is that your view today? 

THE WITNESS. No; I have for a long time been clear that sympathy with the 
enemy is incompatible with responsible or secret work to the United States. 

Mk. Gray. So it would not be sufficient to say to a man, stop making speeches, 
stop going to meetings; that would not be enough? 

THE WITNESS. It was not in fact sufficient before. It was sufficient only if it was 
a man whose disengagement was dependable. 

Mr. Gray. Disengagement as far as activities are concerned. 

THE Witness. And to some extent conduct. Today it is a very simple thing it 
seems to me, and has been for some years. We have a well-defined enemy. 
Sympathy for him may be tolerable, but it is not tolerable in working for the 
people or the Government of this country. 


JOHN LANSDALE: “We kept him under surveillance whenever he 
left the project. We opened his mail. We did all sorts of nasty 
things” 


[Two witnesses, associates of Oppenheimer, testify briefly as to his loyalty: 
Thomas Keith Glennan, president of Case Institute of Technology in Cleve- 
land, who served on the Atomic Energy Commission from 1950 to 1952; 
and Karl T. Compton, who first met Oppenheimer in 1926 and who was 
chairman of the Research and Development Board in the Department of De- 
fense in 1947 and 1948. Then, former security officer John Lansdale, whose 
September 1943, interview with Oppenheimer has already been introduced 
into evidence, is called to testify. A graduate of the Virginia Military Institute 
and Harvard Law School, Landsale is at the time of the hearing a member of 
a Cleveland law firm.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison: ... 


Q. Will you tell the board about your discussions with General Groves about 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s background and about his clearance? 
A. I cannot recall precisely when we first began to discuss Dr. Oppen- 
heimer. ... 
In any event, Dr. Oppenheimer had been on the project prior to the time 
that the Army took over. When the Army took it over, the security was vir- 
tually nonexistent and the program of personnel clearance was practically 


112 THE HEARING 


nonexistent. I won’t say it did not exist because it did, but it was very in- 
complete. One of the first things that we did was to attempt to get some in- 
vestigation and set up some program for the clearance of the personnel that 
were received with the project, as it were.... 

General Groves’ view, as I recall expressed, was (a) that Dr. Oppenheimer 
was essential; (b) that in his judgment—and he had gotten to know Dr. Op- 
penheimer very well by that time—he was loyal; and (c) we would clear 
him for this work whatever the reports said. 

I will confess that I myself at that time had considerable doubts about it. 
Because of our worry, or my worry, let us say, about Dr. Oppenheimer, we 
continued to the best of our ability to investigate him. We kept him under 
surveillance whenever he left the project. We opened his mail. We did all 
sorts of nasty things that we do or did on the project. 

I interviewed him myself a number of times. As I recall, the recommen- 
dations of the security organization headed up by Captain Calvert were ad- 
verse to Dr. Oppenheimer. They recommended against clearance. 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. Who was Captain Calvert? 

A. I think his official title was District Security Officer. He was on General 
Nichols’, then Colonel Nichols, staff. In any event, I fully concurred with 
General Groves as our investigation went on with the fact that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer was properly cleared. ... 

THE WitnEss. I remember that I asked General Groves early in the game what 
would he do if it turned out that Dr. Oppenheimer was not loyal and that we 
could not trust him? His reply was that he would blow the whole thing 
wide open. 

I do not mean to imply by that, that our conclusions as to clearance were 
necessarily dictated by indispensability. I wish to emphasize it for myself. I 
reached the conclusion that he was loyal and ought to be cleared. 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. You did have certain employees, did you not, that the project had at Los 
Alamos who were kept on the basis of what might be called a calculated 
risk? 

A. Yes; that is true. That is true of Los Alamos and other parts of the project. 

Q. Certain people who were known or believed to be Communists? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Why did the project employ some people of that character? 

A. My only answer to that is that we continually had to exercise judgment as 
between obvious all out security and the necessities of the project. It must 
be remembered that the Germans were far ahead of us in the development 
of an atomic bomb. We believed that the nation which first obtained one 
would win the war. We were under, believe me, very terrible feeling of pres- 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 113 


sure. Every security decision we made with reference to important people 
was made in that background. 

Wehad a number of persons who we believed were very likely to be Com- 
munists, who we were persuaded were doing such useful work and such 
important work, that good judgment required that we keep them and let 
them do their work and surround them and insulate them to the best extent 
of our ability. That is what we did in a number of cases. 

I can’t answer it any better than that. 

Q. Dr. Oppenheimer was not in that category of calculated risk, I take it? 

A. Not in my judgment, no. 

Q. Did you ever know of any leakage of information from any of the persons 
of the sort you have mentioned to the outside? 

A. We never discovered any leakage of information from those persons that 
we deliberately kept as a calculated risk. I don’t mean to assert that there 
was none. We discovered none and we used every effort we could to make 
it difficult for them. 

For example, with many of them we made it perfectly obvious that we 
were watching their every move so as to be sure that if they desired to pass 
information they would go to extraordinary lengths to do so and thus make 
it easier to detect. 

Q. Did you know of any leakage from the Los Alamos project, apart from that 
which has become public property? 

A. Apart from the inexcusable Greenglass case, I now recall none that we 
know of. Oh, we had a mail censorship program set up and we were contin- 
ually picking up the things in letters that we thought ought not to go out 
and which we intercepted. Those were the kind of things which my recol- 
lection is that we didn’t regard as deliberate attempts at security viola- 
tion.... 

Q. Was the job of administering this community a difficult one in your judg- 
ment as you observed it? 

A. It certainly was. The commanding officers were changed very rapidly. 

Q. What would you say as to the nature of the scientists and their human 
characteristics, as you saw them at work on the project in relations to the 
problem of administration? 

A. The scientists en masse presented an extremely difficult problem. The rea- 
son for it, as near as I can judge, is that with certain outstanding exceptions 
they lacked what I called breadth. They were extremely competent in their 
field but their extreme competence in their chosen field lead them falsely to 
believe that they were as competent in any other field. 

The result when you got them together was to make administration pretty 
difficult because each one thought that he could administer the administra- 
tive aspects of the Army post better than any Army officer, for example, and 
didn’t hesitate to say so with respect to any detail of living or detail of se- 
curity or anything else. 


114 THE HEARING 


I hope my scientist friends will forgive me, but the very nature of them 
made things pretty difficult. 

Q. They were slightly restive under the confinement of the isolated city. 

A. Very. As time went on, more so. Toward the latter stages it became increas- 
ingly difficult to sit on the lid out there. During the early stages, no. 

Q. What was Dr. Oppenheimer’s policy as an administrator in relation to 
keeping the morale going and keeping the natural restiveness of these 
people within bounds? Was he helpful? 

A. So far as I observed it, he was very helpful. The difficulty primarily arose 
from those that were one step below him, let us say, in the scientific side. 
Dr. Oppenheimer himself so far as security matters with which I was partic- 
ularly concerned was extremely cooperative. ... 

Q. What do you recall of your interview with Dr. Oppenheimer on what we 
call here the Chevalier incident, if you know what I have reference to? 

A. Yes. That is one of the things which I have had the advantage of reading 
the transcript of some weeks ago and glancing at one page of it again last 
night. 

I should say that I talked to Dr. Oppenheimer many times. In that particu- 
lar case the interview was when he was in Washington and I now believe 
that the interview took place in General Groves’ office, although that is a re- 
construction. I have no precise recollection of it except that it was in Wash- 
ington. 

Do you wish me to relate the substance of it? 

Q. Yes. 

A. The substance of it was that Dr. Oppenheimer had advised our people on 
the west coast that an approach had been made to someone on the project to 
secure information concerning the project, and that the approach had been 
made by one Eltenton who was well known to us—from Eltenton to a third 
person and from the third person to the project. 

From reading the transcript and having my attention called to memo- 
randa by Mr. Robb and Mr. Rolander, the information was that the contact 
was with three persons. It is perfectly obvious that was the story. It is a cu- 
rious trick of memory but my recollection was one and that the one person 
was Dr. Oppenheimer’s brother, Frank Oppenheimer. I have no explanation 
as to how I translate it from three into one. 

I called General Groves last night and discussed it with him in an attempt 
to fathom that and I can’t figure it out. But the record shows clearly that 
there were three. 

My effort was to get Dr. Oppenheimer to tell me the identity of the person 
that was later identified as Chevalier. In that I was unsuccessful. Perhaps I 
was not as resourceful a questioner as I might have been. In any event I 
could not get him to tell me. That is the sum and substance of it. 

I came back and told the general that it was up to him, that he just had to 
get the information for us, which the general undertook to do and later re- 
ported back the information. That goes on for pages. I am quite sure that I 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 115 


interrogated him concerning other persons on the project. I am quite sure it 
is a long statement as I read it in the transcript. Our discussion covered a 
wide range. That is my present recollection. 

Q. Was there any other instance in which Dr. Oppenheimer did not give you 
information that you asked for? 

A. I don’t recall any. 

Q. Would you class this incident as an illustration of the characteristic of the 
scientific mind that you spoke of a while back as deciding in their own 
minds what properly they should do, what was required to be done in the 
public interest? 

A. Yes, I think that is a fair statement. I think this whole incident is a good il- 
lustration of that. I will confess that I was pretty fed up with Dr. Oppen- 
heimer at that moment... 

Dr. Oppenheimer then told us that Eltenton had made this approach. It 
was perfectly plain that Dr. Oppenheimer believed that it was quite unnec- 
essary to our security problem to know the names of the person or per- 
sons—the one who later turned out to be Chevalier—got this contact with. 

To my mind it was a sad exhibition of judgment, and an exhibition of ego 
that is quite unwarranted, but nevertheless quite common. That is the way I 
regarded it then. It did not endear him to me at the time. That is the sort of 
incident that it appeared to me to be. 

Q. He did regard it as important and in the national interest for him to impart 
information that had come to him about Eltenton? 

A. I assume that he did, otherwise he would not have done it. 

Q. He took the initiative in doing that? 

A. That is my recollection. ... 

Q. You had many interviews with both Dr. Oppenheimer and his wife during 
the course of the work on the project? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Did you endeavor in these interviews to form the most accurate and thor- 
ough going judgment possible as to his political orientation? I will come to 
Mrs. Oppenheimer later. Did you search to find out what you could about 
his attachment or lack of attachment to Communist ideology? 

A. Yes, sir; that was the purpose of my talks with him. I was working on that 
all the time. 

Q. What judgment did you form as to his political convictions at this time, 
that is, at the time of the project? 

A. May I qualify your question? You asked me as to my judgment as to his po- 
litical convictions. I formed the judgment that he was not a Communist. 

Q. How did you form that judgment? 

A. I would like to continue with that. My working definition of a Communist 
is a person who is more loyal to Russia than to the United States. That is the 
definition I formed very early during my work on the Communist problem 
in the War Department, and which I still think is a sound definition. You 
will note that has nothing to do with political ideas. 


116 THE HEARING 


Unquestionably Dr. Oppenheimer was what we would characterize—and 
as hide bound a Republican as myself characterizes—as extremely liberal, 
not to say radical. Unfortunately, in this problem of determining who is and 
who is not a Communist, determining who is loyal and who is not, the signs 
which point the way to persons to be investigated or to check on are very 
frequently political liberalism of an extreme kind. The difficult judgment is 
to distinguish between the person whose views are political and the person 
who is a Communist, because communism is not a political thing at all. 

Q. You had an extensive experience in that kind of interrogation throughout 
the war, did you? 

A. Yes, sir; I certainly did. 

Q. Did you have enough experience at it to feel as confident as men can be 
about their judgments? 

A. I believe so. I was a lot younger then than I am now, and I am sure I had 
more confidence in my judgment then than I have now. 

Q. About many things? 

A. About many things. But my job in the War Department and up until the 
time I officially moved over to the atomic bomb project and severed all con- 
nections with the War Department in January 1944, was primarily con- 
cerned with the formation of judgment as to who were or were not Commu- 
nists in the loyalty sense in the Army. 

Q. You were satisfied on the basis of these interrogations and of all that you 

knew about Dr. Oppenheimer from surveillance and all other sources that 

he was not a Communist as you have defined one in the sense of being more 
loyal to Russia than to the United States? 

Yes. 

You were satisfied that he was a loyal American citizen? 

Yes. 

Putting the interests of his country first? 

I believed that. . 

. If you had the decision to clear or not to clear Dr. Oppenheimer today, 
‘hess upon your experience with him during the war years and up until the 
time when your association with him ended, would you do so? 

A. I will answer that, yes, based upon the same criteria and standards that we 
used then. Iam making no attempt to interpret the present law. Those crite- 
ria were loyalty and discretion. 

Q. What would you have to say as to his discretion as you saw it? 

A. I think it was very good. We always worried a little bit about how much he 
talked during his recruitment efforts. Certainly there were times when as a 
security officer I would have judged the amount of information that he felt 
he had to give to induce somebody to come on to the project to have been 
indiscreet. That is always a question of judgment and it was in the line of 
duty, so to speak. 

Q. Apart from the problem of recruitment, what would you say? 


OPO Pop 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 117 


A. Yes; I believed him to be discreet. I thought it was indiscreet of him to visit 
Miss Tatlock. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is all at the moment, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Robb. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. As I understand it, Mr. Lansdale, you are not offering any opinion as to 
whether or not you would clear Dr. Oppenheimer on the basis of presently 
existing criteria? 

A. That is a standard that is strange to me. I don’t know what it is. If some- 
body would interpret it for me—isn’t it getting pretty hypothetical? 

I believed on the basis of information I had then that Dr. Oppenheimer 
was loyal and discreet. I have not changed my mind, although I have no 
knowledge of events transpiring since sometime in 1945. 

Q. You said that you thought Oppenheimer’s discretion was very good, is that 
correct? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. You had no doubt, did you, that Jean Tatlock was a Communist? 

A. She was certainly on our suspect list. I know now that she was a Commu- 
nist. I cannot recall at the moment whether we were sure she was a Com- 
munist at that time. 

Q. Did your definition of very good discretion include spending the night 
with a known Communist woman? 

A. No; it didn’t. Our impression was that that interest was more romantic 
than otherwise, and it is the sole instance that I know of.... 

Q. Mr. Garrison asked you some questions about the scientific mind in rela- 
tion to that interview that you had with Dr. Oppenheimer and you re- 
sponded, I think, that Dr. Oppenheimer’s attitude might well have been a 
manifestation of the workings of a scientific mind; is that correct? 

A. Oh, yes; of which I came up against many examples. 

Q. Dr. Oppenheimer has testified here before this board that he lied to you in 
that interview. You would not say that lying was one of the manifestations 
of a scientific mind, would you? 

A. Not necessarily, no. 

Q. It is not a characteristic— 

A. It was certainly a characteristic to decide that I didn’t need to have certain 
information. 

Q. No. But the question is, Mr. Lansdale, you would not say that scientists as 
a group are liars, would you? 

A. No. I don’t think persons as a group are liars. 

Q. No. 

A. I certainly can’t over emphasize, however, the extremely frustrating, al- 


118 THE HEARING 


most maddening, let me say, tendency of our more brilliant people to ex- 
tend in their own mind their competence and independence of decision in 
fields in which they have no competence. 

Q. You were undertaking at the time you interviewed Dr. Oppenheimer to in- 
vestigate what you believed to be a very serious attempt at espionage, it that 
right? 

A. Yes. Let me put it this way. No. “Yes” is a fair answer. 

Q. And Dr. Oppenheimer’s refusal to give you the information that you asked 
him for was frustrating to you? 

A. Oh, certainly. 

Q. You felt that it seriously impeded your investigation, didn’t you? 

A. Certainly. But he wasn’t the first one that impeded my investigation, nor 
the last. 

Q. Mr. Lansdale, do you have any predisposition or feeling that you want to 
defend Dr. Oppenheimer here? 

A. Ihave been trying to analyze my own feelings on that. 

Q. I notice you volunteered that last remark, and I wondered why. 

A. I know, and it was probably a mistake. I have attempted as nearly as I 
can—as nearly as it is possible—to be objective. 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. I do feel strongly that Dr. Oppenheimer at least to the extent of my knowl- 
edge is loyal. I am extremely disturbed by the current hysteria of the times 
of which this seems to be a manifestation. 

Q. You think this inquiry is a manifestation of hysteria? 

A. I think— 

Q. Yes or no? 

A. I won’t answer that question “Yes” or “No.” If you are tending to be that 
way—if you will let me continue, I will be glad to answer your question. 

Q. All right. 

A. I think that the hysteria of the times over communism is extremely danger- 
ous. I can only illustrate it by another dangerous attitude which was going 
on at the same time we were worrying about Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty. 

At the same time over in the War Department I was being subjected to 
pressure from military superiors, from the White House and from every 
other place because I dared to stop the commissioning of a group of 15 or 20 
undoubted Communists. I was being vilified, being reviewed and rere- 
viewed by boards because of my efforts to get Communists out of the Army 
and being frustrated by the blind, naive attitude of Mrs. Roosevelt and those 
around her in the White House, which resulted in serious and extreme 
damage to this country. 

We are going through today the other extreme of the pendulum, which is 
in my judgment equally dangerous. The idea of what we are now doing, 
what so many people are now doing, are looking at events that transpired in 
1940 and prior in the light of present feeling rather than in the light of the 
feeling existing then. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 16 119 


Now, do I think this inquiry is a manifestation of hysteria? No. I think the 
fact that so much doubt and so much—let me put it this way. I think the fact 
that associations in 1940 are regarded with the same seriousness that simi- 
lar associations would be regarded today is a manifestation of hysteria. 

Q. Now, Mr. Lansdale, it is true, is it not— 

A. By golly, I stood up in front of General McNary then Deputy Chief of Staff 
of the Army and had him tell me that I was ruining peoples’ careers and 
doing damage to the Army because I had stopped the commissioning of the 
political commissar of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, and the guy was later 
commissioned on direct orders from the White House. 

That stuff that went on did incalculable damage to this country, and not 
the rehashing of this stuff in 1940. That is what I mean by hysteria... . 

Mr. Gray .... We are charged, as I understand it, to consider the problem put 
before us with respect to the character, loyalty, and associations of an indi- 
vidual. These are the criteria in the act. 

THE WITNESS. Character, loyalty, and association. 

Mr. Gray. My question of you is perhaps of a philosophical nature. I think 
you rather suggested that this board should not concern itself with associa- 
tions perhaps in the thirties or forties? 

THE WiTNEss. I did not intend to convey that. Certainly the board should con- 
cern itself with that. What I intended to convey was that the appraisal or 
evaluation of associations in the forties must be viewed in the light of the 
atmosphere existing then and not in the light of the atmosphere existing at 
the present time. 

Mr. Gray. You did not mean to suggest that it was your opinion that you 
would only consider current associations in determining problems of this 
kind? 

THE Witness. Of course not. Always our starting point, our leads to people 
who are disloyal, are such things as associations. For example, you can 
hardly put your finger on a scientist or a university professor or people who 
tend to get into civic affairs, you can hardly find one anywhere who is now 
in his fifties or so that has not been on at least one list of an association 
which was later determined to be subversive or to have leanings that way. 
Nevertheless, those associations are most frequently the starting point or 
the leads for investigation to go further. You always have the question of de- 
termining the significance of those: (a) the significance at the time of them, 
(b) whether, assuming that there was a sinister significance it has continued. 

I have never, strongly as I have felt and acted with reference to commu- 
nism, never adopted the assumption, once a Communist sympathizer, al- 
ways a Communist sympathizer. One of the finest things that Soviet Russia 
ever did for us was the quick switch of the on again off again with Germany. 
That did more than anything else to tell the men from the boys in the Com- 
munist Party. It would be a terrible mistake to assume that, once having hed 
sinister associations, a man was forever thereafter damned. Yet, once you 
uncover those, you must always exercise judgment. That judgment is al- 


120 THE HEARING 


ways made up ofa large body of intangibles. It is seldom you get anything 
concrete. 
I am being a little vague, I know, but the whole subject is vague. 


[Toward the end of Lansdale’s testimony, Roger Robb reads into the record 
several memoranda, including two Lansdale received from army counterin- 
telligence officers—Peer deSilva and Boris T. Pash—in September 1943. 
DeSilva claimed that Oppenheimer “is playing a key part in the attempts of 
the Soviet Union to secure, by espionage, highly secret information which is 
vital to the security of the United States”; Pash asserted that Oppenheimer 
“is not to be fully trusted and that his loyalty to a Nation is divided.” Lans- 
dale ends by saying that aside from the lie Oppenheimer told about the 
Chevalier incident, “my general impression is that his veracity is good.”] 


Monday, April 19 


GorDon Dean: “A very human man, a sensitive man, ...a 
man of complete integrity” 


[As the hearing opens, a tape recording is played of an August 27, 1943, 
conversation between Oppenheimer and two army security officers: Boris T. 
Pash and Lyall Johnson. A long, involved discussion ensues regarding what 
Oppenheimer actually said: whether, to take one example, he said that he 
would feel friendly to the idea of the commander in chief informing the 
Russians “who are working on this problem” (as Robb believed) or “that we 
were working on the problem” (as Garrison correctly maintained, noting that 
this rendition had less “sinister” implications). With the inaccuracies cleared 
up, the first witness, Gordon Dean, is called. A prominent investment 
banker, Dean had served on the Atomic Energy Commission from May 1949 
to June 1953, the last three years as chairman.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. There was a meeting in June 1951 at Princeton in connection with the 
H-bomb program? 
A. There was.... 

Some studies had been made by Dr. Ulam at Los Alamos and he ran some 
samplings which made it look as though an H bomb built along the lines 
that were talked about in the fall of 1949 just could not be done, or if done 
it would be at such a great cost in A bombs that you couldn't pay the price. 

These things were happening. The H-bomb program looked bad. Every re- 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 121 


sult was discouraging. The A-bomb program was improving. However, in 
the spring of 1951, we started a series of tests. By that I mean test explo- 
sions. We opened in a [jerry] rig fashion on the Nevada proving ground. As 
I recall in that year we shot something like 14, 15, maybe 16 bombs alto- 
gether. Four at Eniwetok in the spring of 1951, and quite a few in Nevada. 
Some of these bore some relationship to a possible H program, and notably 
one shot which was fired in May of 1951 at Eniwetok, which I can’t describe 
without using classified information. 

After that explosion I thought it was high time that we got together all the 
people who had any kind of a view on H weapons. Of course, there were 
many views among the scientists. By views, I don’t mean views as to 
whether you could have one, but views of whether you could have one and 
how you would get it. 

I talked, as I recall, to 2 or 3 of the Commissioners and said wouldn't it be 
good if we could get them all around a table and make them all face each 
other and get the blackboard out and agree on some priorities. 

We did do that. We asked Dr. Oppenheimer, as chairman of the Weapons 
Committee of the GAC, to preside at the meeting. We had at that meeting in 
Princeton in June of 1951 every person, I think, that could conceivably have 
made a contribution. People like Norris Bradbury, head of the Los Alamos 
laboratory, and 1 or 2 of his assistants, Dr. Nordheim, I believe, was there 
from Los Alamos very active in the H program. Johnny von Neumann from 
Princeton, one of the best weapons men in the world, Dr. Teller, Dr. Bethe, 
Dr. Fermi, Johnny Wheeler, all the top men from every laboratory, sat 
around this table and we went at it for 2 days. 

Out of the meeting came something which Edward Teller brought into the 
meeting with his own head, which was an entirely new way of approaching 
a thermonuclear weapon. * * * 

I would like to be able to describe that but it is one of the most sensitive 
things we have left in the atomic energy program * * *. It was just a theory 
at this point. Pictures were drawn on the board. Calculations were made, 
Dr. Bethe, Dr. Teller, Dr. Fermi participating the most in this. Oppy very ac- 
tively as well. 

At the end of those 2 days we were all convinced, everyone in the room, 
that at least we had something for the first time that looked feasible in the 
way of an idea. * * * 

I remember leaving that meeting impressed with this fact, that everyone 
around that table without exception, and this included Dr. Oppenheimer, 
was enthusiastic now that you had something foreseeable. I remember 
going out and in 4 days making a commitment for a new plant. * * * We had 
no money in the budget to do it with and getting this thing started on the 
tracks, there was enthusiasm right through the program for the first time. 
The bickering was gone. The discussions were pretty well ended, and we 
were able within a matter of just about 1 year to have that gadget ready. 

It had to be shipped to Eniwetok. We had to lay it on the task force and it 
was fired in November 1952. 


122 THE HEARING 


Since then there have been many others fired out in the Pacific in this 
field. 

That is the significance of the June meeting. It was the first time that all 
competent people in this program that could contribute anything sat 
around the same table and finally came up with something they all agreed 
on. That is when it began to roll and it rolled very fast then. 

That is the chronology of it. 

Q. Mr. Oppenheimer was the chairman of the meeting and presided? 

A. He presided at the meeting and participated actively in the meeting and 
left the meeting enthusiastic. I recall talking with him afterward, and he 
was, I could say, almost thrilled that we had something here that looked as 
though it might work. * * * I might say, that the gadget which we originally 
thought of in 1949 probably never would work and would have cost in 
terms of A bombs a price we could never have paid.... 

Q. Did you go through Dr. Oppenheimer’s personnel file? 

A. I did. This is the first occasion I ever had to look at Dr. Oppenheimer’s per- 
sonnel file. Ordinarily Commissioners don’t go through the files of people un- 
less there is some real reason. Here, however, was a person who was chair- 
man of the committee; he had been cleared in 1947 by the Commission, and I 
for the first time picked it up and went through it personally myself... . 

Q. Did you continue to read matters that went into his personnel file after 
this? 

A. I told the security officer, I believe, or perhaps my secretary, that anything 
coming from the FBI concerning Dr. Oppenheimer I wanted to see, and file 
in my own mind at least. 

Two or three did come in. Because here was a file with a lot of early asso- 
ciation evidence, I thought he was too important a man for me to overlook 
him, and it was my responsibility as Chairman, also. So I did see, I am sure, 
every memorandum from the FBI. But there were only 2 or 3, and there was 
nothing particularly new in them, as I recall, from that point on. 

Q. What was your belief as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty after you had been 
through the file and had talked with him? 

A. There was no question in my mind—I must say when I first looked at the 
file, I had doubts, largely growing out of these early associations—but there 
was never any doubt in my mind after I examined the file and based partly 
on my knowledge of Dr. Oppenheimer, which was very close, there was 
never any doubt as to his loyalty in my opinion. None. That decision had to 
be made one way or the other. It could not be half way. There were some 
very unpleasant early associations when you look at them in retrospect, but 
as far as his loyalty I was convinced of it, not that the file convinced me so 
much, but the fact that here was a man, one of the few men who can demon- 
strate his loyalty to his country by his performance. Most people illustrate 
their loyalty in negative terms. They did not see somebody. Here is a man 
who had an unusual record of performance. It is much broader than I have 
indicated so far. 

Q. Would you state to the board your general impression of his character as 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 123 


well as his loyalty, his integrity and sense of discretion? How would you 
rate those qualities? 

A. I would say that he is a very human man, a sensitive man, a very well ed- 
ucated man, a man of complete integrity in my association with him. And a 
very devoted man to his country, and certainly to the Commission. No ques- 
tion of these things in my mind.... 

Q. In all of your contacts with Dr. Oppenheimer, has he ever underestimated 
the Russian threat in your opinion? 

A. Never. From the very earliest times Oppenheimer has been worried very 
much about, first of all, the lack of reliability of the Russians. He showed 
some frustration in our inability in the early days to work out a system and 
he never underestimated the Russians. A lot of our people have, but this is 
one man who never did. 

Q. Do you remember a discussion with Dr. Oppenheimer in the fall of 1950 
about his chairmanship of the GAC? 

A. Yes. This was after I was Chairman. Dr. Oppenheimer came to me one 
day—his term had to run until August of 1952, I think. 

Q. As a member? 

A. As a member. He was then Chairman. He said he knew that we had had 
quite a disagreement on the H-bomb program back in 1949 and whether it 
should have a high priority. He told me that he thought that this had per- 
haps hurt his effectiveness on the General Advisory Committee, and that he 
was prepared to get off if for one moment I thought that this effectiveness 
had been so hurt that he could not serve. 

I thought about it for a few moments—in fact, I had thought about it be- 
fore—and I told him that I thought that the General Advisory Committee 
would definitely lose, and so would the Commission, if we lost him from it 
at that time, and that I felt as one who had disagreed with him on the ther- 
monuclear program that his effectiveness perhaps had been hurt in some 
quarters and some people’s opinions, but not in mine. I would miss him 
very much if he left. 

When 1952 came around, he had served his time and he said, “I have 
been on too long. I think newer heads should be brought into the program,” 
and he said, “I hope you would not urge the President to reappoint me.” So 
I sent a letter to the President saying that these three members, Conant, 
DuBridge, and Oppenheimer were leaving. I prepared a draft of the letter for 
the President to sign for each one of them thanking them for their services, 
and that was the end of Dr. Oppenheimer’s term. 

Q. Summing up your convictions about Dr. Oppenheimer, you have testified 
to his loyalty and to his integrity and character with full knowledge of what 
you told us about your reading of his personnel file. I take it, also, that it 
goes without saying that you have read the Commission’s letter which initi- 
ated this proceeding? 

A. The charges? Yes, I have. 

Q. The Commission refers to them as items of derogatory information, and 
not as charges. 


124 THE HEARING 


A. That is right. I read that letter. 

Q. On the basis of that knowledge and your experience with him, in your 
opinion is he or is he not a security risk? 

A. He is not a security risk in my opinion. If I had so considered him a secu- 
rity risk, I would have initiated such a hearing long, long ago. I think his 
usefulness has been impaired by all this. I don’t know how much he can 
contribute further to his country, but I would hope we would get the maxi- 
mum out of him. I am certain that he is devoted to his country and if given 
an opportunity to serve, will serve and effectively as always. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is all, Mr. Chairman. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Mr. Dean, Dr. Oppenheimer has testified before this board in substance 
that in 1943 he became aware of an attempt at Russian espionage against the 
atomic bomb project. He has further testified that when interviewed about 
this matter by intelligence officers of the United States Army, he told these 
officers a fabrication and tissue of lies. 

He has also testified— 

A. May I ask, are you quoting from some testimony? 

Mr. Gray. Just a minute, please. 

Mr. Garrison. Mr. Chairman, I want to object in the strongest terms to the 
form of the question which counsel has put. I think it is impossible to pre- 
sent to this witness the questions about the Chevalier incident without re- 
ally thoroughly going into the whole case and incident in all its ramifica- 
tions. I think the question gives an utterly false summation of what actually 
happened in the total Chevalier incident which is the only way that it can 
be looked at. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Garrison can go into it if he wishes, I think I have the right to 
put the question to the witness in the form of an assumption, if not other- 
wise. 

Mr. Gray. I take it you are objecting to the question, Mr. Garrison? 

Mr. GARRISON. I am objecting to any question to this witness that tries to put 
to him the Chevalier incident without going into it in the kind of shape that 
the matter has come to this board. It involves the whole question of his re- 
lations with Chevalier, of his initiating the information about Eltenton, of 
the views of General Groves and Colonel Lansdale. This whole thing has a 
very long and complicated story. To say here to this witness as a fact that Dr. 
Oppenheimer did this and that in respect to the Chevalier incident seems to 
me most unfair. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, there is not the slightest doubt that Mr. Oppen- 
heimer did testify that he lied to Colonel Pash and Colonel Lansdale, not 
once, but many times, and that his statements— 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman— 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 125 


Mr. Ross. May I finish—and his statements to those officers constituted a fab- 
rication and tissue of lies, and he knew when he was lying, he was imped- 
ing the investigation in progress. There is no question in the world that the 
record shows that. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, this whole business of the so-called lies over 
and over again was in fact nothing but one story. He told this story to 
Colonel Pash. He told part of it, that we have reference to here, to Colonel 
Lansdale. By breaking up the component parts of that story into separate 
questions counsel in his cross examination made this appear as if one lie 
after another had been told. 

It lies heavy on my conscience that I did not at that time object to the im- 
pression that was trying to be conveyed to this board of a whole series of 
lies when in fact there was one story which was told. 

Mr. Gray. Let me ask Mr. Garrison this question. Is it clear that the record 
shows that there was a fabrication? 

MR. GARRISON. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. I wonder if Mr. Robb can proceed from that point on his question 
in a way that it would not be objected to? 

Mr. Ross. I can’t keep Mr. Garrison from objecting, Mr. Chairman. Just so we 
have no doubt about it, I will read from the record at page 488: 

“Isn’t it a fair statement today, Dr. Oppenheimer, that according to your 
testimony now you told not one lie to Colonel Pash, but a whole fabrication 
and tissue of lies? 

“A. Right. 

“Q. In great circumstantial detail, is that correct? 

“A. Right.” 

I submit my question on the basis of that is perfectly fair. 

THE Witness. I don’t know what the question is at this point. 

Mr. Ross. Of course you don’t. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, it really does not convey at all what this was 
about. The question of whether Chevalier told 3 men or 1, whether Eltenton 
had a contact at the consulate or didn’t, whether the consulate had some 
microfilm or didn’t, all that was of an irrelevant character of what the secu- 
rity officer wanted to find out, which was Chevalier’s name. The substance 
of this whole thing is that Dr. Oppenheimer did not for a long time, and he 
has regretted and has said so explicitly, revealed the name of Chevalier, 
which was what the security officers wanted. These incidental details about 
whether there were 3 men or 1 had nothing to do with the problem that the 
security officers were faced with. I think that is the question that counsel 
has put to Dr. Oppenheimer in that form was an unfair one which distorted 
the record, and I should have objected to it at that time. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to say, Mr. Garrison, that frankly the Chairman of the 
Board does not know what the question is, and I have heard the witness ob- 
serve that he does not. I don’t know what the question is. The argument to 
the Chairman by counsel in the presence of the witness pretty well estab- 


126 THE HEARING 


lished a background perhaps to which you are objecting to in the first place. 
There has been a discussion of this incident. I should like to ask if Mr. Robb 
will put his question, and I will give Mr. Garrison an opportunity to object 
to the question. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Mr. Dean, I am going to ask you to assume that Dr. Oppenheimer testified 
before this board that in 1943 he became aware of an attempt at Russian es- 
pionage against the atomic energy project, and assume that he further testi- 
fied that when interviewed about this matter by intelligence officers of the 
United States Army, he told these officers a fabrication and tissue of lies, and 
assume that he further testified that when he told these lies, he knew that by 
telling them, he was impeding the investigation of Russian espionage. 

Now, if Dr. Oppenheimer so testified in substance, would that cause you 
to change your opinion about him? 

A. Asa security risk, then, or a security risk today? 

Q. Now. 

A. None. There must have been some reason for it.... 

Mr. Gray. I would gather the witness’ answer was favorable to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer. It was so intended, was it not? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. My answer was, do you mean a security risk then or now. 
The questioner said “A security risk now,” and I said none.... 


Hans A. BetHE: “Only ... when the bomb dropped on 
Japan, . . . did we start thinking about the moral implications” 


[Hans A. Bethe, a professor of physics at Cornell University, emigrated from 
Nazi Germany to England in 1933 and to the United States in 1935. He met 
Oppenheimer in 1929 and the two became good friends. Oppenheimer re- 
cruited Bethe to head the theoretical division at Los Alamos. His testimony 
deals in part with his reservations about working on the hydrogen bomb in 
1949, reservations Bethe only put aside after the outbreak of the Korean War 
in June 1950.) 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks: ... 
Q. Dr. Bethe, have you read the letter of General Nichols and Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s reply? 
A. Yes, I have. 


Q. How far back does your own familiarity with Dr. Oppenheimer’s political 
associations and activities go? 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 127 


A. I— 

Q. And what do you know about them? 

A. I heard about his political inclination in 1938 from some good friends of 
ours, Dr. Weisskopf and Dr. Placzek, who is mentioned in Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s answer letter, and I understood from them that he was inclined 
rather far to the left. 

Q. Coming to the work on the atomic bomb, would you tell us briefly about 
the part that you and he played in the work on this subject before Los 
Alamos was formed and then subsequently during the Los Alamos days? 

A. Our association began in 1942, on this matter. Dr. Oppenheimer called to- 
gether a group of theoretical physicists, to discuss the way how an atomic 
bomb could be assembled. This was a small group of about seven people or 
so. We met in Berkeley for the summer of 1942. We first thought it would be 
avery simple thing to figure out this problem and we soon saw how wrong 
we were. 

Q. What about Los Alamos? When did you join the Los Alamos group? 

A. Between that time and Los Alamos, the first was the time when Los 
Alamos was being created. It was a very hard task to create this laboratory. 
Most scientists were already involved in war work very deeply and it re- 
quired somebody of very great enthusiasm to persuade them to leave their 
jobs and to join the new enterprise of Los Alamos. I think nobody else could 
have done this than Dr. Oppenheimer. He was successful in getting together 
a group of really outstanding people. 

At Los Alamos, as I mentioned before, we had very close relations be- 
cause I was the leader of one of the divisions, one I believe of seven divi- 
sions. We met almost daily, certainly at least once a week. 

In Los Alamos again I want to say how difficult a job it was and it seems 
to me that no enterprise quite as hard as this had ever been attempted be- 
fore. I believe that Oppenheimer had absolutely unique qualifications for 
this job and that the success is due mostly to him and mostly to his leader- 
ship in the project. 

Q. What were some of the factors that made it so difficult? 

A. There were many. One was in the technical work itself. 

Q. I simply wanted to indicate the nature of the difficulty. 

A. It was that all the time new difficulties came up in different connections, 
new technical difficulties which had to be solved. 

Q. Apart from technical difficulties. 

A. Apart from that, one great difficulty was that scientists are great individu- 
alists, and many of the scientists there had very different ideas how to pro- 
ceed. We needed a unifying force and this unification could only be done by 
a man who really understood everything and was recognized by everybody 
as superior in judgment and superior in knowledge to all of us. This was 
our director. It was also a matter of character, of devotion to the job, of the 
will to succeed. It was a matter of judgment of selecting the right one among 
many different approaches. It was a matter of keeping people satisfied that 


Hans A. Bethe, January 1957. Photograph by Bob Davis, courtesy AIP Emilio Segré Visual 
Archives, Physics Today Collection. 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 129 


they had a part in the laboratory, and we all had the feeling that we had a 
part in the running of the laboratory, and that at the same time at the head of 
the laboratory somebody who understood more than we did. 

Q. Was there any notable exceptions to this? 

A. There were a few notable exceptions. There were people who were dissat- 
isfied. Among them was Dr. Teller. 

Q. Why was he dissatisfied? 

A. He had— 

Q. By the way, am I right that he was on your staff? 

A. He was on my staff. I relied—and I hoped to rely very heavily on him to 
help our work in theoretical physics. It turned out that he did not want to 
cooperate. He did not want to work on the agreed line of research that 
everybody else in the laboratory had agreed to as the fruitful line. He always 
suggested new things, new deviations. He did not do the work which he 
and his group was supposed to do in the framework of the theoretical divi- 
sion. So that in the end there was no choice but to relieve him of any work 
in the general line of the development of Los Alamos, and to permit him to 
pursue his own ideas entirely unrelated to the World War II work with his 
own group outside of the theoretical division. 

This was quite a blow to us because there were very few qualified men 
who could carry on that work. 

Q. Turning to another subject, Dr. Bethe, what was the attitude of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer with respect to the requirements of security at Los Alamos? 

A. He was very security minded compared to practically all the scientists. He 
occupied a position very much intermediate between the Army and the sci- 
entists. The scientists generally were used to free discussion and free dis- 
cussion of course was allowed in the laboratory completely and this was 
one of the reasons for putting it at the remote place. However, many of us 
did not see sometimes the need for the strictness of the requirements and 
Dr. Oppenheimer was, I think, considerably more ready to see this need and 
to enforce security rules. 

Q. Is that what you mean by occupying a position intermediate between the 
scientists and the Army. 

A. That is what I mean. 

Q. Let me ask you, Dr. Bethe, if you can speak of it, what views did the scien- 
tists have about the moral or humane problems that many people have dis- 
cerned in the atomic bomb program at Los Alamos. 

A. Iam unhappy to admit that during the war—at least—I did not pay much 
attention to this. We had a job to do and a very hard one. The first thing we 
wanted to do was to get the job done. It seemed to us most important to con- 
tribute to victory in the way we could. Only when our labors were finally 
completed when the bomb dropped on Japan, only then or a little bit before 
then maybe, did we start thinking about the moral implications. 

Q. What did you think about that or what did the scientists generally think 
about it? 


130 THE HEARING 

A. There was a general belief that this was a tremendous weapon that we had 
brought into the world and that we might have been responsible for incred- 
ible destruction in the future. That we had to do whatever we could to tell 
people, especially the people of the United States, what an atomic bomb 
meant, and that we should try as much as possible to urge an international 
agreement on atomic weapons in order to eliminate them as weapons from 
war if this could be agreed to by all the major nations... . 

Q. Dr. Bethe, let me go back for a moment. I think you said that you had been 
told in the late thirties that Dr. Oppenheimer’s, I think you used the phrase 
“extreme” left-wing political views. That was between the time when you 
first met him in 1929 and your later closeness to him? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When you again met Dr. Oppenheimer, after this brief meeting that you de- 
scribed in 1929, what were your own observations about his political orien- 
tation? 

A. They were very surprising to me. 

Q. When would this have been? 

A. That was in 1940. At the Physical Society meeting in Seattle, Wash., we 
had a long evening in which political matters were discussed. This was in 
late June, I believe, of 1940. It was just after the fall of France, and I felt very 
deeply that a great catastrophe had happened to the world. At this conver- 
sation, Dr. Oppenheimer talked for quite a long time in this same sense. 

(Mr. Garrison entered the room.) 

THE WITNESS. He told all of us how much France meant to the western world, 
and how the fall of France meant an end of many things that he had consid- 
ered precious and that now the western civilization was really in a critical 
situation, and that it was very necessary to do something to save the values 
of western civilization. 


By Mr. Marks:... 


Q. After the explosion of the Russian A bomb, was there any change in the 
character of your work? 

Yes. 
. Would you describe what happened? 
. Should I— 
. As to yourself. 
. In October of 1949 I had a visit from Dr. Teller at Los Alamos. 
. You were at Los Alamos? 
. No, he was at Los Alamos. I was in Ithaca. He came to visit me as he was 
also visiting several other scientists, and he tried to persuade me to come to 
Los Alamos full time, and to help evolve full scale thermonuclear weapons. 
Q. Dr. Bethe, there has been some talk in these proceedings about the General 

Advisory Committee meeting towards the end of October of 1949. 

A. May Igo on? 


>O>O>PO> 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 131 


Q. I beg your pardon. I am sorry. 

A. At the time Dr. Teller visited me, I had very great internal conflicts what I 
should do. Dr. Teller was presenting to me some of his technical ideas 
which seemed to make technically more feasible one phase of the ther- 
monuclear program. I was quite impressed by his ideas. 

On the other hand, it seemed to me that it was a very terrible undertaking 
to develop a still bigger bomb, and I was entirely undecided and had long 
discussions with my wife. 

Q. When did this occur? 

A. This was early in October, as far as I remember. It may have been the mid- 
dle of October, but some time between early and middle of October. What I 
should do? I was deeply troubled what I should do. It seemed to me that the 
development of thermonuclear weapons would not solve any of the diffi- 
culties that we found ourselves in, and yet I was not quite sure whether I 
should refuse. 

Q. Did you consult Dr. Oppenheimer about what to do and if so, approxi- 
mately when? 

A. I did consult Dr. Oppenheimer. In fact, I had a meeting with him together 
with Dr. Teller. This was just a few days later, I think only 2 days later, or 3, 
than my first meeting with Dr. Teller. So this would again be around the 
middle of October, and perhaps a little earlier. I found Dr. Oppenheimer 
equally undecided and equally troubled in his mind about what should be 
done. I did not get from him the advice that I was hoping to get. That is, I 
did not get from him advice from either direction to decide me either way. 

He mentioned that one of the members of the General Advisory Commit- 
tee, namely Dr. Conant, was opposed to the development of the hydrogen 
bomb, and he mentioned some of the reasons which Dr. Conant had given. 
As far as I remember, he also showed me a letter that he had written to Dr. 
Conant. As far as I remember, neither in this letter nor in his conversation 
with us did he take any stand. 

Q. What did you do about the invitation that Teller had extended you? 

A. About 2 days after talking to Dr. Oppenheimer I refused this invitation. I 
was influenced in making up my mind after my complete indecision before 
by two friends of mine, Dr. Weisskopf and Dr. Placzek. I had a very long and 
earnest conversation with Dr. Weisskopf what a war with the hydrogen 
bombs would be. We both had to agree that after such a war even if we were 
to win it, the world would not be such, not be like the world we want to 
preserve. We would lose the things we were fighting for. This was a very 
long conversation and a very difficult one for both of us. 

I first had a conversation with Dr. Weisskopf alone and then with Weiss- 
kopf and Placzek together on the drive from Princeton to New York. In this 
conversation essentially the same things were confirmed once more. Then 
when J arrived in New York, I called up Dr. Teller and told him that I could 
not come to join his project. 


132 THE HEARING 


Q. When would this have been, approximately? 

A. I still can’t give you any much better date than before. It was certainly 
quite some time before the General Advisory Committee meeting. I don’t 
know whether it was 2 weeks before or 10 days before. It may have been 3 
weeks before. I could establish the date if this is important. 

Q. Since that time, however, you have done work on the thermonuclear pro- 
gram, on the H bomb? 

A. Ihave indeed. 

Q. When did that begin? 

A. This began after the outbreak of the Korean war. 

Q. What have you done since then, describing it just in general terms? 

A. In June of 1950, when the Korean war broke out, I decided that I should 
put a full effort on Los Alamos work and in particular should work also on 
thermonuclear weapons. I offered to Los Alamos to do active work at times 
when I was at Los Alamos, but also when I was at Cornell. This offer was ac- 
cepted. I have done work with an assistant who I supplied from among my 
own students. I believe this work has been recognized as contributing. 

Q. Are you saying that continuously from the outbreak of the Korean 
trouble— 

A. Essentially continuously. I worked of course only part time as long as I was 
at Cornell. Then I was at Los Alamos at more frequent intervals since then. 
I mentioned before that I spent a whole 8 months there from February 1952 
to September, which was a critical period in the development of the first 
full scale thermonuclear test which took place in November of 1952, as you 
well know. 

I also went there at other times during the summer. I went usually for a 
month in the winter, and I worked in between at Ithaca. 

Q. When you did finally decide in the summer of 1950 to go to work on the 
thermonuclear program, what became of the inner troubles that you had 
previously that contributed to turning down Teller’s original offer? 

A. Iam afraid my inner troubles stayed with me and are still with me, and I 
have not resolved this problem. I still feel that maybe I have done the wrong 
thing, but I have done it. 

Q. You have done the wrong thing in what? 

A. The wrong thing in helping to create a still more formidable weapon, be- 
cause I don’t think it solves any of our problems. 

Q. During the early part of 1950, that is, after you turned down Teller’s invi- 
tation, but before you went to work at Los Alamos, on the thermonuclear 
program, you made some public statements, I believe, in the press. You 
wrote an article which I believe was published in the Scientific American, 
and the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, setting forth your views about the 
thermonuclear problem. 

Would you describe briefly what you regarded as the alternative to going 
ahead with the thermonuclear program? 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 133 


A. Yes, sir. 

Q. I am speaking now of the period from the end of 1949 to the middle of 
1950. 

A. Yes. I thought that the alternative might be or should be to try once more 
for an agreement with the Russians, to try once more to shake them out of 
their indifference or hostility by something that was promising to be still 
bigger than anything that was previously known and to try once more to get 
an agreement that time that neither country would develop this weapon. 
This is enough of an undertaking to develop the thermonuclear weapon that 
if both countries had agreed not to do so, that it would be very unlikely that 
the world would have such a weapon. 

Q. Can you explain, Dr. Bethe, how you reconciled that view just described of 
wanting to make another try at agreement with Russia, with the view that 
you described a little while ago in which you expressed the feeling that ne- 
gotiations with Russia on the A-bomb were hopeless? 

A. Yes. I think maybe the suggestion to negotiate again was one of despera- 
tion. But for one thing, the difference was that it would be a negotiation 
about something that did not yet exist, and that one might find it easier to 
renounce making and using something that did not yet exist than to re- 
nounce something that was actually already in the world. For this reason, I 
thought that maybe there was again some hope. It also seemed to me that it 
was so evident that a war fought with hydrogen bombs would be destruc- 
tion of both sides that maybe even the Russians might come to reason. 

Q. Didn’t you feel that there was a risk involved in taking the time to negotia- 
tion which might have given the Russians the opportunity to get a head 
start on the H-bomb? 

A. There had to be a time limit on the time that such negotiations would take, 
maybe a half year or maybe a year. I believe we could afford such a head 
start even if there were such a head start. I believed also that some ways 
could have been found that in the interim some research would go on in 
this country. I believed that also our armament in atomic bombs as con- 
trasted to hydrogen bombs was strong enough and promised to be still 
stronger by this time, that, is, by the time the hydrogen could possibly be 
completed, so that we would not be defenseless even if the Russians had 
the hydrogen bomb first. 

Q. Do you have any opinion, Dr. Bethe, on the question of whether there has 
been in fact any delay in the development and the perfection of thermonu- 
clear weapons by the United States? 

A. I do not think that there has been any delay. I will try to keep this unclas- 
sified. I can’t promise that I can make myself fully clear on this. 

Q. Try to, will you? 

A. I will try. When President Truman decided to go ahead with the hydrogen 
bomb in January 1950, there was really no clear technical program that 
could be followed. This became even more evident later on when new cal- 


134 THE HEARING 


culations were made at Los Alamos, and when these new calculations 
showed that the basis for technical optimism which had existed in the fall of 
1949 was very shaky, indeed. The plan which then existed for the making of 
a hydrogen bomb turned out to be less and less promising as time went on. 

Q. What interval are you now speaking of? 

A. Iam speaking of the interval from January 1950 to early 1951. It was a time 
when it would not have been possible by adding more people to make any 
more progress. The more people would have to do would have to be work 
on the things which turned out to be fruitful. 

Finally there was a very brilliant discovery made by Dr. Teller. * * * It 
was one of the discoveries for which you cannot plan, one of the discover- 
ies like the discovery of the relativity theory, although I don’t want to com- 
pare the two in importance. But something which is a stroke of genius, 
which does not occur in the normal development of ideas. But somebody 
has to suddenly have an inspiration. It was such an inspiration which Dr. 
Teller had * * * which put the program on a sound basis. 

Only after there was such a sound basis could one really talk of a techni- 
cal program. Before that, it was essentially only speculation, essentially 
only just trying to do something without having really a direction in which 
to go. Now things changed very much * * *. After this brilliant discovery 
there was a program. 

Q. Dr. Bethe, if the board and Mr. Robb would permit me, I would like to ask 
you somewhat a hypothetical question. Would your attitude about work on 
the thermonuclear program in 1949 have differed if at that time there had 
been available this brilliant discovery or brilliant inspiration, whatever you 
call it, that didn’t come to Teller until the spring of 1951? 

A. It is very difficult to answer this. 

Q. Don’t answer it if you can’t. 

A. I believe it might have been different. 

Q. Why? 

A. I was hoping that it might be possible to prove that the thermonuclear re- 
actions were not feasible at all. I would have thought that the greatest secu- 
rity for the United States would have lain in the conclusive proof of the im- 
possibility of a thermonuclear bomb. I must confess that this was the main 
motive which made me start work on thermonuclear reactions in the sum- 
mer of 1950. 

With the new * * * (idea) [In transcript, footnote reads: “supplied for clar- 
ity.”] I think the situation changed because it was then clear, or almost 
clear—at least very likely—that thermonuclear weapons were indeed pos- 
sible. If thermonuclear weapons were possible, I felt that we should have 
that first and as soon as possible. So I think my attitude might have been 
different. 

Q. One final question, Dr. Bethe. I should have asked you this. I have referred 
you to the press statements and the article that you published in the late 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 135 


winter and spring of 1950, expressing critical views of the H-bomb program. 
Did you ever discuss those moves, that is to make such statements and 
write such articles, with Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I never did. In fact, after the President’s decision, he would never discuss 
any matters of policy with me. There had been in fact a directive from Pres- 
ident Truman to the GAC not to discuss the reasons of the GAC or any of the 
procedures, and Dr. Oppenheimer held to this directive very strictly. 

Q. Did you consult him about the article? 

A. I don’t think I consulted him at all ‘about the article. I consulted him about 
the statement that we made. As far as I remember, he gave no opinion. 

Q. On the basis of your association with him, your knowledge of him over 
these many years, would you care to express an opinion about Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s loyalty to the United States, about his character, about his discre- 
tion in regard to matters of security? 

A. Iam certainly happy to do this. I have absolute faith in Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
loyalty. I have always found that he had the best interests of the United 
States at heart. I have always found that if he differed from other people in 
his judgment, that it was because of a deeper thinking about the possible 
consequences of our action than the other people had. I believe that it is an 
expression of loyalty—of particular loyalty—if a person tries to go beyond 
the obvious and tries to make available his deeper insight, even in making 
unpopular suggestions, even in making suggestions which are not the obvi- 
ous ones to make, are not those which a normal intellect might be led to 
make. 

I have absolutely no question that he has served this country very long 
and very well. I think everybody agrees that his service in Los Alamos was 
one of the greatest services that were given to this country. I believe he has 
served equally well in the GAC in reestablishing the strength of our atomic 
weapons program in 1947. I have faith in him quite generally. 

Q. You and he are good friends? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Would you expect him to place his loyalty to his country even above his 
loyalty to a friend? 

A. I suppose so. 

Mr. Marks. That is all. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 
Q. Doctor, when Dr. Teller came to see you in 1949, were you at Ithaca then, 
sir? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And then you and Dr. Teller went down to Princeton to see Dr. Oppen- 
heimer? 


136 THE HEARING 


A. We went down separately, but we met again in Princeton. 

Q. May I ask, Doctor, why did you pick Dr. Oppenheimer to consult about 
this matter? 

A. Because we had come to rely on his wisdom. 

Q. Doctor, you spoke of Dr. Teller at Los Alamos as always suggesting 
new * * * (ideas). 

A. Yes. 

Q. It was a new * * * (idea) suggested by Dr. Teller which resulted in your 
success in producing the thermonuclear; wasn’t it? 

A. This may be true, and some of his suggestions certainly were extremely 
valuable. 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. There were other suggestions which turned out to be very much to the 
contrary. Dr. Teller has a mind very different from mine. I think one needs 
both kinds of minds to make a successful project. I think Dr. Teller’s mind 
runs particularly to making brilliant inventions, but what he needs is some 
control, some other person who is more able to find out just what is the sci- 
entific fact about the matter. Some other person who weeds out the bad 
from the good ideas. 

* * * as soon as I heard of Dr. Teller’s new invention, I was immediately 
convinced that this was the way to do it, and so was Dr. Oppenheimer. I 
should mention a meeting which took place in 1951, in June, at which Dr. 
Oppenheimer was host. At this meeting the final program for the thermonu- 
clear reactions was set up. At this meeting Dr. Oppenheimer entirely and 
wholeheartedly supported the program. 

Q. Doctor, how many divisions were there at Los Alamos? 

A. It changed somewhat in the course of time. As far as I could count the 
other day, there were 7, but there may have been 8 or 9 at some time. 

Q. Which division was Klaus Fuchs in? 

A. He was in my division which was the Theoretical Division. 

Mr. Ross. Thank you. That is all. 

Mr. Gray. ... I am addressing myself to the point that it has been said in 
many places that the attitude of the GAC did in fact delay successful work. 
I believe this has been said. You are familiar with that. 

THE Witness. I am familiar with that. 

Mr. Gray. I am trying to address myself to that point. 

THE WITNESS. It is awfully hard to answer. It is true certainly that a stroke of 
genius does not come entirely unprepared and that you get ideas only on 
the subjects that you are working on. If you are working on other subjects, 
let us say fission weapons, you probably won’t have any inspiration about 
thermonuclear weapons. It is true on the other hand that two quite impor- 
tant suggestions or discoveries were made on thermonuclear problems dur- 
ing the time when Los Alamos was not actively working on these. I cannot 
name them in an unclassified session. 

One of them was the thing that I mentioned repeatedly, the minor appli- 


MONDAY, APRIL 19 137 


cation, as I call it, of thermonuclear principles. I think it is quite obvious 
that only when there is a concerted effort can there be the atmosphere in 
which you can have big ideas. Whether we would be farther ahead or less 
far ahead, I don’t know. 

Mr. Gray. I was aware that was a difficult question. I have only two more, 
Doctor. 

You testified that at one period you were hoping that it might be possible 
to prove that thermonuclear weapons were just simply not possible. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. I assume, then, that you were hoping that if they were not possible 
in this country they could not be possible in the U.S.S.R.? 

THE WITNEsS. Precisely. 

Mr. Gray. Did you have any reason to hope that the Russians were not taking 
a contrary view to yours? You were hoping that it could not be possible. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. Would it be unreasonable to suppose that the Russians might have 
been taking the contrary view? 

THE WiTNEss. That they were hoping that it was possible? 

Mr. Gray. Yes. 

THE Witness. I am quite prepared to assume that, but I don’t know. 

Mr. Gray. So that there was a double hope that we couldn’t do it and also that 
they couldn’t, but we had no basis for believing that they would not make 
every effort, I assume? 

THE WiTNgss. That is true. In the times when everybody was very pessimistic 
about the outcome of our own effort, that is, in the year 1950 essentially, I 
was often hoping that the Russians would spend their efforts on this prob- 
lem and that they would waste their efforts on this problem. 

Mr. Gray. My final question, I think, relates to Mr. Marks’ last question to you. 

In the light of your intimate personal acquaintanceship with Dr. Oppen- 
heimer and within the framework of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, you 
have no doubts about him with respect to his loyalty, his character, his dis- 
cretion, which were the three areas which Mr. Marks put the question to 
you. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. In order to complete the record, because there is another consider- 
ation which the act imposes and that is, associations, would you answer 
also affirmatively to the question including the test of associations? 

THE Witness. Those associations that I personally know about I certainly 
heartily approve. The associations which I mentioned— 

Dr. Evans. What was that? 

THE WitNEss. I said that— 

Mr. Gray. The associations he knows about he would heartily approve. 

THE Witness. The associations in the dim past of the late 1930’s and maybe 
early 1940’s I certainly cannot approve, but I think they are superseded by a 
long record of faithful service and that one has to judge a man according to 


138 THE HEARING 


his actions, recent actions, which are, as far as I know, all in the public do- 
main and all perfectly known and open to scrutiny. 
Mr. Gray. Thank you. 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks: 


Q. I would like to be sure, Dr. Bethe, that I understand the sense in which you 
made the statement about which the chairman has also questioned you, I 
believe, that the motivation you had in going back to work in the summer of 
1950 on the thermonuclear problem was the hope that you could prove it 
would not work. Did you mean that you hoped you could prove by argu- 
ment that it would not work, or that you could discover it as a law of nature 
in the sense of the theory of relativity or another scientific theory that it was 
impossible? 

A. Hardly quite as conclusively as the theory of relativity, but rather that I 
could make an argument that the methods that we could conceive of for 
such development would all not work. That there were laws of nature 
which doomed such an attempt to failure. 

Q. Would that process which you now describe of work on which you 
launched have been an indispensable part of discovering what would work? 

A. I think so; yes. I don’t know whether it was indispensable because Teller 
dispensed with it. Teller was able to make his invention without having had 
a conclusive discussion of all the possibilities. . . . 

Q. Dr. Bethe, you said, as I understood your remarks, that you disagree... 
about the desirability of relying exclusively on thermonuclear weapons? 

A. I did not say exclusively. Predominantly. 

Q. Was this because of moral considerations? 

A. Yes. It was my belief that if and when war ever comes that it is most im- 
portant not to overdestroy the enemy country, but to fit the weapon in each 
case to the target and to attempt the best accuracy that one can on bombing 
so as to make a minimum of destruction compatible with gaining the objec- 
tive. It was on this that we disagreed. 

Q. Iam afraid I don’t understand you. Did you mean atomic weapons could 
do the job? 

A. Yes, sir. Supposing you have, for instance, a city which contains two indus- 
trial plants which you want to bomb, each of which could be knocked out by 
a 100 kiloton atomic weapon correctly placed, you could also use a 5 million 
ton thermonuclear weapon to hit them both, which would reduce the problem 
for the Air Forces because they would have to fly only 1 plane instead of 2. 

It seemed to me that both from moral considerations and for the consid- 
eration of the state of the enemy country after the war, which we tradition- 
ally take care of in some way, it was important to choose the former alterna- 
tive and not the latter. 

Mr. Marks. That is all. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 139 


[Lloyd K. Garrison calls two additional witnesses who testify briefly. James B. 
Fisk, vice president for research at the Bell Telephone Laboratories, who met 
Oppenheimer when he was director of the AEC’s Division of Research in 
1947-1948, said he knew of “no more devoted citizen in this country.” Fred- 
erick Osborne, who represented the United States on the United Nations 
Atomic Energy Commission from 1947 to 1950 spoke of Oppenheimer’s 
“real patriotism.” The hearing then adjourns.] 


Tuesday, April 20 


Georce F. KENNAN: “It is only the great sinners who become 
the great saints” 


[The first witness in what will be a long, exhausting day of hearings is 
George F. Kennan. Formerly director of the State Department's policy plan- 
ning staff and also ambassador to Russia, Kennan was widely regarded as 
one of the chief architects of United States “containment” policy during the 
cold war. At the time of the hearing in residence at the Institute for Advanced 
Study in Princeton, he is well acquainted with Oppenheimer, the institute’s 
director.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks:... 


Q. In what connections have you known Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I first met Dr. Oppenheimer so far as I can recall when I was Deputy for 
Foreign Affairs. That is equivalent to Deputy Commandant for Foreign Af- 
fairs at the National War College here in Washington in 1946. Dr. Oppen- 
heimer lectured there. I was in charge of political instruction generally. I 
heard the lecture and was very much impressed by the eminence, clarity 
and precision and scrupulousness of thought by which it was characterized. 

I then took over this responsibility as head of the Policy Planning Staff in 
the Department of State, and in the ensuing years until the summer of 1950, 
when I left the Department of State, I met Dr. Oppenheimer on numbers of 
occasions in the course of my work. Those occasions were practically all 
ones or almost all ones on which we had to work on the formulation of for- 
eign policy in fields that required the collaboration of other departments of 
Government and notably the Atomic Energy Commission and the Depart- 
ment of Defense. ... 

Q. As a result of your experience with Dr. Oppenheimer in the cases that you 
have reference to, what convictions, if any, did you form about him? 


140 THE HEARING 


A. I formed the conviction that he was an immensely useful person in the 
councils of our Government, and I felt a great sense of gratitude that we had 
his help. I am able to say that in the course of all these contacts and delib- 
erations within the Government I never observed anything in his conduct 
or his words that could possibly, it seemed to me, have indicated that he 
was animated by any other motives than a devotion to the interests of this 
country. 

Q. Did you ever observe anything that would possibly have suggested to you 
that he was taking positions that the Russians would have liked? 

A. No. I cannot say that I did in any way. After all, the whole purpose of 
these exercises was to do things which were in the interest of this country, 
not in the interests of the Soviet Union, at least not in the interests of the 
Soviet Union as their leaders saw it at that time. Anyone who collaborated 
sincerely and enthusiastically in the attempt to reach our objectives, which 
Dr. Oppenheimer did, obviously was not serving Soviet purposes in any 
way. 

Q. Have you said that he contributed significantly to the results? 

A. Ihave, sir. 

Q. Mr. Kennan, is there any possibility in your mind that he was dissem- 
bling? 

A. There is in my mind no possibility that Dr. Oppenheimer was dissembling. 

Q. How do you know that? How can anybody know that? 

A. I realize that is not an assertion that one could make with confidence 
about everyone. If I make it with regard to Dr. Oppenheimer it is because I 
feel and believe that after years of seeing him in various ways, not only 
there in Government, but later as an associate and a neighbor, and a friend 
at Princeton, I know his intellectual makeup and something of his personal 
makeup and I consider it really out of the question that any man could 
have participated as he did in these discussions, could have bared his 
thoughts to us time after time in the way that he did, could have thought 
those thoughts, so to speak, in our presence, and have been at the same 
time dissembling. 

I realize that is still not wholly the answer. The reason I feel it is out of the 
question that could have happened is that I believed him to have an intel- 
lect of such a nature that it would be impossible for him to speak dishon- 
estly about any subject to which he had given his deliberate and careful and 
professional attention. 

That is the view I hold of him. I have the greatest respect for Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s mind. I think it is one of the great minds of this generation of 
Americans. A mind like that is not without its implications. 

Q. Without its what? 

A. Implications for a man’s general personality. I think it would be actually 
the one thing probably in life that Dr. Oppenheimer could never do, that is 
to speak dishonestly about a subject which had really engaged the responsi- 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 141 


ble attention of his intellect. My whole impression of him is that he is a man 
who when he turns his mind to something in an orderly and responsible 
way, examines it with the most extraordinary scrupulousness and fastidi- 
ousness of intellectual process. 

I must say that I cannot conceive that in these deliberations in Govern- 
ment he could have been speaking disingeniously to us about these matters. 
I would suppose that you might just as well have asked Leonardo da Vinci 
to distort an anatomical drawing as that you should ask Robert Oppen- 
heimer to speak responsibly to the sort of questions we were talking about, 
and speak dishonestly. 

Q. Mr. Kennan, in saying what you have just said, are you saying it with an 
awareness of the background that Dr. Oppenheimer has, the general nature 
of which is reflected in the letter which General Nichols addressed to him, 
which is the genesis of these proceedings, and his response? 

A. Iam, sir. 

Q. How do you reconcile these two things? 

A. I do not think that they are necessarily inconsistent one with the other. 
People advance in life for one thing. I saw Dr. Oppenheimer at a phase of 
his life in which most of these matters in General Nichols’ letter did not 
apply. It seems to me also that I was concerned or associated with him in 
the examination of problems which both he and I had accepted as problems 
of governmental responsibility before us, and I do not suppose that was the 
case with all the things that were mentioned in General Nichols’ letter 
about his early views about politics and his early activities and his early as- 
sociations. 

I also think it quite possible for a person to be himself profoundly honest 
and yet to have associates and friends who may be misguided and mislead 
and for who either at the time or in retrospect he may feel intensely sorry 
and concerned. I think most of us have had the experience of having known 
people at one time in our lives of whom we felt that way. 

Q. I think one might interpret this correspondence that I have referred to as 
going even further than that. I won’t go into what has been testified here or 
a characterization of that which has been said in this room, but in the cor- 
respondence itself, an incident is referred to—I assume you have read the 
correspondence? 

A. Ihave in a cursory way as a newspaper reader reads it in the newspapers. 

Q. An incident is referred to in 1943, in which it is said that an approach to 
Dr. Oppenheimer was made under circumstances suggesting that the ap- 
proach was somehow connected with a possible effort by the Russians to 
secure information or to secure information in their behalf, and that for 
some months thereafter he failed to report this incident. 

What effect does that failure on his part which he freely admits was 
wrong have on your present thinking about it? 

A. Mr. Marks, I have testified about him here as I have known him. I can well 


142 THE HEARING 


understand that at earlier periods in his life conflicts of conscience might 
have arisen as I think they could with any sensitive person between his 
feelings about his friends—perhaps his pity for them—and his governmen- 
tal duties. On the other hand, I would also be inclined to bear in mind the 
fact that in 1943 the Soviet Union was hardly regarded by our top people in 
our Government as an enemy. That great masses of American materials 
were being prepared for shipment to the Soviet Union, many of them I as- 
sume involving the transmission of official secrets. I could imagine that the 
implications of this may not at that time have appeared to be so sinister as 
they do today in retrospect, and I could also imagine if after all the infor- 
mation was not given in this particular instance, the man in question might 
have felt that no damage had been done to the Government interest, and 
that the question of the men who had initiated such a request might be bet- 
ter perhaps left to their own consciences and to the process of maturity in 
their own development. 

I don’t know. I can imagine those things. For that reason I would hesitate 
to make definite judgments on the basis simply of what I read in the letter of 
indictment. 

Q. Would it change your opinion if I were to suggest to you that when Dr. Op- 
penheimer did report this incident to security officers on his own initiative, 
as it turned out, he didn’t tell them everything about it. He still withheld 
the name of the friend and told them a story that was not the whole truth. 

A. Mr. Marks, I do not think that that would alter anything on the statement 
that I just made prior to your question. I might only add to it that I could 
well conceive that Dr. Oppenheimer might have done things which he 
would think in retrospect were mistakes or which others would conclude in 
retrospect were mistakes, but that would not preclude in his own instance 
any more than it would in the case of any of the others the process of 
growth and the ability to recognize mistakes and to learn from them and to 
make fewer in the future. What I have said about his activities, his person- 
ality, the cast of his mind during the years when I knew him would I think 
not be affected. 

Q. These convictions that you have expressed about him, the confidence that 
you have expressed in him, what part is played in that judgment by the ex- 
perience that you had as a Soviet expert? 

A. I think a considerable part. One of the convictions that I have carried away 
from such experience as I have had with these matters in the field of Soviet 
work concerning the Soviet Union is that these things cannot really be 
judged in a fully adequate way without looking at the man as an entirety. 
That is Iam skeptical about any security processes that attempt to sample 
different portions of a man’s nature separate from his whole being. I must 
say as one who has seen Robert Oppenheimer now over the course of sev- 
eral years, and more latterly outside of Government, that I have these feel- 
ings and entertain them on the basis of my estimate of his personality and 
his character as a whole. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 143 


Q. Are they feelings or are they convictions? 
A. They are on my part convictions, sir... . 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. I would like to ask you a question as an expert on diplomacy, Mr. Kennan. 
Supposing the Russians had developed the hydrogen bomb, and had got it 
and we didn’t have it; what would then be our position vis-a-vis the 
Russians in any negotiations? 

A. That, of course, is a key question and a very penetrating one. It is one 
which I have had occasion to argue many times with my friends here in 
Washington. I do not think that the position would have been so much 
different from what it is today. The Russians have for reasons which I don’t 
think include any altruism or any thing like that, or idealism, but they have 
been very, very careful not to use the weapons of mass destruction as a 
threat to other people. I don’t recall any time that the Russians have ever 
threatened as a means of political pressure to use these weapons, to use 
these weapons against anybody else. On the contrary, their position has 
been consistently all along that they were holding them—whether this is 
true or not, it has been their public position—that they were holding them 
for purposes only of retaliation and deterrents and would not use them un- 
less they were used against them. 

It would be a change of Soviet policy if they were to attempt to use any of 
these weapons as a means of pressure. I have also always held doubts—I re- 
alize this is a very difficult thing to express—as to whether the fact that per- 
haps one party had weapons of this sort a little more destructive or greatly 
more destructive than the other would nevertheless change this situation so 
vitally. We did, after all, have the old type of bomb. We had some means of 
delivery. I think the world would have gone along pretty much the same. I 
have in mind in making that judgment the fact that atomic weapons are not 
the only weapons of mass destruction that exist. There are also extremely 
ugly and terrible biological and chemical weapons, at least we have been al- 
lowed to think there are, and if the Russians want to create destruction in 
this country solely for the sake of destruction, I think there are other means 
by which they can do it than the hydrogen bomb. 

Q. You don’t feel, then, that we would have been at any disadvantage as 
against the Russians if they had the hydrogen bomb and we had not? 

A. Iam not absolutely certain. I cannot give you a flat negative answer to that. 
Perhaps we would have been. Perhaps I have been wrong about this. But I 
think that our position with regard to them has depended much less on the 
mathematical equation of who has this and who has that in the way of 
weapons of mass destruction than we think it has. After all our problems 
with them as I have seen them on the political side were very much the 
same in the days when we had the monopoly of the atomic weapon as they 


144 THE HEARING 


are today to my way of thinking. They are pretty much the same old prob- 
lems. I really do not suspect these people, Mr. Robb, of a desire to drop this 
thing on us just out of some native contrariness or desire to wreak destruc- 
tion for destructions’ sake in this country. I think they are people who fight 
wars for very specific political purposes, and usually to get control over 
some area or territory contiguous to what they already have. 

I have often had occasion to say that there is only one real question that 
interests these people, I mean the Soviet leaders, and that is the question of 
who has the ability to haul people out of bed at three in the morning and 
cause them to disappear without giving any accounting for them, and 
where. In other words, who can exercise totalitarian police power over a 
given territory, and where can you do it. That is what they are interested in 
knowing. They think that everybody else rules the way they rule. They are 
always interested in the territorial problem. For that reason I don’t think 
that these weapons play such a part in their thinking as they play in ours. 
They want to know not only how to destroy territory, but how to get control 
of it, and dominate it and run people. 

Q. Of course, you will agree that if you were mistaken in that evaluation, it 
would be a very serious mistake. 

A. I agree and for that reason I have, I believe, always had a certain caution 
with regard to my own views. 

Q. Yes, sir. Mr. Kennan, you spoke of the Russian policy as manifested to you. 
Do you believe the Russians were sincere in their manifestations to you of 
their policy? 

A. Oh, no. We have never drawn our judgments of their policy from a literal 
interpretation of their words. There is no reason why these people should 
ever have been sincere in anything that they said to a capitalist government. 
They may have been on occasions, but there is no real reason for it. 

Q. Putting it in the language of the ordinary man, you just can’t trust them, 
isn’t that right? 

A. That is correct. They do not really expect to be trusted. 

Mr. Ross. Thank you very much. 

Mr. Gray. May I ask you some questions, Mr. Kennan?... 

If you were today director of the policy planning staff and there came to 
you from a staff member or from some other source, perhaps even the Sec- 
retary of State, that a certain individual had been made a member of the pol- 
icy planning staff who had had close Communist associations as late as the 
late thirties or perhaps early forties, would you seriously consider adding 
such a person to your staff today? 

THE Witness. It would depend, Mr. Chairman, on what I would think were his 
possibilities for contribution to the staff and to what extent the negative 
points on his record had been balanced out by a record of constructive 
achievement and loyalty. ... 

Mr. Gray. I assume that if it were a secretary, for example, or clerical assis- 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 145 


tant, that it would be easier for you to decide that the person should not be 
employed. 

THE Witness. I would think that would be correct. 

Mr. Gray. So I gather that you feel that perhaps the application of individual 
judgment increases with the stature and importance of the individual con- 
cerned. That is perhaps not a clear question. 

The Witness. I do feel this, that the really gifted and able people in Govern- 
ment are perhaps less apt than the others to have had a fully conventional 
life and a fully conventional entry, let us say, into their governmental re- 
sponsibilities. For that reason I think that while their cases have to be exam- 
ined with particular care, obviously for the reasons of the great responsibil- 
ities they bear and the capabilities for damage in case one makes a mistake, 
nevertheless it is necessary to bear in mind in many cases, especially people 
who have great intellectual attainments—because those attainments often it 
seems to me do not always come by the most regular sort of experience in 
life, they are often the result of a certain amount of buffeting, and a certain 
amount of trial and error and a certain amount of painful experience—I 
think that has to be borne in mind when one uses people of that sort. 

I agree it presents a special problem, not an easy one for the Government. 
I have the greatest sympathy for the people who have to face it.... 

Mr. Gray. I would like to move back to the question of your attitudes toward 
the development of the hydrogen bomb in the period before the President’s 
decision to proceed in January of 1950. Had you been told, Mr. Kennan, in 
1949, for example, by a scientist whose judgment and capability you re- 
spected that it was probable that a thermonuclear weapon could be devel- 
oped which would be more economical in terms of the use of material and 
cost and the rest of it than the equivalent number of atom bombs, would 
you have then been in favor of developing the hydrogen bomb? 

THE WiTNEss. I would not have favored developing it at least until a real deci- 
sion had been made in this Government about the role which atomic 
weapons were to play generally in its arsenal of weapons. I would have had 
great doubts then about the soundness of doing it. That comes from philo- 
sophic considerations partly which I exposed to the Secretary of State, 
which did not I might say meet with his agreement or with that of most of 
my colleagues and the future will have to tell, but it seemed to me at the 
end of this atomic weapons race, if you pursued it to the end, we building 
all we can build, they building all they can build, stands the dilemma 
which is the mutually destructive quality of these weapons, ... the public 
mind will not entertain the dilemma, and people will take refuge in irra- 
tional and unsuitable ideas as to what to do. 

For that reason I have always had the greatest misgivings about the at- 
tempt to insure the security of this country by an unlimited race in the cul- 
tivation of these weapons of mass destruction and have felt that the best we 
could do in a world where no total security is possible is to hold just 


146 THE HEARING 


enough of these things to make it a very foolish thing for the Russians or 
anybody else to try to use them against us. 

Mr. Gray. So you would have been in favor of stopping production of the A 
bomb after we had reached a certain point with respect to the stockpile? 

THE Witness. That is correct. 

Mr. Gray. Whatever that might have been? 

THE WITNESS. No; and I didn’t consider myself competent to determine ex- 
actly what that point was. I have never known the number of our bombs nor 
the real facts of their destructiveness or any of those things. 

Mr. Gray. Knowing the Russians as you do—perhaps as well as any Ameri- 
can—would you have expected them to continue to improve whatever 
weapons they may have within limitations of economy, scientific availabil- 
ity and so forth? 

THE WITNESS. My estimate is that they would have cultivated these weapons 
themselves primarily for the purpose of seeing that they were not used, and 
would have continued to lay their greatest hopes for the expansion of their 
power on the police weapons, the capacity to absorb contiguous areas, and 
on the conventional armaments as a means of intimidating other people and 
perhaps fighting if they have to fight.... 

Dr. Evans. Mr. Kennan, there are a couple of questions I want to ask you. You 
will admit, I suppose, that at one time in his career, Dr. Oppenheimer dis- 
played that he was a rather naive individual. You will admit that, won’t 
you? 

THE Witness. That I think is apparent from the exchange of correspondence 
that I read in the papers.... 

Dr. Evans. Now, just one other question. You opposed this hydrogen bomb on 
two grounds—on moral grounds and on the fact it was so big it would be 
like using a sledge hammer to kill a mosquito. Is that true? 

THE WITNEssS. I have never conceived them really as just the moral ground be- 
cause I didn’t consider that. After all, we are dealing with weapons here, 
and when you are dealing with weapons you are dealing with things to kill 
people, and I don’t think the considerations of morality are relevant. I had 
real worries, sir, about the effects of this on our future policy and suitability 
of our future policy. 

Dr. Evans. That is all. 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks: 


Q. Mr. Kennan, I would like to follow up briefly the question that you were 
asked by Dr. Evans about the problem which this board faces, and the test it 
has to apply in discharging its rather awesome responsibility, is one in 
which it has to assess, as I read the act, character, associations and loyalty of 
the individual, advise the Commission whether the Commission should de- 
termine that permitting the individual to have access to restricted data—a 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 147 


term which I believe you understand—will not endanger the common de- 
fense and security. ... 

I would like to explore your own views about what standards you had in 
mind when you said that in relation to gifted individuals, it was common to 
find that they had unconventional backgrounds, and that therefore, as J un- 
derstood it, a different type of inquiry was required for evaluation. Could 
you explain a little bit more fully what you had in mind? 

A. It is simply that I sometimes think that the higher types of knowledge and 
wisdom do not often come without very considerable anguish and often a 
very considerable road of error. I think the church has known that. Had the 
church applied to St. Francis the criteria relating solely to his youth, it 
would not have been able for him to be what he was later. In other words, I 
think very often it is in the life of the spirit; it is only the great sinners who 
become the great saints and in the life of the Government, there can be ap- 
plied the analogy. 

I have often said it is the people who have come to their views through 
the questioning of other things who have the highest and firmest type of un- 
derstanding in the interests of the Government. At any rate, it seems to me 
that the exceptional people are often apt not to fit into any categories of re- 
quirements that it is easy to write into an act or a series of loyalty regula- 
tions. 

I feel that one ought to bear that in mind. I realize the problem for the 
Government as to how it is to do it, and technically it is not always easy. It 
is a dangerous thing to talk exceptions because nobody can define again by 
category who is an exceptionally gifted person and who is not. The attempt 
is often invidious and involves the creation of an invidious distinction. 

I am not sure it can be formalized, but I have always felt that the United 
States Government has to realize that it has a real problem here, particularly 
with the people who have the greater capacities. There is need here for 
considerable flexibility, and as I say at the outset, I think for a looking at the 
man as a whole and viewing his entire personality and not judging portions 
of it. 

I am afraid that may not be a very clear answer to what you asked. .. . 

Mr. Gray. Dr. Evans I believe has 1 or 2 questions. 

Dr. Evans. Mr. Kennan, in answer to one of the questions that was asked you, 
I think you stated in effect, or at least you implied that all gifted individuals 
were more or less screwballs. 

THE Witness. Let me say that they apt to be, if I may. 

Dr. EvANS. Would you say that a large percentage of them are? 

THE WITNESS. No, sir; I would not say that they are screwballs, but I would say 
that when gifted individuals come to a maturity of judgment which makes 
them valuable public servants, you are apt to find that the road by which 
they have approached that has not been as regular as the road by which 
other people have approached it. It may have had zigzags in it of various 
sorts. 


148 THE HEARING 


Dr. Evans. I think it would be borne out in the literature. I believe it was Ad- 
dison, and someone correct me if I am wrong, that said, “Great wits are near 
to madness, close allied and thin partitions do their bounds divide.” 

Dr. Oppenheimer is smiling. He knows whether I am right or wrong on 
that. That is all. 


James B. CONANT: “Dr. Oppenheimer’s appraisal of the Russian 
menace . . . was hard headed, realistic, and thoroughly anti- 
Soviet” 


[The examination of the next witness, David E. Lilienthal, is interrupted so 
that the board may hear from James B. Conant and Enrico Fermi (after 
which, Lilienthal resumes testifying). Formerly president of Harvard Univer- 
sity, at the time of the hearing United States high commissioner to Germany, 
Conant served as a scientific adviser to General Groves during the war and 
remained in close touch with Oppenheimer afterward. Conant appears on 
the physicist’s behalf despite being told by Secretary of State John Foster 
Dulles that “it would be a good deal better if you did not become publicly 
involved,” and being warned by Dulles, as Conant wrote in his diary, that 
“this might destroy my usefulness to govt.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. You have read the Commission’s letter of December 23, 1953, which initi- 
ated these proceedings containing the derogatory information about Dr. Op- 
penheimer? 

A. Yes, I have read it. 

Q. Have you a comment to make on it? 

A. Yes, Ihave. I would like to comment on it. I would like to comment on one 
section particularly. Somewhere in the letter it says that the substance of 
the information which raises the question concerning your eligibility for 
employment, referring to Dr. Oppenheimer, on atomic energy work, is as 
follows, and then later it says that it was further reported that in the autumn 
of 1949 and subsequently you strongly opposed the development of the hy- 
drogen bomb; one, on moral grounds; two, by claiming it was not possible; 
three, by claiming that there were insufficient facilities and scientific per- 
sonnel to carry on the development; and four, that it was not politically de- 
sirable. 

Well, it seems to me that letter must have been very carelessly drafted, if 
I may say so, because if you take those two statements together, of course, it 
would indicate that anybody who opposed the development of the hydro- 
gen bomb was not eligible for employment on atomic energy work later. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 149 


I am sure that no one who drew that letter could have intended that, be- 
cause such a position would be an impossible position to hold in this coun- 
try; namely, that a person who expressed views about an important matter 
before him, as a member of the General Advisory Committee, could then be 
ineligible because of a security risk for subsequent work in connection with 
the Government. I am sure that argument would not have been intended. If 
it did, it would apply to me because I opposed it strongly, as strongly as 
anybody else on that committee, that is, the development of the hydrogen 
bomb. Not for the reasons that are given there. 

If I might say so they are a rather caricature of the type of argument which 
was used in the committee in which I participated. I should say I opposed it 
as strongly as anybody on a combination of political and strategic and 
highly technical considerations. I will go into that later to some degree al- 
though I don’t think this is the place to justify the conclusions of the Gen- 
eral Advisory Committee. It would be a long story. 

It seems to me that clearly the question before you here is the question 
rather, is the implied indictment, I submit, namely, because of the informa- 
tion in the first part of this letter—Dr. Oppenheimer’s association with al- 
leged Communist sympathizers in the early days in his youth—that that 
somehow created a state of mind in Dr. Oppenheimer so that he opposed 
the development of the hydrogen bomb for what might be said reasons 
which were detrimental to the best interests of the United States, because 
they were interests of the Soviet Union which he in one way or another had 
at heart. 

That, I take it, is the issue which I take it is before you in part in consider- 
ing this letter. It is to that that I would like to speak for, I think, I have some 
evidence that convinces me that any such charge is completely ill founded. 

If it were true that Dr. Oppenheimer’s opposition to the development of 
the hydrogen bomb were in any way connected with a sympathy which he 
might have had with the Soviet Union, or communism, then surely many 
other actions and decisions which he was involved in over the period of 
years in which I was associated with him would have likewise been influ- 
enced by any such point of view. 

The record is quite the contrary. I just call your attention to a few facts 
probably already before you—actions of Dr. Oppenheimer, participation in 
decisions, all of which were strongly detrimental to the interests of the So- 
viet Union after the close of the war. 

We can start with the time shortly after the Acheson-Lilienthal report 
when an attempt was made through the United Nations to get an agreement 
with Russia on the control of atomic bombs. 

As I recall it, Dr. Oppenheimer was early associated with Mr. Baruch and 
then later with Mr. Osborne in that series of negotiations. I was only tan- 
gentially associated, I was called in from time to time by Mr. Osborne. I re- 
member sitting in one or two meetings. I can’t give you the dates because I 
haven’t had time to look any of this up, and I don’t keep records. 


150 THE HEARING 


At that time we had a number of discussions which were early, you see, 
in the development of the postwar period, with Dr. Oppenheimer and with 
others. At that time it seemed to me that Dr. Oppenheimer’s appraisal of the 
Russian menace, of the Soviet situation, was hard headed, realistic, and 
thoroughly anti-Soviet, designs which even then were quite clear with their 
expansion into the free world. 

That would be my first basis for believing that his attitude at that time 
was thoroughly loyal to the United States and thoroughly opposed to the 
Soviet Union and communism in every way. 

Then coming to the period when he became chairman of the General Ad- 
visory Committee. Again this is probably well known to you. There is no re- 
stricted information here. I am going to speak in general terms. 

Yet, as Winston Churchill later said, it was the possession of the atomic 
bombs in our hands that prevented, so he believes, Russia being at the chan- 
nel ports during that period of history. There was a great deal to be done. Dr. 
Oppenheimer was a vigorous proponent as chairman of the committee of 
getting ahead and putting that shop in order. 

Los Alamos was revivified. From then on all the decisions of the commit- 
tee, with possibly the exception of this controversial thing about the hydro- 
gen bomb would, I think, be shown entirely on the side of arming the 
United States. There was only one possible enemy against whom it was 
being done—it was the Soviet Union. 

There are many other matters if I had a chance to go over the records of 
the General Advisory Committee. 

As seems implied in this indictment that Dr. Oppenheimer was influ- 
enced by pro-Soviet and anti-United States views, he would not have taken 
the views he did. I named just two that come to me. 

One is a matter on which I think I can take some credit of calling to the at- 
tention of the Advisory Committee of getting ahead rapidly on methods of 
detecting any explosion that might occur in the atomic field by the 
Russians. I remember Dr. Oppenheimer may have picked that up before I 
did; he may have had the suggestion before I did, although I don’t think so, 
and taking steps in the committee to see that something would be done in 
that regard. 

Clearly anybody that was influenced by any point of view in favor of the 
Soviet Union could hardly have done that. 

Another matter—the development of smaller atomic bombs which could 
be used for tactical purposes; support of the ground troops which in my 
judgment of military strategy seemed to me of great importance. That was a 
matter which I know he pushed vigorously in the committee. He made 
strong statements about it. I think he was very active. 

There again it seems to me is an illustration of a definite action taken by 
this man which contradicts what seems to me the implied thesis in this part 
of the indictment.... 

Mr. Gray. A summary of your testimony might be that so far as you have any 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 151 


knowledge about anything and on the basis of your best judgment you con- 
sider that Dr. Oppenheimer’s character, loyalty and associations are such 
that he should have access to restricted data. 

THE WITNESS. Quite so. And I would give the specific items in which his judg- 
ment was such that if he had been influenced by pro-Communist views, or 
pro-Soviet views, he would not have taken those actions or decisions, and 
they were quite serious. In other words, this is not a general expression of 
belief based on casual conversations, but participating in a great many, I 
would say, fairly powerful anti-Soviet actions. ... 


By Mr. Garrison: 


Q. Just one question, Dr. Conant. Supposing that you were told that early in 
1943 during the wartime project on which Dr. Oppenheimer served he had 
been approached by a friend—I think you have heard of the Chevalier inci- 
dent? 

A. It is in the letter. 

Q. That this friend had told him of Eltenton’s channel for transmitting infor- 
mation to Russians, that Dr. Oppenheimer rejected emphatically any sug- 
gestion that activity of this sort should be engaged in and spoke of it as trea- 
sonous; supposing that some months later, after a delay of some months, Dr. 
Oppenheimer volunteered the information about Eltenton to security offi- 
cers but refused to disclose at their request and their urging the name of his 
friend who was the intermediary and indeed suggested that the intermedi- 
ary might have been some unnamed other people; that later when he, hav- 
ing persisted in this refusal to name this friend, knowing that the security 
officers were very anxious to ascertain who it was, General Groves asked 
him to tell him, that he declined to tell General Groves, that unless General 
Groves ordered it and General Groves said he didn’t want to order it, but to 
think it over and later General Groves did tell him that he would order him 
unless he told him, and that Dr. Oppenheimer then revealed the name of 
Chevalier; would the judgment which you have expressed here about Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty, about his character, be altered? 

A. It seems to me if I followed this hypothetical—I assume it is hypothetical, 
the way you are stating it—incident, if I sum it up, in that case the question 
would have been that he had been negligent in taking steps necessary to 
bring into prosecution somebody who had attempted to get information? Is 
that roughly what the charge would have been? 

This is a fairly complicated story you are telling me with a good many 
yeses, ands, and buts in it. 

Q. There was the element of delay in reporting it; there was the delay of not 
frankly stating it and the circumstances when he did report it; there was the 
element of declining to name the friend after he had been pressed to do so; 
but there was the element finally of his revealing the name and also of his 
having initiated the whole business of revealing Eltenton’s name. 


152 THE HEARING 


A. Of course, any such thing like that would depend on the number of in- 
stances. You are assuming this is the one instance. 

Q. For the purpose of the question, yes. 

A. I would suppose that the question that would be presented then with that 
is, What were the motives at that time, and what did that show about his 
subsequent attitude in regard toward the Soviet Union? Did he do that at 
that time for reasons of trying to protect the Soviet Union agent who was 
trying to get information and did that indicate that he would continue to 
have an attitude from then on about various matters connected with atomic 
energy which would be not in the interest of the United States? 

In view of all the things I mentioned, I would say that it didn’t change it 
for that reason. It stood by itself and had nothing else but conversation with 
the man. You have to take the summation of evidence as you see it. If I were 
merely testifying here that I had known Dr. Oppenheimer in talks over these 
years, and so on, and | thought he was a loyal citizen, I don’t think my evi- 
dence would be of the sort that I hope it is. By having participated with him 
in what I believe to have been effective actions against the Soviet Union. .. . 

Mr. Gray. May I pursue this hypothetical question of Mr. Garrison’s for a mo- 
ment, Dr. Conant? You suggested what issue that hypothetical situation 
might raise, namely, that this might be an indication of an interest in pro- 
tecting the Soviet Union. I am not sure these were your remarks. 

THE WiTNgss. Or an act of the Soviet Union, if I got the quick summary of it 
correctly. 

Mr. Gray. Or it might be interpreted as simply a desire to protect a friend. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. I would say a mistaken idea that you had to protect a friend 
in those circumstances. 

Mk. Gray. If in this hypothetical situation as I think Mr. Garrison indicated, 
the security officer was pressing for this information, very important per- 
haps to the security officer who was charged with the security and who 
would not have any reason to believe that perhaps friendship was involved, 
the question again—and I am relating this to the present and to the act—or I 
suppose a question is: In any situation involving a divided loyalty or a con- 
flicting loyalty, the protection of a friend, and to the obligation one owes to 
one’s government, is there any question as to which should be— 

THE Witness. Not in my mind. That is why as you recall, I said I wanted to an- 
swer that question in the context that this was one incident and not many. I 
think we all recognize in reviewing a long history of a person, people can 
make errors. If they are single, they are one thing; if they are multiplied, 
they are quite a different picture. 

Dr. Evans. Dr. Conant, if you had been approached by someone for security 
information, wouldn’t you have reported it just as quickly as you could? 
THE Wi7nEss. I think I would have, yes. I hope I would have; let us put it that 

way. 

Dr. Evans. That is all. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 153 


Mr. Ross. May I ask one more question? 
Mr. Gray. Yes. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. When you did report it, Doctor, you would have told the whole truth 
about it? 

A. [hope so. 

Q. Iam sure you would. Thank you. 


Enrico Fermi: “My opinion . . . was that one should try to out- 
law the thing before it was born” 


[After receiving the Nobel Prize for physics in 1938, Enrico Fermi (whose 
wife, Laura, also a physicist, was Jewish) left Fascist Italy for the United 
States. A professor of physics at the University of Chicago, he served as Op- 
penheimer’s associate director at Los Alamos, and then on the General Advi- 
sory Committee from 1947 through 1950.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks:... 


Q. Were you a member of the General Advisory Committee of the Atomic En- 
ergy Commission? 

A. I was a member of the General Advisory Committee for a period of a little 
bit short of 4 years, until December of 1950. 

Q. You participated then in the deliberations of that committee concerning 
the advice to the Commission on the thermonuclear program in the fall of 
1949? 

A. I did. 

Q. Would you tell the board briefly what you can in an unclassified way 
about those deliberations, the positions taken, the reasons for them? 

A. Yes. I should perhaps mention the matter goes back to about 5 years, and 
my recollection is partly vivid, partly a little bit uncertain, but I think I re- 
member the essentials, which are about this way: That the committee was 
confronted with forming an opinion whether it was the right time to start an 
all out program for developing the hydrogen bomb. 

Q. This would have been the meeting of October 29, 1949? 

A. That I understand is the date, although I don’t remember it on my own. So 
we were confronted with this decision. I can testify naturally to my feelings 
in this matter better than I can to those of other people. As far as I could see 
the situation, I had the concern that the pressure for this development was 
extremely inordinate, or at least so it seemed to me. I was concerned that it 


154 THE HEARING 


might weaken the development of conventional atomic weapons which was 
then picking up and essentially set it back for what seemed to me at the 
time a not quite decided advantage on the other side. For that reason, and I 
believe that these views must have been shared more or less by everybody 
in our group, because a decision that it was not the right time to go in an ab- 
solutely overriding way in that direction was, as far as I remember, unani- 
mous. 

There was a subsequent point on which some difference of opinion arose, 
and I found myself in this connection in the minority together with Rabi. 
Again I have no absolutely clear recollection. I have no doubt that the board 
has available the records of those meetings presumably where things are 
spelled out in full detail. My recollection is that this divergence of opinion 
was on whether to essentially declare or establish the policy not to go ahead 
with the program or whether some circumstances could make us go ahead. 

My opinion at that time was that one should try to outlaw the thing before 
it was born. I sort of had the view at that time that perhaps it would be eas- 
ier to outlaw by some kind of international agreement something that did 
not exist. My opinion was that one should try to do that, and failing that, 
one should with considerable regret go ahead. 

Q. Do you remember, Dr. Fermi, whether or not there was opportunity at 
those meetings late in October 1949 with the freest and fullest discussion 
among you—consistent with the rather brief time, few days? 

A. Yes, I think so. I think everybody had a right to his own opinion and to de- 
fend his own opinion. 

Q. Was there a great deal of discussion and debate? 

A. No doubt there was. I think we had some trouble and some soul searching, 
all of us.... 

My general impression is that we all had the concern that the conven- 
tional weapons program should not be weakened and we tried to see that 
the various provisions that were taken for furthering the hydrogen program 
would not be of such a nature of interfering seriously with the conventional 
weapons program. Actually I believe that this could be done and I am not 
aware that there has been such a weakening. 

Q. Do you have any impression that these actions that you took had the effect 
of interfering with the program for the thermonuclear development? 

A. No. 

Q. Going back to the earlier period when you were a member of the GAC, 
prior to the meeting on the thermonuclear device, would you describe very 
briefly the position that Dr. Oppenheimer took with respect to the develop- 
ment, perfection and refinement of atomic weapons? 

A. Yes. I think I can say very definitely that I always saw him push for all 
the measures that could improve our positions in conventional atomic 
weapons, and this includes seeing to it that exploration of ores would go 
ahead vigorously, that production of primary materials would be expanded, 
that all the various gadgets that go into this weapon would be streamlined 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 155 


as much as possible, that varieties of weapons that could conceivably im- 
prove our military position would be investigated and developed. I don’t in 
fact in this respect remember any instance in which I disagreed on essential 
points. We always found ourselves very much together pushing in that di- 
rection together with the help of our colleagues. But perhaps Oppenheimer 
first and I, in somewhat second line, knew perhaps more about the techni- 
cal details of weapons than most other people of the board knew, so that 
this task naturally fell more precisely in our province. 

Q. Would you say that these measures with respect to which you and Oppen- 
heimer had a primary concern and role have had any significant effect on 
the military power of the United States? 

A. I would think so. 

Q. Could you amplify that at all? 

A. It is very hard to know what would have happened if something had not 
happened. Still I feel that this action certainly has contributed, I think, in 
focusing the attention of the Commission on the importance of certain ac- 
tions, in breaking certain bottlenecks that were retarding or limiting the 
production. Advice I don’t suppose is comparable to action in importance, 
but as far as advice is of importance, I think it was in that direction defi- 
nitely. 

Q. One final question. In his role as chairman of the General Advisory Com- 
mittee and conducting the meetings and the affairs of that committee, what 
opportunity did Dr. Oppenheimer afford to the other members of the com- 
mittee to express fully their views and to exert their influence? 

A. I think perfect opportunity. Of course, he is a person who knows a great 
deal about these things and knows how to express what he knows with ex- 
treme efficacy, so naturally many questions just because of this preemi- 
nence and not because so much of his sitting in the chair, he would natu- 
rally take a leading role. But certainly everybody had a perfect freedom to 
act with his own mind and according to his conscience on any issue... . 

Mr. Gray. Would you guess now on the basis of recollection that most of the 
people who came to that meeting had their minds pretty well made up 
about this issue, or do you think that they arrived at the conclusions which 
were reflected in the various reports they signed as a result of the meeting? 

THE WiTNgss. I would not know. I had and I imagine that many other people 
had sort of grave doubts. It was a difficult decision. Even now with the 
benefit of 5 years of hindsight, I still have doubts as to what really would 
have been wise. So I remember that I had in my own mind definite doubts, 
and I presume my ideas and I imagine those of other people, too, must have 
gradually been crystallizing as the discussion went on. However, I have no 
way of judging. 

Mr. Gray. I know it is difficult to answer that question. The fact is that in this 
particular case, Dr. Conant did not take your advice. ... 

Dr. EvANS. You were at Columbia University when the first knowledge came 
out about the fission of uranium. 


156 THE HEARING 


THE WITNESS. Yes, that is right. 

Dr. Evans. Do you believe, Dr. Fermi, that scientific men should be sort of cir- 
cumscribed in regard to scientific information that they may discover? 

THE Witness. I am sorry, I am not sure I got the question. 

Dr. Evans. Do you believe in circumscribing the scientific men in regard to 
scientific information that they discover, that is, not permitting them to 
publish it? 

THE WiTNEss. I see. The matter was this. In ordinary times, I would say that 
scientific discoveries should be made public. At that particular time with 
the war impending and critical political situations and so on, I joined with 
a group of others, the leader of the group or the most active member of that 
group was Leo Szilard, in a voluntary censorship to keep certain results that 
could lead in the direction of the atomic bomb. 

Dr. Evans. Do you believe it is actually possible to conceal this kind of infor- 
mation? 

THE WiTNEsS. Well, for a very limited time, yes. Forever, no. 

Dr. Evans. That is, you could have guessed a lot of this stuff if you had been 
over in Rome? 

THE Witness. I think I might possibly have guessed some things, at least. 


Davib E. LiLiENTHAL: “Here is a man of good character, in- 
tegrity, and of loyalty to his country” 


[David E. Lilienthal, who headed the Tennessee Valley Authority during the 
1930s and 1940s, served as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission 
from October 1946, to February 1950. To prepare for testifying, he requested 
access to the AEC file on Oppenheimer’s 1947 security clearance, but, as 

he later noted, “vital parts of these records had been removed without my 
knowledge.” Those very documents, he believed, were then used by Roger 
Robb to cast doubt on his trustworthiness. The session is not adjourned until 
7:45 p.m., and that night, Lilienthal wrote in his diary, he could hardly sleep, 
“so steamed up was | over the ‘entrapment’ tactics . .. and sadness and nau- 
sea at the whole spectacle.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 
Q. When did you say you became Chairman of the AEC? 
A. I think it was the 28th of October 1946. 
Q. Some time after you became Chairman was the question of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s past associations and his left wing activities and so on called to 
your attention? 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 157 


A. Yes, it was. 

Q. Will you tell us the circumstances of that, please? 

A. The board will recall that there is a kind of grandfather clause in the 
Atomic Energy Act, by which those who had been cleared under the Man- 
hattan District continued to hold their clearances—I have not looked at this 
provision for some time—but the effect is to hold their clearances until a re- 
examination by the FBI was made, and the question is reexamined on the 
basis of new additional information, or something to that effect. So we had 
a number of such reexaminations coming to us. 

I have located the date of March 8 as being the date on which I ap- 
peared—give or take a day or so—a call from Mr. Hoover saying he was 
sending over by special messenger an important file involved in this reex- 
amination. 

I received this file. It related to Dr. Oppenheimer. It contained in it a great 
deal of information from the Manhattan District, and perhaps some subse- 
quent investigation. I called the commissioners together on the 10th. The 
day of Mr. Hoover’s call appears to be Saturday. In any event, I called the 
commissioners together on a Monday, March the 10th, in the morning, I be- 
lieve. ... 

Q. Will you tell us what happened at that Commission meeting? 

A. Commission conference would be the best description because it contin- 
ued for some time. It was very informal. We had this file which I requested 
all the commissioners to read. It was not necessary to request them to be- 
cause it was obviously a matter of great interest and importance. Instead of 
delegating this to someone else, it seemed clear that we should do the eval- 
uating, since the responsibility of deciding what should be done, if any- 
thing, was ours. So we did begin a reading of this file around the table in my 
office in the New State Building, and then later as time went on, members 
would take all or parts of their file to their offices and so on. 

One of the first things that was observed was that although this file did 
contain derogatory information going back a number of years, it did not 
contain any reference, as far as I recall, or at least any significant reference, 
to the work that Dr. Oppenheimer had done as a public servant. ... 

Q. You were saying that you found that the file contained derogatory infor- 
mation, but did not contain affirmative matter, shall we say? 

A. It did not contain any information about those who worked with Dr. Op- 
penheimer in the Manhattan District. So we asked Dr. Vannevar Bush, who 
we knew had been active in the pre-Manhattan District enterprise, as well 
as since that time, and Dr. James Conant, both who happened to be in town, 
to come in and visit us about this file. They expressed themselves about Dr. 
Oppenheimer and his loyalty and character and associations and particu- 
larly the degree to which he had contributed to the military strength of the 
United States. 

I called Secretary Patterson, or someone did, to ask him to request Gen- 
eral Groves, under whom Dr. Oppenheimer had served, be asked to supply 


158 THE HEARING 


a statement about his opinion about Dr. Oppenheimer and the circum- 
stances under which he was selected and kept as director of the laboratory. 

We discussed this with Dr. Bush and Dr. Conant during that day and I 
think into the next day. 

Q. Did you ask Dr. Bush or Dr. Conant for anything in writing? 

A. I don’t know whether they volunteered or whether we asked, but certainly 
they did provide written statements more or less following the line of their 
oral statements. 

Yesterday I had an opportunity to read these and refresh my recollection 
on them. I take it they are in the files... . 

Q. As a result of your experience with Dr. Oppenheimer and your knowledge 
of him, have you formed an opinion as to his loyalty, his integrity, his char- 
acter, all the other factors that go into forming a judgment as to his loyalty, 
security? 

A. Yes, I have. 

Q. What is your opinion? 

A. [have no shadow of a doubt in my mind that here is a man of good char- 
acter, integrity and of loyalty to his country. 

Q. How would you assess him as a security risk? 

A. I did not regard him up until the time my knowledge of the program 
ceased, and had no occasion to regard him as a security risk. 

Q. I think you already indicated that in March 1947 you consciously assayed 
the situation and came to the conclusion that he was not a security risk? 

A. Yes. At that time we had this file before us and that was my conclusion, 
that in the light of the overall picture, taking everything into account, the 
minus signs were very few indeed, and the plus signs very great indeed, 
and I thought he was a contribution to the security of the country. I have 
had no occasion since that time to change that view. 

Q. Has your experience with him confirmed that view? 

A. My experience from that time did confirm that view. I am sure that it is 
clear that he has made great contributions to the security of the country... . 


By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Now, may I, sir, go back to the beginning of your testimony in which you 
gave an account of the events which took place in March 1947? I believe 
you said that the file was delivered to you on a Saturday, March 8, is that 
right? 

A. That is my recollection, yes. ... 

Q. What did that consist of? 

A. I can’t recall except that was a very substantial file, that it contained the 
kind of—a great deal of material from the Manhattan District, Intelligence 
Division, or whatever it was called, counterintelligence. It was a typical FBI 
file. A typical FBI personnel file. 

Q. I have before me what you received, Mr. Lilienthal. It appears to be a 12- 
page summary memorandum on J. Robert Oppenheimer, and a 15-page 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 159 


summary memorandum on Frank Oppenheimer. Is that in accord with your 
recollection of what you received? 

A. No, it is not. Iam sure you are obviously correct. My recollection was that 
we had a big file. I didn’t recall that there was a summary from the FBI.... 

Q. The letter from Mr. Hoover, Mr. Lilienthal, see if this refreshes your recol- 
lection, dated March 8, 1947, addressed to you: 

“My Dear Mr. Lilienthal: In view of developments to date I thought it best 
to call to your attention the attached copies of summaries of information 
contained in our files relative to Julius Robert Oppenheimer, who has been 
appointed as a member ofthe General Advisory Committee, and his brother, 
Frank Friedman Oppenheimer, who was employed in the Radiation Labora- 
tory at Berkeley, Calif., until recently. It will be observed that much of the 
material here contained in the attached memoranda was obtained from con- 
fidential sources.” 

Having heard that, do you agree that what you got was the two sum- 
maries? 

Mr. GARRISON. Is that the whole letter? 

THE WitnEss. I don’t know the distinction between the summary and the re- 
port. But whatever you have there, if you have it, I received. In order to re- 
fresh my recollection of this hearing, I asked for this file yesterday and was 
told it was an FBI file and I could not see it. If I had seen it, my recollection 
would have been refreshed. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. You know, don’t you, Mr. Lilienthal, that the rules for security hearings, 
which I believe were adopted while you were chairman, provide that the 
contents of FBI reports may not be disclosed? 

A. Yes, but the rules of the Commission, as I understand, permit Commis- 
sioners to have access to anything they had access to during the period of 
their commissionership. 

Q. I don’t want to debate that with you. 

A. I apparently am wrong if that is the regulation now, but that is what I asked 
for.... 

Q. Now, after you received this material from Mr. Hoover, on Monday morn- 
ing, do I understand your testimony that you presented it to the Commis- 
sion, is that right? 

A. That is my recollection. 

Q. And each of them read the material, is that correct? 

A. During the course of succeeding hours, or a couple of days, each of them 
did read it. 

Q. Didn’t they read it right then? 

A. That was my recollection. 

Q. That they did? 

A. They sat down and began passing it around, and took it to their offices, 
and soon.... 


160 THE HEARING 


Q. After you had digested this material that Mr. Hoover had sent you, did you 
form any opinion as to whether or not the information contained in Mr. 
Hoover’s material was true or false? 

A. Well, I don’t know how to answer that. The information was like other in- 
formation and we had no way of determining whether it was true or false 
and we did not see the people and the informants were anonymous and so 
on, and so I don’t know how to answer that question. 

Q. Well, from that point on, did you proceed on the assumption it was true, or 
did you proceed on the assumption it was false? 

A. Well, I proceeded on the assumption, we proceeded to try to evaluate it, 
some of it having a ring of veracity and some of it—for example as I recall 
one of the reports, and I think it is in this report, the informant turned out to 
be a nine-year-old boy. If that is true in this case, it may not be, then obvi- 
ously you would say, “Well, this probably is not anything to rely on.” But in 
other cases the report would say that the informant “X” is someone the bu- 
reau has great confidence in, and you would assume that that was true. 

Q. Was the nine-year-old boy referred to in the material Mr. Hoover sent you 
on March 8? 

A. I had an impression, but this may have been some other file and as I re- 
member that as an illustration of how you have to evaluate these things. 

Q. Well, now, having this material before you, I assume that contained certain 
allegations against Dr. Oppenheimer, didn’t it? 

A. It constituted derogatory information about Dr. Oppenheimer, that is right. 

Q. And you say you proceeded to evaluate it? 

A. We did our best to evaluate it... . 

Q. And I believe you have testified there were some items that you accepted 
as true, and some you had doubt about? 

A. Yes. I can’t remember which was which, but I have the recollection that 
some of these things were stronger and more clear than others, but the 
whole picture was that of derogatory information about the man’s past asso- 
ciations, and one episode that was worse than that. 

Q. Which was that? 

A. Involving Chevalier. 

Q. What do you mean, “worse than that,” Mr. Lilienthal? 

A. Well, this struck me as being the only thing, the thing in the whole record, 
that would give the gravest concern, and for that, and the thing that dis- 
missed that concern from my mind was the fact that General Groves and Mr. 
Lansdale, the security officer, at the time this happened examined this man 
on the question, and were apparently satisfied that this was not or did not 
endanger the national security, and the evidence to that was they kept him 
on. I can’t add anything to that. That seemed to me a very conclusive kind 
of a judgment about whether he was dangerous or not... . 

Q. Isn’t it true, Mr. Lilienthal, that that very day, March 10, 1947, after talking 
with Dr. Bush and Dr. Conant, that you concluded that there was no doubt 
as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty? 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 161 


A. I don’t recall whether it was that day, I am satisfied as to what the ultimate 
conclusion was, but we did not entertain any doubts for any length of time, 
and I for one entertained no doubt, speaking for myself, entertained no 
doubts at all. 

Q. Now, thereafter, I believe you testified you talked to Mr. Clifford at the 
White House about it? 

A. Yes. 

Q. And what was the purpose of your conference with him? 

A. Well, we had in mind that Dr. Oppenheimer was an appointee of the Pres- 
ident, and unlike employees of the Commission he was an appointee of the 
President as a member of the General Advisory Committee, and we ought to 
make sure the President knew of the existence of this derogatory informa- 
tion, and so as I recall Dr. Bush and I conveyed this information to him, and 
I believe it was on the following day. .. . 

Q. Did you suggest to Mr. Clifford that a special board be convened to review 
this material? 

A. No, we did not. 

Q. Was that ever discussed with Mr. Clifford? 

A. No, I believe not. 

Q. Are you sure about that? 

A. Iam not sure, but I have no recollection of it. 

Q. Was there any reason that you knew of for the appointment of a board of 
any kind to review this material? 

A. No. It didn’t seem to me and I don’t recall it seemed to anyone that there 
was that much question about it. The reason for that of course is that this 
man subsequent to the time of these events and these associations had done 
a great deal for his country and to prove by his conduct that he was a loyal 
citizen of the country. He wasn’t just an ordinary unknown individual 
whose achievements were not well known to us and to the people we con- 
sulted. 

Q. As to the creation of a board of any sort to evaluate this material, it was 
never discussed between you and Mr. Clifford? 

A. I don’t recall, it could be, but I don’t recall that. Mr. Clifford, my impres- 
sion is Mr. Clifford said he would advise the President, but Mr. Clifford did 
not seem to take this seriously, and to the extent of requiring procedure of 
that kind, but I could be quite wrong about that... . 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Now, was Mr. Carroll Wilson present at the meetings which were held con- 
cerning this matter? 

A. I don’t recall. My recollection is that these were executive meetings and 
those Mr. Wilson would not attend, but he might have attended. I don’t re- 
ally recall. 

Q. I have before me, taken from the files, the original of the memorandum 


162 THE HEARING 


from Carroll L. Wilson, general manager, to the file, and I will read it to 

you.... 

“March 11, 1947: The Commission met this morning for further consider- 
ation of the matters discussed yesterday in connection with Dr. Oppen- 
heimer. The Commission concluded tentatively (1) that on the basis of 
the— 

MR. GARRISON. What is that? 

Mr. Ross (reading), “The Commission concluded tentatively, (1) that on the 
basis of the information supplied by Dr. Bush and Dr. Conant concerning 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s outstanding contributions in this project and his consis- 
tent concern for the security of this country in connection with his services 
as a member of the JRDB Committee on Atomic Energy and as an adviser to 
the Department of State, Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty was prima facie clear 
despite material contained in the FBI summary; (2) that as a result of his 
work for the Government during the last 4 years he is now 1 of the best, if 
not the best-informed scientist in regard to ‘restricted data’ concerning 
atomic energy; (3) that while under these circumstances the questions 
raised by the summary did not create an issue or any immediate hazard, it 
was essential to undertake promptly a full and reliable evaluation of the 
case so that it could be promptly disposed of in one way or another. 

“As a first step, it was decided to secure as promptly as possible written 
expression of views from Dr. Bush, Dr. Conant, and General Groves as to Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty. As a second step, it was decided that the chairman 
should confer with Dr. Bush and Mr. Clifford of the White House concern- 
ing the establishment of an evaluation board of distinguished jurists to 
make a thorough review and evaluation of the case. Inasmuch as Dr. Op- 
penheimer is a Presidential appointee to the General Advisory Committee 
to the Commission, the case is one in which the White House has a definite 
interest. In addition, the matter is of interest to the Department of State 
inasmuch as Dr. Oppenheimer has served as an adviser to the Department 
of State on many phases of atomic energy, including serving as a member 
the Board of Consultants to the Department of State in the preparation of a 
plan for the international control of atomic energy, and subsequently as an 
adviser to Mr. Baruch and more recently as adviser to Mr. Frederick Os- 
borne. 

“At 3 p.m. today Dr. Bush and the chairman”—that was you, wasn’t it? 

THE WITNESS. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Ross (reading), “Dr. Bush and the chairman met with Mr. Clifford and ad- 
vised him of the circumstances in connection with this case and discussed 
with him the desirability of having a review of this case by a board of dis- 
tinguished jurists or other citizens. The chairman proposed that there be 
considered for membership on this board judges of the Supreme Court. Mr. 
Clifford stated that he was decidedly opposed to any move which would 
draw members of the court into outside activities and felt that this case did 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 163 


not warrant an exception to that policy. This policy would not preclude se- 
lection of other jurists for temporary service on such an evaluation board if 
it were deemed desirable that such a board be established. Mr. Clifford 
stated that he would discuss the matter with the President and communi- 
cate with the chairman and Dr. Bush on Wednesday. 

“The results of the discussion with Mr. Clifford were reported to the 
Commission at a meeting at 5 p.m. this afternoon. At that meeting the gen- 
eral manager reported that a detailed analysis of the FBI summary was in 
process of preparation by the Commission’s security staff as an aid to evalu- 
ation.” 

Have you any comment on that, Mr. Lilienthal? 

THE WITNESS. No. I haven’t. It is quite evident that Mr. Clifford in the end did 
not favor the idea of such a board, or perhaps we changed our minds, but I 
had forgotten that recommendation. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. You had forgotten that? 

A. Yes. I think the thing that this does confirm is that the initial reaction of 
the Commissioners was as stated, on the whole case, in view of the record 
of service to his country, this did not raise questions in our minds but was a 
case or matter that should be very carefully dealt with, and dealt with very 
carefully in the evaluation process. 

Q. But you would agree, would you not, sir, that in 1947 you and the Com- 
mission seriously considered, and in fact were of the view that a board 
should be impaneled to consider this matter? 

A. It is quite evident from this memorandum that this was considered. 

Q. And you thought enough of it to go to Mr. Clifford at the White House and 
so recommend? 

A. That is right. 

Q. In other words, you recommended in 1947 that the exact step which is 
now being taken, be taken then? 

A. We suggested it, and I think perhaps that is the import of the memoran- 

dum as I recall, we suggested this to the White House. 

. That step did not strike you as fantastic or unreasonable, did it? 

No. 

. Now, did you talk with Mr. Clifford again about that matter of the board? 

. I don’t recall, and I really don’t. 

. I will show you the original of a memorandum, on March 12, 1947, 11:25 

a.m., report of telephone conversation, at 11:20 with Clark M. Clifford, Spe- 

cial Counsel for the President. That is dated March 12, and it has “DEL” on 

the bottom. Did you write that, Mr. Lilienthal? 
(Whereupon, the document was handed to the witness.) 
Mr. GARRISON. Did you say, “Did he write it?” 


O>FOPO 


164 THE HEARING 


Mr. Ross. Did he dictate it? 
Mr. GarRISON. This is a record that he purportedly made? 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Your answer is that you did dictate it? 

A. Yes, it would appear that I did... 

Q. Now, Mr. Lilienthal, this was a matter of grave import to you, wasn’t it? 

A. Yes it was an important matter, one of many important matters, that is 
right. 

Q. It was of sufficient importance, and important to you, that you took short- 
hand notes on this conversation, and then dictated a memorandum about it, 
is that right? 

A. That is right. 

Q. But it is now your testimony that you had completely forgotten any dis- 
cussion with Mr. Clifford about a board of review? 

A. It is. 

Q. And you had completely forgotten that you even considered such a 
board? 

A. It is. Imust say it just entirely escaped my mind. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, I would like to point out that it seems to me that 
the practice that is adopted here of asking, this was the same case with Dr. 
Oppenheimer on his cross-examination, the Government in possession of 
documents taken from here and there, including from their own files, in Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s case in Princeton, and knowing that they had, first asking 
them to testify about something quite a while ago, without warning and 
without reading the documents, and presenting them and saying, “Tell us 
what happened,” and it seems to me that this is designed to try to make the 
witness look to the board in as unfavorable a light as possible, and to make 
what is a lapse of memory seem like a deliberate falsification. I regret that 
this kind of procedure which is quite suitable in criminal prosecution and a 
court of law, when that attempt is being made before a jury, I am sorry that 
it has to be made here. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, may I reply to that, as I take it to be some reflection 
upon my professional integrity and my professional methods. Let me say— 

Mr. GARRISON. I have not questioned your integrity. 

Mr. Ross. I have no apology to make for the methods I am pursuing in the 
cross-examination of these witnesses. It is an axiom that the greatest inven- 
tion known to man for the discovery of truth is cross-examination, and I am 
pursuing what Mr. Garrison should know are orthodox, entirely proper and 
entirely legitimate methods of cross-examination. I make no apology to Mr. 
Garrison or anyone else for the method I am pursuing, and I submit that I 
have been entirely fair. 

I asked the witness and I have taken him over these matters which I sub- 
mit are matters which, well, I won’t make an argument on that point, and he 


TUESDAY, APRIL 20 165 


has said he did not remember them, and now I have read him these papers, 
and he says that he forgot them. 

THE WitNEss. Mr. Chairman, may I make this comment, that in the great mul- 
tiplicity of things that went on at that time, it is not at all impossible that I 
should not remember even as important a matter as this, but a simple way 
to secure the truth and accuracy would have been to have given me these 
files yesterday, when I asked for them, so that when I came here, I could be 
the best possible witness and disclose as accurately as possible what went 
on at that time. I am a little confused about the technique. The board wants 
the facts, and the facts are in the file, and I asked for the file so I could be a 
better witness, and it was denied me. So I just have to rely on memory dur- 
ing a very troubled and difficult time on matters that are obviously impor- 
tant, but they are not as important as many other things we were concerned 
with at that time. It would help me a good deal, and I could be a much bet- 
ter witness if I saw the files that I helped to contribute to make. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I think Mr. Garrison would agree that it is an en- 
tirely fair comment to make that it is demonstrated that the memory of the 
witness was not infallible. 

THE Wrrnzss. I would be the first to insist on that. 

Mr. Ross. Since we are depending largely on memory, I think it is a fair test. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Why, when we have documents. 

Mr. GarRISON. I thought the notion of an inquiry and not trial was to get at the 
truth by the shortest possible route, and it seems to me the attempt to make 
a witness seem to be not telling the truth, or his memory is not to be relied 
on by this board, by the surprise production of documents, is not the short- 
est way to arrive at the truth. It seems to me more like a criminal trial than 
it does like an inquiry and I just regret it has to be done here. 

Mr. Gray. Well, the board certainly will take cognizance of the comments of 
counsel in respect to this matter, and I think that if counsel is not permitted 
to engage in cross-examination and simply relies on notes the witnesses 
may take from documents in a file, there may be some difficulty in arriving 
at some evaluations, and now on this particular point, it seems to me perti- 
nent at least against general and public discussions, with which counsel 
cannot be unaware, including the New York Times story, the information 
for which was furnished by counsel, it is repeatedly and publicly stated 
that the Commission and others cleared Dr. Oppenheimer at the time that 
these were old charges rehashed, and completely considered and evaluated 
at the time. It does seem important to me, at least as chairman of this board, 
to find out exactly what did take place at that time. 

Mr. GARRISON. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, in full. I want nothing but the 
truth brought out here. And all of the truth about all of the things, and I 
want complete cross-examination, and I raise only the question of surpris- 
ing the witnesses with documents they themselves prepared which are in 
the file and which the Government has, and it seems to me a shorter way of 


166 THE HEARING 


arriving at the truth and a fairer way where a witness has prepared a docu- 
ment which the Government has in its possession is to ask him if he pre- 
pared that document, and to read it into the record, rather than confuse him 
first by asking him about things that he doesn’t remember. That is the only 
point I make, and that limited point, and I wish in no way to confine this in- 
quiry. But it is an important point though limited. 


Wednesday, April 21 


[The board hears from two witnesses who testify in Oppenheimer’s behalf. 
Sumner T. Pike, a member of the AEC from 1946 to the end of 1951, is head 
of the Maine Public Utilities Commission. He says that he never doubted 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty: “| think he is a man of essential integrity. | think he 
has been a fool several times, but there was nothing in there that shook my 
feeling.” Norman Foster Ramsey Jr., a professor of physics at Harvard Univer- 
sity, who was at Los Alamos from 1943 to 1945 as a consultant to the Secre- 
tary of War, similarly testifies to the widespread respect in which Oppen- 
heimer was held.] 


Isipor I. RaBi: “He is a consultant, and if you don’t want to 
consult the guy, you don’t consult him period. . . . We have an 
A-bomb . . . * * * and what more do you want, mermaids?” 


[Isidor |. Rabi, professor of physics at Columbia University, is then called. A 
friend of Oppenheimer’s for a quarter of a century, Rabi succeeded him as 
chairman of the General Advisory Committee. Ten days earlier, as the hear- 
ing was about to begin, Samuel Silverman, an associate of Garrison’s, had 
warned Rabi not to telephone Oppenheimer since his phone was sure to be 
tapped, as indeed it was. Midway through Rabi’s appearance, Oppenheimer 
briefly left the hearing room and permitted the questioning to continue in his 
absence.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 


By Mr. Marks:... 

Q. Dr. Rabi, if you will indulge me I would like to skip around somewhat be- 
cause as nearly as possible I would like to avoid too much repetition of 
things that have already been gone into by others. 


Isidor I. Rabi (left) and Lee A. DuBridge, Washington, D.C. AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives, 
Segré Collection. 


168 THE HEARING 


Will you describe to the extent that you can what took place in the fall of 
1949 insofar as the GAC was concerned or you are concerned in respect of 
the question of thermonuclear program for the Atomic Energy Commission? 

A. I can only give my own view and my own recollection. I have not pre- 
pared myself for this by studying the minutes. I intended to, but I am on in 
the morning rather than the afternoon. So I can give you just my own recol- 
lection. 

The thermonuclear reaction or as it was called the super was under in- 
tense study from my very first contact with Los Alamos. 

Q. When was that? 

A. About April 15, 1943. At the establishment of the laboratory, Dr. Oppen- 
heimer called together a group of people to discuss the policy and techni- 
cal direction of the laboratory, and I was one of those who was invited to 
that discussion. All through the war years and following that, that was a 
subject of discussion and consideration by some of the very best minds in 
physics. 

The problem proved to be an extremely difficult, very recalcitrant prob- 
lem, because of the many factors which were involved where the theory, the 
understanding of the thing, was inadequate. It was just a borderline. The 
more one looked at it, the tougher it looked. 

Following announcement of the Russian explosion of the A bomb, I felt 
that somehow or other some answer must be made in some form to this to 
regain the lead which we had. There were two directions in which one 
could look; either the realization of the super or an intensification of the ef- 
fort on fission weapons to make very large ones, small ones, and so on, to 
get a large variety and very great military flexibility. 

Furthermore, a large number, a large increase in the production of the 
necessary raw materials, the fissionable materials and so on, or one could 
consider both. There was a real question there where the weight of the effort 
should lie. 

Q. When would you say that this question that you are now describing began 
to become acute in your thinking? 

A. Right away. 

Q. You mean with the Russian explosion? 

A. As soon as I heard of the Russian explosion. I discussed it with some col- 
leagues. I know I discussed it with Dr. Ernest Lawrence, with Luis Alvarez, 
and of course with the chairman of our committee, Dr. Oppenheimer. In 
fact, I discussed it with anybody who was cleared to discuss such matters, 
because it was a very, very serious problem. 

That question then came up at the meeting of the General Advisory Com- 
mittee. 

Q. That would have been the meeting that began on October 29, 1949? 

A. Yes. I do not recollect now whether this was the first meeting after the an- 
nouncement of the Russian explosion or whether there was an intervening 
meeting. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21 169 


Q. To refresh your recollection, Dr. Rabi, I think it has been in the record here 
that there was a regular meeting of the General Advisory Committee just 
after or just at the time when the Russian explosion was being evaluated. 

A. Yes. I recollect now.... 

Q. This meeting which you identified was more or less contemporaneous by 
the official announcement of this Government that there had been a Russian 
explosion, was there any discussion at that time of the thermonuclear? 

A. I would have to refresh my memory on that. I cannot say. I would be as- 
tonished if there were not. I cannot say. I could go back and look. In fact, we 
talked about it at every meeting. 

Q. In all events, the interval between that meeting and the one on the 29th, 
was very much on your mind? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. Do you have any recollection or impression as to the form in which the 
question of what to do about the thermonuclear problem came up in your 
meeting that began on October 29? .. . 

A. As I recollect it now—it is 5 years ago—the chairman, Dr. Oppenheimer, 
started very solemnly and as I recall we had to consider this question. The 
question came not whether we should make a thermonuclear weapon, but 
whether there should be a crash program. There were some people, and I 
myself was of that opinion for a time, who thought that the concentration 
on the crash program to go ahead with this was the answer to the Russian 
thermonuclear weapon. The question was, should it be a crash program and 
a technical question: What possibilities lay in that? What would be the cost 
of initiating a crash program in terms of the strength of the United States be- 
cause of the weakening of the effort on which something which we had in 
hand, namely, the fission weapons, and the uncompleted designs of differ- 
ent varieties, to have a really flexible weapon, the question of interchange- 
ability of parts, all sorts of things which could be used in different military 
circumstances. 

Then there was the question of the military value of this weapon. One of 
the things which we talked about a great deal was that this weapon as prom- 
ised which didn’t exist and which we didn’t know how to make, what sort 
of military weapon was it anyway? What sort of target it was good for. And 
what would be the general political effect. 

In other words, we felt—and I am talking chiefly about myself—that this 
was not just a weapon. But by its very nature, if you attacked a target, it took 
in very much more. We felt it was really essential and we discussed a great 
deal what were you buying if you got this thing. That was the general nature 
of the discussion. 

Technical, military, and the combination of military political... . 

Q. To the extent that you can tell it without getting into any classified mate- 
rial, what was the outcome of the GAC meeting of October 1949? 

A. I will try to give it as best I can. 

Q. Let me break it down. First, is it fair to say that the committee was in 


170 THE HEARING 


agreement with respect or essentially in agreement with respect to the tech- 
nical factors involved in the thermonuclear situation? 

A. It was hard to say whether there was an agreement or not because what we 
are talking about was such a vague thing, this object, that I think different 
people had different thoughts about it. You could just give a sort of horse- 
back thing and say, maybe something would come out in 5 years. It is that 
sort of thing. I know in my own case I think I took the dimmest technical 
view of this, and there are others who were more optimistic. 

Q. I think it has been indicated here that there was some statement in the re- 
port of the GAC at that time to the effect that it was the opinion that a con- 
certed imaginative effort might produce—that there was a 50-50 chance of 
success in 5 years. 

Mk. Ross. In the interest of accuracy, I think the report says a better than even 
chance. Let me check it to make sure. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is correct. 


By Mr. Marks: 


Q. Was that supposed to be a consensus of the views? 

A. More or less. When you are talking about something as vague as this par- 
ticular thing, you say a 50-50 chance in 5 years, where you don’t know the 
kind of physical factors and theory that goes into the problem. I just want to 
give my own impression that it was a field where we really did not know 
what we were talking about, except on the basis of general experience. We 
didn’t even know whether this thing contradicted the laws of physics. 

Q. You didn’t know what? 

A. Whether it contradicted the laws of physics. 

Q. In other words, it could have been altogether impossible. 

A. It could have been altogether impossible. The thing we were talking about. 
I want to be specific. 

Q. I understand. 

A. We were talking within a certain definite framework of ideas. 

Q. To the extent that you can describe them now and confining yourself to 
that meeting, to the extent that you can describe them without trespassing 
on classified material, what were the recommendations of the GAC? 

A. They were complicated. We divided into two groups. No, there were some 
recommendations to which I think we all agreed, which were specific tech- 
nical recommendations. 

Q. Can you say what they had to do with in general terms? 

A. Certain improvements in weapons, the production of certain material 
which would be of great utility in weapons and which we felt at the time 
might be fundamental if a super were to be made. We recommend sharply a 
go-ahead on that. We recommended certain directions of weapons and there 
was a third important recommendation which I don’t recollect now of a 
technical nature. 

Q. You have spoken of a division. What had you reference to there? 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21 171 


A. In addition to that there were supplementary reports on which Dr. Fermi 
and I formed a minority, and the other six members present the majority. 
That had more to do with this sphere where the political and the military 
impinge. One group felt—I don’t like to speak for them because the record 
is there, but my impression was—that this projected weapon was just no 
good as a weapon. 

Q. You mean the particular weapon? 

A. I am not talking from the technical but the military opinion. That it was 
not of great military utility. The possible targets were very few in number, 
and so on. I could elaborate on that if I should be asked, but I am speaking 
for somebody else, and there is a record. 

Q. That was the group with which you did not join? 

A. Yes. Of this specific design, Dr. Fermi and I as I recollect it now felt that in 
the first place as far as we could see from the question of having a deliver- 
able weapon one did not gain a tremendous amount. Secondly, we felt that 
the whole discussion raised an opportunity for the President of the United 
States to make some political gesture which would be such that it would 
strengthen our moral position, should we decide to go ahead with it. That 
our position should be such that depending on the reaction, we would go 
ahead or not, whatever going ahead were to mean. 

Q. What made you think that it was appropriate for you to speak about these 
rather nontechnical but more political, diplomatic and military considera- 
tions? 

A. That is a good question. However, somehow or other we didn’t feel it was 
inappropriate. In our whole dealing with the Commission, we very often, or 
most often, raised the questions to be discussed. In other words, we would 
say we want to discuss this and this thing. Would you please provide us 
with documents, would you bring individuals to talk to us on this, and we 
would address the Commission on questions. 

On the other hand, we didn’t feel badly if they didn’t act on our sugges- 
tions. Sometimes they did and sometimes they didn’t. So we did not feel 
that this was inappropriate. It would be very hard for me to tell you now 
why we thought it was appropriate, but we thought so. . . . 

Q. After the President announced the decision to go ahead with the hydrogen 
bomb in January of 1950, what attitude and what steps, if any, did the GAC 
take with respect to the subject from then on? 

A. I think we started talking about the best ways and means to do it. It was a 
very difficult question, because here is a statement from the President to do 
something that nobody knew how to do. This was just a ball of wax. So we 
were really quite puzzled except insofar as to try to get people to go and 
look at the problem. 

Q. In that connection, did the GAC itself try to look into the problem? 

A. Insofar as we could; yes. We had people who were quite expert and actu- 
ally worked on it, chiefly of course Dr. Fermi, who went back to Los 
Alamos, summers and so on, and took a lot of time with it. So we had a very 


172 THE HEARING 


important expert right on the committee. Of course, Dr. Oppenheimer knew 
very well the theoretical questions involved. 

Q. Do you think the GAC had any usefulness in helping the work on this par- 
ticular subject? 

A. I think it did; I think it had a great usefulness some way indirect and some 
way direct, ways of trying to bring out the solid facts. It is awfully hard to 
get at those facts. I recall particularly one meeting, I think it was in the sum- 
mer of 1950 at Los Alamos, I am sure of the dates, where we actually got to- 
gether all the knowledgeable people we could find, I think Dr. Bethe was 
there and Fermi, to try to produce some kind of record which would tell us 
where we stood. This was before the Greenhouse test. 

Q. You mean what the state of the art was at that time? 

A. What the state of the art was, and where do we go from here. 

Q. How many of the laws of nature on the subject were available? 

A. What ideas and what technical information was available. We got this re- 
port and it was circulated by the Commission in various places because 
there was some kind of feeling that here the President is given the directive 
and somehow something is going to appear at the other end and it was not 
appearing. 

Q. If you can tell, Dr. Rabi, what was the connection or relation between the 
meeting you have just described at Los Alamos and another meeting that 
has been testified here which took place, I believe, in 1951, in the late 
spring at Princeton? 

A. That was an entirely different meeting. At that meeting we really got on 
the beam, because a new invention had occurred. There we had a situation 
where you really could talk about it. You knew what to calculate and so on, 
and you were in the realm where you could apply scientific ideas which 
were not some extrapolation very far beyond the known. This is something 
which could be calculated, which could be studied, and was an entirely 
different thing. 

Q. Why did it take that long? 

A. Just the human mind. 

Q. There was the President’s directive in January 1950. 

A. Why it took this long? One had to get rid of the ideas that were and are 
probably no good. In other words, there has been all this newspaper stuff 
about delay. The subject which we discussed in the 1949 meeting, that par- 
ticular thing has never been made and probably never will be made, and we 
still don’t know to this day whether something like that will function. 

This other thing was something quite different, a much more modest and 
more definite idea on which one could go... . 

Q. Doctor, it can be gathered from the nature of these proceedings that this 
board has the function of advising the Commission with respect to a deter- 
mination that the Commission must make on whether permitting Dr. Op- 
penheimer to have access to restricted data will not endanger the common 
defense and security. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21 173 


In formulating this advice, the considerations suggested by the Atomic 
Energy Act to be taken into account are the character, associations, and loy- 
alty of the individual concerned. 

Do you feel that you know Dr. Oppenheimer well enough to comment on 
the bearing of his character, loyalty and associations on this issue? 

A. I think Dr. Oppenheimer is a man of upstanding character, that he is a 
loyal individual, not only to the United States, which of course goes with- 
out saying in my mind, but also to his friends and his organizations to 
which he is attached, let us say, to the institutions, and work very hard for 
his loyalties; an upright character, very upright character, very thoughtful, 
sensitive feeling in that respect. ... 

Mr. Marks. It is agreeable to Dr. Oppenheimer that the proceedings continue 
this afternoon without his presence. 

Mr. Gray. I just want to make it clear that it is a matter of his own choosing, 
and of Mr. Garrison, that they are not present this afternoon for the remain- 
der of these proceedings. 

Mr. Marks. That is correct. He may be back before we finish, but this is a mat- 
ter of his own choosing. 

Mr. Gray. Would you proceed, Mr. Robb. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Dr. Rabi, you testified that in the fall of 1949, the problem of the super pro- 
gram had your attention quite considerably. 

A. Yes. 

Q. And I believe you said that you talked with Dr. Lawrence and Dr. Alvarez 
about it. 

A. Yes. 

Q. Could that have been in October, just before the meeting of the GAC. 

(Dr. Oppenheimer entered the room.) 

Mr. Gray. You are back now, Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Dr. OPPENHEIMER. This is one of the few things I am really sure of. 

THE WiTNEss. I can’t remember the exact date. I think it was in the fall. It was 
before the GAC meeting. 


By Mr. Robb: 

Q. It was before the GAC meeting? 

A. Iam quite sure. 

Q. Did Dr. Alvarez and Dr. Lawrence come to see you in New York? 

A. That is right. 

Q. Together or did they come separately? 

A. Together. 

Q. What was the purpose of their visit to you, sir? 

A. Well, we are old friends. I don’t remember what the purpose was that they 


174 THE HEARING 


wanted to come up which I didn’t find extraordinary. Physicists visit one 
another. Both are people I have known for a long time. But we did talk on 
this thing which was in our mind. 

Q. Yes. To save time, didn’t they come to see you with special reference to the 
thermonuclear question or the super question? 

A. That may have been in their minds. It may have been in their minds. We 
got going on it right away. 

Q. In all events, you talked about it? 

A. That is right. What was in their minds, I don’t know. 

Q. Do you recall what their views were on it as they expressed them to you 
then? 

A. Their views were that they were extremely optimistic. They are both very 
optimistic gentlemen. They were extremely optimistic about it. They had 
been to Los Alamos and talked to Dr. Teller, who gave them a very opti- 
mistic estimate about the thing and about the kind of special materials 
which would be required. So they were all keyed up to go bang into it. 

Q. They thought we ought to go ahead with it? 

A. I think if they had known then what we knew a year later, I don’t think 
they would have been so eager. But at that time they had a very optimistic 
estimate. 

Q. To help you fix the time, was that after the Russian explosion? 

A. After the Russian explosion. 

Q. Was that the main reason why they thought we ought to get along with the 
thermonuclear program? 

A. I don't know. 

Q. Beg pardon? 

A. I would suppose so. As I testified before, what I testified was that we felt 
we had to do something to recover our lead. 

Q. Did you express your view to them on that subject? 

A. Yes, that we had to do something, and I think that I may have inclined— 
this is something which I kept no notes and so on. 

Q. I understand, doctor. 

A. I think I may have inclined toward their view on the basis of the informa- 
tion they said they had from Dr. Teller. 

Q. Did you find yourself in any substantial disagreement with their views as 
they expressed them then? 

A. It wasn’t the case of agreement or disagreement. I generally find myself 
when I talk with these two gentlemen in a very uncomfortable position. I 
like to be an enthusiast. I love it. But those fellows are so enthusiastic that I 
have to be a conservative. So it always puts me in an odd position to say, 
“Now, now. There, there,” and that sort of thing. So I was not in agreement 
in the sense that I felt they were as usual, which is to their credit—they 
have accomplished very great things—overly optimistic. 

Q. Except for that you agreed with their thought that we ought to do some- 
thing, as you put it, to regain our position? 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21 175 


A. That is right. I felt very strongly. I spoke to everybody I could properly 
speak to, as I said earlier, talking about what we could do to get back this 
enormous lead which we had at that time. This of course was one of the 
possibilities. 

Q. Was it before that or after that you talked to Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. Ireally don’t remember the sequence of events at that time and when I saw 
Dr. Oppenheimer, whether he was away for the summer or I was, or what, I 
wish I could testify. I don’t keep a diary. 

Q. I understand. All I want is your best recollection, doctor. Whenever you 
talked to Dr. Oppenheimer, did he express his views on this matter? 

A. It is very hard to answer. I just don’t recollect to tell you a specific time at 
a specific place where I spoke to Oppenheimer. 

Q. May I help you a little bit? It is difficult to separate what he might have 
told you before the meeting with what he said at the meeting. 

A. To which meeting are you talking? 

Q. The meeting of October 29. 

A. I don’t really remember that we met before the meeting or immediately be- 
fore the meeting, or that he told me something of that sort. I just don’t re- 
member. My actual recollection is that I learned the purpose of the meeting 
at the meeting, but I am not certain. I just can’t tell. 

Q. At all events, the views expressed by Dr. Oppenheimer at the meeting 
were not in accord with those expressed to you by Alvarez and Lawrence, 
were they? 

A. No, the meeting was a very interesting one. It was a rather solemn meeting. 
I must say that Dr. Oppenheimer as chairman of the meeting always con- 
ducted himself in such a way as to elicit the opinions of the members and to 
stimulate the discussion. He is not one of these chairmen who sort of takes 
it their privilege to hold the floor; the very opposite. Generally he might ex- 
press his own view last and very rarely in a strong fashion, but generally 
with considerable reservations. When he reported to the Commission, it 
was always a miracle to the other members on the committee how he could 
summarize three days of discussions and give the proper weight to the 
opinion of every member, the proper shade, and it rarely happened that 
some member would speak up and say, “This isn’t exactly what I meant.” It 
was a rather miraculous performance. ... 

Q. Do you recall any mention at that meeting of October 29, 1949, of a com- 
munication from Dr. Seaborg about the problem under discussion? 

A. Ican’t recollect. I don’t know. I might add it would not have been very sig- 
nificant, because my feeling is now that we came into the meeting without 
any clear ideas, that in the course of an extremely exhausting discussion to 
and fro, examining all the possibilities we each became clearer as to what 
this thing meant. So anybody who didn’t participate in the discussion 
wouldn’t have gotten what we conceived at that time to be that kind of clar- 
ity.... 

Mr. Gray. I have one other question. You testified very clearly, I think, as to 


176 THE HEARING 


your judgment of Dr. Oppenheimer as a man, referring to his character, his 
loyalty to the United States, and to his friends and to institutions with 
which he might be identified, and made an observation about associations. 
As of today would you expect Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty to the country to 
take precedence over loyalty to an individual or to some other institution? 

THE WiTNEsS. I just don’t think that anything is higher in his mind or heart 
than loyalty to his country. This sort of desire to see it grow and develop. I 
might amplify my other statement in this respect, and that is something we 
talked of through the years. When we first met in 1929, American physics 
was not really very much, certainly not consonant with the great size and 
wealth of the country. We were very much concerned with raising the level 
of American physics. We were sick and tired of going to Europe as learners. 
We wanted to be independent. I must say I think that our generation, Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s and my other friend that I can mention, did that job, and 
that 10 years later we were at the top of the heap, and it wasn’t just because 
certain refugees came out of Germany, but because of what we did here. 
This was a conscious motivation. Oppenheimer set up this school of theo- 
retical physics which was a tremendous contribution. In fact, I don’t know 
how we could have carried out the scientific part of the war without the 
contributions of the people who worked with Oppenheimer. They made 
their contributions very willingly and very enthusiastically and single- 
mindedly. 

Mr. Gray. Perhaps! could get at my question this way. You are familiar, if you 
have read the Nichols letter and read the summary of a file which Chairman 
Strauss handed you, with the Chevalier episode to some extent, I take it. 

THE WitnEss. I know of the episode, yes. 

Mr. Gray. Would you expect Dr. Oppenheimer today to follow the course of 
action he followed at that time in 1943? 

THE WiTNESs. You mean refuse to give information? Is that what you mean? 

MR. GRAY. Yes. 

THE Witness. I certainly do. At the present time I think he would clamp him 
into jail if he asked such a question. 

Mr. Gray. I am sorry. 

THE Witness. At the present time if a man came to him with a proposal like 
that, he would see that he goes to jail. At least that is my opinion of what he 
would do in answer to this hypothetical question. 

Mr. Gray. Do you feel that security is relative, that something that was all 
right in 1943, would not be all right in 1954? 

THE Witness. If aman in 1954 came with such a proposal, my God—it would 
be horrifying. 

Mr. Gray. Supposing a man came to you in 1943. 

THE WiTNgss. I would have thrown him out. 

Mr. Gray. Would you have done anything more about it? 

THE Witnzss. I don’t think so. Unless I thought he was just a poor jackass and 
didn’t know what he was doing. But I would try to find out what motivated 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21 177 


him and what was behind it, and get after that at any time. If somebody 
asked me to violate a law and an oath—... 

Mr. Gray. In any event, I believe you did testify that you would be quite con- 
vinced—I am not sure you did—are you quite convinced that as of today Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s course of action would be in accord with what you would 
do, rather than what he did in respect to the matter of this sort. I can’t say 
what a man will do, but we only can apply subjective tests in these matters 
as far as your testimony as to character, loyalty and so forth, are concerned. 
So this is all subjective, but would you expect without any real question in 
your mind that today Dr. Oppenheimer would follow the kind of course 
that you would approve of today with respect to this matter? 

THE Witness. I think I can say that with certainty. I think there is no question 
in my mind of his loyalty in that way. You know there always is a problem 
of that sort. I mean the world has been divided into sheep and goats. I mean 
the country has been divided into sheep and goats. There are the people 
who are cleared and those who are not cleared. The people against whom 
there has been some derogatory information and whatnot. What it may 
mean and so on is difficult. It is really a question in one’s personal life, 
should you refuse to enter a room in which a person is present against 
whom there is derogatory information. Of course, if you are extremely pru- 
dent and want your life circumscribed that way, no question would ever 
arise. If you feel that you want to live a more normal life and have confi- 
dence in your own integrity and in your record for integrity, then you might 
act more freely, but which could be criticized, either for being foolhardy or 
even worse. 

In one’s normal course at a university, one does come across people who 
have been denied clearance. Should you never sit down and discuss scien- 
tific matters with them, although they have very interesting scientific things 
to say? 

Mr. Gray. No, I would not think so. ... 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks:... 


Q. Dr. Rabi, Mr. Robb asked you whether you had spoken to Chairman 
Strauss in behalf of Dr. Oppenheimer. Did you mean to suggest in your 
reply—in your reply to him you said you did among other things—did you 
mean to suggest that you had done that at Dr. Oppenheimer’s instigation? 

A. No; I had no communication from Dr. Oppenheimer before these charges 
were filed, or since, except that I called him once to just say that I believed 
in him, with no further discussion. 

Another time I called on him and his attorney at the suggestion of Mr. 
Strauss. I never hid my opinion from Mr. Strauss that I thought that this 
whole proceeding was a most unfortunate one. 

Dr. Evans. What was that? 


178 THE HEARING 


THE Witness. That the suspension of the clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer was a 
very unfortunate thing and should not have been done. In other words, 
there he was; he is a consultant, and if you don’t want to consult the guy, 
you don’t consult him, period. Why you have to then proceed to suspend 
clearance and go through all this sort of thing, he is only there when called, 
and that is all there was to it. So it didn’t seem to me the sort of thing that 
called for this kind of proceeding at all against a man who had accom- 
plished what Dr. Oppenheimer has accomplished. There is a real positive 
record, the way I expressed it to a friend of mine. We have an A-bomb and a 
whole series of it, * * * and what more do you want, mermaids? This is just 
a tremendous achievement. If the end of that road is this kind of hearing, 
which can’t help but be humiliating, I thought it was a pretty bad show. I 
still think so. ... 


RE-CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Dr. Rabi, getting back to the hypothetical questions that have been put to 
you by the Chairman and Dr. Evans about the Chevalier incident, if you had 
been put in that hypothetical position and had reported the matter to an in- 
telligence officer, you of course would have been told the whole truth about 
it, wouldn’t you? 

A. Iam naturally a truthful person. 

Q. You would not have lied about it? 

A. I am telling you what I think now. The Lord alone knows what I would 
have done at that time. This is what I think now. 

Q. Of course, Doctor, as you say, only God knows what is in a man’s mind and 
heart, but give us your best judgment of what you would do. 

A. This is what I think now I hope that is what I would have done then. In 
other words, I do not—I take a serious view of that—I think it is crucial. 

Q. You say what? 

A. I take a serious view of that incident, but I don’t think it is crucial. 

Q. Of course, Doctor, you don’t know what Dr. Oppenheimer’s testimony be- 
fore this board about that incident may have been, do you? 

A. No. 

Q. So perhaps in respect of passing judgment on that incident, the board may 
be in a better position to judge than you? 

A. I have the highest respect for the board. I am not going to make any com- 
ment about the board. They are working very hard, as I have seen. 

Q. Of course, I realize you have complete confidence in the board. But my 
point is that perhaps the board may be in possession of information which 
is not now available to you about the incident. 

A. It may be. On the other hand, I am in possession of a long experience with 
this man, going back to 1929, which is 25 years, and there is a kind of seat 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 179 
of the pants feeling which I myself lay great weight. In other words, I might 


even venture to differ from the judgment of the board without impugning 
their integrity at all.... 


Thursday, April 22 


Norris E. BRADBURY: “A scientist wants to know. He wants to 
know correctly and truthfully and precisely” 


[Norris E. Bradbury met Oppenheimer in the early 1930s when he entered 
the University of California at Berkeley as a graduate student in physics. 
During the war he served as a commander in the naval reserve, and in June 
1944, was assigned to Los Alamos. The following year, when Oppenheimer 
left, Bradbury took over as director of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, a 
position he still holds as he testifies.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. What would you say as to the cooperation or lack of cooperation that was 
evidenced by specifically Dr. Oppenheimer and generally by the General 
Advisory Committee with respect to the thermonuclear program? 

A. Both the General Advisory Committee and Dr. Oppenheimer, I always 
found from my personal knowledge extremely helpful and cooperative—I 
am seeking an appropriate word—actively cooperative with the Los Alamos 
Laboratory in this field. This was, of course, not a unique thing in the ther- 
monuclear field. The GAC and Dr. Oppenheimer had always to my knowl- 
edge been an active friend and been active friends of the laboratory, and had 
been helpful and had worked closely with us in all our discussions relevant 
to Los Alamos, or many discussions relative to Los Alamos. They invited 
the staff of the laboratory to meet with them. I met with them myself on 
many occasions. 

Their comments were always helpful. Their advice was always helpful. I 
never knew them or Dr. Oppenheimer to take a stand or a position or to give 
advice which was other than useful and helpful to the laboratory. . . . 

Q. Do you recall a meeting at Princeton in the spring or summer of 1951? 

A. Yes, I do. 

Q. You were present at that meeting? 


180 THE HEARING 


A. I was present. 

Q. Would you care to say something about the role played by Dr. Oppen- 
heimer there, particularly in connection with what it may indicate to the 
board as to his cooperation in the thermonuclear program? 

A. The meeting of the General Advisory Committee in June, I believe it was, 
of 1951, was called following an Eniwetok operation. It was called follow- 
ing, let me say, the discovery at Los Alamos of some extremely promising 
ideas in this field, and at that time the exploitation of these ideas seemed to 
us at Los Alamos and to others of our consultants and associated with us in 
the field warrant some attention by the Commission to certain decisions, let 
me say, of production, which were extremely important, and could well be 
quite expensive. , 

Weas the laboratory made this proposal. We found the General Advisory 
Committee and Dr. Oppenheimer extremely enthusiastic both about this 
idea and about the general proposals which were needed to implement this 
idea, particularly insofar as they required Commission action. Indeed, I 
think it fair to say that the General Advisory Committee and Dr. Oppen- 
heimer were willing to go further than the laboratory in support of this, let 
us say, new approach to the problem, and that their recommendations to the 
Commission were at least as enthusiastic as ours, and actually went some- 
what beyond, in terms of support, what we had originally drafted. 

I would regard this myself as very positive evidence of the interest and 
enthusiasm which the GAC was showing and showed in this field... . 

Q. You have seen the portion of the Commission’s letter in which the state- 
ment is made, “It was further reported that you, Dr. Oppenheimer, were in- 
strumental in persuading other outstanding scientists not to work on the 
hydrogen project, and the opposition of the hydrogen bomb of which you 
are the most experienced, most powerful and most effective member has 
definitely slowed down its development.” 

What would you say about the statement that the program was slowed 
down because of Dr. Oppenheimer’s opinion or activities? 

A. It is not my opinion that the program was slowed down, as I have said. Of 
course, if he himself had been in a position or wished to work on it directly 
and personally, this would undoubtedly have been a great help. However, it 
is my opinion that the program went and has gone with amazing speed, par- 
ticularly in view of the predictions made regarding the difficulty of this pro- 
gram throughout the years 1945 to 1949. I know of no case, if you wish me 
to pursue these remarks, where Dr. Oppenheimer persuaded anyone not to 
work in this field. 

As I have remarked, scientists of this caliber generally make up their own 
minds about wishing to work or not to work in this field. A number of out- 
standing people whom we would like to have brought into this program felt 
that their best contribution to the country was to remain in university cir- 
cles and contribute to the training of graduate students. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 181 


With this point of view, one can hardly differ. Of course, Los Alamos 
Laboratory had a selfish approach to it. 

Q. Would you say that Dr. Oppenheimer’s attitude, opinions, activities with 
respect to the development of thermonuclear weapons in any way indicated 
that there were some malevolent or sinister motives about it? 

A. Absolutely not. As I have remarked, from 1946 on, I have never known 
him to act in a way other than was a help to the laboratory. . .. 

He has given us frequently prospects, outstanding young individuals, 
whom we might be able to approach particularly in the field of theoretical 
physics to join the laboratory. 

With me personally he has never been other. From October 1945 on and 
during the war years, other than encouraging, helpful, congratulatory, and 
generally both a personal friend and a friend of the laboratory. 

Q. How long have you known Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I knew him as an instructor when I was a graduate student at Berkeley in 
1931-32, probably, somewhere through there. I knew him as director of Los 
Alamos Scientific Laboratory from June of 1944 until October 1945. I knew 
him thereafter as chairman of the General Advisory Committee and saw 
him regularly, I would say, several times a year, in that capacity. He visited 
Los Alamos, I would again say, at least once a year or perhaps twice, in 
connection with his responsibilities as chairman of the General Advisory 
Committee. 

Q. How well do you think you know him as a man, his character, and so on, 
the kind of person he is? 

A. I would think I would know him as well as one knows any individual with 
whom one has had friendly and professional contact over quite a long num- 
ber of years, and perhaps better than the average having seen him in his ca- 
pacity as director of the laboratory, in which I then had an assisting subor- 
dinate position. 

Q. Do you have an opinion as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty to the country, 
and as to whether he would be a security risk? 

A. I do have such an opinion and it is a very strong one. 

Q. Would you state it, please? 

A. I would regard him from my observation as completely loyal to this coun- 
try. In fact, I would make a statement of this sort, I think, that while loyalty 
is a very difficult thing to demonstrate in an objective fashion, if a man 
could demonstrate loyalty in an objective way, that Dr. Oppenheimer in his 
direction of Los Alamos Laboratory during the war years did demonstrate 
such loyalty. I myself feel that his devotion to that task, the nature of the de- 
cisions which he was called upon to make, the manner in which he made 
them, were as objective a demonstration of personal loyalty to this country 
as I myself can imagine. 

Q. As to this business of a security risk, which I take it is perhaps a little 
different from loyalty, do you have an opinion on that? 


182 THE HEARING 


A. Ido not regard him as a security risk. 
MR. SILVERMAN. I have no further questions. 
Mr. Gray. Mr. Robb. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Doctor, what was your position after the Russian explosion on the ques- 
tion of whether or not we should develop the thermonuclear bomb? Were 
you for it or against it? 

A. I was under the impression I had made some remarks on that subject. 
When you say develop the thermonuclear bomb, may I qualify my remarks 
to this extent. I felt, as I believe I said earlier, extremely strongly that the 
laboratory must undertake all possible attacks upon the thermonuclear sys- 
tem to see what there was of utility in this field. Now, it seems easy now to 
say thermonuclear bomb has been developed by public announcement; it 
seems obvious that there must always have been such a device in the obvi- 
ous cards. This was not the case. The state of knowledge of thermonuclear 
systems during the war, and thereafter, and really up until the spring of 
1951, was such as to make the practical utility or even the workability in 
any useful sense of what was then imagined as a thermonuclear weapon ex- 
tremely questionable. This does not mean that—in fact, it meant very much 
to us that one must find out what is there in this field. Only by work in it 
will one find out. It is possible that we would have explored the field and 
out it was not, that we could not find a useful military system in it. But 
without this exploration, it is clear you wouldn’t know. 

We felt very strongly that we had to know the fact. In 1949-50 the state of 
knowledge at that time would certainly permit one to be very pessimistic 
about the practical utility of what was called a hydrogen bomb. 

Q. Did you think that the Russians would certainly try to find out? 

A. I was personally certain that no group of people knowing the energy 
which was available in the so-called fusion type of reaction would fail to 
explore this field. 

Q. Therefore you thought we ought to also? 

A. Icertainly feel this way, yes, felt and feel. 

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Doctor. That is all I care to ask the Doctor... . 

Mr. Gray. Dr. Bradbury, I don’t want you or anyone else to misunderstand the 
next question I am going to ask. It points to no conclusion certainly in my 
mind about anything at all. It has to do with perhaps the most serious un- 
derlying implication involved in these proceedings. That has to do with 
loyalty to country. 

I think your statement in response to a question from counsel was that 
you had no question about Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty, and you based it at 
least in part on his very remarkable accomplishments during the war years 
as Director of the Laboratory. I think there are those perhaps who ques- 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 183 


tioned Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty and who might argue that an individual 
who was sympathetic to the U.S.S.R. could very consistently have gone far 
beyond the call of normal duty in his war work, which was beneficial to the 
interests of the United States, and still have felt that sympathetic interests 
for the Soviet Union were also being served. That is at least an argument 
can be made, and I am sure you are familiar with it. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. In your testimony about Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty, are you pre- 
pared to give your judgment to the war years? In other words, do you think 
that his actions since the war are of the same character and nature as to lead 
you to a conclusion about his loyalty? 

THE Witness. I do, and I have the same opinion. I think it can be supported by 
the same sort—perhaps not quite the same sort of objective evidence. I am 
well aware that it is possible to attribute ulterior motives to almost any 
human action. It is possible to argue these questions in perpetuity along 
those lines. Referring to my statement about his behavior as Director of Los 
Alamos Laboratory, in my own opinion, this to me constitutes as strong ob- 
jective evidence as one can hope for, of loyalty. I have to base this not only 
upon the technical accomplishments of the laboratory, but upon the way in 
which these accomplishments were done, upon the manner in which he 
sought and made use of advice from his senior staff, essentially upon a sort 
of subjective impression which you can only get by seeing a man look wor- 
ried, that indeed the success of this laboratory and its role in the war that 
was then going on were objectives which were uppermost and surpassed all 
others in his mind. I was not looking in his mind, and I cannot say this of 
course from definite knowledge. You can never say anything about a man’s 
loyalty by looking at him except what you feel. I would feel from everything 
that I could see of his operation at Los Alamos during the war years that 
here is a man who is completely and unequivocally loyal to the best inter- 
ests of this country. 

I would make the same remark about the associations I had with him after 
the war years. I suppose it is true, although he can say this better than I, that 
he had deep personal concerns about the actual role of atomic weapons in 
the national security. I think anyone is entitled and should have this same 
sort of concern. What personal decisions one makes in the long run is of 
course a personal matter. But certainly his chairmanship of the GAC after 
the war years never questioned the fact or never questioned the assertion 
that the Los Alamos Laboratory should continue, should be strengthened, 
should proceed along lines of endeavor which were of military effective- 
ness. Every decision that I can recall that the GAC made with respect to the 
laboratory, with the possible exception of what may have been their opin- 
ion regarding thermonuclear development, seemed to me to be the right de- 
cision. In other words, there was never to my knowledge any degree of dif- 
ference of opinion between myself, my senior staff, and the positions taken 
by the GAC. 


184 THE HEARING 


This was particularly the case that the laboratory felt extremely strongly 
that actual test of nuclear weapons were a fundamental part of the progress 
in this field. We still feel that way extremely strongly. The GAC supported 
us in this. Had they not done so, our progress would have been enormously 
slower or almost zero. This could have been a point where one might have 
taken a contrary position perhaps. The GAC did not do so. 

I believe the question which I tend to believe was exaggerated at the time 
in the public press and got into erroneous importance at the time through 
the efforts of a number of people—it assumed an erroneous stature in pub- 
lic debate—was on a case where we might have found ourselves in a differ- 
ence of opinion with the GAC. Whether this difference was real or not, I am 
not prepared to say. But I have stated what the opinion of the laboratory was 
as strongly as I can. 

I do not personally believe that if there was this difference of opinion, 
and I presume there was some difference of opinion here, that it was based 
on malevolent motives. 

I believe and still believe that the apparent position of the GAC was based 
upon a defendable argument although one with which I might not person- 
ally agree. I might not have personally agreed with one of the conclusions of 
the question of policy that some members of the GAC arrived at. Neverthe- 
less, I do not regard them as opinions which are either malevolent or sub- 
versive. I positively regard them as opinions which can be held and which 
were held as matters relating to the safety of the United States. 

The safety of the United States I am convinced was uppermost in the 
minds of all members, including the chairman, of the GAC. We may have 
differed as to the best methods of obtaining the safety. I think such differ- 
ences are an essential part of any democratic system. I never had then nor 
do I now have the slightest feeling that these differences were motivated by 
any other than a direct deep and sincere concern for the welfare of the 
country. 

That was only substantiated by the actions of the GAC after the Presi- 
dent’s decision, which again were in strong support of this whole field 
which we characterize as thermonuclear. Basically the GAC supported the 
laboratory as a weapons laboratory in all fields. If there was a difference of 
opinion in 1949-50, it had to do with perhaps the technical question of em- 
phasis on one or another line of attack in the weapons field in general. 

Does that answer your question? 

Mr. Gray. I think probably it does. I think your answer is in the affirmative. I 
think my question was that you feel that the character and nature and in- 
tensity of Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty has been as great in postwar years as 
you saw it in the war years. 

THE WitnEss. That is my feeling. ... 

Dr. Evans. Do you think that scientific men as a rule are rather peculiar indi- 
viduals? 

THE Witness. When did I stop beating my wife? 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 185 


Mr. Gray. Especially chemistry professors? 

Dr. Evans. No, physics professors. 

THE WITNESS. Scientists are human beings. I think as a class, because their 
basic task is concerned with the exploration of the facts of nature, under- 
standing, this is a quality of mind philosophy—a scientist wants to know. 
He wants to know correctly and truthfully and precisely. By this token it 
seems to me he is more likely than not to be interested in a number of fields, 
but to be interested in them from the point of view of exploration. What is 
in them? What do they have to offer. What is their truth. I think this degree 
of flexibility of approach, of interest, of curiosity about facts, about systems, 
about life, is an essential ingredient to aman who is going to be a successful 
research scientist. If he does not have this underlying curiosity, willingness 
to look into things, wish and desire to look into things, I do not think he 
will be either a good or not certainly a great scientist. 

Therefore, I think you are likely to find among people who have imagina- 
tive minds in the scientific field, individuals who are also willing, eager to 
look at a number of other fields with the same type of interest, willingness 
to examine, to be convinced and without a priori convictions as to rightness 
or wrongness, that this constant or this or that curve or this or that function 
is fatal. 

I think the same sort of willingness to explore other areas of human activ- 
ity is probably characteristic. If this makes them peculiar, I think it is prob- 
ably a desirable peculiarity. 


HARTLEY Rowe: “I don’t like to see women and children killed 
wholesale because the male element of the human race are so 
stupid that they can’t... keep out of war” 


[Bradbury’s testimony was followed by that of Walter Gordon Whitman, 
head of the chemistry department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol- 
ogy, and since 1950, a member of the General Advisory Committee. He 
stated that Oppenheimer was “completely loyal” but that he had antago- 
nized the U.S. Air Force by suggesting that it should not have a monopoly 
over atomic weapons. Then Hartley Rowe—an engineer, a member of the 
General Advisory Committee from 1947 to 1950, and a vice president of the 
United Fruit Co.—is called to testify in Oppenheimer’s behalf.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks:... 


Q. Would you give an account, as far as you can on the basis of your memory, 
and without getting into classified materials, of that meeting of the GAC, of 


186 THE HEARING 


its discussions and of your own views on the subject of the crash program 
for an H-bomb? 

A. My recollection is that it was a pretty soul searching time, and I had rather 
definite views of my own that the general public had considered the A- 
bomb as the end of all wars, or that we had something that would discour- 
age wars, that would be a deterrent to wars. I was rather loath to enter into a 
crash program on the H-bomb until we had more nearly perfected the mili- 
tary potentialities of the A-bomb, thinking that it would divert too large a 
portion of the scientific world and too large a portion of the money that 
would be involved to something that might be good and it might be bad. 

Q. As far as you yourself were concerned, did you have any qualms about the 
development of an H-bomb or the use of it if it could be developed? 

A. My position was always against the development of the H-bomb. 

Q. Could you explain that a little? 

A. There are several reasons. I may be an idealist but I can’t see why any 
people can go from one engine of destruction to another, each of them a 
thousand times greater in potential destruction, and still retain any normal 
perspective in regard to their relationships with other countries and also in 
relationship with peace. I had always felt that if a commensurate effort had 
been made to come to some understanding with the nations of the world, 
we might have avoided the development of the H-bomb. 

Q. Did you oppose the actions that the Atomic Energy Commission was tak- 
ing and with respect to which the General Advisory Committee was advis- 
ing during the period between 1947 and 1950 to realize the full potential of 
the A-bomb? 

A. Will you state the question again? 

Q. Did you oppose the efforts that were made to realize the full potential of 
the A-bomb during the period 1947 onward? 

A. Not knowingly, no. We were in that, and my earnest opinion was that we 
should make the best of it. 

Q. If you can, would you explain why on the one hand you supported the de- 
velopment of A-bombs to their full potential, but at the same time held 
views that were in opposition to the H-bomb? 

A. Ithought the A-bomb might be used somewhat as a military weapon in the 
same order as a cannon or a new device of that sort, and that we perhaps 
could use it as a deterrent to war, and if war came, if we had all the poten- 
tialities of it developed, we would be in a stronger position than if we only 
had the bomb itself without any of the other characteristic military weapons 
that were developed later. 

Q. Why did you distinguish between that and the H-bomb? 

A. Purely as a matter of the order of destruction. The H-bomb, according to 
the papers, this is not classified, is a thousand times more destructive than 
the A-bomb, and you haven’t yet reached the potentiality of it. 

Q. Iam not clear whether you are saying that you felt that the H-bomb was big 
enough for our needs. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 187 


A. I think the A-bomb was exploited to its full capacity, yes. I don’t like to 
step up destructiveness in the order of 1,000 times. ... 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Rowe, I was very much interested in your description of your 
feelings in late 1949 about the development of the H-bomb. I think you 
made it very clear how you felt about it. 

I would like to ask you whether you ever, in thinking about our problem 
and what we should do in this country, whether it was a source of concern 
to you that the Soviet Union might be working and perhaps successfully, to- 
wards the development of this kind of weapon. Perhaps my question is 
does that make any difference to you at all? 

THE Witness. It makes some difference, yes; but I would place more reliance 
on the proper use of the A-bomb without the H-bomb unless it developed 
as it did later that we had to go into it as a deterrent. I don’t think it will 
ever be used against our enemies. I am quite concerned as to whether we 
would ever use the A-bomb or the A-bomb artillery or other military 
weapons. 

Mr. Gray. Some witnesses who have come before this board have testified 
that the news of the Soviet success in early fall, whenever it was, Septem- 
ber, announced in September— 

THE WITNESS. You mean last year? 

Mr. Gray. No; I mean in 1949, the A-bomb of the Soviet. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. Some witnesses have testified that at that point they felt that we 
should do something to regain our lead, is the way it has been expressed, I 
believe; that we had a margin of advantage we thought over a possible 
enemy, and the one with whom we would most likely be engaged in conflict 
if we became so engaged, that with the announcement of the Soviet explo- 
sion it appeared that the lead we had might dwindle and perhaps not con- 
tinue to be a lead, and therefore something should be done to regain it. Do I 
understand your testimony correctly in thinking that you felt that proper 
exploitation of the weapon we already had and the knowledge we already 
had would have enabled us to maintain the lead, or was that important? 

THE WITNESS. I wasn’t thinking so much of the lead, but I thought it would be 
more effective, and we would have a better balanced military arm, the 
Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. Whatever you take away from any one of 
those three is going to unbalance them. A trade of the effort being put on the 
H-bomb would detract from the things that needed to be done to get new 
weapons so that in the next world war we would not be fighting the war 
with the weapons of the previous war, as we have in the last two. It seemed 
to me we had a much better chance militarywise in perfecting our A-bomb 
weapons. You understand what I mean by the different kind of weapons? 

MR. Gray. Yes, sir. 

THE Witness. Than it would be to devote that effort to producing something 
that was a thousand times worse in explosive power at least, and can only 
be used in my opinion in retaliation. I don’t think it has any place in a mil- 


188 THE HEARING 


itary campaign at all. Then if you used it in retaliation, you are using it 
against civilization, and not against the military. 

I have that distinction very clearly in my mind. I don’t like to see women 
and children killed wholesale because the male element of the human race 
are so stupid that they can’t get out of war and keep out of war. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to turn to something else for a moment. You have read 
General Nichols’ letter and Dr. Oppenheimer’s reply? 

THE WITNESS. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Gray. Do you feel that your present conviction about Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
character, loyalty and associations, would be the same if you knew that the 
information contained in the Nichols letter by early associations was true? 
Would your reply still be the same? 

Let me repeat, Mr. Rowe, I am not saying that it is or is not true. Can you 
assume that derogatory information and still arrive at the answer you gave 
to Mr. Marks’ question? 

THE Witness. I think my answer to that would be I would make it just that 
much stronger because people make mistakes and people in the climate of 
public opinion in those days which was quite different than it is now—we 
know a great deal more than we did then—I think a man of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s character is not going to make the same mistake twice. I would say 
he was all the more trustworthy for the mistakes he made. 


Lee A. DuBripGe: “Dr. Oppenheimer . . . was a natural and re- 
spected and at all times a loved leader” 


[The final witness of the day, Lee A. DuBridge, is president of the California 
Institute of Technology and chairman of the Science Advisory Committee of 
the Office of Defense Mobilization. He went to Los Alamos as a consultant 
in May 1945, and later served on the General Advisory Committee, from 
1946 to 1952, when Oppenheimer was chairman. Two weeks before the 
hearing began, DuBridge spoke with Oppenheimer on the telephone. To 
Oppenheimer’s assertion that the hearing was “damn nonsense,” DuBridge 
replied: “It’s more troublesome than that; if it were only nonsense we might 
fight it, but it is deeper than that.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 

By Mr. Garrison:... 

Q. I want to ask you a little about the work of the General Advisory Commit- 
tee from its inception up to the October 1949 meeting. I want to ask you a 
few questions about that meeting and then a few questions about what hap- 
pened in the GAC after President Truman gave the go-ahead on the all-out 
program for the H-bomb. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 189 


We have a good deal of testimony already on these subjects. I don’t expect 
an exhaustive discussion from you, but I would like you to tell the board a 
few of the things that stand out in your memory during the period from the 
beginning of the GAC up to October 1949 in the way of recommendations 
made by the GAC to the Commission and what part Dr. Oppenheimer 
played in that effort. ... 

A. Even if Dr. Oppenheimer had not been officially elected Chairman each 
year, and if I may say so, he resigned or attempted to resign each year, feel- 
ing that a new Chairman should be elected, the Committee unanimously re- 
jected his recommendation every year, and asked him to continue to serve 
as Chairman. He was so naturally a leader of our group that it was impossi- 
ble to imagine that he should not be in the chair. He was the leader of our 
group first because his knowledge of the atomic energy work was far more 
intimate than that of any other member of the Committee. He had obviously 
been more intimately involved in the actual scientific work of the Manhat- 
tan project than any other person on our Committee. He was a natural 
leader because we respected his intelligence, his judgment, his personal at- 
titude toward the work of the Commission, and the Committee. Of course, 
without saying we had not the faintest doubt of his loyalty. More than that, 
we felt, and I feel that there is no one who has exhibited his loyalty to this 
country more spectacularly than Dr. Oppenheimer. He was a natural and re- 
spected and at all times a loved leader of that group. 

At the same time I should emphasize that at no time did he dominate the 
group or did he suppress opinions that did not agree with his own. In fact, 
he encouraged a full and free and frank exchange of ideas throughout the 
full history of the Committee. That is the reason we liked him as a leader, 
because though he did lead and stimulate and inform us and help us in our 
decisions, he never dominated nor suppressed contrary or different opin- 
ions. There was a free, full, frank exchange, and it was one of the finest 
Committees that I ever had the privilege to serve on for that reason. 

Q. Coming now to the October 29, 1949, meeting at which the question of the 
crash program for the H-bomb was discussed at great length, do you recall 
how the topic of the so-called crash program for the H-bomb came up to the 
GAC? 

A. This is a matter of recollection of a particular thing that happened. I will 
have to tell it in rather general terms though I am sure the records of the 
Committee must be available to you.... 

I think it went something like this. May I go back just a moment? After 
this question was posed by Dr. Oppenheimer to the Committee for its con- 
sideration—and I will not attempt to state the full technical content of that 
question at the moment—Dr. Oppenheimer asked the members of the Com- 
mittee if they would in turn around the table express their views on this 
question. The way in which the Committee happened to be seated at the 
table, I was either the last or the next to last to express my views. 

The Chairman, Dr. Oppenheimer, did not express his point of view on 


190 THE HEARING 


this question until after all of the rest of the members of the Committee had 
expressed themselves. It was clear, however, as the individual members did 
express their opinions as we went around the table, that while there were 
differing points of view, different reasons, different methods of thinking, 
different methods of approach to the problem, that each member came 
essentially to the same conclusion, namely, there were better things the 
United States could do at that time than to embark upon this super pro- 
gram.... 

If we made any mistake in our reports, the mistake was in not amplifying 
and giving our views. I think we made our reports too brief, and therefore 
they were not understood. Therefore, much of what I am saying is opinion I 
held as I recall it, and I am not sure just how much was written down. Only 
a small part of that actually. Therefore, there were technical reasons for not 
thinking that the super was ready for production. There were important rea- 
sons for thinking that there were more fruitful things at Los Alamos, and the 
other laboratories could proceed on the fission program. 

The fission weapon program was such that a very large destructive power 
was in our hands, and it was not clear to me that the thermonuclear 
weapons would add in significant ways to that destructive power. 

Finally, there was a question of whether the United States could not find 
a better way of strengthening, rather than deteriorating its moral position 
with the rest of the world. It seemed to me and to some other members—I 
think all of the members of the Committee—that if the United States, in- 
stead of making a unilateral announcement that it was proceeding with this 
new and terribly destructive weapon, should instead say to the world that 
such a weapon may be possible, but we would like to discuss methods of 
reaching agreements where no nation would proceed with the design and 
construction of such a weapon. 

It seemed to me at the time that the moral position of the United States in 
the face of the rest of the world would be better if we took that kind of a 
stand rather than making a unilateral announcement that we were proceed- 
ing with this new weapon of mass destruction. That as I recollect it was the 
background of my thinking at that time. 

I must say that I cannot claim credit for originality in these thoughts. 
These thoughts evolved from my discussions with the other members of the 
Committee. But as nearly as I can reconstruct my thoughts at that time, that 
is it.... 

Q. May I just for a moment remind you that the Atomic Energy Act requires 
the board to consider character, associations, and loyalty. Having this frame 
of reference that the board here must consider, the character, associations 
and loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer, in determining whether or not his continu- 
ance of his clearance would endanger the national safety, having in mind 
the past associations set forth in the letter, having in mind what you know 
about Dr. Oppenheimer’s character, having in mind what you say that the 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 191 


continuance of his clearance would to any degree endanger the national 
safety? 

A. In no degree whatsoever. 

Q. On what do you base this judgment? 

A. In the first place, these associations that are mentioned were those of 
many, many years ago. As I understand it, they have largely long since been 
terminated, in at least one case by death. In the second place, these were 
rather natural associations of a person who had strong human interests, in- 
terests in human rights and human liberties and human welfare, who had 
strong revulsions against the growth of dictatorship in Germany, Spain, and 
Italy, and who wanted to express his opposition to such violations of 
human liberty as he regarded these dictatorships. He therefore found him- 
self among others of like minds, some of whom it turned out were possible 
members of the Communist Party. But this was only a natural exhibition of 
his deep interest in human beings and in human liberty and had nothing to 
do with his devotion to this country, or nothing adverse to do with this 
country. 

In the second place, it seems to me that to question the integrity and loy- 
alty of a person who has worked hard and devotedly for his country as Dr. 
Oppenheimer has on such trivial grounds is against all principles of human 
justice. It seems to me whatever his ideas and associations were in 1935, is 
quite irrelevant in view of the last years since 1941-42, during which he 
has shown such a devoted interest to the welfare, security and strength of 
the United States. Whatever mistakes, if they were mistakes, and I do not 
suggest that they were, that were made in the thirties have well been 
washed out and the value of a man like Dr. Oppenheimer to his country has 
been adequately and repeatedly proved. 

It would be in my opinion against all principles of justice to now not rec- 
ognize the way in which his loyalty has been proved in a positive way 
through positive contributions. Furthermore, this country needs men of 
that kind, and should not deprive itself of their services. 

Q. I think I should put this question to you because it is something that I want 
you to bear in mind when I ask you to give me your final judgment. 

You are familiar with the Chevalier incident as recited in the Commis- 
sion’s letter. 

A. That is my only familiarity, what I read in the letter. . . . 

Q. ... You would regard that seriously, I take it? 

A. I would want to examine this situation very seriously. . . . I assume there- 
fore you wish me to answer this from the point of view of my knowledge of 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s character and integrity, and my statement would be 
without hesitation that I would say that these acts which he is supposed to 
have committed in no case stem from any disloyalty to the United States, 
but possibly a mistaken but nevertheless a sincere and honest belief that 
this was the best thing to do at the time. I just know that Dr. Oppenheimer 


192 THE HEARING 


is loyal to his friend and loyal to his country, that he is honest, but has a hu- 
mane feeling, that if he did these things it was with a sense that a loyalty to 
a friend was important but was not in conflict with any loyalty to the coun- 
try at that time. 

Q. Do you think that today if he were asked by security officers to reveal in- 
formation which they believe to be important for the security of the country, 
that he would decline to do so even if a friend were involved? 

A. I am sure that at any time if he had felt a loyalty to his country was in- 
volved, he would have done what seemed to be the proper thing to rein- 
force that loyalty. 

Q. I am asking you today, leaving aside whether he thought that his friend 
was innocent or not, if he were told by security officers that in their judg- 
ment the interests of the country required knowledge which he had about a 
friend, would he put the interests of his country ahead of the friendship? 

A. Iam confident that he would. We have all learned a great deal about secu- 
rity problems in the last 10 years. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is all. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, do you think that loyalty to a friend justifies the giving of false in- 
formation to a security officer? 

A. I would not wish to do that myself. 

Q. You would not do it, would you? 

A. I don’t think so. 

Q. In fact, you can’t conceive of any circumstances under which you would 
not? 

A. I wouldn't say that. 

Q. It is hard to think of any? 

A. First, it is hard to project ourselves back 10 years as to what the situation 
was like then. None of us had any very keen appreciation of the problems of 
security and secrecy at that time or what was involved. I cannot say under 
no circumstances would I be reluctant to give away or give information 
about a friend if I were personally convinced that this information had 
nothing to do with the country’s welfare. I would try to cooperate with se- 
curity officers under all conditions but I cannot say that under no condi- 
tions would I be reluctant to give such information. 

Q. That was not quite my question. My question was whether or not you 
would feel that loyalty to your friend justified you in lying to a security of- 
ficer. 

A. No, I would not feel so. 

Q. The standards of honesty were the same in 1943 as they are now, weren’t 
they? 

A. Presumably. .. . 


THURSDAY, APRIL 22 193 


Mr. Gray. Dr. Evans, do you have any questions. 

Dr. Evans. Dr. DuBridge, let us go back again to that Chevalier incident. You 
remember about it. I want to ask you this question. Was it Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s job to decide whether the security of his country was involved, 
rather than to report the incident? 

THE WITNESS. Would you repeat that? 

Dr. Evans. Yes. Was it Dr. Oppenheimer’s job to decide for himself whether 
the security of the country was involved rather than report the incident im- 
mediately? 

THE Witness. I think possibly Dr. Oppenheimer was mistaken in his judgment 
at that time. I am sure it is a mistake he will not repeat. 

Dr. Evans. You would not have done it the way Dr. Oppenheimer did? 

THE WITNESS. Knowing what I do now, today, I would not. What I would have 
done in 1940, I cannot say. 

Dr. Evans. That is all. 

Mk. Gray. Mr. Garrison. 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. I just wanted to make sure—and I think it is probably sure by now, but 
perhaps not—that with respect to the items of information about the 
H-bomb in the Commission’s letter, do you have any opinion with regard to 
those particular items? ... 

A. I would like to make a report about the first part. 

First, it seems to me that those statements about his opinions, even inso- 
far as they are true, could perfectly possibly and indeed I believe were the 
opinions of a perfectly loyal American seeking to increase and not decrease 
the military establishment of his country. 

“Further reported that even after it was determined as a matter of national 
policy to proceed with the development of a hydrogen bomb, you contin- 
ued to oppose the project and not cooperate fully in the project.” 

To the best of my knowledge that statement was false. “It was reported 
that you departed from your proper role in the distribution of the reports of 
the General Advisory Committee for the purpose of trying to turn such top 
personnel against the development of the hydrogen bomb.” To the best of 
my knowledge that is false. 

I think it is quite probable that copies of GAC reports did reach the top 
people of Los Alamos as all our reports did by normal channels, but that the 
chairman of the committee departed from his proper role or did this with 
the purpose of trying to turn personnel against the hydrogen bomb is in my 
opinion false. 

“It was further reported that you were instrumental in persuading other 
outstanding scientists not to work on the hydrogen project, and your oppo- 
sition to the hydrogen bomb of which you are the most experienced and 


194 THE HEARING 


most powerful has definitely slowed down its development,” that is also 
false. Quite the contrary, I believe Dr. Oppenheimer’s efforts and the efforts 
of the GAC were intended solely to improve the position of this country, 
with no other objective, purpose or result. 

MR. GARRISON. That is all. 


Friday, April 23 


Rocer Ross: “Mr. Chairman, unless ordered to do so by the 
board, we shall not disclose to Mr. Garrison in advance the 
names of the witnesses we contemplate calling” 


[As the hearing opens, Lloyd K. Garrison requests that Roger Robb follow 
the usual trial procedure and provide the defense lawyers with the names of 
the witnesses he intends to call, as, in fact, Garrison had done for Robb.] 


Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, I was informed by you yesterday afternoon that 
some witnesses would be called this coming week by the board. I had as- 
sumed from prior discussions that we would be informed of the names of 
these witnesses, but whether or not that assumption was correct, I asked 
you at the close of the session yesterday for the names of the respective wit- 
nesses in order that we might have time to prepare for cross-examination, if 
cross-examination seemed to be indicated with respect to one or more of 
them. 

I would like to state very briefly the reasons why it seemed to me this re- 
quest is a proper one to make on behalf of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

The purpose of this inquiry which is not a trial is to arrive at the truth as 
nearly as truth can be arrived at. I don’t think it takes any argument to point 
out that cross-examination is one of the ways of bringing out the truth. I ap- 
preciate fully that there is no question here of denying the right of cross-ex- 
amination, but there is, as I am sure the board knows, oftentimes a need of 
preparation in cases where there may be an element of surprise in the call- 
ing of a witness, or in cases where a witness who one might perhaps think 
it possible the board might call we would know in advance would require a 
great deal of preparation, and in the press of other work, we would not want 
to undertake that uselessly if the person were not to be called. But in the 
main it is to have an opportunity to consider who is going to be called and 
to inform ourselves as to what we need to do. 

With respect to our own witnesses, we have I think from the very first 
day, and from time to time gladly supplied the board with a list of people 


FRIDAY, APRIL 23 195 


whom we expected to call. There have been changes in the schedule. Some 
inevitable additions and some who could not make it because of conflict of 
things and so forth, but in general I have tried to keep the board as accu- 
rately informed as I could. 

It is quite clear that in the case of at least some of these witnesses sub- 
stantial preparation for cross-examination was made ahead of time and in 
the case of several others opportunity was had for the representatives of the 
board to discuss matters with these witnesses themselves, a process to’ 
which we had not the slightest objection at all. 

Now, it seems to me that the same kind of notice and the same opportu- 
nity for preparation both in fairness to Dr. Oppenheimer and in the interest 
of developing the true state of affairs be accorded to Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Therefore, on his behalf I request that we be informed of the witnesses 
whom the board proposes to call. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, unless ordered to do so by the board, we shall not 
disclose to Mr. Garrison in advance the names of the witnesses we contem- 
plate calling. 

I should like briefly to state the reasons which compel me to this conclu- 
sion in the very best of spirit, and I am sure Mr. Garrison will take it that 
way. 

In the first place, I might say, Mr. Chairman, that from the very inception 
of this proceeding, I think Dr. Oppenheimer has had every possible consid- 
eration. Going back to December, subsequent to the receipt by him of the 
letter from General Nichols, the time for his answer to be sent in was ex- 
tended several times at his request, and without any objection whatever, be- 
cause it was thought that was a reasonable request. 

At the proceedings before this board, I am sure the record will show that 
the board has extended every courtesy and consideration to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer and his witnesses. The board has permitted the testimony of several 
witnesses to be interrupted in order that others might be called to suit their 
convenience. The board has sat long hours for that purpose. One evening, 
as I recall, we sat until 7:45, and I cross-examined the witness for the last 2 
hours of that session. On one occasion we adjourned early so that Mr. Gar- 
rison might confer with his client with a view to putting him on for redirect 
examination. 

Counsel has made no objection to any questions, although I say frankly 
that some questions might have been objectionable, but witnesses have 
been permitted to argue from the witness stand without objection, and tell 
the board in rather forceful terms about what the board ought to do about 
the problem, without objection. 

Mr. Rolander has worked late at night and on Saturday and Sunday in 
order to get the record in shape so that it might be taken by Mr. Garrison and 
his associates. 

I mention all these things, Mr. Chairman, only to illustrate what I think 


196 THE HEARING 


the record abundantly shows, which is every effort has been made to make 
this a full and a fair hearing, and to accord Dr. Oppenheimer every right, 
and I am sure that has been done. 

Mr. Chairman, the public has an interest in this proceeding also, and of 
course the public has rights which must be looked out for. In my opinion, 
and it is a very firm opinion, the public interest requires that these wit- 
nesses be not identified in advance. I will say frankly that I apprehend, and 
I think reasonably apprehend, that should that be done, the names of these 
witnesses would leak, and the result then would be the embarrassment and 
the pressure of publicity. 

I think furthermore, and I will be frank about it, that in the event that any 
witnesses from the scientific world should be called, they would be subject 
to pressure. They would be told within 24 hours by some friends or col- 
leagues what they should or should not say. I say specifically and emphati- 
cally I am not suggesting that would be done by Dr. Oppenheimer, his coun- 
sel or anybody representing him. But I think the record abundantly shows 
here the intense feeling which this matter has generated in the scientific 
world. I think it perfectly reasonable to believe that should there appear 
here today that Scientist Y was to testify, inside of 24 hours that man would 
be subject to all sorts of pressure. 

Now, Mr. Garrison has said there would be no leak. Perhaps so, Mr. Chair- 
man, but the New York Times of the day after this hearing began, and the 
column which appeared in the Washington Post this morning do not lead 
me to rely with any great assurance upon any such statements. I think it 
would be a serious danger that the orderly presentation of testimony, the 
truthful presentation of testimo.y would be impeded were these witnesses 
to be identified. 

Mr. Garrison speaks of the preparation for cross-examination. In the first 
place, I didn’t ask Mr. Garrison for the names of his witnesses in advance. It 
was entirely immaterial to me whether he gave them to me or not. We 
talked, of course, to General Groves, Mr. Lansdale—I think that is all of the 
witnesses—because both of them wanted to look at the files to refresh their 
recollection. Most of the witnesses who were called here I never saw before 
in my life. 

I will let Mr. Garrison in on a little trade secret. In the case of almost all of 
the witnesses, my only advance preparation for cross-examination was a 
thorough knowledge of this case. I am sure that Mr. Garrison has an equally 
thorough knowledge of the case. He has been working on it, I am sure, as 
long as I have. He has the assistance of Dr. Oppenheimer. Dr. Oppenheimer 
is the one man in the world who knows the most about Dr. Oppenheimer, 
his life, and his works. He also knows as much, I think, as anybody else 
about the subject of nuclear physics, which has been under discussion. 

Mr. Garrison also has the assistance of three able counsel in this room, 
and I believe one other lawyer who is reading the transcript and making a 
digest of it for him. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 23 197 


As for surprise, I am sure any witness who testifies here within the scope 
of the issues of this case will not be unfamiliar to Mr. Garrison, nor will the 
subject matter of his testimony be unfamiliar to Mr. Garrison. 

I am sure Mr. Garrison can do just as well as I did, however well that may 
have been. Maybe he wants to do better, if he can, fine. 

Mr. Chairman, to sum up, my position is simply dictated by the public in- 
terest which I think would not be served by a disclosure in advance of the 
names of these witnesses for the reasons I have stated. I think that fairness 
to Dr. Oppenheimer does not require such a disclosure. 

Mr. Gray. Do you care to respond to any of that? 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to make an argument. I just want to 
make one or two observations. 

First, with regard to the procedure of the board, the only thing that I have 
objected to that I still regard with all due respect as not in keeping with the 
spirit of the regulations is the questioning of witnesses, particularly Dr. Op- 
penheimer, as to their recollection of things past when the Government had 
in its possession papers, some of them taken in Dr. Oppenheimer’s case 
from his own file as classified, and then declassified and read to him after 
the questions had been put in a way that could be calculated to make the 
witness appear in as poor a light as possible. The sort of thing I can make no 
objection to on orthodox legal rules of trial behavior in a court room, but 
which seem to me not appropriate here. I simply have to say that lest by si- 
lence I seem to acquiesce. 

I also might say that in a court room that state of affairs can scarcely arise 
because of the nature of the documents and the source from which they 
came in this case. So it is perhaps an altogether novel situation and all the 
more I] think not in keeping in the spirit of inquiry as distinct from a 
trial.... 

Mr. Gray. I can respond on behalf of the board, because we have had some 
discussion of it this morning. I am going to advert to several things that 
counsel said here, so my statement may be in the nature of random obser- 
vations in part... . 

Now, it is true, Mr. Garrison, that you have at all times attempted to keep 
the board and Mr. Robb informed as to your general course of action with 
respect to witnesses. It is a courtesy which has been appreciated. It was not 
something that was required by the board. 

I would like to say a little bit about this matter of calling witnesses. In our 
earlier discussion, I think I have loosely used the phrase witnesses to be 
called by the board. Actually I don’t think at this moment that the board in- 
tends to call any witnesses. I do not consider that we have called those who 
have testified to this point, and the witnesses whom Mr. Robb will examine 
in direct examination will be called by him. For that purpose, this board 
considers you the attorney for Dr. Oppenheimer, Mr. Robb the attorney for 
the Atomic Energy Commission. He was appointed by the Atomic Energy 
Commission, as I understand it. 


198 THE HEARING 


The board would be very much concerned if Dr. Oppenheimer’s interests 
were in any way adversely affected by anything in the nature of surprise. I 
would guess from what Mr. Robb has told me that there probably will not be 
an element of surprise in the sense that we have in mind in this discussion. 
If, however, there is, the board will wish to be informed by counsel for Dr. 
Oppenheimer, and can give you assurance on behalf of the board that we 
will so conduct the proceeding that any disadvantage to Dr. Oppenheimer 
by reason of surprise as may be related to cross-examination may not con- 
tinue. 

The board is interested in developing the facts, and if you are unable 
under the circumstances to perform your functions—very important func- 
tions—as counsel for Dr. Oppenheimer, we want to hear about it, and take 
the necessary steps. 

The proceedings under which we operate, which are familiar to you, I 
know, require that the board conduct the proceedings in a way which will 
protect the interests of the individual and of the Government. The repre- 
sentative of the Government in this case feels with some conviction that the 
interests of the Government could possibly be prejudiced by furnishing a 
list of witnesses at this time. 

My ruling after consultation with the board is that Mr. Robb will not be 
ordered by the board to furnish these names. I couple to that ruling, how- 
ever, a repeated assurance that we wish to hear you at any time that you 
think you are at a disadvantage by not having had the names of the wit- 
nesses. ... 

Mr. GarRISON. I want to thank you for the courtesy with which this proceed- 
ing has been uniformly conducted. I know the spirit of fairness which ani- 
mates the members of the board. What you have said about considering any 
request we might make for time to prepare for cross-examination if we were 
disadvantaged by the calling of some particular witness meets what I was 
going to say after the chairman had made his ruling. 

I just feel I must make one comment, not in criticism of the board, but 
with respect to the procedure. The notion that counsel for the Commission 
is to call his own witnesses in a proceeding which therefore takes on the ap- 
pearance of an adversary proceeding with the board sitting as judges, and 
counsel for the Government on the one hand, and counsel for the employee 
on the other, is not quite a true picture of the actual shape of affairs. Unlike 
in an ordinary adversary proceeding before a judge in a courtroom, counsel 
here is possessed of documents taken from Dr. Oppenheimer’s files in some 
cases which we have no opportunity to see in advance of their reading, and 
all the rest of which we have no opportunity ever to see. 

It differs further in that the board itself is in possession of all these docu- 
ments which it has had a week’s opportunity to examine before the hearing 
began. This, then is not like an ordinary adversary proceeding. This is what 
we have to bear, Mr. Chairman. ... 


FRIDAY, APRIL 23 199 


VANNEVAR BusH: “Here is a man who is being pilloried because 
he had strong opinions, and had the temerity to express them” 


[Following this exchange between attorneys for both sides, Harry A. Winne 
testifies. Recently retired as a vice president of General Electric, Winne ex- 
plains that he met Oppenheimer early in 1946, when he was a consultant to 
Assistant Secretary of State Dean Acheson’s Committee on Atomic Energy, and 
expresses confidence in Oppenheimer’s loyalty and integrity. Then Vannevar 
Bush is called. Trained as an engineer and mathematician, Bush had taught at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and, from 1941 to 1945, served as 
director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development. At the time of 
the hearing, he is president of the Carnegie Institution in Washington.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. About how long have you known Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I have known him well since the early days of the war. I undoubtedly met 
him in gatherings of physicists before that time, but have no specific recol- 
lection of the first date that I met him. 

Q. What was your connection with his appointment to the Manhattan Dis- 
trict? 

A. There were appointments before then. At that time General Groves, who 
was in charge of the Manhattan District, reported to a body of which I was 
chairman, .. . It was the Military Policy Committee, of which I was chair- 
man. Dr. Conant was my deputy. General Groves took up all of his programs 
and policies with that group. 

At the time General Groves made the appointment of Dr. Oppenheimer at 
Los Alamos, he took that matter up with us. In my memory he took it up in- 
formally, not in a formal meeting, and discussed it with Dr. Conant and 
with me. 

Q. What recommendation did you make? 

A. General Groves said he had in mind appointing Dr. Oppenheimer. He re- 
viewed for us orally what he knew of Dr. Oppenheimer’s prewar record. I 
don’t remember that we looked at any file or any written records. He recited 
some of the previous history. Then he asked the opinion of me and Dr. Co- 
nant in regard to the appointment, and I told him IJ thought it was a good ap- 
pointment. 

Q. Did you have any discussion about any prior left-wing associations that he 
had? 

A. Yes, we did. He recited previous associations. 

Q. When you say “he,” you mean whom? 

A. General Groves. 

Q. About when was this? 


200 THE HEARING 


Vannevar Bush, November 1957. Hank 
Walker/TimePix. 


A. Inoted down a few dates. I can’t say, gentlemen, that my memory for dates 
and the like is good. In fact, it is a little bad. I have that date here some- 
where. Oppenheimer was chosen in November of 1942. 

Q. Did you have opportunity to observe his work at Los Alamos? 

A. In a sense which I was responsible for it. The structure at that time, you 
remember, was this: OSRD started this work and continued it for a con- 
siderable period. It continued parts of it in fact after that date. I originally 
carried the full responsibility for it, reporting to the President. On my rec- 
ommendation when the matter came to the construction of large facilities, 
the matter was transferred to the War Department. Secretary Stimson and I 
conferred, and the Manhattan District was set up. Groves was made head of 
it. 

After that the Military Policy Committee reviewed his recommendations 
on which I was chairman, and there was also a policy committee appointed 
by the President which consisted of the Vice President, Secretary Stimson, 
General Marshall, Dr. Conant and myself, I believe. That was appointed by 
Mr. Roosevelt at my request. When I was carrying the full responsibility, I 
told him I would prefer to have some group of that sort, and that committee 
was appointed. It never was formally dissolved. 

Q. Would you say a word as to your view of his achievement at Los Alamos? 


FRIDAY, APRIL 23 201 


A. He did a magnificent piece of work. More than any other scientist that I 
know of he was responsible for our having an atomic bomb on time. 

Q. When was your next governmental connection with him, do you recall? 

A. There have been so many I am not sure which one. 

Q. Let me go back a minute and ask you another question about the Los 
Alamos work. 

What significance would you attach to the delivery of the A-bomb on 
time, or was it delivered on time? 

A. That bomb was delivered on time, and that means it saved hundreds of 
thousands of casualties on the beaches of Japan. It was also delivered on 
time so that there was no necessity for any concessions to Russia at the end 
of the war. It was on time in the sense that after the war we had the princi- 
pal deterrent that prevented Russia from sweeping over Europe after we de- 
mobilized. It is one of the most magnificent performances of history in any 
development to have that thing on time. ... 

Q. In connection with the Secretary of State’s panel, did you have occasion to 
visit the Secretary of State in the summer of 1952? 

A. I will not try to be exact on dates on that. But when the panel had gotten to 
a point where it was about to draft a report, we met with the full panel and 
the Secretary of State, and went over some of our conclusions orally, as I re- 
member. 

Q. Before that time did you have occasion to talk with the Secretary of State 
about the question of postponing the test of the H-bomb?... 

A. I did. 

... There were two primary reasons why I took action at that time, and 
went directly to the Secretary of State. There was scheduled a test which 
was evidently going to occur early in November. I felt that it was utterly im- 
proper—and I still think so—for that test to be put off just before election, to 
confront an incoming President with an accomplished test for which he 
would carry the full responsibility thereafter. For that test marked our entry 
into a very disagreeable type of world. 

In the second place, I felt strongly that that test ended the possibility of 
the only type of agreement that I thought was possible with Russia at that 
time, namely, an agreement to make no more tests. For that kind of an 
agreement would have been self-policing in the sense that if it was violated, 
the violation would be immediately known. | still think that we made a 
grave error in conducting that test at that time, and not attempting to make 
that type of simple agreement with Russia. I think history will show that 
was a turning point that when we entered into the grim world that we are 
entering right now, that those who pushed that thing through to a conclu- 
sion without making that attempt have a great deal to answer for. 

That is what moved me, sir. I was very much moved at the time. ... 

Q. Turning to another topic, at the time of the establishment of the Atomic 
Energy Commission and the General Advisory Committee, or several 


202 THE HEARING 


months after the establishment of them both, did the Chairman of the 
Atomic Energy Commission consult you about Dr. Oppenheimer’s clear- 
ance? 

A. Yes, Iremember that he did. Mr. Lilienthal consulted me, and I wrote him 
a letter about it. 

Q. Do you havea copy of that with you? 

A. What I have is this. . . . Isn’t is quicker for me to read it? 

Mr. Gray. Why don’t you read it? 

THE WitnEss. “At our conference yesterday you asked me to comment con- 
cerning Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, and I am very glad to do so. Dr. Oppen- 
heimer is one of the great physicists of this country or of the world for that 
matter. Prior to the war he was on the staff of the University of California, 
and was regarded as the leader of theoretical aspects of atomistics and sim- 
ilar subjects of physics. Shortly after the Army entered into the develop- 
ment of atomic energy he was given a very important appointment by Gen- 
eral Groves. This appointment made him director of the laboratory at Los 
Alamos, which was in all probability the most important post held by any 
civilian scientist in connection with the entire effort. General Groves un- 
doubtedly made this appointment after a very careful study of the entire af- 
fair from all angles, as this was his custom on important appointments. 
Subsequent developments made it very clear that no error had been made 
in this connection, for Dr. Oppenheimer proved himself to be not only a 
great physicist, but also a man of excellent judgment and a real leader in the 
entire effort. In fact, it was due to the extraordinary accomplishments of 
Oppenheimer and his associates that the job was completed on time. Sub- 
sequent to the end of the war Dr. Oppenheimer has had a number of impor- 
tant appointments. He was invited by Secretary Stimson as one of the sci- 
entists consulted by the Secretaries of War and Navy in connection with the 
work of the Interim Committee. He was appointed by the State Department 
as a member of the board which drew up the plan on which Mr. Baruch 
based his program. He has recently been appointed by the President as a 
member of the General Advisory Committee of your organization. I have ap- 
pointed him a member of the Committee on Atomic Energy of the Joint Re- 
search and Development Board. All of this has followed from his extraordi- 
nary war record in which he made a unique and exceedingly important 
contribution to the success of the war effort of this country. 

“I know him very well indeed and I have personally great confidence in 
his judgment and integrity.” 

Mr. Ross. I have the original now. 


By Mr. Garrison: 

Q. At the time you wrote that letter, had you been through Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
personnel file, the FBI reports? 

A. I don’t think I ever went through Dr. Oppenheimer’s FBI file. If I did, I cer- 
tainly do not remember. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 23 203 


Q. Did you understand at the time that you wrote that letter that he had left- 
wing associations? 

A. I understood that at the time his first appointment was made at Los 
Alamos. I had an exposition of the entire affair from General Groves. 

Q. You read the letter of General Nichols dated December 23, 1953, to Dr. Op- 
penheimer, containing the items of derogatory information? 

A. Yes, I read that as it appeared in the press. 

Q. Is there anything in that letter which would cause you to want to qualify 
the letter which you wrote to Mr. Lilienthal that you have just read? 

A. Now, let me answer that in two parts. I had at the time of the Los Alamos 
appointment complete confidence in the loyalty, judgment, and integrity of 
Dr. Oppenheimer. I have certainly no reason to change that opinion in the 
meantime. I have had plenty of reason to confirm it, for I worked with him 
on many occasions on very difficult matters. I know that his motivation was 
exactly the same as mine, namely, first, to make this country strong, to resist 
attack, and second, if possible to fend off from the world the kind of mess 
we are now getting into. 

On the second part of that, would I on the basis of that document, if those 
allegations were proved, change my judgment. That is what I understand 
this board is to decide. I don’t think I ought to try to prejudge what they 
might find out. 

Q. I would not want to ask you to do that, and my question is not designed to 
do that. 

A. My faith has not in the slightest degree been shaken by that letter or any- 
thing else. 

Mr. Garrison. I think that is all, Doctor. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Robb? 

Mr. Ross. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Gray. I have one question which relates to the development of the hydro- 
gen bomb in general, and it is prompted by something you said in answer to 
a question put to you by Mr. Garrison, I think. 

I believe you said that you felt that that test in the fall of 1952 was of 
value to the Russians in their own program. Did I understand that correctly? 

THE WITNEsS. I am sure it was. 

Mr. Gray. And this is for technical reasons? 

THE Witness. I am sure of it for one reason because when we reviewed the ev- 
idence of the first Russian atomic explosion, we didn’t find out merely that 
they had made a bomb. We obtained a considerable amount of evidence as 
to the type of bomb, and the way in which it was made. If they had no other 
evidence than that from their own test and the like, they would have de- 
rived information. * * * 

Mr. Gray. Would it have been your guess that the Soviets would have at- 
tempted to develop this kind of weapon? 

THE WITNESS. Why, certainly, because it is very valuable indeed to them. To 
us, with 500 KT fission bombs we have very little need for a 10 megaton hy- 


204 THE HEARING 


drogen bomb. The Russians, on the other hand, have the great targets of New 
York and Chicago, and what have you. It is of enormous advantage to them. 

Mr. Gray. So they probably would have sought to develop this in any event 
unless some international control machinery had been in effect. 

THE Witness. That is right. 

Mr. Gray. And our not proceeding, as some people thought we should not, 
probably didn’t have any relation to what the Russians might do about it. 
THE Witness. I think it has relation to what the Russians might do about it be- 
cause whether we proceeded or not determined to some extent the speed 
with which they could proceed. Let me interpose a word there, Mr. Chair- 

man. 

MR. GRay. Yes, sir. 

THE WItnNEss. It was not a question, as I understand it, of whether we should 
proceed or not. It was a question of whether we should proceed in a certain 
manner and on a certain program. I have never expressed opinions on that. 
But certainly there was a great deal of opinion which seemed to me sound 
that the program as then presented was a somewhat fantastic one. So it was 
not a question of do we proceed or do we not. I think there was no dis- 
agreement of opinion as to whether we ought to be energetic in our re- 
search, whether we should be assiduously looking for ways in which such a 
thing could be done without unduly interfering with our regular program. 
The question of whether we proceeded along a certain path—may I say one 
more word on that, Mr. Chairman, quite frankly, and I hope you won’t mis- 
understand me, because I have the greatest respect for this board. Yet I think 
it is only right that I should give you my opinion. 

I feel that this board has made a mistake and that it is a serious one. I feel 
that the letter of General Nichols which I read, this bill of particulars, is 
quite capable of being interpreted as placing a man on trial because he held 
opinions, which is quite contrary to the American system, which is a terri- 
ble thing. And as I move about I find that discussed today very energeti- 
cally, that here is a man who is being pilloried because he had strong opin- 
ions, and had the temerity to express them. If this country ever gets to the 
point where we come that near to the Russian system, we are certainly not 
in any condition to attempt to lead the free world toward the benefits of de- 
mocracy. 

Now, if I had been on this board, I most certainly would have refused to 
entertain a set of charges that could possibly be thus interpreted. As things 
now stand, I am just simply glad I am not in the position of the board. 

Mr. Gray. What is the mistake the board has made? 

THE WitNEss. I think you should have immediately said before we will enter 
into this matter, we want a bill of particulars which makes it very clear that 
this man is not being tried because he expressed opinions... . 

Dr. Evans. Dr. Bush, you don’t think we sought this job, do you? 

THE Witness. I am sure you didn’t, and you have my profound sympathy and 


FRIDAY, APRIL 23 205 


respect. I think the fact that a group of men of this sort are willing to do as 
tough and as difficult a job as this augurs well for the country. It is in stark 
contrast with some of the things that we have seen going on about us in sim- 
ilar circumstances. Orderly procedure and all of that is good. I merely regret 
that the thing can be misinterpreted as it stands on the record, and misin- 
terpreted in a way that can do great damage. I know, of course, that the ex- 
ecutive branch of the United States Government had no intention whatever 
of pillorying a man for his opinions. But the situation has not been helped, 
gentlemen, recently by statements of the Secretary of Defense. I can assure 
you that the scientific community is deeply stirred today. 

The National Academy of Science meets this next week, and the Ameri- 
can Physical Society meets, and I hope sincerely that they will do nothing 
foolish. But they are deeply stirred. The reason they are stirred is because 
they feel that a professional man who rendered great service to his country, 
rendered service beyond almost any other man, is now being pilloried and 
put through an ordeal because he had the temerity to express his honest 
opinions. 

Mr. Gray. Dr. Bush, are you familiar with the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 at 
all? 

THE Witness. I have read it. 

Mr. Gray. Are you familiar with the fact that the Commission has a published 
set of procedures which for these purposes have the effect of law? 

THE Witngss. Yes. I am not quarreling with the procedure, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Gray. As I understand it, and I can be corrected by counsel, the writing of 
a letter to Dr. Oppenheimer with specifications is required under these pro- 
cedures. 

THE Witness. I have been a friend of General Nichols for many years. He 
wrote the letter. I quite frankly think it was a poorly written letter and 
should have been written in such a way that it made it absolutely clear that 
what was being examined here was not the question of whether a man held 
opinions and whether those were right or wrong, whether history has 
shown it to be good judgment or poor judgment. I think that should have 
been made very clear. 

Mr. Gray. I would also point out just in the interest of having a record here, 
and I don’t consider myself in any argumentation with you, for whom I 
have a very high regard, personally and professionally, that there were 
items of so-called derogatory information—and that is a term of art—in this 
letter, setting aside the allegations about the hydrogen bomb. There were 
items in this letter which did not relate to the expression and holding of 
opinions. 

THE WITNESS. Quite right, and the case should have tried on those. 

Mr. Gray. This is not a trial. 

THE WiTngss. If it were a trial, I would not be saying these things to the judge, 
you can well imagine that. I feel a very serious situation has been created, 


206 THE HEARING 


and I think that in all fairness I ought to tell you my frank feeling that this 
has gotten into a very bad mess. I wish I could suggest a procedure that 
would resolve it. 

Mr. Gray. The proceeding, of course, is taking place in accordance with pro- 
cedures, and I was glad to hear you say afew moments ago that you felt that 
this was a fair kind of proceeding. I am not sure I am quoting you correctly. 

THE WITNESS. You can quote me to that effect. I think some of the things we 
have seen have been scandalous affairs. I think in fact the Republic is in 
danger today because we have been slipping backward in our maintenance 
of the Bill of Rights. 

Mk. Gray. Dr. Evans. 

Dr. Evans. Dr. Bush, I wish you would make clear just what mistake you 
think the board made. I did not want this job when I was asked to take it. I 
thought I was performing a service to my country. 

THE Witness. I think the moment you were confronted with that letter, you 
should have returned the letter, and asked that it be redrafted so that you 
would have before you a clearcut issue which would not by implication put 
you in the position of trying a man for his opinions. 

Dr. Evans. I was not confronted with that letter, and I don’t think it would 
have made any difference if I had been. I was simply asked if I would serve 
on the board. What mistake did I make when I did that? 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, might I make a remark for myself here, speaking 
for Dr. Oppenheimer? I have the deepest respect for Dr. Bush’s forthright 
character, for his lifelong habit of calling a spade a spade as he sees it. I sim- 
ply want to leave no misunderstanding on the record here that we share the 
view that this board should not have served when asked to serve under the 
letter as written. 

THE WitNgss. I can assure you, Mr. Chairman, that the opinions being ex- 
pressed are my own. They usually are. 

Mr. Gray. I have never heard it suggested that you didn’t express your own 
opinion, Dr. Bush. 

Dr. Evans. Dr. Bush, then your idea is that suppose I was asked to serve on 
this board, and I didn’t know anything about it—I had not seen any of this 
material—after I had agreed to serve, and saw this material, I should have 
resigned? 

THE Witness. No, I think you simply should have asked for a revision of the 
bill of particulars. 

Dr. Evans. I] am just anxious to know what you think my procedure should 
have been. 

THE Witness. That is what I think. Now, I don’t see how you can get out of 
this mess. 

Mr. Morcan. Doctor, on what ground would you ask for a bill of particulars if 
you didn’t know the record? 

THE Witness. I think that bill of particulars was obviously poorly drawn on 
the face of it, because it was most certainly open to the interpretation that 


M 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 207 


this man is being tried because he expressed strong opinions. The fact that 
he expressed strong opinions stands in a single paragraph by itself. It is not 
directly connected. It does have in that paragraph, through improper moti- 
vations he expressed these opinions. It merely says he stated opinions, and 
I think that is defective drafting and should have been corrected. 

R. MorGaNn. In other words, we want to prejudge the case before we know 
anything about it. 


THE WITNESS. Not at all. But I think this board or no board should ever sit on 


a question in this country of whether a man should serve his country or not 
because he expressed strong opinions. If you want to try that case, you can 
try me. I have expressed strong opinions many times, and I intend to do so. 
They have been unpopular opinions at times. When a man is pilloried for 
doing that, this country is in a severe state. .. . Excuse me, gentlemen, if I 
become stirred, but I am. 


Monday, April 26 


KATHERINE OPPENHEIMER: “I was emotionally involved in the 
Spanish cause” 


[The first witness is Oppenheimer’s wife, Katherine. Born in Germany in 
1910, she emigrated to the United States with her parents at the age of three 
and became a citizen by virtue of her father’s naturalization in 1922. She 
had herself been the subject of investigative reports, although not, of course, 


to 
H 
O 


the same extent as her husband. In May 1944, FBI director J. Edgar 
oover informed John Lansdale that she had been “active in Youngstown, 
hio, in the Communist Party during 1934, 1935, and 1936.” In this, the 


first of her two appearances, she explains her radical past and faces cross- 
examination not from Roger Robb but rather from Gordon Gray.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 


By Mr. Silverman: 


>OPO>O>O 


. Mrs. Oppenheimer, you are the wife of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer? 
Iam. 

. What were you doing in the autumn of 1933? 

. I was attending the University of Wisconsin. 

You were attending the University of Wisconsin? 

. That is right. 

. As an undergraduate student? 

Yes. 


208 THE HEARING 


Q. What did you do during the Christmas holidays of 1933? 

A. I went to stay with friends of my parents in Pittsburgh. 

Q. Will you tell us the circumstances of your meeting Joe Dallet? 

A. Yes. I have an old friend in Pittsburgh, a girl called Selma Baker. I saw 
quite a bit of her at that time. It was Selma who said she knew a Commu- 
nist, and would we like to meet him. Everybody agreed that would be inter- 
esting. There was a New Year's party. Selma brought Joe Dallet. 


Q. Did you and he fall in love during that holiday period? 

A. We did. 

Q. Did you decide you would be married? 

A. We did. 

Q. Did you fix a date for that? 

A. Yes. I decided to go back and finish my semester at Wisconsin and then 
join Joe in Youngstown and get married there. 

Q. Is that what you did? 

A. Yes. 

Q. The semester ended at the end of January, I suppose, of 1934, and you 
went to Youngstown? 

A. Early February. I don’t know. 

Q. Joe Dallet was a member of the Communist Party? 

A. He was. 

Q. And you knew that he was? 

A. Yes. 

Q. During your life with him, did you join the party? 

A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Will you tell us why you joined the party? 

A. Joe very much wanted me to, and I didn’t mind. I don’t know when I 


joined the party. I think it was in 1934, but I am not sure when. 
Q. Did you do work for the party? 
A. Yes. 
Q. What kind of work? 
A. I mimeographed leaflets and letters. I typed. I did generally office work, 
mostly for the steel union that was then in existence. 
Q. What were most of your activities related to? 
A. Mostly to the union at first, and later anything that came up, I was sort of 
general office boy. 
. Did you pay dues to the party? 
. Yes. 
. How much were the dues? 
. I believe mine were 10 cents a week. 
. Would you describe the conditions under which you lived with Joe Dallet 
as those of poverty? 
A. Yes 
Q. How much rent did you pay? 
A. Five dollars a month. 


DPOPO 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 209 


Q. As time went on, did you find that you became devoted to the party or 
more devoted or less devoted or more attached or less attached? 

A. I don’t think I could ever describe it as a devotion or even attachment. 

What interest I had in it decreased. 

. Did Joe’s interest decrease? 

. No, not at all. 

. Was that a cause of disagreement between Joe and yourself? 

. Iam afraid so. 

. Did you and Joe ultimately separate? 

We did. 

. When was that? 

. About June of 1936. 

. Would you say that your disagreement with Joe about your lack of enthu- 

siasm, shall we say, for the party, had something to do with the separation? 

A. I think it was mostly the cause of the separation. I felt I didn’t want to at- 
tend party meetings or do the kind of work that I was doing in the office. 
That made him unhappy. We agreed that we couldn’t go on that way. 

. Did you remain in love with him? 

Yes. 

. Where did you go when you separated? 

. Ijoined my parents in England. 

That was about June of 1936? 

. I think it was June. 

. Did atime come when you wrote Joe that you were willing to rejoin him? 

. Yes. I wrote him probably very early in 1937, saying that I would like to re- 
join him. 

Q. Did he answer you? 

A. He answered saying that would be good, but he was on his way to Spain 

to fight for the Republic cause, and would I please instead meet him in 

Paris. 

. Where did you meet him? 

. Imet him at Cherbourg aboard the Queen Mary as it docked. 

That was in 1937? 

. Yes. I think it was March. I am not sure. 

. Did you go with him then to Paris? 

. We took the boat train and went to Paris. 

. How long did you stay in Paris with him. 

. I would think about 10 days. It could have been a week, it could have been 

2 weeks, but roughly— 

Q. Do I understand that he had a furlough or some time off or something be- 
cause of the reunion? 

A. That is right. 

Q. What did you do during that 10 days or so in Paris? 

A. We walked around and looked at Paris, went to restaurants, the sort of 
thing one does in Paris. We went to the museums and picture galleries. We 


>OPrFO>O>O O>PO>O>PO?PO 


>OPOPO>O 


210 THE HEARING 


went to one large political meeting, a mass meeting, where they were advo- 
cating arms for Spain. 

Q. Who was the speaker? 

A. Thorez. 

Q. He was a Communist? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you recall any other political activities if that might be called one dur- 
ing that period or that 10 days or so? 

A. I think one should describe as a political activity that one place I saw 

where people who were going to Spain were being checked in and told how 

to do it. I went there once. 

. As a spectator? 

. Thad nothing to do. 

. Then Joe went off to Spain. 

Yes. 

. During that period did you meet Steve Nelson? 

Yes. I met him in Paris. I saw him several times. I think Joe and I had meals 
with him occasionally. 

Q. What did you talk about with him? 

A. I don’t know; all kinds of things. I think among other things the only thing 

that interests this board is the fact that we talked of various ways of getting 

to Spain, which was not easy. 

Then Joe went to Spain at the end of that 10 days or so? 

Yes. 

. What did you do? 
I went back to England. 
. Did you try to do anything about joining Joe? 

Yes, I wanted to very much. 

What was your plan as to how you would join Joe? 

I was told that they would try to see if it were possible, and if it were, I 
would hear from someone in Paris and then go to Paris, and be told how to 
get there. 

Was there talk of your getting a job somewhere in Spain? 

Yes. I don’t know what, though. 

. Were you ultimately told that it was possible? 

. I got a letter from Joe saying that he found me a job in Albacrete. 

. Did you then go to Paris? 

. First I stayed in England and waited quite a while, until October. 

. What year was this? 

. 1937. I then got a wire saying I should come to Paris, and I went. Do you 

want me to go on? 

Q. What happened when you got to Paris? 

A. When I got to Paris, I was shown a telegram saying that Joe had been killed 
in action. 

Q. What did you do then? 


>O>O>O 


>POPOPOP>O 


>O>O>O>O 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 211 


A. I was also told that Steve Nelson was coming back from Spain in a day or 
two, and I might want to wait and see what Steve had to say. He had a lot to 
tell me about Joe. 

Did Steve come? 

Yes. 

And met you in Paris? 

Yes. 

. Did you talk with Steve? 

Yes, I spent at least a week there. I saw Steve most of the time. 

. What did you talk about with him. 

Joe, himself, myself. 
Would you say that Steve was kind to you and sort of took care of you dur- 
ing that period? 

. He certainly was, very. 

Did you discuss with Steve what you would do now? 

I did. 

. Will you tell us what that discussion was? 

. For a little while I had some notion of going on to Spain anyway. 

Why? 

I was emotionally involved in the Spanish cause. 

. Did Joe’s death have something to do with your wanting to go on anyhow? 

. Yes, as well as if alive he would have. 

. Did you discuss this with Steve? 

. I did, but Steve discouraged me. He thought I would be out of place and in 

the way. I then decided that probably I would go back to the United States 

and resume my university career. 

Q. Is that what you did? 

A. Yes. 

Q. After you returned to the United States, did you continue to see any of the 
friends that you had with the Communists? 

A. When I first got back I saw some friends of Joe’s in New York who wanted 
to know about him and to whom I wanted to talk. I saw some other mem- 
bers of the Communist Party in New York. I went to Florida with three girls. 
I know one was a Communist. I think another one was, and the third one I 
don’t remember. 

Q. Did that relationship with Communist friends continue? 

A. No, it did not. 

Q. What happened? 

A. I visited a friend of mine in Philadelphia. I had planned to go to the Uni- 
versity of Chicago, and got back to the United States to go back to their sec- 
ond trimester. I don’t know whether they still have that system. I knew no 
one there. I met a lot of people in Philadelphia, and they said, “You know 
all of us, why don’t you stay here?” I stayed in Philadelphia and entered the 
University of Pennsylvania, the spring semester of the year 1937-38. 

Q. What kind of work did you do at the university? 


>O>OPOPOPO> OPOPOPO?PO 


212 THE HEARING 


. Chemistry, math, biology. 

. Was biology your major? 

It became my major interest. 

Did you continue to do professional work as a biologist? 

I did graduate work later and some research. 

. Ultimately you had a research fellowship or assistantship? 

Both. 

Where? 

. University of California. 

Did you remarry? 

Yes. 

. Would you give us the date of your remarriage and the man whom you 

married? 

A. I married Richard Stewart Harrison, an English physician, in 1938, in De- 
cember or November. 

Q. Was he a Communist? 

A. No. 

Q. He was a practicing physician? 

A. He had been, I think, in England. He had to take all his examinations in 
this country and do an internship and a residency before he could practice 
here. 

. Did he go to California? 

Yes. 

And you went with him? 

No. He went to California much earlier than I to take up his internship. 

Did you go out there to join him? 

Yes. 

After graduation in June of 1939? When did you meet Dr. Oppenheimer? 

Somewhere in 1939. 

When were you divorced from Dr. Harrison? 

In the first of November 1940. 

You then married Dr. Oppenheimer? 

Yes. 

. Did there come a time after you married Dr. Oppenheimer when you again 

saw Steven Nelson? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Will you tell us the circumstances of that? 

A. I will as best I can remember. I remember being at a party and meeting a 

girl called Merriman. I knew of her. She was in Albacrete, and her husband 

also got killed in action there. The reason I remembered her name is that I 

had been asked to bring her some sox when I came. When I met her at this 

party, she said did I know that Steve Nelson was in that part of the country. 

I said no, and then expressed some interest in his welfare. Some time there- 

after Steve Nelson telephoned me, and IJ invited him and his wife and their 

small child up to our house. 


O>OPOPL>PO>PD> 


O>OPLPO>OPO?O 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 213 


Q. What did you talk about? 

A. We had a picnic lunch. The Nelsons were very pleased that they finally 
had a child, because they tried for a long time to have one without success. 
We talked about the old days, family matters. 

Q. Did you see him again? 

A. Ithink that they came out to our house two times. 

Q. Was it all just social? 

A. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. What was the date of this period, approximately? If you have said, 
I have forgotten. 

THE WITNEsS. I didn’t say, Mr. Gray, because I am a bit vague. 


By Mr. Silverman: 


. Can you give it as closely as you can? 

. Yes. I would guess it was late 1941 or perhaps in 1942. I don’t know. 
. Are you fairly clear it was not later than 1942? 

. Fairly clear. 

. Have you seen Steve Nelson since 1942? 

. Since whenever it was? 

Yes. 


O>O>rO?ro 


Katherine (Kitty) Oppenheimer. J. Robert Oppenheimer Memorial Committee. 


214 THE HEARING 


No. 

You are no longer a member of the Communist Party? 

No. 

When would you say that you ceased to be a member? 

When I left Youngstown in June 1936. 

Have you ever paid any dues to the party since then? 

No. 

Will you describe your views on communism as pro, anti, neutral? 

You mean now? 

Now. 

. Very strongly against. 

. And about how far back would you date that? 

. Quite a long time. I had nothing to do with communism since 1936. I have 

seen some people, the ones that I have already described. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. That is all. 

Mr. Ross. No questions. 

Mr. Gray. Mrs. Oppenheimer, how did you leave the Communist Party? 

THE WITNEsS. By walking away. 

Mr. Gray. Did you have a card? 

THE Witness. While I was in Youngstown; yes. 

Mr. Gray. Did you turn this in or did you tear it up? 

THE Witness. I have no idea. 

Mr. Gray. And the act of joining was making some sort of payment and re- 
ceiving a card? 

THE WITNESS. I remember getting a card and signing my name. 

Mr. Gray. Generally speaking, as one who knows something about commu- 
nism as it existed at that time in this country and the workings of the Com- 
munist Party, and therefore a probable understanding of this thing, what do 
you think is the kind of thing that is an act of renunciation? That is not a 
very good question. In your case you just ceased to have any relationships 
with the party? 

THE Witness. I believe that is quite a usual way of leaving the party. 

Mr. Gray. When you were in the party in Youngstown, or when you were in 
the party at any time, did you have a party name? 

THE WitnEss. No. I had my own name, Kitty Dallet. 

Mr. Gray. Was that the usual thing for people to use their own name? 

THE Witness. I knew of no one with an assumed name. I believe that there 
must have been such people, but I knew of none. 

Mr. Gray. I think the record shows that in some cases there were people who 
had some other name. 

THE Wrtnzss. I think there were people who lived under an assumed name 
and had that name in the party, but then that was the only name I would 
have known. 

Mr. GRAY. When you saw Steve Nelson socially in whatever year this was, 


>OPOPOPOPOPO> 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 215 


1940, 1941 or 1942, did you discuss the Communist Party with him? Did he 
know that you were no longer a member of the Communist Party? 

THE WITNESS. Yes, that was perfectly clear to him. 

Mr. Gray. Did he chide you for this or in any way seek to reenlist your sym- 
pathy? 

THE WITNESS. No. 

Mr. Gray. He accepted the fact that you had rejected communism? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. I would like to make it clear that I always felt very friendly 
to Steve Nelson after he returned from Spain and spent a week with me in 
Paris. He helped me a great deal and the much later meeting with him was 
something that was still simply friendship and nothing else. 

Mr. Gray. The people you dealt with in Paris or that you saw there were 
members of the Communist Party. I have in mind any discussions you had 
about going to Spain, both before and after your husband’s death? 

THE WiTNEss. I wouldn’t know who was or wasn’t then. Many people were 
going to Spain who were not members of the Communist Party. I think, 
however, that probably most of the people I saw were Communists. 

Mr. Gray. But at that time you were not? 

THE WITNESS. No. 

Mr. Gray. This was following your leaving the party in Youngstown? 

THE Witness. That is right. 

Mr. Gray. Do you suppose they were aware of the fact that you had left the 
Communist Party? 

THE WITNEss. I am sure they were. I mean such as knew me. 

Mr. Gray. This is a question not directly related to your testimony, but we 
have had a witness before the board recently—I might say I am sorry I didn’t 
ask him this question—and this witness referred to Soviet communism in a 
general discussion here before the board. In your mind as a former member 
of the Communist Party in this country, can a distinction be made between 
the Soviet communism and communism? 

THE Witness. There are two answers to that as far as I am concerned. In the 
days that I was a member of the Communist Party, I thought they were defi- 
nitely two things. The Soviet Union had its Communist Party and our coun- 
try had its Communist Party. I thought that the Communist Party of the 
United States was concerned with problems internal. I now no longer be- 
lieve this. I believe the whole thing is linked together and spread all over 
the world. 

Mr. Gray. Would you think that any knowledgeable person should also have 
that view today? 

THE-WiTNEss. About communism today? 

Mr. GRay. Yes. 

THE WITNESS. Yes, I do. 

Mr. Gray. I was puzzled by this reference to Soviet communism in April 
1954. But in any event, you would not make a distinction. 


216 THE HEARING 


THE WITNESS. Today, no; not for quite a while. 

Mk. Gray. But in those days you in your own mind made the distinction? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. At that time the American Communist Party was not known to you 
to be taking its instructions from Russia? 

THE WITNESS. No. 

Mr. Gray. You testified that today you are opposed to the Communist Party 
and what it stands for. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. I am getting back now to whatever an action of renunciation is. Do 
you think these days that a person can make a satisfactory demonstration of 
renunciation simply by saying that there has been renunciation? 

THE Witness. I think that is too vague for me, Mr. Gray. 

Mr. Gray. All right. Iam afraid it is a little vague for me, too. I won’t pursue it. 

Do you have any questions? 

Dr. EVANS. Just one. Mrs. Oppenheimer, I have heard from people that there 
are two kinds of Communists, what we call an intellectual Communist and 
just a plain ordinary Commie. Is there such a distinction, do you know? 

THE Witness. I couldn’t answer that one. 

Dr. Evans. I couldn’t either. Thank you. I have no more questions. 

Mr. Gray. Thank you very much, Mrs. Oppenheimer. 


Cartes C. Lauritsen: “I think there is a great deal of differ- 
ence between being a Communist in 1935 and being a Com- 
munist in 1954” 


[Born in Denmark, Charles C. Lauritsen had received his doctorate in 
physics at the California Institute of Technology in 1930, and had then 
joined the faculty. During World War Il he was a pioneer in rocket develop- 
ment, and in 1944 he went to Los Alamos to assist in the final stages of 
building the atomic bomb. There he worked closely with Oppenheimer, one 
of his dearest friends since they had first met at Caltech in the late 1920s.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks:... 


Q. Did you observe Dr. Oppenheimer during the thirties and the forties, and 
can you say anything about his political views and activities during that 
time? 

A. I cannot say very much about it. I knew very little about it until, I think, 
about the time of the Spanish war. This was the first time that I knew that he 
had any political interest. Up to that time I have no recollection that we 
ever discussed political questions of any in interest or serious nature. 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 217 


Q. What impression did you come to have of his political interests? 

A. It is a little difficult to say because I think they changed a great deal with 
time. I would say that at one stage he was very deeply interested in the 
Spanish Loyalist cause, and took the attitude that was taken at that time by 
many liberals, the hope that they could do something about it, and that they 
would like to help the Spanish Loyalist cause. 

Q. You spoke of his changing views. What do you mean by that? 

A. I think it was probably a gradual increase in interest in social causes, a 
compassion for the underdog, if you like. The attitude that many liberals 
took at that time. 

Q. Did you observe in him an identification with views that were regarded as 
Communist views or with which the Communists were associated? 

A. I think at that time very few of us and perhaps very few Americans had 
very little idea about what communism was. I think most of us that were 
concerned about political things and international things were consider- 
ably more concerned about fascism at that time than we were about com- 
munism. Fascism seemed the immediate threat, rather than communism. 
Also, Ithink perhaps my own views were colored by the fact that I was born 
and raised in Denmark, where Germany was the natural enemy, rather than 
Russia. I think for that reason we did not pay as much attention to the evils 
of communism as we should have done. 

Q. Were you mixed up in any communistic activity? 

A. No. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I don’t think the witness quite answered the ques- 
tion Mr. Marks propounded to him. I wonder if we might have it read back 
so the witness could have it in mind. 

(Question read by the reporter.) 

THE Witness. I frankly did not know just what characterized the Communist 
view at that time. When they talked about improving the lot of the working 
people, I believe Oppenheimer and probably many other people thought 
this was a good beginning. But that this was not the whole story of the Com- 
munist ideology I think was not realized by very many people at that time. 
Does that answer the question? 

Mr. Ross. Yes. 

THE WiTNgEss. It did not occur to me at that time or at any other time that he 
was a Communist Party member. 

Q. Dr. Lauritsen, what opinion do you have about Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty 
and character? By loyalty I mean loyalty to the United States. 

A. I have never had any reason to doubt it. 

Q. Do you think you could be mistaken about this? 

A. I suppose one can always be mistaken, but I have less doubt than any other 
case I know of. 

Q. Less doubt than in any other case? 

A. Than in any other person that I know as well. 

Q. Do you know many people better? 


218 THE HEARING 


A. Not many. I suppose I know my own son better, but I don’t trust him any 
more. 

Q. To what extent would you trust Dr. Oppenheimer’s discretion in the han- 
dling of classified information, restricted data? 

A. You are referring now to recent years when he understood these problems, 
I hope. In that case I think I would trust his discretion completely. I think in 
the early thirties very few of us knew anything about discretion and were 
not very conscious of security. Whether he had been indiscreet at that time, 
I don’t know. It is possible. It is possible I have been indiscreet. But I am 
sure after he understood what security meant, and what was involved, that 
he has been as discreet as he knew how. 

Q. What do you mean by as discreet as he knew how? 

A. As discreet as it is possible to be and try to get some work done. 

Q. Do you have any idea about whether your views about the needs for and 
the possibilities of being discreet are any different than his? 

A. Ithink they are no different now, certainly. 

Q. Let us take the period commencing in 1944, when you went to Los 
Alamos. Is that the span of years you are talking about? 

A. During that period this would apply. At that time he knew the importance 
of the information we had. 

Mr. Marks. That is all, Mr. Robb. 

Mk. Gray. I think it would be well to break for a few minutes at this point. 

(Brief recess.) 
Mr. Gray. Mr. Robb, will you proceed. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, do I understand that you have known Dr. Oppenheimer both pro- 
fessionally and socially? 

. That is correct. 

. Have you visited him from time to time at his ranch in New Mexico? 

. Ihave visited him I think twice. 

When was that, sir? 

. About the middle thirties—1935 or 1936, I believe. 

. Do you also know Dr. Oppenheimer’s brother Frank? 

Ido. 

. When did you meet him, sir? 

. I believe I met him for the first time at the ranch in 1935 or 1936. I may 
have seen him once before, but I am not quite sure. 

Q. Was he on the faculty at Caltech? 

A. He was a graduate student. 

Q. Under you? 

A. Yes. 


>O>O>PO>O> 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 219 


. Did you get to know him pretty well, too? 
. I got to know him quite well in the laboratory. 

And you saw him on the ranch, also, I take it? 

Yes. 

Did you know him at Los Alamos? 

Yes, I did. 

Have you seen him since then very frequently? 

Not frequently. I have seen him. Most recently last year at a meeting of the 
physical society in Albuquerque, N. Mex. 

. Up until the end of it, did you have any reason to belive that Frank was a 

Communist or had been a Communist? 

No, I had no reason to believe that until he made that statement himself. 
What would you say about Frank’s loyalty? 

I have no reason to doubt his loyalty. 

And his character? 

. His character is very good. 

. You would make about the same answer about him that you do about Dr. 

Oppenheimer? 

A. Yes, I would think so. His judgment was perhaps not as good as Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s. 

Q. Yes, sir. I notice that you made some little distinction between Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s present appreciation of security and his appreciation in the past of 
security. 

A. I think that applies to all of us. 

Q. Yes, sir. You suggested that there might have been some change in Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s attitude on those matters. 

A. On how important you think it is, how seriously you take it. 

Q. Would you care to tell us, Doctor, when you think that change took 
place? 

A. I think we all learned about it during the war. 

Q. You think Dr. Oppenheimer learned about it during that period? 

A. That would be my judgment. I think this was true of most of us that had 
had little to do with military things until that time. ... 

Mr. Gray. Dr. Lauritsen, do you feel as of today a member of the Communist 
Party, that is, a man who is currently a member of the Communist Party, is 
automatically a security risk? 

THE Witness. I think so. 

Mr. Gray. You don’t have any question in your mind about that, do you? 

THE Witness. No; not if I can believe what I have been told about the Commu- 
nist Party, and I do believe it. 

Mr. Gray. In testifying earlier, I think you said you considered Dr. Frank Op- 
penheimer loyal in every respect, and with no reservations about this char- 
acter or trustworthiness? 

THE WITNESS. That is right. 


PPOPrO> O POPO>PO?PO 


220 THE HEARING 


Mr. Gray. Are you aware that Dr. Frank Oppenheimer has stated at an earlier 
period in his life he was a member of the Communist Party? 

THE WITNESS. Yes, sir ] am aware of that now. 

Mr. Gray. But still you say you have no reservations about his loyalty or char- 
acter? 

THE WiTNESsS. No, I have not. 

Mr. Gray. Would you explain to the Board why you conclude that you would 
trust him with any secret, which I believe is the effect or import of what you 
say, today, although you believe that a member of the Communist Party is 
automatically a security risk? Would you explain that? 

THE Witngss. I believe he has resigned from the Communist Party, and he is 
no longer under the discipline of the Communist Party. I believe he was 
cleared for work on war projects during the war and including nuclear 
weapons work. 

Mr. Gray. This was not after it was known he was a member of the Commu- 
nist Party? 

THE Witness. This I have no way of knowing. I do not know what turned up 
in his investigation. 

Mr. Gray. Would you feel that if it had been known at the time that he was a 
member of the Communist Party he should have been cleared for war work? 

THE Witness. If he had not resigned previously, I would certainly not recom- 
mend his clearance. If he had resigned previously because he no longer 
wanted to be a member of the Communist Party because he had found out 
that the Communist Party was not what it appeared to be, then I would still 
be inclined to say that he would be reliable. 

Mr. Gray. Today on classified projects for which you have some responsibil- 
ity, including a security responsibility, ifa man comes to the project seeking 
employment, who is known to you to have been a former member of the 
Communist Party, would you employ him simply on his statement that he 
no longer was a member of the Communist Party? 

THE Witness. No; not without appropriate clearance through official chan- 
nels. 

Mr. Gray. What would your recommendation be? 

THE Witness. If he had resigned from the Communist Party when he found 
out what the purpose of the Communist Party really was, and had been a 
member only as long as he had been under misconceptions about these 
things, then I would not hold that against him. 

Mr. Gray. You would accept as evidence of that his own statement? 

THE Witness. Not necessarily. I think some people you can trust, and others 
you can’t trust. I think it depends on what other activities he has been in- 
volved in and what he has been doing. In Frank’s case, I think he demon- 
strated that he wanted to work for this country. Other people perhaps have 
not demonstrated that. I think there is a great deal of difference between 
being a Communist in 1935 and being a Communist in 1954. I don’t think 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 221 


very much of us knew, I certainly did not know what the Communist Party 
was up to and how it operated. 

Mr. Gray. Let me ask this question: Would it be a rather accurate summary of 
at least parts of your testimony to say that you never really understood very 
much about the Communist Party or its workings? 

THE Wrtness. That I did not? 

Mr. Gray. That is right. 

THE Witness. At that time. 


JERROLD R. ZACHARIAS: “I am afraid that wars are evil... . But 
the question of morality . . . you do not have time for when 
you are trying to think how you fight” 


[Jlerrold R. Zacharias had also known Oppenheimer since the 1920s. During 
World War II he worked at the radiation laboratory at the Massachusetts In- 
stitute of Technology, and at the time he testifies he directs its laboratory of 
nuclear science. During the summer of 1952 he participated in a study proj- 
ect at Lincoln Laboratory, as did Oppenheimer, Rabi, and Lauritsen. Some in 
the air force regarded the Lincoln Project’s recommendation for an early 
warning system as a threat to the Strategic Air Command, and Fortune maga- 
zine referred to a dangerous—although entirely fictional—conspiracy by a 
cabal known as “ZORC” (the “C” was for “Charles Lauritsen”). Just before 
the hearings opened, Zacharias wrote an encouraging letter to Oppen- 
heimer, saying, “you have nothing personal to fear—really not—and your 
stand is so important for the nation. | guess all | mean is—give ’em hell. 
We're all with you.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Marks: ... 


Q. ... you were about to tell the story of what happened as a result of the 
summer study. 

A. The Lincoln Laboratory set up to work on technological and technical as- 
pects of continental defense. In fact, air defense of any sort. Just prior to the 
summer of 1952, Dr. Lauritsen and I had a long discussion about the trend 
in continental defense, whether the buildup was great enough, * * *. 

Dr. Lauritsen and I decided that it might be a very good thing if we looked 
into these technical, military, and economic questions again during that 
summer. We decided that we should talk this over with certain others 
whom we knew very well. First of all, Dr. Hill, who was then the Director 
and is now the director of Lincoln Laboratory. We decided we would talk it 
over with Dr. Oppenheimer and Dr. Rabi. 


222 THE HEARING 


Q. Why did you talk to Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. In my experience it is always profitable to talk to Dr. Oppenheimer. His 
head is so clear on questions of this sort that when you flounder for months 
to try to formulate your ideas, you get to him and he can listen and help 
state clearly what you and he and others have decided is the germ of what 
you are thinking. This is true in all of my contacts with Dr. Oppenheimer on 
this kind of question. 

We decided, then, that it would be a good idea to start such a study, that 
Dr. Oppenheimer, Dr. Rabi, and Dr. Lauritsen agree to work on this study in 
part. The reason is that it is very difficult to recruit men of stature, men of 
ability into any kind of study. They are doing what they think is adequate 
and they have some sense of urgency but they also have the feeling, why 
don’t we let somebody else do the work. 

Dr. Hill, who is the director of the Lincoln Lab, and I felt that if Dr. Op- 
penheimer, Dr. Rabi, and Dr. Lauritsen agreed to work on this in part, that it 
would be easier for us to recruit a number of very brilliant people and some 
of the more experienced people to do the job. Indeed, that turned out to be 
true. So that directly within the Lincoln Laboratory and sponsored by the 
Air Force, as I say, we set up a study. ... 

Q. Did you conceive the recommendations of this summer study that you 
have referred to as being inconsistent or to be in conflict with any national 
policy with respect to what is described as strategic air policy? 

A. The only conflict is of a funny sort. Let me begin it this way. Certainly part of 
any defensive system in this country is what we call our offensive plan. One 
doesn’t think of protecting the continent by conventional defensive means. 
That is, destruction of enemy bases is just as important and every bit as im- 
portant as local defense. It was the feeling of a number of us who worked on 
this summer study that the amount of money and the amount of effort that the 
Government would have to put into overall defense was larger or is larger than 
was being put in then. Many people interpreted our strong recommendations 
for defense as an unfortunate method of cutting into appropriations for Strate- 
gic Air Command. This was not the case in our recommendations and we be- 
lieved then and I still believe that the money is going to have to come from 
other sources, and not from cuts from the military except in the matter of 
pruning certain military things that are not terribly fruitful. 

Objections to try to build up continental defense from the point of view of 
people who are trying to build up offensive power alone, simply that if you 
work with a limited number of dollars and a limited amount of effort, natu- 
rally if you build one thing up, you would have to build the other down. 
Whereas, I am firmly of the opinion that we are going to build the whole 
thing up, and our economy will have to stand it, and I am assured that it 
will. Does that answer your question? 

Q. You mean that you had both strategic air and also continental defense? 

A. Yes, sir; and other military things, too, as events of the present show.... 

Q. The work which you described in which Dr. Oppenheimer participated on 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 223 


continental defense and other military and scientific affairs, who did you 
conceive to be the enemy that we needed to be worried about? 

A. There is no question in anybody’s mind, and there was no question in the 
mind of anyone who participated or was closely associated with any of 
these discussions, Soviet Union, and the word “enemy,” or “Russia” and 
the word “enemy” are sort of interchanged freely. It is that deeply imbedded 
in everybody’s thinking, including that of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Q. What was your general purpose in devoting yourself to this work? 

A. That is a simple question. This is the only country we have, and these are 
tough times, and we want to help it. 

Q. As a result of your association with Dr. Oppenheimer have you formed an 
opinion or conviction as to his character and his loyalty to the United 
States? 

A. Iam completely convinced of his loyalty to the United States. Can I add a 
little way of saying it? 

When you are gathered in a group of men who are discussing the details 
on how to combat the Russians, how to contain the Russians, how to keep 
them from overrunning the rest of the world, and so on, the loyalties come 
out very, very clearly. There just is not any question in my mind that Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s loyalty is for this country and in no way or shape by anything 
other than hostility toward the U.S.S.R. 

Q. What about his character? 

A. His character? Ethical, moral is first rate. 

Q. Do you have any views as to his capacity to exercise discretion in dealing 
with classified and restricted data and military secrets? 

A. In my opinion, he is always discreet and careful and has regarded the han- 
dling of secret documents and secret ideas and so on with discretion and 
understanding. You might think it is not the easiest thing in the world to 
carry around a head full of secrets and go about in public, too, and talk 
about burning questions of the day. It is difficult. I believe that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer has showed in every instance to my knowledge that he can do this 
kind of thing. 

Mr. Marks. That is all. 

Mr. Ross. I can finish in 2 minutes, I think. 

Mr. Gray. If we can, let us go ahead. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, are you in the group that is called ZORC? 

A. Yes, except let me say that this name was never heard of by the members 
of that group, by any one of those four until it appeared in the national mag- 
azine. 

Q. I was going to ask you if you could tell us what you know about the origin 
of that nomenclature. 


224 THE HEARING 


A. I have no knowledge of the origin of that nomenclature. I do know one 
friend of mine went around to a meeting of the Physical Society and hunted 
for people who had heard of it. Found one and I would rather not mention 
the name because it has nothing to do with this thing. He may have heard it 
or it may have been the invention of the man who wrote the article. 

Q. I think for our purpose, the name is not popular. Was there a group con- 
sisting of yourself, Dr. Oppenheimer, Dr. Rabi, and Dr. Lauritsen? 

A. No, no more than there would be a group of any four people who respect 
each other despite the fact that they hold slightly different ways of looking 
at things—a community of interests and a slight disparity of approach. 
These four people, I think, are very different. 

Q. Were you four people the nucleus of that Lincoln summer study? 

A. No, sir. The four were not. I would say the nucleus, as I tried to clarify be- 
fore, were Dr. Hill and myself. That is, the director of the Lincoln Labora- 
tory. The first discussions were with Dr. Lauritsen. Dr. Oppenheimer and 
Dr. Rabi agreed that it would be a good thing to go ahead with it and they 
were willing to lend their prestige to help pull in some people into it, but 
this is far from being the nucleus of the thing. 

Q. That is what I am trying to find out because it has been rather fuzzy in my 
mind. Were you four people—Dr. Oppenheimer, Dr. Lauritsen, Dr. Rabi, and 
you—peculiarly active in that summer study? Were you the leaders of it? 

A. Let me say this. I ran it. I was the director of it. So, I was in it. There are no 
two ways about that. Dr. Rabi, Dr. Oppenheimer and Dr. Lauritsen spent a 
small fraction of their time. However, let me say this. We had for the first 
week of that study a briefing for 4 days, as I remember it, that was packed 
with as much meat as you can get into any 4 days of technical briefing. I 
wanted a summary of that technical briefing, and there were about 65 
people there, all very fully informed, and the only man I could turn to give 
a summary, who could pull the thing together, was Dr. Oppenheimer. He 
did a masterful job. It was perfectly clear to everybody in that group how 
Oppenheimer felt about all of the issues, so that if you questioned any one 
of those you could find a statement of what he believed. 

Q. Was there any discussion, Dr. Zacharias, about the comparative morality of 
a so-called fortress concept, on the one hand, and a strategic air force to 
wage aggressive war on the other? 

A. Not in that summer study. I am afraid that wars are evil. I do not think 
there is anyone in the room who would take exception to that. It is not a 
very meaningful statement. But the question of morality, one way or the 
other, you do not have time for when you are trying to think how you fight. 

Q. Was there any conclusion reached as to the relative importance of a strate- 
gic air force on the one hand and an impregnable air defense on the other 
hand and, if so, what was it? 

A. Iknow of no one who really knows the inside of the military who believes 
that it is possible to have either an impregnable and all overwhelming and 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 225 


completely decisive strategic air command, and I know of no one in the 
know who thinks you can have a completely impregnable defense. What 
the country needs is a little of both and one has to supplement the other. 
That was clearly stated in the conclusion of this report. 


Rosert F. BACHER: “Dr. Oppenheimer’s individual contribution 
was the greatest of any member of the General Advisory Com- 
mittee” 


[The next witness, Olliver E. Buckley, has recently retired as chairman of the 
board of Bell Telephone Laboratories, but continues to serve on the AEC’s 
General Advisory Committee, to which he was appointed in 1948. He testi- 
fies that Oppenheimer’s leadership was “outstandingly good.” Then the 
board hears from Robert F. Bacher, who received his Ph.D. in physics from 
the University of Michigan in 1930 and headed the experimental physics di- 
vision at Los Alamos. He described himself politically as “an upstate New 
York Republican.” A member of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1946 
to 1949, he is during the time of his testimony chairman of the Division of 
Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy at the California Institute of Technol- 


ogy.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison: .. . 


Q. As a member of the Atomic Energy Commission, did you have occasion to 
observe closely the work of the GAC? 

A. Yes, I think that during the period I was in Washington I probably followed 
the work of the General Advisory Committee more closely than any other 
member of the Commission. This was natural because I was the only one 
with a scientific and technical background, and the work of the General Ad- 
visory Committee was mostly scientific and technical. I frequently attended 
much of their meeting and read their reports very carefully. They were very 
valuable to us in getting the atomic energy enterprise back on its feet and 
getting some of the work established that we thought ought to get estab- 
lished. 

Q. Would you make a comment on Dr. Oppenheimer’s work as chairman of 
that committee? 

A. It was outstanding. He was appointed a member of the General Advisory 
Committee. The members of the General Advisory Committee themselves 
elected him chairman of that committee. Until he left, the committee, I be- 
lieve, he continued to be chairman. He had had the closest connection with 


226 THE HEARING 


the weapons development work of any of the members of the General Advi- 
sory Committee. 

In that period in early 1947 when the General Advisory Committee was 
set up, our greatest problem was to try to get the Los Alamos Laboratory in 
the development of weapons into a sound shape. The General Advisory 
Committee, I might add, was vigorous on this point, and very helpful in get- 
ting the laboratory into shape both by reason of the recommendations 
which they made, and also the direct help that they gave us in connection 
with personnel for the laboratory. 

Q. What about Dr. Oppenheimer’s individual contribution in this effort? 

A. I would say in this effort Dr. Oppenheimer’s individual contribution was 
the greatest of any member of the General Advisory Committee. He took his 
work on the General Advisory Committee very seriously. He usually came 
to Washington before the meetings to get material ready for the agenda and 
usually stayed afterward to write a report of the meeting. 

During the course of the meeting prolonging discussion at great length so 
everybody would express his views, nevertheless after the views had been 
expressed, he had a very great clarity in focusing these views of what would 
be a report of the committee. ... 

Q. How well do you feel that you know Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I feel I know him very well. I have worked very closely with him during 
the war, have seen him frequently since the war, and feel I know him really 
very well. I just don’t think it would be possible to work with a man as 
closely as I worked with Dr. Oppenheimer during the war without knowing 
him very well. 

Q. What is your opinion as to his loyalty to the United States? 

A. Ihave no question at all of his loyalty. 

Q. On what do you base that? Is that purely a subjective judgment? 

A. I think opinions of that sort are always subjective judgments. In this case I 
put great credence in my own judgment, naturally, because I know him very 
well. But this is essentially an assessment on my part based on knowing 
him for a great many years. I have the greatest confidence in his loyalty. 

Q. What would you say as to his sense of discretion in the use that he would 
make of the knowledge that has come to him and will continue to come to 
him assuming that he continues in Government work? 

A. I found Dr. Oppenheimer to be very discreet. I can remember during the 
war once when we had to go out on a trip together and it was essential that 
he carry a memorandum, that even in note form was classified, and he was 
so careful and he pinned it in his hip pocket. I thought here is a man who 
really is very careful about these things. But to say more generally as to his 
discretion, I have always found Dr. Oppenheimer to be very discreet in his 
handling of classified information. 

Q. Is there anything else you care to say to this board about his character as a 
man and as a citizen? 

A. I have the highest confidence in Dr. Oppenheimer. I consider him to be a 


MONDAY, APRIL 26 227 


person of high character. I consider him to be a man of discretion, a good se- 
curity risk and a person of full loyalty to the country. 
Mr. GARRISON. That is all, Mr. Chairman. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Dr. Bacher, you were asked by Mr. Garrison what you knew about Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s political views at the time you were in Los Alamos, and you 
answered, I believe, that you knew him to be a Democrat. 

Did you know anything about his interest in other political philosophies? 

A. As I think I answered Mr. Garrison, too, we didn’t have very much time to 
discuss politics at Los Alamos. 

Q. Whether you discussed it or not, did you know? 

A. Not much. I had been aware of the fact that he had leftish sympathies be- 
fore the war, but I didn’t really know very much about it, and I didn’t dis- 
cuss it with him. 

Q. Did you ever state to anyone that you knew that between 1934 and 1942, 
Dr. Oppenheimer became interested in various political philosophies and 
was interested as many others were at the time in the experiment being con- 
ducted by the Soviet Government in Russia? 

A. I don’t know, but it sounds as if I might have. 

Q. Did you know that? 

A. That is a difficult question to answer, because I am not exactly sure what it 
would take to know that. I was aware that this was commonly discussed. .. . 

Dr. Evans. Do you think that a man can be completely loyal to his country 
and still be a security risk? 

THE Witness. Yes. If he is a drunkard, he might be a security risk and be com- 
pletely loyal. 

Dr. Evans. Just suppose because of his associates. 

THE WITNESS. It seems to me that on this question of association that is a 
different question. If you have full confidence in a man’s character and his 
integrity and his discretion, I don’t believe that one can rule him out as a se- 
curity risk on the basis of his knowing people who have in the past had con- 
nection with the Communist Party, mostly because I don’t believe there 
would be many people left in the United States that would satisfy that cri- 
terion. 

Dr. Evans. Then you are answering the question this way. You think a man 
can be completely loyal, and if he is completely loyal, he is not a security 
risk? Is that what you are saying? 

THE WitnEss. I believe I specified a little more than that, Dr. Evans. I said, if I 
recall correctly, that if he is a person of high character, a person of integrity, 
and a person who is discreet, and is at the same time a person who is clearly 
loyal, then he is not a security risk, assuming of course that other criteria 
such as he is not a drunk or things of that sort are included. 


228 THE HEARING 


Dr. Evans. You think Dr. Oppenheimer is always discreet? 

THE Witness. I do. 

Dr. Evans. Do you think he was discreet when he refused to give the name of 
somebody that talked to him? Do you remember that Chevalier incident? 

THE Witngss. I don’t remember the point you refer to, I am afraid. 

Dr. EvaANS. Someone approached Dr. Oppenheimer about getting security in- 
formation, and Dr. Oppenheimer refused to give the name of the man that 
approached him. 

THE Witness. I thought he did give the name, Dr. Evans. 

Dr. Evans. He refused twice I think, and for quite a long time he didn’t give it. 
Am I right on that? 

Mr. Ross. I believe that is correct. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is right. 

Dr. Evans. Was that discreet? 

THE WitnEss. Could you ask the question again, Mr. Evans? 

Dr. Evans. Yes. If you were on a project, and you had access to a lot of secret 
information, and I came to you and told you that there was somebody that 
knew that I could give information to if you would give it to me, would you 
have gone and told somebody that I had approached you? 

THE Witness. I think that should have been reported. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman. 

Dr. EvANS. Maybe I put the question very badly. 

Mr. GARRISON. All right. I accept it as a hypothetical question. 

Dr. Evans. You have never been approached by people? 

THE WITNESS. No, never. 

Dr. EvaANs. Do you believe a man should place loyalty to his country before 
loyalty to a friend? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Dr. Evans. That is all I want to ask. 


Tuesday, April 27 


JOHN VON NEUMANN: “All of us in the war years . . . got sud- 
denly in contact with a universe we had not known before . . . ; 
we suddenly were dealing with something with which one 
could blow up the world” 


[The first witness to appear, James McCormack, is a major general in the air 
force who served as director of the AEC’s Division of Military Application 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 229 


from 1947 to 1951. While he had favored a crash program to develop the H- 
bomb in 1949—“If the weapon is there, if it can be had, how can we afford 
not to try for it’—he saw nothing sinister in Oppenheimer’s reluctance to 
embark on such a program, and did not consider him a security risk. McCor- 
mack’s testimony is followed by that of Dr. John von Neumann. Born in 
Hungary, he emigrated to the United States in 1930, became a professor of 
mathematical physics at Princeton University, and in 1933 was appointed to 
the Institute for Advanced Study. Since 1952 he has been a member of the 
AEC’s General Advisory Committee. Like McCormack, von Neumann dis- 
agreed with Oppenheimer’s view of the H-bomb but defends him as a loyal 
American.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. There has been, I guess, a fair amount of testimony that would be an un- 
derstatement—about the GAC report of October 1949, with respect to the 
hydrogen bomb and the thermonuclear program. Dr. von Neumann, did you 
agree with the GAC report and recommendations? 

A. No. I was in favor of a very accelerated program. The GAC at that point rec- 
ommended that the acceleration should not occur. 

Q. Very accelerated hydrogen bomb or thermonuclear program? 

A. Yes, it is all the same thing. 

Q. Would it be fair to say one might say in the opposite camp on the question? 

A. Yes, that is correct. 

Q. Did you consider that the recommendations of the GAC and in particular 
Dr. Oppenheimer were made in good faith? 

A. Yes, I had no doubt about that. 

Q. Do you have any doubt now? 

A. No. 

Q. You knew, of course, that Dr. Oppenheimer was not the only person who 
was opposed to the program? 

A. No, the whole group of scientists and military who were keenly in this 
matter—of course, there had been a lot of discussion and practically every- 
one of us knew very soon fairly precisely where everybody stood. So we 
know each other’s opinions, and very many of us had discussed the matter 
with each other. Dr. Oppenheimer and I had discussed it with each other, 
and so we knew each other’s views very precisely. 

My impression of this matter was, like everybody else, I would have been 
happy if everybody had agreed with me. However, it was evidently a matter 
of great importance. It was evidently a matter which would have conse- 
quences for the rest of our lives and beyond. So there was a very animated 
controversy about it. It lasted for months. 

That it lasted for months was not particularly surprising to my mind. I 


230 THE HEARING 


J. Robert Oppenheimer and John von Neumann in front of an early computer, 1952. Photo- 
graph by Alan W. Richards, Princeton, N.J., courtesy AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


think it was perfectly normal that there should be a controversy about it. It 
was perfectly normal that emotions should run rather high. 

Q. Have you yourself participated in the program of the development of ther- 
monuclear weapons and the hydrogen bomb? 

A. Yes. 

Q. After the President’s decision in January of 1950, is it your impression that 
the GAC and particularly Dr. Oppenheimer was holding back in the effort to 
develop the bomb? 

A. My impression was that all the people I knew, and this includes Dr. Op- 
penheimer, first of all took this decision with very good grace and cooper- 
ated. The specific things I know were various actions which were necessary 
in 1951. At that time there were a number of technical decisions that had to 
be made about the technical program. I know in considerable detail what 
Dr. Oppenheimer did then, and it was certainly very constructive. 

Q. Can you tell us any of that in unclassified terms? 

Mr. Ross. Excuse me. Could I ask what date he is referring to? 

THE Witness. I am referring particularly to a meeting in Princeton in June 
1951. 

Mr. Ross. Thank you. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 231 


By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. I don’t know whether you can expand on this in unclassified terms or not. 

A. I think the details of why there was a need for technical decisions at that 
moment and exactly how far they went and so on, I assume is classified, un- 
less I am otherwise instructed. But it is a fact. You must expect in any pro- 
gram of such proportions that there will be as you go along serious techni- 
cal decisions that have to be made. This was one. There was a meeting at 
Princeton which was attended I think by part of the GAC. I think it was the 
weapons subcommittee of the GAC which is in fact about two-thirds of the 
group, plus several Commissioners, plus several experts which included 
Dr. Bethe, Dr. Teller, myself, Dr. Bradbury—I am not sure whether Dr. York 
was there—Dr. Nordheim and possibly others. This meeting was called by 
Dr. Oppenheimer and he certainly to the extent which anybody was direct- 
ing it, he was directing it. This was certainly a very necessary and construc- 
tive operation. 

Q. At that meeting did he express himself as being in favor of going ahead? 

A. In all the discussions at that point there was no question of being or not 
being in favor. In other words, it was a decided technical policy. I didn’t 
hear any discussions after 1950 whether it ought to be done. There certainly 
were no such discussions at this meeting. The question was whether one 
should make certain technical changes in the program or not. 

All I am trying to say is that at that point there was a need for technical 
changes. If anybody wanted to misdirect the program by very subtle means, 
this would have been an occasion. 

Q. Did Dr. Oppenheimer cooperate in making it easier for you and others to 
work at Los Alamos for Los Alamos on the hydrogen bomb program? 

A. I certainly never had the slightest difficulty. One thing is that I think if Dr. 
Oppenheimer had wanted to create difficulties of this kind, as far as I am 
concerned, it would have been possible. Also, our relations would probably 
have deteriorated. There was absolutely nothing of that. Our personal rela- 
tions stayed very good throughout. I never experienced any difficulty in 
going as much to Los Alamos as necessary. 

Q. There was no suggestion by Dr. Oppenheimer that this was interfering 
with your work at the institute? 

A. None whatsoever, absolutely none. ... 

Q. And I take it there was no objection to your doing any work that might be 
helpful to Los Alamos at Princeton? 

A. Absolutely none whatsoever. 

Q. Did Dr. Oppenheimer attempt to dissuade you from working on the hydro- 
gen-bomb program? 

A. No. We had a discussion. Of course, he attempted to persuade me to accept 
his views. I equally attempted to persuade him to accept my views, and this 
was done by two people who met during this period. I would say apart from 
the absolutely normal discussion on a question on which you happen to 


232 THE HEARING 


disagree, there was absolutely nothing else. The idea that this might be 
pressure I must say did not occur to me ever. 

Q. Do you now think that it was pressure? 

A. No. I think it was the perfectly normal desire to convince somebody else. 

Q. During what period was this discussion? 

A. This was in 1949, December 1949. I remember quite clearly two discus- 
sions, one which was about half an hour at which time I saw the GAC opin- 
ion and we discussed it. 

Q. You had a Q clearance at that time? 

A. Yes. We discussed the same subject again about a week later, again for 
about 20 minutes or half an hour, I don’t know. We probably also talked 
about the subject on other occasions, but I don’t recall. 

Q. Wasn’t the discussion about whether you personally should work on the 
hydrogen-bomb program? 

A. Absolutely not. The only question was whether it was or was not wise to 
undertake that program. 

Q. You have known Dr. Oppenheimer, I think you said, substantially contin- 
uously since 1943 to the present date? 

A. Yes. 

Q. With the exception of the period from 1945, the end of the Los Alamos 

days, until 1947, when Dr. Oppenheimer came to the institute as direc- 

tor. 

. That is correct. 

. During that period you have really lived in the same small town? 

Yes. 

And been friends and known each other quite well during all that time? 

Yes. 

. Both professionally and socially? 

. Yes, that is correct. 

. Do you have an opinion about Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty to the United 

States, his integrity? 

A. Ihave no doubts about it whatever. 

Q. Your opinion I take it is quite clear and firm? 

A. Yes, yes. 

Q. Do you have an opinion as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s discretion in the han- 
dling of classified materials and classified information? 

A. Absolutely. I have personally every confidence. Furthermore I am not 
aware that anybody has questioned that. 

Q. There seems to be some question among my associates whether I asked 
this. Do you have an opinion about Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty? 

A. Yes. 

Q. What is that? 

A. I would say he is loyal. 

Q. Do you have any doubt on that subject at all? 


OPOPO>PO> 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 233 


A. No. 
Mk. SILVERMAN. I have no further questions. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Dr. von Neumann, you stated that Dr. Oppenheimer attempted to persuade 
you to accept his views, and you attempted to persuade him to accept your 
views in December 1949? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Would you tell us briefly what his views were as you understood them? 

A. Well, that it would be a mistake to undertake an acceleration of the hy- 
drogen bomb, the thermonuclear program for the following reasons: Be- 
cause it would disorganize the program of the AEC because instead of de- 
veloping fission weapons further, which one knew how to do and where 
one could predict good results fairly reliably, one getting back on a crash 
program which would supersede and damage everything else, and the re- 
sults of the crash program would be dubious. That furthermore, from the 
military point of view, making bigger explosions was not necessarily an ad- 
vantage in proportion to the size of the explosion. Furthermore, that we 
practically had the lead in whatever we did, and the Russians would fol- 
low, and that we were probably more vulnerable than they were for a vari- 
ety of reasons, one of which is that we can probably saturate them right 
now—I meant right then—whereas they could not at that moment. There- 
fore, a large increment on both sides would merely mean that both sides 
can saturate the other. Also, that since there was now this possibility of a 
large increment in destructive power, this was now for the second time, 
and possibly for the last time an opportunity to try to negotiate control and 
disarmament. 

I think this was by and large the argument. There are a few other angles 
which are classified which I think are not very decisive. 

Q. Doctor, was there anything in his argument about the immorality of devel- 
oping the thermonuclear? 

A. I took it for granted that it was his view. It did not appear very much in our 
arguments, but we knew each other quite well. My view on that is quite 
hard boiled, and that was known. 

Q. What was Dr. Oppenheimer’s view, soft boiled? 

A. I assume, but look, now, I am going by hearsay. I have not discussed it 
with him. 

Q. I understand. 

A. I assume that one ought to consider it very carefully whether one develops 
anything of this order of destruction just per se. 

Q. Yes, sir. Doctor, in response to a question from Mr. Silverman, you said 
you had no question about Dr. Oppenheimer’s integrity, did you not? 


234 THE HEARING 


A. Yes. 

Q. By that you meant his honesty, did you not? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Doctor, do you recall having heard anything about an incident which oc- 
curred between Dr. Oppenheimer and a man named Chevalier? 

A. Yes, but that was lately. I do not know for absolutely sure when I first 
heard it. I saw the letter of charges and there it occurs. When I read it, I had 
the vague impression that I had heard this before, but I think that this was 
in the last few years. 

Q. You saw the letter of General Nichols and Dr. Oppenheimer’s response? 

A. Yes. I am not absolutely certain whether.I saw the complete original or 
whether I saw somebody’s excerpts of relevant parts. 

Q. What is your present understanding about that incident that I referred to— 
the Chevalier incident? What do you have in mind about what happened? 
A. What I understand happened was—and please correct me if my recollec- 
tion is inexact—my impression is that Chevalier was a man who had been 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s friend in earlier years, who in 1942, I think, or early 
1943, when Dr. Oppenheimer was already associated with the atomic en- 
ergy project which was not yet the Manhattan district, made an approach 
and suggested to him that somebody else, whose name I have forgotten, was 
working for Russia and would be able to transmit scientific and technical 

information to Russia. 

I understood that Dr. Oppenheimer essentially told him to go to hell, but 
did not report this incident immediately, and that when he later reported it, 
he did not report it completely for some time, until, Ithink, ordered by Gen- 
eral Groves to do so.... 

Look, you have to view the performance and the character of a man as a 
whole. This episode, if true, would make me think that the course of the 
year 1943 or in 1942 and 1943, he was not emotionally and intellectually 
prepared to handle this kind of a job; that he subsequently learned how to 
handle it, and handled it very well, I know. I would say that all of us in the 
war years, and by all of us, I mean all people in scientific technical occupa- 
tions got suddenly in contact with a universe we had not known before. I 
mean this peculiar problem of security, the fact that people who looked all 
right might be conspirators and might be spies. They are all things which do 
not enter one’s normal experience in ordinary times. While we are now 
most of us quite prepared to discover such things in our entourage, we were 
not prepared to discover these things in 1943. SoI must say that this had on 
anyone a shock effect, and any one of us may have behaved foolishly and 
ineffectively and untruthfully, so this condition is something ten years 
later, I would not consider too serious. This would affect me the same way 
as if I would suddenly hear about somebody that he has had some extraor- 
dinary escapade in his adolescence. 

I know that neither of us were adolescents at that time, but of course we 
were all little children with respect to the situation which had developed, 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 235 


namely, that we suddenly were dealing with something with which one 
could blow up the world. Furthermore, we were involved in a triangular 
war ... two of our enemies had done suddenly the nice thing of fighting 
each other. But after all, they were still enemies. This was a very peculiar 
situation. None of us had been educated or conditioned to exist in this situ- 
ation, and we had to make our rationalization and our code of conduct as 
we went along. 

For some people it took 2 months, for some 2 years, and for some 1 year. I 
am quite sure that all of us by now have developed the necessary code of 
ethics and the necessary resistance. 

So if this story is true, that would just give me a piece of information on 
how long it took Dr. Oppenheimer to get adjusted to this Buck Rogers uni- 
verse, but no more. I have no slightest doubt that he was not adjusted to it in 
1944 or 1945. 

Q. Had you completed your answer? 

A. Yes. 

Q. In 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer was the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory, 
wasn’t he? 

A. Yes. 

Q. I believe at that time he was 39 years old? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You wouldn’t say he was at that time an adolescent, would you? 

A. No. I was trying to make this clearer. There are certain experiences which 
are new for an adolescent, and where an adolescent will behave in a silly 
way. I would say these experiences were new for a man of 39, if he hap- 
pened to be 39 at that moment in history. 

Q. Do you think, Doctor, that honesty, the ability and the desire to tell the 
truth, depends upon the international situation? 

A. It depends on the strain under which you are. 

Q. The strain? 

A. Yes. 

Q. You mean a man may lie under certain strains when he would not under 
ordinary circumstances? 

A. Yes, practically everybody will lie under anesthesia. 

Q. Do you think, Doctor, if you had been placed in the same situation that Dr. 
Oppenheimer was in 1943, in respect of this matter, that you would have 
lied to the security officers? 

A. Sir, I don’t know how to answer this question. Of course, I hope I 
wouldn’t. But—you are telling me now to hypothesize that somebody else 
acted badly, and you ask me would I have acted the same way. Isn’t this a 
question of when did you stop beating your wife? 

Q. I don’t think so, Doctor, since you asked me. .. . 

Mr. Gray. Suppose at Los Alamos someone had come to you—this is purely 
hypothetical—and said, although the British are our allies and the official 
policy of the United States Government is to share military information of 


236 THE HEARING 


the highest degree of secrecy with the British, this policy is being frustrated 
in Washington, now I have a way of getting to the British scientists infor- 
mation about what we are doing here in Los Alamos, and don’t you think it 
is up to us to make sure that official policy is not frustrated, and you knew 
that this person was interested in the British, what would your position 
have been at that time, Dr. von Neumann? 

THE Witness. For one thing, I would certainly not have given him informa- 
tion, but I asume that the main question is would I have reported him right 
away. 

Mr. Gray. Yes; let me ask that question. The British were allies, it was official 
policy, this man frankly said that then if the information were made avail- 
able, it could be transmitted through channels which were not official 
channels. 

THE Witness. I would probably have reported him. I realize, however, that 
this can lead to a bad conflict. If I am convinced that the man is honest in 
his own benighted way, that is an unpleasant conflict situation, I would 
probably have reported him anyway. 

Mr. Gray. The reason I asked the question is not to get an answer from you on 
the basis of a hypothetical question, but to really ask next whether you 
would have made a distinction at that time between an approach on behalf 
of the Russians and an approach on behalf of the British. 

THE Witngss. Yes. I think the probability of being at war with Russia in the 
next 10 years was high, and the probability of being at war with England in 
the next 10 years was low. ... 

Dr. Evans. If someone had approached you and told you he had a way to 
transport secret information to Russia, would you have been very much sur- 
prised if that man approached you? 

THE Witness. It depends who the man is. 

Dr. Evans. Suppose he is a friend of yours. 

THE WITNESS. Well; yes. 

Dr. Evans. Would you be surprised? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Dr. Evans. Would you have reported it immediately? 

THE WiTNEss. This depends on the period. I mean before I got conditioned to 
security, possibly not. After I got conditioned to security, certainly yes. 

Dr. Evans. You would. 

THE Witness. I mean after quite an experience with security matters and real- 
izing what was involved; yes. 

Dr. Evans. I am sure you would now, Dr. von Neumann. 

THE Witness. There is no doubt now. 

Dr. Evans. You don’t know some years ago whether you would have or not? 

THE WITNESS. What I am trying to say is this, that before 1941, I didn’t even 
know what the word “classified” meant. So God only knows how intelli- 
gently I would have behaved in situations involving this. I am quite sure 
that I learned it reasonably fast. But there was a period of learning during 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 237 


which I may have made mistakes or might have made mistakes. I think I 
didn’t. 

Dr. EVANS. Would you put loyalty to a friend above loyalty to your country at 
any time? 

THE WITNESS. No. 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. Do you think that Dr. Oppenheimer would place loyalty to a friend above 
loyalty to his country? 

A. I would not think so. 

Q. Dr. Evans asked you about whether it is possible for a man to be loyal to 
his country, and yet be a security risk because of his associations. 

A. Yes. 

Q. I think you answered “Yes.” Do you feel you know Dr. Oppenheimer’s as- 
sociations reasonably well? 

A. Irather think so. 

Q. Do you think that Dr. Oppenheimer is a security risk because of his present 
associations? 

A. No, I don’t think so. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. That is all. 

Mr. Ross. One further question. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 


By Mr. Robb: 

Q. Doctor, you have never had any training as a psychiatrist, have you? 
A. No. 

MR. Ross. That is all. 

Mr. Gray. Thank you very much, Dr. von Neumann. 


WeENDELL M. Latimer: “I kept turning over in my mind... what 
was in Oppenheimer that gave him such tremendous power 
over these men” 


[The first witness to be called by Roger Robb is Wendell M. Latimer, a pro- 
fessor of chemistry at the University of California at Berkeley where he has 
taught since 1919. He serves as associate director of the Berkeley Radiation 
Laboratory, which is headed by Ernest O. Lawrence. Since Robb had not had 
to provide a list of witnesses in advance, Samuel Silverman requests a few 


238 THE HEARING 


minutes to prepare his cross-examination, a request that Gordon Gray re- 
jects.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Doctor, did there come a time when you began thinking about a weapon 
which is called the H-bomb? 

A. Yes. 

Q. When was that? 

A. I suspected I started worrying about the H-bomb before most people. Just 
as soon as it became evident to me that the Russians were not going to be 
cooperative and were distinctly unfriendly. 

Q. Would you keep your voice up just a bit, Doctor? 

A. I felt that it was only a question of time that the Russians got the A-bomb. 
I haven’t much confidence in secrecy keeping these things under control 
very long. It seemed to me obvious that they would get the A-bomb. It also 
seemed to me obvious that the logical thing for them to do was to shoot im- 
mediately for the super weapon, that they knew they were behind us in the 
production of a bomb. It seemed to me that they must conclude shooting 
ahead immediately in making the super weapons. So I suspect it was 
around 1947 that I started worrying about the fact that we seemed to be 
twiddling our thumbs and doing nothing. 

As time passed, I got more and more anxious over this situation that we 
were not prepared to meet, it seemed to me, a crash program of the 
Russians. I talked to a good many people about it, members of the General 
Advisory Committee. 

Q. Do you recall who you talked to about it? 

A. I talked to Glenn Seaborg for one. I didn’t get much satisfaction out of the 
answers. They seemed to me most of them on the phony side. 

Q. Doctor, may I interpose right here before we go on to ask you a couple of 
questions, first, why did it seem obvious to you that the Russians would 
proceed from the A-bomb to the H-bomb? 

A. They knew they were behind us on the A-bomb, and if they could cut 
across and beat us to the H-bomb or the super weapons, they must do it. I 
could not escape from the conclusion that they must take that course of ac- 
tion. It was the course of action that we certainly would have taken if we 
were behind. I could not escape from that conclusion. 

Q. The second question is, you said that we seemed to be twiddling our 
thumbs in the matter. What was the basis for that feeling on your part? 

A. In the period between 1945 and 1949 we didn’t get anywhere in our 
atomic energy program in any direction. We didn’t expand our production 
of uranium much. We didn’t really get going on any reactor program. We 
didn’t expand to an appreciable extent our production of fissionable mate- 
rial. We just seemed to be sitting by and doing nothing. 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 239 


I felt so certain that the Russians would get the A-bomb and shoot for the 
H-bomb that all during that period I probably was overanxious, at least 
compared to most of the scientists in the country. But it seemed to me that 
such an obvious thing would happen. 

Q. Reverting again to your narrative, you said you talked to Dr. Seaborg and 
others about going ahead with the H-bomb, and their answers, you said, 
seemed to be phony. What did you mean by that? 

A. I can’t recall all the details during that period. When the Russians ex- 
ploded their first A-bomb, then I really got concerned. 

Q. What did you do? 

A. Inthe first place, I got hold of Ernest Lawrence and I said, “Listen, we have 
to do something about it.” I think it was after I saw Ernest Lawrence in the 
Faculty Club on the campus, the same afternoon he went up on the Hill and 
Dr. Alvarez got hold of him and told him the same thing. I guess the two of 
us working on him at once with different impulses got him excited, and the 
three of us went to Washington that weekend to attend another meeting, 
and we started talking the best we could, trying to present our point of view 
to various men in Washington. 

On that first visit the reception was, I would say, on the whole favorable. 
Most people agreed with us, it seemed to us, that it should be done. 

Q. Could you fix the approximate date of this? 

A. I would say within 2 or 3 weeks after the explosion of the Russian bomb. I 
don’t remember the date of that. 

Q. That was in September 1949. 

A. Shortly after that. ... 

Q. What was the reception of your suggestions received at that period of 
time? I am speaking of the time 2 or 3 weeks after the Russian explosion. 
A. It was favorable, I would say. We met practically no opposition as I recall. 

Q. Will you tell us whether or not that situation changed? 

A. It definitely changed. 

Q. When? 

A. Within a few weeks. There had been a lot of back pressure built up, I think 
primarily from the Advisory Committee. 

Q. Would you explain that to us a bit? 

A. I don’t remember now all the sources of information I had on it, but we 
very quickly were aware of the fact that the General Advisory Committee 
was opposed. 

Q. What was the effect of that opposition by the Committee upon fellow sci- 
entists, if you know? 

A. There were not many scientists who knew the story. I frankly was very 
mystified at the opposition. 

Q. Why? 

A. Granted at that time the odds of making a super weapon were not known, 
they talked about 50-50, 10 to 1, 100 to 1, but when the very existence of 
the Nation was involved, I didn’t care what the odds were. One hundred to 


240 THE HEARING 


one was too big an odd for this country to take, it seemed to me, even if it 
was unfavorable. The answers that we kept getting were that we should not 
do it on moral grounds. If we did it, the world would hate us. If we didn’t 
do it, the Russians wouldn't do it. It was too expensive. We didn’t have the 
manpower. These were the types of argument that we got and they dis- 
turbed me. 

Q. Did you ascertain the source of any of this opposition? 

A. I judge the source of it was Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Q. Why? 

A. You know, he is one of the most amazing men that the country has ever 
produced in his ability to influence people. It is just astounding the influ- 
ence that he has upon a group. It is an amazing thing. His domination of the 
General Advisory Committee was so complete that he always carried the 
majority with him, and I don’t think any views came out of that Committee 
that weren’t essentially his views. 

Q. Did you have any opinion in 1949 on the question of the feasibility of ther- 
monuclear weapons? 

A. Various calculations seemed to show that it might go if you could just get 
the right conditions or the right mechanical approach to it. The odds didn’t 
look good, but as I say, I didn’t care what the odds were, if there was a pos- 
sibility of it going, I thought we must explore it, that we could not afford to 
take a chance not to. The stakes were too big. The very existence of the 
country was involved and you can’t take odds on such things. 

Q. Was there any way that you knew of to get the answer without experiment 
and tests? 

A. No, I am sure all the calculations showed that the only way it could ever 
be settled was by trying it. 

Q. Have you followed the progress of the thermonuclear program since 1949? 

A. Ina rough way, yes. In the past 2 years, we have been working on some of 
the problems at the Radiation Laboratory. 

Q. At Berkeley? 

A. At Berkeley. 

Q. Dr. Latimer, this board is required within the framework of the statute to 
determine upon its recommendation to the general manager as to whether or 
not the security clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer should be continued and the 
standards set up by the statute for the board are the character, the associa- 
tions and the loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer. Would you care to give the board, 
sir, any comments you have upon the basis of your knowledge of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer as to his character, his loyalty and his associations in that context? 

A. That is a rather large order. 

Q. I know it is, Doctor. 

A. His associations at Berkeley were well known. The fact that he did have 
Communist friends. I never questioned his loyalty. There were elements of 
the mystic in his apparent philosophy of life that were very difficult to un- 
derstand. He is a man of tremendous sincerity and his ability to convince 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 241 


people depends so much upon this sincerity. But what was back of his phi- 
losophy I found very difficult to understand. 

A whole series of events involved the things that started happening im- 
mediately after he left Los Alamos. Many of our boys came back from it 
pacifists. I judged that was due very largely to his influence, this tremen- 
dous influence he had over those young men. Various other things started 
coming into the picture. 

For example, his opposition to the security clause in the atomic energy 
contracts, opposition on the floor of the National Academy which was very 
intense and showed great feeling here. These various arguments which 
were used for not working on the H-bomb, the fact that he wanted to dis- 
band Los Alamos. The fact of the things that weren’t done the 4 years that 
we twiddled our thumbs. All these things seemed to fit together to give a 
certain pattern to his philosophy. A man’s motives are just something that 
you can’t discuss, but all his reactions were such as to give me considerable 
worry about his judgment as a security risk. 

Q. I will put it in very simple terms, Doctor. Having in mind all that you have 
said, and you know, would you trust him? 

A. You mean in matters of security? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. I would find—trust, you know, involves a reasonable doubt, I would say. 

Q. That is right. 

A. On that basis I would find it difficult to do so.... 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. Did you know what General Groves’ views were as to whether it was de- 
sirable in the years 1947 on—in the early years there—as to whether it was 
desirable to concentrate on fission weapons rather than on thermonuclear? 

A. I suppose I heard his views. They seemed to coincide with that of the Gen- 
eral Advisory Committee pretty much. I suspect again under the influence 
of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Q. You don’t of course question General Groves’ patriotism or his good faith? 

A. I don’t question the patriotism of any of the members on that committee. 
Of course, he was not on the committee. Not only General Groves, but the 
other members on the committee, Conant and the other members, they were 
under the influence of Dr. Oppenheimer, and that is some influence, I as- 
sure you. 

Q. Were you under Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence? 

A. No, I don’t believe I was close enough contact to be. I might have been ifI 
had been in closer contact. 

Q. You think that General Groves was under Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence? 

A. Oh, very definitely. 

Q. Have you ever spoken to General Groves? 


242 THE HEARING 


A. About this problem? 

Q. At all. 

A. Oh, yes; I saw him frequently during the war. 

Q. On what do you base your judgment that General Groves was under Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s influence? 

A. I wouldn’t go too far in answering that question, because I don’t know how 
much General Groves’ opinions have changed in recent years. The state- 
ments that I have heard attributed to him seemed to follow the same—at 
least for a while, I have not seen his statements very recently—but during 
part of this period he seemed to be following the Oppenheimer line. 

Q. What I am curious about is how do you know that Dr. Oppenheimer was 
not following the Groves line? 

A. That is ridiculous. 

Q. Pardon? 

A. Knowing the two men, I would say that is ridiculous. Oppenheimer was 
the leader in science. Groves was simply an administrator. He was not 
doing the thinking for the program. 

Q. Iam trying to arrive upon what it is that you base your—I think you said it 
was a suspicion, but perhaps I am wrong, that General Groves was under Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s influence. Is it simply the fact of your knowledge of Dr. Op- 
penheimer and the fact that he is a leading scientist and a man of great gifts. 

A. I know these things were overwhelming to General Groves. He was so 

dependent upon his judgment that I think it is reasonable to conclude that 

most of his ideas were coming from Dr. Oppenheimer. 
How do you know he was so dependent? 
I don’t. I don’t know, but I have seen the thing operate. 

. There were other scientists at Los Alamos, weren’t there? 

Yes, there were. 

And General Groves has had contact with other scientists. 

. Yes, but there were no other scientists there with the influence that Dr. Robert 

Oppenheimer had and moreover this close association with Groves certainly 

one would normally conclude that he still had tremendous influence over 

him. It may be an unreasonable conclusion, but it doesn’t seem so to me. 

Q. Forgive me, but no man considers his own view unreasonable. 

A. That is right. You must accept these as my personal opinions and nothing 
more than that. 

Q. I am trying to arrive on what you base these personal opinions. 

A. Various things that go into a man’s judgment are sometimes difficult to an- 
alyze. 

Q. Iam trying to find out to what extent objective facts— 

A. I had studied this influence that Dr. Oppenheimer had over men. It was a 
tremendous thing. 

Q. When did you study this influence? 

A. All during the war and after the war. He is such an amazing man that one 
couldn’t help but try to put together some picture. 


>POPO>L 


TUESDAY, APRIL 27 243 


Q. Tell us about these studies that you made about Dr. Oppenheimer’s influ- 
ence. You said after the war. 

A. He has been a most interesting study for years. Unconsciously, I think one 
tries to put together the elements in a man that make him tick. Where this 
influence comes from, what factors in his personality that give him this 
tremendous influence. I am not a psychoanalyst. I can’t give you how my 
picture of this thing was developed, but to me it was an amazing study, just 
thinking about these factors. 

Q. For a long time you have been thinking about Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence 
on people. 

A. Yes, particularly during this period when he was able to sway so many 
people, so many of his intimate— 

Q. What is the period here? 

Mr. Ross. Wait a minute. He has not finished. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Sorry. 

THE Witness. During this period of discussion as to whether one should work 
on the H-bomb and the super weapons. I was amazed at the decision that 
the committee was making, and I kept turning over in my mind how they 
could possibly come to these conclusions, and what was in Oppenheimer 
that gave him such tremendous power over these men... . 

Q. You said some of the boys came back from Los Alamos pacifists, and you 
judged that to be due to Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence. On what did you base 
that judgment? 

A. Their great devotion to him. They were capable of independent judgment, 
but it looked to me like a certain amount of indoctrination had taken place. 
That matter I would not put too much weight on, but it was just an observa- 
tion that they had... . 

Q. Dr. Latimer, let me put it to you as frankly as I can, and I would like you 
honestly, and I know you will, to consider this point of view. Would you say 
that your judgment that these boys were influenced to become pacifists by 
Dr. Oppenheimer is based essentially on your judgment that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer is a very persuasive person, and that very few people come in con- 
tact with Dr. Oppenheimer without being influenced by him? 

A. That is certainly an important factor in my decision. 

Q. And that therefore if someone comes back after having a contact with Dr. 
Oppenheimer with a view which to you appears to be Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
view, it is in your judgment reasonable to suppose that Dr. Oppenheimer in- 
fluenced them? 

A. I would conclude from the devotion of these boys to him that would not be 
contrary to his own opinions and probably expressed. 

Q. Did you know what his opinions were on the question of pacifism? 

A. Let me phrase this a little differently. Let us not put the general pacifism, 
but an unwillingness to build weapons or to work on any research involv- 
ing weapons. I believe that was a more careful statement of the opinions 
they voiced. 


244 THE HEARING 


Q. Dr. Latimer, that is a very different thing from being pacifists, is it not? 

A. It amounts to the same thing, I would say. We have to have weapons to 
fight. If we don’t have weapons, we don’t fight. 

Q. Wasn’t it true that many scientists after the explosion at Hiroshima and 

perhaps even before that—many scientists after the explosion at Hiroshima 

were terribly troubled by this weapon? 

. Oh, yes. 

. Weren't you, sir? 

I was more troubled by what the Russians might do along the same line. 

. I would like to ask you whether you were troubled by this weapon. 

No. 

. Were you troubled by the fact that 70,000 people were killed at Hiroshima? 

. I felt that you might even have saved lives. I had been in the Pacific and I 

had seen something of the difficulty of getting the Japanese out of caves. I 

went over there on a special mission that involved that problem. I felt that 

if we had to land our boys on the coast of Japan, and knowing what I knew 
about the difficulty of getting Japanese out of underground positions, that 
the loss of life might be very much greater. 

Q. I think we all understand that consideration, Dr. Latimer, and I think we 
all share it. What I would like to know is whether you were troubled by the 
fact that 70,000 people were killed at Hiroshima. 

A. I suppose I was troubled to the same extent that I was troubled by the great 
loss of life which occurred in our fire bombs over Tokyo. The two things 
were comparable in my mind. I am troubled by war in general. 

Q. Don’t you think that perhaps boys who had worked on the atom bomb and 
who perhaps felt some responsibility for the bomb might have felt that 
trouble in perhaps even more acute form? 

A. I grant that is correct; they might have... . 


>O>POPO> 


[Following Latimer’s testimony, Lloyd Garrison submits several brief docu- 
ments, including an affidavit by James R. Killian Jr., president of the Massa- 
chusetts Institute of Technology, attesting that Oppenheimer was “deeply de- 
voted to strengthening the security of the Nation.” Then the day’s hearing is 
adjourned.] 


Wednesday, April 28 


Roscoe C. Wilson: “My feeling is that the masters in the 
Kremlin cannot risk the loss of their base. This base is vulner- 
able only to attack by air power” 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 245 


[Roger Robb explains that Ernest O. Lawrence will be unable to appear be- 
cause of illness, and then calls Roscoe Charles Wilson, a major general in 
the air force, who has just completed a two-year stint as head of the Air War 
College in Montgomery, Alabama, and is on his way to England to become 
commander of the Third Air Force. He first met Oppenheimer at Los Alamos, 
which he visited as a liaison officer to General Groves. Candidly describing 
himself as “first of all a big-bomb man,” Wilson replies to a question about a 
report, made in February 1950, by an AEC long-range objectives panel on 
which he served.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Can you tell us about that report, General? 

A. This panel was composed of a group of military people, of which I was 
one, and the chairman was Dr. Oppenheimer. Another member was Dr. 
Bacher, and another Dr. Luis Alvarez. The panel contained some conserva- 
tive statements on the possibility or the feasibility of an early production 
of a thermonuclear weapon. These reservations were made on technical 
grounds. They were simply not challengeable by the military. They did, 
however, cause some concern in the military. 

It is hard for me to explain this, except to say that most of us have an al- 
most extravagant admiration for Dr. Oppenheimer and Dr. Bacher as physi- 
cists, and we simply would not challenge any technical judgment that they 
might make. But I must confess, and I find this exceedingly embarrassing, 
sir, that as a result of this panel and other actions that had taken place in the 
Committee on Atomic Energy, that I felt compelled to go to the Director of 
Intelligence to express my concern over what I felt was a pattern of action 
that was simply not helpful to national defense. 

Q. Action by whom? 

A. By Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Q. Would you explain what that pattern was? 

A. I would like first to say that I am not talking about loyalty. I want this 
clearly understood. If I may, I would like to say that this is a matter of my 
judgment versus Dr. Oppenheimer’s judgment. This is a little embarrassing 
to me, too. But Dr. Oppenheimer was dealing in technical fields and I was 
dealing in other fields, and I am talking about an overall result of these ac- 
tions. 

First, I would like to say, sir, that I am a dedicated airman. I believe in a 
concept which I am going to have to tell you or my testimony doesn’t make 
sense. 

The U.S.S.R. in the airman’s view is a land power. It is practically in- 
dependent of the rest of the world. I feel that it could exist for a long time 
without sea communications. Therefore, it is really not vulnerable to attack 
by sea. Furthermore, it has a tremendous store of manpower. If you can 


246 THE HEARING 


imagine such a force, it could probably put 300 to 500 divisions in the field, 
certainly far more than this country could put into the field. It is bordered 
by satellite countries upon whom would be expended the first fury of any 
land assault that would be launched against Russia, and it has its historical 
distance and climate. So my feeling is that it is relatively invulnerable to 
land attack. 

Russia is the base of international communism. My feeling is that the 
masters in the Kremlin cannot risk the loss of their base. This base is 
vulnerable only to attack by air power. I don’t propose for a moment to say 
that only air power should be employed in case of a war with Russia, but I 
say what strategy is established should be centered around air power. 

I further believe that whereas air power might be effective with ordinary 
weapons, that the chances of success against Russia with atomic weapons 
or nuclear weapons are far, far greater. 

It is against this thinking that I have to judge Dr. Oppenheimer’s judg- 
ments. Once again, his judgments were based upon technical matters. It is 
the pattern I am talking about. 

I have jotted down from my own memory some of these things that wor- 
ried me. 

First was my awareness of the fact that Dr. Oppenheimer was interested 
in what I call the internationalizing of atomic energy, this at a time when 
the United States had a monopoly, and in which many people, including 
myself, believed that the A-bomb in the hands of the United States with an 
Air Force capable of using it was probably the greatest deterrent to further 
Russian aggression. This was a concern. 

To do this the Air Force felt that it required quite an elaborate system of 
devices. Some were relatively simple to produce, some of them were ex- 
ceedingly difficult to produce, and some of them were very costly. Dr. Op- 
penheimer was not enthusiastic about 2 out of 3 of these devices or systems. 
I do not challenge his technical judgment in these matters, but the overall 
effect was to deny to the Air Force the mechanism which we felt was essen- 
tial to determine when this bomb went off. In our judgment, this was one of 
the critical dates, or would be at that time, for developing our national- 
defense policy. 

Dr. Oppenheimer also opposed the nuclear-powered aircraft. His oppo- 
sition was based on technical judgment. I don’t challenge his technical 
judgment, but at the same time he felt less strongly opposed to the nuclear- 
powered ships. The Air Force feeling was that at least the same energy 
should be devoted to both projects. 

The approach to the thermonuclear weapons also caused some concern. 
Dr. Oppenheimer, as far as I know, had technical objections, or, let me say, 
approached this conservatism for technical reasons, more conservatism 
than the Air Force would have liked. 

The sum total of this, to my mind, was adding up that we were not ex- 
ploiting the full military potential in this field. Once again it was a matter of 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 247 


judgment. I would like to say that the fact that I admire Dr. Oppenheimer so 
much, the fact that he is such a brilliant man, the fact that he has such a 
command of the English language, has such national prestige, and such 
power of persuasion, only made me nervous, because I felt if this was so it 
would not be to the interest of the United States, in my judgment. It was for 
that reason that I went to the Director of Intelligence to say that I felt un- 


happy. 
Mr. Ross. That is all I care to ask. Thank you, General. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. General, you said you are not raising a question of loyalty? 
A. No, sir. 

Q. You do not question Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty? 

A. Ihave no knowledge in this area at all, sir. 

Q. Do you— 

Mr. Ross. Wait a minute. Let him finish his answer. 

THE WitNgEss. I have no knowledge one way or another. 


By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. Have you any information to indicate that Dr. Oppenheimer has been less 
than discreet in the handling of classified information? 

A. No, sir; I haven’t. Maybe I talk probably too much. ... 

Mr. Gray. You stated, General Wilson, on the basis of your association—I be- 
lieve you stated—with Dr. Oppenheimer, you did not doubt his loyalty to 
the United States? 

THE Witness. I have no knowledge of this at all, sir. I certainly have observed 
nothing nor have I heard him say anything that I personally would say was 
disloyal. In fact, sir, it seems to me that he has demonstrated his loyalty, 
once again in a private opinion, in the tremendous job he has done for this 
country. I have just no knowledge of this. 

Mk. Gray. I should like to ask you another question on this point. It may be a 
difficult one to answer. Is it possible, do you think, for an individual to be 
completely loyal to the United States, and yet engage in a course of conduct 
which would be detrimental to the security interests of the United States? 

THE WITNESS. Yes; I do. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to refer now to what you described as a pattern of con- 
duct. You mentioned several things. The internationalization of atomic en- 
ergy has not been accomplished. With respect now to the long-range detec- 
tion system, have these other two that have been under discussion here 
been developed, and are they now in use? 

THE WiTNEss. Yes, sir; they have been developed and are in use. It was a bitter 
wrangle to get them developed, but they are in use. 

Mr. Gray. With respect to nuclear powered aircraft—I don’t know what the 


248 THE HEARING 


security problem is in this next question—may I ask you whether this is a 
promising field at the present time? I suppose I should state frankly the pur- 
pose of this series of questions. You have stated that you do not question Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s technical judgment and competence. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. You made that very clear. I am trying to find out really whether in 
these several things that you referred to as constituting what might be a pat- 
tern of conduct, whether events have shown technical judgment in this case 
to have been faulty. Let me say for the record this board is not asked to pass 
upon the technical judgment of anybody, and is not competent to pass upon 
it. But it seems to me an answer to my question is pertinent to the part of the 
inquiry that we are engaged in. So I ask whether in these areas subsequent 
events have proved the validity or otherwise of these technical judgments 
which you accepted more or less without question, I believe you said, from 
Dr. Oppenheimer. We know that internationalization of atomic energy has 
not been accomplished. With respect to the others— 

THE Witness. Of course, the long-range detection program has been accom- 
plished. I don’t recall that Dr. Oppenheimer ever said that this couldn't be 
done. It was just perhaps that we ought to concentrate on the portions that 
could be done readily and quickly. I don’t remember exactly the argument. 
It was essentially that—do what we can and perhaps that is the best we can 
do, this sort of thing, and for the rest let us experiment. The Air Force was 
frantic because it was charged with the job of detecting this first explosion 
and it felt all three methods had to be developed and put in place or it 
would fall down on its job. 

Mr. Gray. I think I won’t press you on the answer to the question as | asked it, 
because it is not a good question. 

THE WITNESS. Yes, sir; I am sorry. 

Mr. Gray. General Wilson, with respect to what might be called the philoso- 
phy of strategy in a conflict with the Soviet Union, is it your view, as a ded- 
icated airman today, knowing what you know about our capabilities in the 
field of nuclear weapons, that these weapons are important? 

THE WITNESS. Vastly, yes, sir. 

Mr. Gray. And as an airman, would you feel that even with improvements in 
the atomic weapons, which may have taken place in these years we have 
been discussing, these are still important weapons, that is, the thermonu- 
clear? 

THE WITNESS. Yes, sir. 

Mr. Gray. You feel as an airman, knowing air capabilities, that they have di- 
rect useful application in the course of a conflict with the Soviet Union in 
particular? 

THE Witngss. I think that they are vital, sir, to deterring a war, and I think that 
they are vital to winning a war should such a thing come. Further than this, 
it would seem intolerable to me that the Russians have such a weapon and 
the United States not. This is to get back to this area again. I would have re- 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 249 


versed essentially our position when we had a monopoly on the atomic 
bomb—not entirely, but to a large degree. Involved as we are in a nonshoot- 
ing war, this could have been a tremendous defeat for the United States. 

Mr. Gray. We have had testimony given to this board by scientists who were 
involved in some of these discussions to the effect that thermonuclear 
weapons are more useful to the enemy than they are to us. By that I believe 
they meant to say that we are more vulnerable, assuming that both powers 
have these weapons, than are the Russians. Do you share that view? 

THE WitTNgEss. Of course, it depends on the perimeters of our problem. Stated 
just as you have stated it, I would share that view. But think what would 
happen if we did not have the bomb and they did. The fact that we are 
troubled does not mean we should [not] have this weapon in my view. ... 


KENNETH S. Pitzer: “I would not rate Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
importance in this field very high for the rather personal 
reason ... that | have disagreed with a good many of his 
important positions” 


[Kenneth S. Pitzer, dean of the college of chemistry at the University of Cali- 
fornia at Berkeley, served from 1949 to 1951 as director of the AEC’s re- 
search division. In April 1952, he requested an interview with the FBI. He 
explained that he “now is doubtful” as to Oppenheimer’s loyalty. He 
claimed that Oppenheimer had opposed the development of the H-bomb, 
and had then impeded its progress by “persuading other outstanding scien- 
tists not to work on the H-bomb Project.” In the event the FBI decided to for- 
ward his views to the AEC, Pitzer added, “he desired that suitable precau- 
tions be taken to conceal his identity.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: ... 


Q. Doctor, would you say that you are pretty familiar with the nuclear scien- 
tists, physicists, and chemists in the country? Are you generally familiar 
with them? 

A. I have reasonably wide acquaintanceship, more of course on the chemical 
side, but I am acquainted with many nuclear physicists. 

Q. Given Dr. Oppenheimer’s attitude and feelings as you have described 
them, what can you tell us about what would be the effect in your opinion 
upon the scientific world of such attitudes and feelings so far as either in- 
creasing or decreasing enthusiasm for the thermonuclear program? That is a 
long question. I hope it is clear. I am trying not to lead you. 


250 THE HEARING 


A. I hope you will permit me to make a statement of my general impressions 
of that time. After the President made the decision and announced it to the 
papers, I was rather surprised to find that Dr. Oppenheimer did not in some 
manner or another disqualify himself from a position of, shall we say, tech- 
nical leadership of the program. I had the feeling that if my advice on a 
major subject of this sort had been so—if the decision had been so much in 
reverse from my advice, let us put it that way—that I would not have 
wanted to be in a position of responsibility with respect to the subsequent 
pursuit of the program. 

As to just what course of action would have been most appropriate, there 
are various alternatives. I think this would have led to a clearer and more 
vigorous program had some other arrangement of this sort been had. 

Q. Why do you think that, Doctor? 

A. It would have been clear that the Commission was by this time thoroughly 
behind the program and that the fullest support was going to be given to it 
because special arrangements had been made to be sure that the leadership 
would be vigorous. 

Q. Do you think the fact that Dr. Oppenheimer stayed on entertaining the 
views which you have told us about discouraged other physicists from 
going ahead on the program with vigor? 

A. I can only say to this that I am afraid it may have. I am not aware of de- 
tailed negotiations or influences on particular individuals, but I do know 
there was difficulty in that early period in obtaining the staff that would 
have seemed desirable to me and as I believe Dr. Teller felt was desirable at 
that time, particularly in the theoretical physics area. To have had other ad- 
visory leadership that was known to be enthusiastic for the program would, 
I think, have assisted. 

Q. You suggested other advisory leadership. Did you have in mind a specific 
step that might have been taken either by Dr. Oppenheimer or by the Com- 
mission to get such leadership? 

A. As I said before, it seemed to me that there were several alternatives there. 
If the most extreme change had seemed desirable, there was a possibility of 
full changes of membership in the Statutory Advisory Committee. Other 
possibilities could have been the appointment of some special panel in this 
field, and of course a marked and clearcut change in the viewpoints of cer- 
tain individuals would have assisted the program. 

Q. In your opinion did Dr. Oppenheimer do everything he might have to fur- 
ther the program after the President’s decision? 

A. Again in an inferential sense, I am afraid I must say that he did not. 

Q. Would you explain that to us a little bit? 

A. As I indicated earlier, it seemed to me that had he enthusiastically urged 
men in the theoretical physics field to go to Los Alamos or other points as 
indicated for this program that the difficulties in staffing it would have not 
arisen. I am sure he had great influence over individuals in that field. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 251 


On the other hand, as I say, this is simply an inference, and not something 
that I know from day to day and man to man. 

Q. I understand. What was Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence in the physics field 
during that period to your knowledge? 

A. He was unquestionably a most influential individual in dealings with 
other physicists, particularly theoretical physicists, but also experimental 
men.... 

Q. What can you tell us about the importance or the essentiality to the atomic 
weapons and the thermonuclear weapons program today of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer, in your opinion? 

A. Let me develop this in a number of facets. 

Q. That is why I asked the broad question so you can answer it in your own 
way. 

A. I would like to discuss these briefly from three points of view. One is in 
terms of immediate scientific work. That is the calculations, theoretical der- 
ivations and this sort of thing. This by and large is done by younger people, 
particularly in the field of theoretical physics. I haven’t the slightest doubt 
that Dr. Oppenheimer would be valuable to such work but, by and large, 
from that tradition and experience in theoretical physics, this sort of thing 
is done by people in their twenties or thirties. 

The second aspect is that of leadership among men in this field. I have no 
doubt that Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence and importance in the sense of 
leadership among men is of the highest order. He would have a great deal of 
influence and could be of a great deal of assistance in persuading able 
people to work at certain places and at certain times and in selecting people 
for this. 

The third phase that I would mention would be that on what might be 
called policy advice. This is the sort of thing that the Commission and other 
nontechnical management people need. Personally, I would not rate Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s importance in this field very high for the rather personal rea- 
son, I suspect, that I have disagreed with a good many of his important po- 
sitions and I personally would think that advisers in the policy field of 
greater wisdom and judgment could be readily obtained. 

Q. You say very honestly that you personally disagree. Let me ask you 
whether or not events have proved that you were right or Dr. Oppenheimer 
was right. 

A. That is a difficult question. I think personally that we were right in going 
into a vigorous thermonuclear program at the time we did. I would not want 
to question the possibility of a perfectly sincere and reasonable judgment to 
the contrary at that time. I want to make it perfectly clear that I am empha- 
sizing here essentially need, or in the extreme, indispensability of the ad- 
vice than some other feature. Possibly it would be just fair to say that in the 
policy area I certainly do not regard Dr. Oppenheimer as having any indis- 
pensability. ... 


252 THE HEARING 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. I think you said you were rather surprised that Dr. Oppenheimer did not 
disqualify himself from a position of technical leadership of a program with 
which he apparently disagreed. Do you know whether Dr. Oppenheimer 
did in fact offer to resign from the chairmanship of the General Advisory 
Committee at that time? 

A. Ihave no information on that. 

Q. You have not heard that he offered to the Chairman, Mr. Dean, to resign? 

A. I don’t believe I heard that; no. 

Q. And you don’t know what Mr. Dean’s reaction was. You just never heard 
of it? 

A. I never heard about it. 

Q. I think there has been testimony here about it, so I think the record is clear 
enough on it. 

A. At least, if] heard of it, I do not recall at this time. 

Q. I take it you would be less critical of Dr. Oppenheimer’s attitude if that 
were the fact, if he offered to resign and was urged to remain? 

A. Certainly so. I think, however, that his position today would be better if he 
had insisted on at least some degree of disqualification in this field at that 
time. 

Q. I wish you would elaborate on that. 

A. Let me put it this way. I am extremely sorry to see this issue concerning 
advice which on hindsight proved not too good brought up in connection 
with a security clearance procedure. I feel very strongly that scientists 
should feel free to advise the Government and not be held to account if their 
advice proves not the best afterward. This should have no relevance to se- 
curity clearance procedure. If Dr. Oppenheimer had seen fit to insist upon 
stepping out of the position of advising on the hydrogen program, this 
could not be introduced into this argument at this time. I am very sorry to 
see that it does have to come up at this time. 

Q. Ineed hardly say that I entirely agree with you.... 


EDWARD TELLER: “I feel that | would like to see the vital inter- 
ests of this country in hands which | understand better, and 
therefore trust more” 


[If there was a turning point in the hearings, it occurred when Edward Teller 
testified. As the driving force behind the development of the hydrogen 
bomb, Teller’s opinion, Roger Robb knew, could be decisive. The problem, 
however, was that Teller did not believe Oppenheimer should lose his secu- 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 253 


rity clearance. Interviewed by Robb and Rolander in Berkeley on March 15, 
Teller said that Oppenheimer had given “bad advice in the matter of the 
H-bomb, and that in the future his advice should not be taken and he should 
never have any more influence.” Nevertheless, according to Rolander’s 
memorandum of the talk, “he said he hoped Oppenheimer’s clearance 
would not be lifted for a mere mistake of judgment.” In an effort to ensure 
that Teller would bolster his case, Robb met with him the evening before he 
testified and showed him the portion of Oppenheimer’s testimony in which 
he conceded he had lied to security officers about the Chevalier incident.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Dr. Teller, may I ask you, sir, at the outset, are you appearing as a witness 
here today because you want to be here? 

A. I appear because I have been asked to and because I consider it my duty 
upon request to say what I think in the matter. I would have preferred not to 
appear. 

Q. I believe, sir, that you stated to me some time ago that anything you had to 
say, you wished to say in the presence of Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. That is correct. ... 

Q. Dr. Teller, you know Dr. Oppenheimer well; do you not? 

A. I have known Dr. Oppenheimer for a long time. I first got closely associ- 
ated with him in the summer of 1942 in connection with atomic energy 
work. Later in Los Alamos and after Los Alamos I knew him. I met him fre- 
quently, but I was not particularly closely associated with him, and I did 
not discuss with him very frequently or in very great detail matters outside 
of business matters. 

Q. To simplify the issues here, perhaps, let me ask you this question: Is it 
your intention in anything that you are about to testify to, to suggest that Dr. 
Oppenheimer is disloyal to the United States? 

A. I do not want to suggest anything of the kind. I know Oppenheimer as an 
intellectually most alert and a very complicated person, and I think it 
would be presumptuous and wrong on my part if I would try in any way to 
analyze his motives. But I have always assumed, and I now assume that he 
is loyal to the United States. I believe this, and I shall believe it until I see 
very conclusive proof to the opposite. 

Q. Now, a question which is the corollary of that. Do you or do you not be- 
lieve that Dr. Oppenheimer is a security risk? 

A. In a great number of cases I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer act—I understood 
that Dr. Oppenheimer acted—in a way which for me was exceedingly hard 
to understand. I thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues and his 
actions frankly appeared to me confused and complicated. To this extent I 
feel that I would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which 
I understand better, and therefore trust more. 


254 THE HEARING 


Edward Teller (left) and Enrico Fermi, Chicago, 1951. AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


In this very limited sense I would like to express a feeling that I would 
feel personally more secure if public matters would rest in other hands... . 

Q. Did you work during the war at Los Alamos? 

A. I did. 

Q. When did you go there, sir? 

A. In April 1943. 

Q. What was the nature of your work there? 

A. It was theoretical work connected with the atomic bomb. Generally speak- 
ing—I do not know whether I have to go into that in any detail—I was more 
interested by choice and also by directive in advanced development, so 
that at the beginning I think my work was perhaps more closely connected 
with the actual outcome or what happened in Alamagordo, but very soon 
my work shifted into fields which were not to bear fruition until a much 
later time. 

Q. Will you tell the board whether or not while you were in Los Alamos in 
1943 or 1944, you did any work or had any discussions about the so-called 
thermonuclear weapon? ... 

A. I hope that I can keep my answer in an unclassified way. I hope I am not 
disclosing a secret when I say that to construct the thermonuclear bomb is 
not a very easy thing, and that in our discussions, all of us frequently be- 
lieved it could be done, and again we frequently believed it could not be 
done. I think Dr. Oppenheimer’s opinions shifted with the shifting evi- 
dence. To the best of my recollection before we got to Los Alamos we had 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 255 


all of us considerable hopes that the thermonuclear bomb can be con- 
structed. It was my understanding that these hopes were fully shared by Dr. 
Oppenheimer. 

Later some disappeared and perhaps to counterbalance some things that 
might have been said, I think I have made myself some contributions in dis- 
covering some of these difficulties. 

I clearly remember that toward the end of the war Dr. Oppenheimer en- 
couraged me to go ahead with the thermonuclear investigations. I further 
remember that in the summer of 1945, after the test at Alamogordo it was 
generally understood in the laboratory that we are going to develop ther- 
monuclear bombs in a vigorous fashion and that quite a number of people, 
such as the most outstanding, like Fermi and Bethe, would participate in it. 

I also know that very shortly after the dropping of bombs on Japan this 
plan was changed and to the best of my belief it was changed at least in 
good part because of the opinion of Dr. Oppenheimer that this is not the 
time to pursue this program any further. 

I should like to add to this, however, that this also thoroughly responded 
to the temper of the people in the laboratory, most of whom at that time un- 
derstandably and clearly and in consonance with the general tempo of the 
country, wanted to go home. 

Q. Did you have any conversations with Dr. Oppenheimer at or about Sep- 
tember 1945 about working on the thermonuclear? 

A. We had around that period several conversations and in one of them, to 
the best of my recollection, Oppenheimer and Fermi and Allison and I were 
present. Oppenheimer argued that this is not the time at which to pursue 
the business further, that this is a very interesting program, that it would be 
a wonderful thing if we could pursue it in a really peaceful world under in- 
ternational cooperation, but that under the present setup this was not a 
good idea to go on with it. 

I perhaps should also like to mention that to the best of my knowledge at 
that time there was a decision by a board composed of several prominent 
people, one of them Dr. Oppenheimer, which decided in effect that ther- 
monuclear work either cannot or should not be pursued that it at any rate 
was a long-term undertaking requiring very considerable effort. Tomy mind 
this was in sharp contrast to the policy pursued a short time before. 

But I also should say that this sharp contrast was at least in part moti- 
vated by the fact that in Los Alamos there was a crew of exceedingly able 
physicists who could do a lot and at the end of the war were trying to get 
back to their purely academic duties, and in this new atmosphere it might 
have appeared indeed hard to continue with such an ambitious program. 

One member of the board which made this decision, Fermi, and who con- 

-curred in that decision, told me about that decision and told me that he 
knew that I am likely to disagree with it, and asked me to state my opinion 
in writing. This I did, and I gave my written statement to Oppenheimer, and 


256 THE HEARING 


therefore, both the opinion that the thermonuclear bomb at that time was 
not feasible, and my own opinion that one could have proceeded in this di- 
rection are documented. 

Q. Did there come a time when you left Los Alamos after the war? 

A. That is right. As I mentioned, I left in February 1946. May I perhaps add 
something here if we are proceeding in a chronological manner? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Perhaps if I might interject this not in response to one of your questions. 

Q. That is perfectly all right, sir. 

A. I would like to say that I consider Dr. Oppenheimer’s direction of the Los 
Alamos Laboratory a very outstanding achievement due mainly to the fact 
that with his very quick mind he found out very promptly what was going 
on in every part of the laboratory, made right judgments about things, sup- 
ported work when work had to be supported, and also I think with his very 
remarkable insight in psychological matters, made just a most wonderful 
and excellent director. 

Q. In that statement were you speaking of Dr. Oppenheimer’s ability as an ad- 
ministrator or his contribution as a scientist or both? 

A. I would like to say that I would say in a way both. As an administrator he 
was so busy that his purely scientific contributions to my mind and in my 
judgment were not outstanding, that is, not insofar as I could see his origi- 
nal contributions. But nevertheless, his scientific contributions were great 
by exercising quick and sound judgment and giving the right kind of en- 
couragement in very many different cases. I should think that scientific ini- 
tiative came from a great number of other excellent people whom Oppen- 
heimer not let alone but also to a very great extent by his able recruiting 
effort he collected a very considerable number of them, and I should say 
that purely scientific initiatives and contributions came from many people, 
such like, for instance, von Neumann, Bethe, Segré, to mention a few with 
whom I am very closely connected, and very many others, and I cannot 
begin to make a complete list of them... . 

Q. Doctor, let me ask you for your opinion as an expert on this question. Sup- 
pose you had gone to work on thermonuclear in 1945 or 1946—really gone 
to work on it—can you give us any opinion as to when in your view you 
might have achieved that weapon and would you explain your opinion? 

A. I actually did go to work on it with considerable determination after the 
Russian bomb was dropped. This was done in a laboratory which at that 
time was considerably behind Los Alamos at the end of the war. It is my be- 
lief that if at the end of the war some people like Dr. Oppenheimer would 
have lent moral support, not even their own work—just moral support—to 
work on the thermonuclear gadget, I think we could have kept at least as 
many people in Los Alamos as we then recruited in 1949 under very diffi- 
cult conditions. 

I therefore believe that if we had gone to work in 1945, we could have 
achieved the thermonuclear bomb just about 4 years earlier. This of course 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 257 


is very much a matter of opinion because what would have happened if 
things had been different is certainly not something that one can ever pro- 
duce by any experiment. 

Q. That is right. 

A. I think that statements about the possible different course of the past are 
not more justified but only less hazardous than statements about the fu- 
ture.... 

Q. Do you recall when the Russians exploded their first bomb in September 
1949? Do you recall that event? 

A. Certainly. 

Q. Will you tell the board whether or not shortly thereafter you had a conver- 
sation with Dr. Oppenheimer about the thermonuclear or about what activ- 
ity should be undertaken to meet the Russian advance? 

A. I remember two such conversations. One was in the fall and necessarily 
superficial. That was just a very few hours after I heard, returning from a 
trip abroad, that the Russians had exploded an A-bomb. I called up Oppen- 
heimer who happened to be in Washington, as I was at that time, and I 
asked him for advice, and this time I remember his advice literally. It was, 
“Keep your shirt on.” 

Perhaps I might mention that my mind did not immediately turn in the 
direction of working on the thermonuclear bomb. I had by that time quite 
thoroughly accepted the idea that with the reduced personnel it was much 
too difficult an undertaking. I perhaps should mention, and I think it will 
clear the picture, that a few months before the Russian explosion I agreed to 
rejoin Los Alamos for the period of 1 year on leave of absence from the Uni- 
versity of Chicago. 

I should also mention that prior to that Oppenheimer had talked to me 
and encouraged me to go back to Los Alamos, and help in the work there. I 
also went back to Los Alamos with the understanding and with the expec- 
tation that I shall just help along in their normal program in which some 
very incipient phases of the thermonuclear work was included, but nothing 
on a very serious scale. 

I was quite prepared to contribute mostly in the direction of the fission 
weapons. At the time when I returned from this short trip abroad, and was 
very much disturbed about the Russian bomb, I was looking around for 
ways in which we could more successfully speed up our work and only 
after several weeks of discussion did I come to the conclusion that no mat- 
ter what the odds seemed to be, we must at this time—I at least must at this 
time put my full attention to the thermonuclear program. 

I also felt that this was much too big an undertaking and I was just very 
scared of it. I was looking around for some of the old crew to come out and 
participate in this work. Actually if anyone wanted to head this enterprise, 
one of the people whom I went to visit, in fact the only one where I had very 
strong hopes, was Hans Bethe. 

Q. About when was this, Doctor? 


258 THE HEARING 


A. To the best of my recollection it was the end of October. 

Q. 1949? 

A. Right. Again Iam not absolutely certain of my dates, but that is the best of 
my memory. I can tie it down a little bit better with respect to other dates. It 
was a short time before the GAC meeting in which that committee made a 
decision against the thermonuclear program. 

After a somewhat strenuous discussion, Bethe, to the best of my under- 
standing, decided that he would come to Los Alamos and help us. During 
this discussion, Oppenheimer called up and invited Bethe and me to come 
and discuss this matter with him in Princeton. This we did do, and visited 
Oppenheimer in his office. 

When we arrived, I remember that Oppenheimer showed us a letter on 
his desk which he said he had just received. This letter was from Conant. I 
do not know whether he showed us the whole letter or whether he showed 
us a short section of it, or whether he only read to us a short section. 
Whichever it was, and I cannot say which it was, one phrase of Conant’s 
sticks in my mind, and that phrase was “over my dead body,” referring to a 
decision to go ahead with a crash program on the thermonuclear bomb. 

Apart from showing us this letter, or reading it to us, whichever it was, 
Oppenheimer to the best of my recollection did not argue against any crash 
program. We did talk for quite awhile and could not possibly reproduce the 
whole argument but at least one important trend in this discussion—and I 
do not know how relevant this is—was that Oppenheimer argued that some 
phases of exaggerated secrecy in connection with the A-bomb was perhaps 
not to the best interests of the country, and that if he undertook the ther- 
monuclear development, this should be done right from the first and should 
be done more openly. 

I remember that Bethe reacted to that quite violently, because he thought 
that if we proceeded with thermonuclear development, then both—not only 
our methods of work—but even the fact that we were working and if pos- 
sible the results of our work should be most definitely kept from any public 
knowledge or any public announcement. 

To the best of my recollection, no agreement came out of this, but when 
Bethe and I left Oppenheimer’s office, Bethe was still intending to come to 
Los Alamos. Actually, I had been under the impression that Oppenheimer 
is opposed to the thermonuclear bomb or to a development of the ther- 
monuclear bomb and I don’t think there was terribly much direct evidence 
to base this impression on. I am pretty sure that I expressed to Bethe the 
worry, we are going to talk with Oppenheimer now, and after that you will 
not come. When we left the office, Bethe turned to me and smiled and he 
said, “You see, you can be quite satisfied. I am still coming.” 

I do not know whether Bethe has talked again with Oppenheimer about 
that or not. I have some sort of a general understanding that he did not, but 
I am not at all sure that this is true. 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 259 


Two days later I called up Bethe in New York, and he was in New York at 
that time, and Bethe then said that he thought it over, and he had changed 
his mind, and he was not coming. 

I regretted this very much, and Bethe actually did not join work on the 
thermonuclear development until quite late in the game, essentially to put 
on the finishing touches. 

I do not know whether this sufficiently answers your question. ... 

Q. In January 1950, the President decided that we should go ahead with the 
thermonuclear program. Do you recall that? 

A. Ido. 

Q. After that decision was announced, did you’go to work on the thermonu- 
clear? 

A. I most certainly did. 

Q. Was the program accelerated? 

A. It was. 

Q. What was done in general to accelerate it? 

A. A committee was formed which for a strange and irrelevant reason was 
called a family committee. 

Q. Who was on that committee? 

A. I was the chairman and there were a number of people representing vari- 
ous divisions in the laboratory, and this committee was in charge of devel- 
oping some thermonuclear program and within a very short time this com- 
mittee made a number of proposals directed toward some tests which were 
to give us information about the behavior of some phenomena which were 
relevant. 

At the same time I exerted all possible effort and influence to persuade 
people to come to Los Alamos to work on this, particularly serious because 
theoretical work was very badly needed. 

Q. What was done in respect of the number of personnel working on the ther- 
monuclear? Was it increased, and if so, how much? 

A. It was greatly increased. As I say prior to that there was at most half a 
dozen people working on it. I am not able to tell you how many people 
worked on the thermonuclear program in that period. I would say that very 
few people worked on it really full time. I am sure I didn’t work on it full 
time although in that time the major portion of my effort was directed to- 
ward the thermonuclear work. I believe that Los Alamos has prepared an of- 
ficial estimate in response to a question, and that would be, I think, the best 
source of how many people worked on the thermonuclear program at that 
time. I would guess, but as a very pure guess, and I should not be surprised 
if that document would disprove me, that the number of people working on 
the thermonuclear program increased then to something like two, three, or 
four hundred, which still was something like 10, 20, or perhaps a little 
more percent of the laboratory’s effort. Perhaps it was closer to 20 percent. I 
might easily be mistaken. 


260 THE HEARING 


Q. At all events it was a very large increase. 

A. It was a very large increase. As compared to the previous one it was just 
between standing still and starting to go. 

Q. Did you at or about that time, that is, shortly after the President’s decision, 
have any discussion with Oppenheimer as to whether or not he would as- 
sist you? 

A. Thad two discussions with him, but one was shortly before. I would like to 
quote it a little. Actually the time when President Truman made the an- 
nouncement I happened to be in Los Angeles and was planning to stay 
there, in fact had accepted an appointment at UCLA which IJ at that time 
had to postpone at any rate because I saw this in the paper. You see, I was 
not going to stay in Los Alamos much longer, and the fact that there came 
this announcement from President Truman just changed my mind. Prior to 
the announcement, preceding it perhaps by 2 or 3 days, I saw Dr. Oppen- 
heimer at an atomic energy conference concerning another matter, and dur- 
ing this meeting it became clear to me that in Dr. Oppenheimer’s opinion a 
decision was impending and this decision would be a go-ahead decision. 

At that time I asked Oppenheimer if this is now the decision, would he 
then please really help us with this thing and help us to work, recalling the 
very effective work during the war. Oppenheimer’s answer to this was in 
the negative. This was, however, very clearly before President Truman’s de- 
cision. However, I also should say that this negative reply gave me the feel- 
ing that I should not look to Oppenheimer for help under any circum- 
stances. 

A few months later, during the spring, I nevertheless called up Oppen- 
heimer and I asked him not for direct help, but for help in recruiting people, 
not for his own work but for his support in recruiting people. Dr. Oppen- 
heimer said then, “You know in this matter I am neutral. I would be glad, 
however, to recommend to you some very good people who are working 
here at the Institute,” and he mentioned a few. I wrote to all of these people 
and tried to persuade them to come to Los Alamos. None of them came. 

Q. Where were those people located? 

A. At the Institute of Advanced Study in Princeton. .. . 

Q. Except for giving you this list of names that you have told us about of 
people all of whom refused to come, did Dr. Oppenheimer, after the Presi- 
dent’s decision in January 1950, assist you in any way in recruiting people 
on the thermonuclear project? 

A. To the best of my knowledge not in the slightest. 

Q. After the President’s decision of January 1950, did Dr. Oppenheimer do 
anything so far as you know to assist you in the thermonuclear project? 

A. The General Advisory Committee did meet, did consider this matter, and 
its recommendations were in support of the program. Perhaps I am preju- 
diced in this matter, but I did not feel that we got from the General Advisory 
Committee more than passive agreement on the program which we evolved. 
I should say passive agreement, and I felt the kind of criticism which 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 261 


tended to be perhaps more in the nature of a headache than in the nature of 
enlightening. 

I would like to say that in a later phase there is at least one occurrence 
where I felt Dr. Oppenheimer’s reaction to be different. 

Q. Would you tell us about that? 

A. I will be very glad to do that. In June of 1951, after our first experimental 
test, there was a meeting of the General Advisory Committee and Atomic 
Energy Commission personnel and some consultants in Princeton at the In- 
stitute for Advanced Study. The meeting was chaired by Dr. Oppenheimer. 
Frankly I went to that meeting with very considerable misgivings, because I 
expected that the General Advisory Committee, and particularly Dr. Oppen- 
heimer, would further oppose the development. By that time we had 
evolved something which amounted to a new approach, and after listening 
to the evidence of both the test and the theoretical investigations on that 
new approach, Dr. Oppenheimer warmly supported this new approach, and 
I understand that he made a statement to the effect that if anything of this 
kind had been suggested right away he never would have opposed it. 

Q. With that exception, did you have any indication from Dr. Oppenheimer 
after January 1950 that he was supporting and approving the work that was 
being done on the thermonuclear? 

A. My general impression was precisely in the opposite direction. However, I 
should like to say that my contacts with Oppenheimer were infrequent, and 
he might have supported the thermonuclear effort without my knowing it. 

Q. When was the feasibility of the thermonuclear demonstrated? 

A. I believe that this can be stated accurately. On November 1, 1952. Al- 
though since it was on the other side of the date line, I am not quite sure 
whether it was November 1 our time or their time. 

Q. What? 

A. I don’t know whether it was November 1 Eniwetok time or Berkeley time. 
I watched it in Berkeley. 

Q. Did you have a conversation with Dr. Oppenheimer in the summer of 1950 
about your work on the thermonuclear? 

A. To the best of my recollection he visited Los Alamos in the summer of 
1950 and then in the early fall the General Advisory Committee met in Los 
Alamos—I mean he visited in Los Alamos early in the summer, and then 
they met in Los Alamos sometime, I believe, in September, and on both oc- 
casions we did talk. 

Q. What did Dr. Oppenheimer have to say, if anything, about the thermonu- 
clear? 

A. To the best of my recollection he did not have any very definite or concrete 
advice. Whatever he had tended in the direction that we should proceed 
with the theoretical investigations, which at that time did not look terribly 
encouraging, before spending more money or effort on the experimental ap- 
proach, which I think was at that time not the right advice, because only by 
pursuing the experimental approach, the test approach, as well as the theo- 


262 THE HEARING 


retical one did we face the problem sufficiently concretely so as to find a 
more correct solution. But I also should like to say that the opinion of Dr. 
Oppenheimer given at that time to my hearing was not a very decisive or 
not a very strongly advocated opinion, and I considered it not helpful, but 
also not as anything that need worry us too much. 

I must say this, that the influence of the General Advisory Committee at 
that time was to the best of my understanding in the direction of go slow, 
explore all, completely all the designs before looking into new designs, do 
not spend too much on test programs, all of which advice I consider as 
somewhat in the nature of serving as a brake rather than encouragement. 

Q. Doctor, I would like to ask for your expert opinion again. 

In your opinion, if Dr. Oppenheimer should go fishing for the rest of his 
life, what would be the effect upon the atomic energy and the thermonu- 
clear programs? 

A. You mean from now on? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. May I say this depends entirely on the question of whether his work would 
be similar to the one during the war or similar to the one after the war. 

Q. Assume that it was similar to the work after the war. 

A. In that case I should like to say two things. One is that after the war Dr. Op- 
penheimer served on committees rather than actually participating in the 
work. I am afraid this might not be a correct evaluation of the work of com- 
mittees in general, but within the AEC, I should say that committees could 
go fishing without affecting the work of these who are actively engaged in 
the work. 

In particular, however, the general recommendations that I know have 
come from Oppenheimer were more frequently, and I mean not only and 
not even particularly the thermonuclear case, but other cases, more fre- 
quently a hindrance than a help, and therefore, if I look into the continua- 
tion of this and assume that it will come in the same way, I think that fur- 
ther work of Dr. Oppenheimer on committees would not be helpful... . 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. Did Mr. Oppenheimer oppose the Livermore Laboratory as it was finally 
set up? 

A. No. To the best of my knowledge, no. 

Q. His opposition was to another Los Alamos? 

A. It was to another Los Alamos, and when the Atomic Energy Commission, I 
think, on the advice from the military did proceed in the direction, the Gen- 
eral Advisory Committee encouraged in particular setting up a laboratory at 
the site where it was set up. But prior to that, I understand that the General 
Advisory Committee advised against it. 

Q. That is when there was a question of another Los Alamos? 


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28 263 


A. Right. ... 

Mr. Gray. Dr. Teller, I think earlier in your testimony you stated that in Au- 
gust 1945, Dr. Oppenheimer talked with you and indicated his feeling that 
Los Alamos would inevitably disintegrate. I believe those were your words, 
and that there was no point in your staying on there. Is my recollection cor- 
rect? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. I am not sure that my statement was very fortunate, but I 
am pretty sure that this is how I said it. 

Mr. Gray. Would you say that his attitude at that time was that it should dis- 
integrate? 

THE WITNESS. I would like to elaborate on that for a moment. I think that I 
ought to say this: I do not like to say it. Oppenheimer and I did not always 
agree in Los Alamos, and I believe that it is quite possible, probably, that 
this was my fault. This particular discussion was connected with an im- 
pression I got that Oppenheimer wanted me particularly to leave, which at 
first I interpreted as his being dissatisfied with the attitude I was taking 
about certain questions as to how to proceed in detail. It became clear to me 
during the conversation—and, incidentally, it was something which was 
quite new to me because prior to that, while we did disagree quite fre- 
quently, Oppenheimer always urged no matter how much we disagreed in 
detail I should certainly stay and work. He urged me although on some oc- 
casions I was discouraged and I wanted to leave. On this occasion, he ad- 
vised me to leave. I considered that at first as essentially personal matters. 
In the course of the conversation, it became clear to me that what he really 
meant at that time—I asked him—we disagreed on a similar thing and I for- 
get the thing, but I do remember asking him in a similar discussion that, 3 
months ago—‘“You told me by all means I should stay. Now you tell me I 
should leave.” He said, “Yes,” but in the meantime we had developed these 
bombs and the work looks different and I think all of us would have to go 
home—something to that effect. It was at that time that I had the first idea 
that Oppenheimer himself wanted to discontinue his work very rapidly and 
very promptly at Los Alamos. I knew that changes were due but it did not 
occur to me prior to that conversation that they were due quite that rapidly 
and would affect our immediate plans just right then and there. I do not 
know whether I have made myself sufficiently clear or not. 

I failed to mention this personnel element before. I am sorry about that. I 
think it is perhaps relevant as a background. ... 

Mr. Gray. Dr. Teller, you are familiar with the question which this board is 
called upon to answer, I assume. 

THE WITNESS. Yes, I believe so. 

Mr. Gray. Let me tell you what it is and invite counsel to help me out ifI mis- 
state it. We are asked to make a finding in the alternative, that it will or will 
not endanger the common defense and security to grant security clearance 
to Dr. Oppenheimer. 

I believe you testified earlier when Mr. Robb was putting questions to you 


264 THE HEARING 


that because of your knowledge of the whole situation and by reason of 
many factors about which you have testified in very considerable detail, 
you would feel safer if the security of the country were in other hands. 

THE WiTNEss. Right. 

Mr. Gray. That is substantially what you said? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mk. Gray. I think you have explained why you feel that way. I would then 
like to ask you this question: Do you feel that it would endanger the com- 
mon defense and security to grant clearance to Dr. Oppenheimer? 

THE WITNESS. I believe, and that is merely a question of belief and there is no 
expertness, no real information behind it, that Dr. Oppenheimer’s character 
is such that he would not knowingly and willingly do anything that is de- 
signed to endanger the safety of this country. To the extent, therefore, that 
your question is directed toward intent, I would say I do not see any reason 
to deny clearance. 

If it is a question of wisdom and judgment, as demonstrated by actions 
since 1945, then I would say one would be wiser not to grant clearance. I 
must say that Iam myself a little bit confused on this issue, particularly as 
it refers to a person of Oppenheimer’s prestige and influence. May I limit 
myself to these comments? 

MR. GRay. Yes.... 

Dr. Evans. You understand, of course, that we did not seek the job on this 
board, do you not? 

THE WITNEss. You understand, sir, that I did not want to be at this end of the 
table either. ... 


RE-CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. I would like you, Dr. Teller, to distinguish between the desirability of this 
country’s or the Government’s accepting Dr. Oppenheimer’s advice and the 
danger, if there be any, in Dr. Oppenheimer’s having access to restricted 
data. As to this latter, as to the danger in Dr. Oppenheimer’s having access 
to restricted data without regard to the wisdom of his advice, do you think 
there is any danger to the national security in his having access to restricted 
data? 

A. In other words, I now am supposed to assume that Dr. Oppenheimer will 
have access to security information? 

Q. Yes. 

A. But will refrain from all advice in these matters which is to my mind a 
very hypothetical question indeed. May I answer such a hypothetical ques- 
tion by saying that the very limited knowledge which I have on these mat- 
ters and which are based on feelings, emotions, and prejudices, I believe 
there is no danger. 

Mr. Gray. Thank you very much, Doctor. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 265 


Thursday, April 29 


JOHN J. McCloy: “He used the graphic expression like two 
scorpions in a bottle, that each could destroy the other” 


[Formerly assistant secretary of war, at the time of the hearing chairman of 
the board of Chase National Bank, John J. McCloy was a veritable pillar of 
the establishment. He had last seen Oppenheimer in January at a meeting 
of the Council on Foreign Relations’ Study Group on Soviet-U.S. Relations. 
Shortly before he testified on Oppenheimer’s behalf, McCloy told one friend, 
Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter: “Knowing firsthand the tremendous 
contributions that this man made to the development of our position in 
atomic weapons, | can’t conceive of any real disloyalty on his part no matter 
what his early associations were.” He told another friend, President Dwight 
Eisenhower, that to investigate a man like Oppenheimer “is somewhat like 
inquiring into the security risk of a Newton or a Galileo. Such people are 
themselves always ‘top secret.’ ”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. Coming down to the Soviet study group which you mentioned in the 
Council of Foreign Relations, you were the presiding officer of that group? 

A. Yes, I was the presiding officer. 

Q. And Dr. Oppenheimer was a member of the group? 

A. Yes.... 

Q. When did the group begin? 

A. It began at the beginning of 1953. It has been going for a year, and it will 
probably go for another year. He was selected at the outset and attended one 
or two meetings and then he went to lecture abroad so we didn’t have him 
present at a substantial number of meetings. Then he did give us a picture 
of where he thought we stood generally in relation to the Soviets in respect 
to atomic development. 

Q. Without going into the details of what he said, what impression did his 
talk leave on you about his general attitude toward the situation? 

A. The impression that I gathered from him was one of real concern that al- 
though we had a quantitative superiority, that that didn’t mean a great deal. 
* * * We were coming to the point where we might be, he used the graphic 
expression like two scorpions in a bottle, that each could destroy the other, 
even though one may have been somewhat larger than the other, and he was 
very much concerned about the security position of the United States. He 
pressed vigorously for the continued activity in this field, and not letting 
down our guard, so to speak. Taking advantage of any opportunity that re- 


266 THE HEARING 


ally presented itself that looked as if it was substantial, but if there was to be 
any negotiation, be certain that we were armed and well prepared before we 
went to such a conference. Indeed, I have the impression that he, with one 
or two others, was somewhat more, shall I say, militant than some of the 
other members of the group. I think I remember very well that he said, for 
example, that we would have to contemplate and keep our minds open for 
all sorts of eventualities in this thing * * *. 

In the course of this, I think I should say that he was questioned by the 
members of the group from time to time. In a number of cases, he refused to 
reply, saying that he could not reply because in doing so that would involve 
some security information. His talk was generally in generalities, to some 
extent following the line that he took in an article which I saw later on pub- 
lished in Foreign Affairs. 

I got the very strong impression of Dr. Oppenheimer’s sensitivity to what 
he considered to be the interests of the United States and to the security of 
the United States. 

Q. Based on your acquaintance with Dr. Oppenheimer, and your experiences 
with him, would you give the board your opinion as to his loyalty and as to 
his security risk or want of risk? 

A. In the first place, just to get it out of the way, let me say that there is noth- 
ing that occurred during the entire period of my contact with Dr. Oppen- 
heimer which gave me any reason to feel that he was in any sense disloyal 
to the United States. But I would want to put it more positively than that, 
and also add that throughout my contacts with him, I got the impression, as 
one who has had a good bit of contact and experience with defense matters, 
that he was very sensitive to all aspects of the security of the United States. 

I gathered the impression that he was deeply concerned about the conse- 
quences of this awful force that we had released, anxious to do what he 
could toward seeing that it was not used or did not become a destroyer of 
civilization. He was somewhat puzzled as to what form that would take and 
still be consistent with the interests of the United States. That perhaps more 
than a number of others who were, so to speak, laymen in this field, who 
were members of that study group, were aware of the techniques of the de- 
fense of the United States. He was a little more aware than those who had 
not been really associated with the Defense Department of the military po- 
sition of the United States somewhat apart from the atomic situation. So 
much for loyalty. 

I can’t be too emphatic as to my impression of Dr. Oppenheimer in this 
regard. I have the impression of his being a loyal, patriotic citizen, aware of 
his responsibilities and that I want to accent. 

As to his security risk—to use the current phrase—I again can state that 
negatively certainly. I know of nothing myself which would make me feel 
that he was a security risk. I don’t know just exactly what you mean by a se- 
curity risk. I know that I am a security risk and I think every individual is a 
security risk. You can always talk in your sleep. You can always drop a 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 267 


paper that you should not drop, or you can speak to your wife about some- 
thing, and to that extent no human being is an absolutely secure person. I 
don’t suppose we are talking about that. 

I never heard of any of Dr. Oppenheimer’s early background until very re- 
cently, and so that has never been an element in my thinking. I have only 
thought of him as being a figure whom I feel I know, and I feel I am some- 
what knowledgeable in this field, and one I feel I know is as much respon- 
sible as anybody else if perhaps not more than anybody else in this particu- 
lar field of the weapon for our preeminence in that field. Too many reports 
came in to us as to the work that he was doing, the difficulties under which 
he was laboring, and they were difficulties because there had to be very 
great security precautions and a lot of barbed wire and what not which in- 
troduced serious human problems in connection with the plants where he 
was operating, and the reports all were that in spite of all this, and in spite 
of the little squabbles that took place among this confined group of scien- 
tists, there was a certain inspiration to their work and enthusiasm and a 
vigor and energy that many ascribed to Dr. Oppenheimer, and which I am 
quite clear played a major part in bringing about the achievement of the 
weapon at the critical point, and time that it was achieved.... 

As I try to look back to that period, I think we would have taken pretty 
much anybody who had certainly the combination of those qualities, the 
theoretical ability, plus the practical sense, to advance our defense position 
in that field. In those days we were on guard against the Nazis and the Ger- 
mans. I think we would have grabbed one of them if we thought he had that 
quality, and surrounded him with as much security precautions as we 
could. Indeed, I think we would have probably taken a convicted murderer 
if he had that capacity. There again is this question of the relative character 
of security. It depends somewhat on the day and age that you are in. 

I want to emphasize particularly this affirmative side of it. The names we 
bandied about at that time included a number of refugees and a number of 
people that came from Europe. I have the impression—I may be wrong 
about it—but I have the impression that a very large element of this theoret- 
ical thinking did emanate from the minds of those who immigrated from 
this country, and had not been generated here as far as it had been in Eu- 
rope. There were names like Fermi and Wigner and Teller, Rabi, another 
queer name, Szilard, or something like that—but I have the impression they 
came over here, and probably imbued with a certain anti-Nazi fervor which 
tended to stimulate thinking, and it is that type of mind that we certainly 
needed then. 

We could find, so to speak, practical atomic physicists, and today there 
are great quantities of them being trained, and whether we are getting this 
finely balanced imagination which can stretch beyond the practicalities of 
this thing is to my mind the important aspect of this problem. The art is still 
in its infancy and we still are in need of great imagination in this field. 

In a very real sense, therefore, I think there is a security risk in reverse. If 


268 THE HEARING 


anything is done which would in any way repress or dampen that fervor, 
that verve, that enthusiasm, or the feeling generally that the place where 
you can get the greatest opportunity for the expansion of your mind and 
your experiments in this field is the United States, to that extent the secu- 
rity of the United States is impaired. 

In other words, you can’t be too conventional about it or you run into a 
security problem the other way. We are only secure if we have the best 
brains and the best reach of mind in this field. Ifthe impression is prevalent 
that scientists as a whole have to work under such great restrictions and 
perhaps great suspicion, in the United States, we may lose the next step in 
this field, which I think would be very dangerous for us. .. . 

I will say that as far as I have had any acquaintance with Dr. Oppen- 
heimer, I have no doubt as to his loyalty, and I have absolutely no doubt 
about his value to the United States and I would say he is not a security risk 
to the United States. 

Mr. GaRRISON. Thank you. 
Mr. Gray. Do you have any questions, Mr. Robb? 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. How long have you been president of the Chase National Bank? 

A. A little over a year. 

Q. Had you previously had experience in the banking business? 

A. I was president of the so-called International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, which is known as the World Bank. 

Q. Chase is the largest bank in the world? 

A. No; it is the third. The Bank of America and National City are larger. 

Q. Have you a great many branches? 

A. Yes; 28. 

Q. As far as you know, Mr. McCloy, do you have any employee of your bank 
who has been for any considerable period of time on terms of rather inti- 
mate and friendly association with thieves and safecrackers? 

A. No; I don’t know of anyone. 

Q. I would like to ask you a few hypothetical questions, if I might, sir. 

Suppose you had a branch bank manager, and a friend of his came to him 
one day and said, “I have some friends and contacts who are thinking about 
coming to your bank to rob it. I would like to talk to you about maybe leav- 
ing the vault open some night so they could do it,” and your branch man- 
ager rejected the suggestion. Would you expect that branch manager to re- 
port the incident? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Ifhe didn’t report it, would you be disturbed about it? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Let us go a little bit further. Supposing the branch bank manager waited 6 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 269 


or 8 months to report it, would you be rather concerned about why he had 
not done it before? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Suppose when he did report it, he said this friend of mine, a good friend of 
mine, I am sure he was innocent, and therefore I won’t tell you who he is. 
Would you be concerned about that? Would you urge him to tell you? 

A. I would certainly urge him to tell me for the security of the bank. 

Q. Now, supposing your branch bank manager, in telling you the story of his 
conversations with his friend, said, “My friend told me that these people 
that he knows that want to rob the bank told me that they had a pretty good 
plan. They had some tear gas and guns and they had a car arranged for the 
getaway, and had everything all fixed up,” would you conclude from that it 
was a pretty well-defined plot? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Now, supposing some years later this branch manager told you, “Mr. Mc- 
Cloy, I told you that my friend and his friends had a scheme all set up as I 
have told you, with tear gas and guns and getaway car, but that was a lot of 
bunk. It just wasn’t true. I told you a false story about my friend.” Would 
you be a bit puzzled as to why he would tell you such a false story about his 
friend? 

A. Yes; I think I would be. 

MR. Ross. That isall.... 

Mr. Gray. Mr. McCloy, following Mr. Robb’s hypothetical question, for the 
moment, let us go further than his assumption. Let us say that ultimately 
you did get from your branch manager the name of the individual who had 
approached him with respect to leaving the vault open, and suppose further 
that your branch manager was sent by you on an inspection trip of some of 
your foreign branches, and suppose further that you learned that while he 
was in London he looked up the man who had made the approach to him 
some years before, would this be a source of concern to you? 

THE WitTNgss. Yes; I think it would. It is certainly something worthy of inves- 
tigation, yes.... 

Mr. Gray. So that you would say as of today that it is appropriate and proper 
to have this kind of an inquiry? 

THE Witness. As far as I know, certainly if you have something there that trips 
your mind, you ought to make an inquiry about it. 

Mr. Gray. I meant this proceeding that we are involved in. 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. Would you take a calculated risk with respect to the security of 
your bank? 

THE WITNESS. I take a calculated risk every day in my bank. 

Mr. Gray. Would you leave someone in charge of the vaults about whom you 
have any doubt in your mind? 

THE WITNESS. No, I probably wouldn't. 

Mr. Gray. My question I can put in a more straightforward way, and it is one 


270 THE HEARING 


of the basic issues before the country, and certainly one involved in this 
country. And that is, when the paramount concern is the security of the 
country, which I believe is substantially the language of the Atomic Energy 
Act, can you allow yourself to entertain reasonable doubts? 

Before you answer, let me say if this leads you to think that I or the mem- 
bers of the board have any conclusions about this matter at this point, I 
wish you would disabuse yourself of that notion. 

THE WitnEss. Surely. 

Mr. Gray. What I am trying to get at is this relates yourself in your discussion 
about the other things you have to take into consideration. 

THE Witness. Surely. That brings me back again on this problem which I was 
checked a little because I was going a little far afield, and I don’t think I can 
get the pat analogy to the bank vault man. But let me say, suppose that the 
man in charge of my vaults knew more about protection and knew more 
about the intricacies of time locks than anybody else in the world, I might 
think twice before I let him go, because I would balance the risks in this 
connection. ... 

One of my tasks in Germany was to pick up Nazi scientists and send them 
over to the United States. These Nazi scientists a few years before were 
doing their utmost to overthrow the United States Government by violence. 
They had a very suspicious background. They are being used now, I as- 
sume—whether they are still, I don’t know, because I am not in contact with 
it—on very sensitive projects in spite of their background. The Defense De- 
partment has been certainly to some extent dependent upon German scien- 
tists in connection with guided missiles. I suppose other things being equal, 
you would like to have a perfectly pure, uncontaminated chap, with no 
background, to deal with these things, but it is not possible in this world. I 
think you do have to take risks in regard to the security of the country. As I 
said at the beginning, even if they put you—I won’t be personal about it— 
but let us say put Mr. Stimson or anybody in charge of the innermost secrets 
of our defense system, there is a risk there. You can’t avoid the necessity of 
balancing to some degree. 

So I reemphasize from looking at it, I would think I would come to the 
conclusion if I were Secretary of War, let us balance all the considerations 
here and take the calculated risk. It is too bad you have to calculate some- 
times. But in the last analysis, you have to calculate what is best for the 
United States, because there is no Maginot Line in terms—it is just as weak 
as the Maginot Line in terms of security. .. . 

Dr. Evans. You think that there are very few scientists that could do Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s work? 

THE Witngss. That is my impression. 

Dr. Evans. That is, you think he knows perhaps more about this, as you men- 
tioned in your vault business, than anybody else in the world? 

THE Witness. I wouldn’t say that; no. But I would certainly put him in the 
forefront. 

Dr. Evans. And you would take a little chance on a man that has great value? 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 271 


THE Witness. Yes, I would; particularly in the light of his other record, at least 
insofar as I know it. I can’t divorce myself from my own impression of Dr. 
Oppenheimer and what appeals to me as his frankness, integrity, and his 
scientific background. I would accept a considerable amount of political 
immaturity, let me put it that way, in return for this rather esoteric, this 
rather indefinite theoretical thinking that I believe we are going to be 
dependent on for the next generation. 

Dr. Evans. That is, you would look over the political immaturity and pos- 
sible subversive connections and give the great stress to his scientific infor- 
mation? 

THE WitNEss. Provided I saw indications which were satisfactory to me, that 
he had reformed or matured. 

Dr. Evans. I have no more questions. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Garrison? 

Mr. GarRISON. I would like to put one question, if I may. 

Mr. Gray. Yes. 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Garrison:... 


Q. I would like to put one final question to you. Is it your opinion that in the 
light of the character, associations, and loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer as you 
have known him, that his continued access to restricted data would not en- 
danger the common defense and security? 

A. That is my opinion. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is all. 

Mr. Ross. That is all. Thank you, Mr. McCloy. 


Davip Tresset Griccs: “ZORC are the letters applied by a 
member of this group to the four people: Z is for Zacharias, 
O for Oppenheimer, R for Rabi, and C for Charlie Lauritsen” 


[Of the scientists who testify against Oppenheimer, David Tressel Griggs has 
the closest connection to the military. A professor of geophysics at the Uni- 
versity of California at Los Angeles, he took a leave of absence to serve as 
chief scientist of the air force from September 1, 1951, to June 30, 1952. Ina 
discussion with Oppenheimer on May 23, 1952, Griggs said that the Gen- 
eral Advisory Committee’s 1949 recommendation against developing the 
H-bomb could have had disastrous consequences: “Oppenheimer asked if | 
thought he were Pro-Russian or just confused. After a moment | replied 
frankly that | wish | knew. He then asked if | had ‘impugned his loyalty.’ | 
replied that | had. He then said he thought | was paranoid.”] 


272 THE HEARING 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. May I ask you, sir, was there any particular reason at that time why you 
paid especial attention to any recommendations or views of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer?... 

THE WITNESS. It seems to me this question can be answered only in broad con- 
text, if you will allow me. 

Mr. Gray. Yes; you may answer it any way that seems best to you, Mr. Griggs. 

THE WiTNEss. It seems obvious to me that what you are asking as I understand 
it is one of the purposes of these hearings, namely, to investigate loyalty. I 
want to say, and I can’t emphasize too strongly, that Dr. Oppenheimer is the 
only one of my scientific acquaintances about whom I have ever felt there 
was a serious question as to their loyalty. The basis for this is not any indi- 
vidual contact that I have had with Dr. Oppenheimer or any detailed knowl- 
edge that I have had of his actions. But the basis is other than that and per- 
haps it is appropriate that I say what it is. 

I first warned about this when I joined the Rand project, and was told that 
Dr. Oppenheimer had been considered during the Los Alamos days as a cal- 
culated risk. I heard very little more about this until I came to Washington 
as chief scientist for the Air Force. 

In that capacity I was charged with working directly with General Van- 
denberg, who was then Chief of Staff of the Air Force, on matters of research 
and development, and I was charged with giving advice as requested to the 
Secretary of the Air Force, who was then Mr. Finletter. I worked closely 
with General Doolittle, who was Special Assistant to the Chief of the Air 
Force. 

Shortly after I came to Washington I was told in a way that showed me it 
was no loosely thought out—let me correct that statement. I was told in a se- 
rious way that Mr. Finletter—or rather, I was told by Mr. Finletter that he 
had serious question as to the loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer. I don’t know in 
detail the basis for his fears. I didn’t ask. I do know that he had access to the 
FBI files on Dr. Oppenheimer, at least I think I am correct in making that 
statement. I had this understanding. 

I subsequently was informed from various sources of substantially the in- 
formation which appeared in General Nichols’ letter to Dr. Oppenheimer, 
which has been published. I feel I have no adequate basis for judging Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s loyalty or disloyalty. Of course, my life would have been 
much easier had this question not arisen. 

However, it was clear to me that this was not an irresponsible charge on 
the part of Mr. Finletter or on the part of General Vandenberg, and accord- 
ingly I had to take it into consideration in all our discussions and actions 
which had to do with the activities of Dr. Oppenheimer during that 
year. ... 

Q. Mr. Griggs, did there come a time when a project known as the Lincoln 
Summer Study was undertaken? 

A. Yes. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 273 


Q. Can youtell us briefly what that was and when it took place? 

A. May I answer a broader question in my own way? 

Q. Yes. Iam merely trying to bring these matters up and let you tell us about 
them in your own words. 

A. It became apparent to us—by that I mean to Mr. Finletter, Mr. Borden, and 
Mr. Norton, that there was a pattern of activities all of which involved Dr. 
Oppenheimer. Of these one was the Vista project—I mean was his activity 
in the Vista project, and the things I have already talked about. We were told 
that in the late fall, I believe, of 1951, Oppenheimer and two other col- 
leagues formed an informal committee of three to work for world peace or 
some such purpose, as they saw it. We were also told that in this effort they 
considered that many things were more important than the development of 
the thermonuclear weapon, specifically the air defense of the continental 
United States, which was the subject of the Lincoln Summer Study. No one 
could agree more than I that air defense is a vital problem and was at that 
time and worthy of all the scientific ingenuity and effort that could be put 
on it. We were, however, disturbed at the way in which this project was 
started. 

It was further told me by people who were approached to join the sum- 
mer study that in order to achieve world peace—this is a loose account, but 
I think it preserves the sense—it was necessary not only to strengthen the 
Air Defense of the continental United States, but also to give up something, 
and the thing that was recommended that we give up was the Strategic Air 
Command, or more properly I should say the strategic part of our total air 
power, which includes more than the Strategic Air Command. The empha- 
sis was toward the Strategic Air Command.... 

Q. There has been some mention of a group called ZORC. Was there any such 
group as that that you knew about? 

A. ZORC are the letters applied by a member of this group to the four people, 
Z is for Zacharias, O for Oppenheimer, R for Rabi, and C for Charlie Laurit- 
sen. 

Q. Which member of the group applied it? 

A. [heard it applied by Dr. Zacharias. 

Q. When and under what circumstances? 

A. It was in the fall of 1952 at a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Board in 
Boston—in Cambridge—at a time when Dr. Zacharias was presenting parts 
of a summary of the Lincoln Summer Study. 

Q. In what way did he mention these letters? What were the mechanics of it? 

A. The mechanics of it were that he wrote these three letters on the board— 

Dr. Evans. Did you say three letters? 

THE WITNESS. Four. You said three. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. That was my mistake. Wrote them on what board, a blackboard? 
A. Yes. 


274 THE HEARING 


Q. And explained what? 

A. And explained that Z was Zacharias, O was Oppenheimer, R was Rabi, 
and C was Charlie Lauritsen. 

Q. How many people were present? 

A. This was a session of the Scientific Advisory Board, and there must have 
been between 50 and 100 people in the room.... 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. ...I think you said in your direct testimony, did you not, that such ques- 
tion as you have as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty was not based on any in- 
dividual contact or detailed knowledge by you of his acts? 

A. That is correct. 

Q. Ithink you went further and said you did not feel that you really had an 
adequate basis for judging his loyalty or disloyalty. 

A. That is certainly correct, and I think it is correct that I said it and it is cer- 
tainly correct that I feel it. 

Q. I think you also said that based on hearsay you have been suspicious or 
troubled about it for some time. 

A. Troubled, yes. 

Q. Would it be fair to say you have been suspicious of it for some time? 

A. The circumstances which I pieced together by hearsay evidence, as I think I 
testified, were substantially similar to those that were listed among the alle- 
gations in General Nichols’ letter were sufficient to cause me grave concern. 

Q. Weren’t you suspicious back at the time when you were first warned about 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty when you joined the Rand project? 

A. This, as I testified this morning, it was said to me that Dr. Oppenheimer 
during Los Alamos days had been considered a calculated risk. This state- 
ment was made to me by a person that I respect and it was not made as an 
idle statement. I took it seriously. 

Q. And thereafter in your contacts with Dr. Oppenheimer you could not help 
being a little bit on your guard? 

A. That is correct. 

Q. And perhaps trying a little bit to see what might be beneath the surface of 
what Dr. Oppenheimer was saying? 

A. That is correct. May I amplify this point? 

Q. Certainly. 

A. As I testified, particularly during my term with the Air Force as chief sci- 
entist for the Air Force—I don’t want to emphasize this chief scientist busi- 
ness, because it doesn’t mean anything, but this is just to identify the time 
that I am referring to—as I testified, I was on the opposite side of a pretty vi- 
olent controversy from Dr. Oppenheimer in at least two cases. I was also on 
the opposite side—I mean on his side about people as to whom I had no 
question as to loyalty or motives. I have been involved in a great many—not 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 275 


a great many, but a number of pretty strong controversies in the military, 
and I think it is a fair general observation that when you get involved in a 
hot enough controversy; it is awfully hard not to question the motives of 
people who oppose you. This, I am sure, could not but have colored my 
views on the subject. 

The nagging uncertainty in this particular case was the fact that I had 
heard the loyalty question raised by responsible people in a serious way. 

If it ever comes to the day when we can’t disagree and disagree violently 
in public and on national policy, then of course I feel that it will be a 
calamity for our democracy. I think perhaps I have said enough. 

Q. I think since you candidly told us much of the information you have given 
is based not on your personal knowledge, I would like to review with you 
the items relating to Dr. Oppenheimer that you have of your own knowl- 
edge and see if those are correct. I will just run through them and see if they 
are correct as to your personal knowledge... . 

Dr. Oppenheimer’s views with respect to the Lincoln summer study, you 
know only by hearsay? 

A. Except as they were expressed during the first 3 days of the study, yes. 

Q. In those first 3 days, he didn’t say anything about giving up strategic air- 
power? 

A. No. 

Q. And you know that Dr. Zacharias— 

A. I might point out that after the first session—I think it was the first ses- 
sion—in which Dr. Oppenheimer had taken a fairly active part and he came 
up to me afterward and said, “Did I do all right?” 

Q. And what did you say? 

A. I said “Yes,” or words to that effect. 

Q. Were you just being polite? 

A. No. 

Q. And you were present when Dr. Zacharias wrote the initials “ZORC” on 
the blackboard? 

A. Yes.... 

Mr. Gray. When did this meeting take place at which Dr. Zacharias wrote the 
letters on the board, if you remember? 

THE WITNEsS. That was at the Scientific Advisory Board meeting in Cam- 
bridge in, I believe, September of 1952. It was after the completion of at 
least the formal phases of the summer study, and it was on the occasion at 
which Dr. Zacharias was presenting some of the conclusions of the Lincoln 
summer study to the Scientific Advisory Board of the Air Force... . 

Mr. Gray. Do you have any questions? 

Dr. EVANS. No. 

Mr. MorGan. No. 

Mr. Ross. No. 

MR. SILVERMAN. I am just wondering on this business of Dr. Zacharias writing 
on the blackboard the initials ZORC. 


276 THE HEARING 


Luis W. Atvarez: “I realized that the program that we were 
planning to start was not one that the top man in the scientific 
department of the AEC wanted to have done” 


[Luis W. Alvarez, a professor of physics at the University of California at 
Berkeley, worked closely with Ernest Lawrence at the radiation laboratory. 
Lawrence, who could not appear at the hearing because of illness, urged Al- 
varez not to testify for fear that they would be regarded as part of an anti- 
Oppenheimer cabal. When Alvarez agreed not to appear, he received a 
phone call from Lewis Strauss, who “wondered what my excuse was for let- 
ting him down. . . . Lewis’s emotional intensity increased as he ran out of ar- 
guments. As a parting shot he prophesied that if | didn’t come to Washington 
the next day | wouldn’t be able to look myself in the mirror for the rest of my 
life.” Alvarez finally decided “that | really would be ashamed to think that I’d 
been intimidated. So | poured myself a stiff drink, (and) booked a seat on the 
TWA midnight red-eye flight.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Doctor, directing your attention to September 1949 when the Russians ex- 
ploded their first atomic bomb, did that cause some concern on your part? 
A. Yes; it caused a great deal of concern on my part. I tried to make up my 
mind what was the right thing to do. I had been spending 4 years doing 
basic research again. I think of it as sort of being recharged after 5 years of 
military development work. I had to take awhile to get back into the frame 
of mind of a practicing physicist. I had been concentrating my attention on 
that phase of my career and now, suddenly, it appeared that a crisis had ar- 

rived and perhaps I should get back into the field of atomic energy. 

Q. Why did you think a crisis had arrived? 

A. The Russians had exploded an atomic bomb, and I thought that our own 
program had not been going terribly fast. It certainly had not been going at 
nearly the rate it had during the war, but this is quite natural. 

Q. Did you discuss with any of your colleagues what ought to be done? 

A. Yes; I did. I saw Professor Lawrence the next day, and I told him that I 
thought we should look seriously into the business of constructing the 
super weapon which had, as far as I knew, been neglected in this 4-year pe- 
riod. I had not followed the situation closely enough to be sure that it had 
been neglected but that was my impression. 

Q. Did you make any inquiry to see whether or not your feeling was correct as 
to whether it had been neglected? 

A. Yes. Professor Lawrence and I got on the phone that afternoon and called 
Edward Teller at Los Alamos and asked him if we could come down and 
talk to him in the near future, and, as I remember, within a day or two, we 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 277 


took a plane to Los Alamos where we did talk to Dr. Teller and found out 
the present rather inadequate status of the super program. 

Q. Beginning at about that time and the next few weeks, Doctor, did you keep 
any notes in the form of a diary as to what your activities were in respect of 
a program for the development of the super bomb? 

A. Yes;I did.... 

Q. Do you have it with you, Doctor, the original of that diary? 

A. Yes, I have my typewritten sheets here. They cover the period of about 3 
weeks from the time the Russian bomb was dropped. 

Q. Typewritten or longhand? 

A. They are in longhand.... 

Q. I would like to run this through with you and ask you to amplify. 

“October 5, 1949. Latimer and I independently thought that the Russians 
could be working hard on the super and might get there ahead of us. The 
only thing to do seems to get there first—but hope that it will turn out to be 
impossible.” 

Would you explain to us what you meant by that “hope that it will turn 
out to be impossible.” 

A. By that I meant that there might be some fundamental reason in the 
physics of the bomb that would prevent anyone from making it work just in 
the same sense that people have often said that you cannot make a ther- 
monuclear weapon that will burn up the atmosphere and the ocean. I hoped 
that some such law would prevail and keep anyone from building it, be- 
cause then our stockpile of atomic weapons gave us the lead on the 
Russians. 

Q. You mean if it turned out that it would violate some law of nature the 
Russians could not make it either? 

A. That is right, because if they did make it, that would give them a great 
jump ahead of us and essentially nullify our stockpile of atomic weapons. 

Dr. Evans. The laws of thermodynamics might tell you it could not be done? 

THE WitnNEss. Yes, something of that sort. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. You thought you ought to find out. 

A. I said we can’t trust this hope, but let us find out. ... 

Q. Did you have any reason to believe at that time that Dr. Oppenheimer 
would not be ready to go ahead with this program? 

A. Of course not. The most enthusiastic person I had ever met on the program 
of the super weapon was Dr. Oppenheimer... . 

Q. “October 24, Monday: Made several telephone calls... . 

“Talked with Teller, who had just met Fermi at airport in Chicago. No re- 
action from Fermi, as he was tired from his long trip from Italy. Said he felt 
he could count on Bethe. Felt Oppie was lukewarm to our project and Co- 
nant was definitely opposed. Said Los Alamos was trying to set up confer- 
ence for Nov. 7.”... 


278 THE HEARING 


You talked with Teller and so forth. Where did you talk with him? 

A. I can’t recall. 

Q. Was it by phone or in person? 

A. I suppose it was by phone, but I really could not be sure. I gather from the 
entries on this Monday that I was in Berkeley, and I don’t recall that Teller 
came to Berkeley in that period, so I assume it was by phone. 

Q. Do you recall whether you knew why he thought he could count on Bethe? 

A. I assume that he had had conversations with Bethe and Bethe agreed that 
the super program should be reactivated. I can’t give any definite testimony 
because he just told me that. 

Q. The next item: “Felt Oppie was lukewarm to our project and Conant was 
definitely opposed.” 

Does that require any amplification? 

A. This is quoting Dr. Teller if I read my notes correctly. I had no conversation 
with Dr. Oppenheimer on this subject, and I had no reason to feel that he 
would not be enthusiastic about it. In fact, I assumed he was enthusiastic as 
were all the other people with whom I talked. 

Q. “Said Los Alamos was trying to set up conferences for November 7.” Con- 
ferences for what? 

A. This was the conference that I believe was referred to in one of the first 
day’s notes. Dr. Teller said he thought it would be an excellent idea to bring 
together all of the men who had thought about problems of the super during 
the war, together with new theoretical physicists, young ones who had ap- 
peared on the scene since the war, and to discuss the present state of the art, 
to see what new things had come in, just a sort of reorientation conference, 
I think. 

Q. Did that conference come off? 

A. That conference as far as I know never did come off. ... 

Q. “October 25, 1949—Tuesday: . . . Talked to Serber about GAC meeting. He 
volunteered to see Oppie before the meeting. Called Oppie who said he had 
hoped to be able to talk to him. Therefore Serber is going with us tomorrow 
and will continue to Princeton and have a day with Oppie, before he leaves 
for meeting in Washington. .. . 

“Chicago meeting—then on to Washington—talked with all GAC and most 
of AEC Commissioners. Particularly interesting talk with Oppie just after he 
briefed Bradbury and Norstad at GAC meeting. Pretty foggy thinking.” 

That is the last entry in your diary? 

A. That is right, because after that the project was dead.... 

Q. Talked to Serber about GAC meeting. Where did that conversation take 
place? 

A. That took place in Berkeley. Could I expand a bit on that? 

Q. Would you do that, please sir? 

A. Yes. As I said earlier, Dr. Serber was one of the group that had expressed a 
willingness to work hard on the program of building heavy-water piles. He 
was to be our chief theoretical adviser, and we were counting on his help. 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 279 


There is one thing in here which is not written down, and I think I am cor- 
rect in remembering it this way. I believe I called Dr. Oppenheimer from 
Berkeley and asked him if I could see him before the General Advisory 
Commission meeting to talk over our plans. You will note that in this whole 
diary there is no mention of any talks between me and Dr. Oppenheimer. I 
was anxious in view of the fact that I had heard that he was lukewarm to the 
program to have a chance to brief him on the program and if possible to get 
a little enthusiasm on his part. 

As Iremember it, Dr. Oppenheimer said he would be very glad to see me 
in Princeton, and in fact invited me to stay overnight in their guestroom. 

Then it turned out that our time in Chicago was limited and I thought I 
had better stay and talk pile design because I had spoken with Dr. Serber 
about this meeting with Oppenheimer and Serber said he would be glad to 
present our case to Dr. Oppenheimer and try to convince him of its worth- 
whileness. So essentially I deputized Dr. Serber to transmit my point of 
view to Dr. Oppenheimer. In fact, I was glad to do so, because Dr. Serber and 
Dr. Oppenheimer are somewhat closer friends than Dr. Oppenheimer and I. 
They have been closer personally. Dr. Oppenheimer and I were certainly ex- 
cellent friends at the time and Dr. Serber, I thought, could perhaps do a little 
better job than I could. I thought and felt strongly that he would present the 
point of view which was the laboratory point of view at that time, namely, 
that this was a very worthwhile program and we should get it going. 

Q. You had no doubt at all about Dr. Serber’s enthusiasm for your program? 

A. Absolutely none. 

Q. Do you know whether Dr. Serber did go to Princeton to see Dr. Oppen- 
heimer? 

A. Yes, he did.... 

Q. You mention here, “Particularly interesting talk with Oppie just after he 
briefed Bradbury and Norstad at GAC meeting.” Were you at that GAC 
meeting? 

A. No; I had no reason to be at that GAC meeting. That was a closed meeting, 
if I remember correctly, at which time the Commissioners met with the 
GAC, and the top military men in the country. 

Q. Where were you? 

A. I was standing inside the main entrance to the Atomic Energy Commission 
building and I watched my friends go upstairs, and I saw the famous mili- 
tary men whom I recognized from their pictures follow along. The meeting 
lasted for some while. I watched the people come back out again and in a 
few minutes Dr. Oppenheimer came along and invited Dr. Serber and I, who 
were standing together outside the building, to have lunch with him. 

Q. Did you have lunch with him? 

A. Yes. We went to a small restaurant in the immediate neighborhood of the 
Commission building, and that was the first occasion that Dr. Oppenheimer 
told me of his views on the building of the hydrogen bomb. 

Q. What did he tell you? 


280 THE HEARING 


A. He said that he did not think the United States should build the hydro- 
gen bomb, and the main reason that he gave for this if my memory serves 
me correctly, and I think it does, was that if we built a hydrogen bomb, 
then the Russians would build a hydrogen bomb, whereas if we did not 
build a hydrogen bomb, then the Russians would not build a hydrogen 
bomb. 

I found this such an odd point of view that I don’t understand it to this 
day. I told Dr. Oppenheimer that he might find that a reassuring point of 
view, but I didn’t think that very many people in the country would accept 
that point of view. 

Q. Was Dr. Serber present? 

A. Dr. Serber was present and agreed with Dr. Oppenheimer and this sur- 
prised me greatly in view of the fact that 2 or 3 days before he had gone to 
see Dr. Oppenheimer telling me that he would try to convert Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s lukewarmness into some enthusiasm for our project. 

Q. What was the impact of all this on you? 

A. Well, for the first time I realized that the program that we were planning to 
start was not one that the top man in the scientific department of the AEC 
wanted to have done. We thought that we were doing this as a public ser- 
vice. We were interrupting our own work to do this job. We certainly were 
not going to try to force anybody to take these piles. We had thought all 
along that everyone would be enthusiastic about having a big source of free 
neutrons. 

Q. Did you stay in Washington until the end of the GAC meeting? 

A. I believe I left right away after my conversation with Dr. Oppenheimer. I 
have no way of refreshing my memory on that. I felt that the program was 
dead, and that is the reason the diary ends at this point. 

Q. Until revived by the Presidential pronouncement in January 1950, was the 
program dead? 

A. Dr. Teller was still working at Los Alamos and as far as I know that was all 
that was going on in the program. 

Q. What did you do? 

A. As Iremember I went back to doing physics. 

Q. Did you reflect on this development which you observed in your conver- 
sation with Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. Yes, I did. Of course, I later became aware of the contents of the GAC pol- 
icy memorandum to the Atomic Energy Commission. I was not allowed to 
read it because there was no particular reason for me to do so, but I was told 
that the GAC had said that the United States should not build the hydrogen 
weapon. I have since heard a great deal of talk about the fact that the GAC 
was opposing a crash program, but after rereading some of the document 
last night that is not my impression of what it said. 

Q. Which document do you refer to? 

A. The GAC policy report. ... 

Q. Now, directing your attention to a time perhaps a couple of months after 


THURSDAY, APRIL 29 281 


your return from Washington in 1949, I will ask you if you will recall a con- 
versation with Dr. Vannevar Bush about Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Could you tell us what that was and the circumstances? ... 

What Dr. Bush said to Professor Lawrence and me was that he had been 
appointed by the President to head an ad hoc committee to assess the evi- 
dence for the Russian explosion. The Atomic Energy Commission and the 
Armed Forces, particularly the Air Force, had collected a good deal of in- 
formation, all of which tended to indicate that the Russians had exploded a 
bomb, but before announcing that to the public the President wanted to 
make sure that the evidence was conclusive. If I remember Dr. Bush cor- 
rectly, he said that he was made chairman of that. If I can paraphrase Dr. 
Bush’s statement and give them in the first person, they went something 
like this. He said, “You know, it is a funny thing that I should be made head 
of such a committee, because I really don’t know the technical facts in this 
field. Iam not an atomic physicist, and I am not the one to assess these mat- 
ters.” But, he said, “I think the reason the President chose me is that he does 
not trust Dr. Oppenheimer and he wants to have someone in whom he has 
trust as head of this committee.” 

Dr. Bush then said that the meetings of the committee were very interest- 
ing. In fact, he found them humorous in one respect, because he said, “I was 
ostensibly the chairman of the committee. I called it to order, and as soon as 
it was called to order, Dr. Oppenheimer took charge as chairman and did 
most of the questioning.” I believe Dr. Bush said that Dr. Oppenheimer 
wrote the report. This was the first time that I had ever heard anyone in my 
life say that Dr. Oppenheimer was not to be trusted. 

Dr. Evans. Would you make that statement again? 
THE Witness. This was the first time that anyone had ever said in my presence 
that Dr. Oppenheimer was not to be trusted... . 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Dr. Alvarez, coming now to the winter of 1950, did you serve on a com- 
mittee called the Long Range Planning Committee? 

A. Yes; I did. I did that at the request of Dr. Oppenheimer who called me and 
said, “We are having a meeting of a committee to try to find out the future of 
the military applications of atomic energy.” He said, “I would like to have 
you on this committee because I know you represent a point different from 
mine, and I think it would be healthy to have you on this committee.” I felt 
very happy about this. I thought Dr. Oppenheimer was being very fair in 
inviting me to join this committee, and I accepted the appointment... . 

Q. Go ahead, Doctor. 

A. There was a good deal of discussion about tactical weapons, small 
weapons, using small amounts of fissionable materials. There was discus- 
sion of the tactical use of these weapons. General Nichols briefed us on the 
present status of the guided-missiles program, of which he was then Deputy 


282 THE HEARING 


Director, since there was much interest in the use of atomic warheads on 
guided missiles. This part of the program I thought was in competent hands 
so I didn’t have much to say one way or the other. I thought Dr. Lauritsen 
and Oppenheimer handled this part of the program very well, and I had no 
disagreement with this. 

I found, however, that I was in serious disagreement with them on one 
point and that was that they thought that the hydrogen program was going 
to interfere seriously with the small-weapons program by taking away man- 
power at Los Alamos which could otherwise be put on the hydrogen bomb. 
My view was that the things were not mutually exclusive, if I can use the 
scientific phraseology. That is, there was no reason to say we have to have 
hydrogen bombs and not small weapons and vice versa. It seemed to me 
that there were great resources of scientific manpower in the country and 
that one could have both of these programs simultaneously. I did not object 
to the small-weapon program because it would interfere with the hydrogen 
bomb and I was surprised that they objected to the hydrogen-bomb program 
because it would interfere with the small-weapons program. 

Q. Did Dr. Oppenheimer have anything to say specifically about the hydro- 
gen-bomb program being carried on? 

A. I remember one statement that Dr. Oppenheimer made because it shocked 
me so greatly and I repeated it to several people when I got home. I remem- 
ber telling Professor Lawrence about it, and I believe I told Dr. Cooksey. 
Again if I can be excused for paraphrasing and using first person, Dr. Op- 
penheimer said essentially this: “We all agree that the hydrogen-bomb pro- 
gram should be stopped, but if we were to stop it or to suggest that it be 
stopped, this would cause so much disruption at Los Alamos and in other 
laboratories where they are doing instrumentation work that I feel that we 
should let it go on, and it will die a natural death with the coming tests”— 
which were the Greenhouse tests—“when those tests fail. At that time will 
be the natural time to chop the hydrogen-bomb program off.” 

I assumed I had been put on this committee to present views in favor of 
the hydrogen bomb because I had been always of that point of view. I didn’t 
object to Dr. Oppenheimer’s statement, because he said that he was not 
planning to stop the program. My feeling at the time was that if the Green- 
house test failed, and then Dr. Oppenheimer or the GAC did something to 
stop the hydrogen-bomb program, then would be a good time to fight. It 
seemed to me to be quite useless to express disapproval of this because 
nothing was being done to stop the program. 

However, I found later much to my dismay that my own political naivete 
in matters of this kind led me astray and I found that the report which I 
signed, and J am sorry to say I signed, did do the program great harm. 

Q. Why? 

A. Dr. Teller saw me several months later, and he said, “Luis, how could you 
have ever signed that report, feeling the way you do about hydrogen bombs?” 
I said, “Well, I didn’t see anything wrong with it. It said the hydrogen-bomb 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 283 


program was an important long-range program. Our particular emphasis was 
on small weapons, but that is a program which has no standing in the Com- 
mission’s program now, and I think we should go ahead with it.” He said, 
“You go back and read that report and you will find that that essentially says 
that the hydrogen-bomb program is interfering with the small-weapons pro- 
gram, and it has caused me no end of trouble at Los Alamos. It is being used 
against our program. It is slowing it down and it could easily kill it.” I have 
recently reread that report in the last day, and I am also shocked as was Dr. 
Teller. I can only say in my defense that I have not spent much time on policy 
reports, staff papers, and things of that sort, and I am not attuned to them and 
I didn’t catch this implication. I should have done so, and I didn't. 

Q. Who wrote it? 

A. Dr. Oppenheimer wrote it. I think that probably Dr. Lauritsen and Dr. 
Bacher and I made minor changes in it, but certainly the main draft was 
written by Dr. Oppenheimer. 


[Robb’s direct examination concludes at 5:35 p.M., and so a recess is taken, 
with testimony scheduled to resume the following morning.] 


Friday, April 30 


[Luis W. Alvarez appears and completes his testimony.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Dr. Alvarez, your diary showed, and you testified that you talked to vari- 
ous individuals about your plan and the plans of others for the develop- 
ment of the thermonuclear weapon in early October 1949; is that right? 

A. Yes, sir. 

Q. At that time these individuals were enthusiastic for going ahead with it; is 
that right? 

A. That was my very strong impression. 

Q. To your knowledge, were those conversations in advance of any talks that 
these people had with Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I think that is so, sir. Iam sure it is so in the case of Dr. Serber. I am quite 
sure in the case of Drs. DuBridge and Bacher, and also in the case of Dr. Rabi. 

Q. Subsequently these people changed their views; is that right? 

A. Quite drastically; yes. 

Q. Did you learn at that time whether in the interim they had talked to Dr. 
Oppenheimer? 


284 THE HEARING 


A. I am sure that in the interim they talked with Dr. Oppenheimer, because 
the interim extends until now. 

Mr. Ross. That is all I care to ask on direct, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Silverman. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. Self evidently these people have talked to a lot of other people? 

A. That is absolutely right. ... 

Q. ...I would like now to turn to the discussions in the panel—I think per- 
haps you called it the panel on long-range planning, something like that. 

A. I believe that was the official name. 

Q. I believe you called it that. I am not sure. It may have been referred to at 
other times as the Military Objectives Committee? 

A. Perhaps it was. 

Q. In December 1950, you referred to a statement by Dr. Oppenheimer some- 
what to the effect that we all agree that the hydrogen-bomb program should 
be stopped. If we did this and recommended it, it would cause too much 
disruption at Los Alamos? 

A. That is right. 

Q. And let it go on and the project would die when the Greenhouse test 
failed, as Dr. Oppenheimer expected them to. Is that substantially correct? 

A. That is substantially the way I remember it, yes. 

Q. I would like you to turn to the first part of that statement that we all agree 
that the hydrogen-bomb program should be stopped. I want to ask you 
whether it is possible that what Dr. Oppenheimer said was that “We all 
agree that the hydrogen-bomb program does not look very hopeful now.” 

A. No, I am quite sure I remember it the other way. It was such a startling 
statement to me that it is indelibly in my mind. I don’t think I could be mis- 
taken on that. 

Q. You of course were a representative of the other view? 

A. That is right. 

Q. And when Dr. Oppenheimer said that “We all agree that the hydrogen- 
bomb program should be stopped,” did you as a member of the panel say, 
“We don’t all agree; I don’t.” 

A. I didn’t interrupt him until he finished his statement at the end of which 
time, as he pointed out, he said he was not going to stop it, and I pointed 
out since he said he was not going to stop it, there seemed to be no point in 
arguing about it. 

Q. But you did not correct him and say “We do not all agree.” 

A. No. I am sure from what I have said in this hearing you would know that I 
did not agree. 

Q. It is sometimes necessary on cross-examination to emphasize points. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 285 


A. Very well, sir. Had he stopped his statement with that first sentence, I am 
sure that I would have dissented vigorously. 

Q. Was it the fact that everybody there agreed that at that time the hydrogen 
bomb program did not look very hopeful? 

A. I don’t know whether everyone did agree on that. 

Q. Did you think at that time that the hydrogen bomb program did not look 
very hopeful? 

A. I thought it looked exceedingly hopeful. Again I can only see it through 
the eyes of people like Edward Teller, who have the technical competence, 
who know the details of the program. I am not a theoretical physicist. All I 
can do is base my judgment on people in whom I have great scientific trust. 

Q. Wasn’t everybody pretty depressed in December 1950? 

A. No. I certainly didn’t sense that at all, but I was not at Los Alamos. I did 
not know that things were going very badly. Perhaps they were, I don’t 
know. I was not aware of the fact that people were depressed. 

Q. And you had not heard from other people working on the project in De- 
cember of 1950 that things didn’t look so good? 

A. I had heard that the requirements for tritium had temporarily taken a turn 
toward larger quantities being required. But I had seen the requirements go 
up and down and up and down on many occasions, and this did not disturb 
meatall.... 

Q. I think you said that Dr. Oppenheimer indicated that he thought that the 
Greenhouse tests would fail. 

A. Yes. 

Q. Just what does that mean? 

A. That no thermonuclear reaction would take place in the Greenhouse test 
explosive device. In order for a thermonuclear reaction to take place, very 
high temperatures must be reached, as you know. I think that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer felt that those high temperatures would not be reached, if you can 
permit me to read his mind. 

Q. I would rather you tell us what he said. 

A. Ihave already told you what he said. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, everybody else is reading Dr. Oppenheimer’s mind. 

Mr. Gray. The Chair will say that there has been a parade of witnesses here 
who testified on their intimate knowledge of Dr. Oppenheimer, and that 
they would know exactly what his reaction would be in any particular situ- 
ation. I do not think this witness should be denied an opportunity to make 
his own guess about what Dr. Oppenheimer might think. 

MR. SILVERMAN. I do not wish to cut a witness off. I would point out between 
opinion evidence testimony as to a man’s character and evidence as to what 
a man was thinking about a scientific project. 

Mr. Gray. I will ask you, Mr. Silverman, if you have not asked witnesses in 
this proceeding what did Dr. Oppenheimer think about so-and-so. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. I would certainly not be prepared to say— 


286 THE HEARING 


Mr. Gray. Would it surprise you to learn that you have asked such a question? 

Mr. Witness. Could I be allowed to say what I was going to say in a different 
way? I testified that Dr. Oppenheimer made a certain statement, that he 
thought the thing would fail. There are only two possibilities that the thing 
should fail, as far as I can see. One is that the device misfired. When the but- 
ton was pressed, nothing happened. Certainly the atomic bomb primer of 
the device would work. We have great experience in this line. After that 
fired, then the temperature of the reactants would rise. If they rose high 
enough, I doubt if you could find a scientist in the world who would not 
agree that the thermonuclear reaction would take place. It is taking place in 
the sun all the time. Therefore, when Dr. Oppenheimer said that the thing 
would fail, it could mean to me only one thing, namely, that he thought the 
temperature would not rise high enough. That is why I said I thought I 
could read his mind. 


By Mr. Silverman: ... 


Q. You ultimately signed the report. 

A. Yes. 

Q. And there is a part of it that you have regretted signing? 

A. The thing that I regret is that the report was used to slow down the hydro- 
gen bomb program. The statements having to do with the hydrogen bomb 
come in the last three paragraphs, save for one rather trivial one. 

Q. Did Dr. Oppenheimer use the report to slow down the hydrogen bomb 
program? 

A. I don’t know who used the report. I have had Edward Teller tell me, as I 
said yesterday, that the report was used to slow down the program. 

Q. This being a matter where Dr. Oppenheimer personally is very seriously 
concerned, it becomes a matter of considerable importance as to whether 
Dr. Oppenheimer used it. 

A. Dr. Oppenheimer wrote the report, I am sure. Dr. Oppenheimer ordered 
the statements presumably in the order of the importance he attached to 
them, and the super was more or less damned by faint praise... . 

Q. I think you said Dr. Oppenheimer invited you as the representative of the 
opposite view. 

A. He said as much. As I said, I admired him for doing that. 

Q. And you considered yourself the representative of the opposite view? 

A. Ithink that is true, yes. 

Q. And that was the opposite view on the hydrogen bomb? 

A. That is right.... 

Mr. Gray. Do you have any questions, Dr. Evans? 

Dr. Evans. I have some questions; yes. 

Dr. Alvarez, you have been asked a good many questions and been sitting 
on that chair quite a time, and that main thing that we have gotten out of 
you is that you have tried to show that Dr. Oppenheimer was opposed to the 
development of the super weapon; is that true? 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 287 


THE Witness. I believe that has been known for a long time, and I think I just 
have given some corroborative testimony in this regard. 

Dr. Evans. What does this mean in your mind—anything? 

THE Witness. By itself it means absolutely nothing because I have many other 
friends in the scientific world who feel precisely this way. The point I was 
trying to bring out was that every time I have found a person who felt this 
way, I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence on that person’s mind. I don’t 
think there is anything wrong with this. I would certainly try to persuade 
people of my point of view, and Dr. Oppenheimer is quite free and should 
try to persuade people of his convictions. I just point out the facts as I see 
them, that this reaction has always taken place in the people that I know 
who have been opposed to the bomb. 

Dr. Evans. It doesn’t mean that he was disloyal? 

THE Witness. Absolutely not, sir. 

Dr. Evans. Might it mean that he had moral scruples about the development 
of the atomic bomb? 

THE WITNEsS. I have heard that he has. He has never expressed them to me. I 
told you the one occasion on which Dr. Oppenheimer expressed to me his 
reasons for not wanting to build the hydrogen bomb, and it had nothing to 
do with morals, in the usual sense. 

Dr. Evans. You think it might have been peculiar for him to have moral scru- 
ples after he had been so active in developing the atomic bomb? 

THE WiTNEss. I have never had any moral scruples about having worked on 
the atomic bomb, because I felt that the atomic bomb saved countless lives, 
both Japanese and American. Had the war gone on for another week, I am 
sure that the fire raids on the Japanese cities would have killed more people 
than were killed in the atomic bombs. I am also quite convinced that the 
atomic bomb stopped the invasion of Japan, and therefore saved well over 
100,000 American lives. I believe there are estimates of up to a half million. 

Dr. Evans. Don’t we always have moral scruples when a new weapon is pro- 
duced? 

THE WiTNgEss. That is a question I can’t answer, sir. 

Dr. Evans. After the battle of Hastings, a little before my time— 

Mr. SILVERMAN. Would you give the time, sir? 

Dr. Evans. I cannot give the time, but it was before I was born. 

MR. SILVERMAN. That is 1066, sir. 

Dr. Evans. There was great talk about ostracizing the long bow, because it was 
so strong that it could fire an arrow with such force, it occasionally pierced 
armor and killed a man. They felt they ought to outlaw it. 

When the Kentucky rifle came in, it was so deadly that they talked of get- 
ting rid of it. When we had poison gas, I made a lot of lectures about it, that 
it was terrible. So we have had that after every new weapon that has been 
developed. 

THE WITNESS. Yes, I recognize that. 

Dr. Evans. This opposition that Dr. Oppenheimer had, might he have been 


288 THE HEARING 


jealous that someone else was becoming prominent in this field, rather than 
himself? 

THE WITNESS. I don’t think so; no. 

Dr. Evans. You don’t think so? 

THE WITNESS. No. 

Dr. Evans. Do you think that Dr. Oppenheimer had considerable power with 
men like Conant, Bush, and Groves? 

THE Wirngss. I don’t think power is the right word. Dr. Oppenheimer is cer- 
tainly one of the most persuasive men that has ever lived, and he certainly 
had influence. They respected his opinions and listened to him. 

Dr. Evans. Looking by hindsight, do you think he showed good judgment in 
the fact that he opposed this bomb in the light of present conditions? 

THE Witness. I think he showed exceedingly poor judgment. I told him so the 
first time he told me he was opposed to it. I have continued to think so. The 
thing which I thought at that time was the overpowering reason for building 
the hydrogen bomb was that if we did not do it, some day we might wake 
up and read headlines and see pictures of an explosion such as we saw a 
month or so ago, only this would be done off the coast of Siberia. I felt sure 
that this would be one of the most disastrous things that could possibly 
happen to this country. I thought we must not let this happen. 

Dr. Evans. His opposition to it, might it mean that he feared the spending ofa 
large sum of money and the using of time on a project that would not work 
and might thus endanger the security of our country by not going ahead 
with a project that we knew would work? 

THE Witness. I think he has expressed an opinion somewhat as you just stated 
it.... 

Dr. Evans. Were there a number of other men in the country that could have 
built the A-bomb? 

THE WITNESS. I am sure that there are. I don’t want in any way to minimize Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s contribution, because to my way of thinking he did a truly 
outstanding job at Los Alamos. I think he was one of the greatest directors of 
a military program that this country has ever seen. I stand in awe of the job 
he did at Los Alamos. ... 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. You testified as others did that Dr. Oppenheimer did a splendid job at Los 
Alamos. Did it strike you as peculiar that one who had done such a splen- 
did job at Los Alamos could entertain opinions which you considered so 
wrong in respect of the hydrogen bomb? 

A. I was very surprised when I found that he had these opinions, since he had 
used the super as the primary incentive to get me to join the Manhattan Dis- 
trict in the first place. He had spent almost a solid afternoon telling me 
about the exciting possibilities of the super, and asked me to join and help 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 289 


with the building of such a device. So I was therefore very surprised when I 
found he had these objections. You will note in my diary that I had no hint 
of this until essentially the last entry. 

Q. To use a homely simile, did it strike you as peculiar that such a wonderful 
batter as Dr. Oppenheimer should suddenly begin striking out the way he 
did? 

A. It certainly struck me as peculiar. 

Q. One further question, Doctor. Have you had any hesitation in answering 
questions here or in any way restricted your testimony in answer to any 
question put to you because of the presence here of Dr. Oppenheimer and 
his counsel? 

A. No. I must confess that it is a little hard for personal reasons to say some of 
the things that I have said, but I have said them anyway. 


LioyD K. GARRISON: “The adversary process which we seem to 
be engaged in should be carried out to the fullest extent” 


[Lloyd Garrison now requests permission to see the documentary record 
regarding the AEC’s clearance of Oppenheimer in 1947, particularly any 
“items of derogatory information.” Claiming that this would require the dis- 
closure of confidential FBI reports, Gordon Gray rejects the request.] 


Mr. Garrison. ... If I might just recapitulate for a moment to explain the na- 
ture of the request, I previously referred to the fact that back in the middle 
of February, I asked for the minutes and documents relating to the question 
of the clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer by the AEC in 1947... 

To put it in nontechnical terms, what I would like to ask the board to re- 
quest of the Commission that we have a statement in as much detail as clas- 
sification will permit of the items of derogatory information which were 
contained in the files that went to the members of the Commission... . 

I don’t want to make a great thing out of this. I am not going to argue to 
this board that the action which the Commission took in 1947 was in any 
way conclusive or binding upon this board at all. I don’t want to make such 
an argument. I do say it is quite relevant to consider what those five men 
who knew Dr. Oppenheimer and went through the report thought and be- 
lieved at that time.... 

Mr. Gray. I would like to state the impression of the chairman of the board, 
and be corrected if 1am wrong... . 

Now, with respect to the current request which, if I understand it cor- 
rectly, is a list of all items of so-called derogatory information about Dr. 


290 THE HEARING 


Oppenheimer in the hands of this board, again I would have to respond 
that information which is contained in FBI reports cannot be made avail- 
able. 

I think I shall] have to stop my observation at that point. It may be that 
my interpretation of the procedures under which we operate is faulty, 
and I would ask counsel for the board if he has anything to add to what I 
said. 

Mr. Ross. I certainly agree that your interpretation is entirely correct, Mr. 
Chairman. I would add only one observation, which is that so far as we are 
able to bring it together, all the information and reports which were before 
the Commission in 1947 are now before this board for its consideration and 
its evaluation. 

Of course, as the chairman has said, the FBI reports under the rules of 
these hearings may not be made available to counsel for Dr. Oppenheimer 
or Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Mr. Gray. Let me make one other observation. I suppose it would be reason- 
able for counsel to assume that the board in its effort to get at the truth with 
respect to any matter of very material consequence has sought to have light 
thrown on such a matter of material consequence. This, of course, involves, 
I am sure, the question of anybody’s reliance on the good faith of this board. 
What I am trying to say is that I do not think you are materially disadvan- 
taged by not having the detailed list of information which you have re- 
quested. 

Mr. GaRRISON. I would like to make just one observation. I want to make it 
clear, Mr. Chairman, that so far as the fairness of the members of this board 
and their desire to do the right thing, I have no doubt whatever. My prob- 
lem is one of knowing what seems to us to be relevant so that we may com- 
ment upon if as one should in presenting Dr. Oppenheimer’s case, as well 
as we can. In a process of this kind I should suppose that the adversary pro- 
cess which we seem to be engaged in should be carried out to the fullest ex- 
tent that it can be done within the limits of the governmental regulations 
with respect to the preservation of whatever has to be confidential, that this 
process will aid rather than to the contrary in the deliberations of the 
board. 

I would like to make one or two things clear in the February discussions 
and correspondence. The Commission did, indeed, say to Dr. Oppenheimer 
that he might inspect minutes and reports of the GAC meetings in which he 
participated, and could also see any documents which he himself signed. 
What I am talking about here is the action of the Commission in 1947. I am 
not asking that the FBI reports be disclosed. I appreciate the rule that the re- 
ports of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall not be disclosed to the in- 
dividual or to his representative. I regretfully have to accept that rule. It 
does seem to me, however, that, since in the very letter of General Nichols 
with which we are concerned a very lengthy account is given of numerous 
derogatory items in the file and disclosure has been made of that, I cannot 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 291 


see how it would violate this rule to have us informed as to the derogatory 
items which were before the board in 1947. I am not asking for a transcript 
of the reports or a copy of the reports, but simply for a description of what 
the board acted on—I mean the Commission acted on. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, as I interpret Mr. Garrison’s last remark, he does not 
want a copy of the reports or the transcripts of the reports; he merely wants 
to know their contents, which seems to me to fly right in the face of the rule. 
I am sorry. 

Mr. GARRISON. Let me ask this final question: Would it fly in the face of the 
rule if we were limited merely to being told which of the items now before 
the board were before the Commission in 1947? 

Mr. Ross. I think it would, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. GaRRISON. I just don’t understand that, Mr. Chairman, as to why we can’t 
be told of these items that such-and-such were before the board and such- 
and-such were not. What disclosure of FBI reports is that any more than 
this letter itself is a disclosure of FBI reports? 

Mr. Gray. I believe that what was before the Commission in 1947, and cer- 
tainly from the testimony here, cannot be certain, because the recollection 
of the four former Commissioners who have testified here is uniformly hazy 
as to what happened. I hope that is not an incorrect statement about their 
testimony. With respect, in any event, to what was before them at that time 
we are not certain. I believe what was before them at that time was FBI re- 
ports. It seems to me that comes into the rule. 

I would make this further observation: That if counsel wishes at some 
subsequent point in these proceedings to argue the import of the actions of 
the Commission insofar as they can be reconstructed in 1947, whether Feb- 
ruary, March, or August, that opportunity will be given. As far as this board 
is concerned, we must be concerned with everything before us; and what 
the Commission did in 1947 is, of course, important, but, as you say, not 
conclusive. 


Boris T. PasH: “Dr. Oppenheimer knew the name of the man, 
and it was his duty to report it to me” 


[The son of a bishop of the Russian Orthodox Greek Church, Boris T. Pash 
grew up in San Francisco, learned to speak fluent Russian, and entered the 
U.S. Army’s counterintelligence branch during the war. From 1949 to 1952 
he worked with the Central Intelligence Agency. At the time he testifies, he is 
chief of the counterintelligence division in the office of G-2, Headquarters, 
Sixth Army. When interviewed by Robb and Rolander in March, Pash said 
that when he read the newspaper accounts of the espionage activities of 


292 THE HEARING 


Klaus Fuchs, “he felt that he would next be reading about Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s involvement in such activities.”] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Coming to May 1943, Colonel, I will ask you whether or not at or about 
that time you began an investigation into certain reported espionage taking 
place or which had taken place at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley? 

A. Yes, sir; we did... . 

Q. At or about that time did you receive certain information from Lt. Lyall 
Johnson concerning statements made to him by Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. I did. Lyall Johnson reported to me toward the end of August that Dr. Op- 
penheimer came to him and made some statements which he felt I should 
know about. My reaction was to request an immediate interview with Dr. 
Oppenheimer on this matter. 

Q. Who was Johnson? 

A. Johnson was the intelligence officer for the radiation laboratory. 

Q. Do you recall whether or not Johnson gave you any details of that conver- 
sation? 

A. Johnson told me it concerned a possible espionage effort in connection 
with the radiation laboratory. 

Q. Did you thereafter interview Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. Yes, I interviewed Dr. Oppenheimer on the 26th or 27th of August 1943. 

Q. Where did the interview take place, Colonel, and what were the circum- 
stances under which it took place? 

A. The interview was conducted on the University of California campus. 
There was a building in which Lieutenant Johnson had his office. Captain 
Fidler was a member of the staff. I don’t recall his exact capacity at the time. 
He was in the Army. We used Lieutenant Johnson’s office to conduct this in- 
terview. 

Q. Did you make any arrangements to have it recorded? 

A. Yes. We felt that this information was of considerable importance, and we 
did not want to rely later on on what we may remember, so I made arrange- 
ments for an officer in charge of my investigative unit to set up a recording 
for us. 

Q. So far as you know, was that with the knowledge of Dr. Oppenheimer, or 
was he unaware that it was being recorded? 

A. As far as I know, he was unaware. 

Q. Subsequent to the interview, were the recordings transcribed? 

A. Yes; after hearing what Dr. Oppenheimer had to tell me, I immediately had 
the recordings transcribed so I could forward them to General Groves’ of- 
fice. I recall we made the first draft off the recordings and we tried to check 
that as much as we could. Subsequent to that I wanted to hurry this to Gen- 
eral Groves, so I recall we started doing a second typing of it, and I stopped 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 293 


the typist and forwarded it by airmail immediately to General Groves’ of- 
fice.... 

Q. Have you recently refreshed your recollection about this interview by 
looking over a copy of that transcript? 

A. Ihave. 

Q. Do you recall, Colonel, whether or not in that interview Dr. Oppenheimer 
said anything to you about somebody in the office of the Russian Consul? 

A. Of the Soviet Consul, yes. 

Q. Is there any question in your mind that was mentioned? 

A. No, sir; that was mentioned. 

Q. In what connection? 

A. Dr. Oppenheimer told me that a man contacted him with the suggestion 
that technical information can be made available through proper channels 
to the Soviet Consulate and that there was a man available who was profi- 
cient in microfilming, and that there were channels established for the 
transmission of available information. 

Q. Is there any question that Dr. Oppenheimer made that reference to the use 
of microfilm? 

A. No, sir; not in my mind. 

Q. Do you recall whether or not Dr. Oppenheimer mentioned to you whether 
this man who had made the approach had made more than one approach to 
people on the project? 

A. Yes. He indicated three definite approaches that were made. 

Q. Is there any question about that in your mind? 

A. No, sir. 

Q. Did you ask Dr. Oppenheimer who the man was who had made these ap- 
proaches? 

A. Yes, I did. I asked him for the name of the man. 

Q. Did he give it to you? 

A. No, he did not. 

Q. Did he say why he would not give it to you? 

A. He stated that this man was a friend of his, he felt that no information was 
leaking out, and he felt that he did not want to give the man’s name under 
the circumstances since he felt that it wasn’t successful in accomplishing 
his mission. 

Q. Were you anxious to know the name? 

A. We were. As a matter of fact, I insisted several times and I told Dr. Oppen- 
heimer that without the knowledge of that name our activities were going to 
be made much more difficult. Since he knew the name of the man, I felt he 
should furnish it to me. I think we broached that subject through the con- 
versation on several occasions. 

Q. Why were you so anxious to know the name? 

A. Without the knowledge of the man, our job was extremely difficult. We 
knew definitely that there were espionage activities conducted in favor of 
the Soviets in that area. We knew now that there was a new or at least an ad- 


294 THE HEARING 


ditional effort being exerted through this man. Our investigative unit was 
limited in itself, and if we had to start digging to find out who this man is, it 
would put a tremendous burden on us. 

I also felt, if Imay say, that Dr. Oppenheimer knew the name of the man, 
and it was his duty to report it to me.... 

Q. Dr. Oppenheimer did not give you those names? 

A. No; he did not. He told me at the time that two of the men were down at 
“Y” that we called it, that was Los Alamos, and that one man had either al- 
ready gone or was to go to site X, which I believe was Oak Ridge. 

Q. Did you conduct any investigation as a result of that lead? 

A. Yes; we did. That was another tedious project we had. We had to go 
through files, try to find out who was going to go to site X. We determined, 
and I took measures to stop—at least I asked General Groves to stop the 
man’s movement to that area. 

Q. What man? 

A. The third man. I can’t recall the name at this time. Iam not sure of the name. 

Q. But you felt that you had identified somebody who was about to be moved 
to the site? 

A. Yes. As a matter of fact, we did. But at this point I don’t remember the 
man’s name. 

Q. And you took steps to stop that transfer? 


Q. Colonel, had you had this information about the approach to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer immediately after it had taken place, would that have made a differ- 
ence to you in your investigation? 

A. It certainly would. 

Q. What difference would it have made? 

A. Not having the name, I felt at the time, and I think! still feel impeded seri- 
ously our investigation. 

Q. Why? 

A. We had to start an investigation of a factor which was unknown to us. We 
knew that there was a man, a professor. There were many professors at the 
University of California. The only thing I knew was that he was not con- 
nected with the radiation laboratory, which put it into the University of Cal- 
ifornia, and the staff was tremendous there. ... 

Q. When did you finally learn the name of the unknown professor? 

A. The name of the unknown professor was furnished to me by General 
Groves’ office. I can’t recall the exact time. I presume it was either the end 
of September some time— 

Q. End of when? 

A. September or maybe October. I am not sure of the time. 

Q. Let me see if] can refresh your recollection. I will show you a photostat of 
a teletype addressed to the Area Engineer, University of California, Berke- 
ley, Calif., attention Lt. Lyall Johnson, signed “Nichols,” and asked if look- 
ing at that you are able now to refresh your recollection about it? 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 295 


A. Yes; this is the way we received the information. 

Q. When was the date? 

A. December 13. I must say that I had—there was another somewhat previ- 

ous—this never reached me. 

That never did? 

No. 

. How did you get the information? 

I never got the information—I was gone. 

Do you recall that you did receive the information before you went or not? 

. I think I was only informally informed of certain suspicions but I had 

never received that information. 

Q. When did you leave there? 

A. About the 26th or 25th of November. It was the end of November. ... 

Q. Colonel, I think I asked you before the noon recess when you first learned 
the name of Haaken Chevalier, and I believe you said some time in Septem- 
ber. 

A. Early October or September. 

Q. In what connection did that name come to your attention? 

A. We were receiving reports of other investigative agencies relating to Com- 
munist activities in the area. I don’t recall exactly who delivered those re- 
ports to us, but they probably came from Washington, from General Grove’s 
office. 

Q. What was the purpose of the report about Dr. Chevalier? I don’t mean for 
you to give details. 

A. It concerned Communist activities in the area. It concerned contacts with 
people who were either known or suspected Communists. 

Q. I don’t want to lead you but I am quite sure you are not very easily led any- 

way. Was the burden of the report that Dr. Chevalier was in some way con- 

nected with Communist activities? 

That is right. 

The identification of Dr. Chevalier as the unknown professor came later? 

That is right. It didn’t come to me then. 

It did not come to you? 

No. 

Would you say it came after you left Berkeley? 

. When I returned from a short tour in Europe, after being in the Mediter- 
ranean Theater, I was brought up to date on certain things that transpired in 
my absence. 

Q. Is that when you first learned the identity of the unnamed professor? 

A. Yes, sir, I believe so. 

Q. When did you first begin giving attention and consideration to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer in connection with your investigation of espionage and Communist 
activities in Berkeley? 

A. At the early part of the investigation. It was either late in May or some time 
early in June. 


>OPO>O 


>OPO>O> 


296 THE HEARING 


Mr. Gray. What year? 

THE WITNESS. 1943, sir. Excuse me... . 

Q. On the basis of the information which you had concerning Dr. Oppen- 
heimer, did you consider him to be a security risk? 

A. Yes, I would. 

Q. Did you then? 

A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Do you now? 

A. Yes, I think I do. I do, yes.... 

Q. Would you care to elaborate upon your statement that you now consider 
Dr. Oppenheimer a security risk? 

A. As far as I know, Dr. Oppenheimer was affiliated with Communist front ac- 
tivities. I have reason to feel that he was a member of the Communist Party. 
I have seen no indication which indicates any change from that. I feel that 
his supposed dropping of the Communist Party activities in the early part of 
the war need not necessarily express his sincere opinions, since that was 
done by most all members of the Communist Party. As a result of that, I feel 
that the opinion I had back in 1943 probably would stand. 

Q. Yousay was done by most all members of the party. Just what do you mean 
by that? 

A. Members of the party who came into the service, members who continued 
in Government work, disclaimed any affiliation with the party. ... 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. Colonel Pash, how often have you met Dr. Oppenheimer? 

A. Once, for this interview. 

Q. That was that meeting of August 26, 1943? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Andas far as you can recall until today that is the only time you have ever 
seen him in your life? 

A. Physically, yes.... 

Q. In your one interview with Dr. Oppenheimer, Dr. Oppenheimer did men- 
tion the name? 

A. Yes. 

Q. He volunteered the name? 

A. Yes. 

Q. At that time— 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, I don’t mean to interfere but I think the question 
whether he volunteered the name is a conclusion. I don’t wish to concede— 

Mr. SILVERMAN. There have been a fair number of conclusions suggested by 
you, Mr. Robb. 

Mr. Ross. There certainly have. 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 297 


Mr. Gray. Proceed, Mr. Silverman. 
Mk. SILVERMAN. Thank you, sir. 


By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. At the time that Dr. Oppenheimer gave you Mr. Eltenton’s name, was Mr. 
Eltenton already under surveillance by you? 

A. We had no connection with Mr. Eltenton. We had his name, but he was not 
under our surveillance. He was not connected with the radiation laboratory 
as far as I know. 

Q. So that when Dr. Oppenheimer gave you this name, this was an important 
piece of information for you? 

A. No, we had his name, but not in connection with our investigation. 

Q. Did you have his name as someone who might be mixed up in an espi- 
onage attempt? 

A. Yes, as a Communist Party member. We would not have those details as to 
his activities, because we were not conducting the investigation. 

Q. You were conducting an investigation about espionage. 

A. Yes, by the limitation agreement we did not investigate people who were 
not connected with the military or specifically with the radiation labora- 
tory. 

Q. So far as you know was there any information—I withdraw that. 

You did not have any information that connected Mr. Eltenton with an es- 
pionage attempt or approach? 

A. We had information which connected him with the contacts of the Soviet 
contacts, but I personally in my office did not have the details of those con- 
tacts. 

Q. And did Dr. Oppenheimer say to you that the reason he was not giving you 
the name of the professor was that he thought the man was innocent? 

A. He thought that this was not serious and that he had not achieved any- 
thing. 

Q. And of course Dr. Oppenheimer was very wrong not to give you that name. 

A. Yes. 

Q. And I think we would all agree with that. Do you have any information of 
any leakage of restricted data through Dr. Oppenheimer to any unautho- 
rized person? 

Mr. Ross. May I have that read back? 

(Question read by the reporter.) 

THE WITNESS. No. 


By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. And Dr. Oppenheimer did tell you that on the one instance when the pro- 
fessor approached him, he refused to have anything to do with it? 
A. Yes; he told me that. 


298 THE HEARING 


Q. And some time in 1943, he did give the professor’s name? 

A. Yes. 

Q. We all agree that Dr. Oppenheimer exercised poor judgment, indeed, 
and was very wrong not to give you the name of Professor Chevalier. 
Against that agreement by everyone here, I would like to ask you these 
questions. 

Mr. Gray. Wait a minute. I take it that everyone here includes the members of 
this board. The hearing is being conducted for the information of the mem- 
bers of this board in the discharge of its functions. I as chairman have been 
extremely lenient, perhaps unduly so, in allowing counsel to express an 
opinion. This is not the first time that you have said, Mr. Silverman, that 
everyone here agrees on something. 

I should like to ask you please to refrain from expressions of opinions, 
and not to try to give a witness an indication that you speak for anybody but 
yourself, if you are expressing an opinion. 

MR. SILVERMAN. Very well, sir. I am sorry. 


WILLIAM L. BORDEN: “More probably than not, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union” 


[Robb’s last witness is William L. Borden, whose November 7, 1953, letter to 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation triggered the investigation of Oppen- 
heimer. After graduating from Yale in 1942, Borden served in the air force, 
returned to Yale for a law degree, and in 1948 became executive director of 
the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. His suspicions about 
Oppenheimer had been growing ever since November 1950, when he first 
examined the physicist’s AEC security file. In an interview with Robb and 
Rolander on February 20, 1954, he asserted that Oppenheimer’s opposition 
to the H-bomb could only be explained “on the hypothesis of subversion.” 
For the past year before testifying, the 34-year-old Borden has worked for the 
atomic power division of Westinghouse Electric Corporation.] 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Do you have a copy of your letter with you? 

A. Ihave one in front of me. 

Q. Would you be good enough to read it? 

A. This letter is dated November 7, 1953. 

Q. While our friends are looking at that, I might ask you whether you know 
Dr. Oppenheimer personally? 

A. I have met him on a few occasions. 

Mr. Ross. May we proceed, Mr. Chairman? 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 299 


Mk. SILVERMAN. One moment, please. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to ask the counsel what the purpose of delay is. He is 
simply going to read this. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Mr. Chairman, I can hardly conceive that a letter, with due re- 
spect to Mr. Borden, by a gentleman stating what he adds the evidence up to 
can be enormously helpful to the board which has itself heard the evidence. 
There are statements in this letter, at least one that I see, which I don’t think 
anybody would be very happy to have go into this record, and under those 
circumstances, I would like to look at it a minute longer. There may be seri- 
ous question whether anybody will be helped by having this letter in the 
record. 

Mr. Gray. I think you are now raising a question that counsel cannot deter- 
mine, Mr. Silverman. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Of course not, sir. 

Mr. Gray. If you have any argument about it, I shall be glad to have it. If you 
wish to protest the reading of the letter into the record, you are certainly at 
liberty to do so. I take it, however, that it is evident that Mr. Borden is before 
the committee, he states that this letter is his own letter, he wrote it without 
consultation with the Commission, that it represents the views he held in 
November 1953, it represents the views he holds today, he is the individual 
concerned, he is being confronted by Dr. Oppenheimer and Oppenheimer’s 
counsel and will be available for cross-examination. In view of the fact that 
being here as he is under subpoena, which has been made clear, presum- 
ably this being his opinion, this is what he would testify to. I simply don’t 
see the objection to reading the letter. If 1 am wrong about that, I should be 
glad to hear it. 

MR. SILVERMAN. Mr. Chairman, much of the material in this letter, or some of 
the material in this letter, at least, is matter that has already been before the 
board. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Silverman, you are not suggesting that we should not hear from 
any witnesses who will testify to the same matters previous witnesses have 
testified to? 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Let me say it this way. The thing that struck my eye at once is 
subdivision (e) on page 2. That troubles me going into the record. If you 
think it will advance things to have it in, all right. 

Mr. Gray. I would like to take a moment to consider that objection. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, the third paragraph on page 4, and some com- 
parable material brings in accusations here that have not before been made 
in this record or even indicted in the Commission’s letter. 

Mr. Gray. You are referring to what? 

Mr. GarRRISON. To the third paragraph on page 4, and to the first clause on 
page 4, and also the last clause on page 3. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Garrison, is there any question in your mind that if this is the 
view of the witness, he would not so testify? 

Mr. GARRISON. I have no question about that. 


300 THE HEARING 


Mr. Gray. I am puzzled by the objection to his reading the letter he wrote in 
November 1953, which he states now represents his present views as dis- 
tinguished from giving his present views at this time. I am just honestly not 
clear as to what the objection is. 

Mr. GarRISON. It is simply my feeling, Mr. Chairman, that if these represent 
his present views, and the Commission’s counsel has brought him here to 
testify to this board about accusations which are not in the Commission’s 
letter and are not even suggested in them, and have never before been sug- 
gested in these proceedings, we now have a new case which it seems to me 
either does not belong here or should be included in the Commission’s let- 
ter, either in the first instance or by amendment. 

Mr. Gray. I think now you are making a point that the board should exam- 
ine... that was certainly not clear to me from anything Mr. Silverman said 
earlier. 

I would therefore ask everyone to retire from the room except the board 
and counsel for the board. 

(All persons with the exception of the board and counsel for the Board 
left the hearing room, and after a brief time reentered the room.) 

Mr. Gray. In response to the objection raised by counsel for Dr. Oppenheimer, 
I would have this to say on behalf of the board: 

No. 1, the material which the witness was about to read constitutes testi- 
mony by the witness, and does not become a part of the letter of notification 
from the General Manager of the Commission to Dr. Oppenheimer. I would 
remind counsel that under the regulations pursuant to which this proceed- 
ing is conducted the requirements are that this Board makes specific find- 
ings with respect to the items in the letter of notification. 

I should also remind counsel that much of the testimony here given has 
not necessarily reflected either items in the letter of the General Manager of 
the Commission to Dr. Oppenheimer, or Dr. Oppenheimer’s reply to that let- 
ter. With the exception of the personal items referred to on page 2, and I will 
have something to say to the witness about that, the material as I under- 
stand it specifically referred to by Mr. Garrison is stated as a conclusion of 
the author of the letter. Again I take it that the witness would be permitted 
to present his conclusion about matters which are before this board. Wit- 
nesses have done so with constancy throughout this proceeding. Therefore, 
after consultation with the members of the board, the witness will be al- 
lowed to read this letter, and all concerned will understand that this is a 
part of his testimony which is not necessarily accepted by the Commission, 
does not become a part of the Commission’s letter of notification, nor are the 
conclusions drawn in the testimony necessarily to be considered accepted 
by the board. It is the conclusion of the witness, one of many whom we 
have had before the board, with respect to matters concerned in this pro- 
ceeding. ... 

I would say to counsel that it is not my understanding from conversations 
with the board that testimony of this witness is in any way going to broaden 
the inquiry of the board. 


Thomas A. Morgan, a member of the Personnel Security Board. Courtesy of Hagley Museum 
and Library. 


302 THE HEARING 


Mr. GarRISON. How can it avoid it, sir? Supposing you should believe the wit- 
ness? Here is a witness produced by counsel engaged by the Commission 
and delegated with the responsibility by this board of calling such wit- 
nesses he wishes, and he brings a witness in to make this kind of an accu- 
sation not dreamed of in this proceeding up to this point, and not men- 
tioned in the letter. I think if anything could be more of a surprise and more 
calling for time, if this is to be the subject matter of the inquiry, I don’t know 
what it is. 

Mr. Gray. I should like to ask, Mr. Garrison, whether you knew of the exis- 
tence of this letter? 

Mr. GarRISON. I had heard rumors that Mr. Borden had written a letter; yes, 
sir. I had no notion that this kind of material was in it. 

Mr. Gray. This is a conclusion of a witness that you are speaking to now. 

MR. GARRISON. Yes; but I take it you are going to permit the witness to adduce 
his evidence upon these topics. Otherwise, there is no point of his reading 
the letter unless he is going to testify about it. 

I would suggest, Mr. Chairman—I don’t want to delay the proceeding— 

Mr. Gray. The board is very much concerned with protecting the interests of 
the individual concerned, the Government and the general public. So that I 
do not consider this discussion a matter of delay. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, might I suggest one thing? I assume that in the event 
the witness should be asked whether or not upon the basis of the evidence 
he has considered that he considers Dr. Oppenheimer a security risk, and 
he should say that he did, and should then be asked to give his reasons, he 
might very well give the reasons that he set forth in this letter under con- 
clusions. I can’t see much difference. I think it would not be contended the 
scope of the inquiry is thereby broadened or would be thereby broadened. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Robb is making a point of form and not of substance, Mr. 
Chairman. We are here put on notice in advance—this is the only way in 
which it happens to come up—that this witness proposes to make accusa- 
tions of a new character not touched upon in the letter, and not suggested 
before in these proceedings by anybody, even by the most vigorous critics of 
Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, might I say one thing for the record? The witness 
wrote this letter on his own initiative and his own responsibility, setting out 
certain matters of evidence, I think all of which, if not all, certainly most all 
of which, are mentioned in the letter from General Nichols to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer. This letter was to Mr. Hoover. The letter is a part of the files before 
the board. It is, I think, an important letter. It seemed to the Commission, it 
seemed to us, that under those circumstances it was only fair to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer and his counsel that this witness should be presented here, con- 
fronted by Dr. Oppenheimer, and his counsel, subjected to cross-examina- 
tion on the matters set out in this letter. 

The conclusions drawn by this witness in his letter are not allegations in 
the letter from General Nichols to Dr. Oppenheimer. They will not be alle- 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 303 


gations in any possible amendment of that letter. The conclusions are the 
conclusions of the witness alone. They are conclusions which he has drawn 
from the evidence just as other witnesses on behalf of Dr. Oppenheimer 
have drawn the conclusions that Dr. Oppenheimer is not a security risk, but 
on the contrary is a man of great honesty, integrity, and patriotism. 

I assume that if the witness having written this letter had concluded from 
the evidence set out by him that Dr. Oppenheimer was not a security risk, 
that he was a splendid American, a man of honor, that Mr. Garrison would 
have no objection to reading those conclusions. It seems to me it cuts both 
ways, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. GARRISON. May I ask how long the Commission has had this letter in its file? 

Mr. Ross. I don’t know, Mr. Garrison. Some time, of course. 

Mr. GarRIsON. Did it have it prior to the letter of December 23, 1953? 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Garrison, I don’t think I should be subjected to cross-examina- 
tion by you, but I can say to you that I am sure Mr. Hoover did not wait 8 
months to send it over to the Commission. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, at the bottom of page 3, it says, “From such ev- 
idence considered in detail the following conclusions are justified.” You 
can call them conclusions or allegations; it is all the same thing. 

Mr. Gray. This is simply the testimony of a witness. 

Mr. Garrison. This is the testimony of a witness produced by the Commis- 
sion’s counsel to whom this task has been delegated, on his own responsi- 
bility bringing in here to make accusations of the kind that I don’t think be- 
long here. 

Mr. Gray. I will state to counsel for Dr. Oppenheimer that copies of this letter 
have been in the possession of the board along with all other material and 
have been read by members of this board. Mr. Borden’s conclusions are, 
therefore, known to the members of this board. The board has certainly 
made no suggestion to the Commission and the general manager of the 
Commission has not otherwise taken the initiative to broaden the inquiry to 
include these stated conclusions of the witness. If you prefer not to have Dr. 
Oppenheimer confronted by a witness and cross-examined by his counsel 
with respect to material which you know is in the possession of the board, 
of course that would be your decision in what you consider to be the best 
protection of the interests of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

I gather that is what you are saying, because you have been informed by 
the chairman that a copy of this letter is in the possession of the members of 
the board. That, again, if I need to repeat this, does not in any way indicate 
that it is anything more than one part of material consisting of a record 
which is to be thousands of pages long, and various other data voluminous 
in nature which are before this board. You may not assume that any of the 
conclusions of any of the witnesses may necessarily be those of the board. 
As far as this board is concerned—I hope I may speak for my colleagues—I 
do not think we will insist on either direct or cross-examination of this wit- 
ness. The conclusion which we had reached in the period during which 


304 THE HEARING 


you were excused from the room was that we would proceed. However, I 
shall be glad to consult further with the members of the board to determine 
whether we shall proceed with the introduction of this letter. 

I take it that counsel would not object to direct examination of this wit- 
ness? You are not objecting to the witness? 

MR. GARRISON. No. 

Mr. Gray. Mr. Morgan has just observed to me that he felt that it was the 
fairest thing to Dr. Oppenheimer to give him and his counsel the opportu- 
nity to examine the witness with respect to this letter which was in the pos- 
session of the board. He doesn’t insist that we proceed. I have not yet con- 
sulted Dr. Evans. 

Dr. Evans. That is all right with me. 

Mr. GaRRISON. Mr. Chairman, it is needless to say that we would much rather 
have an opportunity to cross-examine if the board considers that this topic 
is properly a part of the case. Ifthe board considers that it is, then let us pro- 
ceed with it. I trust that in view of the circumstances if it be your decision 
to proceed, that to the extent that we need time here to prepare on this new 
kind of an allegation, that we may have it. 

MR. GRay. Yes. 

(Discussion off the record.) 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the objection previously raised 
by Mr. Silverman, we withdraw that objection and prefer that the letter in 
its entirety be read, if we are to go ahead with it. 

Mr. Gray. All right, sir. 

THE WiTNEsS. This letter is dated November 7, 1943. A copy went to the Joint 
Committee on Atomic Energy. The original went to Mr. J. Edgar Hoover, Di- 
rector, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Washington, D.C.: 

“Dear Mr. Hoover: This letter concerns J. Robert Oppenheimer. 

“As you know, he has for some years enjoyed access to various critical ac- 
tivities of the National Security Council, the Department of State, the De- 
partment of Defense, the Army, Navy, and Air Force, the Research and De- 
velopment Board, the Atomic Energy Commission, the Central Intelligence 
Agency, the National Security Resources Board, and the National Science 
Foundation. His access covers most new weapons being developed by the 
Armed Forces, war plans at least in comprehensive outline, complete de- 
tails as to atomic and hydrogen weapons and stockpile data, the evidence 
on which some of the principal CIA intelligence estimates is based, United 
States participation in the United Nations and NATO and many other areas 
of high security sensitivity. 

“Because the scope of his access may well be unique, because he has had 
custody of an immense collection of classified papers—” 

Dr. Evans. Documents. You said papers. 

THE WITNESS. That is right. Perhaps I should state that the copy I have before 
me is one that I typed myself, and it is possible that it does not conform. 

“Because the scope of his access may well be unique, because he has had 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 305 


custody of an immense collection of classified papers covering military, in- 
telligence, and diplomatic as well as atomic-energy matters, and because he 
also possesses a scientific background enabling him to grasp the signifi- 
cance of classified data of a technical nature, it seems reasonable to estimate 
that he is and for some years has been in a position to compromise more 
vital and detailed information affecting the national defense and security 
than any other individual in the United States. 

“While J. Robert Oppenheimer has not made major contributions to the 
advancement of science, he holds a respected professional standing among 
the second rank of American physicists. In terms of his mastery of Govern- 
ment affairs, his close liaison with ranking officials, and his ability to influ- 
ence high-level thinking, he surely stands in the first rank, not merely 
among scientists but among all those who have shaped postwar decisions in 
the military, atomic energy, intelligence, and diplomatic fields. As chair- 
man or as an official or unofficial member of more than 35 important Gov- 
ernment committees, panels, study groups, and projects, he has oriented or 
dominated key policies involving every principal United States security de- 
partment and agency except the FBI. 

“The purpose of this letter is to state my own exhaustively considered 
opinion, based upon years of study, of the available classified evidence, that 
more probably than not J. Robert Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet 
Union. 

“This opinion considers the following factors, among others: 

“(a) He was contributing substantial monthly sums to the Communist 
Party; 

“(b) His ties with communism had survived the Nazi-Soviet Pact and the 
Soviet attack upon Finland; 

“(c) His wife and younger brother were Communists; 

“(d) He had no close friends except Communists; 

“(e) He had at least one Communist mistress; 

“(f) He belonged only to Communist organizations, apart from profes- 
sional affiliations; 

“(g) The people whom he recruited into the early wartime Berkeley 
atomic project were exclusively Communists; 

“(h) He had been instrumental in securing recruits for the Communist 
Party; and 

“(i) He was in frequent contact with Soviet espionage agents. 

“2. The evidence indicating that— 

“(a) In May 1942, he either stopped contributing funds to the Commu- 
nist Party or else made his contributions through a new channel not yet dis- 
covered; 

“(b) In April 1942 his name was formally submitted for security clear- 
ance; 

“(c) He himself was aware at the time that his name had been so submit- 
ted; and 


306 THE HEARING 


“(d) He thereafter repeatedly gave false information to General Groves, 
the Manhattan District, and the FBI concerning the 1939—April 1942 pe- 
riod. 

“3. The evidence indicating that— 

“(a) He was responsible for employing a number of Communists, some of 
them nontechnical, at wartime Los Alamos; 

“(b) He selected one such individual to write the official Los Alamos his- 
tory; 

“(c) He was a vigorous supporter of the H-bomb program until August 6, 
1945 (Hiroshima), on which day he personally urged each senior individual 
working in this field to desist; and 

“(d) He was an enthusiastic sponsor of the A-bomb program until the war 
ended, when he immediately and outspokenly advocated that the Los 
Alamos Laboratory be disbanded. 

“4, The evidence indicating that: 

“(a) He was remarkably instrumental in influencing the military authori- 
ties and the Atomic Energy Commission essentially to suspend H-bomb de- 
velopment from mid-1946 through January 31, 1950; 

“(b) He has worked tirelessly, from January 31, 1950, onward, to retard 
the United States H-bomb program; 

“(c) He has used his potent influence against every postwar effort to ex- 
pand capacity for producing A-bomb material; 

“(d) He has used his potent influence against every postwar effort di- 
rected at obtaining larger supplies of uranium raw material; and 

“(e) He has used his potent influence against every major postwar effort 
toward atomic power development, including the nuclear-powered subma- 
rine and aircraft programs as well as industrial power projects.” 

From such evidence, considered in detail, the following conclusions are 
justified: 

“1. Between 1929 and mid-1942, more probably than not, J. Robert Op- 
penheimer was a sufficiently hardened Communist that he either volun- 
teered espionage information to the Soviets or complied with a request for 
such information. (This includes the possibility that when he singled out 
the weapons aspect of atomic development as his personal specialty, he was 
acting under Soviet instructions.) 

“2. More probably than not, he has since been functioning as an espi- 
onage agent; and 

“3. More probably than not, he has since acted under a Soviet directive 
in influencing United States military, atomic energy, intelligence, and 
diplomatic policy. 

“It is to be noted that these conclusions correlate with information fur- 
nished by Klaus Fuchs, indicating that the Soviets had acquired an agent in 
Berkeley who informed them about electromagnetic separation research 
during 1942 or earlier. 

“Needless to say, I appreciate the probabilities identifiable from existing 


FRIDAY, APRIL 30 307 


evidence might, with review of future acquired evidence, be reduced to 
possibilities; or they might also be increased to certainties. The central 
problem is not whether J. Robert Oppenheimer was ever a Communist; for 
the existing evidence makes abundantly clear that he was. Even an Atomic 
Energy Commission analysis prepared in early 1947 reflects this conclu- 
sion, although some of the most significant derogatory data had yet to be- 
come available. The central problem is assessing the degree of likelihood 
that he in fact did what a Communist in his circumstances, at Berkeley, 
would logically have done during the crucial 1939-42 period—that is, 
whether he became an actual espionage and policy instrument of the Sovi- 
ets. Thus, as to this central problem, my opinion is that, more probably than 
not, the worst is in fact the truth. 

“I am profoundly aware of the grave nature of these comments. The mat- 
ter is detestable to me. Having lived with the Oppenheimer case for years, 
having studied and restudied all data concerning him that your agency 
made available to the Atomic Energy Commission through May 1953, hav- 
ing endeavored to factor in a mass of additional data assembled from nu- 
merous other sources, and looking back upon the case from a perspective in 
private life, I feel a duty simply to state to the responsible head of the secu- 
rity agency most concerned the conclusions which I have painfully crystal- 
ized and which I believe any fairminded man thoroughly familiar with the 
evidence must also be driven to accept. 

“The writing of this letter, to me a solemn step, is exclusively on my own 
personal initiative and responsibility. 

“Very truly yours, 

“(Signed) William L. Borden, 
“(Typed) William L. Borden.” 

Mr. ROLANDER. Mr. Chairman, I had copies of this letter made, and Mr. Borden 
read from the copies, and I think there is one error in the copy that he read. 
That begins where the letter says, “This opinion considers the following 
factors among others: (1) The evidence indicating that as of April of 1942” 
and then it proceeds. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Indicating that as of what date? 

Mr. ROLANDER. “This opinion considers the following factors, among others: 
“1, The evidence indicating that as of April 1942 (a).” 

Mr. Gray. Now, I should like to make a statement with respect to this letter 
which I am authorized to make by the two other members of the board 
which I think may ease Mr. Garrison’s problem as he has seen it in this dis- 
cussion. 

I would say to you that the board has no evidence before it that Dr. Op- 
penheimer volunteered espionage information to the Soviets or complied 
with a request for such information; that he has been functioning as an es- 
pionage agent or that he has since acted under Soviet directive, with one 
qualification as to that latter point, which I am sure will not surprise you. 
That is, there has been testimony by various witnesses as to whether mem- 


308 THE HEARING 


bers of the Communist Party, as a matter of policy at the time of the war 
years or entering into Government or military service, complied with policy 
or policy directions in that regard. With respect to that qualification, which 
I believe appears already in the record, and which is certainly no surprise to 
Dr. Oppenheimer and his counsel, I repeat that the members of the board 
feel that they have no evidence before them with respect to these matters 
which I have just recited. 

I repeat, therefore, that there are now before the board in the nature of 
conclusions of the witness, stated to be his own conclusions on the basis of 
other material which is set forth in some detail, and I believe practically all 
of which has been referred to without making a judgment whether it has 
been established or not. 

Mr. Ross. May I proceed? 
MR. GRAY. Yes. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Mr. Borden, may I ask you, sir, why you waited until you left the joint 
committee to write that letter? 

A. Mr. Robb, this case has concerned me over a period of years. My concern 
has increased as time passed. Several actions were taken with respect to it 
while I was working for the joint committee. It has consisted in the prepa- 
ration of 400 questions raised on the case. This was the final work that I per- 
formed before leaving the committee. I felt at that time that I had not previ- 
ously fully measured up to my duty on this matter. As of the time I left, the 
preparation of those questions constituted for me the discharge of the duty. 
However, no position was taken in the formulation of those questions, or at 
least if there was a position, it was implicit only. 

After I left, I took a month off and this matter pressed on my mind. The 
feeling grew upon me that I had not fully discharged what was required of 
me in view of the fact that I had not taken a position. 

Accordingly, by approximately mid-October, I had crystalized my think- 
ing to the point where I felt that this step was necessary. There is a letter 
which I have written to the joint committee on this subject, if you wish me 
to refer to it, or to read it to you. 

Q. Is there anything, Mr. Borden, that you can now add to what you have set 
out in this letter as your conclusions? 

A. Ihave no desire to add anything. 

Q. Iam not asking you that, sir. Is there anything that you feel that is appropri- 
ate for you to tell this board in addition to what you have set out in that letter? 

A. I feel, Mr. Robb, that it is my obvious duty to answer any questions that are 
asked me. If I were to volunteer information, I think it is obvious that I 
could talk over a long period of time. 

Q. Iam not asking you to volunteer, but what I want to know is, Does that let- 
ter fully state your conclusions? 

A. This letter reflects my conclusions as of now. 


MONDAY, MAY 3 309 


Q. Does it fully reflect your conclusions? 

A. Yes. 

Q. So there is nothing that you feel you should add to it? 

A. That is correct. Perhaps I misunderstood you. 

Q. Let me see whether or not you feel any hesitation about answering any 
questions that either have been or may be put to you here, because of the 
presence of Dr. Oppenheimer and his counsel. 

A. I do not. 

Q. The answer is no? 

A. The answer is no. 

Mr. Ross. I think that is all I care to ask. You may cross-examine. 

Mr. Gray. We will now take a recess until Monday at 2 o’clock for many rea- 
sons. One is commitments identified with this enterprise as to schedule. 
Second, I think it is useful if time is required for Mr. Garrison. I would hope 
that my statement that I made to the board takes care of most of the difficul- 
ties that we discussed. 

Mr. Garrison. Is it to be understood that the witness will be back here on 
Monday? 

Mr. Gray. The witness is under subpoena, and he is not happy to be here in 
the first place. It is understood that he will be. 


Monday, May 3 


[When the hearing recessed on Friday, Oppenheimer’s lawyers were divided 
over whether to cross-examine William L. Borden. In view of Gordon Gray’s 
assertions that Borden’s testimony was not going “to broaden the inquiry of 
the board,” and that “the board has no evidence before it that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer volunteered espionage information to the Soviets,” the defense team 
decided over the weekend not to cross-examine him. In view of the flimsy 
nature of many of Borden’s allegations, this was surely a mistake. An FBI in- 
ternal memorandum, unknown of course to Garrison, conceded: “Borden’s 
letter contains his own assumptions and conclusions. He admits that the ma- 
terial, at least in part, is only a possibility. Many of Borden’s statements are 
distorted and restated in his own words in order to make them appear more 
forceful than the true facts indicate.” As the hearing enters its final week, 
Garrison briefly explains the reasons for the decision.] 


Mr. Gray. Mr. Garrison. 
Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a short statement, sir. 
Over the weekend we have examined Mr. Borden’s letter to Mr. Hoover of 
November 7, 1953, which he read into the record at the last session. Mr. 


310 THE HEARING 


Borden in his brief testimony stated that the letter constituted his conclu- 
sions, and that he had nothing to add. It is quite clear that the letter consists 
not of evidence, but of Mr. Borden’s opinions arrived at from studying FBI 
reports and other unspecified data. These opinions relate essentially to the 
items contained in General Nichols’ letter to Dr. Oppenheimer of December 
23, 1953, which have been canvassed in the testimony, and the documents 
before this board. It is apparent that except for Mr. Borden’s conclusions 
about espionage, for which there is no evidence, and as to which the chair- 
man has assured us there is no evidence before the board, Mr. Borden’s 
opinions represent his interpretation of evidentiary matters which this 
board has been hearing about for the past 3 weeks from persons who actu- 
ally participated in the particular events which have been the subject mat- 
ter of this investigation. 

In view of these considerations, it has seemed to us that if we were 
now to ask Mr. Borden to develop further his opinions and conclusions, 
we would merely be inviting argument about the interpretation of evi- 
dence. 

While the board has been lenient in permitting argument by witnesses, it 
hardly seems to us that we would be justified in provoking or inviting opin- 
ions and argument which could run the gamut of all the evidence before the 
board. 

For these reasons it has seemed to us appropriate to respond to Mr. Bor- 
den’s letter in our rebuttal and summation as we expect to do. Conse- 
quently, we shall dispense with cross-examination unless the board should 
wish to ask Mr. Borden questions, in which event we would like to reserve 
the right to do ours when the board is through. 

Mr. Gray. Of course, it is the right of Dr. Oppenheimer and counsel to decline 
to cross-examine any witness before this board. Obviously there is nothing 
in our procedure which requires cross-examination. 

Mr. Garrison has stated that this letter constitutes conclusions of the wit- 
ness which, I think he has stated, was the case on direct examination. I 
think, however, it appropriate that the record reflect the fact which would 
be very obvious to anyone who reads it, that there has been a great deal of 
testimony here of conclusions with respect to these matters which were 
contained in General Nichols’ letter to Dr. Oppenheimer, and witnesses 
called by Dr. Oppenheimer, and his counsel, have repeatedly stated that 
they had certain conclusions with respect to these matters which related to 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty, character, and associations. 

I think the present witness has not sought to state anything other than 
these are his own conclusions. 

Mr. GARRISON. That is right, Mr. Chairman. I did not mean to suggest that 
other witnesses have not stated their conclusions and opinions. Of course, 
they have. I meant merely to say that those conclusions were derived from 
testimony of their own with respect to matters in which they had partici- 


MONDAY, MAY 3 311 


pated either with Dr. Oppenheimer or in other connections from which they 
derived their conclusions. 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I wish I could explain to you better 
why I falsified and fabricated” 


[After the board accepts a “stipulated table of corrections” to the transcribed 
versions of Oppenheimer’s tape-recorded interviews with Boris T. Pash, on 
August 26, 1943, and John Lansdale, on September 12, 1943, Gordon Gray 
notifies Garrison that the board will feel free to consider matters that have 
been raised in the testimony even if they were not included in the AEC’s 
original letter to Oppenheimer; Garrison replies that “we certainly raise no 
question of the broadening of the Commission’s letter in order to avoid sur- 
prise.” Then Oppenheimer is recalled to face questions from Gray, Ward 
Evans, and Roger Robb.] 


EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Gray: 


Q. Dr. Oppenheimer, I think it is probably my duty to remind you that you are 
still under oath in this proceeding. 

A. Thank you. 

Q. I have some questions I would like to ask you, and possibly some other 
members of the board will. 

I want now to go back to the so-called Chevalier incident. 

A. Right. 

Q. I should like to give you something of a summary of what I believe to have 
been your testimony before the board. If it is not an accurate summary in 
your opinion, or your counsel thinks it is not an accurate summary, I would 
like to know about it. But on the basis of a summary, then, of your testi- 
mony, I should like to ask some questions. 

The summary would be this: You said that Chevalier was your friend in 
whom you had confidence, and that you were convinced that his remarks 
about passing information to the Russians were innocent. For these reasons, 
you testified, it did not occur to you for a long time that you should report 
this incident to the security officers, and when you did tell them about it, 
you declined to name Chevalier, because you were convinced that he was 
innocent, and in effect wanted to protect him from the harassment of an in- 
vestigation because of your belief in his innocence. 

You testified on the other hand that the story of the Chevalier incident 
which you told to Colonel Pash in August 1943, and reaffirmed to Colonel 
Lansdale in September 1943, was false in certain material respects. Let me 
repeat, you testified here that that story was false in material respects. I be- 


312 THE HEARING 


lieve you testified that this story was a cock and bull story, and that the 
whole thing was a pure fabrication except for the name Eltenton, and that 
this fabrication was in some very considerable circumstantial detail, and 
your testimony here as to your explanation for this fabrication was that you 
were an idiot, and that you were reluctant to mention Chevalier and no 
doubt somewhat reluctant to mention yourself. 

However, I believe that your testimony indicated that you agreed that if 
the story you told Pash had been true, it showed that Chevalier was deeply 
involved, that it was not just a casual conversation, that it would not under 
those circumstances just have been an innocent and meaningless contact, 
and that it was a criminal conspiracy. 

In short, with respect to that portion of your testimony I believe you led 
the board to believe that you thought that if your story to Colonel Pash had 
beeri true it looked like a very unsavory situation to say the very best about 
it. 

Now, here is my question: If Chevalier was your friend and you believed 
him to be innocent and wanted to protect him, then why did you tell a com- 
plicated false story that on the face of it would show that the individual was 
not innocent, but on the contrary, was rather deeply involved with several 
people in what might have been a criminal espionage conspiracy? 

Or to put the question in another way, I ask you whether it is not a fair in- 
ference from your testimony that your story to Pash and Lansdale as far as it 
went was a true story, and that the fabrication may have been with respect 
to the current version. 

A. Let me take the second part of your question first. 

Q. Yes. 

A. The story I told to Pash was not a true story. There were not three or more 
people involved on the project. There was one person involved. That was 
me. I was at Los Alamos. There was no one else at Los Alamos involved. 
There was no one in Berkeley involved. When I heard the microfilm or what 
the hell, it didn’t sound to me as though this were reporting anything that 
Chevalier had said, or at that time the unknown professor had said. I am 
certain that was not mentioned. I testified that the Soviet consulate had not 
been mentioned by Chevalier. That is the very best of my recollection. It is 
conceivable that I knew of Eltenton’s connection with the consulate, but I 
believe I can do no more than say the story told in circumstantial detail, and 
which was elicited from me in greater and greater detail during this was a 
false story. It is not easy to say that. 

Now, when you ask for a more persuasive argument as to why I did this 
than that I was an idiot, I am going to have more trouble being understand- 
able. 

I think I was impelled by 2 or 3 concerns at that time. One was the feeling 
that I must get across the fact that if there was, as Lansdale indicated, 
trouble at the Radiation Laboratory, Eltenton was the guy that might very 
well be involved and it was serious. Whether I embroidered the story in 


MONDAY, MAY 3 313 


order to underline that seriousness or whether I embroidered it to make it 
more tolerable that I would not tell the simple facts, namely, Chevalier had 
talked to me about it, I don’t know. There was no other people involved, the 
conversation with Chevalier was brief, it was in the nature of things not ut- 
terly casual, but I think the tone of it and his own sense of not wishing to 
have anything to do with it, I have correctly communicated. 

I think I need to say that it was essential that I tell this story, that I should 
have told it at once and J should have told it completely accurately, but that 
it was a matter of conflict for me and I found myself, I believe, trying to give 
a tip to the intelligence people without realizing that when you give a tip 
you must tell the whole story. When I was asked to elaborate, I started off on 
a false pattern. 

I may add 1 or 2 things. Chevalier was a friend of mine. 

Dr. Evans. Did you say is a friend. 

THE WITNESS. He was a friend of mine. 

Dr. Evans. Today? 

THE WitNEss. He was then. We may talk later of our present relations. He was 
then a friend of mine. As far as I know he had no close relations with any- 
one else on the project. The notion that he would go to a number of project 
people to talk to them instead of coming to me and talking it over as we did 
would have made no sense whatever. He was an unlikely and absurd inter- 
mediary for such a task. I think there are circumstances which indicate that 
there was no—that there would not have been such a conspiracy—but I am 
in any case solemnly testifying that there was no such conspiracy in what I 
knew, and what I know of this matter. I wish I could explain to you better 
why I falsified and fabricated. 


By Mr. Gray: 


Q. Of course, the point I am trying to make with you, and that is the reason 
for the question I asked, is the inference to be drawn from your motive at 
the time, as I think you have testified, was the protection of an innocent per- 
son, because the story you told was certainly not calculated to lead to the 
conclusion of innocence on Chevalier’s part. These inferences necessarily 
present themselves. 

Let me ask this: First, you heard Colonel Pash testify that as a result of the 
interview with him in which you indicated that there were three other 
people involved, he and his associates actually held up orders with respect 
to an individual who was to transfer to Oak Ridge, I think. Were you aware 
of that at the time? 

A. I was not, not until Friday. 

Q. Ithink a few moments ago, you questioned whether you had discussed mi- 
crofilm in this interview with Colonel Pash. 

A. Then I didn’t make myself clear. I asserted that I had not discussed it with 
Chevalier or Chevalier with me. When I mentioned to Colonel Pash, it came 


314 THE HEARING 


in the form of microfilm or whatever the hell, that was the phrase, which is 
not very precise. May I add a point, Mr. Chairman? 

Mr. GARRISON. Just a minute. You are clear he means the phrase in the record- 
ing as it was played? 

Mr. Gray. Yes, I understand. 

THE Witness. May I add a point. When I did identify Chevalier, which was to 
General Groves, I told him of course that there were no three people, that 
this had occurred in our house, that this was me. So that when I made this 
damaging story, it was clearly with the intention of not revealing who was 
the intermediary. 


By Mr. Gray: 


Q. Again with respect to Chevalier, can you recall any efforts you have ever 
made in his behalf with respect to passport difficulties or problems that he 
may have had? I think you testified about one. 

A. Yes. I remember that at the time when his wife had divorced him and he 
was determined to go to France, I recommended counsel to him to obtain an 
American passport. He had also a French passport. Without discussing it 
with me, nor I believe with anyone else, while the negotiations or the effort 
to secure an American passport were in process, he did leave on his French 
passport. 

Q. Is it clear to you that in your visit in the late fall of 1953 to Paris, you did 
not in any way get involved in Dr. Chevalier’s passport problems as of the 
present time? 

A. I don’t believe I became involved in them. I am not even sure he discussed 
them with me. 

Q. You say he did discuss them with you? 

A. Iam not even sure he discussed them with me. I am sure he discussed one 
point with me at length, which was his continued employment at UNESCO. 

Q. You don’t remember discussing with him the best possible way to get in- 
formation on his part about a passport, or the way to obtain a passport? 

A. That could well have happened and I would have referred him to the em- 
bassy. 

Q. Did you in fact do so? 

A. If I were sure I would tell you. 

Q. I am putting some of the same questions to you now, Dr. Oppenheimer, 
that Mr. Robb put earlier. 

A. Right. 

Q. You had luncheon I believe with Mr. Wymans of the embassy? 

A. That is right. 

Q. I believe you testified on the question of Mr. Robb you did not discuss Mr. 
Chevalier’s passport problem with Mr. Wymans? 

A. No, I saw Mr. Wymans long before I saw Mr. Chevalier; not long before, but 
well a week before. 


MONDAY, MAY 3 315 


Q. Have you been in communication with Chevalier since the time you had 
luncheon with Mr. Wymans? 

A. Yes; I saw Chevalier after my lunch with Wymans, but not the other way 
around. 

Q. Have you been in communication with Chevalier since the evening you 
spent with him? 

A. The next day we drove out to visit Malraux. 

Q. Yes; you testified about that. Have you been in communication with him 
since that time? 

A. No. Well, we had a card from him, just for my birthday. 

Dr. Evans. When did you get that card? 

THE Witness. Around my birthday, which was during these hearings. I don’t 
recall this. I could have advised Chevalier to consult Wymans with regard 
to his passport. 


By Mr. Gray: 


Q. Iam sure that you could have, because I believe it to be true that he did, 
and specifically stated that it was at your suggestion that he do so. I want 
again to ask you whether you had conversations with anybody else other 
than Chevalier about his passport problem while you were in Paris in the 
late fall? I think I am asking you, is it clear to you that you did not? 

A. It is quite clear to me. If—I believe I saw no one at the Embassy after seeing 
Chevalier or no one connected with the Embassy. 

Q. Do you have any guess or knowledge as to whether Chevalier today is ac- 
tive in Communist Party affairs? 

A. Ihave a strong, strong guess that he is not. I have no knowledge. His new 
wife is an extremely sensible, wholly un-Communist girl. The other person 
we saw together was a man who has become a violent anti-Communist and 
is now apolitical. I don’t have knowledge. 

Q. The record shows, I believe, Dr. Oppenheimer, that you continued proba- 
bly until sometime in 1942 to make financial contributions which went to 
Communist causes, with money passing to different people, but among oth- 
ers, Folkoff was one who was known to you to be a Communist Party officer. 

A. That is right. 

Q. Did you discuss these contributions with Mrs. Oppenheimer? Was she 
aware that you were making these contributions? 

A. I would assume that we discussed everything in our life at that time. 

Q. Did she make any contributions on her own account? 

A. [have no knowledge of that. 

Q. Isee. 

A. Iam sure that everything was quite open between us. She has told me that 
she may have given Steve Nelson some money. She remembers that not as a 
contribution for a cause, but as something she was giving Nelson for his 
own use. But I have no recollection of it. 


316 THE HEARING 


Q. If you made contributions as late as 1942, and this fact were known to Mrs. 
Oppenheimer, it was certainly clear to her at that time, or should have been 
clear to her at that time, that these funds were going to Communist Party 
causes because of her previous membership and presumably full awareness 
of the methods of operation. 

A. hate to say so, but I think as to this you will have to ask her. My recollec- 
tion of her Communist Party experience was a very limited one—very hard 
work with the steel union and mimeographing and things like that—and I 
doubt whether she was at any time what you would call an expert on how 
Communists dealt with things. 

Q. I don’t think I have heard suggested at any time that Mrs. Oppenheimer 
was politically naive. I don’t believe that you have made that suggestion, al- 
though there has not been much testimony about her, I might say that any- 
thing I have read or heard in or about these proceedings would indicate 
nothing other than a pretty full knowledge of what she was about. I agree 
with you, however, that some of these questions should be put to her. 

I want to go back now, Dr. Oppenheimer, to a portion of your testimony 
which related to this matter of ceasing political activity by those who came 
into the active service on the project. I believe you testified that as to some 
of these individuals, whose names I don’t recall at the moment, you told 
them that they would have to cease their political activities, and you testi- 
fied that by that you meant making speeches, et cetera. 

Now, do you today take the view that ceasing political activity, whatever 
is encompassed in that phrase, is an adequate safeguard even though you 
think you know the individual and trust his innocence and loyalty com- 
pletely? 

A. Today? No. Well, I think there is nothing better to go on than the judgment 
of a man, but I am not suggesting that it should not be supplemented by 
whatever evidence is available as to what the man is up to. 

Q. Let me put a hypothetical question to you. 

A. Perhaps I did not understand you. 

Q. Suppose you today had a friend in whom you had the highest degree of 
confidence as to his loyalty to this country and his discretion and his char- 
acter; assume further that you could make the judgment to your own satis- 
faction that this man would never yield in the matter of protecting the se- 
curity interests of this country? Incidentally, you happen to have reason [to 
believe] that he was a member of the Communist Party. I am asking whether 
again you would say, well, it depends on the individual. 

A. Let me first point out an implausibility in the hypothetical question. I 
would not today suppose that a man who is a member of the Communist 
Party, was now or recently a member of the Communist Party, whatever his 
other merits, could put the interests of the United States above those of a 
foreign power. But if we can relax it a little bit and say that I know a man 
who once was a member or who I had reason to think was once a member of 
the Communist Party, and whom I knew well and trusted, and of whom 


MONDAY, MAY 3 317 


there was question of his employment on serious secret work, I would think 
it would not be up to me to determine whether his disengagement from the 
Communist Party was genuine. I would think that at this time investigation 
would be called for. But I could have a very strong conviction as to whether 
that disengagement had in fact occurred and was real or whether the man 
was fooling me. 

I would like that conviction to be supported by other evidence. It should 
be. In other words, I would not act today as I did in 1943 for a whole lot of 
reasons. 

Q. What would you consider to be adequate in the way of an act of disen- 
gagement? What kind of thing? 

A. A man’s acts, his speech, his values, the way he thinks, the way he talks, 
and the fact of his disengagement. The fact that there are no longer any 
threads binding him to an organization or connecting him with an orga- 
nization. These would be some of the things. And no doubt his candor. 

Q. Would you expand on this candor point a little bit because I am wondering 
whether you are saying that his own statement about disengagement is to be 
made a primary factor in a determination. 

A. That certainly does depend on the man. His statement that there was 
something to disengage from is something I should think would be rele- 
vant.... 

Q. As long as your memory serves, did you... think we should have a policy, 
whether publicly announced or not, which would lead us to suffer atomic 
attack upon our cities before we would make a similar attack upon Soviet 
cities? 

A. I think the question of our own cities, Mr. Gray, never came into this re- 
port, or at least was not the prominent thing. The prominent problem— 

Q. I didn’t ask about the report, then. I asked in your best recollection was 
this a view you entertained. 

A. That we would welcome an attack on our own cities? 

Q. No; I don’t think that is an accurate restatement of my question. I said that 
we would suffer an attack upon our cities with the use of atomic weapons 
before we would ever make a strategic strike against the U.S.S.R. 

A. Oh, lord, no. I mean the very first thing we would do against the U.S.S.R. 
is to go after the strategic air bases and to the extent you can the atomic 
bases of the U.S.S.R. You would do everything to reduce their power to im- 
pose an effective strategic attack upon us. 

Q. Which might include attacks on cities and industrial concentrations. 

A. It might, although clearly they are not the forward component of the 
Strategic Air Command. 

Q. Perhaps we are tangled up with the question of strategic? 

A. I have always been clear that the thing that you do without fail and with 
certainty is to attack every air base that has planes on it or may have planes 
on it the first thing. I believe our report said that. 

Q. I will try again. Did you have at that time the view that we should not use 


318 THE HEARING 


the atomic weapons against any militarily promising target which might in- 
clude cities in the U.S.S.R. until after such weapons had been used against 
such targets in this country? 

A. I think I have never been entirely clear on that. This seemed to me one of 
the most difficult questions before us. I am sure that I have always felt that 
it should be a question that we were capable of answering affirmatively and 
capable of thinking about at the time. 

Q. This is not clear in your mind as to what our position should be, you say. 
Have you ever thought about it in terms of a public announcement as to pol- 
icy in that regard? 

A. This has always struck me as very dangerous. 

Q. Then you did not advocate a public announcement? 

A. You mean have I publicly advocated it? 

Q. No. I mean did you feel that the United States should make a public an- 
nouncement about its policy, whatever it might be, with regard to the use of 
atomic weapons against the Soviet Union against whatever targets might 
present themselves? 

A. In the 9 years we have been talking about these things, I have said almost 
everything on almost every side of every question. I take it you are asking 
whether in some official document I unequivocally recommended that we 
make a public pronouncement of our policy with regard to this, and to that 
my best and fairly certain answer is “No.” 

Q. I really asked you what your own personal view was. 

A. I think that we had better not make public announcements about what we 
are going to do, if and when. But I do think we need to know more about it 
and think more about it than we had some years ago... . 

Q. I have asked you a lot of questions about how the crash program, as the 
issue, came before the General Advisory Committee in the meeting in Octo- 
ber 1949. Perhaps I asked you some questions about that. 

A. Ithink you did. 

Q. But in any event, has the testimony, all that you have heard in the last 
weeks, made it clearer to you how this came as the alternative, crash pro- 
gram or not? 

A. Iam alittle clearer. I think the greatest clarification came from Dr. Alvarez’ 
testimony. It is clearer to me now than it has been before that in the meeting 
with the Commission, the Commission probably through its chairman— 
told us what was on their minds. It is clear to me that the Commission was 
being beseiged by requests to authorize this, to proceed with that, all on the 
ground that these were the proper ways to expedite the thermonuclear pro- 
gram, and all on the ground that the thermonuclear program was the thing 
to do. It is clear to me that the Commission asked for our views on this. 

Q. Looking back on it, do you feel that the GAC in consistency and with tech- 
nical integrity could have recommended something short of the crash pro- 
gram, but something at the same time that was more active and productive 
than the alternate program? 

A. Indeed I do. Indeed I do. We could have very well written the report to the 


MONDAY, MAY 3 319 


following effect, that the present state of the program is such and such as we 
see it. This we did do. That in order to get on with it, this and this and this 
and this would need to be done. This we did do. We could have said that 
the present state of fog about this is such that we don’t really know just 
what the problem is that is to be decided. Let us get to work and remove as 
much of this fog as fast as possible. 

We could further have said the decision as to whether this is the impor- 
tant, the most important, an important, an undesirable or disastrous course 
involves lots of considerations of which we are dimly aware in the military 
and political sphere, and we hope that these will be taken into account 
when the decision is made. We could have written such a report. 

I think apart from what personal things, feelings, still of the people in- 
volved, the best explanation of why we wrote the kind of report we did was 
that we said what we thought, rather than pointing out that there were other 
people who could be asked to evaluate (a) because we thought, and (b) be- 
cause the pressure, the threat of public discussion, and the feel of the time 
was such that we thought our stating our own case, which was a negative 
case, was a good way, and perhaps the only way to insure mature delibera- 
tion on the basic problem, should we or shouldn't we. 

Q. And your position as reflected in the report under no circumstances 
should we? 

A. Ithinkthat is not quite right. I think the report itself limits itself to saying 
that we are reluctant, we don’t think we should make a crash program, we 
are agreed on that, and that the statement in the majority annex that it 
would be better if these weapons were never brought into being was a wish, 
but it was not a statement that there were no circumstances under which we 
would also have to bring them into being. 

Q. Wouldn’t you say that the impression that the majority annex was calcu- 
lated to give was that those who signed it were opposed to anything that 
would lead to the development of the hydrogen bomb? 

A. That is right, under the then existing circumstances. 

Q. So that really the majority in effect would not have been sympathetic with 
any acceleration of the program which would lead to the development of 
the bomb? 

A. Of course. That does not mean that we would not have been sympathetic 
to studies and clarification. This was a question of whether you were going 
to set out to make it, test it, and have it. 

May I make one other comment? This was not advice to Los Alamos as 
to what it should or should not study. This was not advice to the Commis- 
sion as to what it should or should not build. Some such advice we gave in 
that report. This was an earnest, if not very profound, statement of what 
the men on that committee thought about the desirability of making a su- 
perbomb. 

Q. And they felt that it was undesirable? 

A. We did. 

Q. Ifthe Commission had taken their advice, or if the Government ultimately 


320 THE HEARING 


had taken the advice of the General Advisory Committee, we would not 
now have it. 

A. Iam not certain of that, but it is possible. 

Q. Your advice, it seems to me, has said, and as I interpreted it, the majority 
annex was that we should never have it. I would guess if that advice had 
been taken literally the Commission would have— 

A. The majority annex I still think never said that we should not have it. I 
think it said that it would be better if such weapons never existed. 

Q. I think this is an important point, and I would like to hold on that. 

A. All right. But could we have the context which I also have forgotten? 

Q. Yes. I will try not to take it out of context. 

Mr. Ross. Here is the majority annex. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, would it not be helpful if Dr. Oppenheimer 
could look at the report which he has not seen for some time? 

THE WITNESS. I saw it the other day. 

Mr. Gray. I will show it to him again. I want to pick out the portions that I 
think are pertinent here, and let him make any observations about context. 
The security officer cautioned me that I am really getting on difficult 
ground. 

May I interline this? 

Mr. ROLANDER. Yes. 

THE WitnNEss. Does the majority annex contain information which should not 
be on this record? 

Mr. Gray. I do not know. 

(Mr. Rolander handed copy of report to Dr. Oppenheimer.) 

THE WITNESS. I would like to quote the entire paragraph, if that is permissible. 
I see something—well, I don’t know. 

Mr. Gray. I see no reason why the whole paragraph should not be quoted. 

Mr. ROLANDER. It is all right. 

THE Witness. This is the fourth paragraph of a six paragraph annex: 

“We believe a super bomb should never be produced. Mankind would be 
far better off not to have a demonstration of the feasibility of such a weapon 
until the present climate of world opinion changes.” 

That is that paragraph in its entirety. 


By Mr. Gray: 

Q. That language is pretty clear, isn’t it, that “We believe a super bomb should 
never be produced”? 

A. Sure it is. 

Q. So that there was not any question that the six people of the majority were 
saying that we should not take steps to develop and produce. 

A. Let me indicate to you— 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, could he read it once more, because it is the 
first we heard it. 

THE Witness. This is one paragraph. The document is full of the word “man- 
kind” and this paragraph reads: 


MONDAY, MAY 3 321 


“We believe a super bomb should never be produced. Mankind would be 
far better off not to have a demonstration of the feasibility of such a weapon 
until the present climate of world opinion changes.” 

Let me indicate— 


By Mr. Gray: 


Q. The question I would ask which would be related to this paragraph is—I 
am not attacking the motivation of those who held that belief, I am simply 
saying that the belief is clearly stated there, that the super bomb should 
never be produced. 

A. That a super bomb should never be produced. But look at what that 
means. If we had had indication that we could not prevent the enemy from 
doing it, then it was clear that a super bomb would be produced. Then our 
arguments would be clearly of no avail. This was an exhortation—I will not 
comment on its wisdom or its folly—to the Government of the United States 
to seek to prevent the production of super bombs by anyone. 

Q. Again, without reference to its wisdom or its folly, is it unreasonable 
to think that the Commission, reading this report or hearing it made, 
whichever form it took, would believe that the majority of the General Ad- 
visory Committee recommended that the Government not proceed with 
steps which would lead to the production of a super bomb? 

A. That is completely reasonable. We did discuss this point with the Com- 
mission on two subsequent occasions. On one occasion we made it clear 
that nothing in what we had said was meant to obtain, should it be clear or 
should it be reasonably probable that the enemy was on this trail. 

In another, we made it clear that there was a sharp distinction between 
theoretical study and experiment and invention and production and devel- 
opment on the other hand. So that the Commission, I think, had a little 
more than this very bald statement to go on.... 

Q. ...It would appear that the majority of the members of the GAC at that 
time felt unqualifiedly that they opposed not only the production, but the 
development. 

A. Right. 

Q. So that my question to you is, in this proceeding there has been a lot of tes- 
timony that the GAC was opposed to a particular crash program. Isn’t it 
clear that it was not only the crash program that the majority of the GAC 
found themselves in opposition to, but they were just opposed to a program 
at all which had to do with thermonuclear weapons? 

A. I think it is very clear. May I qualify this? 

Q. Yes, you may. 

A. I think many things could have qualified our unqualified view. I have men- 
tioned two of them. I will repeat them. One is indications of what the 
enemy was up to. One of them is a program technically very different from 
the one that we had before us. One of them a serious and persuasive con- 
clusion that the political effort to which we referred to in our annexes could 
not be successful. 


322 THE HEARING 


Q. Now, following the Government’s decision in January 1950, would it be 
unfair to describe your attitude toward the program as one of passive resis- 
tance? 

A. Yes. 

Q. That would be unfair? 

A. I think so. 

Mr. GARRISON. Unfair, Mr. Chairman? 

Mr. Gray. He said unfair to so describe it. 


By Mr. Gray: 


Q. Would it be unfair to describe it as active support? 

A. Active could mean a great many things. I was not active as I was during the 
war. I think it would be fairer to describe it as active support as an adviser 
to the Commission, active support in my job on the General Advisory Com- 
mittee. Not active support in the sense that I rolled up my sleeves and went 
to work and not active support in the sense that I assumed or could assume 
the job of attracting to the work the people who would have come to a job in 
response to a man’s saying, “I am going to do this; will you help me.” 

Q. You testified that you did not seek to dissuade anyone from working on 
the project. 

A. Right. 

Q. There have been a good many others who have given similar testimony. It 
also, however, has been testified that there would have been those who 
would have worked on the project had you encouraged them to do so. 

A. There has been testimony that there were people who believed this. 

Q. Yes. Do you believe that? 

A. I think it possible. Let me illustrate. In the summer of 1952, there was this 
Lincoln summer study which had to do with continental defense. On a few 
limited aspects of that I know something. On most I am an ignoramus. I 
think it was Zacharias that testified that the reason they wanted me associ- 
ated with it was that that would draw people into it. The fact that I was in- 
terested in it would encourage others. In that sense I think that if I had gone 
out to Los Alamos even if I had done nothing but twiddled my thumbs, if it 
had been known that I had gone out to promote the super, it might have had 
an affirmative effect on other people’s actions. I don’t believe that you can 
well inspire enthusiasm and recruit people unless you are doing something 
about it yourself. 

Q. Furthermore, it was fairly well known in the community—that is, the com- 
munity of physicists and people who would work on this—that you had not 
been in favor of this program prior to the Government’s decision. That prob- 
ably was a factor? 

A. I would think inevitably so. 

Q. Do you think that it is possible that some of those individuals who were at 
Princeton whose names were suggested for the project might have gone had 
they thought you were enthusiastic for the program? 


MONDAY, MAY 3 323 


A. I don’t believe this was the issue. For one thing, I know that I said to all of 
them that it was a very interesting program and that they should find out 
about it. For another—I am talking about a group of people that has been 
testified to, but as to whom I don’t know who they were, I don’t know what 
these names are—but the issue has usually been, should a man give up his 
basic research in science in favor of applied work, and I believe it was on 
that ground and on the personality ground as to whether they did or did not 
want to work with Dr. Teller, and whether they did or did not want to go to 
Los Alamos, the decisions would have been made. I don’t think my lack of 
enthusiasm—lI don’t believe I would have manifested any, nor do I believe it 
would have been either persuasive or decisive. This is in that period after 
we were going ahead. 

Q. Do you remember at approximately what date it was that you offered to re- 
sign as chairman of the General Advisory Committee? 

A. Yes, approximately. It was when Mr. Dean had taken office, the first time I 
saw him. That would have been perhaps late summer of 1950. I believe I 
testified that at the time of the President’s decision Dr. Conant told me he 
had recently talked with the Secretary of State, that the Secretary of State 
felt that it would be contrary to the national interest if either he or I at that 
time resigned from the General Advisory Committee; that this would pro- 
mote a debate on a matter which was settled. The question was how soon 
after that could this be done. 

I talked to Mr. Dean, not primarily about quitting the Advisory Commit- 
tee, but about quitting the chairmanship about which by then I felt not too 
comfortable. That would have been August, September of 1950. 

Mr. Gray. I think I have no more questions. Dr. Evans. 

Dr. Evans. Dr. Oppenheimer, you said you had received a birthday card from 
Chevalier? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Dr. Evans. He is now in France, is that it? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Dr. Evans. Is he teaching or writing? 

THE WITNESS. I remember very much what he is doing because he discussed 
this with us. He is translating, and part of his job is translating for UNESCO, 
or was. I don’t know that it still is... . 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, what was the address on that card from Dr. Chevalier? Was it ad- 
dressed to you at Princeton or here? 

A. I think it was addressed to Princeton and forwarded here. I don’t know. 

Q. Was there any note with the card? 

A. I think there was. 

Q. Do you recall what it said? 

A. No; I can find this. It is back— 


324 THE HEARING 


Do you receive a card from him every year at your birthday? 
. No; this was my 50th birthday. 
Do you know how he knew that? 
No. 
Do you recall what the note said? 
Not very much. 
Any? 
It didn’t say very much, and I don’t recall it. It was written by his wife and 
it said greetings from our Butte. 
Q. Our what? 
A. Our Butte. They live on a hill. 
Q 
A 


>O>POPO>O 


. Doctor, you testified you didn’t feel too comfortable as chairman of GAC in 
1950; is that right? 
. Yes. 


A. Because on a very major point of policy I had expressed myself, had be- 
come identified with a view which was not now national policy. I thought 
that there could be strong arguments for having as chairman of that commit- 
tee someone who had from the beginning been enthusiastic and affirmative. 

Q. Did you feel that others of the scientific community might well feel that 
you still were not enthusiastic? 

A. This is not a consideration that crossed my mind at that time. I think I had 
more in mind that when on an important thing a man is overruled, his word 
is not as useful as it was before. 

Q. Do you now feel that others in the scientific community might then have 
believed that you still were not very enthusiastic about the thermonuclear? 

A. I know that now. 

Q. Do you now feel that your lack of enthusiasm which might have been com- 
municated to other scientists might have discouraged them from throwing 
themselves into the program? 

A. I think this point has been discussed a great deal. I don’t have substantive 
knowledge about it. I think that the critical, technical views which the Gen- 
eral Advisory Committee expressed from time to time had a needling effect 
on the progress at Los Alamos which probably had something to do with 
the emergence of the brilliant inventions. 

Q. To get back to the question, Doctor, would you mind answering that ques- 
tion? 

A. Could you say it again? 

Mr. Ross. Would you read it? 

(Question read by the reporter.) 

THE WITNESS. I suppose so. 


By Mr. Robb:... 


Q. Was there in the draft of the report which you prepared or your visit to 
Pasadena in the fall of 1951 any suggestion that the United States should 


MONDAY, MAY 3 325 


announce that no strategic air attack would be directed against Russia un- 
less such an attack were first started by Russia, either against the European 
Zone of Interior or against our cities or against our European allies? 

A. I have testified on this as fully as I could in response to the chairman’s 
questions. 

Q. I want to have it specific, if I may, Doctor—a specific response to that par- 
ticular question. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, is Mr. Robb reading from the record? 

Mr. Ross. No, sir, I am not. I don’t have it. This is a draft, and we can’t find 
this draft. 

THE Witness. I can tell you where you can find it. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Before you do that, would you mind answering the question? 

A. I would mind answering it, because I have been over this ground as care- 
fully as I know how. When you say “suggest,” I don’t know whether you 
mean recommendation or consideration. 

Q. Was there any language in the report to that effect? 

A. To what effect; that this might be the state of affairs? 

Q. That this might be a good idea. 

Mr. GARRISON. What might be a good idea? I am lost. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Was there any language in the draft to the effect that it would be a good 
idea if the United States should announce that no atomic attack would be 
directed against Russia unless such an attack was first started by Russia ei- 
ther against our Zone of Interior or against our European allies? 

A. To the very best of my recollection, we said we may be faced with a situa- 
tion in which this occurs. 

Q. We may be faced with a situation in which that was desirable; is that right? 

A. Yes; in which it is wise, or in which it is done. 

Q. Was there any language in the final draft or the final report which said that? 

A. In the final draft of the final report it said that in the consideration of the 
use of our strategic airpower, one of the factors should be the deterrent 
value—I have not got the words—the deterrent value of this strategic air in 
the protection of European cities. 

Q. Do you consider that to be different from the language we have talked 
about before? 

A. It is manifestly different language. 

Q. Yes. And don’t you think the difference is important? 

A. It was very important to our readers. ... 

Q. Doctor, you testified that Mrs. Oppenheimer has told you that she may 
have given some money to Steve Nelson; is that correct? 

A. Yes. 


326 THE HEARING 


. Did she tell you how much? 

No. 

. Did you ask her? 

Yes. 

. What did she say? 

. She said she didn’t remember. Not that she had told me that she had given, 

but that she may have given. 

Q. Did you ever give Nelson any money? 

A. I don’t believe so. ... 

Q. You mentioned having seen Miss Tatlock on various occasions. Were any 
of those occasions meetings of Communist groups? 

A. No. 

Q. Or left-wing groups? 

A. If you are willing to include Spanish bazaars. I never saw her at a political 
meeting. 

Q. Did you ever see her at a meeting where a Communist talk was given? 

A. Icertainly don’t remember. 

MR. GARRISON. What kind of a talk? 

Mk. Ross. Communist. 

Mr. Garrison. A Communist talk? 

MR. Ross. Yes. 

THE WITNESS. We went together to some CIO affair, but I don’t remember who 
talked. 

Mr. Gray. Could this have been the FAECT? 

THE Witness. No, it wasn’t. It was in San Francisco. I don’t know what it was. 


>O>O>O 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Did you ever go with her to any meeting of any kind at which literature 
was passed out? 

A. The only meeting at which literature was passed out that I recollect is the 
one at my brother’s house, which I described. 

Q. Was Miss Tatlock there? 

A. No. 

Q. What kind of literature was that, Communist literature that was passed 
out? 

A. I think so; yes. 

Q. At that meeting were any pledges of contributions made by any of the 
people present? 

A. Iam not certain. My impression is that it was some kind of a dues gather- 
ing. 

Q. I believe you testified to that. 

A. Tam not certain.... 

Q. Doctor, is it your testimony that you told a false story to Colonel Pash so as 
to stimulate him to investigate Eltenton? 

A. That appears not to have been necessary. 


TUESDAY, MAY 4 327 


Q. Was that your testimony? 

A. No, itis not. I testified that I had great difficulty explaining why I told him 
a false story, but that I believed that I had two things in mind. One was to 
make it clear that there was something serious, or rather I thought there 
might be something serious, and the other was not to tell the truth. 

Q. Did you have any reason to believe that Colonel Pash would not be active 
in investigating the story you told? 

Mr. GarRISON. Mr. Chairman, isn’t this covering ground that has already been 
gone over this afternoon with you, and already over again in cross-exami- 
nation? I mean do we have to go on and on with this? 

Mr. Gray. I think that clearly this is one of the important things in the Com- 
mission’s letter. I think I will ask Mr. Robb to proceed unless he feels he is 
simply covering ground that has already been covered. 

Mr. GARRISON. I think he ought to try as much as possible not to put words in 
the witness’ mouth. 

Mr. Ross. I am cross-examining him. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. I asked you whether you had any reason to believe that Colonel Pash 
would not be active in investigating your story? 

A. I had no reason to believe anything. I had never met Colonel Pash before. 

Q. Are you really serious, as you stated to the Chair, that you told Colonel 
Pash for the purpose of stimulating him? 

A. [have been very serious in all my testimony and certainly not less in this 
very bizarre incident. 

Q. You would agree that testimony is somewhat bizarre, wouldn’t you? 

A. That is not what I said. 

MR. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, he is arguing with the witness. 

Mr. Ross. No; I am asking. 

Mr. GarRRISON. You are asking, wouldn’t you agree, and this and that, which 
seems to me to be argument. I let it go if the chairman thinks not. But it 
seems to me to be an attempt to make him say what does not come from him 
in his own natural way. 

Mr. Ross. The word “bizarre” was his, not mine. 

THE Witness. I said the incident was bizarre. ... 


Tuesday, May 4 


KATHERINE OPPENHEIMER: “I left the Communist Party. | did not 
leave my past, the friendships, just like that” 


328 THE HEARING 


[Garrison recalls Vannevar Bush in order to rebut Luis Alvarez’s assertion 
that Bush had told him that President Harry Truman did not trust Oppen- 
heimer. Bush declares, “I am quite sure | didn’t say to him that the President 
had doubts about Dr. Oppenheimer simply because it was not true.” Then 
Katherine Oppenheimer is recalled, with most of the questions coming, 
once again, from Gordon Gray and Ward Evans.] 


EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Gray: 


Q. We have asked you to come before the board again for some further ques- 
tions. ... 

I want to refer now to the contributions that Dr. Oppenheimer was mak- 
ing through Isaac Folkoff and possibly others as late as sometime in 1942. 
Were you familiar with the fact that these contributions were being made at 
the time? 

A. I knew that Robert from time to time gave money; yes. 

Q. Do you remember whether he gave money on any regular or periodic 
basis? 

A. Do you mean regular, or do you mean periodic? 

Q. Ireally mean regular. 

A. I think he did not. 

Q. Were you aware that this money was going into Communist Party chan- 
nels? 

A. Through Communist Party channels? 

Q. Yes. 

A. Yes. 

Q. You had yourself broken with the Communist Party as early as 1937, I be- 
lieve? 

A. 1936 I stopped having anything to do with the Communist Party. 

Q. Would it be fair to say that Dr. Oppenheimer’s contributions in the years as 
late as possibly 1942 meant that he had not stopped having anything to do 
with the Communist Party? I don’t insist that you answer that yes or no. 
You can answer that any way you wish. 

A. I know that. Thank you. I don’t think that the question is properly 
phrased. 

Q. Do you understand what I am trying to get at? 

A. Yes; Ido. 

Q. Why don’t you answer it that way? 

A. The reason I didn’t like the phrase “stopped having anything to do with 
the Communist Party” because I don’t think that Robert ever did— 

Dr. EVANS. What was that? 

THE WITNESS. It is because I don’t think Robert ever had anything to do with 
the Communist Party as such. I know he gave money for Spanish refugees; I 
know he gave it through the Communist Party. 


TUESDAY, MAY 4 329 


By Mr. Gray: 


Q. When he gave money to Isaac Folkoff, for example, this was not necessar- 
ily for Spanish refugees, was it? 

A. I think so. 

Q. As late as 1942? 

A. I don’t think it was that late. I know that is some place in the record. 

Q. I may be in error. My recollection is that Dr. Oppenheimer testified that 
these contributions were as late as 1942. Am I wrong about that? 

A. Mr. Gray, Robert and I don’t agree about everything. He sometimes remem- 
bers something different than the way I remember it. 

Q. What you are saying is that you don’t recall that the contributions were as 

late as 1942? 

. That is right. 

. Are you prepared to say here now that they were not as late as 1942? 

. Iam prepared to say that I do not think that they were that late. 

. But you do think it is possible that they could have been? 

. Ithink it is possible. 

. Imean, it is possible, if you don’t have a very clear recollection— 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Would it be helpful for me to state my recollection of the evi- 
dence on this point, or would you rather not, sir? 

Mr. Gray. No, I would prefer to proceed. What I am trying to get at, Mrs. Op- 
penheimer, is at what point would you say Dr. Oppenheimer’s associations 
or relationships with people in the Communist Party ceased? 

THE Witness. I do not know, Mr. Gray. I know that we still have a friend of 
whom it has been said that he is a Communist. 

Mr. Ross. I beg your pardon? 

THE Witness. I said I know we still have a friend of whom it has been said that 
he is a Communist. 

Mr. Gray. You refer to Dr. Chevalier? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. I really was not attempting to bring him into the discussion at this 
point. I believe the import of the testimony you gave the other day was that 
at one time you felt that the Communist Party in this country was of an in- 
digenous character and was not controlled or directed by international 
communism. 

THE Witness. That is right. 

Mr. Gray. I think also that you testified that knowing today what you do, you 
would think it would be a mistake to be identified— 

THE WITNEsS. That is right. 

Mr. Gray. Now, I am trying to get at the point of by what mechanics one who 
has been associated becomes clearly disassociated. 

THE WitnEss. I think that varies from person to person, Mr. Gray. Some people 
do the bump, like that, and even write an article about it. Other people do it 
quite slowly. I left the Communist Party. I did not leave my past, the friend- 


DPrPOPO > 


330 THE HEARING 


ships, just like that. Some continued for a while. I saw Communists after I 
left the Communist Party. I think that I did not achieve complete clarity 
about it until quite a lot later. 

Mr. Gray. About when would that be, do you suppose? 

THE Witness. I find that very hard to say, but I have been thinking about it. I 
would roughly date a lot of it around Pearl Harbor. 

Mr. Ross. Around what, Mrs. Oppenheimer? 

THE Witness. Pearl Harbor. I mean as sort of an end point. There were other 
things that happened much earlier that made me feel that the Communist 
Party was being quite wrong. 

Mr. Gray. Would you attempt to date Dr. Oppenheimer’s conclusion to that 
effect? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. About when would that be? 

THE Witness. I thought you said to that effect, meaning Pearl Harbor. 

Mr. Gray. No. I mean by that the conclusion that the Communist Party was 
quite wrong. At what time would you guess that he came to the same con- 
clusion with clarity? 

THE Witness. I think earlier than IL 

Mr. Gray. Earlier than you? 

THE WITNESS. Yes. 

Mr. Gray. Which would have been earlier than December 1941? 

THE WITNESS. Yes.... 

Dr. Evans. Mrs. Oppenheimer, there has been a lot of talk here about the 
Communists and fellow travelers. Could you tell me so that you and I 
can understand the difference between a Communist and a fellow trav- 
eler? 

THE WITNESS. To me, a Communist is a member of the Communist Party who 
does more or less precisely what he is told. 

Dr. Evans. He does what? 

THE WiTNEss. Rather precisely what he is told to do by the Communist Party. 

I think a fellow traveler could be described as someone to whom some of 
the aims ofthe Communist Party were sympathetic and in this way he knew 
Communists. For instance, let us take the classic example that is bandied 
about all the time nowadays; that is, the Spanish War. Many people were on 
the side of the Republicans during the Spanish War. So were the Commu- 
nists. I think the people who were not Communists and were on the side are 
now always known as fellow travelers. 

Dr. Evans. Did you ever try to get your husband to join the party? 

THE WITNEss. No. 

Dr. Evans. You never did? 

THE Witness. I was not a Communist then. 

Dr. Evans. How is that? 

THE WITNESs. I was not a Communist then. I would not have dreamed of try- 
ing to get anybody to be a member of the Communist Party. 


TUESDAY, MAY 4 331 


Dr. Evans. Do you think you have been completely disillusioned now or are 
you still fuzzy? 
THE Witness. No, I have been disillusioned for a long time... . 


By Mr. Robb: 


Mrs. Oppenheimer, did you used to read the People’s Daily World? 
I have seen it, yes. 
That is the west coast Communist newspaper? 
That is right. 
Did you see it around your house in Berkeley? 
I think it got delivered to our house on Shasta Road. 
On where? 
. On Shasta Road. 
Who subscribed to it, you or Dr. Oppenheimer? 
. Ido not know. I did not subscribe to it. Robert says he did. I sort of doubt 
it. The reason I have for that is that I know we often sent the Daily Worker 
to people that we tried to get interested in the Communist Party without 
their having subscribed to it. So I do not know whether or not Robert sub- 
scribed to it. I know it was delivered to the house. 
Q. You say “we”; do you mean the Communists? Do you mean when you 
were a Communist? 
A. Yes, that is what I mean.... 
Q. You mentioned that you still had a friend who people say was a Commu- 
nist. Was that Dr. Chevalier you had in mind? 
Yes. 
. You heard it said that he still is a Communist? 
. No, I have heard it said he was. 
. Did you know anything about his activities in Communist causes? 
. I think he went to Spanish relief parties. I know he had this party at his 
house at which Schneiderman spoke. 
Q. Had you finished your answer? 
A. I am trying to think if I knew anything else about him. I think I know no 
other facts in that direction. 
Q. Did you ever see his name in the Daily Worker or the Daily People’s World 
as having endorsed the so-called purge trials in Russia? 
No. 
. You saw Dr. Chevalier in France last fall? 
. That is right, in December. 
. In Paris? 
. In Paris. 
. How long were you in Paris on that occasion? 
. Well, let’s see. We went over—I think we spent 2 days and then went up to 
Copenhagen and came back, and I think we spent something like a week 
again. It may have been 5 days or it may have been a little longer than a 
week; I do not remember. 


>OPOPOP>O>O 


>OPOo> 


>OPOPO>D 


332 THE HEARING 


. Was it on the first 2 days that you saw Dr. Chevalier? 

No. 

. You mean after you came back from Copenhagen you saw him? 

. I think so, yes. 

Do you recall how you happened to get in touch with him? 

Yes, I do. 

. Would you tell us that? 

. I called his wife and said we would like to see them. She said that Haakon 

was in Italy, but she thought he would be back and she would let us know. 

Q. Do you remember how you happened to have her telephone number? 

A. It was in the book. I think it was in the book. I think I looked it up. On the 
other hand, I may have had a note from Haakon in my purse with the tele- 
phone number on it, which I would have taken along because if we went to 
Paris we wanted to see them. 

Q. Do you recall how you happened to know they were in Paris at all? 

A. Yes. I think Haakon wrote us. 

Q. How long before you went there? 

A. I think he has written us probably 3 or 4 times in the last few years. 

Q. I suppose he expressed a hope that if you came there you would look him 

up? 

. Certainly. ... 

. I believe you had lunch with the Chevaliers or dinner. 

. Dinner. We had dinner at their house. 

. And then did you take them to lunch or something? 

Oh, yes, no. 

. Did they take you to lunch? 

No. Haakon called for us and we went out to see Malraux. 

. Do you remember any discussion about Dr. Chevalier’s passport difficul- 

ties? 

A. I do not remember it but it has been recalled to me since. 

Q. How was it recalled to you? 

A. I think Robert mentioned it to me. 

Q. Would you tell us what he had to say about it? 

A. He said that he had been asked whether Haakon had spoken to him about 
it and he did not remember it. 

Q. Did Dr. Oppenheimer tell you pretty generally what he had been asked 
about matters of which you had knowledge? 

A. Yes.... 


>O>FO>PO>O 


OPOPOPO> 


By Mr. Silverman:... 


Q. Did you, in fact, attempt to dissuade your husband from making contribu- 
tions or having associations with Communist Party people? 
A. I think not. 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 333 


lerrold Zacharias is recalled by Garrison to challenge David Tressel 
Griggs’s assertion that he chalked “ZORC” on the blackboard at a meeting 
of the Scientific Advisory Committee in 1952. The first time he came across 
the phrase, he insists, was in the Fortune magazine article of May 1953, and 
he considered it a “journalistic trick.” Zacharias also asserts that Griggs at- 
tempted to “sabotage” the Lincoln summer study by using “obstructive tac- 
tics.” Reading portions of Griggs’s testimony before the board, he continues, 
“my blood begins to boil a bit.” Then, Albert Gordon Hill, a professor of 
physics at MIT and director of the Lincoln Laboratory, is sworn in and con- 
firms Zacharias’s recollection: “All the soul and memory searching | can do, 
| first saw it in an issue of Fortune that came out just about a year ago.” Hill 
claims Zacharias did not write “ZORC” on the blackboard, as Griggs al- 
leged: “I cannot believe that, because it would have been a cute trick in a 
very public and formal meeting, and | know Zacharias well enough to 
know that | would have been quite angry with him had he done it. | am 
convinced he did not do it.” The hearing adjourns after Garrison explains 
that he has not reached a final decision “as to whether to ask Dr. Oppen- 
heimer to make a rebuttal or not,” and promises to let the board know 
within a few hours.] 


Wednesday, May 5 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER: “I felt, perhaps quite strongly, that hav- 
ing played an active part in promoting a revolution in warfare, 
I needed to be as responsible as | could with regard to what 
came of this revolution” 


[Finally deciding to call Oppenheimer in rebuttal, his lawyers provide him 
with an opportunity to clarify certain matters. But Roger Robb has another 
surprise in store: two letters—never before seen by the defense, one only re- 
cently declassified and the other being declassified on the spot—that Op- 
penheimer wrote in September and October 1944, to his friend and fellow 
physicist, Richard C. Tolman, in which he appears to argue in favor of devel- 
oping thermonuclear weapons. For one of the few times during the hearing, 
Oppenheimer’s resentment, as well as his lawyers’, at the procedural unfair- 
ness come to the surface.] 


334 THE HEARING 


DIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. Dr. Oppenheimer, Dr. Alvarez testified that when he came to Los Alamos 
there was a hydrogen liquefaction plant there. Will you tell us what that 
was used for? 

A. Yes. It was actually one of the first structures erected at Los Alamos, and 
reflected the opinion, which turned out to be erroneous, that going from the 
fission weapon to the fusion weapon would not be too tough a step. 

Its initial purpose was to make studies of the thermodynamics, and stere- 
sis phenomena in the liquefaction of hydrogen isotopes. This work was also 
conducted by a subcontractor at the University of Ohio. 

About halfway through the war, a number of points arose which changed 
the program. One I think Dr. Teller referred to. He discovered in the work 
we had earlier done we had left out something very important and very se- 
rious, which proved that the ideas we had had about how to make this ma- 
chine would not work in the form we then had. The pressure on the whole 
laboratory to get the fission job done and the difficulties of that job both in- 
creased. The cryogenic facility actually played a small part in our re- 
searches for the fission job but I do not propose to describe it. I think it is 
classified. ... 

I believe that very little was done with the cryogenic facility in the last 
year before the war ended. 

I may, if this is still responsive to your question, describe what else was 
going on at Los Alamos during the war related to the thermonuclear pro- 
gram. 

Q. I wish you would, yes. 

A. As nearly as I can recollect, there were two groups in addition to the cryo- 
genic group concerned. One was Dr. Teller’s group which toward the end of 
the war was in the part of the laboratory that Fermi as associate director ran. 
It was called the advanced development division, and several young people 
under Teller were figuring and calculating on aspects of the thermonuclear 
program. There was another group in which there were three members of 
the British mission, and a number of Americans who were measuring the 
reactivity of the materials which seemed to us relevant to a hydrogen bomb, 
and who actually completed some measurements on this before the war was 
over. I think this is about the whole story. 

Q. As a matter of characterization, would you say that at Los Alamos during 
the war years the laboratory was actively working on the development of 
the thermonuclear bomb? 

A. We planned to be, but we were in fact not. 

Q. And why not? 

A. Ihave outlined the two major reasons. First, we didn’t know how to do it, 
and second, we were busy with other things. 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 335 


Q. Atthe end of the war, was there any expression to you of Government pol- 
icy with respect to going ahead with the thermonuclear weapon? 

A. Ithink I have already testified, but I am willing to repeat. After the Trinity 
test, the Alamagordo test, but before Hiroshima, I went to Chicago to con- 
sult General Groves largely about the major mechanics of the overseas mis- 
sion, and how we would meet our time schedules. In the course of that, I 
put up to General Groves—I think I had already put in writing an account of 
the problem—the fact that we had not moved forward, and perhaps had 
moved somewhat backward on the thermonuclear program, and was this 
something that he wanted the laboratory to take hold of. This was while the 
war was still on. He was fairly clear in saying no. I believe—I will not spec- 
ulate as to his reasons for that, but it was clear to me. ... 

Groves said that in the present state of the world, the work on weapons 
must continue, but that this did not include, he thought, the super. That 
was about all. These were not formal expressions of opinion; they were 
from my boss to me in a most informal way at a time when I was preparing 
not to retain active responsibility. 


By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. Dr. Teller testified about a board of four people at the end of the war, or 
near the end of the war, who he understood decided that the thermonuclear 
program should not be pushed. Can you cast some light on that? 

A. I think I can. I think I know what Dr. Teller was talking about. 

There was a panel of four people. Their names were Arthur Compton, 
Ernest Lawrence, Enrico Fermi and me, Robert Oppenheimer. We had been 
asked to advise on the use of the bombs, on the general nature of the future 
atomic energy program, but we were asked specifically through Mr. Harri- 
son, on behalf of the Secretary of War, to prepare as detailed an account as 
we could of everything we knew that could be done or needed doing in the 
field of atomic energy. 

This was not just military things. It involved the use of isotopes and the 
power problem and the military problems. As a part of this report, we dis- 
cussed improvements in atomic weapons and in the carrier problem. As a 
part of this report, we discussed the thermonuclear bomb, the super, as it 
was called. That was all we had in mind then. I believe that section was 
written by Fermi. I believe that Dr. Teller correctly testified that his own 
view on what the problem was, was attached as a slightly dissenting or even 
strongly dissenting view to our account. 

We wrote an account which was not a recommendation of policy at all, as 
I remember, but was an analysis of where we thought the matter stood. I 
think General Nichols’ letter to me quotes from it, and says this program did 
not appear on theoretical grounds as certain then as the fission-weapon pro- 
gram had at some earlier stage. This was a rather long and circumstantial 


336 THE HEARING 


account of what we knew about it. It was not intended and was not a state- 
ment of what should be done. It was an assessment of the technical state of 
the problem. 

This board had no authority to decide, it was not called on to recommend 
a decision, it did not decide nor recommend a decision. It described. I think 
Dr. Teller was a little mistaken about what our function was. ... 

Q. Dr. Alvarez testified that at a meeting of the Military Objectives Panel in 
about December 1950, you said something to the effect that “We all agree 
that the hydrogen bomb program should be stopped, but to do so will dis- 
rupt the people at Los Alamos and other laboratories, so let us wait for the 
Greenhouse tests, and when those fail that will be the time to stop the pro- 
gram.” Can you cast any light on that? 

A. Iam clear as to what my views were, and therefore fairly clear as to what I 
would have said, which resembles to some extent what Dr. Alvarez re- 
counted. I did not think the Greenhouse test would fail. It was well con- 
ceived technically, and there was no ground for such an opinion. * * * I 
could not have said that I expected it to fail, because I didn’t think it would, 
and I could not have said that I expected it to fail, because this sort of state- 
ment about a test is something none of us ever made. The reason for making 
the test was that we wanted to find out. 

What I did believe, and for the wisdom of this view I am not making an 
argument, was that the real difficulties with the super program, as it then 
appeared, were not going to be tested by this Greenhouse test; that the test 
was not relevant to the principal question of feasibility. I am fairly sure that 
in the course of discussions at the panel, we would have commented on 
this. 

On the question of where the super program stood, on the relevance of 
that to the Greenhouse test, of the doubts that I felt as to whether this part of 
the Greenhouse test was a sensible thing technically to do, I would have 
said that to stop this part of the Greenhouse test, even though it made no 
technical sense, would be disruptive and destructive of all parts of the Los 
Alamos program. 

I think that is the true story of what I would have said at this panel meet- 
ing and Dr. Alvarez’ recollection is in some respects mistaken. 

Q. What were your views as to the feasibility of the Super at that time? 

Mr. Ross. What time are we talking about? 

Mk. SILVERMAN. This is December 1950, at the time of the military objectives 
panel. 

THE Witness. On the basis of then existing ideas it was highly improbable that 
this could be made; that we needed new ideas if there was to be real hope of 
success. 

May I add one comment? In actual fact this component of the Greenhouse 
test had a beneficial effect on the program. This was in part because the con- 
firmation of rather elaborate theoretical prediction encouraged everybody 
to feel that they understood and when they then made very ambitious in- 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 337 


ventions, the fact that they had been right in the past gave confidence to 
their being right in the future. 

It may also to a smaller extent have provided technical information that 
was useful. Certainly its psychological effect was all positive. It would have 
been a great mistake to stop that test. 


By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. And you thought so at the time and said so? 

A. But not for the right reasons. 

Q. There have been discussions on your views on continental defense and 
tactical and strategic use of weapons and so on. Perhaps if we could do this 
very briefly, could you give very briefly your views on continental defense? 

A. As of when? 

Q. As of now, if you like. As of the last year or two. 

A. Ifthe board is not saturated with this, I will say a couple of sentences. 

Q. As of the time of the Lincoln study. 

A. The immediate view after the war was that defense against atomic 
weapons was going to be a very tough thing. The attrition rates of the Sec- 
ond World War, though high, were wholly inadequate to this new offensive 
power. 

Q. By the attrition rates, you mean the number of attacking airplanes you 
could shoot down and kill? 

A. Precisely. In the spring of 1952, the official views of what we could do 
were extremely depressing, * * * and there were methods of attack which 
appeared to be quite open to the enemy where it was doubtful that we 
would either detect or intercept any substantial fraction of the aircraft at 
all. 

I knew that on some aspects of the defense problem, valuable work was in 
progress at Lincoln and elsewhere. I knew something of the Charles study. 
* * * My view is that this is by no means a happy situation, and I know of 
no reason to think that it ever will be a happy situation, but that the steps 
that are now being taken and others that will come along as technology de- 
velops are immensely worth taking if they only save some American lives, 
if they only preserve some American cities, and if they only create in the 
planning of the enemy some doubt as to the effectiveness of their strikes. I 
don’t know whether this answers the question. 

Q. I think that answers the question. 

A. I have never gone along with the 90 to 95 percent school. I hope they are 
right, but I have never believed them. 

Q. The 90 to 95 percent school is the school— 

A. That thinks you can eliminate practically all of the enemy attack. 

Q. What did you conceive to be the relation between continental defense and 
strategic airpower? 

A. First, strategic airpower is one of the most important ingredients of conti- 
nental defense. Both with the battle of Europe and with the intercontinental 


338 THE HEARING 


battle clearly the best place to destroy aircraft is on the ground on enemy 
fields, and that is a job for strategic airpower. 

Second, at least the warning elements and many of the defensive ele- 
ments of continental defense are obviously needed to protect the bases, the 
aircraft, which take part in the strategic air campaign. This is the two-way 
relation which I think has been testified to by others. This has always been 
my understanding. 

Q. It has been suggested that perhaps you had more interest in the tactical 
than the strategic use of atomic weapons. Could you comment on that? 

A. It has been talked about a great deal. When the war ended, the United 
States had a weapon which revolutionized strategic air warfare. It got im- 
proved a little. The Air Force went hard to work to make best possible use 
of it. * * * Even during World War II we had a request through General 
Groves from the Army as to whether we could develop something that 
would be useful in the event of an invasion of Japan to help the troops that 
would be faced with an entrenched and determined enemy. The bomb that 
was developed and embellished in the years 1945 to 1948, and the aircraft 
that go with it, the whole weapons system, can of course be used on any tar- 
get, but it is a very inappropriate one for a combat theater. Therefore, there 
was a problem of developing the weapon, the weapon system, the tactics to 
give a new capability which would be as appropriate as possible under fire, 
and in the combat theater. This is not because it is more important. Nothing 
could be more important than the armament that we had, and which is now 
to be extended, perhaps to some extent superseded, by thermonuclear 
weapons. It was simply another job which needed doing, and which is not 
competitive, ought not to be competitive any more than continental defense 
is, which is another part of the defense of the country and of the free world. 
That job was slow in accomplishment. It is accomplished now, or largely 
accomplished now. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. I have no further questions of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Mr. Gray. I wonder if you have any, Mr. Robb? 

Mr. Ross. I have a few; yes, sir. 


CROSS-EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, I want to show you a carbon copy of a letter dated September 20, 
1944, addressed to Dr. R. C. Tolman, 2101 Constitution Avenue, Washing- 
ton, D.C., bearing the typewritten signature, “J. R. Oppenheimer,” and ask 
you if you wrote that. 

MR. SILVERMAN. May I look at it? 

Mr. Ross. I am sorry, it is declassified with certain deletions which have just 
been circled here. 

THE Witness. I am sure I wrote it. Would you give me the courtesy of letting 
me read it? 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 339 


By Mr. Robb: 


You mean read it aloud? 

No. 

Sure, that is why I showed it to you. 

I remember the circumstances. 

Have you read it now? 

Yes. 

. Including the portions that were circled? 

. Right; which I think they are relevant to the sense of the whole letter. 

. Doctor, do you think if we read this into the record that you can para- 

phrase those portions in some innocuous way? 

A. Let us see how it goes. 

Q. It doesn’t seem to be very much, and we did that once before. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, might I ask to have this read by Mr. Rolander? When 
you get to the portions that are deleted— 

Mk. SILVERMAN. I really find this a very disturbing procedure. 

Mr. GRay. All right, you can state your concern. 

MR. SILVERMAN. My concern is that here on what I hope is the last day of the 
hearing we are suddenly faced with a letter which I have not seen, which I 
know nothing about, and which is going to be read into the record, and I 
haven’t the vaguest idea of what it is about. 

THE WITNESS. It is from my file. 

Mr. SILVERMAN. There are lots of things in the file. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, Dr. Oppenheimer testified, as I understand his testi- 
mony, to certain opinions which were expressed to him, and I think by him 
in the period 1944-45, about the thermonuclear. 

THE WITNESS. No. 

Mk. Ross. I think there were certain discussions he had with Groves and oth- 
ers. 

THE WITNESS. In 1945? 

Mk. Ross. In 1945; yes. 

I think the letter pertains to that general subject. I think the board ought to 
have the letters before the board. 

Mr. Gray. There seems to be no question about this is a letter written by Dr. 
Oppenheimer. I believe he has identified it. 

I repeat, Mr. Silverman, what I have said many timies, and what I hope has 
been demonstrated by the conduct of this proceeding, that if you are taken 
by surprise by anything that happens in this procedure, we will give you an 
opportunity to meet a difficulty arising. 

MR. SILVERMAN. At this moment I haven’t any idea that whether I am going to 
be taken by surprise. I do think it would have been a very easy matter to 
give us a paraphrased copy of this letter in advance. 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, until Dr. Oppenheimer testified about this this 

morning, we had no idea that this letter would become relevant at this par- 


PPOPO>O>roO 


340 THE HEARING 


ticular time. If Mr. Silverman does not want Dr. Oppenheimer to have a 
chance to comment on the letter, that is all right with me. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. I really think that is not the question at all. The real question 
that I suggest is that it would have been a very easy thing to let us have 
some intimation of what this is about, instead of having it just flounder 
here—I don’t know whether we are caught by surprise or not. I don’t know 
what we are talking about. 

Mr. Ross. You know, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that Mr. Silverman is 
most anxious to be outraged. I don’t know why. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Mr. Chairman, is that remark to remain on the record? 

Mr. Gray. I know we have had frequent exchanges between counsel which 
are on the record. 

Mr. SILVERMAN. The suggestion that I am anxious to be outraged suggests that 
I am putting on some kind of an act— 

Mr. Ross. Mr. Chairman, there is some suggestion that I have done something 
improper in anticipating what Dr. Oppenheimer is going to testify. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. I frankly am about documents being produced that we have 
not seen and being produced at the last minute. This is an inquiry and not a 
trial, and it would not happen at a trial. I still don’t know what is in this 
document. For all I know it is a very helpful document. 

Mr. Gray. It may well be. The Chairman of the board makes this statement, 
that while this is an inquiry and not a trial, there are involved in this pro- 
ceeding counsel who have not always agreed. I think I can speak for my col- 
leagues on the board when I say that this board takes cognizance of this fact, 
and the fact that observations of counsel appear on the record do not in any 
way indicate agreement or disagreement on the part of this board with ob- 
servations by counsel. As far as producing the testimony here has been con- 
cerned, there has been the greatest amount of latitude afforded both to Dr. 
Oppenheimer and his counsel and to Mr. Robb throughout. I must say that I 
don’t think frankly that the observations of counsel on either side are mat- 
ters which will be of too much interest and concern to this board. I suggest 
that you proceed, Mr. Robb. 

Mr. Ross. Would you go ahead and read it? 

Mr. ROLANDER. I will hand Dr. Oppenheimer a copy of this letter. 

THE Witnkss. Is this an unexpurgated copy? 

Mr. ROLANDER. It has the portions that are classified circled. The letter is 
dated September 20, 1944, addressed to Dr. R. C. Tolman, 2101 Constitution 
Ave., Washington, D.C.: 

“Dear Richard. The accompanying letter makes some suggestions about 
procedure in the matter of site Y recommendations for postwar work. As 
you will recognize, the problem of making sensible recommendations is 
complicated by the fact that we do not know how far this project will get 
during its present life. It seems a reasonable assumption that we will suc- 
ceed in making some rather crude forms of the gadget per se, but that the 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 341 


whole complex of problems associated with the super will probably not be 
pushed by us beyond rather elementary scientific considerations. 

‘IT should like, therefore, to put in writing at an early date the recommen- 
dation that the subject of initiating violent thermonuclear reactions be pur- 
sued with vigor and diligence, and promptly. In this connection I should like 
to point out that gadgets of reasonable efficiency and suitable design can al- 
most certainly induct significance thermonuclear reactions in deuterium 
even under conditions where these reactions are not self-sustaining”— 

Then there is a portion that has been deleted. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Can you paraphrase that for us, doctor? 

A. Yes. It is a part of the program of site Y to explore this possibility. 

Mr. ROLANDER. Continuing, “It is not at all clear whether we shall actually 
make this development during the present project, but it is of great impor- 
tance that such”—and then there is a blank. 

THE WitnEss. I think that can just be left out. 

Mr. ROLANDER. —“Such blank gadgets form an experimentally possible transi- 
tion from a simple gadget to the super and thus open the possibility of a not 
purely theoretical approach to the latter. 

“In this connection also I should like to remind you of Rabi’s proposal for 
initiating thermonuclear reactions”—and then blanks. 

“At the present time site Y does not contemplate undertaking this, but I 
believe that with a somewhat longer time scale than our present one, this 
line of investigation might prove profitable. 

“In general, not only for the scientific but for the political evaluation of 
the possibilities of our project, the critical, prompt, and effective explo- 
ration of the extent to which energy can be released by thermonuclear reac- 
tions is clearly of profound importance. Several members of this laboratory, 
notably Teller, Bethe, von Neumann, Rabi, and Fermi have expressed great 
interest in the problems outlined above and I believe that it would be prof- 
itable to have a rather detailed discussion of the present technical status— 
which I know to be confused—which should be made available to the com- 
mittee before it draws up its final recommendations. 

“Sincerely yours, 

“J. R. Oppenheimer.” 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, before we go into any discussion, I will show you a carbon copy of 
another letter dated October 4, 1944, addressed to Dr. R. C. Tolman, 2101 
Constitution Avenue, Washington, D.C., bearing the typewritten signature, 
“J. R. Oppenheimer,” and ask you if you will read that and tell us if you 
wrote it. 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Is this a continuation of the same correspondence, Mr. Robb? 


342 THE HEARING 


Mr. Ross. Yes; I think so. I am trying to get this unclassified so I can hand you 
a copy of it, Mr. Silverman. 

Mr. Marks. When was this document unclassified that you are about to hand 
to us? 

Mk. SILVERMAN. It is being declassified now... . 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, who was Dr. Tolman? 

A. He was a very close and dear friend of mine. He had been Vice Chairman 
of the National Defense Research Committee. When I assumed the responsi- 
bility for Los Alamos I introduced him or saw that he was introduced to 
General Groves. General Groves asked him to be one of his two scientific 
consultants. He was a member, possibly secretary, of the Committee of Re- 
view, which visited Los Alamos in the spring of 1943, and pointed out some 
things that we needed to do if we were to be a successful laboratory. He was 
a frequent and helpful visitor to Los Alamos throughout the war. He was at 
one time, and I would assume at the time these letters were addressed to 
him, a member of a committee, possibly chairman of a committee appointed 
by General Groves which was a precursor to the scientific panel to the in- 
terim committee in trying to sketch out for the benefit of the Government 
what the postwar problems in atomic energy might be. These included mil- 
itary and nonmilitary problems. 

I think that these letters were addressed to him in that capacity. 

Q. And site Y was what? 

A. Los Alamos.... 

Q. At the time you wrote these letters, you were in favor of going ahead 
with a program for the development of a thermonuclear weapon, weren’t 
you? 

A. The letters speak for themselves. I believe they speak exactly what I meant. 

Q. Did you mean that? 

A. I meant these letters. 

Q. Did you mean that you were in favor of going ahead with the thermonu- 
clear? 

A. I would like to read the phrases. 

Q. What I am getting at, Doctor, laying aside the technical language, wasn’t 

that the ordinary meaning of that you said, that you though you ought to get 

busy on the thermonuclear? 

. Among other things. 

Yes. 

. With the exploration of the thermonuclear. 

. Did there come a time when you changed that view in subsequent years? 

. Manifestly by October 29, 1949, I was saying very different things. 

. Yes. Doctor, something was said about the liquid hydrogen plant at Los 

Alamos. That was constructed for the purpose of working on a fusion 

weapon, wasn’t it, or hydrogen weapon? 


OPOPO> 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 343 


A. For preliminary research on ingredients that we thought would be essen- 
tial in a hydrogen weapon. 

Q. Yes. In the matter of reactors, there are various kinds of reactors, aren’t there? 

A. Indeed there are. 

Q. Those built for commercial purposes, those built for research purposes, 
and those built for production of weapons purposes, isn’t that right? 

A. I have yet to see one built for commercial purposes but I hope I some day 
will. 

Q. Iam asking for information. 

A. There are, as I testified, reactors for the development of reactors, reactors 
for production, reactors for research, and reactors that serve more than one 
purpose. 

Q. You were asked about how many reactors were built during your tenure as 
chairman of the GAC and I think you said nine, was it? 

A. No. I think you asked me during the entire period how many were started, 
and I think I said about a dozen and a half. Mr. Silverman asked me up to 
the first of 1950 how many were started, and I said perhaps eight. 

Q. Were those eight built for research or production? 

A. This is better found in the reports of the Commission. I believe that 3 or 4 
were reactor development reactors, namely, to improve the art of reactor de- 
velopment. A couple, 2 or 3 were for supplementary production, and 2 or 3 
were for research. 

Q. Was any of them a so-called heavy-water reactor? 

A. No. Iam not quite sure there was not a research reactor at the Argonne, but 
there was no production reactor involving heavy water. 

Q. You spoke of the long range detection matter and the three methods which 
we speak of rather cryptically. Is it true, Doctor, that it was the opinion of 
certain qualified people that the one method which you supported might 
not detect a Russian explosion if it occurred under certain circumstances? 

A. We argued about that, and I advocated that opinion. 

Q. That it might not? 

A. That the Russians might hide an explosion, that this was unlikely, but that 
they might do it if we relied only on this one method. 

Q. In other words, the other methods were necessary to make sure that you 
could detect the explosion? 

A. That’s right. May I add that I know of no instance in which the method I 
advocated has not detected the explosion and in which the others have... . 

Q. Doctor, you have spoken somewhat of strategic and tactical airpower and 
strategic and tactical uses of weapons and all that; you of course don’t con- 
ceive yourself to be an expert in war, do you, or military matters? 

A. Of course not. I pray that there are experts in war. 

Q. Have you from time to time, however, expressed rather strong views one 
way or the other in the field of military strategy and tactics? 

A. Iam sure that! have. I don’t know what specific views or instances you are 
referring to, but I am sure the answer to your question is “Yes.” 


344 THE HEARING 


Q. Iam not referring to any for the moment. 

A. Iam sure the answer to your question is “Yes.” 

Q. Doctor, I am a little curious and I wish you would tell us why you felt it 
was your function as a scientist to express views on military strategy and 
tactics. 

A. I felt, perhaps quite strongly, that having played an active part in promot- 
ing a revolution in warfare, I needed to be as responsible as I could with re- 
gard to what came of this revolution. 

Q. To draw a parallel, Doctor, of course you recall that Ericsson designed the 
first ironclad warship. 

A. Idon’t. Iam reminded of it. 

Q. Beg pardon? 

A. Iam reminded of it. 

Q. Do you thinkthat would qualify him to plan naval strategy merely because 
he built the Monitor? 

Mr. SILVERMAN. Aren’t we really getting into argument? 

THE Witnzss. I don’t think that I ever planned military— 

Mr. Gray. Wait just a minute. Are you objecting? 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Yes, I think this is argument. 

Mr. Gray. Argument? 

Mk. SILVERMAN. Yes, of course. 

Mk. Gray. It seems to me that this board has listened for weeks to witnesses 
who have probed into Dr. Oppenheimer’s mind, have said what we would 
do under circumstances, have stated with certainty what he would, what 
his opinions are, witnesses who disagreed on this, and I think that counsel 
has not failed to ask almost any question of any witness that has appeared 
here. I can’t think of questions that could be remotely related to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer that have not been asked. 

My ruling is that Mr. Robb will proceed with his question. 

THE WitNEss. Now I have forgotten the question. 

Mr. Ross. Perhaps we better have it read back. 

(Question read by the reporter.) 

THE WITNESS. Merely because he built the Monitor would not qualify him to 

plan naval strategy. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, do you think now that perhaps you went beyond the scope of your 
proper function as a scientist in undertaking to counsel in matters of mili- 
tary strategy and tactics? 

A. Iam quite prepared to believe that I did, but when we are talking about my 
counseling on military strategy and tactics, I really think I need to know 
whom I was counseling and in what terms. I am sure that there will be in- 
stances in which I did go beyond, but I do not wish to give the impression 
that I was making war plans or trying to set up military planning, nor that 
this practice was a very general one. 


WEDNESDAY, MAY 5 345 


Mr. Gray. I think the witness is entitled to know whether Mr. Robb has in 
mind committees, panels, and other bodies on which Dr. Oppenheimer 
served or something else. 

Mr. Ross. I was merely trying to explore in general Dr. Oppenheimer’s phi- 
losophy in respect of this matter. That is what I had in mind. I was not pin- 
pointing on any particular thing, Doctor, and I wanted to get your views on 
it as to proper function. 

THE WiTNEss. I served on a great many mixed bodies. This controversial Vista 
project was not a civilian project. There were a great many military consul- 
tants. I learned a great deal from them. The formulation of the views or Vista 
depend to a very large extent on discussions, day-to-day discussions with 
working soldiers and staff officers. The committees in the Pentagon on 
which I sat were usually predominantly committees of military men. I also 
sat on some bodies where there were no military men. I would have thought 
that in an undertaking like Vista the joint intelligence, in which I played an 
extremely small part, of a lot of bright technical and academic people—not 
all scientists—and of a lot of excellent staff officers and military officers was 
precisely what gave value to the project. 


By Mr. Robb: 


Q. Doctor, you stated in response to a question by Mr. Silverman that among 
other things the job of the strategic airpower was to destroy enemy aircraft 
on the fields. Do you recall that? 

A. Yes. 

Q. Do you confine the job of strategic airpower to that, or would you also in- 
clude the destruction of enemy cities and centers of manufacture? 

A. The Strategic Air Command has not only very secret but extremely secret 
war plans which define its job. 

Q. Iam asking you for your views on its job. 

A. You mean what it should do? 

Q. Yes, sir. 

A. I think that it should be prepared to do a great variety of things, and that 
we should maintain at all times full freedom to decide whether in the actual 
crisis we are involved in, this or that should be done. It must obviously be 
capable of destroying everything on enemy territory. 

Q. Do you think that it should do that in the event of an attack on this coun- 
try by Russia? 

A. Ido. 

Mr. Ross. That is all. Thank you. ... 


REDIRECT EXAMINATION 
By Mr. Silverman: 


Q. Do you think that a scientist can properly do his job of advising the mili- 
tary on the potential of newly developed weapons without having some 


346 THE HEARING 


idea of the use that they are to be put to, and some idea of the tactical and 
strategic use? 

A. It depends. I believe we developed the atomic bomb without any idea at 
all of military problems. The people who developed radar needed to know 
precisely, or to have a very good idea of what the actual military campaign 
and needs were. Certainly you do a much better job if you have a feeling for 
what the military are up against. In peacetime it is not always clear, even to 
the military, what they will be up against. 

Q. You were shown two letters by Mr. Robb, one dated September 20, 1944, I 
think, and the other October 4, 1944. Do those letters in any way modify the 
testimony you gave on direct examination as to the scale and intensity of 
the thermonuclear effort at Los Alamos? 

A. Oh, no. 

MR. SILVERMAN. That is all. 

Mr. GRayY. May I have that read back? 

(Question and answer read by the reporter.) 

THE WitNEss. May I amplify? I testified what I could recollect, and I think it is 
complete, of what was going on at Los Alamos during my period there in 
the thermonuclear program. I was asked whether these letters caused me to 
have a different view of what was going on there and I said they did not. 

Mr. Gray. I understand, thank you. 

Mr. Robb, do you have any questions? 

Mr. Ross. I have nothing further. 

THE WITNESS. May I make a comment. I don’t care whether it is on the record 
or off. 

MR. GRAY. Yes. 

THE Witness. I am grateful to, and I hope properly appreciative of the pa- 
tience and consideration that the board has shown me during this part of 
the proceedings. 

Mr. Gray. Thank you very much, Dr. Oppenheimer. 


Thursday, May 6 


LioyD K. GARRISON: “His life has been an open book” 


[The hearing is called to order at 9:30 a.m. By 10:00, after a few loose ends 
are tied up, Lloyd K. Garrison begins his summation. Speaking without a 
prepared text, only occasionally referring to notes, and inviting questions 
from the board, he spends three hours summarizing the case for reinstating 
Oppenheimer’s security clearance.] 


THURSDAY, MAY 6 347 


SUMMATION 


Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman and members of the board, I would like to thank 
you again for waiting over until this morning to give me a little more time to 
prepare what I might say to you. I want to thank each of you also for your 
great patience and courtesy and consideration which you have extended us 
all through these weeks that we have been together. 

I think I should take judicial notice of the fact that unless Dr. Evans has 
some possible question, that I understand that you did not seek the posi- 
tions which you are here occupying, and I appreciate the fact that you are 
rendering a great public service in a difficult and arduous undertaking. 

As we approach the end of this period in which we have been together, 
my mind goes back to a time before the hearings began when the Commis- 
sion told me that you were going to meet together in Washington for a week 
before the hearings began here to study the FBI files with the aid of such 
staff as might be provided. I remember a kind of sinking feeling that I had at 
that point—the thought of a week’s immersion in FBI files which we would 
never have the privilege of seeing, and of coming to the hearings with that 
intense background of study of the derogatory information. 

I suggested two things to the Commission. One, that I might be permitted 
to meet with you and participate with you during the week in discussions 
of the case without, as Iknew would have to be the case, actual access to the 
FBI documents themselves, but at least informally participating with you in 
discussions about what the files contained. 

This the Commission said was quite impractical because of the confiden- 
tial nature of the material, and I then suggested that I meet with you at your 
very first session in Washington to give you very informally a little picture 
of the case as we saw it, so that you might at least have that picture as you 
went about your task, and also that we might have a chance to explore to- 
gether the procedures which would be followed in the hearings. That re- 
quest likewise was not found acceptable. 

It was explained to me that the practice in these proceedings was that the 
board would conduct the inquiry itself and would determine itself whether 
or not to call witnesses and so forth, and it was therefore necessary for the 
board to have a thorough mastery of the file ahead of time. 

We came together then as strangers at the start of the formal hearings and 
we found ourselves rather unexpectedly in a proceeding which seemed to 
us to be adversary in nature. I have previously made some comments upon 
this procedure. I don’t want to repeat them here. I do want to say in all sin- 
cerity that I recognize and appreciate very much the fairness which the 
members of the board have displayed in the conduct of these hearings, and 
the sincere and intense effort which I know you have been making and will 
make to come to a just understanding of the issues... . 

Now, I think that the basic question—the question which you have to de- 
cide—can be boiled down to a very short form. Dr. Oppenheimer’s position 


348 THE HEARING 


is that of a consultant. He is to give advice when his advice is sought. This 
is up to the Atomic Energy Commission as to when and where and under 
what circumstances they shall seek his advice. That, of course, is not a 
question that this board is concerned with. The basic question is whether in 
the handling of restricted data he is to be trusted. That, it seems to me, is 
what confronts this board, that bare, blunt question. 

In trying to reach your determination, you have some guides, some things 
that you are to take into consideration. The statute speaks of character, as- 
sociations, and loyalty. Certainly loyalty is the paramount consideration. If 
aman is loyal, if in his heart he loves his country and would not knowingly 


J. Robert Oppenheimer, 1954. AIP 
Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


THURSDAY, MAY 6 349 


or willingly do anything to injure its security, then associations and charac- 
ter become relatively unimportant, it would seem to me. 

I suppose one can imagine a case of a loyal citizen whose associations 
were so intensely concentrated in Communist Party circles—it is hard for 
me to suppose this of a loyal citizen, but I suppose one might reach a case 
where the associations were so intense and so pervasive—that it would cre- 
ate some risk of a chance word or something doing some harm, a slip, and 
so forth. 

In the case of character, I suppose that a loyal citizen could still endanger 
the national security in the handling of restricted data if he were addicted 
to drunkenness or to the use of drugs, if he were a pervert. These condi- 
tions, we of course don’t have here. ... 

So I say to you, Mr. Chairman and members of the board, that in the Com- 
mission’s own view of the matter it is the man himself that is to be consid- 
ered, commonsense to be exercised in judging the evidence, and that it is 
appropriate to consider in the final reckoning the fact that our long-range 
success in the field of atomic energy depends in large part on our ability to 
attract into the program men of character and vision with a wide variety of 
talents and viewpoints. ... 

So I think we come down in the end, Mr. Chairman, to the basic acid 
question before the board, whether in the overall judgment of you three 
men, after considering and weighing all the evidence, that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s continued right of access to restricted data in connection with 
his employment as a consultant would endanger the national security 
and the common defense, or be clearly inconsistent with the national se- 
curity. 

It would seem to me that in approaching that acid question the most im- 
pelling single fact that has been established here is that for more than a 
decade, Dr. Oppenheimer has created and has shared secrets of the atomic 
energy program and has held them inviolable. Not a suggestion of any im- 
proper use by him of the restricted data which has been his in the perfor- 
mance of his distinguished and very remarkable public service. 

Now, at this moment of time, after more than a decade of service of this 
character, to question his safety in the possession of restricted data seems to 
me arather appalling matter. 

I would like to tell you what this case seems to me to look like in short 
compass. I wish we could dispose of it out of hand on the basis of the fact 
that I have just mentioned to you, that for more than a decade Dr. Oppen- 
heimer has been trusted, and that he has not failed that trust. That in my 
judgment is the most persuasive evidence that you could possibly have. But 
I know that you will have to go into the testimony and the evidence, the 
matters in the file before you, and I would like to sum up, if I may, what it 
looks like'to me to be like. 

Here is a man, beginning in 1943—beginning in 1942, actually—taken 
suddenly out of the academic world in which up to that time he had lived, 


350 THE HEARING 


and suddenly in 1943 put in charge by General Groves of the vast and com- 
plex undertaking of the establishment and operation of the laboratory at Los 
Alamos, aman who suddenly finds himself in administrative charge of the 
scientific direction of some 4,000 people in a self-contained community in 
a desert. He performs by common consent an extraordinary service for his 
country, both administratively and militarily. After the war he hopes to go 
back to his academic work, back to physics, but the Government keeps call- 
ing upon him almost continuously for service. Secretary Stimson puts him 
on his Interim Committee on Atomic Energy, the Secretary of State puts him 
on the consultant group in connection with the program for the control of 
atomic energy before the U.N., he writes a memorandum to Mr. Lilienthal 
within a month of his appointment which contains the essence of the plan 
which the United States is to adopt, a plan which would have called for the 
breaking down of the Iron Curtain, and which was to prove extremely dis- 
tasteful to the Russians. He serves Mr. Baruch at the United Nations and 
after Mr. Baruch retires, he served General Osborne, and General Osborne 
has told us here of his firmness and his realism and his grasp of the prob- 
lems of the conflict and the difficulties of dealing with the Russians. 

He makes speeches and he writes articles setting forth the American pro- 
gram and the essence of it, and supporting it. Some of those you have heard 
before you. 

The President appoints him to the General Advisory Committee in Janu- 
ary of 1947, and then he is elected chairman by his fellow members, and he 
serves on that for 6 years. He helps to put Los Alamos back on its feet. He 
has earlier supported the May-Johnson bill as a means of insuring that this 
work at Los Alamos or the work on atomic weapons wherever it be con- 
ducted can go forward. 

He backs in his official work every move calculated to expand the facili- 
ties of the Commission, to enlarge raw material sources, to develop the 
atomic weapons for long-range detection, so that we may find out what the 
Russians are doing, if and when they achieve the atomic bomb. 

After Korea when we are in the midst of an actual shooting war with a 
military establishment then found to be very depleted, he interests himself 
in the development of atomic weapons for the battlefield in connection not 
merely with our problems of intervention in situations like Korea, but more 
importantly for the defense of Europe against totalitarian aggression. 

Finally, he interests himself in continental defense as a means of helping 
to preserve the home base from which both strategically and tactically any 
war must be fought. In these and in other ways through half a dozen other 
committees he gives something like half his time to the United States Gov- 
ernment as a private citizen. 

Now he is here in this room and the Government is asking the question, is 
he fit to be trusted.... 

It seems to me that in the face of all of the long catalog of efforts of Dr. 
Oppenheimer since 1945, let alone at Los Alamos, but since 1945, to 


THURSDAY, MAY 6 351 


strengthen our defenses, to build up Los Alamos, to expand the weapons 
program, to make us strong in atomic energy, and strong in weapons and 
strong in defense, it is fantastic to suppose that in the face of all those efforts 
he should be harboring a motive to destroy his own country in favor of Rus- 
sia. Just the mere proposition is unthinkable on its face.... 

Now, this whole Chevalier incident has, Iam convinced, assumed undue 
importance, and must be judged in perspective. It has been so extensively 
analyzed here in cross-examination, in the reading of transcripts of inter- 
views of 11 years ago, the hearing of a recording, Colonel Pash’s presence 
here, it is almost as if this whole Chevalier case brought into this room here 
at 16th and Constitution Avenue in 1954 had happened yesterday in the set- 
ting of today, and that we are judging a man for something that has hap- 
pened almost in our presence. 

I get that illusion of a foreshortening of time here which to me is a grisly 
matter and very, very misleading. This happened in 1943. It happened in a 
wholly different atmosphere from that of today. Russia was our so-called 
gallant ally. The whole attitude toward Russia, toward persons who were 
sympathetic with Russia, everything was different from what obtains today. 
I think you must beware above everything of judging by today’s standards 
things that happened in a different time and era.... 

I could go on and I think I won’t. You will read the record, and I know 
that you will take these judgments deeply seriously. You had 31/2 weeks 
now with the gentleman on the sofa. You have learned a lot about him. 
There is a lot about him, too, that you haven’t learned, that you don’t know. 
You have not lived any life with him. You have not worked with him. You 
have not formed those intangible judgments that men form of one another 
through intimate association, and you can't. It is impossible for you to do 
so. And I think that you should take most earnestly to heart the judgment of 
those who have. 

Here he is now with his life in one sense in your hands, and you are 
asked to say whether if he continues to have access to restricted data he 
may injure the United States of America, and make improper use of that. 
For over a decade that he has had this position of sharing in the atomic en- 
ergy information, never a suggestion of an improper use of data. His life has 
been an open book. General Wilson, one of his critics, on the H-bomb end of 
things, testified—I have forgotten the exact words, but we probably have it 
around here—that if anybody had demonstrated his loyalty by affirmative 
action, it is Dr. Oppenheimer, and this affirmative action runs all through 
his record.... 

There is more than Dr. Oppenheimer on trial in this room. I use the word 
“trial” advisedly. The Government of the United States is here on trial also. 
Our whole security process is on trial here, and is in your keeping as is his 
life—the two things together. There is an anxiety abroad in the country, and I 
think I am at liberty to say this to you, because after all, we are all Americans, 
we are all citizens, and we are all interested here in doing what is in the pub- 


352 THE HEARING 


lic interest, and what is best for our country. There is an anxiety abroad that 
these security procedures will be applied artificially, rigidly, like some mono- 
lithic kind of a machine that will result in the destruction of men of great gifts 
and of great usefulness to the country by the application of rigid and me- 
chanical tests. America must not devour her own children, Mr. Chairman and 
members of this board. If we are to be strong, powerful, electric, and vital, we 
must not devour the best and the most gifted of our citizens in some mechan- 
ical application of security procedures and mechanisms. 

You have in Dr. Oppenheimer an extraordinary individual, a very com- 
plicated man, a man that takes a great deal of knowing, a gifted man beyond 
what nature can ordinarily do more than once in a very great while. Like all 
gifted men, unique, sole, not conventional, not quite like anybody else that 
ever was or ever will be. Does this mean that you should apply different 
standards to him than you would to somebody like me or somebody else 
that is just ordinary? No, I say not. I say that there must not be favoritism in 
this business. You must hew to the line and do your duty without favor, 
without discrimination, if you want to use those words. 

But this is the point that if you are to judge the whole man as the Com- 
mission itself in its regulations and its decisions really lays upon you the 
task of doing, you have then a difficult, complicated man, a gifted man to 
deal with and in judging him, you have to exercise the greatest effort of 
comprehension. Some men are awfully simple and their acts are simple. 
That doesn’t mean that the standards are any different for them. The stan- 
dards should be the same. But this man bears the closest kind of examina- 
tion of what he really is, and what he stands for, and what he means to the 
country. It is that effort of comprehension of him that I urge upon you. 

I am confident, as I said, that when you have done all this, you will an- 
swer the blunt and ugly question whether he is fit to be trusted with re- 
stricted data, in the affirmative. I believe, members of the board, that in 
doing so you will most deeply serve the interests of the United States of 
America, which all of us love and want to protect and further. That I am 
sure of, and I am sure that is where the upshot of this case must be. 

Thank you very much. 

Mr. Gray. Thank you Mr. Garrison. .. . 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Chairman, may I thank you again for having borne so pa- 
tiently with me and for the great consideration you have shown to us 
throughout the proceedings. 

Mr. Gray. Thank you. 

Mr. GARRISON. Mr. Morgan and Dr. Evans, the same. 

Dr. Evans. Thank you. 

Mr. Morcan. Thank you. 

Mr. Gray. We now conclude this phase of the proceedings. I think that I have 
already indicated to Dr. Oppenheimer that if we require anything further, he 
will be notified. 

We are now in recess. 


THE DECISION 


The Personnel Security Board 
Reports, May 27 


GorDON GRAY AND THOMAS A. MorcAN: “We have .. . been un- 
able to arrive at the conclusion that it would be clearly consis- 
tent with the security interests of the United States to reinstate 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance” 


[When the hearing ended, the three members of the Personnel Security 
Board left for their respective homes for a much-needed rest. They returned 
to Washington on May 17 and ten days later presented their findings. All of 
them agreed that Oppenheimer was a loyal citizen, but Gordon Gray and 
Thomas A. Morgan nevertheless maintained that he was a security risk. In 
private correspondence, Gray was even less sympathetic to Oppenheimer 
than he was in the majority report. Asserting that he and Morgan had shown 
“restraint and compassion,” Gray admitted that he would more accurately 
have conveyed his feelings about Oppenheimer’s reliability if he had used a 
double negative: that is, rather than making the positive assertion that he 
was loyal, the majority should have said that they could not conclude that 
he was not loyal. The historian Barton Bernstein has examined this gap “be- 
tween the muddled but occasionally generous written opinion and the far 
more harsh private judgment reached by the majority.”] 


Mr. K. D. Nichols, 
General Marager, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 
1901 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington 25, D.C. 
Dear Mr. Nichols: 

On December 23, 1953, Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer was notified by letter 
that his security clearance had been suspended. He was furnished a list of 
items of derogatory information and was advised of his rights to a hearing 
under AEC procedures. On March 4, 1954, Dr. Oppenheimer requested that 
he be afforded a hearing. A hearing has been conducted by the Board ap- 
pointed by you for this purpose, and we submit our findings and recommen- 
dation. 


356 THE DECISION 


Dr. Ward V. Evans dissents from the recommendation of the majority of 
the Board, and his minority report is attached. He specifically subscribes to 
the “Findings” of the majority of the Board, and to a portion of the material 
entitled “Significance of the Findings.” 


INTRODUCTION 


It must be understood that in our world in which the survival of free insti- 
tutions and of individual rights is at stake, every person must in his own 
way be a guardian of the national security. It also must be clear that, in the 
exercise of this stewardship, individuals and institutions must protect, pre- 
serve, and defend those human values for which we exist as a nation, as a 
government, and as a way of life. 

The hard requirements of security, and the assertion of freedoms, together 
thrust upon us a dilemma, not easily resolved. In the present international 
situation, our security measures exist, in the ultimate analysis, to protect our 
free institutions and traditions against repressive totalitarianism and its in- 
evitable denial of human values. Thoughtful Americans find themselves un- 
easy, however, about those policies which must be adopted and those ac- 
tions which must be taken in the interests of national security, and which at 
the same time pose a threat to our ideals. This Board has been conscious of 
these conflicts, presenting as they do some of the grave problems of our 
times, and has sought to consider them in an atmosphere of decency and 
safety. 

We share the hope that some day we may return to happier times when 
our free institutions are not threatened and a peaceful and just world order 
is not such a compelling principal preoccupation. Then security will cease 
to be a central issue; man’s conduct as a citizen will be measured only in the 
terms of the requirements of our national society; there will be no undue re- 
straints upon freedom of mind and action; and loyalty and security as con- 
cepts will cease to have restrictive implications. 

This state of affairs seems not to be a matter of early hope. As we meet the 
present peril, and seek to overcome it, we must realize that at no time can 
the interests of the protection of all our people be less than paramount to all 
other considerations. Indeed, action which in some cases may seem to be a 
denial of the freedoms which our security barriers are erected to protect, 
may rather be a fulfillment of these freedoms. For, if in our zeal to protect 
our institutions against our measures to secure them, we lay them open to 
destruction, we will have lost them all, and will have gained only the empty 
satisfaction of a meaningless exercise. 

Weare acutely aware that in a very real sense this case puts the security 
system of the United States on trial, both as to procedures and as to sub- 
stance. This notion has been strongly urged upon us by those who recom- 
mended clearance for Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, and no doubt a similar 
view is taken by those who feel he should not be cleared. 

If we understand the two points of view, they may be stated as follows: 
There are those who apprehend that our program for security at this point in 


THE PERSONNEL SECURITY BOARD REPORTS 357 


history consists of an uneasy mixture of fear, prejudice, and arbitrary judg- 
ments. They feel that reason and fairness and justice have abdicated and 
their places have been taken by hysteria and repression. They, thus, believe 
that security procedures are necessarily without probity and that national 
sanity and balance can be served only by a finding in favor of the individual 
concerned. On the other hand, there is a strong belief that in recent times 
our government has been less than unyielding toward the problem of com- 
munism, and that loose and pliable attitudes regarding loyalty and security 
have prevailed to the danger of our society and its institutions. Thus, they 
feel that this proceeding presents the unrelinquishable opportunity for a 
demonstration against communism, almost regardless of the facts developed 
about the conduct and sympathies of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

We find ourselves in agreement with much that underlies both points of 
view. We believe that the people of our country can be reassured by this pro- 
ceeding that it is possible to conduct an investigation in calmness, in fair- 
ness, in disregard of public clamor and private pressures, and with dignity. 
We believe that it has been demonstrated that the Government can search its 
own soul and the soul of an individual whose relationship to his Govern- 
ment is in question with full protection of the rights and interests of both. 
We believe that loyalty and security can be examined within the frameworks 
of the traditional and inviolable principles of American justice. 

The Board approached its task in the spirit of inquiry, not that of a trial. 
The Board worked long and arduously. It has heard 40 witnesses including 
Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer and compiled over 3,000 pages of testimony in 
addition to having read the same amount of file material. 

Dr. Oppenheimer has been represented by counsel, usually four in num- 
ber, at all times in the course of the proceedings. He has confronted every 
witness appearing before the Board, with the privilege of cross-examination. 
He is familiar with the contents of every relevant document, which was 
made available to the Board, except those which under governmental neces- 
sity cannot be disclosed, such as reports of the Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion. He has, in his own words, received patient and courteous considera- 
tion at the hands of the Board. The Board has, in the words of his chief 
counsel, displayed fairness in the conduct of the hearings. And, finally, per- 
haps it should be said that the investigation has been conducted under the 
auspices of the responsible agency which has the obligation of decision. 

As it considered substance, the Board has allowed sympathetic considera- 
tion for the individual to go hand in hand with an understanding of the ne- 
cessities for a clear, realistic, and rugged attitude toward subversion, pos- 
sible subversion, or indeed broader implications of security. 

It was with all these considerations in mind that we approached our 
task. ... 


FINDINGS 
Significance of the findings of the Board 


The facts referred to in General Nichols’ letter fall clearly into two major 
areas of concern. The first of these, which is represented by items 1 through 


358 THE DECISION 


23, involves primarily Dr. Oppenheimer’s Communist connections in the 
earlier years and continued associations arising out of those connections. 

The second major area of concern is related to Dr. Oppenheimer’s atti- 
tudes and activities with respect to the development of the hydrogen bomb. 

The Board has found the allegations in the first part of the Commission 
letter to be substantially true, and attaches the following significance to the 
findings: There remains little doubt that, from late 1936 or early 1937 to 
probably April 1942, Dr. Oppenheimer was deeply involved with many 
people who were active Communists. The record would suggest that the in- 
volvement was something more than an intellectual and sympathetic inter- 
est in the professed aims of the Communist Party. Although Communist 
functionaries during this period considered Dr. Oppenheimer to be a Com- 
munist, there is no evidence that he was a member of the party in the strict 
sense of the word. 

Using Dr. Oppenheimer’s own characterization of his status during that 
period, he seems to have been an active fellow-traveler. According to him, 
his sympathies with the Communists seem to have begun to taper off some- 
what after 1939, and very much more so after 1942. However, it is not un- 
reasonable to conclude from material presented to this Board that Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s activities ceased as of about the time he executed his Personnel 
Security Questionnaire in April 1942. He seems to have had the view at that 
time and subsequently that current involvement with Communist activities 
was incompatible with service to the Government. However, it also would 
appear that he felt that former Communist Party membership was of little 
consequence if the individual concerned was personally trustworthy. 

Dr. Oppenheimer’s sympathetic interests seemed to have continued be- 
yond 1942 in a diluted and diminishing state until 1946, at which time we 
find the first affirmative action on his part which would indicate complete 
rejection. In October 1946, he tendered his resignation from the Indepen- 
dent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences, and Professions, Inc., and he 
now says it was at this time that he finally realized that he could not collab- 
orate with the Communists, whatever their aims and professed interests. We 
would prefer to have found an affirmative action at an earlier date. 

The Board takes a most serious view of these earlier involvements. Had 
they occurred in very recent years, we would have found them to be con- 
trolling and, in any event, they must be taken into account in evaluating 
subsequent conduct and attitudes. 

The facts before us establish a pattern of conduct falling within the fol- 
lowing Personnel Security Clearance criteria: Category A, including in- 
stances in which there are grounds sufficient to establish a reasonable belief 
that an individual or his spouse has (1) Committed or attempted to commit 
or aided or abetted another who committed or attempted to commit any act 
of sabotage, espionage, treason, or sedition. (2) Establish an association with 
espionage agents of a foreign nation * * * (3) Held membership or joined any 
organization which had been declared by the Attorney General to be * * * 
Communist, subversive * * * These criteria under the AEC procedures es- 
tablish a presumption of security risk. 


THE PERSONNEL SECURITY BOARD REPORTS 359 


The Board believes, however, that there is no indication of disloyalty on 
the part of Dr. Oppenheimer by reason of any present Communist affiliation, 
despite Dr. Oppenheimer’s poor judgment in continuing some of his past as- 
sociations into the present. Furthermore, the Board had before it eloquent 
and convincing testimony of Dr. Oppenheimer’s deep devotion to his coun- 
try in recent years and a multitude of evidence with respect to active service 
in all sorts of governmental undertakings to which he was repeatedly called 
as a participant and as a consultant. 

We feel that Dr. Oppenheimer is convinced that the earlier involvements 
were serious errors and today would consider them an indication of disloy- 
alty. The conclusion of this Board is that Dr. Oppenheimer is a loyal citizen. 

With respect to the second portion of General Nichols’ letter, the Board be- 
lieves that Dr. Oppenheimer’s opposition to the hydrogen bomb and his re- 
lated conduct in the postwar period until April 1951, involved no lack of 
loyalty to the United States or attachment to the Soviet Union. The Board 
was impressed by the fact that even those who were critical of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s judgment and activities or lack of activities, without exception, tes- 
tified to their belief in his loyalty. 

The Board concludes that any possible implications to the contrary which 
might have been read into the second part of General Nichols’ letter are not 
supported by any material which the Board has seen. 

The Board wishes to make clear that in attempting to arrive at its findings 
and their significance with respect to the hydrogen bomb, it has in no way 
sought to appraise the technical judgments of those who were concerned 
with the program. 

We cannot dismiss the matter of Dr. Oppenheimer’s relationship to the de- 
velopment of the hydrogen bomb simply with the finding that his conduct 
was not motivated by disloyalty, because it is our conclusion that, whatever 
the motivation, the security interests of the United States were affected. 

We believe that, had Dr. Oppenheimer given his enthusiastic support to 
the program, a concerted effort would have been initiated at an earlier date. 

Following the President’s decision, he did not show the enthusiastic sup- 
port for the program which might have been expected of the chief atomic ad- 
viser to the Government under the circumstances. Indeed, a failure to com- 
municate an abandonment of his earlier position undoubtedly had an effect 
upon other scientists. It is our feeling that Dr. Oppenheimer’s influence in 
the atomic scientific circles with respect to the hydrogen bomb was far 
greater than he would have led this Board to believe in his testimony before 
the Board. The Board has reluctantly concluded that Dr. Oppenheimer’s can- 
dor left much to be desired in his discussions with the Board of his attitude 
and position in the entire chronology of the hydrogen-bomb problem. 

We must make it clear that we do not question Dr. Oppenheimer’s right to 
the opinions he held with respect to the development of this weapon. They 
were shared by other competent and devoted individuals, both in and out of 
Government. We are willing to assume that they were motivated by deep 
moral conviction. We are concerned, however, that he may have departed 
his role as scientific adviser to exercise highly persuasive influence in mat- 


360 THE DECISION 


ters in which his convictions were not necessarily a reflection of technical 
judgment, and also not necessarily related to the protection of the strongest 
offensive military interests of the country. 

In the course of the proceedings, there developed other facts which raised 
questions of such serious import as to give us concern about whether the re- 
tention of Dr. Oppenheimer’s services would be clearly consistent with the 
security interests of the United States. 

It must be said that Dr. Oppenheimer seems to have had a high degree of 
discretion reflecting an unusual ability to keep to himself vital secrets. How- 
ever, we do find suggestions of a tendency to be coerced, or at least influ- 
enced in conduct over a period of years. 

By his own testimony, Dr. Oppenheimer was led to protest the induction 
into military service of Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz in 1943 by the outraged 
intercession of Dr. Condon. It is to be remembered that, at this time Dr. Op- 
penheimer knew of Lomanitz’s connections and of his indiscretions. In 
1949, Dr. Oppenheimer appeared in executive session before the House Un- 
American Activities Committee, and at that time was asked about his 
friend, Dr. Bernard Peters. Dr. Oppenheimer confirmed the substance of an 
interview with the security officer which took place during the war years 
and in which he had characterized Dr. Peters as a dangerous Red and for- 
mer Communist. This testimony soon appeared in the Rochester, N.Y., 
newspapers. At this time, Dr. Peters was on the staff of the University of 
Rochester. Dr. Oppenheimer, as a result of protestations by Dr. Condon, by 
Dr. Peters himself, and by other scientists, then wrote a letter for publica- 
tion to the Rochester newspaper, which, in effect, repudiated his testimony 
given in secret session. His testimony before this Board indicated that he 
failed to appreciate the great impropriety of making statements of one char- 
acter in a secret session and of a different character for publication, and that 
he believed that the important thing was to protect Dr. Peters’ professional 
status. In that episode, Dr. Condon’s letter, which has appeared in the press, 
contained a severe attack on Dr. Oppenheimer. Nevertheless, he now testi- 
fies that he is prepared to support Dr. Condon in the loyalty investigation of 
the latter. ... 

Whether the incidents referred to clearly indicate a susceptibility to influ- 
ence or coercion within the meaning of the criteria or whether they simply 
reflect very bad judgment, they clearly raise the question of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s understanding, acceptance, and enthusiastic support of the secu- 
rity system. Beginning with the Chevalier incident, he has repeatedly exer- 
cised an arrogance of his own judgment with respect to the loyalty and 
reliability of other citizens to an extent which has frustrated and at times im- 
peded the workings of the system. In an interview with agents of the FBI in 
1946, which in good part concerned itself with questions about Chevalier, 
when asked about a meeting which Dr. Oppenheimer had attended, at which 
Communists and Communist sympathizers were in attendance, he declined 
to discuss it on the ground that it was irrelevant, although the meeting itself 
was held in Chevalier’s home. In a subsequent interview, he declined to dis- 
cuss people he had known to be Communists. 


THE PERSONNEL SECURITY BOARD REPORTS 361 


Indeed, in the course of this proceeding, Dr. Oppenheimer recalled perti- 
nent details with respect to Communist meetings and with respect to indi- 
viduals with Communist connections, which he had never previously dis- 
closed in the many interviews with Government authorities, in spite of the 
fact that he had been interviewed regarding such matters. 

In 1946 or 1947, he assisted David Bohm in getting a position at Princeton 
and at least on a casual basis, continued his associations with Bohm after he 
had reason to know of Bohm’s security status. He testified that today he 
would give Bohm a letter of recommendation as a physicist, and, although 
not asked whether he would also raise questions about Bohm’s security sta- 
tus, he in no way indicated that this was a matter of serious import to him. 

While his meeting with Lomanitz and Bohm immediately prior to their 
appearance before the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1949, at 
which time both pleaded the fifth amendment, may have been a casual one 
as he testified, he nevertheless discussed with them their testimony before 
that committee. 

Moreover, his current associations with Dr. Chevalier, as discussed in de- 
tail in item No. 23, are, we believe, of a high degree of significance. It is not 
important to determine that Dr. Oppenheimer discussed with Chevalier mat- 
ters of concern to the security of the United States. What is important is that 
Chevalier’s Communist background and activities were known to Dr. Op- 
penheimer. While he says he believes Chevalier is not now a Communist, 
his association with him, on what could not be considered a casual basis, is 
not the kind of thing that our security system permits on the part of one who 
customarily has access to information of the highest classification. 

Loyalty to one’s friends is one of the noblest of qualities. Being loyal to 
one’s friends above reasonable obligations to the country and to the security 
system, however, is not clearly consistent with the interests of security. 

We are aware that in these instances Dr. Oppenheimer may have been sin- 
cere in his interpretation that the security interests of the country were not 
disserved; we must, however, take a most serious view of this kind of con- 
tinuing judgment. 

We are constrained to make a final comment about General Nichols’ letter. 
Unfortunately, in the press accounts in which the letter was printed in full, 
item No. 24, which consisted of 1 paragraph, was broken down into 4 para- 
graphs. Many thoughtful people, as a result, felt that the implication of one 
or more of these paragraphs as they appeared in the press standing alone 
was that the letter sought to initiate proceedings which would impugn a 
man on the ground of his holding and forcefully expressing strong opinions. 
It is regrettable that the language of the letter or the way in which it publicly 
appeared might have given any credence to such an interpretation. In any 
event, the Board wishes strongly to record its profound and positive view 
that no man should be tried for the expression of his opinions. 


RECOMMENDATION 


In arriving at our recommendation we have sought to address ourselves to 
the whole question before us and not to consider the problem as a fragmented 


362 THE DECISION 


one either in terms of specific criteria or in terms of any period in Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s life, or to consider loyalty, character, and associations separately. 

However, of course, the most serious finding which this Board could make 
as a result of these proceedings would be that of disloyalty on the part of Dr. 
Oppenheimer to his country. For that reason, we have given particular at- 
tention to the question of his loyalty, and we have come to a clear conclu- 
sion, which should be reassuring to the people of this country, that he is a 
loyal citizen. If this were the only consideration, therefore, we would rec- 
ommend that the reinstatement of his clearance would not be a danger to the 
common defense and security. 

We have, however, been unable to arrive at the conclusion that it would be 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to reinstate 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance and, therefore, do not so recommend. 

The following considerations have been controlling in leading us to our 
conclusion: 

1. We find that Dr. Oppenheimer’s continuing conduct and associations 
have reflected a serious disregard for the requirements of the security sys- 
tem. 

2. We have found a susceptibility to influence which could have serious 
implications for the security interests of the country. 

3. We find his conduct in the hydrogen-bomb program sufficiently dis- 
turbing as to raise a doubt as to whether his future participation, if charac- 
terized by the same attitudes in a Government program relating to the na- 
tional defense, would be clearly consistent with the best interests of security. 

4, We have regretfully concluded that Dr. Oppenheimer has been less 
than candid in several instances in his testimony before this Board. 

Respectfully submitted. 

Gordon Gray, Chairman. 
Thomas A. Morgan. 


Warp V. Evans: “Our failure to clear Dr. Oppenheimer will be 
a black mark on the escutcheon of our country” 


(Ironically, Ward V. Evans, the lone dissenter, had seemed throughout the 
course of the hearing to be the member of the board who was most hostile 
to Oppenheimer. When he returned to Washington from Chicago, however, 
Evans surprised Gray and Morgan by arguing in behalf of reinstating Oppen- 
heimer’s clearance, leading them, Robb, and Rolander to conclude, accord- 
ing to the FBI, that “someone had ‘gotten to’ him.” The first draft of Evans’s 
opinion was so poorly written that Gray feared it would embarrass the 
board, and so he asked Roger Robb to help rewrite it. That might account for 
its failure to address some of the more important arguments advanced by the 
majority.] 


Ward V. Evans, a member of the Personnel Security Board. Courtesy Northwestern University 
Archives. 


364 THE DECISION 


MINORITY REPORT OF DR. WARD V. EVANS 


I have reached the conclusion that Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer’s clearance 
should be reinstated and am submitting a minority report in accordance 
with AEC procedure. ... 

I am in perfect agreement with the majority report of its “findings” with 
respect to the allegations in Mr. Nichols’ letter... 

The derogatory information in this letter consisting of 24 items has all 
been substantiated except -for one item. This refers to a Communist meeting 
held in Dr. Oppenheimer’s home, which he is supposed to have attended. 

On the basis of this finding, the Board would have to say that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer should not be cleared. 

But this is not all. 

Most of this derogatory information was in the hands of the Commission 
when Dr. Oppenheimer was cleared in 1947. They apparently were aware of 
his associations and his left-wing policies; yet they cleared him. They tooka 
chance on him because of his special talents and he continued to do a good 
job. Now when the job is done, we are asked to investigate him for practi- 
cally the same derogatory information. He did his job in a thorough and 
painstaking manner. There is not the slightest vestige of information before 
this Board that would indicate that Dr. Oppenheimer is not a loyal citizen of 
his country. He hates Russia. He had communistic friends, it is true. He still 
has some. However, the evidence indicates that he has fewer of them than he 
had in 1947. He is not as naive as he was then. He has more judgment; no 
one on the Board doubts his loyalty—even the witnesses adverse to him 
admit that—and he is certainly less of a security risk than he was in 1947, 
when he was cleared. To deny him clearance now for what he was cleared 
for in 1947, when we must know he is less of a security risk now than he 
was then, seems to be hardly the procedure to be adopted in a free country. 

We don’t have to go out of our way and invent something to prove that the 
principle of “double jeopardy” does not apply here. This is not our function, 
and it is not our function to rewrite any clearance rules. The fact remains he 
is being investigated twice for the same things. Furthermore, we don’t have 
to dig deeply to find other ways that he may be a security risk outside of loy- 
alty, character, and association. He is loyal, we agree on that. There is, in my 
estimation, nothing wrong with his character. During the early years of his 
life, Dr. Oppenheimer devoted himself to study and did not vote or become 
interested in political matters until he was almost 30. Then, in his igno- 
rance, he embraced many subversive organizations. 

His judgment was bad in some cases, and most excellent in others but, in 
my estimation, it is better now than it was in 1947 and to damn him now 
and ruin his career and his service, I cannot do it. 

His statements in cross examination show him to be still naive, but ex- 
tremely honest and such statements work to his benefit in my estimation. 
All people are somewhat of a security risk. I don’t think we have to go out of 
our way to point out how this man might be a security risk. 

Dr. Oppenheimer in one place in his testimony said that he had told “a 


THE PERSONNEL SECURITY BOARD REPORTS 365 


tissue of lies.” What he had said was not a tissue of lies; there was one lie. 
He said on one occasion that he had not heard from Dr. Seaborg, when in 
fact he had a letter from Dr. Seaborg. In my opinion he had forgotten about 
the letter or he would never have made this statement for he would have 
known that the Government had the letter. I do not consider that he lied in 
this case. He stated that he would have recommended David Bohm as a 
physicist to Brazil, if asked. I think I would have recommended Bohm as a 
physicist. Dr. Oppenheimer was not asked if he would have added that 
Bohm was a Communist. In recent years he went to see Chevalier in Paris. I 
don’t like this, but I cannot condemn him on this ground. I don’t like his 
about face in the matter of Dr. Peters, but I don’t think it subversive or dis- 
loyal. 

He did not hinder the development of the H-bomb and there is absolutely 
nothing in the testimony to show that he did. 

First he was in favor of it in 1944. There is no indication that this opinion 
changed until 1945. After 1945 he did not favor it for some years perhaps on 
moral, political or technical grounds. Only time will prove whether he was 
wrong on the moral and political grounds. After the Presidential directive of 
January 31, 1950, he worked on this project. If his opposition to the H-bomb 
caused any people not to work on it, it was because of his intellectual promi- 
nence and influence over scientific people and not because of any subver- 
sive tendencies. 

I personally think that our failure to clear Dr. Oppenheimer will be a 
black mark on the escutcheon of our country. His witnesses are a consid- 
erable segment of the scientific backbone of our Nation and they endorse 
him. I am worried about the effect an improper decision may have on the 
scientific development in our country. Nuclear physics is new in our coun- 
try. Most of our authorities in this field came from overseas. They are with 
us now. Dr. Oppenheimer got most of his education abroad. We have taken 
hold of this new development in a very great way. There is no predicting 
where and how far it may go and what its future potentialities may be. I 
would very much regret any action to retard or hinder this new scientific 
development. 

I would like to add that this opinion was written before the Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists came out with its statement concerning the Oppenheimer 
case. 

This is my opinion as a citizen of a free country. 

I suggest that Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance be restored. 

Ward V. Evans. 


366 THE DECISION 


Lloyd K. Garrison’s 
Reply to Kenneth D. Nichols, 
June 1 


Luoyp K. GARRISON: “How can this be?” 


[Under normal circumstances, decisions regarding security clearance rested 
with the AEC’s general manager, Kenneth D. Nichols. But on May 18, the 
commissioners voted 3-2 to make the final determination in the Oppen- 
heimer case themselves. On May 28, Nichols forwarded the Personnel Secu- 
rity Board’s report to Oppenheimer, informing him of his right to request a 
review by the board and giving him twenty days in which to file a written 
brief. Otherwise, Nichols said, he would submit his own recommendation to 
the AEC. Fearing that further review would involve an unacceptable delay 
(or might render the case moot since Oppenheimer’s consultant’s contract 
would expire on June 30), Garrison, Oppenheimer, and Marks decided to 
dispense with an appeal to the board and to place the case squarely before 
the commissioners. Garrison’s request to present oral arguments to the com- 
missioners, however, was turned down; only a written brief could be filed. 
His letter to Nichols, Garrison recalled, presented “the major arguments 
which we were later to incorporate into the brief.” The letter received the 
backing of eighty-year-old John W. Davis, one of the most prominent attor- 
neys in the nation, who had been the Democratic candidate for president in 
1924, and who would have represented Oppenheimer at the hearing if the 
AEC had been willing to hold it in New York City rather than in Washington, 
D.C.] 


Dear General Nichols: 

Dr. Oppenheimer has received your letter of May 28, 1954, in which you en- 
closed a copy of the “Findings and Recommendation of the Personnel Secu- 
rity Board” dated May 27. In this document the Board unanimously found 
that Dr. Oppenheimer was a loyal citizen, but by a 2 to 1 vote, Dr. Ward V. 
Evans dissenting, recommended that Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance should 
not be reinstated. Dr. Oppenheimer has asked me to send you this reply on 
his behalf... . 

To begin with, the majority’s conclusion not to recommend the reinstate- 
ment of Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance stands in such stark contrast with the 
Board’s findings regarding Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty and discretion as to 
raise doubts about the process of reasoning by which the conclusion was ar- 
rived at. All members of the Board agreed: 

(1) That the Nation owed scientists “a great debt of gratitude for loyal and 


LLOYD K. GARRISON’S REPLY TO KENNETH D. NICHOLS 367 


magnificent service” and that “This is particularly true with respect to Dr. 
Oppenheimer.” 

(2) That “we have before us much responsible and positive evidence of 
the loyalty and love of country of the individual concerned,” and “eloquent 
and convincing testimony of Dr. Oppenheimer’s deep devotion to his coun- 
try in recent years and a multitude of evidence with respect to active service 
in all sorts of governmental undertakings to which he was repeatedly called 
as a participant and as a consultant.” 

(3) That “even those who were critical of Dr. Oppenheimer’s judgment 
and activities or lack of activities, without exception, testified to their belief 
in his loyalty.” 

(4) That “we have given particular attention to the question of his loyalty, 
and we have come to a clear conclusion, which should be reassuring to the 
people of this country, that he is a loyal citizen. If this were the only consid- 
eration, therefore, we would recommend that the reinstatement of his clear- 
ance would not be a danger to the common defense and security.” 

(5) That “It must be said that Dr. Oppenheimer seems to have had a high 
degree of discretion reflecting an unusual ability to keep to himself vital se- 
crets.” 

In spite of these findings of loyalty and of discretion in the handling of 
classified data, the majority of the Board reached the conclusion that Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s clearance should not be reinstated. How can this be? The ma- 
jority advanced four considerations as controlling in leading them to their 
conclusion. 

The first two—an alleged “serious disregard for the requirements of the se- 
curity system,” and an alleged “susceptibility to influence”’—rest upon an 
appraisal of the evidence which we do not think is justified by the record. 
Taking sharp issue, as we do, with the majority’s treatment of the incidents 
cited in support of these two considerations, we cannot undertake here to re- 
view the detailed evidence, but propose to do so in the brief. .. . 

The third and fourth considerations advanced by the majority for con- 
cluding that Dr. Oppenheimer was a “security risk” warrant more extended 
comment here. 

The third item—Dr. Oppenheimer’s “conduct in the hydrogen bomb pro- 
gram,” characterized as “disturbing”—and the fourth—alleged “lack of can- 
dor” in several instances in his testimony—require discussion, because they 
involve questions of policy and procedure which we wish particularly to 
draw to the Commission’s attention in a preliminary way. 

In the case of the third consideration—Dr. Oppenheimer’s so-called dis- 
turbing conduct in the hydrogen bomb program—the Board’s unanimous 
findings of fact again stand in stark contrast with the conclusion of the ma- 
jority. Thus the Board unanimously found: 

(1) That Dr. Oppenheimer’s opposition to the H-bomb program “involved 
no lack of loyalty to the United States or attachment to the Soviet Union.” 

(2) That his opinions regarding the development of the H-bomb “were 
shared by other competent and devoted individuals, both in and out of Gov- 
ernment.” 


368 THE DECISION 


(3) That it could be assumed that these opinions “were motivated by deep 
moral conviction.” 

(4) That after the national policy to proceed with the development of the 
H-bomb had been determined in January 1950, he “did not oppose the proj- 
ect in a positive or open manner, nor did he decline to cooperate in the 
project.” 

(5) That the allegations that he urged other scientists not to work on the 
hydrogen bomb program were unfounded. 

(6) That he did not, as alleged, distribute copies of the General Advisory 
Report to key personnel with a view to turning them against the project, but 
that on the contrary this distribution was made at the Commission’s own di- 
rection. 

In short, all the basic allegations set forth in General Nichols’ letter to Dr. 
Oppenheimer on December 23, 1953, regarding any improper action by him 
in the H-bomb problem were disproved. 

In the face of these unanimous findings, the majority then conclude that 
“the security interests of the United States were affected” by Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s attitude toward the hydrogen bomb program. Why? Because, ac- 
cording to the majority of the Board: 

“We believe that, had Dr. Oppenheimer given his enthusiastic support to 
the program, a concerted effort would have been initiated at an earlier date. 

“Following the President’s decision, he did not show the enthusiastic 
support for the program which might have been expected of the chief atomic 
adviser to the Government under the circumstances. Indeed, a failure to 
communicate an abandonment of his earlier position undoubtedly had an 
effect upon other scientists.” 

Without taking into account the factual evidence, which in our opinion 
should have led the Board to an opposite conclusion, we submit that the in- 
jection into a security case of a scientist’s alleged lack of enthusiasm for a 
particular program is fraught with grave consequences to this country. How 
can a scientist risk advising the Government if he is told that at some later 
day a security board may weigh in the balance the degree of his enthusiasm 
for some official program? Or that he may be held accountable for a failure to 
communicate to the scientific community his full acceptance of such a pro- 
gram?... 

As to the majority’s comments about Dr. Oppenheimer’s alleged lack of 
“candor” in “several instances in his testimony,” we shall ask the Commis- 
sion to take special note of the observations in Dr. Evans’ minority opinion 
that while Dr. Oppenheimer’s “statements in cross-examination show him to 
be still naive,” they also show him to be “extremely honest and such state- 
ments work to his benefit in my estimation” and that while “his judgment 
was bad in some cases” it was “most excellent in others but it is better now 
than it was in 1947,” when the Atomic Energy Commission unanimously 
cleared him..... 

We wish to make two more observations of a general character. 

First, we trust that the Commission in weighing the evidence, including 


LLOYD K. GARRISON’S REPLY TO KENNETH D. NICHOLS 369 


the instances of alleged lack of candor, will take into account certain proce- 
dural difficulties which beset the presentation of Dr. Oppenheimer’s case. 
Weeks before the hearing commenced we asked you and the Commission’s 
general counsel for much information which we thought relevant to our case 
but which was denied us—documents and minutes concerning Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s 1947 clearance and a variety of other material. Much of this infor- 
mation did come out in the hearings but usually only in the course of cross- 
examination when calculated to cause the maximum surprise and confusion 
and too late to assist us in the orderly presentation of our case. Some of the 
information which was denied to us before the hearing was declassified at 
the moment of cross-examination or shortly before and was made available 
to us only during cross-examination or after. 

It is true that Dr. Oppenheimer was accorded the privilege of reexamining, 
prior to the hearings, reports and other material in the preparation of which 
he had participated. But he was not given access to the broad range of mate- 
rial actually used and disclosed for the first time at the hearings by the Com- 
mission’s special counsel who had been retained for the case. And of course 
Dr. Oppenheimer was not given access to the various documents which, ac- 
cording to the Board’s report “under governmental necessity cannot be dis- 
closed, such as reports of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.” 

The voluminous nature of this undisclosed material appears from the 
Board’s report. It notes that in our hearings the Board heard 40 witnesses 
and compiled over 3,000 pages of testimony; and we then learn from the re- 
port that “in addition” the Board has “read the same amount of file mate- 
rial.” We can only speculate as to the contents of this “file material.” We can- 
not avoid the further speculation as to how much of this material might have 
been disclosed to Dr. Oppenheimer in the interests of justice without any 
real injury to the security interests of the Government if established rules of 
exclusion, which the Board felt bound to apply and we to accept, had not 
stood in the way. 

Having in mind the difficulties and handicaps which have been recounted 
above, we urge upon the Commission as strongly as possible the following: 

(1) That in weighing the testimony, and particularly those portions where 
documents were produced on cross-examination in the manner described 
above, the Commission should constantly bear in mind how, under such cir- 
cumstances, the natural fallibility of memory may easily be mistaken for 
disingenuousness; 

(2) That in the consideration of documentary material not disclosed to Dr. 
Oppenheimer, the Commission should be ever conscious of the unreliability 
of ex parte reports which have never been seen by Dr. Oppenheimer or his 
counsel or tested by cross-examination; and 

(3) That if in the course of the Commission’s deliberations the Commis- 
sion should conclude that any hitherto undisclosed documents upon which 
it intends to rely may be disclosed to us without injury to what may be 
thought to be overriding interests of the National Government, they should 
be so disclosed before any final decision is made. 


370 THE DECISION 


Our final observation has to do with the general structure of the Board’s 
report, and with what has been omitted from it which we feel the Commis- 
sion should put in the forefront of its consideration if it is to view this case 
in anything like the true perspective of history—a history through which Dr. 
Oppenheimer has lived and which in part he has helped to create. 

The Board’s opinion, as required by the AEC Procedures, makes specific 
findings on each allegation of “derogatory information” contained in your 
letter of December 23, 1953. These findings, which are placed at the begin- 
ning of the report, are not thereafter, except in Dr. Evans’ dissenting opinion, 
considered in the context of Dr. Oppenheimer’s life as a whole. Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s letter to you of March 4, 1954, in answer to yours of December 23, 
1953, stated at the outset that “the items of so-called ‘derogatory informa- 
tion’ set forth in your letter cannot fairly be understood except in the context 
of my life and work.” 

In his letter Dr. Oppenheimer tried to describe the derogatory information 
about him in that context. There is, in fact, little in the Board’s findings that 
did not appear from what Dr. Oppenheimer volunteered about himself in his 
original letter to you. Over and above that, he gave a picture of his life and 
times without which the items of derogatory information cannot fairly be 
understood—a picture to which many witnesses added who had known him 
intimately and had worked side by side with him in the positions of high re- 
sponsibility which the Government, first in war and then in peace and then 
in the cold war, successively devolved upon him. This picture, which is 
glimpsed in Dr. Evans’ vivid opinion, does not appear at all in the main 
body of the report, nor is any mention made of the many witnesses who tes- 
tified at his behest... . 

The witnesses included 10 former and present members of the General 
Advisory Committee, and 5 former Atomic Energy Commissioners. .. . 

Because we believe that the “man himself” can only be understood, and 
therefore fairly judged, by the closest attention to the testimony of those who 
have known him and worked intimately with him, as well as to his own tes- 
timony, we are particularly hopeful that the Commission will permit us to 
file a brief and to be heard. 

In closing this letter we wish to record our appreciation of the patience 
and consideration accorded to Dr. Oppenheimer and his counsel by Mr. 
Gray, Mr. Morgan and Dr. Evans throughout the nearly 4 weeks of hearings, 
and our recognition of the sacrifices which they made in the public interest 
in assuming the long and arduous task assigned to them. 

Mr. John W. Davis has authorized me to say that he joins in this letter and 
will join in the brief. 

Very truly yours, 

Lloyd K. Garrison. 


KENNETH D. NICHOLS’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE AEC 371 


Kenneth D. Nichols’s 
Recommendations to the AEC, 
June 12 


KENNETH D. NicHots: “I have given consideration to the nature 
of the cold war . . . and the horrible prospects of hydrogen 
bomb warfare if all-out war should be forced upon us” 


[Kenneth D. Nichols, the general manager of the AEC, had written the origi- 
nal letter informing Oppenheimer of the charges against him, and now he 
would recommend a course of action to the commissioners. A graduate of 
West Point, Nichols had obtained a doctorate in hydraulic engineering at the 
State University of lowa, and returned to teach at the military academy. Dur- 
ing the war he served as district engineer for the Manhattan Project. Al- 
though stationed at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, he reported to General Groves 
and became acquainted with Oppenheimer. He later became a consultant to 
the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, and, in 1953, general manager. On 
June 3, he informed Garrison that the AEC would accept a written brief, but 
it “does not feel that it can accede to your suggestion that there be oral argu- 
ment as well.” Garrison assumed that Nichols would simply forward the Per- 
sonnel Security Board's findings to the AEC, along with a recommendation. 
But that is not what happened. 

Instead, on June 12, Nichols submitted a confidential report that radi- 
cally altered the grounds for denying Oppenheimer’s clearance. Nichols 
omitted all the allegations concerning the hydrogen bomb, but now intro- 
duced the question of “veracity,” raising issues that had neither been in- 
cluded in his original “indictment” nor discussed by the Gray panel. To 
Nichols, Oppenheimer’s continued friendship with Haakon Chevalier was 
particularly ominous. “The non-charitable view is this,” he told the com- 
missioners in a briefing, “why would Oppenheimer of his own initiative 
come here to Washington . . . to get a briefing on weapons, go out to Los 
Alamos on a briefing of weapons, just prior to going to Paris to see Cheva- 
lier?” Oppenheimer’s attorneys had no opportunity to read Nichols’s letter, 
much less respond to the new charges, before the AEC rendered its deci- 
sion.] 


United States Atomic Energy Commission, 

Washington 25, D.C., June 12, 1954 

Memorandum for: Mr. Strauss, Dr. Smyth, Mr. Murray, Mr. Zuckert, Mr. Campbell. 
Subject: Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer... . 


372 THE DECISION 


FACTORS CONSIDERED 


In making my findings and determination I have considered the question 
whether a security risk is involved in continued clearance of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer I have taken into account his contributions to the United States 
atomic energy program and in addition I have, in accordance with AEC pro- 
cedures, considered the effect which denial of security clearance would 
have upon the program.... 


SECURITY FINDINGS 


I have reviewed the entire record of the case, including the files, the tran- 
script of the hearing, the findings and recommendation of the Personnel Se- 
curity Board, and the briefs filed by Dr. Oppenheimer’s attorneys on May 17, 
1954, and June 7, 1954, and have reached the conclusion that to reinstate the 
security clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer would not be clearly consistent with 
the interests of national security and would endanger the common defense 
and security. 

I concur with the findings and recommendation of the majority of the Per- 
sonnel Security Board and submit them in support of this memorandum. In 
addition, I refer in particular to the following considerations: 

1. Dr. Oppenheimer’s Communist activities—The record contains no di- 
rect evidence that Dr. Oppenheimer gave secrets to a foreign nation or that 
he is disloyal to the United States. However, the record does contain sub- 
stantial evidence of Dr. Oppenheimer’s association with Communists, Com- 
munist functionaries, and Communists who did engage in espionage. He 
was not a mere “parlor pink” or student of communism as a result of imma- 
turity and intellectual curiosity, but was deeply and consciously involved 
with hardened and militant Communists at a time when he was a man of 
mature judgment. 

His relations with these hardened Communists were such that they con- 
sidered him to be one of their number. He admits that he was a fellow trav- 
eler, and that he made substantial cash contributions direct to the Commu- 
nist Party over a period of 4 years ending in 1942. The record indicates that 
Dr. Oppenheimer was a Communist in every respect except for the fact that 
he did not carry a party card. 

These facts raise serious questions as to Dr. Oppenheimer’s eligibility for 
clearance reinstatement. 

It is suggested that Dr. Oppenheimer has admitted many of the facts con- 
cerning his past association with Communists and the Communist Party. 
Whether this be true or not, it appears to me that Dr. Oppenheimer’s admis- 
sions in too many cases have followed, rather than preceded, investigation 
which developed the facts. It appears that he is not inclined to disclose the 
facts spontaneously, but merely to confirm those already known. I find no 
great virtue in such a plea of guilt; certainly it does not cause me to dismiss 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s past associations as matters of no consequence simply on 
the ground that he has admitted them. 

2. The Chevalier incident—Dr. Oppenheimer’s involvement in the 


KENNETH D. NICHOLS’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE AEC 373 


Chevalier incident, and his subsequent conduct with respect to it, raise 
grave questions of security import. 

If in 1943, as he now claims to have done, he knowingly and willfully 
made false statements to Colonel Pash, a Federal officer, Dr. Oppenheimer 
violated what was then section 80, title 18, of the United States Code [18 
U.S. Code, sec. 80, provides in pertinent part: “Whoever * * * shall know- 
ingly or willfully falsify or conceal or cover up by any trick, scheme, or de- 
vice a material fact, or make or cause to be made any false or fraudulent 
statement or representations * * * in any matter within the jurisdiction or 
agency of the United States * * * shall be fined not more than $10,000 or im- 
prisoned not more than 10 years, or both.”] in other words if his present 
story is true then he admits he committed a felony in 1943. On the other 
hand, as Dr. Oppenheimer admitted on cross-examination, if the story Dr. 
Oppenheimer told Colonel Pash was true, it not only showed that Chevalier 
was involved in a criminal espionage conspiracy, but also reflected seriously 
on Dr. Oppenheimer himself. 

After reviewing both the 16-page transcript (as accepted by the Board) of 
the interview between Dr. Oppenheimer and Colonel Pash on August 26, 
1943, and recent testimony before the Board, it is difficult to conclude that 
the detailed and circumstantial account given by Dr. Oppenheimer to 
Colonel Pash was false and that the story now told by Dr. Oppenheimer is an 
honest one. Dr. Oppenheimer’s story in 1943 was most damaging to Cheva- 
lier. If Chevalier was Dr. Oppenheimer’s friend and Dr. Oppenheimer, as he 
now says, believed Chevalier to be innocent and wanted to protect him, why 
then would he tell such a complicated false story to Colonel Pash? This 
story showed that Chevalier was not innocent, but on the contrary was 
deeply involved in an espionage conspiracy. By the same token, why would 
Dr. Oppenheimer tell a false story to Colonel Pash which showed that he 
himself was not blameless? Is it reasonable to believe a man will deliberately 
tell a lie that seriously reflects upon himself and his friend, when he knows 
that the truth will show them both to be innocent? 

It is important to remember also that Dr. Oppenheimer did not give his 
present version of the story until 1946, shortly after he had learned from 
Chevalier what Chevalier himself had told the FBI about the incident in 
question. After learning of this from Chevalier, Dr. Oppenheimer changed 
his story to conform to that given to the FBI by Chevalier. 

From all of these facts and circumstances, it is a fair inference that Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s story to Colonel Pash and other Manhattan District officials was 
substantially true and that his later statement on the subject to the FBI, and 
his recent testimony before the Personnel Security Board, were false... . 

In my opinion, Dr. Oppenheimer’s behavior in connection with the Cheva- 
lier incident shows that he is not reliable or trustworthy; his own testimony 
shows that he was guilty of deliberate misrepresentations and falsifications 
either in his interview with Colonel Pash or in his testimony before the 
Board; and such misrepresentations and falsifications constituted [“]crimi- 
nal, ... dishonest... conduct.[”] 

Further, the significance of the Chevalier incident combined with Dr. Op- 


374 THE DECISION 


penheimer’s conflicting testimony from 1943 to 1954 in regard to it were not, 
of course, available in whole to General Groves in 1943, nor was the com- 
plete record on the Chevalier incident considered by the Atomic Energy 
Commission in 1947. Consideration of the complete record plus a cross- 
examination of Dr. Oppenheimer under oath were not accomplished by any- 
one prior to the personnel Security Board hearing in 1954. 

3. Dr. Oppenheimer’s veracity—A review of the record reveals other in- 
stances which raise a question as to the credibility of Dr. Oppenheimer in 
his appearance before the Personnel Security Board and as to his character 
and veracity in general. 

(a) The record suggests a lack of frankness on the part of Dr. Oppenheimer 
in his interviews with the FBI. It appears that during this hearing he recol- 
lected details concerning Communist meetings in the San Francisco area 
which he did not report in previous interviews with the FBI. 

(b) Dr. Oppenheimer told the FBI in 1950 that he did not know that 
Joseph Weinberg was a Communist until it became a matter of public knowl- 
edge. When confronted with the transcript of his interview with Colonel 
Lansdale on September 12, 1943, he admitted that he had learned prior to 
that date that Weinberg was a Communist. 

(c) It is clear from the record that Dr. Oppenheimer was a great deal more 
active in urging the deferment of Rossi Lomanitz and his retention on the 
atom bomb project than he said he was in his answer to my letter of Decem- 
ber 23, 1953. Furthermore, Dr. Oppenheimer testified that if he had known 
that Lomanitz was a Communist he would not have written the letter to 
Colonel Lansdale of the Manhattan District on October 19, 1943, supporting 
Lomanitz’ services for the project. However, the record reflects that Dr. Op- 
penheimer told Colonel Lansdale of the Manhattan District on September 
12, 1943, that he had learned that Lomanitz was a Communist. 

(d) Dr. Oppenheimer admitted in his testimony before the Board that in 
1949 he wrote a letter to a newspaper which might have misled the public 
concerning his testimony before the House Un-American Activities Commit- 
tee on Dr. Bernard Peters. He testified that an earlier article in the newspaper 
which summarized his testimony was accurate, yet the effect of his pub- 
lished letter was to repudiate the earlier article. 

(e) Dr. Oppenheimer in his answer to my letter of December 23, 1953, and 
in his testimony before the Board with respect to the H-bomb program un- 
dertook to give the impression that in 1949 he and the GAC merely opposed 
a so-called “crash” program. It is quite clear from the record, however, that 
the position of the majority of the GAC, including Dr. Oppenheimer, was 
that a thermonuclear weapon should never be produced, and that the United 
States should make an unqualified commitment to this effect. In discussing 
the building of neutron-producing reactors, a majority of the GAC, including 
Dr. Oppenheimer, expressed the opinion that “the super program itself 
should not be undertaken and that the Commission and its contractors un- 
derstand that construction of neutron-producing reactors is not intended as 
a step in the super program.” The testimony of Dr. Oppenheimer viewed in 
light of the actual record certainly furnished adequate basis for the majority 


KENNETH D. NICHOLS’S RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE AEC 375 


of the Board not believing that Dr. Oppenheimer was entirely candid with 
them on this point. 

(f) Dr. Oppenheimer testified before the Board that the GAC was unani- 
mous in its basic position on the H-bomb. He specifically said that Dr. 
Seaborg had not expressed his views and that there was no communication 
with him. It should be noted that the statement that “there was no commu- 
nication with him” was volunteered by Dr. Oppenheimer in his testimony 
on cross-examination before the Board. However, Dr. Oppenheimer received 
a letter from Dr. Seaborg, expressing his views, prior to the October 29, 1949, 
GAC meeting. 

4. Dr. Oppenheimer’s continued associations after World War II.—Dr. Op- 
penheimer has continued associations which raise a serious question as to 
his eligibility for clearance. He has associated with Chevalier on a rather in- 
timate basis as recently as December 1953, and at that time lent his name to 
Chevalier’s dealings with the United States Embassy in Paris on a problem 
which, according to Dr. Oppenheimer, involved Chevalier’s clearance. Since 
the end of World War II he has been in touch with Bernard Peters, Rossi Lo- 
manitz, and David Bohm under circumstances which, to say the least, are 
disturbing. 

5. Obstruction and disregard of security—Dr. Oppenheimer’s actions 
have shown a consistent disregard of a reasonable security system. In addi- 
tion to the Chevalier incident, he has refused to answer questions put to 
him by security officers concerning his relationships and knowledge of par- 
ticular individuals whom he knew to be Communists; and he has repeatedly 
exercised an arrogance of his own judgment with respect to the loyalty and 
reliability of his associates and his own conduct which is wholly inconsis- 
tent with the obligations necessarily imposed by an adequate security sys- 
tem on those who occupy high positions of trust and responsibility in the 
Government. 


FINDING OF SECURITY RISK IS NOT BASED ON 
DR. OPPENHEIMER’S OPINIONS 


Upon the foregoing considerations relating to the character and associa- 
tions of Dr. Oppenheimer, I find that he is a security risk. In making this 
finding I wish to comment on the item of derogatory information contained 
in my letter of December 23, 1953, which relates to the hydrogen bomb... 

It should be emphasized that at no time has there been any intention on 
my part or the Board’s to draw in question any honest opinion expressed by 
Dr. Oppenheimer. Technical opinions have no security implications unless 
they are reflections of sinister motives. However, in view of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s record coupled with the preceding allegation concerning him, it 
was necessary to submit this matter for the consideration of the Personnel 
Security Board in order that the good faith of his technical opinions might 
be determined. The Board found that, following the President’s decision, Dr. 
Oppenheimer did not show the enthusiastic support for the program which 
might have been expected of the chief atomic adviser to the Government 


376 THE DECISION 


under the circumstances; that, had he given his enthusiastic support to the 
program, a concerted effort would have been initiated at an earlier date, and 
that, whatever the motivation, the security interests of the United States 
were affected. In reviewing the record I find that the evidence establishes no 
sinister motives on the part of Dr. Oppenheimer in his attitude on the hy- 
drogen bomb, either before or after the President’s decision. I have consid- 
ered the testimony and the record on this subject only as evidence bearing 
upon Dr. Oppenheimer’s veracity. In this context I find that such evidence is 
disturbing. ... 


CONCLUSION 


I have conscientiously weighed the record of Dr. Oppenheimer’s whole 
life, his past contributions, and his potential future contributions to the 
Nation against the security risk that is involved in his continued clearance. 
In addition, I have given consideration to the nature of the cold war in 
which we are engaged with communism and Communist Russia and the 
horrible prospects of hydrogen bomb warfare if all-out war should be 
forced upon us. From these things a need results to eliminate from classi- 
fied work any individuals who might endanger the common defense or se- 
curity or whose retention is not clearly consistent with the interests of na- 
tional security. 

Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance should not be reinstated. 

K. D. Nichols, 
General Manager 


Publishing the Transcript, June 
13-15 


On June 1, Lloyd K. Garrison had released to the press the texts of the Per- 
sonnel Security Board’s majority and dissenting reports, and his letter to Ken- 
neth D. Nichols defending Oppenheimer. Garrison’s associate Allen Ecker had 
provided reporters with a covering memorandum that highlighted the Board’s 
comments that were most favorable to Oppenheimer. All of this infuriated 
AEC chairman Lewis L. Strauss who thought that Oppenheimer and his attor- 
neys were maneuvering to swing public opinion to their side. He also imag- 
ined that Oppenheimer might selectively release those portions of the actual 
transcript of the hearing that made him look good. But Strauss knew from FBI 
reports that Oppenheimer’s attorneys feared that publication of the entire 
transcript, not just selective portions, would damage their case. So Strauss 
wanted very much to find some way to publish the full transcript. The stum- 
bling block was that Gordon Gray had promised all the witnesses that their 


PUBLISHING THE TRANSCRIPT 377 


testimony, in accordance with AEC regulations, would be kept strictly confi- 
dential. 

There then ensued a most remarkable series of events. On Friday, June 11, 
AEC commissioner Eugene M. Zuckert left Washington for his home in 
Stamford, Connecticut. He had with him a staff document, 241 pages in 
length, that summarized the most important events in the case and included 
pertinent excerpts from the testimony. He thought he placed the document 
in his briefcase when he got off the train, but on Saturday morning, when he 
looked for it, he realized he had left it by mistake under his seat. He imme- 
diately informed the AEC of what had happened, and the FBI began a search 
for the missing document. Fearing the worst, the commissioners convened 
for an emergency meeting on Saturday night, June 12. Strauss argued that 
the integrity of the hearing had been compromised, that selected portions 
might appear in the press, and that the AEC should make it public as 
quickly as possible. Two of the commissioners, however, opposed immedi- 
ate action on the grounds that the witnesses had been promised confiden- 
tiality. 

The commissioners adjourned at midnight, and forty-five minutes later the 
FBI learned from its office in Boston that the document had been safely recov- 


President Eisenhower and Lewis L. Strauss, March 1954. National Park Service, courtesy 
Dwight D. Eisenhower Library. 


378 THE DECISION 


ered. The New York, New Haven, and Hartford train on which Zuckert was 
traveling had continued on to Boston, where, at 6:00 a.M. on Saturday morn- 
ing, an attendant had found the package and turned it into the lost-and-found 
office. There it remained until midnight, when various urgent, not to say fren- 
zied, inquiries, finally turned it up. The folder, marked confidential, was held 
for the arrival of an AEC official who flew to Boston on Sunday, June 13, and 
carried it safely back to Washington. 

So on Monday, June 14, when the commissioners again met to discuss pub- 
lication, there was exactly no risk that any portion of the transcript had fallen 
into unauthorized hands. But they nevertheless voted four to one in favor of 
publication. Only Henry De Wolf Smyth opposed publishing the testimony. 
The others accepted Strauss’s argument that releasing it would set the record 
straight and correct the distorted picture Oppenheimer’s lawyers had created 
when they gave out the Personnel Security Board’s verdict and their own 
reply. Nichols, Mitchell, and Rolander then spent most of Monday and Tues- 
day on the telephone, notifying as many witnesses as they could reach that 
the transcript was about to be released. 

Meanwhile, the Government Printing Office struggled to get the text of the 
transcript—comprising three thousand typewritten pages or three-quarters of 
a million words—into print. By 6:00 P.M. on Tuesday, June 15, the book was 
ready, and it was made available to the press, to be released to the public at 
noon on Wednesday. 


Decision and Opinions of the AEC, 
June 29 


Lewis L. Strauss: “We find Dr. Oppenheimer is not entitled to 
the continued confidence of the Government . . . because of 
the proof of fundamental defects in his ‘character’ ” 


[Lewis L. Strauss began his career in public life in 1917, when, at the age of 
21, he became an assistant to U.S. food administrator Herbert Hoover. After- 
ward, he joined Kuhn, Loeb & Co., an international banking firm, and dur- 
ing World War II he worked for the navy’s Bureau of Ordinance. In 1954, 
Strauss was serving his second term on the Atomic Energy Commission. First 
appointed by Harry S. Truman in 1946, he served until 1950; he was made 
chairman by Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1953. From the beginning, Strauss 
worried about what he regarded as lax security procedures, and in 1949 he 
strongly advocated the development of thermonuclear weapons. His major- 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 379 


ity opinion, which two other commissioners signed, is noteworthy not only 
for what it says but also for what it fails to say: unlike both Gordon Gray and 
Kenneth D. Nichols, Strauss barely mentions Oppenheimer’s many years of 
valuable service to his country. The historians Richard G. Hewlett and Jack 
M. Holl have concluded: “The Commission’s decision read like a judgment 
in a criminal case demanding punishment for misconduct in the past rather 
than a security evaluation predicting Oppenheimer’s future behavior, based 
upon all relevant data.”] 


The Atomic Energy Commission announced today that it had reached a de- 
cision in the matter of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer. 

The Commission by a vote of 4 to 1 decided that Dr. Oppenheimer should 
be denied access to restricted data. Commissioners Strauss, Murray, Zuckert, 
and Campbell voted to deny clearance for access to restricted data, and Com- 
missioner Smyth voted to reinstate clearance for access to restricted data. 
Messrs. Strauss, Zuckert, and Campbell signed the majority opinion; Mr. Mur- 
ray concurred with the majority decision in a separate opinion. Dr. Smyth 
supported his conclusion in a minority opinion. 

Certain members of the Commission issued additional statements in sup- 
port of their conclusions. These opinions and statements are attached. 


United States Atomic Energy Commission, 
Washington 25, D.C., June 29, 1954. 

The issue before the Commission is whether the security of the United 
States warrants Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer’s continued access to restricted 
data of the Atomic Energy Commission. The data to which Dr. Oppenheimer 
has had until recently full access include some of the most vital secrets in the 
possession of the United States. 

Having carefully studied the pertinent documents—the transcript of the 
hearings before the Personnel Security Board (Gray Board), the findings and 
recommendation of the Board, the briefs of Dr. Oppenheimer’s counsel, and 
the findings and recommendation of the General Manager—we have con- 
cluded that Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance for access to restricted data should 
not be reinstated. 

The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 lays upon the Commissioners the duty to 
reach a determination as to “the character, associations, and loyalty” of the in- 
dividuals engaged in the work of the Commission. Thus, disloyalty would be 
one basis for disqualification, but it is only one. Substantial defects of charac- 
ter and imprudent and dangerous associations, particularly with known sub- 
versives who place the interests of foreign powers above those of the United 
States, are also reasons for disqualification. 

On the basis of the record before the Commission, comprising the transcript 
of the hearing before the Gray Board as well as reports of Military Intelligence 


380 THE DECISION 


and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, we find Dr. Oppenheimer is not enti- 
tled to the continued confidence of the Government and of this Commission 
because of the proof of fundamental defects in his “character.” 

In respect to the criterion of “associations,” we find that his associations 
with persons known to him to be Communists have extended far beyond the 
tolerable limits of prudence and self-restraint which are to be expected of one 
holding the high positions that the Government has continuously entrusted to 
him since 1942. These associations have lasted too long to be justified as 
merely the intermittent and accidental revival of earlier friendships. 

Neither in the deliberations by the full Commission nor in the review of the 
Gray Board was importance attached to the opinions of Dr. Oppenheimer as 
they bore upon the 1949 debate within the Government on the question of 
whether the United States should proceed with the thermonuclear weapon 
program. In this debate, Dr. Oppenheimer was, of course, entitled to his opin- 
ion. 

The fundamental issues here are apart from and beyond this episode. ... 

In weighing the matter at issue, we have taken into account Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s past contributions to the atomic energy program. At the same time, 
we have been mindful of the fact that the positions of high trust and responsi- 
bility which Dr. Oppenheimer has occupied carried with them a commensu- 
rately high obligation of unequivocal character and conduct on his part. A 
Government official having access to the most sensitive areas of restricted 
data and to the innermost details of national war plans and weapons must 
Measure up to exemplary standards of reliability, self-discipline, and trust- 
worthiness. Dr. Oppenheimer has fallen far short of acceptable standards. 

The record shows that Dr. Oppenheimer has consistently placed himself 
outside the rules which govern others. He has falsified in matters wherein he 
was charged with grave responsibilities in the national interest. In his associ- 
ations he has repeatedly exhibited a willful disregard of the normal and 
proper obligations of security. 


As to “character” 


(1) Dr. Oppenheimer has now admitted under oath that while in charge of 
the Los Alamos Laboratory and working on the most secret weapon develop- 
ment for the Government, he told Colonel Pash a fabrication of lies. Colonel 
Pash was an officer of Military Intelligence charged with the duty of protect- 
ing the atomic-weapons project against spies. Dr. Oppenheimer told Colonel 
Pash in circumstantial detail of an attempt by a Soviet agent to obtain from 
him information about the work on the atom bomb. This was the Haakon 
Chevalier incident. In the hearings recently concluded, Dr. Oppenheimer 
under oath swears that the story he told Colonel Pash was a “whole fabrica- 
tion and tissue of lies.” 

It is not clear today whether the account Dr. Oppenheimer gave to Colonel 
Pash in 1943 concerning the Chevalier incident or the story he told the Gray 
Board last month is the true version. 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 381 


If Dr. Oppenheimer lied in 1943, as he now says he did, he committed the 
crime of knowingly making false and material statements to a Federal officer. 
If he lied to the Board, he committed perjury in 1954. 

(2) Dr. Oppenheimer testified to the Gray Board that if he had known Gio- 
vanni Rossi Lomanitz was an active Communist or that Lomanitz had dis- 
closed information about the atomic project to an unauthorized person, he 
would not have written to Colonel Lansdale of the Manhattan District the let- 
ter of October 19, 1943, in which Dr. Oppenheimer supported the desire of Lo- 
manitz to return to the atomic project. 

The record shows, however, that on August 26, 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer told 
Colonel Pash that he (Oppenheimer) knew that Lomanitz had revealed infor- 
mation about the project. Furthermore, on September 12, 1943, Dr. Oppen- 
heimer told Colonel Lansdale that he (Oppenheimer) had previously learned 
for a fact that Lomanitz was a Communist Party member. 

(3) In 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer indicated to Colonel Lansdale that he did not 
know Rudy Lambert, a Communist Party functionary. In fact, Dr. Oppen- 
heimer asked Colonel Lansdale what Lambert looked like. Now, however, Dr. 
Oppenheimer under oath has admitted that he knew and had seen Lambert at 
least half a dozen times prior to 1943; he supplied a detailed description of 
Lambert; he said that once or twice he had lunch with Lambert and Isaac 
Folkoff, another Communist Party functionary, to discuss his (Oppen- 
heimer’s) contributions to the Communist Party; and that he knew at the time 
that Lambert was an official in the Communist Party. 

(4) In 1949, Dr. Oppenheimer testified before a closed session of the House 
Un-American Activities Committee about the Communist Party membership 
and activities of Dr. Bernard Peters. A summary of Dr. Oppenheimer’s testi- 
mony subsequently appeared in a newspaper, the Rochester Times Union. Dr. 
Oppenheimer then wrote a letter to that newspaper. The effect of that letter 
was to contradict the testimony he had given a congressional committee. 

(5) In connection with the meeting of the General Advisory Committee on 
October 29, 1949, at which the thermonuclear weapon program was consid- 
ered, Dr. Oppenheimer testified before the Gray Board that the General Advi- 
sory Committee was “surprisingly unanimous” in its recommendation that 
the United States ought not to take the initiative at that time in a thermonu- 
clear program. Now, however, under cross-examination, Dr. Oppenheimer 
testifies that he did not know how Dr. Seaborg (1 of the 9 members of Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s committee) then felt about the program because Dr. Seaborg 
“was in Sweden, and there was no communication with him.” On being con- 
fronted with a letter from Dr. Seaborg to him dated October 14, 1949—a letter 
which had been in Dr. Oppenheimer’s files—Dr. Oppenheimer admitted hav- 
ing received the letter prior to the General Advisory Committee meeting in 
1949. In that letter Dr. Seaborg said: “Although I deplore the prospects of our 
country putting a tremendous effort into this, I must confess that I have been 
unable to come to the conclusion that we should not.” Yet Dr. Seaborg’s view 
was not mentioned in Dr. Oppenheimer’s report for the General Advisory 


382 THE DECISION 


Committee to the Commission in October 1949. In fact the existence of this 
letter remained unknown to the Commission until it was disclosed during the 
hearings. 

(6) In 1950, Dr. Oppenheimer told an agent of the Federal Bureau of Inves- 
tigation that he had not known Joseph Weinberg to be a member of the Com- 
munist Party until that fact become public knowledge. Yet on September 12, 
1943, Dr. Oppenheimer told Colonel Lansdale that Weinberg was a Commu- 
nist Party member. 

The catalog does not end with these six examples. The work of Military In- 
telligence, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission—all, at one time or another have felt the effect of his falsehoods, eva- 
sions, and misrepresentations. 

Dr. Oppenheimer’s persistent and willful disregard for the obligations of se- 
curity is evidenced by his obstruction of inquiries by security officials. In the 
Chevalier incident, Dr. Oppenheimer was questioned in 1943 by Colonel 
Pash, Colonel Lansdale, and General Groves about the attempt to obtain infor- 
mation from him on the atomic bomb project in the interest of the Soviet Gov- 
ernment. He had waited 8 months before mentioning the occurrence to the 
proper authorities. Thereafter for almost 4 months Dr. Oppenheimer refused 
to name the individual who had approached him. Under oath he now admits 
that his refusal to name the individual impeded the Government’s investiga- 
tion of espionage. The record shows other instances where Dr. Oppenheimer 
has refused to answer inquiries of Federal officials on security matters or has 
been deliberately misleading. 


As to “associations” 


“Associations” is a factor which, under the law, must be considered by the 
Commission. Dr. Oppenheimer’s close association with Communists is an- 
other part of the pattern of his disregard of the obligations of security. 

Dr. Oppenheimer, under oath, admitted to the Gray Board that from 1937 to 
at least 1942 he made regular and substantial contributions in cash to the 
Communist Party. He has admitted that he was a “fellow traveler” at least 
until 1942. He admits that he attended small evening meetings at private 
homes at which most, if not all, of the others present were Communist Party 
members. He was in contact with officials of the Communist Party, some of 
whom had been engaged in espionage. His activities were of such a nature 
that these Communists looked upon him as one of their number. 

However, Dr. Oppenheimer’s early Communist associations are not in them- 
selves a controlling reason for our decision. 

They take on importance in the context of his persistent and continuing as- 
sociation with Communists, including his admitted meetings with Haakon 
Chevalier in Paris as recently as last December—the same individual who had 
been intermediary for the Soviet Consulate in 1943. 

On February 25, 1950, Dr. Oppenheimer wrote a letter to Chevalier attempt- 
ing “to clear the record with regard to your alleged involvement in the atom 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 383 


business.” Chevalier used this letter in connection with his application to the 
State Department for a United States passport. Later that year Chevalier came 
and stayed with Dr. Oppenheimer for several days at the latter’s home. In De- 
cember 1953, Dr. Oppenheimer visited with Chevalier privately on two occa- 
sions in Paris, and lent his name to Chevalier’s dealings with the United 
States Embassy in Paris on a problem which, according to Dr. Oppenheimer, 
involved Chevalier’s clearance. Dr. Oppenheimer admitted that today he has 
only a “strong guess” that Chevalier is not active in Communist Party affairs. 
These episodes separately and together present a serious picture. It is clear 
that for one who has had access for so long to the most vital defense secrets of 
the Government and who would retain such access if his clearance were con- 
tinued, Dr. Oppenheimer has defaulted not once but many times upon the ob- 
ligations that should and must be willingly borne by citizens in the national 
service. 
Concern for the defense and security of the United States requires that Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s clearance should not be reinstated. 
Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer is hereby denied access to restricted data. 
Lewis L. Strauss, Chairman. 
Eugene M. Zuckert, Commissioner. 
Joseph Campbell, Commissioner. 


EUGENE M. ZuCKERT: “This matter certainly reflects the difficult 
times in which we live” 


[The only lawyer on the AEC, Eugene M. Zuckert was a graduate of Yale 
(1933) and Yale Law School (1937) who worked for the Securities and Ex- 
change Commission from 1937 to 1940. A Democrat, he had been serving 
as assistant secretary of the air force since 1947 when, in 1952, President 
Truman appointed him to the AEC (with his term to expire on June 30, 
1954). Although he joined Strauss’s opinion, Zuckert here expresses a very 
different rationale for denying Oppenheimer’s clearance.] 


In subscribing to the majority decision and the substance of the Commis- 
sion opinion, I have considered the evidence as a whole and no single factor 
as decisive. For example, Dr. Oppenheimer’s early Communist associations by 
themselves would not have led me to my conclusion. The more recent con- 
nections, such as those with Lomanitz and Bohm, would not have been deci- 
sive. The serious 1943 incident involving Chevalier would not have been 
conclusive, although most disturbing and certainly aggravated by the contin- 
uation of the relationship between Chevalier and Dr. Oppenheimer. Individ- 
ual instances of lack of veracity, conscious disregard of security considera- 
tions, and obstruction of proper security inquiries would not have been 
decisive. 


384 THE DECISION 


But when I see such a combination of seriously disturbing actions and 
events as are present in this case, then I believe the risk to security passes ac- 
ceptable bounds. All these actions and events and the relation between them 
make no other conclusion possible, in my opinion, than to deny clearance to 
Dr. Oppenheimer. 

There follow some additional observations of my own which I believe are 
pertinent in the consideration of this case and the problems underlying it. 

It is a source of real sadness to me that my last act as a public official should 
be participation in the determination of this matter, involving as it does, an 
individual who has made a substantial contribution to the United States. This 
matter certainly reflects the difficult times in which we live. ... 

One of the difficulties in the development of a healthy security system is 
the achievement of public understanding of the phrase “security risk.” It has 
unfortunately acquired in many minds the connotation of active disloyalty. 
As a result, it is not realized that the determination of “security risk” must be 
applied to individuals where the circumstances may be considerably less 
derogatory than disloyalty. In the case of Dr. Oppenheimer, the evidence 
which convinced me that his employment was not warranted on security 
grounds did not justify an accusation of disloyalty. 

The “security risk” concept has evolved in recent years as a part of our 
search for a security system which will add to the protection of the country. In 
that quest, certain limited guidelines have emerged. With respect to eligibility 
of people for sensitive positions in our Government we have said, in effect, 
that there must be a convincing showing that their employment in such posi- 
tions will not constitute a risk to our security. Except in the clearest of cases, 
such as present Communist membership, for example, the determination may 
not be an easy one. In many cases, like the one before us, a complex qualitative 
determination is required. One inherent difficulty is that every human being is 
to some degree a security risk. So long as there are normal human feelings like 
pain, or emotions like love of family, everyone is to some degree vulnerable to 
influence, and thus a potential risk in some degree to our security. 

Under our security system it is our duty to determine how much of a risk is 
involved in respect to any particular individual and then to determine 
whether that risk is worth taking in view of what is at stake and the job to be 
done. It is not possible, except in obvious cases, to determine in what precise 
manner our security might be endangered. The determination is rather an 
evaluation of the factors which tend to increase the chance that security might 
be endangered. Our experience has convinced us that certain types of associ- 
ation and defects of character can materially increase the risk to security. 

Those factors—many of which are set forth in the majority opinion—are 
present in Dr. Oppenheimer’s case to such an extent that I agree he is a secu- 
rityrisk.... 

There is one final comment which I should add. My decision in this matter 
was influenced neither by the actions nor by the attitudes of Dr. Oppenheimer 
concerning the development of thermonuclear weapons. Nor did I consider 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 385 


material any advice given by Dr. Oppenheimer in his capacity as a top level 
consultant on national security affairs. 

In my judgment, it was proper to include Dr. Oppenheimer’s activities re- 
garding the thermonuclear program as part of the derogatory allegations that 
initiated these proceedings. Allegations had been made that Dr. Oppenheimer 
was improperly motivated. 

The Gray Board, although doubting the complete veracity of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s explanations, found that these most serious allegations were not sub- 
stantiated. I have carefully reviewed the evidence and concur in the finding. 


JoserpH CAmpBELL: “The General Manager has arrived at the 
only possible conclusion available to a reasonable and prudent 
man” 


[When Dwight D. Eisenhower became president of Columbia University in 
1948, he met Joseph Campbell, the university’s treasurer and vice president 
of business affairs. In 1953, after his election, Eisenhower appointed Camp- 
bell, a Republican, to the AEC. Like Zuckert, he also signed Strauss’s opinion 
but offers an additional explanation for his vote.] 


...On June 28, 1954, the question of the clearance of Dr. Oppenheimer was 
presented to the Commission and by a vote of 4 to 1 it was decided that clear- 
ance should be denied him... . 

My vote was to sustain the recommendations of the Gray Board and the 
General Manager... 

I have carefully studied the recommendations of the General Manager and 
have concluded that from the presentation of the testimony before the Person- 
nel Security Board and the information made available to the parties in the 
proceedings from the investigative files, the General Manager has arrived at 
the only possible conclusion available to a reasonable and prudent man. 

The finding, by the General Manager, that the services of Dr. Oppenheimer 
are not indispensable to the atomic energy program, is compelling. ... 

I conclude, therefore, that serious charges were brought against Dr. Oppen- 
heimer; that he was afforded every opportunity to refute them; that a board 
was appointed, composed of men of the highest honor and integrity, and that 
in their majority opinion Dr. Oppenheimer did not refute the serious charges 
which faced him; that the record was reviewed by the General Manager, 
keenly aware of his serious responsibility in this matter, and that he con- 
curred, and even strengthened the findings of the Personnel Security Board. 

If the security system of the United States Government is to be successfully 
operated, the recommendations of personnel security boards must be honored 
in the absence of compelling circumstances. If the General Manager of the 


386 THE DECISION 


Atomic Energy Commission is to function properly, his decisions must be up- 
held unless there can be shown new evidence, violations of procedures, or 
other substantial reasons why they should be reversed. 

Therefore, I voted to reaffirm the majority recommendation of the Personnel 
Security Board and to uphold the decision of the General Manager. Clearance 
should be denied to Dr. Oppenheimer. 


THomas E. Murray: “Dr. Oppenheimer failed the test. ... He 
was disloyal” 


[By training, Thomas E. Murray was a mechanical engineer. He got his start 
working for his father whose company designed electric power plants. When 
his father died in 1929, he inherited an estate worth $10 million, and he 
eventually held two hundred patents in electrical and welding fields. A 
Democrat and a leading Roman Catholic layman, Murray was appointed to 
the AEC by President Truman in 1950. Alone among those who passed judg- 
ment on Oppenheimer, Murray finds him to be “disloyal,” although that 
finding derives from a definition of the word that clearly reveals the cold war 
context in which the case is being decided.] 


I concur in the conclusion of the majority of the Commission that Dr. J. 
Robert Oppenheimer’s access to restricted data should be denied. However, I 
have reached this conclusion by my own reasoning which does not coincide 
with the majority of the Commission. Therefore, I submit my separate opin- 
ion.... 

The American citizen recognizes that his Government, for all its imperfec- 
tions, is a government under law, of law, by law; therefore he is loyal to it. 
Furthermore, he recognizes that his Government, because it is lawful, has the 
right and the responsibility to protect itself against the action of those who 
would subvert it. The cooperative effort of the citizen with the rightful action 
of American Government in its discharge of this primary responsibility also 
belongs to the very substance of American loyalty. This is the crucial prin- 
ciple in the present case. 

This general definition of loyalty assumes a sharper meaning within the 
special conditions of the present crisis. The premise of the concrete, contem- 
porary definition of loyalty is the fact of the Communist conspiracy. Revolu- 
tionary communism has emerged as a world power seeking domination of all 
mankind. It attacks the whole idea of a social order based upon freedom and 
justice in the sense in which the liberal tradition of the West has understood 
these ideas. Moreover, it operates with a new technique of aggression; it has 
elaborated a new formula for power. It uses all the methods proper to conspir- 
acy, the methods of infiltration and intrigue, of deceit and duplicity, of false- 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 387 


hood and connivance. These are the chosen methods whereby it steadily 
seeks to undermine, from within, the lawful governments and communities of 
the free world. 

The fact of the Communist conspiracy has put to American Government 
and to the American people a special problem. It is the problem of protecting 
the national security, internal and external, against the insidious attack of its 
Communist enemy. On the domestic front this problem has been met by the 
erection of a system of laws and Executive orders designed to protect the law- 
ful Government of the United States against the hidden machinery of subver- 
sion. 

The American citizen in private life, the man who is not engaged in govern- 
mental service, is not bound by the requirements of the security system. How- 
ever, those American citizens who have the privilege of participating in the 
operations of Government, especially in sensitive agencies, are necessarily 
subject to this special system of law. Consequently, their faithfulness to the 
lawful Government of the United States, that is to say their loyalty, must be 
judged by the standard of their obedience to security regulations. Dr. Oppen- 
heimer was subject to the security system which applies to those engaged in 
the atomic energy program. The measure of his obedience to the requirements 
of this system is the decisive measure of his loyalty to his lawful Government. 
No lesser test will settle the question of his loyalty. . . . 

When all these distinctions and qualifications have been made, the fact re- 
mains that the existence of the security regulations which surround the 
atomic-energy program puts to those who participate in the program a stern 
test of loyalty. 

Dr. Oppenheimer failed the test. The record of his actions reveals a frequent 
and deliberate disregard of those security regulations which restrict a man’s 
associations. He was engaged in a highly delicate area of security; within this 
area he occupied a most sensitive position. The requirement that a man in this 
position should relinquish the right to the complete freedom of association 
that would be his in other circumstances is altogether a reasonable and neces- 
sary requirement. The exact observance of this requirement is in all cases es- 
sential to the integrity of the security system. It was particularly essential in 
the case of Dr. Oppenheimer. 

It will not do to plead that Dr. Oppenheimer revealed no secrets to the Com- 
munists and fellow travelers with whom he chose to associate. What is incom- 
patible with obedience to the laws of security is the associations themselves, 
however innocent in fact. Dr. Oppenheimer was not faithful to the restrictions 
on the associations of those who come under the security regulations. 

There is a further consideration, not unrelated to the foregoing. Those who 
stand within the security system are not free to refuse their cooperation with 
the workings of the system, much less to confuse or obstruct them, especially 
by falsifications and fabrications. It is their duty, at times an unpleasant duty, 
to cooperate with the governmental officials who are charged with the en- 
forcement of security regulations. This cooperation should be active and hon- 


388 THE DECISION 


est. If this manner of cooperation is not forthcoming, the security system it- 
self, and therefore the interests of the United States which it protects, in- 
evitably suffer. The record proves Dr. Oppenheimer to have been seriously de- 
ficient in his cooperation with the workings of the security system. This 
defect too is a defect of loyalty to the lawful government in its reasonable ef- 
forts to preserve itself in its constitutional existence. No matter how high a 
man stands in the service of his country he still stands under the law. To per- 
mit a man in a position of the highest trust to set himself above any of the laws 
of security would be to invite the destruction of the whole security system. 

In conclusion, the principle that has already been stated must be recalled 
for the sake of emphasis. In proportion as a man is charged with more and 
more critical responsibilities, the more urgent becomes the need for that full 
and exact fidelity to the special demands of security laws which in this over- 
shadowed day goes by the name of loyalty. So too does the need for coopera- 
tion with responsible security officers. 

Dr. Oppenheimer occupied a position of paramount importance; his rela- 
tion to the security interests of the United States was the most intimate pos- 
sible one. It was reasonable to expect that he would manifest the measure of 
cooperation appropriate to his responsibilities. He did not do so. It was rea- 
sonable to expect that he would be particularly scrupulous in his fidelity to 
security regulations. These regulations are the special test of the loyalty of the 
American citizen who serves his Government in the sensitive area of the 
Atomic Energy program. Dr. Oppenheimer did not meet this decisive test. He 
was disloyal. 

I conclude that Dr. Oppenheimer’s access to restricted data should be de- 
nied. 


Henry De WoLF SMYTH: “There is no indication in the entire 
record that Dr. Oppenheimer has ever divulged any secret 
information” 


[The only scientist on the AEC, Henry De Wolf Smyth held a doctorate in 
physics from both Princeton (1921) and Cambridge (1923). He had spent his 
entire academic career at Princeton, serving as chairman of the physics de- 
partment from 1935 to 1950, and naturally got to know Oppenheimer. A 
consultant to the Office of Scientific Research and Development during the 
war, Smyth was appointed to the AEC in 1949. On Monday morning, June 
28, the AEC voted 4-1 not to renew Oppenheimer’s clearance; Smyth, how- 
ever, did not receive written copies of the other commissioners’ opinions 
until that evening, leaving him less than twelve hours in which to compose 
his dissent. He worked on it with two friends, telling them, “You know, it’s 
funny | should be going to all this work for Oppenheimer. | don’t even like 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 389 


the guy very much.” The decisions were released at 4:00 p.m. on June 29, 
thirty-two hours before Oppenheimer’s consultant’s contract expired.] 


I dissent from the action of the Atomic Energy Commission in the matter of 
Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer. I agree with the “clear conclusion” of the Gray 
Board that he is completely loyal and I do not believe he is a security risk. It 
is my opinion that his clearance for access to restricted data should be re- 
stored. 

In a case such as this, the Commission is required to look into the future. It 
must determine whether Dr. Oppenheimer’s continued employment by the 
Government of the United States is in the interests of the people of the United 
States. This prediction must balance his potential contribution to the positive 
strength of the country against the possible danger that he may weaken the 
country by allowing important secrets to reach our enemies. 

Since Dr. Oppenheimer is one of the most knowledgeable and lucid physi- 
cists we have, his services could be of great value to the country in the future. 
Therefore, the only question being determined by the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission is whether there is a possibility that Dr. Oppenheimer will intention- 
ally or unintentionally reveal secret information to persons who should not 
have it. To me, this is what is meant within our security system by the term se- 
curity risk. Character and associations are important only insofar as they bear 
on the possibility that secret information will be improperly revealed. 

In my opinion the most important evidence in this regard is the fact that 
there is no indication in the entire record that Dr. Oppenheimer has ever di- 
vulged any secret information. The past 15 years of his life have been investi- 
gated and reinvestigated. For much of the last 11 years he has been under ac- 
tual surveillance, his movements watched, his conversations noted, his mail 
and telephone calls checked. This professional review of his actions has been 
supplemented by enthusiastic amateur help from powerful personal enemies. 

After reviewing the massive dossier and after hearing some forty witnesses, 
the Gray Board reported on May 27, 1954, that Dr. Oppenheimer “seems to 
have had a high degree of discretion reflecting an unusual ability to keep to 
himself vital secrets.” My own careful reading of the complete dossier and of 
the testimony leads me to agree with the Gray Board on this point. I am confi- 
dent that Dr. Oppenheimer will continue to keep to himself all the secrets 
with which he is entrusted. 

The most important allegations of the General Manager’s letter of December 
23 related to Dr. Oppenheimer’s conduct in the so-called H-bomb program. I 
am not surprised to find that the evidence does not support these allegations 
in any way. The history of Dr. Oppenheimer’s contributions to the develop- 
ment of nuclear weapons stands untarnished. 

It is clear that Dr. Oppenheimer’s past associations and activities are not 
newly discovered in any substantial sense. They have been known for years to 
responsible authorities who have never been persuaded that they rendered Dr. 


Henry De Wolf Smyth, 1957. Orren Jack Turner, courtesy AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives. 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 391 


Oppenheimer unfit for public service. Many of the country’s outstanding men 
have expressed their faith in his integrity. 

In spite of all this, the majority of the Commission now concludes that Dr. 
Oppenheimer is a security risk. I cannot accept this conclusion or the fear be- 
hind it. In my opinion the conclusion cannot be supported by a fair evalua- 
tion of the evidence. 

Those who do not accept this view cull from the record of Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s active life over the past 15 years incidents which they construe as 
“proof of fundamental defects in his character” and as alarming associations. 
I shall summarize the evidence on these incidents in order that their proper 
significance may be seen.... 

The Chevalier incident involved temporary concealment of an espionage at- 
tempt and admitted lying, and is inexcusable. But that was 11 years ago; there 
is no subsequent act even faintly similar; Dr. Oppenheimer has repeatedly ex- 
pressed his shame and regret and has stated flatly that he would never again so 
act. My conclusion is that of Mr. Hartley Rowe, who testified, “I think a man of 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s character is not going to make the same mistake twice.” 

Dr. Oppenheimer states that he still considers Chevalier his friend, al- 
though he sees him rarely. In 1950 just before Chevalier left this country to 
take up residence in France, he visited Dr. Oppenheimer for 2 days in Prince- 
ton; in December 1953, Dr. Oppenheimer visited with the Chevaliers in Paris 
at their invitation. These isolated visits may have been unwise, but there is no 
evidence that they had any security significance. ... 

Associations.—It is stated that a persistent and continuing association with 
Communists and fellow travelers is part of a pattern in Dr. Oppenheimer’s ac- 
tions which indicates a disregard of the obligations of security. On examina- 
tion, the record shows that, since the war, beyond the two visits with the 
Chevaliers, Dr. Oppenheimer’s associations with such persons have been lim- 
ited and infrequent. He sees his brother, Frank Oppenheimer (an admitted 
former Communist who left the party in 1941) not “much more than once a 
year” and then only for “an evening together.” By chance, while returning 
from the barber, he ran into Lomanitz and Bohm on the streets of Princeton in 
May 1949. Dr. Peters called on him once to discuss testimony given by Dr. Op- 
penheimer before the House Committee on Un-American Activities. He has 
seen Bohm and 1 or 2 other former students at meetings of professional 
groups. I find nothing in the foregoing to substantiate the charge that Dr. Op- 
penheimer has had a “persistent and continuing” association with subversive 
individuals. These are nothing more than occasional incidents in a complex 
life, and they were not sought by Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Significance has been read into these occasional encounters in the light of 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s activities prior to 1943. 

The Gray Board found that he was an active fellow traveler, but that there 
was no evidence that he was a member of the party in the strict sense of the 
word. Dr. Oppenheimer’s consistent testimony, and the burden of the evi- 
dence, shows that his financial contributions in the 1930’s and early 1940’s 


392 THE DECISION 


were directed to specific causes such as the Spanish Loyalists, even though 
they may have gone through individual Communists. 

The Communists with whom he was deeply involved were all related to 
him by personal ties: his brother and sister-in-law, his wife (who had left the 
party before their marriage), and his former fiancée, Jean Tatlock. Finally, 
while there are self-serving claims by Communists on record as to Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s adherence to the party, none of these is attributed to Communists 
who actually knew him, and Steve Nelson (who did know him) described him 
in a statement to another Communist as not a Marxist. The evidence supports 
Dr. Oppenheimer’s consistent denial that he was ever a Communist. 

Dr. Oppenheimer has been repeatedly interrogated from 1943 on concern- 
ing his associations and activities. Beyond the one admitted falsehood told in 
the Chevalier incident, the voluminous record shows a few contradictions be- 
tween statements purportedly made in 1943 and subsequent recollections 
during interrogations in 1950 and 1954. The charges of falsehood concerning 
Weinberg and Lambert relate to such contradictions, and are dependent on a 
garbled transcript. In my opinion, these contradictions have been given 
undue significance. ... 

The instances that I have described constitute the whole of the evidence ex- 
tracted from a lengthy record to support the severe conclusions of the major- 
ity that Dr. Oppenheimer has “given proof of fundamental defects in his char- 
acter” and of “persistent continuing associations.” Any implication that these 
are illustrations only and that further substantial evidence exists in the inves- 
tigative files to support these charges is unfounded. 

With the single exception of the Chevalier incident, the evidence relied 
upon is thin, whether individual instances are considered separately or in 
combination. All added together, with the Chevalier incident included, the 
evidence is singularly unimpressive when viewed in the perspective of the 15 
years of active life from which it is drawn. Few men could survive such a pe- 
riod of investigation and interrogation without having many of their actions 
misinterpreted or misunderstood. 

To be effective a security system must be realistic. In the words of the 
Atomic Energy Commission security criteria: 

“The facts of each case must be carefully weighed and determination made 
in the light of all the information presented, whether favorable or unfavorable. 
The judgment of responsible persons as to the integrity of the individuals 
should be considered. The decision as to security clearance is an overall, 
commonsense judgment, made after consideration of all the relevant informa- 
tion as to whether or not there is risk that the granting of security clearance 
would endanger the common defense or security.” 

Application of this standard of overall commonsense judgment to the 
whole record destroys any pattern of suspicious conduct or catalog of false- 
hoods and evasions, and leaves a picture of Dr. Oppenheimer as an able, imag- 
inative human being with normal human weaknesses and failings. In my 


DECISION AND OPINIONS OF THE AEC 393 


opinion the conclusion drawn by the majority from the evidence is so extreme 
as to endanger the security system. 

If one starts with the assumption that Dr. Oppenheimer is disloyal, the inci- 
dents which I have recounted may arouse suspicion. However, if the entire 
record is read objectively, Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty and trustworthiness 
emerge clearly and the various disturbing incidents are shown in their proper 
light as understandable and unimportant. 

The “Chevalier incident” remains reprehensible; but in fairness and on all 
of the evidence, this one admitted and regretted mistake made many years ago 
does not predominate in my overall judgment of Dr. Oppenheimer’s character 
and reliability. Unless one confuses a manner of expression with candor, or 
errors in recollection with lack of veracity, Dr. Oppenheimer’s testimony be- 
fore the Gray Board has the ring of honesty. I urge thoughtful citizens to ex- 
amine this testimony for themselves, and not be content with summaries or 
with extracts quoted out of context. 

With respect to the alleged disregard of the security system, I would suggest 
that the system itself is nothing to worship. It is a necessary means to an end. 
Its sole purpose, apart from the prevention of sabotage, is to protect secrets. If 
a man protects the secrets he has in his hands and his head, he has shown es- 
sential regard for the security system. 

In addition, cooperation with security officials in their legitimate activities 
is to be expected of private citizens and Government employees. The security 
system has, however, neither the responsibility nor the right to dictate every 
detail of a man’s life. I frankly do not understand the charge made by the ma- 
jority that Dr. Oppenheimer has shown a persistent and willful disregard for 
the obligations of security, and that therefore he should be declared a security 
tisk. No gymnastics of rationalization allow me to accept this argument. If in 
any recent instances, Dr. Oppenheimer has misunderstood his obligation to 
security, the error is occasion for reproof but not for a finding that he should 
be debarred from serving his country. Such a finding extends the concept of 
“security risk” beyond its legitimate justification and constitutes a dangerous 
precedent. 

In these times, failure to employ a man of great talents may impair the 
strength and power of this country. Yet I would accept this loss if I doubted 
the loyalty of Dr. Oppenheimer or his ability to hold his tongue. I have no 
such doubts. 

I conclude that Dr. Oppenheimer’s employment “will not endanger the 
common defense and security” and will be “clearly consistent with the inter- 
ests of the national security.” I prefer the positive statement that Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s further employment will continue to strengthen the United States. 

I therefore have voted to reinstate Dr. Oppenheimer’s clearance. 


Henry D. Smyth, Commissioner. 


CONCLUSION: “AN ABUSE OF 
THE POWER OF THE STATE” 


Even as the AEC was reaching its decision, Oppenheimer had resumed his 
duties at the Institute for Advanced Study. Lewis L. Strauss, who was coinci- 
dentally a member of the Institute’s governing board, attempted to oust Op- 
penheimer as director, but the effort failed and his appointment was renewed 
in October 1954. 

He issued no statement regarding the AEC decision, other than to comment 
that Henry De Wolf Smyth’s minority opinion was “fair and considered, made 
with full knowledge of the facts, [and] says what needs to be said.”! Privately, 
he was more forthright. He told Joseph Alsop that the Personnel Security 
Board’s findings were an “outrage” and that the entire proceeding represented 
“an abuse of the power of the state.”? When a friend later suggested that the 
hearings had been like a dry crucifixion, Oppenheimer replied, “You know, it 
wasn't so very dry. I can still feel the warm blood on my hands.” His public 
silence reflected, in part, his fear that scientists “were thinking of quitting 
government projects.” The message he wanted to convey was: “The country 
needs its scientists. Don’t resign or quit or fuss.’””* 

A scientists’ boycott of nuclear weapons programs to protest the AEC deci- 
sion never materialized. But a protest of sorts did occur over a related issue 
and it elicited a revealing response from Oppenheimer. In the fall of 1954, the 
physics department at the University of Washington invited Oppenheimer to 
deliver a week-long series of lectures as a Walker-Ames visiting professor. But 


1. Bernstein, “In the Matter,” 249. 

2. Ibid., 249. 

3. John Mason Brown, cited in Peter Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of 
Worlds (Boston, 1981), 270. 

4. Bernstein, “In the Matter,” 249. 


396 CONCLUSION 


the university’s president, Henry Schmitz, vetoed the appointment on the 
grounds that it would not be in the best interests of the institution. In Febru- 
ary 1955, when the news broke, many faculty members protested as did schol- 
ars around the country. A number of prominent scientists who were planning 
to visit the university to give lectures or take part in symposia—including Vic- 
tor Weisskopf, a physicist at MIT, and several biochemists and physiologists— 
announced they would boycott the university. Oppenheimer, contacted by a 
reporter for the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, was asked: “Do you think it right 
that these scientists [boycotters] embarrass the University?” He described his 
response in a letter to a friend in the physics department: “I replied: the Uni- 
versity has embarrassed itself.”5 

The same could surely have been said of the United States. It took too many 
years, but eventually the government recognized the wrong it had done to a 
patriotic citizen and tried to right it. In 1961, John F. Kennedy became presi- 
dent and brought to Washington as advisers a number of Oppenheimer’s ad- 
mirers, including McGeorge Bundy (who assuredly was unaware he had 
turned up in an FBI report only seven years earlier). The new chairman of the 
AEC was Oppenheimer’s friend, the physicist Glenn T. Seaborg. At a White 
House dinner in 1962, he asked Oppenheimer if he would submit to another 
security hearing in order to clear his name. “Not on your life,” he allegedly 
replied.® But in April 1963, the Kennedy administration announced that Op- 
penheimer would receive the AEC’s annual award given in memory of Enrico 
Fermi. President Lyndon B. Johnson presented the plaque to him in December 
1963, along with a check for $50,000. 

It took longer for the FBI to make amends. The agency maintained a file on 
Oppenheimer, although it naturally grew thinner as the years passed, until his 
death on February 18, 1967, from throat cancer. One of the last items in the 
file is the obituary notice in the New York Times. Ironically, however, the FBI 
was to become involved in a posthumous effort to defend the scientist’s repu- 
tation. In April 1994, exactly forty years to the month after the AEC hearing 
had been held, new allegations surfaced, this time to the effect that J. Robert 
Oppenheimer—and not only Oppenheimer, but also Enrico Fermi and Leo 
Szilard—had actually helped pass atomic secrets to the Soviet Union during 
World War II. 

Time Magazine published the allegations in “The Oppenheimer Files,” a 
nine-page excerpt from the book Special Tasks, the memoirs of Pavel Sudo- 
platov, as recorded by Jerrold L. and Leona P. Schecter. A self-styled “Soviet 
spymaster,” the 87-year-old Sudoplatov had been deputy chief of foreign in- 
telligence for the KGB during World War II. His book claimed that “the most 
vital information for developing the first Soviet atomic bomb came from sci- 
entists designing the American atomic bomb at Los Alamos, New Mexico— 


5. Oppenheimer to E. Uehling, March 24, 1955, University of Washington physics depart- 
ment MSS, Box 5 (University of Washington). 
6. Goodchild, J. Robert Oppenheimer, 275. 


CONCLUSION 397 


Robert Oppenheimer, Enrico Fermi, and Leo Szilard.”” Sudoplatov, however, 
provided not a shred of evidence to support his assertion. Among the many 
who claimed that the charge was groundless was FBI director Louis J. Freeh. 
Writing to Les Aspin, the chairman of the president’s Foreign Intelligence Ad- 
visory Board, Freeh said: “The FBI has classified information available that 
argues against the conclusions reached by the author of ‘Special Tasks.’ The 
FBI, therefore, considers such allegations to be unfounded.”® 

Early in July 1954, just a few days after the AEC announced its verdict, 
J. Robert Oppenheimer was interviewed by a reporter who asked whether he 
thought he resembled a character in a Greek tragedy. In some plays, Oppen- 
heimer replied enigmatically, “a sense of the drama comes from the chorus.”® 
He might rather have cited the lines of Xerxes, who had also sought to control 
the forces of nature, if less dramatically than the “father of the atomic bomb,” 
by building a bridge of ships across the Hellespont. Xerxes paid a high price: 
the loss of the Persian army at Salamis. Yet Oppenheimer, who paid a differ- 
ent kind of price, could still have reflected with Aeschylus’s tragic hero: “Dis- 
may, and rout, and ruin, ills that wait / On man’s afflicted fortune, sink us 
down.” 


7. Pavel Sudoplatov et al., Special Tasks: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness, a Soviet 
Spymaster (Boston, 1994), 172. 

8. The New York Times, May 3, 1995. 

9. Stern, Oppenheimer Case, 426. 


SUGGESTED READING 


Bernstein, Barton J. “Four Physicists and the Bomb: The Early Years, 1945-1950.” 
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 18 (1988): 231-62. 

——. “In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” Historical Studies in the Physical 
Sciences 12 (1982): 195-252. 

——. “The Oppenheimer Conspiracy.” Discover (March 1985): 22-32. 

——. “The Oppenheimer Loyalty-Security Case Reconsidered,” Stanford Law Review 
42 (1990): 1383-1484. 

Chevalier, Haakon. Oppenheimer: The Story of a Friendship. New York, 1965. 

Davis, Nuel Pharr. Lawrence and Oppenheimer. New York, 1968. 

Dyson, Freeman. Disturbing the Universe. New York, 1979. 

——. Weapons and Hope. New York, 1984. 

Goodchild, Peter. J. Robert Oppenheimer: Shatterer of Worlds. Boston, 1981. 

Herken, Gregg. Counsels of War. New York, 1985. 

——. The Winning Weapon: The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War, 1945-50. Princeton, 
1980. 

Hewlett, Richard G. and Oscar E. Anderson. The New World, 1939-1947: A History of 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission. University Park, Pa., 1962. 

Hewlett, Richard G. and Francis Duncan. Atomic Shield, 1947-1952: A History of the 
United States Atomic Energy Commission. University Park, Pa., 1969. 

Hewlett, Richard G. and Jack M. Holl. Atoms for Peace and War, 1953-1961: Eisen- 
hower and the Atomic Energy Commission. Berkeley, 1989. 

Hijiya, James A. “The Gita of J. Robert Oppenheimer.” Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society 144 (June 2000): 123-67. 

Holloway, David. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 
1939-1956. New Haven, 1994. 

Holloway, Rachel L. In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer: Politics, Rhetoric, and 
Sel f-defense. Westport, Conn., 1993. 

Kevles, Daniel J. The Physicists: The History of a Scientific Community in Modern 
America. Cambridge, Mass., 1995. 

Kunetka, James W. Oppenheimer: The Years of Risk. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1982. 

Major, John. The Oppenheimer Hearing. New York, 1971. 


400 SUGGESTED READING 


Rhodes, Richard. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York, 1995. 

——. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York, 1986. 

Schweber, S.S. In the Shadow of the Bomb: Bethe, Oppenheimer, and the Moral Re- 
sponsibility of the Scientist. Princeton, 2000. 

Sherwin, Martin J. A World Destroyed: The Atomic Bomb and the Grand Alliance. 
New York, 1975 (rev. ed., 1987). 

Smith, Alice Kimball and Charles Weiner, eds. Robert Oppenheimer: Letters and Rec- 
ollections. Cambridge, Mass., 1980. 

Stern, Philip M. The Oppenheimer Case: Security on Trial. New York, 1969. 

Strout, S. Cushing. “The Oppenheimer Case: Melodrama, Tragedy, and Irony.” The 
Virginia Quarterly Review 40 (1964): 268-80. 

——. “Telling the Oppenheimer Story: From the AEC to the BBC.” The Yale Review 
73 (1983): 122-30. 

Wang, Jessica. American Science in an Age of Anxiety: Scientists, Anticommunism, 
and the Cold War. Chapel Hill, 1999. 

York, Herbert F. The Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller, and the Superbomb. Stanford, 
1989. 


INDEX 


Numbers in italic type refer to photographs. 


Addis, Thomas, 6, 13-14, 75 
Adelson, David, 7, 8, 14, 16 
AEC. See Atomic Energy Commission 
Alsop, Joseph and Stewart, xxvii, xxviii, 35, 
36, 37, 395 
Alvarez, Luis, 168, 173; on AEC panel, 245, 
281; promoting the super, 174, 239, 
279, 285; pushed to testify, 276 
testimony: hydrogen bomb program, 
276-83, 318; and JRO’s reluctance 
about, 280, 282-83, 284-89; on JRO’s 
trustworthiness, 281, 328 
anti-communism in U.S., 1950s, xv, xxx, 
118; vs. attitudes in 1940s, 119. See 
also McCarthyism 
atomic bomb: armament in, as strong, 133; 
delivered on time, 201; importance of, 
246; moral reservations about, 47, 244, 
287; Soviet explosion of, 106-7, 168, 
203-4, 257; stockpiling, 146; support 
for program, 187; use over Japan, dis- 
cussion about, 33-34, 97 
Atomic Energy Act (1946): and duties of 
commissioners, 379; security restric- 
tions and specifications, 3-4, 79-80, 
137, 157, 392 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) 
file on JRO, 122 
1947 hearing on JRO security clearance: 
Lilienthal testimony about, 157-64; 


record of, request to see, 289-91, 
denied, 369. See also under Bush, Van- 
nevar; Conant, James B. 

at Princeton meeting, 28, 131 

suspension of JRO’s clearance, 9, 31 

See also General Advisory Committee; 
Long Range Planning Committee 

Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), hearing 

on JRO 

AEC'’s role: as agency in charge, xvii; 
selection of lawyers, xxxi; setting and 
participants, xxix—xxxii. See also Per- 
sonal Security Board 

aftermath of decision: AEC annual award 
presented to JRO, 396. See also tran- 
script of proceedings, infra 

assessments of: certain outcome, 
xxiv—xxv; charges as contradictory, 
148-49; context of JRO’s life as a 
whole, 370; as contrary to free expres- 
sion and American way, 204-7; differ- 
ent views of, 177—78, 188; as judgment 
on U.S. government and security 
issues, 351-52, 356, 364; as lacking in 
due process, xviii, xx, xxvi; press 
opinions, xvii; reaction of scientific 
world, 205, 221, 395; as unjust, 
191 

atmosphere, xvi, xviii—xix; charges called 
derogatory information, 123; as inquiry, 
not trial, 29, 205-6; proceedings as con- 
fidential, 29; setting, xxix, 


402 INDEX 


Atomic Energy Commission (cont.) 

xxxii; statement of procedures and 
JRO’s recourses, 9-10 

background, origins, issues, xvi—xvii, 
xxiv, 3, 31, 194 

final opinion of AEC: characterized, xxvi, 
380; majority opinions, 379-88, 
response to, xxviii; minority opinion, 
388-94 

leaking of material to press, xvii, 35-38, 
196 

Nichols’s confidential report to AEC, 
xxvi; assistance of Robb, xxv; charges 
reformulated and general assessment, 
371; major considerations, 372-76 

Nichols’s letter to JRO suspending clear- 
ance, particulars: Communist associa- 
tions and activities, 4-8; opposition to 
hydrogen bomb, 8-9; responses by JRO, 
20, 21, 52-53, 290-91; testimony on, 
193-94. See also hydrogen bomb and 
JRO 

and JRO, xxix; attempts to destroy credi- 
bility of, xxiii, 67-70, 124-26, 154; gov- 
ernment and FBI surveillance, xv, 
xviii-xx, 112, 166; suspension of clear- 
ance and presentation of charges, xvi, 
xvii; as vulnerable, xxi, xxiii, xxiv 

opening proceedings: account of those 
present, 3; ground rules given and oath 
administered, 29-30; Nichols’s letter to 
JRO, 3-10; reply of JRO, 10-29; work 
description by JRO, 30-31 

procedures and discussions about: charac- 
terized, xviii, xx, xxvi; formal complaint 
about, 368-69; grounds changed for 
denial of clearance, 371; inaccurate tran- 
script, 90; material unavailable to JRO 
and attorneys, 85, 87; names of witnesses 
to be called not disclosed, 194-98; 
protests and reactions by JRO’s lawyers, 
89, 90, 125, 290, 291, 299, 300, 339, 340, 
369; protests by JRO, 105, 165; question- 
ing and statements out of context, 88-90, 
124; repeated attempts to characterize 
JRO as a liar, 67—70, 124-26, 154; secu- 
rity clearance denied defense, lawyers 
barred from hearing, 38, 41 

report of board. See Personal Security 
Board 

summation by Garrison, 346-52 

testimony and testimonials about JRO: 
contributions and devotion to national 
welfare, 34, 39, 49, 76, 139, 140, 150, 
183; directness and veracity, 39, 120; as 
dominating and controlling, 240; as 


having tremendous influence, 241-43, 
251, 287, 288; included in present pub- 
lication, xiii-xiv; loyalty and integrity, 
77,111, 112, 116, 117, 122, 135, 144, 
150-51, 152, 158, 160-61, 166, 176, 
181, 184, 185, 188, 189, 192, 199, 217, 
223, 226-27, 232-33, 240, 247, 253, 
266, 268, 389; as not a security risk, 
227, 229, 237, 264, 266, 268, 271; oppo- 
sition to loss of clearance, 252-53; as 
security-minded, 22, 60, 129, 244, 266; 
as security risk, 49, 124, 126, 241, 253, 
272, 296; unusual record of perfor- 
mance, 122, 135, 137-38, 288 

themes: alleged Communist connections 
and sympathies, 53-54, 74-75, 81-85; 
dishonesty, xxiii, 67-70, 124-25; funda- 
mental defects of character, xxvi; poten- 
tial espionage and Chevalier incident, 
63, 64-72, 77-78, 124-26, 151, 160, 
176-77, 191—92, 228, 234, 311; ques- 
tionable loyalty, 120, 176-77; questions 
of security, 54-61. See also hydrogen 
bomb and JRO 

transcript of proceedings: AEC publica- 
tion of entire transcript (see In the Mat- 
ter of J. Robert Oppenheimer); classified 
material deleted, xiii; issue of confiden- 
tiality, xxi, xxvii, 29, 376-77; sections 
released to press and reaction of 
Strauss, xxvii—xxviii, 376 

atomic-energy program: central laboratory, 

need for, 17; JRO’s involvement during 
war, 16-23; postwar, and JRO, 23-24, 
162, 202, 238; use of bombs in Japan, 
discussion about, 33-34, 97. See also 
atomic bomb; hydrogen bomb; Los 
Alamos 


Bacher, Robert F., 28; on AEC panel, 245, 
283; biography, 225; testimony, 225-28 

Baker, Selma, 208 

Baruch, Bernard, 149, 162, 202, 350 

Berkeley lab. See Radiation Laboratory, 
Berkeley 

Bernstein, Barton, xxvi, 355 

Bethe, Hans A., 128; biography, 126; in 
early study group, 17, 127; and hydro- 
gen bomb program, 28, 106, 121, 172, 
231, 257, 277, 341 

testimony: scruples about nuclear devel- 

opment, 129-30, 131, 132, 134, 137, 
138; work at Los Alamos, 127, 129-30, 
132 

Bohm, David, 89, 364; JRO’s association 
with, 7, 21, 361, 375, 383, 391 


Borden, William L., 273 
biography and views on JRO, 298 
defense’s decision not to cross-examine, 
309-10 
letter to Hoover concerning JRO, xvi—xvii, 
xxvi, 298 
testimony, letter read into record, 305-7; 
objections to procedure, 299-300, 
302-4; statement from board concern- 
ing content, 307-8 
Bradbury, Norris, 278, 279; biography, 179; 
at Los Alamos, 23, 28, 106, 231; at 
Princeton meeting, 121, 180 
testimony: JRO as actively loyal and coop- 
erative, 179, 181, 182, 183-84; on sci- 
entists, 180, 184—85 
Bradford, Robert Fiske, xix 
Buckley, Olliver E., 26, 45, 225 
Bundy, McGeorge, xix, 396 
Bush, Vannevar, 17, 42, 200; biography, 199; 
1947 hearing on JRO clearance, 157-58, 
160, 162-63; remark of Truman about 
JRO, 281, 328 
testimony: criticism of hearing and its 
basis, 204—7; on JRO and his service to 
country, 199, 201—4 


Campbell, Joseph, xxvi; biography, 385; sig- 
natory of majority opinion, 379, 383; 
individual arguments given, 385-86 

Chevalier, Haakon, 6, 66; as friend to Op- 
penheimers, 15, 70, 313, 329; later con- 
tacts with, 8, 71, 314-15, 323-24, 360, 
364, 384-85; links to Communist Party, 
70, 75, 315; JRO’s continued friendship 
as ominous, 371. See also Chevalier in- 
cident 

Chevalier incident: circumstances of, xxii, 
8, 21, 61-62, 141; as given undue impor- 
tance, 351, 372, 391; Lansdale’s testi- 
mony about, 114-16; in Nichol’s confi- 
dential report, 373-75; JRO’s failure to 
report and tell whole truth, »«ii, 8, 
21-22, 67-70, 124-25, 294, 297, 373, 380, 
382; Pash’s testimony, 293; references to, 
in hearing, 77-78, 124-26, 151, 160, 
176-77, 191-92, 228, 234, 311; Robb’s 
continued questioning about, xxiii, 
61-72, 326-27; testimony of JRO about, 
review of, 311-15 

Clifford, Clark M., 161, 162-63 

Cohn, Roy, xvii 

Communist: associations and security, 53, 
118; associations as unimportant, 
391-92; definitions of, 115, 330; -front 
organizations, and social causes, 14, 


INDEX 403 


328; in 1950s as security risk, 219, 
316-17; JRO as, 116, 330 
Communist movement, communism: JRO’s 
change of views about, 53, 54, 130; rev- 
olutionary, description, 386-87 
Communist Party in America 
causes and JRO’s contributions to, 13-14 
members of, working on secret projects, 
53, 56, 60, 111 
JRO and: associations with, 5-6, 7, 358; 
denial of membership, 6, 16, 53; meet- 
ing at home, charge denied, 6, 52, 93; 
questioning about, 52-53, 54-61; testi- 
mony about, 93; view of, 7, 14, 15, 
55 
United Front, and JRO, 12 
See also fellow traveler 
Compton, Arthur, 17; advisory panel on 
atomic energy, 23, 34, 335; special com- 
mittee on atomic energy, 16 
Compton, Kar] T., 111 
Conant, James B., 157-58, 200, 323; biogra- 
phy, 148, 199; on GAC, 26, 123; letter 
of JRO to, 105-6; 1947 hearing on JRO’s 
security clearance, 157—58, 160, 162; 
opposition to crash program, 41, 45, 
131, 258; testimony, xxiii—xxiv, 148-53 
crash program: consideration of, 25-27, 153, 
168; defined, 41-42, 98; Fermi’s reserva- 
tions, 153-54; JRO’s alleged opposition 
to, xxiv, 240; JRO’s reservations, 27, 
43-47, 233; opposition to, 26-27, 41-43, 
46, 239-40, 255; Rabi’s reservations, 
170-71; support for, 229, 238, 239, 251 


Dallet, Joseph, 5, 14, 208-10 

Davis, John W., 366 

Dean, Gordon, 48, 49, 323; testimony, 
120-26 

de Silva, Peer, 120 

Doyle, Bernadette, 7, 16 

DuBridge, Lee A., 26, 45, 46, 123, 167; hy- 
drogen bomb development, views on, 
283; testimony, 188-94 

Dulles, John Foster, 148 


Ecker, Allan B., xxix, 36, 38; covering mem- 
orandum to transcript, 376 

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 265, 377; on JRO, 
xxvii;; praise for hearing, xxvi suspen- 
sion of JRO’s clearance, xvi, xvii 

Eltenton, George Charles: and Chevalier in- 
cident, 61, 62, 65, 67, 115, 297, 312-13; 
JRO’s acquaintance with, 63-64; as po- 
tential security risk, 67, 69, 78; as So- 
viet go-between, xxii, 8, 21, 22 


404 INDEX 


Evans, Ward V., xx, 363; description and bi- 
ography, xxix, xxx—xxxi; questioning 
by, xxiii; report to Nichols, xxv, 362, 
364-65 


Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
file on Frank Oppenheimer, 158-59 
file on JRO, 122, 158-60, 202, 272; avail- 
ability to hearing board and AEC attor- 
ney, xx; Lilienthal questioned about, 
158-60; maintained after decision, 396 
internal memo on Borden letter, 309 
new allegations against JRO, 396; 
declared groundless, 397 
surveillance of JRO, 166; information 
obtained, xix; as unethical, illegal, con- 
tinuing, xviii-xx 
fellow traveler: Chevalier as, 70, 75; JRO as, 
358, 382; JRO's description of, 59; 
Katherine Oppenheimer’s definition, 
330; as security risk, 59-60 
Fermi, Enrico, 26, 28, 254, 267, 396, 397; 
AEC award in memory of, 396; biogra- 
phy, 153; and GAC report, 26, 171; and 
hydrogen bomb, 42-43, 45, 46, 121, 
171, 255, 277; at Los Alamos, 334, 341; 
testimony, 153-56; on war department 
interim panel, 23, 34, 335 
Finletter, Thomas, 272-73 
Fisk, James B., 139 
Folkoff, Isaac; as Communist Party func- 
tionary, 6; contributions made through, 
14, 315, 328-29 
Freeh, Louis J., 397 
Friedman, Max Bernard, 7, 21 
Fuchs, Klaus, 94, 136, 291-92, 306 


GAC. See General Advisory Committee 

Garrison, Lloyd K., xviii, xxix, 36, 40; AEC 
denial of access to government files, xx; 
biography and career, xxxi; brief filed 
following board report, xxvi, xxvii, 
366—70; clearance to FBI files denied, 
xx-xxi, and consequences, 290-91; on 
JRO’s accomplishments and service, 
350-51; protests during hearing, 88, 
89-90, 125, 164, 197, 300; reporting to 
the press and reproach by Gray, xxvii, 
35-38, 196; summation, 346-52 

Gascor, Albert J., xxix 

General Advisory Committee (GAC): deci- 
sions and work on Los Alamos, 25, 226; 
discussion about hydrogen bomb, 
26-27; JRO’s functions and outstanding 
leadership, 27-28, 47-48, 121, 189, 
225-26, 350; JRO’s reluctance to con- 


tinue as chairman and end of term, 
47-48, 123, 323, 324; at Princeton 
meeting, 28, 213, 261; role, 24, 98, 
171-72; support of Los Alamos and 
program, 184, 260-61 

General Advisory Committee meeting (Oct. 
29, 1949): background and purpose, 42, 
189, 278, 318; conduct of meeting, 155, 
169, 175, 189-90; different viewpoints 
expressed, 43, 155, 170, 171, 190; 
Fermi’s account, 153-55; moral scru- 
ples raised, 45, 46, 186, 190; JRO’s as- 
sessment, 318-22; participants, 26; 
question of Seaborg’s input, 102-5, 175, 
375, 381-82; questions considered, 
41-42, 169-70, 172; Rabi’s account, 
169-71 

report to AEC, 26, 43-45; JRO’s testimony 

about, 375, 381-82; opposition to crash 
program, 26-27, 46, 239-40; two 
annexes, 26, 171 

Glennan, Thomas Keith, 111 

Gray, Gordon: description and biography, 
xxix, xxx; FBI files available to, xx; and 
guidelines for proceedings, 29; and ma- 
jority report, xxv, 355, 379; promise of 
confidentiality, 29, 377-78; reproach of 
JRO and Garrison, xxvii, 35-38 

Gray Board. See Personal Security Board 

Griggs, David Tressel: biography, 271 

testimony: JRO’s loyalty, 272-73, 274-75; 

on ZORC, 273-74, challenged, 333 

Grossman, Aubrey, 75 

Groves, Leslie R., xxii, 80, 199, 342; assess- 
ment of JRO, 112; consultations about 
hydrogen bomb, 32-33, 42, 335; consul- 
tations about Los Alamos, 19, 23, 85; as 
under JRO’s influence, 241-42; report- 
ing of Chevalier incident to, xxii, 22, 
67, 375; testimonial concerning JRO, 
34; testimony, 76-81; transcript of JRO 
interview sent to, 292-93 


Hagerty, James, xxvii 

Harrison, Richard Stewart, 212 

Hawkins, David, 7, 21, 85 

Hewlett, Richard G., 380 

Hill, Albert Gordon, 221, 222, 224; testi- 
mony, 333 

Hiroshima, bombing of, 33-34 

Hiskey, Clarence, 6, 15 

Holl, Jack M., 380 

Hoover, J. Edgar: Borden’s letter to, xvi—xvii, 
302; information on Katherine Oppen- 
heimer, 207; and JRO investigation, 
xvii, xxvi, 159-60 


House Un-American Activities Committee: 
citing of Communist-front organiza- 
tions, 4, 5, 8; JRO testimony to, 360, 
374, 381 

hydrogen bomb: alternative program to, 133; 
change in opinion about, 106-8, 121, 
122; development and U.S.S.R., 45, 110, 
238; dilemma over destructive quality 
of, 145—46, 154, 229, 233, 234-35; early 
development, 25, 121, 168, 182; pes- 
simism, skepticism about, 160, 182, 
254; president’s decision to develop, 27, 
94, 133, 171, 259, 280; serious work on, 
259. See also Princeton meeting 

hydrogen bomb and JRO 

charges of opposition and hindering 
development, xxiv, 8-9, 280, 282; cor- 
roborative testimony, 249, 250, 260, 
282-83, 284-88; testimony denying 
charge, 47, 193-94, 277 

personal reservations and concerns about, 
xxiv, 48, 97, 99, 106, 109-11, 266, 
321-23, 324; support of and work on, 
122, 136, 154, 230, 255, 261, 322, 
340-41, 389 

testimony on atomic and hydrogen 
bombs, 94-108; and U.S.S.R., 108-9, 
280 

hydrogen bomb testing: Bush’s testimony 
on, 201, 203; Greenhouse test, JRO 
quoted on, 282, 284, 285; JRO testi- 
mony on, 336-37; tests at Alamogordo, 
17, 254, 255, 335, at Eniwetok, 17, 
121-22, 132, 261; work toward and 
GAC support, 172, 184, 259 


Independent Citizens Committee of the 
Arts, Sciences, and Professions, Inc.: 
JRO as vice chairman, 8, 24; JRO’s resig- 
nation, 24, 358 

Institute for Advanced Studies, Princeton, 
260; Kennan at, 139; JRO as director, 
139, 232, and attempt to oust, 395; site 
of Princeton meeting, 261 

Interim Committee on Atomic Energy, ad- 
visory panel to (June 1945): members, 
23, 335, 350; purpose and report, 
335-36 

Inthe Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer. 
publications of, xiii, xxi, xxvii—xxviii, 
377-78; response to, xxviii; significant 
content, xxviii; version presented here, 
xiii 


Johnson, Lyall, 65, 67, 120, 292 
Johnson, Lyndon B., 396 


INDEX 405 


Kallet, Arthur, 5, 13 

Kelly, Mervin J., 39 

Kennan, George F., 42; biography and 
knowledge of JRO, 139 

testimony: on gifted people, 147-48; on 

JRO’s contribution and character, 
139-43; on Soviets, 143-44; on 
weapons development, 145-46 

Kennedy, John F., administration, 396 

Killian, James R., Jr., 244 

Knowland, William, 106, 108 


Lambert, Rudy, 6, 13, 75, 382 

Lansdale, John, 207, 374; and Chevalier in- 
cident, 22, 64, 67, 114-15; JRO’s inter- 
view with, questioning about, 85-93, 
311; JRO’s untrue statements to, 124, 
125, 381; security situation at Berke- 
ley lab, 65; testimony concerning 
JRO’s loyalty and security issues, 
111-20 

Latimer, Wendell, 277; testimony, 237-44 

Lauritsen, Charles C., 282; and Lincoln Proj- 
ect, 221-22, 224; testimony, 216-21; 
and ZORC, 224, 273 

Lawrence, Ernest D., 237, 239, 282; consul- 
tations about super, 168, 173, 276-77; 
and employment of Frank Oppen- 
heimer, 51, 58, 61; and 1949 GAC meet- 
ing, 100; promotion of super, 106, 107, 
108, 174; unable to testify at hearing, 
245, 276 

Lilienthal, David E., 202; concern over hear- 
ing procedures, 156, 165; and 1947 
hearing on JRO security clearance, 
157-64; JRO’s service to, 149, 350; testi- 
mony, 156-66 

Lincoln Laboratory, project of (Lincoln 
Summer Project, 1952), 221-25, 
272-73, 322; Griggs and, 333; JRO and, 
221-23, 224, 272-73, 337 

Livermore Laboratory, 262 

Lomanitz, Giovanni Rossi, 89; as Commu- 
nist, 82, 88, 374; JRO’s association with, 
7, 21, 360, 361, 375, 383, 391; JRO’s 
statements about, 21, 381; work for gov- 
ernment, 7, 21, 64 

Long Range Planning Committee (AEC; Mil- 
itary Objectives Committee panel): con- 
cern about JRO’s views, 246—47; estab- 
lishment and purpose, 245, 281; 
members, 245, 281-83; report of, 
282-83, 286 

Los Alamos, laboratory at 

activities and achievements, 22, 34, 127, 

183 


406 INDEX 


Los Alamos (cont.) 

equipment and programs: heavy water 
piles, 278-79, 280; hydrogen liquefac- 
tion plant, 334, 342; reactors, 101, 
343 

establishment and recruiting, 19-20, 
127 

need for, 17 

JRO and: accomplishments, 181, 182, 201, 
256; appointment to, 199; continued 
backing of, 183, 257, 263, 350; resigna- 
tion, 23; and surveillance, 112; views 
on, 262, 263 

personnel and setup, 22, 33, 136, 256, 334 

postwar purposes and activities, 25, 150, 
172, 226, 255 

site, reasons for choosing, 19 

security issues, 21, 60,94, 112-14, 129 

as special place, 20, 22 


Malraux, André, 70, 71, 315, 332 

Manhattan Engineer District, 288; back- 
ground, 200; leadership, 19, 199; Man- 
hattan project, 101, and security issues, 
21, 22, 55, 79, 157 

Manley, Jack, 6, 7, 16 

Manley, John H., 49, 106 

Marks, Herbert S., xx—xxi, xxix, 37; biogra- 
phy and career, xxxi—xxxii; role in pro- 
ceedings, 38, 366 

Marshall, George C., 34, 200 

May, Kenneth, 15; and Ruth, 6 

McCarthy, Joseph: activities and influence, 
xvi, xxvii; and government investiga- 
tion of JRO, xviii; knowledge of JRO’s 
security status, 36, 37 

McCarthyism: examples of, xxvi, hearing as 
illustration of, xvi; undue emphasis on 
Communist associations, 391—92 

McCloy, John J., 265; hypothetical questions 
for, 268-71; testimony on security, 
266-68, 270 

McCormack, James, 106, 228-29 

McMahon, Brien, 106, 108; McMahon Act, 
25 

Military Objectives Committee. See Long 
Range Planning Committee 

Military Policy Committee, 199, 200 

Mitchell, William, xxix—xxx, 10, 378 

Morgan, Thomas A.: as board member, xx, 
xxix, 301; biography, xxx; and majority 
report, xxv, 355 

Morrison, Philip, 84-85 

Murray, Thomas E., biography, 386; signa- 
tory of majority decision, 279, 383; 
statement, issue of loyalty, 386-88 


National Academy of Sciences, special com- 
mittee, 16 

Nedelsky, Winona, 87 

Nelson, Steve, 6, 7, 15, 20, 392; and Kather- 
ine Oppenheimer, 210-11, 212-14, 215, 
315, 325-26; questioning of JRO about, 
82-84 

Nichols, Kenneth D., xvii, xxvi, 112, 
281-82, 378, 380; biography, 371; de- 
nial of due process to JRO, 371; Garri- 
son letter with major arguments to, 
367-70; letter to JRO suspending secu- 
rity clearance, 3-10, and derogatory 
items within, 4—9; letter of transmittal 
to AEC, xxv, xxvi, 371-76; reports by 
board sent to, 355-65; testimony criti- 
cal of, 205, 206 

Nordheim, Lothar, 121, 231 

Nordstad, Lauris, 278, 279 


Oppenheimer, Frank Friedman (brother), 
57; career and work for government, 
xxi, 14, 21, 51, 57; and Chevalier inci- 
dent, 8, 52, 114; Communist ties and 
activities, xxi—xxii, 5, 50, 51, 57; dis- 
cussion with Lansdale about, 86; FBI 
file on, 159; Lauritsen’s testimony 
about, 218-20; marriage and relations 
with JRO, 14, 50, 391, 392; JRO’s testi- 
mony about, xxi—xxiii, 49-52, 56, 
57-59 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert (JRO), life and ca- 
reer, 18, 26, 40, 80, 230, 348 

achievements and government service, xv, 
201, 202; frequent advice on atomic 
energy, 23, 162, 202; Lincoln Summer 
Project, 221-23, 224, 272-73, 337; pan- 
els and advisory committees, 23, 28, 
202, 245, 345, 350; Study Group on 
Soviet-U.S. Relations, 265-66. See also 
GAC; Los Alamos 

and his brother, xxii—xxiii, 12, 14, 49, 50, 
51 

after the hearing: AEC award to, 396; 
AEC’s findings, views on, 395, 397; 
attempt to oust from institute, 395; 
death, 396; invitation to University of 
Washington, vetoed, 395-96; and publi- 
cation of transcript, xxviii 

character, 352; as actively cooperative 
and positive, 179, 180; as clear thinker, 
222; as good administrator, loved 
leader, 114, 189, 256 

personal beliefs about self and role, xvi 

testimony about personal qualities, 123, 
140-42, 173, 271 


See also testimony and testimonials on 
JRO under Atomic Energy Commission 
(AEC), hearing on JRO 

Oppenheimer, J. Robert (JRO), personal ac- 
count of life and work 

postwar years: consultant on develop- 
ment of atomic energy, 23-24, 34; on 
GAC as chairman, 24-28 

prewar period: background, education, 
family, friends, 11, 12, 13, 22; explana- 
tion of Communist associations, 12-16; 
interests and activities, 11-12, 16; mar- 
riage and children, 14-15, 16; teaching 
career, 11, 13, 23 

war years: on advisory panel, 23; and 
early atomic-energy program, 16-17; at 
Los Alamos, 19-23; questions of clear- 
ance, 17 

Oppenheimer, Jacquenette (Jackie; brother’s 
wife), 392; Communist associations and 
activities, xxi, 5, 14, 86-87 

Oppenheimer, Katherine Puening (Kitty; 
wife), 3, 213; 315; biography, 207; Com- 
munist associations, 5, 316; friendship 
with Nelson, 210-11, 212-15, 315, 
325-26; party membership and its end- 
ing, 14-15 

testimony: on Chevalier, 331-32; on 
Communist Party and communism, 
214-16, 330-31; on personal history 
and Communist associations, 207-13, 
329-30 

Osborne, Frederick: JRO as adviser to, 149, 
162, 350; testimony, 139 


Pash, Boris T., xxiii; biography, 291-92; in- 
terview with JRO about Chevalier, 
67-70, 120, 311, 326-27, 380; JRO’s 
untrue statements to, 124, 125, 312, 
381 

testimony: Chevalier incident, 293, 351; 
investigation of espionage at Berkeley 
lab, 292-98 

Personal Security Board 

majority report: JRO as loyal, 359, 361; 
judgment undecided, unable to recom- 
mend security clearance, 362 

members: availability of FBI and other 
agency files to, xx; descriptions and 
biographies, xxix—xxxi; selection of, 
Xxix—xxx 

minority report: clearance should be rein- 
stated and reasons, 362, 364—65; rewrit- 
ten by Robb, 362 

reports forwarded to JRO, 366 

statements to and concerning: gratitude 


INDEX 407 


and appreciation from Garrison, 347, 
from JRO, 346; self-praise in report for 
the procedure, xxv, 357; as self-sacrific- 
ing and hardworking, 178, 204, 357; as 
showing courtesy and consideration to 
JRO and his witnesses, 195 

Peters, Bernard, 360, 365, 374, 375, 381 

Peters, Hannah, 7 

physics in U.S.: desire to raise level and 
JRO’s contribution, 176; nuclear 
physics, board judgment as detrimental 
to, 365 

Pike, Sumner T., 166 

Pinsky, Paul, 7, 8, 14, 16 

Pitzer, Kenneth S., testimony, 249-52 

Placzek, George, 15, 127, 131 

Princeton meeting (June 1951): discussions 
at, 120-21; JRO’s role and enthusiasm, 
121, 122, 230, 261; participants, 28, 
231, 261; purpose and outcome, 28, 
122,172 


Rabi, Isidor I., 26, 45, 46, 154, 167; biogra- 
phy, 166; and Lincoln Project, 221-22, 
224; work on hydrogen bomb, 255, 283, 
341; and ZORC, 224, 273 

testimony: on development and promo- 
tion of H-bomb, 168-72, 174-75; on 
JRO’s character and loyalty, 173, 
176-77, 178-79; statements about the 
hearing, 177-78 

Radiation Laboratory, Berkeley: CIA investi- 
gation of, 292, 293; employees, 14, 21; 
Frank Oppenheimer at, xxi, 14, 51, 57; 
JRO’s consultations at, 16-17; security 
situation, 64, 65, 78, 292 

Ramsey, Norman Foster, Jr., 166 

Reston, James: investigation of JRO story, 
xxvii, xxviii, 35, 36; knowledge of JRO’s 
security status, 36 

Robb, Roger, xxix, 95, 198; biography and 
career, xxxi; casting of doubts about 
credibility of JRO and witnesses, 
xxiii-xxiv; exploitation of JRO’s vulner- 
ability, xxi-xxiii, xxiv; FBI and other 
agency files available to, xx; grilling of 
JRO about his brother, xxi, 56-61; hu- 
miliating questioning, xxiv, xxviii, 
72-75; major advantages for, xx; per- 
sistent questioning about Chevalier in- 
cident, xxiii, 61-72, 326-27; priming of 
witness, 253; snide remarks to opposing 
counsel, 196-97 

Rolander, Car] Arthur, Jr., xxv, xxix, 378; bi- 
ography and role in hearings, xxxi; 
work in hearings, 195, 253 


408 INDEX 


Roosevelt, Eleanor, 118 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 34, 200 
Rowe, Hartley, 26; testimony, 185-88, 391 


Sandow, Katrina, 7, 16 

Schmitz, Henry, 396 

Schneiderman, William, 6, 15, 93 

scientists: characteristics of scientific mind, 
113, 115, 118, 180, 185; as a group, dif- 
ficult to administer, 113, 114; as indi- 
vidualists, 127, 184—85; issue of censor- 
ship for, 113, 156; and moral issues, 
129-30, 131, 132, 277; proposed boy- 
cott to protest AEC decision, 395 

Seaborg, Glenn T., 238, 396 

and GAC report on crash program, 26; let- 

ter to JRO, 100-102, 104, 105; and ques- 
tion of his input, 102-5, 175, 375, 
381-82 

Segré, Emilio, 256 

Serber, Robert, 17, 278-80, 283 

Silverman, Samuel, xx—xxi, xxix, 89-90, 
166, 237-38; biography, xxxii; objection 
to reading Borden letter into record, 
and ensuing discussion, 299-300; other 
protests about procedure, 339, 340 

Smith, Cyril, 26 

Smyth, Henry De Wolf, 48, 391; biography, 
388; minority decision, 390, 392-94, 
395; opposition to publication of hear- 
ings, 378 

Soviet Union: attempts to get information 
and espionage issues, 8, 55, 63; attitude 
about nuclear weapons, 143-44; explo- 
sion of atomic bomb, 106-7, 168, 
203-4, 257; military strategy against, 
317-18, 324-25; mounting conflict be- 
tween free world and, 23-24, 34, 108; 
and nuclear testing, 201, 203; JRO’s 
change in attitude toward, 6-7, 15, 55, 
123, 150; testimony on military policy, 
245—46, 248; thoughts about agreement 
over nuclear weapons and testing, 133, 
201; U.S. change in attitude toward, 
142, 351; and US. policy re hydrogen 
bomb, 109. See also Chevalier incident; 
Study Group on Soviet-U.S. Relations 

Spanish Civil War, Loyalist cause, 330; 
JRO’s interest in and support of, 12-14, 
217, 328-29 

Stern, Philip M., xiii 

Stevenson, Adlai, xxx 

Stimson, Henry L., 23, 200, 202, 335; and 
Japanese bomb targets, 33-34, 97 

Strauss, Lewis L., xvii, 377; biography, 
378-79; comments on hearing, xxv; and 


final opinion, xxvi, 379; as mastermind 
of crusade against JRO, xxv—xxvi, 276; 
release of transcript to press, xxvii, 376; 
selection of board and lawyers, 
Xxix—XXxxi 

Study Group on Soviet-U.S. Relations (Jan. 
1954), 265-66 

Sudoplatov, Pavel, Special Tasks, 396-97 

super. See hydrogen bomb 

Szilard, Leo, 156, 267, 396, 397 


Tatlock, Jean: Communist connections, 5, 
12, 74, 75, 326; JRO’s close relationship 
with, 5, 12, 73, 392; JRO’s visit to, xxiv, 
60, 73-74, 117; Robb’s questions about, 
xxiv, xxviii, 73-75 

Teller, Edward, 47-48, 254, 264, 323; in 
early study group, 17; and hydrogen 
bomb program, 28, 42, 45-46, 121, 174, 
231, 250, 256-57; at Los Alamos, 129, 
254, 263, 334, 341; new approach to 
thermonuclear weapon, 121-22, 131, 
134, 136, 138; as promoter of the super, 
106, 107, 276—78, 282-83, 285 

testimony: on H-bomb development, 
254-62; opinions of JRO, 256, 260-62; 
on JRO as security risk, 253, 263-64 

Tolman, Richard C.: biography, 342; JRO let- 
ters to, and argument about, 338-42 

Truman, Harry S.: administration, xxx; deci- 
sion to proceed with hydrogen bomb, 
27, 94, 133, 171, 259, 280; on JRO’s 
contributions, 49; quoted as not trusting 
JRO, 281, 328 


Ulam, Stanislaw, 120 
U.S. government 

military and strategic policy: airpower, 
245-48; hydrogen-bomb vs. small 
weapons program, 281, 282; new 
weapons, scruples about, 287-88; JRO’s 
views on, 183, 337—38, 343-44; scien- 
tists’ work on, 222—23, 338; and Soviet 
Union, 317-18, 324-25; Strategic Air 
Command, 221. See also atomic bomb; 
crash program; GAC; hydrogen bomb; 
Lincoln Laboratory, project of 

security, issues of: changing concept and 
climate, 192, 218, 220-221, 234, 236-37, 
267, 317; against Communist enemy, 
388; early apparatus, 111-12, 199, 200; 
hearing as judgment on, 351-52; secu- 
rity measures, reasons for, function of, 
356-57, 393; security risk, meaning of, 
384, 389; testimony on, 266-68, 270. See 
also Atomic Energy Act 


See also Atomic Energy Commission; 
Federal Bureau of Investigation; House 
Un-American Activities Committee; 
Interim Committee on Atomic Energy; 
Study Group on Soviet-U.S. Relations 

U.S.S.R. See Soviet Union 


Vista project, 273, 345 
von Neumann, John, 28, 106, 121, 230, 256, 
341; biography, 229 
testimony: on H-bomb development, 
229-232, 233; on JRO’s loyalty, 
integrity, 232, 234; and security ques- 
tions, 235-37 


Wallace, Henry A., 24 

Weinberg, Joseph W.: employment at Berke- 
ley lab, 21, 64; JRO and, 6, 7, 15, 374, 
382; and links to Communist Party, 82, 
88 

Weisskopf, Victor, 15, 127, 131, 396 


INDEX 409 


Wheeler, Johnny, 28, 121 

Whitman, Walter Gordon, 185 

Wigner, Eugene, 267 

Wilson, Carroll, 161-62 

Wilson, Roscoe C.: biography, 245; testi- 
mony, 245—49, 351 

Winne, Harry A., 199 

Wyzanski, Charles E., xix 


Zacharias, Jerrold R.: and JRO, 221, 322 
testimony, 221-25, on Griggs, 333; and 
ZORC, 224, 273, 275-76 
ZORC 
meaning of, 273, 274 
origin of name: in Fortune, 221, 223-24; 
at Scientific Advisory Board meeting, 
273-74, challenged, 333 
Zuckert, Eugene M., xxvi; biography, 383, 
document misplaced by, 377-378; sig- 
natory of majority decision, 379, 383, 
and arguments given, 383-85 


