Physics tonight 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Citation: Physics Today 9, 7, 10 (1956); doi: 10.1063/1.3060021 
View online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3060021 

View Table of Contents: hitp://physicstoday.scitation.org/toc/pto/9/7 
Published by the American Institute of Physics 


NEW IDP-7 & IDP-10 


Dry Scroll Vacuum Pumps —— —— 


at Agilent Technologies 


10 


Physics Tonight 


By J. Robert Oppenheimer 


An address presented before the American Institute of 
Physics as part of the AIP’s 25th Anniversary Session 
on the general topic “Anticipations”, held February 2, 
1956, in New York City. 


| Side bencent are involved in a wonderfully diverse 
and varied set of enterprises, not simply and neces- 
sarily related. Your speaker is not distinguished by the 
development of his imagination; almost everything that 
happens amazes him. I shall not try to give a general 
landscape of all that physicists are up to. It ranges 
from the magnetohydrodynamics of interstellar matter 
to nuclear alignment at low temperatures; it ranges 
from the giant rocket to transistors, and to instruments 
for detecting valuable minerals in the ground; it ranges 
from automation to the coding problem of genetics; it 
ranges from teaching doctors and engineers and soldiers, 
and even ordinary men, to advising the heads of state. 

I shall speak to three separate themes, illustrative of 
this diversity, that may be samples. One has to do with 
the physicist as teacher, and a serious problem in com- 
munication. One has to do with the physicist as citizen, 
and the changes that his works have brought about in 
the arts of war. The first and the main sample has to do 
with physics itself, and the physicist as discoverer. 


ROGRESS in physics is always marked by two com- 

plementary traits, one centripetal and one centrifu- 
gal. We always try, by the use of new techniques, 
instruments, technology, and ideas, to transcend past 
experience, to find out something new, and to penetrate 
into aspects of the physical world hitherto hidden or 
implicit. This is the side that has adventure in it. It is 
the side for which the great accelerators and the in- 
genious detectors are devised, that give a touch of 
romance and adventure and novelty to our work, 

Yet at the same time we try to find the elements of 
unity and of order in the new experience, and in its 
connections with the old. It is true that we are plural- 
ists. We maintain, rightly and stoutly, that any part 
of physics is just as good, just as much a reward to 
the intelligent, just as worthy as any other. 

But there is another side to it; physics has remained 
rather more united than almost any other part of human 
thought. It has been possible to reduce immense, varied 
experience to a few, simple, rather necessary, not too 
empirical themes and principles. When we had courage 


we used to call them laws. Remembering what other 
meanings law can have, we are hesitant to call them laws. 

We often deprecate the majesty and power of the 
order that pervades the physical world, because we 
know that it is not all comprehended, is subject to 
change without notice, and that at any given moment 
our attention and our wonder are devoted primarily to 
what we do not understand, to the puzzles. You have 
only to think of the history of physics, of Newtonian 
mechanics, or Maxwell’s theory, or, in this century, of 
the immense syntheses of the theories of relativity, or 
of atomic mechanics. In these there are traits of sim- 
plicity, of unity, and of necessity, and the vastest and 
most disparate experience is comprehended within a few 
general ideas and principles. 

Today, in what is called in the trade particle physics 
—and here I would include mesodynamics and at least 
some aspects of field theory—we are searching for this 
order, and we are very far from seeing it. We have a 
vast jumble of odd dimensionless numbers, none of 
them understandable or derivable, all with an insulting 
lack of obvious meaning. Just in the class of objects 
that live long enough to deserve the name of particle — 
there are the light mesons, the K-mesons, at last the 
antinucleon, and the hyperons. This should not be a 
talk to the special problems that at the moment seem 
most pressing of solution: the relation of the 7-meson 
and the @-meson; why the antiproton interacts with 
such a large cross section with nuclei; whether we can 
understand the scattering of pions in s states. There are 
greater mysteries. 

We have a maze of findings: the masses of the semi- 
stable particles, their lifetimes, their reactions, their 
numerous and striking selection rules. In some ways this 
field may remind us of the quantum theory of atoms 
as it was in the earlier years of this century; but we 
have not found that single key to the new physics that 
Planck discovered at the turn of the century, nor any- 
thing analogous to Bohr’s postulates. Above all, we do 
not have the great guidance of the correspondence prin- 
ciple to relate familiar physics that we understand with | 
the phenomena now newly discovered. 


ee 


ee 


PHYSICS TODAY 


NDEED, in ordering the discoveries in this field we 

have three sure guides and one uncertain one: small 
fingers of light in the darkness, imperfect analogies, by 
whose correction and refinement we may hope for un- 
derstanding. It is not wrong that we use analogies. There 
can hardly be any other way than to try to talk about 
a new situation in terms which have been adequate to 
an older one, aware that we are making a mistake, but 
trying to learn from nature what the mistake is. 

One of these fingers of light is the nonrelativistic 
quantum mechanics, One uses this in the model ex- 
ploited by Chew, for the study of the interaction of 
mesons and nucleons. It rests on the fiction, which obvi- 
ously is not going to last forever, that the mass ratio of 
nucleon to pion, which is in fact about seven, is infinite. 

The second is the theory of weakly interacting fields, 
of which the most perfect and most beautiful example 
is quantum electrodynamics, just in its present approxi- 
mate state. It is so perfect that for positronium I sup- 
pose we have rightly the feeling that there are only two 
kinds of mysteries left. One is that the charge and the 
mass of the electron are numbers that mean nothing to 
us, that we have to read from experiment. The other is 
that there are some really academic fine points that we 
may not know enough about. Thus it is possible that 
higher order Fermi processes somewhat modify the in- 
teraction of electron and positron. It is certain that the 
existence of mesons and nuclear matter modifies the 
electromagnetic field. We know a little of this, but 
perhaps not in all detail. We hardly can be sure, not 
knowing what mesons exist. We even know that some- 
where in this picture gravity probably plays a part. 
But these are all of such extraordinary remoteness and 
smallness that we have an almost closed theory of 
positronium, as closed as it is healthy for anything to 
be in this world. 


J. Robert Oppenheimer, professor of physics and director 
of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, is a 
former president (1948) of the American Physical Society. 

(Photo by Gertrude Samuels—PIX) 


JULY 1956 


12 


Tt is even something of a paradox that the weak in- 
teractions introduced by Fermi to describe radioactive 
processes give us one of the few quantitatively adequate 
instruments of description, and that the strong, more 
obvious forces elude us. 

A third tool is our understanding of the connection 
between the invariance of physical systems, and the 
constants, or almost-constants, of the system's be- 
havior—its selection rules. We have begun to see that 
some of the most striking of these symmetry or in- 
variance properties lie outside the Lorentz group, and 
the simple rules of charge symmetry and of the identity 
of elementary particles. 

The fourth tool, and a very powerful one it is, is the 
application of relativity and its pronouncements about 
causal behavior to the theory of fundamental particles. 
It is a powerful tool, but it is not certain; for we are 
not convinced that we as yet understand how to formu- 
late the requirements of relativity in domains of experi- 
ence in which our familiar ideas of space and time are 
not obviously or necessarily applicable. 


wet sort of questions can we ask about the order 
that we do not have and are seeking? I can think 
of at least three: Will this be an atomic theory, in the 
basic sense that the number of long-lived fundamental 
particles is finite? Shall we find that, as we study with 
higher and higher energy impacts and higher and higher 
resolving power, we come to an end of the relatively 
stable components of matter? The experience of the last 
five years can be read both ways, Very much new has 
been found; but it seems a small lot, and we do not 
know whether there is another installment coming. 

This question, as has long been recognized, may be 
closely related to the question of whether we can in 
fact define the state of affairs in arbitrarily small in- 
tervals of space and time. The reason is that if one has 
an infinite regress of more massive objects that Jast 
indefinitely long compared to their proper times, it 
would appear that they could be used rather naturally 
for the measurement of smaller and smaller intervals. 
If there are no such particles, then the definition of 
spaciotemporal relations and the definition of fields is 
at least not a direct extension of what we have known 
in classical and quantum theory. 

The second question rests on the first. If we are 
through, or will one day soon be through with the dis- 
covery of fundamental particles, will we also be through 
with the discovery of the laws of their behavior? 
Hitherto, the changes in physical law as we go to higher 
energy and smaller distance have usually been charac- 
terized by the emergence, or the emerging importance, 
of new objects. Is a new regime that is qualitatively 
different to emerge when we come to still higher ener- 
gies, even though there are no stable particles, or quasi- 
stable particles, characteristic of that energy? There is 
no necessary answer to this question, even if we accept 
the finiteness of the fundamental group of particles. 
There are, among others, two probably related reasons: 
One is that the particles are of a great but only finite 


the mysteriously small number which characte 
Fermi interactions, which points in an obscure way to 
the even smaller number characterizing gravitati 
forces. Do these define enormously higher energies: 
those now under study, where novelty again appears 
novelty relevant to the character of the atomic wo 
Of course they do define enormously higher energies, 
We do not know whether that means that a new set of 
laws and a new set of phenomena will become manife st, 
and we do not know whether it is relevant to the grea ie 
puzzles with which we are living today. 
The third question rests even more heavily. Will this 
world, with its variety, its un-understood numbers, ever 
really yield to an ordered description, simple and ce 
sary? Will our future students be able to me 
mass ratios, the coupling constants, the selection rules 
as necessary consequences of the physical principles 7 
the subnuclear world; or will these remain empirica ( 
findings, to be measured with greater and greater ac- 
curacy, and recorded in tables that every physicist must. 
memorize or carry about with him? Surely past expe 
ence, especially in relativity and atomic mechanics, has — 
shown that at a new level of explanation some simple 
notions previously taken for granted as inevitable had 
to be abandoned as no longer applicable. Surely we are 
fully prepared not to regress in this, not to find that 
in this new domain the generalization symbolized by 
Planck’s constant and the velocity of light are suddenly 
no longer there. On the contrary, we are prepared for 
a new and at first probably almost unrecognizable kind 
of explanation. Always in the past there has been an 
explanation of immense sweep and simplicity, and in it 
vast detail has been comprehended as necessary. Do we 
have the faith that this is inevitably true of man and 
nature? Do we even have the confidence that we shall — 
have the wit to discover it? For some odd reason, the 
answer to both questions is yes. 


HYSICISTS not only invent and discover; they also 
explain. On the one hand we are teachers, increasing 
the number and, we hope, the competence of our own 
profession, There is for us at least one great problem 
that, in my opinion, is relevant to the now very promi- 
nent question of the adequacy of our profession, both 
in talent and in number, to the needs of the time and 
of our country. 
It is true that here much could, and some should 
be said of many of the practices by which we waste 
ourselves and our colleagues, and the treasure of their 
genius and training. I do not have in mind so much the 
Federal security system, though there are too many 
people here who know its sorrows and its evils to ignore 
it. I have in mind quite practical things, for the shortage 
of people is largely in practical undertakings. The i- 
version of scientists to administration, the terrible prob- 
lems of largeness in organization, lack of adequate 4 
sistance, the committees on committees, these cou ti 
be better than they are, could by being better greatly 


PHYSICS TODAY 


ig ae 


of science. There is moreover, and this is far 

r, in many practical undertakings, a characteristic 
p fog in policy, a tendency massively to pursue 
ature and trivial and irrelevant a ait that 


ag know something of our work, and have some 
honest pleasure in it. I may not deal with this theme 


wh hich overcame me as T listened with some anguish to 
what he said. For there is an old truth that we cannot 
ach what we do not know: I fear that he has char- 
acterized as an educational crisis, a default in trans- 
mission to a new generation, what is in fact a deeper 
crisis, a default in our own understanding. This crisis 
s deep in the mind of every thoughtful scientist. What 
‘can we do better to maintain the health and the firm- 
ness of our civilization? How can we let the beauties, 
the excitement, the order, the love of science play some 
“helpful part? 

Every scientific advance, past or contemporary, has 
two traits: it is an enrichment of technique; it enables 
“us to do what we could not do before, or to do it better: 
‘it is knowhow. It is also, on the other hand, the answer 
and formulation of questions long agitating man’s curi- 
osity, something to contemplate, in Peirce’s words, “the 
demi-cadence which closes a musical phrase in the 
“symphony of our intellectual life’, a glimpse of har- 
‘mony and order, a thing of beauty: it is knowledge. 

_ As physics grows, and there appears to be more and 
more to learn, the problem of reconciling knowhow and 
knowledge grows more difficult and more urgent. We do 
solve it in one context. In the last years of graduate 
study, in the years following those of postdoctoral study, 
knowhow and knowledge are not each other's enemies, 
but each other's complements. There students are al- 
lowed to forget almost all there is in the world except 
the problems on which they are working. They are then 
in action as apprentices. They see the relevance of tech- 
nique to understanding, and, if we or they are any good 
at all, they are touched with the light and wonder at 
“finding out something new. 

‘We tend to teach each other, except in the golden 
years of graduate and postdoctoral study and appren- 
ticeship, more and more in terms of mastery of tech- 
nique, losing the sense of beauty and with it the sense 
of history and of man. On the other hand, we tend to 
teach those not destined to be physicists too much in 
terms of the story, and too little in terms of the sub- 
stance. We must make more humane what we tell the 


. Stratton, “Science and the Educated Man", Physics Today, 
1956, This lecture was given before the same session of the 
sped, Institute of Physics as the talk printed here. 


‘JULY 1956 


13 


young physicist, and must seek ways to make more 
robust and more detailed what we tell the man of art or 
letters or affairs, if we are to contribute to the integrity 
of our common cultural life. 


Si elias are not only inventors and discoverers 
and teachers: they are busy in almost all the prac- 
tical undertakings of a highly technical society, making 
available to men power, material, information, and order. 

I will take one field where our works have made 
changes of great portent for man’s history. We have 
changed the instruments, and therefore in large measure 
the nature, of war. What this was to mean for our 
future has been in part vivid and clear for a long time 
now to many of those who worked during the second 
world war to make available the new resources. I think 
especially of Bohr, but he was far from being alone. 
Despite the “peace of mutual terror”, despite “deter- 
rence” and “retaliation”, despite the growing apparent 
commitment to the thesis that global or total war has 
become “unthinkable”, the full import of the new situa- 
tion is surely not clear today. This is in part because 
there tends to be between the intention and the pro- 
nouncements of statesmen and of governments, and 
what in fact happens, an often tragic mismatch; it is 
even more because of the larger truth that civilizations 
themselves achieve their greatest triumphs, not by their 
avowed purpose, intent, and dedication, but almost by 
inadvertence. 

I know how many of you devote much of your heart 
and life not only to the explanation of the technical 
possibilities, but to weighing the probable course of 
future development, and the alternatives of policy. Yet 
the last decade has brought one change that we must 
welcome. In a measure that is in the nature of things 
neither complete nor adequate, the new situation has 
been explained to the makers of policy in particular, and 
to people in general. The labors of physicists in explana- 
tion and in prophecy are not and cannot be ended; and 
there is no standing Joint Committee on the World’s 
Salvation to which they can abdicate their concern. 
Yet by now the problem of living with the new dangers 
and the new hopes is where it belongs: with the public 
and its officers, the governments. Let us be sure that by 
our effort and our clarity we always keep it there. 


HESE three themes that I have touched could 

hardly be more disparate. I see no logical or neces- 
sary relation between them. The majority of us is con- 
cerned with only one or another, or with yet a different 
room in the vast house of physics. They are connected 
for us not through logic, but because there are among 
us men who have an interest in more than one. This 
is the unity of our profession, as, in my opinion, it 
must be typical of the unity of contemporary culture 
and even life. The American Institute of Physics and 
its founder societies are the benign framework for bring- 
ing together not only the specialists, but those among 
you who, by bearing in themselves more than one 
passion, provide the basis of our community. 


