AFFAIRS 


An Inward Look 

Author(s): Robert Oppenheimer 

Source: Foreign Affairs, Vol. 36, No. 2 (Jan., 1958), pp. 209-220 
Published by: Council on Foreign Relations 


Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20029277 
Accessed: 11/06/2014 01:30 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


Council on Foreign Relations is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Foreign 
Affairs. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


AN INWARD LOOK 
By Robert Oppenheimer 


throws a harsh light on our own society. As this conflict 

continues, and its obduracy, scope and deadliness become 
increasingly manifest, we begin to see traits in American society 
of which we were barely aware, and which in this context appear 
as grievous disabilities. Perhaps the first thus to come to atten- 
tion is our inability to give an account of our national purposes, 
intentions and hopes that is at once honest and inspiring. It is a 
long time since anyone has spoken, on behalf of this country, of 
our future or the world’s future in a way that suggested complete 
integrity, some freshness of spirit and a touch of the plausible. 

Two other national traits have more recently aroused grave 
concern. Because the conflict with Communist power is taking 
place concurrently with an extreme acceleration of a technological 
revolution, and in particular because these last years have marked 
the maturing of the military phases of the atomic age, public 
attention has been drawn to the relative effectiveness of the Sov- 
iet system and ours in the training and recruiting of scientists 
and technical people. This comparison has shown that, in a field 
where once we were better than the Russians, we may soon be 
less good. The Soviet system, by combining formidable and rare 
incentives for success in science and technology with a massive 
search for talent and with rigorous and high standards in early 
education, appears about to attract to scientific work a larger 
fraction of its population than we shall be doing. 

When we learned this, it was natural to turn our attention to 
its causes. Some of these lie in the relatively low esteem in which 
learning is held in this country and, above all, in our indifference 
to the profession of teaching, especially teaching in the schools, 
a low esteem that is both manifested and caused by the fact that 
we pay our teachers poorly and our scientists not too well. The 
grimness of life in Soviet countries makes it easy to translate 
prestige into luxury and privilege. We do not want it so here. Yet 
on closer examination we have seen that in our own schools 


l YHE conflict with Communist power from time to time 


Editors Note: This paper, prepared last spring for the Center for International Studies, 
M.LT., will appear in “The American Style: Essays on Value and Performance,” edited by 
Elting E. Morrison, to be published in 1958 by Harper and Brothers. 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


210 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


educational standards are far lower for languages, mathematics 
and the sciences than in their Soviet counterparts. We have 
learned that many of our teachers are not really versed in the 
subjects which it is their duty to teach and, in many cases, their 
lack of knowledge is matched by their lack of affection or interest. 
In brief, we have come upon a problem of the greatest gravity 
for the life of our people by matching ourselves against a remote 
and unloved antagonist. 

Something of the same kind appears to be happening in a quite 
different area. This has to do with the ability of our Government 
—in fact, with the ability of our institutions and our people 
through our Government—to determine national policy in those 
areas that have to do with foreign affairs and strategy, military 
and political. ‘To quote Mr. W. W. Rostow in an address to the 
Naval War College late in 1956: 


I do not believe we as a nation have yet created a military policy and a civil 
foreign policy designed to fulfill [our purposes] and to exploit the potentials 
for social and political change favorable to our interest within the Commu- 
nist Bloc... . Historically, the United States has thrown its energies into the 


solution of military and foreign policy problems only when it faced concrete, 
self-evident dangers. 


Or again, Mr. Henry Kissinger wrote in the April 1957 issue of 
Foreign Affairs: 


By establishing a pattern of response im advance of crisis situations, stra- 
tegic doctrine permits a Power to act purposefully in the face of challenges. 
In its absence a Power will constantly be surprised by events. An adequate 
strategic doctrine is therefore the basic requirement of American security. 


It is now a widely held view that, despite the organization of 
the executive branch of the Government to cope precisely with 
long-range problems, foreign policy and military strategy; despite 
the role assigned to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the National Secu- 
rity Council and the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of 
State; despite the availability to these organizations of the tech- 
nical and intellectual talent of the whole of this country and, to a 
more limited extent, of the whole free world—despite all this, 
the United States has not developed an understanding of its 
purposes, its interests, its alternatives and plans for the future in 
any way adequate to the gravity of the problems that the coun- 
try faces. There is a widespread impression that we live from 
astonishment to surprise, and from surprise to astonishment, 
never adequately forewarned or forearmed, and more often than 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


AN INWARD LOOK 211 


not choosing between evils, when forethought and foreaction 
might have provided happier alternatives. Why should this state 
of affairs exist in a country rich with wealth and leisure, dedicated 
to education, with a larger part of its citizenry involved in educa- 
tion than in any other land at any other time, with more colleges, 
universities, institutes and centers than anyone cares to count, 
and at a time when unparalleled powers in the hands of a dedi- 
cated and hostile state threaten us more grievously than ever 
since the early days of the Republic? 

There are, of course, other national traits of which we can 
scarcely be proud, on which neither the atomic age nor the con- 
flict with Communism has put much emphasis. We may think, 
for instance, of our great wantonness with our country’s re- 
sources; we may think of the scarcity of instances in which a con- 
cern for public beauty and harmony has made of the physical 
environment in which we live that comfort to the spirit which 
the loveliness of our land and our great wealth could well make 
possible. 

Indeed, all of the traits in which we judge ourselves harshly 
could have been drawn by historians comparing us with past 
cultures, or observers of the current scene comparing us with 
those contemporary. We should then, perhaps, have noted that no 
people has ever solved the educational problem which we have 
put to ourselves, and that no government, in a world in which 
few governments succeed for very long, has ever succeeded in a 
problem of the scope and toughness of that which faces ours. In- 
deed we could recognize the traits of weakness in our society in 
terms of a norm or an ideal, and hear of them from the philosopher 
or prophet. I believe, in fact, that these ways are the more con- 
structive, because I believe, as will be more evident in what fol- 
lows, that the traits that bother us are signs of a rather deep, re- 
fractory and quite unprecedented cultural crisis, and that in the 
end they will yield, not to symptomatic therapy, but to changes 
in our life, changes in what we believe, what we do and what 
we value. 

For the problems of our country and our age have hardly in 
historical times arisen in anything like their present form; cer- 
tainly they have never been resolved. If our adversary appears 
to have solved them better than we, it may be healthy for us to 
note that; it can hardly be healthy for us to adopt his means. 
He knows what he wants, because he has a simple theory of the 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


212 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


meaning of human life and of his place in it. With the strength 
of that confidence, he has a government prepared to take, at vast 
human cost, all necessary steps to reach his ends. That there is 
only a small, fragmentary, largely obsolete taint of truth to his 
theory, that it excludes the greater part of truth, and the deeper, 
should give us some confidence that he will not succeed. That his 
failure may be marked by a vast if not universal human involve- 
ment, and an unparalleled devastation and horror, should temper 
our pleasure in this prospect and return us to the solution of our 
problems on our own terms, in our own way, in our own good 
time. 

For the traits of weakness in our society we can see grounds 
that are at once multiple, intelligible and ironic. I think that the 
three weaknesses—in our education, in our faltering view of 
the future, and in our difficulties in the formulation of policy— 
have some common grounds; but they are not the same, and to 
follow them all is not the purpose of this paper. Certainly egali- 
tarianism and our traditionally cherished tolerance of diversity, 
diversity precisely on the most fundamental issues of man’s na- 
ture and destiny, his salvation and faith, certainly these quali- 
ties, long held as virtues, have much to do with our troubles in 
education where they define, as it were, the insoluble problem; 
they have much to do with the difficulties of prophecy and pol- 
icy, which traditionally rest on consensus precisely with regard 
to those matters where we are dedicated to difference. The good 
fortune of the country, speaking in large terms and over the cen- 
turies, and its consequent optimism and confidence, have some- 
thing to do with our troubles. Perhaps we would not change these 
things, but we must give weight to them, when we compare our- 
selves with Athens, or Elizabethan England, or Victorian, or sev- 
enteenth century France. 

Our weaknesses, of course, have a touch of irony. It is our very 
confidence in education, our determination that it should be 
available to all, our belief that through it man will find dignity 
and freedom, that have played so large a part in reducing our edu- 
cational system to the half-empty mockery that it now is. When, 
for the first time in years of formal peace, we have devoted effort, 
study, thought and treasure to the quest for military security, 
we have brought about the most fearful insecurity that has been 
known to man in what we know of his history. 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


AN INWARD LOOK 213 


Il 


It is commonly said that our national culture favors practice 
over theory, action over thought, invention over contemplation. 
There is some truth to this thesis. It should not be exaggerated. 
For one thing, the balance between operation and reflection must 
always, everywhere, numerically favor the doers as compared to 
the reflectors; even in Athens there were quite a few Sophists for 
one Socrates; and I find it hard to imagine any society in which 
the world’s work does not occupy more people more of the time 
than does an understanding of the world. For another, the bal- 
ance between these aspects of life has been accented by circum- 
stance, in that the doers in our country have had great good for- 
tune to mark and celebrate their deeds: the country’s wealth, 
its spaciousness, its wide measure of freedom, and, on the whole, 
its prevailing optimism. It would take quite considerable ac- 
complishments of theory and understanding to match the bril- 
liance, often almost the impudence, of our material creations. 

Our past has always been marked by a few original and deeply 
reflective minds whose work, though it was part of the intellectual 
tradition of Europe and the world, has nevertheless a peculiarly 
national stamp, as in the four names of Peirce, Gibbs, James, Veb- 
len. Today, in almost all fields of natural science, and in some 
others as well, our country is preéminent in theory as it is in ex- 
periment, invention and practice. This has meant a great change 
in the educational scene, as far as higher education is concerned, 
in the graduate schools, in post-doctoral work, in the institutes 
and universities. Part of this, it is true, has come about because 
of misfortunes abroad: the two wars in Europe, and the Nazis, 
the initial effects of Communist power in Russia, which for a time 
at least made conditions of serious study very difficult. It has 
been brought about in part by the coming to this country of 
scholars in refuge from their régimes, from tyranny and trouble 
abroad. Nevertheless it is true that today a young man wishing 
the best training in theoretical physics or mathematics, theoreti- 
cal chemistry or biology, will be likely to come to this country, as 
three decades ago he would have gone to the schools of Europe. It 
was important, after the end of the Second World War, when 
there was much public interest in the successes in applied science 
which the war years had brought about in this country, to combat 
any exaggerated sense of American superiority by pointing to the 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


214 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


great contributions for which we were in debt to Europeans and 
others from other lands; but to repeat today that which was only 
partially true then, namely that Americans excel in practical un- 
dertakings but are weak in theory, is to distort the truth. It 
should be added, of course, that the number of men engaged in 
theoretical science is always small and, even with us today, it is 
very small. Their work and their existence can have little direct 
bearing on the temper and style of the country. 

Having said all this, it does seem to me that in comparison 
with other civilizations—that of classic India surely, that on the 
continent of Europe, and probably even that of England, where 
theory is brilliantly made but largely ignored in practice—ours 
is a land in which practice is emphasized far more than theory, 
and action far more than contemplation. In the difficult balance 
of teaching, we tend to teach too much in terms of utility and too 
little in terms of beauty. And if and when we “do it ourselves,” 
it is unlikely to be learning and thought. 

To see the bearing of this trait, we should recognize another 
feature of the American landscape: in important, deep and com- 
plex ways, this is a land of diversity; and it tolerates, respects 
and fosters diversity in the form of a true pluralism. There is 
much theory made in the United States: cosmological theory, 
theory of genetic processes, theory about the nature of immunity, 
theory about the nature of matter, theory about learning, about 
prices, about communication; but there is no unifying theory of 
what human life is about; there is no consensus either as to the 
nature of reality or of the part we are to play in it; there is no 
theory of the good life and not much theory of the role of govern- 
ment in promoting it. The diverse talents, skills, beliefs and ex- 
perience of our people contribute effectively to the solution of a 
concrete problem, to answering the well-defined question, to the 
building of a machine, or a structure, or a weapon system; and in 
such concrete and limited exercises, the diversity and strangeness 
of the participants is harmonized by the community of the con- 
crete undertaking. The team of experts, sometimes including 
experts from social science, was an immensely successful inven- 
tion for wartime research, and continues to be in many forms 
of technical enterprise. It continues to be inappropriate, and 
tends to languish, in the general undertakings of academic life. 

American pluralism can no doubt in part be understood in 
terms of our history, and those features in which we differ from 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


AN INWARD LOOK 215 


most of the communities of Europe and of much of Asia. We may 
think of the relatively primitive communities in the Indian vil- 
lages of the Southwest, which some of us may still remember 
from the earlier years of this century. The quality of their life was 
relatively static and highly patterned; all of its elements were 
coherent, and were rendered unified and meaningful by religious 
rites and religious doctrine. Change was slow, and communication 
adequate to the limited experience of the villagers. Such commu- 
nities represent almost an ideal of unity, of common understand- 
ing, and of a monistic view of the world. There has been little of 
the village in American life. The frontier, the openness of the 
country, and later the immense rapidity of change and the tumult 
of motion and traffic, have given us a very different national expe- 
rience. Probably for two centuries New England had the stability 
of village life; and I believe that we see today, in the coherence, 
firmness and mutual understanding of its survivors, one of the 
most stable and unified elements in our country. Probably, al- 
though I know less of this, one could find a similar story in the 
South, though the fortunes of the last hundred years have dealt 
harshly with it. 

Even if we turn our thoughts to Europe, the site of so much 
of the commotion, disillusion and variety which characterize our 
own land, we see important differences; there is a long past of 
limited mobility, culminating in the thirteenth century in the 
unified view of all matters important to man, in a universe deter- 
mined by God, with God omnipresent, with the unvarying 
natures of all finite things, and the ever-present end and purpose 
of man’s life. When this world began to break, it broke slowly, 
first in the minds of the philosophers and scientists. It was not 
until the seventeenth century that the turn from contemplation 
to action can be seen with any completeness; long after it oc- 
curred, its consequences were still troubling to John Donne: “ ’Tis 
all in peeces, all cohaerence gone, All just supply, and all Rela- 
tion.” Man’s awareness of his power came slowly to Europe; it 
came to people bound by a common tongue, a common habit and 
common traditions in taste, manners, arts and ways. 

Compared to all this, Americans are nomads. There is, of 
course, much in common in what brought people to this country; 
but in overwhelming measure, what was common was either nega- 
tive or personal and practical: the desire to escape repression, or 
the hope of making a new fortune. In the formative years of our 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


216 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


history, emptiness, the need and reward for improvisation, vari- 
ety, and the open frontier endowed the differences between men 
with weight and sanction. Our political philosophy undertook to 
reconcile the practical benefits of union with the maximum toler- 
ance of diversity. To all of this has come within the last century, 
and complementing the closing of the physical frontier, a new 
source of change, more radical and in the end more universal than 
those before. This lies, on the one hand, in the unprecedented 
growth of knowledge, whose time scale, estimated apprehensively 
as a half century two hundred years ago, could better now be 
put at a decade; and with this, based partly upon it, partly upon 
accumulated wealth, and partly on the tradition of freedom and 
mobility itself, a technological explosion and an economy unlike 
any the world has seen. 
Early in this century, William James wrote: 


The point I now urge you to observe particularly is the part played by the 
older truths. .. . Their influence is absolutely controlling. Loyalty to them 
is the first principle—in most cases it is the only principle; for by far the most 
usual way of handling phenomena so novel that they would make for a serious 
rearrangement of our preconception is to ignore them altogether, or to abuse 
those who bear witness for them. 


In our time the balance between the old truths and the new has 
been unhinged, and it is not unnatural that most men limit, in 
the severest possible way, the number and the kind of new truths 
with which they will have to deal. This is what makes the intel- 
lectual scene a scene of specialists, and this is what makes our 
people, for all the superficial evidences of similarity, more varied 
in their experience, more foreign to each other in the tongues 
which they use to talk of what is close to them, than in any time 
or place which comes to mind; this is what limits consensus to 
statements so vague that they may mean almost anything, or to 
situations so stark and threatening and so immediate that no 
theoretical structure, no world view, need intervene. 

Perhaps the most nearly coherent of all our large theoretical 
structures is that of natural science. It is hardly relevant to many 
of the questions of policy and strategy with which our Govern- 
ment must be confronted; to some it is. This coherence is, how- 
ever, of a very special sort: it consists by and large in an absence 
of contradiction between any part and any other, and in a per- 
-vasive, often only potential mutual relevance. It does not consist 
in a structural coherence by which the whole can be derived from 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


AN INWARD LOOK 217 


some simple summary, some key, some happy mnemonic device. 
There are thus no fundamentals of science. Its largest truths are 
not definable in terms of common experience; nor do they imply 
the rest. Our knowledge of nature is in no true sense common 
knowledge; it is the treasure of the many flourishing specialized 
communities, often cut off from one another in their rapid growth. 
Never has our common knowledge been so frail a part of what 
is known. Natural science is not known, and probably cannot 
be known, by anyone; small parts of it are; and in the world of 
learning there is mediation in the great dark of ignorance between 
the areas of light. 

In assessing the practical import of scientific developments, the 
Government may be faced by a reflection of this situation. Even 
in so relatively limited a field as the peacetime hazards of atomic 
radiation, it cannot turn to an expert for the answer. It turns to 
the National Academy of Sciences, which assembles a series of 
committees, both numerous and populous, whose collective 
knowledge and collective recognition of ignorance is, for the time 
being, our best answer. 

In other aspects of intellectual life, more relevant to policy and 
to strategy, we find a situation not wholly dissimilar, though less 
formalized and less clearly recognized. In our own internal affairs, 
knowledge on the part of the Government of what the situations 
in fact are with which it must deal is complemented by a tradi- 
tional safeguard in our political institutions. If, in fact, the execu- 
tive and legislative branches of the Government have erred in 
their assessment of the problems of Northwestern lumbermen, 
or of maritime labor, or of Marine recruits, there is opportunity 
for those who are specialists in these ways, because they live in 
them, to be heard; and there is an underlying tolerance, some- 
times violated, sometimes ignored, which yet gives to the voice 
of those most deeply concerned, and most intimately and imme- 
diately knowledgeable, the grave weight of the doctrine of the 
concurrent majority. In foreign affairs, in matters affecting other 
lands and people, no such protection and no such redress exist. 
Here the Government must rely most heavily on what is essen- 
tially scholarship: what the historian, the linguist, the artist 
and all others who, with the slowly learned historian’s art of 
judging, evaluating and understanding, can give as an intimate 
glimpse of what goes on in foreign and often very strange lands. 

Faced with all this, faced with the complexity, the variety and 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


218 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


the rapid change which characterize both the intellectual scene 
and the world itself, there is a terrible temptation to seek for the 
key that is not there, the simple summary from which all else 
might follow. We have tended to do that in the wars of this cen- 
tury, with, it would seem most probable, consequences of great 
trouble when we have come to the end of the war. It was probably 
bad even in the First World War, when our Government had a 
relatively elaborate and learned theory which was widely ac- 
cepted by our people, but which was not quite true. It was prob- 
ably bad in the Second World War, where the theory seemed to 
be very primitive and to consist of the view that evil, however 
widely spread in the world, was so uniquely concentrated in the 
governments of the hostile Powers that we could forget it else- 
where. 

A government may, for more or less valid reasons, reach a con- 
clusion as to what its action should be, as ours does when we de- 
clare war, or when we adopt such relatively well-defined policies 
as the Truman Doctrine. Such decisions, reflecting the best esti- 
mate of the evidence available when they are made, are acts of 
will; clearly, further evidence which supports the decisions rein- 
forces the will, makes the prosecution of the war or the execution 
of the doctrine more likely to be effective. Evidence that the de- 
cisions may have been in error or may no longer be timely has a 
contrary effect. The human commitment to its own decisions, 
the human reluctance to learn and to change should not be rein- 
forced by any doctrine which deprecates the truth, and therefore 
the value, of what is inconsistent with past evidence and past 
judgment. The danger lies, not so much in that the new and con- 
flicting evidence may be weighed and given too little weight; it 
is that it will not even be seen, that our organs of intelligence and 
perception will be coded, much as our sense organs are, by our 
commitment, so that we will not even be aware of inconsistency 
and novelty. 

I believe that we are now deeply injured by the simplifications 
of this time. The cold war is real, it is bitter, and it is deadly. 
But it is not the only issue in the world, and for countless other 
peoples and their governments it is not the issue they see in the 
brightest, harshest light. Such global views tend to inhibit the 
reception of essential knowledge because in the light of our dom- 
inant doctrine this knowledge appears irrelevant or somehow does 
not fit. That we are indeed in this danger seems to me clear from 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


AN INWARD LOOK 219 


the extent to which the unfolding of history finds us always sur- 
prised. 

There are two features of the situation that I have attempted 
to sketch that need a special comment. It seems to me that both 
the variety and the rate of change in our lives are likely to in- 
crease, that our knowledge will keep on growing, perhaps at a 
faster and faster rate, and that change itself will tend to be accel- 
erated. In describing this world, there will probably be no syn- 
opses to spare us the effort of detailed learning. I do not think it 
likely that we are in a brief interval of change and apparent dis- 
order which will soon be ended. The cognitive problem seems to 
me unprecedented in scope, one not put in this vast form to any 
earlier society, and one for which only the most general rules of 
behavior can be found in the past. 

It also seems to me that we must look forward to a world in 
which this American problem is more nearly everyone’s prob- 
lem. The beginnings of this are perhaps as important in the pres- 
ent moods of Europe as are the history of the two Great Wars, 
Communism, the Nazis, and Europe’s loss of political, military 
and economic power. The problems seem clearly implied in the 
determination of peoples in Africa and Asia, and in Central and 
South America, by means not yet devised and not at all under- 
stood, to achieve education, learning, technology and a new 
wealth. They form a part of the unrest, newly apparent in the 
intellectuals of the Soviet world, perhaps especially among their 
scientists, and increase the sombreness of any prospect of change 
from tyranny to freedom. 

There are thus the most compelling external reasons why we, 
in this country, should be better able to take thought, and to 
make available in the pressing problems of policy and strategy 
the intellectual resources now so sorely lacking. ‘They are needed 
in the struggle with Communism; they are needed if we are to 
have some understanding and some slight influence, in all the 
rest of the world, in the great changes that lie ahead for it. 
Awareness of this need will do us good; and I do not underesti- 
mate the value of its general recognition by the people of this 
country nor official recognition by their Government. It can only 
help to make money available to education and to teaching; it 
can only help to make the learned as well as the facile welcome 
in the proceedings of government policy-making. But though 
these measures are bitterly necessary, and though they are long 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


220 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


overdue, the real thing will not, I fear, come from them alone. 

There may be valid grounds for a difference of opinion as to 
whether an official recognition of a need, or even a generally 
understood recognition of a need among our people, will evoke 
the response to that need. What we here need is a vastly greater 
intellectual vigor and discipline; a more habitual and widespread 
openmindedness; and a kind of indefatigability, which is not 
inconsistent with fatigue but is inconsistent with surrender. It 
is not that our land is poor in curiosity, in true learning, in the 
habit of smelling out one’s own self-delusion, in the dedication 
and search for order and law among novelty, variety and con- 
tingency. There is respect for learning and for expertness, and 
a proper recognition of the role of ignorance, and of our limits, 
both as men and as man; but of none of these is there enough, 
either among us, or in the value with which they are held by us, 
if indeed government by the people is not to perish. 


This content downloaded from 62.122.77.90 on Wed, 11 Jun 2014 01:30:48 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


