LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


the 2Py: limit. Electrons excited to any of 
these states are in the continuum of the lower 
set of levels having the same quantum num- 
bers and parity, but approaching the lower 
limit. The result is, the ejection of an electron, 
(i.e. auto-ionization) and the return of the 
atom to the lower limit 2P43. 

Three members of the *P* (3dmd) series in 
calcium, made famous through the work of 
Russell and Saunders, lie above the series 
limit, 42,S1, of the four chief series of singlets 
and triplets. The continuum above these four 
chief series corresponds to even S and D terms 
and to odd P and F terms. The mean-life of 
the three negative °P® states is sufficiently 
great therefore to combine normally with 
lower odd terms and give respectable spec- 
trum lines. The observed 383 term, attributed 


1787 


to (3d4d) by Russell, in combination with 
other terms gives, as would be expected froma 
short mean-life, diffuse lines. 

In strontium a negative 3F° term (4d5p) 
lies above the 52S; limit and in a continuum 
of °F terms (554). These negative *F° (4d6p) 
terms, because they are observed at all, would 
be expected to havea very short mean-life and 
should therefore give rise to diffuse lines, as 
observed. These same *F° terms in barium lie 
below the first limit 62S; and give rise to 
sharp lines, as expected. 

H. E. WHITE 

Department of Physics, 

University of California, 


Berkeley, California, 
September 9, 1931. 


On the Range of Fast Electrons and Neutrons 


Recent experiments on the stopping of 
cosmic rays raise again the question of the 
energy losses of electrons and protons with 
velocity very close to that of light. On the one 
hand we have a good deal of evidence that 
there are, associated with the cosmic rays, 
rays which are certainly not gamma-radia- 
tion, and which behave in some respects like 
beta-rays, since they produce a large number 
of ions in their passage through matter. This 
conclusion, which was reached originally by 
experiments with Geiger counters in series, 
-has been beautifully confirmed by Mott- 
Smith,! who was able to show that the cosmic 
rays are accompanied by particles which pro- 
duce definite cloud-chamber tracks, tracks 
rather thinner than those of an ordinary 
radioactive beta-particle. These ionizing rays 
are, according to Rossi, at least as penetrating 
as the cosmic rays themselves, and perhaps 
more so. On the other hand the independence 
of cosmic-ray intensities of terrestrial latitude 
makes it hard to believe that the rays enter 
the earth’s atmosphere as charged particles. 
We should then want to know the theoretical 
answer to the question: Can a gamma-ray 
produce secondary beta-particles more pene- 
trating than itself? 

Numerous calculations have been made of 
the range of particles moving with velocities 
not too near that of light. Thus quantum- 
theoretical formulae have been obtained by 
Gaunt and Bethe, which in essential points 
confirm the classical formula of Bohr. But no 
quantum theoretical calculations have been 
made for particles of very high energy; and 


the classical result of Bohr for this case is 
based on a derivation which is not quite free 
from objection. Now it would seem at first 
that no adequate calculation could here be 
made, since we have at present no complete 
theory of the interaction of particles of very 
high relative velocity. That such a calculation 
is, nevertheless, possible rests on the fact that 
the processes chiefly responsible for the stop- 
ping of a beta-particle involve relatively in- 
significant energy losses, and that the mean 
energy loss of a beta-particle on collision with 
an atom is very small. This preponderance of 
relatively small energy losses becomes even 
more marked for particles whose velocity ap- 
proaches that of light, and makes it possible 
to calculate the range of the particles without 
neglecting the retardation of the forces be- 
tween them and the atomic electrons. Such a 
calculation has in fact been made by Mller 
for the collision of two free electrons; we have 
made it for the collision of electrons and pro- 
tons with electrons bound in an atom. The re- 
sults are very simple. If the energy of the par- 
ticle (rest mass M, and charge £) is 
eMc? 

then for very large e the number of ions pro- 
duced per cm path increases with Ine, and the 
energy loss per cm path through a gas in 
which there are N electrons per cc is 


[4rre2E2N /me?|- In e. (1) 
1 We want here to thank Dr. Mott-Smith 


for telling us at a Berkeley seminar of his re- 
cent very beautiful experiments. 


1788 


Here e and m are the electronic charge and 
rest mass. For large but not very large e this 
formula must be modified: to Ine must be 
added 

In me?/khv 


where m is the electronic rest mass, v a mean 
ionization frequency for the atomic electrons, 
and 1.1k51.2. This term is just the one 
found by Bethe for slow electrons, and in 
every case reduces the range of the particle 
below the value given by (2). The formula (1) 
gives for the range FR of the particle 


R = |mMct/4re2E2N | - [e/In e| (2). 


This range is just twice that given by Bohr’s 
relativistic formula. Our result gives equal 
ranges to electrons and protons of equal en- 
ergy, and makes this range just one fourth of 
the mean distance, which, according to the 
Klein-Nishina formula, a gamma-ray of this 
same energy travels before its first Compton 
scattering. | 

The result (1) makes it hard to believe that 
the particles observed with cosmic rays are 
electrons or protons, since they are observed 


to ionize less than slower beta-particles. And | 


if we believe in the approximate validity of 
the Klein-Nishina formula, then (2) shows 
that the particles cannot be secondary elec- 
trons. We have therefore thought it of inter- 
est to investigate the ionizing power of the 
neutrons, which were suggested by Pauli to 
salvage the theory of the nucleus. These neu- 
trons,” it will be remembered, are particles of 
finite proper mass, carrying no charge, but 
having a small magnetic moment. Although 
the full calculations of the collision of such a 
neutron with an electron have not yet been 
completed, we have carried them far enough 
to see that there are characteristic differences 
between the ionizing power of a neutron and 
that of an electron, differences which rest 


LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


ultimately upon the fact that the field of the 
neutron falls off more rapidly with distance 
than the Coulomb field. (The field of a neu- 
tron may, of course, be derived from its wave 
equation; and this has been given by Pauli.) 
In particular, the number of ions produced by 
a neutron is, for energies large compared to 
the electronic proper energy mc*, sensibly in- 
dependent of the velocity of the neutron, and 
of its mass, and does not increase, like (1), 
with increasing velocity. Thus even a very 
fast neutron would, if its magnetic moment 
were of the order of that of the proton, pro- 
duce ion tracks perceptibly thinner than those 
of a beta-particle. It will be remembered that, 
according to Pauli, it is one of the functions of 
the neutron to carry off the apparently lost 
energy in a radioactive beta-ray disintegra- 
tion. It would be of extreme interest to see 
whether, in such a disintegration, thin tracks, 
of the kind observed by Mott-Smith, could be 
found. If they were found, we should be cer- 
tain that the neutrons not only played a part 
in the building of nuclei, but that they also 
formed the cosmic rays; if no such tracks 
were found, we should know that the neu- 
trons, if they exist at all, have nothing to do 
with cosmic radiation. 

The theory of the collision of neutrons and 
electrons, and the detailed calculation of the 
ranges of neutrons and fast electrons, will be 
published very shortly. 

J. F. CARLSON. 
J. R. OPPENHEIMER 

LeConte Hall, 

Berkeley, California, 
October 9, 1931. 


2 We are much indebted to Dr. Pauli for 
telling us, at a theoretical seminar in Ann 
Arbor last summer, the elements of the theory 
of the neutron, its functions and its properties, 


The Calculation of the Characteristic Frequency from the Coefficient of Compressibility 


A number of years ago Einstein! derived 
an expression for the characteristic frequency 
of a monatomic solid which is as follows 


p= 2.8 X 107AU3p-16 4-1/2 (1) 


where « is the coefficient of compressibility, 
A is the atomic weight and p is the density of 
the solid. This relation was derived from 
dimensional considerations, and the constant 
was evaluated by considering the effect on a 
given atom of its 26 immediate neighbors in a 


lattice which we now call the simple cubic or 
rock salt type. The result must be regarded as 
an approximation yet it is a useful one and 
therefore deserves further consideration. A re- 
examination of the derivation in the light of 
present knowledge reveals that several am- 
biguities and restrictions inherent in the origi- 
nal work now may be removed. 


1 Einstein, Ann. d. Physik 34, 170 (1911); 
35, 879 (1911). 


