Tur JOHNS HOPKINS 


UNIVERSITY FRESS 


A Study of Thinking 

A Study of Thinking by Jerome S. Bruner; Jacqueline J. Goodnow; George A. Austin; Roger 
W. Brown 

Review by: Robert Oppenheimer 

The Sewanee Review, Vol. 66, No. 3, The University of the South 1858-1958: The Centennial 
Symposia (Summer, 1958), pp. 481-490 

Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press 

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27538750 


Accessed: 10/06/2014 21:29 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


The Johns Hopkins University Press 1s collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The 
Sewanee Review. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ARTS AND LETTERS 48] 


A STUDY OF THINKING* 


By ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


In the spring of 1949, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
held a convocation devoted to the celebration of recent successes in the 
sciences, and to reflections on their portent. Mr. Churchill, then Prime 
Minister of the United Kingdom, commented in the course of his ad- 
dress, “The Dean of the Humanities spoke with awe, ‘of an approach- 
ing scientific ability to control men’s thoughts with precision.’ I shall 
be very content to be dead when that happens.” This book which is 
before us need lend no haste to Churchill’s thoughts of death, nor to 
those of the many others who, without words or with words of less 
austere finality, share his anxieties. 


_ Even the lay reader will recognize in this book some fresh and solid 
steps toward an understanding of characteristic traits of man’s rational 
behavior. He will also see that the psychological sciences have a very 
long way indeed to go. For 4 Study of Thinking has in many ways 
the flavor of the opening of a new science. This is not because its au- 
thors so regard themselves. They are learned in the literature of their 
science; they make discriminating and frequent use of the findings of 
those who have worked in the study of perception, of concept forma- 
tion, of linguistics and of learning. They are happy to recognize that 
the logical ideas to which they are led are as well explicated by Aris- 
totle as ever since; it is clear that the models of von Neumann and 
the theory of games have contributed both to their explicit terminology, 
and to their ways of thinking and of formulating problems. 

But the book has a unity of view and a fervor of conviction which 
makes it point to the future. If it raises more questions than it answers, 
the questions are new and newly sharp because there are some answers 
in the book. Although there is little in the findings here reported that 
shocks or transcends common sense, these findings are cast with the 
precision and objectivity which is indeed the mark of a science finding 
its bearings. 

We are concerned throughout with the discovery and creation of 
order in man’s cognitive life. We are dealing with a work which both 


*4 Study of Thinking. By Jerome S. Bruner, Jacqueline J. Goodnow, the late 
George A. Austin; with an Appendix on Language by Roger W. Brown. Publication 
of the Harvard Cognition Project. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. London: 
Chapman and Hall, Limited. 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


482 ARTS AND LETTERS 


studies a part of this great theme and, in itself, exemplifies it. The 
theme is vast. Man has a great capacity for discrimination. His po- 
tential sense of otherness is almost unlimited. Rational life begins 
with the selective practice of ignoring differences, failing in truth to per- 
ceive them; rational life begins with the failure to use discriminatory 
power in anything like its full potentiality. It lies in the selection, ar- 
rangement, and appropriate adequation to the objects of perception 
and thought, of limited traits, of a small residue of potential wealth. © 

Dr. Brown in his Appendix assaults the analogous problems of lan- 
guage, language made possible only because so many differences of 
sound and tone, aspiration, and articulation are ignored in the forging 
of a common tongue. Lest this creation of order from chaos be seen 
wholly as attrition, one anticipatory finding: the powers of discrimina- 
tion which are subordinated in learning and in language, are not lost; 
they are in a sense set to one side, or on the back burner. They do not 
come easily and immediately into use; but once there is evidence that 
they are relevant to the subject of learning or thought, they can be 
brought back. Thus we can learn languages whose phonetic and sonic 
distinctions differ in profound ways from those of our own; thus it is 
that we can not only see the world as ordered, but can learn when we 
have missed the point, and can attain new levels of insight, complexity, 
richness and structure. 

A physicist, reflecting on these matters, is likely to be reminded of 
his experiences with the quantum theory. In perception, in learning 
concepts, only a small part of our potential perceptivity is engaged. 
The small part, if we are to be successful, must have a proper adequa- 
tion to our theme. The rest cannot be involved in the operation if 
there is to be clarity or order at all. Some of the rest will be involved 
in other problems and other contexts. These limited constellations of 
our human powers are used in a complementary way, none of them ex- 
hausting what we could do, but each in a measure excluding the con- 
current use of all the others. In physics we have learned that in ex- 
periments on an atomic scale, one experimental arrangement and the 
words and ideas appropriate for describing the findings of that experi- 
ment, are complementary to others which might indeed have been used, 
which will again be used, but which cannot be used concurrently. 

What then is this book all about? Certainly not about the whole of 
perception and of thinking; certainly not even about the whole of.the 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ARTS AND LETTERS 433 


processes of abstraction and categorization. But the authors tell us 
in their preface, 


This book is an effort to deal with one of the simplest and most 
ubiquitous phenomena of cognition: categorizing or conceptualiz- 
ing. On closer inspection, it is not so simple. The spirit of the 
inquiry is descriptive. We have not sought “explanation” in terms 
of learning theory, information theory, or personality theory. We 
have sought to describe and in a small measure to explain what 
happens when an intelligent human being seeks to sort the en- 
vironment into significant classes of events so that he may end by 
treating discriminably different things as equivalents. In dealing 
with the problem, we have found ourselves travelling far afield. 


More specifically, the book is an extended analysis, and a report of 
experiments, some done earlier by these and other scientists, but the 
majority done for testing the analysis and answering the questions 
which it raises. It deals with situations neecessarily almost ludicrously 
abstract and unlifelike, with how people learn to categorize, with how 
they learn to recognize instances that they see or hear as belonging 
or not belonging to a class, as illustrating or not illustrating a concept. 
It asks by what procedures people learn to do these things. Are they 
procedures which show a certain consistency of logical method? Do the 
various steps in learning form a coherent pattern, or is each step a 
more or less random probe? Can one perceive the logical structure un- 
derlying the effort of learning? Can one describe it as a strategy of 
learning? And to the extent to which the answers of these questions 
are affirmative, can one understand the choice of strategy in terms of 
its difficulty, its economy, its certitude, its abstractness, the burden it 
puts on memory and inference? How is the choice of strategy affected 
by the circumstances of the learning process, the pressure of time, the 
availability of confirmation, the penalties attaching to error, the purity 
or allusiveness of the material being ordered? 


In short, this is an inquiry, limited to the most antiseptic, controll- 
able and gamelike situations, into one great part of human reason: 
the learning of categories and concepts on the basis of an experience 
either wholly, or in some cases only partially, logically adequate to 
teach them. But neither the authors nor the reader will mistake the 
vast scope of the domain to which this research is relevant. “The re- 
search we have reported has mainly been drawn from the field of 
‘concept formation’ so-called, but’ we would propose that our conclu- 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


484 ARTS AND LETTERS 


sions are applicable to any phenomenon where an organism is faced 
with the task of identifying and placing events into classes on the basis 
of using certain criterial cues and ignoring others.” Or again, very 
near the end, 


We have chosen to call this volume 4 Study of Thinking. A word 
in explanation of this title brings the enterprise to a close. Concept 
attainment is, to be sure, an aspect of what is conventionally called 
thinking, and in this sense the title justifies itself. But we have 
also urged a broader view: that virtually all cognitive activity in- 
volves and is dependent on the process of categorizing. More cri- 
tical still, the act of categorizing derives from man’s capacity to 
infer from ‘sign to significate, and in so far as we have shed any 
light on categorizing as such it is our hope that we have also made 
clearer the nature of inference as a psychological phenomenon. 


It is in passages like these that the authors point with firm hope to 
the future. With even greater frequency, they acknowledge their debt 
to their colleagues, present and past, and even to the “Zeitgeist,” that 
has made it natural for psychologists to turn their attention to man 
as a rational being, and not only to the problems of his appetites, his 
folly, and his will. 


How have the authors set about their enterprise? The main part of 
the book is divided into two principal sections: the first is primarily 
an analysis of categorizing activity, and its relations to general infer- 
ence; and the discussion of the factors involved in learning how to sort 
the environment into functionally significant categories and equivalence 
classes. Here we find discussed the form in which decisions on how 
to learn occur in practice, how sequences of such decisions come to de- 
fine a learning strategy, what general considerations may favor one or 
another course of learning, and how one may alter the weight of these 
considerations by changing the “problem.” It is right that these des- 
criptive and analytic chapters come first, before the discussion of the 
experimental material; the experiments could hardly be intelligible 
without this. Yet the authors themselves state that the clarity which 
illuminates these earlier chapters, and gives order and sense to the 
sequence of experiments, and meaning to the questions that they an- 
swer, emerged after long periods of observation and did not underlie 
the initial designs. “. .. the ideal strategies that have served us so 
steadily in this chapter are essentially refined versions of what we 
have observed our subjects doing. They were not invented by us in 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ARTS AND LETTERS 485 


an a priori manner. Our description of ideal strategies is a descrip- 
tion of what, it seemed to us, our subjects were trying to ‘bring off.’ ” 
Perhaps this also has to do with the hopeful quality of the book. If 
in these simple experiments, stylized as we have said and piteously 
artificial, enough could emerge to warrant an ordered review of so much 
of logic and of common sense, the experiments themselves take on an 
interest far greater than any single one of them reported in this, their 
summation. 


Throughout the whole of the analytic discussion, and throughout 
most of the presentation of the experiments, the authors see, in the 
learning problems which they have studied, a very close analogy to the 
situations confronting the scientist when he plans his research pro- 
gram and tries to decide between alternative concepts and theories, 
which are at the moment still compatible with the evidence. Some parts 
of science are clearly not touched on in this—the moments of discov- 
ery, the times of creation. Here, rather, is the scientist doing his con- 
scientious best, disentangling puzzles fairly well defined and finite. In- 
deed, it is the part of science which is most like a game that is closest 
to the situations dealt with in this study. The rules are well defined; 
the information is honest; there are no tricks: a world, to alter Ein- 
stein’s “Raffiniert ist der Herr Gott, aber boshaft ist er nicht,”—in 
which God is not only not malicious but not even very subtle. But 
this, no doubt, is where most of us begin as children, and this, for 
sure, is where most of us still stay most of our time as men. 

Chapters 4 to 7 describe the experimental designs, the experiments 
themselves, and the questions they raised; and chapter 8 returns to 
the summary of what has been learned, and to some of the principal 
questions raised to a new sharpness by the findings and their analysis, 
questions only partially answered or as yet wholly unanswered. 

What do the experiments do? They are designed to make manifest 
the sequence of choices the subjects use in trying to learn. The verbal 
accounts the subjects give are occasionally referred to; they are not 
part of the experiment. 


In studying concept attainment, then, it has been our aim to 
externalize for observation as many of the decisions as could pos- 
sibly be brought into the open in the hope that regularities in these 
decisions might provide the basis for making inferences about the 
processes involved in learning or attaining a concept.... To put 
the matter perhaps too simply, the analysis of performance strat- 
egy consists in comparing the actual performance of a subject with 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


486 APTS AND LETTERS 


a set of rational or ideal strategies and determining a best fit. 

In the study of thinking, inference, conceptualizing, and 
other such diversely labelled activities, the great technical problem 
is precisely this one. If behavior is to be viewed as strategy, the 
task of analysis can only be accomplished by devising experiments 
that can get a lot of sequentially linked behavior out of the or- 
ganism where it can be observed. 


The subjects of the experiments were students, mostly from Harvard, 
a few from Radcliffe. The number of subjects in one given experi- 
ment runs in the tens, seldom in the hundreds. The students are as- 
signed a task of learning, usually from visual material, cards on which 
objects are printed or drawings, mostly abstract, some sketchily the- 
matic. As far as the experimentor can arrange it, the world of the 
student is limited to these cards that he may see or select or be shown. 
The students are told that they are to learn about a class which con- 
tains some but not all of the cards. They are told whether the defining 
concepts are conjunctive (round and blue), or disjunctive (round or 
blue or both), and whether the relationship between the instance and 
the category is certain or only probable. Then the students are watched 
going about their learning. Sometimes there are limited opportunities 
for selecting instances, or for volunteering a solution; sometimes not. 
Sometimes the cards are presented with maximum order; sometimes 
not. Sometimes what is on the cards refers to a human world; some- 
times not. What goes on is duly noted. On occasion, things which 
cannot be recorded as part of the experiment, such as an expression of 
pleasure at insight, or an evidence of mastery, are noted down as a pro- 
blem for the future. 


The four chapters on experiments, sometimes reviewing earlier work, 
but for the most part undertaken for the purposes of this study, are 
called, “Selection Strategies in Concept Attainment,” “Reception Strat- 
egies in Concept Attainment,” “On Disjunctive Concepts and Their 
Attainment,” “On Categorizing with Probabilistic Cues.” | 


We shall turn now to a sketchy and incomplete account of some of 
the findings. But before we do that, in order to stress again the ab- 
stract nature of the experiments, we quote the final sentences of this 
study, “We have idealized the experimental] situations employed in our 
investigations beyond what is normal in daily life, but that is the price 
one pays for experimenting at all. It is our hope that by reaching a 
fuller understanding of these more idealized forms of thinking i”. vitro, 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ARTS AND LETTERS 487 


the complexities of thinking as we observe it around us will be more 
readily understood.” 

Huizinga, who sees human culture and man’s rational life as an out- 
growth of Homo Ludens, would, no doubt, concur. 

A Study of Thinking is replete with findings based on experiments 
and their analysis. They are almost all statistical findings, in the sense 
that the traits of behavior discovered can not be predicated with uni- 
versality and certainty of every subject. One of the findings, for in- 
stance, is that when students are trying to learn a disjunctive concept, 
they fare far better when their first instances are negative. This does 
not mean that every sequence started with a negative instance gives 
the quickest possible learning, nor does it mean that no subject whose 
“rst instance is positive learns quickly. But the statistical traits are 
striking, and strikingly different from a record of chance behavior; and 
in none of the important conclusions is there any question of their sta- 
tistical significance. The samples are small, but they appear to be 
more than large enough. They are, however, quite specialized, and the 


question of whether Hindus, Senegalese, or Senators would behave like 
Harvard students is left over for the future. 


The samples which are here briefly sketched seem typical to this re- 
viewer in their interest, in their scope, and in the extent to which they 
seem to confirm, refute, or refine common sense views. I have at- 
tempted to select findings which could be presented with a minimum of 
specialized language, and this has caused me to omit many which are 
sharp and, to me, most illuminating. Even where no very specialized 
language is needed, we must remember that these refer to well-defined 
experimental situations, that they are in this sense objective, and in 
this sense limited. 


A. It is possible, in the problem solving behavior of a subject, to 
identify a strategic pattern, and to get a measure of strategic con- 
sistency. “. . . it is possible to describe and evaluate strategies in a 
relatively systematic way, both in terms of their objectives and in terms 
of the steps taken to achieve these” . . . “Each of the strategies is 
amenable to relatively rigorous description, and it is fairly simple to 
employ a quite precise measure for describing the shift from one strat- 
egy to the other.” Thus the authors indicate that they can usually 
identify a strategy from observation of the subject’s choices and se- 
quence of choices. It is all-important for the future of their work that 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


488 ARTS AND LETTERS 


this identification be established as objective, in the sense that the cri- 
teria for identification can be learned by others. 


The authors write further, “. . . it is possible to demonstrate the ef- 
fect of relevant conditions upon measurable aspects of categorizing stra- 
tegies. By so doing, we have been able to ‘get into’ the process of con- 
cept attainment... .” Subjects in general adopt strategies appropriate 
to the problem beloce them, the amount of information they are being 
given, and the instructions of the game. And then again, “In general 
we are struck by the notable flexibility and intelligence of our subjects 
in adapting their strategies to the information, capacity, and risk re- 
quirements we have imposed on them.” If he expects to be allowed 
to continue, the student will take steps, the value of which lies in the 
future use of the information they yield. Some of the best strategies 
on purely logical grounds are unused because they require too much 
inference and too much thinking to be done readily in the head. 
Through all this, a strategy is a sequence of decisions made by the sub- 
ject in an attempt to learn the concept. Through all this, the question 
of the relevance of education and culture comes often to mind. How 
universal are these traits! 


B. A second set of findings has to do with a comparison between in- 
stances based on pictures, pictures of people that evoke stories and 
familiar scenes on the one hand, with pictures of shapes and figures of 
a neutral and abstract quality on the other. The thematic examples 
reduce the logical appropriateness of the strategies employed, and gen- 
erally tend to lead to the testing of a series of hypotheses evoked by 
the themes. “. . . in attempting to differentiate exemplars from non- 
exemplars of a category, as one so frequently must in science, medicine, 
and indeed in daily life, the person will, in the absence of other infor- 
mation, tend to fall back on cues that in the past have seemed useful, 
whether these cues have been useful in an analagous situation or not.” 
This is surely not the whole reason why the questions which most move 
and touch men are among the hardest to answer. 


C. A third set of findings has to do with decisive evidence for the 
aversion and the ineptitude that are involved in the negative: in hand- 
ling the negative instance, in learning from the indirect test, and in 
learning anything about disjunctive concepts. It is not that negative 
instances are not essential. They are in fact the principal instrument 
of correcting error and learning. But they are not liked and there is 
a marked “tendency on the part of subjects to utilize only positive in- 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ARTS AND LETTERS 489 


stances as a basis for forming hypotheses.” Subjects also do not like 
to use indirect tests of a hypothesis. They do not like to have to trans- 
form negative information into positive information or a positive con- 
clusion. Finally, subjects do not like and show little skill in attaining 
disjunctive concepts. The authors think that this may be a character- 
istic of our culture. “It is a characteristic of much scientific thinking 
to assume at the outset that whatever behaves in a common way does 
so for a common cause.” This finding is clearly relevant to the pro- 
blem of causality in history. 


D, Strategies and the purposes of strategy are markedly affected, 
among many other things, by the extent to which the student can learn 
whether he is right or wrong. If he is told of his errors, he works 
hard to eliminate them and to solve the problem. If he has little op- 
portunity to know whether he is right or wrong, he abandons this hope 
and adopts a prudential policy, keeping error within limited bounds. 
Such is our government. 


EK. In a beautiful little experiment on categorization of spoken sounds, 
the Harvard student regarded as distinctive sounds characterized by 
different letters in English. The mono-lingual Navajos, not Harvard 
students, categorized by the length of the vowel. Once the material 
was so arranged as to indicate the possible relevance of vowel length, 
English-speaking students categorized by it too. This is an example 
of a theme running through the whole book: powers of discrimination, 
unused but latent, are resurrected when evoked by the problem. 


None of the findings sketched above, and indeed very few in the 
book as a whole, upsets what we would have expected, or outrages 
common sense; but in every case they suggest further studies; and in 
most cases, the questions to which they lead find no firm answer in 
common sense. This reviewer, at least, does not know the answers. 


A Study of Thinking ranges through territory which has been for 
millennia a battleground of epistemology and metaphysics. It is thus 
not astonishing that from time to time the authors may be found tem- 
porarily manning one of the old trenches. Thus at one point they say, 
“To be sure, the defining criteria in terms of which equivalence classes 
are formed exist in nature as potentially discriminable.” This does 
not keep them from writing, further on, “The categories in terms of 
which we group the events of the world around us are constructions 
or inventions. ... They do not ‘exist’ in the environment.” Nor is 
Dr. Brown able to avoid a bout with Locke and Berkeley. But the 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


490 ARTS AND LETTERS 


authors’ more steady view, it appears to me, they record as follows: 
“We have found it more meaningful to regard a concept as a network 
of sign-significate inferences by which one goes beyond a set of ob- 
served criterial properties exhibited by an object or event to the class 
identity of the object or event in question, and thence to additional in- 
ferences about other unobserved properties of the object or event.” 


That man must act in order to know, that he must thereby reject 
other actions of which he is capable, and lose other knowledge of what 
is knowable in the world, will not solve the old philosophical questions; 
but it will alter, deepen, and illuminate them. 


NOW, GOD HELP THEE, POOR MONKEY!* 


By CHARLES TOMLINSON 


Mr. Coveney’s study of the child in literature (its title comes from 
the words of Lady Macduff to her son) is typical of a good deal of 
the critical writing that appears in England at the present. At its best 
level, his book is highly informative and stimulating. At its average 
level it seems uncertain of the nature of the audience it has to deal 
with, and consequently disperses much of its force in retailing beck- 
ground information of the kind that the educated reader already pos- 
sesses. At its worst level Poor Monkey is somewhat derivative in sub- 
stance and tired in tone. Now this is a pity. For the book possesses 
a real core and its materials are potentially and, at times, actually a 
valuable addition to our notions about literature. 

The author traces the passage of the literary image of the child from 
Blake to Lawrence. He sees in the Romantic use of that image a 
creative symbol, “a focal point of contact,” as he says, “between the 
growing human consciousness and the ‘experience’ of an alien world.” 
In short, the child focuses a disquiet and, at the same time, the artist’s 
hopes for human salvation: it is a touchstone for life. The corruption 
of that symbol provides Mr. Coveney with matter for some of his most 
interesting and original chapters; the symbol of growth gives place to 
its antithesis, to the Victorian image of the “dying child” and to the 


*Poor Monkey: The Child in Literature. By Peter Coveney. London: Rockcliff. 30s. 


This content downloaded from 62.122.73.213 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 21:29:20 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


