PHYSICAL 


REVIEW VOLUME 73, NUMBER 2 JANUARY 


The Multiple Production of Mesons 


H. W. Lewis, J. R. OPPENHEIMER, AND S. A. WOUTHUYSEN 
Depariment of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California* 


(Received October 2, 1947) 


In this paper an attempt is made to treat the impacts of nucleons of very high energy 
(> Mc?). These impacts lead to meson emission, despite the relatively small momentum trans- 
fers to be expected, because changes of nuclear charge and spin require a readjustment of the 
nuclear meson fields. Where the fields are strong (as e.g., in the pseudoscalar case), meson 
emission is multiple, and the multiplicity increases with energy. For weaker coupling (e.g., 
scalar fields) this is not true. 

Two closely related methods are developed for a more quantitative description of these 
collisions. These methods may be expected to give valid results when the collision time is short 
compared to the periods of the emitted mesons, and when the emission of mesons into the various 
modes can be treated as statistically independent. Under these conditions the total cross section 
may be expected to be about 10-*6 cm?, and the multiplicity to approach for high energies 
2¢3(MEo/2xp*c*)!, with Eo the primary energy and g the dimensionless coupling constant. 

Some applications to the calculation of positive excess, primary spectrum, angular dis- 


15, 


1948 


tribution, and the theory of auger showers, are discussed briefly in the final section. 


I. QUALITATIVE CONSIDERATIONS 


URKAWA’S original argument, which antici- 
pated the existence of mesons, was based on 
the role which they would play in accounting for 
nuclear stability and the forces between nucleons. 
On the one hand, very extensive theoretical study 
has failed to devise a theory which accounts at 
all reasonably for the quantitative aspects of 
nuclear forces; on the other hand, decisive ex- 
perience with cosmic-ray mesons, both with the 
absorption and scattering of the penetrating 
component, and with the capture of mesons 
brought to rest in matter, fails to reveal the 
evidences of any strong interaction. Only one 
phenomenon shows, if not yet conclusively, that 
there is a strong interaction between mesons and 
nuclear matter. This is the phenomenon of the 
production of mesons, which takes place with 
very high probability, and with characteristic 
and high multiplicity when the primary cosmic 
rays traverse the matter of the earth’s atmos- 
phere.! These present notes give some con- 
siderations about the theoretical treatment of 
these collisions. 
Quite apart from the inadequacy of current 
theoretical methods and concepts, to which we 
will have to return over and over again in the 


* Now at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, 
New Jersey. 

1M. Schein, W. P. Jesse, and E. O. Wollan, Phys. Rev. 
59, 615 (1941); M. Schein, M. Iona, and J. Tabin, Phys. 
Rev. 64, 253 (1943). 


discussion of this problem, it appears that a 
somewhat more complex model may have to be 
invoked to reconcile the strong interactions 
manifested in meson creation with the absence of 
subsequent interactions between cosmic-ray 
mesons and nuclear matter. Especially if one 
compares the processes of production with the 
processes of meson absorption, let us say, in the 
domain of ten billion volts, one is led to an 
apparent lack of correspondence between ele- 
mentary processes and their approximate in- 
verses quite at variance with preceding ex- 
perience. In the discussions of this problem, 
which has definiteky not been resolved by such 
theoretical development as the “strong coupling”’ 
theory, it was recognized at the Shelter Island 
Conference? that the most natural interpretation 
lay in the existence of ‘‘structure,’’ either for the 
nucleons or the mesons, or both. Thus Weisskopf 
suggested the existence of lang-lived metastable 
states for the nucleons formed during the primary 
collision and subsequently decaying with a long 
lifetime to yield the mesons; whereas Marshak 
proposed the equally satisfactory view that the 
mesons originally created were metastable with 
regard to disintegration into those actually ob- 
served, as might, for instance, be the case if they 
had a higher mass. 

In making this study, we shall, of course, not 


2 June 1947, sponsored by the National Academy of 
Sciences. 


127 


128 


be able to account for copious meson production 
without assuming a strong coupling between 
mesons and nucleons; but it is to be understood 
that much of the argument does not depend on a 
direct identification of the mesons with those 
observed in cosmic rays, nor on the exclusion of 
metastable states for nuclear matter. In fact, the 
arguments which originally led Yukawa to the 
view that charged quanta must exist have in no 
way been weakened by recent experience in the 
domain of nuclear physics: the scattering, by 
neutrons and protons, of neutrons of high energy 
reveals the important part played by charge 
exchange in these phenomena; and the measure- 
ment of the magnetic moment of the triton 
strongly suggests, if it does not prove, the 
existence of electromagnetic currents associated 
with nuclear attractions.® 

Even under the assumption of strong coupling, 
such as, for instance, characterized the sym- 
metric pseudoscalar or ‘‘mixed”’ theories, or the 
pair theories, of nuclear forces, an understanding 
of the phenomena of meson production is by 
no means trivial. There seem to be two charac- 
teristics of these collisions which are well 
established: The first is that they correspond toa 
cross section very close to the size of the nucleus; 
the second is that the typical act is a multiple 
one in which a considerable number of mesons, 
perhaps 5 or so, for typical cosmic-ray energies, 
are created. When one remembers that these 
collisions occur at distances of encounter for 
which nuclear forces as normally experienced are 
extremely weak, one must ask two questions: 
Why do these encounters lead to such strong 
emission, and why is this emission characteris- 
tically multiple? 

To these two questions one would like to give 
simple qualitative answers. To the first: although 
relatively remote collisions are not accompanied 
by large momentum transfers between nucleons, 
they probably are accompanied by changes of 
spin and isotopic spin. Thus, the collision pro- 
duces a discrepancy between the meson fields 
which are actually present about the nucleon, 
and those which are appropriate to its new state. 
Insofar as it is possible to idealize the collision 
processes as rapid, compared to the time of 


3 Felix Villars, Phys. Rev. 72, 256 (1947). 
4 Cf. reference 1. 


LEWIS, OPPENHEIMER, 


AND WOUTHUYSEN 


emission of mesons, this would lead us to expect 
a very probable emission. As to the second 
question,> and guided by similar qualitative 
arguments, we may suppose that if the fields of 
nucleons are indeed very intense, so that large 
numbers of mesons are present in these fields, 
then the effect of a sudden change of spin of 
isotopic spin will be to release considerable 
numbers of mesons, as is observed. Whether and 
how this number will depend on the energy of 
the collision must, as the future analysis will 
show, depend importantly on detailed charac- 
teristics of the field. But even at this stage we 
may say that if the collisions between nucleons 
involved no change other than a small transfer 
of momentum, the large radiation cross sections 
would not be intelligible, and that if the fields 
surrounding the nucleons were in fact as weak 
and as weakly dependent on position as the 
Coulomb field, this radiation process would not 
be highly multiple. 

It should be observed that in these discussions 
we have assumed that the primary cosmic ray is 
itself a nucleon, an assumption which is now 
current. Some support for the view that meson 
production is in fact the result of the collision of 
nucleons comes from the study of so-called 
penetrating showers throughout the atmosphere, 
and at sea level.® In fact, the characteristics and 
number of such showers at sea level, and the 
equal distribution between charged and neutral 
initiators, suggests quite strongly that these 
phenomena are what is left of the primary col- 
lisions in the upper atmosphere, after the absorp- 
tion of the primaries and of their secondary 
protons and neutrons. At least this assumption 
that protons initiate these collisions in the upper 
atmosphere underlies the work of this paper. 

Most of the evidence of multiple production 
and of collision cross section comes from the 
typical cosmic ray, of energy say ten billion volts. 
It is possible so to interpret the very large air 
showers as to obtain evidence bearing on much 
higher energies. [t seems to be true that these 
showers have their origin quite near the top of 


5 J. R. Oppenheimer and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 60, 
150 (1941); PEL A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 70, 787 (1946). 

él. Janossy, Proc. Roy. Soc. A179, 361 (1942); L. 
Janossy ae G. D. Rochester, Proc. Roy. Soc. A181, 399 
(1943); W. B. Fretter, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. Stanford 
meeting, July 1947. 


MULTIPLE PRODUCTION 


the atmosphere, and that they involve an in- 
timate mixture of meson and soft radiation. A 
natural, but by no means unique, interpretation 
of this is that the soft radiation arises primarily 
from the decay of neutral mesons, though little 
in our arguments would be altered were the decay 
process to involve transitions from heavier to 
lighter particles, provided the time of such 
decay were short enough to satisfy the Mills- 
Christy condition,’ and long compared to all 
collision times. If these suggestions prove to be 
correct, they will bring with them the conse- 
quence that, even for energies in the range of the 
10“ volts, and perhaps higher, collision cross 
sections must be of the order of nuclear areas, 
and must lead to the conversion of a large part 
of the primary energy into mesons and their 
decay products. As we shall see, the interpreta- 
tion of such collisions on the basis of meson-field 
theories gives us information about field strengths 
of very great magnitude, such as might obtain in 
the immediate neighborhood of the nucleon. 

It is, of course, not possible, even adopting one 
of the more or less standard forms of meson 
theory, to compute what will happen in a col- 
lision between two nucleons of high energy, 
because of this clearly depends on a reliable 
theory of the reaction of meson radiation on the 
collision process. Even in the simple case of the 
electromagnetic radiation of a slow electron 
deflected by a scatterer no such theory exists; 
nor do even the most radical attempts at altering 
electrodynamics give an answer which is finite 
and acceptable.’ But precisely for this reason, 
attempts at treating meson radiation may not be 
entirely devoid of methodological interest, since 
effects of radiation reaction, which in electro- 
dynamics may be small and only barely sus- 
ceptible to observation, are here of decisive 
importance. 

For analogy, we may be guided by the problem 
of electromagnetic radiation. Here, as Bloch and 
‘6 M. M. Mills and R. F. Christy, Phys. Rev. 71, 275 
<th Pauli, Helv. Phys. Acta 19, 234 (1946); H. A. 
Bethe and J. R. Oppenheimer, Phys. Rev. 70, 451 (1946). 
Note added in proof: Recently, in connection with the 
work of Lamb, Schwinger, Bethe and Weisskopf on the 
term shifts of hydrogen, one of us (H. W. L.) has solved 
this problem (Physical Review; to be published). The ex- 
tension of this work to meson problems clearly deserves 


intensive study. It is to be hoped that it makes many of 
the assumptions of this paper unnecessary. 


OF MESONS 129 
Nordsieck first showed, the problem can be very 
simply treated insofar as one may make three 
assumptions: (1) the collision time is short com- 
pared to the periods of the emitted radiation; (2) 
the effect of the emitted radiation, in particular 
its recoil, on the source may be neglected; (3) only 
those components of the radiation field will be 
considered for which these conditions are satis- 
fied. The difficulties, of course, arise from the 
fact that in any radiation problem, the ‘“‘virtual”’ 
effects of components for which conditions 1 and 
2 are not satisfied cannot legitimately be ignored. 
When these three conditions are fulfilled, one 
has two simple results: The radiated spectrum 
can be obtained as the difference between the 
quasi-static fields of the radiator as it is and as it 
should be after the scattering process, and (2) 
the total probability of collision is not altered, 
though collisions are now accompanied by the 
emission of radiation, which would have been 
regarded as elastic had not the coupling with the 
radiation field been considered. 

In the following we shall attempt to develop 
methods based on the three assumptions above, 
and appropriate to meson-producing collisions. 
To this end, we shall first modify the Bloch- 
Nordsieck method of canonical transformation to 
make it apply to characteristic meson fields. As 
is well known, this means physically regarding 
the nucleon, plus its quasi-static field, as the 
elementary ingredient of the collision rather than 
the bare nucleon itself. Although it is easy to 
carry through these calculations, they may 
nevertheless leave something to be desired, and 
that for the following reason: in nuclear impacts 
and for the emission of mesons, the spin and 
isotopic spin of the nucleons change. On the one 
hand, these changes cannot be consistently taken 
into account by a theory which neglects the 
effects of radiation on the source. On the other 
hand, just these changes in spin would appear 
to be decisive for the course of the collision. For 
this reason we have supplemented the Bloch- 
Nordsieck treatment by a species of perturbation 
theory, which in the electromagnetic case would 
itself be its equivalent, and which again exploits, 
but to a more limited extent, the statistical 
independence of the emission process. In this 
treatment we considered the process of emitting 
a fixed number of mesons, and calculated its 


130 


cross section to the lowest order in all coupling 
constants in which it appears in the formal 
treatment. We then compare the cross sections 
for various numbers of mesons emitted, always 
working in their lowest order. We assume that 
although these absolute cross sections are mani- 
festly meaningless, their ratios are correctly 
given by this means of calculation. In fact, this 
assumption means that all calculated cross 
sections will be reduced by the effects of radiation 
damping, so that, as in the electromagnetic case, 
the sum of all cross sections is the same as we 
would obtain for the elastic cross section with the 
neglect of radiation processes and, further, that 
the factor by which the calculated cross section 
must be reduced varies not at all, or only slowly, 
with the number of mesons emitted. It is clear 
that quite apart from deeper questions, some 
consideration needs to be given to the momentum 
relations in these collisions, since collisions in- 
volving large transfers of momentum from one 
nucleon to another can take place only for cor- 
respondingly small impact parameters. Some 
comments on this point will be found in the 
course of the actual calculations. 

Thus the calculations which follow make no 
pretense to an estimate of total cross sections, 
but take these over from the estimate of the 
probability of the corresponding elastic col- 
lisions. It may be agreed that on the basis of 
what is known about nuclear forces and of the 
measurement on the collisions of 100-million volt 
neutrons with protons and neutrons,® the cross 
section observed for the cosmic-ray processes 
would seem to be a reasonable extrapolation. In 
fact, if one assumes that there are no serious 
singularities in the potentials between neutrons 
and protons, and adjusts their range and strength 
to agree with nuclear experience, one obtains 
elastic cross sections in the relativistic domain 
which are constant, and have the value of about 
10-2 cm? per nucleon. This is in reasonable 
enough accord with cosmic-ray experience. 

One final comment may perhaps be appropri- 
ate. These calculations have been carried out in 
the relativistic domain, that is, where the primary 
energies are large compared to a billion volts; 
this has been done in part in an attempt to 


® We are indebted to Dr. E. MacMillan for information 
on #-p and n-n total cross sections at about 90 Mev. 


LEWIS, OPPENHEIMER, AND WOUTHUYSEN 


make the results applicable to the great auger 
showers, and this in turn in part because this 
application of theory extends to the most intense 
fields and the smallest distances. Since it will be 
clear from the following calculations that in 
theories like the scalar theory, where these fields 
are only moderate, one does not obtain a high 
and increasing multiplicity of meson production, 
the question arises as to what meaning to ascribe 
to the enormously greater field strengths charac- 
teristic, e.g., of the pseudoscalar, or pair, 
theories. For certainly we know one thing: the 
nucleon response to these fields gives no direct 
evidence of their existence; the nucleons act as 
though the forces between them were free of 
important singularities, not only in the normal 
phenomena of nuclear physics, but even by the 
collisions of 100-million volt nucleons, where 
quite small momentum exchanges are the rule. 
Nevertheless, the possibility should not be over- 
looked that these strong fields may have mean- 
ing, in the sense that they can be radiated under 
suitable circumstances, and yet not be sus- 
ceptible of familiar interpretation in terms of the 
behavior of the nucleons which are subject to 
them. Much will have to be learned before even 
the partial validity of this notion can be regarded 
as established. 

In summary of the results of the calculations 
which have just briefly been described, it may 
be said that a scalar theory gives an energy inde- 
pendent, and, in general, a small multiplicity of 
production; that a theory which involves no 
internal change in the nucleons when they scatter 
each other, such as charge or spin exchange, will 
give a very small probability of radiation; that 
the symmetrical pseudoscalar theory, and a 
similar formulation of pair theory, do in fact 
give large probabilities and large multiplicity of 
meson production; and that in the forms here 
considered, and at extremely high energies, the 
multiplicity rises with the cube root of the 
primary energy. Some physical applications of 
these results are discussed in a quite tentative 
way in Section IV of the paper. 


II. BLOCH-NORDSIECK METHOD 
A. Symmetrical Scalar Theory 


We will now treat the collision of two nucleons 
in the symmetrical scalar theory by a method 


MULTIPLE PRODUCTION OF MESONS 


similar to that of Bloch and Nordsieck. The 
meson field will be considered to interact with the 
nucleon through the latter’s isotopic spin, which 
will be treated classically. A canonical transfor- 
mation will be performed to find the quasi-static 
meson field associated with the nucleon for a 
definite orientation of its isotopic spin (definite 
charge state). We will describe charge exchange 
in the collision by introducing a potential, V, 
which can change the isotopic spin of the 
nucleons in the collision. The corresponding 
change in the quasi-static field appropriate to the 
isotopic spin orientation will give us the radiation 
in the collision. Thus the primary interaction 
between nucleons could, for instance, be of the 
form (1-2) V(r); of V we shall assume that its 
Fourier transform tends to zero for momenta 
>pc. As will be obvious, we should obtain no 
radiation (in the approximation here considered) 
were we to omit the charge exchange (1:2) 
from the interaction. It should further be ob- 
served that here we neither assume nor deny 
that the interaction can be derived from the 
meson interactions themselves. Following Bloch 
and Nordsieck,!® we use the Dirac equation for 
the heavy particle coupled to the meson field, and 
neglect recoils. The Hamiltonian is then,* 


kb 
H=a-P+BM+> 5 (Que! + Pua) 
ak 


+Bg(4r)? > (Ore sink-r+Py,.cosk-r) (1) 
ak Ro 


which, by the Bloch-Nordsieck argument,** can 
be replaced by its positive energy part, 


M Ro 
H= v-P+—+), 3 (eee FP nat) 
Y ak 


g To 
+ —(4r)i +> 7 eee sink-r+P:.cosk-r), (2) 
Y 0 


ak 


where the isotopic spin vector = is treated as a 
classical unit vector. M is the mass of the heavy 


10F, Bloch and A. Nordsieck, Phys. Rev. 52, 54 (1937). 

* ¢=h=p=mass of the meson=1. 

** It will be seen in Section III that virtual pair pro- 
duction does not play an important part in these processes. 
In (1), w@ and B are the usual Dirac matrices, Qka is the 
amplitude of the mode of the meson field with wave 
number k and charge coordinate a, Pka is the momentum 
conjugate to Qka, ko is [1-+-k?]#, and g* is the dimensionless 
coupling constant, yM is the energy of the nucleon. 


131 


particle, and the meson field is represented by 
Ca = Ok ko (Qa sink: r+ Pre cosk- r), (3) 


where the Qyq and Pie are canonically conjugate. 
We make the canonical transformation 


Pra = Pre — ke cosk- r’, 
Oke = Oka! — Aka sink: rr 

rr, 

P= Pp’ + a kaa (Qh! sink -y’ 

ak 
+ Pra’ cosk-r’ — fax), 
£T« (4a/ko)? 
y(ko— V- k) 


obtaining finally, for the transformed wave 
equation, 


(4) 


with 


Lka 


M Ro 
v-P’+—+>> — (Oke? + Pra’) 

Y ak 2 

arg” 
k ¥?(Ro—V-k) 
whose solution is 
u’=y exp[tMyv-r’ lI] hmax(Qko’), (6) 

ak 


—Epul(t’, Qra’') =0, (5) 


where x is a normalized spinor, and the Ama, are 
normalized Hermite polynomials. 

Now, transforming back to the old coor- 
dinates, we have 
u(r, Ora) =x exp[tMyv-r | 

II exp[ —t@xa cosk- r(Qra+ $e sink: r) 

ak 


Xhmaz(Qrat Oka sink- Tr). (7) 


The cross section for scattering by a potential V, 
with emission of 7,, mesons in each mode ak, is 


e~Yar, (8) 


Nak: 


where (P, Po) and (Q, Qo) are the initial and final 
momentum and energy of the nucleon, and 


a (9) 


where Ar, is the change in rq during the scat- 
tering process. 

It should be observed that the term e—“«s 
above is independent of the m., and should be 
summed over all the modes available. This would 


132 


make the total cross section zero, corresponding 
to the fact that the virtual emissions are not 
restricted by the energy conservation conditions. 
A similar result was found by Pauli and Fierz!! 
for the electromagnetic case. However, the fact 
that this factor is independent of the 2., means 
that its effect is to cut down the total cross 
section, but it does not affect the ratzo of the 
probabilities of emitting NM and N-+1 mesons. 
We will assume that the inadequacy of the 
assumptions inherent in this method, as dis- 
cussed in Section I, does not destroy this charac- 
teristic of the damping. In this way we can give 
sense to the calculation, since we will calculate 
only the most probable number of mesons 
emitted, and will attach no significance to the 
total cross section. Therefore we omit these 
terms, and all others that do not depend upon 
the number of emitted mesons. We also replace 
Nox! by 1, since the finite rest mass makes it 
unlikely that more than one meson will be 
emitted into any particular mode. We have, then, 


o~|Vepo|? II Wak; (10) 


where the product is carried out over all the 
modes into which a meson is emitted. 

Now to obtain the total cross section for the 
emission of N mesons, with total energy loss e, 
this has to be summed over all the modes satis- 
fying the energy loss condition. Thus 


2 N 
al 
Il dk, at (Ara?) Na 
Xx ——__—_______—— } ] ——-—_, 
a Ron(Ron— V° -k aye a N,! 
where the sum is taken over all N. such that 
> Na=WN, and the integral over the volume in 
momentum space corresponding to an energy 
loss between e and e+de.*** The N,! arise from 
the indistinguishability of mesons of each type. 
We have, then, 


o(N, e)de~| Vrol*( 


o(N, e)de~w | Veal*( = 


(11) 


=) = (Ax*)¥ 


ary” 
k adbdin 
xX f- {1 (12) 
e Ge? a)? 


1 W. Pauliand M. Fierz, Nuovo Cimento 15, 167 (1938). 

*** It should be noted that the continuous decrease in 
y affects only the absolute magnitude of the cross section, 
so that the initial value may be used here. 


LEWIS, OPPENHEIMER, AND WOUTHUYSEN 


where yu, is the cosine of the angle the mth meson 
makes with the direction of motion of the 
nucleon. Now, in order to find the limits of 
integration, it is necessary to take into account 
the longitudinal momentum transfer from the 
other nucleon (for which exactly these same con- 
siderations hold, provided we are in a coordinate 
system in which each nucleon is near the speed 
of light). 

If the momentum transfer between the nu- 
cleons is K, then the equations of conservation 
of energy and momentum are 


Ni 
APi,= —>\ k.—K,, 
N2 
AP , k.+K., 
2 Ds (13) 
Ni 
Ak, = —e=Vv,;: AP, = —Vy, >, k,—K,, 
N2 


AF, = —€ = Vo: AP. = >, k,—v.Kz, 


where the 2 axis is taken along the direction of 
motion of the first nucleon. Thus, since 


N 
Ds Ron=ater, 


vy 


N N 
€) = >, (Ron +vekzn) . ye QXny 
U1 V2 
(14) 


N N 
(Ron Uirken) = 2 Bn- 


01+ Ve 
Now making the transformation from py, ko, to 
Qn, Bn we have, since 


Vy+V. 
kdkodp = dadBp~ 2dadB, 


Uy V9 


g" NitN2 
o( Ni, Noese:)deydeg ~ | V(K,) | (-) 
T 


ie fe i= , dand Bn (15) 


ye ye2V2N IN! 2) No(Bn2)N1 


where in the denominator a? appears for each 
meson emitted by the second nucleon, and £? for 
each emitted by the first. The integration is over 
the sheet 


N N 
€) < > On <e+de, €2S ~ BaS éo+des. 


For e, and e: large compared to uc’, the integral 


(16) 


MULTIPLE PRODUCTION OF MESONS 


in (15) becomes 
[- ji <<). n(—— =), 
arty? wbye 

since for a given a the lower limit of @ is 
(a?+-71?)/4ay12, and inversely. This can be ap- 
proximately evaluated when e:/Niy1 and €2/Ney2 
are either much less than or much greater than 
one. We shall see that the most probable multi- 
plicity and energy losses occur in the latter 
region, so we will evaluate the integral in that 
case. The major contributions will then come 


from aa~ei/N1, Bua~e2e/N2, and the integral 
becomes, in this limit, 


€1 Ni-1 €5 No-l NiN> 
ANw 2N 1 2N (==) ( in) ———de,dep. 


v1 v2 E1€9 
Thus 
a (NV. LV. 2€1€2) deide. Cm | V(K z) | : 
22\% NIN, 
x (=) (Aes?) %1( A 29?) ¥2 
v €1€2 


. (Ine,/y1)¥* (Ines /y2)¥2 


dede. (17) 
N,! N,! 


Now to account for the different distributions of 
the mesons among the nucleons, this has to be 
multiplied by the binomial coefficient Cv,%, and 
summed over JN, to obtain the cross section for 
the emission of N mesons, with energy losses e€; 
and €:. 


g N N 
o(New)dade~( = N! a | V(Kz) ie 
WT N1=0 
N» 
(At12)¥1( Ag?) 2 


€,€9 
(Iner/yi)¥! (Inee/y2) 827 


N,? N," 


The | V|? is placed inside the sum, since, from 
(13), setting vi~ve~e, 
No Ni 


N 
2K,=atet>d, kz—>d, ke=ate— Dd, Rin, 


so that the longitudinal momentum transfer 
required depends upon the distribution of the 
mesons between the nucleons. We can obtain an 
idea of what is required by using the average 
values of the kz, as given by the distribution (11). 


(18) 


€;d 2. 


(19) 


133 


Here the resonance denominators force the 
emissions to be forward for the most part, and 
K, is of the order Nuc. Now our assumption that 
both nucleons are moving near the speed of light 
requires us, for large energy losses, to work in a 
coordinate system in which neither nucleon 
reverses its direction of motion. For large equal 
energy losses this is the center of mass system. 
We therefore} go into the center of mass system, 
setting y1=Y2=y, and suppose that N<y. This 
corresponds to the condition that the mesons 
emitted have energies greater than Mc?. The 
Fourier analysis of the scattering potential should 
be flat up to momentum transfers of order uc, 
so that the | V|? can now be taken out of the sum. 
Integrating over-all energy losses, we obtain 


gt\N Emax \ ™ 
w)~(=) win ) 
T Y 
N (AtP)N1(A te?) 2 
N,!No! 


, (20) 


N1=0 


where é€max is the maximum energy a nucleon can 
lose in the center of mass system. This probably 
is somewhere between (y—1)M and (y—2)M, 
since the nucleon does not convert its rest energy 
into mesons, and probably stops appreciable 
emissions when its velocity becomes sensibly 
less than that of light. Thus this factor becomes 
In M/p for high energies, greater than around 
10" volts. 

Now for a symmetrical potential of the form 
(<1: %2) V(r) as is given by the symmetrical meson 
theories, t1-+ 2 is a constant of the motion in a 
scattering process, so At,;= —Art,=Art, and, 
since the sum in (20) may be replaced to sufficient 
accuracy by its largest term, we have, 


4g?Ac’\% 1 Gane 
o(N)~ ( ) —(in 
T N! ¥ 


since (4N)!~2-%?(N!)%, This is valid for 
N <émax/y. The cross section has a maximum at 


(21) 


(22) 


which is small for most reasonable values of g?, 
and gives a most probable multiplicity which 


+ Thus, if Eo is the primary energy, 
yM=(3M(E°+ MM) }. 


134 


does not increase with energy.{f This corre- 
sponds to the fact that the scalar meson field has 
only a r~ singularity near the source, and con- 
tains only a logarithmically infinite number of 
mesons. 


B. Symmetrical Pseudoscalar Theory 


We will now use essentially the same method 
to treat the case of a symmetrical pseudoscalar 
field, which is different from the scalar theory in 
two respects. First, we will use a coupling in 
which both the isotopic and ordinary spins 
appear, so that changes in either one can cause 
meson emission. Second, we will use a gradient 
coupling so that the quasi-static field has a worse 
singularity near the source than was the case for 
the scalar field (1/r? instead of 1/7). As we will 
see, this latter leads to a more copious meson 
emission, corresponding to the much stronger 
meson-field strengths in the vicinity of the 
source. We will suppose that the internucleonic 
potential can effect either ordinary or isotopic 
spin changes, but that it is free of singularities— 
and its Fourier transform small for k>>yc—as 
would not be the case were the interaction to be 
derived directly from the meson fields; such 
singular interaction can clearly not be treated as 
small. The procedure is then exactly analogous 
to that for the scalar field, with the Namiltonian 


k 
Va pig eS = (Qret-+ Pa) 
ak 


Ta 
+g(4m)! 3) —(o-k—ysko) 
ak kot 


X (Ore cosk: rt — Pye sink-r), 


which can be replaced by 


(23) 


M ko ; 
H=v- Pt te geet Pee!) 
Y 


—g(4m)3 = (bo Ri) 
X (Qka a r—Pysink-r) (24) 


tt Were we to assume very large values of g?, we should 
have the other limiting case N>>emax/y; here (21) would 
be replaced by 


2 As2 2 QIN 
Pare Cee see) (8 1 


We (2 la) 


which yields 

N~ (487A 2% emax?/ry")!, 
which, though large for large enough g?, still does not 
increase with increasing energy. 


LEWIS, OPPENHEIMER, AND WOUTHUYSEN 


for y~c. The canonical transformation is similar 
to the scalar one, and we obtain again 


o~|Vee|? II vex, (25) 
where now 
Vak = (24g?/ko)| A(tasi\) F, (26) 
so that 
g2\ gNigg’? 
o (Ni Noeie) desde, ~ | V(K,) n(= ) nen 
us N, IN,! 
N 
xf . { [[ dand8,, (27) 
where 
= deal A(raa))) |. 
The integration yields, 
g? N g Nig N2 
o (Ni Noei€2)deyden~ | V(K,) "(=) zee 
N,'N,! 
(€)€.)¥—} 
(28) 


x N reap oe 2 


Again multiplying by Cy," and summing, we 


have 
g?\ N?(e@)¥— 
o(Wee)dede~ (- ) ———_———(d¢,de 
vs N! 
N g Nig Ne 
DV) ee (29) 
N1=0 (Ni!N2!)? 


Now, however, for large energy losses in the 
center of mass system the spherical symmetry 
gives 


K.~jlert+e), 


which can be as large as émax, which is larger 
than yuc for incident proton energies greater 
than about 510! ev. However, the spherical 
symmetry also makes the momentum transfer 
independent of the distribution of the mesons 
between the two nucleons, so that the matrix 
element can be taken out of the summation, and 
we will return to the question of the large mo- 
mentum transfers below. 

Replacing the sum, as before, by its largest 
term, which occurs at Ny=fiN and N2=f2N, 
where fi=qi/(qitq2) and fe=qe2/(qitge2), we 
have 


o( Nees) derder 


2\ N N2(e6)¥—! sg, +Go 
~(- )- i ee ( a ) desde, (30) 
N38 fr fel? 


MULTIPLE PRODUCTION OF 


and, integrating over-all energy losses in the 
center of mass system, 


2 erga Gitge x 
iny~(=) ~~.) . (31) 
ar N38 fil fof? 


(31) has a maximum at 


Int Nf2y 3 3 i 
(yy (GY 
T fi’ 1 FoF? yM 
which increases as y! or as the cube root of the 
primary energy. This corresponds to the inverse 
square singularity of the pseudoscalar meson 
field, which gives an unlimited supply of mesons. 
We have assumed that the | V(K,)|? varies more 
slowly with NV than the other factors, even in the 
region of large momentum transfers. 
We note, for future reference, that the case of 
a neutral pseudoscalar field is obtained by setting 
fi=fe=4, and q:=q2=[A(7,0;;) ?, for the case 
of a symmetrical interaction between the 
nucleons. Thus, the cross section becomes, 


4g? N ence’ 
oW)=(—=) fate 
r/ (NY) | 


and gives 


—— 
ot 


y (a "Tac ¥(“=) (32a) 
— A(r.¢0 —— }, a 
1] yM 


Tv 


We note also that the number of mesons of 
each charge type depends upon the change in 
Tao\; SO that with a potential that doesn’t dis- 
criminate among the different rt. we should 
expect that an average of one-third of the mesons 
would be neutral, and two-thirds charged. 


C. Comparison and Total Cross Section 


The preceding considerations have illustrated 
a number of general features of the radiation 
process. First, it is clear from the method, as 
well as from the examples, that the radiation 
occurs through a change in the source—in par- 
ticular, a change in some feature of the source to 
which the meson field is coupled. Thus the scalar 
field can be radiated by a change in the isotopic 
spin of the source, and the pseudoscalar by a 
change in either the ordinary or isotopic spin. 


rn 


MESONS 13 


Secondly, the number of mesons emitted is 
largely determined by the number previously 
existing in the virtual field. Therefore, in order 
to obtain an appreciably energy-dependent mul- 
tiplicity of production, we must have a badly 
singular meson field (worse than 1/r), and cannot 
cut off the singularity except at very short dis- 
tances. This makes the self-energy and nuclear 
forces difficulties acute, and a quantitative dis- 
cussion of the cut-off question will be deferred to 
Section IV. 

Another difference between the scalar and 
pseudoscalar theories is in the angular distribu- 
tion of the emitted mesons. For the scalar case 
the average perpendicular momentum of an 
emitted meson is of order uc, whereas for the 
pseudoscalar mesons the distribution is spheri- 
cally symmetric in the center of mass system. 
This has the consequence that the emission of 
scalar mesons requires only a small momentum 
exchange between the nucleons, and the absolute 
cross section is not limited by this. Thus we 
might suppose that the total cross section for 
inelastic scattering is of the same order as that 
for elastic scattering, around (#/yc)?, which is in 
rough accord with the data on the absorption of 
primaries at the top of the atmosphere. 

On the other hand, the pseudosclar mesons 
require a momentum exchange between the 
nucleons of the order yMc in the center of mass 
system, and, if the potential between them is 
similar to a Lorentz-contracted Yukawa well, 
this means an impact parameter h/ Mc. However, 
this extreme situation obtains only for energies 
greater than around 10-in. volts. For lower 
energies the factor emax/yM becomes important, 
and the important impact parameters become of 
order hcy/émax which increases the cross section 
somewhat. Thus, at 10! volts primary energy, 
Emax is perhaps 3 to Suc? and hcy/emax~sh/ uc, 
which is not too small. 

The evaluation of the physical consequences of 
these considerations is not unambiguous. For 
they show that only for close impact (</ Mc for 
extremely high energies) can probabilities of 
meson emission be regarded as statistically 
independent; and only to this case are the 
methods of this paper applicable. For the more 
distant collisions, in which large momentum 


136 LEWIS, 
transfers are not readily available, there are two 
possibilities: either the statistical independence 
upon which the methods of this paper are based 
will be maintained, in which case such distant 
collisions will not, in general, be accompanied by 
radiation. Or the requirement of small mo- 
mentum transfers may force correlations among 
the successive emissions, in which case the 
methods here used are no longer applicable. 
However, one might schematize the correlations 
by supposing, for example, that the volume in 
momentum space available to the mesons is 
decreased by the momentum transfer require- 
ment. In order, for instance, to cut down the 
momentum transfer from yMc to yuc, a factor 
of roughly ten, the emissions might be concen- 
trated forward, into about one-fifth of the pre- 
viously available momentum space per meson. 
Thus a factor of 1/5 might be introduced into 
Eq. (31), and 5-? or 0.6 into Eq. (32). 

Although present theoretical methods do not 
settle which alternative will be realized, the 
experimental evidence for auger showers shows 
that even at these energies the cross sections for 
converting primary into cascade radiation are 
still of the order of 1/100 barn per nucleon. 

We also note that ‘cut-off’ procedures in the 
meson fields would tend to concentrate the 
emissions forward, level off the multiplicity as a 
function of energy, and decrease the required 
momentum transfer between the nucleons. 

We may also note some more general features 
of the multiplicity laws. The fact that the differ- 
ential cross section must be a relativistic in- 
variant, for all numbers of mesons emitted, 
means, in the case of statistical independence of 
the successive emissions, that that part of the 
cross section which involves the meson emission 
must be a product of invariant factors. Thus, in 
the scalar case we have 


dk, 
Rony? (Ron =< k,)? 


and in the pseudoscalar [|[dk,/kon. In the case 
where the emissions are statistically independent, 
(and only in this case) the cross section will 
break up into a product. Since only the two 
four-vectors (k, ko) and (P, £) can appear, the 


OPPENHEIMER, 


AND WOUTHUYSEN 


cross section must then have the form 


dk, 
II 5, Thy Fon v-k,) |. 


On 


The two cases studies so far correspond to f(x) 
a simple power, f(x) =1/x? for the scalar theory, 
and f(x) =1 for the pseudoscalar, For a general 
case f(x)=x’, some of the properties of the 
solution are immediately clear. First, for »v 
negative the emissions are concentrated in a 
forward direction, increasingly so as v becomes 
more negative. For v=0, we have spherically 
symmetric emissions in the center of mass 
system, and for y>0 the mesons tend to be con- 
centrated backward somewhat. One can do the 
integrations over the momentum space roughly, 
and finds that, for v 20, o(N)~wy@t24/N '3t, 
apart from numerical factors. The case of the 
pseudoscalar field corresponds to v=0. 

If v is less than zero, the cross section behaves 
as const./N!3+" for N«&M/u, and const./N!-” 
for N>M/yn, so that no negative values of v 
give a multiplicity which varies appreciably with 
energy. The scalar field corresponds to v= —2. 
As »v increases, the multiplicity will also tend to 
increase more rapidly with energy. 


III. PERTURBATION METHOD 
A. Neutral Pseudoscalar 


Now, in order to take into account the quan- 
tum properties of the ordinary and isotopic spin 
in a more consistent manner, we will treat the 
case of a neutral pseudoscalar field by a sort of 
perturbation theory,” giving an explicit form to 
the spin and isotopic spin dependence of the 
potential function. In the electromagnetic case 
this would be the formal equivalent of the Bloch- 
Nordsieck method. We will use the Born ap- 
proximation, in the sense that each process will 
be considered only in the first order in which it 
occurs, and we will use a potential function pro- 
portional to (*-T)(¢-X—vysI's), which has the 
property of flipping either the spin or isotopic 
spin of the nucleons. Here, as later, the small 
Greek letters refer to the first nucleon, and the 
large ones to the second. The matrix elements for 
the emission of a meson by the first or second 


122 We are indebted to Dr. H. A. Bethe for helpful method- 
ological discussions during the early part of this work. 


MULTIPLE PRODUCTION OF MESONS 


nucleon, respectively, are 


2r\? 
g a, T20||(Ro— Re), 


2r\? 
(=) T,2)\(Ro+k:z), 


0 


(33) 


where, as before, the pair-producing parts have 
been omitted, and the nucleons have been sup- 
posed near the speed of light. We take only the 
even parts since the large energy denominators 
associated with pair production will cut down 
the contribution of the odd parts as 1/y so that 
one can neglect them. 

The matrix element for the emission of NV, 
and N. mesons by the first and second nucleon, 
respectively, is 


HW (2rg?) "PTT, Dy, 
ge Ront 
xX Apo T22 12° saa VecattO|}T2° . * AGX: 


ey 


(34) 
energy denominators 


where x; and yy are the initial and final state 
spinors (each for two nucleons), A; and A, are the 
corresponding projection operators, and 0, is 
Ron—Rzn for a meson emitted by the first nucleon, 
and Ron+k.z, for one emitted by the second 
nucleon. The energy denominators are of the 
form 


bi(b1 +02) +--+ (—by-1— by) (— by), 
where the break occurs at the scattering act. If 
there are 1; emissions by the first nucleon before 
the scattering, and m2 by the second, then the 
sum is Over 71, 2, the combinations of 2, and 1» 
mesons, and all the permutations of the emissions 
before and after the scattering. Since the oj), 


D1, Tz, and Z, all commute, the sum over per- 
mutations is done directly, and with 


1 1 
yields 
(2arg?)*/? 
“tees 
X (211 T2)"2-"* Vacate (oj 72) "(ZT 2) PAX. 


H DL) tt xeF As (opp te) MI" 


(35) 


137 


Now the operator part of Vecatt can be broken 
up into a part that commutes with the o);7, and 
a part that anticommutes. Thus 


(c-T)(o- = —ysI's) 
i Cael ze — 50's) + (1: Ti) (oy ; zx) | 
+[7.7.(o1° 1) +(e1: Ti)o22, | (36) 


and, calling the former of these At and the 
latter A~, we have 


(2g?) 
H=V(K)——— 


n On 


Dp a aac): Bike a. baa ey oa 


xe" Ay (oy 72) 8 4( 21, D2) ¥? 


(37) 


where 
Dl ( —) nitnzAt+t A—] 
= CuX1Cn¥2[(—)At4A-]=2A-, 


mine 
‘The loss of the A4* means that only that part of 
the potential that can flip either the spin or 
isotopic spin of the nucleons is effective in 
causing radiation. We have then, 


(82g?) *? 
SX A oie) 


2 
n On 


H= V(K,) 


K (2 T2)"*A-Aixi]. (38) 


Squaring, then averaging over the initial and 
summing over the final spins (ordinary and iso- 
topic), we have 


(8mg?)* 


| Z|? = ye | V(Kz) |? SpLAsA~AA7]. (39) 


nO0n 


The spur is non-vanishing, and independent of 
the NV, so 


Sx 2\N 
HP~ 1 VK.) (40) 
aaa nm On 
g?\ w dk, 
do~ | V(K.) | (=) Tay 


Now the integration over the momentum space 
of the mesons, and summation over N;, can be 
carried out as in Section II, yielding 


82? N N?(€1€2) 4 
da~ | V(K.) "(—) —————de,de, (42) 
T N'8 


138 


which, as before, favors large energy losses, and 


owny~(— 


82? Caaxe 
~*)' (43) 


Ni 


a 


for the integrated cross section in the center of 
mass system, which has a maximum at 


242 } 
N= (= Y ~) (= 
T y¥M 

Comparing (43) with the result for the neutral 
pseudoscalar field obtained by the _ Bloch- 
Nordsieck method in Section II, we see that the 
only difference is the replacement of (Ar,0),)? by 
2, indicating that an exchange potential is in 
fact equivalent to a large spin change in the 
Bloch-Nordsieck method. 

We could, of course, treat a neutral scalar 
field by exactly this same method, with similar 
results. 

The extension of the above to the case of the 
symmetrical theory is not trivial, since the 
feature that made the combinatorics simple, 
namely, the commutativity of the 7,, is not 
present when charged mesons appear. Thus the 
successive emissions are not independent, and 
the simplicity is lost. In this particular case the 
non-commutativity of the successive emissions 
is related to the conservation of charge. In our 
treatment by the Bloch-Nordsieck method we 
neglected this difficulty by treating the isotopic 
spin vector classically. Such classical treatment 
would correspond to an extreme form of the 
so-called strong coupling theories, implying in 
particular the existence of charge isobars of the 
nucleons. Thus the charge asymmetry of the 
emitted mesons is compensated for by the fact 
that the heavy particles emerge from the col- 
lision in isobar states, in such a way as to effect 
the over-all conservation of charge. This problem 
does not exist in a neutral theory. 


B. A Pair Theory 


We wish now, in view of the fact that the 
emission of single mesons may be almost for- 
bidden, to consider a typical spinor-pair theory. 
We use an interaction that is sensitive to spin 
changes of the nucleons, 


Aint = rae gv*y* (o- a— —%¥5 ls)yy, 


(44) 


(45) 


LEWIS, OPPENHEIMER, AND WOUTHUYSEN 


where the capital letters refer to the heavy par- 
ticle, and the small ones to the mesons. Taking 
the even part for the heavy particle, we can 
replace this by 


FA ing= g¥* 2 YY* (oj —¥s)¥, (46) 


where we will later take the odd part of the light 
particle operators. 

Writing down the matrix element for the 
emission of N pairs in an exactly analogous 
manner to that used in the preceding section, 
and with the same potential between the nu- 
cleons, we obtain 


(2g) 
H= V(K,) Ex Aydt Nida, re 2 (Zip . =2,) Ax: | 
II. Wn Ant (a4) a )) An Wn, (47) 


where, as before, the A and X are the projection 
operators for the heavy and light particles, 
respectively, and 


bn =e,++e,— — part — pny : 


Squaring, then summing over final and averaging 
over initial spins, we have 


(4g")"" 

II. 4,” 
 SpLAs(Z1.+ Ba) A(Zis- E21) | 
‘Tn SpLAn*(o)) — ¥5)An7 (oi — ys) J. 


The former spur is non-vanishing, and inde- 
pendent of N, and the latter, since the momen- 
tum of the ‘‘positron’”’ is the negative momentum 
of the negative energy state, is 


(2/én*en—) (ent — pr 1*) (en = pnt): 


Therefore, 


P= = V(K,) |? 


(48) 


Say: 
do~ (8e2)* TE ee 


n En’ En 
(€n* — pnii*) (en — Prj\~) 
(ent ten — payyt — pry)? 


, (49) 


which has an invariant form of the sort discussed 
in Section II. Integration of this expression over 
the momentum space available, followed by 
summation over N;, would give the total cross 


MULTIPLE PRODUCTION OF 


section for the emission of N pairs, but, unfor- 
tunately, the integration is not as simple as in 
the previous cases. However, to obtain an 
estimate of energy dependence, we may set the 
final factor in (49) equal to unity, and have 


o(N) ~émax?® /NP(2N) !, 
which has a maximum for 
N~eémax! 
which, by coincidence, is the same result as was 
found for the single pseudoscalar theory. 
IV. SOME APPLICATIONS 
A. Angular Distribution 


We wish now to apply the foregoing results to 
the auger showers, and to the primary production 
of mesons. For this purpose we will use the 
results of the symmetrical pseudoscalar theory, 
as obtained in Section II. We found there that 
the weighting in momentum space was propor- 
tional to 


dk, 
II « J] dandBn, 


% ROn 


with the a, and @, defined by (14). Averaging 
over all the mesons except one, we have for the 
average value of any function of a and 6 


es f Sf fla, B) 


X (a — a) * (ee — 8)" dad 8. 


(f(a, B))w = 


(50) 


Thus the average energy of the emitted mesons 
is obtained by setting f(a, 8)=a+ 8, and gives 


(Ropw = (artes) /N, 


as it must. 

Now approximating the distribution function 
for high energies, and transforming it to the 
laboratory system, we have a convenient form 
for applications, 


NN? Ro 1 
exp| —N{—+ )| 
2r ME, Eo 2Mko 


dk 
<exp[ ere eee 
0 


P(k)dk= 


(51) 


MESONS 139 
where, as before, energies are measured in units 
of uc? and masses in units of the meson mass. 

In order to obtain the angular distribution 
alone, we have to integrate this over ko, and 
obtain approximately, for small 9, 


2M N? 2M 
P(d)dQ=— exp| — (v+— 
vw as) 4M? Eo 
dQ 
Se (92) 
(3?+2M / Eo)? 


This involves, however, an integration over 
meson momenta as low as V/2M, many of which 
will not reach sea level, and, in order to find the 
sea level angular distribution, we should only go 
down to energies of the order of 210° ev, which 
is the energy required to come through the at- 
mosphere. With the lower limit 7 =2 10° ev we 
find 


2M Nn 2M 
Pr(o)dax— exp] -—* o?-+-— | 


wEo 2M Eo 
x<—— oo, (53) 
(2+2M/Eo)? 
which has two characteristic widths 
ti~(2M/Ey)t, de~(2M/N7n)}, (54) 


and we must choose whichever is smaller. Es- 
timating the coefficients in (32), we find N~2E,} 
so that for the most probable multiplicity, 


v} ~4Eo-3, ro ~ Fo, (55) 


and for Ey >5 X10!" ev, 3; is smaller, and we have 
roughly 


2M dQ 
P"'(8)dQ~— 


Tore (56) 
Ey (+2M/Ey)? 


for angles less than #2. 

This corresponds to spherically symmetric 
emissions in the center of mass system, and cor- 
responds to an extremely wide distribution for 
the most highly populated primary energies. In 
the region of the auger showers, where E,~ 10" 
or 10!5 ev, the half-width is around 4107-3 
radian. This is, of course, the spread of the hard 
core of the showers, and the initial spread of the 
neutral mesons that form the soft part. The latter 


140 


is later considerably spread by multiple scat- 
tering. 

If the showers are created at altitudes of (say) 
20 km, this angle corresponds to a diameter of 
approximately 80 meters at sea level. 


B. Primary Spectrum 


The fact that the average multiplicity of 
production increases with the energy of the 
primary proton causes the energy spectrum of 
the mesons to be different from that for the 
primary protons. In particular, if the primary 
spectrum is proportional to Eo~dE» and the 
average multiplicity is proportional to Eo", then 
the average energy e of an emitted meson is 
E.'-" and the meson spectrum at the place of 
production is proportional to 


eM (-r). li(l-n)—Ide.er/4-1) op ge  A-2r)/—-1) dg, 


Thus, if we take the meson spectrum as e?-8de 
and take r= 4, the primary spectrum implied is 
Eo? -*dE, in the relatively high energy region for 
which these considerations are valid, Eo greater 
than around 10-in. ev. For lower energies the 
multiplicity changes more rapidly, and if the 
primary spectrum predicted above persists below 
10" volts, we should expect the high altitude 
meson spectrum to deviate from an e~?:5 law, the 
deviation being toward increased numbers of 
slow mesons. Of course the decay of the slower 
mesons and the magnetic effects on the pri- 
maries will influence these results. 


C. Positive Excess 


If we suppose that all final charge states of the 
nucleons are equally probable, then the fact that 
the primaries are positively charged causes an 
excess of positive mesons to be produced. If the 
number of charged mesons is N,, then the average 


LEWIS, OPPENHEIMER, AND WOUTHUYSEN 


number of positive mesons will be 4(2N.+1) and 
of negative 4(2N.—1) so that the positive excess 
is 2/(2N.—1)~1/N,. This is both energy de- 
pendent and depends upon the absolute number 
of mesons produced. Taking, as above, N~2Et 
and N,~2N~1.3E t, we have 


Pos. excess~ 0.8 4g t~ €7}, (57) 


since €y=Ho/N&3E,t. This gives the positive 
excess as a function of meson energy at the point 
of production, and around 210° ev must be 
added to energies at sea level to extrapolate back 
to the top of the atmosphere. For energies of a 
few Bev at sea level, this corresponds to an excess 
of between 15 and 20 percent, which is in accord 
with the experiments. No data are yet available 
on the variation of the excess with meson energy. 


D. Range of Fields and Distances Involved 


Integrating the distribution (51) over angles, 
we obtain for the energy distribution in the 
laboratory system, which is the initial rest 
system for the air nucleon, 


N Ro 1 
P(Ry) dkh=z— exp| —N ( —-+ ) fete (58) 
E Ey 2Mkyo 


0 


Thus the energy distribution is uniform from 
around k)~ N/2M to ky~ E/N, and the average 
energy is indeed £o/N. Thus we are exploring 
the meson field to distances of order N/E which, 
for N=N~2E,¢ is 2Eo?. Thus a cut-off at a few 
times the proton Compton wave-length, as is 
suggested by magnetic moment, nuclear force, 
and self-energy consideration, would modify our 
results in the entire cosmic-ray range. The 
proton Compton wave-length itself becomes im- 
portant at around 10! ev, and at 10 volt we 
are exploring the meson field to distances of 
about 1/1000 of 2/ Mc. 


