Routledge 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Fateful Decision 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1950) Fateful Decision, Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, 6:3, 75-75, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1950.11461220 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1950.11461220 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 


‘J 
(Sg Submit your article to this journal @ 


lil Article views: 1 


N 
IQ] View related articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


absence of any reliable international 
agreement mean resigning ourselves to 
surrender to the superior force of our 
rivals whenever such force is pressed 
upon us? Would this mean failure to 
do our share in protecting other na- 
tions which perforce look to us in 
aiding their defense? 


My main point is that this is not 
a question for experts, either mili- 
tarists or scientists. All they can do 
is to explain what the results will be 
if we do or do not try to develop such 
destructive weapons. The American 
people must themselves say whether 
they want to defend themselves with 
such weapons or whether they prefer to 
take what others may force upon them 
rather than resort to the destructive 


action which such weapons make possi- 
ble. 

The familiar techniques of the opin- 
ion polls, when applied in the effort 
to get a fair sampling of views, may 
be adequate to find what we Americans 
think. It is possible that the result will 
be overwhelmingly in favor of develop- 
ing the H-Bomb in case the President’s 
military advisors are agreed that its 
development will strengthen our de- 
fense more than will an equal effort 
spent along some other line. 

If this is the dominant American 
view, I think it ought to be known. 
Expressions to this effect would greatly 
strengthen the morale of the scientists 
and others whose task it would be 
to proceed with making the new 
weapons, 


Fateful Decision 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


HE decision to seek or not to 

| seek international control of the 
A-bomb, the decision to try to 
make or not to make the H-bomb, are 
issues, rooted in complex technical mat- 
ters, that nevertheless touch the very 
basis of our morality. There is grave 
danger for us in that these decisions 
have been taken on the basis of facts 
held secret. This is not because the men 
who must contribute to the decisions, or 
must make them, are lacking in wis- 
dom; it is because wisdom itself cannot 


flourish, nor even truth be determined, 
without the give and take of debate or 
criticism. The relevant facts could be of 
little help to an enemy; yet they are in- 
dispensable for an understanding of 
questions of policy. If we are wholly 
guided by fear, we shall fail in this 
time of crisis. The answer to fear can- 
not always lie in the dissipation of the 
causes of fear; sometimes it lies in 
courage. 


Response made in the course of Mrs. Roose- 
velt’s Round Table broadcast of February 12th. 


Let Us Pledge 


Not to Use H-Bomb First! 


At the close of the recent meeting 
of the Physical Society in New York, 
twelve of the country’s prominent phys- 
icists issued the following statement: 
A man decided that this country 

should go ahead with the con- 
struction of a hydrogen bomb. 

This decision was one of the utmost 
gravity. Few of the men who publicly 
urged the President to make this de- 
cision can have realized its full im- 
port. Among the reports in the press 
was a great deal of misinformation. 
However, it was stated correctly that 
a hydrogen bomb, if it can be made, 
would be capable of developing a pow- 
er 1,000 times greater than the present 
atomic bomb. New York, or any other 
of the greatest cities of the world, could 


be destroyed by a single hydrogen bomb. 
We believe that no nation has the 


FEW days ago, President Tru- 


right to use such a bomb, no matter 
how righteous its cause. This bomb 
is no longer a weapon of war but a 
means of extermination of whole pop- 
ulations. Its use would be a betrayal 
of all standards of morality and of 
Christian civilization itself. 

Senator McMahon, in a speech on 
Thursday, February 2, has pointed 
out to the American people that the 
possession of the hydrogen bomb will 
not give positive security to this coun- 
try. We shall not have a monopoly 
of this bomb, but it is certain that 
the Russians will be able to make one 
too. In the ease of the fission bomb 
the Russians required four years to 
parallel our development. In the case 
of the hydrogen bomb they will prob- 
ably need a shorter time. We must 
remember that we do not possess the 
bomb but are only developing it, and 
Russia has received, through indiscre- 


tion, the most valuable hint that our 
experts believe its development pos- 
sible. Perhaps the development of the 
hydrogen bomb has already been under 
way in Russia for some time. But 
if it was not, our decision to develop 
it must have started the Russians on 
the same program. If they had al- 
ready a going program, they will re- 
double their efforts. 

Statements in the press have given 
the power of the H-bomb as between 
2 and 1,000 times that of the present 
fission bomb. Actually the thermo- 
nuclear reaction, on which the H-bomb 
is based, is limited in its power only 
by the amount of hydrogen which can 
be carried in the bomb. Even if the 
power were limited to 1,000 times 
that of a present atomic bomb, the 
step from an A-bomb to an H-bomb 
would be as great as that from an 
ordinary TNT bomb to the atom bomb. 


To create such an ever-present peril 
for all the nations in the world is 
against the vital interests of both 
Russia and the United States. Three 
prominent senators have called for re- 
newed efforts to eliminate this weapon, 
and other weapons of mass destruc- 
tion, from the arsenals of all nations. 
Such efforts should be made, and made 
in all sincerity by both sides. 


In the meantime, we urge that the 
United States, through its elected gov- 
ernment, make a solemn declaration 
that we shall never use this bomb first. 
The circumstance which might force 
us to use it would be if we or our 
allies were attacked by this bomb. 
There can be only one justification 
for our development of the hydrogen 
bomb, and that is to prevent its use. 

—Signed 

S. K. Auuison, Director of Institute 
for Nuclear Studies, University of 
Chicago 

K. T. BAINBRIDGE, Harvard Univer- 
sity 

H. S. BerHe, Cornell University 

R. B. BropE, University of Califor- 
nia 

C. C. LAURITSEN, Director of Kellogg 
Radiation Laboratory, California In- 
stitute of Technology 

F. W. Loomis, Chairman of Physics 
Department, University of Dlinois 

G. B. PeGcRamM, Dean of Graduate 
Faculties, Columbia University 

B. Rossi, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology 

F. SEITz, University of Illinois 

M. A. Tuve, Director, Department 
of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie In- 
stitution, Washington, D.C. 

V. F. WEIssKopr, Massachusetts In- 
stitute of Technology 

M. G. WHITE, Princeton University 


75 


