636 | ns (7 


minute from LiOH+H!, CaF.+H!, and B+H!}, 


respectively. These results were secured under 


different experimental conditions for each target 


and indicate only the order of magnitude of the 
relative yields. Using an electroscope surrounded 
by 1 inch of lead, Hafstad and Tuve® found a 
ratio of ionizations of 0.13 for CaF.,+H! and 
LiOH +H}. Observations made in this laboratory 
indicate a higher yield from CaF,.+H! relative to 
B-++H! than the ratio of five to one indicated 
roughly by Bothe and Gentner’s results. The 
yields found for Li+H? in this laboratory are not 
trustworthy as the composition of the surface of 
the target employed was uncertain. In all cases 
the observed yields must be corrected for the 
relative response of a counter or electroscope to 
incident quanta of different energies. In case the 
secondaries are produced in lead it can be shown 
that the response is roughly proportional to the 
energy of the quantum. The theoretical cross 
sections for pair formation and recoil electron 
production must be taken into account as well as 
the range of the pair and recoil secondaries. On 
this basis the yields from LiOH-+H! and 
CaF.+H! must be corrected by factors of ~2 


APRIL 15, 1938 


and ~0.5 relative to that from B+H). 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 


The 
corrected yields are, respectively, 7X10-° and 
5 X10-° quanta per incident proton. 

The yield for LiOH+H! is much larger than 
that given by the results of Hafstad, Heydenburg 
and Tuve, and the source of the discrepancy is 
not entirely clear. More direct evidence is 
obviously needed. Our results indicate a gamma- 
ray breadth of 40 volts for the 440 kv resonance 
for Li?+H}. 

In conclusion it is well to point out that the 
radiative capture of protons by B" is intimately 
connected with the alpha-particle transmutations 
occurring when boron is bombarded by protons. 
The B"-+H! reactions have been discussed by 
Kalckar, Oppenheimer and Serber,“ but it is 
difficult to reconcile their conclusions simul- 
taneously with the energy distribution of the 
gamma-radiation, with the large yield which we 
find and with other recent experimental results 
on these reactions. Further discussion of these 
difficulties will be found in this issue in an article 


by Professor Oppenheimer and Dr. Serber. 


, 4 pales, Oppenheimer and Serber, Phys. Rev. 52, 279 
193 . 


VOLUME 53 


Note on Boron Plus Proton Reactions 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 
University of California, Berkeley, California 
(Received February 1, 1938) 


A discussion of the experimental evidence on the B“+H! reactions and of the selection rules 
available for their interpretations shows that it is not possible to obtain a satisfactory descrip- 
tion on the assumption that the same resonance level of C” is responsible, both for the 16 Mev 
y-ray observed by Fowler, Gaerttner and Lauritsen, and the long range alpha-particles whose 


angular distribution was determined by Neuert. 


HE disintegrations induced when B" is 
bombarded with protons exhibit certain 
striking peculiarities. We wish to return to their 
interpretation in the light of new experimental 
evidence! on the yield and spectrum of the 
y-rays observed in these reactions. 
The essential findings may be briefly sum- 


1 Fowler, Gaerttner and Lauritsen, Phys. Rev. 53, 628 
(1938). 


marized. The most probable reaction involves? 
the emission of short range a-particles, leaving 
the Be® in an excited unstable state (probably 


1D). This reaction shows no resonance,’ and is 


accompanied by no observable y-rays or long 
range a’s. Both the long range a’s and the 


2 Dee and Gilbert, Proc. Roy. Soc. 154, 279 (1936). 
ao Wells, Tate and Hill, Phys. Rev. 51, 
(1937). 


434 


BORON-PROTON REACTIONS 


y-rays come from a resonance reaction.*: > The 
resonance occurs at about 160 kv, and the reso- 
nance energy agrees within the experimental 
uncertainty of 2—3 kv for the two reactions.® ? 

Since for neither reaction has another reso- 
nance level been observed in the range up to 
500 kv, it is natural to ascribe both reactions to 
the same level of the excited compound C®. 
The resonance yield of a’s from a pure B target 
is roughly 5X10-°;? the total yield of y-rays 
determined by Fowler and Lauritsen! is also 
56 10=1%5 : 

The long range a-particles are anisotropically 
distributed,® roughly according to a 1+cos? 6 law 
(with @ the angle between the direction of 
emission and the direction of bombardment). 
The y-ray spectrum! shows three resoluble lines, 
at 4, 12 and 16 Mev. The first two have equal 
intensity ; the 16 Mev line, which corresponds to 
transitions to normal C, is about six times as 
weak. Fowler and Lauritsen give arguments 
based on the excitation curves of Bothe and 
Gentner and their own work to make it plausible 
that all three y-rays come from the 160 kv 
resonance.’ | 

It is clear that for the interpretation of these 
findings selection rules will be essential. The 
known selection rules which could be invoked 
are these: | 


4 Bothe and Gentner, Zeits. f. Physik 104, 685 (1937). 
_5 Allen, Haxbyand Williams, Phys. Rev. 53, 325(A) (1938). 

6 We are indebted to Dr. Williams for a further discussion 
of the experimental results reported in reference 5. 

7 Allen, Haxby and Williams give 10 kv as the observed 
breadth of the resonance, but it seems (reference 6) not im- 
possible that this is entirely instrumental, and comes 
primarily from the ripple and unsteadiness of the accelerat- 
ing voltage of the protons. If one were to accept the 
observed breadth as real, it would add further serious 
difficulties to the interpretation; for since the proton 
breadth of the level must be very small compared to 10 kv, 
and since y-radiation competes successfully with a-emis- 
sion, this would necessitate a y-ray breadth of the order of 
several kilovolts. This is larger than any value heretofore 
observed, and seems particularly implausible for radiation 
of magnetic dipole or electric. quadripole type which, as 
we shall see, is probably involved in these reactions. 

8 The y-ray yield is smaller than that from the Li’+H! 
reaction by a factor of 10-20. If one accepts the absolute 
radiative field for the Li reaction given by Hafstad, 
Heydenburg and Tuve (Phys. Rev. 50, 504 (1936)), one is 
led to y-ray yields from the B reaction here considered 
which are about a tenth of those given by Fowler and 
Lauritsen. The precise value of the yield will not be im- 
portant for our argument. In fact the y-ray breadths of 
highly excited light nuclei are so difficult to estimate 
theoretically that our information about them must depend 
on just such absolute yield measurements as are here 
involved. 

® Neuert, Physik. Zeits. 38, 122 (1937). 


637 


1. A compound nucleus cannot decay into 
products with vanishing intrinsic angular mo- 
mentum if it has odd parity and even angular 


momentum, or even parity and odd angular 
momentum. This rule offers at first sight a 
natural explanation!® of the absence of long 


range a@’s in the nonresonance reaction. 

2. An odd C® level of vanishing angular 
momentum can never give three a-particles. 
These rules, 1 and 2, are strict. | 

3. A triplet compound state will disintegrate 
to singlet products at a rate roughly 10* slower 
than a corresponding singlet, because the forces 
converting spin into orbital angular momentum 
are small. This argument is naturally invoked?® 
to account for the great but not complete 
stability of the C” resonance level to a-decay. 
Only singlet and triplet states may be expected 
when B" is bombarded by protons." ; 

4. Since the Coulomb forces are still small for 
C, the isotopic spin” T may also be a fairly good 
quantum number, and a level of C”® with T=1 
will disintegrate into products with T=0 at a 
rate reduced by a factor which may be of the 
order of 104 from that of levels with 7=0. Only 
levels with 7 =0, 1 will be formed in the reactions 
considered. | | 

No further relevant selection rules of com- 
parable rigor would seem to follow from known 
invariance properties of the nuclear system. 

The relatively large yield of short range a’s 
shows that this reaction must come predomi- 
nantly from the capture of s-protons, and the 


absence of observable resonance indicates that 


ae yo Oppenheimer and Serber, Phys. Rev. 52, 279 
1937). 

11 In a recent letter Landau (Phys. Rev. 52, 1251 (1937)) 
has objected to this argument, on the ground that the 
spin-orbit off-diagonal perturbation energy is not small 
compared to the spacing of the levels of a. sufficiently 
highly excited sufficiently heavy nucleus. Quite apart from 
the fact that the ‘‘combining’’ resonance levels of C” 
would seem to be spaced by several hundred kilovolts, 
this argument appears to involve a misapprehension, in 
that it uses an estimate of the magnitude of the matrix 
elements of the spin-orbit coupling energy based on a 
“one-body” model, of the level spacing based on a ‘‘many- 
body’”’ model. It would in fact seem that the “average 
energy denominator’ occurring in the perturbation the- 
oretic treatment can hardly be essentially smaller than 
h/collision time, and that the triplet contamination of a 
singlet wave function can hardly exceed a few percent. 
Analogous arguments apply to the selection rule 4. 

122 Wigner, Phys. Rev. 51, 106 (1937). We are indebted 
to Professor Breit, who in private communications has 
emphasized the role which might be played by the so-called 
‘partition quantum numbers.” 


638 J. 


singlet levels, with rapid a-decay rate and I. 
breadths of the order of hundreds of kilovolts, 
must be involved. Since normal B" is pretty 
certainly odd, 1 can be used to explain the 
absence of long range a’s only if the C” involved 
has even angular momentum; this cannot be 
zero by 2. We are thus led to assign for the 
‘normal state of B™ an odd D, G term. The most 
plausible state seems to be a 7D3;2. 

The angular dependence of the long range a’s 
shows that the resonance level is formed. not 
by s, but by » or d proton capture. Estimates of 
the proton breadth, based on correcting the 
observed breadth of the 440 kv resonance level 
in the Li’+H! reaction for altered barrier 
penetrability, give T,~5 v for p-protons, and 
about 1/100 of that for d-protons. The observed 
resonance yields thus show that we have to do 
with p-capture, and that the minimum possible 
value for y-ray and long range a breadth is of 
the same order as the proton breadth. Since 
r,<10F,, it is hard to accept the ‘‘observed”’ 
breadth of the resonance level, ~ 10 kv, as real. 


The resonance level is then even; its angular 


momentum 7 must be 1 or 2, since it gives 
y-rays to 1S of normal C™; and since it gives 
long range a’s we must have 1=2. The resonance 


level must therefore be a 'D, or a?Po, *?De, or 2Fo. - 


Now the energy" of the resonance level differs 
from that of normal B® by just about what we 
should expect for the Coulomb energy difference 
(~0.002 mu). Since the normal state of B” is 
the lowest lying term of isotopic spin T=1, 


we should expect!* the resonance level to be a | 


TABLE |. Angular distribution of long range a-particles. 
c=cos 0, s=sin 6. | 


NORMAL STATE OF B?! 


RESO- 
NANCE 
STATE OF 

Cie 2P 1/2 - 2P 3/0 2D 3/2 2D 5/2 2F 5/2, 7/2 
1p 1+3c? 1+3c? s? s? 2 +c? 
Pe 1-+-3c? 1+65? 1+6s? 3+¢? 
8De 1+3c? 1 3 +45? 447s? 
3B, 142c?2 1+16s2 
8F 4 3+5c? 


18 We wish to thank Professor Breit for pointing out to 
us the possible homology of the resonance level and normal 
BL. | 

4 Feenberg and Phillips, Phys. Rev. 51, 597 (1937). 


R. OPPENHEIMER AND R. SERBER 


singlet or triplet P, D or F with T=1. The great 
stability of the level to a-decay would suggest 
that it is a triplet, so that selection rules 3 and 4 
could both be invoked to explain this stability. 
Since however an even pure triplet *Pe, *De, ?Fo, 
cannot combine with the 1S normal state of 
C” by y-radiation, this possibility is excluded. 
In fact the only triplet which could give the high 
energy y-ray with the observed intensity is an 
even 3S, which can neither give long range a’s 
nor be formed from a parent B"™ in a 2D state by 
p capture. . 

The only remaining possibility is that the 
resonance level is an even 1D with T=1, and 
that its stability must be understood in terms 
of the approximate conservation law for isotopic 
spin. However the angular distribution to be 
expected for the long range a’s, for capture to 
1D from a ?D3;2, 5/2 parent term of B", is sin? 6, 
which cannot be reconciled with the observed 
1-+cos? @. It will be seen from Table I that, to 
obtain an anisotropy even qualitatively in agree- 
ment with experiment, we would be forced either 
to make the resonance level a °F, or to make 
the parent term one of odd Z and thus to give 
up the explanation, in terms of the parity angular 
momentum selection rule, of the striking ab- 
sence of long range a’s in the dominant s capture 
reaction. | 

We have been led to this very unsatisfactory 
conclusion by the supposition that both the long 
range a-particles and the 16 Mev y-rays come 
from the same resonance level. In this connection 
it should be emphasized that the yields of long 
range a-particles and y-rays have not been 
adequately investigated in the range above 
250 kv. If one assumes, as our arguments perhaps 


suggest, that the high energy y-ray comes from 
a resonance level in this range, and other than 


that for which the angular distribution of the 
long range a’s has been determined, no unique 
assignment of the resonance level is possible at 
present. If this should turn out to be true, one © 
would probably still-fiave some difficulty in 
reconciling a 7D parent B witha triplet character 
for the resonance level. | 


