Einstein =} Routledge 
Peace z 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Oppenheimer on Einstein 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1979) Oppenheimer on Einstein, Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, 35:3, 36-39, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1979.11458597 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1979.11458597 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 


XJ 
(s Submit your article to this journal @ 


lil Article views: 5 


N 
IQ] View related articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


Oppenheimer on Einstein 


There is another theory of relativity, 
one more easily noticed and intui- 
tively understood than Einstein’s 
great theory. It speaks to human 
nature rather than to the nature of 
the physical universe, to the comple- 
mentary relationship between ob- 
server and observed. It speaks to the 
occasional work in which an author 
comes to a deeper understanding of 
his own life through studying an- 
other. The process is particularly 
enlightening when great triumphs and 
frustrations have marked the careers 
of two exceptionally talented people, 
regardless of the differences of their 
accomplishments and failures. ‘‘On 
Finstein,’’ the revised, published 
version of an address by J. Robert 
Oppenheimer delivered on December 
13, 1965, at UNESCO house in Paris, is 
such a work. 

The occasion for Oppenheimer’s 
remarks was the opening session of a 
3-day international symposium mark- 
ing the 10th anniversary of Einstein’s 
death and the 50th of his general 
theory of relativity.* Oppenheimer, 


*See Science & Synthesis: An Inter- 
national Colloquium Organized by 
UNESCO on the Tenth Anniversary of 
the Death of Albert Einstein & Teil- 
hard de Chardin (Berlin, Heidelberg, 
New York: Springer/Verlag, 1971). 


the Director of the Institute for Ad- 
vanced Studies in Princeton, N.J., 
where Einstein had spent the last two 
and a half decades of his life, took it 
as his task ‘‘to start to dispell the 
clouds of myth and to see the great 
mountain peak that these clouds hide. 
As always,’’ he said, ‘‘the myth has 
its charms; but the truth is far more 
beautiful.”’ 


What follows, however, was not a 
celebration of Einstein’s accomplish- 
ments so much as an effort to under- 
stand why he had not accomplished 
more, a revisionist view of the limi- 
tations that experience and person- 
ality, circumstance and taste inevit- 
ably create for even the most brilliant 
and imaginative mind. Here was an 
interpretation that Oppenheimer 
understood only too well, but ‘‘it 
came as a surprise to a good number 
of people,’’ a prominent conference 
participant has noted in a grand 
understatement. But the passage of 
time and Oppenheimer’s revision of 
the original draft have highlighted the 
importance of his remarks, their dual 
importance perhaps it is appropriate 
to say.—Martin Sherwin, historian, 
Center for Environmental Studies, 
Princeton University, and author of 
A World Destroyed: The Atomic 
Bomb and the Grand Alliance (1975). 


Sa a LT a a a FT TS 


Though | knew Einstein for two or 
three decades, it was only in the last 
decade of his life that we were close 
colleagues and something of friends. 
But I thought that it might be useful, 
because I am sure that it is not too 
soon—and for our generation 
perhaps almost too late—to start to 
dispel the clouds of myth and to see 
the great mountain peak that these 
clouds hide. As always, the myth has 
its charms; but the truth is far more 
beautiful. 


36 


Late in his life, in connection with 
his despair over weapons and wars, 
Einstein said that if he had to live it 
over again he would be a plumber. 
This was a balance of seriousness 
and jest that no one should now at- 
tempt to disturb. Believe me, he had 
no idea of what it was to be a 
plumber; least of all in the United 
States, where we have a joke that the 
typical behavior of this specialist is 
that he never brings his tools to the 
scene of the crisis. Einstein brought 


his tools to his crises; Einstein was a 
physicist, a natural philosopher, the 
greatest of our time. 

What we have heard, what you all 
know, what is the true part of the 
myth is his extraordinary originality. 
The discovery of quanta would 
surely have come one way or 
another; but he discovered them. 
Deep understanding of what it means 
that no signal could travel faster than 
light would surely have come: the 
formal equations were already 
known. But this simple, brilliant 
understanding of the physics could 
well have been slow in coming, and 
blurred, had he not done it for us. 
The general theory of relativity 
which, even today, is not well 
proved experimentally, no one but 
he would have done for a long, long 
time. It is in fact only in the last dec- 
ade, the last years, that one. has seen 
how a pedestrian and hard-working 
physicist, or many of them, might 
reach that theory and understand 
this singular union of geometry and 
gravitation. And we can do even that 
today only because some of the a 
priori open possibilities are limited 
by the confirmation of Einstein’s 
discovery that light would be de- 
flected by gravity. 

Yet there is another side besides 
the originality. Einstein brought to 
the work of originality deep elements 
of tradition. It is only possible to dis- 
cover in part how he came by it, by 
following his reading, his friend- 
ships, the meager record that we 
have. But of these deep-seated ele- 
ments of tradition—I will not try to 
enumerate them all; I do not know 
them all—at least three were indis- 
pensable and stayed with him. 

e The first is from the rather beau- 
tiful but recondite part of physics 
that is the explanation of the laws of 
thermodynamics in terms of the me- 
chanics of large number of particles, 


There follow two ‘‘appreciations”’ of Albert Einstein by J. Robert Oppenheimer—one 
prepared in 1939 on the occasion of Einstein’s 60th birthday and the second delivered in 
1965 in commemoration of the tenth anniversary of Einstein’s death. There is clearly 
more to the latter than meets the eye, as can be observed in the reference to it by Peter 
Bergmann in his book review in this issue of the Bulletin and in the introductory 
remarks below by Martin Sherwin, whose forthcoming biography of Oppenheimer we 
await with great interest. It would be difficult to imagine two personalities as different 
as Einstein and Oppenheimer. And yet, in the perverse manner in which history 
operates, both represented science in the imagination of the post-World War II 
generation. The interplay of two such charismatic characters is obviously of more than 
passing interest, even if the remarks that follow shed, perhaps, more light on 
Oppenheimer than on the object of his analysis. 


statistical mechanics. This was with 
Einstein all the time. [t was what en- 
abled him from Planck's discovery 
of the law of black-body radiation to 
conclude that light was not only 
waves but particles, particles with an 
energy proportional to their fre- 
quency and momentum determined 
by their wave-number—the famous 
relations that de Broglie was to ex- 
tend to all matter, to electrons first 
and then clearly to all matter. 

It was this statistical tradition that 
led Einstein to the laws governing 
the emission and absorption of light 
by atomic systems. It was this that 
enabled him to see the connection 
between de Broglie’s waves and the 
Statistics o* light-quanta proposed by 
Bose. It was this that kept him an 
active proponent and discoverer of 
the new phenomena of quantum 
physics up to 1925. 

e The second and equally deep 
strand—and here I think we do know 
where it came from—was his total 
love of the idea of a field: the follow- 
ing of physical phenomena in minute 
and infinitely subdividable detail in 
space and in time. This gave him his 
first great drama of trying to see how 
Maxwell's equations could be true. 
They were the first field equations of 
physics; they are still true today with 
only very minor and well-understood 
modifications. It is this tradition 
which made him know that there had 
to be a field theory of gravitation, 
long before the clues to that theory 
were securely in his hand. 

e The third tradition was less one 
of physics than of philosophy. It is a 
form of the principle of sufficient 
reason. It was Einstein who asked 
what do we mean, what can we mea- 
sure, what elements in physics are 
conventional? He insisted that those 
elements that were conventional 
could have no part in the real pre- 
dictions of physics. This also had 


roots: for one the mathematical in- 
vention of Riemann, who saw how 
very limited the geometry of the 
Greeks had been, how unreasonably 
limited. But in a more important 
sense, it followed from the long trad- 
ition of European philosophy, you 
may say starting with Descartes—if 
you wish you can start it in the 13th 
century. because in fact it did start 
then—and leading through the 
British empiricists, and very clearly 
formulated (though probably without 
influence in Europe) by Charles 
Peirce: One had to ask how do we do 
it, what do we mean, is this just 
something that we use to help our- 
selves in calculating, or is it some- 
thing that we can actually study in 
nature by physical means. 

For the point here is that the laws 
of nature not only describe the re- 
sults of observations, but the laws of 
nature delimit the scope of observa- 
tions. That was the point of Ein- 
stein’s understanding of the limiting 
character of the velocity of light. It 
also was the nature of the resolution 
in quantum theory, where the quan- 
tum of action, Planck's constant, 
was recognized as limiting the fine- 
ness of the transaction between the 
system studied and the machinery 
used to study it, limiting this fineness 
in a form of atomicity quite different 
from and quite more radical than any 
that the Greeks had imagined or than 
was familiar from the atomic theory 
of chemistry. 

In the last years of Einstein's life, 
the last 25 years, his tradition in a 
certain sense failed him. They were 
the years he spent at Princeton and 
this, though a source of sorrow, 
should not be concealed. He had a 
right to that failure. He spent those 
years first in trying to prove that the 
quantum theory had inconsistencies 
in it. No one could have been more 
ingenious in thinking up unexpected 


and clever examples, but it turned 
out that the inconsistencies were not 
there, and often their resolution 
could be found in earlier work of 
Einstein himself. When that did not 
work, after repeated efforts, Ein- 
stein had simply to say that he did not 
like the theory. He did not like the 
elements of indeterminacy. He did 
not like the abandonment of con- 
tinuity or of causality. These were 
things that he had grown up with, 
saved by him, and enormously en- 
larged; and to see them lost, even 
though he had put the dagger in the 
hand of their assassin by his own 
work, was very hard on him. He 
fought with Bohr in a noble and furi- 
ous way, and he fought with the 
theory which he had fathered but 
which he hated. That is not the first 
time it has happened in science. 

He also worked with a very am- 
bitious program, to combine the 
understanding of electricity and 
gravitation in such a way as to ex- 
plain what he regarded as the 
semblance—the illusion—of dis- 
creteness, of particles in nature. I 
think that it was clear then, and be- 
lieve it to be obviously clear today, 
that the things that this theory 
worked with were too meager, left 
out too much that was known to 
physicists but had not been known 
much in Einstein's student days. 
Thus it looked like a hopelessly lim- 
ited and historically rather acciden- 
tally conditioned approach. 
Although Einstein commanded the 
affection, or, more rightly, the love 
of everyone for his determination to 
see through his program, he lost 
most contact with the profession of 
physics, because there were things 
that had been learned which came 
too late in life for him to concern 
himself with them. 

Einstein was indeed one of the 
friendliest of men. I had the impres- 


March 1979 The Bulletin 37 


sion that he was also, in an important 
sense, alone. Many very great men 
are lonely; yet I had the impression 
that although he was a deep and 
loyal friend, the stronger human af- 
fections played a not very deep or 
very central part in his life taken asa 
whole. He had of course incredibly 
many disciples, in the sense of 
people who, reading his work or 
hearing it taught by him, learned 
from him and had a new view of 
physics, of the philosophy of 
physics, of the nature of the world 
that we live in. But he did not have, 
in the technical jargon, a school. He 
did not have very many students 
who were his concern as apprentices 
and disciples. And there was an ele- 
ment of the lone worker in him, in 
sharp contrast to the teams we see 
today, and in sharp contrast to the 
highly cooperative way in which 
some other parts of science have de- 
veloped. In later years, he had 
people working with him. They were 
typically called assistants and they 
had a wonderful life. Just being with 
him was wonderful. His secretary 
had a wonderful life. The sense of 
grandeur never left him for a minute, 
nor his sense of humor. The assis- 
tants did one thing which he lacked 
in his young days. His early papers 
are paralyzingly beautiful, but there 
are many errata. Later there were 
none. I had the impression that, 
along with its miseries, his fame gave 
him some pleasures, not only the 
human pleasure of meeting people 
but the extreme pleasure of music 
played not only with Elizabeth of Bel- 
gium but more with Adolphe Busch, 
for he was not that good a violinist. 
He loved the sea and he loved sailing 
and was always grateful for a ship. I 
remember walking home with him on 
his 71st birthday. He said, ‘“You 
know, when it’s once been given toa 
man to do something sensible, af- 
terward life is a little strange." 


Einstein is also, and I think 
rightly, known as a man of very great 
goodwill and humanity. Indeed, if I 
had to think of a single word for his 
attitude towards human problems, | 


38 


would pick the Sanskrit word 
Ahinsa, not to hurt, harmlessness. 
He had a deep distrust of power: he 
did not have that convenient and 
natural converse with statesmen and 
men of power that was quite appro- 
priate to Rutherford and to Bohr, 
perhaps the two physicists of this 
century who most nearly rivaled him 
in eminence. In 1915, as he made the 
general theory of relativity, Europe 
was tearing itself to pieces and half 
losing its past. He was always a pac- 
ifist. Only as the Nazis came into 
power in Germany did he have some 
doubts, as his famous and rather 
deep exchange of letters with Freud 
showed, and began to understand 
with melancholy and without true 
acceptance that, in addition to 
understanding, man sometimes has a 
duty to act. 


After what you have heard, I need 
not say how luminous was his intelli- 
gence. He was almost wholly with- 
out sophistication and wholly with- 
out worldliness.I think that in Eng- 
land people would have said that he 
did not have much ‘background,’ 
and in America that he lacked ‘‘edu- 
cation."’ This may throw some light 
on how these words are used. | think 
that this simplicity, this lack of clut- 
ter and this lack of cant had a lot to 
do with his preservation throughout 
of a certain pure, rather Spinoza- 
like, philosophical monism, which of 
course is hard to maintain if you 
have been **educated”* and have a 
**background.’” There was always 
with him a wonderful purity at once 
childlike and profoundly stubborn. 

Einstein is often blamed or praised 
or credited with these miserable 
bombs. It is not in my opinion true. 
The special theory of relatively 
might not have been beautiful with- 
out Einstein; but it would have been 
a tool for physicists, and by 1932 the 
expenmental evidence for the inter- 
convertibility of matter and energy 
which he had predicted was over- 
whelming. The feasibility of doing 
anything with this in such a massive 
way was not clear until seven years 
later, and then almost by accident. 


This was not what Einstein really 
was after. His part was that of creat- 
ing an intellectual revolution, and 
discovering more than any scientist 
of our time how profound were the 
errors made by men before then. He 
did write a letter to Roosevelt about 
atomic energy. | think this was in 
part his agony at the evil of the 
Nazis, in part not wanting to harm 
any One in any way: but | ought to 
report that that letter had very little 
effect, and that Einstein himself is 
really not answerable for all that 
came later. I believe he so under- 
stood it himself. 

His was a voice raised with very 
great weight against violence and 
cruelty wherever he saw them and, 
after the war, he spoke with deep 
emotion and I believe with great 
weight about the supreme violence 
of these atomic weapons. He said at 
once with great simplicity: now we 
must make a world government. It 
was very forthright, it was very ab- 
rupt, it was no doubt “‘uneducated,”” 
no doubt without *‘background’’: 
still all of us in some thoughtful mea- 
sure must recognize that he was 
right. 

Without power, without calcula- 
tion, with none of the profoundly 
political humor that characterized 
Gandhi, he nevertheless did move 
the political world. In almost the last 
act of his life, he joined with Lord 
Russell in suggesting that men of sci- 
ence get together and see if they 
could not understand one another 
and avert the disaster which he 
foresaw from the arms race. The 
so-called Pugwash movement, which 
has a longer name now, was the di- 
rect result of this appeal. I know it to 
be true that it had an essential part to 
play in the Treaty of Moscow, the 
limited test-ban treaty, which is a 
tentative, but to me very precious, 
declaration that reason might still 
prevail. 

In his last years, as 1 knew him, 
Einstein was a 20th century 
ecclesiastes, saying with unrelenting 
and indomitable cheerfulness, ** Van- 
ity of vanities, all is vanity..“"D 


United Stares8° United States 8° 


= 


United Sta 


—wrow - 
a : ; ‘. 
tes8° United States8 


United States 8° 


tr 
io 9) 
fe 
B 


NIALSNIA 
NI@ALSNTA 


Celebration of the Sixtieth Birthday 
of Albert Einstein 


The 60th birthday of Albert Einstein, March 16, 1939, was marked by a special 
radio program from Oakland, Calif. Professor J. Robert Oppenheimer spoke 


as follows: 


This program is in celebration of the 
sixtieth birthday of Albert Einstein. 
His name is perhaps more widely 
known than that of any other living 
scientist; and to many millions of 
people it has come to stand for 
science itself, and for all that we 
admire in the way of life and thought 
of the scientist. 

Most of us who are concerned with 
research in one or another branch of 
scientific work, are proud to have in 
Einstein a popular symbol of what we 
are doing and trying to do. Few men 
have contributed so much to our 
understanding of the Physical World, 
to our ability to predict and follow 
and control its behavior. And we see 
in Einstein, especially those of us who 
have come to know him a little, all 
those personal qualities that are the 
counterpart of great work: selfless- 
ness, humor, and a deep kindness. 

But if few scientific workers would 
quarrel with the fact that Einstein is 
in many ways a perfect symbol of 
their work, there are many who 
would feel that there is something a 
little false and fabulous in the way he 
is thought of. There was a fable at 
one time that there were only a dozen 
men who could understand what Ein- 
stein had done; there is certainly a 
general impression, supported in part 
by his eminence, that his work has 
been qualitatively different from that 
of his fellow workers; that it is 


abstruse, and remote, and useless. 
This seems to me a very strange 
ground for admiration. And of 
course it is not true; and the truth is 
much better than the fable. 

All discoveries in science grow 
from the work, patient and brilliant, 
of many workers. They would not be 
possible without this collaboration; 
they would not be possible without 
the constant technological develop- 
ments that are necessary to new 
experiment and new scientific expe- 
rience. One may even doubt whether 
in the end they can be possible except 
in a world which encourages scientific 
work, and treasures the knowledge 
and power which are its fruits. 


For science is not parasitic on 
society: it makes a good return. And 
it is for its return, and not its ab- 
struseness, that our children, when 
they learn of Einstein’s work in 
college or in school, will prize it. It 
will be part of their thought, as for us 
today the work of Newton and of 
Pasteur; they will be able to trace its 
history in the development of count- 
less new and powerful technological 
methods. In fact it was some of the 
early work of Einstein on the theory 
of relativity that first pointed the way 
to vast and hitherto untapped sources 
of energy. We know now that most of 
the sun’s heat comes from these 
sources. And it is one of the most 
spectacular projects of contemporary 


atomic physics to make this energy 
available terrestrially, and thus to 
solve as far as human wants are con- 
cerned the problem of mechanical 
and electrical power. One could 
multiply instances of the usefulness, 
in the most direct and immediate 
sense, of Einstein’s discoveries. But in 
every case we would find their 
development so closely interwoven 
with the work of countless other 
scientists and technicians that there 
would seem something artificial to 
such an analysis, and we would come 
away with only a deepened conviction 
of the cooperative and interrelated 
character of scientific achievement. 
And if we were to trace the effects of 
any great scientific discovery on 
human thought and culture, we 
should find a similar story. 

It seems appropriate, on Einstein’s 
sixtieth birthday, to speak of these 
simple things with a certain seri- 
ousness, for we know that he himself 
has been led to question the pos- 
sibility of continued scientific prog- 
ress in a world dominated by fascism 
and by fascist thought. We may be 
sure that it is not the special 
persecution to which he has been 
subject which has raised those grave 
doubts. It is a deeper thing. For it 
would seem that in a fascist world 
neither the technological nor the cul- 
tural fruits of science could find 
anything but abuse. For technology, 
by rendering less desperate the 
struggle for an adequate and rich 
existence, should tend to reduce and 
not increase the exploitation of man 
by man and of nation by nation. And 
in general the effect of science is to 
reduce too the absoluteness of the 
differences between people, and to in- 
crease their common understanding: 
that is just the content of its objec- 
tivity. 

There are surely graver reasons for 
concern in the contemporary world 
than this threat to the future of 
science. But I doubt whether today 
there can be any better way to honor 
Einstein than to commit ourselves to 
the kind of world in which such work 
as his can be possible.1 


March 1979 The Bulletin 39 


