ANALOGY IN SCIENCE’ 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
The Institute for Advanced Study 


American Psychological Association, ladies 
and gentlemen: 

I listened to what President Newcomb just said 
to explain why I had been asked to speak here; but 
it did not clear it up for me entirely. I have thought 
about this question ever since, in a response to the 
honor and pleasure of being asked to come, I ac- 
cepted. I wondered then what a professional physi- 
cist should be doing on this platform, a somewhat 
old and not so lively professional physicist, but 
still that. 

I thought first that your inviting me might have 
a relation to the Institute for Advanced Study. 
We have had there a few members who are psy- 
chologists; we have an advisory committee consist- 
ing of members of this organization, whom we love 
and trust; and we hope to continue this. I have 
learned a great deal from them; we have often be- 
come friends. But we do not have a program in 
psychology; we do not have a department of psy- 
chology. We have, in fact, only two schools. One 
is called the School of Mathematics and the other 
called the School of Historical Studies; and it may 
help to reveal the limitations of my own scope if I 
describe very briefly what these are. You may 
recognize blind spots in me which will be comfort- 
ing later, as J get on with my talk. 

The School of Mathematics and the School of 
Historical Studies have both, of course, the problem 
of filtering the immense, fascinating, inchoate, un- 
manageable complexity of our experience. But they 
filter in quite different ways. The School of Mathe- 
matics is concerned with relations, with forms, with 
logical structure, and the application of these pat- 
terns and their discovery to the empirical sciences. 
And so it happens that psychologists are members 
of the School of Mathematics. 

The School of Historical Studies uses a different 
kind of filtration. When I was in England not long 
ago I talked to Namier, who has undertaken the 
compilation of the parliamentary biographies of all 


Proscar: NEWCOMB, members of the 


1 Presented at the Sixty-Third Annual Meeting of the 
American Psychological Association, San Francisco, Cali- 
fornia, September 4, 1955. 


Members of Parliament, from the origin to now. 
In the first parliaments almost nothing is avail- 
able in the record about most of the members, so 
it is hard to write about this. And at present it is 
hard to write the biographies because there are such 
volumes available about everybody; only in the 
16th and 17th and 18th centuries is the amount of 
material fit for human compass. The filtration of 
history is, of course, a very special one. It not only 
reduces the volume of available evidence and experi- 
ence; it does so through the eyes of once living 
people who, by their actions, their evaluation, their 
tradition, have selected the things which are to re- 
main meaningful over the years. 

It is very often in history that just the unique 
point, the point that has no satisfactory, exhaustive, 
formal relation to more general patterns, is what is 
interesting. In the School of Mathematics it can 
only be things general enough so that structure can 
be recognized. I need to add that one mathema- 
tician, who has made such great contributions to 
logic, Géddel, has said of mathematics that it is 
purely an historical accident that it developed along 
quantitative lines. This, which is one of the themes 
which I take as text for today, may moderate some- 
what the austerity of the two schools of learning. 
Yet taking it all-in-all I can only describe the rela- 
tions of the Institute to psychology by a story. 

About twenty years ago for the first time I 
visited the great laboratory in New York where 
Professor Rabi and his colleagues were beginning 
to do the most exciting experiments on molecular 
beams; and I had a fine time. But, as I left, I 
noticed that over the door it said in somewhat 
dusty letters, “Cosmic Ray Laboratory,’ and I 
asked Rabi, “What the heck?” “Well,” he said, 
“you see, we don’t keep them out.” 


I have thus given up talking about the Institute; 
and my second thought is rather simpler. It is to 
say a few things about physics which are, I think, 
interesting and which, I hope, may be helpful if 
not taken too literally and too seriously, also in 
the various fields of psychology. I know that it is 
a terrible bear trap to talk of the philosophy of 


127 


128 


science; only in a very, very limited sense am I 
going to do that. 

One would think that the two sciences could 
hardly be further apart. In all hierarchical schemes 
they are put far apart. Psychology, to everyone 
who works in the field, is felt to be a new subject in 
which real progress and real objectivity are recent. 
Physics is, perhaps, as old as the sciences come; 
physics is reputed to have a large, coherent, con- 
nected corpus of certitudes. This does not exist 
in psychology, and only the beginnings of it, the 
beginnings of things that are later going to be tied 
together, are now before us. 

But I have always had a feeling that there were 
ways in which the two sciences had a community; 
in some sense, of course, all sciences do. One very 
simple one is that each is responsive to a primitive, 
permanent, pervasive, human curiosity: What ma- 
terial bodies are and how they behave, on the one 
hand, and how people and the people-like animals 
behave and feel and think and learn. These are 
the curiosities of common life and they will never 
be abated. Both, for this reason, can hardly make 
important pronouncements of a technical sort which 
do not appear to have some bearing on our views of 
reality, on metaphysics. Both manifestly have, and 
continue to have, a fresh and inspiriting effect on 
the theory of knowledge, on epistomology. 

There are other ways in which we are brothers. 
In the last ten years the physicists have been extra- 
ordinarily noisy about the immense powers which, 
largely through their efforts, but through other 
efforts as well, have come into the possession of 
man, powers notably and strikingly for very large- 
scale and dreadful destruction. We have spoken of 
our responsibilities and of our obligations to society 
in terms that sound to me very provincial, because 
the psychologist can hardly do anything without 
realizing that for him the acquisition of knowledge 
opens up the most terrifying prospects of controlling 
what people do and how they think and how they 
behave and how they feel. This is true for all of 
you who are engaged in practice, and as the corpus 
of psychology gains in certitude and subtlety and 
skill, I can see that the physicist’s pleas that what 
he discovers be used with humanity and be used 
wisely will seem rather trivial compared to those 
pleas which you will have to make and for which 
you will have to be responsible. 

The point, of course, is that as the relevance of 
what we find to human welfare and human destiny 
becomes sharper and more manifest, our responsi- 


Tur AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGIST 


bilities for explication, for explanation, for com- 
munication, for teaching grow. These are rather 
our responsibilities for being sure that we are under- 
stood than responsibilities for making decisions; 
they are our responsibilities for laying the basis in 
understanding for those decisions. 

There are other ways in which we are alike. The 
practical usefulness of our professions gives us often 
the impression that we are right for the wrong 
reasons, and that our true nature is very different 
from our public presence. We are both faced with 
the problem of the need to keep intact the purity 
of academic and abstract research and, at the same 
time, to nourish and be nourished by practice. In 
physics, of course, our debt to technology and engi- 
neering is unlimited. I think it would be so in 
psychology as well. 

Both sciences, all sciences, arise as refinements, 
corrections, and adaptations of common sense, 
There are no unique, simple, scientific methods that 
one can prescribe; but there are certainly traits 
that any science must have before it pretends to 
be one. One is the quest for objectivity. I mean 
that not in a metaphysical sense; but in a very 
practical sense, as the quest to be sure that we 
understand one another, and that all qualified prac- 
titioners mean essentially the same thing. Com- 
mon-sense language is inherently ambiguous; when 
the poet uses it, or the rhetorician, he exploits the 
ambiguity, and even when we talk in ordinary life 
we almost need ambiguity in order to get by. But 
in science we try to get rid of that, we try to talk 
in such simple terms, and match our talk with deeds 
in such a way that we may differ as to facts, but 
we can resolve the differences. This is, of course, 
the first step in the quest for certitude. But cer- 
titude is not the whole story. When we move from 
common sense into scientific things, we also move 
toward generality using analysis, using observation 
and, in the end, using experiment. And we also do 
something which is even more characteristic; we 
look for novelty, we look for transcendence, we look 
for features of experience that are not available in 
ordinary life. Characteristic in physics are the in- 
struments that enable us to transcend elementary, 
daily experience: the telescope that lets us look 
deep into the sky, the enormous accelerators which 
are, today, the logical extension of the microscope, 
enabling us to look on a finer and finer scale into 
the structure of matter. 

T need to be cautious in citing parallels in psy- 
chology; but certainly the use of hypnosis, the use 


ANALOGY IN SCIENCE 


of drugs, are typical extensions into unfamiliar 
realms of human experience which just bring out 
characteristics of psychological phenomena that are 
largely lost in day-to-day experience. There is an 
example which may be only a physicist’s idea of a 
perfect experiment. It is the work that was done 
at McGill in the last years on the effects of reducing 
sensory stimuli, with very simple arrangements to 
change the level of stimulation; these produce most 
striking and almost frighteningly great, though es- 
sentially temporary, changes in memory, in the in- 
tellectual and cognitive life of the subjects. This 
is again an example of carrying to an extreme some- 
thing which is indeed encountered in ordinary ex- 
perience but which only the patience and the ab- 
stractness of experimental enquiry is likely to make 
manifest. 

We come from common sense; we work for a 
long time; then we give back to common sense re- 
fined, original, and strange notions, and enrich what 
men know and how they live. And here, I suppose, 
the real hero is the teacher. 


I chose as my theme, “Analogy in Science.” 
What I am going to talk about is analogy as an in- 
strument in science and, to a much lesser extent, 
some slight traits of analogies between the sciences; 
mostly the second theme has led to misunderstand- 
ing and limitation; as for the first theme, analogy is 
indeed an indispensable and inevitable tool for sci- 
entific progress. Perhaps I had better say what I 
mean by that. I do not mean metaphor; I do not 
mean allegory; I do not even mean similarity; but 
I mean a special kind of similarity which is the 
similarity of structure, the similarity of form, a 
similarity of constellation between two sets of struc- 
tures, two sets of particulars, that are manifestly 
very different but have structural parallels. It has 
to do with relation and interconnection. I would 
like to quote you a scholastic comment on analogy. 


- Tt is a translation of Penido, “In a very general 


sense every analogy presupposes two ontological 
conditions; one, a plurality of real beings and thus 
among thein an essential diversity. Monism is the 
born enemy of analogy. And, two, at the very 
heart of this multiplicity, of this inequality, a cer- 
tain unity.” 

It is a matter about which we could argue whether 
these structural elements are invented by us, or 
whether they are discovered in the world. I find it 
very artificial to say that they are invented, in the 
sense that they are more of an artifact than the 


129 


particulars which they unite and describe. I may 
tell one incident in the long history of astronomy 
and physics, which makes this very vivid for me. 
For practical purposes, for prophecy and ritual, the 
Babylonians worked out a method of predicting 
what days the moon would first be visible, of pre- 
dicting lunar eclipses and certain rarer astronomical 
events. They did this by purely mathematical 
methods. They observed when things happened, 
and they got the pattern of it. They were very good. 
They got so good that their methods were in use in 
the last century in India to predict eclipses within 
some thirty minutes, using these two thousand year 
old methods. The Babylonians not only became 
very good, but they enjoyed it very much and they 
did it for fun; long after the practical reasons had 
gone away they published these tables, apparently 
as we publish articles on the internal constitution of 
the stars, because it is interesting. They did all of 
this without any celestial mechanics, without any 
geometry; nothing moved; there were no objects 
circulating around in orbits; there were no laws of 
motion; there was no dynamics; this was just in the 
field of the numbers, 

You know how today we predict eclipses and first 
risings. It would seem to me very wrong to pre- 
tend that the mathematical regularities which were 
the basis of the Babylonian predictions were some- 
thing they invented; it would seem to me equally 
wrong not to recognize in celestial mechanics as we 
now know it, a far deeper and more comprehensive 
description of regularities in the physical world. I 
think that not only because it is a little more useful, 
I think that not only because it unites more sub- 
jects, but because it reveals an aspect of the regu- 
larities of the world which was wholly unseen by 
the Babylonians. 

Perhaps I need now to quote from Charles Peirce, 
and get on: “However, as metaphysics is a subject 
much more curious than useful, the knowledge of 
which, like that of a sunken reef, serves chiefly to 
enable us to keep clear of it, I will not trouble the 
reader with any more Ontology at this moment.” 

Whether or not we talk of discovery or of in- 
vention, analogy is inevitable in human thought, be- 
cause we come to new things in science with what 
equipment we have, which is how we have learned 
to think, and above all how we have learned to think 
about the relatedness of things. We cannot, coming 
into something new, deal with it except on the basis 
of the familiar and the old-fashioned. The con- 
servatism of scientific enquiry is not an arbitrary 


130 THE AMERICAN 
thing; it is the freight with which we operate; it is 
the only equipment we have. We cannot learn to 
be surprised or astonished at something unless we 
have a view of how it ought to be; and that view is 
almost certainly an analogy. We cannot learn that 
we have made a mistake unless we can make a mis- 
take; and our mistake is almost always in the form 
of an analogy to some other piece of experience. 

This is not to say that analogy is the criterion 
of truth. One can never establish that a theory is 
right by saying that it is like some other theory 
that is right. The criterion of truth must come 
from analysis, it must come from experience, and 
from that very special kind of objectivity which 
characterizes science, namely that we are quite sure 
we understand one another and that we can check 
up on one another. But truth is not the whole 
thing; certitude is not the whole of science. Science 
is an immensely creative and enriching experience; 
and it is full of novelty and exploration; and it is 
in order to get to these that analogy is an indis- 
pensable instrument, Even analysis, even the ability 
to plan experiments, even the ability to sort things 
out and pick them apart presupposes a good deal 
of structure, and that structure is characteristically 
an analogical one. 

Let me read you now a few relevant and eloquent 
words of William James, He wrote them in one of 
his later accounts of pragmatism, at a time when 
his own good sense and shrewd observation and 
wisdom and humanity made him aware of the fact 
that to say only that an idea was true because it 
worked was a rather poor description of what went 
on in science, that something was missing from that 
account. This is what he wrote: 

The point I now urge you to observe particularly is the 
part played by the older truths. Failure to take account 
of it is the source of much of the unjust criticism levelled 
against pragmatism. ‘Their influence is absolutely control- 
ling. Loyalty to them is the first principle—in most cases 
it is the only principle; for by far the most usual way of 
handling phenomena so novel that they would make for a 
serious rearrangement of our preconception is to ignore 


them altogether, or to abuse those who bear witness for 
them. 


What I want to do next is to give you five ex- 
amples of the use of analogy in atomic physics. 
They will not all be equally familiar; perhaps that 
is an understatement, for some are very new, even 
to such a point new that I do not know how good 
the analogies are and we have not yet found the 
decisive point at which they are mistaken. 


PSYCHOLOGIST 


The analogies in physics may very well be mis- 
leading for biologists and psychologists, because of 
the enormous part that rather rigid formal struc- 
ture plays in physics. This structure is not per- 
haps necessarily quantitative, though in fact much 
of it is quantitative. Our ability to write down 
synoptic relations in symbolic form, our use of 
formulae, enables us to talk of vast amounts of ex- 
perience, very varied experience, very detailed ex- 
perience, in a shorthand way; and to point sharply 
to mistakes, to correct error on occasion by alter- 
ing only one letter, that changes everything. These 
examples are thus not meant as paradigms, but 
rather as an illustration of the fact that, in what is 
regarded as one of the most rigorous and certain 
of the sciences, we use an instrument which has been 
in great disrepute, because uncritically used it can 
confuse invention with confirmation and truth. 

Let me give a first example which is not from 
atomic physics, which is almost from pre-physics, 
because it deals with very familiar things and yet 
illustrates the nature of the role of form in the use 
of analogy in physics. This has to do with Jean 
Buridan and the Paris school of the 14th century 
and the theory of impetus. What was their classic 
view? Physics has a special meaning for the word 
“classic”; classic means wrong, it means a wrong 
view that was held to be right a little while ago. 
The classic view was that the natural state of mat- 
ter was rest, and that where you found bodies in 
motion you needed to look for a cause. This was 
the Schoolman’s view; it was Aristotle’s view. It 
is, in fact, supported by a lot of observation. It is 
not well supported by observation on projectiles; 
the notion that air pushes the bullet becomes less 
plausible the more you watch. ‘Buridan and _ his 
colleagues took a step, making a new analogy, prob- 
ably the greatest step in the history of Western sci- 
ence. They said, it is true that matter has a natural 
state, but it is not rest. It is true that when it 
departs from this natural state this must be ascribed 
to the intervention of a cause. But the natural 
state is one of constant impetus, one of constant 
momentum, one of uniform velocity. And with 
that the beginnings of rational mechanics and ra- 
tional physical science were made. This seems a 
small change, to replace the coordinate by the 
velocity; it is a small change; and yet it is a change 
in the whole way of thinking about the physical 
world. 

Let me list the five illustrations from atomic 
physics: they are what has happened to the idea 


ANALOGY IN SCIENCE ~ 


of waves; what has happened to the ideas of 
classical physics in the atomic domain, the so- 
called correspondence principle; the analogy be- 
tween radioactive decay and emission of light which 
we owe to Fermi; the analogy between electromag- 
netic forces and nuclear forces, between electro- 
dynamics and mesodynamics; and a final subject 
which I will only call strangeness because that is 
about all I know about it. 

Take the wave theory. It originated in the ob- 
servation of regular, rhythmic changes in matter, 
waves on water, and was developed by an easily 
conducted physical exploration of sound waves, 
where there is a periodic change, a regular change 
in the density of air or other media. Both of 
these phenomena exhibit a characteristic. If two 
waves collide they can cancel each other out, or 
they can reinforce each other. They show inter- 
ference. They have another abstract property: If 
waves pass through an orifice or around an obstacle 
that is small compared with the wave length, then 
the obstacle or the orifice does not cast a sharp 
image or shadow, but there are characteristic blur- 
ring effects which are called diffraction. Waves 
superpose; the sum of the two waves is just what 
you get by adding algebraically and not arithme- 
tically; you may get zero if you add equal positive 
and negative waves; this again is interference. 

This abstract set of properties is persistent; light 
is also a wave motion, but there is no matter in 
motion; there is no substrate. It was a great mark 
of progress for physics to recognize this disanalogy. 
There is still motion; and what moves are physically 
measurable things, rather more abstract things, 
electric fields and magnetic fields. Again we find 
interference, diffraction, and superposition, the same 
abstract characteristics, and again in principle, the 
infinitely regular, infinitely repeated pattern as a 
special case of a wave. 

More extremely abstract examples are the waves 
of atomic mechanics, of wave mechanics, because 
these waves in the first place are in multidimen- 
sional space, then they are represented by complex 
numbers so that they are not directly measurable; 
they are indeed quite unobservable. There is noth- 
ing to measure in the physical world that corre- 
sponds to these waves. They are indirectly con- 
nected with observation; but they have again these 
same abstract properties—interference, linearity, 
superposition, diffraction; and when one talks about 
them, one uses much the same mathematics as for 
sound and light waves, although it is not the fact 


131 


that one can use the mathematics but the fact that 
the structure and the relations are the same that is 
the decisive discovery. These waves represent, if 
one wants to say what they are, not matter, not 
forces, not electric fields, but essentially the state of 
information about an atomic system. 

At each point the first scientists have tried to 
make a theory like the earlier theories, light, like 
sound, as a material wave; matter waves like light 
waves, like a-real, physical wave; and in each case 
it has been found one had to widen the framework 
a little, and find the disanalogy which enabled one 
to preserve what was right about the analogy. 

The second example of analogy is a massive one; 
it is, I think, the greatest experience in this century 
for the physicist, even greater than relativity; it is 
the discovery of atomic mechanics. Here again, 
in a way very characteristic of scientific theory, 
great conservatism presided over and guided the de- 
velopment. What is all this about? When one gets 
to the atomic domain, and this is a domain of small 
actions, of limited distances and limited impulses, 
of things such as one encounters in atoms and 
nuclei, then the coarseness of the whole physical 
world, its granular atomic structure, for the first 
time begins to manifest itself. This is not yet the 
granulation of the fundamental particles, but the 
granulation of atomic physics itself, of the quantum 
of action. What this turns out to mean is that 
when one tries to study such a system there are 
aspects of it which are accessible to experiment but 
are not compatibly or simultaneously accessible to 
experiment. A famous example is in the uncer- 
tainty relations, that one can determine the location 
of something in time and space, but if one does that, 
he uses an experimental setup which makes it im- 
possible to know exactly what the impulse or 
velocity or energy of the system is. One may do 
the opposite; one can study the impulse and then 
lose all account of where the object is. And one 
can, of course, compromise with limited knowledge 
of both; but one cannot combine; and we call these 
the complementary aspects of an atomic system, 
and the complementary character of the funda- 
mental observations. ‘That means that we cannot 
talk about an atom as we can about a classical 
mechanical system. We cannot say the objects in 
it are here and they are moving in certain orbits 
and so on; in fact, in ordinary atoms there are no 
orbits. In atoms as they are ordinarily encountered 
there is something entirely different; there are sta- 
tionary states which have a stability, a uniqueness, 


132 


a reproduceability, which has no counterpart in 
classical physics at all, which could not exist if it 
were not for a revolutionary new feature. 

One can talk about these stationary states in a 
consistent way; one can describe them accurately, 
and predict them; but one has a vast change from 
the familiar experience of bodies in motion, of mat- 
ter in motion. Sometimes people say that this 
atomic theory is characterized by the fact that we 
cannot observe a system without disturbing it. But 
that is not quite right. It is not the disturbance 
which makes the trouble; it is the fact that the 
means of observation would be frustrated as means 
of observation if we tried to take account of the 
disturbance which we are making. This is thus a 
slightly more subtle matter. Sometimes people say 
that the electron has a position and momentum but 
we cannot measure them simultaneously. But this 
is not right either, because only the act of observa- 
tion, the coupling of the atom with the physical 
measuring equipment, makes it logically permissible 
to attribute a position to an electron. We cannot 
get the right answer by saying that the electron 
has a position, and since we do not know what it 
is, let us average. If we do that we get a wrong 
answer. We have to admit that unless the situation 
is one which is created by our physical operation 
on the atomic system to realize, to manifest, to 
objectify the localization of the electron, then it 
will not be localized; it will in fact have no proper- 
ties at all apart from what we do to it. 

All of this is extraordinarily radical and extra- 
ordinarily unlike Newtonian mechanics. But what 
does the physicist say? Even before the full an- 
swer was found it was said there was something 
going on here which limits classical ideas; they do 
not quite apply; but in any situation in which they 
do apply we know that they are right; and, there- 
fore, whatever laws hold in the atomic domain, they 
must merge into the laws of classical mechanics. 
There must be a one-to-one correspondence, an 
analogy; otherwise, in capturing some insight into 
this new domain we will throw out all we ever 
knew, and throw out things that are true. This 
affirmation is called the correspondence principle. 
Let me give an example of how extremely compact 
is this correction of the analogy, which has revolu- 
tionized everything, of how one deals with analogy 
in a highly formalized science. 

Each law of classical mechanics may be written 
so that it is true in atomic mechanics: that the 
velocity is proportional to the momentum; that the 


THE AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGIST 


change in time of the momentum is proportional to 
the force; that the energy is conserved. All of 
these things hold provided we make one formal 
change, provided we say that the momentum and 
the coordinate are not numbers, but are objects 
such that when we multiply the momentum by the 
coordinate and when we multiply the coordinate 
by the momentum we do not get the same answer, 
and that the difference between these two answers 
is an imaginary, universal, atomic constant. If we 
just write that one formula, then everything we 
had before is formally identical with what we have 
now. This is not only a powerful illustration of the 
use of analogy and disanalogy in a formal science; 
it played a decisive part in the exploration and dis- 
covery of the atomic world. We shall have to come 
back to other aspects of this great development. 
Let me run rather more briefly over the three other 
examples. 

Radioactive nuclei, almost all of those that are 
made artificially, and many natural ones, disin- 
tegrate by sending out electrons. We puzzled and 
puzzled over this, since it was quite clear that there 
were no electrons in nuclei. Then Fermi made the 
suggestion that one might describe this as one de- 
scribes the emission of light or light quanta from 
atoms. Nobody would say there was a light quan- 
tum in an atom; but still we observe light coming 
out; and he made a theory along these lines. It 
was not exactly right; the analogy was not quite 
perfect; but with a very little adjustment which 
took some fifteen years of comparison with the 
details of experiment, we have a description and a 
theory that work fine. 

The Japanese physicist Yukawa proposed a some- 
what braver analogy, whose fortunes are still not 
entirely clear. He proposed a similarity between - 
electrical and nuclear forces. The way in which 
one describes the forces between electrically charged 
bodies is, of course, that one charged body makes 
electric fields; and these electric fields are propa- 
gated to other bodies, and give them some mo- 
mentum to push them around. Nuclear forces, 
which are not electromagnetic, but are very strong 
and spectacular, Yukawa said, would probably be 
due to a field of a new kind; replacing the electric 
field there would be this new field; and replacing 
the light quanta, there would be new kinds of par- 
ticles. Using general arguments of relativity and 
complementarity, or quantum theory, he concluded 
that because the forces between nucleons are of 
short range these new particles would have a mass 


ANALOGY IN SCIENCE 


some hundreds of times that of the electron; and 
from other particularities of nuclear forces, he drew 
conclusions about the nature of these particles. 
These particles were found in cosmic rays; they are 
called mesons. The analogy which Yukawa started 
with has been refined; one has discovered that there 
are many differences between mesodynamics and 
electrodynamics. One is at the present time not 
quite sure what all of the key points of difference, 
of disanalogy, are. Some of them have been dis- 
covered, but they appear to be rather the more 
trivial ones; yet the theory, as it stands now, has 
some predictive value; it has brought order and 
clarity to a part, at least, of nuclear physics; it has 
kept people at work, busy for twenty years of rather 
odd and arduous and rarified boondoggling. It has 
been a very major event in physics and I do not 
know at the moment how to describe what limits 
this analogy, why it is not a perfect one. If we 
were having a seminar on physics I would talk 
about it for an hour, but I still would not know. 

The troubles, though, are probably connected 
with my fifth example. It is true that these mesons 
of Yukawa’s were discovered; but not very long 
after that, in the last five years, one has found a 
whole lot of other objects—about six manifestly 
different objects and maybe more to come, which 
are also quite stable and last quite a while, and 
which are not simple mesons of the kind Yukawa 
envisaged. Almost certainly their intervention in 
the picture, which is not something that is provided 
for in the analogy we started from, will provide a 
clue to the new point. But, their existence raises a 
different problem. Whenever in physics one en- 
counters a situation in which something does not 
happen, or happens very slowly, one finds it inter- 
esting; and the great point was why do these new 
particles not decay quickly. They do decay; but 
it takes them an inordinately long time, and they 
come apart into products which one would expect 
to emerge right away. 

We have a great deal of experience with reactions 
that occur slowly or not at all; and the character- 
istic reason for that is that something does not tend 
to change, like the energy of a system, or the total 
charge: something is conserved. Whenever that 
turns up, it also turns out that the fact that some- 
thing is invariant and unchanging is mathematically 
identical with the statement that something makes 
no difference to the behavior of the system. Ex- 
amples of what may make no difference to the be- 
havior of a system may be its position in space, or 


133 


its orientation in space, or some more abstract cir- 
cumstance. Thus the first thing that we all did 
was to try to find the characteristic of these new 
particles that did not tend to change. That has 
not been hard to do; and a quite successful theory 
has been developed which accounts for some of the 
great peculiarities in this field. We do not have a 
good name for what does not tend to change, and 
the inventor of it calls it the “strangeness.” 

These five examples are not meant to exhaust, 
but merely to illustrate, the powerful use, the in- 
evitable use, of analogy in a well-developed, in a 
highly-organized, highly-formalized, highly-coher- 
ent science. I need to point out that in every case 
an immense amount of experience, of measurement, 
of observation, and of analysis has gone both to the 
correction of the analogies and to their confirmation. 


When J turn to the question of analogies between 
sciences I talk of something very different. There 
is first of all the fact that there are often situations 
that are not analogies at all. There are congruences 
when, in two different sciences, by different tech- 
niques, different language, different concepts, it 
turns out that the same subject has been explored 
from two sides. And when it turns out that there 
is a mapping of one description on the other, usually 
one description contains more elements than the 
other, is richer; the other may then be more eco- 
nomical and more convenient. Examples: The 
chemical theory of valence and atomic physics, 
which are identical except that atomic physics does 
give an account of some phenomena, such as reso- 
nance, which were hard to cope with within the 
framework of the classical chemical theory. An- 
other example, newer and perhaps not yet as well 
explored or understood, lies in classical genetics 
on the one hand, and the discovery of the genetic 
substances DNA, RNA, and so on, which are, at 
the moment, very close to being in a one-to-one 
correspondence, but in which the biochemical de- 


‘scription will turn out richer, more relevant to 


dynamics, and more subtle. 

These are great events of science; when they 
happen there is rejoicing, and when they do not 
happen there is hope. These are the great events 
which bring coherence and order and large struc- 
ture to the unfolding of scientific life. But prob- 
ably between sciences of very different character, 
the direct formal analogies in their structure are 
not too likely to be helpful. Certainly what the 
pseudo-Newtonians did with sociology was a laugh- 


134 


able affair; and similar things have been done with 
mechanical notions of how psychological phenomena 
are to be explained. I know that when physicists 
enter biology their first ideas of how things work 
are indescribably naive and mechanical; they are 
how things would work if the physicists were mak- 
ing them work, but not how they work in life. I 
know that when I hear the word “field” used in 
physics and in psychology I have a nervousness that 
I cannot entirely account for. I think that, espe- 
cially when we compare subjects in which ideas of 
coding, of the transfer of information, or ideas of 
purpose, are inherent and natural, with subjects in 
which these are not inherent and natural, that 
formal analogies have to be taken with very great 
caution. 

But for all of that I would like to say something 
about what physics has to give back to common 
sense that it seemed to have lost from it, not be- 
cause I am clear that these ideas are important 
tools in psychological research, but because it seems 
to me that the worst of all possible misunderstand- 
ings would be that psychology be influenced to 
model itself after a physics which is not there any 
more, which has been quite outdated. 

We inherited, say at the beginning of this cen- 
tury, a notion of the physical world as a causal one, 
in which every event could be accounted for if we 
were ingenious, a world characterized by number, 
where everything interesting could be measured and 
quantified, a determinist world, a world in which 
there was no use or room for individuality, in which 
the object of study was simply there and how you 
studied it did not affect the object, it did not affect 
the kind of description you gave of it, a world in 
which objectifiability went far beyond merely our 
own agreement on what we meant by words and 
what we are talking about, in which objectification 
was meaningful irrespective of any attempt to study 
the system under consideration. It was just the 
given real object; there it was, and there was noth- 
ing for you to worry about of an epistemological 
character. This extremely rigid picture left out a 
great deal of common sense. I do not know whether 
these missing elements will prove helpful; but at 
least their return may widen the resources that one 
can bring to any science. 

What are these ideas? In our natural, unschooled 
talk, and above all in unschooled talk about psy- 
chological problems, we have five or six things which 
we have got back into physics with complete rigor, 
with complete objectivity, in the sense that we 


Tue AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGIST 


understand one another, with a complete lack of 
ambiguity and with a perfectly phenomenal tech- 
nical success. One of them is just this notion that 
the physical world is not completely determinate. 
There are predictions you can make about it but 
they are statistical; and any event has in it the 
nature of the surprise, of the miracle, of something 
that you could not figure out. Physics is predic- 
tive, but within limits; its world is ordered, but not 
completely causal. 

Another of these ideas is the discovery of the 
limits on how much we can objectify without refer- 
ence to what we are really talking about in an 
operational, practical sense. We can say the elec- 
tron has a certain charge and we do not have to 
argue as to whether we are looking at it to say 
that; it always does. We cannot say it has a place 
or a motion. If we say that we imply something 
about what we ourselves—I do not mean as people 
but as physicists—are doing about it. 

A third point is very closely related to this; it is 
the inseparability of what we are studying and the 
means that are used to study it, the organic connec- 
tion of the object with the observer. Again, the 
observer is not in this case a human; but in psy- 
chology the observer sometimes is a human. 

And then, as logical consequences of this, there 
is the idea of totality, or wholeness. Newtonian 
physics, classical science, was differential; anything 
that went on could be broken up into finer and finer 
elements and analyzed so. If one looks at an atomic 
phenomenon between the beginning and the end, 
the end will not be there; it will be a different phe- 
nomenon. Every pair of observations taking the 
form “we know this, we then predict that” is a 
global thing; it cannot be broken down. 

Finally, every atomic event is individual. 
not, in its essentials, reproducible. 

This is quite a pack of ideas that we always use: 
individuality, wholeness, the subtle relations of 
what is seen with how it is seen, the indeterminacy 
and the acausality of experience. And I would only 
say that if physics could take all these away for 
three centuries and then give them back in ten 
years, we may well say that all ideas that occur in 
common sense are fair as starting points, not 
guaranteed to work but perfectly valid as the ma- 
terial of the analogies with which we start. 

The whole business of science does not lie in 
getting into realms which are unfamiliar in normal 
experience. There is an enormous work of analyz- 
ing, of recognizing similarities and analogies, of 


It is 


ANALOGY IN SCIENCE 


getting the feel of the landscape, an enormous quali- 
tative sense of family relations, of taxonomy. It 
is not always tactful to try to quantify; it is not 
always clear that by measuring one has found some- 
thing very much worth measuring. It is true that 
for the Babylonians it was worth measuring— 
noting—the first appearances of the moon because 
it had a practical value. Their predictions, their 
prophecies, and their magic would not work with- 
out it; and I know that many psychologists have 
the same kind of reason for wanting to measure. 
It is a real property of the real world that you are 
measuring, but it is not necessarily the best way to 
advance true understanding of what is going on; 
and I would make this very strong plea for plural- 
ism with regard to methods that, in the necessarily 
early stages of sorting out an immensely vast ex- 
perience, may be fruitful and may be helpful. They 
may be helpful not so much for attaining objec- 
tivity, nor for a quest for certitude which will never 
be quite completely attained. But there is a place 
for the use of naturalistic methods, the use of de- 
scriptive methods. I have been immensely im- 
pressed by the work of one man who visited us last 
year at the Institute, Jean Piaget. When you look 
at his work, his statistics really consist of one or 
two cases. It is just a start; and yet I think he 
has added greatly to our understanding. It is not 
that I am sure he is right, but he has given us 
something worthy of which to enquire whether it 
is right; and I make this plea not to treat too 
harshly those who tell you a story, having observed 
carefully without having established that they are 
sure that the story is the whole story and the 
general story. 

It is of course in that light that I look at the im- 
mense discipline of practice, that with all its pitfalls, 
with all the danger that it leads to premature and 
incorrect solutions, does give an incredible amount 
of experience. Physics would not be where it is, 
psychology would not be where it is if there were 
not a great many people willing to pay us for think- 
mg and working on their problems. 


If any of this is true there is another thing that 
physicists and psychologists have in common: we 
are going to have quite a complicated life. The 
plea for a plural approach to exploration, the plea 
for a minimal definition of objectivity that I have 
made, means that we are going to learn a terrible 
lot; there are going to be many different ways 


135 


of talking about things; the range from almost 
un-understood practice to recondite and abstract 
thought is going to be enormous. It means there 
are going to have to be a lot of psychologists, as 
there are getting to be a lot of physicists. When 
we work alone trying to get something straight it 
is right that we be lonely; and I think in the really 
decisive thoughts that advance a science loneliness 
is an essential part. When we are trying to do 
something practical it is nice to have an excess of 
talent, to have more sailors than are needed to sail 
the ship and more cooks than are needed to cook the 
meal; the reason is that in this way a certain 
elegance, a certain proper weighing of alternatives, 
guides the execution of the practical task. 

We are, for all kinds of reasons, worrying about 
how our scientific community is to be nourished 
and enough people who are good enough are to 
come and work with us. And then on the other 
side we are worried about how we are to continue 
to understand one another, and not get totally 
frustrated by the complexity and immensity of our 
enterprises. 

I think there are good reasons of an inherent 
kind, beside the competitive compulsion of the com- 
munist world, why we would do well to have more 
and better scientists. I know that exhortation, 
money, patronage, will do something about this; 
but I do not think that is all that will be needed. 
I think that if we are to have some success it must 
be because, as a part of our culture, the under- 
standing, the life of the mind, the life of science, 
in itself, as an end as well as a means, is appreciated, 
is enjoyed, and is cherished. I think that has to be 
a very much wider thing in the community as a 
whole, if we are to enjoy with the community as a 
whole the healthy relations without which the de- 
veloping powers of scientific understanding, pre- 
diction, and control are really monstrous things. 

It may not be so simple, to have in the com- 
munity at large some genuine experience of the 
pleasures of understanding and discovery. It may 
not be simple because what this requires is not 
merely that this experience be agreeable, but that 
it have a touch of virtue; that not only the con- 
sideration of ends, of products, of accomplishments 
and status, but the texture of life itself, its momen- 
tary beauty and its nobility, be worth some atten- 
tion; and that among the things that contribute to 
these be the life of the mind and the life of science. 
Let us try to make it so. 


