RS 


Atomic Weapons and American Policy 

Author(s): J. Robert Oppenheimer 

Source: Foreign Affairs, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Tul., 1953), pp. 525-535 
Published by: Council on Foreign Relations 

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20030987 


Accessed: 08/05/2014 07:45 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


Council on Foreign Relations is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Foreign 
Affairs. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


Vol. 31 JULY 1953 No. 4 


ATOMIC WEAPONS AND 
AMERICAN POLICY 


By J. Robert Oppenhevmer 


T IS possible that in the large light of history, if indeed there 
I is to be history, the atomic bomb will appear not very differ- 
ent than in the bright light of the first atomic explosion. 
Partly because of the mood of the time, partly because of a very 
clear prevision of what the technical developments would be, we 
had the impression that this might mark, not merely the end of a 
great and terrible war, but the end of such wars for mankind. 
Two years later Colonel Stimson was to write in Foreign Af- 
fairs, “The riven atom, uncontrolled, can be only a growing men- 
ace to us all... .” In the same paragraph he wrote, “Lasting 
peace and freedom cannot be achieved until the world finds a 
way toward the necessary government of the whole.” Earlier, 
shortly after the war’s end, the Government of the United States 
had put forward some modest suggestions, responsive to these 
views, for dealing with the atom in a friendly, open, codperative 
way. We need not argue as to whether these proposals were still- 
born. They have been very dead a long, long time, to the surprise 
of only a few. Openness, friendliness and codperation did not 
seem to be what the Soviet Government most prized on this 
earth. 

It should not be beyond human ingenuity for us to devise less 
friendly proposals. We need not here detail the many reasons 
why they have not been put forward, why it has appeared irrele- 
vant and grotesque to do so. These reasons range from the special 
difficulties of all negotiation with the Soviet Union, through the 
peculiar obstacles presented by the programmatic hostility and 
the institutionalized secretiveness of Communist countries, to 
what may be regarded as the more normal and familiar difficul- 
ties of devising instruments for the regulation of armaments in a 
world without prospect of political settlement. 


1“The Challenge to Americans,” by Henry L. Stimson. Foreign Affairs, October 1947. 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


526 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


Instead we came to grips, or began to come to grips, with the 
massive evidences of Soviet hostility and the growing evidences 
of Soviet power, and with the many almost inevitable, yet often 
tragic, elements of weakness, disharmony and disunity in what 
we have learned to call the Free World. In these preoccupations 
—one wholly negative, and one largely positive though very difh- 
cult—the atom, too, was given a simple rdle, and the policy fol- 
lowed was a fairly simple one. The role was to be one ingredient 
of a shield: a shield composed also in part of the great industrial 
power of America, and in part of the military and, even more, the 
political weaknesses of the Soviet Union. The rule for the atom 
was: “Let us keep ahead. Let us be sure that we are ahead of 
the enemy.” | 

Today it would seem that, however necessary these considera- 
tions and these policies may be, they are no longer nearly suffi- 
cient. The reason for that one can see when one looks at the char- 
acter of the arms race. The reason for that one can see when 
one compares the time-scale of atomic developments here and 
abroad with the probable time-scale of deep political changes in 
the world. 

It is easy to say “let us look at the arms race.” I must tell about 
it without communicating anything. I must reveal its nature 
without revealing anything; and this I propose to do. 

There are three countries embarked on this race: The United 
Kingdom—and of that we need to note only that it is unfortu- 
nate that so talented and hard-pressed a country, so close to us 
in history and tradition, should be doing all this separately from 
us—ourselves, and the U.S.S.R. 

As for the U.S.S.R., it has recently been said officially, and thus 
may be repeated with official sanction, that it has produced three 
atomic explosions, and is producing fissionable material in sub- 
stantial quantities. I should like to present the evidence for this; 
IT cannot. We do need one word of warning: this is evidence which 
could well be evidence of what the Government of the U.S.S.R. 
wants us to think rather than evidence of what is true. I may, 
however, record my own casual, perhaps too rough guess as to 
how the U.S.S.R. stands in relation to us in the field of atomic 
munitions. This does not refer at all to other elements of arma- 
ment. I think that the U.S.S.R. is about four years behind us. 
And I think that the scale of its operations is not as big as ours 
was four years ago. It may be something like half as big as ours 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ATOMIC WEAPONS AND AMERICAN POLICY 527 


then was. This is consistent with the facts known to us. It has not 
been proven by them, by any means. 

This sounds comfortably reassuring. It sounds as though the 
job of keeping ahead were being satisfactorily accomplished. But 
in order to assay what it means, we have to know something of 
what it is that they are four years behind, how fast the situation 
is likely to change, and what it means to be half as big as we are. 

When Hiroshima was bombed there was a single plane. There 
was no air opposition. We flew straight in at medium height, at 
rather low speed, over the city of Hiroshima; we dropped one 
bomb with an energy release the equivalent of about fifteen thou- 
sand tons of TNT. It killed more than seventy thousand people 
and produced a comparable number of casualties; it largely de- 
stroyed a medium-sized city. That we had in mind. But we also 
had in mind, and we said, that it was not a question of one bomb. 
It would become a question of ten, and then one hundred, and 
then a thousand, and then ten thousand, and then maybe one 
hundred thousand. We knew—or, rather, we did not know, but 
we had very good reason to think—that it was not a question of 
ten thousand tons but of one hundred thousand and then a mil- 
lion tons, and then ten million tons and then maybe one hundred 
million tons. 

We knew that these munitions could be adapted, not merely to 
a slow medium bomber operating where we had almost complete 
air supremacy, but to methods of delivery more modern, more 
flexible, harder to intercept, and more suitable for combat as it 
might be encountered today. 

Today all of this is in train. It is my opinion that we should all 
know—not precisely, but quantitatively and, above all, authori- 
tatively—where we stand in these matters; that we should all 
have a good idea of how rapidly the situation has changed, and of 
where we may stand, let us say, three, four, or five years ahead, 
which is about as far as one can see. I shall revert to the reasons 
why I think it important that we all know of these matters. | 
cannot write of them. 

What I can say is this: I have never discussed these prospects 
candidly with any responsible group, whether scientists or states- 
men, whether citizens or officers of the Government, with any 
group that could steadily look at the facts, that did not come 
away with a great sense of anxiety and somberness at what they 
saw. The very least we can say is that, looking ten years ahead, it 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


528 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


is likely to be small comfort that the Soviet Union is four years 
behind us, and small comfort that they are only about half as big 
as we are. [he very least we can conclude is that our twenty- 
thousandth bomb, useful as it may be in filling the vast munitions 
pipelines of a great war, will not in any deep strategic sense offset 
their two-thousandth. The very least we can say is that, as Mr. 
Gordon Dean has emphasized, there will come a time when, even 
from the narrowest technical point of view, the art of delivery 
and the art of defense will have a much higher military relevance 
than supremacy in the atomic munitions field itself. 

There are other aspects of the arms race; though they may be 
well-known, they are worth mentioning. We developed the 
atomic bomb under the stimulus of the fear that the Germans 
might be at it. We deliberated at length on the use of the bomb 
against Japan; indeed it was Colonel Stimson who initiated and 
presided over these thorough deliberations. We decided that it 
should be used. We have greatly developed and greatly increased 
our atomic activities. This growth, though natural technically, is 
not inevitable. If the Congress had appropriated no money, it 
would not have occurred. We have made our decision to push 
our stockpiles and the power of our weapons. We have from the 
first maintained that we should be free to use these weapons; and 
it is generally known we plan to use them. It is also generally 
known that one ingredient of this plan is a rather rigid commit- 
ment to their use in a very massive, initial, unremitting strategic 
assault on the enemy. 

This arms race has other characteristics. There has been rela- 
tively little done to secure our defense against the atom; and in 
the far more tragic and difficult problem of defending our Allies 
in Europe still less has been done. This does not promise to be an 
easy problem. 

Atomic weapons are not just one element of an arsenal that 
we hope may deter the Soviet Government, or just one of the 
means we think of for putting an end to a war, once started. It 
is, perhaps, almost the only military measure that anyone has in 
mind to prevent, let us say, a great battle in Europe from being 
a continuing, agonizing, large-scale Korea. It is the only military 
instrument which brings the Soviet Union and the United States 
into contact—a most uncomfortable and dangerous contact— 
with one another. 

Atomic weapons, as everyone knows, have been incorporated 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ATOMIC WEAPONS AND AMERICAN POLICY 529 


in the plans for the defense of Europe. They have been developed 
for many tactical military uses, as in the anti-submarine cam- 
paign, the air campaign, and the ground campaign in the Euro- 
pean theater; and these potential applications continue to ramify 
and multiply. Yet the Europeans are rather in ignorance what 
these weapons are, how many there may be, how they will be 
used and what they will do. It thus needs to be remarked, as we 
shall need to remark again, that for Europe the atomic weapon 
is both a much needed hope of effective defense and a terrible im- 
mediate peril, greater even than for this country. 

These are some of the peculiarities of this arms race, marked 
for us by a very great rigidity of policy, and a terrifyingly rapid 
accumulation, probably on both sides, of a deadly munition. 
When we think of the terms in which we in this country tend to 
talk of the future, the somberness with which thoughtful men 
leave a discussion of the subject is not wholly ununderstandable. 
There are two things that everyone would like to see happen; but 
few people, if any, confidently believe that they will happen soon. 
One is a prompt, a happily prompt reform or collapse of the en- 
emy. One is a regulation of armaments as part of a general politi- 
cal settlement—an acceptable, hopeful, honorable and humane 
settlement to which we could be a party. 

There is nothing repugnant in these prospects; but they may 
not appear to be very likely in the near future. Most of us, and 
almost all Europeans, appear to regard the outbreak of war in 
this near future as a disaster. Thus the prevailing view is that we 
are probably faced with a long period of cold war in which con- 
flict, tension and armaments are to be with us. The trouble then 
is just this: during this period the atomic clock ticks faster and 
faster. We may anticipate a state of affairs in which two Great 
Powers will each be in a position to put an end to the civilization 
and life of the other, though not without risking its own. We may 
be likened to two scorpions in a bottle, each capable of killing the 
other, but only at the risk of his own life. 

This prospect does not tend to make for serenity; and the basic 
fact that needs to be communicated is that the time in which this 
will happen is short, compared to the time in which reasonable 
men may have some confidence in a reasonable amelioration or 
even alteration of the great political troubles of our time. 

In this prospect, surely, we shall need all the help and wisdom 
and resourcefulness we can muster. This, in all probability, is a 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


530 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


very tough fix. There are three things we need to remember, three 
things that are very sharp. It is perilous to forget any one of 
them. One is the hostility and the power of the Soviet. Another 
is the touch of weakness—the need for unity, the need for some 
stability, the need for armed strength on the part of our friends 
in the Free World. And the third is the increasing peri! of the 
atom. The problem is straightforward, if not easy, if we forget 
the last. It is easy if we forget the first. It is hard if we remember 
all three. But they are all there. 

We need the greatest attainable freedom of action. We need 
strength to be able to ask whether our plans for the use of the 
atom are, all things considered, right or wrong. We need the free- 
dom of action necessary—and we do not have it today—to be 
able to negotiate, should an opportunity for that at some future 
time appear. 

Much will be needed to bring us this freedom of action. Some 
of it we cannot write about, because it has not occurred to us. 
Some we cannot write about because it would not be proper for 
anything but official discussion. An example may be the question 
of whether, under what circumstances, in what manner, and with 
what purpose to communicate with the Soviet Government on 
this and related problems. 

But there are three reforms which seem so obvious, so impor- 
tant, so sure to be salutary that I should like to discuss them 
briefly. One has to do with making available to ourselves, in this 
tough time, the inherent resources of a country like ours and a 
- government like ours. These resources are not available today. 
The second has to do with making available the resources of a 
coalition of governments, bound together in an alliance, yet at 
the moment foreclosed from discussing one of the principal fac- 
tors that affects the destiny of the alliance and of all its members. 
The third has to do with taking measures to put off, to moderate, 
to reduce the dangers of which we have spoken. I shall deal with 
each of these. 

The first is candor—candor on the part of the officials of the 
United States Government to the officials, the representatives, 
the people of their country. We do not operate well when the im- 
portant facts, the essential conditions, which limit and determine 
our choices are unknown. We do not operate well when they are 
known, in secrecy and in fear, only to a few men. 

The general account of the atomic arms race that has been out- 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ATOMIC WEAPONS AND AMERICAN POLICY 531 


lined here can, of course, be found in the public press, together 
with a great deal of detailed information, some true, and much 
largely false. This mass of published rumor, fact, press release 
and speculation could yield, upon analysis, a fairly solid core of 
truth; but as it stands, it is not the truth. The consequences of 
such ignorance may seem obvious; but we may recall two exam- 
ples that illustrate well what they are. 

It must be disturbing that an ex-President of the United 
States, who has been briefed on what we know about the Soviet 
atomic capability, can publicly call in doubt all the conclusions 
from the evidence. Perhaps this was primarily because it was all 
so secret that it could not be talked about, or thought about, or 
understood. It must be shocking when this doubt, so recently ex- 
pressed, is compounded by two men, one of them a most distin- 
guished scientist, who headed one of the great projects of the 
Manhattan District during the war, and one of them a brilliant 
officer, who was in over-all charge of the Manhattan District. 
These two men are not now employed by any agency of the Gov- 
ernment concerned with these questions; therefore they did not 
have access to the evidence. Thus their advice is unavailing, their 
public counsel wrong. 

A second example may illustrate further. A high officer of the 
Air Defense Command said—and this only a few months ago, in 
a most serious discussion of measures for the continental defense 
of the United States—that it was our policy to attempt to protect 
our striking force, but that it was not really our policy to attempt 
to protect this country, for that is so big a job that it would inter- 
fere with our retaliatory capabilities. Such follies can occur only 
when even the men who know the facts can find no one to talk 
to about them, when the facts are too secret for discussion, and 
thus for thought. 

The political vitality of our country largely derives from two 
sources. One is the interplay, the conflict of opinion and debate, 
in many diverse and complex agencies, legislative and executive, 
which contribute to the making of policy. The other is a public 
opinion which is based on confidence that it knows the truth. 

Today public opinion cannot exist in this field. No responsible 
person will hazard an opinion in a field where he believes that 
. there is somebody else who knows the truth, and where he be- 
lieves that he does not know it. It is true that there are and al- 
ways will be, as long as we live in danger of war, secrets that it is 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


532 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


important to keep secret, at least for an appropriate period, if not 
for all time; some of these, and important ones, are in the field of 
atomic energy. But knowledge of the characteristics and prob- 
able effects of our atomic weapons, of—in rough terms—the 
numbers available, and of the changes that are likely to occur 
within the next years, this is not among the things to be kept 
secret. Nor is our general estimate of where the enemy stands. 

Many arguments have been advanced against making public 
this basic information. Some of these arguments had merit in 
times past. One is that we might be giving vital information to 
the enemy. My own view is that the enemy has this information. 
It is available to anyone who will trouble to make an intelligence 
analysis of what has been published. Private citizens do not do 
this; but we must expect that the enemy does. It is largely avail- 
able by other means as well. It is also my view that it is good for 
the peace of the world if the enemy knows these basic facts—very 
good indeed, and very dangerous if he does not. 

There is another source of worry—that public knowledge of 
the situation might induce in this country a mood of despair, or 
a too ready acceptance of what is lightheartedly called preven- 
tive war. I believe that until we have looked this tiger in the eye, 
we shall be in the worst of all possible dangers, which is that we 
may back into him. More generally, I do not think a country like 
ours can in any real sense survive if we are afraid of our people. 

As a first step, but a great one, we need the courage and the 
wisdom to make public at least what, in all reason, the enemy 
must now know: to describe in rough but authoritative and 
quantitative terms what the atomic armaments race is. It is not 
enough to say, as our government so often has, that we have 
made “substantial progress.” When the American people are re- 
sponsibly :aformed, we may not have solved, but we shall have 
a new freedom to face, some of the tough problems that are be- 
fore us. 

There is also need for candor in our dealings with at least our 
major allies. The Japanese are exposed to atomic bombardment; 
and it may be very hard to develop adequate counter-measures. 
Space, that happy asset of the United States, is not an asset for 
Japan. It is not an asset for France. It is not an asset for England. 
There are in existence methods of delivery of atomic weapons 
which present an intractable problem of interception, and which 
are relevant for the small distances that characterize Europe. It 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ATOMIC WEAPONS AND AMERICAN POLICY 533 


will be some time at least before they are relevant for interconti- 
nental delivery. These countries will one day feel a terrible pinch, 
when the U.S.S.R. chooses to remind them of what it can do, and 
do very easily—not without suffering, but in a way that the Eu- 
ropeans themselves can little deter or deflect. 

There have been arguments for technical collaboration with 
the United Kingdom and Canada; these have often appeared 
persuasive. There have been arguments for military collabora- 
tion with the NATO governments, and with the responsible com- 
manders involved. General Bradley and General Collins both 
have spoken of this need, partly in order to explain to our allies 
that an atomic bomb will not do all things—that it has certain 
capabilities but it is not the whole answer. This is surely a pre- 
condition for effective planning, and for the successful defense of 
Europe. 

Yet there are much more general reasons. We and our allies 
are in this long struggle together. What we do will affect the 
destiny of Europe; what is done there will affect ours; and we 
cannot operate wisely if a large half of the problem we have in 
common is not discussed in common. This does not mean that we 
should tie our hands. It means that we should inform and consult. 
This could make a healthy and perhaps very great change in our 
relations with Europe. 

It is not clear that the situation even in the Far East would be 
wholly unaffected. It is troublesome to read that a principal 
reason that we should not use atomic weapons in Korea is that 
our allies would not like it. We need not argue here either that it 
is right or that it is wrong to use them there. In either case, our 
decisions should rest on far firmer ground than that other gov- 
ernments, who know less than we about the matter, should hold 
a different view than ours. It would be proper that the Japanese 
and the British and the many other governments immediately 
involved have a notion of what the issues really are. 

Once, clearly, the problem of proper candor at home is faced— 
the problem of a more reasonable behavior toward our own 
people and our representatives and officials with regard to the 
atom—then the problem of dealing with our allies will be less 
troublesome. For it is pretty much the same information, the 
same rough set of facts, that both our people and our allies need 
to have and to understand. 

The third point may seem even more obvious. I do not believe 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


534. FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


—though of course we cannot today be certain—that we can take 
measures for the defense of our people, our lives, our institutions, 
our cities, which will in any real sense be a permanent solution 
to the problem of the atom. But that is no reason for not doing a 
little better than we are now doing. 

The current view, as is well known, is not very optimistic. Not 
long ago General Vandenberg estimated that we might, with 
luck, intercept 20 or 30 percent of an enemy attack. That is not 
very reassuring, when one looks at numbers and casualties and 
at what it takes to destroy the heart and life of our country. For 
some months now, a highly-qualified panel, under the chairman- 
ship of Dr. Mervin Kelly, appointed by Secretary Lovett and 
reporting now to Secretary Wilson, has studied the complex 
technical problems of continental defense. There are many tech- 
nical developments that have not yet been applied in this field, 
and that could well be helpful. They are natural but substantial 
developments in munitions, in aircraft and in missiles, and in 
procedures for obtaining and analyzing information. Above all, 
there is the challenging problem of the effective use of space; 
there is space between the Soviet Union and the United States. 
This panel, it would appear, has been oppressed and troubled by 
the same over-all oppression which any group always finds when 
it touches seriously any part of the problem of the atom. Yet 
there is no doubt that it will recommend sensible ways in which 
we can proceed to try to defend our lives and our country. 

Such measures will inevitably have many diverse meanings. 
They will mean, first of all, some delay in the imminence of the 
threat. They will mean a disincentive—a defensive deterrent—to 
the Soviet Union. They will mean that the time when the Soviet 
Union can be confident of destroying the productive power of 
America will be somewhat further off—very much further off 
than if we did nothing. They will mean, even to our allies, who are 
much more exposed and probably cannot be well defended, that 
the continued existence of a real and strong America will be a 
solid certainty which should discourage the outbreak of war. 

A more effective defense could even be of great relevance 
should the time come for serious discussion of the regulation of 
armaments. There will have been by then a vast accumulation of 
materials for atomic weapons, and a troublesome margin of un- 
certainty with regard to its accounting—very troublesome in- 
deed if we still live with vestiges of the suspicion, hostility and 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


ATOMIC WEAPONS AND AMERICAN POLICY 535 


secretiveness of the world of today. This will call for a very broad 
and robust regulation of armaments, in which existing forces and 
weapons are of a wholly different order than those required for 
the destruction of one great nation by another, in which steps of 
evasion will be either far too vast to conceal or far too small to 
have, in view of then existing measures of defense, a decisive 
strategic effect. Defense and regulation may thus be necessary 
complements. And here, too, all that we do effectively to con- 
tribute to our own immunity will be helpful in giving us some 
measure of an increased freedom of action. 

These are three paths that we may take. None of them is a 
wholly new suggestion. They have, over the long years, been 
discussed; but they have not been acted on. In my opinion they 
have not, in any deep sense, been generally understood. We need 
to be clear that there will not be many great atomic wars for us, 
nor for our institutions. It is important that there not be one. 
We need to liberate our own great resources, to shape our destiny. 


This content downloaded from 86.8.187.105 on Thu, 8 May 2014 07:45:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


