PHYSICAL REVIEW 


VOLUME 73, 


NUMBER 10 MAY 15, 1948 


Note on Stimulated Decay of Negative Mesons 


S. T. Epstein, R. J. FINKELSTEIN, AND J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey 


(Received February 5, 1948) 


Theories in which the decay of negative mesons is accelerated by electrostatic fields are 
investigated. Such theories always give radiative decay for free mesons. The competition of 
radiationless decay of negative mesons increases with Z5, and the two rates become equal 
for a value of Z, which depends somewhat on the choice of coupling, but which, for one simple 
form, is 12. Experimental evidence probably disproves theories of this kind. 


ALLEY and Rossi! have reported their 
studies of the decay of mesons in aluminum. 
They find that the lifetime of negative mesons in 
that material is about 3 that of positive mesons. 
They also refer to the suggestion* that the 
shortened lifetime may be interpreted, not in 
terms of competing nuclear capture of mesons, 
but by the acceleration of the decay process itself, 
presumably because of the strong electric fields 
acting on negative mesons when they are bound 
in atomic states. If this were true, we should 
clearly have a natural interpretation of the 
regular and marked decrease of observed delayed 
coincidences from negative mesons as the effective 
intensity of the electric field increases with 
atomic number. 

One general feature of any theory which 
provides for appreciable acceleration of meson 
decay by electric fields needs first to be noted. 
In effect, even in the absence of matter, fluc- 
tuating electric fields, ascribable to the vacuum 
fluctuations, will always be present. These will 
in turn lead to stimulated decay accompanied by 
the emission of light quanta. Thus, in all theories 
of this kind, the decay of mesons in free space 
must, at least frequently, be accompanied by 
y-ray emission. When negative mesons are 
trapped in matter, the electrostatic fields of the 
nuclei compete with the fluctuation fields, giving 
rise to processes in which no quanta are emitted, 
and whose probability may be expected to 
increase markedly with atomic number. 

We wish to report briefly some typical cal- 
culations bearing on this point. However, we 


1G. Valley and B. Rossi, Phys. Rev. 73, 177 (1948). 

* These questions were discussed at the Ram Island 
Conference sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences, 
June, 1947, 


need to note, in a preliminary way, that the 
evidence? as it stands is probably not com- 
patible with the view that normal meson decay 
involves light quantum emission. It need hardly 
be pointed out that the results of Anderson’ and 
his collaborators in which a decay positron has 
an observed energy of 25 Mev could readily be 
explained in these terms. 

For the calculations we have assumed that 
the spin of the meson is 0 (it cannot be greater 
than 4); it then does not affect these results 
whether the meson field is scalar or pseudoscalar. 

One might at first take, as a simple interaction 
which promises to account for a stimulated 
decay, the coupling 


2¢nty"¢.0,U-+complex conjugate, (A) 


where ¢,, ¢-, and U are the neutrino, electron, 
and meson wave functions and 0,=(0/0x,) 
—(1e/hc)A,. As is well known, the free disin- 
tegration of a meson into electron and neutrino 
is highly forbidden with this coupling, and one 
might suppose that electromagnetic fields would 
circumvent the selection rule. That this is not 
true follows from the remark of Nelson,‘ that, 
in fact, the coupling (A) is for these purposes 
equivalent to the scalar coupling 

g(m/n) Pn* Pe U, (A’) 
(with m the electron, » the meson, masses) 
except for terms of higher order in g, which do 
not enter here. Estimates based on these coup- 
lings indicate that the decay rate in aluminum 


2For example, R. D. Sard, and E. J. Althaus (to be 
published). 
( 3 the Adams, Lloyd, and Rau, Phys. Rev. 72, 724 
1947). 
4E. C. Nelson, Phys. Rev. 60, 830 (1941). 


1140 


STIMULATED DECAY OF NEGATIVE MESONS 


is not changed by more than 1 percent from the 
rate for free mesons. 

We have, therefore, examined more complex 
coupling schemes, such as are obtained by adding 
to the Lagrangian one of the four following forms 


gFuvgenty*y’ eeU, (B) 
BF’ onty" ped, (C) 
BF U0 ent ¥* ee) (D) 
gh U ent y"Orge- (E) 


Of these, we have examined only (B) and (C) 
in detail. The result of the calculation can be 
expressed in terms of the ratio A,/A; where A; is the 
rate of ternary free decay, and X, is the rate of bin- 
ary stimulated decay for a negative meson trapped 
in its atomic K-shell. These ratios are completely 
fixed by the coupling, and of course independent 
of the value of g. The results are 


\s/Az = (256/3) (e?/hc)4Z* for (B), 
= 1280(e?/hc)*Z5 for (C). 


The general character of these results can be 
understood by a simple argument. The vacuum 
fluctuations leading to the emission of quanta of 
energy ~uc? can be characterized by an electric 
field of the order 


Ey = (he)*/(h/uc)?. 


On the other hand, the electric field acting on a 


1141 


meson in the K-shell is 
Ey, = Ze/[ (h/uc) (he/e?)Z~ J. 
Hence, for the ratio of the two rates 
(E;,/ Es)? = 2°(e/he)*. (1) 


Detailed calculation shows, however, that in 
these high energy disintegrations the effective 
distance of the meson from the nucleus is 


(h/uc)(Ze*/hc)* 
rather than the K-radius 
(h/wc) (Ze*/he)—, 
as assumed above. This alters the ratio (1) to 
Z5(e?/he)*. (2) 


We can compare these results with the findings 
of Valley and Rossi by asking for what value of 
Z we get a X, twice the value of A;. Valley and 
Rossi find Z~13; (B) gives Z=24; (C) gives 
Z=14. This latter result would clearly be con- 
sistent with experiment. Because of the unlikeli- 
hood that the basic mechanisms here proposed 
are realized in nature, we have not examined the 
cases (D) and (E) in detail. 

It is, of course, conceivable that the accelera- 
tion of decay would have to be ascribed, not to 
the electric fields of nuclei, but to the charge 
density itself. In this case, free decay would not 
involve y-ray emission, though it would involve 
pair emission. It has not seemed profitable to 
explore these complex alternatives. 


