948 LETTERS TO 


tried with about the same results as for pure hydrogen. 
No evidence of any helium ions was observed. 

A probable mechanism for the dissociation of the 
hydrogen is as follows. From work on accommodation 
coefficients of ions on metal surfaces it seems reasonable 
to suppose that the hundred volt ions striking the cylinder 
retain after neutralization between 80 and 90 percent of 
their kinetic energy. Since their masses are approximately 
equal to those of the gas atoms or molecules, they quickly 
reach thermal equilibrium with the gas, thus producing 
effectively a gas at a very high temperature. The chemical 
equilibrium data between atomic and molecular hydrogen 
as a function of pressure and temperature would then lead 
one to expect a high ratio of atomic to molecular hydrogen. 
At lower pressures most of the collisions of the high speed 
neutral particles are with the walls and thus the gas is 


THE EDITOR 


not raised to the effective high temperature. The mechan- 
ism just outlined is quite possibly that responsible in 
part for the dissociation in the proton source reported 
recently by Oliphant and Rutherford.® 
The proton source here reported is believed to possess 
certain advantages: first, the small voltages needed for its 
operation are obtainable from storage batteries and thus 
require no elaborate apparatus and second, the total power 
required is small, being less than one hundred watts. 
E. S. LAMAR 
OVERTON LUHR 
George Eastman Research Laboratories, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
November 14, 1933. 


§’ Oliphant and Rutherford, Proc. Roy. Soc. A141, 259 
(1933). 


Lit Fine Structure and Wave Functions near the Nucleus 


The fine structure of the (1s2p)’P level of Lit has been 
calculated by using for the unperturbed level wave func- 
tions built up from F=7,(1+¢ cos 6) exp (—x71/2 —yro/2) 
by multiplication with the proper angle functions and for- 
mation of the antisymmetric part of the products. a, x, 
and y were determined by the Ritz variational method. 
The energy of the spin-free state assumed its minimum 
value —1.16404R, for x=0.3605, y=0.993, c= —0.009836. 
The expressions for the spin-orbit and spin-spin inter- 
actions used previously! to calculate the fine structure of 
He were evaluated for this wave function and gave 
C= —0.334, D= —1.040 cm. The energies of the triplet 
levels 7 =0, 1, 2 are Fo +[—3(C+D), 2(D—C), 0], respec- 
tively, and the measurements of Schiiler? give C=0.016, 

= — 1.033. | 

The variational process was conducted as follows. Since 
c is small and gives a very small contribution to the 
energy, it was first taken to be zero and x and y were 
varied, the values above giving a minimum energy. 
Keeping x and y fixed, the energy was then minimized 
with respect to c. The energy is very sensitive to a change 
in y, and the error in y caused by neglecting ¢ can hardly 
exceed +0.001. It may be that the best value of x is 


shifted slightly by lifting the restriction c=0, but a change 
in x of even 0.0002 changes C and D by less than one part 
in 500. Thus disagreement between calculated and observed 
values of C is quite definitely present. 

As in He the disagreement is much smaller for the spin- 
spin interaction D than for the spin orbit interaction C. 
In both cases this is due to the fact that the spin orbit 
interaction is a sum of two opposing effects having the 
same order of magnitude. One may suppose that to some 
extent this situation is general also for heavier atoms and 
one may express a doubt as to the exactness of nuclear 
magnetic moments derived by using approximate theo- 
retical expressions for the spin-orbit interaction. 

We are indebted to Mr. J. Leiner for help with the 
numerical computations. 

JOHN A. WHEELER 
G. BREIT 
New York University, 
University Heights, 
November 15, 1933. 


1G. Breit, Phys. Rev. 36, 385 (1930). 
2H. Schiiler, Zeits. f. Physik 66, 431 (1930). 


The Production of Positives by Nuclear Gamma-Rays 


The gamma-rays emitted by a nucleus may, when the 
energy of the rays is greater than the million volts necessary 
to produce a pair, be absorbed by the creation of an 
electron and a positive in the neighborhood of the nucleus. 
The probability of internal conversion by an atomic 
electron is very small for gamma-rays of high energy and 
elements of small atomic number, for this process depends 


essentially upon the Coulomb field of the nucleus and the 


consequent acceleration of the electron. In contrast to this 
atomic internal conversion, the production of pairs can 
occur even when the gamma-ray is emitted by a nucleus 
of negligible electrostatic field. 


This circumstance makes possible a very simple calcu- 
lation of the probability of internal absorption of the 
gamma-ray by pair production, in which one neglects 
entirely the effect upon electron and positive of the 
electrostatic field of the nucleus. A more detailed con- 
sideration shows that the results so computed should be 
valid whenever, for both particles of the pair, the quantity 
2rZe*/hv is small; here v is the velocity of the particle, and 
Z the nuclear charge. For light elements the method will 
thus give trustworthy results whenever this absorption is 
important; but with the heavier radioactive elements the 


LETTERS TO 


results may be expected to hold even reasonably well only 
for the hardest radioactive gamma-rays. | 

The probability of pair production depends a little, 
though not nearly as much as the atomic internal con- 
version, on whether the gamma-ray is a dipole or a quadri- 
pole ray. If y, «, e’, are the energies of gamma-ray, electron 
and positive, all in units mc?, so that e, ¢ =land y=e+e’, 
this probability is 


(ala) "del 2pp/-+(2+e%) In B] (1) 


for a dipole gamma-ray, and 


(a/ay®) [ "del 8p! (ee! —1) +3y%(@ +e” —2) In b} (2) | 


for a quadripole. Here 
p=(e&—1)?; p' =(e" —1)?; b=y ee’ + pp’ +1); a=27e*/he. 


For very high energy gamma-rays we obtain the asymp- 
totic values 


(Qa/3mr) {In Qy)—3/5} and (2a/3r) {In (2y) — 61/30} 
for dipole and quadripole, respectively. 

In the approximation here considered, the distribution 
in energy, as given by (1) and (2), is symmetric between 
the two particles. Because the nuclear field repels the 
positives and attracts the electrons, the positives will in 
fact tend to have higher energies; and when the gamma-ray 
is not too near the threshold, the mean energy of the 
positives will exceed that of the electrons by about aZ mc’. 
For high energies the two particles tend to come off within 
a small angle of each other, though this effect is much less 
pronounced than for the pairs created by a beam of 
gamma-rays. It should be emphasized that these results, 
and the formulae given, are very insensitive to changes 


THE EDITOR 949 


in the field of the multipole, and the electrostatic field, 
in the immediate neighborhood of the nucleus. 

We may apply this theory to the observations of Curie 
and Joliot! who detected positives from beryllium and 
aluminum bombarded by the alpha-particles of polonium. 
This bombardment is known, in the case of beryllium, to 
produce gamma-rays of energy somewhat over five million 
volts, and we may take the yield of gamma-rays to be 
roughly 310-5 per alpha- particle. For this case (1) and 
(2) agree in giving about 210-3 for the probability that 
a gamma-ray will produce a pair; and we are thus led to 
expect a yield of positives of about 610~° per alpha- 
particle. This seems consistent with the observations; but 
quantitative data are not available. For aluminum, on the 
other hand, it is necessary to assume a vield of very high 
energy gamma-rays at least fifty times the known yield 
of disintegration protons to account for the number of 
positives observed. This, together with the circumstance 
that, in absolute disagreement with the expected symmetry 
of the energy distributions, practically no high energy 
electrons were observed, makes it almost certain that the 
positives observed were not produced as pairs by the 
radiation from the disintegrating nucleus, and wholly 
confirms the distinction made by Curie and Joliot between 
the positives observed in the two cases. The positives 
observed in aluminum are, from the point of view of 
present theory, altogether unexplained. 

The intense gamma-ray of Th C”’, with y~5, is known 
by its atomic internal conversion to be a quadripole ray. 
Here (2), which should still be right in order of magnitude, 
gives 5107 for the probability of pair production. 

Leo NEDELSKY 
J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
University of California, 
November 18, 1933. 


17, Curie and F. Joliot, J. de Physique 4, 494 (1933). 


Hyperfine Structure in the Tantalum Arc Spectrum 


The results given in this note were presented in full at 
the June, 1933, meeting of the American Physical Society 
in Chicago. The evidence leading to the determination of 
the value 7/2 for the nuclear spin of tantalum was not 
given in full in the published abstract.! This evidence is 
especially interesting since it was possible to determine the 
nuclear spin without any knowledge of the term analysis 
of the spectrum. A partial analysis has been published 
since. / 

The spectrum was excited in a water-cooled Schiiler 
tube, and the hyperfine structure resolved by means of a 
Fabry-Perot etalon. The two lines on which the chief 
evidence rests are \A5997.24 and 6020.69. A reproduction 
of the original photograph of these lines, taken by the 
second author, is shown in Fig. 1, together with their 
microphotometer traces. The etalon separation was 5 mm. 
6020.69 can be interpreted only a transition between 
levels with J-values 1/2 and 3/2. The intervals can be 
fitted only if Z is 7/2. The level scheme is shown in Fig. 2, 


in which the intervals and positions of components are 
given in cm, The term identifications are from Kiess 
and Kiess. The agreement between the observed and 
calculated patterns is shown ir Table I. (The measured 


TABLE I, 
Position Intensity Position Intensity 

Component  (obs.) (obs.) (calc.) (calc.) 

A 0 33 0 15.9 

B 0.085 63 0.084 47,7 

C .193 100 .189 100 

D 355 65 349 45.4 

i A19 61 412 47.7 

F A495 41 A96 34.1 


1 Grace and McMillan, Phys. Rev. 44, 325A (1933). 
2 Kiess and Kiess, Bur. Standards J. Research 11, 277 
(1933), 


