ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
ON ALBERT EINSTEIN 


THOUGH I KNEW Einstein for two or three decades, it was only in the 
last decade of his life that we were close colleagues and something of 
friends. But I thought that it might be useful, because I am sure that it 
is not too soon—and for our generation perhaps almost too late—to 
start to dispel the clouds of myth and to see the great mountain peak 
that these clouds hide. As always, the myth has its charms; but the 
truth is far more beautiful. 

Late in his life, in connection with his despair over weapons and 
wars, Einstein said that if he had to live it over again he would be a 
plumber. This was a balance of seriousness and jest that no one should 
now attempt to disturb. Believe me, he had no idea of what it was to be 
a plumber; least of all in the United States, where we have a joke that 
the typical behavior of this specialist is that he never brings his tools 
to the scene of the crisis. Einstein brought his tools to his crises; Ein- 
stein was a physicist, a natural philosopher, the greatest of our time. 

What we have heard, what you all know, what is the true part of 
the myth is his extraordinary originality. The discovery of quanta 
would surely have come one way or another, but he discovered them. 
Deep understanding of what it means that no signal could travel 
faster than light would surely have come; the formal equations were 
already known; but this simple, brilliant understanding of the physics 


5) 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


could well have been slow in coming, and blurred, had he not done it 
for us. The general theory of relativity which, even today, is not well 
proved experimentally, no one but he would have done for a long, 
long time. It is in fact only in the last decade, the last years, that one 
has seen how a pedestrian and hard-working physicist, or many of 
them, might reach that theory and understand this singular union of 
geometry and gravitation; and we can do even that today only because 
some of the a priori open possibilities are limited by the confirmation 
of Einstein’s discovery that light would be deflected by gravity. 

Yet there is another side besides the originality. Einstein brought to 
the work of originality deep elements of tradition. It is only possible 
to discover in part how he came by it, by following his reading, his 
friendships, the meager record that we have. But of these deep-seated 
elements of tradition—I will not try to enumerate them all; I do not 
know them all—at least three were indispensable and stayed with him. 

The first is from the rather beautiful but recondite part of physics 
that is the explanation of the laws of thermodynamics in terms of the 
mechanics of large numbers of particles, statistical mechanics. This 
was with Einstein all the time. It was what enabled him from Planck’s 
discovery of the law of black body radiation to conclude that light 
was not only waves but particles, particles with an energy propor- 
tional to their frequency and momentum determined by their wave- 
number, the famous relations that de Broglie was to extend to all 
matter, to electrons first and then clearly to all matter. 

It was this statistical tradition that led Einstein to the laws govern- 
ing the emission and absorption of light by atomic systems. It was this 
that enabled him to see the connection between de Broglie’s waves 
and the statistics of light-quanta proposed by Bose. It was this that 
kept him an active proponent and discoverer of the new phenomena 
of quantum physics up to 1925. 

The second and equally deep strand—and here I think we do know 
where it came from—was his total love of the idea of a field: the fol- 


36 


ALBERT EINSTEIN 


lowing of physical phenomena in minute and infinitely subdividable 
detail in space and in time. This gave him his first great drama of try- 
ing to see how Maxwell’s equations could be true. They were the first 
field equations of physics; they are still true today with only very minor 
and well-understood modifications. It is this tradition which made him 
know that there had to be a field theory of gravitation, long before the 
clues to that theory were securely in his hand. 

The third tradition was less one of physics than of philosophy. It is 
a form of the principle of sufficient reason. It was Einstein who asked 
what do we mean, what can we measure, what elements in physics are 
conventional? He insisted that those elements that were conventional 
could have no part in the real predictions of physics. This also had 
roots: for one the mathematical invention of Riemann, who saw how 
very limited the geometry of the Greeks had been, how unreasonably 
limited. But in a more important sense, it followed from the long tra- 
dition of European philosophy, you may say starting with Descartes— 
if you wish you can start it in the Thirteenth Century, because in fact 
it did start then—and leading through the British empiricists, and very 
clearly formulated, though probably without influence in Europe, by 
Charles Pierce: One had to ask how do we do it, what do we mean, is 
this just something that we can use to help ourselves in calculating, or 
is it something that we can actually study in nature by physical means? 
For the point here is that the laws of nature not only describe the results 
of observations, but the laws of nature delimit the scope of observa- 
tions. That was the point of Einstein’s understanding of the limiting 
character of the velocity of light; it also was the nature of the resolution 
in quantum theory, where the quantum of action, Planck’s constant, 
was recognized as limiting the fineness of the transaction between the 
system studied and the machinery used to study it, limiting this fine- 
ness in a form of atomicity quite different from and quite more radi- 
cal than any that the Greeks had imagined or than was familiar from 
the atomic theory of chemistry. 


37 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


In the last years of Einstein’s life, the last twenty-five years, his tra- 
dition in a certain sense failed him. They were the years he spent at 
Princeton and this, though a source of sorrow, should not be con- 
cealed. He had a right to that failure. He spent those years first in try- 
ing to prove that the quantum theory had inconsistencies in it. No one 
could have been more ingenious in thinking up unexpected and clever 
examples; but it turned out that the inconsistencies were not there; 
and often their resolution could be found in earlier work of Einstein 
himself. When that did not work, after repeated efforts, Einstein had 
simply to say that he did not like the theory. He did not like the elements 
of indeterminacy. He did not like the abandonment of continuity or 
of causality. These were things that he had grown up with, saved by 
him, and enormously enlarged; and to see them lost, even though he 
had put the dagger in the hand of their assassin by his own work, was 
very hard on him. He fought with Bohr in a noble and furious way, 
and he fought with the theory which he had fathered but which he 
hated. It was not the first time that this has happened in science. 

He also worked with a very ambitious program, to combine the 
understanding of electricity and gravitation in such a way as to 
explain what he regarded as the semblance—the illusion—of discrete- 
ness, of particles in nature. I think that it was clear then, and believe it 
to be obviously clear today, that the things that this theory worked 
with were too meager, left out too much that was known to physicists 
but had not been known much in Einstein’s student days. Thus it 
looked like a hopelessly limited and historically rather accidentally 
conditioned approach. Although Einstein commanded the affection, 
or, more rightly, the love of everyone for his determination to see 
through his program, he lost most contact with the profession of 
physics, because there were things that had been learned which came 
too late in life for him to concern himself with them. 

Einstein was indeed one of the friendliest of men. I had the impres- 
sion that he was also, in an important sense, alone. Many very great 


38 


ALBERT EINSTEIN 


men are lonely; yet I had the impression that although he was a deep 
and loyal friend, the stronger human affection played a not very deep 
or very central part in his life taken as a whole. He had of course 
incredibly many disciples, in the sense of people who, reading his 
work or hearing it taught by him, learned from him and had a new 
view of physics, of the philosophy of physics, of the nature of the 
world that we live in. But he did not have, in the technical jargon, a 
school. He did not have very many students who were his concern as 
apprentices and disciples. And there was an element of the lone 
worker in him, in sharp contrast to the teams we see today, and in 
sharp contrast to the highly cooperative way in which some other 
parts of science have developed. In later years, he had people working 
with him. They were typically called assistants and they had a won- 
derful life. Just being with him was wonderful. His secretary had a 
wonderful life. The sense of grandeur never left him for a minute, nor 
his sense of humor. The assistants did one thing which he lacked in his 
young days. His early papers are paralyzingly beautiful, but there are 
many errata. Later there were none. I had the impression that, along 
with its miseries, his fame gave him some pleasures, not only the 
human pleasure of meeting people but the extreme pleasure of music 
played not only with Elizabeth of Belgium but more with Adolf 
Busch, for he was not that good a violinist. He loved the sea and he 
loved sailing and was always grateful for a ship. I remember walking 
home with him on his seventy-first birthday. He said, “You know, 
when it’s once been given to a man to do something sensible, after- 
ward life is a little strange.” 

Einstein is also, and J think rightly, known as a man of very great 
good will and humanity. Indeed, if I had to think of a single word for 
his attitude toward human problems, I would pick the Sanscrit word 
Abinsa, not to hurt, harmlessness. He had a deep distrust of power; 
he did not have that convenient and natural converse with statesmen 
and men of power that was quite appropriate to Rutherford and to 


Bey 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


Bohr, perhaps the two physicists of this century who most nearly 
rivaled him in eminence. In 1915, as he made the general theory of 
relativity, Europe was tearing itself to pieces and half losing its past. 
He was always a pacifist. Only as the Nazis came into power in Ger- 
many did he have some doubts, as his famous and rather deep 
exchange of letters with Freud showed, and began to understand with 
melancholy and without true acceptance that, in addition to under- 
standing, man sometimes has a duty to act. 

After what you have heard, I need not say how luminous was his 
intelligence. He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly 
without worldliness. I think that in England people would have said 
that he did not have much “background,” and in America that he 
lacked “education.” This may throw some light on how these words 
are used. I think that this simplicity, this lack of clutter and this lack 
of cant, had a lot to do with his preservation throughout of a certain 
pure, rather Spinoza-like, philosophical monism, which of course is 
hard to maintain if you have been “educated” and have a “back- 
ground.” There was always with him a wonderful purity, at once 
childlike and profoundly stubborn. 

Einstein is often blamed or praised or credited with these miserable 
bombs. It is not in my opinion true. The special theory of relativity 
might not have been beautiful without Einstein; but it would have 
been a tool for physicists, and by 1932 the experimental evidence for 
the inter-convertibility of matter and energy which he had predicted 
was overwhelming. The feasibility of doing anything with this in such 
a massive way was not clear until seven years later, and then almost 
by accident. This was not what Einstein really was after. His part was 
that of creating an intellectual revolution, and discovering more than 
any scientist of our time how profound were the errors made by men 
before then. He did write a letter to Roosevelt about atomic energy. I 
think this was in part his agony at the evil of the Nazis, in part not 
wanting to harm anyone in any way; but I ought to report that that 


40 


ALBERT EINSTEIN 


letter had very little effect, and that Einstein himself is really not 
answerable for all that came later. I believe he so understood it himself. 

His was a voice raised with very great weight against violence and 
cruelty wherever he saw them and, after the war, he spoke with deep 
emotion and I believe with great weight about the supreme violence 
of these atomic weapons. He said at once with great simplicity: Now 
we must make a world government. It was very forthright, it was 
very abrupt, it was no doubt “uneducated,” no doubt without “back- 
ground”; still all of us in some thoughtful measure must recognize 
that he was right. 

Without power, without calculation, with none of the profoundly 
political humor that characterized Gandhi, he nevertheless did move 
the political world. In almost the last act of his life, he joined with 
Lord Russell in suggesting that men of science get together and see if 
they could not understand one another and avert the disaster which 
he foresaw from the arms race. The so-called Pugwash movement, 
which has a longer name now, was the direct result of this appeal. I 
know it to be true that it had an essential part to play in the Treaty of 
Moscow, the limited test-ban treaty, which is a tentative, but to me 
very precious, declaration that reason might still prevail. 

In his last years, as I knew him, Einstein was a twentieth-century 
Ecclesiastes, saying with unrelenting and indomitable cheerfulness, 
“Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.” 


—This was a lecture delivered at UNESCO House 
in Paris on December 13, 1965. 


41 


The Company They Kept 


Writers on Unforgettable Friendships 


PREFACE BY 
Robert B. Silvers 


EDITED BY 
Robert B. Silvers and Barbara Epstein 


NEW YORK REVIEW BOOKS 


New York 


THIS 1S A NEW YORK REVIEW BOOK 


PUBLISHED BY THE NEW YORK REVIEW OF BOOKS 


THE COMPANY THEY KEPT: 
WRITERS ON UNFORGETTABLE FRIENDSHIPS 


Copyright © 2006 by The New York Review of Books 
Preface © 2006 Robert B. Silvers 


All pieces © by individual authors: 

“On John Cheever” © 1983 by Saul Bellow. Reprinted with permission of The Wylie Agency, Inc. 
“Francis Bacon (1909-1992)” © 1992 by Caroline Blackwood. Reprinted with permission. 
Excerpt from “Isaiah Berlin at Eighty” © 1989 by Joseph Brodsky. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux, LLC, on behalf of the Estate of Joseph Brodsky. 

“My Life with Stravinsky” © 1982 by Robert Craft. Reprinted with permission. 

“Knowing S.J. Perelman” © 1987 by Prudence Crowther. Reprinted with permission. 

“Hart Crane” © 1966 by Edward Dahlberg. Reprinted with permission. 

“E. W. (1895-1972)” © 1972 by Jason Epstein. Reprinted with permission. 

“Visiting Gertrude and Alice” © 1986 by Maurice Grosser. Reprinted with permission. 

“Mary McCarthy in New York” © 1992 by Elizabeth Hardwick. Reprinted with permission. 
Preface to the book There You Are: Writings on Irish and American Literature and History by Thomas 
Flanagan; preface by Seamus Heaney; edited and with an introduction by Christopher Cahill; published 
by The New York Review of Books. Preface © 2004 by Seamus Heaney. Reprinted with permission. 
“On Bruce Chatwin” © 1989 by Michael Ignatieff. Reprinted with permission. 

“Josephine Herbst” © 1969 by Alfred Kazin. Reprinted with permission of The Wylie Agency, Inc. 
“In Memory of Octavio Paz (1914-1998)” © 1998 by Enrique Krauze. Reprinted with permission. 
“Theodore Roethke” © 1963 by Stanley Kunitz. Reprinted with permission on behalf of the author by 
Darhansoff, Verrill, Feldman, Literary Agents. 

“Anthony Hecht (1923-2004)” © 2004 by Brad Leithauser. Reprinted with permission. 
“Randall Jarrell, 1914-1965” © 1965 by Robert Lowell. Reprinted with permission. 
“Delmore Schwartz (1913-1966)” © 1966 by Dwight Macdonald. Reprinted with permission. 
“F.W. Dupee (1904-1979)” © 1979 by Mary McCarthy. Reprinted with permission of 
The Mary McCarthy Literary Trust. 

“On the Road” © 2002 by Larry McMurtry. Reprinted with permission. 


“Sweet Evening Breeze” © 1984 by Darryl Pinckney. Reprinted with permission. 
“Remembering Francis Crick” © 2005 by Oliver Sacks. Reprinted with permission of The Wylie Agency, Inc. 
“On Jér6me Lindon, 1926-2001” © 2001 by Richard Seaver. Reprinted with permission. 

“On Paul Goodman” © 1972 by Susan Sontag. Reprinted with permission of The Wylie Agency, Inc. 
“On Joseph Brodsky {1940-1996)” © 1996 by Tatyana Tolstaya. Reprinted with permission of The Wylie 
Agency, Inc. Translation © 1996 by Jamey Gambrell. 

“On Robert Lowell” © 1984 by Derek Walcott. Reprinted with permission. 


All rights reserved, which includes the right 
to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. 


Published by The New York Review of Books, 1755 Broadway, New York, NY 10019 
www.nyrb.com 
Distributed in the United States by Random House 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
The company they kept : writers on unforgettable friendships / edited by Robert B. Silvers and Barbara 
Epstein ; preface by Robert B. Silvers. 
p. cm. 
ISBN 1-59017-203-5 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-59017-204-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Celebrities — Biography. 2. Authors — Biography. 3. Friendship. 4. Influence (Literary, artistic, 
etc.) 5. Biography — 20th century. 
I. Silvers, Robert B. II. Epstein, Barbara, 1929- 
CT 120.E55 2006 


920.009'04 — dc22 
2005027598 


Cover design: Louise Fili Ltd. 
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper. 
ISBN-13: 978-1-59017-203-2 
ISBN-10: 1-59017-203-5 
13579108642 


