MARCH 1, 1930 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


VOLUME 35 


LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


Prompt publication of brief reports of important discovertes in physics may 


be secured by addressing them to this department. 


Closing dates for this depart- 


ment are, for the first issue of the month, the twenty-eighth of the preceding month; 
for the second issue, the thirteenth of the month. The Board of Editors does not 
hold itself responsible for the opinions expressed by the correspondents. 


On the Theory of Electrons and Protons 


Inarecent paper,! Dirac has suggested that 
the reason why the transitions of an electron 
to states of negative energy, which are pre- 
dicted by his theory of the electron, do not 
in fact occur is that nearly all of the states of 
negative energy are already occupied. Dirac 
has further shown that the unoccupied states 
of negative energy have many of the proper- 
ties of protons; that, for instance, they may 
be represented by wave functions which 
would be taken to correspond to a particle 
of positive charge and positive mass. He has 
further shown that the mass associated with 
these gaps is not necessarily the same as that 
of the electron, and he has suggested the 
assumption that the gaps are protons. In 
order to account for the fact that the diver- 
gence of the electric field is not, in spite of the 
infinite electron density, everywhere infinite, 
Dirac further assumes that only the depar- 
tures from the normal state in which all 
negative states are filled are to be counted in 
computing the charge density for Maxwell’s 
fourth equation 

div H=—Arnp. (1) 
Finally, Dirac is able to account for the 
validity of the Thomson formula for the 
scattering of soft light by a free electron, in 
spite of the fact that the derivation of this 
formula on his theory of the electron—a 
derivation which makes explicit use of the 
transitions to states of negative energy which 
are now forbidden, is invalid. According to 
Dirac, the scattering takes place by a double 
electron jump, in which a negative? electron 
jumps up to some state of positive energy, 


1P, Dirac, Roy. Soc. Proc. A126, 360 
(1930). 

2 By a negative electron we mean an elec- 
tron of negative energy. 


and the original positive electron falls down 
into the gap left. 

There are several grave difficulties which 
arise when one tries to maintain the sugges- 
tion that the protons are the gaps of negative 
energy, and that there are no distinctive 
particles of positive charge. In the first place, 
we can easily see that Dirac’s theory requires 
an infinite density of positive electricity; 
and since we should expect the de Broglie 
waves of this charge to be quantized, we 
should expect some corpuscular properties 
for the positive charges. The reason why the 
theory requires an infinite positive charge is 
this: If the explanation of the scattering of an 
electron is to be tenable, a negative electron 
must interact with the electromagnetic field 
in the way predicted by Dirac’s theory of the 
electron; for otherwise the scheme proposed 
would not give the Thomson formula. But 
this means that there must be a term involv- 
ing the current and charge vector of the nega- 
tive electrons in the total energy momentum 
tensor for matter and radiation. Thus by (1), 
the divergence of the electric field will be 
everywhere infinite unless there is an infinite 
density of positive electricity to compensate 
the negative electrons. 

A further difficulty appears when we try 
to compute the scattering of soft light by a 
proton. This difficulty is not unconnected 
with the difference in mass between the elec- 
tron and proton, and makes it seem im- 
probable that this difference can be explained 
on the basis suggested by Dirac. For the 
scattering process must in this case be re- 
garded as a double jump of a single electron, 
in which a negative electron jumps to some 
state of positive energy, and then falls back 
into the hole that is the original proton. Now 
it is easy to see that the probability of this 


562 


LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


scattering is determined by precisely the 
same matrix components as those which give 
the electron scattering, and that the present 
theory gives equal scattering coefficients for 
electron and proton. Of course, the interac- 
tion between electrons is omitted in this 
computation; but the difficulty is this, that 
such interaction would affect electron scatter- 
ing and proton scattering in precisely the 
same way; whereas the Thomson formula 
requires the latter to be smaller by a factor 
proportional to the square of the ratio of the 
masses. 


Finally, there is a numerical discrepancy 
to be noted. According to Dirac’s suggestions, 
the filling of the proton gaps in the distribu- 
tion of negative electrons should correspond 
to the annihilation of an electron and a pro- 
ton, and should thus, under all normal con- 
ditions, be a very rare occurrence. Now if we 
consider for definiteness a free electron in an 
enclosure in which there are m, free protons 
per unit volume, we may readily compute the 
rate at which the electron should, by the 
Dirac radiation theory, fall into one of the 
corresponding gaps. The conservation laws 
require that at least two quanta be emitted 
in this process; and it is sufficient to consider 
jumps in which no more than two quanta are 
emitted. The details of the calculation will 
be published elsewhere; if we neglect the 
interaction of the electron with the negative 


563 


electrons we obtain for the mean life time of 
the electron: 

T=Gmcte*/np (2) 
where G is a numerical constant of the order 
of unity, e the charge, and m the mass of the 
electron. Now again it is difficult to see what 
large errors could be involved in the compu- 
tation, since the matrix components which 
give (2) are of precisely the same type as 
those which give correctly the Thomson 
formula and the optical transition probabili- 
ties of the electron; and (2) gives a mean life 
time for ordinary matter of the order of 1071 
seconds. 

Thus we should hardly expect any states of 
negative energy to remain empty. If we re- 
turn to the assumption of two independent 
elementary particles, of opposite charge and 
dissimilar mass, we can resolve all the diff- 
culties raised in this note, and retain the 
hypothesis that the reason why no transi- 
tions to states of negative energy occur, either 
for electrons or protons, is that all such states 
are filled. In this way, we may accept Dirac’s 
reconciliation of the absence of these tran- 
sitions with the validity of the scattering for- 
mulae. 

J. R. OPPENHEIMER 

The Norman Bridge Laboratory of Physics, 

California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, California, 
February 14, 1930. 


The Collision Diameter of the Hydrogen Atom 


Harteck measured the viscosity of mona- 
tomic hydrogen and calculated the collision 
radius to be rg = 1.3 X 10-8 cm (ro of the first 
Bohr orbit is 0.531078 cm). We have 
measured the decrease of intensity of a fine 
beam of monatomic hydrogen in passing 
through 3.0 cm of mercury vapor at 0.000185 
mm Hg and find the decrease of intensity to 
be 23 percent. If the collisions are supposed 
to be between elastic spheres the sum of their 
radii is 6.2 X 1078 or assuming rp, =1.8 X 1078, 


Excited Radicals in 


The letter of Mr. D. H: Andrews in your 
number of December 15th makes the im- 
portant point it is possible to assign definite 
frequencies to vibrating groups in the mole- 
cule, and that these frequencies are constant, 
to a first approximation, from molecule to 
molecule e.g. the value of the vibration fre- 


the radius of hydrogen atom is 4.4X107%. 
This is larger than would be assumed even 
on wave mechanics unless there is very con- 
siderable resonance interaction between mer- 
cury and hydrogen. 

E. G. LUNN 

F, R. BicHowskKY 


U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, 
Anacostia, D. C., 
February 17, 1930. 


Chemical Compounds 


quency of C-H in any molecule will be of the 
order of 3000 cm“, altering only slightly with 
change of environment. Although some of 
Mr. Andrews’ values are open to question, 
there is a weight of evidence, both from the 
Raman effect and from infra-red spectra, for 
the essential correctness of his statement; 


