Communication and Comprehension of Scientific Knowledge 

Author(s): J. Robert Oppenheimer 

Source: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
Vol. 50, No. 6 (Dec. 15, 1963), pp. 1194-1200 

Published by: National Academy of Sciences 

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/71866 


Accessed: 03/05/2014 21:52 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


National Academy of Sciences 1s collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


1194 CENTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION Proc. N. A.&. 


artist, and poet, until after the time of the Renaissance when a new tool was per- 
fected by the use of which he could project a new, more exclusive public image. 
This tool was the experimental method which led to the flourishing of natural science 
in the Western World. 

Our Academy’s birth occurred at a time when systematic use of accumulated 
scientific knowledge for practical purposes was first being made, which soon caused 
the flourishing of synthetic chemicals and metallurgical industries. Only recently 
did societies as a whole, through governments, recognize science as a powerful 
stimulus for political, economic, and cultural change and progress; and thus only 
recently did governments begin consciously to promote science. ‘The result has 
been its continuing exponential growth, the appearance of many new scientific 
disciplines, and also the emergence of many difficult problems. President Kennedy 
spoke of some of the problems in his address at our Centennial Convocation. 
Some others will be considered by the distinguished speakers this afternoon. 

The extraordinarily rapid growth of science (let us not forget that over 90 per 
cent of all natural scientists who ever lived are still alive) and the proliferation of 
new areas of research have led, from sheer volume as well as other factors, to 
difficulties in communication. ‘There is the problem of transmitting information 
among the sciences, to preserve their coherence, if not unity; an individual scientist 
knows more and more about less and less. A far more difficult problem is communi- 
cation between scientists and those who apply the results of scientific research to 
political, technological, and cultural purposes. This is the topic about which we 
shall hear from Dr. Oppenheimer. 

Dr. Wiesner will speak of our Government’s effort to expand science in the ex- 
pectation of rich practical returns for our society and to enhance its cultural con- 
tributions. 

Dr. Fisk will tell us of the problems which arise when knowledge obtained in 
basic research is being translated into practical uses by organized modern industrial 
research teams. ‘These are the uses that constitute the progress of our technological 
civilization. | 

And finally Dr. Rabi will speak of science in the framework of the culture of a 
free society as a force of far deeper significance than mere satisfaction of material 
needs. 


COMMUNICATION AND COMPREHENSION OF SCIENTIFIC 
KNOWLEDGE 


By J. RoBERT OPPENHEIMER 
INSTITUTE FOR ADVANCED STUDY 


The theme that has been assigned to me seems in some ways a little odd. That 
is only in part because this talk comes after three days and fifteen lectures in which, 
as actors and auditors, we have lived with many beautiful examples of good com- 
munication, and even very largely good comprehension—good understanding—of 
scientific knowledge. If I have any doubts, it may be that here and there, in those 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


Vou. 50, 1963 CENTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION 1195 


reports which dealt with subjects close to me, the communication and the under- 
standing have gone a little bit beyond the knowledge. 

In an important sense, the sciences have solved the problem of communicating 
within and with one another more completely than has any human enterprise. I 
may retell an old story. Thirty-five years ago, Dirac and I were in Gottingen. 
He was making the quantum theory of radiation, and I was a student. He learned 
that I sometimes wrote a poem, and he took me to task, saying, “In physics we try 
to say things that no one knew before in a way that everyone can understand, 
whereas in poetry... .” 

It is an old and sousisient tradition with us to be concerned with the words we 
use, and with their purification, and thus with the concepts in terms of which we 
describe nature. It was true of Newton, of Lavoisier, of Cauchy, of Mendel, and 
of course, in our day, of Einstein, and of Bohr. As for Newton, we will understand 
this better when we have, after almost three centuries, the critical edition of the 
Principia; at least we will know that in the renowned Hypotheses non jfingo it is 
not the first word but the last that bears the meaning. 

When we tell about our work, we explain what we have done and we tell what we 
have seen, whether we are describing a radioastronomical object, or a new property 
of fiber bundles, or the behavior of men attempting to solve problems. We are 
prepared to believe that the explicit content of science has its roots in these accounts 
of action, often factual, often foreshortened and synoptic, because cast in terms 
which the scientific traditions have established long ago. 

Among us there is surely a great and appropriate variation in how we describe 
this foundation for the objectivity of our knowledge, and for the lack of ambiguity 
in the terms we use to tell of it; and of course there is an even wider latitude, 
insofar as we may bring ourselves 0 speak of them, in what we think of the reasons 
for the success of science, in what attributes of the world of nature in which we 
find ourselves underlie the manifestations of order which are our business: why 
we can work on the same table and with the same test tube when we cannot have the 
same melancholy or the same resolution; why so much of the order of the natural 
world finds its expression in number and the more abstract mathematical structure. 

We probably all, with varying enthusiasm, would say yes to Charles Peirce as to 
how to make our ideas clear. We would make a good case that we do indeed know 
the structure of some ribonucleic acids, or some properties of the longer-lived 
particles of physics, only leaving room for the fact that in new things as well as in 
old, there are points we may not have looked at, and that wonders may be hidden in 
the crevasses. . 

This foundation for aawleiee precudes much that is an essential part of man’s 
life. One cannot be a very effective scientist if he is a practicing solipsist. We 
cannot expect to describe a common world of introspection by telling people what 
we have done and what we have seen; though probably we can, and increasingly we 
will, describe elements of behavior which may have some correspondence to the 
inner world. Among these things of which we cannot talk without some ambiguity, 
and in which the objective structure of the sciences will play what is often a very 
minor part, but sometimes an essential one, are many questions which are not 
private, which are common questions, and public ones: the arts, the good life, the 
good society. ' There is to my view no reason why we should come to these with a 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


1196 CHNTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION Proc. N. A. S. 


greater consensus or a greater sense of valid relevant experience than any other pro- 
fession. ‘They need reason, and they need a preoccupation with consistency; 
but only insofar as the scientist’s life has analogies with the artist’s—and in impor- 
tant ways it does—only insofar as the scientist’s life is in some way a good life, and 
his society a good society, have we any professional credentials to enter these discus- 
sions, and not primarily because of the objectivity of our communication and our 
knowledge. Butif I doubt whether we have a special qualification for these matters, 
I doubt even more that our professional practices should disqualify us, or that we 
should lose interest and heart in preoccupations which have ennobled and purified 
men throughout history, and for which the world has great need today. Your 
lives attest this. 

This account of a constant concern within the scientific enterprise to purify and 
refine our language is, of course, a sort of parody of what we are all about. We 
do not really do this except in moments of crisis, or in order to make way for some- 
thing very new and deep. We come to our new problems full of old ideas and old 
words, not only the inevitable words of daily life, but those which experience has 
shown fruitful over the years. This is an inevitable approach to the new; and when 
it is not too new, it gets by. But the comprehension, the understanding of scientific 
knowledge is a very different thing from being the recipient of a communication. I 
think there is an element of action inseparable from understanding: to question, to 
try, to apply, to adapt, to ask new questions, to see if one understands, and to test 
what one has been told: action in the laboratory or the observatory, or on paper, 
or, at the very least, in the motions of the spirit. We need, at times, to talk about 
the sources and the springs of this motion, without which communication would 
provide the fuel pipes, the electrical wiring, the transmission of a car, but not the 
combustion which gives it power and life. 

We do not talk of this very well: imagination, play, curiosity, invention, action, 
these are all involved. ‘T'hey are indeed only rarely all combined, and supple- 
mented by skepticism and criticism, In any one man in any one moment; one of 
the charms of the scientific enterprise is how deficient we can be in many of these 
qualities and still play some meaningful part in it. 

We know that we love the old words, the old imagery, and the old analogies, 
and that we keep them for more and more unfamiliar and more and more un- 
recognizable things. ‘Think of “wave,” ‘information,’ “relativity.” We know 
that one can explore and study the springs of the movement of science, that it is 
a fit if very difficult subject of study. Today at least we are not able to talk about 
it very well, not at all as we can of molecules or galaxies, or even of the effective 
definition of the words that we use. Yet we may be sure that without a living 
engagement there 1s no understanding and there is no life of science, and we know 
that we cannot command this, or perhaps even learn it, except by apprenticeship, 
by following what others have done, and by listening to the mischievous voices of 
adventure and play and exploration and doubt with which we greet a new experience 
or anew communication. ‘This has very much to do with what we can in practice 
and honestly mean by the unity of science. I think, for instance, of contemporary 
mathematics, whose absence from this program does not at all reflect a lack of 
vitality, of discovery, and of beauty in the current scene. Up to our time, it has 
been the experience of our enterprise that there have been a good number of men 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


Vou. 50, 1963 CENTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION 1197 


who combined creation and wide knowledge of the mathematics of their day with a 
lively interest in those elements of the natural sciences in which this mathematical 
order might be embodied. ‘This conversation, as a lively mutual understanding, 
is rather thin today. It is not rare to find a physical scientist who will hear some 
beautiful new result—in algebra, for instance, or topology—with pleasure, with 
amazement, and with admiration; but it is not likely that he will be deeply engaged, 
and try to see if he can make it wider, how it affects other things he may have known, 
or thought to know. I know that it is also true that many mathematicians will 
accept with a certain interest that there are in nature two neutrinos which have 
different properties, or that astronomers believe that they may be witnessing 
evidence of very massive gravitational implosion in other galaxies. ‘To me it seems 
good that we still do tell each other these pieces of news; but I would hope that the 
century-long tradition of a felt sense of reciprocal relevance between mathematics 
and natural science would soon again find itself embodied in many of us, or, far 
more plausibly, in our successors. 

Thus between us, as specialists in our professions, there 1s a partly accidental 
quality to the effectiveness of our converse with one another, and thus to the 
effective unity of our view of the world, even as scientists. There are two reasons 
for deploring this. One is that past experience suggests so strongly that among 
the sciences there are elements of relevance and mutual enlightenment which make 
such converse an essential part of deep and rapid progress; the other is that we 
regret for ourselves what we do not really know, and we regret for others what we 
cannot really tell them. ‘This is, of course, a reflection, within the internal society 
of the scientific enterprise, of a situation that characterizes our relations with 
human societies as a whole, with the society within which we are embedded, and 
that leaves us with problems, some very grave, and by no means all clearly soluble, 
having to do just with the communication and comprehension—understanding—of 
scientific knowledge. | 

These problems rest, of course, on human weakness and limitation; but more 
specifically they rest on at least three features of the scientific enterprise which it 
has in common with the world in which its whole action takes place: size and satura- 
tion, growth and change, and specialization. I will not speak to size, having no 
true wisdom as to whether there is a natural and appropriate limit to how vast the 
scientific enterprise can and should be, beyond which it suffers too deeply from suf- 
focation and fragmentation. I do not think that I know an answer, but I rather 
hope that those who follow me today may have some wisdom; and I know that they 
have some views on how large our world should be, perhaps because that is a still 
harder question. | 

One thing we do know: growth and change imply size, and growth and change 
are very deep in the nature of the scientific enterprise. Without them we would not 
recognize the rooms in which we were living, or what our days were all about. As 
for specialization, it is what sharpens our tools and our words, and is the instrument 
of penetrating deeper and farther into the world of nature. 

I think that we must live with these, and that we can live with them. Some of 
us will know one thing, some fewer will know many things, and the unity of our 
knowledge, its freedom from contradiction, and its important and often very deep 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


1198 CENTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION Proc. N. A. 8. 


common relevance, will not preclude but will be enriched by the great and blessed 
diversity of man. , 

These limits on the communication and comprehension of scientific knowledge 
which we find among ourselves, with which we have been living and will continue 
to live, have their analogies in the related but vaster limitations that we have in 
our external relations with those who are not yet, or not ever, involved in the 
scientific enterprise. ‘The first of these is with the young, those who may be enter- 
ing the life of science, and perhaps also, perhaps even more importantly, those who 
may not. I cannot speak with even a decent record of experience of authority 
of the problems of education and schooling, for I have known them only at the late 
level that is essentially apprenticeship, where a young man or woman has become 
engaged in some part of science, and the problem is to help him enlarge his interest 
and his power and his knowledge of what others have done. I have the impression, 
which I hope may be true enough to be shared by most of you, that in the graduate 
schools, and in their increasing postdoctoral studies, we have in the natural and 
mathematical sciences rather happy arrangements for this period of apprenticeship, 
happy in comparison with the situation in other branches of study—historical or 
philosophical, for instance—rather happy in comparison with our sister institutions 
abroad, and very happy indeed in comparison with our own country some fifty 
years ago. Apart from this, my life gives me no qualification except to express an 
appreciation to our many colleagues who have been studying and practicing the 
teaching of the sciences in the schools and the colleges, so that first sight shall 
not repel, and the institutions not resist the natural curiosity and love and joy of 
the experience, but open it, so that as many as can will have an opportunity to 
discover some trait of nature, to see with welcome some sure sign of order in nature, 
with their own hands and their own heads. 

I know that our colleagues understand the universal value, in all teaching, of 
quickly correcting error. I know that they are concerned to free the teaching of 
science of a slovenly and lazy dependence on history, in which discoveries were 
often made in obscure, contingent, and not deeply relevant struggles, whose in- 
terest as history is not helpful to the young student, and usually obscure to his 
teacher. I know that they hope, as often as may be, to open perspectives on the 
larger connections in nature and in the sciences which describe it, and rarely, 
when it can be done with historical scruple, on some chapters in the history of man’s 
knowledge. 

We mostly take it for granted, though it is not quite obvious, that we would like 
to have this opening of the world of science, this induction into it, effective not only 
for those who will be of our company, but for as many as may be of all the young, 
and the newly young who are willing to study. It seems to me that there are prob- 
ably two reasons why we hold this view, not in the first instance commensurable 
reasons. On the one hand, I think we increasingly feel the need for companionship 
and for help. I am not here speaking of the patronage of science, which has not 
been ungenerous or niggardly in the past years, though it may come to be so. I 
have in mind rather what we all know, that more rapidly than ever before, the 
sciences have been embodied in new technologies, and that these bring on the scene 
new powers and possibilities, now a new need, now a new opportunity. ‘These 
needs and opportunities often are relevant to what in us, and in most men, are the 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


Vot. 50, 1963 CENTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION 1199 


most deeply held convictions of what is right and good, convictions rooted in a 
long tradition, and integrally a part of our sensibility. We do not talk about it 
much, but most of us, I think, are committed to preserving life and health where that 
is possible. Increasingly, and largely because of the effects during the last centuries 
of technology and industrialization themselves on its modes, we are committed to 
limiting, if possible to eliminating, war. Weare committed to relieving, to reducing 
labor and drudgery, and not only the hard labor of the field and the mine and the 
galley, but the dull labor of the Midlands factory. We are now clearly engaged 
in a great enterprise testing whether we can live in a world in which war does not 
play its traditional part, an enterprise in which not only long inherited human in- 
stitutions, but even older, even other more permanent human attitudes, of anger, 
hatred, solidarity, self-importance, righteousness, which war has fed, can permit 
the change. We are in this too deeply, I think, to let the good news or the bad 
news of the day or month or year affect or limit our hope and, where it is possible 
for us, our engagement in this great, open, unsettled action of man’s history. 

With the preservation of life too, and along with it the alteration and automation 
of work, we are concerned not only with the inadequacy of our institutions, which 
were framed for a very different world, but with our attitude toward the meaning 
and value and nature and quality of human life, so largely in our past built on pro- 
ductive work as its foundation. Here in this country we see the mixed fruits of 
medical and engineering technology first with the young and the old. It is reason- 
able to expect that they will spread, and that they will characterize many other 
technologically developed societies. I know of the concern, so well expressed by 
some of you, that even the saving of children’s lives may have created problems 
with which no one can cope, that have some bearing on the growth and size of the 
human society. | 

Though I do not suppose that a thorough knowledge of science, which is essentially 
unavailable to all of us, would really be helpful to our friends in other ways of life 
in acting with insight and courage in the contemporary world, it would perhaps 
be good if in talking with them we could count on a greater recognition of the 
quality of our certitudes, where we are dealing with scientific knowledge that 
really exists, and the corresponding quality of hesitancy and doubt when we are 
assessing the probable course of events, the way in which men will choose and act, 
to ignore or to apply, or make hypertrophic or nugatory the technological pos- 
sibilities recently opened. I think that some honest and remembered experience 
of the exploration of nature, of discovery, and of the way in which we talk to one 
another about these things, might indeed be helpful; but that is because 1t would 
remove barriers and encourage an effective and trusting converse between us, and 
make more fruitful the indispensable role of friendship. ‘These things are perhaps 
always easier in a small society. ‘They were perhaps easier a century ago, for us 
and for many of the countries of Europe. We have a modest part to play in history, 
and the barriers between us and the men of affairs, the statesmen, the artists, the 
lawyers, with whom we should be talking, could perhaps be markedly reduced if 
more of them knew a little of what we were up to, knew it with pleasure and some 
confidence; and if we were prepared to recognize both the important analogies 
between what moves us to act and to know, and the extraordinary and special 
quality of our experience and our communication about it with one another. I 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


1200 CENTENNIAL: FOURTH SCIENTIFIC SESSION Proc. N. A.S. 


have often thought that with the historic game so grand and so uncertain, we should 
not dismiss any help, even of that small part which we could play. 

The other set of reasons for hoping the young people who will not be professional 
scientists, and older people who are young in heart, could have a greater scientific 
literacy and some limited experience, as ours also is limited, is that we know, all 
of us, that the experience of scientific discovery is a good and beautiful experience, 
and an unforgettable one. We know that this is true even of little discoveries, 
and we understand that with the great ones it is shattering. It was on his seventy- 
first birthday that Einstein said to me, ‘‘When it has once been given a man to do 
some sensible things, afterwards his life is a little different.”” It seems not really 
as an act of arrogance but simply human, and not in the purely pejorative sense of 
the word, to wish these pleasures for as many of our fellows as can have them. 

In our world, many things that men do rather naturally, that they have learned 
to do long, long ago, have become professions, have become part of the market. I 
think of song and sport and the arts, the practical arts and the fine arts. None of 
these is without discipline; and although they are very different from those that 
lead to the sciences, I would be slow to rate them easier. Yet people sing and make 
sport and practice the arts quite apart from the market, quite apart from a career. 
It would be a poorer, thinner life without that. Though surely we will not all burst 
into song, or take to skis, or pick up a chisel or a brush, some of us have done some 
of these things, and some of us will; and it seems a proper hope that in our educa- 
tion, both for the young, and for those, in growing number, who like us have kept 
a lifelong taste for it, we do what we can to open the life of science at least as wide 
as that of song and the arts. Not everybody will want our pleasures, as among 
us not everyone can taste the other’s, and as even we cannot expect an astronomer 
and a biologist fully to share what each has. We think of this as a high and 
lovely part of life which, with all its discipline, is still directly responsive to a deep 
human need. We all know this, and all share it; but each of us, I think, must be 
free to use his own words to sing its praise, even to describe it. 

We may be seeing a time in which war will come to play a smaller and an in- 
creasingly trivial part in man’s life. I hope that we are. We may be coming to a 
time in which for growing parts of the world the production of goods will require a 
much more minor commitment of human effort and life, and the market leave men 
with a far greater measure of freedom. I hope that we are. Jor this it will clearly 
not be enough that we preserve the integrity of our communication and compre- 
hension, either among us, or with our fellows; but this is at the heart of our enter- 
prise, and it is the least we can do. 


This content downloaded from 130.132.123.28 on Sat, 3 May 2014 21:52:45 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


