REVIEWS OF 
MODERN PHYSICS 


Votume 28, Number 1 


January, 1956 


Einstein 


ITH the death of Albert Einstein in April of 1955, 

physicists lost their greatest colleague. For two 

golden decades early in this century, the history of 

Einstein’s discoveries is inseparable from the history of 
physics. 

Einstein started with the nineteenth century de- 
velopments of statistical mechanics and of electro- 
magnetic theory as his inheritance. In the first year of 
his fully mature work, his paper on Brownian movement 
enlarged and defined statistical theory, and led to 
those insights into fluctuations which were to play so 
great a part in Ejinstein’s contributions to quantum 
theory. In a second great paper he formulated with full 
incisiveness the hypothesis of light quanta, and ir- 
revocably changed our understanding of physical 
processes on the atomic scale. In a third paper he made 
the special theory of relativity. Many of the results 


contained in his paper were to be found also in inde- 


pendent and concurrent publications of Lorentz and 
Poincaré; but only Einstein saw the role that in prin- 
ciple the finite velocity of light plays in determining the 
nature of our observation and definition of simultaneity, 
and of intervals of space and time, and thus the deep 
logical inevitability of a phenomenon only much later 
to be established experimentally: that clocks in motion 
by virtue of that motion go more slowly. 

From then on, for the next decade, Einstein was to 
be preoccupied with the problems of inertia, of mass, 
of acceleration, and of gravity. He discovered first the 
identity of mass and energy, which was to be verified in 
detail only some twenty-five years later, and was to 
provide the basis for such fateful developments for 
man’s whole history during and since the second world 
war. He began to understand the import of the precise 
equality of inertial and gravitational mass, and to see 
in this the foundation for a geometrical theory of gravi- 
tation. He sought to preserve the logically necessary 
general covariance of the equations of physics, until 
this long effort was crowned with the discovery of the 
general theory of relativity and the field equations. He 


was almost at once able to define three crucial experi- 
ments, accessible through existing observational tech- 
niques, by which the novel implications of his theory 
could be compared with experience. In the forty years 
that have elapsed these have remained the principal 
and, with one exception, the only connections between 
the general theory and experience. The exception les 
in the field of cosmology, where Einstein himself was 
the first to see wholly new approaches opened by the 
theory of relativity. More than any other great advance 
in physics, the general theory of relativity is the work 
of one man. Without him, it might have lain long 
undiscovered. 

During this whole period Einstein was very close to 
the rapidly evolving quantum theory of atomic phe- 
nomena. He reverted to the use of statistical arguments, 
and to the logical meaning of fluctuations, to discover 
the laws of emission and absorption of radiation, and to 
establish the connection between the waves of de 
Broglie and the statistical laws proposed by Bose from 
the description of light quanta. As this period drew to 
a close with the discovery in 1925 of the quantum 
mechanics, and its more and more definitive formula- 
tion, especially by Bohr, Einstein’s role was to change. 
He found himself from the first disturbed and unsatis- 
fied by the statistical and acausal character of the new 
mechanics, to the discovery of which he had made 
such great contributions. 

In a long period of brilliant discussion and analysis, 
especially with Ehrenfest and with Bohr, he attempted 
again and again to show that the new mechanics, for 
all its vast agreement with experience, contained logical 
errors and inconsistencies. Yet, as example after ex- 
ample, upon analysis, only confirmed the harmony and 
consistency of the quantum theory, he was led to accept 
this; but to it he always coupled his unaltered convic- 
tion that this should not be the ultimate description of 
the atomic world, and that in an ultimate description 
acausal and statistical features must be eliminated. 


Z EINSTEIN 


Thus, for the last decades of his life he did not share 
in full the convictions or the interests of the great 
majority of his colleagues. Instead, with increasing 
single-mindedness, he turned his attention to the dis- 
covery of what would for him have been a basic and 
satisfying account of the atomic nature of matter. 
This was the program of the unified field. Here he 
sought to generalize the matter-free field equations of 
general relativity so that they might also account for 
electromagnetic phenomena. He sought equations whose 
solutions would correspond to local.aggregations of mass 
and charge, and whose behavior would resemble the 
atomic world so well described by quantum theory. He 
was hard at work on this program until his death. It 
was a program that did not arouse the hope or indeed 


the active interest of many physicists; yet his knowl- 
edge of their work, and his judgment of it, remained 
firm and masterful; and he was never deceived by any 
of the proposed causal reinterpretations of atomic 
physics. 

When the weather was good enough, Einstein 
would walk home from work. One day not long ago he 
said to me ‘When it has once been given you to do 
something rather reasonable, forever afterward your 
work and life are a little strange.” It had indeed been 
given him to do something reasonable. His presence 
among us stayed us from the worst folly, and touched 
those who knew him with the light of magnanimity. 


J. RoBERT OPPENHEIMER 


