Bulletin of the Routledge 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


A Letter to Senator McMahon 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1949) A Letter to Senator McMahon, Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, 5:6-7, 163-163, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1949.11457071 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1949.11457071 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
XJ 
(s Submit your article to this journal @ 
all Article views: 1 
N 
iQ] View related articles 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


A LETTER TO SENATOR MCMAHON 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


This letter from one of America’s 
most distinguished scientists to the 
Chairman of the Joint Congressional 
Committee on Atomic Energy, was in- 
troduced at the Committee hearings on 
the AEC fellowship program on May 17. 


DEAR SENATOR McManHon: 

From the press, and directly from the 
Atomic Energy Commission, I have 
learned of the recent discussions 
about the Commission’s fellowship pro- 
gram, which raise the question of 
whether candidates for fellowships sup- 
ported by funds from the Commission 
should or should not be subject to in- 
vestigation and clearance procedures. 
It seems to me that this question, and 
the implications of the decisions here 
taken with regard to the Federal sup- 
port of science and education generally, 
are closely related to many of the great 
issues on which you have taken so con- 
structive and farseeing a position. I 
am writing to you in the hope that in 
one way or another it may prove help- 
ful to you to have an expression of my 
views. The question at issue clearly 
does not present some of the grave and 
often tragic aspects that the mainte- 
nance of security on secret technical 
work has brought so prominently to the 
forefront. For this reason, I have come 
to believe that we can and should deal 
with it unequivocally. 


1. The present situation, as I under- 
stand it, is this: The Atomic Energy 
Commission has advanced funds to the 
National Research Council, and has 
asked the National Research Council to 
use these for the granting of fellow- 
ships. In making this request, the Com- 
mission has asked the Council to pur- 
sue its traditional methods of selecting 
fellows. In this selection, considerations 
of scientific and intellectual competence 
play a decisive part. Considerations of 
character are not excluded; but, in the 
past, no effort has been made by the 
National Research Council to determine 
the political views, sympathies, or as- 
sociations of candidates. My under- 
standing is that the Commission has 
accepted this procedure and has en- 
dorsed it. With the basic wisdom of 
this decision, I fully agree. 


2. In considering the issue, we need 
first to ask ourselves what effects we 
can anticipate if, from time to time, 
young men and women who are Com- 


munists, or who have Communistic sym- 
pathies or associations, are in fact 
granted fellowships. The fellowships 
are, of course, in fields where no access 
to restricted data will be needed or 
granted; and there can be no question 
of any jeopardy to security. What is 
more, there is no direct commitment, 
and no implication, that recipients of 
the fellowships will later be engaged in 
secret work. The Commission does not 
require this, nor do the research fel- 
lows. As a matter of fact, only a small 
fraction of the scientists of the coun- 
try can or should be engaged in such 
secret work. The Scientific Panel of 
the Secretary of War’s Interim Com- 
mittee at one time estimated that even 
in the fields of the greatest relevance, 
not more than 15 per cent of our scien- 
tists would be associated with the 


In This Issue 


The "Cleansing" of the AEC 
Fellowship Program 


A Letter to Senator McMahon 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Washington Notes: AEC Under 
Fire 
Anne W. Marks 


The Fellowship Program: 
Testimony Before the Joint Com- 
mittee 


The AEC Fellowships: Shall We 
Yield or Fight? 
Leo Szilard 


Reflections on Government 
Edward U. Condon 


Hickenlooper v. Lilienthal 


FAS Announces Policy Decisions. 


Psychology and Structure of Large- 
Scale Physical Research 
L. Kowarski 


Science, Materialism, and the 
Human Spirit—a Symposium 
Percy W. Bridgman 
Julius S. Bixler 


Why Another Cyclotron? 
L. A. DuBridge 


“Histopathology of Irradiation” 
Reviewed by Shields Warren.........- 


The present issue constitutes a double 
number—Volume V, Nos. 6 and 7. 


atomic energy programs; and of these, 
of course, many will be concerned with 
their nonclassified aspects. The actual 
practices of the Commission bear out 
these predictions, Thus one must ask 
the question of whether it is a proper 
charge upon the Federal Government, 
and upon the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion in particular, to support the train- 
ing and research of men who will not 
be directly involved in the work of the 
Commission. It is the Commission’s 
opinion, and this is an opinion fully 
shared by the General Advisory Com- 
mittee, that the answer to this ques- 
tion is in the affirmative. For basic 
work in science, in aspects which are 
not and may not be under the direct 
control of any one Federal agency, is, 
nevertheless, a major source of our sci- 
entific progress, of invention, discovery, 
and technical leadership. 


There are many examples of discov- 
eries basie to the present work of the 
Atomie Energy Commission which were 
in fact made by Communists or Com- 
munist sympathizers. Of these many 
examples, we may cite a famous one: 
The major—one might almost say the 
only—present peaceful application of 
atomic energy rests on the preparation 
and use of artificial radioactive materi- 
als, which were discovered by Joliot, 
who is a Communist, and by his wife, 
who is a Communist sympathizer. It 
would be folly to suppose that the 
United States would be the stronger, 
or our science and industry the more 
vigorous, if this discovery had not been 
made. It would be contrary to all ex- 
perience to suppose that only those who 
throughout their lives have held con- 
formist political views would make the 
great discoveries in the future. The peo- 
ple and the Government of the United 
States have a stake in scientific discov- 
ery and invention; and it is for this 
stake, rather than as an act of benevo- 
lence toward the recipients of the 
grants-in-aid, that one must look for 
justification for having a fellowship 
program at all. 

3. The argument given above would 
seem to me a cogent ground for main- 
taining the Commission’s policy, even 
if the determination of loyalty and re- 
liability could be made by the most 
straightforward and satisfactory meth- 
ods. As you well know, the actual pro- 
cedures which have been employed, and 
which perhaps must be employed, in 
order to establish the loyalty of an ap- 
plicant, are far from simple and far 
from satisfactory. They involve secret, 
investigative programs which make dif- 
ficult the evaluation and criticism of 

(Continued on page 178) 


163 


Perhaps there is a loophole in the 
Constitution. Or maybe in times of 
stress the Constitution gets stretched a 
bit. Scientists are not qualified to judge 
such legal issues, yet we scientists can- 
not help being concerned. 


S CITIZENS, we are bound to be 
A concerned because we are asked 
to sanction something that comes very 
close to the persecution of a political 
minority. And as scientists we are 
bound to be concerned because the Gov- 
ernment will henceforth send us men 
to work in our laboratories who have 
been selected in a manner contrary to 
the tradition that has prevailed for 
over a century at our great universi- 
ties, as well as at the universities of 
Western Europe. 


What are the overriding national in- 
terests that require us to pay such a 
price? And if there are none, why 
should we condone political discrimina- 
tion of this sort? 


It is well to remember that there was 
a wave of persecution of Communists 
after the first World War under Attor- 
ney-General A. Mitchell Palmer, at a 
time when Russia represented no mili- 
tary threat to the United States, and, 
in many ways the persecution then was 
worse than anything that has happened 
this time—so far. But this time, the 
scientists are being asked to sanction 
persecution by accepting students into 
their laboratories on the basis of a 
selection that is not free from political 
bias. 

If there are no overriding national 
interests involved, why should we tol- 
erate the breach of a tradition which 
has hitherto prevailed at our great 
universities, even though not all of our 
universities abided by it with equal 
tenacity? 

It is a vital part of this tradition that 
scientific ability be made the sole cri- 
terion for the selection of those who 
are given facilities for research or 
faculty appointments. The requirement 
of a non-Communist affidavit is the 
first breach of this tradition that has 
resulted from accepting Federal aid to 
education, and there is every reason to 
expect that others will follow. 


Federal aid to education may be a 
necessity, but Federal political control 
of education is an evil. This evil our 
universities will not be able to resist un- 
less scientists take a stand based on the 
major principle which is involved, and 
on which they are united. Once we give 
up this stand and retreat, there is no 
second line of defense behind which we 
can unite. 


178 


If asking for a non-Communist affi- 
davit is reasonable, then it is also 
reasonable for the Government to re- 
fuse to take an applicant’s word for 
his not being a Communist, and to in- 
vestigate all applicants. And, if it 
is reasonable to investigate holders of 
AEC fellowships, why is it not equally 
reasonable to investigate holders of 
fellowships from the National Science 
Foundation? And if a university re- 
ceives Federal aid to its educational 
and research program, is it not quite 
reasonable to investigate the members 
of the faculty and the students who 
benefit from such aid? 


Those who reconcile themselves to 
the first breach of our tradition will in 
due time reconcile themselves to a sec- 
ond breach. Those who follow the prin- 
ciple of the lesser evil will have to re- 
treat again and again. If we do not 
take a stand on the first occasion, when 
our most valued tradition is threatened, 
we shall never take a stand. 


The scientists, ever since they scored 
a major victory in defeating the May- 
Johnson Bill, and thus helped to bring 
about civilian control of atomic energy, 
have been very conscious of the im- 
portance of their good public relations. 
Many of them think that it is better 
from the viewpoint of public relations 
to appear “reasonable” at this time, and 
to make concessions, rather than to take 
a fighting stand. 


They might be right about this, for 
this time, if we give battle, we cannot 
be sure that we shall win. 


But there are more important things 
for us to think about these days than 
our good public relations. There are 
more important considerations than our 
natural desire to win every battle. 
There is justice to think about, and 
freedom, and our integrity. 


Justice and freedom have never been 
secure for very long in any one area 
of the world. None of us can say for 
sure what fate awaits them in the 
United States in the crisis through 
which we shall be going in the re- 
mainder of this century. Freedom and 
justice might survive this crisis; or 
they might not. They might perish and 
the efforts of scientists might be of 
little avail. What we scientists can do 
is to resolve that they shall not be 
allowed to perish without a fight. And 
those of us who do not wish to fight 
can at least refuse to help dig the 
grave. 


Oppenheimer’s Letter 
(Continued from page 168) 


evidence; they take into consideration 
questions of opinion, sympathy, and 
association in a way which is profound- 
ly repugnant to the American tradition 
of freedom; they determine at best 
whether at a given time an individual 
does have sympathy with the Commu- 
nist program and association with Com- 
munists, and throw little light on the 
more relevant question of whether the 
man will in later life be a loyal Amer- 
ican. It would be foolish to suppose that 
aman against whom no derogatory in- 
formation can be found at the age of 
twenty was by virtue of this guaran- 
teed loyal at the age of thirty. It would 
be foolish to suppose that a young man 
sympathetic to and associated with 
Communists in his student days would 
by that fact alone become disloyal, and 
a potential traitor. It is basic to science 
and to democracy alike that men can 
learn by error. 


4. My colleagues and I attach a spe- 
cial importance to restricting to the 
utmost the domain in which special 
secret investigations must be conducted. 
For they inevitably bring with them a 
morbid preoccupation with conformity, 
and a widespread fear of ruin, that is 
a more pervasive threat precisely be- 
cause it arises from secret sources. 
Thus, even if it were determined, and I 
do not believe that it should be, that 
on the whole the granting of fellow- 
ships, or, more generally, of Federal 
support, to Communist sympathizers, 
were unwise, one would have to balance 
against this argument the high cost in 
freedom that is entailed by the inves- 
tigative mechanisms necessary to dis- 
cover and to characterize such Com- 
munist sympathizers. This is what we 
all have in mind in asking that these 
intrinsically repugnant security mea- 
sures be confined to situations where 
real issues of security do in fact exist 
and where, because of this, the mea- 
sures, though repugnant, may at least 
be intelligible. 

You and I have had oceasion to dis- 
cuss in the past how central a place 
the control of atomic energy occupies 
in the preservation of the basic free- 
doms of inquiry, freedoms essential at 
once for scientific progress and for the 
preservation of our democratic institu- 
tions. It is because I believe that the 
issue which has been raised here bears 
directly on the maintenance of freedom 
of inquiry that I hold it so important 
that it be wisely resolved. 

With every warm good wish, 


ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


