OCTOBER 1, 1938 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


VOLUME 54 


LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


Prompi publication of brief reports of imporiant discoveries in physics may be secured by 
addressing them to this department. Closing dates for this department are, for the first issue of the 
month, the eighteenth of the preceding month, for the second issue, the third of the month. Because of 
the late closing dates for the section no proof can be shown to authors. The Board of Editors does 
not hold itself responsible for the opinions expressed by the correspondents. 


Communications should not in general exceed 600 words in length. 


On the Stability of Stellar Neutron Cores 


The quite regular variation of stellar energy generation 
with stellar mass has seemed to justify the hope that neither 
the structure nor the mechanism of energy generation 
would differ essentially from star to star. With increased 
knowledge of the rates of nuclear reactions, it has grown 
clear that such reactions must take place in stellar in- 
teriors, and that, on the basis of a standard Eddington 
model, reactions must occur which can account in order of 
magnitude for the radiation of the lighter stars. In par- 
ticular it would seem that the formation of deuterons by 
proton collision, and at the least partially regenerative 
capture of protons by elements between carbon and oxygen 
could be made to account successfully for the main sequence 
stars.1 Nevertheless it has been clear that these reactions 
could in no way account for the enormously greater radia- 
tion of such stars as Capella, and that for these either one 
would have to invoke other and readier nuclear reactions, 
with a correspondingly reduced time scale, or one would 
here be led, as in the earlier arguments of Milne, to expect 
serious deviations from the Eddington model. 

It is in this connection that the suggestion? of a condensed 
neutron core, which would make essential deviations from 
the Eddington model possible even for stars so light that 
without a core a highly degenerate central zone could not 
be stable, still seems of some interest. Essential for a dis- 
cussion of the role of such a core, is the estimate of the 
minimum mass for which it will be stable. An estimate of 
Landau, based apparently on the requirement that the 
sum of the gravitational and kinetic energies per particle 
of core should be lower than the energy per particle in stable 
nuclei (Landau chose oxygen), led to the value 0.001 solar 

-masses for the limiting mass. This figure appears to be 
wrong; if one takes only gravitational attraction into ac- 
count, the binding energy of a neutron in the core does not 
become equal to nuclear binding energies until the core 
mass is about 4 that of the sun. It is true that Landau’s 
requirement is unnecessarily severe: In order that the core 
be stable with respect to the most firmly bound nuclei (say 
calcium) it is only necessary that the neutron’s free energy 
in the core be less than that in the nucleus. Since the total 
core energy is proportional to the 7/3 power of the number 
of particles, the magnitude of the free energy in the core 
is 7/3 the mean binding energy. One thus gets a limiting 
core mass of 3 that of the sun. It seems that these results 
can be obtained without serious error by assuming a uni- 
form density for the core: The actual polytrope gives only 
a slightly greater stability (roughly ten percent). 


' A core of this high mass, even in a star considerably more 
massive than the sun, would involve a complete breakdown 
in the Eddington model, since so heavy a core would be 
surrounded by a degenerate zone which would use up the 
star’s total mass. The question of the actual stability of core 
models thus involves a consideration of the contribution of 
nuclear forces to the coré-binding. The forces which must 
be known are those acting between a pair of neutrons; and 
no existing nuclear experiment or theory gives a complete 
answer to this question. If, however, we assume that the 
forces between neutrons are of the spin exchange saturating 
type (c-o’), they help to reduce the lower limiting mass for 
core stability only to about yo that of the sun; the de- 
generate zone surrounding such a core must have nearly 
the sun’s mass; and thus if such a core existed, the Edding- 
ton model would be completely wrong except perhaps for 
very massive stars. 

If, on the. other hand, one gives:up the requirement of 
saturating two body forces and accepts an explanation of 
saturation along the lines of the suggestion of Critchfield 


- and Teller,? he will be led to suppose that the forces be- 


tween all pairs of nuclear. particles are, except for Coulomb 
forces, the same, and that the only important factor making 
the binding energy of a neutron in the core smaller than in © 
say a Ca nucleus is the increased kinetic energy which the 
promotion required by the exclusion principle involves. 
With this assumption the minimum core mass is very much 
reduced, and a mass of a few percent of that of the sun 
would insure its stability..For core masses under 0.03 that 
of the sun, the mass of the degenerate zone will be less than 
that of the core. | 

It seems clear that even in the heaviest stars no core will 
be formed until practically all sources of nuclear energy 
have been, at least for the central material of the star, 
exhausted. The arguments given above cannot, therefore, 
be regarded as showing that, even with the most favorable 
assumption about nuclear forces, actual stars have cores; 


~ but they do show that forces of the often assumed spin 


exchange type preclude the existence of a core for stars with 
masses comparable to that of the sun. 
J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
ROBERT SERBER 


Department of Physics, 
University of California, 
Berkeley, California, | 
September 1, 1938. 


1 Bethe and: Critchfield, Phys. Rev. 54, 248 (1938). We are indebted 
to Dr. Bethe for an interesting discussion of these questions. 

2Gamov, Atomic Nuclei and Nuclear Transformations, second edition 
(Oxford, 1936), p. 234. Landau, Nature 141, 333 (1938). 

3 Critchfield and Teller, Phys. Rev. 53, 812. (1938). 


540 


