April 14, 1950, Vol. 111 


SCIENCE 


373 


Encouragement of Science 


Robert Oppenheimer 


The Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey 


CIENCE HAS PROFOUNDLY ALTERED 
the conditions of man’s life. “During the last 
centuries, the discoveries in science, and their 
applications to practice, have changed the ma- 

terial conditions of life. They have changed as well 
many matters of the spirit. They have changed the 
form in which practical problems of right and wrong 
come before us; they have changed the focus of moral 
issues, both for the individual and for governments. 
They have given us new methods for defining the 
meaning of problems that face us, and for judging 
whether or not our solutions are just. 


The most manifest of the changes are the material 
ones. Yet even here it takes a certain perspective to 
see their true extent. Advances in the study of man 
and other living forms have extended our lifespan by 
decades. Discoveries in physical science have immeas- 
urably lightened our toil, and enriched our lives. 
They have given leisure to an ever widening group of 
men. They have made a reasonable education not a 
special privilege, but a common right. They have 
made the world, in its physical dimensions, a small 
place, and established the means by which people in 
remote parts of the earth can communicate with each 
other, can get to know each other, and can learn to 
work together. They have put at the disposal of 
everyone the resources of physical power, of ease, and 
of knowledge that were in the past reserved for the 
few. 


Not all of the changes in material well-being that 
science offers are realities. Yet the very fact that 
they are possibilities has changed the nature of the 
responsibility that we bear, both as individuals and 
as a community of men and women banded together 
in government. In the Greek cities, political democ- 
racy, and civilization itself, appeared possible only on 
the basis of a slave economy. Technology, born of 
science, has altered that; it has enabled mankind, as 
it has forced mankind, to deal with the issues of 
slavery as a moral issue. Poverty has always been 
an ugly thing, and in its extremes a desperate one. 
Today, it is an evil, in the sense that it les within 
human hands and human hearts to abate it. Science 
can provide us, for the first time in history, with the 
means of abating hunger for everyone on earth. 

Perhaps nowhere has the impact of science more 
clearly altered the specific terms of a great political 
issue than in the effects of scientific development on 


warfare. This is a can of worms with which I have 
myself unhappily been engaged for some years. It 
would not be honest to say—as it would be folly not 
to hope—that the very terror of modern weapons 
would in itself put an end to war; it would not even 
be honest to say that because of this terror the aboli- 
tion of war and the maintenance of peace have be- 
come the one absolute, final objective of all political 
decisions. There are other things in man’s life: his 
freedom, his decency, and his sense of right and wrong, 
that cannot so lightly be subjected to a single end. 
But what we need to remember is that war today has 
become, and is increasingly becoming, something very 
different from what it was a century ago or a millen- 
nium ago. We need to recognize the new situation as 
new; we need to come to it with something of the 
same spirit as the scientist’s, when he has conducted 
an experiment and finds that the results are totally 
other than those that he had anticipated. 

Four months before Hiroshima, in the last days of 
his life, President Roosevelt’s thoughts turned to these 
questions. In the last words that he wrote, in words 
he did not live to speak, the President looked to the 
future, to the atomic age. He looked to the past, to 
the days of the founding of the Republic. He wrote: 


Thomas Jefferson, himself a distinguished scientist, 
once spoke of the ‘‘brotherly spirit of science, which 
unites into one family all its votaries of whatever grade, 
and however widely dispersed throughout the different 
quarters of the globe.’’ 

Today science has brought all the different quarters of 
the globe so close together that it is impossible to isolate 
them one from another. 

Today we are faced with the pre-eminent fact that, if 
civilization is to survive, we must cultivate the science of 
human relationships—the ability of all peoples, of all 
kinds, to live together and work together, in the same 
world, at peace. 


Science has greatly extended the range of questions 
in which man has a choice; it has extended man’s free- 
dom to make significant decisions. Is there anything 
in the methods of science itself, or in the spirit of 
science, that can help in the making of these decisions? 
To what extent is there a play on the word science 
which can mislead us and take us up false roads when 
we speak of this sciencé of human relationships? Is 
there anything we can learn from the relevance of 
science to politics? 


374 


If we are to answer these questions, and answer 
then honestly, we must recognize important and basic 
differences between problems of science and problems 
of action, as they arise in personal or in political life. 
If we fail to recognize these differences, we shall be 
seeking magic solutions and not real ones. We shall 
delude ourselves into laying aside responsibility, which 
it is an essential part of man’s life to bear. 

In most scientific study, questions of good and evil, 
or right and wrong, play at most a minor and second- 
ary part. For practical decisions of policy, they are 
basic. Without them political action would be mean- 
ingless. Practical decisions and, above all, political 
decisions can never quite be freed from the conflicting 
elaims of special interest. These too are part of the 
meaning of a decision and of a course of action, and 


they must be an essential part of the force of its 


implementation. 

Political decisions are unique acts. In politics there 
is little that can correspond to the scientist’s repetition 
of an experiment. An experiment that fails in its 
purpose may be as good as or better than one that 
succeeds, because it may well be more instructive. A 
political decision cannot be taken twice. All the fac- 
tors that are relevant to it will conjoin only once. The 
analogies of history can provide a guide, but only a 
very partial one. 

These are formidable differences between the prob- 
lems of science and those of practice. They show that 
the method of science cannot be directly adapted to the 
solution of problems in polities and in man’s spiritual 
life. Yet there is relevance of a more subtle, but by 
no means trivial kind. 

In trying more fully to explore this relevance, I 
should like to start with a text. This text is a letter? 
written by Thomas Jefferson to a young man who had 
enquired of him as to the usefulness of his studies of 
science. It was written in the middle of the year 1799, 
the year in which Napoleon abolished the Directory 
and began to assume dictatorial power in France, the 
year before Thomas Jefferson was elected for the first 
time as President of the United States. Jefferson and 
the diverse brave and hopeful men who with him laid 
the foundations of our own government had learned 
much from the peoples of other nations. Many of 
their highest political ideals and their most powerful 
political instruments were built on the experience, the 
insight and wisdom of European scientists and phi- 
losophers. Even today we need to remember that this 
was so, and that there may be much that we can learn 
from others, and that we should be s to learn, as in 
turn by example we should be glad to teach. 

Jefferson’s letter starts with a survey of, the subjects 


tT am indebted to Dr. Julian Boyd, of Princeton Univer- 
sity, for the copy of this hitherto unpublished letter. 


SCIENCE 


April 14, 1950, Vol. 111 


in science which he believes young Munford ought to 
pursue. I will quote one characteristic passage which 
may strike a familiar and homely note for you: 


The science of calculation also is indispensible as far 
as the extraction of the square and cube roots; Algebra 
as far as the quadratic equation and the use of logarithms 
are often of value in ordinary cases: but all beyond these 
is but a luxury; a delicious luxury indeed; but not to be 
indulged in by one who is to have a profession to follow 
for his subsistence. 


But that is not really the part of Jefferson’s letter 
which I commend to you. Here it is: 

I am among those who think well of the human char- 
acter generally. JI consider man as formed for society, 
and endowed by nature with those dispositions which fit 
him for society. I believe also, with Condorcet, as men- 
tioned in your letter, that his mind is perfectible to a 
deg.ee of which we cannot as yet form any conception. 
It is impossible for a man who takes a survey of what is 
already known, not to see what an immensity in every 
branch of science yet remains to be discovered, and that 
too of articles to which our faculties seem adequate. 


And later, in the same letter, still more explicitly: 


. and it is still more certain that in the other 
branches of science, great fields are yet to be explored to 
which our faculties are equal, and that to an extent of 
which we cannot fix the limits. JI join you therefore in 
branding as cowardly the idea that the human mind is 
incapable of further advances. This is precisely the doc- 
trine which the present despots of the earth are inculcat- 
ing, and their friends here re-echoing; and applying espe- 
cially to religion and polities; ‘‘that it is not probable 
that any thing better will be discovered than what was 
known to our fathers.’’ We are to look backwards then 
and not forwards for the improvement of science, and to 
find it amidst feudal barbarisms and the fires of Spital- 
fields. But thank heaven the American mind is already 
too much opened, to listen to these impostures; and while 
the art of printing is left to us, science can never be 
retrograde; what is once acquired of real knowledge can 
never be lost. To preserve the freedom of the human 
mind then and freedom of the press, every spirit should 
be ready to devote itself to martyrdom; for as long as we 
may think as we will, and speak as we think, the condition 
of man will proceed in improvement. The generation 
which is going off the stage has deserved well of mankind 
for the struggles it has made, and for having arrested 
that course of despotism which had overwhelmed the 
world for thousands and thousands of years. If there 
seems to be danger that the ground they have gained will 
be lost again, that danger comes from the generation your 
cotemporary. But that the enthusiasm which character- 
izes youth should lift it’s parracide hands against free- 
dom and science would be such a monstrous phaenomenon 
as I cannot place among possible things in this age and 
this country. ) 


To me there are two striking impressions this letter 
of Jefferson’s makes, even beyond its eloquence and its 


April 14, 1950, Vol. 111 


SCIENCE 


375 


beauty. The first is that the letter is pervaded with 
the idea of progress, that ideal that owes so much to 
the development of science and that in turn has pro- 
vided the great enriching human faith in which scien- 
tific discovery and invention has flourished. Jefferson 
is confident that an increased understanding of the 
world will lead to progress; he is convinced that the 
barbarisms of the past cannot stand up against 
enquiry and understanding and enlightenment; he is 
confident in man and sure that as men know more they 
will act move wisely and live better. In our con- 
temporary expressions of hope that catastrophe could 
be averted and civilization yet be saved, that confi- 
dence has lost much of its robustness. 

The second point is that for Jefferson there is some- 
thing in the ways of science that is relevant to polit- 
ical life. Even in religion and polities, he holds that 
it is probable that things better will be discovered than 
what was known to our fathers. This conviction that 
new knowledge is possible, and that not all the an- 
swers are known, is of course the stuff of the day-to- 
day life of the scientist. Science itself does progress; 
new knowledge is possible; and new knowledge, be- 
cause it does not destroy or ignore the old, can only 
increase our understanding. The very idea of the 
development of science is an example of progress, and 
of progress which in no true sense can ever be re- 
versed. But this is only part of the story. It is true, 
as Jefferson knew, that, in the large, science has 
flourished in conditions of human freedom, and that 
its growth is parallel to the growth of democratic 
institutions. Today, looking back on more than a 
century and a half of further history, we can be even 
more sure of this. We have seen not only the in- 
spiriting example of science and democracy flourish- 
ing together, but the tragic examples of their founder- 
ing together. We express the hope that of this 
tragedy we shall soon have seen the end. 

What are these lessons that the spirit of science 
teaches us for our practical affairs? Basic to them 
all is that there may be no barriers to freedom of en- 
quiry. Basic to them all is the ideal of open-minded- 
ness with regard to new knowledge, new experience, 
and new truth. Science is not based on authority. 
It owes its acceptance and its universality to an ap- 
peal to intelligible, communicable evidence that any 
interested man can evaluate. 

There is no place for dogma in science. The sci- 
entist is free to ask any question, to doubt any asser- 
tion, to seek for any evidence, to correct any error. 
Where science has been used in the past to erect a 
new dogmatism, that dogmatism has found itself in- 
compatible with the progress of science; and in the 


end, the dogma has yielded, or science and freedom 
have perished together. 

Our own political life is predicated on openness. 
We do not believe any group of men adequate enough 
or wise enough to operate without, scrutiny or without 
criticism. We know that the only way to avoid error 
is to detect it, that the only way to detect it is to be 
free to enquire. We know that the wages of secrecy 
are corruption. We know that in secrecy error, un- 
detected, will flourish and subvert. 

Let me be clear. Science is not skepticism. It is 
not the practice of science to look for things to doubt. 
It was not by deliberate attempt of skepticism that 
physicists were led to doubt the absolute nature of 
simultaneity, or to recognize that the ideas of strict 
causality embodied in classical physics could not be 
applied in the domain of atomic phenomena. There 
is probably no group of men who take more for 
granted in their daily work than the scientists. Com- 
mon sense, and all that flows from it, is their prin- 
cipal basis for what they do in the laboratory and for 
what they make of it on paper. But for scientists 
it is not only honorable to doubt, it is mandatory to 
do that when there appears to be evidence in support 
of the doubt. In place of authority in science, we have 
and we need to have only the consensus of informed 
opinion, only the guide of example. No scientist 
needs to order his colleagues to use a new technique of 
experiment or to enter a new field of discovery. If 
he has done this, it will be an invitation to his fellows 
to follow. 

These then are some of the attitudes of mind, these 
are some of the disciplines of spirit, that grow natu- 
rally in the scientist’s world. They have grown there 
in part as a result of a humane and liberal tradition 
in political life, and in part as a cause of that. The 
open mind, the reliance on example and persuasion, 
rather than on authority—these are the heritage of 
the centuries in which science has altered the face of 
the earth. Science can help in diverse ways in pre- 
serving and extending this heritage. Its very univer- 
sality speaks across frontiers to make truth manifest 
in lands otherwise darkened; its material applications 
create the preconditions—in leisure, in education, in 
means of communication—for the converse of men 
with each other. Science provides the material and 
the intellectual basis for a world in which example 
and understanding can help all men to fulfill their 
hopes. Today we need to remember that our country, 
founded on these practices, and grown strong by their 
exercise, owes its strength to them. In this time of 
crisis, we need to cherish that strength. 


Based on an address given at the Awards Banquet of the Ninth Annual 
Science Talent Search in Washington, D. C., March 6, 1950, 


