pametialehie os Routledge 


Atomic Scientists 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Oppenheimer Replies 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1954) Oppenheimer Replies, Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, 10:5, 177-187, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1954.11453469 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1954.11453469 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 


XJ 
(s Submit your article to this journal @ 


lil Article views: 5 


N 
IQ] View related articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


Oppenheimer Replies 


On March 4, Dr. Oppenheimer replied to General Nichols’ let- 
ter of December 23, 1953. The complete text is printed below. 


Dear GENERAL NICHOLS: 


This is in answer to your letter of 
December 23, 1953, in which the 
question is raised whether my con- 
tinued employment as a consultant on 
Atomic Energy Commission work “will 
endanger the common defense and se- 
curity and whether such continued 
employment is clearly consistent with 
the interests of the national security.” 

Though of course I would have no 
desire to retain an advisory position 
if my advice were not needed, I can- 
not ignore the question you have 
raised, nor accept the suggestion that 
I am unfit for public service. 

The items of so-called “derogatory 
information” set forth in your letter 
cannot be fairly understood except in 
the context of my life and my work. 
This answer is in the form of a sum- 
mary account of relevant aspects of 
my life in more or less chronological 
order, in the course of which I shall 
comment on the specific items in your 
letter. Through this answer and 
through the hearings before the Per- 
sonnel Security Board, which I hereby 
request, I hope to provide a fair basis 
upon which the questions posed by 
your letter may be resolved. 

I was born in New York in 1904. 
My father had come to this country at 
the age of 17 from Germany. He was 
a successful business man and quite 
active in community affairs. My mother 
was born in Baltimore and before her 
marriage was an artist and teacher of 
art, 

I attended the Ethical Culture 
School and Harvard College, which I 
entered in 1922. I completed the work 
for my degree in the spring of 1925. 
I then left Harvard to study at Cam- 
bridge University and in Géttingen, 
where in the spring of 1927 I took 
my doctor's degree. 

The following year I was National 
Research Fellow at Harvard and at 
the California Institute of Technology. 
In the following year I was Fellow of 


the International Education Board at 
the University of Leiden and at the 
Technical High School in Zurich. 

In the spring of 1929, I returned to 
the United States. I was homesick for 
this country, and in fact I did not 
leave it again for over nineteen years. 
I had learned a great deal in my stu- 
dent days about the new physics; I 
wanted to pursue this myself, to ex- 
plain it, and to foster its cultivation. 

I had had many invitations to uni- 
versity positions, one or two in Eu- 
rope, and perhaps ten in the United 
States. I accepted concurrent appoint- 
ments as assistant professor at the 
California Institute of Technology in 
Pasadena and at the University of 
California in Berkeley. For the coming 
twelve years, I was to devote my time 
to these two faculties. 

Starting with a single graduate stu- 
dent in my first year in Berkeley, we 
gradually began to build up what was 
to become the largest school in the 
country of graduate and post-doctoral 
study in theoretical physics, so that as 
time went on, we came to have be- 
tween a dozen and twenty people 
learning and adding to quantum the- 
ory, nuclear physics, relativity, and 
other modern physics. 

As the number of students increased, 
so in general did their quality: the 
men who worked with me during those 
years hold chairs in many of the great 
centers of physics in this country; they 
have made important contributions to 
science, and in many cases to the 
atomic energy project. Many of my 
students would accompany me to Pasa- 
dena in the spring after the Berkeley 
term was over, so that we might con- 
tinue to work together. 

My friends, both in Pasadena and 
in Berkeley, were mostly faculty peo- 
ple, scientists, classicists, and artists. 
I studied and read Sanskrit with 
Arthur Rider. I read very widely, but 
mostly classics, novels, plays, and po- 
etry; and I read something of other 


) 


parts of science. I was not interested 
in and did not read about economics 
or politics. I was almost wholly di- 
vorced from the contemporary scene 
in this country. 

I never read a newspaper or a cur- 
rent magazine like Time or Harper's; 
I had no radio, no telephone; I learned 
of the stock market crash in the fall 
of 1929 only long after the event; the 
first time I ever voted was in the Presi- 
dential election of 1936. 

To many of my friends, my indif- 
ference to contemporary affairs seemed 
bizarre, and they often chided me with 
being too much of a highbrow. I was 
interested in man and his experience; 
I was deeply interested in my science; 
but I had no understanding of the 
relations of man to his society. 

I spent some weeks each summer 
with my brother Frank at our ranch 
in New Mexico. There was a strong 
bond of affection between us. After my 
mother’s death, my father came often, 
mostly in Berkeley, to visit me; and 
we had an intimate and close associa- 
tion until his death. 

Beginning in late 1936, my interests 
began to change. These changes did 
not alter my earlier friendships, my 
relations to my physics; but they 
added something new. I can discern 
in retrospect more than one reason for 
these changes. 

I had had a continuing, smoldering 
fury about the treatment of Jews in 
Germany. I had relatives there, and 
was later to help in extricating them 
and bringing them to this country. 

I saw what the depression was doing 
to my students. Often they could get 
no jobs or jobs which were wholly in- 
adequate. And through them, I began 
to sense the larger sorrows of the great 
depression. I began to understand how 
deeply political and economic events 
could affect men’s lives. I began to 
feel the need to participate more fully 
in the life of the community. But I 
had no framework of political con- 


177 


viction or experience to give me per- 
spective in these matters. 

In the spring of 1986, I had been 
introduced by friends to Jean Tatlock, 
the daughter of a noted Professor of 
English at the University; and in the 
autumn, I began to court her, and we 
grew close to each other. We were 
at least twice close enough to marriage 
to think of ourselves as engaged. 

Between 1939 and her death in 
1944 I saw her very rarely. She told 
me about her Communist party mem- 
berships; they were on again, off again 
affairs, and never seemed to provide 
for her what she was seeking. I do not 
believe that her interests were really 
political, She was a person of deep 
religious feeling. She loved this coun- 
try and its people and its life. She was, 
as it turned out, a friend of many 
fellow travelers and Communists, with 
a number of whom I was later to 
become acquainted. 

I should not give the impression 
that it was wholly because of Jean 
Tatlock that I made left-wing friends, 
or felt sympathy for causes which 
hitherto would have seemed so remote 
from me, like the Loyalist cause in 
Spain, and the organization of mi- 
gratory workers. I have mentioned 
some of the other contributing causes. 
I liked the new sense of companion- 
ship, and at the same time felt that 
I was coming to be part of the life 
of my time and country. 

In 1987, my father died; a little 
later, when I came into an inheritance, 
I made a will leaving this to the Uni- 
versity of California for fellowships to 
graduate students. 

This was the era of what the Com- 
munists then called the “united front,” 
in which they joined with many non- 
Communist groups in support of hu- 
manitarian objectives. Many of these 
objectives engaged my interest. 

I contributed to the strike fund of 


one of the major strikes of Bridges’ 
union; I subscribed to The People’s 
World; I contributed to the various 
committees and organizations which 
were intended to help the Spanish 
Loyalist cause. I was invited to help 
establish the Teacher's Union, which 
included faculty and teaching assis- 
tants at the University, and school 
teachers of the East Bay. I was elected 
recording secretary. My connection 
with the Teacher’s Union continued 
until some time in 1941, when we 
disbanded our chapter. 

During these same years, I also be- 
gan to take part in the management 
of the Physics Department, the selec- 
tion of courses and the awarding of 
fellowships, and in the general aftairs 
of the Graduate School of the Univer- 
sity, mostly through the Graduate 
Council, of which I was a member for 
some years. 

I also became involved in other 
organizations. For perhaps a year, I 
was a member of the Western Council 
of the Consumers Union, which was 
concerned with evaluating information 
on products of interest on the West 
Coast. I do not recall Arthur Kallet, 
the national head of the Consumer’s 
Union; at most I could have met him 
if he made a visit to the West Coast. 

I joined the American Committee 
for Democracy and Intellectual Free- 
dom in 1987. I think it then stood as 
a protest against what had happened 
to intellectuals and professionals in 
Germany. 

I listed, in the Personnel Security 
Questionnaire that I filled out in 1942 
for employment with the Manhattan 
District, the very few political organiza~ 
tions of which I had ever been a mem- 
ber. I say on that questionnaire that I 
did not include sponsorships. I have 
no recollection of the Friends of the 
Chinese People, or of what, if any, my 
connection with this organization was. 

The statement is attributed to me 


“, «» The great majority of this country’s leading physicists harbored 
the most profound doubts about the wisdom of making a vast invest- 
ment in the hydrogen project. These doubts were in part moral. And 
why should they not be, since physicists are also human beings? But 
they were basically technical and scientific... . 

“But the point is that the physicists had a right to be wrong—and 


not only because the thermonuclear field was then an unexplored jungle 
of imponderables. They had a right to be wrong also because this right 
—the privilege of making an honest error of judgment without being 
labelled a traitor—is basic to free science and a free society.” 

JosepH aNnD STrewart ALsop 

Washington Post and Times Herald, April 11, 1954 


178 


that, while I was not a Communist, I 
“had probably belonged to every Com- 
munist-front organization on the West 
Coast and had signed many petitions 
in which Communists were interested.” 

I do not recall this statement, nor 
to whom I might have made it, nor 
the circumstances. The quotation is 
not true. It seems clear to me that if 
I said anything along the lines quoted, 
it was a half-jocular overstatement. 

The matter which most engaged my 
sympathies and interests was the war 
in Spain. This was not a matter of 
understanding and informed convic- 
tions. I had never been to Spain; I 
knew a little of its literature; I knew 
nothing of its history or politics or 
contemporary problems. But like a 
great many other Americans I was 
emotionally committed to the Loyalist 
cause. 

I contributed to various organiza- 
tions for Spanish relief. I went to, and 
helped with many parties, bazaars, 
and the like. Even when the war in 
Spain was manifestly lost, these activi- 
ties continued. The end of the war 
and the defeat of the Loyalists caused 
me great sorrow. 

It was probably through Spanish 
relief efforts that I met Dr. Thomas 
Addis and Rudy Lambert. As to the 
latter, our association never became 
close. As to the former, he was a 
distinguished medical scientist who be- 
came a friend. 

Addis asked me, perhaps in the win- 
ter of 1987-38, to contribute through 
him to the Spanish cause. He made 
it clear that this money, unlike that 
which went to the relief organizations, 
would go straight to the Bghting ef- 
fort, and that it would go through 
Communist channels, I did so contri- 
bute; usually when he communicated 
with me, explaining the nature of the 
need, I gave him sums in cash, prob- 
ably never much less than a hundred 
dollars, and occasionally perhaps some- 
what more than that, several times 
during the winter. I made no such 
contributions during the spring terms 
when I was in Pasadena or during the 
summers in New Mexico. 

Later—but I do not remember the 
date—Addis introducted me to Isaac 
Folkoff, who was, as Addis indicated, 
in some way connected with the Com- 
munist party, and told me that Folkoft 
would from then on get in touch with 
me when there was need for money. 
This he did, in much the same way 
that Addis had done before. As be- 
fore, these contributions were for spe- 
cific purposes, principally the Spanish 
war and Spanish relief. 


Sometimes I was asked for money 
for other purposes, the organization of 
migratory labor in the California val- 
leys, for instance. I doubt that it oc- 
curred to me that the contributions 
might be directed to purposes other 
than those I had intended or that such 
other purposes might be evil. I did 
not then regard Communists as dan- 
gerous; and some of their declared ob- 
jectives seemed to me desirable. 

In time these contributions came to 
an end. I went to a big Spanish relief 
party the night before Pearl Harbor; 
and the next day, as we heard the 
news of the outbreak of war, I de- 
cided that I had had about enough 
of the Spanish cause, and that there 
were other and more pressing crises in 
the world. My contributions would not 
have continued much longer. 

My brother Frank married in 1936. 
Our relations thereafter were inevitab- 
ly less intimate than before. He told 
me at the time—probably 1937—that 
he and his wife Jackie had joined the 
Communist party. Over the years we 
saw one another as occasions arose. 
We still spent summer holidays to- 
gether. In 1937 or 1940 Frank and 
Jackie moved to Stanford; in the au- 
tumn of 1941 they came to Berkeley, 
and Frank worked for the Radiation 
Laboratory. At that time he made it 
clear to me that he was no longer a 
member of the Communist party. 

As to the alleged activities of Jackie 
and Frank in 1944, 1945, and 1946; 
I was not in Berkeley in 1944 and 
1945; I was away most of the first 
half of 1946; I do not know whether 
these activities occurred or not, and 
if I had any knowledge of them at 
the time it would only have been very 
sketchy. 

After Christmas of 1945 my family 
and I visited my brother’s family for 
a few days during the holidays, and I 
remember that we were there New 
Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day in 
1946, On New Year’s Day people were 
constantly dropping in. Pinsky and 
Adelson, who were at most casual 
acquaintances of mine, may have been 
among them, but I cannot remember 
their being there, nor indeed do I 
remember any of the others who 
dropped in that day or what was dis- 
cussed. 

It was in the summer of 1989 in 
Pasadena that I first met my wife. 
She was married to Dr. Harrison, who 
was a friend and associate of the 
Tolmans, Lauritsens, and others on the 
California Institute of Technology 
faculty. I learned of her earlier mar- 
riage to Joe Dallet and of his death 


fighting in Spain. He had been a 
Communist party official, and for a 
year or two during their brief mar- 
riage my wife was a Communist party 
member, When I met her I found in 
her a deep loyalty to her former 
husband, a complete disengagement 
from any political activity, and a cer- 
tain disappointment and contempt that 
the Communist p was not in fact 
what she had once thought it was. 

My own views were also evolving. 
Although Sidney and Beatrice Webb's 
book on Russia, which I had read in 
1986, and the talk that I heard at that 
time had predisposed me to make 
much of the economic progress and 
general level of welfare in Russia, and 
little of its political tyranny, my views 
on this were to change. 

I read about the purge trials, though 
not in full detail, and could never 
find a view of them which was not 
damning to the Soviet system. In 
1938 I met three physicists who had 
actually lived in Russia in the nine- 
teen-thirties. All were eminent scien- 
tists, Placzek, Weisskopf, and Schein; 
and the first two have become close 
friends. What they reported seemed to 
me so solid, so unfanatical, so true, 
that it made a great impression; and 
it presented Russia, even when seen 
from their limited experience, as a 
land of purge and terror, of ludicrously 
bad management and of a long-suffer- 
ing people. 

I need to make clear that this 
changing opinion of Russia, which was 
to be reinforced by the Nazi-Soviet 


pact, and the behavior of the Soviet 
Union in Poland and in Finland, did 
not mean a sharp break for me with 
those who held to different views. At 
that time I did not fully understand 
as in time I came to understand—how 
completely the Communist party in 
this country was under the control of 
Russia. During and after the Battle of 
France, however, and during the 
Battle of England the next autumn, I 
found myself increasingly out of 
sympathy with the policy of dis- 
engagement and neutrality that the 
Communist press advocated. 

After our marriage in 1940 my wife 
and I for about two years had much 
the same circle of friends as I had had 
before—mostly physicists and univer- 
sity people. Among them the Cheva- 
liers, in particular, showed us many 
acts of kindness. We were occasionally 
invited to more or less obviously left- 
wing affairs, Spanish relief parties that 
still continued; and on two occasions, 
once in San Francisco and once in 
Berkeley, we attended social gather- 
ings of apparently well-to-do people, 
at which Schneiderman, an official of 
the Communist party in California, 
attempted, not with success as far 
as we were concemed, to explain what 
the Communist line was all about. 

I was asked about the Berkele 
meeting in an interview in 1946 wit 
agents of the F.B.I. I did not then 
recall this meeting, and in particular 
did not in any way connect it with 
Chevalier, about whom the agents 
were questioning me; hence it seemed 


Statement by Sterling Cole, chairman, and Bourke B. Hickenlooper, 
vice-chairman, of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy 


The Joint Committee on Atomic 
Energy has maintained long and con- 
tinuing interest in the matters involv- 
ing Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, and 
is fully acquainted with the circum- 
stances leading to the present hear- 
ing before the Personnel Security 
Board of the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission. 

This case, as it has developed over 
the past several years, deserves and 
has received the closest study and 
consideration by the Joint Committee 
on Atomic Energy as the appropriate 
and responsible agent of the Congress 
in matters concerning the atomic en- 
ergy program. 

he dispoaiticn of this case is with- 
in the responsibility and authority of 
the Atomic Energy Commission. The 


Joint Committee has found no fault 
with the procedures taken by the 
Atomic Energy Commission in this 
case. 

While the present hearing is being 
carried out, we believe it inappro- 
priate to make any public comment 
on the merits of the issues involved. 

We do not believe it necessary for 
further Congressional action at this 
time. When the orderly review of Dr. 
Oppenheimer’s record now under wa 
by the Atomic Energy Commission's 
Personnel Security Board is com- 
pleted, the Joint Committee, which 
will be kept fully informed, will be 
in a position to take whatever action, 
if any, that may be appropriate in 
the public interest. (Statement dated 
April 18, 1958). 


179 


wholly irrelevant to the matter under 
discussion. Later my wife reminded 
me that the Berkstey meeting had 
occurred at the house of the Cheva- 
liers; and when I was asked about it 
by the F.B.I. in 1950 I told them so. 

We saw little of Kenneth May; we 
both liked him. It would have been 
not unnatural for us to go to a house- 
warming for May and his wife; neither 
my wife nor I remember such a party. 

Weinberg was known to me as a 

aduate student; Hiskey I did not 

now. Steve Nelson came a few times 
with his family to visit; he had be- 
friended my wife in Paris, at the time 
of her husband’s death in Spain in 
1987. Neither of us has seen him since 
1941 or 1942. 

Because of these. associations that 
I have described, and the contribu- 
tions mentioned earlier, I might well 
have appeared at the time as quite 
close to the Communist party—perhaps 
even to some people as belonging to 
it. As I have said, some of its de- 
clared objectives seemed to me de- 
sirable, But I never was a member of 
the Communist party. I never accept- 
ed Communist dogma or theory; in 
fact, it never made sense to me. 

I had no clearly formulated politi- 
cal views. I hated tyranny and repres- 
sion and every form of dictatorial con- 
trol of thought. In most cases I did 
not in those days know who was and 
who was not a member of the Com- 
munist party. No one ever asked me 
to join the Communist party. 

Your letter sets forth statements 
made in 1942-45 by persons said to 
be Communist party officials to the 
effect that I was a concealed member 
of the Communist party. I have no 
knowledge as to what these people 
might have said. What I do know is 
that I was never a member of the 
party, concealed or open. 

Even the names of some of the 
people mentioned are strange to me, 
such as Jack Manley and Katrina San- 
dow. I doubt that I met Bernadette 
Doyle, though I recognize her name. 
ey and Adelson I met at most 
casually, as previously mentioned. 

By the time that we moved to Los 
Alamos in early 1948, both as a re- 
sult of my changed views and of the 
great pressure of war work, my par- 
ticipation in left-wing organizations 
and my association with left-wing 
circles had ceased and were never to 
be re-established. 

In August 1941, I bought Eagle 
Hill at Berkeley for my wife, which 
was the first home we had of our own. 
We settled down to live in it with our 


180 


new baby. We had a good many 
friends, but little leisure. My wife was 
working in biology at the university. 

Many of the men I had known went 
off to work on radar and other aspects 
of military research. I was not with- 
out envy of them; but it was not until 
my first connection with the rudi- 
mentary atomic energy enterprise that 
I began to see any way in which I 
could be of direct use. 

Ever since the discovery of nuclear 
fission, the possibility of powerful ex- 
plosives based on it had been very 
much in my mind, as it had in that 
of many other physicists. We had 
some understanding of what this 
might do for us in the war, and how 
much it might change the course of 
history. 

In the autumn of 1941, a special 
committee was set up by the National 
Academy of Sciences under the chair- 
manship of Arthur Compton to review 
the prospects and feasibility of the 
different uses of atomic energy for 
military purposes. I attended a meet- 
ing of this committee; this was my 
first official connection with the atomic 
energy program. 

After the Academy meeting, I 
spent some time in preliminary calcu- 
lations about the construction and 
performance of atomic bombs, and be- 
came increasingly excited at the pros- 
pects. 

At the same time I still had a quite 
heavy burden of academic work with 
courses and graduate students. I also 
began to consult, more or less regular- 
ly, with the staff of the Radiation 
Laboratory in Berkeley on their pro- 
gram for the electric-magnetic separa- 
tion of uranium isotopes. I was never 


by et prin’ i : 

Soa] | beso BEB pai ney PCR, 
“QON'T TELL. BNYOME —ALL YOU PO /S SP61F Ay SCIENTIST ™ 
Courtesy of J. Burck and the Chicago Sun-Times 


a member or employee of the labora- 
tory; but I attended many of its staff 
and policy meetings. 

With the help of two of my gradu- 
ate students, I developed an invention 
which was embodied in the produc- 
tion plants at Oak Ridge. I attended 
the conference in Chicago at which 
the Metallurgical Laboratory (to pro- 
duce plutonium) was established and 
its initial program projected. 

In the spring of 1942, Compton 
called me to Chicago to discuss the 
state of work on the bomb itself. Dur- 
ing this meeting Compton asked me 
to take the responsibility of this work, 
which at that time consisted of 
numerous scattered experimental proj- 
ects. Although I had had no adminis- 
trative experience and was not an 
experimental physicist, I felt sufficient- 
ly informed and challenged by the 
problem to be glad to accept. At this 
time I became an employee of the 
Metallurgical Laboratory. 

After this conference I called to- 
gether a theoretical study group in 
Berkeley in which Bethe, Konopinski, 
Serber, Teller, Van Vleck, and I par- 
ticipated. We had an adventurous 
time. We spent much of the summer 
of 1942 in Berkeley in a B a study 
that for the first time really came to 
grips with the physical problems of 
atomic bombs, atomic Speen and 
the possibility of using fission explo- 
sions to initiate thermonuclear re- 
actions. 

I called this possibility to the atten- 
tion of Dr. Bush during the late sum- 
mer; the technical views on this sub- 
ject were to develop and change from 
then until the present day. 

After these studies there was little 
doubt that a potentially world-shatter- 
ing undertaking lay ahead. We began 
to see the great explosion of Alamo- 
gordo and the greater sat eae of 
Eniwetok with a surer foreknowledge. 
We also began to see how rough, 
difficult, challenging, and unpredict- 
able this job might turn out to be. 

When I entered the employ of the 
Metallurgical Laboratory I filled out 
my first Personnel Security Question- 
naire. Later in the summer, I had 
word from Compton that there was 
question of my clearance on the 
ground that I had belonged to left- 
wing groups; but it was indicated that 
this would not prove a bar to my 
further work on the program. 

In late summer, after a review of 
the experimental work, I became con- 
vinced, as did others, that a major 
change was called for in the work on 
the bomb itself. We needed a central 


laboratory devoted wholly to this pur- 
pose, where people ould talk freely 
with each other, where theoretical 
ideas and experimental findings could 
affect each other, where the waste 
and frustration and error of the man 
compartmentalized experimental stud- 
ies could be eliminated, where we 
could begin to come to grips with 
chemical, metallurgical, engineering, 
and ordnance problems that had so 
far received no consideration. We 
therefore sought to establish this labo- 
ratory for a direct attack on all the 
problems inherent in the most rapid 
possible development and production 
of atomic bombs. 

In the autumn of 1942 General 
Groves assumed charge of the Man- 
hattan Engineer District. I discussed 
with him the need for an atomic bomb 
laboratory. There had been some 
thought of making this laboratory a 
part of Oak Ridge. For a time there 
was support for making it a military 
establishment in which key personnel 
would be commissioned as officers; 
and in preparation for this course I 
once went to the Presidio to take the 
initial steps toward obtaining a com- 
mission. 

After a good deal of discussion with 
the personnel who would be needed 
at Los Alamos and with General 
Groves and his advisers, it was de- 
cided that the Laboratory should, at 
least initially, be a civilian establish- 
ment in a military post. While this 
consideration was going on, I had 
shown General Groves Los Alamos; 
and he almost immediately took steps 
to acquire the site. 

In early 1943, I received a letter 
signed by General Groves and Dr. 
Conant, appointing me director of the 
laboratory, and outlining their con- 
ception of how it was to be organized 
and administered. The necessary con- 
struction and assembling of the needed 
facilities were begun. All of us worked 
in close collaboration with the en- 
gineers of the Manhattan District. 

The site of Los Alamos was selected, 
in part at least, because it enabled 
those responsible to balance the obvi- 
ous need for security with the equally 
important need of free communication 
among those engaged in the work. 
Security, it was hoped, would be 
achieved by removing the laboratory 
to a remote area, fenced and patrolled 
where communication with the out- 
side was extremely limited. 

Telephone calls were monitored, 
mail was censored, and personnel who 
left the area—something permitted 
only for the clearest of causes-knew 


that their movements might be under 
surveillance. On the other hand, for 
those within the community, full ex- 
position and discussion among those 
competent to use the information was 
encouraged. 

The last months of 1942 and early 
1943 had hardly hours enough to get 
Los Alamos established. The real 
problem had to do with getting to 
Los Alamos the men who would make 
a success of the undertaking. For this 
we needed to understand as clearly as 
we then could what our technical pro- 
gram would be, what men we would 
need, what facilities, what organiza- 
tion, what plan. 

The program of recruitment was 
massive. Even though we then under- 
estimated the ultimate size of the 
laboratory, which was to have almost 
4,000 members by the spring of 1945, 
and even though we did not at that 
time see clearly some of the difficulties 
which were to bedevil and threaten 
the enterprise we knew that it was a 
big, complex, and diverse job. 

Even the initial plan of the labo- 
ratory called for a start with more 
than 100 highly qualified and trained 
scientists, to say nothing of the tech- 
nicians, staff, and mechanics who 
would be required for their support, 
and of the equipment that we would 
have to beg and borrow since there 
would be no time to build it from 
scratch. We had to recruit at a time 
when the country was fully engaged 
in war and almost every competent 
scientist was already involved in the 
military effort. 

The primary burden of this fell on 
me. To recruit staff I traveled all over 
the country talking with people who 
had been working on one or another 
aspect of the atomic energy enterprise, 
and people in radar work, for ex- 
ample, and underwater sound, telling 
them about the job, the place that we 
were going to, and enlisting their en- 
thusiasm. 

In order to bring responsible scien- 
tists to Los Alamos, I had to rely on 
their sense of the interest, urgency, 
and feasibility of the Los Alamos mis- 
sion. I had to tell them enough of 
what the job was, and give strong 
enough assurance that it might be 
successfully accomplished in time to 
affect the outcome of the war, to make 
it clear that they were justified in 
leaving their other work to come to 
this job. 

The prospect of coming to Los 
Alamos aroused great misgivings. It 
was to be a military post; men were 
asked to sign up more or less for the 


duration; restrictions on travel and on 
the freedom of families to move about 
were to be severe; and no one could 
be sure of the extent to which the 
necessary technical freedom of action 
could actually be maintained by the 
laboratory. 

The notion of disappearing into the 
New Mexico desert for an indetermi- 
nate period and under quasi-military 
auspices disturbed a good many scien- 
tists, and the families of many more. 
But there was another side to it. 

Almost everyone realized that this 
was a great undertaking. Almost 
everyone knew that if it were com- 
pleted successfully and rapidly enough 
it might determine the outcome of 
the war. Almost everyone knew that 
it was an wipanibled: opportunity to 
bring to bear the basic knowledge and 
art of science for the benefit of his 
country. Almost everyone knew that 
this job, if it were achieved, would 
be a part of history. 

This sense of excitement, of devo- 
tion and of patriotism in the end pre- 
vailed. Most of those with whom I 
talked.came to Los Alamos. Once they 
came, confidence in the enterprise 
grew as men learned more of the 
technical status of the work; and 
though the laboratory was to double 
and redouble its size many times be- 
fore the end, once it had started it 
was on the road to success. 

We had information in those days 
of German activity in the field of nu- 
clear fission. We were aware of what 
it might mean if they beat us to the 
draw in the development of atomic 
bombs. The concensus of all our 
opinions, and every directive that I 
had, stressed the extreme urgency of 
our work, as well as the need for 
guarding all knowledge of it from our 
enemies. Past Communist connections 
or sympathies did not necessarily dis- 
qualify a man from employment, if 
we had confidence in his integrity and 
dependability as a man. 

There are two items of derogatory 
information on which I need to com- 
ment at this point. The first is that it 
was reported that I had talked the 
atomic bomb question over with Com- 
munist party members during this 
period (1942-45). The second is that 
I was responsible for the employment 
on the atomic bomb project of indi- 
viduals who were members of the 
Communist party or closely associated 
with activities of the Communist party. 

As to the first, my only discussions 
of matters connected with the atomic 
bomb were for official work or for 
recruiting the staff of the enterprise. 


181 


So far as I knew none of these discus- 
sions were with Communist party 
members. I never discussed anything 
of my secret work or anything about 
the atomic bomb with Steve Nelson. 

As to the statement that I secured 
the employment of doubtful persons 
on the project: 

Of those mentioned, Lomanitz, 
Friedman, and Weinberg were never 
employed at Los Alamos. I believe 
that I had nothing to do with the 
employment of Friedman and Wein- 
berg by the Radiation Laboratory; I 
had no responsibility for the hiring of 
anyone there. During the time that I 
continued to serve as a consultant with 
the Radiation Laboratory, and to ad- 
vise and direct the work of some of 
the graduate students, I assigned 
David Bohm and Chaim Richman to 
a problem of basic science which 
might prove useful in analyzing ex- 
periments in connection with fast 
neutrons. That work has long been 
published. 

Another graduate student was Rossi 
Lomanitz. I remember vaguely a con- 
versation with him in which he ex- 
eee reluctance to take part in de- 
ense research, and I encouraged him 
to do what other scientists were doing 
for their oe Thereafter he did 
work at the Radiation Laboratory. 

I remember no details of our talk. 
If I asked him to work on the project, 
I would have assumed that he would 
be checked by the security officers 
as a matter of course. Later, in 1948, 
when Lomanitz was inducted into the 
Army, he wrote me asking me to help 
his return to the project. I forwarded 
a copy of his letter to the Manhattan 
District Security officers, and let the 
matter rest there. Still later, at Lo- 
manitz’s request, I wrote to his com- 
manding officer that he was qualified 
for advanced technical work in the 


ry: 

I asked for the transfer of David 
Bohm to Los Alamos; but this request, 
like all others, was subject to the 
assumption that the usual security re- 
quirements would apply; and when I 
was told that there was objection on 
security grounds to this transfer, I was 
much surprised, but of course agreed. 

David Hawkins was known to the 
Personnel Director at the laboratory, 
and I had met and liked him and 
found him intelligent; I supported the 
suggestion of the Personnel Director 
that he come to Los Alamos. I under- 
stood that he had left-wing associa- 
tions; but it was not until in March 
of 1951, at the time of his testimony, 


182 


that I knew about his membership in 
the Communist party. 

In 1943 when I was alleged to 
have stated that “I knew several in- 
dividuals then at Los Alamos who had 
been members of the Communist 
party,” I knew of only one; she was 
my wife, of whose dissociation from 
the party, and of whose integrity and 
loyalty to the United States I had 
no question. Later, in 1944 or 1945, 
my brother Frank, who had been 
cleared for work in Berkeley and at 
Oak Ridge, came to Los Alamos from 
Oak Ridge with official approval. 

I knew of no attempt to obtain 
secret information at Los Alamos. 

Prior to my going there, my friend 
Haakon Chevalier with his wife visited 
us on Eagle Hill, probably in early 
1943. During the visit, he came into 
the kitchen and told me that George 
Eltenton had spoken to him of the 
possibility of transmitting technical in- 
formation to Soviet scientists. I made 
some strong remark to the effect that 
this sounded terribly wrong to me. 
The discussion ended there. Nothing 
in our long-standing friendship would 
have led me to believe that Chevalier 
was actually seeking information; and 
I was certain that he had no idea of 
the work on which I was engaged. 


It has long been clear to me that I 
should have reported the incident at 
once. The events that led me to re- 
port it-which I doubt ever would 
have become known without my re- 
port—were unconnected with it. 

During the summer of 1943, Colonel 
Lansdale, the Intelligence Officer of 
the Manhattan District, came to Los 
Alamos and told me that he was 
worried about the security situation 
in Berkeley because of the activities 
of the Federation of Architects, En- 
gineers, Chemists, and Technicians. 
This recalled to my mind that Eltenton 
was a member and probably a pro- 
moter of the FAECT. 

Shortly thereafter, I was in Berkeley 
and I told the security officer that 
Eltenton would bear watching. When 
asked why, I said that Eltenton had 
auepted, through intermediaries, to 
approach people on the Project, 
though I mentioned neither myself nor 
Chevalier. Later, when General Groves 


urged me to give the details, I told 
him of my conversation with Cheva- 
lier. I still think of Chevalier as a 
friend. 

The story of Los Alamos is long 
and complex. Part of it is public 
history. For me it was a time so 
filled with work, with the need for 
decision and action and consultation, 
that there was room for little else. 

I lived with my family in the com- 
munity which was Los Alamos. It was 
a remarkable community, inspired by 
a high sense of mission, of duty and of 
destiny, coherent, dedicated, and re- 
markably selfless. 

There was plenty in the life of Los 
Alamos to cause irritation; the security 
restrictions, many of my own devising, 
the inadequacies and inevitable fum- 
blings of a military post unlike any 
that had ever pre before, short- 
ages, inequities, and in the eeserith 
itself the shifting emphasis on dit- 
ferent aspects of the technical work 
as the program moved forward; but 
I have never known a poup more 
understanding and more devoted to a 
common purpose, more willing to lay 
aside personal convenience and pres- 
tige, more understanding of the role 
that they were playing in their coun- 
try’s history. 

Time and again we had in the tech- 
nical work almost paralyzing crises. 
Time and again the laboratory drew 
itself together and faced the new prob- 
lems and got on with the work. We 
worked by night and by day; and in 
the end the many jobs were done. 

These years of hard and loyal work 
of the scientists culminated in the 
test on July 16, 1945. It was a success. 

I believe that in the eyes of the 
War Department, and other knowl- 
edgeable people, it was as early a 
success as they had thought possible, 
given all the circumstances, and 
rather a greater one. There were many 
indications from the Secretary of War 
and General Groves, and many others, 
that official opinion was one of satis- 
faction with what had been ac 
complished. 

At the time, it was hard for us at 
Los Alamos not to share that satis- 
faction, and hard for me not to accept 
the conclusion that I had managed the 
enterprise well and played a key part 
in its success. But it needs to be 
stated that many others contributed 
the decisive ideas and carried out the 
work which led to this success, and 
that my role was that of understand- 
ing, encouraging, suggesting, and de- 
ciding. It was the very opposite of 
a one-man show. 


Even before the July 16 test and 
the use of the bombs in Japan, the 
members of the laboratory began to 
have a new sense of the possible im- 
port of what was going on. 

In the early days, when success was 
less certain and timing unsure, and 
the war with Germany and Japan in 
a desperate phase, it was enough for 
us to think that we had a job to do. 
Now, with Germany defeated, the war 
in the Pacific approaching a crisis, and 
the success of our undertaking almost 
assured, there was a sense both of 
hope and of anxiety as to what this 
spectacular development might por- 
tend for the future. This came to us a 
little earlier than to the public general- 
ly because we saw the technical de- 
velopment at close range and in secret; 
but its quality was very much the 
same as the public response after 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 

Thus it was natural that in the 
spring of 1945 I welcomed the op- 
portunity when I was asked by Sec- 
retary Stimson to serve, along with 
Compton, Lawrence, and Fermi, on an 
advisory panel to his Interim Com- 
mittee on Atomic Energy. 

We met with that Committee on 
the Ist of June, 1945; and even during 
the week when Hiroshima and Naga- 
saki were being bombed, we met at 
Los Alamos to sketch out a prospectus 
of what the technical future in atomic 
energy might look like; atomic war- 
heads for guided missiles, improve- 
ments in bomb design, the thermo- 
nuclear program, power, propulsion, 
and the new tools available from 
atomic technology for research in 
science, medicine, and technology. 

This work absorbed much of my 
time during September and October; 
and in connection with it I was asked 
to consult with the War and State 
Departments on atomic energy legisla- 
tion, and in a preliminary way on the 
international control of atomic energy. 

I resigned as Director of Los Alamos 
on Oct. 16, 1945, after having se- 
cured the consent of Commander 
Bradbury and of General Groves that 
Bradbury should act as my successor. 

There were then on the books at 
the laboratory, embodied in memo- 
randa and reports and summarized by 
me in letters to General Groves, de- 
velopments in atomic weapons, which 
could well have occupied years for 
their fulfillment, and which have in 
fact provided some, though by no 
means all, of the themes for Los 
Alamos work since that time. It was 
not entirely clear whether the future 
of atomic weapons work in this coun- 


try should be continued at or confined 
to Los Alamos or started elsewhere at 
a more accessible and more practical 
site, or indeed what effect interna- 
tional agreements might have on the 
program. But in the meantime Los 
Alamos had to be kept going until 
there was created an authority com- 
petent to decide the question of its 
future. This was to take almost a year. 

In November 1945, I resumed my 
teaching at the California Institute of 
Technology, with an intention and a 
hope, never realized, that this should 
be a full-time undertaking. The con- 
sultation about postwar matters which 
had already begun continued, and I 
was asked over and over both by the 
Executive and the Congress for advice 
on atomic energy. 

I had a feeling of deep responsi- 
bility, interest, and concern for many 
of the problems with which the de- 
velopment of atomic energy confronted 
our country. 

This development was to be a major 
factor in the history of the evolving 
and mounting conflict between the 
free world and the Soviet Union. 
When I and other scientists were 
called on for advice, our principal 
duty was to make our technical ex- 
perience and judgment available. We 
were called to do this in a context 
and against a background of the 
official views of the government on 
the military and political situation of 
our country. Immediately after the 
war, I was deeply involved in the 
effort to devise effective means for the 
international control of atomic weap- 
ons, means which might, in the words 
of those days, tend toward the elimina- 
tion of war itself. 


As the prospects of success receded, 
and as evidence of Soviet hostility and 
growing military power accumulated, 
we had more and more to devote our- 
selves to finding ways of adapting our 
atomic potential to offset the Soviet 
threat. 

In the period marked by the first 
Soviet atomic explosion, the war in 
Korea and the Chinese Communist 
intervention there, we were principal- 
ly preoccupied, though we never for- 
got long-term problems, with im- 
mediate measures which could rapidly 
build up the strength of the United 
States under the threat of an imminent 
general war. 

As our own atomic potential in- 
creased and developed, we were aware 
of the dangers inherent in comparable 
developments by the enemy, and pre- 
ventive and defensive measures were 
very much on our minds. Throughout 
this time the role of atomic weapons 
was to be central. 

From the close of the war, when I 
returned to the West Coast until 
finally in the spring of 1947 when I 
went to Princeton as the Director of 
the Institute for Advanced Study, I 
was able to spend very little time at 
home and in teaching in California. 

In October 1945, at the request of 
Secretary of War Patterson, I had 
testified before the House Committee 
on Military Affairs in support of the 
May-Johnson bill, which I endorsed 
as an interim means of bringing about 
without delay the much needed tran- 
sition from the wartime administra- 
tion of the Manhattan District to post- 
war management of the atomic energy 
enterprise. 

In December 1945, and later, I 


The Oppenheimer Case 
“Lying and disloyalty are not matters of degree. They are not matters 
on which there can be differences of opinion. The evidence on which 
the allegations of lying and disloyalty are based can be proved or 


disproved. 


“The paramount question is whether the issues can be judged with 
finality by administrative tribunals and administrative agencies. . . . 

“The capacity of U.S. institutions to protect the innocent and to 
punish the guilty is also put to the test. Americans cannot afford to 
fail in that test, but they will have failed unless the judgment is con- 
clusive—a judgment that no reasonable and disinterested man can 


question. 


“To get a verdict of this kind it may not be enough to rely alone 
upon the new and little-tested procedure of administrative inquiry. It 
may also be necessary to subject the verdict to the judicial process.” 


Wa ter LirppMANN 
Chicago Sun-Times, April 16, 1954 


appeared at Senator McMahon's re- 
quest in sessions of his Special Com- 
mittee on Atomic Energy, which was 
considering legislation on the same 
subject. 

Under the chairmanship of Dr. 
Richard Tolman, I served on a com- 
mittee set up by General Groves to 
consider classification policy on mat- 
ters of atomic energy. For two months, 
early in 1946, I worked steadily as a 
member of a panel, the Board of Con- 
sultants to the Secretary of State’s 
Committee on Atomic Energy, which, 
with the Secretary of State’s Com- 
mittee, prepared the so-called Ache- 
son-Lilienthal report. After the pub- 
lication of this report, I spoke publicly 
in support of it. 

A little later, when Mr. Baruch was 
appointed to represent the United 
States in the United Nations Atomic 
Energy Committee, I became one of 
the scientific consultants to Mr. Baruch 
and his staff in preparation for and 
in the conduct of our efforts to gain 
support for the United States’ plan. 
I continued as consultant to General 
Osborn when he took over the effort. 

At the end of 1946 I was appointed 
by the President as a member of the 
General Advisory Committee to the 
Atomic Energy Commission. At its 
first meeting I was elected chairman, 
and was re-elected until the expiration 
of my term in 1952. This was my 
principal assignment during these 
years as far as the atomic energy pro- 
gram was concemed, and my principal 
preoccupation apart from academic 
work, 

A little later I was appointed to the 
Committee on Atomic Energy of the 
Research and Development Board, 
which was to advise the Military 
Establishment about the technical 
aspects of the atomic energy program; 
I served on it for seven years; and 
twice was designated chairman of 
special panels set up by the com- 
mittee. 

Meanwhile I had become widely re- 
garded as a principal author or in- 
ventor of the atomic bomb, more 
widely, I well knew, than the facts 
warranted. In a modest way I had be- 
come a kind of public personage. 

I was deluged, as I have been ever 
since, with requests to lecture and to 
take part in numerous scientific activi- 
ties and public affairs. Most of these I 
did not accept. Some, important for 
the promotion of science or learnin 
or of public policies that cueiodaded 
to my convictions, I did accept: the 
Council of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the Committee on the 


184 


Present Danger, the Board of Over- 
seers of Harvard College, and a good 
number of others. 

A quite different and I believe 
unique occurrence is cited as an item 
of derogatory information—that in 
1946 I was “listed as vice chairman on 
the letterhead of the Independent 
Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sci- 
ences, Professions, Inc. . . . cited as a 
Communist-front by the House Com- 
mittee on Un-American Activities.” 

The fact is that in 1946 when I was 
at work on the international control 
of atomic energy, I was notified that 
I had been nominated and then 
elected as vice-chairman of this or- 
ganization. 

When I began to see that its litera- 
ture included slogans such as “With- 
draw United States troops from 
China,” and that it was endorsing the 
criticism enunciated by the then Sec- 
retary Wallace of United States policy 
on atomic energy, I advised the 
organization in a letter on October 
11, 1946, that I was not in accord 
with its policy, that I regarded the 
recommendations of Mr. Wallace as 
not likely to advance the cause of find- 
ing a satisfactory solution for the con- 
trol of atomic energy, and that I 
wished to resign. When an effort was 
made to dissuade me from this course 
I again wrote on December 2, 1946, 
insisting upon resignation. 

Later in the postwar period an inci- 
dent occurred which seems to be the 
basis of one of the items of derogatory 
information. In May 1950, Paul 
Crouch, a former Communist official, 
and Mrs. Crouch testified before the 
California State Committee on Un- 
American Activities that in July 1941, 
they had attended a Communist party 
meeting at a house in Berkeley, of 
which I was then the tenant. 

On the basis of pictures and movies 
of me which they saw some eight 
years later, they said they recognized 
me as having been present. When the 
F.B.I. first talked to me about this 
alleged incident, I was quite certain 
that no such meeting as Crouch de- 
scribed had occurred. So was my wife, 
when I discussed it with her. Later, 
when I saw the testimony, I became 
even more certain. 

Crouch had described the gathering 
as a closed meeting of the Communist 
party. I was never a member of the 
party. Crouch said that no introduc- 
tions had been made. I could not re- 
call ever having had a group of peo- 
ple at my home that had not been 
introduced. In May of 1952, I again 
discussed this alleged meeting with 


the United States attorney in the 
Weinberg case.1 

I again said that I could not have 
been present at a closed meeting 
of the Communist party because I 
was not a member of the party; that 
I had searched my memory and that 
the only thing that conceivably could 
be relevant was the vaguest of impres- 
sions that someone on the campus 
might at some time have asked Pe 
mission to use our home for a gather- 
ing of young people; that, however, I 
could recall no such gathering, nor 
any meeting even remotely resembling 
the one described by Crouch; that I 
thought it probable that at the time 
of the meeting, which by then had 
been fixed by Crouch as approximate- 
ly July 23, my wife and I were away 
from Berkeley. 

Shortly thereafter, with the aid of 
counsel, we were able to establish that 
my wife and I left Berkeley within a 
few days after July 4, 1941, and did 
not return until toward the end of 
the first week in August. 

I need to turn now to an account 
of some of the measures which, as 
chairman of the General Advisory 
Committee, and in other capacities, I 
advocated in the years since the war 
to increase the power of the United 
States and its allies to resist and defeat 
aggression. 

The initial members of the General 
Advisory Committee were Conant, 
then president of Harvard; DuBridge, 
president of the California Institute of 
Technology; Fermi of the University 
of Chicago; Rabi of Columbia Uni- 
versity; Rowe, vice-president of the 
United Fruit Company; Seaborg of 
the University of California; Cyril 
Smith of the University of Chicago, 
and Worthington of the du Pont Com- 
pany. In 1948, Buckley, president of 
the Bell Telephone Laboratories re- 
placed Worthington; in the summer of 
1950, Fermi, Rowe, and Seaborg were 
replaced by Libby of the University 
of Chicago; Murphree, president of 
Standard Oil Development Company, 
and Whitman of the Massachusetts In- 
stitute of Technology. Later Smith re- 
signed, and was succeeded by von 
Neumann of the Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study. 

In these years from early 1947 to 
mid-1952 the Committee met some 
thirty times and transmitted perhaps 
as many reports to the Commission. 

Formulation of policy and the man- 

1 An indictment against Joseph Wein- 
berg for perjury for having among other 
things denied membership in the Com- 
munist party. 


agement of the vast atomic energy 
enterprise were responsibilities vested 
in the Commission itself. 

The General Advisory Committee 
had the role, which was fixed for it 
by statute, to advise the Commission. 

In that capacity we gave the Com- 
mission our views on questions which 
the Commission put before us, 
brought to the Commission’s attention 
on our initiative technical matters of 
importance, and encouraged and sup- 
ported the work of the several major 
installations of the Commission. 

At one of our first meetings in 1947 
we settled down to the job of forming 
our own views of the priorities. And 
while we agreed that the development 
of atomic power and the support and 
maintenance of a strong basic scien- 
tific activity in the fields relevant to it 
were important, we assigned top 
priority to the problem of atomic 
weapons. 

At that time we advised the Com- 
mission, that one of its first jobs 
should be to convert Los Alamos into 
an active center for the development 
and improvement of atomic weapons. 

In 1945-46 during the period im- 
mediately following the war, the pur- 
poses of Los Alamos were multiple. It 
was the only laboratory in the United 
States that worked on atomic weap- 
ons. Los Alamos also had wide in- 
terests in scientific matters only in- 
directly related to the weapons pro- 
gram. 

We suggested that the Commission 
recognize as the laboratory’s central 
and primary program the improvement 
and diversification of atomic weapons, 
and that this undertaking have a 
pee second to none. We suggested 

er that the Commission adopt 
administrative measures to make work 
at Los Alamos attractive to assist the 
laboratory in recruiting, to help build 
up a strong theoretical division for 
guidance in atomic weapons design, 
and to take advantage of the avail- 
ability of the talented and brilliant 
consultants who had been members of 
the laboratory during the war. 

In close consultation with the Direc- 
tor of the Los Alamos Laboratory, we 
encouraged and supported courses 
of development which would marked- 
ly increase the value of our stockpile 
in terms of the destructive power of 
our weapons, which would make the 
best use of existing stockpiles and 
those anticipated, which would pro- 
vide weapons suitable for modem 
combat conditions and for varied 
forms of delivery and which in their 
cumulative effect would provide us 


with the great arsenal we now have. 

We encouraged and supported the 
building up of the laboratory at San- 
dia whose principal purpose is the in- 
tegration of the atomic warhead with 
the weapons system in which it is to 
be used. 

In agreement with the Los Alamos 
staff we took from the very first the 
view that no radical improvement in 
weapons development would be feasi- 
ble without a program of weapons 
testing. We strongly supported such 
a program, helped Los Alamos to 
obtain authorization for conducting 
the tests it wished, and encouraged 
the establishment of a permanent 
weapons testing station and the adop- 
tion of a continental test station to 
facilitate this work. 

As time went on and the develop- 
ment of atomic weapons progressed, 
we stressed the importance of inte- 
grating our atomic warheads and the 

evelopment of the carriers, aircraft, 
missiles, etc., which could make them 
of maximum effectiveness. 

We observed that there were op- 
portunities which needed to be ex- 
plored for significantly increasing our 
arsenal of weapons both in numbers 
and in capabilities by means of pro- 
duction plant expansion and by ambi- 
tious programs to enlarge the sources 
of raw material. 

It was not our function to formulate 
military requirements. We did regard 
it as our function to indicate that 
neither the magnitude of existing 
plant nor the mode of operation of 
existing plant which the Commission 
inherited, nor the limitation of raw 
materials to relatively well-known and 
high-grade sources of ore, need limit 
the atomic weapons program. 


The four major expansion programs 
which were authorized during the 
six years 1946 to 1952 reflected the 
decision of the Commission, the Mili- 
tary Establishment, the Joint Congres- 
sional Committee and other agencies 
of the government to go far beyond 
the production program that was in- 
herited in 1946. And the powerful 
arsenal of atomic weapons and the 
variety of their forms adaptable to a 
diversity of military uses which is 
today a major source of our military 
strength in turn reflect the results of 
these decisions. 

The record of minutes, reports, and 
other activities of the General Ad- 
visory Committee will show that that 
body within the limits of its role as 
an advisory group played a significant, 
consistent, and unanimous part in 
encouraging and supporting and some- 
times initiating the measures which 
are responsible for these results. 

As a committee and individually, 
our advice was sought on other matters 
as well. As early as October 1945, I 
had testified before a Senate com- 
mittee on the Kilgore-Magnuson Bill 
—the initial measure for a National 
Science Foundation; like most scien- 
tists I was concerned that steps be 
taken for recreating in the United 
States a healthy scientific community 
after the disruption of the war years. 

In the General Advisory Committee 
we encouraged the Commission to do 
everything that it properly could to 
support atomic science, both in its 
own laboratories and in the university 
centers to which we felt we must 
look for the training of scientists for 
advances of a basic character. 

Throughout the postwar sage my 
colleagues and I stressed the impor- 


“, .. To bring up the question of Dr. Oppenheimer’s loyalty now, 
when his principal work has been completed and when he carries in 
his head almost everything there is to know about nuclear and thermo- 
nuclear reactions may seem to some to embody the worst features of 
a brand of ‘witch hunting’ which his political enemies invariably iden- 


tify with Senator McCarthy. 


“But the unquestionable fact is that it is not Senator McCarthy who 
has acted against Dr. Oppenheimer, but Mr. Eisenhower and his 


AEC.... 


“The suggestion under such circumstances would be that the AEC, 
acting for Eisenhower, with a view to depriving Mr. McCarthy of a 
talking point, has hastily drafted a bill of particulars which largely 
consists of ancient history, and has done so for cheap political advan- 
tages, indifferent to the reputation of a distinguished scientist.” 


Chicago Daily Tribune 
Editorial, April 15, 1954 


185 


tance of continuing support and Fae 
motion of basic science so that there 
might be a healthy balance between 
the effort invested in military research 
and applied science, and that invested 
in pure scientific training and research 
which is indispensable to all else. We 
supported the Commission’s decision 
to make available for distribution in 
appropriate form and with appropriate 
safeguards the tracer materials, iso- 


topes, and radioactive substances 
which have played so constructive a 
part in medicine, in biological re- 


search, in technology, in pure science, 
and in agriculture. 

We took an affirmative view of the 
development of reactors for sub- 
marines and naval propulsion not only 
for their direct military value but also 
because this seemed a favorable and 
forward-looking step in the important 
program of reactor development. 

We were, for the most part, skepti- 
cal about the initially very ambitious 
plans for the propulsion of aircraft, 
though we advocated the studies 
which in time brought this program to 
a more feasible course. We frequently 
pointed out to the Commission the 
technical benefits which would accrue 
to the United States by closer col- 
laboration with the atomic energy 
enterprise in Canada and the United 
Kingdom. 

During all the years that I served 
on the General Advisory Committee, 
however, its major preoccupation was 
with the production and perfection 
of atomic weapons. On the various 
recommendations which I have de- 
scribed, there were never, so far as 
I can remember, any significant di- 
vergences of opinion among the mem- 
bers of the Committee. These recom- 
mendations, of course, constitute a 
very small sample of the Committee’s 
work, but a typical one, 

In view of the controversies that 
have developed I have left the subject 
of the “Super” and thermonuclear 
weapons for separate discussion— 
although our Committee regarded this 
as a phase of the entire problem of 
weapons. 

The Super itself had a long history 
of consideration, beginning, as I have 
said, with our initial studies in 1942, 
before Los Alamos was established. It 
continued to be the subject of study 
and research at Los Alamos through- 
out the war. 

After the war, Los Alamos itself 
was inevitably handicapped pending 
the enactment of necessary legislation 
for the atomic energy enterprise. With 
the McMahon Act, the appointment 


186 


of the Atomic Energy Commission 
and the General Advisory Committee, 
we in the Committee had occasion at 
our early meetings in 1947 as well as 
in 1948 to discuss the subject. 

In that period the General Advisory 
Committee pointed out the still ex- 
tremely unclear status of the problem 
from a technical standpoint, and urged 
encouragement of Los Alamos’ efforts 
which were then directed toward 
modest exploration of the Super and 
of thermonuclear systems. No serious 
controversy arose about the Super 
until the Soviet explosion of an atomic 
bomb in the autumn of 1949. 

Shortly after that event in October 
1949, the Atomic Energy Commission 
called a special session of the General 
Advisory Committee and asked us to 
consider and advise on two related 
questions: 

First, whether in view of the Soviet 
success the Commission’s program was 
adequate, and if not, in what way it 
should be altered or increased; second, 
whether a “crash” program for the de- 
velopment of the Super should be a 
part of any new program. 

The Committee considered both 
questions, consulted various officials 
from the civil and military branches of 
the Executive Departments who 
would have been concerned, and 
reached conclusions which were com- 
municated in a report to the Atomic 
Energy Commission in October 1949. 

This report, in response to the first 
question that had been put to us, rec- 
ommended a great number of meas- 
ures that the Commission should take 
to increase in many ways our over-all 
potential in weapons. 

As to the Super itself, the General 
Advisory Committee stated its unani- 
mous opposition to the initiation by 
the United States of a crash program 
of the kind we had been asked to ad- 
vise on. The report of that meeting, 
and the Secretary’s notes, reflect the 
reasons which moved us to this con- 
clusion. 

The annexes, in particular, which 
dealt more with political and policy 
considerations—the report proper was 
essentially technical in character—indi- 
cated differences in the views of mem- 
bers of the Committee. There were 
two annexes, one signed by Rabi and 
Fermi, the other by Conant, Du- 
Bridge, Smith, Rowe, Buckley, and 
myself, (The ninth member of the 
Committee, Seaborg, was abroad at 
the time.) 

It would have been surprising if 
eight men considering a problem of 
extreme difficulty had precisely the 


same reasons for conclusion in which 
we joined. But I think I am correct in 
asserting that the unanimous opposi- 
tion we expressed to the crash pro- 
gram was based on the conviction, to 
which technical considerations as well 
as others contributed, that because of 
our over-all situation at that time such 
a program might weaken rather than 
strengthen the position of the United 
States, 

After the report was submitted to 
the Commission, it fell to me as chair- 
man of the Committee to explain our 
position on several occasions, once at 
a meeting of the Joint Congressional 
Committee on Atomic Energy. All 
this, however, took place prior to the 
decision by the President to proceed 
with the thermonuclear program. 

This is the full story of my “opposi- 
tion to the hydrogen bomb.” 

It can be read in the records of the 
General Advisory Committee and the 
transcript of my testimony before the 
Joint Congressional Committee. It is 
a story which ended once and for all 
when in January 1950, the President 
announced his decision to proceed 
with the program. 

I never urged anyone not to work 
on the hydrogen bomb project, I never 
made or caused any distribution of the 
GAC reports except to the Commis- 
sion itself. As always, it was the Com- 
mission’s responsibility to determine 
further distribution. 

In summary, in October 1949, I and 
the other members of the General Ad- 
visory Committee were asked ques- 
tions by the Commission to which we 
had a duty to respond, and to which 
we did respond with our best judg- 
ment in the light of evidence then 
available to us. 

When the President’s decision was 
announced in January 1950, our Com- 
mittee was again in session and we 
immediately turned to the technical 
problems facing the Commission in 
carrying out the President's directive. 

We sought to give our advice then 
and in ensuing meetings as to the 
most promising means of solving these 
problems. We never again raised the 
question of the wisdom of the policy 
which had now been settled, but con- 
cerned ourselves rather with trying to 
help implement it. 

During this period our recommenda- 
tions for increasing production facili- 
ties included one for a dual purpose 
plant which could be adapted to make 
materials either for fission bombs or 
materials useful in a thermonuclear 
program. In its performance charac- 
teristics, the Savannah River Project, 


subsequently adopted by the Commis- 
sion, was overshadowed by this rec 
ommendation. 

While the history of the GAC o 
position to a crash program for the 
Super ended with the announcement 
of the President’s decision, the need 
for evaluation and advice continued. 
There were immense technical com- 
plications both before and after the 
President’s decision. It was of course 
a primary duty of the Committee, as 
well as other review committees on 
which I served, to report new devel- 
opments which we judged promising, 
and to report when a given weapon or 
family of weapons appeared impracti- 
cal, unfeasible, or impossible. 

It would have been my duty so to 
report had I been alone in my views. 
As a matter of fact, our views on such 
matters were almost always unani- 
mous. It was furthermore a proper 
function for me to speak my best 
judgment in discussion with those re- 
sponsibly engaged in the undertaking. 

Throughout the whole development 
of thermonuclear weapons, many oc- 
casions occurred where it was neces- 
noid for us to form and to express 
judgments of feasibility. This was true 
before the President’s decision, and it 
was true after the President’s decision. 

In our report of October 1949, we 
express the view, as your letter states, 
that “an imaginative and concerted at- 
tack on the problem has a better than 
even chance of producing the weapon 
within five years.” Later calculations 
and measurements made at Los Alamos 
led us to a far more pessimistic view. 
Still later brilliant inventions led to the 
possibility of lines of development of 
very great promise. 

At each stage the General Advisory 
Committee, and I as its Chairman and 
as a member of other bodies, reported 
as faithfully as we could our evalua- 
tion of what was likely to fail and 
what was likely to work. 

In the spring of 1951 work had 
reached a stage at which far-reaching 
decisions were called for with regard 
to the Commission’s whole thermonu- 
clear program. In consultation with the 
Commission, I called a meeting in 
Princeton in the late spring of that 
year, which was attended by all mem- 
bers of the Commission and several 
members of its staff, by members of 
the General Advisory Committee, by 
Dr. Bradbury and staff of the Los 
Alamos Laboratory, by Bethe, Teller, 
Bacher, Fermi, von Neumann, 
Wheeler, and others responsibly con- 
nected with the program. The out- 
come of the meeting, which lasted for 


(Continued on page 191) 


AEC Statement 


Following is the full text of the state- 
ment issued by the Atomic Energy 
Commission on April 13: 

The Atomic Energy Commission has 
made no previous statement in connec- 
tion with the personnel security pro- 
ceedings concerning Dr. J. Robert 
Oppenheimer. This is in accordance 
with established practice of the Com- 
mission to protect the privacy of indi- 
viduals appearing before its personnel 
security boards. Departure from this 
practice in this instance is only due to 
the fact that Dr. Oppenheimer has 
exercised his privilege of making pub- 
lic an account of the matter. 

Dr. Oppenheimer’s connection with 
the atomic energy enterprise ante- 
dated the assignment of responsibili- 
ties to the Corps of Engineers, U.S. 
Army, in 1942. He later became Direc- 
tor of the laboratory at Los Alamos 
under the Manhattan Engineer Dis- 
trict. When the Commission was estab- 
lished, he was appointed to the statu- 
tory General Advisory Committee to 
the Commission and was named as its 
chairman by the members of that 
Committee in 1947. 

He served in that capacity until 
June 1952. On his retirement, the 
Commission engaged him as a consul- 
tant for one year. The contract would 
have terminated on June 30, 1953. Its 
renewal for one year was initiated on 
June 5, 1953. 

On July 3, 1953, Lewis Strauss be- 
came Chairman of the Commission. He 
and the other Commissioners were 
aware of the fact that under the secu- 
rity standards of the Commission and 
under Executive Order 10450 which 
had been issued by the President on 
April 27, 1958, a security review was 
required for all employees and con- 
sultants concerning whom there was 
substantial derogatory information. 
Because there was such material in the 
file of Dr. Oppenheimer, it was sub- 
ject to review. 

At the request of the Chairman, the 
Commission, on July 7, 1953, initiated 
steps to organize the removal of classi- 
fied documents belonging to the Com- 
mission and which were in Dr. Oppen- 
heimer’s custody at the Institute for 
Advanced Studies at Princeton in a 
facility approved by the Commission 
to a facility to be established on prem- 
ises to be owned by the Commission. 

Subsequently, Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
file underwent preliminary study by 
the Commission and the Department 
of Justice. By November 1953, the 
file had been brought up for definitive 
examination and appraisal. Because of 


material therein which had been 
brought to the attention of the Presi- 
dent by the Department of Justice, the 
President in consultation with the 
Chairman of the Commission, the 
Secretary of Defense and the Director 
of the Office of Defense Mobilization 
directed that pending a security review 
of the material in the file, a blank wall 
be placed between Dr. Oppenheimer 
and any secret data and that, without 
prejudging the outcome, established 
procedures should be followed. 

Since Dr. Oppenheimer had there- 
after to be denied further access to 
classified material, the Commission un- 
dertook to suspend his “Q” clearance. 
The suspension of clearance involved 
arrangements to stop the transmittal to 
him of classified documents which he 
had been receiving from various parts 
of the organization. As a further re- 
sult, suspension of clearance automati- 
cally voided Dr. Oppenheimer’s avail- 
ability for membership on the Science 
Advisory Committee under the Office 
of Defense Mobilization. 

Under the regulations established 
by the Commission as published in 
the Federal Register of Sept. 19, 1950, 
Dr. Oppenheimer was entitled to a 
hearing before a personnel security 
board. Further in accordance with the 
Commission’s procedure, on Dec. 23, 
1953, the General Manager of the 
Commission wrote a letter to Dr. 
Oppenheimer suspending his clear- 
ance, listing the items of derogatory 
information, and explaining Dr. Op- 
penheimer’s right to a hearing. 

On March 4, 1954, Dr. Oppen- 
heimer replied requesting a hearing. 
The hearing procedures had been 
worked out in 1950 and previous years 
to combine maximum security to the 
United States and maximum fairness 
to the persons under review. 

A board was accordingly established 
for the purpose of hearing the case 
and advising the Commission as to 
whether or not suspension of clearance 
of Dr. Oppenheimer should be made 
permanent. This board is now sitting 
under the chairmanship of Gordon 
Gray, formerly Secretary of the Army 
and presently president of the Univer- 
sity of North Carolina. The other 
members of the board are Mr. Thomas 
A. Morgan, former president of the 
Sperry Corporation, and Dr. Ward V. 
Evans, professor of chemistry, Loyola 
University, Chicago. 

The Commission, because of its ulti- 
mate responsibility for decision in this 
matter, believes that propriety requires 
that it make no further statement. 


187 


Oppenheimer Replies 
(Continued from page 187) 


two or three days, was an agreed pro- 
gram and a fixing of priorities and 
effort both for Los Alamos and for 
other aspects of the Commission’s 
work. This program has been an out- 
standing success. 

In addition to my continuing work 
on the General Advisory Committee, 
there were other assignments that I 
was asked to undertake. 

Late in 1950 or early in 1951, the 
President appointed me to the Science 
Advisory Committee to advise the Of- 
fice of Defense Mobilization and the 
President; in 1952 the Secretary of 
State appointed me to a panel to ad- 
vise on armaments and their regula- 
tion; and I served as consultant on 
continental defense, civil defense, and 
the use of atomic weapons in support 
of ground combat. 

Many of these duties led to reports 
in the drafting of which I participated, 
or for which I took responsibility. 
These supplement the record of the 
General Advisory Committee as an ac- 
count of the counsel that I have given 
our government during the last eight 
years. 

In this letter, I have written only of 
those limited parts of my _ history 
which appear relevant to the issue now 
before the Atomic Energy Commission. 
In order to preserve as much as possi- 
ble the perspective of the story, I have 
dealt very briefly with many matters. 
I have had to deal briefly or not at 
all with instances in which my actions 
or views were adverse to Soviet or 
Communist interest, and of actions 
that testify to my devotion to freedom, 
or that have contributed to the vitality, 
influence, and power of the United 
States. 

In preparing this letter, I have re- 
viewed two decades of my life. I have 
recalled instances where I acted un- 
wisely. What I have hoped was, not 
that I could wholly avoid error, but 
that I might learn from it. What I 
have learned has, I think, made me 
more fit to serve my country. 


Very truly yours, 
J. Ropert OPPENHEIMER 


Princeton, N. J. 
March 4, 1954. 


The Suspension of Dr. Oppenheimer 


Executive Committee of the Federation of American Scientists 


“The suspension of J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer has relegated to official ostra- 
cism a distinguished scientist and citi- 
zen, long a confidential and respected 
adviser in our innermost councils of 
government. The charge that his con- 
tinued public service threatens the 
security of the United States has 
shocked the nation and the scientific 
community in particular. The bases for 
the charge are activities and associa- 
tions of more than 10 years ago, long 
known and several times evaluated 
under the most responsible auspices, 
and his officially expressed opinions 
and recommendations in the autumn 
of 1949 and subsequently on policy 
questions relating to thermonuclear 
weapons. ... 

“The issues raised in this unfortunate 
affair are grave and an early solution 
of the entire matter is essential. The ef- 


forts to achieve security by secrecy and 
restriction are placing a heavy burden 
on reason and on justice to the individ- 
ual. They now have placed in the dock 
one whose achievements have contrib- 
uted as much as any to our scientific 
eminence and our military strength. It 
is past time that our entire program 
for security and loyalty investigations, 
including the circumstances which led 
to them and the pressures which are 
driving them beyond bounds, should 
be reviewed dispassionately and ob- 
jectively. In this, we are confident that 
all responsible scientists stand ready 
to assist. As citizens, we accept our full 
reponsibility for maintaining the 
strength and democratic ideals of our 
country. As scientists we recognize an 
additional responsibility due to our 
special knowledge and training in one 
of the areas most affected by security.” 


University of Illinois Physicists 


fhe undersigned, many of whom have been closely associated with Dr. J. 
Robert Oppenheimer and all of whom are very familiar with his work, wish 
to reassure the public that there can be no reasonable doubt of his loyalty. 

The charges brought by the Atomic Energy Commission against Dr. Oppen- 
heimer fall roughly into two categories. 

The first group deals with his activities and associations before 1943. The 
relevant facts have long been known to the government and were never con- 
cealed by Dr. Oppenheimer. Fortunately, in 1943, these charges were not 
deemed sufficiently serious to prevent him from leading the United States to 
atomic supremacy. Dr. Oppenheimer’s obvious discretion during the subsequent 
10 years attests to his reliability, independent of his outstanding achievements. 
When, in addition, his many positive contributions are taken into account, we 
feel that these old charges can safely be disregarded. 

The second category consists of charges growing out of Dr. Oppenheimer’s 
position, in 1949, with respect to the hydrogen bomb. One of these charges, in 
particular, imputes disloyalty to Dr. Oppenheimer simply on the ground that he 
opposed the immediate expansion of the hydrogen bomb project. This type of 
charge has most serious implications for our government's scientific program. 

It is dangerous to question the loyalty of a man because his advice on an ex- 
ceedingly complicated problem is unpopular and perhaps even mistaken. This 
practice, if continued, will make advisory positions so precarious that they will 
become unacceptable to men of ability and integrity. Equally important, the 
penalty that goes with advocating views that could become unpopular will pre- 
vent honest expression of opinion by men who do accept such positions. 


Ditton E. MAPoTHER 
GrorcE NEWELL 
ARNOLD NorpsIECK 
Davin PINEs 

R. D. RAWCLIFFE 
Crank S. RoBINsoN 
Jack Ruina 


A. O. HANSON 
IsmmorE Hopes 
Donap F, Hotcoms 
L. J. Korsten Jr. 
Leo LAVATELLI 
Daviw Lazarus 
Francis Low 


E_mu ABRAHAMS 
G. M. ALMY 

PretTer AXEL 

J. H. BartLetr 
FRANK BLATT 
THomas CARVER 
GEoFFREY F. CHEw 


PETER GIBBS F. W. Loomis FREDERICK SEITZ 
Epwin L. GotpwassER STEFAN MACHLUP James H. SmirH 
April 16, 1954 


191 


