Routledge 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Prospects in the Arts and Sciences 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1955) Prospects in the Arts and Sciences, Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists, 11:2, 42-44, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1955.11453555 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1955.11453555 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
XJ 
(s Submit your article to this journal @ 
all Article views: 2 
N 
iQ] View related articles 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


Prospects in the Arts 


and Sciences 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


and sciences” mean two quite 

different things to me. One is 
prophecy: what will the scientist dis- 
cover and the painters paint, what new 
forms will alter music, what parts of 
experience will newly yield to objec- 
tive description? The other meaning 
is that of a view: what do we see 
when we look at the world today and 
compare it with the past? 

I am not a prophet and I cannot 
very well speak to the first subject, 
though in many ways I should like 
to. I shall try to speak to the second, 
because there are some features of 
this view which seem to me so re- 
markable, so new and so arresting, 
that it may be worth turning our eyes 
to them; it may even help us to create 
and shape the future better, though 
we cannot foretell it. 

In the arts and in the sciences it 
would be good to be a prophet. It 
would be a delight to know the fu- 
ture. I had thought for a while of my 
own field of pbiyeics and of those 
nearest to it in the natural sciences. 
It would not be too hard to outline 
the questions that natural scientists 
today are asking themselves and try- 
ing to answer. What, we ask in phys- 
ics, is matter, what is it made of, how 
does it behave when it is more and 
more violently atomized, when we try 
to pound out of the stuff around us 
the ingredients which only violence 
creates and makes manifest? What, 
the chemists ask, are those special 
features of nucleic acids and proteins 
which make life possible and give it 
its characteristic endurance and mut- 
ability? What subtle chemistry, what 
arrangements, what reactions and con- 
trols make the cells of living organisms 
differentiate so that they may perform 
functions as oddly diverse as trans- 
mitting information throughout our 


[es words “prospects in the arts 


This address was given at the close of 
the ea Columbia University Bicen- 
tennial Celebration, December 26, 1954. 


42 


nervous systems or covering our heads 
with hair? What happens in the brain 
to make a record of the past, to hide 
it from consciousness, to make it ac- 
cessible to recall? What are the physi- 
cal features which make consciousness 


possible? 


A Pattern for Predicting 


All history teaches us that these 
questions that we think the pressing 
ones will be transmuted before they 
are answered, that they will be re- 
placed by others, and that the very 
process of discovery will shatter the 
concepts that we today use to describe 
our puzzlement. 

It is true that there are some who 
profess to see in matters of culture, 
in matters precisely of the arts and 
sciences, a certain macro-historical 
pattern, a grand system of laws which 
determines the course of civilization 
and gives a kind of inevitable quality 
to the unfolding of the future. 

They would, for instance, see the 
radical, formal experimentation which 
characterized the music of the last 
half-century as an inevitable conse- 
quence of the immense flowering and 
enrichment of natural science; they 
would see a necessary order in the 
fact that innovation in music precedes 
that in painting and that in tum in 
poetry, and point to this sequence in 
older cultures. 

They would attribute the formal 
experimentation of the arts to the 
dissolution, in an industrial and tech- 
nical society, of authority—of secular, 
political authority, and of the Catholic 
authority of the Church. Thus they 
are armed to predict the future, but 
this, I fear, is not my dish. 

If a prospect is not a prophecy, it 
is a view. What does the world of the 
arts and sciences look like? There are 
two ways of looking at it. One is the 
view of the traveler, going by horse 
or foot, from village to village to town, 
staying in each to talk with those who 


ope’, 
VY o 


live there and to gather something of 
the quality of its life. This is the inti- 
mate view—partial, somewhat acci- 
dental, limited by the limited life and 
strength and curiosity of the traveler, 
but intimate and human, in a human 
compass. The other is the vast view, 
showing the earth with its fields and 
towns and valleys as they appear to a 
camera carried in a high altitude rock- 
et. In one sense this prospect will be 
more complete; one will see all 
branches of knowledge, one will see 
all the arts, one will see them as part 
of the vastness and complication of 
the whole of human life on earth. But 
one will miss a great deal; the beauty 
and warmth of human life will largely 
be gone from that prospect. 

It is in this vast high altitude survey 
that one sees the general surprisin 
quantitative features that distinguis 
our time. This is where the listings 
of science and endowments and lab- 
oratories and books published show 
up; this is where we learn that more 
people are engaged in scientific re- 
search today than ever before, that 
the Soviet World and the Free World 
are running neck and neck in the 
training of scientists, that more books 
are being published per capita in Eng- 
land than in the United States, that 
the social sciences are pursued active- 
ly in America, Scandinavia, and Eng- 
land, that there are more people who 
hear the great music of the past, and 
more music is composed and more 
paintings are painted. 


From Vastness to Intimacy 


This is where we learn that the arts 
and sciences are flourishing. This great 
map, showing the world from afar and 
almost as to a stranger, would show 
more: it would show the immense 
diversity of culture and life, diversity 
in place and tradition for the first 
time clearly manifest on a really 
world-wide scale, diversity in tech- 
nique and language, separating sci- 


ence from science and art from art, 
and all of one from all of the other. 

This great map—world-wide, cul- 
ture-wide, remote—has some odd fea- 
tures. There are innumerable villages. 
Between the villages there appear to 
be almost no sath discernible from 
this high altitude. Here and there, 
passing near a village, sometimes 
through its heart, there will be a sort 
of superhighway, along which windy 
traffic moves at enormous speed. 

The superhighways seem to have 
little connection with the villages— 
starting anywhere, ending anywhere 
and sometimes appearing almost b 
design to disrupt the quiet of the vile 
lage. This view gives us no sense of 
order or of unity. To find these we 
must visit the villages—the quiet, busy 
places, the laboratories and studies, 
and studios. We must see the paths 
that are barely discernible; we must 
understand the superhighways and 
their dangers. 

In the natural sciences these are, 
and have been, and are likely to con- 
tinue to be, heroic days. Discovery 
follows discovery, each both raising 
and answering questions, each ending 
a long search, and each providing the 
new instruments for a new search. 

There are radical ways of thinking 
unfamiliar to common sense and con- 
nected with it by decades or centuries 
of increasingly specialized and un- 
familiar experience. There are lessons 
of how limited, for all its variety, the 
common experience of man has been 
with regard to natural phenomena, 
and hints and analogies as to how 
limited may be his experience with 
man. 

Every new finding is a part of the 
instrument kit of the sciences for fur- 
ther investigation and for penetrating 
into new fields. Discoveries of new 
knowledge fructify technology and 
the practical arts, and these in tum 
pay back refined techniques, new pos- 
sibilities of observation and experi- 
ment. 


Communities of Scientists 

In any science there is a harmony 
between practitioners. A man may 
work as an individual, learning of 
what his colleagues do through read- 
ing or conversation; or he may be 
working as a member of a group on 
problems whose technical equipment 
is too massive for individual effort. 
But whether he is part of a team or 
solitary in his own study, he, as a 
professional, is a member of a com- 
munity. 

His colleagues in his own branch 
of science will be grateful to him for 


the inventive or creative thoughts he 
has, will welcome his criticism. His 
world and work will be objectively 
communicable and he will be quite 
sure that, if there is error in it, that 
error will not long be undetected. In 
his own line of work he lives in a com- 
munity where common understanding 
combines with common purpose and 
interest to bind men together both 
in freedom and in cooperation. 

This experience will make him 
acutely aware of how limited, how 
inadequate, how precious is this con- 
dition of his life; for in his relations 
with a wider society there will be 
neither the sense of community nor 
of objective understanding. He will 
sometimes find, it is true, in returning 
to practical undertakings, some sense 
of community with men who are not 
expert in his science, with other sci- 
entists whose work is remote from 
his, and with men of action and men 
of art. 

The frontiers of science are sepa- 
rated now by long years of study, by 
specialized vocabularies, arts, tech- 
niques, and knowledge from the com- 
mon heritage even of a most civilized 


society, and anyone working at the 
frontier of such science is in that sense 
a very long way from the practical 


arts that were its matrix an ye 
as indeed they were of what we today 
call art. 


Role in the Universities 

The specialization of science is an 
inevitable accompaniment of prog- 
ress; yet it is full of dangers, and it 
is cruelly wasteful, since so much that 
is beautiful and enlightening is cut 
off from most of the world. Thus it is 
proper to the role of the scientist that 
he not merely find new truth and 
communicate it to his fellows, but 
that he teach, that he try to bring the 
most honest and intelligible account 
of new knowledge to all who will try 
to learn. 


This is one reason—it is the decisive 
organic reason—why scientists belong 
in universities. It is one reason why 
the patronage of science by and 
through universities is its most proper 
form; for it is here, in teaching, in the 
association of scholars, and in the 
friendships of teachers and taught, of 
men who by profession must them- 
selves be both teachers and taught, 
that the narrowness of scientific life 
can best be moderated and that the 
analogies, insights, and harmonies of 
scientific discovery can find their way 
into the wider life of man. 

In the situation of the artist today 
there are both analogies and differ- 
ences from that of the scientist; but it 
is the differences which are the most 
striking and which raise the problems 
that touch most on the evil of our 
day. 

For the artist it is not enough that 
he communicate with others who are 
expert in his own art. Their fellow- 
ship, their understanding, and their 
appreciation may encourage him; but 
that is not the end of his work, nor 
its nature. The artist depends on a 
common sensibility and culture, on a 
common meaning of symbols, on a 
community of experience and common 
ways of describing and interpreting it. 
He need not write for everyone or 
paint or play for everyone. But his 
audience must be man; it must be 
man, and not a specialized set of ex- 
perts among his fellows. 

Today that is very difficult. Often 
the artist has an aching sense of great 
loneliness, for the community to which 
he addresses himself is largely not 
there; the traditions and the culture, 
the symbols and the history, the myths 
and the common experience, which it 
is his function to illuminate and to 
harmonize and to portray, have been 
dissolved in a changing world. 

There is, it is true, an artificial au- 
dience maintained to moderate be- 
tween the artist and the world for 


“When will it come about that the learned ones of the world 
will turn the wonderful discovery of the profound forces of mat- 
ter exclusively to purposes of peace: to enable man’s activity to 
produce energy at a low cost which would alleviate the scarcity 
and correct the unequal geographical distribution of the sources 
of wealth and work, as also to offer new arms to medicine and 
agriculture, and to peoples’ new fountains of prosperity and well 


being.” 


—Pore Pius XII 
from His Easter Message, 1954. 


which he works: the audience of the 
professional critics, popularizers, and 
advertisers of art. But though, as does 
the popularizer and promoter of sci- 
ence, the critic fulfills a necessary pres- 
ent function, and introduces some 
order and some communication be- 
tween the artist and the world, he can- 
not add to the intimacy and the direct- 
ness and the depth with which the 
artist addresses his fellow men. 

To the artist’s loneliness there is a 
complementary great and terrible bar- 
remness in the lives of men. They are 
deprived of the illumination, the light 
and tenderness and insight of an in- 
telligible interpretation, in contem- 
porary terms, of the sorrows and won- 
ders and gaieties and follies of man’s 
life. 

This may be in part offset, and is, 
by the great growth of technical 
means for making the art of the past 
available. But these provide a record 
of past intimacies between art and 
life; even when they are applied to 
the writing and painting and compos- 
ing of the day, they do not bridge the 
gulf between a society too vast and 
too disordered, and the artist trying 
to give meaning and beauty to its 
parts. 


Qualitative Change in World 


In an important sense, this world 
of ours is a new world, in which the 
unity of knowledge, the nature of hu- 
man communities, the order of soci- 
ety, the order of ideas, the very no- 
tions of society and culture have 
changed and will not return to what 
they have been in the past. What is 
new is new not because it has never 
been there before, but because it has 
changed in quality. 

One thing that is new is the pre- 
valence of newness, the changing 
scale and scope of change itself, so 
that the world alters as we walk in 
it, so that the years of man’s life meas- 
ure not some small growth or rear- 
rangement of moderation of what he 
learned in childhood, but a great up- 
heaval. 

What is new is that in one genera- 
tion our knowledge of the natural 
world engulfs, upsets, and comple- 
ments all knowledge of the natural 
world before. The techniques, among 
which and by which we live, multiply 
and ramify, so that the whole world 
is bound together by communication, 
blocked here and there by the im- 
mense synapses of political tyranny. 

The global quality of the world is 
new: our knowledge of and sympathy 
with remote and diverse peoples, our 


44 


involvement with them in practical 
terms and our commitment to them in 
terms of brotherhood. What is new in 
the world is the massive character of 
the dissolution and corruption of au- 
thority, in belief, in ritual, and in tem- 
poral order. 

Yet this is the world that we have 
come to live in. The very difficulties 
which it presents derive from growth 
in understanding, in skill, in power. 
To assail the changes that have un- 
moored us from the past is futile, and, 
in a deep sense, I think it is wicked. 
We need to recognize the change and 
learn what resources we have. 

Again I will turn to the schools, 
and, as their end and as their center, 
the universities. For the problem of 
the scientist is in this respect not dif- 
ferent from that of the artist, nor of 
the historian. He needs to be a part 
of the community, and the community 
can only, with loss and peril, be with- 
out him. Thus it is with a sense of in- 
terest and hope that we see a grow- 
ing recognition that the creative artist 
is a proper charge on the university, 
and the university a proper home for 
him; that a composer or a poet or a 
playwright or painter needs the toler- 
ation, understanding, the rather local 
and parochial patronage that a univer- 
sity can give; and that this will pro- 
tect him to some extent from the tyr- 
anny of man’s communication and 
professional promotion. 

For here there is an honest chance 
that what the artist has of insight and 
of beauty will take root in the com- 
munity and that some intimacy and 
some human bonds can mark his rela- 
tions with his patrons. For a univer- 
sity rightly and inherently is a place 
where the individual man can form 
new syntheses, where the accidents of 
friendship and association can open a 
man’s eyes to a part of science or art 
which he had not known before, where 
parts of human life, remote and per- 
haps superficially incompatible one 
with the other, can find in men their 
harmony and their synthesis. 

These then, in rough and rather 
general words, are some of the things 
we see as we walk through the vil- 
lages of the arts and of the sciences 
and notice how thin are the paths that 
lead from one to another, and how 
little in terms of human understanding 
and pleasure the work of the villages 
comes to be shared outside. 


Mass Voices Also Blighting 

The superhighways do not help. 
They are the mass media—from the 
loud speakers in the deserts of Asia 


Minor and the cities of Communist 
China to the organized professional 
theatre of Broadway. They are the 
purveyors of art and science and cul- 
ture for the millions upon millions— 
the promoters who represent the arts 
and sciences to humanity and who 
represent humanity to the arts and 
sciences; they are the means by which 
we are reminded of the famine in re- 
mote places or of war or trouble or 
change; they are the means by which 
this great earth and its a2 es have 
become one to another, the means by 
which the news of discovery or honor, 
and the stories and songs of today 
travel and resound throughout the 
world. 

But they are also the means by 
which the true human community, the 
man knowing man, the neighbor un- 
derstanding neighbor, the schoolboy 
learning a poem, the women dancing, 
the individual curiosity, the individ- 
ual sense of beauty are being blown 
dry and issueless, the means by which 
the passivity of the disengaged spec- 
tator presents to the man of art and 
science the bleak face of unhumanity. 

For the truth is that this is indeed 
inevitably and increasingly an open, 
and inevitably and increasingly, a 
closed world. We know too ach for 
one man to know much, we live too 
variously to live as one. Our histories 
and traditions—the very means of in- 
terpreting life—are both bonds and 
barriers among us. Our knowledge 
separates as well as it unites; our 
orders disintegrate as well as bind; 
our art brings us together and sets us 
apart. The artist’s loneliness, the 
scholar’s despairing, because no one 
will any longer trouble to learn what 
he can teach, the narrowness of the 
scientist, these are not unnatural in- 
signia in this great time of change. 


Facing Wider Understanding 

For what is asked of us is not easy. 
The openness of this world derives 
its character from the irreversibility 
of learning; what is once learned is 
part of human life. We cannot close 
our minds to discovery, we cannot 
stop our ears so that the voices of 
far off and strange people can no 
longer reach them. The great cultures 
of the East cannot be walled off from 
ours by impassable seas and defects 
of understanding based on ignorance 
and unfamiliarity. Neither our inte- 
grity as men of learning nor our hu- 
manity allows that. In this open world 
what is there any man may try to 
learn. 


(Continued on page 52) 


J. Oppenheimer: Arts 


and Sciences 
(Continued from page 44) 


This is no new problem. There has 
always been more to know than one 
man could know; there has always 
been a mode of feeling, many modes 
of feeling, that could not move the 
same heart; there have always been 
deeply held beliefs that could not be 
composed into a synthetic union. 

Yet never before today has the 
diversity, the complexity, the richness 
so clearly defied hierarchical order 
and simplification, never before have 
we had to understand the complemen- 
tary, mutually not compatible ways of 
life, and recognize choice between 
them as the only course of freedom. 

Never before today has the integri- 
ty of the intimate, the detailed, the 
true art, the integrity of craftsman- 
ship and the preservation of the famil- 
iar, of the humorous and the beautiful 
stood in more massive contrast to the 
vastness of life, the greatness of the 
globe, the otherness of pene the 
otherness of ways and the all-encom- 
passing dark. 

This is a world in which each of 
us, knowing his limitations, knowing 
the evils of superficiality and the ter- 
rors of fatigue, will have to cling to 
what is close to him, to what he 
knows, to what he can do, to his 
friends, and his tradition and his love, 
lest he be dissolved in a universal 
confusion and know nothing and love 
nothing. It is at the same time a world 
in which none of us can find hieratic 
prescription or general sanction for 
any ignorance, any insensitivity, any 
indifference. 

When a friend tells of a new dis- 
covery, we may not understand, we 
may not be able to listen without 
jeopardizing the work that is ours and 
closer to us; but we cannot find in a 
book or canon—and we should not 
seek—grounds for hollowing our ig- 
norance, If a man tells us that he sees 
differently than we or that he finds 
beautiful what we find ugly, we may 
have to leave the room, from fatigue 
or trouble; but that is our weakness 
and our default. 

If we must live with a perpetual 
sense that the world and the men in it 
are greater than we and too much for 
us, let it be the measure of our virtue 
that the limits of our powers corres- 
pond to some special wisdom in our 
choice of life, of learning, or of beauty. 

This balance—this perpetual, pre- 
carious, impossible balance between 
the infinitely open and the intimate, 


52 


this time—our twentieth century—has 
been long in coming; but it has come. 
It is, I think, for us and our children, 
the only way. 

This is for all men. For the artist 
and for the scientist there is a special 
problem and a special hope, for in 
their extraordinarily different ways, in 
their lives that have increasingly di- 
vergent character, there is still a 
sensed bond, a sensed analogy. 

Both the man of science and the 
man of art live always at the edge of 
mystery, sarrounded: by it; both al- 
ways, as the measure of their creation, 
have had to do with the harmoniza- 
tion of what is new and what is fami- 
liar, with the balance between novel- 
ty and synthesis, with the struggle to 
make partial order in total chaos. 

They can, in their work, and in 
their lives help themselves, help one 


another, and help all men. They can 
make the paths that connect the vil- 
lages of arts and sciences with each 
other, and with the world at large, the 
multiple, varied, precious bonds of a 
true and world-wide community. 

This cannot be an easy life. We 
shall have a rugged time of it to keep 
our minds open and to keep them 
deep, to keep our sense of beauty and 
our ability to make it, and our oc- 
casional ability to see it, in places re- 
mote and strange and unfamiliar; we 
shall have a rugged time of it, all of 
us, in keeping these gardens in our 
villages, in keeping open the mani- 
fold, intricate, casual paths, to keep 
these flourishing in a great open windy 
world; but this is, as I see it, the 
condition of man; and in this condi- 
tion we can help, because we can 
love one another. 


Fall-out Hazard 


An Erratum by 
JAMES ARNOLD 


T= editors of Popular Science mag- 
azine have sent the writer some 
calculations made for a proposed ar- 
ticle on the fall-out hazard. The cal- 
culations are based in part on a figure 
given in an article! by the writer for 
the hazard due to carbon 14 from a 
fusion bomb. It now appears that this 
figure is, fortunately but embarrass- 
ingly, incorrect. 

The erroneous statement, contained 
in the final paragraph of the article, is 
that if fifty tons of neutrons escape 
from a nuclear explosion, enough car- 
bon 14 would be produced, if mixed 
with the atmosphere and living mat- 
ter, to give a total internal body dos- 
age of 15 mr/day to the average hu- 
man. The correct figure is in the neigh- 
borhood of 5 mr/week or about twen- 
ty times less. 

It seems worth while to call atten- 
tion to this error a little more forcibl 
than with the usual “erratum.” Al- 
though the calculation is not a dif- 
ficult one, it has not been made else- 
where in the open literature to my 
knowledge. 

The natural carbon 14 in our bodies 
contributes only 0.12 mr/week, per- 
haps 2 per cent of each person’s 
total radiation dose from “natural” 


1 “The Hydrogen-Cobalt Bomb,” Bulle- 
tin, 6 (June 1950), 290. 


sources, ie., cosmic rays, and the 
radioactivity of man himself and his 
normal environment. Rough calcula- 
tions based on the estimated energy 
release of the fusion tests so far, indi- 
cate that these tests will change this 
small percentage itself by at most a 
few per cent. Thus there is no cause 
for concern over radiation hazards due 
to carbon 14 at the present time. 

The main conclusions of the article 
on the cobalt bomb danger are, of 
course, not affected in any way by this 
error, which involves a hazard which 
was considered to be minor, even with 
the old figure. It may be worth while, 
however, to look again at this article, 
now four years old. There are two 
points in which our knowledge has 
advanced. First, the H-bomb is no 
longer “between possible and prob- 
able.” It is no longer an idea, but a 
thing, Second, my estimates for the 
cost of materials for a cobalt bomb 
were undoubtedly too high. Deuterium 
is apparently cheaper than was indi- 
cated, by how much it is hard to say. 
Also, thanks in part to television, co- 
balt is now produced on a much larger 
scale than in 1950. 

There is correspondingly less doubt 
that the cobalt bomb could be made. 
One thing seems clear from recent 
events—it had better not be tested. 


