The Age of Seience 
1900- [950 


In the first half of this century man has vastly 
enlarged his understanding and control of nature. 


An introduction to the 10 articles in this issue 


by J. R. Oppenheimer 


THE SURFACE OF THE EARTH is photographed rocket. Man’s deepest penetration of space by rocket: 
from a height of 18 miles by a camera in an Aerobee 250 miles by a two-step machine on February 24, 1949. 


20 © 1950 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC 


NE EVENING 
more than 20 years 
ago Dirac, who was 
in Gottingen work- 
ing on his quantum 
theory of radiation, 
took me to task with 
characteristic gen- 
tleness. “I understand,” he said, “that 
you are writing poetry as well as work- 
ing at physics. I do not see how you can 
do both. In science one tries to say some- 
thing that no one knew before in a way 
that everyone can understand. Whereas 
in poetry...” 

The 10 reports here, to which these 
words may serve as introduction, do 
indeed attest that science says things 
that no one knew before in a way we 
can all understand. They are reports, 
each written by a man eminent in his 
science, of what has happened in that 
science during the last half-century. 
They are diverse in style and in sub- 
stance, reflecting the great diversity of 
the several sciences and the healthy and 
heartening diversity of the authors. Yet 
they all tell heroic stories. They all tell 
of a period of unparalleled advance of 
understanding, of new experience, new 
insight and new mastery. Indeed, for 
some of the sciences—for biochemistry, 
for physics, for genetics—the half-cen- 
tury now closing has been a time of splen- 
dor: of great men and great discoveries, 
of a real revolution in our knowledge of 
the world. For all it has been a time of 
extraordinary vitality and progress, ex- 
tending and enriching what we know 
about the world, and unearthing, for 
every question answered, a host of new 
questions. Few of the authors, schooled 
by the surprises and wonders unfolded 
in the history of the last 50 years, hazard 
much of a preview of the history of the 
half-century to come; yet all speak with 
confidence of a future that will be 
worthy of a great past. 

For truly science is a prototype of 
human progress. Its advances in expe- 
rience and technique, in knowledge and 
understanding—these are never undone. 
Even its errors and its byways turn out, 
usually before many years have passed, 
to be an enrichment and not a perver- 
sion of knowledge. In its application to 
practice, in extending the resources 
available to mankind, as well as in its 
ever-growing contributions to human 
understanding, it has sustained and 
nourished the very ideal of the progress 
of human civilization. 

All the reports are pervaded, though 
necessarily and properly with varying 
emphasis, by this sense of the dual role 
of science. The purpose and the fruits of 
science are discovery and understand- 
ing. Yet equally, though in a quite dif- 
ferent sense, its purpose and its fruits 
are a vast extension of human resources, 
of man’s power to control and alter the 
environment in which he lives, works, 
suffers and perishes. Some of the au- 


thors, perhaps notably Pauling, tend to 
speak of the future advances in terms 
of the triumphs of practice that further 
understanding will make possible. Kroe- 
ber speaks only most casually of prac- 
tical benefits. Born, writing with the 
caution that experience has forced upon 
the physicists, refers briefly to the “for- 
midable issues” that the advances in 
that science have raised. But perhaps the 
wisest, because most frankly paradoxi- 
cal, words are those that conclude Mey- 
erhof’s brilliant report: 

“Biochemistry has an important bear- 
ing on the progress of medicine. But be- 
cause of this, it must remain a pure 
science, whose initiates are inspired by 
a craving for understanding and by 
nothing else.” 

With that surely most scientists will 
agree. We hope also for agreement and 
understanding from an increasing num- 


Oppenheimer 


ber of men who are not scientists, but 
who are nevertheless concerned that ad- 
vances in science make the greatest pos- 
sible contribution to human welfare. 


ET AT THIS hour in history one 
cannot read these 10 reports, which 
constitute so substantial an account of 
heroic human achievement and so per- 
suasive an example of the progress of 
civilization, without being sensible of a 
darker shadow, quite outside this serene 
and active workshop of the human spirit, 
and yet somehow touching it. Scientific 
progress, which has so profoundly al- 
tered both the material and the spiritual 
quality of our civilization, is not the sole 
root of its present grave crisis. But few 
men can be doubtful of its decisive part. 
Hand in hand, the growth of science 
and of the practical arts has produced, 
is increasingly producing, an unparal- 
leled revolution in human resources, re- 
sources that in some part have altered, 
and in far greater part can alter, the 
material conditions of man’s life. 
Science, for all the brilliance of its 
contemporary development, for all the 
ingenuity of its technical invention, is 


© 1950 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC 


still continuous with man’s long history 
of rational life, of which it is a part; it is 
still the inheritor of the hope, so deeply 
founded in both Eastern and Western 
cultures, that, by.reason and by open- 
minded efforts at understanding, man 
could not only enrich his life but better 
cope with the decisions that it fell to 
him to make. Those who are active, how- 
ever modestly, in the work of science 
tend to feel themselves the inheritors of 
this tradition and of this hope. They see 
how vastly science, and the technology 
that is both its instrument and its conse- 
quence, have increased the range and 
difficulty and subtlety of the occasions 
on which decisions are required of men; 
they note how characteristic it is of these 
decisions that in one way or another they 
rest not with one man but with some 
community of men. They ask, as in all 
humility they must ask, whether in their 
own successful experience there may be 
any elements that could be helpful in the 
wider issues that confront mankind. 

This is a wholesome question in the 
contemporary world: a world threatened 
with wars of vast destruction and count- 
less particular cruelties, a world divided 
not only as to what constitutes truth but 
as to how truth can at all be established, 
a world overripe for the fruits of science 
yet in great areas destroying the essen- 
tial conditions of its existence. 


6 Nees DAY is long past—if indeed it 
ever existed except in legend—when 
the whole of science was the expert 
province of any one man. These 10 re- 
ports are not addressed to the expert but 
to the interested layman. They attempt 
to tell, and I think for the most part with 
great success, of the high spots in the 
story of the last 50 years. There are of 
course important points of specific com- 
mon interest between the sciences, 
where progress in one has made possible 
spectacular advance in another: so it has 
been with physics and astronomy, with 
biochemistry and physiology; so it will 
surely be with chemistry and genetics. 
The past decades have been marked by 
many such examples of the mutual fruc- 
tification between sciences, and all signs 
point to its growth in the years ahead. 
In this happy sense a reader can discern 
evidences of the unity of science as he 
follows the reports here published. 

But even more striking is another al- 
most opposite impression: that of an 
extraordinary diversification and spe- 
cialization of the several sciences. They 
differ from one another, and their vari- 
ous parts differ from one another, by 
experimental techniques, by emphasis, 
by the kind of regularities that research 
reveals, by almost everything that might 
be codified as method. Most scientists 
will follow with pleasure what is written 
in the reports; few will fail to find some- 
thing in them that is new, or newly 
clear; but none, I think, will recognize 
in himself any real technical compe- 


21 


tence, any basis for sound critical judg- 
ment, or for new discovery or new 
understanding, except in a very, very 
limited part of the broad field of contem- 
porary science. This science is a land of 
extreme specialization and wonderful 
diversity, where the advances made by 
any one man rest, and necessarily rest, 
on the work of countless others, who 
characteristically have used techniques 
and ideas quite different from his own. 
This is a cooperative enterprise resting 
on specialization; its unity is based on 
the fullest exploitation and encourage- 
ment of diversity. The diversity is an ap- 
propriate reflection of the many-sided- 
ness of our experience of nature; the 
unity, which we like to call the unity of 
nature, is in the first instance a result of 
the systematic application of the convic- 
tion that contradiction is a sign of error, 
a beginning for inquiry. The varied re- 
searches which in their totality make up 
contemporary science can never inhibit 
but only fructify one another: where 
their outcome appears to conflict, that 
conflict gives rise to new inquiry and the 
discovery of new truth. 

Thus the order that characterizes the 
relations of one part of science with 
another is not primarily an hierarchal 
order. It is true that there have been 
attempts to sketch out possible hierar- 
chies, designating, let us say, physics as 
more abstract than biology, or astronomy 
as more quantitative than anthropology. 
But it is doubtful whether such schemes 
have contributed much either to the 
growth of science or to its general un- 
derstanding; certainly they do not de- 
scribe at all the benign and tolerant 
symbiosis in which the sciences have 
flourished and nourished one another. 
Tolerance, open-mindedness and confi- 
dence in the resolution of conflict by 
further inquiry—these constitute the lib- 
eralism of the sciences in their relations 
with one another. These relations are 
rooted in many things, but not least in 
mutual respect and in a total, a deliber- 
ate candor. 


UR VIEWS on the relations of one 


set of researches with another, of 
one mode of inquiry with another, have 


EINSTEI 


( > { 
=, VS ) 


ioe Pm 
nah 


FIVE NOBEL PRIZE WINNERS in physics met at 
Berlin-Zehlendorf in 1931. Walter Nernst had stated the 


22 


been refined and deepened in an impor- 
tant way by the discoveries of the past 
half-century in one branch of science: 
atomic physics. It is probably true that 
in the past centuries physics led to the 
most nearly monistic, the least dialecti- 
cal, the most hierarchal view of the 
order of nature. Yet it is just here that 
we have been most sharply taught by 
experience of the inadequacy of such 
syntheses. The discoveries in physics, 
which are described briefly in Born’s 
article, revealed the inapplicability of 
causal, Newtonian physics to problems 
of individual atomic systems; they un- 
covered the universal duality between 
corpuscular and undulatory descriptions 
of atomic systems. Codified in the pow- 
erful formalism of the quantum mechan- 
ics, they were in the first instance given 
an acceptable epistemological formula- 
tion in Bohr’s principle of complemen- 
tarity. The basic finding was that in the 
atomic world it is not possible to de- 
scribe the atomic system under investi- 
gation, in abstraction from the apparatus 
used for the investigation, by a single, 
unique, objective model. Rather a va- 
riety of models, each corresponding to a 
possible experimental arrangement and 
all required for a complete description 
of possible physical experience, stand in 
a complementary relation to one an- 
other, in that the actual realization of 
any one model excludes the realization of 
others, yet each is a necessary part of the 
complete description of experience in the 
atomic world. 

It is of course not yet fully clear how 
characteristically or how frequently we 
shall meet instances of quite close analo- 
gy to the complementarity of atomic 
physics in other fields, above all in the 
study of biological, psychological and 
cultural problems. Yet it is clear, as has 
repeatedly been stressed by Bohr him- 
self, that the discovery of complemen- 
tarity has provided us with a far wider 
and more sophisticated framework for 
the synthesis of varieties of scientific ex- 
perience. It has refined and extended 
the pluralism natural to science, and 
added new elements of subtlety to the 
idea of dialectic. Indeed, it seems to offer 
a far richer and more adequate general 


MILLIKAN 


PLANCK VON LAUE 


© 1950 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC 


point of view for the comprehension of 
human experience than the misleadingly 
rigid and unitary philosophies that 
flowed so naturally from the experiences 
of Newtonian mechanics. It has also 
tended of course to emphasize the ele- 
ments of analogy between the scientific 
tradition and the great traditions of 
Oriental philosophy, of Lao-tse and of 
Buddha—a_ circumstance which may 
hold some promise at this time, when 
understanding between diverse cultures 
seems more imperative than ever before. 

The candor, the openness, of science 
is too well known to need elaborate em- 
phasis. Yet it is basic. The most ele- 
mentary student is taught to preserve 
and make available direct records of his 
experience. However obscure the find- 
ings or recondite the subject, the pro- 
cedures of scientific investigation must 
be straightforwardly describable and 
communicable, so that work may be re- 
peated at will. The mutual respect and 
the tolerance which ought to prevail, 
and so largely do prevail, in the sciences, 
rest in overwhelming measure on this 
complete accessibility. It is through this 


third law of thermodynamics. Albert Einstein was the 
author of the special and general theories of relativity. 


that a scientist, no matter how narrow his 
field of specialization, comes to be an 
equal member in a community: not be- 
cause he shares the experience of all 
other workers or even a substantial part 
of it, but because no barriers have been 
raised and all efforts have been ad- 
dressed to reducing the barriers to a 
minimum. Few of us can forget the de- 
light of entering a new field of inquiry 
that appeared relevant at one time or an- 
other to our own work but had hitherto 
been unknown to us. 


O DOUBT there are elements of 

overidealization in this sketch of 
the relation of the individual scientist to 
his scientific community. Honor, pre- 
rogative and worldly pomp do some- 
times, briefly and almost trivially, color 
and infect that relation. Yet there are 
few human institutions in which coop- 
eration is more fruitful or the freedom 
of the individual conscience and taste 
more complete, where mutual respect 
makes for so great a harmony between 
the flourishing of the community and 
the liberation of the individual man. 


Max Planck had originated the quantum theory. Robert 
A. Millikan had measured the charge of the electron. 


This harmony, even in science itself, 
is being destroyed or threatened in vast 
areas of the world today. Terror, ortho- 
doxy, recantation, hierarchy, secrecy— 
these words are full of grim omens for 
science and for liberty. A society which 
as a matter of principle invokes the 
measures for which these words stand 
betrays, whatever its protestations, sci- 
ence and the tradition that has nourished 
it. A society which invokes these meas- 
ures (in the name of man’s welfare, in 
fear or in folly) is in danger of death. 

Increasingly, in these days of growing 
crisis, men have talked with earnest des- 
peration of the application of scientific 
method to new areas, to problems of 
man’s behavior and to human society. 
None of us knows or can foresee what 
progress individual genius and common 
effort may make possible in our under- 
standing of these problems in the dec- 
ades to come. Yet if the history of other 
sciences is a good guide, progress will 
come in only fitful and wayward re- 
sponse to man’s needs, and will wait 
upon his insight, his patience and his in- 
vention. From this modest view, I think, 


© 1950 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, INC 


neither Cantril nor Kroeber would dis- 
sent. 

Yet science itself in its nature is, 
largely has been and in our hopes neces- 
sarily must be, world-wide. The need for 
the practical fruits of science is world- 
wide, as universal as man’s striving to 
improve his lot on earth. The community 
of science is a limited but worthy proto- 
type for that tolerant, open, open-mind- 
ed community of men which alone can 
maintain the progress of civilization, 
which alone can contribute in these criti- 
cal times to fulfilling the aspirations of 
mankind. 


oe 


J. R. Oppenheimer, theoretical physicist, 
is perhaps best known as the wartime di- 
rector of the Los Alamos Scientific Lab- 
oratory. Before the war he had been pro- 
fessor of physics at the University of 
California and the California Institute of 
Technology. He is presently chairman of 
the General Advisory Committee of the 
Atomic Energy Commission and director 
of the Institute for Advanced Study. 


Max von Laue had suggested the application of X-ray 
diffraction to show the arrangement of atoms in crystals. 


23 


