THE 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


A Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics Established by E. L. Nichols in 1893 


Vor. 57, No. 2 


JANUARY 15, 1940 


SECOND SERIES - 


The Production of Soft Secondaries by Mesotrons 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER AND H. Snyper, University of California, Berkeley, California 


AND 


R. Serper, University of Illunots, Urbana, Illanots 
(Received November 3, 1939) 


I, Cosmic-ray evidence shows that the soft component, 
which persists even under great thicknesses of matter, 
consists, primarily at least, of electrons and y-rays. The 
- observations of the magnitude and variation with depth 
of the soft component and showers, and of the size and 
material dependence of bursts, lead to the following rough 
phenomenological description: In addition to ordinary 
ionization losses, the mesotrons have an appreciable chance 
of transferring a considerable fraction of their energy to 
the soft component. For transfers above 2 X 10! v this prob- 
ability is roughly independent of mesotron energy. Under 
10° v the probability of large transfers is much greater, 
roughly 20 times as great as at higher energies. II. The 
production of secondaries of energy <10 v can be ac- 
counted for by a familiar process: the Lorentz contracted 
Coulomb field of the mesotron, in sweeping. over an atom, 
ejects a high energy electron. This mechanism, however, is 
inadequate to explain the very large energy transfers, 
>10 v, involved in bursts. The theory which has been 
developed to describe the mesotron of spin one associates 
with transitions in which the direction of the mesotron spin 
changes an intrinsic dipole moment; this dipole field favors 


I. INTRODUCTION: OBSERVATIONS 


HE persistence of the soft component of 

cosmic radiation under great thicknesses of 
matter shows that this is secondary radiation 
produced by the mesotrons of the penetrating 
component. At sea level the cascade radiation 
which comprises the soft component still has 
three sources of roughly equal importance :! 


1 We are grateful to Professor E. Amaldi for informing 
us of unpublished experimental results. For a general dis- 


high energy transfers, and, roughly, can account for the 
observed bursts. However, the dipole field also gives 
probabilities of high energy bremsstrahlung, >10!° v, much 
too large to be compatible with the observations. III. The 


cross sections for the production of electron secondaries 


75 


and bremsstrahlung by the intrinsic mesotron dipole field 
have been estimated under the assumption that the coup- 
ling of mesotron and electromagnetic field is small; when 
this is not so the formula cannot be right. Examination of 
the approximation made indicates that the estimate of the 
cross section for electron secondaries should be valid up to 
mesotron energies of ~10" v, and is thus applicable to 
the bursts. The bremsstrahlung formula, on the other hand, 
fails at 10" v; it thus cannot be used for bursts, while for 
energies 109<#<10" it leads to no contradiction with the 
experimental evidence. The problem of extending the 
formulae above these critical energies probably goes beyond 
the framework of present theory. The evidence indicates 
that it is the largeness of the coupling, and not the oc- 
currence of lengths smaller than the critical h/wo~2 X 1078 
cm, that limits the applicability of the quantum me- 
chanics. 


degraded primary cascade radiation of high 
initial energy; secondaries produced by the 
mesotrons in matter; and (less certainly) second- 
aries from the disintegration of mesotrons in the 
atmosphere. But after a few meters water 
equivalent below sea level only the second group 
of secondaries is of importance. 

From this point on, the fraction of soft com- 


cussion, see Euler and Heisenberg, Ergeb. d. exakt. 
Naturwiss. 17, 1 (1938). 


76 J. R. OPPENHEIMER, H. 
ponent increases with depth.? Of the order of 10 
percent of the ionizing particles are soft at 10 m 
under sea level; the proportion is about doubled 
at 30 m. The number of showers and of bursts 
also tails off less rapidly with filtration than the 
number of mesotrons. At 75 m below sea level 
the relative number of showers is about four 
times that at 10 m. This soft radiation has the 
typical behavior of cascade radiation of electrons 
and y-rays, and there is no evidence that heavy 


particles or low energy mesotrons play an im-_ 


portant part in it. 

These results may be simply interpreted: 
filtration increases the mean mesotron energy, 
and for a power law. energy distribution this 
increase is linear with depth. Thus the increase in 
the soft component with filtration means that 
the mean energy transfer from mesotrons to soft 
component must increase with mesotron energy. 

Some information on the energy transfer cross 
section in the region of very high energies is 
given by what. is known of the variation of 
burst frequency with burst size and with ma- 
terial. A most striking result here® is that the 
distribution of bursts in size, above roughly 
10!° v, follows the same law as the energy 
distribution of the penetrating mesotrons: the 
number of bursts greater than S in size is given 


Nss~S~, (1) 


by whereas the number of mesotrons of energy 
greater than EF is given by the law, obtained from 
the absorption curve on the assumption that most 
of the absorption comes from ionization losses, 


Nszr~E-?, yrwl.9., (2) 


This parallelism of the burst frequency and 
absorption curves follows immediately if for high 
energies the probability of a given fractional 
transfer of energy from a mesotron to soft 
radiation is independent of mesotron energy. 
Such a law of.energy transfer does, in fact, give a 
mean energy loss just proportional to the meso- 
tron energy. 

Additional evidence on the form of the cross 
section is provided by observations on the rela- 


y~1.8, 


2W. M. Nielsen and K. Z. Morgan, Phys. Rev. 54, 245 
a6ee. P. Auger and T. Grivet, Rev. Mod. Phys. 11, 232 
1939), 
3 A, Sittkus, Zeits. f. Physik 112, 626 (1939); M. Schein 
and P. S. Gill, Phys. Rev. 55, 1111 (1939). 


SNYDER AND R. SERBER 

tive burst frequencies in different materials. As 
is discussed in more detail elsewhere,’ a cross 
section depending only on fractional energy loss 
gives, for the frequency of bursts in substances 
of different atomic number, a Z dependence 


(g(Z)/Z)1(Z)*-”, (3) 


where g(Z) gives the atomic number dependence 
per atom of the large energy transfers, and I(Z) 
is the critical energy of the cascade theory, which 
increases with decreasing Z. It seems probable 
that, by taking into account the effect of scat- 
tering on the low energy cascade radiation, this 
result, if g(Z)=Z, can be reconciled with the 
observed approximate equality of burst fre- 
quencies in different materials. 

These considerations suggest that, in addition 
to the ordinary ionization losses, mesotrons can 
transfer to the soft component an appreciable 
fraction of their total energy, and that the 
probability of this is roughly independent of the 
mesotron energy. It is, however, not possible to 
fix the constant determining this probability to 
give agreement both with the increase in soft 
radiation on filtration and with the absolute 
value for the probability that a high energy 
mesotron make a burst. To see this, let us write 
for the cross section per atom for a mesotron of 
energy # and mass pz to transfer an energy fE to 
the soft component 


do = aox(f df, (4) 


Then the probability that in a centimeter of 
material a mesotron of energy greater than & 
makes a burst of energy greater than E is just 


0o= wZe'/ pct. 


p= oN f K(f) frdf, (5) 


where JN is the number of atoms per cc of the 
material. According to Schein and Gill®> the 
probability that a mesotron will make a burst of 
energy greater than 2 X10!° v is about £=2X10-° 
per cm. | 

An independent check on this figure we may 
obtain by the following argument: the maximum 
of the transition curve for bursts in Pb, at ~5 
cm, is about twice the value at greater thick- 


‘J. R. Oppenheimer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 11,7264 (1939). 
5’ Schein and Gill, reference 3. 


SOFT 


nesses. Thus the bursts produced by cascade 
radiation give a contribution equal to that from 
the mesotrons: decay ‘electrons will not give an 
appreciable contribution. The total number of 
cascade electrons is about 1/20 the number of 
mesotrons. Of these the theory of showers shows 
that (4*107/e)!\® have an energy greater than e. 
On the other hand, if e> 10", roughly (2 *10°/)!° 
mesotrons have an energy greater than e. The 
bursts they make have a “range” of about 5 cm 
in Pb. Thus we must have, for the probability é 
that a mesotron of energy >e make a burst ina 
cm of Pb, 


5£(2%10%/e)#9= (1/20)(4 10/6)", 
= (1/100) (1/50)"$~0.5 X10-%. 


The value €~ 10-5, gives 


c= f «Nfafrs. (6) 


Now this value is not great enough to account for 
the increase in relative soft radiation with 
filtration. To see this we have to compare the 
total energy lost to the soft component per cm by 
(4) with the mean ionization energy loss of the 
secondaries, which gives then directly the number 
of soft particles per mesotron. This ratio is 


R=mB [ «(f)fdf/4ute? In (1(Z)/ZRh). (1) 


Here m is the electron mass and EF the mean 
mesotron energy. This gives, for the increase in 
ratio of soft to hard component on filtration by 
30 m water equivalent, if we use (6) to estimate 
x, only 0.5 percent, whereas the experimental 
value is more nearly 10 percent. 

Since the mesotron energies and energy trans- 
fers involved in the increase of the soft compo- 
nent are primarily less than 10! v, and the bursts 
involve energies greater than 2X10!° v, we are 
led to the following rough phenomenological 
description: In addition to ordinary ionization 
losses, the mesotrons have an appreciable chance 
of transferring a considerable fraction of their 


‘We have supposed {” “K(f df~ nA "«(f)fdf; for a distri- 


bution «(f) which greatly favored the emission of slow 
electrons this would no longer be right. For example 
«(f)~1/f? would increase the fraction of soft component 
of energy >Emin by a factor In (H/Emin). 


SECONDARIES FROM MESOTRONS 77 


energy to the soft component. For transfers 
above 2X10!° v this probability is roughly 
independent of mesotron energy and is given by. 
(4) and (6). Under 10" v the probability of large 
transfers is much greater, and in this range it is 
roughly 20 times as great as at higher energies. 


II. ELECTRON SECONDARIES AND 
BREMSSTRAHLUNG 


The elementary processes by which mesotrons 
transfer energy to the soft component may con- 
veniently be classified as nuclear or electromag- — 
netic, according to whether the coupling of 
mesotrons with the heavy particles or with the 
electromagnetic field plays the primary part in 
them. Because of the large nuclear coupling and: 
high mesotron mass it has usually been assumed 
that the nuclear processes would alone be im- 
portant for high energy transfers. In fact, calcu- 
lations of nuclear effects, such as mesotron 
absorption and scattering by nuclei, calculations 
based on the perturbation theoretic treatment of 
the coupling as small, lead to cross sections so 
large, for high energies, that they completely 
contradict the high penetrating power of the 
mesotrons. It has been emphasized especially by 
Heisenberg’ that the prediction of these large 
cross sections rests on the essentially erroneous 
treatment of the interactions as small; despite 
several attempts no reliable estimate of them has 
been given, and this problem probably goes 
beyond the framework of present theory. Nor is 
it sure in what way such impacts will give 
appreciable amounts of soft radiation: the emis- 
sion of y-rays from nuclei excited by such impacts 
hardly seems a very plausible mechanism; the 
radiative capture of a mesotron by a nucleus, 
inverse to the mesotron photo-effect, seems more 
probable. 

Under these circumstances we have thought it 
profitable to re-examine the electromagnetic 
effects a little more closely. For the problem of 
energy transfers to the soft component two types 
of collision are of first importance: elastic impacts 
with free electrons, and bremsstrahlung: to this 
latter corresponds, for the inverse problem of the 
creation of mesotrons by the soft component, pair 
production. 


7W. Heisenberg, Zeits. f. Physik 113, 61 (1939), 


78 J. R. OPPENHEIMER, H. 

If mesotrons satisfied the Dirac equation, cross 
sections for these two processes could be obtained 
from the familiar calculations for electrons. For 
the cross section per atom that a mesotron of 
energy £ gives a fraction f of its energy to an 
electron, 


larZe* df arc" 
c= eee Sy u/( Lae ) 
mcf f 2m 
= 200(u2c?/mE)df/f?. (8) 


Similarly, for the cross section per atom that a 
y-ray of energy fE be emitted 


4aZoo 2E(1— 4(1- 
do =——-— |n —— l(s42 : oar (9) 
“5 ucrZ sf a 


a=e?/he. 


In this result atomic screening has been neg- 
lected, but the Coulomb field has been smoothed 
out for r<Z3h/uc; and the Born approximation 
has, of course, been used. 

The cross section (8) gives a logarithmic 
increase of the soft radiation with filtration; the 
fraction of the electrons of energy greater than 
Emin at depth ¢ is 


2me? I(Z) 

i ee a) 
WOE wis ZRh 

In 10(e/10%)? 
36—41n Z 


R=} 


for 


ow 


Emin=10' v, (10) 
where ¢« is the ionization energy loss of the 
mesotron in penetrating to the depth ¢. This 
gives, at sea level, R=13 percent, at 30 m below 
sea level, with Z=12, R=25 percent, at 80 m 
R=31 percent, in rough agreement with the 
observed values, although perhaps somewhat low 
at 80m. From (9) we obtain R~3 X1075Z(€/109), 
a much smaller contribution than (10). 

For showers of energies X10° vv <E<10" v, 
(8) gives, instead of (1), the law Nsg~S-7, 
Both the size dependence and absolute number 
of showers predicted by (8) agree well with the 
experimental results.* 

However, (8) has the wrong energy dependence, 
(9) the wrong Z dependence, to account for the 
observations on bursts. But it is interesting to 
note that both (8) and (9) give for bursts 


* See A. C. B. Lovell, Proc. Roy. Soc. 172, 583 (1939), 


SNYDER AND R. SERBER 
>2X10!° v, a probability in rough agreement 
with observation; thus (9) gives 


k~3aZ~2 for Pb, 


whereas the experimental value is x~ 4. Also (8) 
gives, for all Z and bursts >2X10!°, a burst 
frequency corresponding to n~ 4. 

There is, however, valid ground for doubting 
the applicability to the burst processes of (8) and 
(9). For Yukawa’s theory requires an integral 
mesotron spin, and the spin dependence of 
nuclear forces shows that this spin must be one. 
The theory which has been developed to describe 
these particles? makes the mesotron electro- 
magnetic current density depend on derivatives 
of the mesotron field, and associates, with transi- 
tions in which the direction of the mesotron spin 
changes, current distributions more singular than 
those of a Dirac electron. The Fourier com- 
ponents of current corresponding to a momentum 
hk > wc behave like k?: for the Dirac electron, and 
for mesotron transitions not changing the spin, 
they behave like k->. For a classical point charge 
they behave like k°, and for a point dipole like k; 
thus one may roughly ascribe these singular 
currents to an intrinsic mesotron dipole moment. 
The Fourier components of current corresponding 
to this dipole moment are larger by a factor k/yc 
than those corresponding to the electric charge. 

These singular currents of course interact very 
strongly with high frequency radiation fields. 
They radically alter the high energy cross 
sections, giving much larger values than (8) and 
(9). At the same time they introduce couplings 
so large that the question of the perturbation 
theoretic estimate of the cross section requires 
re-examination. 

This behavior of the cross sections is well 
illustrated by the work of Laporte® on the 
Coulomb scattering of mesotrons. Treating this 
problem by the Born approximation, one finds 
for scattering without spin change the Rutherford 
result 


do =4Z0)(uc?/E) csc! $6d(cos 0), E>yuc?. (11) 
8 Yukawa, Sakata, and Taketani, Proc. Phys.-Math. 

Soc. Japan 20, 319 (1938); Yukawa, Sakata, Kobayasi, 

and Taketani, Proc. Phys.-Math. Soc. Japan 20, 720 

(1938); N. Kemmer, Proc. Roy. Soc. A166, 127 (1938); 

Froéhlich, Heitler, and Kemmer, Proc. Roy. Soc. A166, 

154 (1938); H. J. Bhabha, Proc. Roy. Soc. A166, 501 (1938). 
9Q. Laporte, Phys. Rev. 54, 905 (1938). 


SOFT SECONDARIES FROM MESOTRONS 79 


For scattering with spin change 


do =%Zoy ctg? 50d (cos 0). (12) 


For elastic impacts with electrons one finds,! 
again using the Born approximation, an analo- 
gous result: for no spin change we again get (8); 
for spin change 


do=foo(1—f+sf)df/f, 
. f<1/A+tyc/2mB). 


This result is indeed of the form (4), and thus can 
account roughly for the size and material- 
dependence of large bursts. It gives 


413) 


K=0.22. 


This is of the order of magnitude observed, and 
together with (8) can probably account for the 
greater part of the high energy bursts. 

For the bremsstrahlung, the high probability of 
large angle scattering given by (12), and the 
large coupling with high frequency radiation 
fields, give a cross section increasing rapidly 
with energy. For an unscreened Coulomb field 
the cross section takes the asymptotic form 
o~aZoo(E/uc?)?; most of these are close impacts 
and correspond to large angles of scattering and 
radiation. It is therefore essential to take into 
account the modification of the Coulomb field 
within the nuclear radius ~ Z*h/ye. If we do this 
by eliminating all Fourier components of the 
Coulomb field with k>pc/hZ*, and thus ignoring 
nuclear collisions, we get for high &, still using 
the Born approximation, a cross section of the 
form 


o~aZiool/uc?. (14) 


It is clear that neither the E nor Z dependence 
of this cross section is in agreement with the 
observations on bursts. For H>2X10! v, (14) 
cannot be right. However, in the range 10° v 
<E<10! v, (14) is in no contradiction to the 
experimental evidence: its contribution to the 
soft component would be only R~1 percent. 

We see, so that (13) can account roughly for 
soft radiation with E>2X10!° v; that (14) can 
surely not be right for E>2 X10" v. On what 

10 This result has been independently derived by Corben 


and Massey, Proc. Phil. Camb. Soc. in press. We are 
indebted to Dr. Corben for telling us of his results. 


grounds can we regard (14) as invalid; and do 
these apply, and if so in what range of energies, 


to (13)? 


III. VALIDITY 


Two distinct but related criteria" are involved 
in the question of the validity of both our results 
(13) and (14) for secondaries and bremsstrahlung: 
Formulae for mesotron charge and current 
density have been used for arbitrary small wave- 
lengths; one may question, as has often been 
done, whether they are right for distances | 
<h/wc. On the other hand, we have throughout 
treated the coupling of mesotron and electro- 
magnetic field as small, have used, that is, a 
Born approximation: under what conditions is 
this treatment justified? The formulae (13) and 
(14) will surely have no validity when it is not. 

The former condition is not in Lorentz- 
invariant form, nor can it be reformulated to 
apply only to the rest system of the mesotron, 
since in the impact the mesotron momenta 
change. A natural extension of the criterion is 
that only for those impacts in which momentum 
transfer + and energy transfer e satisfy 


(15). 


r—e/eb we 


can charge and current expressions of mesotron 
theory be used. This condition is thus clearly 
equivalent to the rejection of relativistic mesotron 
theory. It is incisive; there is no evidence that it 
is right. | 

To apply this condition we note that in the 
rest system of the center of mass of electron and 
mesotron the energy of the electron does not 
change, and the transverse and longitudinal 
momentum changes are of the same order of 
magnitude. Since the transverse momentum 
transfer is invariant, and is of the order (2mE)?, 
we get from (15) | 


E> we?/2m~10!® v. 


It is, as we have seen, only above this energy that 
the terms (13) become of importance compared 
to (8). 

In the same way we may apply (15) to the 
bremsstrahlung. If the Coulomb field were not 


11 W. Heisenberg, Zeits. f. Physik 110, 251 (1938). 


80 J. R. OPPENHEIMER, H. 
cut off at the nuclear radius, the scattering and 
radiation would be at large angles in the nuclear 
rest system, and (15) would give 


E> wet. 


For the screened field the scattering and radiation 
is roughly isotropic in a coordinate system S 
where the mesotron momentum is (2uF)?, so 
that uw} p2c?; in either case the bremsstrahlung 
formulae would have no range of validity at all, 
since they are for the case E>>wc?, and (15) 
denies that mesotron theory is applicable to such 
a problem. 

For nuclear problems, where the relative 
magnitude of the coupling energy compared to 
the kinetic energy of the mesotrons is measured 
by gE/uc?, with g a constant of order unity, the 
smallness of the interaction energy essentially 
requires (15). For electromagnetic effects the 
relative magnitude of the coupling is a?H/ne?, 
a=e?/ic; and the coupling may remain small 
even when (15) is violated. 

It is clear from (13) and (14) that for high 
enough energies the coupling terms are not small. 
If we use for each problem the coordinate 
systems in which scattering is roughly isotropic, 
in which therefore for secondaries and brems- 
strahlung, respectively, the mesotron momentum 
P is (2mE)? and (2uE)', the validity of the Born 
approximation at least requires that the cross 
section be small compared to the summed areas 
of the partial waves involved. For the second- 
aries, with nearly spherical scattering, this means 
that o<(#/P)?, and thus that 


E<pe/mZoe2~4X10"/Z v. (16) 


For the bremsstrahlung, the half-width, 66, of the 
angular distribution of the scattered mesotron, 
for fixed direction of emission of the y-ray, is of 
the order (60)?~ (uc/Z#)?/pE~ye?/ZiE ; thus par- 
tial waves up to L?~Z!F/yuc? are involved; we 
must have o<(hL/P)? and 


E<pe/eZ~3X104/Z v. (17) 


To see whether these conditions, which are 
certainly necessary for the smallness of the 
coupling, are also sufficient, let us look more 
closely at the coupling energy density and the 
kinetic energy density. This is simplest in the 
coordinate systems S, where one may use wave 


SNYDER AND R. SERBER 

packets of approximate dimensions 4/P through- 
out. The kinetic energy density is then of the 
order (P/h)*Pc whereas the coupling energy, for 
those transitions involving a change of mesotron 
spin, is ~(P/h)'ai(P/uc)Pc, and the ratio is of 


the order 
o? P/ yc. (18) 


Then we must have 


i <we/ma~2 X10" v for the validity of (13), 


and 
E<pe?/a~10" v for the validity of (14). 


These conditions are more incisive than (16,17), 
because the coupling of the mesotron with its 
radiation field becomes large before the coupling 
with the weaker fields of electron and nucleus do. 
Thus in the problem of the bremsstrahlung the 
maximum value of the electric field of the 
nucleus (in coordinate system S) acting on the 
mesotron is Ze(Z*h/uc)—?(Ey/ye)? = Ztelyic/h’, 
whereas the zero point electric field fluctuations 
of wave-length #/P, which induce mesotron 
radiation of this wave-length, are of the order 
(hc)*P?/h?=(hc)*pE/h, and thus (E/ucaZ*) 
larger. 

The derivation of the results (13) and (14) can 
certainly then not be justified for energies 
greater than 10!° v for the bremsstrahlung, 
2X10" v for the secondaries. For to extend these 
results to higher energies would involve not 
treating the coupling of mesotrons and radiation 
as small. It is well known that this program 
leads to divergent results, and that only the 
roughest correspondence-theoretic analogies offer 
any guide to their interpretation. It should be 
emphasized that it would be of no use to treat 
more strictly, say in the problem of brems-— 
strahlung, the motion of the mesotron in the 
Coulomb field; it is not primarily the magnitude 
of thts coupling which makes the trouble. 

This discussion therefore suggests that the 
bremsstrahlung formula (14) may well be right up 
to 10!° v; at much higher energies the observa- 
tional material on burst frequency shows that it 
must be wrong. On the other hand (13), for high 
energy secondaries, can be justified up to 2X10” 
v, and, as we have seen, can explain at least a 
good part of the bursts observed. 


SOURCE OF ENERGY 


It may be mentioned that for the inverse 
problem of mesotron production, pair production 
in a ‘‘cut-off’’ Coulomb field again gives a cross 


section of the form o=aZ*ooH/uc?, and again a_ 


limit ~10! v for its validity. At this highest 
energy the cross section per atom of oxygen is 
10-28 cm?, which is about 300 times too small to 
account for the observed high intensity of 


JANUARY 15, 1940 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


IN DENSE STARS 81 


secondary mesotrons of this energy. A cross 
section 300 times larger would, as a matter of 
fact, be inconsistent with the high penetrability 
of mesotrons. The large observed discrepancy 
between mesotron production and absorption 
probabilities has been repeatedly emphasized.” 


12 See for example, L. W. Nordheim, Phys. Rev. 56, 502 
(1939), 


VOLUME 57 


The Proton-Deuteron Transformation As a Source of Energy in Dense Stars* 


W. A. WILDHACK 
George Washington University, Washington, D. C. 


(Received November 4, 1938) 


The rates of energy evolution due to the transformation to helium, starting with the reaction 
H+H=D-+et, in hydrogen at densities of 104 to 108 g/cm, were calculated on the basis of 
complete degeneracy, and the assumption of a crystal-like spacing of the protons. The results 
indicate that any considerable amount of hydrogen in white dwarf stars would lead to much 
higher luminosities than those observed. Thus the low effective molecular weight (1.5) as 
calculated for some of these stars from the accepted white dwarf model, cannot be due to a 
high content of hydrogen. It might be explained as due to very large content (~100 percent) 
of the helium isotope He but it is very difficult to see how such large amounts of this isotope 
could be present in these stars. It appears that the paradox can be removed only by revision 
of the observational data concerning the white dwarf radii. 


1. INTRODUCTION 


HE importance of the reaction H+H=D-+et 
as a major source of stellar energy has been 
established by Bethe and Critchfield,! at least for 
stars lighter than the sun. In view of prevailing 
theories of stellar composition, which indicate a 
considerable proportion of hydrogen in most 
stars, it is desirable to investigate the rate of 
energy production due to this H—H reaction in 
dense stars. 

Since the zero-point energy of matter at high 
stellar densities (p = 10° or 10’ g/cm?) approaches 
that due to stellar temperatures (10%-10’ °C), it 
is permissible, for a conservative approximation, 
to neglect temperatures in computing the rate of 
combination of protons. The results may then be 


interpreted as indicating a minimum value for 


the rate of energy production for assumed com- 


* The preliminary results of this work were referred to 
by G. Gamow, Phys. Rev. 55, 723 (1939). 
1H. Bethe and C. Critchfield, Phys. Rev. 54, 248 (1938). 


positions, or as indicating a maximum hydrogen 
content for a given rate of energy production. 

We will first consider an electron-proton gas, 
corresponding to a pure hydrogen composition 
and consider later the modifications necessary to 
take account of heavier particles. We assume 
closest cubic packing of the protons. Then, if 27 
is the distance between nearest protons, the 
volume per proton is 


A(v2)r2 and 2r=(v2M/pu)’, (1) 
where JM is the mass of the proton (1.66 10-* g) 


and py is the density of protons in g/cm?. 


2. THE POTENTIAL FUNCTION 


In deducing the form of the potential function 
governing the relative motion of two protons, the 
influence of neighboring protons will be con- 
sidered first. The electrical potential at the 
equilibrium points may be taken as zero. Each 
proton, in its equilibrium position, is more or 


