Bulletin of the =} Routledge 
Ato Scientists 2 Taylor & Francis Group 


A MAGAZINE FOR SCIENC! PUBLIC AFFAIRS 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Comments on the Military Value of the Atom 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1951) Comments on the Military Value of the Atom, 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 7:2, 43-45, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1951.11457138 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1951.11457138 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 


‘J 
(Sg Submit your article to this journal @ 


lil Article views: 2 


N 
IQ] View related articles @ 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles G 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


COMMENTS ON 


THE MILITARY VALUE OF THE ATOM 


J, ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


Dr. Oppenheimer was the wartime director of the Los Alamos Lab- 
oratory. He is now director of the Institute for Advanced Study at 


Princeton University. 


HAT contribution may one 
WW cesensti hope that the 

atom can make to our mili- 
tary power, the si for the preven- 
tion of war, the limitation of war, and 
for the defeat of the enemy in the 
event that war does come? It is clear 
that not all the aspects of this problem 
are public or can be public. What is 
important is that there are some as- 
pects that are public. 

In the past the debate about the 
military value of the atom has had a 
singularly empty quality. To the first 
impression that the atomic weapon 
was so great a thing that it was a deci- 
sive, an absolute military power, there 
was a reaction: it is another weapon, 
it is “just another weapon,” or, as in 
Mr. Hoover's phrase, it is “a less domi- 
nant weapon” than we had thought. 
People close to the work have at times 
also thought that the atom was a bit of 
a gold brick. But, in fact, one cannot 
talk in these terms. This is the argu- 
ment of the optimist who thinks that 
this is the best of all possible worlds, 
and of the pessimist, who knows it. 
This is not an argument that has 
meaning. 

For our purposes, at this time, 
there is a very definite thing we need 
to say: the difficulty and the magni- 
tude of the military and the political 
problems which we now face and will 
continue to face, and the extent of our 
investment in the atomic field, mean 
that we cannot afford to misuse, and 
we cannot afford to ignore, what the 
atom can do for military purposes. 
This is a luxury in which we should 
not indulge. 

In what I shall say, I am limiting 
myself, and I think rightly limiting 
myself, to one use only of atomic ener- 
gy, one class of uses, the atomic bomb. 
There have been many references in 
the papers to other projects: to poisons, 
to other kinds of explosives, to propul- 


sion systems for military craft of one 
kind and another. That is enough to 
indicate that some technical work has 
been done on them. But it is not of 
them I am speaking, but of the Atom- 
ic Bomb. 

There are two sides to our problem, 
though they are related. One side is 
the technical and the military: ques- 
tions of what we do to make weapons 
available, what weapons we make 
available, how we plan to use them; 
the other is the side of policy, the 
conditions under which we might use 
atomic weapons, their significance in 
the conduct of war, their significance 
in international relations. It is clear 
that these two sides are related; and 
yet it will be useful, I think, to sepa- 
rate them; for the role of the public is 
quite different in them. 


THE TECHNICAL QUESTIONS 


With regard to the first group of 
questions, the technical ones, techni- 
cal both for engineers and scientists 
and for the military people, the pub- 
lic role is probably in the first instance 
to determine that secrecy and power 
are not being abused, that the oe 
questions are being asked and that 
reasonably honest men are trying to 
answer them. There is a lot of hard 
work to do, much of which has not 
been completely done at the moment. 
There is, as the commission has made 
clear, an increase in the scale on which 
the explosives are to be manufactured. 
That will not be a trivial undertaking; 
for there is not only a problem of a 
balance of the various ways of making 
explosives, but of a balance between 
them and other military efforts, a nec- 
essarily tight balance in a period of 
mobilization. The use of electric power 


Excerpt from an address given before a 
meeting of the Association of the Bar of 
the City of New York on January 11. 


and the use of other scarce materials 
are examples. 

There is an obvious need for the de- 
velopment of weapons systems, so that 
one can use atomic bombs in a variety 
of ways, so that one can deliver them 
in more than one way, and so that one 
can make them for a variety of targets 
and uses and situations. There is need 
for operational planning, so that one 
may be prepared to anticipate under 
what conditions they are good weap- 
ons, and a good use of explosive, and 
under what conditions they are not; 
and there is need for serious work on 
such countermeasures as exist. There 
are no special countermeasures against 
atomic weapons; but if we can inter- 
cept carriers, we can hope to intercept 
carriers of atomic bombs. 

These are all major problems. They 
are not substantially different from 
those which are met in all other 
branches of the mobilization program. 
There is a bit of novelty; and there is 
one important difference: there is a 
very great lack of military experience. 
It is doubtful whether the military ex- 
perience of the end of the last war is 
relevant, and, in any case, it applies 
only to a special form of delivery and 
a special target, a high altitude de- 
livery of atomic bombs against cities. 
Nevertheless, I am quite confident that 
good work on all four of these points 
is being done, that more and better 
work will be done, and that, with vigi- 
lance and sense, we shall come out 
with a very considerable increase in 
military capability. 


QUESTIONS OF POLICY 

The other side, the policy side, is 
the one where the role of the public is 
rather different and rather deeper. 
That is, of course, also partly a tech- 
nical question, because one cannot ask 
whether to use, or under what condi- 
tions to use, or how to regard a weap- 


43 


on, until the weapon is defined. It is 
also a technical question, in that nor- 
mally and properly these decisions are 
made by the chiefs of staff, by the 
National: Security Council, and by the 
President, and not by a Gallup Poll. 
But I think I am right in saying that 
public opinion on the use of atomic 
weapons is a most important factor. I 
have been so assured by many military 
planners. Even without that assurance, 
it is obvious, if only because how we 
use and whether we use atomic weap- 
ons in warfare depends a great deal 
on what else is done. It ae a 
great deal on whether the public in- 
sists upon, supports, or balks at other 
military or political measures. 

The question comes first, of course, 
in the crude form: Shall we or shall 
we not use the atomic bomb? I think 
that before public debate can usefully 
cope with the question, it is necessary 
to have a few distinctions, One of 
them is this: We normally think not 
of the weapon, but of the specific use 
which was made of it against Hiro- 
shima and Nagasaki. We think of it as 
an instrument of strategic bombing, 
for the destruction of lives and of 

ants, essentially in cities. It is the 

ecisive, even if perhaps not the final, 
step in a development that may have 
started at Guernica, that was charac- 
terized by the blitz against London, 
by the British raids on Hamburg, by 
our fire raids on Tokyo, and by Hiro- 
shima. 


STRATEGIC BOMBING 


In so far as the prospect of such use 
may be a deterrent to the initiation of 
war, or an inducement to governments 
to carry out policies which we think 
are sound, and in our interest, it is a 
fine thing. But the question arises: 
What happens if the fighting starts? 
What sort of an instrument is this in 
a real war? At a time when so very 
much of our uncommitted military 
power is in the form of atomic weap- 
ons, it is a question that it is danger- 
ous not to face. It is not a new ques- 
tion. It has been asked before. I have 
thought that I could do little better 
than to quote comment on strategic 
bombing from the hearings! held in 
October of 1949, before the Armed 
Services Committee of the House, in 
connection with the so-called B-36 
program. In those hearings, there were 
many debates about whether the B-36 
could ever reach its target, and many 
debates about whether, if it did, the 


1 House Committee on Armed Services, 
page 183. 


44 


bombardier could hit the target. From 
time to time the argument took on a 
more general character. Here are some 
nee of the testimony of Admiral 
Ralph A. Ofstie, who is now in a Paci- 
fic command, who was at that time a 
member of the Military Liaison Com- 
mittee to the Atomic Energy Commis- 
sion. 

Admiral Ofstie first said what he 
meant by strategic bombing. “There is 
no official definition of the term ‘strate- 
gic bombing!’ The official military 
term is ‘strategic air warfare,’ defined 
as: Air combat and supporting opera- 
tions designed to effect, through the 
systematic application of force to a 
collective series of vital targets, the 
progressive destruction and disinte- 
gration of the enemy’s war-making ca- 
pacity to a point where he no longer 
retains the ability or the will to wage 
war. Vital targets may include key 
manufacturing systems, sources of raw 
material, critical material, stockpiles, 
power systems, fae poate systems, 
communication facilities, concentra- 
tions of uncommitted elements of ene- 
my armed forces, key agricultural 
areas, and other such target systems. 

“This is a very broad field,” he said. 
“Indeed, it would seem to be almost 
all-inclusive except for the active 
armed forces of an enemy. In fact, 
however, the major elements of most 
of those target systems are located 
where people live and work, in urban 
and industrial areas. Further to inject 
realism into the picture, we must view 
the tools with which it is proposed the 
job be done, in this instance the heavy 
bomber of very long range, of modest 
performance, operating at great alti- 
tudes, and preferably at night. These 
factors dictate area attack as the 
means of destroying war-making ca- 
pacity located within those areas. 
Therefore, whether we speak of the 
mass bombing of World War II or the 
proposed atomic blitz of today, which 
are major tenets of the strategic bomb- 
ing concept, we are talking of attacks 
on cities. This is what I mean when 
I use the colloquial term ‘strategic 
bombing.’ ” 


Then, speaking for himself and 


“many senior officers in the Navy,” 
Admiral Ofstie says: “We consider 
that strategic air warfare, as practiced 
in the past and as proposed for the 
future, is militarily unsound and of 
limited effect, and is morally wrong, 
and is decidedly harmful to the sta- 
bility of a postwar world.” 

After a technical summary of argu- 
ments on the degree of effectiveness, 
and the technical problems of exe- 
cuting strategic missions, Admiral Of- 
stie continues: “Much emphasis has 
been placed upon the instant character 
of an offensive using atomic bombs. 
Among laymen this has produced an 
illusion of power and even a kind of 
bomb-rattling-jingoism. Although re- 
sponsible officials of the government 
generally do not themselves subscribe 
to it, they must be influenced by the 
public acceptance of the proposal of 
instant retaliation. The idea that it is 
within our power to inflict maximum 
damage upon the enemy in a short 
time without serious risk to ourselves 
creates the delusion that we are 
stronger than we actually are. This, 
in turn, becomes a constant tempta- 
tion for policy-makers to over-commit 
themselves, to make commitments ac- 
tually impossible to fulfil.” 

There is nothing in the public rec- 
ord which indicates that these views 
had at the time any great effect on 
military or political thought and plan- 


ning. 


TACTICAL USES 


This was all long before the fighting 
broke out in Korea. Much of what was 
clear to Admiral Ofstie then has be- 
come clear to all of us today. The ac- 
tion in Korea, furthermore, has raised 
publicly another aspect of the question 
of the use of atomic weapons in war- 
fare: their use against military targets. 
The targets commonly discussed are 
troop concentrations, airfields, naval 
craft, communications centers. These 
are among the targets that are an im- 
mediate military threat, rather than 
the basic producing power and the 
population of an enemy. 

I am not qualified, and if I were 
qualified I would not be allowed, to 
give a detailed evaluation of the ap- 
propriateness of the use of atomic 
weapons against any or all such tar- 
gets; but one thing is very clear: It is 
clear that they can be used only as 
adjuncts in a military campaign which 
has some other components, and whose 
purpose is a military victory. They are 
not primarily weapons of totality or 
terror, but weapons used to give com- 
bat forces help that they would other- 


wise lack. They are an integral part of 
military operations. Only when the 
atomic bomb is recognized as useful 
in so far as it is an integral part of 
military operations, will it really be 
of much help in the fighting of a war, 
rather than in warning all mankind 
to avert it. 

Just in this connection, of course, 
it is clear that the mode of use and the 
time of use have a relation to each 
other. Today we do not have very 
much military strength with which to 
integrate atomic weapons. Two years 
from now that should be quite dif- 
ferent. 

The question of whether to use or 
not to use atomic weapons is a differ- 
ent question, depending on whether 
or not one has combat forces and is 
prepared for combat. They are always 
terrible weapons; they may not be 
effective weapons if they are all, or 
almost all, that we have. 


THREE WAYS THE ATOM MAY 
SERVE MILITARY POWER 


In fact, one can imagine, in some 
relation to time, at least three differ- 
ent ways in which the atom may serve 
as military power. The first and the 
easiest to imagine is as the principal, 
if not the only, instrument whose pur- 
pose is to destroy plant and kill peo- 
ple: that is the extreme form of the 
atomic bomb as a strategic weapon. 

The second course is the use of 
atomic bombs primarily against mili- 
tary targets, in tactical use, in coordi- 
nation with more conventional forms 
of warfare, in combat. Whether or not 
they would then be used strategically 
will depend in part on whether non- 
use can serve as an effective deterrent; 
it will depend on the technical advan- 
be as they appear at the time, of 
offense and defense. It may not be 
reasonable to anticipate that the stra- 
tegic use of atomic weapons will be 
renounced as was the strategic use of 
gas warfare, because, in any future 
we can foresee, the atomic bomb will 
offer far vaster prospects of destruc- 
tion. Such renunciation could, I think, 
result only from a considered policy 
decision. 

There is a third course we can im- 
agine, that we need to imagine: that, 
with the obvious horror of a general 
war, through a combination of our 
efforts and the efforts of others, and 
through some good fortune, we may 
manage to find our way to a more 
secure and more tolerant and more 
open world without general war. It is 
as a principal deterrent to such war 


that the military power of atomic 
weapons may yet be decisive. 

I am painfully aware that it is not 
entirely in our hands to determine 
which of these three courses does, in 
fact, take place, or which other course. 
I am also clear that it is not only or 
primarily. a question of the atom bomb. 
But it is partly a question for the 
United States, and partly a public 
question; and it is partly a question of 
the atom. For if we misjudge what 
this weapon can or cannot do, in our 
hands or in the hands of the enemy, 
if we misjudge its contribution to mili- 
tary strength, it is clear that we will 
continue to cause our government, on 
the basis of our illusions, to follow a 


course whose only end must be dis- 
aster. 

As you know, about a year ago the 
Prime Minister of India visited this 
country. He met with many people 
and talked with them; and shortly 
before he left the country I asked him 
whether he had found in his visit here 
any appreciation, in this quite differ- 
ent culture, of the Hindu notion of 
control, of restraint. He answered, 
“Since this, in the last analysis, only 
rests on a proper evaluation of the 
consequences of action, I cannot be- 
lieve that any great people would be 
without it.” 

I believe that the American people 
are a great people. 


DR. OPPENHEIMER ON THE RATE OF AMERICAN 
BOMB PRODUCTION 


In his address before the New York 
Bar Association on January 11, Dr. 
Oppenheimer commented on the way 
his testimony before the Senate Com- 
mittee on Atomic Energy has been mis- 
interpreted as a basis for estimates of 


the size of the U.S. stockpile: 


“For the last two years, I have seen 
many estimates of how many bombs 
we have, all allegedly deriving from 
testimony I gave about five years ago 
before the Special Senate Committee 
on Atomic Energy, estimates differin 
widely with the differing arithmetica 
practices of the reporter. Even in this 
last week I have heard and seen three 
such estimates. 

“Let me quote the relevant excerpts 
of the testimony. Senator Tydings 
asked: ‘Assuming that ten years from 
now atomic energy in many countries 
has been licensed by the government 
for peacetime manufacture and uses. 
. .. If it were decided to make mili- 
tary bombs from our peacetime atomic 


nett, how long would it take us to 
complete 200? I said, ‘Maybe a little 
over a year.’ Senator Tydings said, 
‘How long would it take us to make 
50?’ And I said, ‘Maybe a year.’ And 
then I said, ‘I think a year is too long; 
maybe nine months.’ 

“It is clear that these estimates con- 
cern the rate of conversion of fission- 
able material into weapons, whereas 
the pacing factor in the making of 
atomic weapons has for us been the 
making of fissionable material. Never- 
theless, this testimony has been quoted 
and requoted as an estimate of our 
weapons stockpiles; perhaps unchal- 
lenged—certainly not adequately chal- 
lenged—for many years.” 


45 


