J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


Cosmic Rays: Report of 
Recent Progress, 1936-1941 


HE ORIGIN of cosmic rays has 
been the subject of a good deal of speculation. The extraterrestrial 
character of their origin, which has been certainly established for 
over twenty years, and the rapidly unfolding evidence that the radia- 
tion itself has properties qualitatively unlike that of any radiation 
we can produce in the laboratory, have naturally led to quite radical 
suggestions about the ultimate source of the radiation. These specula- 
tions have been in large part barren because they have been based 
on theories subsequently shown to be erroneous, of just what the 
primary cosmic rays—those striking the atmosphere of the earth— 
really were. Our ideas on this question have undergone many serious 
revisions in recent years, and it does not seem likely that we have 
arrived ata final answer even now. But a few facts, clearly established, 
do serve to exclude some possibilities for the origin of the radiation, and 
to lend weight to others. Thus it is known that the greatest part, and 
probably the whole, of cosmic radiation reaches the earth’s atmosphere 
in the form of singly charged particles, and that this charge is largely, 
if not entirely, positive in sign. The mean energy of the primary cosmic 
rays is some ten billion electron volts. The minimum energy is some 
two billion volts, and the distribution in energy appears to be continu- 
ously decreasing. But unambiguous evidence shows that there are some 
primary rays with energies exceeding 10°°-electron volts, although rays 
with this energy are extremely rare, of the order of one in a billion of 
the total number. These energies so greatly exceed, in order of magni- 
tude, not only those currently released in laboratory experience of 
nuclear reactions, but the total energy available from the complete 
annihilation of the heaviest known nuclei, that we may be quite sure 


24 Science in the University 


that the origin of cosmic rays is not in any way associated with the 
conversion of matter into energy, or with the phenomena of nuclear 
physics generally. The view which at present seems most plausible 
to physicists is that the primary cosmic rays receive their high ener- 
gies—and on this property alone most of their remarkable behavior 
would seem to rest—by acceleration in electric fields probably of low 
intensity but of immense extent. Whether these fields act within stellar 
systems, or between galaxies, is not established. The actual origin of 
the radiations thus constitutes a serious and interesting problem for 
astrophysics, and possibly for cosmology; it probably has no close con- 
nection with atomic physics. 

What does concern atomic physics—and what for most physicists 
constitutes the extraordinary interest and puzzle of the cosmic rays— 
is the behavior of the radiation once it has reached the earth and comes 
into interaction with the matter of the earth’s atmosphere and, later, 
of the earth’s surface; for the cosmic rays give us by far the most 
powerful high-voltage laboratory that we have, with the primary 
rays, and some of their secondary products, as the high-energy radia- 
tion, and the matter they hit on earth as the target. Even the humblest 
cosmic ray is, from this point of view, a far more powerful projectile 
than any we can produce in the laboratory, since it carries some thou- 
sand times higher energy than the best products of the cyclotron or 
betatron. 

It may not at first be clear why these high energies are of such in- 
terest to the physicist. The reason why high-voltage equipment was 
necessary to open up the vast field of nuclear reactions was that charged 
particles are strongly repelled by nuclei and must be given energy 
enough to overcome this repulsion if they are to penetrate to the 
nuclear matter and cause transmutation. But the energies necessary 
for this are well within the range of existing laboratory installations, 
and in fact all nuclei have been transmuted by cyclotron bombard- 
ment. The importance of the vastly higher energies of cosmic radia- 
tion to deepened physical investigation lies in a different circumstance. 
It is this: in a collision in which two particles are hurled together with 
a momentum #, and energy E, not all features in the interaction will 
manifest themselves clearly—those whose scale of length is smaller 
than 4/p, or whose scale of time is much shorter than hc/E, will be 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 25 


largely lost because of the inevitable lack of spatiotemporal definition 
demanded by the uncertainty principle for systems with well-defined 
momentum. In these formulae / is Planck’s constant, c the velocity of 
light; their numerical values are such that the characteristic lengths 
and times for a ten-million-volt electron are about 5x10 cm. or some 
ten times nuclear dimensions, and 2x10 ™ sec., respectively. These 
spatiotemporal dimensions are decreased roughly in the inverse ratio 
of the energy with which the collision takes place. Thus, with respect 
to fundamental physical discovery the domain of very high energies 
is also the domain of the very small and very rapid—a domain that, 
as experience has shown, is rich in new complexities and new order. 
And it is because cosmic rays are unique in opening up this remark- 
able, strange, and otherwise inaccessible region of the atomic world 
that they have commanded such interest from physicists. 

It is in this connection important, especially in evaluating the rather 
fragmentary and extraordinarily incomplete knowledge that cosmic- 
ray experience has given us, to remember that the radiation itself does 
not have those features of controllability that make an artificially pro- 
duced laboratory radiation so useful. Work with cosmic rays is neces- 
sarily observational rather than experimental. We can alter the nature 
of the matter which the cosmic rays strike, we can investigate the 
radiation at various stages in its course through the earth’s atmos- 
phere and the earth itself, and we can improve and refine the methods 
of observation; but we cannot alter the radiation itself, cannot increase 
its intensity to pursue weak effects, cannot readily separate one com- 
ponent of its complex spectrum from another. These limitations are 
reflected in our very partial and uncertain knowledge. It is, in its field, 
the only knowledge we have at all. 

This complexity of the cosmic radiation to which I have just referred 
has made it helpful, in disentangling the phenomena, to distinguish 
three qualitatively distinct, though genetically related, types of radi- 
ation: the soft or cascade component, the mesotrons, and the primary 
rays. In summarizing some of the remarkable discoveries of recent 
years, we may follow this classification, although we may be fairly sure 
that it isa very rough and incomplete one, and postpone our discussion 
of the genetic relations of these components to the end. 

Cascades.—The cosmic rays are very penetrating: it takes some 30 


26 Science in the University 


meters of water to reduce their intensity at sea level to one-half, and 
the radiation is still detectable at 1,000 m of water below sea level. 
Nevertheless, there is always a portion of the radiation, amounting to 
more than half at high altitudes, dropping to some ro per cent just 
below sea level, and rising again with increasing depth to some 20 
or 30 per cent, that is readily absorbed by some inches of a heavy 
material such as lead. This portion is called the soft component, and 
the processes involved in its absorption and regeneration have been the 
subject of a great deal of study. It consists of electrons, which are 
normal ingredients of matter, and positrons, unstable mates of the 
electron of the same mass and opposite charge, and gamma rays, high- 
frequency electromagnetic radiation. 

It has taken research and discovery to make this identification, since 
the positron itself was not known until it was discovered in the cosmic 
rays, and since the properties of all these radiations are qualitatively 
unlike anything that was known before. In this development theo- 
retical ideas have played a very great part. Thus the existence of the 
positron and its properties had been suggested on theoretical grounds 
before its actual discovery, and this rendered its identification rela- 
tively easy and conclusive. The reason for the theoretical prediction 
of the positron was this: when we try to make a theory of the wave 
mechanics of electrons which is in accordance with the special prin- 
ciple of relativity, we are led—by very general and inescapable argu- 
ments—to the conclusion that the electron must have a mate which 
is either a particle of the same charge as an electron and of negative 
mass, or a particle of the same mass and of opposite charge. With the 
former alternative, ordinary electrons should be able by emission of 
radiation to transform themselves into electrons of negative mass— 
the “donkey” electrons, so called because they retreat when we pull, 
advance when we push them. This prediction, which is in the grossest 
kind of contradiction with the experimental stability of electrons, 
shows that of the two alternatives only the second is possible, and that 
we must have, in nature, particles of the same mass as the electron, 
but positively charged. A further general consequence of the relativ- 
istic wave mechanics is, then, that a pair of positively and negatively 
charged electrons—a positron-electron pair—may be created by the 
collision of two sufficiently energetic beams of radiation, or, and this 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 27 


is the case of practical importance, by the impact of radiation on a 
strong electrostatic field, such as surrounds the atomic nucleus of 
elements of high atomic number. All these predictions could be made 
quantitative by assuming the detailed correctness of Dirac’s electron 
theory, which alone had given a complete and experimentally verified 
account of the properties of electrons in atomic physics, of the electron 
spin and magnetic moment, and of the duplexity phenomena of 
spectroscopy. When Anderson found in the cosmic radiation a particle 
of positive charge and electronic mass, a whole host of experiments 
soon proved that these positrons could be annihilated, together with 
an electron, on collision; that such pairs could be made by irradiating 
heavy elements with gamma rays; and that our quantitative formulae 
for the probability of these processes agreed with the facts. These phe- 
nomena of pair formation and annihilation, which can be studied in 
the laboratory, since the energy necessary for pair creation is just over 
one million electron volts, afforded a most striking confirmation of 
the interconvertibility of matter and energy, in that the energy of a 
gamma ray could be used up to create the mass of a pair of particles, 
and conversely in that the mass of a pair of particles could disappear 
in the form of radiation. The instability of the positron is then natu- 
rally ascribed to the circumstance that there is in normal matter a great 
excess of electrons with which any stray positron will in a short time 
combine. Positrons of high energy will almost always lose their energy 
before combining with electrons. 

The phenomenon of pair production by gamma rays provides one 
of the two essential mechanisms dominating the behavior of the soft 
component. The probability that a gamma ray of high energy (above 
some ten million volts) will make a pair on hitting the strong electric 
field around an atomic nucleus is proportional to the square of the 
nuclear charge, and independent of the gamma-ray energy. Thus the 
penetrating power of gamma rays is limited, whatever their energy, 
and is much smaller in heavy materials than in light. The mean dis- 
tance that a gamma ray travels before making a pair is, in Pb (lead), 
about 0.6 cm; in water, about 50 cm. It is, then, clear that a few inches 
of Pb will absorb all the incident gamma radiation. 

In order to follow the behavior of the soft component in detail, 
it is necessary to know, too, what happens to the high-energy pairs. 


28 Science in the University 


Like all charged particles, these lose energy continuously to the loosely 
bound electrons of the atoms near which they pass, and this loss 
manifests itself in ionization of the atoms and thus affords the actual 
means of detection in ionization chambers, counters, and cloud cham- 
bers of the cosmic rays. But electrons and positrons also lose energy 
by another, and for high energies incomparably more important, 
mechanism. When they pass through the strong electric fields around 
atomic nuclei—the same fields in which gamma rays produce pairs— 
they are deflected, accelerated, and radiate. Here again the probability 
of radiating as gamma radiation a given fraction of the electron’s 
energy is independent, for high energies, of the electron’s energy, and 
proportional again to the square of the atomic number of the material; 
and the characteristic distance in which an electron will, on the aver- 
age, have lost half its energy in the form of radiation is slightly smaller 
than, though of the same order as, the characteristic absorption dis- 
tance for gamma rays, amounting to 0.5 cm of Pb, 4o cm of water. 
What, then, do these theoretical predictions imply, for the behavior 
of an electron, positron, or gamma ray of very high energy incident 
on matter? In a very short distance the gamma ray will make a pair; 
the pair will make gamma rays; the gamma rays will make further 
pairs, and the pairs further gamma rays, and all these secondary radia- 
tions will be just about as penetrating and absorbable as the primary. 
Thus, from one initial energetic ray we shall soon have built up a great 
shower or cascade of rays, and this multiplication will continue until 
the rays are of such low energy that they are no longer effective in 
radiating and producing pairs, and lose their energy by ionization 
alone. The characteristic energy at which multiplication ceases is lower 
in heavy elements than in light, since in the former the multiplicative 
processes are more probable. The energy is about 9 mev (million elec- 
tron volts) for Pb, about 100 mev for water. For this reason the multi- 
plication proceeds further, and for a given total energy leads toa larger 
cascade in heavy elements than in light. A 10° v-electron will in Pb 
make a shower in which at the maximum —and this occurs some 3 cm 
from the surface—there are about 100 charged particles and some 150 
gamma rays; a 10° v-electron will make a shower of some 5,000,000 
particles, reaching its maximum dimension after some 8 cm of Pb, 
some 6 m of water. Almost all the secondary radiation preserves ap- 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 29 


proximately the primary direction, with appreciable angular devia- 
tions limited to secondaries of low energy. 

This, then, is what atomic theory says about the behavior of the soft 
component. For a long time these ideas—which only recently have 
been worked out with full mathematical elaboration—were viewed 
with a good deal of skepticism, for three reasons: 

1. If these ideas are right, electrons, positrons, gamma rays, are all 
very rapidly absorbed ; 20 cm of Pb should take out even the most ener- 
getic soft radiation. Yet the cosmic rays are penetrating, and even a 
meter of Pb does not reduce their intensity by a factor of 2. 

2. Direct cloud-chamber observation of the behavior of cosmic rays, 
at sea level, showed that the overwhelming majority would pass 
through a plate of Pb without undergoing the energy loss, or mani- 
festing the multiplication, theoretically predicted for electrons. 

3. Although phenomena of shower formation have long been 
known, and have been studied by coincidence-counter, ionization- 
chamber, and cloud-chamber techniques, it was for a long time erro- 
neously believed that these showers were explosive, many rays being 
simultaneously created in one collision process; and only a detailed 
analysis revealed that the overwhelming majority of showers were 
in fact multiplicative, and that the explosive events were rare and of a 
characteristically different nature and distribution. 

Arguments 1 and 2 had an added cogency since it was quite easy to 
show that the penetrating cosmic rays most certainly were not protons 
or other nuclei, in that their mass was smaller than the proton mass 
and they occurred with about equal frequency with positive and with 
negative charge. The acceptance of the theoretical ideas concerning 
the behavior of the soft component therefore brought with it the 
necessity of admitting that the penetrating, and at sea level the pre- 
ponderant, component of cosmic rays consisted almost wholly of 
radiation not hitherto known to physics. The evidence of the detailed 
agreement between the actual behavior of the soft component, in its 
shower formation, multiplication, and absorption, and in the location 
of the shower maxima and the dependence of this on material and on 
shower size, left in the end no doubt that the theoretical predictions 
were right, and that the soft component of cosmic rays was only a 
part of a far more complex radiation, of which the greater part was 


30 Science in the University 


not electronic, and was new. The positive and negative particles of 
this penetrating radiation, identified at first only in the negative sense 
that they were neither electrons, positrons, protons, nor any known 
particle, have come to be known as mesotrons, or mesons, because their 
mass is intermediate between that of electrons and that of protons. The 
mesotron also, like the positron, had been the subject of theoretical 
speculation before it was discovered. But before we enter on the argu- 
ments involved, and the difficult and as yet unsettled question of the 
range of their validity, it will be well to sketch one other important 
application of the cascade theory of the soft component, an application 
which was for long regarded as its greatest success, but which we now 
know to be in large measure illusory. 

This has to do with the course of cosmic rays incident on the earth’s 
atmosphere. To simplify and render quantitative the argument we 
may confine our attention to those rays which reach the earth at a high 
geomagnetic latitude but not near the equator. These rays are charged 
particles having energy sufficient to penetrate the geomagnetic field 
of the earth at high latitudes but insufficient to penetrate in the equa- 
torial belt. By choosing two suitable latitudes it is thus possible by 
subtraction of the low-latitude from the high-latitude effects to obtain 
the effects which must be ascribed to primary charged particles lying 
in a relatively narrow and accurately calculable energy range. If the 
ionization due to these primaries, lying for example in the range 
10-15 bev (billion electron volts), or the frequency of counting, in a 
vertical counter telescope, is plotted against the amount of matter 
traversed by the radiation from the top of the earth’s atmosphere, a 
curve is obtained which at first rises steeply, has a sharp maximum 
at about 100 gm/cm’, and then falls off rapidly at greater depths. This 
curve is in rough but excellent agreement with the theoretically cal- 
culated cascade curve for the behavior of a 12-bev electron or positron 
incident on the earth’s atmosphere: the position of the maximum 
agrees precisely with that calculated, and there are only two, obviously 
related, points of discrepancy. One is that the maximum reached— 
about to particles per primary in this case—is about 30 per cent below 
the theoretical; the other is that the curve at great depths, near sea 
level (1,000 gm/cm’), falls off much less rapidly than the cascade 
curve. This last is just another expression for the fact that if all cosmic 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 31 


radiation were soft we could not account for its actual very great 
penetration. It was, then, natural to suggest that the primary and sec- 
ondary cascade radiation could in part be converted, on nuclear im- 
pact, into mesotrons; that this at the same time reduced the extent of 
the cascade multiplication, by converting a part of the energy into 
nonmultiplying components, and accounted for the low absorption 
at great depths. The probabilities estimated in this way for meso- 
tron production seemed, in the light of theoretical speculation, not 
unreasonable, and the good agreement between cascade theory and 
atmospheric “transition” curves was taken as at the same time validat- 
ing the cascade theory and establishing unambiguously the nature of 
primary cosmic radiation: since it was charged, and predominantly, 
at least, positively charged, and produced showers, it consisted of posi- 
trons. Cosmologically this was an odd result, since the only processes 
we know that make positrons also make gamma rays and electrons. 
But these worries turned out to be unnecessary: the multiplication of 
primary cosmic rays in the upper atmosphere, which seemed to be 
described so well by the cascade theory, now appears to be a totally 
different and even more remarkable phenomenon. To this we shall 
return in our last section. 

Mesons and Nuclei—The suggestion that there exist particles carry- 
ing a unit positive or negative charge and with a mass approximately 
two hundred times that of the electron and approximately one-tenth 
that of the proton, was first put forward by Yukawa about three years 
before it was generally recognized by physicists that such particles con- 
stituted the penetrating component of cosmic rays. Yukawa’s argu- 
ments were a great deal more speculative than those on which the 
prediction of the positron was based; and although mesotrons are now 
known to exist, and are in fact known to have not only the mass and 
charge Yukawa predicted, but also to be, as he suggested, unstable 
(with a half life of some microseconds), nevertheless it is now quite 
certain that the mesotron will not perform that function for which 
Yukawa invented it, namely, to give us a direct consistent theory, in 
agreement with known facts, about nuclear forces. The situation in 
this respect is not only rather complicated; it is also very incompletely 
understood, and presents at the moment the principal challenge to 
theoretical physics. 


32 Science in the University 


It will be helpful to outline first Yukawa’s ideas, and then the facts 
that bear on them, and finally the present dark state of the theory. 

Yukawa put forward a theory of nuclear forces based on an analogy 
con variazione with the Faraday-Maxwell field theory of electro- 
magnetic interactions: he tried to make a theory in which the forces 
between neutrons and protons, protons and protons, neutrons and 
neutrons, appear not directly in terms of action at a distance, but 
through the intermediary of a field: each neutron and proton (we 
call them nucleons) produces a field, and another nucleon moving 
in that field is subject to forces. In electrodynamics this formulation 
has proved powerful and led to increased insight, in that the laws 
for producing electromagnetic fields, on the one hand, and the re- 
sponse of charges to such fields, on the other, are far simpler than 
the actual laws of interaction of charges. Field theories of this type 
also automatically satisfy the fundamental requirement of the special 
theory of relativity, that momentum and energy be propagated with 
a finite velocity, never exceeding that of light. Since our empirical 
knowledge of nuclear forces has not led to any great insight into 
their detailed nature, it was natural to look to field theories to provide 
us with a powerful method of investigating them. 

The two points in which nuclear forces differ most strikingly from 
electromagnetic forces are that they have a very limited range, R~ 10 * 
cm, and are very much stronger than electromagnetic interactions be- 
tween elementary particles. Yukawa was now able to establish the 
following general important interpretation of the range R. Just as 
the quantum theory leads to the existence of light quanta, or photons, 
which carry the energy and momentum of the electromagnetic field, 
so, in general, quantum theory will ascribe corpuscular properties to 
any field. Yukawa could now show that if these quanta had a mass 
M=A/Rc, then the range of forces would be of the order R. With the 
best values for R, obtained from evidence on nuclear forces, M turns 
out to be approximately two hundred electron masses, very close indeed 
to the best experimental determinations of the mass of the mesotron, 
the penetrating particle of the cosmic ray. 

By rather less general arguments, Yukawa, and others working on 
the elaboration of this theory, were led to assign further properties to 
these nuclear force quanta, or mesons as we call them. 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 33 


1. From the striking saturation character of nuclear forces—that is, 
from the fact that the density of nuclear matter is about constant for 
all nuclei, as is also the binding energy per nucleon—physicists had 
concluded that the exchange of momentum between nucleons, which 
gives the forces between them, is often if not always accompanied by 
an exchange of charge. This leads to forces of the so-called exchange 
type, which have saturation properties similar to the familiar ones that 
characterize the homopolar chemical bond. For this reason Yukawa 
assumed that mesons carried a charge—an elementary positive or nega- 
tive charge. The question of the existence of neutral mesons is not 
yet definitively settled, and the cosmic rays do not provide any good 
grounds for believing in them. The cosmic-ray mesons are singly, posi- 
tively and negatively, charged. 

2. Yukawa suggested that mesons are spontaneously beta-radioactive, 
and estimated their lifetime on the assumption that it is their presence 
in nuclei which give rise to the observed beta and positron radioactivity 
of nuclei. Although efforts to refine the quantitative connection be- 
tween beta decay and meson decay in nuclei have not been successful, 
the general order of magnitude of the lifetime of the meson, predicted 
by Yukawa as a microsecond, is in good agreement with the best 
cosmic-ray observations. These observations are themselves of interest. 
They rest on a circumstance long ago noted, that the absorption of 
cosmic rays in the atmosphere exceeds their absorption in an equivalent 
weight of any kind of condensed matter. By assuming that this excess 
absorption is to be ascribed to the spontaneous decay of mesons in their 
relatively long paths through the rare atmosphere, and by taking into 
account the Einstein effect, or retarding of the decay process for fast- 
moving mesons, one can obtain a reasonably consistent interpretation 
of all the absorption data by assigning to a meson a proper lifetime of 
some microseconds. An extremely important consequence of this result 
is that mesons are not primary: they are themselves produced in the 
earth’s atmosphere by the primary rays. The view that they are pro- 
duced by nuclear impacts is of course in qualitative agreement with 
Yukawa’s theory, according to which mesons are present in the field 
of all nuclear particles. 

3. Nuclear forces are strongly spin-dependent, that is, they depend 
strongly in magnitude, and even in sign, on the relative orientations of 


34 Science in the University 


the intrinsic spins or angular momenta of the nucleons involved, and 
the orientation of these spins with respect to the line of centers of the 
nucleons. To explain this dependence, Yukawa and others assumed 
that the meson, like the photon, had itseif a unit of angular momentum 
or spin, which it could carry from one nucleon to another. It turned 
out that this assumption was not necessary to explain the spin depend- 
ence of nuclear forces; and in fact an analysis of the collisions of mesons 
with the electrostatic fields surrounding nuclei, in which they, too, like 
electrons, can radiate gamma rays—gamma rays which, if of sufficient 
energy, are readily detectable as large cascade showers or bursts,— 
showed unambiguously that the meson spin is not unity, that it may 
be zero, or, as it is for the electron, 4%. The value 0 is alone consistent 
with Yukawa’s field theory in its simpler forms. 

4. A final known essential difference between meson and photon 
fields is that the meson fields are near nucleons, and correspondingly 
the strength of nuclear forces is enormously greater than in the electro- 
magnetic case. For the mathematical treatment of this case quite new 
methods have had to be worked out, the physical content of which lies 
in treating the nucleon plus its intense field, rather than the “bare” 
nucleon, as the fundamental particle. One of the most interesting quali- 
tative predictions of this strong-coupling treatment, as yet unverified 
by cosmic-ray observation, is the existence of excited states, or isobars, 
of proton and neutron, with a mass less than 10 per cent greater than 
that of the known stable forms, and carrying anomalous charges and 
spins, charges of +2 or -1 units for instance. These isobars are unstable, 
and only in cosmic-ray phenomena or with a giant cyclotron should 
we expect to find them. 

The quantitative development of Yukawa’s ideas along the lines here 
outlined has not led to a satisfactory theory. In fact, even if we limit 
ourselves to a consideration of the detailed form of the nuclear forces 
theoretically predicted, it has not been possible to obtain any measure 
of agreement, despite the considerable flexibility of these theories, with 
nuclear experience; nor has it been possible on any of these theories to 
escape the conclusion that there is a connection between the effective 
range R of nuclear forces, which is roughly known, and the scattering 
of mesons by nuclei. The experimental estimates of this scattering sys- 
tematically fall below the theoretical predictions by a factor of about 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 35 


100. It is not at present understood how to resolve this difficulty, which 
has appeared in the detailed elaboration of all forms of meson theory 
of nuclear forces. Nor has the meson theory of forces as yet helped 
in any way to systematize or illuminate the facts of nuclear physics. 
It would seem likely that the source of all these troubles, which so far 
no amount of mathematical ingenuity has been able to resolve, lies in 
the inapplicability of field theory to nuclear problems, where the range 
of forces between nucleons probably does not exceed appreciably the 
size of the nucleons themselves, and where therefore the Faraday- 
Maxwell ideas of the propagation of disturbances between small ele- 
mentary charges, over distances vastly greater than the size of the 
charges themselves, no longer may appropriately be applied. The prob- 
lems put to us by this frustration of Yukawa’s program would appear 
to be among the most urgent and deep-seated in contemporary atomic 
physics. It is important, in this connection, to observe that cosmic-ray 
findings on the scattering of mesons as well as on their secondary 
origin, on the nature of the radiative collisions of mesons, and on their 
shewer-producing properties, have served to eliminate many theoret- 
ically possible forms of meson theory. 

Primary and Secondary Radiations.—Under these circumstances it is 
inevitable that many physicists should wish to regard the agreement 
between the properties of the cosmic-ray mesons and the particle pre- 
dicted by Yukawa as sheer accident, and to revert to the view that 
mesons have no deep connection with nuclei. It does not seem to us 
that this is a tenable position: it is not the idea that mesons are essential 
ingredients of nuclei, responsible for the forces holding them together 
as well as for many of the properties of the neutron and proton them- 
selves, that is at fault, but rather our mathemaitcal methods and physi- 
cal models for describing this situation. For mesons most certainly are 
an ingredient of nuclei, and for this there is direct cosmic-ray evidence 
of the most striking sort. 

We have seen that mesons are secondary cosmic rays, made in the 
upper atmosphere. Our discussion of the atmospheric transition curve 
on the basis of cascade theory led us to believe that the primary cosmic 
rays were positrons, and that either these, or the secondary gamma rays 
of the cascade, would, in addition to making the great atmospheric 
cascade phenomena, produce mesons. 


36 Science in the University 


Three sets of observations, carried out very near the top of the atmos- 
phere, have shown that this is not so. 

1. At less than one cascade unit from the top of the atmosphere, 
where, according to cascade theory, the number of vertical rays should 
exceed the number of primary rays by only some 30 per cent, the actual 
observed number of vertical rays is some five to ten times the number 
of primaries (these figures refer to the most energetic component; for 
lower energies the multiplication at this point is two- to fivefold). This 
indicates that the fundamental multiplicative process has nothing to 
do with cascades, and strongly suggests that it involves, not the succes- 
sive building up of the radiation, but the production of a considerable 
number of secondaries in one elementary collision taking place very 
near the top of the atmosphere. 

2. If the primary radiation were cascade (positrons), then very large 
showers should be very frequent near the top of the atmosphere. This 
is not the case. The maximum in the shower component falls well 
below the maximum in the atmospheric transition curve, and the num- 
ber of large showers, with an energy of 10°° v or so, is far too small to 
be consistent with the view that primary cosmic rays are positrons of 
mean energy in this range. 

3. If the primary radiation were cascade radiation, most of it, near 
the top of the atmosphere, before meson production is appreciable, 
would be absorbed by some inches of Pb. This is not the case; the 
intensity of radiation, well above the atmospheric transition maximum, 
is nearly independent of Pb filtration. 

These facts show clearly that there is a rapid noncascade multiplica- 
tion of the primary rays in the atmosphere, and that the immediate 
products of this multiplication are penetrating cosmic rays, or mesons— 
whether they are in all respects similar to the mesons which survive at 
sea level is not known with certainty. A detailed analysis of this pri- 
mary multiplication shows that it occurs on the average at a depth of 
some 30 gm/cm’ of matter, and that the mean number of rays pro- 
duced in one multiplicative collision is about ten, increasing somewhat 
with the energy of the primary rays. These fundamental explosions, 
which occur very much less frequently lower in the atmosphere, but 
can still be seen in cloud chambers operated at 14,000 ft, and indirectly 
detected even lower, involve the simultaneous ejection from an atomic 


Oppenheimer: Cosmic Rays 37 


nucleus—a nitrogen nucleus for the most part—of some 5 to 20 mesons, 
together with a general pulverization of the nucleus itself into its com- 
ponent nucleons. This fact alone shows that mesons do play an essen- 
tial part in nuclei, and confirms in a qualitative way the enormously 
high meson density around nucleons. 

The agreement, then, between the position and magnitude of the 
atmospheric transition curve and the cascade theory turns out to be 
an accident: the primary radiation is certainly not cascade. The most 
conservative hypothesis at the moment is that this primary radiation 
consists largely of protons (we know it is for the most part singly posi- 
tively charged). But this is a conjecture only, rendered plausible by the 
fact that we might expect a collision of one nucleon of high energy 
with an atomic nucleus to give rise to just such an explosion of mesons 
as is found. 

It turns out that many of the mesons so formed are quite slow, and 
that, traveling in the rare reaches of the upper atmosphere, most of 
them decay spontaneously, thus giving rise to secondary radiation of 
rather low-energy electrons and positrons, which subsequently build 
up small showers and provide a cascade component that is relatively 
intense in the upper atmosphere. Some part of the meson energy of the 
penetrating component is converted into the cascade component even 
in solid matter, where meson decay is insignificant. This is a simple 
effect, for the most part, in which mesons hit electrons present in 
matter and give them a high energy. In addition to this, mesons do 
occasionally radiate in the strong electric fields near atomic nuclei, and 
this gamma radiation can initiate showers. In this way it is possible 
to understand fairly well the production and intensity of the soft 
radiation, not only in the atmosphere, but deep in the earth. The soft 
radiation, once formed, is adequately described by the cascade theory. 
But it is almost all tertiary radiation, produced by the decay and the 
collisions of mesons that are themselves secondary. There is no evi- 
dence that mesons, once formed, interact strongly with atomic nuclei, 
or even that they are scattered by them. I have already mentioned the 
difficulty of understanding this small scattering. 

There is one part of the soft component, insignificant in intensity 
but unmistakable in its surprising properties, that cannot at present be 
accounted for as tertiary radiation: this is the showers of immense 


38 Science in the University 


size that were discovered by Auger, showers in which a million or 
more electrons and positrons may sweep over an area of many square 
meters simultaneously. Some of these showers at their maximum point 
may extend over 100 meters square or more, and involve an energy of 
10-10" volts. The frequency of these events, which can be recorded 
by coincidence counters separated by tens of meters, and illuminated by 
cloud chambers so operated that we may look at the radiation passing 
at a random point between the counters, is very small, but is still 
immensely greater than any tertiary cascade radiation would explain. 
Whether there is a weak high-energy primary cascade component, or 
whether these high-energy gamma rays or electrons are occasionally 
produced in the collisions of a primary protonic component with mat- 
ter in the earth’s atmosphere, is for the moment not known. And on 
this point, as on so many others that have arisen in this discussion, 
theoretical ideas can be only a rather untrustworthy guide, since their 
application involves an extrapolation over the known range of validity 
of existing theory by a factor of about one hundred million. 

It is perhaps appropriate to conclude this report without attempting 
to alleviate the impression of uncertainty, of adventure, and of an 
inevitable confusion. For that is likely for a long time to be a part of 
research in cosmic rays. 


SCIENCE 
IN THE 


UNIVERSITY 


By Members of the Faculties of 
the University of California 


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
BERKELEY AND LOS ANGELES 


1944 


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
BERKELEY AND LOS ANGELES 


CALIFORNIA 


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


LONDON, ENGLAND 


COPYRIGHT, 1944, BY 


THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


BY THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 


