On the Quantum Theory of the Autoelectric Field Currents 

Author(s): J. R. Oppenheimer 

Source: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
Vol. 14, No. 5 (May 15, 1928), pp. 363-365 

Published by: National Academy of Sciences 

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/85208 


Accessed: 04/05/2014 00:24 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


National Academy of Sciences 1s collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 195.78.108.85 on Sun, 4 May 2014 00:24:34 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


PROCEEDINGS 


NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES 


ON THE QUANTUM THEORY OF THE AUTOELECTRIC FIELD 
CURRENTS 


By J. R. OPPENHEIMER* 
NORMAN BriIDGE LABORATORY, PASADENA 


Communicated March 28, 1928 


By the application of a sufficiently intense electric field a Bohr atom 
could be rendered unstable. For when the drop in potential across the 
electronic orbit reaches a value of the order of magnitude of the ionizing 
potential of the atom (10° volts/cm.), the electron, instead of remain- 
ing in the neighborhood of the nucleus will fall down the hill of 
potential energy, and the atom will be dissociated. This dissociation 
is explosive in character. For there is a critical field strength, below 
which the atom remains stable indefinitely and above which it dissociates 
in a time of the order of the orbital periods of the atom. ‘The character- 
istic for the .autoelectric current should accordingly show abrupt dis- 
continuities. 

If one examines the same problem with the quantum mechanics, he 
finds that these abrupt changes disappear: Any field, no matter how 
weak, will in time dissociate an atom. ‘This is essentially a consequence 
of the fact that the motion of the electron is no longer absolutely restricted 
to a region of the dimensions of the Bohr orbit; it will now occasionally, 
though not very often, be found at points much further from the nucleus; 
and the further it is, the smaller will be the field required to insure that 
it does not return to the nucleus. Since the probability that an electron 
be at a distance R from the nucleus falls off exponentially with increasing 
R, the rate at which the field ionizes the atom may be expected to decrease 
rapidly when the field strength is decreased. 

These considerations may be made precise. For, by a slight extension 
of the perturbation theory of the quantum mechanics, one may find the 
rate at which the field induces transitions; and the particular transition 
which is responsible for the effect is the quantum jump from the normal 
state of the atom to a state of the same energy, in which electron and 
nucleus are falling apart under the influence of the field. ‘This rate turns 
out! to be, for a hydrogenic atom with ionizing potential W, 


This content downloaded from 195.78.108.85 on Sun, 4 May 2014 00:24:34 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


364 PHYSICS: J. R. OPPENHEIMER Proc. N. A. S. 


ae a = h/2a(2mW)7"” 
0.02 h/m a? a’ exp {— 4/3 8a} (1) 
a = 8r'mek /h? 


per unit time; here m and —e are the mass and charge of the electron. 
If the wave functions of the atom are not quite hydrogenic in character, 
the exponential is not essentially affected, but the numerical factor may 
vary by a factor, perhaps, of two. | 
From (1) it follows that the characteristics of the field currents should 
satisfy | | 
Inti —'/sln F = C/E. | (2) 


The reversible curves published two years ago by Millikan and Eyring? 
do, in fact, satisfy this condition very satisfactorily. And the formula 
(2) is essentially that found empirically and independently by Millikan 
and Lauritsen;? it has been shown by them to hold with great exactitude 
for all the reversible currents investigated. 

With W in volts, the theoretical value of C in volts per cm. is —108 W™”. 
The observed slope of the characteristic should thus make possible, pro- 
vided F may be correctly estimated, the determination of the ionizing 
potential for electrons in metal: the work function. The values of F, 
however, computed from the geometrical dimensions of the wire, give for 
W values of a few tenths of a volt. From this we may conclude that the 
autoelectrons do not come uniformly from the surface of the wire, but 
only from certain favored points where the field strengths are abnormally 
high. Now this is just what is found experimentally. For the wire (after 
systematic out-gassing) may be subjected to fields of four million volts 
per centimeter without drawing a current measurable on the galvanom- 
eter;* but this condition may suddenly be changed,’ so that the current 
jumps immediately to a large value, and one (or more) bright spots appear 
on the anode and the walls of the tube. If after such an event the wire 
is examined*’ microscopically, it is found that at appropriate positions 
there are small craters, and that these are surrounded by protuberances 
with very small radius of curvature; and the dimensions of these points, 
which should be responsible for the current, vary from a tenth to a fortieth 
of those of the wire and thus give work functions of the order of a few 
volts. Thus atypical crater has a radius of curvature of 2 X 107° cm. and 
gives W = 4.7 volts. Diffraction, however, makes the precise estimation 
of the radii of curvature of the points impossible. 

The formula (1) gives in amperes for the current per series electron: 


i=3X 10°F“ WwW” exp — (10° W” F-, (3) 


It is thus possible, from the value of W and F, to compute the number of 
atoms taking part in the effect. This computation cannot be made very 


This content downloaded from 195.78.108.85 on Sun, 4 May 2014 00:24:34 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


Vou. 14, 1928 PHYSICS: J. R. OPPENHEIMER | 365 


precise, however, because small changes in the exponential mask large 
changes in the number of atoms, and because, further, the value of the 
constant factor is not quite certain. But all the values so far obtained 
show that the number of atoms taking part lies between 10~* and 10~6 
of the total number of surface atoms. ‘This explains the spotted appear- 
ance of the anode, and agrees reasonably with the dimensions of the 
points as observed, which give an area about 10~° that of the wire. 

The field currents are not absolutely independent of temperature. 
Empirically the characteristic curves show two distinct slopes for constant 
temperature and varying field; these correspond respectively to the 
thermionic current as modified by the field (Schottky), and to the field 
current as modified by the temperature; because of the steepness of the 
exponentials the intermediate region is not susceptible of experimental 
resolution. The former region is given qualitatively by Schottky’s 
theory of the reduced image force. In the latter region one finds the law 
that the relative change in current induced by a change of temperature 
is nearly independent of the strength of the field. ‘This law follows readily 
from the theory of field currents,' if one assumes the existence of one or 
more excited electronic states with work functions somewhat less than W. 

Since the formula (1) was published, two theoretical treatments of the 
autoelectric effect have been given. ‘The former of these, that of Houston,® 
ascribes the effect to the reduction of the work function of the metal by 
the field, and the internal partial pressure which the conduction electrons 
acquire on the Fermi statistics. ‘This seems, however, not to lead to a 
satisfactory quantitative account of the experiments; for this purpose, 
the atom furnishes a better model than the Fermi gas. In the second 
paper® the effect is obtained, as in the present theory, from the fact that 
the wave functions for the electrons do not vanish completely outside the 
surface of the metal; but the method of computing the current is in- 
consistent with the quantum mechanics and involves undetermined 
constants which should in fact be determinate. The characteristic 
obtained by this calculation also fails to agree with experiment, because 
the binding force which holds the electron in the metal is taken to be 
the image force instead of the coulomb attraction of the ions, as in the 
present paper. 

* NATIONAL RESEARCH FELLOW. 

1 J. R. Oppenheimer, Phys. Rev., 31, 80 (1928). 

2 R. A. Millikan and C. Eyring, [bzd., 27, 55 (1926). 

3 R.A. Millikan and C. Lauritsen, Proc. Nat. Acad. Scé., 14, 45 (1928). 

4. R.A. Millikan and B. E. Shackelford, Phys. Rev., 15, 289 (1920). 

44 T am indebted to Dr. Lauritsen for an opportunity to see his photographs of the 
craters. 


5 V. Houston, Zs. Phys., 47, 33 (1928). 
6 QO. W. Richardson, Roy. Soc. Proc., A667, 719 (1928). 


This content downloaded from 195.78.108.85 on Sun, 4 May 2014 00:24:34 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


