Bulletin of the Routledge 


Taylor & Francis Group 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Functions of the International Agency in Research 
and Development 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1947) Functions of the International Agency 
in Research and Development, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 3:7, 173-176, DOI: 
10.1080/00963402.1947.11459078 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1947.11459078 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
XJ 
(sg Submit your article to this journal @ 
alal Article views: 1 
N 
IQ] View related articles @ 


we Citing articles: 5 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


FUNCTIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL AGENCY 


IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


The following report is a slightly condensed version of the testimony 
given by Dr. Oppenheimer before the Control Committee of the 
UN Atomic Energy Commission on April 29 concerning interna- 
tional research and developmental activities. Dr. Oppenheimer 
was wartime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory and a member 
of the committee that prepared the Acheson-Lilienthal Report on 
the international contro! of atomic energy. Dr. Oppenheimer, Pro- 
fessor of Physics at California Institute of Technology and at the 
University of California, is about to assume his new duties as head 
of the Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton. 


I have read the seven working pa- 
pers and, by and large, have been very 
much impressed, not only with the 
very great elements of agreement, 
but also with the clarity which per- 
meates them. I think that the prob- 
lems of research and development are 
among those where the attack should be 
most clear and where agreement 
should be least difficult. 

I think everyone has had the ex- 
perience, when he first inquired into 
atomic energy, of being rather dis- 
appointed that the so-called benign 
uses, the so-called peaceful uses 
seemed so extremely vague and so 
conjectural, and in some cases so 
remote, compared to the very im- 
mediate application in the form of 
atomic weapons. The reason for this 
is that, to an extent that is hard 
to overstate, the peaceful uses of 
atomie energy are a problem of re- 
search and development. 

Therefore, it need hardly be em- 
phasized that any attempt to out- 
line what the consequences of such 
research will be is most misleading, 
unless it is coupled with a statement 
that we do not know what the con- 
sequences of such research will be. 

I would start then by an account 
of what to me are the visible areas 
of development, and I will try to 
give some feeling as to whether they 
are things which will pay off—which 
will lead to benefits—in a month 
or a year or a century. Having done 
that, I will speak a little of respon- 
sibility, of the organic relation which 
international agencies might appro- 
priately have to these varied fields. 
In this, I am going to adopt the 
fundamental principle of international 


cooperative development of atomic 
energy. This is a _ controversial 
principle which has been argued about, 
but it seems to me that there has 
been sufficient agreement on it to 
warrant pursuing it in this discus- 
sion, 


SIX FIELDS 
OF INVESTIGATION 


I have listed six fields of investiga- 
tion—others would make slightly dif- 
ferent lists. The first is essentially 
the use of atomic energy as an in- 
strument of research and develop- 
ment itself. As you know, this field 
was opened up before the war. The 
role of atomic energy, in its pure- 
ly narrow and technical sense of the 
chain reaction, in making the use of 
tracers possible, is a limited but 
very important one. It is limited, 
because you can make both stable 
and radioactive tracers by other meth- 
ods. What the development of re- 
actors has done is essentially to give 
a limitless supply. In some cases 
this supply is undigestible. A fis- 
sion product is manufactured normal- 
ly in quantities far beyond any that 
seem to have usefulness in academic 
or industrial research. I have no 
doubt that uses will be found; but 
it is hard to handle hundreds of 
thousands of curies of material, and 
it is not clear to me that this will 
be a great thing for the future. It 
is clear that in the case of tracers 
which are hard to make, where the 
yield is small, and of which the most 
notable and probably the most fa- 


mous example is carbon 14, the avail- 
ability of these tracers has quite 
revolutionized the scale of activity. 

This is characteristic also of the 
direct use of radiation which is again 
not a new thing. Gamma rays and 
neutrons have been used for alleged- 
ly therapeutic purposes for a long 
time, and some thoughts about their 
industrial use have occurred to peo- 
ple in the past; but here again the 
scale has been vastly increased by 
reactors. These are things which can 
start paying off in scientific insight, 
and probably in technical progress, 
very rapidly. 

As for other uses, in physical re- 
search, of intense beams of neutrons, 
I may point out that the very pre- 
cise measurements of the magnetic 
moment of the neutron were in fact 
accomplished using a reactor and that 
it is doubtful whether a comparably 
good job could have been done in 
any other way. 

With regard to power, the other 
great development to which people 
who try to promote the benign uses 
of atomic energy usually refer, the 
situation is different in all respects. 
It is not an undertaking which is 
likely to be successful if left to the 
random efforts of small laboratories. 


PROBLEMS OF 
OPERATING REACTORS 


The time scale for it, though con- 
troversial, is certainly different from 
the time scale for the applications of 
radioactive materials. There are a 
number of problems which in fact 
are closely related. There is the 
problem of operating reactors at tem- 
peratures sufficiently high, so that 
significant power can be produced. 
This is a complicated problem in chem- 
ical engineering, complicated by what 
radiation does to materials, compli- 
cated by questions of heat transfer. 
This problem was not pursued by us 
during the war; we do not have a 
small generator of atomic power 
turning over a turbo-generator to 
demonstrate. My own view is that 
it should not be a matter of many 


173 


years before delivering atomic ener- 
gy in the form of electrical energy 
will be a proven thing. But that is 
of course a very small part of the 
problem. In order to consider using 
power reactors, let us say, for spe- 
cialized purposes such as propulsion, 
and a fortiori for general power 
production, so as to relieve power 
shortages and to supplement power 
on the present scale of world con- 
sumption, you have to worry about 
the problem of fuel; and the prob- 
lem of fuel is very largely the prob- 
lem of making what in the termi- 
nology of these Committees is called 
nuclear fuel. This does not happen 
overnight. This is something where 
one can erect from the fundamental 
constants, Planck’s constant, the 
charge on the electron, and so on, 
a certain time scale which it will 
take to produce reasonable quanti- 
ties of this fuel. 


THREE STAGES 
IN DEVELOPMENT 


Therefore, speaking just as a guess, 
I would give the following estimate 
of three stages in the development 
of atomic power, and I assure you 
that this is not secret information, 
because there is no secret informa- 
tion as to estimating what the future 
holds in store. 

I think that within five years, 
and possibly considerably less than 
that, there will be a demonstration 
of usable electrical energy derived 
from nuclear reactors. I think in 
a decade from now, and certainly in 
less than two decades, it may be 
possible to apply nuclear energy to 
certain specific highly critical prob- 
lems of energy generation. Whether 
this will be to establish a station 
near the north pole, or to propel ships 
or rockets, J don’t know; but it will 
be a case where cost is not important, 
where one is willing to divert quite 
valuable material to a specialized and 
important objective. I think that it 
will take between thirty and fifty 
years before atomic energy can in 
any substantial way supplement the 
general power resources of the world. 

There are three other areas of 
activity that I have written down. 
One is the question of the origins of 
nuclear energy. I think there is a 
rather wide-spread belief that the 
pursuit of fundamental physics is 
related to atomic energy. It is in 


174 


fact so related, but much less direct- 
ly and much less foreseeably, I 
think, than is commonly assumed. 


EXTENSION OF 
FRONTIERS OF KNOWLEDGE 


I may illustrate the relation, by 
saying that I think the study of fun- 
damental particles, nuclear forces, the 
reasans for nuclear stability, the prop- 
erties of nuclear reactions, and so 
on, that these things, insofar as they 
relate to the future, bear to atomic 
energy about the same relation that 
the quantum theory does to organic 
chemistry. This theory is necessary, 
in order really to understand organic 
chemistry in terms of physics, but 
is not necessary in order to have a 
mastery of organic chemistry quite 
adequate for the manufacture of TNT 
and quite adequate for the study of 
plastics. 

These studies of fundamental phys- 
ies, which are extremely popular 
among my colleagues in this country, 
and no doubt abroad, are characteris- 
tically things which are conducted in 
universities, though sometimes in in- 
dustrial laboratories, and which could 
be conducted in scientific institutes. 
They are, as I think was observed 
in the working paper of the United 
Kingdom, ideal training grounds for 
scientists. They correspond to an ex- 
tension of the frontiers of human 
knowledge. They may lead, in some 
way or other, to practical consequen- 
ces of immense import for the world; 
that they have a direct bearing on 
atomic energy is admittedly possible, 
but I should not predict that it is 
likely. I do not, in other words, be- 
lieve in the cosmic ray bombs of 
which we have read so much in the 
newspapers. 

Here again these are activities 
which are now going on, which will 
continue, and of which it is reason- 
able to expect that they will not be 
exhausted, at least in our lifetime, 
and where the prediction of any kind 
of practical fruit is really beyond 
even my indiscretion. 

There are two other areas. One 
is the field of atomic explosives. I 
think that the design of instruments 
for the delivery of atomic weapons, 
instruments for the fusing of atomic 
weapons, of minor improvements in 
the economy of such weapons, in the 
way in which they use the material, 


and so on, these are things which it 
is hardly reasonable to have studied, 
except with war-like intent. I think 
that the discovery of the possibilities 
of making atomic explosions, what 
kind of materials can be used, what 
principles of assembly can be used, 
what really goes on in an atomic ex- 
plosion, these are matters which may 
need to be studied even in a peaceful 
world. I believe that very affirmative- 
ly, because I think that we do not 
too fully understand what the limita- 
tions and what the possibilities are, 
and I do not think it is possible to 
feel confidence in a system of security 
which leaves unanswered questions 
which are capable of answer by the 
proven methods of physical experi- 
mentation. 


There may be one other argument 
in favor of such study; it is conceiv- 
able—you have all heard it discussed 
—that atomic explosives may come 
to be useful for nondestructive pur- 
poses. Of course, physically they will 
always destroy something but they 
may be used for purposes which are 
beneficial, such as certain blasting 
operations or operations for the con- 
trol of weather, and so on. I do not 
believe this is a very hopeful avenue 
of attack, but I do not think that, in 
any plans for the future, the door 
should be firmly bolted against ex- 
ploring these things, 


PROBLEMS OF 
CONTROL AND SAFETY 


This brings me to a class of prob- 
lems which are directed toward pur- 
poses of contro] and safety. Let me 
give three or four examples. An 
agency which is worried about the 
destructive uses of atomic energy will 
be concerned to see to what extent 
use can be made of denaturants. I 
can honestly say that I do not know, 
and, to the best of my knowledge, 
none of my colleagues in this coun- 
try know, how useful denaturants will 
be—within the rather wide limits 
of the assertion that they will be of 
some use, and the certainty that they 
cannot be all-comprehensive as a 
scheme of control. 


I will give a second example. Every- 
one knows that in the sun the re- 
actions of light nuclei, notably of 
hydrogen, give rise to the energy that 
we live by. Every month or so a 
man will come around with some 
scheme for making this energy avail- 


able terrestrially. The schemes I 
have heard are unsound. They will 
not work. But there is no law of 
nature that says you cannot make 
atomic energy on earth out of light 
nuclei. Therefore, it is necessary to 
keep open an avenue whereby any 
sound scheme that is proposed, or 
any scheme which is not on paper 
proven unsound, could be explored. 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
THE AGENCY 


There are other things which tend 
toward the maintenance of safety. 
For instance, it has often been sug- 
gested that clandestine plants of a 
certain kind could be detected by the 
radioactivity that they emit. That 
wants to be explored. One would 
want to know whether there are sim- 
ple methods by which the detonation 
of an atomic bomb in a remote area 
can reliably be detected. These are 
things which any agency that was 
really worried about maintaining 
security would want to be free to 
act upon. It would wish to explore 
any good suggestions that were made. 


It has seemed to me that it would 
be useful—and here I think my views 
follow very closely the suggestions 
in the working paper presented by 
France—to distinguish three rather 
different kinds of responsibility that 
an international agency would have. 
The first of these is what might be 
called primary responsibility, as in 
an undertaking without which the 
agency could not do the other duties 
with which it was entrusted. The 
second is facilitative responsibility. 
The third responsibility is a sec- 
ondary and benevolent responsibility, 
because on the whole it was a very 
good thing to have this work go on, 
the agency has an interest in it, but 
does not live and die by it. 


I think these distinctions will be- 
come clearer by example. With the 
exception of its responsibility for 
control, the only thing which an agen- 
cy dedicated to international develop- 
ment of atomic energy has to do now 
lies in the field of research and devel- 
opment. That is an overstatement. 
It does have to do some other things. 
It has to mine some uranium, look 
into the future, and so on; but the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy are 
coextensive with research and devel- 
opment. 


If one takes these words with 
the kind of seriousness that the situa- 
tion warrants, I would say that the 
international agency would have a 
primary responsibility for the devel- 
opment of reactors, for the methods 
of producing nuclear fuels. Here my 
own view would be that, in the long- 
term, the reactors themselves would 
be the most effective instruments for 
doing this, but that separation plants 
would play a necessary, if not major, 
part. The agency would have such 
responsibility for the discovery, ex- 
ploitation, and recovery of raw mate- 
rials, for the problems that I men- 
tioned above, having to do with safe- 
ty, and with devices that can be 
used to render more or less likely the 
diversion of material to destructive 
ends, and for an understanding of 
atomic explosives, 

When I say “primary responsibil- 
ity”, I do not mean by that that the 
international agency should forbid 
others to participate in this work. 
We will talk of that briefly later. 
But it should see that the work gets 
done and should by all means direct- 
ly engage in the work, in laboratories 
of its own. Such laboratories are 
going to be large undertakings. They 
are going to be patterned after the 
typical wartime laboratory, which was 
mostly a place where development 
was carried out. They are going to 
be not too dissimilar from what in 
this country is a rather common pat- 
tern of industrial laboratory. They 
are not going to be very much like 
the academic laboratory in which 
fundamental physics, chemistry, and 
biology have in the past been pur- 
sued. 


THE FACILITY 
LABORATORY 


Quite different is the style of the 
facility laboratory, the laboratory 
which is built and perhaps operated 
by the agency, but with the purpose 
of being useful to people outside 
the agency and with the purpose of 
making available facilities and tech- 
niques developed by the agency. A 
small reactor is in this category. 
Here I would not wish to insist that 
it be operated by the agency. That 
does not seem to me to be terribly 
important. It must at least be li- 
censed, and it needs to be brought 
into existence by the agency. 


The agency must be responsible for 
seeing that such facilities are avail- 
able where there are people to make 
use of them. Here a very much 
greater degree of dispersion is prob- 
ably desirable. Here the pattern 
should probably be laboratories of 
quite moderate size and not very 
programmatic; that is, anyone who 
comes in and says “I want to radiate 
this” should get permission, provided 
“this” is not something that will blow 
the place up and provided he is a 
competent scientist. These laborato- 
ries should be free laboratories in 
which the agency’s great role is that 
it can facilitate the pursuit of scien- 
tific and technical matters. 


VALUE OF UNPREDICTABLE 
FINDINGS 


In the third category, by way of 
example, I think it might be very 
desirable for the international agen- 
ey to have a great synchrotron or 
synchro-cyclotron. However, this is 
certainly a field in which it does 
not have a primary involvement. This 
is a great field in which men and 
women work in a rather badly or- 
ganized manner, as scientists usually 
do, in institutes and universities; 
men and women who get up late and 
do not quite know what they are 
going to do tomorrow unless they do 
have a bright idea, in which they 
will work as they have in the past 
and from which essentially unpre- 
dictable findings about the natural 
world will emerge. 


That goes for physics; it goes for 
chemistry; it goes for biology; and 
it goes for all those fields which have 
contact with atomic energy but in 
which that contact is only a very 
small part of the field. Atomic ener- 
gy is a small part of science; it is 
only a very big problem in the con- 
temporary world. 


As was mentioned in the memoran- 
dum of the United Kingdom, I share 
the view that these three kinds of 
activities probably should not be 
mixed to too great an extent. What 
you run into when you mix develop- 
mental activities, which are pro- 
grammed, planned and focused, with 
activities which are of an inquiring 
and scientific nature, is the rivalry 
of two incompatible snobisms. 


The scientist is irritated by the 
practical preoccupations of the man 
conderned with development, and the 


175 


man concerned with development 
thinks that the scientist is lazy and 
of no account and is not doing a real 
job anyway. Therefore, the labora- 
tory very soon gets to be all one 
thing or all the other. I remember 
that Dr. Fermi came to Los Alamos 
some time after the foundation of the 
laboratory. He was somewhat horri- 
fied when he came to me and said, 
“The people here are actually in- 
terested in developing atomic weap- 
ons.” That indicated the triumph 
of the engineer’s view over that of the 
scientist. 


THREE FIELDS 
FOR MONOPOLY 


Of all these things, there are, to 
my way of thinking, only three where 
I would feel that a provision for mo- 
nopoly by the international agency, 
as opposed to the privilege to pur- 
sue and instruction to pursue, might 
appropriately be written into the pa- 
per setting up the agency. Two are 
in the fields of atomic explosives and 
in those parts of reactor develop- 
ment which use a large amount of 
explosive or potentially explosive ma- 
terial. My belief is that the reactor 
cevelopment of the future will in- 
volve large amounts of nuclear fuel, 
amounts so large that their diversion 
would in itself constitute a military 
menace, perhaps not a major menace 
but a disagreeable menace. 


These two things and a third, which 
I would add as a possibility but not 
a mandate, would be the only fields 
of monopoly. As every one knows, 
the third is that fission products can 
be used as poisons. I do not know 
whether this is a very effective form 
of warfare. However, the explora- 
tion of the potentialities here might 
well be left an international mo- 
nopoly. Certainly, it is something 
which should not be facilitated by the 
international agency as a national 
activity. One would not want the in- 
ternational agency to say, “Here are 
a million curies of radio-barium. 
See how many people you can poison 
with it.” 

I think that the prominence that 
has been given to the matter of atom- 
ic explosives, in what has been writ- 
ten about it, gives quite a wrong view 
of its importance. I think one or two 
laboratories poking around on the 
question of the fundamentals of atom- 
ic explosives, trying out notions of 
how you might use a certain dena- 


176 


tured material and prove that it would 
explode, would probably be all that 
would be involved. 


There may be a period of a decade 
where an international agency might 
say of this field, “There is not any- 
thing to do; nobody has any ideas 
and we are not interested in im- 
proving the efficiency of atomic ex- 
plosions by five per cent.” However, 
I think that provisions should be made 
to make such studies possible; and 
provisions should surely be made to 
forbid them to national agencies, be- 
cause they are certainly useful in the 
hands of national agencies only in 
the measure in which they may be 
used in warfare. 

I would add to that—and here I 
am differing from the United States’ 
working paper, but I believe in a 
legitimate way—it does not seem to 
me very profitable to forbid thinking 
about atomie explosives. This is 
something the prohibition of which 
may be rather hard to enforce. I be- 
lieve, therefore, that the prohibition 
should be limited to those activities 
which require the possession of sig- 
nificant quantities of nuclear fuel for 
being carried out, because, if the in- 
ternational agency is good, if it is 
any good, it will know where the nu- 
clear fuel is and it will know what 
is happening to it. Controls which 
are determined by this physical in- 
strument—namely, where the mate- 
rial is—are certainly enforceable, if 
anything is. 

I do not think that general staffs 
can be prevented from brooding about 
targets to bombard, carriers to carry 
the bombs, fuses, or anything like 
that; and I would hesitate to do more 
than to implore them not to engage 
in this activity. I would hesitate to 
prohibit them from engaging in this 
activity. 


SCALE OF RESEARCH 
AND DEVELOPMENT 


I should now like to comment as to 
the scale of this whole activity of 
atomic research and development. I 
think the work of the development 
authority might, when it was flourish- 
irg, take some ten per cent of the 
physicists and chemists, perhaps five 
per cent of the chemical engineers, 
and perhaps five per cent of the min- 
ing engineers there are in the world. 

There ought to be several pro- 
g-ammatic laboratories, several mean- 
ing not one or two and not one 


hundred but something of the order 
of a half-dozen perhaps, which would 
give a reasonable dispersion and yet 
make possible rather large laborato- 
ries in which coordinated effort would 
be carried on... Futhermore, it is 
important to emphasize that there 
should be openness, not only among 
these laboratories but also between 
these laboratories and all other lab- 
oratories of the agency, and all pri- 
vate, university, academic, national, 
and institutional laboratories. There 
should be complete and absolute open- 
ness. 


SECRET KNOWLEDGE 
IS DANGEROUS 


I also extend this to the problem of 
atomic explosives. Knowledge about 
atomic explosives is, in @ situation 
such as we are here contemplating, 
more dangerous if not disseminated 
than it is if disseminated. The pos- 
sibilities of keeping secrets in this 
field are in any case so remote, if one 
has an international undertaking, 
that one should plan for a systematic 
program of dissemination and educa- 
tion. 

I have a word to say about this; 
namely, that it is not enough to de- 
clare something is open. It requires 
instruction; it requires work to get 
an understanding of these things 
abroad. I know this from experience. 
I know it is not enough to tell some- 
one a secret; it is very hard to give 
away a secret. You have to work at- 
it week after week after week be- 
cause these things are complex. Only 
the creation of a really widespread 
and informed understanding of the 
techniques of atomic energy will get 
work on these problems advanced 
rapidly and with full effectiveness, 


Let me explain that. The normal 
way in which progress is made in 
any of these developmental activi- 
ties is that people become excited by 
the problem, They read about it some 
place; they talk about it; they have 
en idea and they come and say they 
would like to work on it. In order 
to further that goal, people who are 
not working on the problem, on the 
specific problem, must have a way of 
finding out about it. That is, they 
must have access to information be- 
fore there is any foreseeable chance 
that they will make good use of the 
information. 


(Continued on Page 197) 


Functions of the 
International Agency 


(Continued from Page 176) 


It is my feeling that the agency, 
if it is set up, must devote itself 
to the cultivation of this understand- 
ing, so that the whole pool of scien- 
tists and engineers in the world will 
be available. Only a small fraction 
of them would actually participate in 
the work. Nevertheless, those who 
participate in the work should be the 
ones who are interested in it and have 
learned about it before they could 
prove that their learning about it 
would pay off. 


I belabor this point because it is, 
to my way of thinking, the decisive 
reason why the development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy will 
prosper more under a system of in- 
ternational cooperation, and corres- 
ponding openness, than it possibly 
can under purely national systems. 


Under purely national systems, vast 
areas will remain secret. It is true 
that various nations may all be keep- 
ing the same secrets from each other, 
but they will keep them. As a result 
of that, the spontaneous growth and 
development—which is the thing that 
has always in the past enriched our 
lives through scientific discovery— 
will be enormously slowed down. It 
will not be stopped. I do not know 
that my time scales for atomic pow- 
er are too far off even under national 
development, but they are certainly 
too short for national development 
and deliberately conservatively long 
for international development. 


There are other reasons. The dis- 
traction of atomic armament is a 
real distraction. But these are sec- 
ondary reasons compared to the enor- 
mous advantage of allowing the imagi- 
nation and spontaneous interest of 
men to carry out this development, as 
it would under such conditions of in- 
ternational cooperation and openness. 


I would make only two further com- 
ments: there is in the proposal for 
international cooperative development, 
insofar as it is a job of research and 
development, very little that is con- 
trary to past patterns of scientists 
and technical people all over the 
world. It is a pattern recognized by 
all of us. Just for that reason, this 
part of the job of international con- 
trol is an easy part; in this part, one 
can be quite confident of success. 


| 


A Letter to the Editors | 


IMPORTANT OMISSION IN AC- 
COUNT OF WORLD GOVERNMENT 


I have just read in your June 
issue the article, “The World Gov- 
ernment Movement in the United 
States,” by Mr. Harrison Brown. In 
the article Mr. Brown discusses the 
movement at some length and ends 
by listing and describing world gov- 
ernment organizations. In both he 
fails to mention Federal Union. 


His only reference to the Federal 
Union movement is to say that “ad- 
vocates of Russian exclusion from 
such a government, including former 
Associate Justice Owen J. Roberts 
and Clarence Streit (formerly leader 
of the Union Now movement), di- 
vorced themselves from the groups 
listed above at an early date.” 


The fact is that Federal Union, Inc., 
was founded in 1939 to unite free 
people by world government and has 
never changed that policy. It is not 
based on a negative policy of ex- 
cluding Kussia, but on a_ positive 
policy of uniting free nations until 
the attraction of this free union brings 
all nations of the world into a dem- 
ocratic federal world government. 
Mr. Streit is still leader of the Union 
Now movement which is Federal 
Union. Advocates of this movement 
did not divorce themselves from the 
groups which Mr. Brown lists; the 
reverse is true, two of the three 
crganizations Brown mentions being 


The last comment is this: 

Although the primary purpose of 
the United States proposals is to pro- 
vide security, rather than to provide 
freedom of research, this freedom is 
nevertheless a criterion by which 
their fundamental soundness may be 
judged; for no proposals predicated on 
forbidding enquiry and learning could, 
in the end, survive. 


first formed as splinter groups break- 
ing away from Federal Union. 

Mr. Brown and some of his col- 
leagues seek to minimize Federal 
Union by ignoring it. Yet this or- 
ganization has done more by sus- 
tained effort to stimulate the desire 
for world government than any of 
the four organizations Mr. Brown 
lists at the end... 

It is significant that in the same 
issue of your publication in which 
Mr. Brown discussed the “world gov- 
ernment movement” while convenient- 
ly ignoring Federal Union, Dr. Har- 
old C. Urey in the lead article calls 
for a federal union of democratic 
nations as the first step toward dem- 
ocratic world government. This is 
exactly the Federal Union prog- 
gram... 

—Don Dennis 
Executive Director, 
Federal Union Ine. 


I would like to apologize to Fed- 
eral Union for overlooking their or- 
ganization in my article surveying 
world government groups. Contrary 
to the belief expressed by Mr. Den- 
nis, the omission was not premedi- 
tated, nor was it my intention to 
“minimize Federal Union by ignor- 
ing it’, The fact of the matter is 
that I have long admired the unselfish 
vigor with which Mr. Streit has car- 
ried on his program of education con- 
cerning the need for federation. 

When the editors of the BULLETIN 
requested that I write an article de- 
scribing ‘which organization is 
which” in world government circles, 
I accepted reluctantly, realizing that 
the history of the various organiza- 
tions is so complicated, I might easily 
offend some groups and find myself in 
a delicate position, Apparently, I was 
right. 

Perhaps the omission occurred be- 
cause I have always subconsciously 
thought Federal Union leaders to be 
vigorous in their belief that a gov- 
ernment should be formed either 
directly or indirectly excluding Rus- 
sia until she is democratized. A gov- 
ernment that does not include Russia 
is not a “world” government. Like- 
wise, I did not believe, until Mr. Den- 
nis indicated my error, that a group 
fighting for such a partial govern- 
ment considered itself to be a world 
government organization. I apolo- 
gize. 

—Harrison Brown 


197 


