JULY 15, 1941 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


VOLUME 60 


On the Interaction of Mesotrons and Nuclei 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER AND JULIAN SCHWINGER 
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 
(Received June 19, 1941) 


HE formalism of mesotron field theories was 
first developed in analogy either with the 
method of classical electrodynamics that involves 
the determination of fields produced by pregiven 
sources, or with the perturbation technique of 
quantum electrodynamics. This program not only 
has led to predictions in contradiction with 
experiment (the singular nature of nuclear forces, 
and large cross sections for mesotron scattering 
by nuclei) but is intrinsically inconsistent, for the 
methods of electrodynamics, involving the neg- 
lect of the reaction of field on source, and based 
on the small magnitude of the coupling between 
charges and the electromagnetic field, are here 
quite unjustified. This inconsistency is rendered 
far sharper by the charge- and spin-dependent 
couplings of the mesotron theory. These diffi- 
culties have led to two apparently unrelated sug- 
gestions for modifying the formal treatment of 
mesotron theory. 

Thus Heisenberg has attempted a more com- 
plete solution of the mesotron. equations by 
including, within the framework of a classical 
theory, the large reaction of the field on the 
emitting source. He treated the problem of a 
neutral vector field interacting with a fixed, 
spatially extended source to which is attached a 
classical spin. His calculations showed that the 
inertia of the spin, arising from the reaction of its 
proper field, would greatly reduce the spin- 
dependent mesotron scattering. A_ relativistic 
variant of this procedure has been elaborated by 
Bhabha, who based his work on Dirac’s classical 
electron model. Those terms in the field reaction 
on the source which become singular as a, the 
spatial’ extension of the source, vanishes, are 
discarded and the finite terms are evaluated in 
the limit of point coupling. However, it is 
precisely these singular terms that are essential 
for Heisenberg’s explanation of the small mesotron 
scattering. Furthermore, quite apart from the 
serious question of whether this method affords a 
classical description of elementary particles, it is 
so essentially restricted to the classical domain 


that it provides no basis for a correspondence 
treatment of the actual quantum-mechanical 
problems encountered in a discussion of the 
scattering of charged mesotrons and of nuclear 
forces. 

For this reason Bhabha himself and Heitler 
suggested the alternative. theory of proton 
isobars. They observed that, from the point of 
view of perturbation theory, the large scattering 
arising from charge- and spin-dependent couplings 
is a consequence of the prohibition of certain 
intermediate states in the scattering process by 
the conservation laws for charge and angular 
momentum. They therefore proposed a modifi- 
cation of the assumptions of mesotron theory by 
postulating the existence of slightly more massive 
nuclear particles with arbitrary integral charge 
and half-integral spin. By a suitable choice of the 
excitation energy of the lowest isobars—high 
enough to make them escape ready detection— 
the scattering cross section could be reduced 
sufficiently to avoid conflict with experiment. 

The connection between these two sets of ideas 
lies in the circumstance that a field strongly 
coupled to a charge or spin-dependent source will 
itself possess states in which charge or angular 
momentum is bound to the source, with the 
energy of the system increasing quadratically in 
its dependence on the total charge or angular 
momentum. This has been shown in detail by 
Wentzel for the charged scalar field. Wentzel 
used a lattice space to achieve convergence and 
considered only the limit of strong coupling. 
Despite the fact that his theory predicted isobars, 
his calculations indicated an inacceptably large 
value for the mesotron scattering cross section. 

The evidence of nuclear forces shows, however, 
that the mesotron coupling is spin dependent, 
and indicates that the coupling constant itself is 
not very large. In order to see how these facts 
would modify Wentzel’s conclusions, we have 
investigated a class of problems that throws some 
light on the earlier work and that also offers 
promise of a limited but consistent description of 


150. 


INTERACTION OF MESOTRONS AND NUCLEI 


the mesotron, in agreement with experience: 
nuclear forces on the one hand, and, on the other, 
the small scattering, zero spin, and highly 
multiple production observed for mesotrons in 
cosmic rays. We have, in part, generalized 
Heisenberg’s treatment, and considered the clas- 
sical problem of the coupling of neutral and 
charged, scalar and pseudo-scalar mesotrons to 
an extended, spatially fixed source. These prob- 
lems are all rigorously soluble, for all values of 
the coupling constant and source size. In addi- 
tion, we have treated Wentzel’s quantum problem 
of the charged scalar field,! using an extended 
source instead of a lattice space, in the limit where 
the coupling constant g is large, y=g?/hc>1, 
and have made the analogous calculation for the 
neutral pseudo-scalar in the corresponding limit 
y>> xa (here x=yc/h and yp is the mesotron mass). 
The problem of the charged pseudo-scalar has 
not been solved quantum-mechanically even in 
this limit, nor has any quantum solution been 
found for intermediate values of y, or y/xa; nor 
have the revisions in nuclear forces been calcu- 
lated in detail. 

Nevertheless, we believe our results to be of 
some interest. The classical solutions for the 
pseudo-scalar always give states of bound angular 
momentum if y/xa is not too small; the energy of 
these states depends on the total angular 
momentum J, as 


3 (xa/y)pc?(J?— 4). 
Here a is defined by 
a= fdrK (1) |r—r' | K(r') dr’ 


and K(r) is the source function. The symmetrical 
scalar and charged scalar theories give solutions 
with bound charge, the former only if 2y >1; and 
here the mass of the normal state of an isobar, for 
y>>1, depends on the charge Q as (u/v)(Q—72)”. 
For the symmetrical pseudo-scalar the condition 
for the existence of bound spin and charge is 
2y>3xa. The quantum solutions for y>1 
(charged scalar) and y>xa (neutral pseudo- 
scalar) agree in these conclusions.’ This agree- 


1 Julian Schwinger, to be published soon. 
2G. Wentzel (Helv. Phys. Acta 13, 269 (1940)) gives 
yka>>1 as the condition for the validity of his solution and, 
for the isobar separation (u/y«a)(Q—4)?. In both results 
yea must be replaced by y. Wentzel’s conclusions were 
obtained by overlooking the contribution to the isobar 


15t 


ment confirms the a priori expectation that, for 
large enough coupling, the quantum fluctuations 
of the source will be negligible compared to the 
reaction of the source to the field. 

Classical scattering formulae, applicable when 
the proton recoil is negligible, give for all pseudo- 
scalar theories a scattering vanishing with a’: 
this is a direct consequence of the fact that, in 
these theories, only p states are coupled to the 
source. Thus, for y>xa, and a mesotron mo- 
mentum p<h/a, the scattering cross section for a 
charged mesotron on the symmetrical pseudo- 
scalar theory is 


do = #a*(pc/E)*(1+2 cos*d)dQ, (1) 


whereas for a charged scalar with y>1, a—-0, it 
is just 

do = (hc/E)*dQ. (2) 
The results of the quantum solution agree with 
(2) for the charged scalar, and are of the same 
form as (1) for the neutral pseudo-scalar. 

It is thus clear that pseudo-scalar theories can 
give a scattering small enough to agree with that 
observed, but that scalar theories could, at most, 
do so with a choice of y far too small to account 
for nuclear forces. In fact, the experimental 
scattering results demand a value of a of the 
order of the proton Compton wave-length h/Mc, 
or possibly slightly smaller. Indeed, this length 
marks the extreme limit of validity of the 
methods we are using, and of the classical 
localizability of the source. | 

With this small value of a, and a value y~ 34, 
which is derived from the magnitude of nuclear 
forces in singlet states, the spin and charge 
isobars will have an excitation only somewhat 
smaller than the rest energy of the mesotron. 

This small value of y would at first sight seem 
to be inconsistent with the high multiplicity of 
mesotron production in high energy nuclear 
collisions; but for pseudo-scalar theories this is 
not so. We have made an admittedly crude 
estimate of this multiplicity by calculating 
classically the excitation of the mesotron field 
when a proton’s velocity and spin are suddenly 


energy of order g™ in the expansion of the Hamiltonian in 
descending powers of g. For a detailed discussion see 
reference 1. 


152 | am © 


altered, and then limiting the actual spectrum to 
mesotrons of total energy equal to or lower than 
the energy loss AE of the proton. In this way one 
finds a multiplicity N~y*(AE/uc?)?, with a value 
10 for y=7y, and an energy loss of 10! volts. 
Under these conditions, and with a comparable 
value of y, a scalar theory would give practically 
no multiple production. 

It will be observed that we have used a value 
_of y given by the perturbation theoretic evalua- 
tion of nuclear forces. This is because, for singlet 
states, our theories still give forces of range h/wc, 
which have an effective depth of the order yuc?, 
and which behave like g?/a for y <a. The detailed 


R. OPPENHEIMER AND J. 


SCHWINGER 


radial dependence, and in particular the form of 
the tensor forces, remains to be investigated. 

In conclusion, we should like again to empha- 
size that our present methods involve, in their 
physical content, only a rather more complete 
effort to take into account the reaction of the 
source to the mesotron field than either Bhabha’s 
classical methods or the a priort postulation of 
isobars afforded. But it would seem that these 
methods are sufficient to decide definitely in favor 
of a pseudo-scalar, rather than a scalar or vector, 
field and to fix roughly the values of the coupling 
constant and source size needed to make the 
model definite. : 


