Thirty years of mesons 
Robert Oppenheimer 


Citation: Physics Today 19, 11, 51 (1966); doi: 10.1063/1.3047815 
View online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3047815 

View Table of Contents: http://physicstoday.scitation.org/toc/pto/19/11 
Published by the American Institute of Physics 


NEW IDP-7 & IDP-10 ~\°; 


Dry Scroll Vacuum Pumps 


NEW IDP-7 NEW IDP-10 


bat Agilent Technologies 


Thirty Years of Mesons 


Mesons have been predicted (in the first place, 

pi mesons by Yukawa in 1935),misidentified 

(mu mesons in cosmic rays) and discovered 

(pi mesons in cosmic rays), or at times discovered 
and not understood (the K mesons). Although 


LET ME OPEN this account by reminding you that 
by now many mesons have been recognized, ordered 
and sorted out, their properties in part established, 
in some limited measure understood. 

Thus there are three groups of nonets (some of 
you may with reason prefer to say mixed octets and 
singlets): the pseudoscalar which 
clude the two that Yukawa predicted thirty years 
ago, the vector mesons, and the mesons with spin 
two, perhaps slightly less certain; and there are 
others now being identified. It would 
hazardous guess that we were now at the beginning 
or the end of this story. 


mesons, in- 


be a 


Three families of particles 


The mesons form one of the three families of 
particles of which, in addition to the quanta of the 
classical fields, we find it helpful and necessary to 
speak. They are characterized, these three families, 
either by the existence or irrelevance of quantum 
numbers satisfying ununderstood but very rigorous 
conservation laws. 

There are the leptons, electron-like objects: the 
electron, the mu meson, the neutrinos and their 
antiparticles. The lepton number, the number of 
leptons minus the number of antileptons, does not 
change; this is a strict conservation law good even 
for cosmological times. The leptons have electro- 


magnetic interactions, and weak interactions re- 


the discovery of more mesons is expected, it seems 


unlikely that we are about to return to a 


traditional view of the fundamental particles 


as “simply” composed. 


by Robert Oppenheimer 


lated to the Fermi interactions of beta decay. 
Under hitherto accessible observational conditions, 
these interactions are never very strong. The lep- 
tons have no direct or specific involvement with 
the strong interactions that characterize the other 
families of particles, mesons and baryons. 

The baryons are proton-like objects: the proton, 
neutron, the Y*'s, the 3-3 resonance discovered by 
Fermi and his colleagues, the omega minus. For 
them, which also have their antiparticles, and which 
are characterized by a quantum number—baryon 
number—defined in analogy to lepton number, 
the baryon number does not change, here again 
even in cosmic times. 

Mesons have neither of these quantum num- 
bers: they can appear and disappear singly, sub- 
ject, of course, to the conservation laws of relativity, 
to the symmetry between identical particles, to 


PHoTO By sTELTZER Robert Oppenheimer recently retired as 


) director of the Institute for Advanced 
Study, a position he has held since 1947. 
He was born in New York City in 1904, 
B® veceived his bachelor’s degree from Har- 
vard University, and his doctorate from 
Gottingen University. From 1929 to 1947 
» he was professor of physics at the Uni- 
versity of California in Berkeley and at 
the California Institute of Technology. 
This article is adapted from a talk de- 
livered at the January meeting of the 
American Physical Society, in New York. 


PHYSICS TODAY +» NOVEMBER 1966 «+ 5] 


charge symmetry (although this and the next four 
do not provide strict or exact rules) to parity 
and strangeness conservation, charge-conjugation 
and time-reversal invariance, but nothing like 
baryon or lepton numbers. 


Compelling arguments 


Today our situation is, of course, very different than 
in 1935, but there are still analogies. In that year 
Yukawa predicted subnuclear objects that had not 
been observed. My principal purpose is to remind 
you of the nature of and reasons for what he did, 
and to follow some of the remarkable episodes 
that mark the three decades that separate us from 
those beginnings. Today we also have on the books 
undiscovered objects that have been sought experi- 
mentally, and for which, typically, the experimen- 
tal statement is that they do not exist with a mass 
less than some rather high value. I have here less 
in mind the magnetic poles, which seem to me in 
a quite other category of speculation, than two 
other sets of objects, sometimes called, in disparate 
flashes of erudition, schizons and quarks. The for- 
mer, studied and so named by Lee and Yang, 
which are vector bosons of undefined parity, 
strangeness and isotopic spin, were already fore- 
shadowed by Yukawa: His mesons were to be beta- 
unstable, and by Yukawa coupling with baryon 
and lepton currents, were to induce beta decay. 
Until now the schizons have not been found; if 
they exist, they are substantially more massive 
than the proton. As higher neutrino energies be- 
come available, the search for them will doubtless 
continue. The quarks, in their simplest, most strik- 
ing form, have fractional charge and baryon num- 
ber. They too have not been found. 

In all these cases—Yukawa mesons, 
quarks—the imagined existence of these particles 
makes it for a time somewhat easier to describe 
important regularities that we do observe among 
particles known to exist: nucleons for Yukawa’s 
mesons thirty years ago; baryons, mesons, leptons 
today, If we were now confronted with the existence 
of the conjectured particles, we should face the 
most formidable theoretical problems of their de- 
scription, more formidable no doubt for quarks 
than schizons, but for both wholly beyond. what 
we know how to do. We could not explain 
dynamically how the new objects contribute to the 
regularities they were invented to account for. In- 
deed that happened for many long years with 
meson theory, and has taken many long years to 
bring to a partial, approximate and provisional 


schizons, 


resolution. 
The reasons that have led to the invention of 


52 * NOVEMBER 1966 * PHYSICS TODAY 


quarks or schizons, while completely nontrivial, do 
not have the compelling necessity of Yukawa's 
arguments, even as they were put forward and 
a fortiori today. Yukawa had a few rough but clear 
experimental findings. He also had what now ap- 
pears to be some very solid general arguments; 
that is why although the journal (The Proceedings 
of the Physical and Mathematical Society of 
Japan) in which he published was quite obscure, 
and his conjecture fairly wide, it was both in 
Japan and abroad, early taken quite seriously. I 
should say a word about why we in California 
took it seriously, because we had some advantages 
as well as obvious disabilities not shared by our 
colleagues in Europe. To that I shall return, 


On predicting particles 


At this point it may be instructive to recall a few 
episodes of the last thirty years, to pay some at- 
tention to other mesons that were correctly and 
thoughtfully anticipated, either on grounds of sym- 
metry (which has been a very important argument 
since charge symmetry and charge independence, 
and still more important since the recognition of 
unitary symmetry by Gell-Mann and Ne’eman) or, 
on the other hand, on deep and general principles 
of relativity and quantum theory. These are prin- 
ciples so general that they are quite beyond the dis- 
putes between theoretical physicists who like only 
S-matrices, those who trust only axiomatic field 
theory, those who like Lagrangian methods or 
Feynman diagrams. For all of these are intended 
to be consistent with the special theory of relativity 
and the general framework of quantum mechanics. 

The first enlargement of Yukawa’s invention was 
an application of the symmetry of charge inde- 
pendence: Kemmer’s recognition that this required 
a neutral meson in addition to Yukawa's charged 
particles. Although strangeness was a discovery 
anticipated by no one, once it was found it was at 
the same time clear that there must be strange 
mesons. The rho meson was predicted on the 
basis of empirical nucleon form factors, but with 
the use of quite general arguments of quantum 
field theory. The eta meson was a clear prediction 
of unitary symmetry; so too was the omega, also 
needed to complement the rho in explaining 1s0- 
vector nucleon form factors. 

If we try today to think back to 1935, it is a 
little strange. A great deal that we now take for 
granted was then quite uncertain or obscure. Yet 
I think it will be clear why Yukawa’s argument, 
though very fresh, was still so persuasive. For that 


we had best start with 1932, the beginning of the 


SIX CHARGED 
PRONGS emerge from 

interaction in bub- 
ble chamber, including 
four + mesons, two of 
which undergo ,-e decay. 


only the electron and proton were known, and the 
quanta of classical fields. In that year Chadwick 
discovered the neutron. The neutron, as you 
know, was predicted, not on all the grounds that 
would be clear in 1932, but on many, by Ruther- 
ford in his 1920 Bakerian lecture. Chadwick, who 
of course knew that lecture well, once asked the 
Joliot-Curies why they had not looked for the neu- 
“| tron in the penetrating radiation they had dis- 
“| covered, instead of leaving that to Chadwick. They 
answered that it was unthinkable for Frenchmen 
to look to a public lecture for any new idea. 

That same year saw another discovery that also 
had much to do with Yukawa’s invention: Ander- 
son's discovery of the positron in the cosmic rays. 
One great change this discovery brought to the 
physicists of that day: an increased confidence in 
the general soundness of that combination of quan- 
“) tum theory and relativity that was quantum elec- 
“| trodynamics, and more widely by analogy, quantum 
‘| field theory. For myself, this confidence was greatly 

reinforced by the paper of Pauli and Weisskopf, 

establishing that spinless particles, with no ex- 

clusion principle, no “filled” sea, no “holes,”” never- 
®| theless were involved in the processes of pair for- 
mation and annihilation, manifested charge sym- 
metry—charge-conjugation invariance—and, despite 
initial disparities of language, closely paralleled 
the theory of the electron and positron and sup- 
ported the conjecture that all charged particles 
would have their own antiparticles of the same 
mass, 

Well before Yukawa’s paper, Fermi had written 
his well known review and most welcome simplifica- 
tion of quantum electrodynamics that led him to 
a description of beta decay in which the emission 
and absorption of electron and neutrino are treat- 
ed in analogy with the emission and absorption of 
light quanta. Here was another field, the electron- 
Neutrino field, and thus another field theory; in 
Japan, in the Soviet Union, elsewhere in Europe 
and in this country it was noted that Fermi’s theory 
‘of beta decay implied the existence of forces be- 
tween proton and neutron; for the neutron could 
mit an electron and neutrino, and a proton could 
absorb them. There would be an exchange of 


BROOKHAVEN NATIONAL LABORATORY 


particles, of momentum and of charge. Although 
charge exchange was an expected feature of these 
forces, neither the apparent weakness of the beta- 
induced forces at nuclear distances, nor their de- 
pendance on internucleon distance seemed familiar; 
for the observed forces are strong and characterized 
—unlike electricity and gravitation—by a_ fairly 
sharp range (~10-%cm) characteristic of nuclear 
dimensions. 


The range of forces 


At this point Yukawa made his theory. He had 
reported on the electron neutrino theory. Nishina 
had shown great interest but also saw clearly the 
inadequacies. Yukawa came up with something 
better. 

Yukawa noticed that the existence of a range 
of forces could be understood if the quanta of the 
field of force had a finite mass. Thus he wrote, 
instead of Poisson’s equation 


Vig+(-G) b= 


where ¢ is the potential of the field, » the mass 
of its quanta and p the nucleon density, the 
source of the field of which @ is the potential. 
One then finds, for distance r large compared 
to the dimensions of p 


as ee hG 


This is a good explanation of range. From it 
Yukawa estimated the mass be two or three hun- 
dred electron masses. 

Yukawa embellished this proposal with one other 
logically quite separable notion: that these mesons, 
since they did not seem evident in ordinary matter, 
were radioactively unstable, and that their radio- 
activity accounted for the beta activity—the Fermi 
interactions—of nucleons. Today this has been pro- 
posed of the schizons, which have no strong inter- 
actions; strongly interacting particles are much 
too closely related for an entirely obvious distinc- 
tion to indicate the “primarily” radioactive ones. 

The inherent generality of Yukawa’s argument 
for the meson was widely appreciated, and first 


PHYSICS TODAY * NOVEMBER 1966 « 53 


Ortec thinks research scientists shouldn’t have to be 
part-time instrument technicians. 


If you've got a multichannel analyzer 
around the lab, we can save you 
some valuable time in setting up for 
gamma and x-ray spectroscopy. Our 
Model 524 System, for example. 

The system includes all the other 
instrumentation required: a Ge(Li) 
detector with cryostat and dewar, 
preamplifier, linear amplifier, biased 
amplifier, detector bias supply, and 
an AEC standard modular bin 
and power supply. 

Prior to shipment, the system is 
calibrated and adjusted for optimum 
performance by actual lab checkout. 


It is delivered with a setup roster 


that explicitly spells out eac 
every instrument setting. There will 
be no question, of course, of possible 
signal incompatibility, poor impedance 
matching, or any of the other 
vexations that somehow turn up when 
you use hardware of randomly 
assorted manufacture. Ortec 
equipment is compatible by design. 

It is capable of the same specified 
level of system performance whether 
we hook it up and tune it, or you 

do the job, yourself. (The big 
advantage of the prechecked system, 


of course, is that you don't have to 
spend time calibrating and aligning 
the instruments.) 

lf you would like detailed 
specifications, drop us a line. If you 
have particular questions to discuss, 
call our Technical Information Center 
at (615) 482-1006; one of our staff 
specialists will be glad to help. 
Oak Ridge Technical Enterprise Corp, 
111 Midland Road, Oak Ridge, 


Tenn. 37830. 


So we’re now offering a packaged gamma spectroscopy system. 
It comes pretested, functionally checked out, and guaranteed 
capable of 5 keV resolution on the ©°Co 1.33 MeV peak. 


54 * NOVEMBER 1966 + PHYSICS TODAY 


3467 


the meson as relatively light, which is, of course, 
t necessary but was initially helpful, then when 
nucleon emits a meson of mass yp, this costs 
energy not less than y»c*. By the uncertainty 
relations, this state cannot endure much longer 
than #i/yc?; and since the meson cannot travel faster 
than light, it cannot reach much further than 
R=ti/yc: This is the connection between range R 
and mass, which has become a recurrent and essen- 
tial argument in physics and is used over and 
over in many forms, not least in dispersion theory 
and in approximate treatments of the analytic 
structure of scattering amplitudes and form 
factors. 


Cascades and cosmic rays 

In the midthirties our situation in California was 
rather special, because Anderson was there, and his 
work on the cosmic rays, and later that of his 
collaborators. He used to show us his marvelous 
doud-chamber pictures; the more beautiful and 
marvelous they grew the sadder he became. The 
o of the story—perhaps known to you—about 
naids lies here. I took Pauli to Anderson's 
itory, to look at some of his recent pictures. 
on kept shaking his head and looking mel- 
holy, because the situation they revealed seem 
mplicated and hard to understand or figure 
- Pauli was fascinated, and asked: “What did 
ect to see, that you are so sad—mermaids?” 
rds have been repeated in quite other con- 


confidence in the soundness of the founda- 
of field theory was one reason why we 
that Yukawa’s mesons should exist; an- 
Was in the end quite persuasive to me. 
1932, it was recognized that the principal 
rption of gamma rays in matter would be, 
ie Compton effect, but pair production, with 
and constant cross section for high energy, 
pair production in the nuclear electric field. 
ilar formula and asymptotic energy inde- 
ence described the gamma radiation of an 
tron or positron passing through this field. 
predictions made it awkward to identify 
netrating radiation, charged or neutral, with 
ns, positrons or gamma rays. Anderson’s pic- 
howed countless trajectories penetrating sub- 
plates of lead and gold without absorp- 
r detectable interaction. Indeed at sea level 
true for more than three fourths of the 
rays. Of these about half, though not 
were negatively charged. The only known 
atively charged particle was the electron. 


By '35 or "36 we had persuaded ourselves, as 
others had earlier, that the quantum electro- 
dynamic formulas for gamma radiation and pair 
production had little chance of being wrong for 
cosmic rays, on the convincing ground that these 
phenomena involved transfers of four-momentum 
that are not large, and quite in the range where 
the formulas have been well checked; further, 
the electromagnetic fields involved were not un- 
usually strong. Thus, the phenomena were the 
Lorentz transforms—because of the cosmic rays’ 
high energy—of situations already rather well ex- 
plored in the laboratory. We therefore concluded 
that electrons, gamma rays, positrons would all 
have poor penetrating power, being rapdily con- 
verted and degraded by a series of radiative col- 
lisions and pair productions, in what we then 
called “multiplicative showers,” what were soon 
after and much better called “cascades.” Of this 
Carlson and I made a theory, which of course 
described the Rossi transition curves and the great 
air showers of Auger. That seemed to settle the 
behavior of these components. What were the rest 
of the cosmic-ray particles, the majority, positive, 
negative and comparatively vastly more penetrat- 
ing? 


Mesons in cosmic rays 


It was Anderson’s opinion that they could not all 
—these penetrating particles—or even predominant- 
ly be as heavy as protons. They were thus un- 
identified and unknown. Thus encouraged, Serber 
and I got ready a short note, arguing that Yuka- 
wa’s mesons did exist, and that here, in the cosmic 
rays, they were. After Anderson himself and Ned- 
dermeyer published their results and Street and 
Stevenson found about the same things, we pub- 
lished our note; that was followed in a month or so 
by a closely related paper of Yukawa. We did not, 
as we originally intended, include evidence of the 
radioactivity of the mesons, for Bohr persuaded 
us that that was a logically quite separable point, 
as indeed it was; but within a year Blackett pub- 
lished that, with better evidence than we had 
found, 

It is natural that in Europe the response to 
Yukawa’s paper should have been a little slower; 
it seems not to have been noted until the con- 
nection with cosmic rays had been published. 
There is now a very interesting account of the 
developments, prepared by Kemmer for the 30th 
anniversary celebrations of the meson in Kyoto 
last year. Kemmer himself played an important 
part in the story. At first, of course, one looked 
in Japan, in Europe and in this country at 


PHYSICS TODAY »* NOVEMBER 1966 * 55 


56 


ee 


BROOKHAVEN NATIONAL LABORATORY 


NOVEMBER 1966 


PHYSICS TODAY 


BUBBLE-CHAMBER PHOTOGRAPH of ;-p in- 
teraction, producing a K~, a K, (shown by dotted 
line), a 7, and a neutron (no track). The K* quick- 
ly decays into 7* and 7° (no track). The 7* decays 
into a ne which decays into an e. The 7° decays 
into a pair of gammas (no tracks), one of which 
creates an e-e* pair. K,° decays into 7* and 7. 


what might be the spin and parity of the mesons; 
scalar mesons, as originally proposed, hardly 
seemed promising for nuclear forces. We could 
show, of the cosmic-ray mesons, that they could 
not have spin one, because then they too would 
radiate gamma rays too much to be as penetrating 
as observed. We thought that they were charged 
pseudoscalar fields. We noticed, with growing but 
much too well contained alarm, that they showed 
very little nuclear interaction: they showed no 
appreciable nuclear scattering besides multiple 
Coulomb scattering; the limits, still not very sharp, 
were ominous. We tried to explain this by de- 
veloping strong coupling theory, which can _in- 
deed give very much reduced nucleon scattering, 

All of this of course later turned out to be non- 
sense. No one had ever predicted these cosmic- 
ray mesons. No one then knew what they were; 
no one understands their existence today; no one 
expected it; no one has a good argument as to 
why they should exist, nor have the properties 
they have. 

It was in Europe that Kemmer looked at an- 
other question: not the spin and _parity-transfor- 
mation properties of the fields but their charge- 
bearing properties and thus the charge depend- 
ence of the resulting nuclear forces. After the 
careful work of Breit, it was hard to doubt that 
the forces between proton and neutron had much 
in common with those between proton and _ pro- 
ton. With charged mesons only, this would be 
most puzzling since the exchange of a single 
charged particle, which gives exchange character 
to proton-neutron forces, is impossible between pro- 
ton and proton. Kemmer, therefore, not only pos- 
tulated neutral mesons, but devised a charge 
independent, charge-symmetric as well as charge- 
conjugation-invariant theory of the interaction of 
mesons and nucleons, a theory not only charge 
symmetric but leading to exchange forces. It was 
soon widely observed that these neutral mesons, 
charge self-conjugate, should be unstable for gam- 
ma decay, whether into two or three quanta de- 


other, went off to war. We had the impression 
that the strong meson-nucleon coupling presented 
lems that were theoretically very tough, and 


nall cosmic-ray meson-nucleon scattering. We 
hought Yukawa’s general ideas right and that one 
looked at his mesons in the cosmic rays at sea 
In some countries, among our Japanese col- 
es, in England, in Italy, valuable work con- 
ued; at the Princeton Institute Pauli and _ his 
colleagues worked out several forms of strong- 
oupling theory. The development which was later 


periments of Conversi et al in Rome. They 
showed that the interaction of cosmic-ray mesons 
with nuclei was extraordinarily feeble, of the or- 
» as was later recognized, to be expected of 
ermi beta-decay interactions, not of the order 
of the very strong nuclear forces, or fields that 
could produce them. Indeed the observations com- 
pared the radioactive decay rates of negative mes- 
ons with their capture from mesic stationary 
atomic states; for light nuclei the rates are com- 
able. When word of all this became known, 
was far more decisive than the small nuclear 
Scattering in proving that cosmic-ray mesons did 
not do what Yukawa invented mesons to do: re- 
act with nucleons and thus mediate nuclear forces. 
Fermi and Teller analyzed the mesic atoms and 
showed that there was an overwhelming chance 
t mesons so bound would be captured before 
ecay if the Yukawa process were of expected or 
sonable probability. In June of 1947, at the 
st serious and intimate conference after the war, 
ese problems were discussed, as were the Lamb 
hift, and the electron’s anomalous magnetic mo- 
lent, and renormalization in quantum electro- 
dynamics. Then Bethe and Marshak proposed that 
particles one saw in the cosmic rays might 
e relatively inert decay products of Yukawa’s 
Mesons. This was indeed found by Powell and 
hialini with their new Ilford plates. It was 
then that for ten years we had misread the 
ticles, 


interactions and strangeness 


the discovery of the pi meson, and the re- 
firmation by direct neutron-proton scattering 
periments of the exchange character of nuclear 
ces, it became natural to think again of the 


neutral meson. We recognized that it would give 
risé to a copious production of the soft component 
of cosmic rays, because of the gamma decay; this 
would explain the Auger showers, without any 
appreciable number of primary electrons or gamma 
rays. Then the neutral pi meson was also found 
in Berkeley. It decayed into two gamma rays, in 
harmony with the view that the Yukawa pi-meson 
field was a pseudoscalar field. 

One then had in earnest the problem of how 
to describe meson-nucleon interactions. For years 
one had tried perturbation theory in analogy with 
electrodynamics; but even before the war the 
strength of the coupling made that seem, as it 
was, a most unpromising procedure. Nor were the 
postwar efforts with the related Tamm-Dancoft 
treatments more fruitful in their results, as they 
were no more secure in their foundation. Thus 
in some ways the strong-coupling approximation, 
which rested at least initially on treating the mes- 
on mass as very small compared to that of the 
nucleon, gave more relevant insight: It predicted 
a low-lying isobar of spin 3/2 and isospin 3/2, 
as an example. When Fermi and his laboratory 
began to study the scattering of Yukawa mesons 
—and not the inert mesons of cosmic radiation— 
on nucleons, this isobar appeared as a very promi- 
nent feature, indeed a resonance, in the scattering 
amplitude. Just this gave impetus to the develop- 
ment of more adequate and yery slightly more 
sophisticated ways of dealing with the strong in- 
teractions. The first work of Chew (similar in 
approach to strong coupling theory) and then 
Low's equation, crossing, and forward-dispersion 
relations (rediscovered by Goldberger and greatly 
extended by him and many others) led to a frame- 
work within which—with dispersion relations and 
the analyticity they express, with crossing sym- 
metry, with unitarity—one could again describe 
the properties of strongly interacting particles. As 
of today, this machinery in general provides very 
meager powers of accurate a priori prediction but 
does provide a description in which empirical 
knowledge and conjectured theoretical regularities 
can be expressed and exploited. Jost has char- 
acterized the earlier unenlightened dependence on 
perturbation theory as requiring a moderately ade- 
quate familiarity with the Latin and Greek al- 
phabets, and none whatever with mathematics. 

The last great discovery that cosmic rays contrib- 
uted to particle physics was the discovery of 
strange particles. Here the obvious paradox lay in 
the abundance of their production from non- 
strange matter, compared to their slow decay back 
to such matter. It was clear that here the pi-mu 


PHYSICS TODAY * NOVEMBER 1966 «+ 57 


meson trick would not work; but when one strange 
particle was produced from nonstrange matter, 
another of opposite strangeness would appear with 
it; this probable process would lead to two parti- 
cles which of themselves could only by weak forces 
—and slowly—decay into nonstrange matter be- 
cause for each the decay involves a change in 
strangeness and thus no fast reaction. It thus 
was clear that if a negative pi-meson—proton col- 
lision produced a lambda particle—which would, 
two times in three, give back a proton and a 
negative meson—a strange meson of strangeness 
Opposite to the lambda must appear in the pri- 
mary collision. 

The story of the strange mesons was itself quite 
a story, centering on the relation of the tau and 
theta mesons, which decayed into three and two 
pi mesons respectively. I shall not remind you of 
what a tangle and trouble that was, until the 
two mesons were recognized as one, and the lack 
of parity conservation in weak interactions, sug- 
gested by Lee and Yang, was established by Miss 
Wu and her collaborators. With all this we are 
surely not finished, not nearly. We do not under- 
stand the rare decay of the long lived K meson 
into two pi mesons, though there are many specu- 
lations, including some, largely from Lee, that 
would replace this mystery with a larger and 
deeper one, of a mismatch between charge and 
baryon-number conjugation. 


Puzzles that remain 


With the K and pi mesons, one had seven, all 
described by pseudoscalar fields. A quite different 
source of enrichment was the analysis of the elec- 
tromagnetic form factors of the proton and neu- 
tron. In perturbation-theoretic terms, one expected 
the proton to be a well localized charge, replaced 
by a more diffuse one when the proton was dis- 
sociated into neutron and meson. This picture 
did not find any support empirically, and for a 
time it was not clear what physical reactions de- 
termined the charge distributions. Writing down 
the dispersion integral for the form factor, one 
saw that arguments of relativity and complemen- 
tarity had once again something to say: Frazer 
and Fulco showed that there must be, to under- 
stand the form factors, at least a pi-pi complex 
—an object of spin | and isospin 1, bound though 
not stable—and estimated where its mass should 
lie and how unstable it should be. These mesons 
were looked for and in time found. Theoretical- 
ly, I fear, no clear calculation of their proper- 
ties, their mass and width, has been possible so 
far, and surely not for want of trying. It also 


58 +« NOVEMBER 1966 * PHYSICS TODAY 


the form factors. Needless to say, we are no 
finished with the form factors either, especiall 
at high momentum transfers. 
With the discovery of the K resonance, the 
four spin 1, isospin 1/2 excited K mesons, one 
then had eight vector mesons. An eighth pseudo- 
scalar meson had long been conjectured and 
sought and was found in the narrow, long-lived — 
eta. But this, and the finding of a ninth isoscalar — 
pseudoscalar and isoscalar vector meson, followed — 
the increased confidence of Gell-Mann and other 4, 
colleagues, that there was a good measure of 
truth in unitary symmetry and the eightfold way. y 
Unitary symmetry was surely not the only—or t 
the first—to be tried. It has worked better than 1 
others, much better, better than O, or G, for 
instance. As for larger groups, their situation was UE: 
well reviewed in a session of this meeting, to 4 
which I refer for an account of the recent work \ 
and views, among others, of Dashen and Gell- 
Mann, Giirsey and Radicati, Adler, Weissberger, ! 
Fubini, Cabbibo. These lead me to expect more 4 
baryons and mesons to be identified, indications ' 
of many of which appear in current studies. 
Whether we should also expect far more massive, ! 
less familiar ingredients, quarks, that should quite 4 
directly manifest the order of subnuclear matter, 
is to me profoundly more doubtful. N9 
Always before in our history, in chemistry, in 1 
atomic physics, and nuclear physics, it has been 
possible to order a large and complex array of | 
material particles as composites of a very much ! 
smaller number of more elementary particles in- | 


4 
teracting according to moderately simple—or ap- yf 
proximately simple—laws. Today one has to re- 
member that the quarks would, like baryons and 4 
mesons, have to be strongly interacting particles, ~~ 

—— 


composites of one another, composites too of their 
composites. Thus it seems to me unlikely enough 
that we are about to return to a simple view of ~ 
the fundamental particles as “simply” composed, — 
as is the hydrogen atom or the deuteron, of 
simpler things and by simple laws. 

It seems to me that we are in for a far greater — 
novelty than the discovery of “more fundamen- > 
tal” particles. It is not one of the privileges, as 
it is assuredly not one of the virtues, of senility — ; 
to make predictions. I make only one, I think — 
that we are unlikely to live again through such — 
a ten-year joke as mistaking the mu mesons for 
Yukawa’s particles. I do not think that could 
have happened if it had not been for World W: 


