REVIEWS OF MODERN PHYSICS 


VOLUME 21, 


NUMBER 1 JANUARY, 1949 


Concluding Remarks to Cosmic-Ray Symposium 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey 


N concluding this conference I have been 
asked by President Du Bridge to summarize 

its almost unsummarizable proceedings. I shall 
try only to make a few comments. What we have 
heard here, the arguments about the nature of 
the incoming cosmic radiation, the arguments 
about the origin of the incoming cosmic radia- 
tion, made a very deep impression; and so too 
the new evidence as to the kinds of particles 
which are found, evidence on which the theo- 
retical physicist has learned to be properly 
humble. Apart from arguments which are almost 
arguments of consistency, and which make us 
hesitate to believe that those mesons that are 
easily produced by nuclei are hard for nuclei to 
capture, there are of course no a priori views at 
the moment about what the things may be. 
I think it hard to disbelieve Le Prince Ringuet’s 
evidence for a very heavy meson. 

But perhaps what to me was most exciting of 
all was the account from Schein and above all 
from Rossi about the nature of the interactions 
which are encountered in the cosmic radiation. 
It will be some time before one will be able to 

mock up the 10-billion volt nucleon-nucleon col- 
lisions, with which presumably the cosmic-ray 
story starts, by artificial acceleration. Here again 
the conclusion which one is first led to is some- 
what surprising. One finds that as products of 
these collisions there are at least three kinds of 
radiation. There are, at least, nucleons; there are 
the cascade components, electrons, and gamma- 
rays, and there are mesons. The general energetic 
average over the cosmic-ray spectrum indicates 
that the amount of energy going into these three 
different components is not very different, one 
from the other. There may be, as Schein said, 
a strong tendency for the nuclear component to 
play a less prominent part as the energy of the 
collision is increased. We also know that the 
primaries lose their ability to make by collision 
the second and third components very early— 
essentially after a few nuclear’ impacts. A few 


passages in the neighborhood of the nucleus, and 
they can no longer do these things. © 

I think that the possibility should perhaps be 
faced that we not only don’t know what the 
elementary particles are, but that the whole way 
of thinking about their interactions, which we 
have derived by analogy from electromagnetic 
theory, and by the application of this analogy 
to problems of the meson field as Yukawa 
originally suggested, that these views may be 
quite wrong. We have at the moment at least 
the possibility of trying further to exploit that 
analogy. One or two points about this: one is 
that a really good job to date has not been done. 
Heitler gladly told you that his theory was not 
a really good job. The really good job would be 
to take advantage, or rather, and this is the 
second point, to see whether one can take ad- 
vantage of the developments in electrodynamics 
that are so much associated with Schwinger’s 
name. 

As you know, the purpose of these develop- 
ments has been to take into account, certainly 
in an approximate way, and perhaps even in 
principle rigorously, the effects, on the one hand 
of the interaction of charges with the fluctuations 
in electromagnetic fields that derive from the 
quantum nature of light, and on the other, the 
interaction of quanta with fluctuations in charge 
that derive from the phenomena of pair pro- 
duction and annihilation. Schwinger’s achieve- 
ment has been to provide a method for isolating 
these ‘“‘reactive’’ effects, which manifest them- 
selves as peculiar deviations in the laws of inter- 
action between electrons and between electrons 
and radiation, from the paradoxical effects ex- 
pressing the contributions of these same inter- 
actions to the mass and charge of the elementary 
particles, contributions that are not, at least 
directly, measurable or separable from other 
sources on inertia or charge, and the infinite 
values of which, according to present theory, are 
thus not in themselves in contradiction with 
experience. In electrodynamics the alteration of 


181 


1820 Oe 


interaction laws thus found is small; it is prob- 
able that, if completely evaluated, it would have 
the effect of making all real interactions less 
singular. 

For the case of nucleons and mesons, argu- 
ments of analogy suggest that these reactive 
corrections would be far larger, and that their 
neglect could give a totally misleading picture 
of nucleon interactions and nucleon-meson col- 
lisions. It is not known whether if the very much 
more complicated of the nuclear problems, where 
neither the nature of the fields nor the inter- 
actions is known from classical physics, and 
where surely the interactions are in some way 
far stronger, this can logically be done—it is 
certainly not known with what techniques to 
do it. It is above all unknown whether it makes 
any sense to do it; that is, whether this is a 
step toward describing the real world. Perhaps 
that may be a point on which we shall have 
evidence for Dr. Millikan’s next birthday. If it 
were necessary today to prejudge the outcome, 
perhaps we should doubt that the attempt to 
take into account that 
fields are here surely very large would in itself 
lead to a theory in agreement with experience. 

If one tries in these problems to use only the 
roughest arguments of correspondence as to what 
to expect in high energy nucleon collisions, one 
comes, if he takes only known couplings into 
account, to a picture in some respects like that 
already outlined here by Heitler. Thus, for in- 
stance, one would see no appreciable chance for 
the emission of gamma-rays or electrons during 
the encounters. One then ascribes the fact that 
there obviously is a soft component produced by 
these encounters to the production of unstable 
mesons, whose decay produces the soft radiation. 
A natural view has seemed to be that we were 
dealing with unstable neutral mesons, the exist- 
ence of which might give a sort of isotopic sym- 
metry to nuclear forces. But, for instance, the 
Le Frince Ringuet mesons, if they were also 
strongly coupled to nuclear matter, would like- 
wise be expected to disintegrate into gamma- 
rays; perhaps the one picture we have seen 
indicates a lifetime rather long to fit this sup- 
position. 

We have come to the view that probably, in 
the relatively high energy region, the number of 


interactions between 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


mesons produced in nucleon impacts is typically 
greater than one, and that it increases slowly 
with the energy of the encounter. Heitler’s 
failure to find this multiplicity may derive, in 
part from the special nature of the problems 
studied, but in the main, I believe, from the 
peculiarities of his treatment of radiation reac- 
tion. At least there are problems, where one 
knows the answer from classical electrodynamics, 
and where there is multiplicity of emission, and 
yet where the theory of Heitler would not give 
a correct account of it. 

On the experimental side, I may mention two 
points that bear on the question of multiplicity, 
and that have been brought up in our meetings. 
One has to do with the course of the air shower 
curve, and more generally with the variation of 
the soft component, in the atmosphere. There 
has been work, notably by Lewis and by Christy 
and Mills, towards a theoretical understanding 
of what these curves would be like if we were 
dealing with a primary electron or primary 
photon. If in fact the photon or electron were 
made singly or in fixed small numbers by nucleon 
encounters, say, on the average, some fifty 
grams or so below the top of the atmosphere, the 
curves should be displaced downward corre- 
spondingly. Therefore we should expect the 
experimental air showers curves (and also those 
for’the soft component) to have their maximum 
well below that calculated for a soft primary. 
According to the analyses of Lewis, and of Mills 
and Christy, this seems not be true. The maxima 
are definitely higher than calculated. This means 
that although the soft component is “‘late’’ in 
getting started, this is more than made up for 
by the initial multiplicity with which it starts, 
which must be considerably greater than the 
cascade multiplication in the thickness of matter 
needed on the average for a nucleon encounter. 

The second point may be more speculative. In 
Auger’s beautiful report he told us how close, in 
Auger showers, is the relation between the 
penetrating component on the one hand, the 
cascade component on the other. Even after 
filtration with 20 cm of Pb there are still com- 
ponents present capable of making cascades. If, 
as seems most reasonable, we are here no longer 
dealing with the fluctuations in the penetrating 
power of the high energy cascades per se, then 


CONCLUDING REMARKS 


this would fit rather closely with the suggested 
views about the nature of the primary collisions. 
In these collisions the primary would lose the 
greater part of its energy to mesons. Among 
these perhaps a third will be neutral and unstable 
and give rise to the cascade. The others will be 
charged mesons and penetrating, and will for 
the most part be distributed over an area at 
sea level of some hundred meters square. For 
high energies the rate of pi-mu-decay will be 
slowed, so that many mesons will retain their 
nuclear activity; they will be able to initiate 
cascades something like a nucleon cross section. 
This interpretation, however, uncertain at the 
moment, may deserve further study. 

However that may be, all the basic questions 
seem to me quite open. It may be doubted 
whether these rough descriptions, exploiting 
points of supposed analogy between the Maxwell 
field and the Yukawa field, have any valid 
content; it may be doubted whether a refinement 


183 


of such theory, based on a generalization of the 
recent advances in electrodynamics, will lead 
toward the truth; surely, if this refinement can 
be carried out at all in a logically consistent — 
manner, it will lead to a theory rather radically 
different from what we have today. It may well 
be that a quite new description of interactions is 
called for, at present no more to be anticipated 
than the taxonomy of the mesons themselves. 

On these questions experiment will throw 
light: what are the particles with which we have 
to deal? what are the primary collisions, what 
their immediate and what their secondary prod- 
ucts? are they multiple? and if so, how do 
multiplicity and cross section vary with energy? 
what are the many origins of cascade radiation? 
what becomes of the mesons? ... These are 
among the questions to which this conference 
has led us; the answers will be the elements of 
our understanding of the fundamental particles 
and the laws of their interaction. 


