FEBRUARY 15, 1934 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


VOLUME 45 


On the Theory of the Electron and Positive 


W. H. Furry* ann J. R. OPPENHEIMER, University of California, Berkeley, California 
(Received December 1, 1933) 


In this paper we develop Dirac’s suggestions for the 
interpretation of his theory of the electron to give a con- 
sistent theory of electrons and positives. In Section 1, we 
discuss the physical interpretation of the theory, the limits 
which it imposes on the spatiotemporal description of a 
system and in particular on the localizability of the elec- 
tron. In Section 2, we set up the corresponding formalism, 
introducing wave functions to describe the state of the 
electrons and positives in the system, and constructing 
operators to represent the energy, charge and current 
density, etc. It is shown that the theory is Lorentz in- 
variant, and has just that invariance under contact trans- 
formations which the physical interpretation requires. The 
electromagnetic interaction of the electrons and positives 
is formulated, and certain ambiguities which arise here are 


Eis 


ITH the discovery of the positive electron, 

one of the most curious and radical pre- 
dictions of Dirac’s theory of the electron has re- 
ceived experimental support. It appears that the 
positive electron has the properties of the anti- 
electron of the Dirac theory, and that in some 
cases, notably in the absorption and internal 
conversion of gamma-rays, the circumstances of 
the production of pairs of electrons and positives 
are just those to be expected from the theory. We 
want to develop the formalism of the theory in its 
present form as clearly and consistently as 
possible, and to show how the formalism is to be 
interpreted physically, where it justifies earlier 
methods of calculation, where it leads to new 
predictions, and where these predictions fail. We 
shall see that the present theory is limited in 
very much the same way as the quantum theory 
of wave fields: here, too, it is possible to develop 
a consistent and relativistic formalism which 
within wide limits corresponds to the possibilities 
of physical observation and gives correct results; 
but here, too, the legitimate application of the 
theory is limited to lengths which are large com- 


* National Research Fellow. 


discussed. In Section 3, it is shown that in all problems to 
which the Dirac equation is directly applicable it gives the 
correct energy levels for an electron, and the correct radia- 
tive and collision transition probabilities. In these prob- 
lems the wave functions are constructed from the solutions 
of the Dirac equation. In Section 4, we discuss certain 
problems which have no analogue in the original Dirac 
theory of the electron, show that a certain part of the 
energy of an electromagnetic field in general resides in the 
electrons and positives, and consider the extent to which, in 
the present state of theory, this can be detected by experi- 
ment. For two charges within a Compton wave-length of 
each other the law of force is not quite Coulomb’s law. The 
deviations though small should in principle be detectable 
when protons are scattered in hydrogen. 


pared to the classical electron radius e?/mc?; and 
when not so limited, leads at once to grave con- 
tradictions with experiment. 

The formal changes which are required in the 
theory are simple, and correspond closely to 
Dirac’s most recent suggestion! for interpreting 
the negative kinetic energy states which are 
falsely predicted by his theory of the electron in 
its original form. These formal changes may most 
easily be formulated with the help of the distinc- 
tion made by Schroedinger,? in his attempt to re- 
solve the difficulties with the negative energy 
states, between odd and even operators, and 
show how this distinction is properly to be ap- 
plied to give a consistent and Lorentz invariant 
theory. This distinction between even and odd 
operators is essential to the physical interpreta- 
tion of the theory: for only those dynamical 
variables of a system which correspond to even 
operators may be determined without rendering 
the number of particles—electrons and positives 
—in the system indeterminate. 


1P, A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A133, 60 (1931). 

2 E, Schroedinger, Berl. Ber., p. 63, 1931. For a review of 
these earlier theories of the Dirac electron, see W. Pauli, 
Handb. d. Physik 24, XXIV, 242-247 (1933). 


245 


246 


According to Dirac’s theory, the states of an electron 
subject to no forces are given by the solutions of the wave 
equation 

thy = Hoy; fy) = —Bmc?—c(a-p). (1.1) 


Any solution of (1.1) may be built up out of solutions of 
two sorts: those of positive kinetic energy, for which 


thb)=HywW=Ey, with E=2=mc (1.2) 
and those of negative kinetic energy: 
thb=Hw=Ey, with E=—me. (1.3) 


Any state which is a superposition of states of type (1.2) 
may be called positive, any of type (1.3) alone negative. 
Now with the help of these solutions, we can assign a 
matrix to represent any function of the elementary dynam- 
ical variables of the electron: p, x, a. When this matrix 
reduces to two submatrices for positive and negative states 
respectively and has no elements in which one index refers 
to positive, the other to negative states, the corresponding 
variable is said to give us an even operator. The momenta 
of an electron are even; the coordinates are not. 


Variables which correspond to operators which 
are not even may still, of course, in principle be 
determined; important examples of such vaci- 
ables are the total energy of a system in an ex- 
ternal field, and the charge and current density 
of a system; but this cannot be done without 
introducing an indeterminacy in the number of 
electrons and positives present. This circum- 
stance which corresponds to a complementarity 
between the description of a system in terms of a 
definite number of permanent particles on the 
one hand, and a spatiotemporal specification of 
these particles on the other, is decisive in limiting 
the applicability of the nonrelativistic trans- 
formation theory of the quantum mechanics. For 
it is not, in general, possible to specify at the 
same time the number of particles in a system 
and the values of arbitrary dynamical variables 
of these particles. In particular, this means that 
the unambiguous determination of the presence 
of a positive in a system demands that under the 
circumstances of the experiment one should be 
able to abstract entirely from the creation and 


destruction of pairs. This must particularly be > 


borne in mind in putting such questions as “‘Are 
there any positives present near a nucleus?”’; for 
such a question can be given an unambiguous 
meaning only by reference to such an experi- 


W. H. FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


mental arrangement for answering it, that one 
may abstract from the nuclear field of the atom 
which produces and destroys pairs. 

From the formal point of view this situation 
implies serious limitations on the use of wave 
functions defined in a configuration space: wave 
functions whose arguments are the characteristic 
values of the dynamical variables of the particles 
of the system. For, quite apart from the limita- 
tion of the symmetry character of the wave func- 
tions imposed by the exclusion principle, we meet 
here for the first time the requirement that such 
wave functions be defined as functions only of 
even variables, since no physical interpretation 
whatever can be given to the probability that a 
particle shall have a determinate value for a 
variable which is not wholly even. The canonical 
transformations of the configuration space, 
which in nonrelativistic theory are unrestricted, 
are here limited to even transformations. In gen- 
eral, too, a wave function defined in such an even 
configuration space will not be adequate to de- 
scribe the state of the system, since the number of 
particles in the system, and thus the dimensions 
of the configuration space, will not in general be 
determinate: here, as in the description of the 
electromagnetic field, we shall need, in general, a 
series of wave functions, defined in spaces of 
different numbers of dimensions and correspond- 
ing to the probability of finding different num- 
bers of particles in the system. This circumstance 
means that, again as in the case of the electro- 
magnetic field, the formal aspects of the theory 
are best studied by abandoning the wave func- 
tions defined in configuration space and by using 
the method of quantized waves in actual space; 
for specific calculations it is more convenient to 
revert to the configuration space functions; and 
it is, of course, possible to establish a corre- 
spondence between the functions introduced by 
the two methods. 

Before we develop this formalism, we may il- 
lustrate these considerations in the important 
case of the position determinations of the elec- 
tron. It is important to note that what we say 
here has to do only with the critical length 2/mc, 
and throws no light at all on the breakdown of 
the theory for lengths of the order e?/mec?. For 
what we have here to consider, the charge on the 
electron could have an arbitrarily small value; 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


and these considerations, like all those based on 
the present relativistic quantum mechanics, must 
rather be regarded as attaining asymptotic 
validity when the ratio of the two critical lengths, 
which is the fine structure constant, a, goes to 
zero. 

It has often been observed? that by the gamma- 
ray microscope one could not, in general, deter- 
mine the position of an electron with arbitrary 
precision. The limits on this precision are deter- 
mined by the, in general, finite wave-length of 
light scattered through a large angle by the 
electron. For an electron at rest this wave-length 
is of the order of the Compton wave-length Xo; 
for an electron whose kinetic energy before the 
scattering is E, it is possible to choose an ar- 
rangement such that the wave-length of the light 
scattered through a right angle is ~hc/E. The 
finiteness of these wave-lengths limits, of course, 
the precision with which, from a given observa- 
tion in the microscope, one can infer the position 
of the scattering electron. This limitation in- 
heres in all attempts to localize the electron by 
scattering experiments, whatever be the nature 
of the scattered radiation. 

The Dirac theory of the electron, on the other 
hand, starts with the postulation of a probability 
density W(x) that the electron be found near the 
point x, and thus guarantees the observability of 
the position of the electron. But it does this only 
at the expense of admitting the existence of states 
of negative kinetic energy. For the conclusion 
that hard light scattered by an electron is neces- 
sarily softened by the scattering depends essen- 
tially upon the fact that the kinetic energy of the 
electron before the scattering is taken positive. 
Because of the nonexistence in fact of electrons 
of negative kinetic energy, the postulation of the 
complete localizability of the electron and the 
existence of the probability density W(x) appears 
unjustifiable. 

With the charge density the situation is 
radically different. On the Dirac theory, it is 
true, this charge density is merely proportional 
to W(x): 


p(x) =eW(x). (1.4) 


3See for instance L. Landau and R. Peierls, Zeits. f. 
Physik 69, 56 (1931). 


247 


But for the determination of p other experimental 
procedures are available. For the quantum theory 
of the electromagnetic field and the careful con- 
sideration recently given by Bohr to the possi- 
bilities of observation which it implies show that, 
at least so far as we may abstract from the atomic 
nature of the measuring instruments, the electric 
field may be mapped out with any precision we 
want; its divergence gives the charge density p, 
which may by this method be in principle deter- 
mined. In any theory in which the atomic nature 
of measuring instruments is neglected, this ob- 
servability of charge density must persist. Since 
we have seen what grave difficulties inhere in 
relativistic theory in the definition of the particle 
density, we must be prepared to abandon the 
simple definition of p given by (1.4). As a matter 
of fact we shall see that in the present theory the 
vanishing of the mean charge density in a region 
of space does not necessarily mean that there are 
no particles present in the region; it may mean 
only that there are equal numbers of electrons 
and positives present and is no guarantee that the 
region is empty. For in the present theory, the 
charge density is not an even operator and can 
therefore be determined only at the expense of 
leaving indeterminate the number of particles 
present in the system. , 
As far as the localizability of the electron itself 
is concerned, the conclusions reached by the con- 
sideration of the gamma-ray microscope are fully 
confirmed by theory. For this it is essential to ob- 
serve that the coordinate of an electron is not an 
even operator; this means that in the Dirac 
theory it is not possible at once to specify the 
coordinate of a particle and to be sure that its 
kinetic energy is positive. Now in the determina- 
tion of the position of an electron, we cannot ad- 
mit an indeterminacy in the number of particles 
present since we must be sure that the light was 
scattered into the microscope by the electron 
which we wish to observe. (We are considering 
for simplicity the case where only a single electron 
is initially present.) We cannot, therefore, devise 
an experiment for measuring precisely the co- 
ordinate of the electron. What we have to con- 
sider is how precisely we can infer the position of 
an electron from an experiment in which an 
even operator is determined. Thus we may deter- 
mine the “‘even part” of the coordinate which is 


248 W. H. 


given as an operator by 
o(x) =x —(he/21)[ a,Hy 1+cp,Hy? |. 


Inferences as to the value of the coordinate de- 
pend upon the properties of the transformation 
functions gx. More precisely, these four- 
component functions are the transformation 
functions from g, ¢ the component of spin in a 
fixed direction and the sign of the kinetic energy 
to the coordinates.* They are given by 


(1.5) 


(x, ig, 0, +) =274 f dp exp [i(e—g)0/h] 


XL (mc? + p?)* {me + (mic? + p*)*} 4a", 


where 


(1.6) 


A" =p, 
a4? =me+ (mc? + p?)?, 


ay = 13" ae 0, 


a3! =mc-+ (mc? p*)?, 
Qe} =a, = 0, 


where these functions are taken for positive 
kinetic energy, and o=1 corresponds to spin 
parallel, c=2 to spin antiparallel, to the x axis; 
a set of functions for negative kinetic energy, 
which are relevant only in discussing the localiza- 
tion of the positive, may be obtained from (1.6) 
by replacing (m?c?+ p*)? throughout by — (m?c? 
+28) 

These functions (1.6) form a complete set for 
the expansion of any positive function; and the 
mean dispersion, defined in the usual way as 
x2—x2 vanishes for all these packets.® This cor- 
responds to the circumstance that it is possible to 
prepare an electron in such a way that its posi- 
tion may be known without uncertainty. But 
from the results of the experiment, namely the 
determination of g, no unambiguous and precise 
inference about the position of the electron be- 
fore the measurement may be drawn. For the 
probability of finding a value g is determined by 


P(g) Ag=Ag 


a 2 


xz 


o=l1 


dx E Ele Due. aa) 


—-O 


4We here give the formulae for the x-coordinate, and 
take p,=.=0: analogous formulae can be given which 
correspond to determining g(x), g(y) and g(z) at once. 

5 This is apparently in disagreement with the argument 
of Landau and Peierls, reference 3. 


FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


and this is not in general given by 


4 

W(g) Ag = Ag- 2.1 ¥(g)|* (1.8) 
but depends upon the value of y in a region of 
the order \) about g. When nothing is known 
about the state of the electron, y, before the 
measurement, the value of the coordinate x is 
fixed by the determination of g only within the 
limit of the Compton wave-length. When it is 
known that the kinetic energy of the electron 
before the observation is certainly as great as £, 
then the probability of observing a given value 
for g depends on the magnitude of the wave func- 
tion Y only throughout the region g+hc/E; and 
the position of the electron before the experiment 
can be inferred from the results of the experiment 
with a correspondingly greater precision. One 
may say therefore that, whereas it is possible by 
experiment to localize an electron, in the sense 
that the position of the electron after the experi- 
ment may be determined as precisely as one 
wishes, it is nevertheless not possible to deter- 
mine the position of an electron in an arbitrary 
state with a precision greater than Xp. It will be 
seen that this corresponds exactly to the possi- 
bilities. offered by the gamma-ray microscope 
where the initial determination of position is 
necessarily unprecise by about ic/E, but where a 
second determination of position, after the elec- 
tron is known to have scattered a hard gamma- 
ray, may in principle be made precise. 

We have in this discussion assumed, in ac- 
cordance with the physical considerations ad- 
duced and in conformity with the theory which 
we are here to develop, that the states of an elec- 
tron in a system where it is known that no posi- 
tives or pairs are produced correspond to purely 
positive functions; in the same way we shall see 
that the states of the isolated positive correspond 
to purely negative states; and the limits here 
derived for the localizability of an electron hold 
unchanged for a positive. In situations in which, 
as in the determination of the charge density, we 
cannot be sure of the number of charges present 
in our system, no unambiguous position meas- 
urements of the charges are possible. 

Because of these considerations it is not in 
general possible, in experimental situations where 
electron pairs are produced, to localize the region 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


in which they are produced with a precision much 
greater than the Compton wave-length. In this 
sense the production of pairs by the absorption 
of gamma-rays and their internal conversion 
must be regarded as an extranuclear phenom- 
enon; as far as present theory is concerned, the 
fields within the nuclei have singularly little 
effect upon the probability of these processes. 
We must turn now to the development of the 
formal theory. In the next section we shall in- 
troduce the necessary methods, set up the wave 
equations which the wave functions of the theory 
must satisfy, and give the necessary proofs of 
invariance. In Section 3 we shall show how these 
equations may be solved and how their solutions 
are connected with those of the original Dirac 
theory, and justify the use of this theory in most 
of the cases to which it has been applied. In Sec- 
tion 4 we must discuss certain new effects intro- 
duced in the present theory and define those 
limitations on the applicability of the theory 
which are introduced by the here postulated 


Wa fa) = [ioe f diese daw Gu-+ aw tues) Wr 59). 


249 


and not understood corpuscular nature of the 
elementary charges. | 


2. 


We must now find what wave functions de- 
scribe the states and what operators correspond 
to the dynamical variables, in particular the 


energy and charge and current density, of a 


system of electrons and positives. In the non- 
relativistic quantum mechanics, a system of NV 
indistinguishable particles which satisfy the 
exclusion principle may be described by an anti- 
symmetric wave function in the 3N-dimensional 
configuration space of the particles: 


WY (x19121° : ‘XN YNSN). (2.1) 


We can find the wave function corresponding to 
this state as a function of any other complete set 
of commuting variables &, &---&, with the help 
of the transformation functions 


(1° . fay | x1° ‘ -Zy)! 


(2.2) 


In particular we can specify the configuration of the jth electron by the three commuting variables 
£;, nj, ¢; instead of x;, y;, 2;, and use the wave functions 


¥(E1- + ow) = [- fds --d2y I (Eimbsl xiv 200 --2y) =(ri- + +7) 


for the system. It will in no way impair the gen- 
erality of the argument to suppose the sets of 
characteristic values of £, 7, £ enumerable; we can 
then order these sets of characteristic values in 
an arbitrary but fixed order; and for any set we 
can use the symbol 7. We can then fix the sign of 
the antisymmetric function (2.3) by letting its 
arguments be ordered. If we introduce’ new 
variables NV, to describe the system, one for each 
characteristic value of 7, and let N,=1 when there 
is a particle present in the state 7, N,=0 when 
there is no particle present in this state, then we 
can describe the state of the system by a wave 
function of the N,’s, defined by 


6P, Jordan and E. Wigner, Zeits. f. Physik 47, 631 
(1928). 


(2.3) 
¥(N,)=0 when >~N,+N 
v(0 -L,, 0 1;; Liye ) 
=(N!)iW(ri-++rw). (2.4) 


Any dynamical variable of the system which is 
symmetric in the particles corresponds to an 
operator on (2.4). To a variable which, as an 
operator on (2.3), is given by 


N 
>» OQ 757; (2.5) 
j=l 
there corresponds the operator 
D Der Os (2.6) 


r, vr! 


The a,, a,;+ here introduced satisfy 


250 


a,ta,st+a,ta,t =0; 


a,tas+a,a,;* == Ongs 


Q,As+FA,=0; 
(2.7) 


They may be expressed in terms of the N,’s and 
operators [,, v;: 


T.F(N: : »Ny_1, N,, Nowa, 
= F(N,: : tM gaits Le x No4t' : “)T,; 


v,-F(N) =(—)*=%sF(N) (2.8) 
by 
COA IN i SN Lee (2.9) 
Thus 
N,=O,'@y} 1—N,=4a,a,7; 
N2=N,; T=1; v2=1. (2.10) 


Similarly, to an operator on (2.3) of the form 


os Q re? ryt; ryEry (2.1 1) 
a, 79 
there corresponds the operator 
Do. Qt a age, (2.12) 
and to 
S OQ rg? ry’; Ter (2.13) 
t=] 
the operator 
oy 5? 9°: al pO Oar Og: (2.14) 


r,s’, 7,8 


It isin terms of this formalism that the relativ- 
istic theory of electrons and positives may most 
easily be developed. The formalism as it stands is 
immediately applicable to the Dirac theory of the 
electron in its original form and describes a sys- 
tem of N electrons whose wave functions are 
given by the Dirac wave equation, and in which 
the electrons may have positive or negative 
kinetic energies. (To describe the state of an elec- 
tron, 7 must be supposed to include a variable 
which determines the orientation of the spin of 
the electron.) But a simple formal change, which 
corresponds exactly to regarding the emptiness 
and not the fullness of a state of negative kinetic 
energy as equivalent to the presence of a particle, 
gives us at once the theory of electrons and posi- 
tives. To make this change it is necessary, in 

accordance with the physical considerations of 
Section 1, to restrict the 7’sin a critical way. From 
now on we shall consider only states 7, such that a 
given state is either wholly positive or wholly 


W. H. FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


negative; the states r which are positive shall be 
indexed by Latin letters; the negative by Greek; 
and a state which may be either positive or 
negative will be indexed by a Latin letter in 
parentheses: (7). By this restriction the unlimited 
applicability of the quantum-mechanical trans- 
formation theory is destroyed. 


For what follows it is helpful to generalize our definition 
of positive and negative states. A positive state is one 
which is a superposition of states of a free particle of posi- 
tive kinetic energy. And the states of a free particle are 
determined by a wave equation which is in general 


(cro—T)¥=0; T=—c(a-t)—Bme?. (2.15) 
Here 
w= (th/c)(0/dt) — (e/c) V; 


(2.16) 
T= —th grad —(e/c)A 


and, for no field 


V=—(1/c)(0/dt)X(x, y, 2, 2} 
A=grad X(x, y, 8, t). 


The solutions of (2.15) are given in terms of the solution 
Yo of (2.15) with \=0 by the transformation 


Y= yo exp (ted/hc). 


We have of course to consider solutions of (2.15) which 
correspond to definite values of the kinetic energy, which is 
represented by the operator cm=T. It will be observed 
that under the transformation 


ie 


y’=wWexp (tedh/hc) (2.17) 


the kinetic energy is invariant; under it positive states go 
into positive, negative into negative states. 


Let us consider an operator of the form (2.5) 
for which Q,,)(s) is a diagonal matrix: to it will 
correspond the operator 


> Veet Sy, Qo, (2.18) 

r p 

or, if we write ,=1—-N,, 
X Dare Qo pM yt dL re (2.19) 


For a system containing N electrons—i.e., for 
which WV of the NV, for the occupied states are 1, 
and the others vanish—and containing MV posi- 


- tives, in states corresponding to pi--:pyu, we 


should expect for the operator (2.6) just 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


» ig lN eo = Op (2.20) 


We are thus led to consider, in connection with 
an arbitrary operator Q, the operator 


B= YI Qo (ON (s) (2.21) 
(7) (s) 
with 
Wr( 3) = Art Qs) > Wrs= Airy *As} 
W pg =p! de — bp = —Aghp*. (2.22) 


This assignment suffices for a consistent descrip- 
tion of a system of noninteracting electrons and 
positives. To the question of the treatment of the 
interaction of these particles, which cannot be 
wholly clarified, and to which no complete and 
unambiguous answer can be given, we shall return 
only later. 

The energy of a system of noninteracting par- 
ticles, which may however be subject to arbi- 
trary external forces, is of the form (2.5), and 
corresponds then to the operator © 


H= Y, Ho (80096): 
(r) (8s) 


(2.23) 


In particular the kinetic energy T of the system is 


2 N Dee 2, MT op (2.24) 
r p 


and is necessarily positive, the sum of the posi- 
tive kinetic energies of the electrons and the 
positive kinetic energies —7",, of the positives. 
The difference between the total number of posi- 
tives and electrons in the system, which gives the 
total charge, 


—ev=e(M—N); M=>,M,; N=>N, 

p r 
commutes with H, and is constant, as it should 
be: to any system there corresponds a fixed value 
of »v. But both M and N change with time in 


general: 


—inN= —ihM=> (FT ppp Oy ~ LH rptyt Gp). (2.25) 
rp 

Unless the energy corresponds to an even opera- 
tor the number of particles in the system N-+ MW 
will not be constant. The rate of production of a 
pair 7, p is measured by |#,,|? and that of its 
annihilation by |/,,|?. 

The modification by which (2.21) was obtained 
from (2.6), namely the subtraction of 


251 


Sa) = ye Q (2.26) 
has destroyed, as we have seen, and as the phys- 
ics requires, the invariance of the theory under 
arbitrary contact transformations. If we restrict. 
ourselves however to the even transformations, 
((r)|(s)), for which ((r)|(s)) is an even matrix, 
then >°_(Q), which is the spur of the matrix 
Q(»)(s) IN an invariant subspace, will remain in- 
variant. To any wave function of the V, and M, 
there will correspond a wave function of N, and 
M, for any s, o which are obtained from 7, p by an 
even transformation; and under such eraastonma: 
tion the theory is invariant. 

The Lorentz invariance of the theory follows 
from this. For under Lorentz transformation 
positive kinetic energies go over into positive, 
negative into negative; the Lorentz transforma- 
tion is even. Thus 


> —(2) and O= 2. Q 62) (s)B0r) Fao) — L- (Q) 
r) (s) 


will transform under a Lorentz transformation 
just as Q does; if Q is a scalar, then 


2 —(2) 


will be scalars; if the Q# form a four vector, so 
will the 


and © 


> —(2#) and the &+. 


In the present formulation the subtraction of 
the spur (2.26) destroys the gauge invariance of 
the theory, in that it is not possible to associate 
in an unambiguous way with a given choice of 
gauge to represent a given field a unique gauge in 
(2.16). This circumstance means that the division 
of states into positive and negative here formu- 
lated is still provisional, and will have to be modi- 
fied in the presence of an electromagnetic field. 
As the arguments of the next section will show, 
the non-gauge-invariance of the theory does not 
affect the predictions which the theory makes 
about the reactions of the system to a given 
external field—the energy differences of the 
states of the system in the field, the transition 
probabilities, and the probabilities of production 
of observable pairs. On the other hand, the 
predictions of the theory about the reaction of 
the system on the electromagnetic field are 
gauge-dependent. 


252 W. H. 


Again with neglect of the interaction of the 
particles, we may write the wave equation for 
the functions ¥(NV,; M,). If there is an electro- 
magnetic field described by the potentials V, A 


then the Hamiltonian is given by 
H=eV-+thc(a, grad)+e(a-A)—Bmc?. (2.27) 


To this there corresponds the matrix H(,) (3) and 
to this the operator 


V(N,; M,) =09, 
M 
-0-- par : -) = (NIM !)?(—)*lyy (11: “Ns ptt? -pm), 


17 (Re OS ee ee 


FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


H= > Hoy (s 00 (s)- 
(ry (8) 


(2.28) 


The wave equation is then 
in(d/dt)w(Nr; M,) = HYy(N;; M,). (2.29) 


We can readily write the wave equation in the 


‘configuration space of the particles which cor- 


responds to this. We define the wave functions in 
configuration space, in analogy to (2.4), by’ 


N-M+p 


N-M=v (2.30) 


with the arguments of the yyy ordered. We may now define the operator @ corresponding to (2.5) and 
(2.21) as an operator in configuration space. This operator transforms any function y into &y, 


according to 


N M 
(OY), u(7; p) =D Oren, ao rear’ Piga 5p) — QL DL Qoreshw, um (13 ++ + 03-19" D341°° +) 
reat p’ 9 


N M 
—(NM)~*§ SD (-)8 FEO pophwis, maa Pe-aPaga so ppg’ **) 
Ge 
—(N+1)*(+1)? D0 Oper brgs, meats tw?"5 p’prs+ spa). (2.31) 
rh pt 


Then the wave equation is 


or, in detail, for N— MW =v=0: 
th(0/dt)Wo= — dX. XS Aorerbur(’s 9’), 
r’? pt 


th(d/dt)vn, u(7; 7) = (Ay)w, u(r; p) 


(2.32) 


(2.33) 


th(d/dt)Wir(ra; px) = DS Ary rebirl’; 91) — Hor, Wirri; 0’) —Hrye,boo— 2 Do Ayr Woa(rir’; p’p1); 
yt p! rv’ p? 


forv=1: 


th(d/dt) Pr0(71) a Fr, rio(1’) — 22 2 2X, EL reborn’; p'), 


th(0/dt)Wo1(rire; p1) = >, Ayr parlr’re; pr) td Ar, reQoil(rir’$ pi) 


(2.34) 


— SS Aororber(rite; p’) — 2-H ro, i011) +272 ro Wi0l(%2) — 692) Dd) Dp bse(rirer’; pp); 
p’ r? pt 


and for v= —1: 


th(O/dt)Wor(or) = — L Hore Worlo’) — 2% DoD) Mare bia(r"; pp), 


th(d/db)Wie(r13 pips) om » FT, rwis(’ ; P1p2) a= 2 Aorp Wi12(113 p’ pa) 
an p? 


(2.35) 


— > Aorpshie(r1; pip’) — 2-2 1,0, Wor(p2) +22 ry o,Po1(o1) — O89) Dy Ayr Ws0(rit"; p’pipa). 
p’ yr! p’ 


M 
7 Here [p;] is the ordinal number assigned to the state p; in ordering the negative states. The factor (—)##l#j is in- 


serted to save writing. 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


The rule for the transition from (2.6) to (2.21) 
cannot be unambiguously extended to operators 


of the form (2.14) ; and for the consideration of the — 


electromagnetic interaction of the particles of 
the system we must revert to electrodynamical 
theory. According to (2.21), to the charge density 


Dy PM's Pyro) =eWoy Woy (2.36) 
v 


and current density 


DIimvins Jom =ebrn avery (2.37) 
t 


must be assigned the operators 


and =D fers) @(r)(8)- 
(r)(s) 


Dd Pir) (8)@(r) (8) 
(r)(s) 


(2.38) 


The form a four vector S*. 

The electrostatic interaction of the system with 
itself, i.e., the Coulomb forces exerted by the 
particles on themselves and on each other, may 
then, with neglect of retardation, be obtained 
from the matrix 


Por) (sy (X) pct) (my (X”) 
Conca wom= ff drdr! = ee ae 


pees) 


and give an operator 


C= Cory (s) + (2) (m)® (7) (8)@ (2) (mm) 
(7), (s), (1), Cm) 


(2.40) 


This includes of course in its present form the 
proper electrostatic energy of the particles. 


oe 


ple 


(r) Cs) (2) (m) 


253 


When the magnetic forces and the retardation 
of the forces between the charges must be taken 
strictly into account, there can be, of course, no 
operator in the configuration space of the par- 
ticles to represent the corresponding energy; 
rather one must use the expressions (2.38) for the 
charge and current of the system, and from these 
compute the interaction energy between the 
charges and the electromagnetic field 


pis f de[6V+U-A)]. (2.41) 


This expression may then be treated as a per- 
turbation which induces an interchange of energy 
between the particles and the field; and in its 
application one meets only the same difficulties 
as in the Dirac dispersion theory: convergence 
difficulties which rest ultimately on an illegiti- 
mate application of the methods of the quantum 
mechanics to the electromagnetic field. 


In addition to the approximation (2.39) by which, with 
the total neglect of retardation, one has the possibility of 
taking into account to all orders the Coulomb interactions 
of the charges, one has had, as is known, a second method of 
approximation by which one can take the fully retarded 
interaction into account to the first order only. For the case 
that, in the absence. of interactions, the Hamiltonian of 
the system is even and has the characteristic values E,, Ep, 
the interaction may to the first order be taken into account 
by the inclusion of a term in the energy which corresponds 
to the operator 


Dy A crycayt (1) my O07) (8) OCD) Cm) F 


; ye SH ry (a) (%)S* (ay (amy (H’) 
A (ry(s)i ()(m) = sf drdr’ >). ——__--—____- [exp (4(r¢s7/€) + exp (tv(y¢mr/C) | (2.42) 
i 


= er 


with v5(s) =(Euy—Evsy)/h. But the application of this 
method is seriously limited on the present theory. For 
an unambiguous extension of this to the case where 
the odd parts of the Hamiltonian without interac- 
tion are not negligible does not appear to be possible, be- 
cause the method presupposes that in the absence of inter- 
actions the particles remain in stationary states, and, on 
the present theory, this is not, in general, true; in general, 
namely, there will be no even states r which give deter- 
minate values to the energy of the system. 

The interactions between the particles, in particular, the 
Coulomb interactions given by (2.40), can certainly not be 
entirely neglected, since one must surely expect that posi- 
tives and electrons will attract and repel each other. On 


the other hand, there are ambiguities in the application of 
(2.40), which arise from the apparent impossibility of 
drawing a rational distinction in all cases between proper 
energy and interaction energy, and which we must now 
discuss. Two consequences in particular of these interac- 
tions must be noted. In the first place, they give rise to the 
possibility of the simultaneous production or destruction of 
more than one pair, a possibility which does not, of course, 
exist when they are neglected. In the second place they 
introduce deviations in the energy levels of an electron in a 
static field computed from Dirac’s equation. These effects 
are small, and in view of the ambiguities involved in ap- 
plying (2.40), it appears that the application of the formal- 
ism to these problems transcends the limits within which 


254 


the methods are valid. For these ambiguities can appar- 
ently be dissipated only by a clearer understanding of the 
stability of the elementary particles. 

The terms in (2.40) with Cys: m, Coo: ru and Crs; po Cor- 
respond to the even parts of the interactions of electrons 
with electrons, positives with positives, and electrons with 
positives. In analogy to the replacement of (2.12) by (2.14), 
we may eliminate the proper energies by 


Oy Wim PE AL Anas; WO pa Wrp—PA ght ay’, 


leaving 
Wr sWpo = Ay Aghohpt ANA WyoWrs = —Aohp Ay As. 


Analogous rules can be given for all the other terms of 
(2.40) 


Wp sWlpAr Ar AyAs, WprWsi Pay Ast aiay, 


WO paWmdPAghAm' Ap", W pmOahPAmAnAe Ap”. 


W prWs¢—Aeh pA Se: 


The remaining terms should not be changed. These changes 
have been made in such a way that no infinite contributions 
to the electrostatic energy appear. Because there is no equa- 
tion in configuration space with which to compare our 
formulae, we cannot be sure that as far as the odd parts of 
(2.40) are concerned our results are right: they lead to no 
grossly incorrect consequences. In fact the distinction be- 
tween proper energy and interaction energy, which has in 
the present state of field theory to be made, cannot be 
made without ambiguity in a system in which the number 
of particles is necessarily indeterminate. 


3. 


The wave functions which we have introduced, 
vv, u(r3p), give us directly the probability 
P(ri:++twjpi-++pm) of finding in the system NV 
electrons and M positives in the states 71: +--+ pw. 
Just as in the case of the general transformation 
functions of nonrelativistic theory, it is here not 
always possible to say to what extent these 
probabilities can be determined by actual ex- 
- periment. For although the theory enables us to 
devise conceptual experiments for the determina- 
tion of P which in no way contradict the theoret- 
ical possibilities, it is not in general possible to 
find actual physical means for carrying them out. 
This may be illustrated by considering the func- 
tion W for a static, non-even field, and taking the 
(r) to be the components of momentum of the 
particles. Here, by suddenly destroying the field, 
destroying it, that is, in a time very short com- 
pared to h/mc*, and determining in the usual way 
the momenta of the free particles, we can in prin- 
ciple determine P. Again, by scattering hard 


W. H. FURRY AND J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


radiation, and observing the momenta of the 
particles of the pair and of the light after scatter- 


“ing, we could in principle determine the original 


momentum distribution with the same precision 
as in nonrelativistic atomic theory. But here an 
important point must be noted: the gamma-ray— _ 
or electron—which we use for the experiment, will 
itself tend to produce or destroy pairs; for the 
perturbation it induces is represented by an 
operator which is not even; and to determine the 
initial distribution in momentum of the pairs, we 
should have actually to use an “‘even’’ gamma- 
ray. It is clear therefore that the actual experi- 
ments in which positives are observed do not 
provide us with unambiguous determinations of 
FP for the field around nuclei. [t is clear too that 
the theory in its present form does not impose 
restrictions on the available experimental means, 
which make P unobservable; from the point of 
view of this theory, there could be such a thing as 
an ‘even’ gamma-ray. Nor is it possible to say 
whether the limitations which are in fact imposed 
ought to be recognized by a consistent theory: 
whether, that is, they should be regarded as 
limitations in principle or by accident. It seems 
clear that such a limitation in the experimental 
possibilities could only be based on a theory in 
which the electromagnetic nature of the electrons 
and positives were understood; and it is in the 
sense of the quantum mechanical theory, and the 
approximation a—0 which defines its appli- 
cability, that these restrictions should not find a 
counterpart in the theory, or the possibilities of 
observation which it offers. This situation, how- 
ever, makes it particularly urgent to show how 
the wave functions ~y, w(7; p), which are only in 
principle and hardly in fact observable, can be 
used for the calculation of things that the experi- 
ments do give us. 

When the interaction of the particles can be 
neglected, the wave equation (2.32) determines 
the characteristic values of the energy of the 
system in static fields, and the transition prob- 
abilities in collisions and radiative processes. Now 
to certain of these questions, such as the energy 
levels of an electron in some static fields, or the 
probability of scattering of light by an electron, 
the Dirac theory of the electron gives us an 
answer, and one in large measure confirmed by 
experiment. We have now to show how, in these 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


cases, the new formalism gives the same answer 
as the Dirac theory. 

Let us consider first the characteristic values 
of the energy of an electron in a static field. Ac- 
cording to the Dirac theory these are determined 
as the characteristic values of H in the equation 


Ag = Eqttn. (3.1) 


Under certain circumstances, some of these char- 
acteristic values give correctly the energy levels 
of an electron in the field of force, and the corre- 
sponding wave functions may be used to describe 
the behavior of the electron in its stationary 
states. The circumstances under which this is so 
may be defined in the following way: if we 
imagine the field in which the electron is moving 
(or the odd part of the field) to go adiabatically to 
zero, the wave functions will go over into the 
wave functions of a free particle (or the functions 
for a particle in an even field of force). In the 
absence of degeneracies of a special kind, any 
solution uw, will go over into a positive or purely 
negative function. A function which in this sense 
is ‘‘genetically positive” (LZ) will correspond to a 
possible state of the electron, and the energy 
value E;, to a possible energy level. The functions 
A which are genetically negative do not corre- 
spond to states of the electron. Such an unam- 
biguous application of the adiabatic theorem will, 
in general, only then be possible, when the 
stationary states corresponding to the even part 
of the energy are not in this sense degenerate, 
that positive and negative functions correspond 
to the same energy value. When, as in the prob- 
lem of the Klein paradox, such degeneracies oc- 
cur, no simple interpretation of the Dirac wave 
functions can be given. But in many problems, in 
particular in the problems of electrons in atomic 
fields, and in general in all stationary state prob- 
lems to which the Dirac theory gives correct 
answers, the classification of states as genetically 
positive (ZL) or genetically negative (A) will be 
possible; and it is just in these cases that we can 
establish a connection between the wave func- 
tions of the present theory and those of the 
Dirac theory in its original form, and a corre- 
sponding equivalence of energy levels. Without 
in general investigating the properties of the fields 
for which this division of states is possible, we 
may remark that of the simple fields defined by a 


200 


scalar potential which is a polynomial in 7 and 
1/r, the Coulomb field alone® permits this classi- 
fication. As for the states A, which in the Dirac 
theory are simply rejected, we shall see that in 
the present theory, as we should expect, these 
define the states of the positive in the field, and 
give — EH, for the corresponding energy levels. 
In the present formalism the energies £7, Fa, 
the wave functions uw; and uw,, do not appear di- 
rectly at all. Rather (2.33) determines the states 
of the system when it is known that there are 
just as many electrons as positives present; (2.34) 
when it is known that there is one electron more; 
(2.35) when there is one extra positive, and so on. 
And the energies £; must be connected with the 


differences in energy levels of (2.34) and (2.33), 


those of the positive with differences between 
(2.35) and (2.33). Now just in the case of fields 
for which, on the Dirac theory, the classification 
of states as L or A is possible, there is a unique 
state (O), for which the energy is a minimum, and 
which corresponds to the normal state of the 
pairs in that field. The interpretation of the wave 


function for this state has already been discussed ; 


to the question of the interpretation of the energy 
we shall return in the next section. Let us call 
this energy ©), and the wave functions for this 
state y. For yv=1, (2.34) will give us a set of 
energies E™ and corresponding wave functions; 
for v= —1, we shall get the energies LE“). We 
shall now show that the differences between the 
EE“) and EE are just the L energy values given 
us by the Dirac equation: 


EO EO =F, (3.2a) 


and similarly that the differences between the 
E™ and E©® are the negative of the A energy 


values of the Dirac equation: 


EVSROS— hy, (3.2b) 


In particular the energy differences HE — EF” 
are the energy differences H,—F,’. This result 
is essential, for it shows that where the Dirac 
theory gives correct energy levels for an electron, 
the present theory gives the same energies. In 
particular it shows that the present theory will 
give again Sommerfeld’s formula for the relativ- 
istic doublets. In the derivation of the result it is 


8 M.S. Plesset, Phys. Rev. 41, 278 (1932). 


256 


essential that we neglect.the effect of the electro- 
magnetic interaction of the particles of the pairs.® 

For the proof of (3.2) one can on the one hand 
use perturbation methods, treating the odd parts 
of H as small. If we let the states 7, p diagonalize 
the even part of H, we find, to the second order 
in H7,,: for v=0: 


FMD dg?) (Ep Eg) (3.3) 
rT, p 
forv=1: 
ee es ae (3.4) 
r p 
and for v= —1 


EM =—Y) Y| Hr, |?(Er—-E,). (3.5) 
r p=eh F 


The differences between (3.4) and (3.3) on the 
one hand, and (3.3) and (3.5) on the other, are 
however just the terms of this order in Ez; and 


(GENE Ohi es ia i107, (1) yp(0) 
wwii, w (7%; p) =(N+1)7? DS (—) Or SM YOn, we - 
4=1 


N+1 


W. H. FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


Ex for those states Z and A which go over into 
1, \ when the odd part of H vanishes. In interpre- 
tation of this result it may be remarked that that 
contribution to the energy which in the Dirac 
theory may formally be ascribed to transitions to 
states of negative kinetic energy, here appears 
because of the interdiction, on introduction of the 
electron, of the formation of such pairs as have 
electrons in the state in which the electron was 
introduced. This perturbation method can be 
extended to prove (3.2) in all orders, but soon 
becomes unwieldy. 

We may obtain a more powerful method of 
solving the wave equations (2.32) by the follow- 
ing construction. We introduce the components 
of the Dirac wave functions uz) in the (7) space: 


OF = ee (3.6) 
and form the wave functions 
Pah ye =o 45D) 
+(N+1)2 © Cores, wales + pnp’), 
. (3.7) 


(0; (L)) 2 ee 
Wy, nai (43 p) =(N+1)-*? DO) NTE Cp SO YOO, w(73 ++ pe-tpsrae +) 
4=1 


It may be shown then that ¥(: ® and p60; () 
satisfy (2.34) and (2.35), respectively, with en- 
ergy values respectively #°%+E,7) and EO 
— Fz). The proof is straightforward and gives 
us, for cases to which the Dirac equation is di- 
rectly applicable, a method of constructing the 
wave functions of the present theory. Here all the 
solutions of the Dirac equation appear: the solu- 
tions L give us the wave functions for an elec- 
tron, the solutions A those for a positive. 
We must of course demand that 


(A; O) 


(O; Z) 
Wn41, N =; 


Wn, n41=0, (3.8) 


for these functions would correspond to the addi- 
tion of an electron in a genetically negative state 
or a positive corresponding to a genetically posi- 


9 Cf, Section 4. 


~(N+1)I XS Co Oynrrs, war(t’rie ++ 5p) 


tive state. It is easy to see by direct inspection 


that (3.8) must be satisfied; and we obtain a 
proof by constructing the yy, , in terms of the 
C™).,). This construction of the yy,» is sug- 
gested by the original formulation which Dirac 
gave to the present theory, according to which 
‘all negative energy states’”’ should normally be 
full. Alternatively we may characterize the state 
(O) by saying that all the “negative energy 
states’ of the positive are full. If then we are 
given a complete set of solutions uz and uw, and 
form the quantities C%(,, C4q@ for all these states, 
we may write the solutions as infinite determi- 
nants, as follows: 


WO 9, o=|C,*| , 


= es (3.9) 
YO. (715 pa) = | C2 Co, "|, 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


and generally 
YOO n, n(fi: "* FN, Pie? - pn) 


=(N1-| Cr% Coys 5|s (3.9) 


where, in these determinants, in all the rows L 
the C,,” are replaced by the C”py,;_;; here r’s 
and p’s should be ordered. Alternatively we may 


write 


Yoo, o=|CoAls WOO1, 1(r13 1) = — | Co A9C;,4], 
(3.10) 


297 


The ¥y so defined, if we avoid questions intro- 
duced by the convergence of the determinants, 
formally satisfies (2.32), with the energy value 


EO = — 3) Ayr, (73 p)/WO 0, o- (3.11) 
r, p 


From these expressions for ¥ the vanishing of 
YO? ) and py: % follows. 

We may now generalize (3.7) to give us the 
wave functions which correspond to the addition 
of electrons in the states L,---L, and m posi- 
tives in the states A,---Am. These functions 


Yon, w(f1' + *TN3 pi’ + * pn) 
=(—)%(N Do CoA C4 


vanish unless all the Z’s and all the A’s are 


Pemee distinct: 


CLiees Ln L’); AreerAm) 


(Lise Ln; A) 
Wn, M 


N 
(ri- ++ ty3 pis pm) = N-* DD (1) 1 ye, a Pea + +5 P) 
3 


(Li+++ Ln; A) 


SCCM 1)’ 3 Ce FP! vy a) | (Ge) 
p! 


=O unless N—M=n+1-m; (3.12) 
M 
Dy+++ Ln; Agee*Am(D’)) 1 AY , L; AyessAm 
Vivat (Y1:°¢¢N3 pit + pm) =M? > (=) ¥-#Cp 2 y, M1 (rs 98 pe pir *) 
i=1 
1 y= rp CL; Aaee+Am) 
—(—)eFm( N41) Ce ebay, a” (rye +4 p) 
=0 unless V—-M=n-—m-—1. 
The identities corresponding to (3.8) are now of the form 
YBa End's BierAm) =), Lares Eng AierAmL) = Q) (3.13) 


and follow, as before, from (3.9). In this way we can construct a series of solutions, corresponding to 
different values of 1, for all of which »=m and vy =0. The transition from a state x to n+1 corresponds 
to the creation of a pair; that from » to m—1 to its annihilation. Similarly the transition, with 
m=0, n=1, from the state L to L’ gives just the transition of the electron from one “genetically 
positive” state to another, and that from A to A’, with m=1, n=0, gives the corresponding transition 
for the positives. 

With the help of the functions (3.12) we can establish another useful result. Let us consider an 
operator of the form (2.5). To this there will correspond an operator & on the ¥(N,; /,), and from 
this, according to (2.31), we can construct the corresponding operator as a matrix in the scheme L, 
A. The only elements of this matrix which do not vanish are those for which (L)-(L’), (A)>(A’), 
(L; A)->(O), or (O)->(Z; A). By using the functions (3.12) we can now prove that 


(L | o|L’) = (yo -Oyl") = Qn 7 = f drain 
(Aa | A’) = (yo OYS%) = — Ana = = f arity; 
(L; A|3|0) =(9% 9-8) = -Qra= — f drapous; 


(O||L; A) = (PO - ay ®) = —M%p= — f drasou:, 


258 


In this proof one has to make repeated use of the 
identities (3.13). For operators of the form (2.21) 
we may thus use the Dirac functions uz and us, 
to compute the matrix elements for states (ZL), 
(A), (O), and (LZ; A). In general G@y41°4n5 Attn) 
gives us wave functions pO 4n14% Ar Am) | 
per En; Are Am—14’) | pba Enb!; AreerAma’) and 
pore Ln-1s AveAm-) Tn constructing the corre- 
sponding matrix elements of &, the antisymmetry 
of the w~’s in all Z and all A must be considered. 

Let us now consider transitions induced in the 
system by perturbations. For the present argu- 
ment it does not matter whether these perturba- 
tions arise from the coupling of the system with 
another system, such as the radiation field, or by 
a direct introduction of time dependent forces. In 
either case, to a transition of the system in which 
the energy of the system changes by AZ there will 
correspond a perturbing term in the Hamiltonian 
of the system which is of the form (2.5), and is 
given by the matrix 7()(.) exp(#A#t/h). The per- 
turbation theory then tells us, that, to the first 
orders in v, and with suitable normalization, the 
transition probability L—-JL’ induced by the 
perturbation will be 


Po nasry = (1/h*) | (L'|v| LZ) |? 


with FG2-—EX 
Similarly 
Pcoysca; a) = (1/8) | (LA|o| O) |; 

| EG )— FO — AR, 


(3.15) 


necessarily equal to AE. 


From (3.14) we see that to this order the transi- 
tion probabilities are given by 


Ponescoy =(1/h*) loner? @; 
(3.16) 

Puasa = (1/h?) | van |? (d); 
Poet; 4) = (A/F) | oral? (a); 3.17) 


Por; m0 = (1/8?) [oa r|? (d). 


This result shows that in the problems where the 
Dirac theory may be applied to determine the 
stationary states of the system, the first order 
transition probabilities, which give the probabil- 
ities of radiative and collision transitions, may be 
computed with the help of the Dirac wave func- 
tions uz) just as in nonrelativistic theory. For 
these cases (3.16b) also shows that analogous 


W. H. FURRY AND J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


methods may be applied to positives, and gives 
(3.17a) for the probability of pair production; itis 
this formula which is applied in computing the 
production of pairs by gamma-rays and electrons. 

This result cannot be generally extended to the 
calculation of higher order transition probabili- 
ties, as is at once clear when we remember that a 
system which, when unperturbed, may very well 
admit the application of the Dirac equation, may, 
under the influence of the perturbation, cease to 
have this property. Thus the free electron or the 
electron in a Coulomb field may as is well known 
be treated by the Dirac equation; but when this 
system is coupled to the radiation field, the 
catastrophic transitions to negative energy states 
occur, and we cannot expect that a theory in 
which these transitions cannot be unambiguously 
excluded will give correct results. One can show, 
however, that to the second order in v, for any 
perturbation whatever, the direct use of the 
wave functions wz, ua and their corresponding 
energy values E,, E, gives, upon application of 
the usual perturbation methods, the correct re- 
sult. For the proof of this the antisymmetry of the 
peri so in the L’s and A’s is essential. 

This result is sufficiently general to validate all 
the calculations made on the basis of the Dirac 
equation which have been compared with experi- 
ment. In particular it furnishes a generalization 
of Dirac’s proof that “filling the states of nega- 
tive energy’ would not affect the scattering 
formulae of Thomson and Klein-Nishina. As far 
as perturbations induced by coupling an electron 
with the radiation field are concerned, calcula- 
tions of transition to orders higher than the 
second cannot in any case be made, because in 
these higher orders the difficulties of the magnetic 
proper energy make an insurmountable am- 
biguity. For this magnetic proper energy the 
present theory, of course, gives new results; but 
these in no way remove the familiar difficulties of 
the radiation theory. 

The limitation on the nature of the system 
which makes possible an unambiguous applica- 
tion of Dirac’s equation, and which has played so 
large a part in the arguments of this section, 
admits a very simple interpretation. For this 
limitation means only that in such systems no 
genuine transitions to states of negative energy 
should, on the Dirac theory, be possible; on the 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


present theory these are the systems in which, 
though pairs may be present, their presence may 
be unambiguously detected only by disturbing 
the system with high energy radiations. To prob- 
lems in which pairs are constantly being created 
by the fields present, the Dirac equation in its 
original form cannot be simply applied. 

Throughout this section we have consistently 
neglected the interaction of the particles with 
each other, and supposed them to be affected only 
by given external fields. When these interactions 
are considered, the proofs which we have given of 
the applicability of the Dirac equation no longer 
hold, for in the original Dirac theory these inter- 
actions have of course no analogue. In particular, 
when these interactions are considered, one can 
no longer establish the rigorous validity of the 
scattering formulae, and the energy levels of 
electrons in static fields cease to be given correctly 
by the Dirac equation. The effects of these inter- 
actions are in general small and cannot, as we 
have seen, be unambiguously formulated in all 
cases. But within the limits here discussed, which 
from a physical point of view seem inevitable, we 
have shown that the Dirac equation, wherever it 
can consistently be applied, leads to the same 
results as the present theory. For such problems, 
and within these limits, it is thus not in general 
necessary to use the wave functions wy, m(7; p) 
at all; and this is fortunate, since the wave equa- 
tions which determine them are in general in- 
tractable. 


4. 


In this section we have to consider some of the 
applications of the theory which have no analogue 
in the Dirac theory of the electron in its original 
form. We shall make no attempt to treat these 
exhaustively, but try only in a few simple cases 
to see how the results may be interpreted, and in 
what way the application of the theory is limited. 

Let us look first at HE. In a system in which 
directly observable pairs are not being created 
and in which therefore the solutions of Dirac’s 
equations may be classified as L or A, there exists 
as we have seen a unique normal state for the 
pairs; the energy of this state is © and is given 
by (3.11). This is the energy of these ‘‘nascent’”’ 
pairs in the given field; when the field vanishes 
E50; when the field does not vanish E™ is in 


259 


general negative. To establish the field, therefore, 
we do not in general have to do quite as much 
work as electromagnetic theory predicts; for in 
addition to the electromagnetic energy 


E, = (1/81) f dr(C2+62) (4.1) 


in the electromagnetic field, there is an energy 
E in the pairs formed by the field. This is in no 
sense a discrepancy with Maxwell’s theory, ac- 
cording to which &, should give the energy in 
empty space of the field ©, 9; for, as we have 
seen, the field will not be empty. This then is the 
simplest general interpretation of E™, 

If the field is itself produced by a charged 
particle—and here we shall assume that this par- 
ticle is not an electron, but is so heavy that the 
reaction of the pairs upon it may be neglected— 
then the corresponding energy EK‘ must be in- 
terpreted as proper energy of the particle. The 
only way in which £™ here could be directly ob- 
servable is by the creation or destruction of the 
particle; it could be inferred from the mass of the 
particle if the specifically electromagnetic energy 
of the particle could be computed in a satisfactory 
manner. For a point charge with a Coulomb field 
this proper energy HE is infinite and negative. 
It does not appear to be possible to interpret the 
difference between the electromagnetic and the 
pair energy of the particle in such a way that 
this difference should correspond to a finite mass; 
and in general it may be said that the present 
theory, which presupposes the particulate nature 
of the electron and positive, throws absolutely no 
light on their ultimate stability. 

When more than one heavy charged particle 
produces the field, the energy E™ will depend 
upon their relative positions. This dependence of 
the energy on the positions of the particles will 
correspond to a new term in the potential be- 
tween them: i.e., to new forces. These forces will 
not in general be Coulomb forces and the devia- 
tions may be computed, and should ultimately be 
observable. | 

To make these considerations quantitative, let 
us consider the case of an electrostatic field, for 
which 

A=0; © = —grad V. (4.2) 


When the field strength is not too great, we should 


260 W. H. 


expect to be able to solve (2.33) and compute 
y, by perpurbation methods, and use (3.3) for 
EO. A sufficient condition on the field strength 
is that it should always be small compared to 
mc?/eh. In this case it will be permissible to 
neglect entirely the even part of V which can 
give effects only in higher order and corresponds 
to the nonuniform motion of the pairs when they 
are accelerated by the field. Then we find 


EO = — 30 | Veo l?/(Er—E,), (4.3) 


where now 7, p index the positive and negative 
states of a free electron. The energy density in the 
pairs is of the order a compared to the electro- 
magnetic energy. For the case that the potential 
varies relatively little in regions of the order of 
the Compton wave-length we find for the ratio of 
the two energy densities: 


EO /E,= — ax. (4.4) 


Here «x is given by the integral 
c= (2/m) [ hk? (1+hk?) dk 
(0 
+(4/3m) { R4(1 +k?) dk, (4.5) 
0 


where in turn k is (1/2mc) times the magnitude of 
the vector difference of the momenta of the two 
particles of a pair. The second integral diverges 
for large values of k: the contribution of pairs of 
large momentum does not fall off rapidly enough 
to give a determinate result. This divergence does 
not depend upon the special simplifications intro- 
duced into the problem and arises from a genuine 
limitation of the present theory. 

This limitation is of the same kind as that met 
in all applications of the quantum mechanical 
formalism to wave fields, and comes in the di- 
vergence of x to a similar expression; it has its 
analogue in the now familiar divergence difficul- 
ties of dispersion theory which may be schemati- 
cally formulated as the failure of such theories 
when applied to extremely small lengths or inter- 
vals of time. The difficulty here has nothing to do 
with the introduction of point singularities in the 
field ; the electromagnetic field we are studying is 
slowly varying and nowhere infinite. An analo- 
gous failure of field theory in a problem in which 


FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


no singularities occur is known in gravitational 
theory, where the quantum theoretic calculation 
of the gravitational energy of an electromagnetic 
wave gives a divergent result.!° These difficulties 
thus tend to appear in all problems in which ex- 
tremely small lengths are involved; the critical 
lengths are presumably of the order of the cla s- 
sical electron radius. The difficulties are of such a 
character that they are apparently not to be 
overcome merely by modifying the electromag- 
netic field of an electron within these small dis- 
tances, but require here a more profound change 
in our notions of space and time, on which ulti- 
mately the quantum mechanical methods rest, 
and which in turn require the existence of stable 
particles for their definition. At present neither 
the precise point at which the theory breaks down 
nor the nature of the needed modifications can be 
determined; but it is clear that the sort of thing 
we must do with expressions like (4.5) is to break 
off the integral as it stands at some upper limit K 
corresponding roughly to the critical length 
e?/mc?, and trust a future theory to show that 
the contributions from k values greater than 
this are small. It is from this at once apparent 
that the theory in its present form can make no 
predictions whatever about the fields within the 
critical distance e?/mc? of a charge. 

In the case of the production of pairs, there is 
direct evidence that the present theory gives too 
large a probability for high energy pairs. For the 
probability of production of pairs by a beam of 
gamma-rays in the field of nuclei, when computed 
on the basis of the present theory, turns out to be 
much larger than any value which could be rec- 
onciled with the known penetrating power of 
high energy gamma-rays. And in this case too the 
failure of the theory seems in no way connected 
with the magnitude of the nuclear field in the im- 
mediate neighborhood of the nuclei. The fact 
that the theory should fail here is not very sur- 
prising when we remember that even on classical 
theory the model of a point electron, which un- 
derlies the present theory, would give altogether 
wrong results for the reaction of the electron to 
light of wave-length appreciably shorter than the 
critical length e?/mc?. 

With this understanding, then, x is given by 


10, Rosenfeld, Zeits, f. Physik 65, 589 (1930), 


THEORY OF THE ELECTRON AND POSITIVE 


(4/37) In 2K —10/97 and is about 2 with K~1/a. 
The result then tells us that the work we must do 
to establish an electrostatic field is about 2 per- 
cent less than the energy stored in the electro- 
magnetic field; the difference is supplied by the 
pairs. One might at first suppose that this result 
would have catastrophic consequences for elec- 
tromagnetic theory. But one sees at once that the 
forces exerted upon a point charge (by a field 
which still varies little within \9), which serve 
to define the field strengths in terms of the unit 
of charge, are reduced by the pairs formed about 
the charge in just the ratio (4.4). And we may 
readily see that the forces exerted by two charges 
upon each other (again at distances large com- 
pared to Xo), which serve to define the unit of 


Dee a (aesea/4n*r«) [ f dhe’ 


with k, k’=(27/mc) times the momentum of the 
positive and electron, and e=(1+?)?. When 
R>o, this may be evaluated and gives just 


(0) 
Eint. = — ake €o/R. 


(4.7) 


This result shows that if we define the unit 
charge!! in the usual way and the field strengths 
in terms of this charge, then the energy in the 
field will be given by &. of electromagnetic 
theory. In situations where the charges are not 
strongly accelerated and in which no lengths 
small compared to Ao enter, the difference be- 
tween the charge so defined and the true charge 


10a Note added in proof: Because of the gauge dependence 
of the theory no unambiguous calculation of the polariza- 
tion energy of the pairs in a magnetostatic field can be 
made; and in fact no straightforward choice of gauge gives 
for this energy that value formally equal to (4.4), which 
alone is consistent with relativity. This consideration 
shows that, quite apart from the ambiguities discussed 
~ above, the present calculations of the reaction of the pairs 
on the field may have to be essentially modified. 

1 Through the kindness of Professor Lawrence, we have 
just seen Dirac’s report to the Solvay Congress. In this 
report, Dirac, from a different point of view, is led to a 
result that the charge of an electron defined in the usual 
way is not the true charge. The expression which Dirac 
derives for the difference between these charges is in com- 
plete agreement with (4.7). 


261 


charge, are similarly reduced; so that as long as 
we do not consider lengths smaller than \o— 
which vanishes as i goes to zero as the corre- 
spondence principle requires—the consistency of 
classical electromagnetic theory is not affected 
at all, and the difference between the ‘true’ 
charges, and “true” fields and those which in- 
clude the effect of the pairs, are not, under these 
circumstances, observable. 1! 

We may calculate simply this dependence of 
pair energy on the separation of two charges. 
If the charge on the particles is not greater than 
Ze, then the condition |€| <m?c*/he means only 
that the particles shall stay far apart compared to 
(aZ)*Ao. If the two particles are separated by a 
distance R, then 


[ ee’ —_ (k-k’) — 1 je*k-k): R/O 


(4.6) 
ec’ (e+e’)|k—k’|* 


Ze, will not be observable.” In principle a detec- 
tion of this difference between true and apparent 
charge could be expected for a violently accel- 
erated electron; the effects would be of the order 
a for accelerations of the order mc?/h. But for 
such accelerations the electron theoretic behavior 
of an electron is uncertain by effects of just the 
order a which is the ratio of the acceleration to 
mc*/e?. Although, therefore, the effects here dis- 
cussed would in principle be capable of observa- 
tion if we had an adequate electromagnetic 
theory with which to compare them and would in 
that case have to be taken into account in descril 
ing the behavior of the electron, they would a, 
pear in fact in the present state of the theory not 
to be unambiguously detectable by observation. 
A similar argument shows that the deviations 
from (4.7) given by (4.6) for the field at dis- 
tances R<)Xo from an electron are also in this 


sense unobservable, that they are masked by the 


12 This can be said in another way: Because of the polar- 
izability of the nascent pairs, the dielectric constant of 
space into which no matter has been introduced differs 


‘from that of truly empty space. For fields which are 


neither too strong nor too rapidly varying the dielectric 
constant of a vacuum then has the constant value~ (1-+ xa). 
Because it is in practice impossible not to have pairs pres- 
ent, we may redefine all dielectric constants, as is cus- 
tomarily done, by taking that of a vacuum to be unity. 


262 


electron theoretic uncertainties in the behavior of 
an accelerated electron. Thus these deviations in 
the field give a shift in the energy levels of an 
atomic electron predicted by the Dirac theory; 
but these shifts are never greater than the un- 
certainties in the energy levels which arise from 
our ignorance of the reaction of the electron to its 
own radiation field. 

For protons, for which we may perhaps sup- 
pose that the electron theoretic ambiguities arise 
only for the far larger accelerations Mc‘*/e? the 
deviations from the Coulomb law should in prin- 
ciple be detectable. These deviations arise at dis- 
tances R~Xo. For R<KXo, but still, in order that 
KR may be regarded as large, large compared to 
e/nc, (4.6) gives: 


Ein. = — (ae®/R) «+ ((10/9)27) 
+ ((4/3)r) (In (2tR/No)+7)] (4.8) 


W. H. FURRY AND J. 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


with y = Euler’s constant. This corresponds to an 
increase of effective charge of the proton of 


be~ (2ae/37) In (40/25R). (4.9) 


The effect is small, but may perhaps be detected 
by scattering experiments. For the scattering of 
protons by protons, deviations from the scatter- 
ing for a Coulomb field of the order of one percent 
should appear for proton energies of a hundred 
thousand volts. It must again be emphasized that 
for very close distances of approach, where these 
deviations may be large, the theory may not be 
applied; for the methods here used to give a 
meaning to x must rather be thought of as the 
first steps in an approximation based upon the 
actual smallness of a. 


