Electron theory: Description and analogy 
J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Citation: Phys. Today 10(7), 12 (1957); doi: 10.1063/1.3060427 

View online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3060427 

View Table of Contents: http:/Awww.physicstoday.org/resource/1/PHT OAD/v1 0/i7 
Published by the American Institute of Physics. 


Additional resources for Physics Today 
Homepage: http://www. physicstoday.org/ 

Information: http:/Awww.physicstoday.org/about_us 
Daily Edition: http:/www.physicstoday.org/daily_edition 


ADVERTISEMENT 


Custom Liquid Helium 
Management Systems 


Components include: Si - CRYOMECH 


¢ Liquid Helium Plant 


Downloaded 25 Aug 2012 to 136.159.235.223. Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about_us/terms 


12 


ELECTRON THEORY 


Description and Analogy 


By J. Robert Oppenheimer 


THE FIRST JOHN FRANKLIN CARLSON 


We are indebted to Dr. G. C. Danielson, Chairman of the John Franklin Carlson Lecture 
Fund Committee, for having offered the text of the first Carlson Lecture for publication 
in these pages. The lectures, which are held in memory of Frank Carlson (1898-1954), 
professor of physics at Iowa State College, Ames, Iowa, from 1946 until his death, are 
made possible under a fund established by his friends for the purpose of bringing to Iowa 
State College each year an outstanding scholar to speak on some aspect of physical sci- 
ence, its philosophical implications, and its relation to human affairs. J. Robert Oppen- 
heimer, Director of the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N. J., gave the present 
lecture at the Ames campus on May 17, 1955. The second lecture was to have been given 
last year by John von Neumann, but owing to his fatal illness it had to be cancelled. 
This year’s lecture was given on May 1st by P. W. Bridgman. 


| es is a very special sort of privilege to give this lec- 
ture in honor and in memory of Carlson who was, 
for many of us, both a friend and a colleague. It is cer- 
tainly appropriate that, as we mourn his loss, we try, 
as well as we can, to do the kind of thing that he did 
when he was with us, that he would approve and did 
approve in his life. It is, of course, also a great pleasure 
for me to be here in Ames, at a growing and already 
very famous center of study in many fields, including 
physics, Carlson’s specialty. 

Carlson was a student of mine in Berkeley. To those 
in this audience who are graduate students I would re- 
call the earnestness, the intensity, almost the terror 
with which he underwent the rites of initiation in a 
great science, and the seriousness with which he met it. 
In those days, he used to say, “I have only one wish, 
and that is to be a good physicist.” I think he lived to 
see that wish abundantly fulfilled. I knew him, I was 
fortunate to know him, as a colleague when he came 
back to Berkeley; the two of us had a bit of luck and 
did some work together that was fun and was success- 
ful—something that does not often happen. I knew him 
in Princeton at the Institute for Advanced Study—a 
very sweet time. 

His interests were extremely broad. He was profes- 


Downloaded 25 Aug 2012 to 136.159.235.223. Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright; see -http://www.physicstoday.org/aboul us/iermns: 


LECTURE 


John Franklin Carlson 


sionally, primarily, and always a physicist, but his in- 
terests in science were catholic. Many of you will know, 
as I do, the fervor with which he taught men expert in 
other fields. He loved the history of science; he was in- 
terested in philosophy and in literature. He was con- 
cerned and sensitive to all human problems, and yet 
very balanced and unfanatic, a real scholar, one of the 
most modest of men, a man with a great gift for teach- 
ing, whether it was the young fellow whom he would 
for the first time show a new subject, or whether ex- 
plaining to rather highbrow characters what he had just 
found out. He was loyalty itself and great friendliness, 
and he was very funny. He had a wonderful sense of 
humor which softened the sobriety, the depth, and the 
sense of pathos and tragedy with which he looked at 
human affairs. He exemplified and, with a kind of stead- 
fastness which none of us will forget, he established 
that being a scientist is harmonious with and continu- 
ous with being a man. Being a man of heart, a man of 
feeling, and a man of knowledge and wisdom, he re- 
futed the notion that if you were a specialist you were 
inhuman. He established the fact that if you were a 
good specialist that makes you more human. He did 
more than any number of symposia or elaborate and 
sophisticated efforts to provide integration, to give a 


PHYSICS TODAY 


> 


ee the unity of human knowledge—because he en- 
joy | and knew 1 many things from many different fields 
and, in his p person, proved that knowledge was integral 
hat we were all brothers one with another even 
could not always understand what we were 
about. 
‘would, I think, have liked the terms of these lec- 
ures, he would have liked the thought that a man 
Ecce here and tell about physical science and 
in some way relate it to more general problems, be- 
cause he believed in such relations. But he was not a 
shallow man, and he knew that if there are things in 
the history of physics or in the history of physical sci- 
ence that bear on our lives in other respects, that bear 
on ¢ other aspects of science, that bear on human rela- 
tions, or knowledge in general, or what is right and 
wrong, that then this would be a pretty subtle relation, 
that there was no simple mechanical way in which you 
could translate what you had learned in physics and 
ce it applicable to the very different problems that 
face in daily life or that you face in political life. 
He would have thought, I think, that human affairs 
c ald be illuminated, that they were illuminated, by the 
experience in the cumulative sciences, in what we call 
: ce today; but he would have known that human 
life was far too broad, deep, subtle, and rich to be ex- 
usted by anything that the scientist would find out 
‘in his own field. 
_ Carlson, himself, was an atomic physicist par excel- 
lence. He worked during the war on problems of radia- 
- tion, which were of pressing practical importance, as 
“well as real theoretical interest, in connection with the 
great establishment at MIT, the Radiation Laboratory. 
But, when he was on his own, his interests were in 
atomic physics. It turned out, as always, that the rela- 
n tions between these two fields were formal and full of 
‘great analogies and, when he returned to atomic phys- 
ics, his work was enriched by the experience that he had 
; acquired by studying microwaves, studying how radia- 
tion behaves and how you may deal with it mathemati- 
“cally. He worked on the theory of radiation and elec- 
trons. He worked on the theory of collisions. I am not 
‘go ig, at ‘this point, to give a scientific vita. It should 
be known to you that he made contributions with which 
we are living today, and with which our children will 
‘be living, though they may have forgotten how they 
came about. 
-. "The work that he did, with which I was most closely 
associated, had to do with the subject of the lecture to- 
Iright-—electron Theory. I would like to tell the story, 
or part of the story of this. The reason is that this is a 
_ very odd piece of theory indeed. It is an almost perfect 
ry, in many contexts. It makes it possible for us to 
1 dict what we observe with an accuracy of one part 
in a billion or better than that. It is a theory which is 
almost closed, almost self-consistent and almost per- 
fect. Yet it has one odd feature: if you try to make it 
quite: pected, then it is nonsense; and this may have a 


JULY 


1957 


13 


I would like to tell this as a narrative. I cannot teach 
electron theory; it is a very hard subject; it is a recon- 
dite one. I cannot tell you in detail how one is sure 
when one looks at the results of an experiment—one is 
never sure, but how one is convinced—that this experi- 
ment means what it says: how, when you see a certain 
black line on a photographic plate, you know that it 
was made by an electron; how when you hear a count 
in a counter, or when you see a constellation of criss- 
crosses in a photographic film under a microscope, you 
say, yes, that was an electron that did it. This is part 
of the cumulative character of science: these things 
have been learned really over the centuries, and you 
go to school and you find out what has been learned. 
You find out that you can use a sort of shorthand, In- 
stead of saying that curve (the set of drops that seems 
to be distributed along a curved path whose picture you 
have taken; it was formed in a gas which was super- 
saturated, which was exposed to cosmic rays) repre- 
sents a positive electron, you just say, that is a positive 
electron, or positron. There is a lot of learning in that 
and I am going to short-circuit it. 

I am also going to have to short-circuit the mathe- 
matical apparatus which we use, not always success- 
fully, to decide what are the logical consequences of an 
assertion, what is the content of the theory, because 
this also is something which people will go to school 
for many years to learn. So that my description is going 
to be the kind of thing that you have to do in this 
world. You have to say, “I will tell you a story about 
it. I hope you believe me. If you do not believe me I 
hope you will be interested enough to spend eight years 
to find out whether I was telling the truth.” I know no 
other way; and I have the conviction that Dr. Carlson 
himself believed in these efforts to reach out a hand 
and try to explain across the great gulf of different 
experience, different language, different interests even, 
what we were doing, to explain that to each other. But 
I need to apologize to the many of you in the audience 
who are professional physicists for lack of detail and 
rigor, and to the probably rather more in the audience 
who are not physicists for what may seem the profusion 
of detail and rigor. I know no way to come around this. 
I wish I did. 


| Det electron is one of the fundamental particles of 
physics. By that we mean only that it has not 
proven possible, profitable, useful, to regard it as made 
up of something else. It is only one of a rather large 
number of such particles. My own count at the mo- 
ment is 24; but physics is one of those subjects in 
which you have to have a bit of a theory before you 
can count, because you do not know what you are 
identifying until you have a bit of a theory. The elec- 
tron is the oldest (the first to be found), the best 
studied, in many ways the simplest particle; it is one 
of the very few particles which is stable, which does 
not, that is, of itself, come apart and disappear into 
something else. It was discovered at about the turn of 
the century by J. J. Thompson. It is, as you know, 


in subject tc AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about_us/terms 


14 


the ingredient which gives chemical and most physical 
properties to ordinary atoms and molecules. It is very 
light compared to a nucleus, being about 2000 times 
lighter than the nucleus of hydrogen, the lightest one. 
It is probably the only particle in nature of which we 
have much understanding; I have to say that though 
this is a great deal of understanding, it is far from a 
complete one. 

With Rutherford’s discovery of the atomic nucleus, 
and Bohr’s invention, one had the familiar picture 
(which is not right but which has been so useful): of 
an atom consisting of a heavy nucleus, quite small 
(about a thousand times smaller than atomic dimen- 
sions), with almost all of the mass and a charge equal 
to the atomic number, Around this nucleus is a constel- 
lation of electrons which Bohr rather cautiously said 
were in a certain set of stationary states and which he 
pictured even rather more cautiously in terms of ellipti- 
cal orbits. These orbits being very large compared to 
the nucleus, their properties determine the chemistry 
and the ordinary physics of matter. 

Things were not, however, quite simple, because at 
the time of the electron’s discovery there were two basic 
theories into which to fit the electron’s behavior, One 
was Newton’s mechanics, which said that a particle 
moved so that the mass times the acceleration was equal 
to the force; and the force on the electron was the elec- 
tric force which acted directly on its charge, and the 
magnetic force which acted if it were in motion. And 
the other theory was that of Maxwell; which describes 
how electric and magnetic fields are produced. They are 
produced by charges and they propagate with the ve- 
locity of light; Maxwell in his famous equations said 
just how that was. So you had a theory that told you 
how charge produces an electric field and how an elec- 
tron should move in that electric field. This was all 
fine; it had to be most radically modified. 

But, even before coming to that modification, I 
should recall an attempt, associated with Lorentz, to 
see if one could understand the electron itself in terms 
of these two theories, Newton’s equations of motion 
and Maxwell’s theory about how charges make fields. 
I will say a word about this, not because we are wor- 
ried about it today—it is obsolete, it is wrong—but be- 
cause it illustrates with peculiar and rather elementary 
vividness something that has happened very recently 
and that is so hard to explain that I can only say it 
happened and cannot adequately explain it. 

The old idea was this: If you have charge producing 
field and field acting on charge, is it possible that the 
electron itself is a structure whose own field explains 
its existence? That is, the charge is accumulated in this 
way and the forces that the charge produces keep the 
electron intact. What else happens, when you have an 
electron that is moving subject to an external force? It 
is also charged; it must be producing a field; it will re- 
spond to this field. The program then looks like this: 
You say, “I have an electron and Newton’s law tells 
me that the mass, m, times the acceleration, x”, which 
is the second time derivative of the coordinate, is equal 


Downloaded 25 Aug 2012 to 136.159.235.223. Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about 


to the force exerted on it from the outside. mx” = F.” 
Then, you try to ask, what kind of effects will the fact 
that here is a bit of charge, what kind of effects will 
that have on the behavior of the electron itself? 

Well, you start out and say, “I do not know how big 
the electron is but let me say it is about that big” 


O 


and then let me calculate. Then we find that there are 
two kinds of effects the field makes. One is the build- 
ing up of all the electric fields around here. 


This gives energy and therefore inertia and mass to the 
electron and you think you may be able to calculate 
this out. 

In the second place, we notice also that when the 
electron is subject to nonuniform motion, then the fields 
are altered and new forces are introduced which depend 
on the motion. All of this, in general, depends on the 
structure, and—as in some respects we shall rediscover 
later—we find that as we make the electron smaller and 
smaller, the energy of the field grows larger, and the 
mass becomes infinite. The effect of the complicated 
motion of the electron becomes simple and turns out 
to be independent of the dimensions of the electron; 
all structure dependent effects vanish. This equation, 
mx’ =F, becomes complicated by the addition of a 
term depending on the third derivative of x. The com- 
plete equation is 


2 x//"e2 
30 


+ mx! =F 


where e is the electron’s charge, and ¢ the velocity of 
light. ; 

Well, the physicists of this day (and this is a half 
century ago) said, “The mass of the electron is known. 
It is not infinite. I will put in the right mass.” This is 
the term — 4x’’e2/c? which seems to be truly inde- 
pendent of how this charge is distributed, if the dis- 
tribution is small enough, This has the effect of slowing 
up an electron which is accelerated, It turns out to have 
just the effect of taking away from the motion of the 
electron the energy which the electron must radiate 
when it is in agitated motion, as an electron in any 
radio antenna behaves, Now the only point that I want 
to make about this equation—and believe me, though it 
may look complicated, it is easy compared to what is 
coming—the only point that I want to make is the fol- 
lowing: If you forget this term, then there are solutions 


PHYSICS TODAY — 


: ll you that if there is a force, the object is ac- 
ate if there is no ) Fore, then the only solu- 


an sy and the electron does that. If you put this 
term — $x’e2/c® in as a correction, there is no correc- 
{ on, because the third derivative of the coordinate is 
--zero for a body moving in a straight line. That is cor- 
rect. But if you get smart and say, “I can solve this 
quation,” then there are solutions of the form, 


x=x9 exp(t/T). 


So that means an electron will exponentially accelerate 
- itself; T equals 2e*/3mec, It is a very short time, about 
10-8 seconds. 

People have coped with this paradox in a variety of 
ways, but the obvious answer is that that equation was 
‘not meant to be treated that way. If you treat this 
as a correction, it never does you any harm; it is 
all for most motions and it agrees with experiment 
when you try it out. But if you take it completely seri- 
ously you get an answer which permits a kind of mo- 
' tion that does not appear in real life. This is a first 
sign of the fact that the theory of the electron works 
only when you regard the charge on the electron as it 
isin fact, as a rather small quantity. I should just point 
‘ ~ out that the denominator, 7, is proportional to e?, and 
‘I will show you another one like that later. 

__ In order to get on at all with the theory of the elec- 
tron, great reforms had to be made, and were made, in 
_ Newtonian-Maxwellian physics. The first of these was 
the special theory of relativity which, starting with the 
idea that signals cannot be transmitted faster than light, 
redefined the notion of simultaneity and the measure- 
ments of interval of space and time; showed that a 
“moving object does its stuff more slowly than an ob- 
ject at rest, merely by virtue of being in motion; 
showed that the mass of a body, the inertia of a body, 
increased with its energy content and so led to the 
E=me? of Einstein; showed that the definitions of 
‘simultaneity, length, ‘and interval all depend on rela- 
tive uniform motion; and established the fact that the 
Biiomens of nature are the same in (are uninfluenced 
by) uniform motion, that they will be the same irre- 
spective of whether you see something in uniform mo- 
‘tion or not. The theory of relativity took over from 
‘Newton most of his laws of motion, but with some 
‘modification, 

‘This is the first of those great conservative traits in 
electron theory which I want to point out. The most 
important of Newton’s laws—the conservation of mo- 
by nentum, the fact that a body not acted on by a force 
s its velocity and its momentum preserved, the fact 
‘tha at action and reaction are equal and opposite—these 
Mv ere: not altered by the special theory of relativity. 
Only the connection between the acceleration and the 
velo ocity, only the relations between mass and velocity, 
y vere e altered. 


JULY 1957 


15 


That was one great change in the earlier years of the 
century. The other is harder to describe briefly. It is 
much deeper; it is very important. This second great 
change was the discovery of the true nature of atomic 
mechanics, a discovery which, in some ways, shattered 
both the Newtonian and Maxwellian framework very 
much more deeply than relativity. This was the dis- 
covery both of the quantum of action and the place of 
the quantum in the description of atomic systems. The 
history is a very long one; but we can summarize it by 
reminding you that it was a resolution of the dual 
character of light: the character of light as a wave 
motion, as Maxwell said it was and as we know from 
everyday experience, with interference on the radio and 
all the rest of it; and the character of light as always 
involving a corpuscular discrete exchange of energy and 
momentum between light and matter in phenomena 
where they interact. 


INSTEIN discovered the light quanta in the same 

year that he discovered the special theory of rela- 
tivity; and twenty years later a way of reconciling this 
duality was made, not only for light, but for all ob- 
jects, for all matter, for electrons, for everything else. 
It is a very practical thing, the wave character of the 
electron. It is not only necessary for understanding 
atoms, but it is directly related to the kind of bonding 
that occurs in organic molecules which seems to us so 
inescapable a precondition for life itself. The wave 
character of the proton is what enables it to get into 
nuclei in the sun and in the other stars and keeps them 
shining. The wave character of the neutron is what 
makes it possible to build reactors with materials avail- 
able on earth and have them react. This pervades all 
of nature as we know it. 

Perhaps the simplest way to summarize what this 
revolution was, is to say that on the one hand it estab- 
lished a relation between the dynamical description of 
objects, an electron you may think of, and the waves 
associated with them. If you have any body—it might 
be a house, but it should not be because it would not be 
very interesting, but an electron is a good example—if 
you have anything and it has an energy content £, then 
this would be related to the frequency, y, of the wave 
representing the situation by the relation of E = hy, 
where / is Planck’s constant; and, if the momentum is 
P, that will be related to the wave number, K, of the 
wave by this simple relation, P=AK, where again h 
is Planck’s constant. So you have a code of translation 
from the description in terms of particles to the de- 
scription in terms of waves. 

This code leads to a very basic point: there are a va- 
riety of ways of exploring and objectifying the state of 
an electron in nature and some of them are exclusive 
of others. An attempt to make a wave which is very 
much localized (therefore to know that the electron is 
in a small region of space) will interfere with the use 
of limited ranges of wave numbers or momenta, For- 
mally one gets that the lack of definition in the co- 
ordinate of an electron Ax, and the lack of definition of 


to AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about_us/terms 


16 


momentum AP, have a product which cannot be smaller 
than this constant h. 


AxAP2h. 


The equation concerning energy we shall need to use 
later, We may say that in a time interval, At, the en- 
ergy of a system cannot be defined better than is given 
by this relation: 


AIAE2 h. 


If you want a definition of energy better than this AZ 
you must take the time longer than this At. 

This is a very rough way of talking about the wave 
mechanics, but it must suffice to get us on. I need to 
remind you that on the basis of a little bit of relativity 
and a lot of atomic mechanics most of the physical and 
chemical properties of ordinary matter and a great deal 
of the properties of nuclei too (composed of neutrons 
and protons), have found an orderly explanation—not 
always a complete one, because things can be too com- 
plicated to work out, but one which we believe is, in 
principle, adequate. So that the whole of physics for 
the last 30 years has been directed towards questions 
more or less exclusively evoked by doing abnormal 
things with matter rather than by simply observing its 
normal behavior. 

And how is that? It is many different things. But, for 
one thing, these relations AxAP 2 hk and AtAE 2 h, and 
Einstein’s relation E = mc”, together give you another 
code of translation; and that code says that there is a 
relation between length and time on the one hand and 
energy and momentum on the other. A time can be con- 
nected with an energy by the relation T=A/E, and 
with a mass by the relation T = h/E = h/me*. A length 
can be connected with a mass by the relation L = h/P 
=h/mc. And what that means is that if you wish to 
study the finer structure, in space or in time, of matter, 
you will be led to use very high energy or very massive 
particles. But, if you wish to study very massive par- 
ticles, you will need a lot of energy; if you want to ex- 
plore smaller and smaller regions of space, you will have 
high energies to deal with. And this is, of course, the 
reason for the overwhelming importance of accelerators 
and cosmic rays in this aspect of the progress of physics. 

In all of this development of atomic mechanics, there 
has been a trait of conservatism and a use of the idea 
of analogy similar to those that I mentioned in rela- 
tivity. Things like these—limits on the accuracy with 
which you can define position or momentum of par- 
ticles, dualisms between waves and particles and so on 
—sound very radical. But, throughout, there has been 
first a principle and then a discovery that in all situa- 
tions in which it is all right to use a picture of waves, 
the Maxwellian description of these waves (or what- 
ever one had in classical physics) shall not be monkeyed 
with. It is right. Wherever it is right to use a New- 
tonian picture of an orbit, that orbit will be followed. 
It is only when one has a situation where these ideas 


Downloaded 25 Aug 2012 to 136.159.235.223. Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright; see hitp://www.physicstoday.org/about us/terms 


do not apply that one cannot use the classical formal 
laws, And it is true that all the laws of quantum the- 
ory, esthetically and in symbols, are very much like the 
classical laws that they supersede. This trait of con- 
servatism, this use of analogy, is what has made atomic 
physics so rapidly a success. It is a revolutionary busi- 
ness; I am not playing that down; but it is only revo- 
lutionary at one point. It is revolutionary only at this 
point regarding the duality of waves and particles. It 
takes everything else more or less as it finds it and pre- 
serves it, and it has led to some really astonishing suc- 
cesses. 

The question, then, is what happens when you take 
this new machine, the quantum theory, the wave par- 
ticle duality on the one hand and relativity on the 
other, and you put some of the old questions about the 
electron itself. You think that you would like to under- 
stand the motion of electrons in external fields; you 
would like to understand their behavior; you would like 
to understand how they emit radiation and all the rest 
of it. That is the electron theory, which has come to be 
a great success, and of which I wanted to talk. 

There are two basic processes. They do not always 
occur, but given the right circumstances they will occur. 
One of them is very familiar and one of them is very 
unfamiliar. The familiar process is that by which an 
electron, if it is not moving uniformly, will give out 
some radiation. This is what happens to electrons in 
antennae when you get radio waves; it is what happens 
when electrons are stopped by the electric fields sur- 
rounding the nuclei in the target of an x-ray tube, and 
you get the x-rays from it; it is a very well studied 
thing. I just have to indicate that there is something 
(F) to accelerate the electron (e) or change its motion 
in order to give the y-ray (y) 


F+-e—+ (Process 1). 


This is different from the electrodynamics of 1900 only 
in that we know that these y-rays have their corpuscular 
property, and some of the detailed rules for the rate at 
which this process happens correspondingly change. 

The other process was really a new one when it was 
discovered twenty years ago; it is typical of the wave 
character of electrons that it should occur. In this proc- 
ess, we have a y-ray plus some kind of electromagnetic 
field. They do something that was not anticipated, They 
produce two things, an electron and a positive electron 
or positron. The two are called a pair. 


y+ F-e-+ e* (Process 2). 


These particles (electron and positron) are identical ex- 
cept in the sign of their charge. The fact that the laws 
of physics should allow a positive electron is not new; 
that is true of classical physics as it is of the physics 
of this century. The fact that this will happen, this ma- 
terialization process, is a pretty direct consequence of 
rather general things, of relativity, and of the wave 
particle duality of quantum theory, I know of no de- 


PHYSICS TODAY 


r scription which satisfies the requirements that nothing 
t avels faster than light, which satisfies the rules of the 


the t does not make this process a necessary thing. It has 
not been proved that no such theory exists, because that 
would be a kind of hard thing to prove, but I have 
never seen one and it has been tried for a long time to 
devise one. This pair production was a theoretical pre- 
diction which the theorists who made it were somewhat 
reluctant to believe until the positive electron was dis- 
covered, It was discovered in the cosmic rays by An- 
derson and immediately gave an immense stimulus to 
electron theory. 

_ These two processes, as they occur in nature, give rise 
to one of the phenomena which Carlson studied with 
‘success and great interest. The cosmic rays are many 
_ things; they have a mysterious origin, and they are in- 
teresting for all sorts of reasons; but a very great part 
of their interest is that they are a wonderful source of 
radiation of high energy, energy which may go up to a 
hundred thousand times, or even a million times, the 
energies now available in accelerators and may go even 
_ higher than that. So that if a phenomenon depends on 
having a lot of energy available, the cosmic rays are a 
good place to look for it. 

Now let us see what happens if we have an electron 
and it comes somewhere near the nucleus of an atom 
where there are strong electric fields. It will be ac- 
1 -celerated, and in the course of that it will give off a 
y-ray, and then the electron will go on with a little less 
energy. But now if the y-ray comes near the nucleus of 
another atom it will make a pair, an electron and posi- 
tron pair; and one of these may come near another 
atom and give off another y-ray. 


fncident electron 


this distance /s wy 
about 4" in lead-y 


Carlson and I worked on this a little and found that 
this distance d is not very long. On the average it is 
about a quarter of an inch of lead, something like that, 
or only about a foot of water. Not very big distances 
are involved. These multiplicative processes were found 
in cosmic rays. In fact they had been there all along. 
‘One was shy about saying what they were. They are 
‘Teally i impressive. The very high-energy ones spread in 
the air. There may be at one time a million of these 
things i in one event. They may cover a part of a square 
mile in distance while building up this enormous multi- 
plicative event which is called a cascade or shower, 
eee this is a kind of vivid demonstration of the ele- 


1 ne - after the other, in different events. 


JULY 1957 


7 


Part of the importance of this finding of Carlson’s 
was that one saw these cascades in the cosmic rays and 
was sure that this was largely a correct theory. Carlson 
had worried a good deal about whether the quantum 
theory of electrons in radiation was correct at all, be- 
cause in the cosmic rays there are many particles that 
do not radiate. They just go straight along and do not 
multiply at all; they penetrate through lots of lead. 
There are other particles that do quite different things. 
So very grave doubt was cast on the correctness of 
these theoretical ideas. But our doubts were largely re- 
solved (and since have been even more resolved) when 
we saw that there were things that behaved just this 
way and really quantitatively just this way. 

One of the important points, then, is that because of 
that certitude and because, in the cosmic rays, there 
were things which did not behave this way, which did 
not multiply, which did not give cascades, one knew 
that there were other particles in the cosmic rays than 
the familiar ingredients of matter. And that started a 
search and a period of discovery which has been ac- 
celerating and has been of most extraordinary vigor in 
the last years; so that, at the moment, we have some 
two dozen elementary particles, most of them radio- 
active and unstable, all of them transmuting one into 
the other when they collide, though not without some 
inhibitions. They all transmute into something, but they 
do not all transmute into everything. These discoveries 
appear to be taking us very close indeed to the elements 
of the subatomic world, to the actual atoms of which 
matter is made. This development is one of the by- 
products of the theory of cascade showers. Some of 
these objects, not electrons, are quite inert and are con- 
nected with electrons only by incredibly weak forces so 
that transitions occur very slowly indeed. Most of them, 
on the other hand, have very strong interactions with 
each other, which make the transitions occur rapidly 
and make their production and their destruction very 
common events. There are forces in nature enormously 
weaker than electric forces and there are forces very 
much stronger than electric forces. Electric forces and 
electron theory appear to occupy a middle ground. 


HE success of the theory of the electron, basing 

itself on these elementary reactions, with a quanti- 
tative and relatively straightforward way of describing 
how often and under what conditions they happen, led 
to at least two attempts at an analogous theory, One 
was Fermi’s theory to describe the radioactivity of nu- 
cleons. The simplest example, though it was not origi- 
nally an example, is that the neutron is radioactive. It 
produces a proton, an electron, and another little ob- 
ject which is called a neutrino and is hard to find. Fermi 
made the theory of this in exact analogy to the transi- 
tion of an electron from one state to another, electrons 
being accelerated and in the process a y-ray appearing. 
Instead of the process 


Estate 1—entate 2-7, 


ition subject to AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about_us/terms 


18 


he said a neutron goes into a proton and in the process 
an electron plus a neutrino appears: 


N-P-+ (e+). 


He initially made the theory formally yery similar. It 
turned out, with rather minor modifications, that this 
gives a powerful and helpful description of the phe- 
nomena of radioactivity; its connection with many other 
problems in physics has remained an indigestible ques- 
tion. 

The Japanese physicist Yukawa made an even more 
daring and, as we shall see, not so totally successful 
analogy to electron theory. He said, ‘There are these 
strong forces, which hold nuclear matter together, forces 
from neutrons interacting with protons, neutrons with 
neutrons and so on. They are very strong; they have very 
short range and, when momentum goes from one par- 
ticle to the other, this very often involves an exchange 
of charge between one particle and the other.” He said, 
“T know that if this were electrodynamics there would 
be a field of force stretching from one electron to the 
other. This field would correspond to the wave aspect 
of light quanta which go from one electron to the other. 
The quanta that go from one nucleon to another may 
be charged and that would account for this phenomenon 
of charge exchange, If they were heavy, that would ex- 
plain the fact that nuclear forces do not act over a big 
distance but have a range.” Thus, he would point to 
the formula AtAE 2 h, and he would say that an object 
of mass M has an energy Mc? and can last a time cer- 
tainly not greater than 4/Mc?, because that is the un- 
certainty relation. It can travel certainly no greater dis- 
tance than jic/Mc?. Then 


R=he/Me=h/ Mc 


should be the relation between the range (R) of the 
forces and the mass of the particles that are associated 
with the field. He did say this, and he said a few more 
things, and some very great truths have been in this 
theory; it has occupied physicists for a long time. In 
this complex analogy that Yukawa made between the 
forces between nucleons due to these new particles 
(which are called mesons) and the forces between elec- 
trons due to light quanta, Yukawa was trying to keep 
the theories formally as similar as possible. 

But before one can really get into that, we had bet- 
ter say a few words about some of the things that have 
happened to electron theory. Because, as of the turn 
of the century, it was not free of some contradictions 
and some troubles. If an electron can emit y-radiation, 
then, when an electron is just standing around, it will 
not free that y-radiation because there is no source for 
the energy, It is not accelerated or anything. But it will 
emit y-radiation and then reabsorb it, and the time will 
just be about fA times the reciprocal of the energy of 
the y-ray. If a y-ray can make pairs, it will not do so 
when it is just traveling through free space and there 
is nothing for it to hit. But part of the time it will exist 


Downloaded 25 Aug 2012 to 136.159.235.223. Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about us/i 


a 


in the form, not of a y-ray but of a pair of electrons, 
electron and positron. Those electrons, in turn, will 
sometimes be accompanied by secondary y-rays and 
those y-rays sometimes in turn by secondary pairs. This 
sounds terrible; but fortunately each step in the process 
is less and less probable and by about a factor of 1000, 
because the number, e?/hc, which measures the relative 
probability of these various steps in the sequence, is 
about one-thousandth, That means that it is only one- 
thousandth as probable that you find two y-rays around 
an electron as that you find one, and it is only a thou- 
sandth as probable that you will find one as you find 
none. 

Still, these complications have two kinds of conse- 
quences. One is that, if you want to talk about the real 
world, you ought to talk about the electron with its 
family, all its y-rays and pairs and all the rest, and ask 
what they do. And this turned out to be very impor- 
tant since the family changes the properties of the elec- 
trons a little. It changes its magnetic properties and 
changes the energy levels of the simplest systems; such 
as hydrogen (an electron in the field of a proton) or 
positronium (the system made up of one positive and 
one negative electron, twice the size of the hydrogen 
atom, behaving very much like the hydrogen atom). 
These changes were discovered experimentally in the 
years after the war, and are just a description of the 
altered character of the electron because of these virtual 
cascades that go on all the time. So it is also with light. 
The properties of light itself in the free world, when it 
is all by itself, are not altered; but the properties of 
light in its interaction with matter, with charges, the 
properties of light which make it shake off pairs when 
two light quanta collide, are altered. This is one reason 
for wanting to give a description of these interactions. 
The changes are, of course, small because the charge 
is small. 

The other reason is the following: we had made elec- 
tron theory for a long time but we had always been 
rather careful not to make it too well. We had calcu- 
lated how often something would happen and we had 
done it roughly, and then we had not made corrections 
for all these complications that I have just outlined. 
The reason we did not make corrections is that each 
correction, though it had a small coefficient (e?/hc), 
also had a large coefficient which was multiplied into it 
and which was, in general, infinite. It was infinite, be- 
cause, although the effects of y-rays on electrons and 
of electrons on y-rays are small for any given y-ray, if 
you go to y-rays of infinitely high frequency, if you 
consider more and more small-scale disturbances, these 
effects add up and accumulate to an infinite amount. 

A discovery was made about eight years ago, a very 
beautiful one, It was this: there are two kinds of phe- 
nomena; the kind of phenomena which depend in a 
sensitive way on the behavior of electrons and y-rays 
for arbitrarily high frequency, arbitrarily small space- 
time phenomena; and those which are relatively insensi- * 
tive. The only two which depend on the high-frequency 
behavior, which is the root behavior in the very small 


PHYSICS TODAY 


very short times, are the charge of the electron 
ss; and these are the things that are infinitely 

caffe ted by those phenomena, very much as in the clas- 
sical theory of Lorentz. And physicists then said, “Good, 
e will give up this attempt. We cannot calculate the 
the electron, It would be meaningless anyway 
theory in which there are no other particles, be- 
e we could give meaning only to its ratio to the 
f something else. We would’ like to calculate the 
; we would like to calculate that number one in 
jusand; but we will give that up too. These things 
we will measure; then everything else will be given by 
the theory i in a ‘finite way.” So they said; and this is 
: hat is called the renormalization program. It has the 
double. purpose of translating from a description of an 
electron with none of its cloud and company of y-rays 
pee electrons around it to the description of the elec- 
on as it really is, and to do the same for the y-ray; 
and, at the same time, of removing from the descrip- 
tion those features (namely, the mass and charge) which 
v would come out infinite and which are nonsensical. 
_A basic idea behind renormalization is that electro- 
dynamics cannot be the whole story. But if you try in- 
‘stead to modify electrodynamics in other ways (and it 
‘has been tried many different times and many different 
ways), to say that for very small regions of space and 
time things will be different, it is very hard to make such 
a modification (lacking any real knowledge of the phys- 
ics of that region) which is even formally consistent 
with the requirements of good sense, of causality, of the 
‘continued existence of matter, of complementarity, and 
the rest of it. 
: The renormalized theory has been very successful. It 
is the theory which has made it possible to predict the 
levels of hydrogen to a part in ten billion, to do very 
well with the spectrum of positronium, and to give a 
very accurate account of phenomena at ordinary ener- 
gies. The reason for the success is that one can do the 
corrections for the additional electrons and y-rays, step 
by step, expanding always to take more and more com- 
plicated situations; and each step is much smaller than 
the one that came before, maybe some hundred times 
smaller. 
At very very high energies this convergence is not so 
good any more and that has been known a long time. 
People have had the curiosity, the morbidity, to ask, 
“Well, suppose that I do not do this step by step, sup- 
pose I try to do the whole thing. I might like to do that 
because, if I could get rid of this expansion, I might 
even get some insight into the value of the constant, 
c. I could say how things would behave even if it 
ere a large constant.” And there a very odd thing has 
turned up. It has turned out that for ordinary phe- 

mena one can probably get things accurate to one 
in ten to the fiftieth or something like that, and at 
Tgies as high as the highest cosmic-ray energies one 
ae is almost certainly making no appreciable mistake 
tc discussion of electrodynamic things with electron 
th ay. Nevertheless, if one tries to do it just a little 
better and get it exact, and get it so that it holds at 
gy 


je LY 1957 ; 


19 


all energies, then the theory seems to turn out to have 
no meaning whatever. 

In fact, in all efforts so far, it predicts something like 
this: that the electron should have another state, an- 
other configuration with a mass which is negative and 
is enormously negative, 


m'~—m exp(hc/2e*). 


The exponent is about five hundred; you might say that 
sounds pretty bad. But it is not only that the mass is 
negative and enormous—this alone would be bother- 
some; but whenever this state occurs, it occurs in such 
a way that, if something goes into that state, it increases 
the probability of things going into other states. So we 
are producing more and more electrons and more and 
more phenomena whenever we have a collision or when- 
ever anything occurs. This is just another way of say- 
ing utter nonsense; it is utter nonsense of rather the 
same kind that we ran into with the Lorentz theory 
(and the Dirac modification of the Lorentz theory) of 
an electron. One has pushed the theory too far. One has 
pushed it to the point where it is saying to us, “I am 
not logically consistent.* You have left out something 
and that has made a hole in me, which I show, although 
I cannot say what belongs in the hole.” 

What belongs in the hole, of course, is all the rest of 
the world. It is those weak interactions which occur in 
B decay, it is those strong interactions, and those 24 
different kinds of particles which may some day be 30 
or 40 or even an infinite number, which appear in the 
great laboratory of the cosmic rays. It is all the rest of 
physics, which is not very closely tied in, and which 
leaves electrodynamics and electron theory an almost 
perfect, but not a perfect subject. 

The analogies, especially Yukawa’s analogy, have not 
fared so well. The reason is not because his quanta have 
a mass and his quanta have a charge. The primary rea- 
son is that his analogue of the number e*/ic is not 
small at all but very large; and therefore, in this situa- 
tion, the nucleon is very often accompanied, not by one 
meson but by several. These things cannot be treated as 
corrections; and the fact that they cannot be summed, 
that one cannot treat them in any other way than as 
corrections, means that one does not have in a strict 
sense much of a theory at all. However, it has been 
possible, with a good deal of sophistication, to use this 
analogy, together with a good deal of experimental in- 
formation, to coordinate phenomena of scattering, of 
meson production, and of nuclear interactions—those 
phenomena which occur for mesons of rather low en- 
ergy (comparable with the meson rest energy pc*) and 
those phenomena which have to do with internuclear 
forces at rather large distances (comparable with the 
meson Compton wavelength, h/yc). 


*“The question of the consistency of electrodynamics, or perhaps 
more realistically, the nature of the inconsistency of electrodynamics, 
has continued to occupy attention at the past two years. It is 
not definitely or rigorously settled. (Ref: Killen, G., ‘On the Mathe- 

matical Consistency of Quantum Electrodynamics’ Sheep 2m of the 
CERN Symposium, 1956, Vol. 2)." J. R, O., Princeton, N. . J. April, 


to AIP license or copyright; see http://www.physicstoday.org/about_us/terms 


20 


This is a first and a very modest step in the begin- 
nings of sorting out the new physics. These 24 particles 
are there, and, as I said, there are perhaps more. They 
have very odd properties. They were wholly unexpected, 
The theory of Yukawa, which was supposed to tie to- 
gether a few of them—certain mesons and the nucleons 
—would, if it were true, cover only a very small sub- 
section of the field. It does not cover that except in a 
more and more limited area. This subsection is not sepa- 
rate from the rest of the field as electron theory is from 
most things. It is clear that we are in for one of the 
very difficult, probably very heroic, and at least thor- 
oughly unpredictable revolutions in physical understand- 
ing and physical theory. One of the great times in phys- 
ics lies ahead; it is certainly something that will often 
make us remember how much we miss the guidance and 
the companionship that Carlson could have given us 
had he lived. 


UT BRCUGH all of this story there has gone a theme 
of the use of analogy in building physical theory: 
the analogy between Newton’s laws and the laws of 
relativity, the analogy between Newton’s laws and the 
laws of atomic physics, the analogy between Maxwell’s 
waves and the waves of quantum physics, the analogy 
between Fermi's theory of @ decay and the quantum 
theory of radiation, between Yukawa’s theory of mesons 
and nuclear forces and the quantum theory of the elec- 
tron. 

Over and over again, we have used formal analogies. 
This is not strange. We are trying always to feel our 
way into something new and unexperienced. We take 
into it what we have, which is our own experience, in 
this case of the physical world, and we seek a relevant 
pattern of form and order. Number plays a part in the 
expression of this, but is not essential to it; the no- 
tion of analogy is deeper than the notion of formulae, 
though not deeper perhaps than all parts of mathe- 
matics. These analogies are sometimes right and some- 
times wrong. Analysis, the confrontation of the full 
logical consequences of what it is that we have asserted 
with what we have learned to observe, is the final arbi- 
ter of whether the analogy is right and how far it is 
right. It determines the truth of the conjecture. But, 
without the analogy, there would be no conjecture, no 
way to go into a new field. 

You have, in entering novelty, to use what you know. 
You would not be able to make meaningful mistakes 
without analogy. You would not be able to try things 
out, the failure of which was interesting. You start 
thinking by the use of analogy. Analogy is not the cri- 
terion of truth; it is an instrument of creation, and the 
sign of the effort of human minds to cope with some- 
thing novel, something fresh, something unexpected. 
Analogies play, in the relation between sciences, a very 
great part, sometimes a harmful one; and they also play 
a decisive part in what little there is that natural sci- 
ence can teach of general use in general human experi- 
ence. 

One of the great things of this century is how illumi- 


nating and relevant the experience of the quantum the- 
ory, of complementarity, has been; how wide the scope 
of those analogies; I think for our children it will be 
better understood. What am I speaking of? The uncer- 
tainty in the position of an electron can be very small, 
the uncertainty in its momentum can be very small, 
but no experiment, no situation, can be devised which 
makes them both very small at the same time. This 
means that the physicist, or anybody else, has some 
choice as to what he is going to look at in a system, 
what he is going to realize, Is he going to realize a po- 
sitioned electron or an electron which has a well de- 
fined velocity and wavelength? He can do one or the 
other but they are complementary in the sense that 
there is no piece of equipment which will do both for 
him. He cannot realize them both together; one says 
that they are complementary situations. 

But life is full of that, of course. We all know it in 
the relations between our acts and our introspection, 
our thinking about our acts. Hamlet has said it better 
than Planck’s constant. We know it in the difference 
between, in the inherent inability fully to combine, the 
ideals of love and the ideals of justice. They are just 
about two different things; balance between them, yes, 
but fulfillment of both simultaneously, I think we know 
that that is not possible. We know it in the difference 
between a piece of knowledge, a piece of equipment, or 
a man regarded on the one hand as an instrument and 
on the other hand as an end or a purpose or an object; 
the difference between the inevitable and universal 
transcience of events and their eternal and timeless 
quality. This is part of life; and it is simply a rich set 
of analogies to the rather sharply defined, nonambigu- 
ous, straightforward complementarity that one found in 
the heart of the atom. 

So it is I think, also, for the electron theory, All of 
life has both its aspects, being complete in itself and 
referring outside itself. Closure and openness are with 
us all the time. Here is this quite beautiful theory, per- 
haps one of the most perfect, most accurate, and most 
lovely that man has discovered. We have external proof, 
but above all internal proof, that it has only a finite 
range, that it does not describe everything that it pre- 
tends to describe. The range is enormous, but internally 
the theory is telling us, “Do not take me absolutely or 
seriously, I have some relation to a world that you are 
not talking about when you are talking about me.” This 
is a kind of rebuke, of course, to anyone who believes 
that any specialty can wholly exhaust life or its meaning. 

Our knowledge is limited by the limits of our experi- 
ence. It grows all the time. As we see more of the har- 
mony, the order, and the beauty in the world, we take 
great pride in sharing that knowledge. This knowledge is 
the reward of the scientists. The power that comes with 
it is for other people. But we can be reminded, at the 
same time that we are aware of our knowledge and its 
scope and its beauty, that built into it there are also 
these perceived limitations. I think that is a lesson 
that Frank Carlson never had to learn, because he was 
a very modest man. 


PHYSICS TODAY 


Downloaded 25 Aug 2012 to 136.159.235.223. Redistribution subject to AIP license or copyright; see hitp://www.physicstoday.org/about_Us/ierms = 


