8 Science and Synthesis 
EINSTEIN’S PRESENCE * 


J. Robert Oppenheimer + It is an honor to be in this company, the tenth 
year after Einstein’s death, the fiftieth anniversary of his discovery of the 
general theory of relativity. 

As the President has said, though I knew Einstein for two or three decades, 
it was only in the last decade of his life that we were close colleagues and 
something of friends. But I thought that it might be useful, because I am sure 
that it is not too soon — and for our generation perhaps almost too late — to 
start to dispel the clouds of myth and to see the great mountain peak that these 
clouds hide. As always, the myth has its charms; but the truth is far more 
beautiful. 

Late in his life, in connection with his despair over weapons and wars, Ein- 
stein said that if he had to live it over again he would be a plumber. This was 
a balance of seriousness and jest that no one should now attempt to disturb. 
Believe me, he had no idea of what it was to be a plumber; least of all in the 
United States, where we have a joke that the typical behavior of this specialist 
is that he never brings his tools to the scence of the crisis. Einstein brought his 
tools to his crises; Einstein was a physicist, a natural philosopher, the greatest 
of our time. 

What we have heard, what you all know, what is the true part of the myth, 
is his extraordinary originality. The discovery of quanta would surely have 
come one way or another, but he discovered them. Deep understanding of 
what it means that no signal could travel faster than light would surely have 
come; the formal equations were already known; but this simple, brilliant 
understanding of the physics could well have been slow in coming, and blurred, 
had he not done it for us. The general theory of relativity which, even today, is 
not well proved experimentally, no one but he would have done for a long, 
long time. It is in fact only in the last decade, the last years, that one has seen 
how a pedestrian and hard-working physicist, or many of them, might reach 
that theory and understand this singular union of geometry and gravitation, 
and we can do even that today only because some of the a priori open pos- 
sibilities are limited by the confirmation of Einstein’s discovery that light 
would be deflected by gravity. 

Yet there is another side besides the originality. Einstein brought to the 
work of originality deep elements of tradition. It is only possible to discover in 
part how he came by it, by following his reading, his friendships, the meager 
record that we have. But of these deep-seated elements of tradition —I will 
not try to enumerate them all; I do not know them all — at least three were 
indispensable and stayed with him. 


* Title added after the author’s death. 


The Scientific Synthesis 9 


The first is from the rather beautiful but recondite part of physics that is the 
explanation of the laws of thermodynamics in terms of the mechanics of large 
numbers of particles, statistical mechanics. This was with Einstein all the time. 
It was what enabled him from Planck’s discovery of the law of black body 
radiation to conclude that light was not only waves but particles; particles 
with an energy proportional to their frequency and momentum determined by 
their wave-number, the famous relations that de Broglie was to extend to all 
matter, to electrons first and then clearly to all matter. 


It was this statistical tradition that led Einstein to the laws governing the 
emission and absorption of light by atomic systems. It was this that enabled 
him to see the connection between de Broglie’s waves and the statistics of light- 
quanta proposed by Bose. It was this that kept him an active proponent and 
discoverer of the new phenomena of quantum physics up to 1925. 

The second and equally deep strand — and here I think we do know where 
it came from — was his total love of the idea of a field: the following of 
physical phenomena in minute and infinitely subdividable detail in space and 
in time. This gave him his first great drama of trying to see how Maxwell’s 
equations could be true. They were the first field equations of physics; they are 
still true today with only very minor and well-understood modifications. It is 
this tradition which made him know that there had to be a field theory of 
gravitation, long before the clues to that theory were securely in his hand. 

The third tradition was less one of physics than of philosophy. It is a form 
of the principle of sufficient reason. It was Einstein who asked what do we 
mean, what can we measure, what elements in physics are conventional? He 
insisted that those elements that were conventional could have no part in the 
real predictions of physics. This also had roots: for one the mathematical in- 
vention of Riemann, who saw how very limited the geometry of the Greeks had 
been, how unreasonably limited. But in a more important sense, it followed 
from the long tradition of European philosophy, you may say, starting with 
Descartes — if you wish, you can start it in the thirteenth century, because in 
fact it did start then — and leading through the British empiricists, and very 
clearly formulated, though probably without influence in Europe, by Charles 
Peirce: one had to ask how do we do it, what do we mean, is this just some- 
thing that we use to help ourselves in calculating, or is it something that we 
can actually study in nature by physical means. For the point here is that the 
laws of nature not only describe the results of observations, but the laws of 
nature delimit the scope of observations. That was the point of Einstein’s 
understanding of the limiting character of the velocity of light; it also was the 
nature of the resolution in quantum theory, where the quantum of action, 
Planck’s constant, was recognized as limiting the fineness of the transaction 
between the system studied and the machinery used to study it, limiting this 
fineness in a form of atomicity quite different from and much more radical 


10 Science and Synthesis 


than any that the Greeks had imagined or that was familiar from the atomic 
theory of chemistry. 

In the last years of Einstein’s life, the last twenty-five years, his tradition in 
a certain sense failed him. They were the years he spent at Princeton and this, 
though a source of sorrow, should not be concealed. He had a right to that 
failure. He spent those years, first, in trying to prove that the quantum theory 
had inconsistencies in it. No one could have been more ingenious in thinking 
up unexpected and clever examples, but it turned out that the inconsistencies 
were not there; and often their resolution could be found in earlier work of 
Einstein himself. When that did not work, after repeated efforts, Einstein had 
simply to say that he did not like the theory. He did not like the elements of 
indeterminacy. He did not like abandonment of continuity or of causality. 
These were things that he had grown up with, saved by him, and enormously 
enlarged; and to see them lost, even though he had put the dagger in the 
hand of their assassin by his own work, was very hard on him. He fought with 
Bohr in a noble and furious way, and he fought with the theory which he had 
fathered but which he hated. That is not the first time it has happened in 
science. 

He also worked with a very ambitious program, to combine the understand- 
ing of electricity and gravitation in such a way as to explain what he regarded 
as the semblance — the illusion — of discreteness, of particles in nature. I think 
that it was clear then, and I believe it to be obviously clear today, that the 
things that this theory worked with were too meager, left out too much that 
was known to physicists but had not been known much in Einstein’s student 
days. Thus it looked like a hopelessly limited and historically rather acciden- 
tally conditioned approach. Although Einstein commanded the affection, or, 
more rightly, the love of everyone for his determination to see through his pro- 
gram, he lost most contact with the profession of physics, because there were 
things that had been learned which came too late in life for him to concern 
himself with them. 

Einstein was indeed one of the friendliest of men. I had the impression that 
he was also, in an important sense, alone. Many very great men are lonely; 
yet I had the impression that although he was a deep and loyal friend, the 
stronger human affections played a not very deep or very central part in his 
life taken as a whole. He had of course incredibly many disciples, in the sense 
of people who, reading his work or hearing it taught by him, learned from him 
and had a new view of physics, of the philosophy of physics, of the nature of 
the world that we live in. But he did not have, in the technical jargon, a school. 
He did not have very many students who were his concern as apprentices and 
disciples. And there was an element of the lone worker in him, in sharp con- 
trast to the teams we see today, and in sharp contrast to the highly co-operative 
way in which some other parts of science have developed. In later years, he 
had people working with him. They were typically called assistants and they 


The Scientific Synthesis 11 


had a wonderful life. Just being with him was wonderful. His secretary had a 
wonderful life. The sense of grandeur never left him for a minute, nor his sense 
of humor. The assistants did one thing which he lacked in his young days. His 
early papers are paralyzingly beautiful, but there are many errata. Later there 
were none. I had the impression that, along with its miseries, his fame gave 
him some pleasures, not only the human pleasure of meeting people but the 
extreme pleasure of music played not only with Elizabeth of Belgium but more 
with Adolphe Busch, for he was not that good a violinist. He loved the sea and 
he loved sailing and was always grateful for a ship. I remember walking home 
with him on his seventy-first birthday. He said, “You know, when it’s once 
been given to a man to do something sensible, afterward life is a little strange.” 

Einstein is also, and I think rightly, known as a man of very great goodwill 
and humanity. Indeed, if I had to think of a single word for his attitude 
towards human problems, I would pick the Sanscrit word “Ahinsa”, not to 
hurt, harmlessness. He had a deep distrust of power; he did not have that 
convenient and natural converse with statesmen and men of power that was 
quite appropriate to Rutherford and to Bohr, perhaps the two physicists of this 
century who most nearly rivalled him in eminence. In 1915, as he made the 
general theory of relativity, Europe was tearing itself to pieces and half losing 
its past. He was always a pacifist. Only as the Nazis came into power in 
Germany did he have some doubts, as his famous and rather deep exchange of 
letters with Freud showed, and began to understand with melancholy and 
without true acceptance that, in addition to understanding, man sometimes has 
a duty to act. 

After what you have heard, I need not say how luminous was his intelli- 
gence. He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without 
worldliness. I think that in England people would have said that he did not 
have much “background,” and in America that he lacked “education.” This 
may throw some light on how these words are used. I think that this sim- 
plicity, this lack of clutter and this lack of cant, had a lot to do with his preser- 
vation throughout of a certain pure, rather Spinoza-like, philosophical monism, 
which of course is hard to maintain if you have been “educated” and have a 
“background.” There was always with him a wonderful purity at once child- 
like and profoundly stubborn. 

Einstein is often blamed or praised or credited with those miserable bombs. 
This is not in my opinion true. The special theory of relativity might not have 
been beautiful without Einstein; but it would have been a tool for physicists, 
and by 1932 the experimental evidence for the inter-convertibility of matter 
and energy, which he had predicted, was overwhelming. The feasibility of 
doing anything with this in such a massive way was not clear until seven years 
later, and then almost by accident. This was not what Einstein really was 
after. His part was that of creating an intellectual revolution, and discovering 
more than any scientist of our time how profound were the errors made by 


12 Science and Synthesis 


men before then. He did write a letter to Roosevelt about atomic energy. 
I think this was in part his agony at the evil of the Nazis, in part not wanting 
to harm any one in any way; but I ought to report that that letter had very 
little effect, and that Einstein himself is really not answerable for all that came 
later. I believe he so understood it himself. 


His was a voice raised with very great weight against violence and cruelty 
wherever he saw them and, after the war, he spoke with deep emotion and I 
believe with great weight about the supreme violence of these atomic weapons. 
He said at once with great simplicity: now we must make a world government. 
It was very forthright, it was very abrupt, it was no doubt “uneducated,” no 
doubt without “background;” still all of us in some thoughtful measure must 
recognize that he was right. 

Without power, without calculation, with none of the profoundly political 
humor that characterized Gandhi, he nevertheless did move the political 
world. In almost the last act of his life, he joined with Lord Russell in suggest- 
ing that men of science get together and see if they could not understand one 
another and avert the disaster which he foresaw from the arms race. The so- 
called Pugwash movement which has a longer name now, was the direct result 
of this appeal. I know it to be true that it had an essential part to play in the 
Treaty of Moscow, the limited test-ban treaty, which is a tentative, but to me 
very precious, declaration that reason might still prevail. 

In his last years, as I knew him, Einstein was a twentieth century Eccle- 
siastes, saying with unrelenting and indomitable cheerfulness, “Vanity of 
vanities, all is vanity.” 


THE UNIFIED FIELD THEORY 


Werner Heisenberg Among the many ideas which Einstein has pursued in 
connection with his theory of general relativity, his proposal of a unified 
theory has aroused the widest interest on account of its philosophical implica- 
tion. Einstein has suggested that such different phenomena as gravitation, 
electromagnetism and material bodies could ultimately be described by one 
fundamental field or system of fields; that all the different empirical laws of 
nature could be expressed by one universal system of non-linear equations for 
the components of this field. From a philosophical point of view this possi- 
bility looks very attractive. Different groups of phenomena, like gravitation 
and electricity, can scarcely be separated completely. They may influence each 
other, and therefore the laws of nature responsible for them cannot be com- 
pletely independent. The unified field theory would contain the different laws 
as special cases and would at the same time establish the connection and 
thereby state the structure of nature. 


SCIENCE AND 
SYNTHESIS 


An International Colloquium organized by Unesco on 
the Tenth Anniversary of the Death of Albert Einstein 
and Teilhard de Chardin 


RENE MAHEU 
FERDINAND GONSETH 

J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 
WERNER HEISENBERG 
REVEREND DOMINIQUE DUBARLE 
SIR JULIAN HUXLEY 
GIORGIO DE SANTILLANA 
GERALD HOLTON 

B. M. KEDROV 

FRANCOIS LE LIONNAIS 
LOUIS DE BROGLIE 

RENE POIRIER 

PIERRE AUGER 

JEAN PIVETEAU 
REVEREND PIERRE LEROY 


French Contributions Translated by 
BARBARA M. CROOK 


SPRINGER-VERLAG BERLIN - HEIDELBERG: NEW YORK 1971 


Translated from the French by Barbara M. Crook, with the exception of the papers by 
J. R. Oppenheimer, W. Heisenberg, Sir Julian Huxley, G. Holton and B. M. Kedrov, 
also certain contributions to the debates, which were originally delivered in English. 


All rights reserved. 
Original publication in French by Gallimard. 


© 1967 by Unesco. 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover Ist edition 1967 


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 77-143044 


ISBN-13: 978-3-642-95208-1  c-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-95206-7 
DOI: 10.1007/ 978-3-642-95206-7 


