On the Quantum Theory of the Ramsauer Effect 

Author(s): J. R. Oppenheimer 

Source: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
Vol. 14, No. 3 (Mar. 15, 1928), pp. 261-262 

Published by: National Academy of Sciences 

Stable URL: http://www. jstor.org/stable/8542 1 


Accessed: 04/05/2014 07:07 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


National Academy of Sciences 1s collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 195.78.109.15 on Sun, 4 May 2014 07:07:52 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


VoL. 14, 1928 PHYSICS: J. R. OPPENHEIMER 261 


ON THE .QUANTUM THEORY OF THE RAMSAUER EFFECT 
By J. R. OPPENHEIMER* 
NORMAN BRIDGE LABORATORY OF Puysics, PASADENA 


Communicated February 21, 1928 


The Ramsauer effect does not correspond to the decrease in optical 
scattering by a particle when the wave-length of the light is increased. 
For one may compute the cross-section for elastic collision of an electron 
with an atom, without making the approximations used by Born. If 
one does this, and neglects the resonance of the colliding electron with 
the atomic electrons one finds that, for atoms with no dipole moment in 
the normal state, the cross-section approaches a finite limit when the 
electronic velocity is decreased. The only general result of this calculation 
is that the distribution of scattered electrons tends, in this limit, to become 
uniform over all angles. 

If, however, one considers the electronic resonance and spin, one obtains 
results which seem adequate to account for the effects observed by Ram- 
sauer. ‘Thus one may compute two first order cross-sections for the elastic 
collision of an electron and a hydrogenic atom, corresponding to initial 
orbital wave functions respectively symmetric and anti-symmetric in 
the codrdinates of the impacting electron and the atomic electron. ‘These 
turn out to be of the form | 


| f(a, 5) =e g(v, 5) | 


and 


|f(v, 6) — g(v, 8) |®. 


Here v is the electronic velocity, 6 the angle of deflection; f and g are 
positive; f corresponds to transitions in which the atomic electron remains 
undisturbed, and the free electron changes its direction of motion by the 
angle 6; g corresponds to transitions in which the free electron takes the 
place of the atomic electron and this latter electron leaves the atom with 
a velocity v and a direction of motion 6. For fixed 6 and large v, fis much 
greater than g, while for v = 0, g = 6f; and f becomes equal to g for 
velocities of the order of a volt. Thus the symmetric wave function gives 
a cross-section which is always greater than that computed without reso- 
nance: ‘The anti-symmetric one gives a cross-section which, for each angle 
of deflection, vanishes for some small velocity; and the corresponding 
total cross-section | 


i: 6d | f(a, 6) — g(v, 6)|? 


has a sharp minimum at about a volt. 


This content downloaded from 195.78.109.15 on Sun, 4 May 2014 07:07:52 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


262 PHYSICS: WIENER AND STRUIK Proc. N. A. S. 


Now, in general, both symmetrical and anti-symmetrical wave functions 
will occur; and the orbital wave function will involve terms which are 
symmetrical in the colliding electron and one of the atomic electrons. 
But if the atom has only paired electrons, the symmetric orbital solution 
will be excluded by Pauli’s principle. Hence in this case (e.g., helium, 
argon, methane) the cross-section will be given by the anti-symmetric 
wave function alone, and may pass through a minimum for sufficiently. 
low velocities. | 

The position and shape of the minimum will depend essentially upon 
the series of wave functions of the atom, and may be computed only by 
complete solution of the collision problem; the first order cross-section 
is inadequate for quantitative prediction. But the occurrence of the 
minimum depends upon the chemical properties of the atom; this is in 
good agreement with the available experiments,! and particularly with 
those of Rusch, who reports a sharp minimum in the cross-sections of 
argon and krypton. Details of the theory will be published elsewhere. 


* NATIONAL RESEARCH FELLOW. 
1 Hdb. d. Phys., 23, 646, 1926. 


THE FIFTH DIMENSION IN RELATIVISTIC QUANTUM THEORY 


By NoRBERT WIENER AND D. J. STRUIK 
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS, MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 


Communicated January 24, 1928 


O. Klein! has shown that the Schrédinger equation 


Lf 2 wh 4 trie $5 Ov 
a/ —g ik=1 Ox? ox" he j=1 Ox? 
Are? ik mc _ 
hc? LE, ee | ss 
may be cast into the form 
1 & 0 ,~,~— » dv | 
—— pce = — OF 2 
TS ztoan V YY ov | @) 


where 


2rix® 
U(x, xt, 07, 08, x4) =e Pat, x, x8, x"), 
and the matrix y;; has the components 
1 


Yo = —>>> 
mc? 


This content downloaded from 195.78.109.15 on Sun, 4 May 2014 07:07:52 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


