Tae is a brief report on the future of 


atomic explosives. I cannot tell of the 
probable future technical developments of 
atomic explosives. When the war was 
over we recognized that we had only 
scratched the surface of this problem; no 
doubt since then some further progress has 
been made, both in development and in 
understanding. But these are things that 
we cannot talk about here. When, if ever, 
they can be talked about openly, it will be 
a very different world, and to my way of 
thinking a very much better one. 

As for the uses of atomic explosives, the 
one that has been most widely discussed, 
the one in which their pre-eminence was 
first established and is most obvious, is the 
strategic bombardment of cities. No 
doubt there can be important tactical 
applications as well, but on these ignor- 
ance and inexperience as well as the re- 
quirements of secrecy force me to silence. 
There has even been a little talk of possible 
beneficent applications of atomic explo- 
sives, such as the blasting of polar ice and 
the possible control of major natural 
Phenomena such as tornadoes, earth- 
quakes, and eruptions. There is enough 
energy in atomic explosives to give these 
vague suggestions an air of plausibility: 
even the weapons so far used release 
about one thousandth of that in the San 
Francisco earthquake. But of course the 
forces produced by an atomic explosion 
have @ very different sort of order from 
those involved in the great natural phepom- 
ena of quakes and tornadoes; and the 
radiation and radioactivities that accom- 
pany any major atomic explosion must at 
least complicate its application to benign 
purposes. If men are ever to speak of 
the benefits of atomic energy, I think these 
applications will at most play a very small 
part in what they have in mind. 

There is only one future of atomic explo- 
sives that I can regard with any enthusi- 
asm: that they should never be used in 


1350 


“i wk & ok & & & Future of Atomie Energy « k k k k * 


Atomic Explosives 


J. RoBperr OPPENHEIMER 
Professor of Physics, University of California 


The development of atomic weapons can, if wisely handled, make 
the problem of preventing war, not more hopeless, but more hope- 
ful, than it would otherwise have been; this is so not merely because 
it intensifies the urgency of our hopes, but because it provides new 
and healthy avenues of approach to the solution of the problem 


a ee a a a a a a a a a ee a a a a a a 


war. Since in any major total war, such 
as we have known in these late years, they 
will most certainly be used, there is noth- 
ing modest in this hope for the future: it 
is that there be no such wars again. 


International Authority Proposed 


Some months ago, a group, acting as 
consultants to the Secretary of State’s 
Committee on Atomic Energy, spent 
many weeks exploring this problem, which 
is commonly defined in a sort of code as 
“The International Control of Atomic 
Energy’’. Since that time our conclu- 
sions, expurgated of all secret or classified 
matter, have been made public, and may 
have come to your attention. They were 
made public in order to facilitate public 
understanding and discussion, a discussion 
made more necessary by the difficulty of 
the problem, made more difficult by the 
secrecy which has been maintained about 
many of its technical elements. What I 
should like to do is to add a few comments 
which may help to supplement the report 
that was made public, to make explicit 
some of the things left implicit in it, to 
restore a balance of emphasis somewhat 
marred by the initial accidents of its re- 
lease. 

The heart of our proposal was the rec- 
ommendation of an International Atomic 
Development Authority, entrusted with 
the research, development, and exploita- 
tion of the peaceful applications of atomic 
energy, and the elimination from national 
armaments of atomic weapons. In this 
proposal we attempted to meet, and to put 
into a constructive context, two sets of 
facts, long recognized, and commonly re- 
garded as contributing tc the difficulty, if 
not to the insolubility, of the problem. 

The first of these is that the science, the 
technology, and the industrial develop- 
ment involved in the so-called beneficial 
uses of atomic energy are apparently in- 
extricably intertwined with those involved 


in making atomic weapons, The same 
raw material, uranium, is needed for the 
use of atomic energy for power as for 
atomic bombs. The plants of an atomic 
power program may not be ideally suited 
for the production of bomb materials, but 
in a pinch—and atomic warfare is a 
pinch—they can be made to do. The 
various fissionable materials derived from 
uranium and thorium that play such a 
decisive part in the power program, or 
even in the use of atomic energy for re- 
search reactors and for advancing medi- 
ci: and the practical arts, are, or can 
with more or less effort be made into, 
atomic explosives. The same physics 
which must be learned and studied and 
extended in the one field will help with the 
other—although there are of course some 
things in the higher art of bomb making 
that as yet appear to have no other 
application. 

It is true that the properties that make 
a fissionable materia] useful for reactors 
are not quite the same properties that 
make it useful for bombs. Natural 
uranium can be used in a power plant, but 
I don’t think a bomb can be made of it. 
Uranium considerably enriched in the 
isotope 235 can be more flexibly and effec- 
tively used in reactors; but I am not sure 
that it can be made explosive, and am 
fairly confident that it would be so in- 
efiective as not to warrant the effort. 
Plutonium can be doctored—not without 
prohibitive cost to make it completely 
nonexplosive—but to make it a relatively 
ineffective explosive, and a difficult one to 
use. These differences in the require- 
ments for controlled and explosive uses of 
atomic energy, might, if appropriately 
recognized in law, keep a group of in- 
dividuals from making atomic weapons 
out of the materials for peacetime indus- 
try; they could retard and thus perhaps 
discourage nations otherwise prevented 
from the exploitation of atomic energy; 


CHEMICAL AND ENGINEERING NEWS 


but to any who are actively engaged in 
such exploitation they could provide a 
deterrent so slight as to constitute a most 
dangerous illusion. Thus, a mere pro- 
hibition on the activities of nations in the 
field of atomic energy sufficiently incisive 
to inspire confidence that, if enforced, it 
would prevent rapid conversion to atomic 
armament, would at the aame time close 
this field to the national exploitation of 
any of its benefits. This fact, which 
further technical developments appear 
unlikely to invalidate, has long been re- 
garded as an almost decisive difficulty on 
the path of international control It 
might have appeared so to us, too, if there 
had not been a greater one. For even if 
the course of development of atomic 
energy for peace were entirely distinct 
from its development for war, even if it 
were universally agreed that there were no 
peaceful applications of atomic energy 
worthy of interest or effort, we should still 
be faced with the fact that there exists in 
the world today no machinery for making 
effective a prohibition against the national 
development of atomic weapons. in the 
light of this fact, that to my mind touches 
upon the heart of the problem, the close 
technical parallelism and interrelation of 
the peaceful and the military applications 
of atomic energy cease to be a difficulty, 
and become a help. This does not, un- 
fortunately, mean that it guarantees a 
solution. But it does mean that it pro- 
vides a basis for seeking a healthy solution 
that would not otherwise exist. 

If there were nothing to do with atomic 
energy but make bombs, there inight still, 
it is true, be a convention between nations 
not to do so. Such conventions have in 
the past seldom withstood the strain of 
rivalries between naticns preparing for 
war, ner does it seem likely that they could 
do so in future in the case of a weapon 
whose effectiveness, especially in surprise, 
is so spectacular. For this reason two 
proposals have long been current, for sup- 
plementing international conventions with 
some form of international action, 


Difficulties of Policing 


One of these would set up a scheme of 
multilateral or international inspection, 
whose sole function would be to attempt to 
establish that the conventions were in fact 
being observed. It is conceivable that if 
the conventions were sufficiently radical, 
comprising, for instance, the total renunci~ 
ation of all mining and refining of uranium, 
such a procedure might work. But I 
doubt this, even in that case. I doubt 
whether the agency entrusted with such 
inspection could even then have the moti- 
vation, the personnel, the skill, the experi- 
ence, or the endurance to carry out such a 
dreary, sterile, and repressive job. I 
doubt whether the relations between this 
agency and the nations and nationals 
whorn it was instructed to police would be 
such as to diminish the nationalism leading 
to war, or to inspire the confidence of the 
VOLUME 24, 


NO. 10 > , > 


nations in each other, or to advance the 
cause of the unification of the world, or to 
serve us a useful prototype for the elimina- 
tion of weapons of mass destruction, per- 
haps equally, perhaps more, terrible. 
Therefore, one may perhaps not regret 
that the door to vhis sort of international 
action is largely closed by the impossibility 
of denying to the worldin any long term an 
opportunity to explore the beneficial possi- 
bilities of atomic energy. For once such 
exploration is allowed to the nations, the 
technical complexities and human inade- 
quacies of international inspection as a 
sole safeguard become manifestly insup- 
portable. 


International Manufacture 


The second suggestion for international 
action to supplement the renunciation by 
nations of atomic armaments has s more 
affirmative character. It is that an inter- 
national agency be entrusted with the 
making of atomic weapons. Though 
there has been much in this proposal that 
has seemed attractive, it has two weak- 
nesses, and probably fatal ones; the 
more serious is that there is nothing that 
an international agency can do, or sbould 
do, with such weapons. They are not 
police weapons. They are singularly un- 
suited for distinguishing between innocent 
and guilty or for taking even crudely into 
account the distinction between the guilt 
of individuals and that of peoples; they 
are themselves a supreme expression in a 
weapon of the concepts of totalwar. The 
second difficulty, in some sense inescapable 
in any form of international action, but 
desperately acute im this, is that such 
stocks of atomic weapons, however earn- 
estly they are proclaimed international, 
however infeniously they are distributed 
on earth, would nonetheless offer the most 
terrible temptation to mational seizure, 
for the almost immediate military ad- 
vantage that their use might afford. 

These two examples do give recognition 
to the need, in any system of outlawing 
atomic weapons, of international action. 
In this I think they aresound. In fact, in 
another context, the study—but not the 
production—-of atomic weapons, and in- 
spection to prevent the illegal mining of 
uranium both vould seem to be essential 
functions of an international authority. 


The Problem of Control 


It is time to turn to the second of the 
great difficulties that have from the outset 
been regarded as preventing any effective 
international control. It is the absence in 
the world teday of any machinery ade- 
quate to provide such control, any prece- 
dent for such machinery, any adequate 
patterns of the past to provide such prece- 
dent. Just this is the reason why the 
problem is so much ofa challenge, why we 
may be sustained by the hope that. its 
solution would provide such precedent, 
such patterns, fora wider application. It 
did not take atomic weapons to make 


MAY 25, 1946 


wars, to make wars terrible, to make wars 
total. If there had never been and could 
never be an atomic bomb, the problem of 
preventing war in an age when science and 
technology have made it too destructive, 
too terrible to endure, would still be with 
us, There would be the blockbuster, the 
V-2, the M-67, and their increase; there 
would no doubt be biological warfare. 
But the atomic bomb, most spectacular of 
proved weapons, most inextricably inter- 
twined with constructive developments, 
least. fettered by private or by vested in- 
terest or long national tradition, has to 
many seemed the place to start. 

Many have said that without world 
government there could be no permanent 
peace, that without peace there would be 
atomic warfare. I think one must agree 
with this. Mlany have said that there 
could be no outlawry of weapons and no 
prevention of war unless international law 
could apply to the citizens of nations, as 
federal law does to those of states, or have 
made manifest. the fact that international 
control is not compatible with absolute 
national sovereignty. I think one must 
agree. Many have said that atomic 
energy could not be controlled if the con- 
trolling authority could be halted by a 
veto, as in many actions can the Security 
Council of the United Nations. I think 
one must agrec with that, too. With 
those who argue that it would be desirable 
tohave world government, an appropriate 
delegation of national sovereignty, laws 
applicable to individuals in all mations, it 
would seem most difficult to differ. With 
those who argue that these things are 
directly possible, in their full and ulti- 
mately necessary scope, it may be rather 
difficult to agree. 


Role of the Authority 


What relation does the proposal of an 
international Atomic Development 
Authority, entrusted with a far-reaching 
monopoly of atomic energy—what relation 
does this proposal of the State Depart- 
ment’s board of consultants bear to these 
questions? It proposes that in the field of 
atomic energy there be set up a world 
government, that in this field there be re- 
nunciation of national sovereignty, that in 
this field there be no legal veto power, that 
in this field there be international law. 
How is this possible in a world of sovereign 
nations? There are only two ways in 
which this ever can be possible: one ig 
conquest, that destroys sovereignty; the 
other is the partial renunciation of that 
sovereignty. What is here proposed is 
such a partial renunciation, sufficient, but 
not more than sufficient, for an Atemic 
Development Authority to come into be- 
ing, te exercise its functions of develop- 
ment, exploitation, and control, to enable 
it to protect the world against the use of 
atomic weapons and provide it with the 
benefits of atomic energy. 

Whatever else happens, there is likely 
to be a discussion of the control of atomia 


1351 


energy in the United Nations Commis- 
sions set up for that purpose. Should 
these discussions eventuate in the proposal 
of an International Authority, and in a 
charter for that authority, these proposals 
and that charter would in the end be pre- 
senied for ratification to the several na- 
tions. Tach nation, the small as well as 
the great, can exercise its sovereign right 
to refuse such ratification. Should that 
happen, there would be no Atomic De- 
velopment Authority, and conceivably, in 
my opinion probably, no trustworthy in- 
ternational control of atomic energy. 
Should a nation, after the creation of the 
authority, exercise its sovereign right and 
withdraw from it, or fail with regard to it 
to carry out the accepted conditions of the 
charter, then there will also be no Atomic 
Development Authority: unlike the Se- 
curity Council, it presumably could not 
survive the application of the qyeto to its 
major provisions, But if it} comes into 
existence, and in sd faras it stays in exist- 
ence, it will provide, in its field, the inter- 
national sovereignty whose necessity has 
been so generally recognized. 

Perhaps, one will say, no international 
enterprise can live under such conditions. 
But the conditions themselves will not re- 
main unaffected by the enterprise. Its 
coming into existence will be a step that, 
once learned, canbe repeated; a commit- 


Fier years ago, on March 1, 1896, 
Beequerel discovered the radioactivity of 
uranium. This appears to have been 
man’s initial exploration in the field. By 
1898 the Curies had discovered radium. 
Soon the biological implications of atomic 
energy became apparent through injuries 
to Becquerel and other workers. Evi- 
dence soon accumulated that the rays 
from radium, slong with those from x-ray 
tubes, could be used with benefit in the 


1352 


ment that, once made in one field, can be 
extended to others. If this is to happen, 
the development authority will have to 
have a healthy life of its own; it willhave 
to flourish, to be technically strong, to be 
useful to mankind, to have a staff and an 
organization and way of life in which there 
is some pride, and some cause for pride. 
This would not be possible if there were 
nothing of value to do with atomic energy. 
This would not be possible if the preven- 
tion of atomic armament were its only com- 
cern, if all other activity was technically so 
separable and separate from atomic arma- 
ment that it could remain in national 
hands. In the long struggle to find a way 
of reconciling national and intemational 
sovereignty, the peaceful applications of 
atomic energy can only be a help. It is 
perhaps doubtful that we should have had 
a federal government had not those func- 
tions that could not safely nor effectively 
be carried out by the states had a certain 
importance for the people of this country. 

The Board of Consultants to the State 
Department was aware of the supreme 
necessity for providing the authority with 
work that could attract men, and consoli- 
date and inspire them. It was equakly 
aware of the complementary dangers of a 
too complete, a too absolute monopoly. 
For this reason we found it important to 
point out that there were many activities 


in the field of atomic energy which either 
in themselves, or because of the ease and 
reliability of supervision, inspection, and 
control, could not lend themselves to the 
evasive or diversionary development of 
atomic weapons. In this context, but in 
this context only, we thought that use 
could be made of those differences in the 
requirements on fissionable materials for 
their use in reactors and in atomic explo- 
sives, and which we, perhaps unhappily 
summarized in the word denaturing. For 
we believed that the exploitation of these 
differences together with restrictions on 
design and operation would make it possi- 
ble to operate certain types of reactors, 
not without international control, but 
without that most complete control that 
is an operating monopoly. I think that 
this will turn out to be so. 

No thoughtful man can look to the 
future with complete assurance that the 
world will not again be ravaged by war, 
by a total war in which atomic weapons 
contribute their part to the ultimate wreck 
and attrition of our western civilization. 
The fact that there is so far-reaching a 
technical inseparability of the constructive 
uses of atomic energy from the destructive 
ones is precisely the central vital element 
that can make effective action possible. 
If we are clear on this, we shall have some 
guide for the future. 


wk kw ok ok ok Ok OUFestureot Atomic Energy x *k &k *& Kk OX 


Biological Phase 


W. Epw.anp CHAMBERLAIN 


Professor of Roentgenolog-yy and Radiology, Temple University 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pa. 


The new science of atomic emergy will benefit biology and medicine 
not only directly, as when ralicactive isotopes are put to work 
as tracers or as therapeutic agents, but indirectly through the 
advances that it will contin ucto produce in all scientific thinking 


Kw ae Ke here Kh Kw KEK KK KKK KK kK wk Kk 


treatment of cancer and a number of other 
diseases, Thus the earliest applicatiom of 
atomic energy to biology lay in the field 
of treatment. In 1934 the Curie-JoBiots 
discovered artificial radioactivity. The 
cyclotron, already in operation in Law. 
rence’s laboratory at Berkeley, was soon 
engaged in the production of radioactive 
isotopes of a great many of the chemical 
elements. Biologists were quick to see the 
importance of these radioactive isotope 


as “tracers” for the study of vital proc- 
esses. In the meantime certain develop- 
ments in the field of clinical medicine 
were paving the way for a very satisfying 
integration of the new tool into that field. 

The ever-accelerating advance of science 
exhibits some very human facets. It even 
follows cycles that might be stigmatized as 
fashions. A good example is to be found 
in the influence which Sir William Osler 
still wields over the medical world. Osler’s 


CHEMICAL AND ENGINEERING NEWS 


