Bulletin of the & 2 Routledge 
2 Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


The Open Mind 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1949) The Open Mind, Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists, 5:1, 3-5, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1949.11457024 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1949.11457024 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
XJ 
(s Submit your article to this journal @ 
all Article views: 1 
N 
IQ] View related articles 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


THE OPEN MIND 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


Dr. Oppenheimer, Director of the Institute for Advanced Study 
at Princeton, was wartime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory 
and has been a leader in the American effort to organize inter- 
national control of atomic energy. His faith in the possibility 
of agreement has not been shaken by the current failure of 
negotiations. In the following speech, given to the Rochester 
Institute for International Affairs, he discusses the spirit which 
should guide American conduct in the present impasse. 


A few weeks ago the president of 
a college in the prairie states came 
to see me. Clearly, when he tried to 
look into the future, he did not like 
what he saw: the grim prospects for 
the maintenance of peace, for the 
preservation of freedom, for the 
flourishing and growth of the hu- 
mane values of our civilization. He 
seemed to have in mind that it might 
be well for people, even in his small 
college, to try to take some part in 
turning these prospects to a happier 
end; but what he said came as rather 
a shock. He said, “I wonder if you 
can help me. I have a very peculiar 
problem. You see, out there, most of 
the students, and the teachers too, 
come from the farm. They are used 
to planting seed, and then waiting for 
it to grow, and then harvesting it. 
They believe in time and in nature. 
It is rather hard to get them to take 
things into their own hands.” Perhaps, 
as much as anything, my theme to- 
night will have to do with enlisting 
time and nature in the conduct of our 
international affairs: in the quest for 
peace and a freer world. This is not 
meant mystically, for the nature 
which we must enlist is that of man; 
and if there is hope in it, that lies not 
least in man’s reason. What elements 
are there in the conduct of foreign 
affairs which may be conducive to the 
exercise of that reason, which may 
provide a climate for the growth of 
new experience, new insight, and new 
understanding? How can we recog- 
nize such growth, and be sensitive to 
its hopeful meaning, while there is 
yet time, through action based on 
understanding, to direct the outcome? 

To such difficult questions one 
speaks not at all, or very modestly and 
incompletely. If there are indeed an- 
swers to be found, they will be found 
through many diverse avenues of ap- 
proach—in the European Recovery 


Program, in our direct relations with 
the Soviet states, in the very mecha- 
nisms by which our policies are de- 
veloped and determined. Yet you will 
not find it inappropriate that we fix 
attention on one relatively isolated, 
yet not atypical, area of foreign af- 
fairs—on atomic energy. It is an 
area in which the primary intent of 
our policy has been totally frustrated. 
It is an area in which it is commonly 
recognized that the prospects for 
success with regard to this primary 
intent are both dim and remote. It 
is an area in which it is equally rec- 
ognized that this failure will force 
upon us a course of action in some 
important respects inconsistent with 
our original purposes. It is an area 
in which the excellence of our pro- 
posals, and a record in which we may 
and do take pride, have, nevertheless, 
not managed quite to quiet the uneasy 
conscience, nor to close the mind to 
further trouble. 


Our Efforts 
for International Control 


The history of our policy and our 
efforts toward international atomic 
control is public; far more important, 
it has from the first aroused wide- 
spread interest, criticism, and under- 
standing, and has been the subject of 
debates in the Congress and the press 
and among our people. There may 
even be some notion of how, if we 
had the last years to live over again, 
we might alter our course in the light 


1The essential elements of these proposals 
were: (1) the internationalization of the key 
activities in the field of atomic energy; (2) 
the complete abolition of secrecy; (8) the pro- 
hibition of national or private activities in 
fields menacing to the common security; (4) 
the intensification of cooperation between na- 
tions in research, development, and exploita- 
tion; and (5) the abrogation of the right of 
veto, both in the management of the affairs 


of the international development authority 


and in the determination of transgression 
against the covenant. 


Tp putt 
+ 


hg 
o  beterenty 


of what we have learned, and some 
rough agreement as to the limits with- 
in which alternative courses of action, 
if adopted at a time when they were 
still open to us, could have altered 
the outcome. The past is in one re- 
spect a misleading guide to the fu- 
ture: it is far less perplexing. 

Certainly there was little to inspire, 
and nothing to justify, a troubled 
conscience in the proposals that our 
government made to the United Na- 
tions as to the form which the inter- 
national control of atomic energy 
should take.!1 These proposals, and 
some detailed means for implement- 
ing them, were explored and criticized, 
elaborated, and recommended for 
adoption by fifteen of the eighteen 
member-nations who served on the 
United Nations Atomic Energy Com- 
mission. They were rejected as 
wholly unacceptable, even as a basis 
for further discussion, by the three 
Soviet states, whose contributions to 
policy and to debate have throughout 
constituted for us a debasingly low 
standard of comparison. 

This September the Commission 
made its third, and what it thought 
was its final, report to the General 
Assembly, meeting in Paris. It rec- 
ommended to the Assembly that the 
general outlines of the proposed form 
of international control be endorsed, 
that the inadequacy of the Soviet 
counter-proposals be noted, and that 
the Commission itself be permitted to 
discontinue its work pending either a 
satisfactory prior negotiation be- 
tween the permanent members of the 
Security Council and Canada, or the 
finding by the General Assembly that 
the general political conditions which 
had in the past obstructed progress 
had been so far altered that agree- 
ment now appeared possible. The As- 
sembly did, in fact, accept all the 
recommendations but one. It asked 
the Commission to continue meeting. 
In its instructions to the Commission, 
however, the Assembly failed to pro- 
vide affirmative indications of what 
the Commission was to do, or to ex- 
press any confidence in the success of 
its further efforts; in fact, one might 
dismiss this action as no more than 
an indication of unwillingness on the 
part of the Assembly to accept as 
permanent the obvious past failures 
of the Commission to fulfil its man- 
date. 


Yet we may recognize that more is 
involved in this action, that we will 
come to understand in the measure in 
which the nature and purposes of our 
own preoccupation with the problem 
become clearer. In part, at least, the 
Assembly asked that this problem of 
the atom not be let lapse because it 
touches in a most intimate, if some- 
times symbolic, way the profoundest 
questions of international affairs; be- 
cause the Assembly wished to reaf- 
firm that these problems could not be 
dismissed, that these issues could not 
be lost, whatever the immediate 
frustrations and however obscure the 
prospects. The Assembly was, in fact, 
asking that we let time and nature, 
and human reason and good example 
as a part of that nature, play some 
part in fulfilling the age-old aspira- 
tions of man for preserving the peace. 


Our Political Traditions 
of Persuasion and Free Discussion 


In any political action, and surely 
in one as complex and delicate as the 
international act and commitment 
made by the United States with re- 
gard to atomic energy, far more is 
always involved than can or should 
be isolated in a brief analysis. De- 
spite all hysteria, there is some truth 
to the view that the steps which we 
took with regard to atomic energy 
could be understood in terms of the 
terror of atomic warfare. We have 
sought to avert this; we have further 
sought to avert the probable adverse 
consequences of atomic armament for 
our own institutions and our freedom. 
Yet more basic and more general is- 
sues are involved, which, though sym- 
bolized and rendered critical by the 
development of atomic energy, are in 
their nature not confined to it; they 
pervade almost all the key problems 
of foreign policy. If we are to seek 
a clue to the troubled conscience with 
which we tend to look at ourselves, 
we may, I think, find it just in the 
manner in which we have dealt, in 
their wider contexts, with these basic 
themes. 

The first has to do with the role of 
coercion in human affairs; the second, 
with the role of openness. The atomic 
bomb, born of a way of life, fostered 
throughout the centuries, in which the 
role of coercion was perhaps reduced 
more completely than in any other 
human activity, and which owed its 
‘whole success and its very existence 
to the possibility of open discussion 
and free inquiry, appeared in a 


4. 


strange paradox, at once a secret, and 
an unparalleled instrument of coer- 
cion. 

These two mutually interdependent 
ideals, the minimization of coercion 
and the minimization of secrecy, are, 
of course, in the nature of things, not 
absolute; any attempt to erect them 
as absolute will induce in us that ver- 
tigo which warns us that we are near 
the limits of intelligible definition. 
But they are very deep in our ethical 
as well as in our political traditions, 
and are recorded in earnest, eloquent 
simplicity in the words of those who 
founded this nation. They are, in 
fact, inseparable from the idea of the 
dignity of man to which our country, 
in its beginnings, was dedicated, and 
which has proved the monitor of our 
vigor and of our health. These two 
ideals are closely related, the one 
pointing toward persuasion as the 
key to political action, the other to 
free discussion and knowledge as the 
essential instrument of persuasion. 
They are so deep within us that we 
seldom find it necessary, and perhaps 
seldom possible, to talk of them. 
When they are challenged by tyranny 
abroad or by malpractice at home, we 
come back to them as the wardens of 
our public life—as for many of us 
they are wardens of our lives as men. 

In foreign affairs we are not un- 
familiar with either the use or the 
need of power. Yet we are stubbornly 
distrustful of it. We seem to know, 
and seem to come back again and 
again to this knowledge, that the pur- 
poses of this country in the field of 
foreign policy cannot in any real or 
enduring way be achieved by coer- 
cion. 


Our Aversion to Coercion 
and Secrecy 


We have a natural sympathy for 
extending to foreign affairs what we 
have come to learn so well in our 
political life at home: that an indis- 
pensable, perhaps in some ways the 
indispensable, element in giving mean- 
ing to the dignity of man, and in mak- 
ing possible the taking of decision on 
the basis of honest conviction, is the 
openness of men’s minds, and the 
openness of whatever media there are 
for communion between men, free of 
restraint, free of repression, and free 
even of that most pervasive of all 
restraints, that of status and of 
hierarchy. 

In the days of the founding of this 
republic, in all of the eighteenth cen- 
tury which was formative for the 


growth and the explicit formulation 
of our political ideals, politics and 
science were of a piece. The hope 
that this might in some sense again 
be so was stirred to new life by the 
development of atomic energy. In 
this it has throughout been decisive 
that openness, openness in the first 
instance with regard to _ technical 
problems and to the actual under- 
takings underway in various parts of 
the world, was the one single essen- 
tial precondition for a measure of 
security in the atomic age. Here we 
met in uniquely comprehensible form 
the alternatives of common under- 
standing, or of the practices of se- 
crecy and coercion. 

In all this I pretend to be saying 
nothing new, nothing that has not 
been known to all thoughtful men 
since the days of Hiroshima; yet it 
has seldom come to expression; it has 
been overlaid with other preoccupa- 
tions, perhaps equally necessary to 
the elaboration of an effective inter- 
national control, but far less decisive 
in determining whether such a con- 
trol could exist. It is just because it 
has not been possible to obtain as- 
sent, even in principle, even as an 
honest statement of intent or purpose, 
to these basic theses that the dead- 
lock in attempting to establish control 
has appeared so serious, so refractory, 
and so enduring. 


Our Failure in Winning 
Acceptance for These Principles 


These words have an intent quite 
contrary to the creation of a sense of 
panic or of doom. Yet we need to 
start with the admission that we see 
no clear course before us that would 
persuade the governments of the world 
to join with us in creating a more 
and more open world, and thus to 
establish the foundation on which per- 
suasion might so largely replace 
coercion in determining human affairs. 
We ourselves have acknowledged this 
grim prospect and responded by 
adopting some of the very measures 
that we had hoped might be univer- 
sally renounced. With misgivings— 
and there ought to be misgivings— 
we are rearming, arming atomically, 
as in other fields. With deep misgiv- 
ings, we are keeping secret not only 
those elements of our military plans, 
but those elements of our technical in- 
formation and policy, a knowledge 
of which would render us more sub- 
ject to enemy coercion and less effec- 
tive in exercising our own. There are 
not many men who see an acceptable 


alternative to this course, although 
there apparently are some who would 
regard it as a proof of the shallow- 
ness and insincerity of our earlier re- 
nunciation of these ways. But wheth- 
er, among our own people or among 
our friends abroad, or even among 
those who are not our friends, these 
measures which we are taking ap- 
pear excessive, or on the whole insuf- 
ficient, they must have at least one 
effect. Inevitably, they must appear 
to commit us to a future of secrecy, 
of coercion, and to an imminent 
threat of war. It is true that one may 
hear arguments that the mere exist- 
ence of our power, quite apart from 
its exercise, may turn the world to 
the ways of openness and of peace. 
Yet we have today no clear, no for- 
mulated, no in some measure credible 
account of how this may come about. 
We have chosen to read, and perhaps 
we have correctly read, our past as a 
lesson that a policy of weakness has 
failed us. But we have not read the 
future as an intelligible lesson that 
a policy of strength can save us. 


When the time is run, and that fu- 
ture become history, it will be clear 
how little of it we today foresaw or 
could foresee. How then can we pre- 
serve hope and sensitiveness which 
could enable us to take advantage of 
all that it has in store? Our problem 
is not only to face the somber and the 
grim elements of the future, but to 
keep them from obscuring it. 


Our recent election has seemed to 
touch this deep sense of the imponder- 
able in the history of the future, this 
understanding that we must not pre- 
clude the cultivation of any unex- 
pected, hopeful turnings. Immediate- 
ly after the election people seemed 
stirred, less even by the outcome it- 
self; than by the element of wonder; 
they would tend to say things like: 
“Well, after this perhaps we need 
not be so sure that there will be a 
war.” This sense that the future is 
richer and more complex than our 
prediction of it, and that wisdom lies 
in sensitiveness to what is new and 
hopeful, is perhaps a sign of some 
maturity in politics. 


The Importance of Style 


The problem of doing justice to 
the implicit, the imponderable, and 
the unknown is, of course, not unique 
to politics. It is always with us in 
science, it is with us in the most triv- 
ial of personal affairs, and it is one 
of the great problems of writing and 
of all forms of art. The means by 


which it is solved is sometimes called 
style. It is style which complements 
affirmation with limitation and with 
humility; it is style which makes it 
possible to act effectively, but not 
absolutely; it is style which, in the 
domain of foreign policy, enables us 
to find a harmony between the pur- 
suit of ends essential to us, and the 
regard for the views, the sensibilities, 
the aspirations of those to whom the 
problem may appear in another light; 
it is style which is the deference that 
action pays to uncertainty; it is above 
all style through which power defers 
to reason. 


Need To Reaffirm Our Values 


We need to remember that we are 
a powerful nation. 


We need to remember that when the 
future that we can now foresee de- 
viates so markedly from all that we 
hope and all that we value, we can, 
by our example, and by the mode and 
the style with which we conduct our 
affairs, let it be apparent that we 
have not abandoned those hopes nor 
forsaken those values; we need to do 
this even while concrete steps, to 
which we resort to avert more imme- 
diate disaster, seem to negate them. 


Our past is rich in example. In that 
other agony, the Civil War, where the 
foundations of our government were 
proved and reaffirmed, it was Lin- 
coln who again and again struck true 
the balance between power and rea- 
son. By 1863 the war and the block- 
ade had deepened the attrition of the 
South. They had also stopped the 
supplies of cotton to the English mills. 
Early that year Lincoln wrote a letter 
to the working men of Manchester. 
He wrote: 


... It is not always in the power of 
governments to enlarge or restrict 
the scope of moral results which follow 
the policies that they may deem it 
necessary for the public safety from 
time to time to adopt. 


I have understood well that the 
duty of self-preservation rests solely 
with the American people; but I have 
at the same time been aware that 
favor or disfavor of foreign nations 
might have a material influence in 
enlarging or prolonging the struggle 
with disloyal men in which the coun- 
try is engaged. A fair examination 
of history has served to authorize a 
belief that the past actions and in- 
fluences of the United States were 
generally regarded as having been 
beneficial toward mankind. I have, 
therefore, reckoned upon the forbear- 
ance of nations.... 

Fifteen months later, a year before 


Lincoln’s death, the battle had turned. 
He could say: 


. «« When the war began, three years 
ago, neither party, nor any man, ex- 
pected it would last till now. Each 
looked for the end in some way, long 
ere to-day. Neither did any anticipate 
that domestic slavery would be much 
affected by the war. But here we are; 
the war has not ended, and slavery has 
been much affected—-how much needs 
not now to be recounted... . 


But we can see the past, though we 
may not claim to have directed it; 
and seeing it, in this case, we feel 
more hopeful and confident for the 
future. ... 3 

In such magnanimity even Grant, 
at Appomattox a year later, looking 
beyond the bitter slaughter, looking to 
nature and to time, could speak to 
Lee: His troops were to keep their 
horses; they would need them for the 
spring plowing. 


Each of us, recalling our actions in 
these last critical years, will be able to 
find more than one instance where, in 
the formulation or implementation of 
policy, we have been worthy of this 
past. Each of us will mourn the op- 
portunities that may seem to him lost, 
the doors once open and now closed. 
Not even in critical times can the 
sense of style, the open mind, be fos- 
tered by issuing directives; nor can 
they rest wholly on soliciting great 
actions not yet taken, great words not 
yet spoken. If they were wholly a mat- 
ter for one man, all could rest on his 
wisdom and his sensitiveness—they 
neither are, nor can, nor should be. 


The Spirit of the Open Mind 


The spirit in which our foreign 
affairs are conducted will, in the large, 
reflect the understanding and the de- 
sires of our people; and their concrete, 
detailed administration will neces- 
sarily rest in the hands of countless 
men and women, officials of the gov- 
ernment, who constitute the branches 
of our foreign service, of our State 
Department, and of the many agencies 
which now supplement the State De- 
partment, at home and abroad. The 
style, the perceptiveness, the imagi- 
nation and the open-mindedness with 
which we need to conduct our affairs 
can only pervade such a complex of 
organizations, consisting inevitably of 
men of varied talent, taste, and char- 
acter, if it is a reflection of a deep 
and widespread public understanding. 
It is in our hands to see that the hope 
of the future is not lost, because we 
were too sure that we knew the an- 
swers, too sure that there was no 
hope. 


