Routledge 


Taylor & Francis Group 


Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 


‘A MAGAZINE FOR SC! ‘AMD PUBLIC AFFAIRS 


Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 


ISSN: 0096-3402 (Print) 1938-3282 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rbul20 


Encouragement of Science 


J. Robert Oppenheimer 


To cite this article: J. Robert Oppenheimer (1951) Encouragement of Science, Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, 7:1, 6-8, DOI: 10.1080/00963402.1951.11457126 


To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.1951.11457126 


sea Published online: 15 Sep 2015. 
XJ 
(s Submit your article to this journal @ 
all Article views: 1 
N 
iQ] View related articles 


we Citing articles: 1 View citing articles @ 


Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallnformation?journalCode=rbul20 


THE SCIENTIST IN PUBLIC AFFAIRS 


We present here a group of articles dealing with the participation 
of scientists in public life. The first in the series is by an eminent 
nuclear physicist (wartime director of Los Alamos Laboratory, now 
director of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton) who has 
played a leading part in the efforts to achieve the international con- 
trol of atomic energy. Later in this issue we publish reports from sev- 
eral organizations of scientists whose objectives lie in the realm of 
public rather than professional affairs. 


ENCOURAGEMENT OF SCIENCE 


J. ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


E ARE here tonight to honor 
W you and to celebrate the high 

promise of your future as 
scientists. We are happy to be with 
you. We think of that future with re- 
spect and curiosity. We think of the 
discoveries which you will make. We 
think of the questions to which we to- 
day have no answer, and to which you 
will come to know an answer. Even 
more, we think of the answers that we 
have today, and of the new questions 
that you will put to those answers. We 
think of how altered and how deep- 
ened our knowledge of the world will 
be before you are through with it. My 
first wish to you is that you may make 
and that you may share in the making 
of great and beautiful discoveries 
which enrich our knowledge of the 
world of nature and of man. I have a 
second wish for you; but that must 
come at the end of my talk. 

I do not propose to talk to you of 
such topics of the day as the hydrogen 
bomb and the statutory provisions of 
the National Science Foundation. If 
these matters are not in a very different 
state when you shall have come to as- 
sume the full responsibilities of citizen- 
ship, you will have reason to reproach 
your elders for your inheritance. 

Science has profoundly altered the 
conditions of man’s life. During the last 
centuries, the discoveries in science, 
and their applications to practice, have 
changed the material conditions of life. 
They have changed as well many mat- 
ters of the spirit. They have changed 
the form in which practical problems 
of right and wrong come before us; 


6 


they have changed the focus of moral 
issues, both for the individual and for 
governments. They have given us new 
methods for defining the meaning of 
problems that face us, and for judging 
whether or not our solutions are just. 


THE MATERIAL BENEFITS 
OF SCIENCE 


The most manifest of the changes 
are the material ones. Yet even here it 
takes a certain perspective to see their 
true extent. Advances in the study of 
man and other living forms have ex- 
tended our lifespan by decades. Dis- 
coveries in physical science have im- 
measurably lightened our toil, and en- 
riched our lives. They have given 
leisure to an ever widening group of 
men. They have made a reasonable 
education not a special privilege, but a 
common right. They have made the 
world, in its physical dimensions, a 
small place, and established the 
means by which people in remote parts 
of the earth can communicate with 
each other, can get to know each other, 
and can learn to work together. They 
have put at the disposal of everyone 
the resources of physical power, of 
ease, and of knowledge that were in 
the past reserved for the few. 

Not all of the changes in material 
well-being that science offers are reali- 
ties. Yet the very fact that they are pos- 
sibilities has changed the nature of the 


Address delivered at the Awards Ban- 
quet of the Science Talent Institute in 
Washington, D.C., March 6, 1950. 


responsibility which we bear, both as 
individuals and as a community of men 
and women banded together in gov- 
ernment. In the Greek cities, political 
democracy, and civilization itself, ap- 
peared possible only on the basis of a 
slave economy. Technology, born of 
science, has altered that; it has enabled 
mankind, as it has forced mankind, to 
deal with the issues of slavery as a 
moral issue. Poverty has always been 
an ugly thing, and in its extremes a 
desperate one. Today, it is an evil, in 
the sense that it lies within human 
hands and human hearts to abate it. 
Science can provide us, for the first 
time in history, with the means of abat- 
ing hunger for everyone on earth. 


THE IMPACT OF SCIENCE 
ON WAR 


Perhaps nowhere has the impact of 
science more clearly altered the spe- 
cific terms of a great political issue 
than in the effects of scientific develop- 
ment on warfare. This is a can of 
worms with which I have myself un- 
happily been engaged for some years. 
It would not be honest to say—though 
it would not be foolish to hope—that 
the very terror of modern weapons 
would in itself put an end to war; it 
would even be foolish to say that be- 
cause of this terror the abolition of war 
and the maintenance of peace have be- 
come the one absolute, final objective 
of all political decisions. There are 
other things in man’s life: his freedom, 
his decency, and his sense of right and 
wrong, that cannot so lightly be sub- 
jected to a single end. But what we 
need to remember is that war today 
has become, and is increasingly becom- 
ing, something very different from what 
it was a century ago or a millennium 
ago. We need to recognize the new 
situation as new; we need to come to it 
with something of the same spirit as 
the scientist’s, when he has conducted 


an experiment and finds that the re- 
sults are totally other than those that 
he had anticipated. 

Four months before Hiroshima, in 
the last days of his life, President 
Roosevelt’s thoughts turned to these 
questions. In the last words that he 
wrote, in words he did not live to 
speak, the President looked to the fu- 
ture, to the atomic age. He looked to 
the past, to the days of the founding of 
the Republic. He wrote: 

“Thomas Jefferson, himself a distin- 
aie scientist, once spoke of the 

rotherly spirit of science, which 
unites into one family all its votaries of 
whatever grade, and however widely 
dispersed throughout the different 
quarters of the globe.’ 

“Today science has brought all the 
different quarters of the globe so close 
together that it is impossible to isolate 
them one from another. 

“Today we are faced with the pre- 
eminent fact that, if civilization is to 
survive, we must cultivate the science 
of human relationships—the ability of 
all peoples, of all kinds, to live to- 
gether and work together, in the same 
world, at peace.” 


THE RELEVANCE OF SCIENCE 
TO POLITICS 


Science has greatly extended the 
range of questions in which man has a 
choice; it has extended man’s freedom 
to make significant decisions. Is there 
anything in the methods of science it- 
self, or in the spirit of science, which 
can help in the making of these deci- 
sions? To what extent is there a play on 
the word science which can mislead us 
and take us up false roads when we 
ow of this science of human relation- 
ships? Is there anything we can learn 
from the relevance of science to poli- 
tics?P 

If we are to answer these questions, 
and answer them honestly, we must 
recognize important and basic differ- 
ences between problems of science and 
problems of action, as they arise in per- 
sonal or in political life. If we fail to 
recognize these differences, we shall be 
seeking mee solutions and not real 
ones. We shall delude ourselves into 
laying aside responsibility, which it is 
an essential part of man’s life to bear. 

In most scientific study, questions of 
good and evil, or right and wrong, play 
at most a minor and secondary part. 
For practical decisions of policy, they 
are basic. Without them political action 
would be meaningless. Practical deci- 
sions and, above all, political decisions 
can never quite be freed from the con- 


flicting claims of special interest. 
These, too, are part of the meaning of 
a decision and of a course of action, 
and they must be an essential part of 
the force of its implementation. 

Political decisions are unique acts. 
In politics there is little that can corre- 
spond to the scientist’s repetition of an 
experiment. An experiment that fails 
in its purpose may be as good as or bet- 
ter than one that succeeds, because it 
may well be more instructive. A polit- 
ical decision cannot be taken twice. All 
the factors that are relevant to it will 
conjoin only once. The analogies of his- 
tory can provide a guide, but only a 
very partial one. 

These are formidable differences be- 
tween the problems of science and 
those of practice. They show that the 
method of science cannot be directly 
adapted to the solution of problems in 
politics and in man’s spiritual life. Yet 
there is relevance of a more subtle, but 
by no means trivial kind. 


JEFFERSON'S VIEWS ON THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE 


In trying more fully to explore this 
relevance, I should like to start with a 
text. This text is a letter! written by 
Thomas Jefferson to a young man who 
had enquired of him as to the useful- 
ness of his studies of science. It was 
written in the middle of the year 1799, 
the year in which Napoleon abolished 
the Directory and began to assume dic- 
tatorial power in France, the year be- 
fore Thomas Jefferson was elected for 
the first time as President of the United 
States. Jefferson and the diverse brave 
and hopeful men who with him laid 
the foundations of our own govern- 
ment had learned much from the 
peoples of other nations. Many of their 
highest political ideals and their most 
powerful political instruments were 
built on the experience, the insight and 
wisdom of European scientists and phi- 


1I am indebted to Dr. jae Boyd, of 
Princeton University, for the copy of this 
hitherto unpublished letter. 


losophers. Even today we need to re- 
member that this was so, and that 
there may be much that we can learn 
from others, and that we should be 
glad to learn, as in turn by example we 
should be glad to teach. 

Jefferson’s letter starts with a survey 
of the subjects in science which he be- 
lieves young Munford ought to pur- 
sue. I will quote one characteristic pas- 
sage which may strike a familiar and 
homely note for you: 


“The science of calculation also is 
indispensable as far as the extraction of 
the square and cube roots; Algebra as 
far as the quadratic equation and the 
use of logarithms are often of value in 
ordinary cases: but all beyond these is 
but a luxury; a delicious luxury indeed; 
but not to be indulged in by one who 
is to have a profession to follow for his 
subsistence.” 


But that is not really the part of Jef- 
ferson’s letter which I commend to 
you. Here it is: 


“I am among those who think well 
of the human character generally. I 
consider man as formed for society, 
and endowed by nature with those dis- 
positions which fit him for society. I 
believe also, with Condorcet, as men- 
tioned in your letter, that his mind is 
perfectible to a degree of which we 
cannot as yet form any conception. It is 
impossible for a man who takes a sur- 
vey of what is already known, not to 
see what an immensity in every branch 
of science yet remains to be discovered, 
and that too of articles to which our 
faculties seem adequate.” 


And later, in the same letter, still 
more explicitly: 

“,..and it is still more certain that 
in the other branches of science, great 
fields are yet to be explored to which 
our faculties are equal, and that to an 
extent of which we cannot fix the 
limits. I join you therefore in branding 
as cowardly the idea that the human 
mind is incapable of further advances. 
This is precisely the doctrine which the 
present despots of the earth are incul- 
cating, and their friends here re-echo- 
ing; and applying especially to religion 
and politics; ‘that it is not probable 
that any thing better will be discovered 
than what was known to our fathers.’ 
We are to look backwards then and 
not forwards for the improvement of 
science, and to find it amidst feudal 
barbarisms and the fires of Spital-fields. 
But thank heaven the American mind 
is already too much opened, to listen 
to these impostures; and while the art 
of printing is left to us, science can 


7 


never be retrograde; what is once ac- 
quired of real knowledge can never be 
lost. To preserve the freedom of the 
human mind then and freedom of the 
press, every spirit should be ready to 
devote itself to martyrdom; for as long 
as we may think as we will, and speak 
as we think, the condition of man will 
proceed in improvement. The genera- 
tion which is going off the stage has 
deserved well of mankind for the 
struggles it has made, and for having 
arrested that course of despotism 
which had overwhelmed the world for 
thousands and thousands of years. If 
there seems to be danger that the 
ground they have gained will be lost 
again, that danger comes from the gen- 
eration your cotemporary. But that the 
enthusiasm which characterizes youth 
should lift its parracide hands against 
freedom and science would be such a 
monstrous phaenomenon as I cannot 
place among possible things in this age 
and this country.” 


To me there are two striking impres- 
sions which this letter of Jefferson’s 
makes, even beyond its eloquence and 
its beauty. The first is that the letter is 
suffused with the idea of progress, 
that ideal that owes so much to the de- 
velopment of science and that in turn 
has provided the great enriching hu- 
man faith in which scientific discovery 
and invention has flourished. Jefferson 
is confident that an increased under- 
standing of the world will lead to prog- 
ress; he is convinced that the barba- 
risms of the past cannot stand up 
against enquiry and understanding and 
enlightenment; he is confident in man 
and sure that as men know more they 
will act more wisely and live better. In 
our contemporary expressions of hope 
that catastrophe could be averted and 
civilization yet be saved, that confi- 
dence has lost much of its robustness. 

The second point is that for Jeffer- 
son there is something in the ways of 
science that is relevant to political life. 
Even in religion and politics, he holds 
that it is probable that things better 
will be discovered than what was 
known to our fathers. This conviction 
that new knowledge is possible, and 
that not all the answers are known, is 
of course the stuff of the day-to-day life 
of the scientist. Science itself does 
progress; new knowledge is possible; 
and new knowledge, because it does 
not destroy or ignore the old, can only 
increase our understanding. The very 
idea of the development of science is 
an example of progress, and of prog- 
ress which in no true sense can ever be 
reversed. But this is only part of the 


8 


story. It is true, as Jefferson knew, that, 
in the large, science has flourished in 
conditions of human freedom, and 
that its growth is parallel to the growth 
of democratic institutions. Today, look- 
ing back on more than a cen and a 
half of further history, we can be even 
more sure of this. We have seen not 
only the inspiriting example of science 
and democracy flourishing together, 
but the tragic examples of their foun- 
dering together. We express the hope 
that of this tragedy we shall soon have 
seen the end. 


THE SPIRIT OF SCIENCE 


What are these lessons that the spirit 
of science teaches us for our practical 
affairs? Basic to them all is that there 
may be no barriers to freedom of en- 
quiry. Basic to them all is the ideal of 
open-mindedness with regard to new 
knowledge, new experience, and new 
truth. Science is not based on author- 
ity. It owes its acceptance and its uni- 
versality to an appeal to intelligible, 
communicable evidence that any inter- 
ested man can evaluate. 

There is no place for dogma in sci- 
ence. The scientist is free to ask any 
question, to doubt any assertion, to 
seek for any evidence, to correct any 
error. Where science has been used in 
the past to erect a new dogmatism, 
that dogmatism has found itself incom- 
patible with the progress of science; 
and in the end, the dogma has yielded, 
or science and freedom have perished 
together. 

Our own political life is predicated 
on openness. We do not believe any 
group of men adequate enough or wise 
enough to operate without scrutiny or 
without criticism. We know that the 
only way to avoid error is to detect it, 
that the only way to detect it is to be 
free to enquire. We know that the 
wages of secrecy are corruption. We 
know that in secrecy error, undetected, 
will flourish and subvert. 

Let me be clear. Science is not skep- 
ticism. It is not the practice of science 
to look for things to doubt. It was not 
by a deliberate attempt of skepticism 
that physicists were led to doubt the 
absolute nature of simultaneity, or to 
recognize that the ideas of strict causal- 
ity embodied in classical physics could 
not be applied in the domain of atomic 
phenomena. There is probably no 
group of men who take more for 
granted in their daily work than the 
scientists. Common sense, and all that 
flows from it, is their principal basis for 
what they do in the laboratory and for 
what they make of it on paper. But for 
scientists it is not only honorable to 


doubt, it is mandatory to do that when 
there appears to be evidence in support 
of the doubt. In place of authority in 
science, we have and we need to have 
only the consensus of informed opin- 
ion, only the guide of example. No sci- 
entist needs to order his colleagues to 
use a new technique of experiment or 
to enter a new field of discovery. If he 
has done this, it will be an invitation to 
his fellows to follow. 

These then are some of the attitudes 
of mind, these are some of the disci- 
plines of spirit, that grow naturally in 
the scientist’s world. They have grown 
there in part as a result of a humane 
and liberal tradition in political life, 
and in part as a cause of that. The open 
mind, the reliance on example and per- 
suasion, rather than on authority— 
these are the heritage of the centuries 
in which science has altered the face of 
the earth. Science can help in diverse 
ways in preserving and extending this 
heritage. Its very universality speaks 
across frontiers to make truth manifest 
in lands otherwise darkened; its mate- 
rial applications create the precondi- 
tions—in leisure, in education, in means 
of communication—for the converse of 
men with each other. Science provides 
the material and the intellectual basis 
for a world in which example and un- 
derstanding can help all men to im- 
prove their lot and fulfill their hopes. 
Today we need to remember that our 
country, founded on these practices, 
and grown strong by their exercise, 
owes its strength to them. In this time 
of crisis, we need to cherish that 
strength. 

And this brings me to my second 
wish for you. I wish you not only the 
joy of great discovery; I wish for you a 
world of confidence in man and man’s 
humanity, a world of confidence in 
reason, so that as you work you may be 
inspired by the aa 9 that what you find 
will make men freer and better—in 
which, working as specialists in what 
may be recondite parts of the intellec- 
tual life of the time, you are neverthe- 
less contributing in a direct and basic 
way to the welfare of mankind. 


