ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 


THE TREE 
OF 
KNOWLEDGE 


In April Dr. Oppenheimer spoke to a group of 
editors and journalists from all over the world 
who had gathered in Washington for a meeting 
of the International Press Institute. He spoke 
without a prepared text, using only notes; the 
article which follows is published substantially 
as it was recorded during the lecture. 


\W HEN I speak to.the press | am aware 
that I am talking to a group of men who 
have a singularly critical destiny in these rather 
peculiar times. Those of us whose work it is to 
preserve old learning, and to find new, look to 
the press to keep the channels of truth and com- 
munication open and to keep men in some 
sense united in common knowledge and common 
humanity. 

1 want to talk about the nature and structure 
of our knowledge today and how it has altered 
and complicated the problems of the press. There 
are enormous differences between our world of 
learning today—our Tree of Knowledge—and 
those of Athens, or the Enlightenment, or the 
dawn of science in fifteenth- and sixteenth- 
century Europe. You can get some suggestion 
of how shattering these changes have been if 
you remember that Plato, when he tried to think 
about human salvation and government, recom- 
mended mathematics as one of the ways to learn 
to know the truth, to discriminate good from 
evil and the wise from the foolish. Plato was 
not a creative mathematician, but students con- 
firm that he knew the mathematics of his day, 
and understood it, and derived much from it. 


Today, it is not only that our kings do not 
know mathematics, but our philosophers do not 
know mathematics and—to go a step further— 
our mathematicians do not know mathematics. 
Each of them knows a branch of the subject 
and they listen to each other with a fraternal 
and honest respect; and here and there you 
find a knitting together of the different fields 
of mathematical specialization. In fact, a great 
deal of progress in mathematics is a kind of 
over-arching generalization which brings things 
that had been separate into some kind of rela- 
tion. Nevertheless, it is not likely today that 
our most learned advisers—the men who write 
in the press and tell us what we may think- 
would suggest that the next President of the 
United States be able to understand the mathe- 
matics of the day. 


YIELDING BOUNDARIES 


THE first characteristic of scientific knowledge 
today—a trivial and pedestrian characteristic— 
is that its growth can be measured. When I talk 
of “science” here I would like to use the word in 
the broadest sense to include all man's knowl. 
edge of his history and behavior, his knowledge, 
in fact, of anything that can be talked of in an 
objective way so that people all over the world 
can understand it, know what the scientist has 
done, reproduce it, and find out if it is true or 
not. It is hard to measure the growth of science 
defined in these terms in a sensible way but it 
can be measured in fairly foolish ways 

One way of measuring science, for example 
is to find out how many people are engaged in 
it. I know a young historian of science who has 
amused himself by counting the scientists of the 
last two centuries and he has found that their 
number has, quite accurately, doubled about 
every ten years. Professor Purcell of Harvard 
put the same conclusion another way the other 
day when he said, “Ninety per cent of all sci 
entists are alive.” This gives some notion of 
the changes involved. 

I must, however, qualily this trend in two ways. 
First, it cannot continue, because if it went on 
for another century, then everyone would be a 
scientist—there would be nobody else left. So 
a kind of saturation is setting in and the rate of 
science’s growth is slowing down. The second 
qualification is that what might be called the 
“stature” of science is not proportional to its 
volume; it may be proportional to the cube root 
of its volume or something like that. In short, 
every scientist is not a Newton and the propor 


56 TREE OF KNOWLEDGE 


tion of Newtons among all scientists tends to 
decline as the number of people involved gets 
bigger. 

Despite all qualification, though, the fact re- 
mains that the growth in the number of people 
in science and the growth in firm knowledge 
—important, non-trivial knowledge of the kind 
that appears in learned journals and books— 
have been more or less parallel; and this growth 
will continue, although the increase in it is 
bound to taper off. The result is that nearly 
everything that is now known was not in any 
book when most of us went to school; we can- 
not know it unless we have picked it up since. 
This in itself presents a problem of communica- 
tion that is nightmarishly formidable. 

On the other hand, there is a more encourag- 
ing aspect of this scientific knowledge. As it 
grows, things, in some ways, get much simpler. 
They do not get simpler because one discovers 
a few fundamental principles which the man in 
the street can understand and from which he 
can derive everything else. But we do find an 
enormous amount of order. The world is not 
random and whatever order it has seems in large 
part “fit,” as Thomas Jefferson said, for the 
human intelligence. The enormous variety of 
facts yields to some kind of arrangement, simplic- 
ity, generalization. 

One great change in this direction—and it 
has not yet, I think, fully come to public under- 
standing—is that we are beginning to see that 
the hard boundaries which once seemed to sepa- 
rate the parts of the natural world from each 
other are now yielding to some kind of inquiry. 
We are beginning to see ways across the gaps 
between the living and the dead, the physical 
and the mental. 

Let me give just a few illustrations: 


e It is probably not an accident, although 
it is not really understood, that the age of 
the earth—some six or seven billion years 
according to calculation by radioactive tech- 
niques—is very close to the period required for 
the most distant nebulae to recede into the 


furthest reaches of space. We can _pictur- 
esquely define that time by saying that during 
it things were a lot closer together than they 
are now and the state of the material universe 
was very different. Some years ago the bril- 
liant Russian biochemist Oparin suggested 
that when the atmosphere had no oxygen in 
it, certain conditions could have prevailed on 
earth under which life could have originated 
from inorganic matter. There has since been 
confirmation in Urey’s laboratory and_ this 


hypothesis turns out to be true. Although 
mermaids and heroes do not walk out of the 
test tube, we do see that quite reasonable 
accounts of the origin of life are not too far 
from our grasp. 


e The recent research on how the genetic 
mechanisms of all living material operate 
shows how certain proteins have special in- 
formation-bearing properties—how they can 
store information and transmit it from one 
generation to another.*® 


e The study of how the nerve impulses 
from our sense organs to the brain can be 
modulated and altered by the perceptive ap- 
paratus of the animal—often it is an animal 
rather than a man—give us some notion both 
of the unreliability of our sense impressions 
and of the subtlety of the relations between 
thought and the object of thought. 


All these problems, which even in the nine- 
teenth century seemed to obstruct the possi- 
bility of a unified view of the great arch of na- 
ture, are yielding to discovery; and in all science 
there is a pervasive, haunting sense that no 
part of nature is really irrelevant to any other. 


GAY AND WONDERFUL MYSTERY 


B U T the model of science which results from 
all this investigation is entirely different 
from a model which would have seemed natural 
and understandable to the Greeks or the New- 
tonians. Although we do start from common 
human experience, as they did, we so refine what 
we think, we so change the meaning of words, 
we build up so distinctive a tradition, that sci- 
entific knowledge today is not an enrichment 
of the general culture. It is, on the contrary, 
the possession of countless, highly specialized 
communities who love it, would like to share 
it, would very much like to explain it, and 
who make some efforts to communicate it; but 
it is not part of the common human understand- 
ing. This is the very strange predicament to 
which the press addresses itself today and to 
which it can give, I believe, only a partial solu- 
tion. 

It would of course be splendid—and one often 
hears this—if we could say that while we cannot 
know the little details about the workings of 
atoms and proteins and the human psyche, we 
can know the fundamental principles of science. 
But I am afraid that this is only marginally 


*An account of: this development, by F.H.C. Crick, 
appeared in Scientific American, September 1957. 


true. The fundamentals of physics are defined 
in terms of words that refer to an experience 
that lay people have not had and that very 
few people have run across in their education. 

For example, in my opinion, it is almost im- 
possible to explain what the. fundamental prin- 
ciple of relativity is about, and this is even 
more true of the quantum theory. It is only 
possible to use analogies, to evoke some sense 
of understanding. And as for the recent dis- 
covery—the very gay and wonderful discovery 
for which Dr. Yang and Dr. Lee were awarded 
the Nobel Prize—that nature has a preference 
for right-handed or left-handed screws in certain 
situations and is not indifferent to the handed- 
ness of the screw—to explain this is, I believe, 
quite beyond my capacity. And I have never 
heard anyone do it in a way that could be called 
an enrichment of culture. 

To sum up the characteristics of scientific 
knowledge today, then, I would say that it is 
mostly new; it has not been digested; it is not 
part of man’s common knowledge; it has be- 
come the property of specialized communities 
who may on occasion help one another but who, 
by and large, pursue their own way with grow- 
ing intensity further and further from their 
roots in ordinary life. 

We must always remember that, like most hu- 
man accomplishments, the sciences have grown 
out of a long, accumulating experience of error, 
astonishment, invention, and understanding. 


Taken as a whole, they constitute a series of 
traditions; and these traditions—once largely 
common, now largely separate—are as essential 
to understanding a part of biology or astronomy 
or physics as the general human tradition is to 


the existence of civilized life. 1 know that a 
complete immersion in these many different, re- 
lated, yet specific traditions is beyond the reach 
of any one person—that as things stand today, 
most of us are without any experience, really, in 
any. We have much in common from the simple 
ways in which we have learned to live and talk 
and work together. Out of this have grown the 
specialized disciplines like the fingers of the 
hand, united in origin but no longer in contact. 


PRACTICAL BOOBY TRAPS 
Wwiet I am going to make a distinction 


which may seem arbitrarily sharp but 
which is I think important both to the learned 
community and the press. I have been talking 
until now about science as the things we have 
discovered about nature—incredible things and 


BY ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 57 


beautiful and astonishing, but defined, usually, 
not by any use to which they are put, but simply 
in terms of the ways in which they were found 
out. Pure science is thus inherently circum- 
scribed but immensely revealing, showing as it 
does that left to itself, man’s imagination was 
not a patch on reality. 

Seeking out this knowledge is one problem and 
f am not through with it. But the other problem 
is that, of course, this knowledge has practical 
consequences. On it is built the world we live 
in and the face of that world has been changed, 
probably more than in any other period of his- 
tory, by the scientific revolution. Now these 
practical consequences, because they are intended 
in some way to be responsive to man’s needs, can 
be talked about in an intelligible way. It is not 
necessary to know how a nucleus is put together, 
or what are the laws which determine its be- 
havior, in order to explain what nuclear energy 
is all about. It may be very hard to explain it 
well because it involves human choices, options, 
decisions, prejudices. But I believe that it is no 
more difficult to write about nuclear energy than 
about where people go for a holiday. It is not 
much harder to write about nuclear weapons, 
except that, to the problems of human variety. 
there is added the problem of a very great deal 
of secrecy. 

To take another example, it has not been hard 
to write about the use of vaccines in the preven- 
tion of disease and these can be described with 
out elaborate theory. As a matter of fact the 
vaccines were discovered without much theoreti- 
cal background and the atomic bomb was made 
before we had much idea what held nuclei to. 
gether; we do not have very much idea today. 

The press has done an admirable job in ex- 
plaining these and other practical applications 
of science—I think it is aware that it has to do a 
much, much greater one: But there are, I think, 
some booby traps which stand in its way. I 
would like to list three of them. 

One of the simplest traps is that when techni- 
cal people talk they always emphasize the fact 
that they are not sure. Sometimes, as in the 
case of knowing all the effects of radiation on 
life, we are not, in fact, sure, because experience 
takes so long to acquire. But usua!’y the state 
ment that we are not sure is more like the polite 
comment, “I don’t want to bore you but. . .” 
Statements about scientific matters are not en 
tirely sure—nothing is—but compared to politics 
they are so extremely sure as to be of a different 
order of certainty. If a scientist says he is not sure, 
pay attention to the limits within which he says 


58 TREE OF KNOWLEDGE 


this—the margin for error he insists on allowing. 
This margin will not be so wide. Within what 
limits we are uncertain about the genetic dam- 
ages of radiation, for example, is not something 
to worry or wonder about. We know something 
of the effects on the genes. The differences of 
opinion over this question lie in quite a different 
field. They lie in conflicting assessments of the 
relative gravity of these damages and of other 
vaster dangers of total nuclear war. 

A second trap to beware of is the strange fact 
that the words scientists use have taken on spe- 
cial meaning so that there is a confusing quality 
of punning when they discuss technical things 
and describe their aims. “Relativity” sounds like 
something that occurs in daily life; it is not. 
Scientists talk about the “adventure” of science 
and they are right; but of course in the public 
mind this is very likely to be identified with 
looking’ to see if the other side of the moon is 
really there. Here the public is wrong. The ad- 
ventures of science are intellectual adventures, 
involving discoveries of the inadequacy of our 
means of describing nature, because it is so un- 
familiar and strange. Space travel has, no doubt, 
its value and virtue, but it is in no way related 


“What's so terrible? It’s a deadly rock 
but it’s a clean rock.” 


to the great adventures of science. It would be, 
of course, if we could go out two or three billion 
light-years and see what is going on there, be- 
cause it is hard to see that far with telescopes. 
But this is not the same thing as the progress of 
human learning and understanding. 

A third trap and a serious one—it has infested 
the discussion of radioactive fallout—is that in 
most technical explanations, very large numbers 
occur, and it is often hard to convey their im- 
plications sensitively. It may be equally true to 
say, for instance, that something will cause 
10,000 casualties and that these casualties will 
affect a hundred-thousandth of the population 
of the world; but one statement can make the 
effect seem rather small and the other can make 
it very big. We cannot get over the habit of talk- 
ing in numbers but it takes some exposition if 
we are to avoid creating the wrong impression. 

| have one example of this. It has to do with 
radioactive fallout. I know nothing about the 
main efforts being made to eliminate fallout at 
present but it is obvious that they have to do 
with the elimination of fissionable material from 
bombs. The first step is to take the casing away 
from big bombs and the next step, presumably, 
is to take away much—or even all—of the 
rest. 

I have some understanding of this as a 
technieal problem and some idea of the 
benefits which will accrue from it. But in 
an old day, when we had the first primitive, 
tiny, atomic weapons, there was also a con- 
trast. The story is in the public domain 
and | am surprised that no reporter has 
dug it out. We were thinking then in terms 
of casualties of hundreds of thousands and 
not hundreds of millions. It was a much 
more innocent age but it was warfare and 
in that sense it was not innocent. All the 
bombs then had fissionable material and 
the first one we set off at Trinity near Los 
Alamos was dirty. It was set off practically 
at ground level, the fireball touched the 
ground and in fact a great deal of radioac- 
tive contamination was spread, by the stand- 
ard of those days. The government had a 
lot of trouble with a herd of cattle whose 
hair turned white as a result. It was a very 
dirty bomb. 

The bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
on the other hand were clean. They were 
exploded high in the air and few if any 
casualties were produced by fallout. Pos- 
sibly there were a handful on a glebal 
scale, but practically all the hundreds 


of thousands who died, and the others who were 
maimed from radiation and blast, did not have 
the benefit of fallout. Nevertheless, I vastly pre- 
fer our first dirty bomb to those two clean ones. 

When all is said and done about these prob- 
lems—essentially soluble problems—of describing 
the practical consequences of scientific progress, 
there remains the central, perplexing question, 
to which I keep returning, of bringing an appre- 
ciation of the new scientific knowledge to the 
world. It is a question of high importance; it 
deserves study. 

I do not see, for example, how the scientist can 
evoke the same understanding and grateful 
warmth from his fellows as the actor who gives 
them pleasure and insight, and reveals their own 
predicament to them, or the musician or dancer 
or writer or athlete, in whom they see their tal- 
ents in greater perfection, and often their own 
limitations and error in larger perspective. The 
power of the new knowledge itself to excite the 
intelligent public's mind is very different from 
the days of Newton when the problems under 
discussion—the course of the heavenly bodies, the 
laws of dynamics—were not far from ordinary hu- 
man experience. People could go to demonstra- 
tions to see the new principles in action; they 
could discuss them in salons and cafés. The ideas 
were revolutionary but not very hard to under- 
stand. It is no wonder that the excitement and 
change and enrichment of culture in Europe that 
came about as a result of these discoveries were 
without parallel. 

Today there are sciences like that, which are 
just starting. During the nineteenth century the 
theory of evolution certainly played this role. 
And today, in the psychological sciences there 
are many fundamental points that anyone can 
understand if he is willing to take the trouble— 
science here is just beginning to leave the com- 
mon experience, and the accumulated tradition 
has not yet grown very far. 

Yet as a whole, the problem is formidable. It 
is not hopeless—much can and should be done. 
But I do not believe it can be done by the press 
alone. Part of the solution lies in education, 


and, I think, part of it lies with just learning 
to live with it. Our tradition and culture and 
community of learning have become reticulated, 


complicated, and non-hierarchal. They have 
their own nobility if one brings to them the 
right attitudes of affection, interest, and inde- 
fatigability. The new knowledge is not the kind 
of thing one can ever finally master; there is no 
place a man can go to get it all straight. But it 
has its beauty if one knows how to live with it 


BY ROBERT OPPENHEIMER 59 


And the main thing is to recognize this and not 
to talk in terms of cultures which are unattain- 
able for us, but to welcome those that are at 
hand. 

Because beyond the need for explanation of 
the practical, beyond the need for information, 
there will always be the need for a community 
of meaning and understanding. To my mind 
this is a basic and central need. It is a very grave 
circumstance of our time that the overwhelming 
part of new knowledge is available only to a few 
people and does not enrich common understand- 
ing. I think, nevertheless, that learned folk do 
have some sense of this community; and I think 
this furnishes a clue for others, because it comes 
in part from the similarities of experience in our 
professional lives—from recognizing points in 
common and differences in our separate tradi- 
tions. We have lived in parallel ways through 
experience and wonder and have some glimmer- 
ing of a kind of new-found harmony. 

This suggests to me that all of us in our years 
of learning, and many if not most of us through 
out our lives, need some true apprenticeship, 
some hard and concentrated work, in the spe- 
cialized traditions. This will make us better able 
to understand one another but, most important 
of all, it will clarify for us the extent to which 
we do not understand one another. It will not 
be easy. It means a major change in the way we 
look at the world and in our educational prac- 
tices. It means that an understanding of the 
scope, depth, and nature of our ignorance should 
be among the primary purposes of education. 
But to me, it seems necessary for the coherence 
of our culture, and for the very future of any 
free civilization. A faithful image of this in the 
public press could do a great deal to help us all 
get on with it. 


CRAZY BUT NOT STUPID 


] WANT to turn now to a second subject 
disarmament—which may seem irrelevant but 
as I hope to show, is not entirely so. Somehow 
it does not seem quite right of me to discuss a 
question which I regard as quite central for the 
future of culture without adding at least a few 
phrases about the anomalous and terrible situa 
tion of the new weapons with which, in their 
origins, I had quite a close connection. 

Perhaps I can best start with a story. It seems 
that a man was driving into an American city to 
keep an appointment and one of his back wheels 
came off in front of an insane asylum. One of 
the inmates stared out of the window at him 


OO TREE OF KNOWLEDGE 


and the man said to him in desperation, “Look, 
the bolts are missing from one of my wheels— 
I've got an important engagement and every- 
thing depends on my making it.” The man in 
the asylum said, “Well you've got four wheels, 
take a bolt from each of the other three and 
your problem is solved.” The traveler looked 
up and said, “Say, you aren't so crazy.” And the 
inmate replied, “Sure I'm crazy, but I’m not 
stupid,” That may be a good parable for where 
we stand with our weapons. 

I fully respect those who take the cheerful 
view that matters might be much worse. It would 
certainly be worse if all Europe were in Com- 
munist hands; it would be worse if a third world 
war had broken out and ravaged our lives and 
our culture. But the situation is still terribly 
dangerous. When we come on testimony before 
Congressional committees that our operations as 
now planned would call for 300 million deaths, 
and so on, we are not, | believe, hearing over- 
statements or misstatements. 

Furthermore, it is my impression that those 
who are in a position to know expect that, for 
a time at least, technical developments may tend 
to create a situation much more trigger-happy 
and much less subject to the enormous control 
these weapons call for—the control which should 
perhaps be the first expression of that change in 
the behavior of states and governments for which 
we are surely destined if we are to survive. 

Yet there is enough anxiety so that there 
is more and more talk of disarmament, and the 
governments—which have agonizing responsibili- 
ties for maintaining the power and influence of 
their states—are at last nibbling gently at the 
subject. 

I would be reluctant to create the impression 
that I do not believe in disarmament. We all 
know what indescribable difficulties stand in the 
way of negotiating it and how Utopian it seems 
to talk of meaningful, effective, adequate dis- 
armament which would protect the world. But 
my point is a little different. It is not that dis- 
armament is Utopian but that it really is not 
Utopian enough. There are two quite simple 
arguments from the nature of scientific progress 
which bear on the stability and value of disarma- 
ment. They are very general principles and they 
were very much on our minds when, in 1946, a 
group of people in this country and abroad tried 
to work out an idea of what the control of atomic 
energy would mean. 

The first point, which I mentioned earlier, is 
that new discoveries are made with such enor- 
mous and unpredictable rapidity that you can- 


not possibly devise an instrument of disarmament 
which is to hold good twenty or thirty years from 
now unless you forbid inquiry and discovery— 
and you probably could not legislate that even 
if you wanted to. 

The second point is that the acquisition of 
knowledge is, for practical purposes, and barring 
global catastrophe, an irreversible thing. If ever 
the nations do start to fly at each other's throats 
they will be quite capable of doing again what- 
ever they once learned to do. 


AN OPEN WORLD 
{ H ESE two propositions meant to us then, 


and mean to me now, that the world 
has to be an open world in which, practically 
speaking, secrets are illegal. They mean that 
some of the great power and responsibility which 
habitually and traditionally rest with the nation- 
states must rest in less national hands which are 
better able to use it. They mean that ours must 
be a united world, as it has never been before. 

Some part of this redistribution of power can 
be accomplished through international organi- 
zations, and the experience of OEEC and 
EURATOM and NATO give very great hope 
for developing into valuable trans-national in- 
stitutions. NATO, in particular, may have its 
greatest historic destiny in this hope, rather than 
in its past. 

But, even more than a growing role for the 
international organizations, these propositions 
signify to me the greater development of some 
thing which pervades the whole of natural sci- 
ence, and most of learning, and which is begin- 
ning even to touch our colleagues behind the 
Iron Curtain. I refer to the fraternal commu- 
nities of men embarked on specialized work: 
those who know how to extirpate malaria; those 
who seek to understand the radio signals coming 
to us from remote parts of the Universe; those 
who recreate the early history of man, his art, 
and his learning. Their knowledge and know- 
how bind them together as possessors of true 
community, complementary to the local geo- 
graphic communities, complementary to the 
communities of state and civic tradition; they 
are the warp of community, as the nations are 
the woof. 

These communities of the mind are the hu- 
man counterpart and the basis of the interna- 
national institutions that the future must hold 
in store and on them rests, it seems to me, the 
hope that we will survive this unprecedented 
period in the history of man. 


Harper's Magazine, October 1958 


HARPER & BROTHERS 

PUBLISHERS 
Chairman of the Executive 
Committee: CASS CANFIELD 


Chairman of the Board: 
FRANK 8. MACGREGOR 


President: 
RAYMOND C. HARWOOD 


Vice-Presidents: 


EDWARD J. TYLER, JR., 

EUGENE EXMAN, ORDWAY TEAD, 
DANIEL F. BRADLEY, 

JOHN FISCHER, EVAN W, THOMAS 


Treasurer: LOUIS F. HAYNIE 


Assistant to the Publisher 
and Circulation Director: 


JOHN JAY HUGHES 


EDITORIAL STAPF 


Editor in Chief: JOHN FISCHER 
Managing Editor: RUSSELL LYNES 


Editors: 


KATHERINE GAUSS JACKSON 
CATHARINE MEYER 


ANNE G. FREEDGOOD - 


ROBERT B, SILVERS 
LUCY DONALDSON 


Washington Correspondent: 
WILLIAM 8, WHITE 


Editorial Secretary: ROSE DALY 


Editorial Assistant: 
VIRGINIA HUGHES 


ADVERTISING DATA: consult 
Haanpen-Atiantic Saces, Inc. 

480 Lexington Ave., New York 17, N. Y. 
Telephone MUrray Hill 3-5225. 


HARPER'S MAGAZINE issue for 

Oct. 1958. Vol. 217. Serial No. 1301. 
Copyright® 1958 by Harper & Brothers 
in the United States and Great Britain. 
All rights, including translation into 
other languages, reserved by the 
Publisher in the United States, Great 
Britain, Mexico and all countries 
participating in the International 
Copyright Convention and the 
Pan-American Copyright Convention. 
Published monthly by Harper & 
Brothers, 49 East 33rd St., New York 16, 
N.Y. Composed and printed in the u.s.a. 
by union labor by the Williams Press, 
99.129 North Broadway, Albany, N. Y. 
Entered as eccond-clase matter at 

the post office at Albany, N. Y., 

under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


SUBSCRIPTION RATES: 6O¢ per copy; 
$6.00 one year; $11.00 two years; 
$15.00 three years. Foreign postage— 
except Canada and Pan America— 
$1.50 per year additional. 


CHANCE OF aporness: Six weeks’ 
advance notice, and old address as 
well as new, are necessary. 

Address all correspondence relating 

to subscriptions to: Subscription Dept., 
49 East 33rd St., New York 16, N. Y. 


5 
Harper S 
MAGA Z INE ® 
OCTOBER 1958 vot. 217, No. 1301 


ARTICLES 
ImprRiAL Harvarp, David Boroff 
Drawings by George Samerjan 


AMERICAN Homes: Solemn to Gaudy to Drab 
Osbert Lancaster 


Why THE Israrii Army Wins, Brig. Gen. S. L. A. Marshall 


Drawings by Arieh Glaser 


PENNSYLVANIA'S NEW BREED OF POLITICIANS, Joseph Kraft 


Tue Tree or KNow.epce, Robert Oppenheimer 
Cartoon by Richard McCallister 


Tue Harp Kino oF Courace, James Baldwin 
Drawings by Eldzer Cortor 


ATHENS ON THE SuBWaAY, Frederick Gutheim 
Drawings by Donald Mackay 


THe Day THE Taps Run Dry, Robert and Leona Rienow 


Cartoon by Ed Fisher 


THE WASHINGTON PHoniks, William S. White 


FICTION 
Tue Lire AND DEATH OF A WESTERN GLADIATOR, 


Charle, G. Finney 
Drawings by Gil Walker 


DEPARTMENTS 


LETTERS 


Tue Eprror’s Easy CHair—Society and Morals in the 


Underworld, John Fischer 
Drawing by Tomi Ungerer 


PERSONAL & OTHERWISE—Among Our Contributors 


Arter Hours, Mr. Harper 
Drawings by N. M. Bodecker 


Tue New Books, Paul Pickrel 


Books IN Brier, Katherine Gauss Jackson 


Tue New Recoroines, Edward Tatnall Canby 


Jazz Notes, Eric Larrabee 


COVER by George Samerjan 


