LETTERS TO 


An examination of the statistics of the problem shows that 
if in an appreciable fraction of ionic spurts, say 20 percent 
as observed, the counters also record, then the number of 
rays is probably not considerably less than what would 
correspond to an average of one ray through each counter 
set. Taking into account the average distances involved, 
we are led to the conclusion that the nuclear disintegra- 
tions observed corresponded to at least 100 secondaries, 
and may of course represent many more. The possibility of 
there being more secondaries than would correspond to the 


THE EDITOR 53 


total number of electrons and protons in the disintegrated 
atom naturally raises interesting considerations regarding 
the mechanism of the processes accompanying the dis- 
integration. 
W. F. G. Swann 
C. G. MONTGOMERY 
Bartol Research Foundation of 
The Franklin Institute, 
Swarthmore, Pennsylvania, 
June 1, 1933, 


Scattering of Molecular Rays in Gases 


Knauer! has recently investigated the scattering of 
molecular rays in gases. By the aid of high speed pumps the 
author has found it possible to produce a more intense 
beam so that scattering might be investigated with higher 
resolving power. 

A beam is formed by three successive slits and the distri- 
bution of the scattered molecules or atoms studied by the 
aid of a Pirani gauge. Two slits placed before the gauge 
permit molecules to enter it only when they are scattered 
from a definite position in the beam. 

Fig. 1 (curves A and B) shows the scattering curves which 
have been obtained for hydrogen molecules and helium 
atoms. The temperature of the source of the beam and 
scattering chamber was 20°C. The scattered intensity is 
expressed in arbitrary units, being simply the galvanometer 
deflection multiplied by sin 6 to correct for the variation in 
the length of the beam from which scattered molecules 
may enter the gauge. | 

Massey and Mohr? have computed the scattered intensity 
for helium atoms having a relative kinetic energy corre- 
sponding to 20°C and — 185°C. The results which they have 
obtained offer a qualitative explanation of the helium 
scattering curve. Curve C (Fig. 1) is reproduced from their 
article after being multiplied by sin 26 and divided by 
sin 9 to obtain the scattering per unit solid angle in a 
coordinate system in which one atom is initially at rest. 
One peak occurs at 25° and another at 40°. From a qualita- 
tive point of view three effects are immediately obvious 
which would tend to merge these two peaks into the one 
observed at 30°. The first is the finite resolving power of 
the apparatus, second the Maxwellian distribution of 


He scattered in He 


He scattered in H 


eee a 


zero curve C 


Scattered Intensity 


e) 50 80 0 30 60 90 
tS) 6 


Fic. 1. Curve A, He scattered in He; curve B, He 
scattered in He; curve C, results of Massey and Mohr for 
He scattered in He. 


velocities in the beam and third the fact that the scattering 
molecules are not at rest but are moving in random direc- 
tions with a Maxwellian distribution of velocities. 

The intensity of the region of 65° is too small to deter- 
mine definitely whether a peak exists there. 

A complete report will appear in a short time. 

| R. M. ZaBeE.L* 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
June 3, 1933. 


* National Research Fellow 
1 Knauer, Zeits. f. Physik 80, 80 (1933). 
* Massey and Mohr, Nature 130, 277 (1932). 


On the Production of the Positive Electron 


The experimental discovery of the positive electron gives 
us a striking confirmation of Dirac’s theory of the electron, 
and of his most recent attempts to give a consistent inter- 
pretation of the formalism of that theory. As is well known, 
and quite apart from the difficulties connected with the 
existence and stability of the electron itself, the theory in 
its original form led to very grave difficulties in all prob- 
lems involving lengths of the order of the Compton wave- 
length, in that it predicted the occurrence of electrons of 
negative kinetic energy, in gross conflict with experience. 


Dirac has pointed out that we might obtain a consistent 
theory by assuming that it is only the absence of electrons 
of negative kinetic energy that has a physical meaning; in 
this way one could avoid the occurrence of the critical trans- 
itions, and yet understand the validity of many correct 
predictions of the theory, such as the formula for the 
relativistic fine structure, and the Thomson and Klein- 
Nishina scattering formulae: only the physical interpreta- 
tion of the formulism was changed, and involved in many 
cases the appearance pairs of electrons and ‘‘antielectrons”’ 


54 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


—particles of electronic mass and of positive charge numer- 
ically equal to that of the electron. It was this aspect of 
the theory which remained dubious; and the discovery of 
the positive electron appears to settle that doubt. 

. Perhaps the simplest example of the production of pairs 
is the case of an externally maintained electrostatic field in 
which differences of potential greater than 2 mc? occur. 
Here one may see in a particularly clear way that the pro- 
duction of pairs is a typical quantum effect, depending 
upon the finite wave-length of the electron waves, and dis- 
appearing, as the correspondence principle requires, when 
h->0. For all macroscopic fields such an effect is negligible; 
and for the fields within nuclei, where alone the pairs 
might be expected to be of primary importance, we know 
that Dirac’s theory, together with the whole notion of the 
electron as a particle, becomes inapplicable. It is for this 
reason that the anti-electrons could so long escape de- 
tection, 

In the case of a Coulomb field the theory shows that to 
detect the pairs we should have to use radiation (electrons 
or gamma-rays) of energy greater than 2 mc? (strictly 
greater than mce?[1+(1+a2Z?/(1—a?Z?)*)~*] where Ze is 
the charge producing the field). Thus, if we allow gamma- 
rays of energy y to fall upon a nucleus, we should expect 
pairs to appear; the kinetic energy of the pairs would be 
+ —2 mc?; and the effect might be interpreted as a photo- 
electric absorption of the gamma-ray by the pair; in the 
process the nucleus necessarily takes up. a small recoil 
momentum. The recent experiments of Anderson and 
Neddermeyer with filtered gamma-rays of Th C’” show 
that in fact pairs are produced when the radiation passes 
through lead; and this very strongly supports the tentative 
suggestion made by Blackett and Occhialini that that part 
of the absorption of these rays in lead which cannot be 
accounted for by the scattering and photo-effect of the 
atomic electrons is to be ascribed to the creation of pairs 
near the nucleus. This hypothesis, even without calculation, 
finds much support in the evidence, for the number of 
pairs observed by Anderson and Neddermeyer is of the 
right order to account for the excess absorption of the 
gamma-rays. Further Gray and Tarrant! have found that 
a part, but not all, of the excess energy absorbed is re- 
radiated; the reradiated gamma-rays consist, wholly for 
the light elements, and for the greater part in lead, of 
quanta of energy 510° volts. This is what we should 
expect from the pairs, which should lose practically all of 
their kinetic energy in passing through matter, and in 
which the anti-electron near the end of its range should 
combine with an electron with the radiation of two quanta 
of about a half-million volts. 

We have applied the theory to this simple model, in 
which gamma-rays of high energy may be absorbed by 
the production of pairs in the Coulomb field of nuclei. 
When the energy of the gamma-rays is only a little greater 
than the threshold energy, and the kinetic energy of the 
pair is small, so that relativistic effects for electron and 
positive may reasonably be neglected, the calculations can 
easily be made strictly. The important term in the effective 
absorption cross section per nucleus (of charge Z) for 


gamma-rays of energy y is 
a =(mr/3 (2)*)atZ5(et/mct)gie 2720), with 
g=y/me—2, (1) 


The positives tend to take most of the available kinetic 
energy, and the distribution in the direction of ejection of 
the particles about the direction of the incident gamma- 
rays is given by the cosine-square law. 

For higher energies of the gamma-rays, we have made an 
approximate calculation, in which we have found the wave 
functions for the pair to the first order only in the per- 
turbing field of the nucleus. For y—> © we find asymptoti- 
cally 

o = (27/6 —2/3)aZe4/mirc!. (2) 


Here the relative probability of a distribution of energy 
between positive (e,) and electron (e_) is given by 


ete? (e>> me; <> me). (3) 


Both particles tend to come off within a small angle of the 
original beam. The probability of ejection falls off rapidly 
for angles >>mc?/e,, mc?/e_ for the two particles. 

From (2) we see that the excess absorption of hard 
radiation should be proportional to Z?, in good agreement 
with the experiments with Th C’’ gamma-rays. Further, 
even the asymptotic formula (2) gives reasonable values for 
the absolute magnitude of the excess absorption. Numerical 
calculation for the case of Th C”, y22.610%v (with the 
use of the same approximate wave functions), gives an 
excess absorption of about 25 percent of the Klein-Nishina 
absorption of these rays in lead, and 15 percent in tin, in 
excellent agreement with experiment. We see too from a 
comparison of (1) and (2) that the absorption due to the 
production of pairs rises very rapidly as the energy of the 
gamma-rays is increased; at half the energy of the Th C” 
rays the absorption is only one five-hundredth as great. 
The small effect for gamma-rays near the threshold arises 
in part from the small number of states available, and in 
part from the repulsion of the low energy positive by the 
nuclear field. In this way we can understand that the excess 
absorption and the reradiated gamma-rays were not ob- 
served with incident gamma-rays of energy much lower 
than 210° volts. Thus the theory gives a reasonable ac- 
count of the dependence of the excess absorption on the 
gamma-ray energy and on the atomic number and of the 
absolute magnitude of the absorption. The origin of the 
radiation of ~ 10° volts which Gray and Tarrant found re- 
radiated from heavy element is not altogether clear. It is 
possible that this arises by the annihilation of a positive in 
a process in which only one quantum is radiated, and an 
electron or nucleus takes up a small recoil momentum. The 
relative importance of such processes would increase with 
the atomic number, as is observed. 

According to the theory the gamma-rays from a radio- 
active nucleus should occasionally be ‘‘internally con- 
verted” by the production of a pair near the nucleus. The 
internal conversion coefficient is of the order a3Z?, and is 


1 Gray and Tarrant, Proc. Roy. Soc. A136, 662 (1932). 


LETTERS TO 


about 210-4 for the quadripole gamma-ray of Th C”, 
y =2.6X 108 volts. 

The application of (2) to the absorption of cosmic rays 
is in some respects illuminating. For as the energy of the 
gamma-ray is increased, the absorption by the production 
of pairs becomes relatively more important than the ab- 
sorption by Compton effect. This would account for. Ander- 
son’s observation that among high energy particles the 
numbers of positives and negatives are roughly equal; and 
it would increase the energy of the gamma-rays as esti- 
mated from their absorption coefficients. Further (2) gives 
a limiting penetration, which is of the same order for water 
as that observed for the hardest cosmic rays. Nevertheless 
(3) is here in definite disagreement with experiment, in that 
a penetration in water twice as great as that predicted by 
(2) has been observed by Regener, and further in that (2) 
predicts serious deviations from the mass absorption law 
which are certainly not found experimentally. It appears 
that deviations from the Coulomb law for the nuclear fields 
could not sensibly affect our result; and one is tempted to 
see in this discrepancy a failure of the theory when applied 
to radiation whose wave-length is of the order of the critical 
distance e?/me? which marks the limit of applicability of 


THE EDITOR 55 


classical electron theory. But we must emphasize that (2) 
was derived by the use of approximations which may be 
unsound; just in the range of high energies and large atomic 
numbers their validity appears doubtful; and we believe 
that no conclusions may justly be drawn until this purely 
analytical point is settled. Even for light elements the use 
of (2) for y greater than 108 volts appears to us questionable. 

On the present simple theory there is no place for the 
simultaneous production of large numbers of pairs. The 
fast electrons and positives, however, will themselves tend 
to produce further pairs; and although this point too wants 
much closer investigation, it is possible that one may so 
be able to account for the multiple tracks observed. 

We want to express our profound thanks to Professor 
Bohr, who has helped us to understand the essential con- 
sistency of the theory which we have here applied. 

J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
. M. S. PLEesset* 
California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, California, 
June 9, 1933. 


* National Research Fellow | 


The Emission of Alpha-Particles from Various Targets Bombarded by Deutons of High Speed 


Using a sample of hydrogen containing 50 percent of the 
heavy isotope, H?, in our apparatus for the multiple accel- 
eration of ions we have given to the ions H!H?* energies of 
2,000,000 volts. These ions striking any target immediately 
yield 660,000 volt-protons and 1,330,000 volt H? nuclei 
which we call deutons. We have directed these particles 
against various targets. 

It was of particular interest to study elements of the 
nuclear type 4n+2 in order to ascertain whether these 
would yield nuclei of type 4” and a-particles. As a matter 
of fact the two targets which were most striking because of 
the range and number of emitted a-particles were NH,NO; 
and LiF, which contained the nuclei N#4 and Li’. Experience 
with other targets containing O, H and F shows that most 
of the effects observed were due to N and Li. N yielded 
about 100 a-particles per 10° deutons all apparently homo- 
geneous with a range of 6.8 cm. The minimum deuton 
energy at which we observed this disintegration was 
600,000 volts. The energy of the a-particles obtained in 
this disintegration is only about one-half of that which 
should be set free in the process N!4-+H?>C”+Het. 

With Li a large number of a-particles of range 8.2 cm 
were obtained which are very likely due to the accompany- 
ing protons. In addition there are about one-tenth as many 
with the great range of 14.5 cm corresponding to an energy 
of 12,500,000 volts. No other known natural or artificial 
disintegration has yielded particles of so great energy. If we 
assume the process Li*+H?—2He‘4 and take for He the 
mass 4.0022 and for H? and Li® the most recent values of 
Bainbridge, which he has kindly communicated to us, the 
values 2.0136 and 6.0145, respectively, and take account of 
the kinetic energy of the deuton (1,300,000 volts), we find 
23,400,000 volts as the total.energy set free. If this energy 


is equally divided between the two a-particles, each would 
have 11,700,000 volts, whereas, from the observed range 
we find 12,500,000 volts. This calculation of the energy 
from the range is a wide extrapolation, with the use of the 
3/2 power voltage range relation, and the agreement be- 
tween the observed and calculated values is well within the 
limits of uncertainty because of this and other causes. An 
alternative, but less likely hypothesis, that the process in- 
volves Li’ with the emission of a neutron, happens to agree 
equally well with the observations if the mass of the 
neutron has the low value (about unity) that we discuss 
later. . 

With the Be target a-particles were obtained of the same 
range (3.3 cm) as those obtained in this laboratory in 
similar experiments with high speed protons. But the num- 
ber of disintegrations per deuton was at least 100 times as 
great as the number per proton. The identity of the two 
ranges strongly suggests that the bombarding particle 
merely causes the disintegration of the unstable Be nucleus; 
in other words, that we have disintegration without cap- 
ture. This is a process which has already been suggested by 
Bainbridge! for the disintegration of Be by a-particles. If 
we take Bainbridge’s value for the mass of Be, 9.0155, our 
value for the kinetic energy of the a-particles and Chad- 
wick’s? for the kinetic energy of the neutron, the mass of 
the neutron would come out as a little less than unity, 
which tends to confirm the estimate of the mass of the 
neutron (following communication) which we have obtained 
from quite different experiments. 

Of the remaining targets studied, Al and Mg gave a small 


1 Bainbridge, Phys. Rev. 43, 367 (1933). 
* Chadwick, Proc. Roy. Soc. A136, 692 (1932). 


