44 J. 


be a distinct systematic difference between the 
separations depending on the pressure used ‘in 
the source. It is conceivable that this is real. 
On the other hand it may be due to wide varia- 
tion in intensities of the unresolved components. 
If we assume that the fourth and fifth compo- 
_nents have zero intensities on the low pressure 
plates and theoretical intensities on the high 


JANUARY 1, 1935 


PHVSICAL REVIEW 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


pressure plates, the systematic difference is 
greatly reduced. The only conclusion to be drawn 
at present from this difference is that the 


‘uncertainty of the separation must be much 


greater than is indicated by the calculated 
probable errors. Our best estimate of this 
uncertainty may be expressed by saying that 
1/a probably lies between 137 and 138. 


VOLUME 47 


Are the Formulae for the Absorption of High Energy Radiations Valid? 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER, University of California, Berkeley 
(Received November 12, 1934) 


In this paper we consider the discrepancies between 
theoretical prediction and experiment for the absorption 
of cosmic-ray electrons and gamma-rays. By applying a 
strict criterion for the validity of classical electron theory, 
it is possible to derive new formulae for impact and 
radiative energy losses of high energy electrons, which 
may be regarded as theoretical lower limits for these 


1. THe THEORETICAL FORMULAE 


HE question of the validity of the theoretical 


formulae for the absorption of high energy 
radiations has been brought to a new prominence 
by recent experimental and theoretical re- 
searches. On the one hand the observation of the 
cloud chamber tracks of cosmic rays has made it 
possible to extend our knowledge of the specific 
ionization and energy loss of electrons from 
_ particles of a few million volts on up to a few 
billion.! On the other hand two mechanisms of 
absorption, increasingly important at high 
energies, have been carefully investigated the- 
oretically :? the pair production by gamma-rays, 
and the radiative energy losses of electrons. The 
question of whether the formulae derived for the 
probability of these processes, and the more 
familiar formulae for the ionization and impact 
energy losses of fast electrons, should hold for the 
very high cosmic-ray energies, has often been 
discussed, and has been explicitly studied by v. 


1C, D. Anderson and S. H. Neddermeyer, International 
Conference on Physics, London, 1934. 

2H. Bethe and W. Heitler, Proc. Roy. Soc. A146, 83 
(1934). 


quantities, and which are in far better agreement with 
experiment than the formulae given by an _ uncritical 
application of quantum mechanics to these problems. 
These limitations on classical electron theory are consistent 
with those given by possible unitary classical field theories, 
but are more incisive than those given by®the unitary 
theory of Born. | 


Weizsaecker? and by Williams.4 The conclusion 
to which these researches have led is that the 
formulae should remain valid. The experiments, 
however, do not speak for this. We want here to 
reconsider the question in the light of this dis- 
crepancy. , 

The predictions of the theory are these: (1) 
The specific primary ionization of an electron 
(or positron) should pass through a minimum as 
the energy of the electron increases, and should 
increase slowly with the energy throughout the 
entire range of cosmic-ray energies. If the veloc- 
ity of the electron be v=@c, then the specific 
ionization should vary® with v according to 


(1/6")[In «8-+1n (k/a) - 367] 
e=(1—67)-?; a=e/ic. (1) 

Here & is a constant of the order of 10, depending 

on the f-values of the atomic electrons of the 


matter through which the ray is passing. Ac- 
cording to this formula one has to expect an 


with 


 3y, Weizsaecker, Zeits. f. Physik 88, 612 (1934). 

4K. J. Williams, Phys. Rev. 45, 729 (1934). 

5e.g., H. Bethe, Handbuch der Phystk, XXIV, 1, 2nd 
edition, 1932. 


ABSORPTION OF HIGH ENERGY RADIATION | 45 


increase of the ionization in air, which amounts 
to seventy percent when the energy of the elec- 
tron rises from three million to a billion volts. 

Often it is not the primary ionization which is 
observed, but the ‘‘probable’’ ionization :® the 
total ionization produced by the primary and by 
secondaries with energies less than ¢’mc® (in 
practice ¢>>a~™, e’ <1). This probable ionization 
is measured roughly by the total energy loss to 
secondaries of energy <e’mc’, and increases with 
‘¢ less rapidly than the primary ionization, since 
the increase in ionization comes chiefly from 
secondaries of very low energy. For the probable 
ionization we have instead of (1) 


(1/62) (In (Be)+1n (Rav €’/o®) — 46%}, 


with ky~2.5 for hydrogen. 

(2) An electron passing through matter will 
be accelerated by the nuclear fields, and will 
radiate. If o, is the differential cross section of a 
nucleus for radiation of a quantum of energy hy, 
one may define a cross section for energy loss | 


(1a) 


= (A/o0) ayvdv; vor=emc?/h. 
0 


This has been computed by Heitler and Sauter’ 
for a model in which the nuclear field is taken to 
be the Coulomb field of a charge Ze: 


o=4aZ7%p2(In 2e—§), with p=e?/mc*, (2) 


a result valid for «1. These calculations have 
been extended by Bethe and Heitler to the case 
of a nuclear field screened externally by the 
statistical charge distribution of the atomic 
electrons. With this model o does not increase 
indefinitely, but approaches, for e> ©, an 
asymptotic value 


doZ*p*[In (183/Z4)+1/18)]. 3) 


For energies above 10° volts o does not differ 
seriously from its limiting value (3). Essentially 
these same results have been derived by v. 
Weizsaecker by a method which we shall have 
to consider in detail. 

(3) Gamma-rays of high energy will produce 
pairs in nuclear fields. Bethe and Heitler have 
carried through the calculations of the cross 


$F. J. Williams, Proc. Roy. Soc. A135, 108 (1932). 
7 Reference 2. 


section for pair production in the fields of un- 
screened and screened nuclei, and find 


o=4AaZ?p{7/9 In 2e—109/54], (4) 
o=4aZ2p°[7/9 In (183/Z%) —1/54]. (5) 


All of these calculations are approximate, for the 
effect of the nuclear field is treated as small, and: 
the formulae obtained are to be regarded as the 
first terms in a series of powers of aZ. Complete 
calculations which do not involve this approx- 
imation have not been made: but by using the 
wave functions of Furry® it is at least possible to 
see that the error involved does not become 
progressive as the energy increases, that, for 
example, no terms of the form aZe occur; and 
this conclusion, as Williams has observed, follows 
also from the argument of v. Weizsaecker. The 
formulae (4) and (5) have thus to be regarded as 
legitimate approximations for small Z, no matter 
how great the energy. In the case of pair pro- 
duction o is known to be quite accurately pro- 
portional to Z? for gamma-rays of energy 2.6 
and 5.4 million volts;? and it appears from this 
that one may expect (5) to hold without serious 
error even for heavy elements. 


2. THE EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE!® 


According to (3), a beam of high energy elec- 
trons should have a good part of its energy con- 
verted into gamma-radiation in a centimeter of 
lead; in an equal distance this gamma-ray will 
be largely reconverted into pairs. The two 
mechanisms together therefore furnish a very 
rapid mechanism for the degradation and ab- 
sorption of electrons, positrons or gamma-rays, 


an absorption which deviates strongly from a 


mass absorption law. It is therefore possible to do 
justice to the great penetration of the cosmic 
rays only by admitting that the formulae are 
wrong, or by postulating some other and less 
absorbable component of the rays to account for 
their penetration. 

Other arguments lead to this same alternative. 


Thus it is possible to observe the ionization of 


8W.H. Furry, Phys. Rev. 46, 391 (1934). 

9E. McMillan, Phys. Rev. 46, 868 (1934). 

10 Such clarity as there is in this account of the experi- 
mental situation I owe entirely to Dr. Anderson and Mr. 
Neddermeyer, who have with great patience explained to 
me just what the evidence is, what it indicates, and how 
little it proves. 


46 | J. 


cosmic-ray tracks in cloud chambers. This has 
been done by Anderson and Neddermeyer and 
by Kunze," who fail to find evidence for the in- 
crease in ionization with e predicted by (1). 
According to Dr. Anderson, estimates of two 
kinds have been made: 

(a) Estimates of the density of thin tracks, 
which should give the primary ionization, for 
which (1) holds. Although a seventy percent 
difference in density for low energy 6-particles 
could be detected, no difference could be de- 
tected for tracks varying from a few million to a 
few billion volts. 

(b) Actual counts-on diffuse tracks. Here it is 
the total ionization produced by primary for 
secondaries of energy below some value £ which 
is measured. E is determined by the fact that 
when an energetic secondary is curled up in the 
magnetic field, it makes the separate counting 
of the drops impossible. E probably lies between 
10% and 105 volts. For this “‘probable’”’ ionization 
we have instead of (1) to use (1a). Here again 
there is no large increase in ionization with e. 
A small increase might still escape detection. 

It would thus seem necessary to say, either 
that the increase of ionization predicted by (1) 
or (1a) does not occur, or that all of the high 
energy tracks by Anderson are made by protons. 
This second alternative, which has been seriously 
advocated by Williams,4 meets with the diff- 
culty that there are tracks (with an Hp corre- 
sponding to a 5108 volt electron, for instance) 
for which one would expect an ionization ob- 
servably greater than the minimum, whether 
they are made by electrons or protons. But the 
uncertainties in the ionization observations do 
not make it possible to exclude the possibility 
of protons completely. 

Anderson and Neddermeyer! have made stud- 
ies of the energy losses in lead plates. For tracks 
of not too high energy (~3X10® volts), the 
energy loss can be directly measured. There is 
good evidence for large energy losses, which are 
almost certainly radiative. The losses are smaller 
than one would expect from (3). But the number 
of tracks is small; large fluctuations are to be 
expected ; and it is not certain, though it is prob- 
able, that the formula (3) gives too high a result. 


1 P, Kunze, Zeits. f. Physik 83, 1 (1933). 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


With higher energy tracks, where energy losses 
are not directly measurable, one can still con- 
clude that, if the tracks are made by electrons 
(and positrons) both (3) and (5) cannot be right, 
since one does not observe at all that multiplica- 
tion of tracks by gamma-radiation and pair pro- 
duction which (3) and (5) would predict. 

Against the hypothesis that these high energy 
tracks are made by protons, positive and nega- 
tive, there are two further arguments. In the 
energy range where one can unambiguously 
distinguish between electronic and protonic mass, 
protons are an extreme rarity, and although 
positive and negative curvatures occur with 
about equal frequency for the high energy tracks, 
no definitely recognizable negative protonic 
tracks have been seen. The second argument 
concerns the production of high energy secondary 
electrons. The number and distribution of these 
corresponds to what we should expect for pri- 
maries of electronic mass, and can hardly have 
been produced by protons of the observed distri- 
bution in Hp. It does not seem likely that protons 
are important in the energetic part of the cosmic 
radiation. 

Little evidence exists for the validity of the 
theoretical formulae for pair production by 
gamma-rays of very high energy. The theoretical 
formulae hold quite well up to energies of 10? 
volts, but beyond that there are no definite tests 
of the formulae. Gilbert!®? has, however, meas- 
ured the absorption coefficient of the shower 
producing components of the cosmic rays. This 
absorption follows the Z? law; and the radiation 
is probably a gamma-radiation. The total ab- 
sorption found by Gilbert is, however, only 
one-fourth of that to be expected from (5) for 
single pair production alone. 

It is with this experimental evidence in mind 
that we wish to reexamine the question of the 
validity of the theoretical formulae. We shall see 
that when we restrict ourselves to those contri- 
butions to the formulae where the applicability of © 
theory cannot be held in doubt, we obtain re- 


sults to be regarded as theoretical lower limits 


for the probability of the processes in question— 
which in every case differ radically from the 
corresponding formulae of Section 1. For radia- 


2C, W. Gilbert, Proc. Roy. Soc. A144, 559 (1934). 


ABSORPTION OF HIGH ENERGY RADIATION 47 


tive losses, for the probable total ionization, for 
pair production by gamma-rays, the modifica- 
tions in the formulae appear to resolve satis- 
factorily the discrepancies with experiments. 
This is probably not true in the case of primary 
ionization, for which the modified formulae still 
call for a detectable increase in the range of 
cosmic-ray energies. 


3. Tue LIMITATIONS OF CLASSICAL ELECTRON 
THEORY 


The origin of the critique of the theoretical 
formulae lies in classical electron theory. The 
domain of applicability of this theory is limited 
to problems in which an unambiguous separation 
of the field of the electron itself and the external 
field acting on it is possible: in which, that is, 
the effect of the proper field is with good approxi- 
mation given by the inertia of the electron, and 
in which the radiative reaction of the electron 
may be treated as a small correction. Thus we 


may consider the expansion given by Lorentz® for _ 


the proper force of an electron, taken momen- 
tarily at rest, and considered as a distribution of 
charge, spherically symmetric, and limited to a 
region of order of magnitude p=e?/mc’: 


F= mé-42e# /30+O0(ep' x /c*). (6) 


The condition that the terms in this series de- 
crease rapidly is then that 


Xp/dc<K1; “X p/¥c<K1, --- 


etc. The frequencies of the motion of the electron 
must therefore be small compared to v=mc?/e?. 
When the external forces are in this sense slowly 
varying, classical electron theory can be un- 
ambiguously applied. 

This condition: that the radiative reaction be 
small compared to the inertial reaction—and 
thus the external ponderomotive force—does not 
depend on the choice of reference system; in fact 
the usual method of computing the radiative 
forces in a system in which the electron is not at 
rest is to transform 2e?/3c** by a Lorentz trans- 
formation, under which all terms of (6) trans- 
form similarly. But only in a coordinate system 
in which the electron is substantially at rest 
(1— 6?~1) can the criterion for the applicability 


1H, A, Lorentz, Theory of Electrons, p. 252. 


of electron theory be put simply as the condi- 
tion that the fields acting on the electron shall 
not vary much in a time 7=1/7. 

Since the formalism of the Dirac electron 
theory and the quantum theory of the field may 
be regarded as a natural quantum theoretic 
generalization of the dualistic classical electron 
theory, one may expect that this formalism too 
will fail in the same region as its classical counter- 
part. The fact that a relativistic quantum theory 
is possible at all depends then essentially upon 
the smallness of a, which gives the relative mag- 
nitude of successive terms in (6) for the frequen- 
cies~mc?/h characteristic of relativistic electron 
theory. Since, in the problem of the energy losses 
and radiation of very high energy electrons, 
energies corresponding to frequencies >? neces- 
sarily occur, the question of the validity of the 
theoretical formulae requires investigation. 


4, APPLICATION TO THE CLASSICAL THEORY OF 
ENERGY Loss! 


One may treat the ionization and energy loss 
of a fast electron by computing the probability 
of transition induced in the atomic systems by the 
field, calculated classically; of the (undeflected) 
primary ; for all impacts in which the momentum 
transfer is small compared to the primary mo- 
mentum this treatment is fully justified; and it 
is the probability of these impacts which can be 
observed by studying the primary and ‘probable’ 
ionization of the electron tracks. The components 
of the primary field responsible for this ioniza- 
tion are low frequency components, for which 
v<v; the secondary electron, in these impacts, 
never attains velocities very close to that of light, 
and if only these low frequency components 
acted on the electron, there could be no question 

144The question of the energy losses of very energetic 
electrons has been much considered by Swann, who has 
also emphasized that with increasing ¢ the radiative forces 
may increase enormously. The present treatment differs 
from Swann’s in two essential points: (a) Swann concludes 
that when the radiation computed classically would be 
equal to the energy transferred, no transfer at all will 
occur, whereas we argue that the magnitude of the radia- 
tion reaction merely makes classical electron theory in- 
applicable. (b) Swann assumes that for large e the radiative 
reactions are large for all impacts, whereas we find this 
true only for impacts with parameter p<p=pe. This is 
why we find a finite constant lower limit for the energy 
loss, instead of concluding, as does Swann, that it should 


vanish as e—>, We do not believe that the vanishing of 
the energy loss can be justified by any electrodynamics. 


48 | J. 


of the validity of the theoretical formulae. It 
is substantially this argument which has so often 
led to the conclusion that the formulae should 
hold.“ The cogency of this argument can, how- 
ever, be questioned. The argument may be for- 
mulated in this way: Assume the validity of 
theory to describe the reaction of the electron to 
all components, high as well as low, to the field, 
then we can show that the high frequency com- 
ponents contribute nothing to the probability 
of the processes—small energy transfers—in 
which we are interested. Then for the low fre- 
quency components alone there is no question 
of the validity of theory. But to establish this 
it is necessary to assume the validity of the 
theory also for the high frequency components, 
and this assumption cannot be justified. The 
condition for the rapid convergence of (6) is a 
condition on the total motion of the electron, and 
thus on the whole external field acting on it, 
and we must be prepared to find that the pondero- 
motive force acting on the electron cannot, 
when rapidly varying fields are involved, be 
taken simply as the sum of the forces exerted by 
the separate Fourier components. It is in this 
point that we differ from v. Weizsaecker and 
from Williams; and it is only by insisting on this 
that we can understand at all why the theoretical 
formulae can fail. | 
We are here making a distinction, which in 
the domain of classical electron theory does not 
need to be made, between the external field 
strengths computed by classical theory, and the 
ponderomotive force, which is of the same general 
character as that developed by Born’ in his 
modified unitary electrodynamics. Such a dis- 
tinction is possible only in a theory in which the 
field equations are not linear, since for a linear 
theory it would follow from the conservation 
laws that the ponderomotive force of the sum of 
two fields is the sum of the ponderomotive forces 
of the separate fields. The existence of such 
nonlinearities seems, however, inevitable in 
any theory which would account for the specific 
stability of the electron ; and it may be remarked 
that the theory of the positron, even in its present 


15 Reference 6; J. F. Carlson and J. R. Oppenheimer, 
Phys. Rev. 41, 763 (1932). 

16M. Born, Proc. Roy. Soc. A143, 410 (1934); M. Born 
and L. Infeld, Proc. Roy. Soc. A144, 425 (1934). 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


incomplete form, involves such nonlinearities 
for the field equations. | 

In the following discussion we shall then sup- 
pose—in distinction to v. Weizsaecker and 
Williams—that whenever high frequency com- 
ponents are present in the external field with an 
amplitude comparable to that of the low fre- 
quency components, the application of electron 
theory becomes dubious. To the question of the 
application of Born’s electrodynamics to these 
problems we shall return in Section 7. 

The normal component .of the electric in- 
tensity in the field of the primary which is 
responsible for the greater part of the ionization, 
is given by the Fourier resolution: 


gm f emeytdr, with 


H,(vpi/ev)-e- I”, (7) 


6 t= 


€U 


Here $, the impact parameter, is the distance 


from the track, z is measured along the track and 
=0 for £=0, and again e=(1—6?)~?, and v is the 
primary velocity. The components of frequency 
y> y are large near the track, and begin to fall off 
rapidly as p>p=e/v~ep. Emaximum at P is 
mc /eev, and thus for e>1, the field is always 
weak. We may, however, expect that for impacts 
in which the field within p is of importance 
the theoretical calculations can give totally 
wrong results. In a purely classical calculation 
of the energy loss, the omisston of such impacts 
has the effect of introducing a lower limit p for 
the impact parameter, and thus gives an energy 
loss which does not increase with e; instead of the 
classical formula of Bohr: energy losses <mc? 


~ (Are*/mv?) In (emu? /e?w), (8) 


(w the resonance frequency of the atomic elec- 
trons), we obtain 


~ (Are*/mv*) In (mv? /e*w). (9) 


The increase in energy loss which comes from 
the equatorial flattening of the field, and the 
consequent increase in the upper limit of the 
impact parameter (Pmax.~ve/w), is Compensated 
by the decrease in close impacts. The impacts 
which are excluded by taking p as a lower limit 
for the impact parameter involve relatively large 
energy transfers; but for e~100 transfers of 


ABSORPTION OF HIGH ENERGY RADIATION 49° 


energy of the order of 20 volts are being excluded. 
We might therefore suppose that for primary 
energies >5X10’ volts, the observed ionization 
will no longer increase with energy. To the 
difficulties in extending these considerations to a 
quantum theoretic calculation of ionization we 
shall return later. In the problem of radiative 
losses these complications do not arise. 


5. APPLICATION TO RADIATIVE LOSSES 


In the treatment of radiative losses one con- 
siders the probability of radiation of an electron 
(or positron) when it is accelerated in the screened 
field of a nucleus—a field given (very roughly) by 
the potential 


V=Ze{1/r—1/ro} 
=0 for r>fro 
ro=h?/meZ}. 


for r<7o 


with 


The frequencies of the radiated energy are of the 
order emc?/h; the velocity of the electron is large, 
and here again it is not at once clear whether 
classical electron theory should be applicable. 
To simplify the consideration of this question, 
v. Weizsaecker has considered the problem in 
another coordinate system: that in which the 
impinging electron is at rest. This electron is now 
accelerated by the field of the passing nucleus, 
and will radiate. One needs, however, in this 
coordinate system to consider frequencies for the 
emitted radiation which are of the order of 
mc’/h; and in this system, for such radiative 
processes, the electron never attains an energy 
very large compared to mc. The situation is 
thus quite analogous to that in the problem of 
ionization: the components of the field of the 
passing nucleus which one needs to consider are 
<yv, and this in a coordinate system where the 
electron does not attain a velocity very close to 
c. Here again, in the classical treatment of the 
problem, there are impacts for which the field 
acting on the electron varies rapidly in a time 
7=1/¥, and for which therefore we must call in 
question the validity of the electron theoretic 
treatment. | 

v. Weizsaecker has in fact shown that one may 
give a semi-classical treatment of the problem, 
for e>0, which leads to (2) and (3). In this 
treatment one introduces again an impact 


parameter ~, considers the radiation for an elec- 
tron initially at p, and integrates over p. This 
treatment can be justified for such values of p 
that the field of the nucleus is there varying 
little over a wave packet which is large enough 
to permit a fair definition of the momentum 
change of the electron during this impact; such 
wave packets are large compared to 4/mc; and 
one thus concludes that for values of po>h/mc 
the method may be used. For p<h/me the field 
varies rapidly; and v. Weizsaecker shows that 
for such impacts we may expect little radiation. 
Thus f/mc is roughly the lower limit of the 
impact parameter. For an unscreened nucleus 
the percentage error introduced by the necessary 
vagueness of fmin, vanishes with e>«; for a 
screened nucleus it does not, but remains of the 
order #/mcr. This is because, for an unscreened 
nucleus, the outer limit of the impact parameter, 
determined by the condition that the impact 
time be not too long compared to h/mc*, in- 
creases with e; whereas for the screened nucleus 
it remains =7. 

For e>1, p>h/mc, the field of the nucleus 
can now be represented with good approxima- 
tion as the superposition of plane electromagnetic. 
waves traveling parallel to the nucleus; the am- 
plitude of these waves is given, from (7), by | 


Ey~ (rivZe/2ec*)H 1 (avp/ec). 


The radiative losses can thus be regarded as 
arising from the scattering of these waves; and 
for the treatment of this v. Weizsaecker uses 
the formula of Klein-Nishina—the result is 


o~AaZ*p*[In pmax, —ln Pmin. | 
~AaZ’ p? In € 


~4AaZ*p* In (1/aZ4) 


for no screening (3a) 


screening. (4a) 


The justification for regarding these formulae 
as valid for large e v. Weizsaecker finds in the 
circumstance that only components of the 
nuclear field and the radiation field: for which 
v<vy play a part in these results. 

We have, however, to remember that for im- 
pacts for which p<p=ep, the impact time is 
short compared to 7, and frequencies >v appear 
in the field acting on the electron. They do not 
contribute directly to the probability of radiative 
losses, but their presence makes the application 


50 ie 


of electron theory and the use of the superposi- 
tion principle for the force on the electron ques- 
tionable. If we omit altogether the contribution 
of these impacts, we have again to introduce a 
new lower limit for p, fb=ep. For e>137, p 
>h/mc, and we find smaller radiative losses 
than those given by (3a) and (4a): 


o~4aZ*p* In (1/a) 
~4AaZ*p* In (1/0?Z%e) 


~0 for e>~a?Z-: 


no screening, (3b) 
screening. (Ab) 


6. DISCUSSION: APPLICATION TO PRIMARY 
IONIZATION 


Formula (9) for the ionization energy losses, 
and (4b) for radiative losses (and presumably 
y-ray pair production), have been derived by 
neglecting all contributions from those impacts 
to which classical electron theory may not 
certainly be applied; they thus give us lower 
limits for the effects to be expected in fact, since 
it is possible (and for some problems certain) that 
some contribution will come from these ‘fast’ 
impacts which cannot at present be rigorously 
treated. a 

These lower limits (4b) and (9) differ signifi- 
cantly from (4a), (8), the theoretical formulae 
obtained by applying. present theory to all 
impacts. For in (9) there is no increase with e 
of the low energy ionization energy losses. Ac- 
cording to (4b), moreover, the probability of 
radiative losses (and pair production by y-rays) 
begins to decrease for ¢>137, and vanishes al- 
together for e~(137)?Z-, or 10°-10'° v. In 
spite of the rough nature of these conclusions, 
and the tentativeness of the experimental re- 
sults, we may thus say that the discrepancies 
between theory and experiment which appear 
to exist when we use the theoretical formulae of 
Section 1 disappear when we leave out of con- 
sideration those processes where the application 
of present theory is dubious. 

In the classical calculation of energy transfer, 


we have seen that the limitation on the impact 


parameter p>P leaves out all impacts in which 
large energies are transferred to the secondary. 
The number and distribution of the secondaries 
with energies E’>>mc’, E’<emc?, has been studied 
by Anderson and Neddermeyer.! They find good 
agreement with the classical formula for the 


R. OPPENHEIMER 


probability of production of such secondaries: 

od’ = (ret/mc?) (dE’/E”). (10) 
(In the range investigated the interchange terms 
by which the quantum theoretical formulae 
differ from (10) are negligible.) The number of 
secondaries is small, and the observed energy 
has to be corrected for energy loss; nevertheless, 
these experiments give no evidence of a discrep- 
ancy here between theory and experiment, and 
show that high energy secondaries are produced, 
and with frequency that can hardly be less than 
that predicted by a factor of two. These secon- 
daries are produced in impacts to which we should 
not expect electron theory to apply; and the 
approximate validity of (10) cannot be justified 
from our point of view. What the experiments 
themselves seem to show is that the theoretical 
predictions for the number of high energy secon- 
daries are not more seriously in error than those 
for low energy secondaries. 

The classical treatment of small energy losses 
cannot be justified quantum theoretically. For 
one cannot make wave packets which at the same 
time define precisely enough the momentum of 
the electron (AP < amc) and over which the field 
varies relatively little, except for values of the 
impact parameter p>h/mca; and impacts for 
smaller p contribute essentially to this energy 
loss. One can, however, formally obtain the cor- 
rect quantum theoretic answer for the energy 
by introducing as a lower limit for p not p 
but i/mc." If we do this but introduce p as a 
further lower limit, we find that the low energy 
losses (Z’ <mc*) increase with ¢ till e~137, and 
then remain constant. 

When ¢>a™, p>hi/mca, classical calculations 
can be made for all impacts for which p>, 
since in this region the problem of energy trans- 
fers can be treated as a pure dispersion problem. 
If now we again take p as a lower limit for the 
impact parameter, we find that the primary 
ionization approaches, for e>, a finite limit, 
and in place of (1) obtain: | 


~In (a*) for &>a™. (11) 


This gives a primary ionization about 70 percent 
greater than the minimum value of (1). The 
corresponding result, for «>, for the total 
energy loss <mc?, is given essentially by (9). 


17F, Bloch, Ann. d. Physik 16, 285 (1933). 


ABSORPTION OF HIGH ENERGY RADIATION | 51 


This limiting value is roughly equal to the mini- 
mum value of the classical expression for this 
energy loss, and is about 25 percent greater than 
the minimum of. the corresponding quantum 
theoretic value. These results are again to be 
regarded as lower limits, for e—©, since in their 
derivation impacts with p< have been omitted 
altogether. | 

To find the course of this increase of ionization 
with e, we should have to treat wave packets so 
large that in a part the field was rapidly varying, 
and in the rest slowly varying. A simple but 
hardly adequate way to do this is to set the 
field of the primary zero within p; this procedure 
in the classical calculation leads of course to (9). 
If we do this we find that for «<a, formula (1) 
should hold. 

These conclusions help somewhat to mitigate, 
but do not resolve, the discrepancies between 
theory and the cloud chamber observations of 
ionization. In spite of the qualitative. character of 
(11), we think it certain, both that electrons of 
arbitrarily high energy will give a primary 
ionization measurably greater than the minimum 
value, and that for large e the increase predicted 
by (1) cannot be regarded as theoretically es- 
tablished. 


7. RELATION TO CLASSICAL UNITARY ELECTRON 
‘THEORIES 


In Section 3 we have formulated a condition 
for the validity of electron theory: that the suc- 
cessive terms in the Lorentz expansion (6) 
should diminish rapidly, that in particular, the 
radiative reaction should be small compared to 
the inertial reaction. The ground for the neces- 
sity of this limitation is that the stability of the 
electron itself is not to be understood on the 
basis of Maxwellian electrodynamics: non- 
Maxwellian forces must be assumed to account 
for the stability; of their nature, apart from 
this, we know nothing; and it is therefore not 
possible to take the reaction of the electron-to 
these forces into account in detail; we have to 
confine ourselves to those problems in which the 
effect of these forces is given essentially by the 
inertial reaction of the electron which must 
then for stability be equal to the external pon- 
deromotive force. In any classical theory which 


accounts for the electron’s stability, the limita- 
tions we have discussed could be removed. 

Recently Born has proposed a modification of 
Maxwellian electrodynamics in which the elec- 
tron itself appears as a possible (if not unique) 
singular solution of the field equations of finite 
energy =mc?. When the electron is subjected to 
an external field, its motion can be deduced from 
the conservation laws for energy and momentum, 
which are to hold in spite of the fact that the 
field equations, from which they may in general 
be deduced, fail to hold along some world line— 
the electron’s path. One has thus a consistent 
classical theory which gives a specific answer 
even where the earlier electron theory could 
not be applied. What does this theory give for 
the problems of ionization and radiative loss we 
are here considering? 

When the fields acting on the electron are 
weak, | F|<F=m’c'/e, and when they vary 
slowly (for the electron nearly at rest »<v) then 
this motion agrees with that given by electron 


theory. When the electron (nearly at rest) is 


acted on by a disturbance whose frequency 
grows large compared to », then, as Born has 
shown, the reaction of the electron is in general 
much smaller than that computed: fror’ the 
Lorentz Force. And when the external fields are 
of the order F, the treatment of these fields as 
small perturbations breaks down, and we may 
again expect deviations from electron theoretic 
formulas. 

It is with the latter condition that we are con- 
cerned, since, as we have seen, the frequencies 
in the field which are directly involved in energy 
loss and radiation are low, and deviations from 
classical electron theory are to be expected only 
if the superposition principle for the pondero- 
motive force breaks down. The external fields 
become comparable to the proper field F=m?c*/e? 
for impact parameter p~pe?, for impact energy 
losses, and for p~p(Ze)*? for radiative losses. 
The theory of Born thus does not give as strong a 
limitation on the validity of classical theory as 
we have used: p~pe. 

This situation is, however, not intrinsic to a 
classical unitary electron theory, and depends 
upon the fact that the Lagrangian of Born’s 
theory involves the field strengths, but not their 


52 HARKINS, GANS AND NEWSON 


derivatives. Consider for instance the Lagrangian 
L=7V(1+p?¢/y)7 with y=4FF,,, and — 


p= 3(0FH/dx*) 9 (0F,,/dx*), 
The field equations of this Lagrangian are of the 


3rd order—and nonlinear. They have a static. 


spherically symmetric singular solution, of finite 
energy, which reduces for r>p to a Coulomb 
field. For this Lagrangian the superposition 
principle breaks down for 


prods prpZid, 


for impact and radiative losses respectively. 
More generally, if Z involves derivatives of the 
fields of order z, and gives an electron of finite 
energy as a singular solution, then the superposi- 


JANUARY 1, 1935 


PHYSICAL REVIEW 


tion principle breaks down for 


Dimp. © pEeMtD(nt2) | Prad. © pL mt (atl)! (n+2) | 


The p=pe which we have used as a limit for 
classical theory in this paper is thus given by a 
unitary field theory whose field equations are 
integral equations, for which no, 

We adduce these considerations, not because 
we believe that the solution to the problem of 
electronic stability lies in a theory of this type, 
but because they show that there is, even in 
classical theory, no inconsistency in the criteria 
we have used for the validity of electron theory. 
The discrepancies between theoretical predic- 
tion and the experiments can thus be understood 
on a purely classical basis. 


VOLUME 47 


The Disintegration of the Nuclei of Light Atoms by Neutrons 


II. Neon, Fluorine and Carbon | 


Witiiam D. Harkins, Davip M. GANs anp Henry W. Newson, Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago 
(Received November 8, 1934) 


Neon and fluorine. Quantitative information is presented 


on the disintegration, by capture of a neutron, of 11 nuclei — 


of neon and 13 of fluorine. The reactions are considered 
to be: 

e Nese ie & On otles 

9 Fitton 7 No+sHe 
in which nitrogen 16-is a new isotope of nitrogen. As in 
the earlier work on nitrogen, it is found that: (1) Neutrons 
effective in disintegration appear both to come directly 
from the source and to be scattered by nuclear impact 
prior to the disintegration. (2) Kinetic energy disappears 
in the process, or is (rarely) conserved. This kinetic energy 
decrement may be transformed into mass, if mass increases 
in the reaction, or into y-rays; it may also excite the 
heavier product nucleus and later give rise to an artificial 
radioactivity. (3) The maximum, minimum.and average 
kinetic energy for the neutrons which in our experiments 
have been found to disintegrate fluorine, neon and nitrogen 
are listed below in the table. 

Carbon. Mass values obtained in positive ray work 


I. INTRODUCTION 


HE first paper! of this series on the disinte- 
gration of light atoms by neutrons pre- 
sented values related to the mechanics of the 
disintegration of twenty-eight nitrogen nuclei. 


1 Harkins, Gans and Newson, Phys. Rev. 44, 529 (1933), 


- give 6.9 m.e.v. as the mass increase in the reaction: 


12 1 9 4 
6 Cotom—>4Ber+2Heo. 


If the mass values are extremely accurate only neutrons 
with kinetic energy greater than about 6.9 m.e.v. can 
therefore disintegrate carbon. Of 6 disintegrations found 
among 6400 pairs of photographs with ethylene, only 1. 
involves a neutron which approximates this energy. The 
other disintegrations may be those of oxygen or nitrogen 
from the water vapor and trace of air in the chamber. 
Carbon has therefore not yet been disintegrated with 
certainty by neutrons. It is of interest that about 20 
percent of the neutrons found in this work have extremely 
high velocities, so that their kinetic energy is from 13.6 
to 15.1 m.e.v., and that the energy transformed into 
y-rays rises as high as 10 m.e.v, 


No. of : 
disinte- _ Kinetic Energy in m.e.v. 
grations Min. Ave. ax. 
Nitrogen (28) 1.9 5.4 16.1 
Fluorine (13) 1.9 6.7 13.2 
3.1 10.6 15.1 


Neon (11) 


Further experiments have since been carried out 


with deuterium, carbon, fluorine and neon. This 


paper gives the quantitative relations found for 
the disintegration of 11 neon and 13 fluorine 
nuclei. 


2For preliminary reports, see Harkins, Gans and New- 
son, Phys. Rev. 44, 236, 945 (1933), ; 


