LETTERS TO 


fraction of unscattered neutrons to be detected, the effect is 
necessarily small. 

In another scattering experiment only one plate was used 
and the detector was placed out of the direct beam at an 
angle of about twenty-five degrees so that the only neutrons 
counted were scattered neutrons, Again the number 
counted was greatest with the plate demagnetized. The 
percentage change was 4.1 percent +1.4 percent. The 
probable error is rather large because of the high back- 
ground of fast neutrons in a scattering experiment. 

P. N. POWERS 
H. CARROLL 


J. R. DUNNING 
Pupin Physics Laboratories, 
Columbia University, 
New York, N. Y., 
May 18, 1937. 


1 Powers, Beyer and Dunning, Phys. Rev. 51, 371 (1937). 

2 Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 51, 544 (1937). 

3 Bloch, Phys. Rev. 50, 259 (1936). 

4 Hoffman, Livingston and Bethe, Phys. Rev. 51, 214 (1937). 


Note on the Nature of Cosmic-Ray Particles 


The results of Neddermeyer and Anderson,! and those of 
Street and Stevenson,? seem quite clearly to indicate the 
presence, in the penetrating component of cosmic rays, of 
positive and negative particles of electronic charge, which 
do not radiate and make showers as do electrons, and 
which are not protons. Since the probability of radiation 
can depend essentially only on the charge and the mass of 
the particle, these authors suggest that we have here to do 
with particles of mass intermediate between that of the 
electron and that of the proton. If this mass u is unique, 
it introduces a new constant /=h/ye into physics; and one 
would hope to bring this into connection with the length 
which plays so fundamental a part in the structure of 
nuclei: the ‘‘size’’ of the proton and neutron: the range of 
nuclear forces. The value of some 50-100 Mev which this 
argument suggests for the mass of the particle seems 
consistent with the cloud chamber observations. These 
observations themselves, however, could be equally well 
interpreted if the particles had a quite wide variation in 
mass; nor do they exclude values considerably lower than 
50 Mev. 

In fact, it has been suggested by Yukawa‘ that the 
possibility of exchanging such particles of intermediate 
mass would offer a more natural explanation of the range 
and magnitude of the exchange forces between proton and 
neutron than the Fermi theory of the electron-neutrino 
field. Thus a straightforward application to this problem 
of the quantum theory of fields, developed for such 
particles by Pauli and Weisskopf, gives a Heisenberg 
exchange force approximately derivable from a potential of 
the form —fce~!'/4arr. Yet in trying to account in 
detail along these lines for the characteristics of nuclear 


THE EDITOR 1113 


forces, one meets with difficulties hardly less troublesome 
than in the various forms of electron-neutrino theory which 
have been proposed. In particular, the reconciliation of the 
approximate saturation character of nuclear forces with the 
apparent equality of like and unlike particle forces and 
with the magnetic moments of neutron and proton could 
here too be achieved only by an extreme artificiality. These 
considerations therefore cannot be regarded as the elements 
of a correct theory, nor serve as any argument whatever 
for the existence of the particles; their valid content can 
at most be this: that these particles may be emitted from 
nuclei when sufficient energy (>yc?) is available, and that 
they will ultimately prove relevant to an understanding of 
nuclear forces. Since even with an energy up to 15 Mev 
available for the disintegration, nuclei exhibit normal 
8-decay, the mass of the particles must surely on this view 
exceed 15 Mev. These particles need not then be primary 
cosmic rays, but may be ejected from nuclei by y-rays (and 
formed by pair production) in the upper atmosphere, and 
thus complicate the degradation of the primary electrons 
and greatly increase the effective penetration of the 
radiation. 

The incidence near sea level of multiplicative showers 
may then be understood in a simple way. For on the one 
hand we may expect some degraded shower radiation from 
incident electronic primaries of high initial energy;® on the 
other hand the penetrating particles will produce electronic 
secondaries by extranuclear impacts; from the curvature 
distribution of the particles, and with any acceptably low 
value for their mass, one can see that impacts in which the 
secondary has energy enough to initiate a small shower 
should occur about once in 10 m water equivalent. At great 
elevations (>3 km from sea level) the degraded shower 
radiation should play the predominant part; under con- 
siderable thicknesses of heavy absorber, at sea level, this 
radiation. will be absorbed, and only the secondaries will 
contribute to the multiplicative showers. Near sea level 
the two contributions may be comparable in importance. 

J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


R. SERBER 
California Institute of Technology, 


Pasadena, California, 
June 1, 1937. 


1S. Neddermeyer and C. D. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 51, 884 (1937). 
Goan. Street and E. C. Stevenson, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 12, 2, 13 

3 Jt is true that the range of nuclear forces is roughly equal to e? /mc?; 
but the fact that it has not been possible to find in electron theory itself 
any satisfactory physical interpretation of this ‘‘electron radius’ 
makes it seem likely that the interpretation of even this quantity must 
essentially involve the heavy particles and their structure. 

4H. Yukawa, Proc. Phys. Math. Soc., Japan 17, 48 (1935). 

5 The number of electrons surviving at sea level depends critically on 
the energy of the incident particles. For vertical incidence the number 
surviving per primary of energy EF is 


3-10-12 Xexp {x-? In (50x) +924}, 


where x=}1ln F/I, and I1=75 Mev. This is the asymptotic form for 
t{=27 of Eq. (36), in Phys. Rev. 51, 227 (1937). 


