908 LETTERS TO 


The three integration lower limits, u, on page 893 are not 
misprints. However, the brackets should be closed in 
front of the exponential factor in the second equation for w, 
and the last equation on page 894 should read w=$+3.2kT. 


1G. M. Fleming and J. E. Henderson, Phys. Rev. 58, 887 (1940). 
2 J. E. Henderson and R. K. Dahlstrom, Phys. Rev. 55, 473 (1939). 


On the Selection Rules in Beta-Decay 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
Physics Department, University of California, Berkeley, California 
April 25, 1941 


HE rapid decay of a presumably largely 1S He® toa 
8S-+3D Li® has always been regarded as strong 
evidence for the Gamow-Teller selection rules in beta- 
decay. The analogous disintegration C¥—B is also rapid 
and obviously allowed. However the three further at first 
sight similar disintegrations 


(5) H+H+>D; BeBe; CHN4, 


where in every case the parent nucleus would be expected 
to be largely 4S, and the product nuclei are known to be 
predominantly 3S+3D, are slower than would be expected 
for allowed transitions of the observed energy by factors 
of the order 10¢—107. The activity OM--N"™, homologous 
to that of C¥, is not known; the activity of F’8, where 
normal states can perhaps be less unambiguously assigned, 
is allowed. 

The assumption that the initial states in the disintegra- 
tions (S) have been incorrectly assigned is very unsatis- 
factory. For the reaction H+H->D there can be no 
question that the initial state is 1S; and the astrophysical 
evidence that this reaction is slow seems excellent. For 
Be!® and C* states of very high angular momentum ('G) 
would be required to account, with Gamow-Teller selection 
rules, for their extremely long life; this is not only highly 
implausible on the basis of any known nuclear theory, 
but in gross contradiction with the expected proton- 
neutron symmetry of the nuclei C! and Be!®, Almost 
equally unsatisfactory is the assumption that He® and 
C! are 3S or 3D, and the Gamow-Teller selection rules 
wrong; for this too, in addition to leaving unexplained the 
many less direct evidences for spin change in allowed 
transitions, would grossly violate theoretical expectations 
on the symmetry of normal states and on the proton- 
neutron symmetry in C!® and Be”. 

The fast reactions 


(F) He®—Li’; 


differ from the slow reactions (S$) systematically, in that 
for (F) energies of over 3 Mev are available, whereas for 
GS) the energies are 350 kev, 550 kev, and 150 kev, re- 
spectively. This suggests that the Gamow-Teller selection 
rules have a ‘“‘threshold,’”’ such as would be involved if 
the corresponding neutrino had a rest mass. This rest 
mass would have to be at least of the order of that of an 
electron, and might for instance characterize a neutrino 
of spin 3. On this theory the reactions (S) would be 
governed by Fermi selection rules, and there would then 


Clo_+B10 


THE EDITOR 


be no difficulty, on taking into account the small amount 
of 8P to be expected in the initial states, and of 1P in B” 
and Ni‘, in accounting for their very long lifetimes. The 
reactions (F) on the other hand would involve the emission 
of a heavy neutrino and be allowed by Gamow-Teller 
selection rules. 

This suggestion has three simple consequences: (I) There 
should be a discrepancy, given by the mass of the heavy 
neutrino, in the energy balance of the reactions (F).} 
(II) The shape of the upper end of the He® and C* spectra 
should correspond to a finite neutrino mass. (III) The 
disintegration O!4—>N", that has an estimated upper limit 
3.8 Mev—uc?, with w the heavy neutrino mass, should 
decay rapidly. If we take N!4 as 15 percent 3S, and pee~? 
Mev, the lifetime should be about 20”. 

It would appear that published evidence was neither 
sufficient to check nor disprove these expectations. If we 
suggest the a priort, highly improbable existence of the 
heavy neutrino, it is in part because these three points 
can so readily be settled, but even more again to call 
attention to the very puzzling difficulties that have arisen 
in interpreting these activities. 

1The Wigner and Hartree estimates of the C!®—Be!? Coulomb 
difference themselves differ by several hundred kilovolts, and are 
presumably of insufficient accuracy to afford a test of the C!9 energy 
Peers ponbaraielt of C with alpha-particles, of N with deuterons, 
both lead to strong O activity; the bombardment of N with protons 
leads to a strong C!!. All these reactions have been tried in Berkeley, 
by Dr. Kamen, Dr. Segré, and Mr. Wright, as sources for O!4; in every 
case the results of a preliminary survey were negative. These investi- 


gations are not yet concluded, and I am grateful to these workers for 
telling me of their findings. 


Non-Laue Diffraction Maxima from Rocksalt— 
Non-Equatorial Maxima 


G. E. M. Jauncey, O. J. BALTZER, AND D. C. MILLER 
Washington University, St. Louis, Missourt 
May 15, 1941 


ROFESSOR W. H. Zachariasen has been kind enough 

to send the senior author a copy of his Letter to the 
Editor which appears in this issue of The Physical Review. 
Non-equatorial associated Bragg spots appeared on the 
films which were used in Jauncey and Baltzer’s paper.! A 
correction for the position of these spots on the film must 
be made if the 7 axis of the crystal and the axis of the 
cylinder of photographic film are not parallel. Making this 
correction, which will be described later, we find the 
experimental shifts, 20,.,—26z, shown in the second column 
of Table I. The shifts are for the 402 associated Bragg spots 


TABLE I. Values of 26m —20B. 


FORMULA 
A Exp ORIG. REV 
— 3°20’ —1°19’ —2°29’ — 1°37’ 
2025" — 0°55’ — 1°48’ — 1°10" 
~ O04 ~ 0°09" = 0033" 909)" 
+0°12’ —0°00’ +0°09/ +0°06’ 
+1°01’ —0°28’ +0°45/ +0°29’ 
+-1°49’ —0°45’ +1°21’ +0°52’ 


