RS 


International Control of Atomic Energy 

Author(s): J. Robert Oppenheimer 

Source: Foreign Affairs, Vol. 26, No. 2 (Jan., 1948), pp. 239-252 
Published by: Council on Foreign Relations 

Stable URL: http://www. jstor.org/stable/20030103 


Accessed: 10/06/2014 14:17 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of 
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms 
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


Council on Foreign Relations is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Foreign 
Affairs. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


Vol. 26 JANUARY 1948 No. 2 


INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF 
ATOMIC ENERGY 


By F. Robert Oppenheimer 


One day in a clearing in the forest, Confucius came upon a woman in deep mourning, 
wracked by sorrow. He learned that her son had just been eaten by a tiger; and he 
attempted to console her, to make clear how unavailing her tears would be, to restore 
her composure. But when he left, he had barely reéntered the forest, when the renewed 
sounds of weeping recalled him. “That is not all,” the woman said. “You see, my hus- 
band was eaten here a year ago by this same tiger.” Again Confucius attempted to con- 
sole her and again he left only to hear renewed weeping. “Is that not all?” “Oh, no,” 
she said. “The year before that my father too was eaten by the tiger.” Confucius 
thought for a moment, and then said: “This would not seem to bea very salutary neigh- 
borhood. Why don’t you leave it?”” The woman wrung her hands. “I know,” she said, 
“I know; but, you see, the government is so excellent.” 


HIS wry tale comes to mind often when one observes the 

efforts which the Government of the United States is mak- 

ing to turn the development of atomic energy to good ends, 

and the frustrations and sorrows of the negotiations within the 

United Nations Atomic Energy Commission to which these ef- 
forts toward international control have now been reduced. 

In these notes I should like to write briefly of some of the 
sources of United States policy, and of the formulation of that 
eed in the context of the contemporary world. Against the 

ackground of present prospects, which manifestly make success 
in any short term seem rather unlikely, to write of these matters 
today must of necessity be difficult. We are beyond advocacy, 
and not yet far enough for history. Yet the effort may not be 
without some slight usefulness in helping us to achieve an ap- 

reciation of what was sound, what was timely and what was last- 
ing in the policy adopted by the United States, and even more 
than that, in helping us to see why this policy has not been suc- 
cessful. To answer simply that we have failed because of non- 
cooperation on the part of the Soviet Government is certainly to 
give a most essential part of a true answer. Yet we must ask our- 
selves why in a matter so overwhelmingly important to our in- 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


240 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


terest we have not been successful; and we must be prepared to 
try to understand what lessons this has for our future conduct. 

Clearly, such understanding must depend in the first instance 
on insight into the nature and sources of Soviet policy, and in- 
deed into our own political processes. Such an analysis, which in 
any final sense may transcend the collective wisdom of our time, 
is of course wholly beyond the scope of this paper. These notes 
are concerned solely with questions of our intent with regard to 
atomic control, questions which, though necessarily over- 
abstract, are yet a part of history. 


II 


The development of atomic energy had none of the other- 
worldliness normally characteristic of new developments in 
science. It was marked from the very first by an extreme self- 
consciousness on the part of all participants, which has given it 
an often heroic, though not eleauatls rather comic, aspect. 
Thus when the phenomenon of fission was discovered by Hahn, 
after less than a decade of intensive exploration of nuclear struc- 
ture and nuclear transmutations, we were all very quick to hail it, 
not as a beautiful discovery, but as a likely source of a great 
technological development. Long before it was known that con- 
ditions could be realized for maintaining a fission chain reaction, 
long before the difficulties in that enterprise were appreciated or 
methods for their solution sketched out, the phenomenon of fission 
was greeted as a possible source of atomic explosives, and their 
development was urged upon many governments. Thus, it 
happened that when, in the United States, the Manhattan Dis- 
trict was approaching the completion of its task, and atomic —_ 
ons were in fact almost ready for use, there was a fairly well 
informed group of people who in a sort of fraternal privacy had 
discussed what these developments might mean — what prob- 
lems they would raise, and along what lines the solution might be 
sought. After the use of the weapons at the end of the war, much 
of this thinking became public; it achieved a sort of synoptic 
codification because of the joint requirements of easy comprehen- 
sion and military security. 

Yet it should be not without usefulness now to recall how the 

roblem appeared to us in the summer of 1945, when it became 
fally apparent that atomic weapons and the large-scale release of 
atomic energy were not only realizable, but were about to be 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


CONTROL OF ATOMIC ENERGY 241 


realized. Even at that time a good deal of thought had gone into 
what subsequently came to be known as the peaceful use of 
atomic energy. On the technical side this preoccupation was 
natural enough, since many interesting avenues of exploration 
had been sealed off by the overriding requirements of the military 
program, and we were naturally curious to sketch out what might 
ie along these avenues against that time when there should be 
leisure oe their pursuit. 

But beyond that there was a political consideration. It was 
clear to us that the forms and methods by which mankind might 
in the future hope to protect itself against the dangers of un- 
limited atomic warfare would be decisively influenced just " the 
answer to the question “Is there any good in the atom?” From 
the first, it has been clear that the answer to this question would 
have a certain subtlety. The answer would be “yes,” and em- 
phatically “yes,” but it would be a “yes” unconvincing, condi- 
tional and temporizing compared to the categorical affirmative of 
the atomic bomb itself. In particular, the advantages which 
could come from the exploitation of atomic energy do not appear 
to be of such a character that they are likely to contribute in a 
very short term to the economic or technical well-being of man- 
kind. They are among the long-range goods. Thus they could 
not be expected to recommend themselves as urgent to the 
peoples of countries devastated by war, suffering from hunger, 
poverty, homelessness and the awful confusion of a shattered 
civilization. The importance of these limitations was perhaps not 
adequately recognized as a deterrent to the sort of interest in the 
development of atomic energy on the part of other peoples and 
other governments which might have played so great a part in 
assuring their support for our hopes. Only among the professional 
scientists, for whom the interest in the development of atomic 
energy is rather immediate, could we have expected to find, and 
did we in fact find, an enlightened enthusiasm for codperation in 
this development. 

Only two classes of peaceful applications of atomic energy 
were then apparent. To the best of my knowledge, only two are 
apparent today. One is the development of a new source of 
power; the other is a family of new instruments of research, in- 
vestigation, technology and therapy. 

Of the former, it was clear two years ago, and it is clear today, 
that although the generation of useful power from atomic sources 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


242 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


would assuredly be a soluble problem and would under favorable 
circumstances make decisive progress within a decade, the ques- 
tion of the usefulness of this power, the scale on which it could be 
made available, and the costs and general economic values, would 
take a long time to answer. As we all know, the answers depend 
on the raw material situation — essentially, that is, on the avail- 
ability and cost of natural uranium and thorium — and on the 
extent to which one could in practice manage to consume the 
abundant isotope of uranium and thorium as nuclear fuels. Thus, 
no honest evaluation of the prospects of power in 1945 could fail 
to recognize the necessity iain development and explora- 
tion. Equally, no honest evaluation could give assurances as to 
the ultimate outcome beyond those general assurances which the 
history of our technology justifies. Certainly no evaluation at 
that time, nor for that matter today, could justify regarding 
atomic power as an immediate economic aid to a devastated and 
fuel-hungry world, nor give its development the urgency which 
the pail of atomic armaments would be sure to have once the 
nature and ferocity of the weapons had been made clear to all. 

With regard to the use of tracer materials, of radioactive 
species, and of radiations for science, the practical arts, for tech- 
nology and medicine, we were in a better position to judge what 
might come. The use of tracer materials was not new. The last 
decade — the 1930’s — had seen increasingly varied and effective 
applications of them. The use of radiation for the study of the 
properties of matter, for diagnosis and for therapy was likewise 
not new. Several decades of hopeful and bitter experiences gave 
us some notion of the power and limitations of these tools. What 
was held in store by the development of atomic reactors and of 
new methods for the handling of radioactive materials and the 
separation of isotopes, was a much greater variety and a vastly 
greater quantity of tracer materials, and a far higher intensity of 
radiation than had been available in the past. That this would be 
a stimulus to physical and biological study was clear; that its 
value would in the first instance depend on the skilful develop- 
ment of chemical, physical and biclopical techniques, and that 
this development even under the best circumstances would be a 
gradual and continuing one, we knew as well. 

Thus, our picture of the peaceful uses of atomic energy was 
neither need i nor heroic: on the one hand, many years, perhaps 
many decades, of development — largely engineering develop- 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


CONTROL OF ATOMIC ENERGY 243 


ment — with the purpose of providing new sources of power; on 
the other hand, a new aie of instruments for the exploration 
of the physical and biological world, and in time, for their further 
set to be added to the always growing arsenal of what 
scientists and engineers have had available. 

Three other matters were clear at that time. On the one hand, 
the development of atomic power could not be separated from 
technological development essential for and largely sufficient for 
the manufacture of atomic weapons. On the other hand, neither 
the development of power nor the effective and widespread use 
of the new tools of research and technology could prosper fully 
without a very considerable openness and candor with regard to 
the technical realities — an openness and candor difficult to rec- 
oncile with the traditional requirements of military security 
about the development of weapons of war. To these general con- 
siderations we should add again: although the peaceful use of 
atomic energy might well aidiean the interests of technical 
people, and appear as an inspiration to statesmen concerned with 
the welfare of mankind, it could not make a direct appeal to the 
weary, hungry, almost desperate peoples of a war-ravaged world. 
Such an appeal, if made, could hardly be made in honesty. 


III 


Important though these views as to the peaceful future of 
atomic energy may have been, they were overshadowed then as 
they have been overshadowed since by a preoccupation of quite 
another sort. In an over-simplified statement, this is the pre- 
occupation for the “control of atomic energy to the extent neces- 
sary to prevent its use for destructive purposes.” Two sorts of con- 
siderations bear on this problem, one deriving from the nature of 
atomic armament, and the other from the palitical climate of the 
postwar world. The former set of arguments has perhaps been 

iven more relative weight in public discussions. Surely it 1s in the 
Tater that the peti ga cs of policy should have lain. 

Even the weapons tested in New Mexico and used against 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki served to demonstrate that with the re- 
lease of atomic energy quite revolutionary changes had occurred 
in the techniques of warfare. It was quite clear that with nations 
committed to atomic armament, weapons even more terrifying, 
and perhaps vastly more terrifying, than those already delivered 
would be developed; and it was clear even from a casual estimate 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


244 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


of costs that nations so committed to atomic armament could 
accumulate these weapons in truly terrifying numbers. 

As the war ended, adequate defenses against the delivery of 
atomic weapons almost certainly did not exist. There would be 
variations, as military developments progressed, in the advan- 
tages of offense and defense. If effective antiaircraft interception 
is developed before new types of aircraft or rockets, there may 
even be periods during which the delivery of atomic weapons is 
seriously handicapped. But it was clear then that for the most 

art the development of these weapons had given to strategic 
bombardment — that form of warfare which peculiarly charac- 
terized the last war, and contributed so much to the desolation 
of Europe and Asia — a new and important and qualitative in- 
crease in ferocity. It was not necessary to envisage novel and in- 
genious methods of delivery, such as the suitcase and the tramp 
steamer, to make this point clear to us. To this must be added a 
preoccupation not unnatural for us in the United States. It seemed 
unreasonable to suppose that any future major conflict would 
leave this country as relatively unharmed as had the last two 
wars and as totally unscathed by strategic bombardment. These 
points have been so commonly made, and with such fervor, that 
they have perhaps obscured to some extent the true nature of the 
issues involved in the international control of atomic energy. 

In this last war, the fabric of civilized life has been worn so thin 
in Europe that there is the gravest danger that it will not hold. 
Twice in a generation, the efforts and the moral energies of a 
large part of mankind have been devoted to the fighting of wars. 
If the atomic bomb was to have meaning in the contemporary 
world, it would have to be in showing that not modern man, not 
navies, not ground forces, but war itself was obsolete. The ques- 
tion of the fe of atomic energy thus appeared in one main 
constructive context: ‘What can be done with this development 
to make it an instrument for the preservation of peace and for 
bringing about those altered relations between the sovereign na- 
tions on the basis of which there is some reason to hope that 
peace can be preserved?” 

Although this may have been the question in principle, a far 
more concrete and immediate problem faced the world. It is true 
that there may be a certain myopia in too great a preoccupation 
with relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. 
It is true that other sources of conflict, other possibilities of war, 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


CONTROL OF ATOMIC ENERGY 245 


and other problems which must be solved if the world is to achieve 
peace can well be discerned and could well be decisive. But al- 
though the codperation — on a scale, with an intimacy and ef- 
fectiveness heretofore unknown — between the Soviet Union and 
the United States may not be sufficient for the establishment of 
peace, it clearly was necessary. Thus, the question naturally 
presented itself whether the codperative control and develop- 
ment of atomic energy might not play a unique and decisive part 
in the program of establishing such codperation. Clearly, quite 
widely divergent views might be held as to the readiness of the 
Soviet Union to embark on such codperation — varying from the 
belief that it would be forthcoming if the United States indicated 
the desire for it to the conviction that it was not in our power to 
bring it about. The prevalent view, and, I believe, that on which 
our subsequent policy was based, was that such codperation 
would represent a reversal of past Soviet policy, and to some ex- 
tent a repudiation of elements of Soviet political theory, very 
much more incisive in fact than the corresponding attitudes on 
our part. The prevalent view, that is, saw in the problems of 
atomic energy, not an opportunity to allow the leaders of the 
Soviet state to carry out a policy of international rid ap ena of 
openness, candor and renunciation of violence to which they were 
a committed; rather, it saw an opportunity to cause a de- 
cisive change in the whole trend of Soviet policy, without which 
the prospects of an assured peace were indeed rather gloomy, and 
which might well be, if accomplished, the turning point in the 
attern of international relations. 

Why did the field of atomic energy appear hopeful for this en- 
deavor? It appeared hopeful only in part because of the terrifying 
nature of atomic warfare, which to all peoples and some govern- 
ments would provide a strong incentive to adapt themselves to a 
changing technology. As such, atomic weapons were only a sort 
of consummation of the total character of warfare as waged in 
this last world war, a sort of final argument, if one were needed, a 
straw to break the camel’s back. But there were other points far 
more specific. The control of atomic weapons always appeared 
possible only on the basis of an intensive and working collabora- 
tion between peoples of many nationalities, on the creation (at 
least in this area) of supra-national patterns of communication, 
of work and of development. The Stenens of atomicenergy lay 
in an area peculiarly suited to such internationalization, and in 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


246 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


fact requiring it for the most effective exploitation, almost on 
technical grounds alone. The development of atomic energy lay 
in a field international by tradition and untouched by preéxisting 
national patterns of control. Thus the problem as it appeared in 
the summer of 1945 was to use our understanding of atomic en- 
ergy, and the developments that we had carried out, with their 
implied hope and implied threat, to see whether in this area in- 
ternational barriers might not be broken down and patterns of 
candor and codperation established which would make the peace 
of the world. 

It was impossible even at that time not to raise two questions 
of some gravity. One was whether Soviet policy had not already 
congealed into almost total non-codperation. The difficulties dur- 
ing the war years, both in cooperation on technical problems 
which had some analogy to atomic energy, and in the more gen- 
eral matters of the codrdination of strategy, could certainly be 
read as a bad augury for a codperative future. A second and re- 
lated question was whether the development of atomic weapons 
by Great Britain, Canada and the United States, and the an- 
nouncement of this completed development at the end of the war, 
might not itself rd toad to cast a doubt upon our willingness to 
cooperate in the future with allies with whom we had not in this 
field been willing to codperate during the war. 

In any case, these doubts = rather strongly to the need 
for discussions between the heads of state and their immediate 
advisors, in an attempt to re-open the issue of far-reaching co- 
operation. The later —— of problems of atomic energy to 
discussions within the United Nations, where matters of the 
highest policy could only be touched upon with difficulty and 
clumsily, would 6 tr to have prejudiced the chances of any 
genuine rac of minds. 

In the field of atomic energy our own security demanded a quite 
new approach to international problems. The security of all peo- 
ples would be jeopardized by a failure to establish new systems 
of openness and codperation between the nations; and many 
favorable circumstances made concrete cooperative action appear 
attractive and feasible. Thus atomic energy had a special rdle in 
international affairs. Yet it should be stressed again that no 
prospect of intimate collaboration in this field appeared likely of 
success unless coupled with a comparable codperation in other 
fields. It should be stressed again that if atomic energy appeared 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


CONTROL OF ATOMIC ENERGY 247 


of some importance as an international issue, it was precisely be- 
cause it was not entirely separable from other issues, precisely 
because what was done in that field might be prototypical of 
what could be done in others, and precisely because we appeared 
to have in this a certain freedom of manceuvre — which our 
technical developments appeared to have given us — to ask for a 
consideration on the highest possible plane of the means by which 
the nations of the world could learn so to alter their relations that 
future wars would no longer be likely. 


IV 


The views which have just been outlined no doubt reflect only 
roughly those current in the closing months of the war, among the 
people to whom familiarity or responsibility had made the nature 
of atomic energy apparent. That considerations such as these 
should have found expression in the policy of the people and the 
Government of the United States is itself somewhat surprising. 
One must bear in mind that the field of atomic energy was quite 
unfamiliar to the people of this country, that the whole spirit 
and temper of a development of this kind would require explain- 
ing and reéxplaining. One must bear in mind that for reasons of 
security much that was relevant to an understanding of the prob- 
lem could not be revealed and cannot be revealed today. One 
must bear in mind that with the end of the war there was a wide- 
spread nostalgia among all our people that the efforts and ten- 
sions of the war years be relaxed and that we return to a more 
familiar and less arduous life. That under these circumstances the 
United States should have developed, and in large part com- 
mitted itself to, a policy of genuine internationalization of atomic 
energy, and that it should have fortified this policy with concrete, 
if sketchy, proposals as to how the internationalization was to be 
accomplished, and indeed that it should have taken the initiative 
in putting these views before the governments of the other 
Powers — this should not be too lightly dismissed as a remark- 
able achievement in the democratic formulation of public policy. 
Nevertheless, this has cost something. 

Perhaps most of all what it has cost is that in our reoccupation 
with determining and clarifying our own policy, we cies given far 
too little thought to attempting to influence that of the Soviet 
Union on the only plane where such an influence could be effective. 
We have allowed our own internal preoccupations to make us 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


248 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


content to put forward our views in the world forum of the United 
Nations, without pursuing early enough, on a high enough plane, 
or with a fixed enough resolution, the objective of making the 
heads of the Soviet state in part, at least, party to our effort. Our 
internal effort has cost delay, it has cost confusion, it has cost the 
injection of some irrelevant and some inconsistent elements in our 
policy with regard to atomic energy. Above all, it has cost a sort 
of schizophrenic separation of our dealings in this field from our 
dealings in all others. In fact, in order to keep pace with political 
developments all over the world, we have found ourselves negat- 
ing in many concrete political contexts the possibility of that 
confidence and that codperation which we were asking for in the 
field of atomic energy. It is surely idle to speculate, as 1t may well 
be meaningless to ask, whether, if this country had had its own 
thoughts in better order in June 1945, and had been prepared to 
act upon them, its policies would have met with greater success. 
Only an historian to whom the intimacies of Soviet thinking and 
Soviet decision are freely available would be able to begin to 
answer such a question. But the evidence, as the actual course of 
events has unfolded it, necessarily gives little support to the view 
that by prompter, clearer and more magnanimous action we 
might have achieved our on 

The history of the development of United States atomic energy 
policy from the first pronouncements of President Truman and 
Secretary Stimson on August 6, 1945, to the most recent detailed 
working papers of the United States representative on the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission, is of public record, and has 
in large part been summarized by the State Department’s report 
“International Control of Atomic Energy.” ! Two aspects of this 
development need to be specially mentioned. One has to do with 
what may be called the aim of United States policy — the sketch 
of our picture of the world as we would like to see it in so far as 
atomic energy was concerned. Here, the principles of internation- 
alization, openness, candor and the complete absence of secrecy, 
and the emphasis on codperative, constructive development, the 
absence of international rivalry, the absence of legal right for 
national governments to intervene — these are the an on 
which our policy was built. It is quite clear that in this field we 
would like to see patterns established which, if they were more 


1“Tnternational Control of Atomic Energy: Growth of a Policy.” Washington: Department 
of State Publication 2702, 1947. 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


CONTROL OF ATOMIC ENERGY 249 


generally extended, would constitute some of the most vital ele- 
ments of a new international law: patterns not unrelated to the 
ideals which more generally and eloquently are expressed by the 
advocates of world government. It has naturally taken some time 
for it to be clear that more modest attempts at control were likely 
to agepravate rather than alleviate the international rivalries and 
suspicions which it is our purpose to abolish. 

his solution which the United States has proposed and advo- 
cated is a radical solution, and clearly calls for a spirit of mutual 
confidence and trust 1n order to give it any elements of substance. 
Only in the field of sanctions — of the enforcement of undertak- 
ings with regard to atomic energy — has the policy of the United 
States necessarily been somewhat conservative. Here in an effort 
to fit this problem of enforcement into the preéxisting structure of 
the United Nations it has had to rely on the prospects of collective 
security to protect complying states against the deliberate efforts 
of another state to evade controls, and to arm atomically. 

The second aspect of our policy which needs to be mentioned is 
that while these proposals were being developed, and their sound- 
ness explored and understood, the very bases for international 
codperation between the United States and the Soviet Union 
were being eradicated by a revelation of their deep conflicts of 
interest, the deep and apparently mutual repugnance of their 
ways of life, and the apparent conviction on the part of the Soviet 
Union of the inevitability of conflict — and not in ideas alone, but 
in force. For these reasons, the United States has coupled its far- 
reaching proposals for the future of atomic energy with rather 
guarded reference to the safeguards required, lest in our transi- 
tion to the happy state of international control we find ourselves 
at a marked relative disadvantage. 

Many factors have contributed to this background of caution. 
There appears to be little doubt that at the asa time our unique 
possession of the facilities and weapons of atomic energy consti- 
tute military advantages which we only reluctantly would lay 
down. There appears to be little doubt that we yearn for the 
notion of a trusteeship, more or less as it was formulated by Presi- 
dent Truman in his Navy Day address of late 1945: we would de- 
sire, that 1s, a situation in which our pacific intent was recognized 
and in which the nations of the world would gladly see us the sole 
possessors of atomic weapons. As a corollary, we are reluctant to 
see any of the knowledge on which our present mastery of atomic 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


250 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


energy rests, revealed to potential enemies. Natural and in- 
evitable as these desires are, they nevertheless stand in bleak con- 
tradiction to our central proposals for the renunciation of sover- 
eignty, secrecy and rivalry in the field of atomic energy. Here 
again, it is no doubt idle to ask how this country would have re- 
sponded had the Soviet Union 4g parares the problem of atomic 
energy control in a true spirit of codperation. Such a situation 
presupposes those profound changes in all of Soviet policy, which 
in their reactions upon us would have altered the nature of our 
political purposes, and opened new avenues for establishing inter- 
national control, unfettered by the conditions which in the present 
state of the world we no doubt shall insist upon. Nor should it be 
forgotten that were there more reality to the plans for the inter- 
nationalization of atomic energy, we ourselves, and the govern- 
ments of other countries as well, would have found many diff- 
culties in reconciling particular national security, custom and 
advantage with an over-all international plan for insuring the 
security of the world’s peoples. That these a have not 
arisen in any serious form reflects the lack of reality of all dis- 
cussions to date. 

Yet despite these limitations the work of the United Nations 
Atomic Energy Commission has established one point: through 
many months of discussion, under circumstances of often dis- 

iriting frustration, and by delegates not initially committed to 
it, the basic idea of security through international codperative 
development has proven its extraordinary and profound vitality. 


Vv 


The view sketched above of the international aspects of the 
problems of atomic energy is thus a history of high, if not provably 
unreasonable hope, and of failure. Questions will naturally arise 
as to whether limited but nevertheless worthy objectives cannot 
be achieved in this field. Thus, there is the question of whether 
agreements to outlaw atomic weapons more like the conventional 
agreements, supplemented by a more modest apparatus for in- 
spection, may not give us some degree of security. Possibly when 
x lines of political hostility were not as sharply drawn as they 
are now between the Soviet Union and the United States, we 
might have tried to find an affirmative answer to this question. 
Were we not dealing with a rival whose normal practices, even in 
matters having nothing to do with atomic energy, involve secrecy 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


CONTROL OF ATOMIC ENERGY 251 


and police control which is the very opposite of the openness that 
we have advocated — and under suitable assurances offered to 
adopt — we might believe that less radical steps of internation- 
alization could be adequate. The history of past efforts to outlaw 
weapons, to reduce armaments or to maintain peace by such 
methods gives little encouragement for hopefulness regarding 
these approaches. 

Nor does it seem reasonable to hope, with the world as it now 
is, and with our policies in fields other than atomic energy as 
clearly predicated as they now are on conflict (which is not the 
same as war) with the Soviet Union, that intermediate solutions 
involving, perhaps, a formal renunciation of atomic armament, 
and some concession with regard to access to atomic facilities on 
the part of international inspectors, will appeal to us as useful. 
They will hardly do so either in the achievement of present secur- 
ity or the later realization of codperative relations. fides it has 
come to be the official position of the Government of the United 
States that palliative solutions along these lines would almost 
certainly give rise to intensified rey pee and intensified rival- 
ries, whereas they manifestly would lose for us whatever national 
advantages — and they cannot a priori be dismissed as incon- 
siderable — our prior development and extensive familiarity with 
atomic energy now give us. 

Clearly we may not lightly dismiss consideration of whether 
there are other approaches to the problem of the international 
control of atomic energy which have a better chance of contribut- 
ing to our security. In fact, recent literature is replete with sug- 
gestions along these lines. No one aware of the gravity of the 
situation can fail to advocate what appears to be a hopeful avenue 
of approach; and no one has a right to dismiss these proposals 
without the most careful consideration. 

It is my own view that none of these proposals has any elements 
of hopefulness in the short term. In fact, it appears most doubtful 
if there are now any courses open to the United States which can 
give to our people the sort of security they have known in the 
past. The argument that such a course must exist seems to be 
specious; and in the last analysis most current proposals rest on 
this argument. 

This does not mean that on a lower plane, and with much more 
limited objectives, problems of policy with regard to atomic en- 
ergy will not arise, even in the international field. Clearly, ar- 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


259 FOREIGN AFFAIRS 


rangements that could be established between the Government 
of the United States and other governments, for the purpose of 
profitably exploiting atomic energy or of strengthening our rela- 
tive position in this field, have some sort of bearing on security, 
and have an important, if not transparent, bearing on the e 
abilities for the maintenance of peace. But such arrangements, 
difficult though they may be to determine, and significant though 
they may be for our future welfare, cannot pretend, and.do not 
pretend, to offer us real security, nor are they direct steps toward 
the perfection of those codperative arrangements to which we 
rightly look as the best insurance of peace. They belong in the 
same class, in our present situation, as the proper, imaginative 
and wise conduct of our domestic atomic-energy program. They 
are part of the necessary conditions for the long-range mainte- 
nance of peace; but no one would for a moment suppose them to be 
sufficient. | 

Thus, if we try to examine what part atomic energy may play in 
international relations in the near future, we can hardly believe 
that it alone can reverse the trend to rivalry and conflict which 
exists in the present-day world. My own view is that only a pro- 
found change in the whole orientation of Soviet policy, and a cor- 
responding reorientation of our own, even in matters far from 
atomic energy, would give substance to the initial high hopes. The 
aim of those who would work for the establishment of peace, and 
who would wish to see atomic energy pay whatever useful part 
it can in bringing this to pass, must be to maintain what was 
sound in the early hopes, and by all means in their power to look 
to their eventual realization. 

It is necessarily denied to us in these days to see at what time, 
to what immediate ends, in what context, and in what manner of 
world, we may return again to the great issues touched on by the 
international control of atomic energy. Yet even in the history of 
recent failure, we may recognize elements that bear more gener- 
ally on the health of our civilization. We may discern the essential 
harmony, in a world where science has extended and deepened 
our understanding of the common sources of power for evil and 

ower for good, of restraining the one and of eet the other. 
his is seed we take with us, travelling to a land we cannot see, to 
plant in new soil. 


This content downloaded from 195.34.78.178 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 14:17:18 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 


