462 LETTERS TO 


On the Spin of the Mesotron 


J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
Physics Depariment, University of California, Berkeley, California 
February 14, 1941 


N two papers in this issue of The Physical Review 
Christy and Kusaka! have given minimum estimates 

for the probability of radiative collisions by mesotrons, and 
have shown that these involve, for a mesotron of spin one 
and mass of the order of two hundred electron masses, a 
frequency of burst production greater by more than an 
order of magnitude than that actually found. In the case of 
mesotrons of zero spin the agreement with observation is 


good: in the case of mesotrons of spin 3 and unit magnetic 


moment the calculated values exceed the experimental by a 
factor of about 1.6, a factor which probably lies within the 
uncertainties of the calculation, in particular the rather 
large uncertainty introduced by the unknown mass m of 
the mesotron. Nevertheless the many experimental indi- 
cations of the beta-instability of mesotrons, and in par- 
ticular the result of Nelson’s analysis? of the data of Neher 
and Stever, that about one-half of the energy of mesotron 
decay is shower producing, would seem fully to have 
confirmed Yukawa’s suggestion that mesotrons can dis- 
integrate into electrons and neutrinos; and this would in 
our opinion make a half-integral value of the mesotron spin 
improbable. These arguments would then establish that the 
mesotron was described by a scalar or pseudoscalar field. 
It may be remarked in this connection that the neutron 
proton forces derived’ from a charged pseudoscalar field by 
‘classical’ or perturbation-theoretic approximation agree in 
sign and spin dependence, though not of course in their 
singular dependence upon distance, with the sign and 
magnitude of the singlet triplet difference and the quadripole 
moment of the deuteron system, whereas the corresponding 
theory for charged mesotrons of unit spin gives a quadripole 
moment of wrong sign. The results of CK can thus not be 
regarded as adding a further difficulty to this in itself 
highly unsatisfactory theory of nuclear forces. 

The calculations of CK give minimum estimates of burst 
production for the following reasons: 

(1) They have in each case been made with that value 

of the magnetic moment which gives the smallest radiative 
probabilities compatible with the spin considered. 
_ (2) They do not include nuclear collisions, and any 
electromagnetic or nuclear secondaries such collisions might 
produce. . 

(3) They include only those processes whose probability 


can legitimately be computed by perturbation theory; in» 


them any contribution from processes that do not satisfy 
this condition has been discarded. 

The first two points are fully discussed in the papers of 
CK, and of Corben and Schwinger.‘ It is only the last we 
wish to review here, since on this depends the cogency of 
the conclusions reached. 

The radiative collisions of a mesotron of mass m and 
energy émc?, €>>1, with the Coulomb field of a nucleus of 
charge Z and radius hZ*/mc, may with good approximation, 
insofar as they are extranuclear, be treated as the Compton 
scattering by the mesotron of the virtual quanta in the 


THE EDITOR 


contracted field of the nucleus. In this coordinate system, 
where the mesotron is at rest, the maximum field acting on 
the mesotron, when it is nearest to the nucleus, is of the 
order eZ?é(mc/h)?. The ratio of the interaction energy of 
this field with the mesotron charge and current is 
Ziat(a=e2/he); and the probability of processes involving 
the absorption of » virtual quanta is small of the order 
(aZ*)"1 compared to that of the absorption of one virtual 
quantum. This circumstance makes it possible to treat the 
effect of the various virtual quanta additively, and in 
particular to eliminate the possibility that the presence of a 
small intensity of high frequency quanta can sensibly 
alter the reaction of the mesotron to radiation of lower 
frequency. 

For the further consideration of what happens when a 
quantum of frequency »v is absorbed by a mesotron, it is 
convenient to introduce a coordinate system in which 
mesotron and quantum have equal and opposite momenta, 
in which all momenta are of the order P=(mhvr)?, and all 
scattering processes are essentially isotropic. For the 
validity of the perturbation-theoretic treatment of the 
Compton effect, it isnow further necessary that the coupling 
energy between light quanta of momentum P and mesotrons 
of momentum P be small compared to the energy of light 
quantum or mesotron, a condition which is satisfied if and 
only if P<me/a}. This condition is not only necessary for 
the formal derivation of the scattering formula, but is also 
the condition that processes involving the simultaneous 
emission of several light quanta or several mesotron pairs 
be unlikely compared to the calculated process of simple 
scattering. In fact the relative probability that ¢g quanta 
and p pairs be emitted is of the order Sy p(aP?2/m%c2)r2p, 
where the S,,p are numbers of order unity but presumably 
less than one, of which only the first, S;,9=(5/72)?, has 
been computed. For virtual quantum frequencies higher 
than mc?/ha, one may then expect the emission of large 
numbers of quanta and mesotron pairs: of these the former 
but not the latter will be burst-producing. For frequencies 
under this limit, multiple processes are unlikely, and there 
is no reason to expect competition® from them to reduce the 
probability of single scattering, or to doubt the applicability 
of perturbation theory. 

What CK have done is to leave out altogether all 
scattering processes of virtual quanta of frequency above 
mc/ha, and to show that their results on burst production, 
especially for the smaller burst sizes, are not at all critically 
dependent on the exact frequency of this ‘“‘cut-off.” It is 
true that the calculations of CK necessarily involve the 
application of the quantum theory of the electromagnetic 
field to space time regions smaller than any for which this 
theory has heretofore been directly verified. But apart from 
this it would seem that no valid argument could be found 
against the cogency of their conclusions. 

1R.F. Christy and S. Kusaka, Phys. Rev. 59, 405, 414 (1941) quoted 
a Welk Phys. Rev. 58, 771 (1940). 

3W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 59, 436 (1941). This result 
is obtained by using a pure pseudovector coupling, and introducing 
suitable square well potentials for the radial dependence of the forces. 

4H. C. Corben and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 58, 953 (1940). 

5 See for instance L. Landau, J. Phys. USSR 2, 483 (1940). I am 


indebted to Professor Pauli for calling to my attention the relevance 
of Landau’s argument to the calculations of CK. 


