LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


903 


5 


@ 
ane 
ie) 


a 
vs 9 
URRENT IN AMPERES xX 10° 


a N 
: \ 
\ 


CARBON DISK PLACED 
AT WINDOW 


GALVANOME TE: ROE: FLECTION IN CM 


| 
| 
t 


Fic. 2. Radioactivity from protons on carbon. 


sensitivity and, in spite of the raggedness of the trace at 
this extreme sensitivity, a displacement of the mean of 
about one centimeter could have been detected. This 
would be one-two thousandth of the effect measured in 
Fig. 1 and, since the proton-current used was four times 
the deuton-current, we may conclude that any effect 
produced by protons on carbon is less than one-eight 
thousandth of the effect produced by deutons. [Inci- 
dentally, this is additional evidence for the extreme purity 
of our proton-beam after magnetic analysis, as previously 
reported. | 

The wide discrepancy between this result and those 
reported by the workers in Cambridge and Pasadena 
does not appear to us to be particularly surprising, since 
magnetic analysis evidently was not used in their experi- 
ments. While it is true that in the experiments at Pasadena 
residual contamination by deuterium would hardly be 
expected to amount to 10 percent or 20 percent of the 
total beam, it is quite possible that the total beam with 
deuterium flowing might contain only five to ten times as 
many deutons as with the deuterium-flow cut off. In some 


of our previous work we determined the yields of several 
efficient disintegration-processes by working for many 
days with no deuterium-flow, that is, using only the residue 
of deuterium left in the tube from previous runs. Further 
evidence that the percentage of deutons in the Pasadena 
experiments is much lower than estimated is given by_ 
the higher gamm-ray yields from carbon and beryllium 
we have observed.‘ 

We take great pleasure in expressing our gratitude to 
Professors Urey, Zanetti, and La Mer, of Columbia 
University, for the supply of deuterium which made these 
experiments possible. | 

L. R. Harstap 
M. A. Tuve 
Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, 
Carnegie Institution of Washington, 
Washington, D. C., 
June 1, 1934. 


4Hafstad, Tuve and Brown, Phys. Rev. 45, 746-747 
(1934). 


On the Limitations of the Theory of the Positron 


In a recent paper! Dirac has suggested a further develop- 
ment of his theory of the positron. Dirac here considers the 
operators corresponding to charge and current density for 
a system of electrons in which nearly all the negative energy 
states are full, and shows that in the presence of an arbi- 
trary external electromagnetic field these operators may 
be divided into two terms: one of these is infinite, and 
depends on the field but not on the state of the electrons; 
the other is finite and determinate, and depends on the 
field and on the electron state. Dirac makes the suggestion 
that these second terms be regarded as giving the charge 
and current density of the electron-positron distribution 
(epd): i.e., that the formalism of his theory of the electron 
be modified by the subtraction from the operators for 
charge and current density of the infinite and _field- 
dependent terms. This modification leaves unaltered the 
Lorentz and gauge invariance of the theory and the validity 
of the conservation law for charge and current. Because, 
however, the way in which the operators are to be modified 
depends upon the value of the electromagnetic field, the 


method is not readily extended to take account of the field 
produced by the efd; on the other hand, it gives for the 
charge and current induced in the efd by an external field 
finite and definite results, and thus constitutes in this 
respect a true theoretical advance. 

In the further development. of Dirac’s suggestions one 
meets, however, with a curious difficulty, in that it is ap- 
parently impossible to find a consistent definition of the 
operators for the energy and momentum density of the epd. 
Dirac’s density matrix, of course, makes possible a com- 
plete formal definition of any operator, which one obtains, 
in analogy with the methods of the quantum mechanics, 
by taking the matrix product of the matrix corresponding 
to the variable in question and the density matrix. This is 
just what Dirac has done for the current density. If one 
carries this through for the energy momentum tensor of 
the epd, one finds in general that its divergence is not given 
by the Lorentz force with Dirac’s expressions for the 
charge and current. This is because the electromagnetic 


1P, Dirac, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 30, 150 (1934). 


904 LETTERS TO 


potentials enter explicitly in the density matrix, and lead 
to the existence of non-Maxwellian forces. With this 
definition of the dynamical operators, one has thus to 
abandon either Dirac’s expression for the charge and 
current density or the validity of the conservation laws for 
energy and momentum. In particular one would not other- 
wise obtain consistent results, in computing on the one 
-hand the induced charge density, and on the other the 
polarization energy, of the efd in an electrostatic field. 

The simplest way of obviating these difficulties is to 
modify the density matrix in a way which does not depend 
on the electromagnetic field strengths present: i.e., to 
subtract from the operator given by the Dirac theory of 
the electron the expressions for the state of the electron 
distribution in the absence of external fields, for which all 
negative states are full. This procedure leads directly. to 
the theory of the positron as we have developed it. On 
this theory one finds a polarization of a vacuum by an 
electromagnetic field which is infinite, and which can only 
be rendered reasonably unambiguous by special conven- 
tions about the way in which the divergent expressions 
occurring are to be handled.? This theory is therefore not 
only unable in general to predict the reaction of the epd to 
its own field, but can make no unambiguous statements 
about the fields induced by the epd under the influence of 
a given external field. 

Nevertheless we believe that these difficulties in no way 
impair the limited validity of the theory of the positron, 
a validity which is limited to those questions which do not 
involve essentially the reaction of the electrons and 
positrons to their own radiation fields and thus does not 
extend to problems in which there are external fields whose 
frequency is of the order of the critical value mc?/e?. For 
at least insofar as the fields are themselves produced by 
electrons and positrons, the polarization of the epd mani- 
fests itself? in effects which are not unambiguously sepa- 


rable from the unknown effects of the radiation reaction of - 


the particles. An instructive illustration of this may be 
found in the question of the fluctuations of the charge 
density of the epd, which was brought to our attention by 
Dr. Bloch. If we consider, for instance, the case of an 
empty epd in no external field, for which the expectation 
value of the charge density vanishes everywhere, we readily 
find that the expectation value of the square of the charge 
within any volume is infinite, corresponding to the fact 
that there are infinite fluctuations in the charge density. 
If we now ask in what measure it is possible to observe 
these fluctuations, we see that, to detect them, we must 
have an observing system (e.g., galvanometer) which will 
react in accordance with the electron-theoretic laws to 
electromagnetic fields of arbitrarily high frequency. If we 
admit that our instruments will not respond to waves of 


THE EDITOR 


frequency large compared to mc?/e?, then we see at once 
that the observed fluctuations in the charge density will be 
finite and small, and that the paradoxical predictions of 
the theory of the positron are quite without physical 
consequences. 

There exists the possibility, which is suggested by 
classical electron-theory, that we should have in the 
proton a particle which would respond in accordance with 
Maxwellian electrodynamic to waves of frequency far 
greater than mc?/e*, and that by its use the effects of the 
polarization of the epd could be separated from the 
problems of radiation reaction. There is, however, a grow- 
ing mass of experimental evidence that so simple a theory 
of the proton can hardly be correct, and which lends 
support to the view that the present electrodynamics will 
be inapplicable in all questions involving lengths of the 


‘order of e?/mc?. From this point of view the paradoxes of 


the theory of the positron would be inextricably connected 


-with those of quantum electrodynamics, and the applica- 


bility of the two theories would be similarly limited. 

It must of course be remarked that the condition that 
in the field acting upon the charges there be no components 
of frequency of the order of mc3/e? or greater is a sufficient, 
but by no means a necessary condition for the applicability 
of present electrodynamics, for this condition is clearly 
not relativistically invariant. The necessary condition, as 
Bohr particularly has emphasized, is that there exist a 
coordinate system in which such high frequency com- 
ponents are absent, insofar at least as one may consequently 
neglect the reaction of the charges to their own field. On 
the other hand, it is not in general possible to infer that, 
if in a given Lorentz frame high frequency components 
appear, the reaction of the charges to the low frequency 
components is correctly given by the Lorentz force. It is 
for this reason that one need not regard as altogether 
cogent the arguments recently advanced by v. Weiz- 
saecker! for the validity of the theoretical formulae for 
the behavior of very high energy radiations in their passage 
through matter, formulae which are in fact very difficult 
indeed to reconcile with experiment. 

. W. H. Furry* 
. J. R. OPPENHEIMER 
Pasadena, , 
June 2, 1934. 


2 Thus Peierls, to whom we are indebted for telling us 
of his results, has developed a method by which the 
polarization of the epd in an arbitrary electromagnetic may 
be computed in first order in a gauge and Lorentz invariant 
manner. 7 

3W.H. Furry and J. R. Oppenheimer, Phys. Rev. 45, 
245 (1934); pages 261-2. 

41. F. v. Weizsaecker, Zeits f. Physik 88, 612 (1934). 

* National Research Fellow. 


A New Mode of Disintegration Induced by Neutrons 


The capture of a neutron followed by the ejection of an 
a-particle is now a well-known process in the disintegration 
of light nuclei. Thus in nitrogen this may be written: 


7N¥-+ on! = ;BU+ 2He'. 
Using as a source of neutrons beryllium bombarded by 
3 MV deutons, which were accelerated in the Lawrence- 


Livingston! apparatus, I have photographed six examples 
of a disintegration in which the emitted particle is of 
smaller charge than an a-particle and is probably a proton. 
The judgment is based on the character of the trace left 


1E. O. Lawrence and M. S. Livingston, Phys. Rev. 45, 
608 (1934). 


