Pt tn 
(for, 4s | 
eee TaD = 
i fi a = <b = f 
ot ‘Ol 
SPae ty i 
let, BP E: 
i 4 7 # ‘ 
s - ' | I 
or 


Ay AN 
cae yp ge Res 


-h} - 


Atomic Weapons 

Author(s): J. R. Oppenheimer 

Source: Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 90, No. 1, Symposium on 
Atomic Energy and Its Implications (Jan., 1946), pp. 7-10 

Published by: American Philosophical Society 

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3301032 

Accessed: 10-06-2016 23:51 UTC 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 


http://about.jstor.org/terms 


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted 
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about 


JSTOR, please contact support @jstor.org. 


American Philosophical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 


This content downloaded from 129.101.79.200 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 23:51:40 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 


ATOMIC WEAPONS 
J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


Professor of Theoretical Physics, California Institute of Technology and the University of California 
(Read November 16, 1945, in the Symposium on Atomic Energy and its Implications) 


Wuat you have good reason to wish to hear 
from me today, what circumstances have perhaps 
qualified me to discuss with you on the basis of 
experience, is how to make atomic weapons. It 
is true, as we have so often and so earnestly said, 
that in the scientific studies which we had to carry 
out at Los Alamos, in the practical arts there de- 
veloped, there was little of fundamental discovery, 
there was no great new insight into the nature of 
the physical world. But we had many surprises; 
we learned a good many things about atomic nuclei 
and many more about the behavior of matter 
under extreme and unfamiliar conditions; and not 
too few of the undertakings were in their quality 
and style worthy of the best traditions of physical 
science. It would not be a dull story; it is being 
recorded in a handbook of fifteen volumes, much 
of which we think will be of interest to scientists 
even if they are not by profession makers of 
atomic bombs. It would be a pleasure to tell you 
a little about it. It would be a pleasure to help 
you to share our pride in the adequacy and the 
soundness of the physical science, of our common 
heritage, that went into this weapon, that proved 
itself last summer in the New Mexico desert. 

That would not be a dull story; but it is not one 
that I can tell today. It would be too dangerous 
to tell that story. That is what the President, on 
behalf of the people of the United States, has told 
us. That is what many of us, were we forced our- 
selves to make the decision, might well conclude. 
What has come upon us, that the insight, the 
knowledge, the power of physical science, to the 
cultivation of which, to the learning and teaching 
of which we are dedicated, has become too danger- 
ous to be talked of even in these halls? It is that 
question that faces us now, that goes to the root of 
what science is and what its value is; it is to that 
question to which tentatively, partially, and with 
a profound sense of its difficulty and my own in- 
adequacy, I must try to speak today. 

It is not a familiar question to us in these late 
days. It is not a familiar situation. If it seems 
to bear analogy to that raised by other weapons, 
to the need for a certain secrecy, let us say, in the 


discussion of howitzers or torpedoes, that analogy 
will mislead us. There are some accidents in this 
situation, some things that may in the large light 
of history seem contingent. Atomic weapons are 
based on things that are in the very frontier of 
physics; their development is inextricably en- 
tangled with the growth of physics, as in all prob- 
ability with that of the biological sciences, and 
many practical arts. Atomic weapons were actu- 
ally made by scientists, even, some of you may 
think, by scientists normally committed to the ex- 
ploration of rather recondite things. The speed of 
the development, the active and essential partici- 
pation of men of science in the development, have 
no doubt contributed greatly to our awareness of 
the crisis that faces us even to our sense of re- 
sponsibility for its resolution. But these are con- 
tingent things. What is not contingent is that we 
have made a thing, a most terrible weapon, that 
has altered abruptly and profoundly the nature of 
the world. We have made a thing that by all the 
standards of the world we grew up in is an evil 
thing. And by so doing, by our participation in 
making it possible to make these things, we have 
raised again the question of whether science is 
good for man, of whether it is good to learn about 
the world, to try to understand it, to try to control 
it, to help give to the world of men increased in- 
sight, increased power. Because we are scientists, 
we must say an unalterable yes to these questions: 
it is our faith and our commitment, seldom made 
explicit, even more seldom challenged, that knowl- 
edge is a good in itself, knowledge and such power 
as must come with it. 

One will perhaps think back to the early days 
of physical science'in western culture when it was 
felt as so deep a threat to the whole Christian 
world. One will remember the more recent times 
of the last century where such a threat was seen 
by some in the new understanding of the rela- 
tions between man and the rest of the living world. 
One may even remember the concern among the 
learned at some of the developments of physics, 
the theory of relativity, even more the ideas of 
complentarity, and their far-reaching implications 


PROCEEDINGS OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, VOL. 90, No. 1, JANUARY, 1946 


This content downloaded from 129.101.79.200 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 23:51:40 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 


8 J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


on the relations of common sense and of scientific 
discovery, their enforced reminder, familiar to 
Hindu culture but rather foreign to that of Europe, 
of the latent inadequacies of human conceptions 
to the real world they must describe. One may 
think of these things, and especially of the great 
conflicts of the renaissance, because they reflect 
the truth that science is a part of the world of 
men; that often before it has injected into that 
world elements of instability and change; that if 
there is peril in the situation today, as I believe, 
we may look to the past for reassurance that our 
faith in the value of knowledge can prevail. 

An atomic bomb is not a new conception, a new 
discovery of reality: it is a very ordinary thing in 
some ways, compact with much of the science that 
makes our laboratories and our industry. But it 
will change men’s lives as over the centuries the 
knowledge of the solar system changed them; for 
in a world of atomic weapons wars will cease. 
And that is not a small thing, not small in itself, 
as the world knows today perhaps more bitterly 
than ever before, but perhaps in the end even 
greater in the alterations, the radical if slow alter- 
ations, in the relations between men and between 
nations and cultures, that it implies. 

It can only help us, I believe, to recognize these 
issues as rather great issues. We can _ serve 
neither ourselves, nor the cause of the freedom 
and growth of science, nor our fellow men, if we 
underestimate the difficulties, or if we through 
cowardice becloud the radical character of the con- 
flict and its issue. During our lifetime perhaps 
atomic weapons could be either a great or a small 
trouble. They cannot be a small hope. They can 
be a great one. 

Sometimes, when men speak of the great hope 
and the great promise of the field of atomic energy, 
they speak, not of peace, but of atomic power and 
of nuclear radiations. Certainly these are proper 
enthusiasms, enthusiasms that we must all share. 
The technical feasibility of deriving virtually un- 
limited amounts of power from controlled nuclear 
reactors seems nearly certain, and realization of 
plants to demonstrate the advantages and limita- 
tions of such power does not seem, from the point 
of view of technical effort, remote. One must 
look at history to learn that such possibilities will 
in time be found of value, will in time come to 
play an important, even if at this moment not 
thoroughly understood, part in our industry and 
economy. You have heard this morning of some 
of the biological and medical problems and uses of 


radiation from such reactors. Even physicists can 
think of some instructive things to do with the 
grams of neutrons such reactors make available. 
And all of us, who have seen something of the 
growth of science, know very well that what we 
can discern of the possibilities in these fields is a 
very small part of what will turn up when we get 
into them. 

Nevertheless, it would seem somewhat wrong 
to me to let our confidence—in my view our 
wholly justified confidence—in the future of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear physics distract us 
entirely from the immediacy, and the peril, of 
atomic weapons. It would not be honest to do so, 
for not even a better understanding of the physical 
world, not even the most welcome developments 
of therapy, should make us content to see these 
weapons turned to the devastation of the earth. 
It will not even be very practical to do so. Tech- 
nically, the operation of reactors and the manu- 
facture of weapons are rather closely related. 
Wherever reactors are in operation there is a 
potential source, not necessarily a convenient one, 
of materials for weapons; wherever materials are 
made for weapons they can be used for reactors 
that may be well suited to research or power de- 
velopment. And it would seem to me almost 
inevitable that in a world committed to atomic 
armament the shadows of fear, secrecy, constraint, 
and guilt would hang heavily over much of nuclear 
physics, much of science. Scientists in this 
country have been quick to sense this and to 
attempt to escape it. I do not think that this 
attempt can be very successful in a world of 
atomic armament. 

There is another set of arguments whose intent 
is to minimize the impact of atomic weapons, and 
thus to delay or to avert the inevitably in the end 
radical changes in the world which their advent 
would seem to require. There are people who say 
they are not such very bad weapons. Before the 
New Mexico test we sometimes said that too, writ- 
ing down square miles and equivalent tonnages 
and looking at the pictures of a ravaged Europe. 
After the test we did not say it any more. Some 
of you will have seen photographs of the Nagasaki 
strike, seen the great steel girders of factories 
twisted and wrecked; some of you may have no- 
ticed that these factories that were wrecked were 
miles apart. Some of you will have seen pictures 
of the people who were burned, or had a look at 
the wastes of Hiroshima. That comb at Nagasaki 
would have taken out ten square miles, or a bit 


This content downloaded from 129.101.79.200 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 23:51:40 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 


ATOMIC WEAPONS 9 


more, if there had been ten square miles to take 
out. Because it is known that the project cost us 
two billion dollars, and we dropped just two 
bombs, it is easy to think that they must be very 
expensive. But for any serious undertaking in 
atomic armament—and without any elements of 
technical novelty whatever, just doing things that 
have already been done—that estimate of cost 
would be high by something like a factor of a 
thousand. Atomic weapons, even with what we 
know today, can be cheap. Even with what we 
know how to do today, without any of the new 
things, the little things and the radical things, 
atomic armament will not break the economic back 
of any people that want it. 

The pattern of the use of atomic weapons was 
set at Hiroshima. They are weapons of aggres- 
sion, of surprise, and of terror. If they are ever 
used again it may well be by the thousands, or 
perhaps by tens of thousands; their method of 
delivery may well be different and may reflect new 
possibilities of interception, and the strategy of 
their use may well be different from what it was 
against an essentially defeated enemy. But it is 
a. weapon for aggressors, and the elements of sur- 
prise and of terror are as intrinsic to it as are the 
fissionable nuclei. 

One of our colleagues, a man most deeply com- 
mitted to the welfare and growth of science, ad- 
vised me not long ago not to give too much weight 
in any public words to the terrors of atomic wea- 
pons as they are and as they can be. He knows 
as well as any of us how much more terrible they 
can be made. “It might cause a reaction,” he said, 
“hostile to science. It might turn people away 
from science.” He is not such an old man, and I 
think it will make little difference to him, or to any 
of us, what is said now about atomic weapons if 
before we die we live to see a war in which they 
are used. I think that it will not help to avert such 
a war if we try to rub the edges off this new terror 
that we have helped bring to the world. I think 
that it is for us among all men, for us as scientists 
perhaps in greater measure because it is our tradi- 
tion to recognize and to accept the strange and the 
new, I think it is for us to accept as fact this new 
terror, and to accept with it the necessity for those 
transformations in the world which will make it 
possible to integrate these developments into hu- 
man life. I think we cannot in the long term pro- 
tect science against this threat to its spirit and 
this reproach to its issue unless we recognize the 
threat and the reproach and help our fellow men 


in every way suitable to remove their cause. Their 
cause 1S war. 

If I return so insistently to the magnitude of 
the peril, not only to science, but to our civiliza- 
tion, it is because I see in that our one great hope. 
As a further argument against war, like arguments 
that have always existed, that have grown with 
the gradual growth of modern technology, it is not 
unique ; as a further matter requiring international 
consideration, like all other matters that so require 
it, it is not unique. But as a vast threat, and a new 
one, to all the peoples of the earth, by its novelty, 
its terror, its strangely promethean quality, it has 
become, in the eyes of many of us, an opportunity 
unique and challenging. 

It has proven most difficult to make those 
changes in the relations between nations and peo- 
ples, those concurrent and mutually dependent 
changes in law, in spirit, in customs, in concep- 
tions—and they are all essential and no one of 
them is absolutely prior to the others—that should 
make an end to war. It has not only been difficult ; 
it has been impossible. It will be difficult in the 
days ahead, difficult and beset with discourage- 
ments and frustrations, and it will be slow. But it 
will not be impossible. If it is recognized, as I 
think it should be recognized, that this, for us, in 
our time, is the fundamental problem of human 
society, that it is a precondition not only for civi- 
lized life, or for freedom, but for the attainment 
of any living human aspiration, then it will not be 
impossible. These are very major commitments, 
nor would I minimize their depth. For they in- 
volve holding prior to all else we cherish—all that 
we would live for and die for—our common bond 
with all peoples everywhere, our common responsi- 
bility for a world without war, our common confi- 
dence that in a world thus united the things that 
we cherish—learning and freedom and humanity— 
will not be lost. 

These words may seem visionary, but they are 
not meant so. It is a practical thing to avert an 
atomic war. It is a practical thing to recognize 
the fraternity of the peoples of the world. It isa 
practical thing to recognize as a common responsi- 
bility, wholly incapable of unilateral solution, the 
completely common peril that atomic weapons 
constitute for the world, to recognize that only 
by a community of responsibility is there any hope 
of meeting the peril. It could be an eminently 
practical thing to attempt to develop these arrange- 
ments and that spirit of confidence between peo- 
ples that are needed for the control of atomic 


This content downloaded from 129.101.79.200 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 23:51:40 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 


10 J. R. OPPENHEIMER 


weapons. It could be practical to regard this as 
a pilot plant for all those other necessary inter- 
national arrangements without which there will be 
no peace. For this is a new field, less fettered than 
most with vested interest or with the vast inertia 
of centuries of purely national sovereignty; this is 
a new field, growing out of a science inspired by 
the highest ideals of international fraternity. 

It would seem somewhat visionary and more 
than a little dangerous to hope that work on atomic 
energy and atomic weapons might proceed as have 
so many things in the past, like the building of 
battleships, on a purely and narrowly national au- 
thority, without basic confidence between peoples, 
without cooperation or the abrogation in any way 
of sovereignty, and to hope that with such a course 
an armament race would not develop, that some- 
how these separate, distrustful atomic arsenals 
would make for the peace of the world. It would 
seem to me visionary in the extreme, and not prac- 
tical, to hope that methods which have so sadly 
failed to avert war in the past will succeed in the 
face of this far graver peril. 

It would in my opinion be most dangerous to 
regard, in these shattering times, a radical solution 
as less practical than a conventional one. It would 
also be most dangerous, and most certain to lead 
to tragic discouragements, to expect that a radical 
solution can evolve rapidly, or that its evolution will 
be free of the gravest conflicts and uncertainties. 
The first steps in implementing the international1- 
zation of responsibility—of responsibility perhaps 
in the first instance for averting the perils of an 
atomic war—will inevitably be very modest. It 1s 
surely not proper for me, who have neither experi- 
ence nor knowledge, to speak of what such steps 
might be. But there are two things that perhaps 
might be borne in mind that we might wish to say 
as scientists. One is that, not only politically but 
technically, this field of atomic energy is a very 
new field and a very rapidly changing one, and 
that it would be well to stress the interim, tenta- 
tive character of any arrangements that might in 
the near future seem appropriate. The second is 
that in the encouragement and cultivation of the 
exchange between nations of scientists and stu- 
dents we would see, not only an opportunity for 
strengthening the fraternity between scientists of 
different lands, but a valuable aid in establishing 
confidence among the nations as to their interests 


and activities in science generally, and in the fields 
bearing on atomic energy in particular. It is not 
at all as a species of super-intelligence that we 
should propose this; it is rather as a concrete and 
constructive, if limited, form of those relations of 
cooperation among nations which must be the hope 
of the future. Let me say again: these remarks 
are not intended in any way to define or exhaust 
the content of any international arrangements it 
may be possible or appropriate to make, nor to 
limit them; they are offered as suggestions that 
occur naturally to a scientist who would wish to 
be helpful, but they leave quite untouched the 
basic problems of statesmanship on which all else 
depends. 

There will have been little in these words that 
can have been new to anyone. For months now 
there has been among scientists, as well as many 
others, a concrete, often a most confusingly articu- 
late concern, both for the critical situation in which 
nuclear physics finds itself and for the more gen- 
eral dangers of atomic war. It seems to me that 
these reactions among scientists, that have caused 
them to meet and speak and testify and write and 
wrangle without remission, and that are general 
almost to the point of universality, reflect, correctly 
reflect, an awareness of unparalleled crisis. It is 
a crisis because, not only the preferences and tastes 
of scientists are in jeopardy, but the substance of 
their faith: the general recognition of the value, 
the unqualified value, of knowledge, of scientific 
power and progress. Whatever the individual 
motivation and belief of the scientist, without that 
recognition from his fellow men of the value of 
his work, in the long term science will perish. I 
do not believe that it will be possible to transcend 
the present crisis in a world in which the works 
of science are being used, and are being knowingly 
used, for ends men hold evil; in such a world it 
will be of little help to try to protect the scientist. 
from restraints, from controls, from an imposed 
secrecy, which he rightly finds incompatible with 
all he has learned to believe and cherish. There- 
fore, it has seemed necessary to me to explore 
somewhat the impact of the advent of atomic wea- 
pons on our fellow men, and the courses that might 
lie open for averting the disaster that they invite. 
I think there is only one such course, and that in 
it lies the hope of all our futures. 


This content downloaded from 129.101.79.200 on Fri, 10 Jun 2016 23:51:40 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 


